PROCEDURES IN COSMETIC DERMATOLOGY 

SERIES

THIRD EDITION

Chemical  
Peels

Editor
Suzan Obagi, MD
Associate Professor of Dermatology
Associate Professor of Plastic Surgery
Director
UPMC Cosmetic Surgery & Skin Health Center
Sewickley, PA, USA

Series Editor
Jeffrey S. Dover, MD, FRCPC
Associate Professor of Clinical Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine
Adjunct Professor of Medicine (Dermatology), Dartmouth Medical School
Director, SkinCare Physicians of Chestnut Hill, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA

Associate Editor
Murad Alam, MD, MSCI
Associate Professor of Dermatology, Otolaryngology, and Surgery
Chief, Section of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Elsevier  
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043

PROCEDURES IN COSMETIC DERMATOLOGY SERIES:  
CHEMICAL PEELS, THIRD EDITION 
Copyright © 2021 by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.

Previous Edition Copyright © 2011, 2006 by Elsevier Inc.

ISBN: 978-0-323-65389-3

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the 
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance 
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).

Notices

Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broad-
en our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may 
become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and 
using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid advances 
in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be 
made. To the fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contrib-
utors for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or 
otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the 
material herein.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2019955460

Content Strategist: Charlotta Kryhl
Content Development Manager: Ellen Wurm-Cutter
Content Development Specialist: Meghan Andress
Publishing Services Manager: Deepthi Unni
Project Manager: Janish Ashwin Paul
Design Direction: Maggie Reid

Printed in the United States

Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

C O N T R I B U T O R S

Richard Hector Bensimon, MD
Medical Director
Plastic Surgery
Bensimon Center,
Portland, OR, USA

Joe Niamtu III, DMD
Private Practice
Cosmetic Facial Surgery
Richmond, VA, USA

Claudia Borelli, MD
Associate Professor of Dermatology
Director, Aesthetic Dermatology and Laser Unit 
 Department of Dermatology Eberhard-Karls- 
University Tuebingen

President of German Aesthetic Dermatology and 

Cosmetology Working group ADK Past President 
International Peeling Society IPS

Tuebingen, Germany

Desmer Destang, DDS, MSc (Ortho), MSc (Derm), 
MSc (Aesth Med)
Medical Director, Dermalogics Aesthetic Dermatology, 

St. Lucia

Lecturer in Cosmetic Medicine, University of South 

Wales, Cardiff, UK

Luc Dewandre, MD
Consultant, Internal Medical Service, Paris, France
Consultant in Aesthetic Medicine, Vitality Institute, 

Miami, FL, USA

Sabrina Fischer, MD
Associate Professor of Dermatology
Aesthetic Dermatology and Laser Unit Department of 

Dermatology Eberhard-Karls-University  
Tuebingen

Tuebingen, Germany

Marina Landau, MD
Senior Dermatologist
Dermatology
Wolfson Medical Center,
Holon, Israel

Suzan Obagi, MD
Associate Professor of Dermatology,
Associate Professor of Plastic Surgery,
Director
UPMC Cosmetic Surgery & Skin Health Center,
Sewickley, PA, USA

Jeave Reserva, MD
Dermatology Resident
Division of Dermatology
Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL, USA

Barry Resnik, MD
Private Practice
Resnik Skin Institute Miami
Voluntary Clinical Professor
Dr Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology and 

 Cutaneous Surgery

University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA

Peter Rullan, MD
Medical Director
Dermatology Institute
Volunteer Clinical Faculty
University of California San Diego,
San Diego, CA, USA

Jaishree Sharad, MBBS, DDV, MD
Cosmetic Dermatologist
Medical Director
Skinfiniti Aesthetic Skin and Laser Clinic,
Mumbai, India

iii

iv

CONTRIBUTORS

David Surprenant, MD
Dermatology Resident
Division of Dermatology
Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL, USA

Alain Tenenbaum, MD, PhD, DSc
Swiss National Delegate 
EAFPS,
Lübeck, Germany, President
SACDAM,
Engelberg, Switzerland, Vice President
IPSC,
Alpnach Dorf, Switzerland, Researcher
Research and Development
Styling Cosmetics AG,
Engelberg, Switzerland

Yardy Tse, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor,
Department of Medicine/Dermatology,
University of California, San Diego; SkinCare
Physicians and Surgeons Inc., Encinitas, CA, USA

Rebecca Tung, MD
Mohs and Dermatologic Surgeon
Florida Dermatology and Skin Cancer Centers,
Winter Haven, FL, USA

Carlos G. Wambier, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Clinician Educator
Department of Dermatology, The Warren Alpert Medical 

School of Brown University

Providence, RI, USA

Carolyn Willis, MD
Dermatology
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Sewickley, PA, USA

S E R I E S   P R E FA C E ,   F I R S T   E D I T I O N

While  dermatologists  have  been  procedurally  inclined 
since  the  beginning  of  the  specialty,  particularly  rapid 
change  has  occurred  in  the  past  quarter  century.  The 
advent of frozen section technique and the golden age 
of Mohs skin cancer surgery has led to the formal incor-
poration of surgery within the dermatology curriculum. 
More  recently,  technological  breakthroughs  in  mini-
mally invasive procedural dermatology have offered an 
aging population new options for improving the appear-
ance of damaged skin.

Procedures  for  rejuvenating  the  skin  and  adjacent 
regions are actively sought by our patients. Significantly, 
dermatologists have pioneered devices, technologies, and 
medications that have continued to evolve at a startling 
pace.  Numerous  major  advances,  including  virtually  all  
cutaneous lasers and light-source based procedures, botu-
linum exotoxin, soft tissue augmentation, dilute anesthesia 
liposuction,  leg  vein  treatments,  chemical  peels,  and  hair 
transplants, have been invented or developed and enhanced 
by dermatologists. Dermatologists understand procedures, 
and we have special insight into the structure, function, and 
workings of skin. Cosmetic dermatologists have made reju-
venation accessible to risk-averse patients by emphasizing 
safety and reducing operative trauma. No specialty is better 
positioned than dermatology to lead the field of cutaneous 
surgery while meeting patient needs.

As dermatology grows as a specialty, an ever-increas-
ing proportion of dermatologists will become proficient 
in the delivery of different procedures. Not all dermatol-
ogists will perform all procedures, and some will perform 
very few, but even the less procedurally directed among 
us must be well-versed in the details to be able to guide 
and educate our patients. Whether you are a skilled der-
matologic surgeon interested in further expanding your 
surgical  repertoire,  a  complete  surgical  novice  wish-
ing to learn a few simple procedures, or somewhere in 
between, this book and this series are for you.

The  volume  you  are  holding  is  one  of  a  series  enti-
tled  Procedures  in  Cosmetic  Dermatology.  The  purpose 
of each book is to serve as a practical primer on a major 
topic area in procedural dermatology.

If you want to make sure you find the right book for 
your needs, you may wish to know what this book is and 

what it is not. It is not a comprehensive text grounded 
in theoretical underpinnings. It is not exhaustively ref-
erenced. It is not designed to be a completely unbiased 
review  of  the  world’s  literature  on  the  subject.  At  the 
same time, it is not an overview of cosmetic procedures 
that  describes  these  in  generalities  without  providing 
enough specific information to actually permit someone 
to perform the procedures. And importantly, it is not so 
heavy that it can serve as a doorstop or shelf filler.

What  this  book  and  this  series  offer  is  a  step-by-
step,  practical  guide  to  performing  cutaneous  surgical 
procedures. Each volume in the series has been edited 
by  a  known  authority  in  that  subfield.  Each  editor  has 
recruited  other  equally  practical-minded,  technically 
skilled,  hands-on  clinicians  to  write  the  constituent 
chapters. Most chapters have two authors to ensure that 
different approaches and a broad range of opinions are 
incorporated. On the other hand, the two authors and 
the editors also collectively provide a consistency of tone. 
A uniform template has been used within each chapter 
so that the reader will be easily able to navigate all the 
books  in  the  series.  Within  every  chapter  the  authors 
succinctly tell it like they do it. The emphasis is on thera-
peutic technique; treatment methods are discussed with 
an  eye  to  appropriate  indications,  adverse  events,  and 
unusual cases. Finally, this book is short and can be read 
in its entirety on a long plane ride. We believe that brev-
ity paradoxically results in greater information transfer 
because cover-to-cover mastery is practicable.

Most  of  the  books  in  the  series  are  accompanied  by 
videos that demonstrate the procedures discussed in that 
text. Some of you will turn immediately to the video and 
use the text as a backup to clarify complex points, whereas 
others will prefer to read first and then view the video to 
see the steps in action. Choose what suits you best.

We  hope  you  enjoy  this  book  and  the  rest  of  the 
books in the series and that you benefit from the many 
hours of clinical wisdom that have been distilled to pro-
duce it. Please keep it nearby where you can reach for it 
when you need it.

Jeffrey S. Dover, MD, FRCPC,  
Murad Alam, MD, MSCI

v

S E R I E S   P R E FAC E ,   T H I R D   E D I T I O N

As  this  Procedures  in  Cosmetic  Dermatology  series 
undergoes  another  iteration,  it  is  clear  our  mission 
that was initiated 15 years ago to provide succinct and 
current  expert  guidance  regarding  particular  cosmetic  
procedures remains highly relevant. Our portable, travel- 
ready  format  continues  to  match  the  ever-shortening 
attention  span  of  the  overwhelmed  physician.  Indeed, 
similar series of slim volumes have emerged in this and 
other  procedural  specialties—versions  of  the  sincerest 
form of flattery.

Even so, changes need to be made. As the evolution 
and exponential growth of cosmetic dermatology con-
tinues,  new  procedures  are  created,  and  multiple  vari-
ants of existing drugs, devices, and techniques emerge. 
The volumes in the series have been updated to reflect 
these  advances  so  that  the  books  are  now  better  but 
remain concise and highly practical.

We are also cognizant of the decline of paper pub-
lishing.  To  preserve  the  environment  and  provide 
content  everywhere,  all  the  time,  and  on  all  types 
of  media,  the  series  will  be  available  in  whole  and 

chapter-by-chapter  in  various  electronic  formats  and 
on  several  platforms.  We  have  expanded  the  video 
offerings  because  they  are  worth  many  pages  of  text 
and are easier to follow.

As always, we are very grateful to our chapter book 
editors  and  authors.  These  practitioners  are  among 
the most prominent, bright, erudite, and skilled in the 
world. They have worked tirelessly to provide a uniform 
tone and structure. It is our hope that you find that these 
multiauthored  books  read  like  a  single  person  wrote 
them, whose writing is a paragon of clarity.

Our  thanks  are  also  due  to  Elsevier,  our  publisher 
since the start. Elsevier has provided our rapid publish-
ing window, which allows content to be put out and dis-
seminated before it goes out of date.

Finally, thanks to you, the reader, for continuing to 
use these texts. We wish you the joy of learning some-
thing new and then delighting your patients with your 
freshly honed skills.

Jeffrey S. Dover, MD, FRCPC 
Murad Alam, MD, MSCI

vi

C H E M I C A L   P E E L S ,  T H I R D   E D I T I O N

It is with much excitement that I bring to you the third 
edition of Chemical Peels! This latest textbook on peels 
will take your knowledge to the next level, building on 
what was covered in previous editions. Chemical peels 
will  be  covered  by  experts  recognized  worldwide  for 
their  innovation,  talent,  and  skills.  This  international 
group of thought leaders will cover the entire approach 
to the skin resurfacing patient from evaluation, to skin 
preparation,  to  performing  peels  ranging  from  light 
peels to the advanced deep peels, and finally to recog-
nizing  and  managing  complications.  The  new  edition 
features  many  new  chapters  dedicated  to  an  in-depth 
dive  into  a  specific  peel  or  skin  condition.  These  new 
chapters  include  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  peels  of 
the chest, neck, and upper extremities; peels as an adju-
vant treatment of acne; chemical peels in male patients; 
several chapters on unique approaches to acne scars; a 
chapter  on  combining  peels  with  surgical  procedures; 
and  several  chapters  that  illustrate  safely  performing 
deeper,  modified  phenol  peels  with  wonderful  photo-
graphs to accompany the text. Videos of various proce-
dures will allow easy incorporation of chemical peeling 
techniques into your practice.

Once  again,  chemical  peels  have  shown  themselves 
to  be  time-proven  methods  with  unparalleled  flexibil-
ity in their performance. Chemical peels have resurged 
in popularity as courses and didactic sessions are once 
again  being  offered  to  physicians.  With  a  growing, 

ethnically  diverse  population,  we  need  a  tool  such  as 
chemical peels to allow us to treat every patient with any 
skin  type  that  comes  to  us  seeking  cosmetic  enhance-
ment.

I  am  truly  humbled  and  grateful  to  work  with  col-
leagues  from  all  over  the  world  on  this  edition,  and  I 
thank  them  for  their  hard  work  in  bringing  to  you  an 
exceptional  textbook.  I  want  to  also  recognize  and 
give  special  thanks  to  Meghan  Andress  at  Elsevier  for 
the  patience  and  guidance  she  offered  all  the  authors. 
Furthermore, our series editors, Murad Alam, MD, and 
Jeffrey Dover, MD, deserve special recognition for their 
tireless efforts in creating a series of textbooks focused 
on cosmetic dermatology procedures and for their guid-
ance when the content of this book was being developed.
Lastly,  to  my  family,  thank  you,  thank  you,  thank 
you! It was a busy year to say the least, but knowing I had 
your  support  made  it  all  worthwhile!  I  survived  many 
weekends and evenings of writing and editing but made 
sure to get to all the important family celebrations and 
school achievements. It was worth the effort!

I hope, as you read through this textbook, your inter-
est in peels is kindled and your desire to hone your skills 
in this field is heightened. I am sure I speak on behalf 
of all my coauthors when I say, once a “peeler” always a 
“peeler.” Hopefully you will join us as a fellow “peeler”!

Sincerely,

Suzan Obagi, MD

vii

L I S T   O F   V I D E O S

 Video 1. Alpha Hydroxy Acid Peel
 Video 2. Salicylic Acid Peel
 Video 3. TCA Peel - 1
 Video 4. TCA Peel - 2
 Video 5. Phenol Peeling - 1
 Video 6. Phenol Peeling - 2
 Video 7. Phenol Peeling - 3

 Video 8. Phenol Peeling - 4
 Video 9. Blue Peel and Hetter VL Medium-Depth Peel
 Video 10. A combination of Microneedling and 

Chemical Peels for the Treatment of Acne Scars

 Video 11. Carbolic CROSS
 Video 12. Chemical Peel Over Facelift
 Video 13. A Medium-Depth TCA Peel on Dark Skin

ix

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

1

The Chemistry of Peels: A 
Hypothesis of Mechanism of 
Action and Classification of Peels

Luc Dewandre, Alain Tenenbaum, Desmer Destang

A chemical peel is a treatment technique used to improve 
and smooth the facial and/or body skin’s texture using a 
chemical solution that causes the dead skin to slough off 
and eventually peel off. The regenerated skin is usually 
smoother, healthier, and less wrinkled than the old skin.
It is advised to seek training with a specialist such as 
a dermatologist, plastic surgeon, otorhinolaryngologist 
(facial  plastic  surgeon),  or  oral-maxillofacial  surgeon 
who  is  experienced  in  the  specific  types  of  peels  you 
wish to perform.

INTRODUCTION

This  chapter  proposes  a  classification  of  chemical  peels 
based on the mechanism of action of chemical peel solu-
tions.  The  traditionally  accepted  mechanism  has  been 
based on the concept that the effect of a peeling solution 
on the skin is based purely on its acidity. By using elemen-
tary concepts in chemistry, three separate mechanisms of 
action for chemical peeling solutions are explained:
 1.   Acidity
 2.   Toxicity
 3.   Metabolic interactions

The  literature  devoted  to  chemical  peels  is  full  of 
information  about  the  methodology,  indications,  con-
traindications, side effects, and results obtained. With-
out any proof, acidity has always been assumed to be the 
sole mechanism of action of peeling agents. All peeling 
agents were assumed to induce the three stages of tissue 

replacement: destruction, elimination, and regeneration, 
all accompanied by a controlled stage of inflammation.

A brief study of the chemistry of the molecules and 
solutions used in chemical peels immediately questions 
the hypothesis that acidity is the only basis for the action 
of  peeling  solutions.  In  fact,  with  the  exception  of  tri-
chloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  and  nonneutralized  glycolic 
acid  solutions,  the  most  commonly  used  peeling  solu-
tions are only weakly acidic, and phenol and resorcinol 
mixtures may not be acidic at all, having a pH greater 
than 7 in some formulations.

This  chapter  will  discuss  the  elementary  chemistry 
concepts  that,  along  with  a  review  of  the  chemistry  of 
the  skin,  should  help  explain  the  possible  interactions 
between different peeling solutions and the skin. Finally, 
two classifications of solutions for peelings will be pro-
posed,  one  according  to  their  mechanisms  of  action 
(classification of L. Dewandre) and the other according 
to chemical parameters (structure of the molecule, pKa, 
etc; or classification of A. Tenenbaum).

USEFUL ELEMENTS OF BASIC 
CHEMISTRY

Understanding some of the basic concepts of chemistry 
is necessary to truly understand chemical peels. Mineral 
and  organic  chemistry  are  taught  as  biochemistry  to 
medical students, but most practicing physicians do not 
remember these fundamental principles.

1

2

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

Also  chemistry  has  been  unfortunately  neglected  in 
cosmetic  dermatology  and  aesthetic  medicine  courses, 
masters workshops, and congresses. A brief review of use-
ful information should help update most practitioners.

Acids
An acid (from the Latin acidus, meaning “sour”) is tradi-
tionally considered any chemical compound that, when dis-
solved in water, gives a solution with a hydrogen ion activity 
greater  than  in  pure  water,  i.e.,  a  pH  less  than  7.0.  That 
approximates the modern definition of Johannes Nicolaus 
Brønsted and Martin Lowry, who independently defined an 
acid as a compound that donates a hydrogen ion (H+) to 
another compound (called a base). Acid–base systems are 
different from redox reactions in that there is no change in 
oxidation state. Acids can occur in solid, liquid, or gaseous 
form, depending on the temperature. They can exist as pure 
substances or in solution. Chemicals or substances having 
the property of an acid are said to be acidic (adjective).

Arrhenius Acids
The  Arrhenius  concept  is  the  easiest  one  retained  by 
most peelers, because most peeling acids are ionic com-
pounds, acting as a source of H3O+ when dissolved in 
water.

The Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius attributed the 
properties of acidity to hydrogen in 1884. An Arrhenius 
acid  is  a  substance  that  increases  the  concentration  of 
the hydronium ion, H3O+, when dissolved in water. This 
definition  stems  from  the  equilibrium  dissociation  of 
water into hydronium and hydroxide (OH−) ions:
H2O l( )+ H2O l( ) ⇌ H3O +(aq)+ OH – (aq) 

In pure water most molecules exist as H2O, but a small 
number  of  molecules  are  constantly  dissociating  and 
reassociating. Pure water is neutral with respect to acid-
ity  or  basicity,  because  the  concentration  of  hydroxide 
ions is always equal to the concentration of hydronium 
ions. An Arrhenius base is a molecule that increases the 
concentration  of  the  hydroxide  ion  when  dissolved  in 
water. Note that chemists often write H+(aq) and refer to 
the hydrogen ion when describing acid–base reactions, 
but the free hydrogen nucleus, a proton, does not exist 
alone in water; it exists as the hydronium ion, H3O+.

Brønsted Acids
Although  the  Arrhenius  concept  is  useful  for  describ-
ing many reactions, it is also quite limited in its scope. 
Brønsted  acids  act  by  donating  a  proton  to  water  and, 

differently  than  Arrhenius  acids,  can  also  be  used  to 
describe  molecular  compounds,  whereas  Arrhenius 
acids must be ionic compounds.

In  1923  chemists  Johannes  Nicolaus  Brønsted  and 
Thomas  Martin  Lowry  independently  recognized  that 
acid–base  reactions  involve  the  transfer  of  a  proton.  A 
Brønsted–Lowry acid (or simply Brønsted acid) is a spe-
cies  that  donates  a  proton  to  a  Brønsted–Lowry  base. 
Brønsted–Lowry  acid–base  theory  has  several  advan-
tages  over  Arrhenius  theory.  Consider  the  following 
reactions of acetic acid (CH3COOH) (used as a chemical 
peel for the décolleté by some great peelers like L. Wiest), 
the organic acid that gives vinegar its characteristic taste:

O

H3C

O

H3C

C

O

H

C

O

H

OH2

NH3

O

C

H3C

O

C

H3C

_
O

_
O

+
OH2

H

+
NH2

H

Both  theories  easily  describe  the  first  reaction: 
CH3COOH acts as an Arrhenius acid because it acts as 
a  source  of  H3O+  when  dissolved  in  water,  and  it  acts 
as a Brønsted acid by donating a proton to water. In the 
second example CH3COOH undergoes the same trans-
formation, donating a proton to ammonia (NH3), but it 
cannot be described using the Arrhenius definition of an 
acid because the reaction does not produce hydronium.
As  with  the  acetic  acid  reactions,  both  definitions 
work  for  the  first  example,  where  water  is  the  solvent 
and a hydronium ion is formed. The next reaction does 
not involve the formation of ions but can still be viewed 
as a proton transfer reaction.

Lewis Acids
The Brønsted–Lowry definition is the most widely used 
definition;  unless  otherwise  specified,  acid–base  reac-
tions  are  assumed  to  involve  the  transfer  of  a  proton 
(H+) from an acid to a base.

A  third  concept  was  proposed  by  Gilbert  N.  Lewis 
that  includes  reactions  with  acid–base  characteristics 
that do not involve a proton transfer. A Lewis acid is a 
species that accepts a pair of electrons from another spe-
cies; in other words, it is an electron pair acceptor. Brøn-
sted  acid–base  reactions  are  proton  transfer  reactions, 

 
whereas  Lewis  acid–base  reactions  are  electron  pair 
transfers.  All  Brønsted  acids  are  also  Lewis  acids,  but 
not all Lewis acids are Brønsted acids. Contrast the fol-
lowing reactions, which could be described in terms of 
acid–base chemistry:

F

B

F

F

N

H

H

H

-

F

+

H

F

H

-

F

+

H

F

B

F

H

N

H

In  the  first  reaction  a  fluoride  ion,  F−,  gives  up  an 
electron  pair  to  boron  trifluoride  to  form  the  product 
tetrafluoroborate. Fluoride “loses” a pair of valence elec-
trons because the electrons shared in the B–F bond are 
located in the region of space between the two atomic 
nuclei and are therefore more distant from the fluoride 
nucleus  than  they  are  in  the  lone  fluoride  ion.  BF3  is 
a  Lewis  acid  because  it  accepts  the  electron  pair  from 
fluoride. This reaction cannot be described in terms of 
Brønsted theory, because there is no proton transfer. The 
second reaction can be described using either theory. A 
proton is transferred from an unspecified Brønsted acid 
to  ammonia,  a  Brønsted  base;  alternatively,  ammonia 
acts as a Lewis base and transfers a lone pair of electrons 
to  form  a  bond  with  a  hydrogen  ion.  The  species  that 
gains the electron pair is the Lewis acid; for example, the 
oxygen atom in H3O+ gains a pair of electrons when one 
of  the  H–O  bonds  is  broken  and  the  electrons  shared 
in  the  bond  become  localized  on  oxygen.  Depending 
on the context, Lewis acids may also be described as a 
reducing agent or an electrophile.

Dissociation and Equilibrium
Reactions  of  acids  are  often  generalized  in  the  form  
HA ⇌ H+ + A−, where HA represents the acid and A− is 
the conjugate base. Acid–base conjugate pairs differ by 
one  proton  and  can  be  interconverted  by  the  addition 
or removal of a proton (protonation and deprotonation, 

3

respectively). Note that the acid can be the charged spe-
cies  and  the  conjugate  base  can  be  neutral,  in  which 
case  the  generalized  reaction  scheme  could  be  written 
as HA ⇌ H+ + A. In solution there exists an equilibrium 
between the acid and its conjugate base. The equilibrium 
constant K is an expression of the equilibrium concen-
trations of the molecules or the ions in solution. Brack-
ets  indicate  concentration,  such  that  [H2O]  means  the 
concentration of H2O. The acid dissociation constant Ka 
is generally used in the context of acid–base reactions. 
The numerical value of Ka is equal to the concentration 
of the products divided by the concentration of the reac-
tants, where the reactant is the acid (HA) and the prod-
ucts are the conjugate base and H+.
[H +] [A −]
[HA]

Ka =

The  stronger  of  two  acids  will  have  a  higher  Ka 
than  the  weaker  acid;  the  ratio  of  hydrogen  ions 
to  acid  will  be  higher  for  the  stronger  acid  because 
the  stronger  acid  has  a  greater  tendency  to  lose  its 
proton.  Because  the  range  of  possible  values  for  Ka 
spans many orders of magnitude, a more manageable 
constant,  pKa,  is  more  frequently  used,  where  pKa 
=  −log10Ka.  Stronger  acids  have  a  smaller  pKa  than 
weaker acids. Experimentally determined pKa at 25°C 
in aqueous solution are often quoted in textbooks and 
reference material.

Acid Strength
For peelers, the notion of acid strength is very import-
ant, because stronger acids have a higher Ka and a lower 
pKa than weaker acids.

For  our  classification,  two  parameters  have  to  be 

taken into consideration for peelers:
 1.   The pKa, a synonym of the acid’s strength.
 2.   The pH, a synonym of the penetration for the selected 

acid.
For chemists, the strength of an acid refers to its abil-
ity  or  tendency  to  lose  a  proton.  A  strong  acid  is  one 
that completely dissociates in water; in other words, one 
mole  of  a  strong  acid,  HA,  dissolves  in  water,  yielding 
one mole of H+ and one mole of the conjugate base, A−, 
and none of the protonated acid HA. In contrast a weak 
acid only partially dissociates, and at equilibrium both 
the acid and the conjugate base are in solution. In water 
each of these essentially ionizes 100%. The stronger an 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action 
 
4

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

acid  is,  the  more  easily  it  loses  a  proton,  H+.  Two  key 
factors that contribute to the ease of deprotonation are 
the  polarity  of  the  H–A  bond  and  the  size  of  atom  A, 
which determines the strength of the H–A bond. Acid 
strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stabil-
ity of the conjugate base.

Caution  is  advised  against  simply  classifying  “cos-
metic peels” for acids with pKa > 3 and “medical peels” 
for acids with pKa < 3, because some acids like phenol 
can be toxic substances even with a pKa > 3.

Polarity and the Inductive Effect
The polarity of the H–A bond is the first factor contribut-
ing to acid strength.

As  the  electron  density  on  hydrogen  decreases,  it 
becomes more acidic. Moving from left to right across a 
row on the periodic table, elements become more elec-
tronegative (excluding the noble gases).

In several compound classes, collectively called car-
bon  acids,  the  C–H  bond  can  be  sufficiently  acidic  for 
proton  removal.  Inactivated  C–H  bonds  are  found  in 
alkanes and are not adjacent to a heteroatom (O, N, Si, 
etc.). Such bonds usually only participate in radical sub-
stitution.

Polarity  refers  to  the  distribution  of  electrons  in  a 
bond,  the  region  of  space  between  two  atomic  nuclei 
where  a  pair  of  electrons  is  shared.  When  two  atoms 
have  roughly  the  same  electronegativity  (ability  to 
attract  electrons),  the  electrons  are  shared  evenly  and 
spend  equal  time  on  either  end  of  the  bond.  When 
there is a significant difference in electronegativities of 
two bonded atoms, the electrons spend more time near 
the nucleus of the more electronegative element and an 
electrical dipole, or separation of charges, occurs, such 
that  there  is  a  partial  negative  charge  localized  on  the 
electronegative element and a partial positive charge on 
the electropositive element. Hydrogen is an electropos-
itive element and accumulates a slightly positive charge 
when it is bonded to an electronegative element such as 
oxygen or chlorine.

The  electronegative  element  need  not  be  directly 
bonded  to  the  acidic  hydrogen  to  increase  its  acidity. 
An  electronegative  atom  can  pull  electron  density  out 
of an acidic bond through the inductive effect. The elec-
tron-withdrawing ability diminishes quickly as the elec-
tronegative atom moves away from the acidic bond.

Carboxylic  acids  can  be  reduced  to  the  corresponding 
alcohol;  the  replacement  of  an  electronegative  oxygen 
atom with two electropositive hydrogens yields a prod-
uct that is essentially nonacidic. The reduction of acetic 
acid to ethanol using LiAlH4 (lithium aluminum hydride 
or LAH), and ether is an example of such a reaction.

H

H

C

H

O

C

LAH

H

OH

ether

H

C

H

H

C

H

OH

The  pKa  for  ethanol  is  16,  compared  with  4.76  for 

acetic acid.

Atomic Radius and Bond Strength
The size of the atom A or atomic radius is the second fac-
tor contributing to acid strength.

Moving down a column on the periodic table, atoms 
become less electronegative but also significantly larger, 
and  the  size  of  the  atom  tends  to  dominate  its  acidity 
when sharing a bond to hydrogen.

Hydrogen sulfide, H2S, is a stronger acid than water, 
even though oxygen is more electronegative than sulfur. 
This is because sulfur is larger than oxygen and the H–S 
bond is more easily broken than the H–O bond.

Another  factor  that  contributes  to  the  ability  of  an 
acid to lose a proton is the strength of the bond between 
the acidic hydrogen and the atom that bears it. This, in 
turn, is dependent on the size of the atoms sharing the 
bond. For an acid HA, as the size of atom A increases, the 
strength of the bond decreases, meaning that it is more 
easily broken, and the strength of the acid increases.

Chemical Characteristics
It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  the  difference  between 
monoprotic acids (having one unique pKa) and polyprotic 
acids (having two or more pKa).

Monoprotic Acids
Monoprotic acids are those acids that are able to donate 
one  proton  per  molecule  during  the  process  of  disso-
ciation  (sometimes  called  ionization),  as  shown  below 
(symbolized by HA):

HA(aq)+ H2O(1) ⇌ H3O +(aq)+A–(aq)Ka

Carboxylic  acids  are  organic  acids  that  contain  an 
acidic  hydroxyl  group  and  a  carbonyl  (C–O  bond). 

Common  examples  of  monoprotic  acids  in  organic 
acids  indicate  the  presence  of  one  carboxyl  group, 

 
 
and  mostly  these  acids  are  known  as  monocarboxylic 
acid.  Examples  in  organic  acids  include  acetic  acid 
(CH3COOH), glycolic acid, and lactic acid.

5

Polyprotic Acids
Polyprotic acids are able to donate more than one pro-
ton per acid molecule, in contrast to monoprotic acids 
that only donate one proton per molecule. Specific types 
of  polyprotic  acids  have  more  specific  names,  such 
as  diprotic  acid  (two  potential  protons  to  donate)  and 
triprotic acid (three potential protons to donate).

A  diprotic  acid  (here  symbolized  by  H2A)  can 
undergo one or two dissociations depending on the pH. 
Each dissociation has its own dissociation constant, Ka1 
and Ka2.
  H2A (aq) + H2O (1) ⇌ H3O + (aq) + HA− (aq) Ka1   
HA− (aq) + H2O l( ) ⇌ H3O +(aq) + A2 −(aq) Ka2 

The first dissociation constant is typically greater than 
the second; i.e., Ka1 > Ka2. For example, the weak unstable 
carbonic acid (H2CO3) can lose one proton to form bicar-
−) and lose a second to form carbon-
bonate anion (HCO3
2−). Both Ka values are small, but Ka1 > Ka2.
ate anion (CO3
Diprotic  acids  used  for  peelings  are  malic,  tartaric, 

and azelaic acids.

Two dissociations mean that such acids can gen-
erate  two  peelings,  depending  on  the  pH,  with  the 
second one less acidic than the first one. In this case, 
we  consider  one  peeling  reaction  per  one  dissocia-
tion.

A  triprotic  acid  (H3A)  can  undergo  one,  two,  or 
three dissociations and has three dissociation constants, 
where Ka1 > Ka2 > Ka3.
 H3A (aq) + H2O l( ) ⇌ H3O +(aq) + H2A – (aq) Ka1

2A (aq) H2O l( )

H3O (aq) HA (aq) Ka2

HA2 –(aq) + H2O l( ) ⇌ H3O + (aq) + A3 –(aq) Ka3

An organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid, 
which can successively lose three protons to finally form 
the citrate ion. Even though the positions of the protons 
on the original molecule may be equivalent, the succes-
sive Ka values will differ, because it is energetically less 
favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is more 
negatively charged.

Weak Acid–Weak Base Equilibria
To lose a proton, it is necessary that the pH of the system 
rise above the pKa of the protonated acid. The decreased 
concentration  of  H+  in  that  basic  solution  shifts  the 
equilibrium toward the conjugate base form (the depro-
tonated  form  of  the  acid).  In  lower-pH  (more  acidic) 
solutions,  there  is  a  high  enough  H+  concentration  in 
the solution to cause the acid to remain in its protonated 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action 
 
 
6

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

form, or to protonate its conjugate base (the deproton-
ated form).

Solutions  of  weak  acids  and  salts  of  their  conjugate 

bases form buffer solutions.

Buffer Solution
A buffer solution is an aqueous solution consisting of 
a  mixture  of  a  weak  acid  and  its  conjugate  base  or  a 
weak base and its conjugate acid. The property of buffer 
solutions  is  that  the  pH  of  the  solution  changes  very 
little when a small amount of acid or base is added to 
it. Buffer solutions are used as a means of keeping pH 
at a nearly constant value in a wide variety of chemi-
cal applications. Many life forms thrive only in a rela-
tively small pH range; an example of a buffer solution 
is blood.

Le Chatelier’s Principle
In  a  solution  there  is  an  equilibrium  between  a  weak 
acid, HA, and its conjugate base, A−:

	•	

	•	

HA + H2O ⇌ H3O + + A – 
 When hydrogen ions (H+) are added to the solution, 
equilibrium moves to the left, as there are hydrogen 
ions (H+ or H3O+) on the right-hand side of the equi-
librium expression.
 When hydroxide ions (OH−) are added to the solu-
tion,  equilibrium  moves  to  the  right,  as  hydrogen 
ions  are  removed  in  the  reaction  (H+  +  OH−  → 
H2O).
Thus, in both cases, some of the added reagent is con-
sumed in shifting the equilibrium in accordance with Le 
Chatelier’s principle, and the pH changes by less than it 
would if the solution were not buffered.

Henderson–Hasselbach Equation
The  acid  dissociation  constant  for  a  weak  acid,  HA,  is 
defined as:

Ka =

[H + ] [A − ]

[HA]

Simple manipulation with logarithms gives the Hen-
derson–Hasselbach  equation,  which  describes  pH  in 
terms of pKa:

pH =pKa + log10

[A − ]

[HA]

In  this  equation  [A−]  is  the  concentration  of  the 
conjugate base and [HA] is the concentration of the 
acid. It follows that when the concentrations of acid 
and  conjugate  base  are  equal,  often  described  as 
half-neutralization, pH = pKa. In general, the pH of 
a  buffer  solution  may  be  easily  calculated,  knowing 
the composition of the mixture, by means of an ICE 
table.  An  ICE  (initial,  change,  equilibrium)  table  is 
a simple matrix formalism that used to simplify the 
calculations in reversible equilibrium reactions (e.g., 
weak  acids  and  weak  bases  or  complex  ion  forma-
tion).

One should remember that the calculated pH may be 

different from measured pH.

Buffer Capacity
Buffer  capacity  (Fig.  1.1)  is  a  quantitative  measure  of 
the resistance of a buffer solution to pH change with the 
addition of hydroxide ions. It can be defined as follows:

Buffer capacity=

dn
)pH  

d (

where  dn  is  an  infinitesimal  amount  of  added  base 
and  d(pH)  is  the  resulting  infinitesimal  change  in 
pH.  With  this  definition  the  buffer  capacity  can  be 
expressed as:

dn

d ( pH)

=2.303

Kw
[H + ]

+ [H + ] +

CAKa [H + ]
(Ka + [H + ])2  

where  Kw  is  the  self-ionization  constant  of  water  and 
CA  is  the  analytical  concentration  of  the  acid,  equal 
to [HA] + [A−]. The term Kw/[H+] becomes significant 
at  pH  greater  than  about  11.5,  and  the  second  term 
becomes significant at pH less than about 2. Both these 
terms  are  properties  of  water  and  are  independent  of 
the  weak  acid.  Considering  the  third  term,  it  follows 
that:
 1.   Buffer capacity of a weak acid reaches its maximum 

value when pH = pKa.

 2.   At pH = pKa ± 1 the buffer capacity falls to 33% 
of  the  maximum  value.  This  is  the  approximate 
range  within  which  buffering  by  a  weak  acid  is 
effective.  Note:  at  pH  =  pKa  −  1,  the  Hender-
son–Hasselbach  equation  shows  that  the  ratio 
[HA]:[A−] is 10:1.

 3.   Buffer capacity is directly proportional to the analyt-

ical concentration of the acid.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)

%

(

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c

r
e
f
f
u
B

100

80

60

40

20

0

4

5

6

7

pH

8

9

10

Fig. 1.1  Buffer capacity for pKa = 7 as a percentage of maxi-
mum.

Current Applications of Buffer Solutions
Their resistance to changes in pH makes buffer solutions 
very useful for chemical manufacturing and essential for 
many biochemical processes. The ideal buffer for a par-
ticular pH has a pKa equal to that pH, since such a solu-
tion has maximum buffer capacity.

Buffer  solutions  are  necessary  to  keep  the  correct 
physiological  pH  for  enzymes  in  many  organisms  to 
work. A buffer of carbonic acid (H2CO3) and bicarbon-
−) is present in blood plasma, to maintain a 
ate (HCO3
pH between 7.35 and 7.45.

The majority of biological samples used in research 
are  made  in  buffers,  specifically  phosphate-buffered 
saline (PBS) at pH 7.4.

Buffered TCA are more likely to create dyschromias.

Useful Buffer Mixtures
	•	
	•	

 Citric acid, sodium citrate, pH range 2.5 to 5.6.
 Acetic acid, sodium acetate, pH range 3.7 to 5.6.

Neutralization
There  is  among  physicians  a  big  confusion  between 
a  buffered  peel  (see  above)  and  a  neutralized  peel.  In 
chemistry, neutralization is a chemical reaction whereby 
an acid and a base react to form water and a salt.

In  an  aqueous  solution,  solvated  hydrogen  ions 
(hydronium  ions,  H3O+)  react  with  hydroxide  ions 
(OH−)  formed  from  the  alkali  to  make  two  molecules 

7

of water. A salt is also formed. In nonaqueous reactions, 
water is  not  always  formed; however, there is always a 
donation  of  protons  (see  Brønsted–Lowry  acid–base 
theory).

Often, neutralization reactions are exothermic, giving 
out heat to the surroundings (the enthalpy of neutraliza-
tion).  On  the  other  hand,  an  example  of  endothermic 
neutralization is the reaction between sodium bicarbon-
ate (baking soda) and any weak acid—for example, ace-
tic acid (vinegar).

Neutralization  of  the  chemical  peeling  agent  is  an 
important step, the timing of which is determined by 
either the frost in the skin or how much contact time 
the  peel  has  with  the  skin.  Neutralization  is  achieved 
by  a  majority  of  peelers  applying  cold  water  or  wet, 
cool  towels  to  the  face  following  the  frost.  According 
to  physical  chemistry,  using  water  just  after  the  frost 
provokes  an  exothermic  reaction  that  can  provoke 
a  “cold”  burn.  Other  neutralizing  agents  that  can  be 
used  include  bicarbonate  spray  or  soapless  cleansers. 
Peeling agents for which this neutralization step is less 
important  include  salicylic  acid,  Jessner’s  solution, 
TCA, and phenol.

In  partially  neutralized  alpha-hydroxy  acid  (AHA) 
solutions,  the  acid  and  a  lesser  amount  of  base  are 
combined  in  a  reversible  chemical  reaction  that  yields 
unneutralized acid and a salt.

The resulting solution has less free acid and a higher 
pH than a solution that has not been neutralized. In par-
tially  neutralized  formulations,  the  salt  functions  as  a 
reservoir of acid that is available for second-phase pen-
etration. This means that partially neutralized formulas 
can  deliver  as  much,  if  not  more,  AHA  than  free  acid 
formulas, but in a safer, “time-released” manner. There-
fore  the  use  of  partially  neutralized  glycolic  acid  solu-
tions  seems  prudent,  because  they  have  a  better  safety 
profile than low-pH solutions containing only free gly-
colic acid.

Clinical studies have shown that a partially neutral-
ized lactic acid preparation improves the skin, both in 
appearance and histologically. Other studies using skin 
tissue cultures showed that partially neutralized glycolic 
acid stimulates fibroblast proliferation—an index of tis-
sue  regeneration.  Looking  at  electrical  conductance  of 
the  skin  (an  indicator  of  water  content  or  moisturiza-
tion),  higher  pH  products  (those  that  have  been  par-
tially neutralized) are better moisturizers than lower pH 
preparations.

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action 
 
8

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

0.45 mm

0.06 mm

0.6 mm

Stratum papillare

Stratum reticulare

Fig.  1.2  Anatomy  of  the  skin  with  penetration  depths  of  the  various  peels:  green,  superficial  peels;  blue, 
medium-depth peels; and red, deep peels.

ANATOMY OF THE SKIN

Like the whole human organism, the skin can be con-
sidered an aqueous solution into which are dissolved a 
certain number of molecules (Fig. 1.2). These are mol-
ecules of proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates in variable 
quantities and proportions.

There is more water in the dermis than in the epider-
mis. This is due to the presence of blood, glycosamino-
glycans (GAGs), and lymph in the dermis, all of which 
have  a  high  water  content,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the 
epidermis is in contact with a more or less dehydrated 
environment.

There  are  more  proteins  (keratin)  in  the  epidermis 
than  in  the  dermis,  whereas  more  carbohydrates  and 
lipids exist in the dermis, and there are even more in the 
subcutaneous layer than in the dermis.

The  most  important  molecule  in  the  epidermis  is  a 
fibrous  and  corneal  protein,  keratin,  that  protects  and 
takes  part,  through  its  continuous  production  by  the 
keratinocytes,  in  the  complete  replacement  of  the  epi-
dermis every 27 days.

The most important molecules of the dermis are 
collagen, elastin, GAGs, and the proteoglycans. Col-
lagen  and  elastin  are  proteins,  whereas  GAGs  (e.g., 
hyaluronic  acid)  and  the  proteoglycans  are  biolog-
ical  polymers  formed  mainly  by  sugars  that  retain 
water.

Collagen  constitutes  the  skin’s  structural  resource 
and is the most abundant protein in the human body. It 
is formed mainly by glycine, proline, and hydroxypro-
line. It is one of the most resistant natural proteins and 
helps give the skin structural support. Elastin is similar 
to collagen, but it is an extensible protein responsible for 

elasticity;  hence  its  name.  It  has  two  unique  polypep-
tides, desmosine and isodesmosine.

The GAGs contain specific sugars such as glucos-
amine sulfate, N-acetylglucosamine, and glucosamine 
hydrochloride,  all  very  capable  of  attracting  water. 
They  form  long  chains  of  molecules,  such  as  hyal-
uronic  acid,  keratin  sulfate,  heparin,  dermatin,  and 
chondroitin, that retain up to 1000 times their weight 
in water.

The  hypodermis  or  subcutaneous  tissue  consists 
mainly of fat, although this tissue accounts for a com-
pletely different chemical interaction with peeling solu-
tions. Chemical peels are not meant to extend down into 
the subcutaneous layer, so this is not discussed.

The  different  molecular  composition  of  the  differ-
ent levels of the skin may explain the variability of the 
interactions and the results obtained. These benefits are 
correlated to the penetration level achieved when using 
a given peeling agent.

It  is  likewise  for  the  pH.  Although  the  pH  of  the 
epidermis  is  a  well-established  number,  the  pH  of  the 
dermis  is  not  an  exact  value  and  has  been  difficult  to 
measure precisely.

The  epidermal  acid  layer  or  mantel  is  the  result  of 
sebum  secretion  and  sweat.  It  protects  the  skin  and 
makes it less vulnerable from attacks by microorganisms 
such  as  bacteria  and  fungi.  A  healthy  epidermis  has  a 
slightly acidic pH with a range between 4.2 and 5.6. It 
varies from one part of the skin to another and, in gen-
eral, is more acidic in men than in women.

The pH of the epidermis also varies depending on its 
different layers. For a “skin” pH of around 5 we will find 
a pH near 5.6 in the corneal layer and one of 4.8 in the 
deep layers of the epidermis, which are rich in corneo-
cytes and melanocytes. Finally, dry skin is more acidic 
than oily skin, which can reach pH 6.

Because the dermis contains a significant amount of 
fluid and blood, we can presume the pH to be 6 to 6.5, 
and  it  is  slightly  less  acidic  than  the  epidermis,  with  a 
pH of 6 for the papillary dermis and 7 for the vascular 
reticular dermis.

Skin Basic Chemistry
The approximate skin composition is seen in Box 1.1.

Acids and Cell Membranes
Cell  membranes  contain  fatty  acid  esters  such  as 
phospholipids.  Fatty  acids  and  fatty  acid  derivatives 

9

BOX 1.1  Approximate Skin Composition

Water 70%

Proteins 25.5%
Lipids 2.0%
Oligo  mineral  elements  0.5%  (e.g.,  zinc,  copper,  se-

lenium)

Carbon hydrates 2.0% (mucopolysaccharides)

are another group of carboxylic acids that play a sig-
nificant  role  in  biology.  These  contain  long  hydro-
carbon  chains  and  a  carboxylic  acid  group  on  one 
end.  The  cell  membrane  of  nearly  all  organisms 
is  primarily  made  up  of  a  phospholipid  bilayer,  a 
micelle  of  hydrophobic  fatty  acid  esters  with  polar, 
hydrophilic  phosphate  “head”  groups.  Membranes 
contain  additional  components,  some  of  which  can 
participate  in  acid–base  reactions.  Cell  membranes 
are generally impermeable to charged or large, polar 
molecules  because  of  the  lipophilic  fatty  acyl  chains 
comprising their interior. Many biologically import-
ant  molecules,  including  a  number  of  pharmaceuti-
cal agents, are organic weak acids that can cross the 
membrane  in  their  protonated,  uncharged  form  but 
not in their charged form (i.e., as the conjugate base). 
The  charged  form,  however,  is  often  more  soluble 
in  blood  and  cytosol,  both  aqueous  environments. 
When  the  extracellular  environment  is  more  acidic 
than the neutral pH within the cell, certain acids will 
exist  in  their  neutral  form  and  will  be  membrane 
soluble,  allowing  them  to  cross  the  phospholipid 
bilayer.  Acids  that  lose  a  proton  at  the  intracellu-
lar  pH  will  exist  in  their  soluble,  charged  form  and 
are  thus  able  to  diffuse  through  the  cytosol  to  their  
target.

BASIC CHEMISTRY OF THE MOST 
USED MOLECULES IN SOLUTIONS FOR 
CHEMICAL PEELINGS

It  is  interesting  to  consider  the  chemical  nature  of  the 
molecules most commonly found in chemical peels. In 
the  case  of  the  alpha-hydroxy  acids,  the  acid  carboxyl 
group is on the first carbon (C1) and the hydroxyl is on 
the alpha carbon (C2). Salicylic acid is a beta-hydroxy 
acid with the hydroxyl group on C3.

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action10

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

How the Most Commonly Used Substances 
in Chemical Peel Solutions Work—A 
Hypothesis
Based  on  their  different  properties  and  the  ways  in 
which  they  work,  L.  Dewandre  divides  the  substances 
most used for chemical peels into three categories: met-
abolic, caustic, and toxic (Table 1.1).

SUBSTANCES WITH MAINLY METABOLIC 
ACTIVITY

With the exception of glycolic and lactic acids, the met-
abolic substances described in the following sections are 
not used, properly speaking, in the solutions involved in 
chemical peels. Today, glycolic and lactic acids are nearly 
ubiquitous in medical cosmetology as a part of skin care 
regimens and in the office as chemical peel procedures.

Alpha Hydroxy Acids
The AHAs are a class of chemical compounds that con-
sist  of  a  carboxylic  acid  with  a  hydroxy  group  on  the 
adjacent carbon. They may be either naturally occurring 
or synthetic. AHAs are well known for their use in the 
cosmetics  industry.  They  are  often  found  in  products 
claiming  to  reduce  wrinkles  or  the  signs  of  aging  and 
improve the overall look and feel of the skin. They are 
also used as chemical peels available in a dermatologist’s 
office, beauty and health spas, and home kits, which usu-
ally contain a lower concentration. Although their effec-
tiveness  is  documented,  numerous  cosmetic  products 
have appeared on the market with unfounded claims of 
performance. Many well-known AHAs are useful build-
ing blocks in organic synthesis: the most common and 
simple are glycolic acid, lactic acid, citric acid, and man-
delic acid.

AHA peels include aliphatic (lactic, glycolic, tartaric, 
and malic) and aromatic (mandelic) acids that are syn-
thesized chemically for use in peels. Various concentra-
tions can be purchased, with 10% to 70% concentration 
used for facial peels, most commonly 50% or 70%. AHAs 
are weak acids that induce their rejuvenation activity by 
either metabolic or caustic effect. At low concentration 
(<30%), they reduce sulfate and phosphate groups from 
the  surface  of  corneocytes.  By  decreasing  corneocyte 
cohesion,  they  induce  exfoliation  of  the  epidermis.  At 
higher concentration, their effect is mainly destructive. 
Because of the low acidity of AHAs, they do not induce 

enough  coagulation  of  the  skin  proteins  and  therefore 
cannot neutralize themselves. They must be neutralized 
using a weak buffer.

Knowledge  of  the  skin  structure  within  the  frame-
work  of  cutaneous  aging  is  helpful  to  understand  the 
topical action of AHAs. Human skin has two principal 
components,  the  avascular  epidermis  and  the  under-
lying  vascular  dermis.  Cutaneous  aging,  though  it  has 
epidermal involvement, seems to involve primarily the 
dermis  and  is  caused  by  both  intrinsic  and  extrinsic 
aging factors.

AHAs most commonly used in cosmetic applications 
are typically derived from fruit products including gly-
colic  acid  (sugar  cane),  lactic  acid  (sour  milk),  malic 
acid (apples), citric acid (citrus fruits) and tartaric acid 
(grapes  and  wine).  For  any  topical  compound,  includ-
ing AHA, it must penetrate into the skin, where it can 
act  on  living  cells.  Bioavailability  (influenced  primar-
ily  by  small  molecular  size)  is  one  characteristic  that 
is  important  in  determining  the  compound’s  ability  to 
penetrate  the  top  layer  of  the  skin.  Glycolic  acid  hav-
ing the smallest molecular size is the AHA with greatest 
bioavailability and penetrates the skin most easily; this 
largely  accounts  for  the  popularity  of  this  product  in 
cosmetic applications.
	•	

 Epidermal  effects:  AHAs  have  a  profound  effect  on 
keratinization,  which  is  clinically  detectable  by  the 
formation of a new stratum corneum. It appears that 
AHAs modulate this formation through diminished 
cellular cohesion between corneocytes at the lowest 
levels of the stratum corneum.
 Dermal  effects:  AHAs  with  greater  bioavailabil-
ity appear to have deeper dermal effects. Glycolic 
acid,  lactic  acid,  and  citric  acid,  on  topical  appli-
cation to photodamaged skin, have been shown to 
produce  increased  amounts  of  mucopolysaccha-
rides  and  collagen  and  increased  skin  thickness 
without detectable inflammation, as monitored by 
skin biopsies.
AHAs  are  generally  safe  when  used  on  the  skin  as 
a  cosmetic  agent  using  the  recommended  dosage.  The 
most common side effects are mild skin irritation, red-
ness,  and  flaking.  The  severity  usually  depends  on  the 
pH and the concentration of the acid used.

	•	

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has also 
warned  consumers  that  care  should  be  taken  when 
using  AHAs  after  an  industry-sponsored  study  found 
that they can increase photosensitivity to the sun.

TABLE 1.1  Classification of Chemical Peels (A. Tenenbaum)

Acids  
Category

Acids 
Subcategory

pKa >3 from Lower to 
Higher

Alpha hydroxy Aliphatic

pKa = 3
Tartaric

pKa <3

Aromatic

Citric
Malic
Glycolic
Lactic

TXA

Azelaic

Aromatic

Phenol

Alpha keto
Bicarboxylic
Beta Hydroxy
TCA
Phenol

TCA, Trichloroacetic acid; TXA, tranexamic acid.

Mandelic

Salicylic

Pyruvic

TCA

pKa2
4.37
4.77
5.13

pKa3

6.40

5.59

pKa1
3.04
3.15
3.40
3.83
3.86
3.37
4.3
2.49
4.55
2.97
0.53
9.95

Classification of L. 
Dewandre

Number of 
Reactions

Metabolic
Metabolic
Metabolic
Metabolic
Metabolic
Metabolic

Not available
Metabolic
Toxic
Caustic
Toxic

Diprotic
Triprotic
Diprotic
Monoprotic
Monoprotic
Monoprotic
Monoprotic
Monoprotic
Diprotic
Monoprotic
Monoprotic
Alcohol > acid

1
1

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action12

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

	•	

Comparison of the pH to the pKa: The Interesting 
Cosmetic Actions of the Alpha-Hydroxy Acids
	•	

 For a pH greater than the pKa, the AHAs are essentially 
moisturizers. The main differences between the mois-
turizing and caustic effects are related to the degree 
of neutralization of the AHA molecules. Neutralizing 
the  AHA  with  sodium  or  ammonium  creates  a  salt 
with more moisturizing and less caustic effect.
 For  a  pH  less  than  or  equal  to  the  pKa,  the  AHAs  are 
keratoregulators that increase skin exfoliation and cell 
replacement. In such case, the acid form is preponder-
ant, which is more absorbed and facilitates penetration.
Their  antiaging  action  can  be  compared  with  reti-
noids, but their mechanism of action is different. They 
interfere  with  certain  kinds  of  enzymes  (sulfotransfer-
ases, phosphotransferases, kinases) whose function is to 
fix the sulfate and phosphate groups to the surface of the 
corneocytes.  The  reduction  of  these  groups  involves  a 
decrease  in  electronegativity  and  corneocyte  cohesion, 
which  leads  to  a  breaking  away  of  the  cells  from  each 
other, creating exfoliation and flaking. This activity can 
be characterized as a metabolic action. However, when 
used in strong concentrations of 30% to 70% free acid 
in aqueous solution for peeling, their effect is based on 
their acidity and results in destruction.

Aliphatic Alpha Hydroxy Acids (Glycolic, 
Lactic, Malic, Tartaric, Citric) With pKa >3
Glycolic Acid (pKa = 3.83) and Its Different 
Concentrations
Abbreviation: GA

O

OH

HO

	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	

Properties:
 Molecular formula: C2H4O3
 Molar mass: 76.05 g/mol
 Appearance: white, powdery solid
 Density: 1.27 g/cm3
 Solubility in water: 70% solution
 Solubility in other solvents: alcohols, acetone, acetic 
acid, and ethyl acetate
 Acidity (pKa): 3.83
Glycolic acid (or hydroxyacetic acid) is the smallest 
AHA. This colorless, odorless, and hygroscopic crystal-
line solid is highly soluble in water. It is used in various 
skin care products.

	•	

Formulated  from  sugar  cane,  glycolic  acid  creates 
a  mild  exfoliating  action.  Glycolic  acid  peels  work  by 
loosening up the horny layer and exfoliating the superfi-
cial top layer. This peel also stimulates collagen growth.
Once  applied,  glycolic  acid  reacts  with  the  upper 
layer  of  the  epidermis,  weakening  the  binding  proper-
ties of the lipids that hold the dead skin cells together. 
This  allows  the  outer  skin  to  “dissolve,”  revealing  the 
underlying skin.

In  low  concentrations,  5%  to  10%,  glycolic  acid 
reduces cell adhesion in the top layer of the skin. This 
action promotes exfoliation of the outermost layer of the 
skin, accounting for smoother texture following regular 
use of topical glycolic acid. This relatively low concentra-
tion of glycolic acid lends itself to daily use as a mono-
therapy or a part of a broader skin care management for 
such conditions as acne, photo-damage, and wrinkling. 
Care needs to be taken to avoid irritation, as this may 
result in worsening of any pigmentary problems. Newer 
formulations combine glycolic acid with an amino acid 
such  as  arginine  and  form  a  time-release  system  that 
reduces  the  risk  of  irritation  without  affecting  glycolic 
acid efficacy. The use of an anti-irritant like allantoin is 
also  helpful.  Because  of  its  safety,  glycolic  acid  at  con-
centrations below 10% can be used daily by most people 
except those with very sensitive skin.

In medium concentrations, between 10% and 50%, its 
benefits are more pronounced but are limited to tempo-
rary skin smoothing without much long-lasting results. 
This is still a useful concentration to use because it can 
prepare the skin for more efficacious glycolic acid peels 
at higher concentrations (50%–70%) as well as to prime 
the skin for deeper chemical peels such as TCA peel.

At higher concentrations (called here high concentra-
tions), 50% to 70% applied for 3 to 8 minutes (usually 
done by a physician), glycolic acid promotes disruption 
of the bonds between the keratinocytes and can be used 
to treat acne or photo damage (such as mottled dyspig-
mentation,  or  fine  wrinkles).  The  benefits  from  such 
short  contact  application  (chemical  peels)  depend  on 
the pH of the solution (the more acidic the product, or 
lower  pH,  the  more  pronounced  the  results),  the  con-
centration of GA (higher concentrations produce more 
vigorous response), the length of application, and prior 
skin conditioning such as prior use of topical retinoids. 
Although single application of 50% to 70% GA will pro-
duce beneficial results, multiple treatments every 2 to 4 
weeks  are  required  for  optimal  results.  It  is  important 

to understand that glycolic acid peels are chemical peels 
with similar risks and side effects as other peels.

effective,  though  not  incredibly  invasive  or  capable  of 
significant improvement with one treatment.

13

Lactic Acid (pKa = 3.86)
Lactic  acid  is  derived  from  either  sour  milk  or  bilber-
ries. This peel will remove dead skin cells and promote 
healthier, softer, and more radiant skin.

O

OH

	•	
	•	
	•	

Properties:
 Molecular formula: C3H6O3
 Molar mass: 90.08 g/mol
 Acidity (pKa): 3.86 at 25°C
In our opinion, glycolic and lactic peel solutions must 
have a pH between 1.5 and 2.5 in order to combine a source 
of  inflammation  and  stimulation,  with  their  metabolic 
effects being, essentially, the turnover of epidermal cells.

Malic Acid (pKa1 = 3.4, pKa2 = 5.13)

O

OH

HO

OH

O

This peel is the same type of mildly invasive peel derived 
from  the  extracts  of  apples.  It  can  open  up  the  pores, 
allow the pores to expel their sebum, and reduce acne.

Tartaric Acid (pKa1 = 3.04, pKa2 = 4.37)

OH

O

HO

OH

O

OH

This  is  derived  from  grape  extract  and  is  capable  of 
delivering the same benefits as the above peels.

Citric Acid (pKa1 = 3.15, pKa2 = 4.77, pKa3 = 6.40)
O

OH

O

O

HO

OH

OH

Citric  acid  is  usually  derived  from  lemons,  oranges, 
limes,  and  pineapples.  These  peels  are  simple  and 

The  citric  acid  is  triprotic,  having  three  pKa  values. 
It is quite interesting, because the first pKa is lower than 
the  pKa  of  the  monoprotic  glycolic  acid  on  one  hand, 
and the three reactions are made of two peelings (pKa1 = 
3.15, pKa2 = 4.77) that end with a buffer (third reaction) 
of a pKa3 = 6.40.

We  can  easily  understand  that  citric  acid  used  for 

peelings does not need any neutralization or a buffer.

Aromatic Alpha Hydroxy Acid with pKa >3
Mandelic Acid: An Aromatic Alpha Hydroxy Acid 
(pKa = 3.37)

HO

OH

O

Mandelic acid is an aromatic AHA with the molecular 
formula C8H8O3. It is a white crystalline solid that is sol-
uble in water and most common organic solvents.

Mandelic acid has a long history of use in the med-
ical  community  as  an  antibacterial  agent,  particularly 
in the treatment of urinary tract infections. It has also 
been  used  as  an  oral  antibiotic.  Lately,  mandelic  acid 
has  gained  popularity  as  a  topical  skin  care  treatment 
for adult acne. It is also used as an alternative to glycolic 
acid in skin care products. Mandelic acid is a larger mol-
ecule than glycolic acid, which makes it better tolerated 
on the skin. Mandelic acid is also advantageous in that it 
possesses antibacterial properties, whereas glycolic acid 
does not.

Its  use  as  a  skin  care  modality  was  pioneered  by 
James  E.  Fulton,  who  helped  develop  retinoic  acid 
(tretinoin,  Retin  A)  in  1969  with  his  mentor,  Albert 
Kligman,  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  On  the 
basis  of  this  research,  dermatologists  now  suggest 
mandelic  acid  as  an  appropriate  treatment  for  a  wide 
variety of skin pathologies, from acne to wrinkles; it is 
especially good in the treatment of adult acne because 
it  addresses  both  of  these  concerns.  Mandelic  acid  is 
also  recommended  as  a  prelaser  and  postlaser  resur-
facing  treatment,  reducing  the  amount  and  length  of 
irritation.

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Actionbleaching of normal skin or clothing; however, 20% aze-
laic acid can be a skin irritant.

Azelaic acid is diprotic, having two pKa values. It is 
quite interesting, because its second pKa is almost equal 
to the pH of the skin (5.5).

We  can  easily  understand  that  azelaic  acid  used  for 
peelings may need to be neutralized but does not need 
any buffer.

In vitro, azelaic acid works as a scavenger (captor) of 
free  radicals  and  inhibits  a  number  of  oxidoreductase 
enzymes, including 5-alpha reductase, the enzyme respon-
sible  of  turning  testosterone  into  dihydrotestosterone.  It 
normalizes keratinization and leads to a reduction in the 
content of free oily acids in lipids on the skin surface.

Apart from that, azelaic acid has antiviral and antimi-
totic properties. Finally, it can also act as an antiprolif-
erant and a cytotoxin via the blockage of mitochondrial 
respiration and DNA synthesis.

Beta Hydroxy Acid Peels With pKa Around 3
It  is  becoming  common  for  beta  hydroxy  acid  (BHA) 
peels to be used instead of the stronger AHA peels due 
to BHA’s ability to get deeper into the pore than AHA. 
Studies show that BHA peels control oil and acne as well 
as remove dead skin cells to a certain extent better than 
AHAs because BHAs are more lipophilic than AHAs.

Salicylic acid (from the Latin Salix meaning: willow tree) 
is a biosynthesized, organic BHA that is often used. Sodium 
salicylate  is  converted  by  treating  sodium  phenolate  (the 
sodium salt of phenol) with carbon dioxide at high pressure 
and temperature. Acidification of the product with sulfuric 
acid gives salicylic acid. Alternatively, it can be prepared by 
the hydrolysis of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) or oil of win-
tergreen (methyl salicylate) with a strong acid or base.

Salicylic Acid (pKa = 2.97)
The most commonly used peeling currently is 30% sali-
cylic acid in ethanol.

14

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

Mandelic  acid  peels  are  commercialized  nowadays 
as gels with a specific viscosity, which make them user 
friendly for beginners.

Alpha Keto Acids With pKa <3
Pyruvic Acid: An Alpha Keto Acid (pKa = 2.49)

O

OH

O

A solution of 40% to 50% pyruvic acid in ethanol is the 
most-used pyruvate in current practice.

Pyruvic acid is a ketone as well as the simplest alpha-
keto acid. The carboxylate (COOH) ion (anion) of pyru-
vic acid, CH3COCOO−, is known as pyruvate and is a 
key intersection in several metabolic pathways.

It is often used to treat mild to moderate papulopustu-
lar acne with concentrations between 40% and 50% every 
2 weeks for a total of 3 to 4 months. It reduces the sebum 
levels and does not affect the cutaneous hydration.

Bi Carboxylic Acid With pKa >3
Azelaic Acid (pKa1 = 4.550, pKa2 = 5.598)
O

O

HO

OH

Azelaic  acid  or  1,7-heptanedicarboxylic  acid  is  a  satu-
rated dicarboxylic acid naturally found in wheat, barley, 
and rye. It is active in a concentration of 20% in topical 
products  used  in  a  number  of  skin  conditions,  mainly 
mild  to  moderate  acne  and  papulopustular  rosacea.  It 
works in part by inhibiting the growth of skin bacteria 
that cause acne and by keeping skin pores clear.

	•	

	•	

It has some interesting properties:
 Antibacterial: It reduces the growth of bacteria in the 
follicle (Propionibacterium acnes, Staphylococcus epi-
dermis)
 Keratolytic and comedolytic: It returns to normal the 
disordered growth of the skin cells, lining the follicle.
 Scavenger of free radicals and reduces inflammation
 Reduces pigmentation by acting as a weak tyrosinase 
inhibitor
 Nontoxic and is well tolerated by most patients
Azelaic acid does not result in bacterial resistance to 
antibiotics,  reduction  in  sebum  production,  photosen-
sitivity (easy sunburn), staining of skin or clothing, or 

	•	
	•	

	•	

Salicylic  acid  is  lipid  soluble  (lipophilic);  therefore 
it is a good peeling agent for comedonal acne. Salicylic 
acid is able to penetrate the comedones better than other 
acids. The antiinflammatory and anesthetic effects of the 
salicylate result in a decrease in the amount of erythema 
and discomfort that generally is associated with chem-
ical peels.

Salicylic  acid  is  a  key  ingredient  in  many  skin  care 
products  for  the  treatment  of  acne,  psoriasis,  calluses, 
corns,  keratosis  pilaris,  and  warts.  It  works  as  both  a 
keratolytic  and  comedolytic  agent  by  causing  the  cells 
of the epidermis to shed more readily, opening clogged 
pores and killing bacteria within, preventing pores from 
clogging  up  again  by  constricting  pore  diameter,  and 
stimulating new cell growth. Because of its effect on skin 
cells, salicylic acid is used in several shampoos to treat 
dandruff.  Use  of  high  concentrations  of  salicylic  acid 
may  cause  hyperpigmentation  in  patients  with  uncon-
ditioned skin, those with darker skin types (Fitzpatrick 
phototypes IV, V, VI), and in patients who do not regu-
larly use a broad-spectrum sunblock.

Also  known  as  2-hydroxybenzoic  acid,  it  is  a  crys-
talline carboxylic acid and classified as a BHA. Salicylic 
acid is slightly soluble in water but very soluble in eth-
anol and ether (like phenol and resorcinol). It is made 
from sodium phenolate, and this explains its direct rela-
tionship with phenol, with which it shares certain toxic 
properties  that  become  apparent  when  used  in  great 
quantity and on large surface areas.

Salicylic acid is found naturally in certain plants (Spi-
raea ulmaria, Andromeda leschenaultii), particularly fruits.

Jessner’s Peel
Jessner’s  peel  solution,  formerly  known  as  the  Coombe’s 
formula,  was  pioneered  by  Max  Jessner,  a  dermatologist. 
Jessner combined 14% salicylic acid, 14% lactic acid, and 
14% resorcinol in an ethanol base. Its main effect is to break 
intracellular bridges between keratinocytes, whereas the sal-
icylic acid component also allows better penetration across 
sebum-rich skin. It is a stronger peel than 30% salicylic acid.

Retinoic Acid Peels

H3C

CH3

CH3

CH3

O

OH

CH3

15

Retinoic acid or vitamin A acid is not soluble in water 
but is soluble in fat; therefore retinyl palmitate or vita-
min A palmitate is the elected retinoic agent for chem-
ical peels.

O

O

Retinyl  palmitate,  or  vitamin  A  palmitate,  is  the 
ester of retinol and palmitic acid. Tretinoin is the acid 
form of vitamin A and so also known as all-trans reti-
noic acid (ATRA). It is a drug commonly used to treat 
acne  vulgaris  and  keratosis  pilaris.  Tretinoin  is  the 
best-studied retinoid in the treatment of photoaging. It 
is used as a component of many commercial products 
that are advertised as being able to slow skin aging or 
improve wrinkles.

The  terpene  family,  to  which  retinoic  acid  belongs, 
includes  numerous  compounds  whose  common  fea-
ture is that they are formed by a chain of isoprene units 
CH2=C(CH3)–CH=CH2.  Terpenes  have  a  raw  formula 
type  (C5Hx)n,  x  being  dependent  on  the  amount  of 
unsaturation. Their names depend on n:
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	

 n = 2 æ C10: monoterpenes
 n = 3 æ C15: sesquiterpenes
 n = 4 æ C20: diterpenes
 n ≈ 1000: polyterpenes (rubber).
The main representative of the family of diterpenes is 
vitamin A or retinol. Retinol is present in food (beta car-
otene) and converts completely in the skin into retinalde-
hyde (retinal). Subsequently, 95% of this is converted into 
retinyl ester and 5% into all-trans and 9-cis retinoic acids.
Retinoids have multiple properties in embryogenesis, 
growth control and differentiation of adult tissues, repro-
duction, and sight. In dermatology their use is well estab-
lished for psoriasis, hereditary disorders of keratinization, 
acne, and skin aging. The most commonly used retinoids 
are ATRA (tretinoin; used topically), 13-cis retinoic acid 
(isotretinoin; used both orally and topically), and retinal-
dehyde/retinal and retinol (both of which are used topi-
cally). In addition, there are the synthetic retinoids such 
as etretinate, acitretin, adapalene, and tazarotene.

Only the natural retinoids are of relevance in chem-
ical peelings: retinol, ATRA, and retinoic acid, the last 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action16

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

two of which are useful in strong concentrations as peel-
ing agents used under medical supervision.

SUBSTANCE WITH MAINLY CAUSTIC 
ACTIVITY
Trichloroacetic Acid Peels
Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) (pKa = 0.54)

O

CI

CI

CI

OH

UN 1839 is required to transport it because of its corro-
sive activity.

TCA  is  also  called  trichloroethanoic  acid.  It  is 
obtained through distillation of the product from nitric 
acid  steam  on  chloral  acid.  It  is  found  as  anhydrous 
(very hygroscopic), white crystals.

TCA can be found directly in the environment because 
it is used as a herbicide (as sodium salt) and indirectly as 
a metabolite derived from chlorination reactions for water 
treatment. At the same time, it is a major metabolite of per-
chloroethylene (PCE), which is used mainly in the field of 
dry cleaning. Its general toxicity when taken in low dose 
is almost nonexistent. Its molecular structure is very close 
to  glycolic  acid.  The  carbon  in  the  alpha  position  has  a 
hydroxyl group and two hydrogens in the case of glycolic 
acid, as opposed to three chlorines in TCA. TCA is a much 
stronger acid than any other current acids used for peelings; 
its pKa is the lowest of any current acids used for chemical 
peels. Like glycolic acid, TCA does not have general toxic-
ity, even when applied in concentrated form on the skin.

When applied to the skin, it is not transported into 
the blood circulation. TCA’s destructive activity is a con-
sequence of its acidity in aqueous solutions, but in peels 
the acid is rapidly “neutralized” as it progresses through 
the different skin layers, leading to a coagulation of skin 
proteins (Fig. 1.3). As the proteins become coagulated, 
the  TCA  is  used  up.  To  penetrate  deeper,  more  TCA 
must be applied (volume) or a higher concentration of 
TCA needs to be used. TCA action is simple, reproduc-
ible,  and  proportional  to  the  concentration  and  to  the 
amount applied. Unique to TCA and phenol, visual signs 
(light  speckling  to  white  frost)  in  the  skin  following 
application indicate the degree of coagulation of protein 
molecules and the depth of penetration of the acid.

Fig. 1.3  The schematic shows the difference of skin reactivity 
to  the  coating  with  TCA.  The  darker  the  area,  the  higher  the 
number  of  coats  to  be  applied  at  the  same  concentration  to 
achieve the same level of frosting.

TCA is used as an intermediate to deep peeling agent 
in concentrations ranging from 20% to 50%. Depth of 
penetration is increased as concentration increases, with 
50% TCA penetrating into the reticular dermis.

The  quality  of  manufacture  of  a  particular  TCA 
depends  of  14  parameters  linked  to  the  raw  material 
itself  and  one  parameter  linked  to  the  manufacturer 
(material of protection if necessary like dust mask, eye 
shield,  face  shield,  full  face  particle  respirator,  gloves, 
respirator cartridge, respirator filter):
  1.   The  density  of  the  vapor.  Example:  Relative  vapor 

density (air = 1): 5.6.
  2.   The grade of purity.
  3.   The quality (analytical specification of the pH).
  4.   The index of refraction.
  5.   The temperature of ebullition per liter.
  6.   The density in g/ml at 25°C.
  7.   If present, the residual traces of anions and/or cations 
may  cause  tattooing  due  to  increased  penetration 

17

depth correlative to pH. For this reason, we do not 
recommend  using  buffered  TCA  or  neutralizing 
with plain water, which contains metallic ions. We 
prefer to use TCA prepared unbuffered, completed 
with bidistilled water and rose oil mosqueta.

the  burning  sensation  of  TCA.  In  fact,  phenol  has  an 
anesthetic effect. Some combinations are TCA 35% w/w 
(weight/weight)  and  phenol  without  croton  oil  15%  to 
25% w/w. However, the following must be kept in mind:
 1.   Both phenol and TCA are caustic, and adding both of 

  8.   Other  residual  chemical  elements  (such  as  SO4): 
whether they should be considered as ignored.
  9.   The  flash  point  (high  flash  point  offers  greater 

safety).

 10.   The impurities if they exist—for example, nonsolu-

ble material.

 11.   The  solubility  in  water  in  mole  at  20°C,  with  the 
clearness or colorlessness (without any color) of the 
obtained solution.

 12.   The turbidity.
 13.   The  pressure  of  the  vapor  (for  low  vapor  pressure 
sealing  and  lubrication  in  high  vacuum  applica-
tions). Example: Vapor pressure, Pa at 51°C: 133.
 14.   Designed  for  use  in  electrophoresis,  suitable  as  a 
fixing solution (designed for use in IEF and PAGE 
gels),  ≥99%.  Isoelectric  focusing  (IEF)  separates 
proteins on the basis of their isoelectric point.
TCA  peel  solution  must  be  stored  separately  from 
food and foodstuffs; it should be stored in a secure cool, 
dry area in a well-ventilated room. The packaging must 
be unbreakable; if it is breakable, it should be transferred 
to a closed unbreakable container. It is preferable to keep 
TCA peel solutions in opaque glass bottles.

In  addition  to  this  detailed  chemistry  data,  clinical 
scenarios are helpful to highlight the action of TCA on 
the skin. TCA is the most aggressive acid (lowest pKa of 
all  acids  used  for  peels),  and  the  depth  of  penetration 
is correlated with its pH. The TCA application is linked 
to the pressure of application, the time, the number of 
coats, the total quantity used, and the neutralization.

We  prefer  special  creams  called  “frosting  stoppers” 
instead  of  water  to  neutralize  the  TCA,  thus  avoiding 
an exothermic reaction, which would provoke a “cold” 
burn. In our view, unbuffered TCA prepared with pure 
crystals  and  completed  with  bidistilled  water  with 
rose  oil  mosqueta  is  less  likely  to  provoke  pigmentary 
rebound  or  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  ver-
sus buffered TCA. It is recommended not to use water or 
primary or secondary alcohols before or after the appli-
cation of an unbuffered TCA to prevent an exothermic 
reaction as a reversible reaction of esterification.

Some  authors  mix  TCA  and  phenol  for  the  com-
fort  of  the  patient,  arguing  that  phenol  helps  reduce 

them will not reduce the toxicity.

 2.   Phenol  can  be  diluted  into  TCA  or  vice  versa  to 
reduce the concentration of the phenol and/or TCA. 
All calculations have to be made in w/w and never in 
v/v (volume/volume), because only mass are additive.
Why  add  another  toxic  substance  to  get  a  lower 
concentration of TCA or phenol for peels? It is safer to 
choose a lower concentration of TCA or phenol for the 
peel. Furthermore, the main caustic effect of phenol is 
due to croton oil and not the phenol itself.

+/phoh) – 6.4 (pKaphoh/

SUBSTANCES WITH MAINLY TOXIC 
ACTIVITY
Phenol ((pKaphoh2
pho−) 9.95)
Phenol is also named phenic acid, or hydroxybenzene. 
It is a colorless, crystalline solid that melts at 41°C and 
boils  at  182°C,  is  soluble  in  ethanol  and  ether,  and  is 
sometimes soluble in water.

Alcohols are organic compounds that have a func-
tional hydroxyl group attached to a carbon atom of an 
alkyl chain. Benzene hydroxyl derivatives and aromatic 
hydrocarbons  are  called  phenols,  and  the  hydroxyl 
group is directly attached to a carbon atom in the ben-
zene  ring.  In  this  case,  phenol  is  an  alcohol  but  not 
an  alkyl  alcohol:  the  group  C6H5–  is  named  phenyl, 
but  the  C6H5OH  compound  is  called  phenol  and  not 
phenylic alcohol.

Phenol  is  an  aromatic  alcohol  with  the  properties 
of a weak acid (it has a labile H, which accounts for its 
acid character). Its three-dimensional structure tends to 
retain  the  H+  ion  from  the  hydroxyl  group  through  a 
so-called  mesomeric  effect.  It  is  sometimes  called  car-
bolic acid when in water solution. It reacts with strong 
bases to form the salts called phenolates. Its pKa is high, 
at 9.95. Phenol has antiseptic, antifungal, and anesthetic 
pharmacological properties.

Carbolic acid is more acidic than phenol, and there are 

three differences between phenol and carbolic acid:
 1.   The  aromatic  ring  allows  resonance  stabilization 
of  the  phenoxide  anion.  In  this  way,  the  negative 
charge on oxygen is shared by the orthocarbon and 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action18

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

paracarbon atoms. That is why carbolic acid is used 
instead  of  phenol  for  endopeel  techniques  (which 
lead  to  medical  liftings  obtained  by  chemical  myo-
plasty, myopexy, and myotension).

 2.   Increased acidity is the result of orbital overlap between 

the oxygen’s lone pairs and the aromatic system.

 3.   The  dominant  effect  is  the  induction  from  the  sp2 
hybridized  carbons;  the  comparatively  more  pow-
erful  inductive  withdrawal  of  electron  density  that 
is provided by the sp2 system compared with an sp3 
system allows for great stabilization of the oxyanion.

Resorcinol (pKa = 11.27)

HO

Resorcinol is a phenol substituted by a hydroxyl in posi-
tion  meta.  Hydroquinone  is  a  phenol  substituted  by  a 
hydroxyl in position para; pyrocatechol is a phenol sub-
stituted by a hydroxyl in position ortho.

Resorcinol is also named resorcin, m-dihydroxyben-
zene, 1,3-dihydroxybenzene, or benzenediol-1,3. It is a 
crystalline powder that melts at 111°C, boils at 281°C, 
and is soluble.

Like  phenol,  resorcinol  is  a  protoplasmic  poison 
that works through enzymatic inactivation and protein 
denaturation  with  production  of  insoluble  proteins. 
Apart from that, both phenol and resorcinol act on the 
cellular membrane, modifying its selective permeability 
by changing its physical properties. This change in per-
meability then leads to cell death.

Phenol alone is a more powerful poison, with a sec-
ondary  anesthetic  effect  due  to  inhibition  of  sensory 
nerve endings.

Phenol and (to a lesser extent) resorcinol are cardiac, 
renal,  and  hepatic  toxins  that  are  eliminated  from  the 
body at 80% concentration either unchanged or conju-
gated with glucuronic or sulfuric acid.

HOW THE MOST COMMONLY 
USED SUBSTANCES IN CHEMICAL 
PEELS WORK: A PROPOSAL FOR 
CLASSIFICATION

When  making  reference,  even  superficially,  to  the 
chemical  and  pharmacological  properties  of  these 

diverse  molecules,  we  realize  that  acidity  is  far  from 
being  the  only  mechanism  of  action  that  causes  the 
previously documented peel-induced modifications of 
the skin. The pH alone is only destructive in the case of 
trichloroacetic  acid.  The  other  substances  act  mainly 
through toxic effects (phenol, resorcinol, less so- sali-
cylic acid) or through metabolic effects in the case of 
AHAs and azelaic and retinoic acids and by interfering 
with  cell  structure  and  synthesis  without  destroying 
them, but merely modifying or stimulating them.

Thus we can propose to classify the substances used 
in  the  peels  into  three  categories:  caustic,  metabolic, 
and toxic. Caustic effects are localized only to the areas 
that come into contact with the chemical, whereas toxic 
effects,  although  mainly  localized  in  nature,  can  also 
affect  cells  distant  from  where  the  chemical  has  been 
applied.

Classification of Substances Used for 
Chemical Peels (L. Dewandre)
	•	
 Caustic: trichloroacetic acid
	•	
 Metabolic: AHAs, azelaic acid, retinoic acid
	•	
 Toxic: phenol, resorcinol, salicylic acid
When  acidity  is  not  the  main  mechanism  of 
action, the pH seems to be the factor that allows cer-
tain  other  substances  present  in  the  solution  (that 
have mainly metabolic effects) to penetrate the skin. 
The  skin  and  its  constituent  molecules,  and  water, 
act  as  a  kind  of  buffer  for  the  solution  that  makes 
contact  and  penetrates  until  it  reaches  the  depth 
necessary  for  its  relative  neutralization.  It  acts  as  a 
blotter of the solution applied, which is more or less 
avid  depending  on  the  pH  and,  most  of  all,  on  the 
pH gradient between this solution and the depth of 
the skin involved.

Toxins, particularly phenol, have little if any caustic 
action  (unless  solutions  are  used  that  contain  croton 
oil); phenol solutions have a pH of 5 or 6.

We  understand  that  there  is  an  interest  in  using 
peeling  mixtures  of  different  substances  to  minimize 
complications  and  to  take  advantage  of  the  various 
mechanisms  of  action  (caustic,  toxic,  and  metabolic 
effects).  This  explains  the  interest  in  Jessner’s  solution 
(a mixture of resorcinol, lactic acid, and salicylic acid); 
Monheit’s  formula  (a  version  of  a  modified  Jessner’s 
solution  with  the  resorcinol  replaced  with  citric  acid) 
followed by the application of a TCA peel; other “secret” 
modified  phenol  formulas;  and  others  (Fintsi,  Kako-
wicz, De Rossi Fattaccioli, etc.).

19

activation,  and  the  resultant  plasmin  stimulates  α-MSH 
(melanocyte-stimulating  hormone),  and  therefore  mela-
nogenesis.2 TXA has been found to act on UV-irradiated 
keratinocytes by reducing plasmin activity in these cells. 
As  a  result,  factors  promoting  melanogenesis,  such  as 
prostaglandins, are downregulated and suppressed.3,4

Another proposed mode of activity is that TXA, hav-
ing a similar molecular structure to tyrosine, functions as 
a competitive inhibitor to the enzyme tyrosinase, which 
is  responsible  for  melanin  production.  This  ultimately 
results in lowered melanin production.5 A 2017 histolog-
ical analysis of melasma patients treated with oral TXA 
revealed that not only was pigmentation decreased, but 
patients also experienced a decrease in associated facial 
erythema  due  to  decreased  vascularity  and  capillary 
numbers and a decrease in mast cell numbers.6

Based  on  current  histochemical  studies,  TXA  has 
been  shown  to  have  multiple  effects  on  the  skin  and 
exhibits  the  following  effects  on  cells  within  both  the 
dermis and epidermis:

	•	

	•	

	•	

	•	

Dermis 
 Fibroblasts  irradiated  by  UVA  demonstrate  an 
increased  expression  of  matrix  metalloprotease  1 
(MMP-1),  an  enzyme  known  to  degrade  collagen. 
MMP-1  activity  is  dependent  upon  plasmin  activa-
tion.  In  tissue  samples  exposed  to  UVA  radiation, 
TXA was found to decrease MMP-1 expression and 
as  a  result  collagen  degradation.  It  is  proposed  that 
TXA may confer antiaging benefits to UV-damaged 
skin via a decrease in collagen breakdown.7
 Capillary  formation  is  suppressed  by  the  action 
of  TXA.  Plasmin  activates  VEGF,  an  activator  of 
neocapillary  genesis.  TXA  has  also  been  shown 
to  suppress  basic  ﬁbroblast  growth  factor  (bFGF), 
which stimulates angiogenesis and repopulates the 
microvasculature.  The  antiplasmin  effects  of  TXA 
therefore  have  shown  clinical  benefits  by  reducing 
the  overall  blood  vessel  count  and  reducing  ery-
thema.6,8
Epidermis 
 TXA functions as a barrier membrane. In the epider-
mis, animal studies have demonstrated that TXA can 
improve  xerosis,  reduce  transepidermal  water  loss 
(TEWL),  and  reduce  inflammation  by  decreasing 
mast cell proliferation.9
 Another  in  vitro  study  supported  the  role  of  TXA 
in  improving  barrier  function  recovery  because  it 
showed  an  increase  in  upregulation  of  the  protein 
occludin in cells treated with TXA.5

Fig. 1.4  The molecular structure of tranexamic acid.

The classification of A. Tenenbaum makes it easy to 
understand how even some acids with pKa >3 such as 
tartaric,  mandelic,  salicylic,  and  of  course  phenol  may 
not be appropriate in the hands of novice peelers.

Therefore it is recommended that beginners start by 
using low concentrations of the nonaromatic diprotic or 
tripotic AHAs with pKa >3.
Tranexamic Acid (pKa = 4.3) and Aromatic 
Carboxylic Acid
The Role of Tranexamic Acid in Chemical Peels

Proposed  mechanisms  of  action.  Tranexamic  acid 
(trans-4-aminomethyl  cyclohexane  carboxylic  acid; 
TXA) has a chemical composition as shown in Fig. 1.4. 
This agent was first introduced to the medical literature 
in 1962 by a Japanese husband-and-wife team and was 
first prescribed for heavy menstrual bleeding and dental 
extraction bleeding. It is a well-known plasmin inhibitor 
and is a synthetic derivative of the amino acid lysine. Its 
antifibrinolytic effects occur via the reversible blockade 
of lysine-binding sites on plasminogen molecules.

The figures show the molecular structure of TXA (see 
Fig. 1.4) and its inhibitory role in the plasminogen cas-
cade (Fig. 1.5). Plasmin formation is inhibited by TXA, 
resulting  in  plasmin  downregulation  and  inability  to 
cleave the fibrin clot.

The effects of TXA on melanin production has been 
documented in the literature; however, the biochemical 
pathways and mechanisms of action are less well known. 
Studies on guinea pigs have demonstrated that TXA can 
reduce skin pigmentation. The mechanism of action is 
not  by  affecting  the  absolute  numbers  of  melanocytes, 
but by decreasing the melanogenic activity of the mela-
nocytes, resulting in a reduced synthesis of melanin.1

Plasminogen activity is also affected by TXA. Plasmino-
gen exists in basal cell keratinocytes, and studies have con-
firmed that ultraviolet (UV) light stimulates plasminogen 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action20

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

ACTIONS OF TXA ON THE SKIN

TXA upregulates occludin, a tight
junction protein and improves
barrier membrane function.

α -MSH

Arachidonic
  Acid (AA)

MMP-1

VEGF &
   bFGF

Inflammatory mediators promote
melanogenesis.
TXA reduces melanogenesis by
down-regulation of inflammation &
possible direct competitive inhibition
of tyrosinase.

EPIDERMIS

TXA blocks the conversion of
plasminogen to plasmin and the
resulting cascade formation of
inflammatory and melanogenic
mediators.

PLASMINOGEN

PLASMIN

     FIBRIN
DEGRADTION 
 PRODUCTS &
INFLAMMATORY
  MEDIATORS

PLASMINOGEN
ACTIVATOR (PA)
 (blocked by TXA)

Plasmin also activated by UV light,
contraceptives, pregnancy,  ENO-1
cytoplasmic enzyme (higher in patients
with atopic dermatitis, impaired
keratinocyte tight-junctions, and
impaired barrier membrane function)

DERMIS

Effects of MMP-1. VEGF
& bFGF on the dermis

FIBROBLASTS
MMP-1 activated by plasmin induced kinases and results in collagen degradation.
TXA decreases MMP-1 via anti-plasmin action. This results in protection from
collagen degradation

MAST CELL PRODUCTION
VEGF & bFGF result in tryptase release and activation of destruvtive MMP-1
within mast cells. This results in basement membrane destruction.
TXA surpresses tryptase release from mast cells, reduces mast cell numbers,
reduces MMP-1, reduces inflammation, and stimulates neocollagenesis.

CAPILLARIES
Stimulated by plasmin induced VEGF & bFGF. This results in
neo-vascularisation which can result in telangiectasia.
TXA decreases VEGF & bFBF via anti-plasmin pathway &
downregulates neo-vascularisation (beneficial to melasma patients).

Proposed actions of TXA on the skin 

Fig. 1.5  Actions of tranexamic acid on the skin.

	•	

 TXA affects keratinocytes. Enolase-1 (ENO-1) is a ubiq-
uitous cellular enzyme present both intracellularly and 
on the cell surface. It is a cell surface receptor for plas-
minogen.  Patients  with  atopic  dermatitis  demonstrate 
increased  levels  of  ENO-1  and  plasminogen  within 

the keratinocytes and basal layer. Upon treatment with 
TXA, it was found that in vitro tissue samples showed 
reversal  of  tight  junction  protein  disruption.  This 
implies that treatment with TXA improves the integrity 
of keratinocytes within the basement membrane.10

	•	

	•	

 TXA has been found to inhibit α-MSH production in 
melanocytes stimulated by ultraviolet B (UV B) radi-
ation. In vitro studies propose that TXA can decrease 
α-MSH by decreasing the production of prohormone 
convertase 2 (PC2), an enzyme involved in the cleav-
age of POMC to α-MSH. PC2 is activated by plasmin 
and,  via  TXA’s  antiplasmin  action,  decreases  mela-
nogenesis.4  Another  pathway  for  TXA  decreasing 
melanogenesis was found by investigating melanoma 
cells. This study determined that TXA enhanced the 
production  of  kinases  (mitogen  activated  protein 
kinase  [MAPK]  and  extracellular  signal-regulated 
kinase [ERK]) involved in autophagy and downregu-
lation of tyrosinase.11
 A histochemical study published in 2017 has confirmed 
that  TXA  can  downregulate  melanin  synthesis  via 
stimulation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK) signaling pathway and the autophagy system. It 
means  that  production  of  melanogenesis-promoting 
proteins such as microphthalmia-associated transcrip-
tion factor (MITF), tyrosinase, and tyrosinase-related 
protein 1 and 2 (TRP 1&2) can be reduced and down-
regulated by treatments with TXA. The research results 
suggest that TXA can result in a decrease in melanin 
synthesis  by  decreasing  the  production  of  tyrosinase 
and TRP 1&2, along with lowered MITF protein lev-
els.11
It is known that melanocytes are immune cells highly 
responsive and communicative with cells of the dermis 
and  epidermis.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  postulate 
that TXA having a positive regulatory effect on dermal 
and epidermal cells may create a favorable environment 
for pigmentation control via the multiple pathways on 
which it can act. TXA therefore has the ability to mod-
erate  cellular  interactions,  especially  that  between  the 
keratinocytes and melanocytes.

Fig. 1.5 summarizes the proposed actions of TXA on 

the dermal and epidermal cells and melanogenesis.

Delivery of Tranexamic Acid to the Skin
As  discussed,  TXA  has  the  ability  to  alter  the  physio-
logical behavior of cutaneous tissue. TXA can be deliv-
ered to the skin via various modes: topical, intradermal, 
and oral delivery, with the topical and oral routes most 
widely  studied. The  ideal  treatment  route  and  delivery 
method  for  TXA  is  undetermined,  and  no  consensus 
currently exists. Based on current publications, the fol-
lowing two regimens are often described.

21

Oral route: 500 mg daily (250 mg twice daily). Three 
recent  clinical  studies  used  this  dose  with  reports  that 
patients  exhibited  signs  of  skin  lightening  without 
adverse reactions. Lee et al have conducted the largest 
retrospective study to date on the efficacy of oral TXA. 
They concluded that 250 mg twice daily (BID) is an effec-
tive  dose  for  the  observance  of  skin  lightening  within 
2  months.  Studies  confirming  the  efficacy  and  safety 
of  this  dosage  were  also  reported  by  Del  Rosario  et  al 
(2018), by Tan et al (2017), and by Wu et al (2012).12-14

Topical  route.  Topical  serum  5%  TXA  in  a  suitable 

base for use BID.

Previous  recent  studies  have  shown  effectiveness  of 
topically  applied  TXA  at  5%  without  adverse  effects. 
Kanechorn et al used 5% in a liposomal gel base,15 and 
Banihashemi et al16 used 5% liposomal TXA and found 
it efficacious.

Tranexamic Acid and Its Usefulness With Chemical 
Peeling
Chemical  peels  are  chemoexfoliants,  with  the  under-
lying  principle  for  their  mechanism  of  action  being  to 
chemically  alter  the  epidermis  and/or  the  dermis  in  a 
controlled  manner.  As  a  consequence,  peeling  of  the 
skin occurs, with the end result being a visible improve-
ment  in  the  aesthetic  tone  and  texture  of  the  skin.  As 
previously described, TXA use can result in skin light-
ening, as well as improvement in skin barrier membrane 
function. Because of its positive effects on both the der-
mis  and  the  epidermis,  it  stands  to  reason  that  TXA 
can be a useful adjunctive and supportive treatment to 
augment the resolution of postinflammatory hyperpig-
mentation (PIH) and cosmetic cutaneous dyschromias, 
while supporting the health of that ever-important bar-
rier  membrane.  Barrier  membrane  function  is  often 
breached  during  chemical  peels.  TXA  used  by  the  cli-
nician as both the prepeel treatment skin conditioning 
program and also postpeel use of the excellent agent is 
expected  to  produce  enhanced  results  to  the  chemical 
peeling process.

CONCLUSION

If we look at the history and the evolution of chemical 
peels it is possible to distinguish two great developmen-
tal periods. The first period was from the 19th century 
to the end of the 1980s, during which great substances 
were  discovered,  classical  formulas  and  mixtures  were 

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action22

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

created,  and  their  histological  and  clinical  effects  were 
studied.  The  second  period  includes  the  development 
and improved understanding of modified TCA, mainly 
influenced by Z. Obagi, and the development of AHAs. 
The rediscovery of AHAs, notably glycolic acid, by Van 
Scott  et  al  popularized  mild  chemical  peels  for  a  large 
part of the population.

Despite this important progress, the science of chem-
ical peels is still mainly empiric, and its applications are 
often intuitive. We believe that we might be entering a 
third  period,  characterized  by  a  better  understanding 
of the mechanism of action of peels, as discussed pre-
viously. Hopefully we will emerge from this period with 
the  appearance  of  new,  more  scientific  methods  and 
products for use in chemical peeling.

Although some have predicted the disappearance of 
chemical peels in favor of physical peeling using lasers, 
quite the opposite has occurred, and we are witnessing a 
rekindled interest. This development in this field will be 
completely  achieved  when  the  application  of  chemical 
peels extends beyond the empiric and enters the scien-
tific realm.

REFERENCES

  1.   Li D, Shi Y, Li M, Liu J, Feng X. Tranexamic acid can 

treat ultraviolet radiation-induced pigmentation in guin-
ea pigs. Eur J Dermatol. 2010;20(3):289–292.
  2.   Handel AC, Miot LD, Miot HA. Melasma: a clini-
cal and epidemiological review. An Bras Dermatol. 
2014;89(5):771–782.

  3.   Maeda K, Naganuma M. Topical trans-4-aminomethyl-
cyclohexanecarboxylic acid prevents ultraviolet radia-
tion-induced pigmentation. J Photochem Photobiol B. 
1998;47(2-3):136–141.

  4.   Hiramoto K, Yamate Y, Sugiyama D, Takahashi Y, 

Mafune E. Tranexamic acid suppresses ultraviolet B eye 
irradiation-induced melanocyte activation by decreasing 
the levels of prohormone convertase 2 and alpha-mela-
nocyte-stimulating hormone. Photodermatol Photoimmu-
nol Photomed. 2014;30(6):302–307.

  5.   Yuan C, Wang XM, Yang LJ, Wu PL. Tranexamic acid 
accelerates skin barrier recovery and upregulates occlu-
din in damaged skin. Int J Dermatol. 2014;53(8):959–965.

  6.   Na JI, Choi SY, Yang SH, Choi HR, Kang HY, Park KC. 

Effect of tranexamic acid on melasma: a clinical trial with 
histological evaluation. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2013;27(8):1035–1039.

  7.   Sonoki A, Okano Y, Yoshitake Y. Dermal fibroblasts 

can activate matrix metalloproteinase-1 independent of 

keratinocytes via plasmin in a 3D collagen model. Exp 
Dermatol. 2018;27(5):520–525.

  8.   Kim EH, Kim YC, Lee ES, Kang HY. The vascular charac-
teristics of melasma. J Dermatol Sci. 2007;46(2):111–116.

  9.   Hiramoto K, Sugiyama D, Takahashi Y, Mafune E. 
The amelioration effect of tranexamic acid in wrin-
kles induced by skin dryness. Biomed Pharmacother. 
2016;80:16–22.

 10.   Tohgasaki T, Ozawa N, Yoshino T, et al. Enolase-1 

expression in the stratum corneum is elevated with par-
akeratosis of atopic dermatitis and disrupts the cellular 
tight junction barrier in keratinocytes. Int J Cosmet Sci. 
2018;40(2):178–186.

 11.   Cho YH, Park JE, Lim DS, Lee JS. Tranexamic acid inhib-

its melanogenesis by activating the autophagy system in 
cultured melanoma cells. J Dermatol Sci. 2017;88(1):96–
102.

 12.   Tan AWM, Sen P, Chua SH, Goh BK. Oral tranexamic 
acid lightens refractory melasma. Australas J Dermatol. 
2017;58(3):e105–e108.

 13.   Del Rosario E, Florez-Pollack S, Zapata Jr L, et al. Ran-

domized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of oral 
tranexamic acid in the treatment of moderate-to-severe 
melasma. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78(2):363–369.
 14.   Wu S, Shi H, Wu H, et al. Treatment of melasma with 
oral administration of tranexamic acid. Aesthetic Plast 
Surg. 2012;36(4):964–970.

 15.   Kanechorn Na Ayuthaya P, Niumphradit N, Manosroi A, 
Nakakes A. Topical 5% tranexamic acid for the treatment 
of melasma in Asians: a double-blind randomized con-
trolled clinical trial. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2012;14(3):150–
154.

 16.   Banihashemi M, Zabolinejad N, Jaafari MR, Salehi M, 

Jabari A. Comparison of therapeutic effects of liposomal 
tranexamic acid and conventional hydroquinone on 
melasma. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2015;14(3):174–177.

FURTHER READING

Allinger NL, Cava MP, de Jongh DC, et al. Chimie Organique 
[Organic Chemistry]. Vols. 1–3. Montreal: McGraw-Hill; 
1990.

Arnaud P. Chimie Organique – Ouvrage D’initiation à la 
Chimie Organique. [Organic Chemistry – Introductory 
Work to Organic Chemistry]. Paris: Dunod; 1992.
Brody HJ. Chemical Peeling. St Louis: Mosby; 1997.
Carlson BM. Integumentary, Skeletal, and Muscular Systems. 
Human Embryology and Developmental Biology. St Louis: 
Mosby; 1994:153–181.

Demas PN, Bridenstine JB, Braun TW. Pharmacology of 

agents used in the management of patients having skin 
resurfacing. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1997;55:1255–1258.

23

de Levie R. The Henderson–Hasselbach equation: its history 

Normant H, Normant J. Chimie Organique [Organic Chemis-

and limitations. J Chem Educ. 2003;80:146.

try]. Paris: Masson; 1968.

de Levie R. The Henderson approximation and the mass ac-

Pauwels. Les alpha-hydroxyacides en pratique derma-

tion law of Guldberg and Waage. Chem Educ. 2002;7:132–
135.

tologique [The alpha-hydroxyacids in dermatological 
practice]. BEDC. 1994;2:437–453.

De Rossi Fattaccioli D. Histological comparison between 

deep chemical peeling (modified Litton’s formulae) and 
ultra pulsed CO2 laser resurfacing. Dermatología Peruana. 
2005;15:1.

Ebbing DD, Gammon SD. General Chemistry. 8th ed. Boston: 

Houghton Mifflin; 2005.

Pavia DL, Lampman GM, Kriz GS. Organic Chemistry Volume 
1: Organic Chemistry 351. Mason, OH: Cenage Learning; 
2004.

Perrin DD. Dissociation constants of inorganic acids. London: 
Butterworths; 1969 [Reprint of Pure and Applied Chemis-
try, vol. 20(2) 1969]

Halaas YP. Medium depth peels. Facial Plast Surg Clin North 

Po HN, Senozan NM. Henderson–Hasselbach equation: Its 

Am. 2004;12:297–303.

history and limitations. J Chem Educ. 2001;78:1499–1503.

Hasselbach KA. Die Berechnung der wasserstoffzahl des 

Resnick SS, Resnik BL. Complications of chemical peeling. 

blutes aus der freien und gebundenen kohlensäure dessel-
ben, und die sauerstoffbindung des blutes als funktion der 
wasserstoffzahl. Biochemische Zeitschrift. 1917;78:112–144.

Henderson LJ. Concerning the relationship between the 

Dermatol Clin. 2005;13:309–312.

Rubin MG. Manual of Chemical Peels: Superficial and Medi-
um Depth. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
1995.

strength of acids and their capacity to preserve neutrality. 
Am J Physiol. 1908;21(4):173–179.

Schmitt R. [no title found]. J Prakt Chem. 1885;31:397.
Solomons TWG. Organic Chemistry. 3rd ed. New York: 

Hermitte R. Aged skin, retinoids and alpha hydroxyl acids. 

Wiley; 1984.

Cosmetics Toiletries. 1992;107:63–67.

Streitwiezer A, Heathcock CH. Introduction to Organic Chem-

Holbrook KA. Embryology of the human epidermis. In: Vin-
cent C, ed. Kelley’s Practice of Pediatrics. Hagerstown: MD: 
Harper and Row; 1980.

Holbrook KA. Structure and function of the developing 

human skin. In: Goldsmith LA, ed. Physiology, Biochemis-
try, and Molecular Biology of the Skin. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1991.

Hornby M, Peach JM. Foundations of Organic Chemistry. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1991.

Howard P, Meylan W, eds. Handbook of Physical Properties of Or-
ganic Chemicals. Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Lewis Publishers; 1997.

Kolbe H. Liebig’s Annals of Chemistry. 1860;115:201.
Kortum G, Vogel W, Andrussow K. Dissociation constants of 
organic acids in aqueous solution. London: Butterworths; 
1961[Reprint of Pure and Applied Chemistry, vol 1(2,3), 1961]

Lagowski J, ed. Macmillan Encyclopedia of Chemistry. New 

York: Macmillan; 1997.

Lee HC, Thng TG, Goh CL. Oral tranexamic acid (TA) in the 
treatment of melasma: a retrospective analysis. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2016;75(2):385–392. 

istry. 2nd ed. Macmillan; 1981.

Tenenbaum A. In: Laserpeel. Longo L, Hoffstetter AG, Pascu 
ML eds. Proceedings of the SPIE Laser Florence ‘99: a 
window on the laser medicine. 1999;4166:169–179.

Tenenbaum A. La tecnica Endopeel-Vol: la medicina estetica- 
A.Redaelli- 2009 Ed SEE Firenze; 2009:60–62, 71–73, 79, 
227, 234.

Tenenbaum A, Tiziani M. The philosophy of synergy in reju-
venation’s techniques-Tecniche Endopeel-Tecniche per il 
lifting non chirurgico del viso e del corpo- Ed Evolution 
MD.

Tenenbaum A. Medical facelifts by chemical myoplasty, 
myotension and myopexy (endopeel techniques or 
muscular SMAS repositioning). Anaplastol. 2013;2:116. 
https://doi.org/10.4172/2161-1173.1000116.

Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. Control of keratinization with alpha-hy-
droxy acids and related compounds. Arch Dermatol. 
1974;110:586–590.

Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. Alpha-hydroxy-acids: procedures for use 

in clinical practice. Cutis. 1989;43:22–229.

Lespiau R. La molécule Chimique [Chemical Molecule]. Paris: 

Vollhardt KPC, Schore NE. Traité de chimie organique [Or-

Félix Alcan; 1920:285.

Methley AM, Campbell S, Chew-Graham C, McNally R, Cher-

aghi-Sohi S. PICO, PICOS and SPIDER: a comparison study 
of specificity and sensitivity in three search tools for qualita-
tive systematic reviews. BMC Health Serv Res. 2014;14:579.

Montagna W, Parakkal PF. The Structure and Function of 

Skin. 3rd ed. New York: Academic Press; 1974.

ganic Chemistry Handbook]. Brussels: De Boeck-Wesmael; 
1998:1350.

Zumdahl S, Zumdahl S. Chemistry. 8th ed. New York: Hough-

ton Mifflin; 2009.

CHAPTER 1 The Chemistry of Peels: A Hypothesis of Mechanism of Action2

Choosing the Correct Peel  
for the Appropriate Patient

Yardy Tse, Suzan Obagi

INTRODUCTION

EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT

Chemical  peels  are  a  method  of  resurfacing  the  skin 
to address a variety of skin conditions. The benefits of 
understanding  the  peel–tissue  interaction  gives  the 
physician  the  ability  to  selectively  resurface  various 
parts of the skin, thus allowing for control and artistry 
in  the  resurfacing  process.  By  inducing  a  controlled 
wound  to  the  skin,  chemical  peels  can  resurface  part 
or all of the epidermis (very superficial and superficial 
peels), the papillary dermis (medium-depth peels), even 
down to the level of the upper or mid-reticular dermis 
(deep peels). By forcing turnover of skin cells, peels can 
improve  photodamage,  rhytides,  pigmentation  abnor-
malities, and scarring.

Chemical  peels  are  divided  into  four  categories 
depending  upon  the  depth  of  the  wound  created  by 
the peel (see Chapters 4 through 8). Very superficial 
peels  only  penetrate  through  the  stratum  corneum 
and the uppermost portions of the epidermis. Super-
ficial  chemical  peels  penetrate  the  epidermis  but  
not  more  than  the  basal  layer  of  the  epidermis. 
 Medium-depth  peels  penetrate  the  entire  epidermis 
plus the papillary dermis. Deep chemical peels create 
a  wound  to  the  level  of  the  upper  and  mid-reticular 
dermis.

Each  category  of  peels  addresses  a  different  aspect 
of  photodamage  and  pigmentary  abnormality.  Heal-
ing  time  and  complications  vary  among  the  different 
categories of peels as well, with some peels being more 
appropriate  for  certain  skin  types.  Therefore,  to  maxi-
mize the benefits of a peel for a patient and to minimize 
adverse effects, it is important to choose which, if any, 
peel is appropriate for each patient.

24

When evaluating a patient for a peel, an extensive his-
tory should be taken. The patient should be questioned 
regarding  a  history  and  frequency  of  herpes  simplex 
virus (HSV) infection, human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)  status  (more  so,  viral  load),  keloid  formation, 
previous  x-ray  therapy  of  the  skin,  nicotine  use,  oral 
isotretinoin  use,  and  a  history  of  a  previous  facelift  or 
browlift.

Patients  with  a  history  of  frequent  HSV  infections 
(more  than  1  every  6  months)  should  be  treated  pro-
phylactically  to  prevent  an  outbreak  of  herpes  during 
the  healing  process.  This  is  most  important  during 
medium-depth  and  deep  peels.  All  patients  having  a 
medium-depth  to  deep  peel  should  receive  HSV  pro-
phylaxis  with  the  dose  adjusted  so  that  it  is  higher  in 
patients  prone  to  more  than  one  HSV  breakthrough 
every  6  to  12  months.  Typically  patients  having  a  
medium-depth or deep peel are started on 500 mg vala-
cyclovir  twice  a  day  for  7  to  14  days  starting  the  day 
before  the  procedure.  If  they  are  at  risk  for  HSV,  the 
dose is increased to 1000 mg twice a day. If an HSV or 
varicella zoster virus (VZV) breakthrough is suspected 
during  the  healing  process,  the  dose  is  increased  to 
1000 mg three times a day for 14 days.

Patients with detectable viral loads of HIV are poor 
candidates  for  a  medium-depth  or  deep  peel,  because 
their  immunocompromised  state  delays  wound  heal-
ing and increases the risk of wound infection and sub-
sequent  scarring.  Transplant  patients  and  patients  on 
immunosuppressive  medications  for  autoimmune  dis-
eases are similarly at risk for infection and poor wound 
healing.

CHAPTER 2  Choosing the Correct Peel for the Appropriate Patient

25

The  biggest  controversy  is  the  concern  over  timing 
of skin resurfacing in patients who have just completed 
isotretinoin  treatment.  The  previous  recommendation 
of waiting 6 to 12 months after isotretinoin use to have a 
chemical peel may have been overexaggerated. Isotreti-
noin does impair wound healing, but there is growing 
evidence that resurfacing patients with peels and lasers 
may be safe as early as 3 months after the medication is 
completed.

Although  peels  can  be  performed  simultaneously 
with surgical procedures, the timing of skin resurfacing 
changes for patients who have had recent surgery in the 
same area. The safe window for resurfacing is either the 
same day as surgery or 6 to 12 months after a facelift or 
browlift procedure. The extensive undermining during 
facelifts and browlifts compromise the skin’s lymphatic 
drainage, so it is best to wait 6 to 12 months to reduce 
the risk for prolonged postoperative edema.

Superficial  x-ray  therapy  of  the  face  (used  many 
decades  ago  to  treat  acne)  destroys  the  pilosebaceous 
units,  which,  in  turn,  leads  to  delayed  reepithelializa-
tion, and nicotine use decreases the blood supply to the 
skin and delays wound healing. Both of these underly-
ing factors can result in an increased risk of scarring.

The physician should also perform a physical exam-
ination  and  pay  particular  attention  to  the  patient’s 
skin  type  and  degree  of  photodamage.  Skin  type  can 
be classified using the Obagi Skin Classification System 
(Table 2.1). This skin classification system can be used 
to objectively assess the patient’s skin and is an import-
ant tool for choosing the appropriate peel. This classifi-
cation system incorporates more information than the 
traditional  Fitzpatrick  skin  type  or  Glogau  scales  did. 
The five assessments are skin color, oiliness, thickness, 
laxity, and fragility (Figs. 2.1–2.5).

Color
Skin color involves a patient’s variation within a particu-
lar ethnic or racial background. Patients who have very 
light Caucasian skin are less likely to experience hyper-
pigmentation  than  darker-skinned  Caucasian  patients. 
However, darker-skinned patients with Asian or African 
descent  have  more  stable  skin  pigment  and  are  at  less 
risk  of  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  (PIH). 
Conversely,  light-skinned  patients  with  Asian  or  Afri-
can descent and biracial fair-complexion patients are at 
increased risk for PIH. Patients at risk for PIH should 
receive  a  longer  course  of  skin  preconditioning  (see 

Chapter  3).  Risk  of  hypopigmentation  also  correlates 
with skin color (see Table 2.1).

Oiliness
The  physician  should  also  note  the  sebaceous  quality 
of  the  skin,  because  oil  is  a  significant  hinderance  to 
the  penetration  of  the  peeling  solution.  There  is  also 
an  increased  risk  of  postpeel  acne  flares  if  oiliness  is 
not  controlled.  Patients  with  very  sebaceous  skin  may 
require  additional  prepeel  degreasing  of  the  skin  to 
achieve  the  same  depth  of  penetration  of  the  peeling 
agent  as  patients  with  very  thin,  nonsebaceous  skin. 
Very oily-skinned patients may require several months 
of  systemic  isotretinoin  before  skin  resurfacing  if  a 
medium-depth or deep peel is planned.

Skin Thickness
Thinner-skinned  patients  are  at  risk  during  deep  skin 
resurfacing  (peels  or  laser)  due  to  a  decrease  in  the 
amount of the adnexal structures that are required for 
reepithelialization. However, they benefit the most from 
skin resurfacing if performed properly. Thin skin is bet-
ter treated with a series of medium-depth (papillary der-
mis level) peels to help build collagen and tighten skin. 
Thicker-skinned  patients  are  safer  for  skin  resurfacing 
with  peels  and  lasers  but  will  require  more  aggressive 
resurfacing to reach the desired depth of penetration.

Skin Laxity
Skin  laxity  must  be  differentiated  from  muscle  laxity. 
Muscle  laxity  requires  surgical  intervention  to  help 
resuspend ptotic tissue. However, skin laxity improves 
with  repeated  papillary  dermis 
level  resurfacing 
because it increases the amount of anchoring fibrils at 
the dermal–epidermal junction (DEJ) and the papillary 
dermis–level  collagen  and  elastin  thickness,  which  in 
turn firms up skin.

Fragile Skin
Skin becomes more fragile as patients get older due to 
the flattening of the Rete ridges between the epidermis 
and  dermis  (DEJ)  and  the  loss  of  anchoring  fibrils  at 
the DEJ. Patients usually present with easy bruising and 
delayed wound healing from minor wounds (mainly on 
the  dorsal  forearms).  This  is  worsened  with  age,  with 
long-term  systemic  prednisone  use,  and  with  taking 
blood-thinning medication. Repeated papillary dermis–
level peels can help reduce the fragility of the skin.

2
6

P
A
R
T
1

I

n
t
r
o
d
u
c
t
o
r
y
C
h
a
p
t
e
r
s

TABLE 2.1  Obagi Skin Classification

Skin Variable

Color

Skin Conditioning:
Before and After Resurfacing

Conditioning varies with skin color
More aggressive with darker Caucasian skin and with lighter 

skin in patients of Asian or African descent

Oiliness

Increased skin surface oil interferes with effectiveness of 

skin conditioning.

It may contribute to postoperative acne flares.
Topical or systemic therapy to control or reduce surface 

oiliness preoperativelya

Thickness

Thin skin needs papillary level procedures to thicken the 

papillary dermal collagen layer

Thick skin needs reticular dermis level procedures to effect a 

textural change

Laxity

Lax skin requires long-term collagen stimulation to prevent 

further laxity

Fragility

Goal is to maintain or possibly increase skin strength.

Suitable Procedures and Potential Complications

Complications related to depth and skin color
Darker skin:
	•	  Hypopigmentation
	 •	  Superficial procedure: rare
	 •	  Medium-depth procedures: possible
	 •	  Deep procedures: more likely
	•	  Hyperpigmentation
	 •	  Common regardless of depth
Excessive oil hinders chemical peel acid penetration
Laser resurfacing is not affected by oiliness

Thin skin: light to medium depth peels
Medium-thick skin: good for peels, dermabrasion, fractionated lasers
Thick skin: deeper chemical peels, dermabrasion, fractionated lasers

Differentiate between skin and muscle laxity:
Skin Laxity:
Medium depth peel to the level of the papillary dermis
Muscle laxity:
Facelift alone or in combination with a medium depth peel (to correct 

any associated skin laxity)

Fragility correlates with postsurgical scarring.
Procedure depth should be limited to the papillary dermis in fragile 

skin

This classification looks at skin more critically using five categories: color, thickness, oiliness, laxity, and fragility. This helps guide depth of resurfacing to minimize 
complications while improving results.
aIf systemic isotretinoin is used, it is prudent to delay medium or deep skin resurfacing at least 3 months (medium-depth resurfacing) to 6 months (deeper resur-
facing).

 
 
 
CHAPTER 2  Choosing the Correct Peel for the Appropriate Patient

27

Fig. 2.1  Very fair complexion patients (typically considered Fitzpatrick phototype I). Pigment is very stable, 
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is unlikely, fragility increases with age, and wrinkles are the predomi-
nant complaint. Rosacea is common.

Other Considerations
Perhaps the most important discussion that a physician 
must have with a patient preoperatively is one regarding 
realistic  expectations.  Without  doubt,  eliciting  clearly 
a patient’s chief complaint is of the utmost importance 
and  can  prevent  any  misunderstanding  after  the  pro-
cedure.  The  physician  should  realistically  describe  the 
postoperative  course,  healing  time,  anticipated  results, 
and potential risks of the procedure.

VERY SUPERFICIAL CHEMICAL PEELS

Although  a  single  treatment  of  a  very  superficial  peel 
can induce exfoliation, a series of these peels is neces-
sary to achieve additional benefit. Improvement of skin 
texture,  through  the  removal  of  the  stratum  corneum, 
induction of acanthosis, and an increase in thickness of 
the granular layer, as well as improvement of epidermal 
melasma and solar lentigines can be achieved through a 

28

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

Fig. 2.2  Fair complexion patients (Fitzpatrick II). Pigment instability starts to show as freckling and uneven 
complexion, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is still unlikely, and wrinkles and rosacea are the pre-
dominant complaint. Patients with melasma are at increased risk for PIH. Skin thickness may begin to increase.

series of very superficial peels. PIH is not common with 
superficial  peels,  because  they  create  minimal  inflam-
mation.

SUPERFICIAL CHEMICAL PEELS

Superficial  chemical  peels  are  more  effective  than 
the very superficial peels for the treatment of actinic 
keratoses,  epidermal  melasma,  solar  lentigines,  and 
epidermal growths such as thin seborrheic keratoses. 

Skin  texture  may  also  be  improved.  Erythema  and 
scaling  will  occur  postoperatively  for  3  to  4  days; 
however,  healing  time  is  faster  if  patients  are  pre-
treated  with  the  proper  skin  preconditioning  (see 
Chapter 3).

Although all lighter peels can be used in virtually all 
skin types, caution must still be taken in patients at risk 
for PIH. A thorough knowledge of the subtleties of these 
chemical peels will allow the practitioner the ability to 
treat all skin types safely and effectively.

CHAPTER 2  Choosing the Correct Peel for the Appropriate Patient

29

Fig.  2.3  Moderate  complexion  patients  (Fitzpatrick  III).  Dyschromia  increases,  risk  of  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation  increases,  patients  can  present  with  a  primary  concern  of  wrinkles  or  dyschromia,  or 
both. Oiliness, as well as skin thickness, may increase.

MEDIUM-DEPTH CHEMICAL PEELS

SUMMARY

Medium-depth peels reach the papillary dermis level and 
thus take about 7 days to heal. With increased healing time 
comes an increased risk for complications such as scarring, 
hypopigmentation, and PIH. However, the benefit in skin 
firming, pore tightening, sun damage reduction, and pig-
mentation improvement make them very versatile peels.

DEEP CHEMICAL PEELS

Deep  peels  are  comparable  to  traditional  ablative  CO2 
laser resurfacing and are most appropriate for patients 
with deep scars or deep wrinkles. However, due to the 
depth of penetration into the reticular dermis, textural 
change, permanent hypopigmentation, and scarring are 
real  concerns.  The  recovery  time  associated  with  deep 
peels is on the order of 10 to 12 days.

Chemical peels are a safe and versatile method of resur-
facing  the  skin.  However,  it  is  critical  for  the  physi-
cian to choose the appropriate peel for the appropriate 
patient to achieve the desired end point and to decrease 
the  risk  of  complications.  Superficial  peels  are  safe  in 
virtually all skin types. These peels can effectively treat 
melasma,  acne  vulgaris,  and  thin  seborrheic  keratoses 
and can lighten solar lentigines. They may also induce 
subtle  changes  in  skin  texture.  Medium-depth  peels 
are  used  to  address  deeper  concerns  such  as  dermal 
melasma, large pores, and fine wrinkles/laxity. The risk 
of PIH is greatly increased. Deep peels can dramatically 
improve  deep  facial  rhytides,  acne  scarring,  and  pho-
todamage. Newer phenol-croton oil combination peels 
have  made  these  deeper  peels  safer  to  use  in  a  wider 
range of patients.

30

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

A

Fig. 2.4  These patients show the wide range of skin types in the Fitzpatrick IV group. Skin color alone does 
not help predict postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Patients with melasma and freckling are more likely to 
develop PIH. Patients without dyschromia tend to have more stable pigment cells. Patients with freckling or 
melasma should be treated with longer skin-preconditioning regimens. Skin thickness and oiliness should be 
addressed before planning a resurfacing procedure.

CHAPTER 2  Choosing the Correct Peel for the Appropriate Patient

31

B

Fig. 2.4, cont’d 

Fig. 2.5  More variability in the Fitzpatrick V group. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is a significant 
concern with procedures; fragility is less of a concern. Patients with more even tone across their face are at 
less risk for PIH.

32

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

FURTHER READING

Ahn HH, Kim IH. Whitening effect of salicylic acid peels in 

Asian patients. Dermatol Surg. 2006;32:372–375.

Hantash BM, Stewart DB, Cooper ZA, Rehmus WE. Facial 
resurfacing for nonmelanoma skin cancer prophylaxis. 
Arch Dermatol. 2006; 142:976–982.

Landau M. Cardiac complications in deep chemical peels. 

Briden ME. Alpha-hydroxy acid chemical peeling agents: 

Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:190–193.

case studies and rationale for safe and effective use. Cutis. 
2004;73(supply 2):18–24.

Monheit GD. Medium-depth chemical peels. Dermatol Clin. 

2001;19(3):413–425.

Brody HJ. Chemical Peeling and Resurfacing. 2nd ed. St Louis: 

Monheit GD, Chastain MA. Chemical and mechanical skin 

Mosby-Year Book; 1997.

Buter PE, Gonzalez S, Randolph MA, et al. Quantitative 
and qualitative effects of chemical peeling on pho-
to-aged skin: an experimental study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2001;107(1):222–228.

El-Domati MB, Attia SK, Saleh FY, et al. Trichloroacetic acid 
peeling versus dermabrasion: a histometric, immunohis-
tochemical, and ultrastructural comparison. Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30:179–188.

Glogau RG, Matarasso SL. Chemical peels. Trichloroacetic 
acid and phenol. Dermatol Surg. 1995;13(2):263–276.
Fanous N, Côté V, Fanous A. The new genetico-racial skin 
classification: how to maximize the safety of any peel or 
laser treatment on any Asian, Caucasian or Black patient. 
Can J Plast Surg. 2011;19(1):9–16.

Halaas YP. Medium depth peels. Facial Plast Surg Clin North 

Am. 2004;12(3):297–303.

resurfacing. In: Dermatology, Bolognia J, Jorizzo JL, Rapi-
ni RR, eds. St Louis: Mosby; 2003:2379–2396.

Obagi S, Obagi ZE, Bridenstine JB. Isotretinoin use during 

chemical skin resurfacing: a review of complications.  Am 
J Cosmet Surg. 2002;19(1):9–13.

Obagi ZE, Obagi S, Alaiti S, Stevens MB. TCA-based blue 

peel: A standardized procedure with depth control. Der-
matol Surg. 1999;25:773–780.

Resnik SS, Resnik BI. Complications of chemical peeling. 

Dermatol Clin. 13(2):309–312.

Stone PA, Lefer LG. Modified phenol chemical face peels. 

Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;9(9):351–376.

Tse Y, Ostad A, Lee HS, et al. A clinical and histologic 

evaluation of two medium-depth peels: glycolic acid 
versus Jessner’s trichloroacetic acid. Dermatol Surg. 
1996;22(9):781–786.

3

The Role of Priming the Skin for Peels

Barry I. Resnik

INTRODUCTION

Foundation: That upon which anything is founded; 
that  on  which  anything  stands,  and  by  which  it 
is  supported;  the  lowest  and  supporting  layer  of  a 
superstructure; groundwork; basis

Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary 1998.

The  art  of  chemical  peeling  has  been  a  constant  in 
dermatologic  surgery  for  many  years.  From  the  use  of 
phenol in the treatment of acne scars in the early 1950s 
through  the  delineation  of  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA) 
as treatment for photodamage, through the use of high 
percentages of TCA in the treatment of acne scars and 
benign  lesions  to  the  advent  of  alpha-hydroxy  acid 
(AHA)  and  beta-hydroxy  acids  and  others,  the  chem-
ical peel has been the “slow and steady” performer for 
a  variety  of  conditions.  Regardless  of  the  indication, 
skin priming is a required ﬁrst step to ensuring the best 
results. It may be the most valuable step in the peeling 
treatment  of  melasma,  second  only  to  aggressive  sun 
protection. The various factors involved in skin priming 
are examined here.

The foundation of an effective chemical peel is skin 
preparation. This begins in the weeks leading up to the 
peel  and  also  includes  the  actual  preoperative  steps 
before  the  peel.  With  adequate  priming,  the  skin  will 
frost rapidly and more uniformly than unprimed skin. 
TCA  in  particular  is  usually  applied  expeditiously  to 
minimize discomfort; a more rapid and complete frost 
will enhance the patient’s experience. Although relatively 
uncommon,  adverse  effects  such  as  hypopigmentation 
or  hyperpigmentation,  delayed  reepithelialization,  and 
prolonged  erythema  may  also  be  minimized,  because 

skip  areas  are  usually  minimized  as  well.  Finally,  the 
postoperative phase can be shortened as a result of more 
rapid healing in primed skin.

Skin priming can be divided into two phases: (1) pre-
treatment and (2) preparation. These two phases are dif-
ferentiated and determined by timing and the agents used. 
The pretreatment phase consists of topical agents applied 
in the days or weeks preceding the peel. The preparation 
phase  encompasses  those  steps  taken  directly  before  the 
peel  is  performed.  These  include  patient  degreasing  and 
cleansing just before and upon arrival at the ofﬁce. The goal 
of  both  phases  is  to  thin  the  epidermal  barrier,  enhance 
uniform active agent  penetration,  accelerate  healing,  and 
reduce postoperative side effects and complications, most 
importantly postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

PRETREATMENT

Pretreatment refers to the period before the actual peel. 
A well-planned and executed regimen will enhance any 
chemical  peel.  The  three  major  goals  are  thinning  of 
the  stratum  corneum,  reduction  of  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation, and faster wound healing. A valu-
able but less tangible goal is the ability to assess patient 
compliance  and  tolerance  to  the  prepeel  and  postpeel 
peel  regimens, 
including  sunscreens,  moisturizers, 
and  other  antiaging  products.  Agents  commonly  used 
during the pretreatment phase are hydroquinone, reti-
noids (tretinoin, retinol, adapalene, tazarotene), glycolic 
acid, and Kojic acid. Lactic acid, salicylic acid, and aze-
laic acid are rarely used. Aggressive sun protection may 
be  the  most  important  step  in  reducing  the  likelihood 
of  postinflammatory  pigment  deposition  and  should 
accompany all agents.

33

34

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

Most  practitioners  will  pretreat  for  2  weeks  to  3 
months before the peel, with a longer pretreatment time 
for patients at risk for postinflammatory hyperpigmen-
tation. This author has come to prefer a 1-month period 
of pretreatment. It is not mandatory, but it is more often 
than not beneficial to the outcome.

Retinoids,  including  tretinoin,  or  all-trans  retinoic 
acid,  retinol,  adapalene,  and  tazarotene,  are  arguably 
the  most  popular  pretreatment  agents.  Many  studies 
have  supported  tretinoin’s  beneﬁcial  effects  in  wound 
healing. Pretreatment with 0.05% tretinoin cream for 2 
weeks  has  been  shown  to  signiﬁcantly  accelerate  heal-
ing, regardless of body region. A more rapid and even 
frost in the pretreated areas has also been noted, regard-
less  of  location.  Tretinoin  pretreatment  in  dermabra-
sion cases has also been shown to enhance healing. In 
a  study  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  hydroquinone 
and tretinoin as adjunctive therapy with TCA peels in 
the treatment of melasma in Indian skin, it was shown 
that  although  hydroquinone  and  tretinoin  functioned 
equally  well  as  adjunctive  agents  to  TCA  in  the  treat-
ment of melasma, only hydroquinone showed a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in postinflammatory pigment deposition. 
However, in carbon dioxide (CO2) resurfacing patients, 
no signiﬁcant difference in the incidence of postproce-
dural hyperpigmentation was found in  skin pretreated 
with  10%  glycolic  acid,  4%  hydroquinone,  or  0.025% 
tretinoin.  Tazarotene  is  not  commonly  used  as  an 
adjunctive  priming  agent  but  does  have  utility  in  pre-
paring  the  skin.  Retinol  (available  over  the  counter  in 
countless  preparations)  and  adapalene,  a  popular  acne 
therapy,  are  less  irritating  and  are  preferred  by  some 
practitioners.

The AHAs, of which glycolic acid is the best known, 
have been used in all three phases: pretreatment, prepa-
ration,  and  as  a  superﬁcial  peeling  agent.  Its  utility  is 
dependent on the concentration used. At low percent-
ages, keratinocyte adhesion is reduced, whereas at high 
percentages, superﬁcial to deep peeling can occur. A 2- 
to  3-week  pretreatment  period  is  sufﬁcient  to  thin  the 
epidermis and prepare the skin for the peel. In patients 
with keratotic lesions like actinic keratoses, AHAs help 
thin the hyperkeratotic tissue, increasing the penetration 
of the peeling agent. Glycolic acid does not have much 
effect  on  the  incidence  of  postinflammatory  hyperpig-
mentation. This AHA can also be used in combination 
with  retinoids  and  hydroquinone.  There  have  been  no 
studies on whether glycolic acid has the same effect on 

postprocedural healing as tretinoin, but anecdotal expe-
rience  has  shown  it  to  be  beneﬁcial  in  the  postproce-
dural period as well.

Hydroquinone  is  a  tyrosinase  inhibitor  used  to 
treat conditions of pigmentation, including melasma 
and  postinflammatory  pigmentation.  It  is  avail-
able  commercially  in  2%  and  4%  forms  and  is  com-
pounded in higher percentages. This agent, when used 
as a priming ingredient in both TCA and glycolic acid 
peels  for  melasma,  was  more  effective  than  retinoic 
acid  0.025%  in  reducing  this  difficult-to-treat  condi-
tion. Kligman and Willis’s original formula consisted 
of hydroquinone 5%, tretinoin 0.1%, and dexametha-
sone 0.1%. This original formulation and many mod-
ified  ones  have  been  used  successfully  in  reducing 
hyperpigmentation secondary to injury and melasma. 
The  combination  of  hydroquinone  8%,  tretinoin 
0.025%,  and  hydrocortisone  1%  (modified  Kligman’s 
formula) is one of the most common priming agents. 
Some  physicians  are  concerned  about  aberrant  pig-
mentation with higher percentages of hydroquinone. 
In the author’s experience, aberrant pigmentation has 
not been noted with this formula. Some irritation can 
be seen in certain patients; expectations should be set 
appropriately.

Kojic  acid  is  also  a  tyrosinase  inhibitor  that  can  be 
used  in  patients  who  cannot  tolerate  hydroquinone  or 
have a sensitivity to it. It is most often used in combina-
tion with glycolic acid or a retinoid.

It should be noted that most priming regimens pro-
duce irritation. The regimen is generally discontinued at 
least  one  day  before  the  actual  peeling  procedure. The 
degree of irritation noted may require an earlier cessa-
tion of the regimen.

Sun protection is important in the priming of skin for 
peeling.  A  broad-spectrum  UVA/UVB  sunscreen  with 
a  minimum  SPF  30  and  Heliocare  dietary  supplement 
should be used daily, along with appropriate sun protec-
tion measures.

	•	

	•	

The author’s priming regimen of choice is as follows:
 Kligman’s  formula,  modified  (hydroquinone  8%, 
tretinoin  0.025%,  and  hydrocortisone  1%),  applied 
nightly. This is custom-compounded by a local phar-
macy for each patient.
 Glycolic acid foaming cleanser (Topix Pharmaceuti-
cals,  Amityville,  NY)  twice  daily.  Nondrying  gentle 
cleanser (Topix Pharmaceuticals, Amityville, NY) is 
used postprocedure.

CHAPTER 3  The Role of Priming the Skin for Peels

35

A

B

Fig. 3.1  Before (A) and after (B) using topical therapy. Photo courtesy of Suzan Obagi, MD.

	•	

	•	

	•	

 Extreme  Moisture  with  hyaluronic  acid  moisturiz-
ing  gel  (Topix  Pharmaceuticals,  Amityville,  NY)  as 
needed.
 UltraSheer SPF 50+ sunscreen (Topix Pharmaceuti-
cals, Amityville, NY) twice daily.
 Heliocare  Dietary  Supplement  (Ferndale  Laborato-
ries, Ferndale, MI) daily.
This  regimen  begins  4  weeks  before  the  peel,  is 
stopped  1  day  before  the  peel,  and  then  is  resumed  at 
full  healing  for  at  least  4  weeks  after  the  peel.  Fig.  3.1 
shows a patient with melasma treated for 6 weeks with 
tretinoin 0.05% nightly, 4% hydroquinone twice a day, 
6%  glycolic  acid  lotion  every  morning,  and  an  SPF  50 
mineral sunscreen.

PREPARATION

Preparation  encompasses  those  steps  that  occur 
directly before, and sometimes those leading into, the 
peel itself. Uniformity of depth, as well as ease of appli-
cation and enhanced healing, all ﬁgure into this phase 
of the peel. Degreasers; “depth-enhancing” agents such 
as Jessner’s solution, glycolic acid, and solid CO2; and 
applications of topical anesthetics all fall into this time 
period.

Most dermatologic surgeons will use alcohol, acetone, 
or a combination of both to degrease the skin before the 
peel.  Chlorhexidine  gluconate  (Hibiclens),  a  popular 
antibacterial scrub, is also used in this manner. It should 
be  noted  that  chlorhexidine  gluconate  can  cause  kera-
titis and therefore may not be the best choice for facial 
procedures. The amount of material used, as well as the 
force and time of application, will have an impact on the 
depth  and  uniformity  of  the  peel.  The  use  of  different 
applicators  will  also  have  an  impact  on  depth  of  peel. 
Cotton-tipped applicators, obstetrical swabs, and gauze 
squares have all been used to apply peeling agents. These 
will hold differing amounts of agent, release it at differ-
ent  rates,  and  allow  for  varying  amounts  of  pressure 
during application. The search for the ideal degreasing 
agent  prompted  an  examination  of  alcohol,  acetone, 
chlorhexidine gluconate, and Freon Degreaser (trichlo-
rotrifluoroethane) in 35% TCA peeling of the scalp. No 
differences between the various compounds were found, 
but the authors cautioned against the use of acetone in 
conjunction with possible igniters such as electrosurgi-
cal units.

Topical  anesthetic  preparations  have  been  used  as 
both preparatory and postprocedural agents. All contain 
combinations of “caine” anesthetics in differing vehicles. 

36

PART 1 

Introductory Chapters

They offer pain control as well as skin hydration. The ini-
tial formulations required occlusion, but there are mul-
tiple commercial and proprietary versions now available 
that are effective without occlusion. In the author’s hands, 
a combination anesthetic gel obtained from a local com-
pounding pharmacy (20% benzocaine, 6% lidocaine, 4% 
tetracaine) has proved to be very effective at pain con-
trol. The enhanced skin hydration usually combines with 
the  other  preparatory  steps  to  deliver  a  more  uniform 
peel. Differing results were reported with another pro-
prietary formulation compounded in a methylcellulose 
base. Frosting occurred less rapidly, tended to be patchy, 
and went deeper than desired. Delayed stinging and dis-
comfort  occurred  as  well.  These  issues  may  have  been 
due to the nature of the vehicle as well as to the topical 
anesthetic itself and do provide a cautionary note. This 
author has not encountered these issues when using the 
newer  preparations  and  has  determined  that  their  use 
can be a valuable adjunct to the procedure.

Jessner’s  solution,  consisting  of  lactic  acid,  salicylic 
acid, and resorcinol, is a mild peeling agent in its own 
right. It is a very safe peel, used primarily for acne treat-
ment  and  to  address  light  actinic  damage.  It  produces 
a patchy blanching effect and has a mild postoperative 
course. Due to its ability to serve as cleanser, degreaser, 
and peel in one step, it is often combined with TCA in 
a combination peel, giving an excellent medium-depth 
peel. In this instance, the Jessner’s solution is applied to 
the skin, and once it has penetrated, it is followed by the 
application of the TCA peel.

Glycolic  acid  in  70%  strength  was  shown  to  pro-
mote even penetration of acid and facilitate uniformity 
of  depth.  In  this  instance,  the  glycolic  acid  solution  is 
applied  to  the  skin,  and  once  it  has  penetrated  and  is 
neutralized, it is followed by the application of the TCA 
peel.  Jessner’s  solution  and  solid  CO2  have  also  been 
used in this manner and have proven to be effective pre-
paratory agents in combination with TCA 35% in both 
the aqueous and clay-chelated forms.

CONCLUSION

The palette approach to chemical peeling begins with a 
solid  foundation.  The  ﬁrst  stratum  is  the  pretreatment 
regimen.  Epidermal  effacement,  reduction  of  potential 
hyperpigmentation, and enhanced healing are the goals. 
A more intangible asset of the pretreatment period is the 
ability to prepare the patient mentally for the procedure. 

Regular  daily  application  of  pretreatment  medications 
enforces the habits necessary for safer and more effective 
healing postprocedure. Although a poorly executed regi-
men is not a contraindication to performing the peel, the 
dermatologic surgeon can better gauge the patient’s com-
mitment  to  treatment  when  assessing  their  adherence 
to the pretreatment regimen. The second stratum is the 
preparation period. The steps taken during this crucial 
time just before and during the peel itself are designed 
to ensure a more even application of agent, produce the 
desired depth of penetration, and reduce pain and dis-
comfort.  Combining  a  good  foundation  with  excellent 
technique will help ensure an optimum result.

FURTHER READING

Ayres III S. Superﬁcial chemosurgery in treating aging skin. 

Arch Dermatol. 1962;85:578.

Brody HJ, Hailey CW. Medium-depth chemical peeling of the 
skin: a variation of superﬁcial chemosurgery. J Dermatol 
Surg Oncol. 1986;12(12):1268–1275.

Buchanan PJ, Gilman RH. Retinoids: literature review and 
suggested algorithm, for use prior to facial resurfacing 
procedures. J Curan Aesthet Surg. 2016;9:139–144.

Chiarello SE, Resnik BI, Resnik SS. The TCA Masque: a new 
cream formulation used alone and in combination with 
Jessner’s solution. Dermatol Surg. 1996;8:687–690.
Chun EY, Lee JB, Lee KH. Focal trichloroacetic acid peel 

method for benign pigmented lesions in dark-skinned pa-
tients. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(4):512–516; discussion 516.
Coleman III WP, Futrell JM. The glycolic acid trichloroacetic 

acid peel. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1994;20(1):76–80.
Garg VK, Sarkar R, Agarwal R. Comparative evaluation of 
beneficiary effects of priming agents (2% hydroquinone 
and 0.025% retinoic acid) in the treatment of melasma with 
glycolic acid peels. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(8):1032–1040.
Hevia O, Nemeth AJ, Taylor JR. Tretinoin accelerates healing 
after trichloroacetic acid chemical peel. Arch Dermatol. 
1991;127(5):678–682.

Hung VC, Yu-yun Lee J, Zitelli JA, et al. Topical tretinoin and 
epithelial wound healing. Arch Dermatol. 1989;125:65–69.

Kligman AM, Willis I. A new formula for depigmenting 
human skin. Arch Dermatol. 1975;111(1):40–48.

Koppel RA, Coleman KM, Coleman III WP. The efficacy of 
EMLA versus ELA-Max for pain relief in medium-depth 
chemical peeling: a clinical and histopathologic evalua-
tion. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26(1):61–64.

Lee JB, Chung WG, Kwahck H, et al. Focal treatment of acne 
scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruction 
of skin scars method. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(11):1017–
1021; discussion 1021.

CHAPTER 3  The Role of Priming the Skin for Peels

37

MacKee GM, Karp FL. The treatment of post-acne scars with 

phenol. Br J Dermatol. 1952;64:456.

Mandy S. Tretinoin in the preoperative and postoperative 
management of dermabrasion. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1986;15(4):878–879, 888–889.

Matarasso SL, Glogau RG, Markey AC. Wood’s lamp 

for superﬁcial chemical peels. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1994;30(6):988–992.

Peikert JM, Krywonis NA, Rest EB, et al. The efﬁcacy of vari-
ous degreasing agents used in trichloroacetic acid peels. J 
Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1994;20(11):724–728.

Resnik SS, Lewis L. The cosmetic uses of trichloroacetic acid 
peeling in dermatology. Southern Med J. 1973;66(2):225–227.
Rubin MG. The efﬁcacy of a topical lidocaine/prilocaine anes-
thetic gel in 35% trichloroacetic acid peels. Dermatol Surg. 
1995;21(3):223–225.

Monheit GD. The Jessner’s + TCA Peel: a medium depth 

Sarkar R, Arsiwala S, Dubey N, et al. Chemical peels in 

chemical peel. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:924–930.
Moy LS, Howe K, Moy RL. Glycolic acid modulation of colla-
gen production in human skin ﬁbroblast cultures in vitro. 
Dermatol Surg. 1996;22(5):439–441.

Nanda S, Grover C, Reddy BSN. Efﬁcacy of hydroquinone 
(2%) versus tretinoin (0.025%) as adjunct topical agents 
for chemical peeling in patients of melasma. Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30(3):385–389.

melasma: a review with consensus recommendations 
by Indian pigmentary expert group. Indian J Dermatol. 
2017;62:578–584.

Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. Alpha hydroxy acids: procedures for use 

in clinical practice. Cutis. 1989;43(3):222–228.

West TB, Alster TS. Effect of pretreatment on the incidence 
of hyperpigmentation following cutaneous CO2 laser 
resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(1):15–17.

PART 2  Light Peels

4

Light Chemical Peels

Claudia Borelli, Sabrina Fischer

INTRODUCTION

Chemical peels are classified by their level of injury to 
the skin as very light/very superficial, light/superficial, 
medium-depth, or deep peels. They can also be classi-
fied by their mechanism of action as caustic, metabolic, 
or toxic peels. They induce a controlled destruction of 
parts  or  the  whole  epidermis  with  or  without  the  der-
mis,  producing  exfoliation  with  ablation  of  superficial 
lesions. The ablation is followed by regeneration of new 
epidermal and dermal tissue.

Very light or very superficial peels (Table 4.1) are those 
that lead to a necrosis of the epidermis at the level of the 
stratum  corneum.  In  contrast,  light  peels  or  superficial 
peels are those that penetrate through the epidermis and 
lead to necrosis of the entire epidermis down to the level 
of  the  stratum  granulosum  or  the  basal  lamina.  Light 
peels  cause  reduced  corneocyte  adhesion  and  increase 
the  collagen  formation  in  the  dermis.  In  this  way  they 
improve the skin’s radiance and luminosity.

Light  peels  are  used  to  treat  pigmentary  disturbances 
like  solar  lentigines,  melasma  and  hyperpigmentation, 
papulopustular rosacea, superficial acne scars and photo-
aged or light-damaged skin, as well as to improve skin tone.
The  type  of  chemical  peel  and  depth  of  the  peel  is 
selected according to the severity of the wrinkling, laxity, 
and the patient’s downtime expectations. To enhance cos-
metic improvement, topical skin-rejuvenating creams and 
dermal fillers can be used. Light peels should be repeated 
to  achieve  the  best  possible  cosmetic  improvement  and 
to obviate recurrence of the skin lesions being addressed.

38

Schürer  and  Wiest  divide  the  penetration  depths 
more  exactly  into  five  levels  (Fig.  4.1):  very  superficial 
peels  only  reach  the  stratum  corneum  (level  A),  and 
superficial/light  peels  reach  the  middle  epidermal  lay-
ers (level B) (Table 4.2). A deeper light peel to a medi-
um-depth  peel  reaches  just  below  the  stratum  basale 
(level C) and in this way causes epidermolysis.1-5

Very  superficial  peels  can  be  repeated  every  1  to 
2  weeks,  and  light  peels  can  be  repeated  every  2  to  4 
weeks. Peeling too frequently can result in an increased 
risk for complications, in particular persistent erythema, 
 postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  infections,  and 
scarring.  Because  of  the  simplicity,  low  morbidity,  cost 
effectiveness and simple availability of solutions, chemi-
cal peels still play an important role in treating photoa-
ging and pigmentary disturbances, even though there are 
more modern techniques available such as lasers.4,6,7

PEELING AGENTS: CHEMISTRY AND 
CHEMICAL FORMULATIONS
Alpha-Hydroxy Acids
Alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) are a group of organic acids. 
They are often referred to as fruit acids, including glycolic 
acid from cane sugar, citric acid from citrus fruits, and malic 
acid from apples. The AHAs used for a chemical peeling are 
produced in chemical laboratories. Additional AHAs also 
include lactic and mandelic acid. Lactic acid decreases cor-
neocyte cohesion, leading to a thinner stratum corneum. It 
moisturizes and brightens the skin and improves superficial 
acne scarring by improving the skin texture and appearance 

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

39

TABLE 4.1  Agents for Very Light Peels

Peeling Agent

Concentration

Procedure

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)
Glycolic acid (GA)
Salicylic acid
Resorcinol
Jessner’s solution

10%
20%–50%
10%–30%
20%–30%
Salicylic acid 14 g, lactic acid (85%) 14 g,  

Applied in 1 coat
Applied briefly for 1–4 minutes
4–6 minutes
Applied briefly for 5–10 minutes
Applied in 1–3 coats

Retinoic acid

1%–5%

Washed off after 4–5 hours

resorcinol 14 g with ethanol to make 100 mL

Data from Drake LA, Dinehart SM, Goltz RW et al 1995 Guidelines of care for chemical peeling. Guidelines/Outcomes Committee: 
American Academy of Dermatology. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology 33:497–503; Khunger N 2008 Standard 
guidelines of care for chemical peels. Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology 74 Suppl:S5-12; Clark E, Scerri L 
2008 Superficial and medium-depth chemical peels. Clinical Dermatology 26:209–218; and Committee for Guidelines of Care for 
Chemical Peeling. Guidelines for chemical peeling in Japan (3rd edition). Journal of Dermatology. 2012;39(4):321–325.

Beta-Hydroxy Acid
Both salicylic acid (SA) and beta-lipohydroxy acid (LHA), 
which is a derivative of SA, have antibacterial, antiinflam-
matory, antifungal, and anticomedogenic properties. Due 
to the additional fatty chain, LHA is more lipophilic than 
SA and has a more targeted mechanisms of action and a 
greater keratolytic and comedolytic effect. LHA penetrates 
well into the sebaceous follicle and through the epidermis, 
but less deeply into the skin compared with glycolic acids 
and SA. It is particularly effective in the superficial layers 
of the stratum corneum, specifically the stratum compac-
tum/disjunctum interface, and focuses its effects on the 
follicle and epidermis. Neutralization is  neither necessary 
nor possible when peeling with LHAs.3,4,8

Retinoic Acid
Retinoic acids (RAs) (all-trans retinal and retinoic acid) 
are usually used alone or in combination with AHAs or 
other ingredients. RAs lead to a thinner and more com-
pact stratum corneum and a thicker epidermis. They can 
help to improve dyschromias by creating a more consis-
tent  distribution  of  melanin  throughout  the  epidermis. 
Furthermore, RAs reverse the number of atypical kerat-
inocytes, thus leading to an improvement or eradication 
of actinic keratosis.8 By increasing production of collagen 
and capillary branching in the dermis, RAs improve skin 
texture and superficial dyschromias and lead to a pinker, 
rosier  complexion.8  The  side  effects  of  RAs  include 
increased photosensitivity.8 Exposure to sunlight during 
treatment should therefore be strictly avoided.8

AHAs act mainly on the stratum granulosum, compared 
with  RAs,  which  mainly  act  on  the  stratum  corneum.8 
Both AHAs and RAs lead to an increased and accelerated 
skin turnover from the normal 28 days to 10 to 12 days. 

Fig.  4.1  Classification  of  the  depth  of  peeling  in  five  levels 
according to Schürer and Wiest. A. very superficial,  B. superfi-
cial/light, C. medium-depth peel, D. and E. deeper peels (From 
Rubin MGS, Nanna Y, Wiest LG, Gout U 2014 Illustrated Guide 
to Chemical Peels: Basics, Practice, Uses (Aesthetic Methods 
for Skin Rejuvenation). London, Quintessence)

of the scars.8,9 Mandelic acid has slow skin penetration due 
to its large molecule size. Therefore, it is considered a safe, 
light peeling agent. In concentrations of 20% to 50% it has a 
skin-rejuvenation and lightening effect.9

AHAs  are  considered  keratolytic  agents  because  they 
cause a superficial exfoliation by breaking bonds between 
keratinocytes in the different layers of the stratum corneum 
and stratum granulosum. AHAs help to correct an abnor-
mally  thickened  stratum  corneum  of  the  epidermis.  This 
effect lasts for up to 14 days after the end of the therapy. The 
daily use of topical AHA lotion leads to an increased epi-
dermal thickness.8 In addition, AHAs lead to an increased 
dermal thickness by stimulating an increased deposition of 
collagen  and  glycosaminoglycans.8  AHAs  are  particularly 
suitable for treating patients with very sensitive skin, a ruddy 
complexion, telangiectasias, or moderate sun damage.8-11

40

PART 2  Light Peels

TABLE 4.2  Agents for Light Peels

Peeling Agent

Concentration

Procedure

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)
Glycolic acid (GA)
Salicylic acid
Mandelic acid
Pyruvic acid

10%–30%
20%–70%
10%–30%
20%–25%
40%–60%

Jessner’s solution

Salicylic acid 14 g, lactic acid (85%)  
14 g, resorcinol 14 g with ethanol  
to make 100 mL

Applied in 1 coat
Applied for a variable time (2–20 minutes)
Applied in 1 coat and left on for 5–6 minutes
—
Application until erythema occurs, 2–4 

minutes

Applied in 4–10 coats

Resorcinol

40%–50%

Applied for 30–60 minutes

inhibitors  can  be  used.  They  inhibit  tyrosinase,  thus 
blocking the conversion of tyrosine into L-dopa. This may 
reduce the melanin production of the skin and result in 
a lower risk of hyperpigmentation. Supplementary treat-
ment  with  skin-lightening  products  should  be  started  2 
to 4 weeks before the chemical peel, be continued during 
the  peel,  and  not  be  finished  until  2  to  3  months  after 
cessation of the peels. The more pronounced the hyper-
pigmentation and the darker the pigment, the earlier the 
preconditioning should be started (see Chapter 3).8

Salicylic-Mandelic Combination Acid Peels
Salicylic-mandelic  combination  acid  peels,  in  concen-
trations of 20% SA and 10% mandelic acid, are effective 
in treating acne vulgaris and acne scars. One study by 
Sarkar  et  al.  showed  that  salicylic-mandelic  combina-
tion  acid  peels  are  better  tolerated  and  therefore  more 
suitable in treating Indian patients with melasma com-
pared with glycolic acid peels (35%).9-12

Pyruvic Acid
Pyruvic acid belongs to the α-ketoacids. Pyruvic acid is also 
effective  in  treating  acne  scars  because  of  its  keratolytic, 
antimicrobial, and sebostatic qualities and collagen-build-
ing ability. It is used in concentrations of 40% to 70% and 
causes desquamation during the treatment. It may cause a 
transient, intense stinging and burning sensation.11,13

INDICATIONS

The indications for a superficial peeling include the fol-
lowing:
	•	
	•	

 Coarse skin, large pores (Fig. 4.3)
 Acne  comedonica,  papulopustular  acne  (Fig.  4.4), 
acne excoriée
 Papulopustular rosacea

A

B

Fig.  4.2  A,  Male  patient  with  hyperpigmentation  (darker  skin 
type)  who  received  five  very  superficial  chemical  peels  with 
glycolic and salicylic acid (20%) every 2 weeks in combination 
with  a  2.5%  hydroquinone  formulation:  before  treatment.  B, 
Two weeks after treatment.

RAs and glycolic acids facilitate the distribution of melanin 
throughout the epidermis. This skin-lightening effect can 
be used for the treatment or reduction in the incidence of 
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (Fig. 4.2).

In addition to the peels, topical products with a lighten-
ing effect such as hydroquinone, Kojic acid, or tyrosinase 

	•	

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

41

A

B

A

B

Fig.  4.3  A,  Patient  who  received  four  superficial  chemical 
peels  with  glycolic  and  salicylic  acid  (20%)  every  2  weeks  in 
combination for skin texture. B, Two weeks after treatment.

Fig. 4.4  A, Patient with papulopustular acne. B, After four very 
superficial chemical peels with glycolic and salicylic acid (20%) 
every 2 weeks.

	•	

	•	
	•	
	•	

	•	

 Keratosis  pilaris  (Fig.  4.5),  including  ulerythema 
ophryogenes
 Photodamaged and photoaged skin
 Actinic keratosis
 Dyschromias of the skin including ephelides, lentig-
ines  simplex,  senile  lentigines,  flat  seborrheic  ker-
atoses,  melasma  (Fig.  4.6),  and  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation
 Improvement of the skin appearance1-5,9,10,15

PATIENT PREPARATION

Priming or preprocedural treatment of the skin before 
the peel is recommended at least 2 to 4 weeks before the 
peel. The more pronounced the pigment and the darker 
the complexion, the longer the priming or precondition-
ing should be.

Adequate  priming  of  the  skin  helps  reduce  wound 
healing  time,  facilitates  uniform  penetration  of  the 
peeling  agent,  reduces  the  risk  of  possible  side  effects, 
strengthens patient compliance, and helps detect intol-
erances  at  an  early  stage.  In  addition,  a  daily  use  of 
broad-spectrum  sunscreen  (SPF  50+)  and  sun  avoid-
ance are crucial for the treatment.

Patients  should  be  instructed  not  to  perform  any 
bleaching,  scrubbing,  waxing  therapies  or  depilato-
ries, or massage in the treatment area throughout the 
time that chemical peels are being performed.

Prophylactic  antiviral  therapy  is  recommended  for 
patients  prone  to  herpes  simplex  infections,  for  example 
with acyclovir 200 mg four times per day (400 mg two times) 
or valacyclovir 500 mg one-two times per day, starting 1 day 
before the peel and for 5 to 14 days, until reepithelialization 
is completed.1-4,8,9,11-13 Antiviral therapy is continued for a 
longer duration for deeper peels than for lighter peels.

42

PART 2  Light Peels

B

A

C

Fig. 4.5  A, A patient with keratosis pilaris. B, Scaling some days after peeling. C, After epithelialization. (Cour-
tesy Dr. Luitgard Wiest.)

PEELING TECHNIQUE
Salicylic Acid Peel and General Instructions
Before starting the chemical peel, it is very important to 
ensure that the patient performed the skin priming and 
strict daily sun protection/sun avoidance reliably. There 
should  be  precise  documentation  of  the  dosage,  dura-
tion, and condition of the treated skin after each peel, as 
well as a chemical peel consent form.

After  exclusion  of  active  viral,  mycotic,  or  bacterial 
infections, the patient’s face is cleaned with a mild soap 
and water. The hair is held back by a band or cap.

The  patient  should  be  positioned  lying  on  the  back 
with the head elevated at 45 degrees or less and is asked 
to keep the eyes closed throughout the whole procedure.
Because of the thinner stratum corneum, xerosis, and 
an increased sensitivity of certain areas, the acid can be 
absorbed more quickly in areas like the nasolabial fold, 
the  lateral  canthus  of  the  eye,  the  oral  commissures, 
and the chin. These sensitive areas should be protected 

with petroleum jelly before the application of the peel. 
Additionally, the eyes should be covered with 2-inch by 
2-inch moist gauze pieces. The skin is then cleaned with 
alcohol-soaked  2-inch  by  2-inch  cotton  gauze  pieces 
and degreased with acetone.

The required peeling agent is poured into a glass bea-
ker or cup. The neutralization solution or cream should 
be placed in a glass cup and a syringe filled with saline 
or water, to flush the eyes in case of accidental exposure 
of the eyes to the peel solution.

It is important to check the label of the bottle to make 
sure the correct acid is being used before applying the 
peel.  The  neutralization  solution  should  also  be  ready, 
and  this  should  be  checked  before  starting  the  proce-
dure. To avoid dripping of the peel solution into the eyes, 
the opened bottle or soaked applicator should never be 
passed over the patient’s face/eyes.

The  peeling  agent  is  applied  evenly  and  quickly 
to  the  face  using  a  brush,  cotton-tipped  applicator,  or 
gauze.  The  application  starts  from  the  forehead,  then 

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

43

Very  superficial  peels  can  be  repeated  every  1  to  2 

weeks, superficial peels every 2 to 4 weeks.2,4,8

Glycolic Acid Peels
Glycolic acid is the most commonly used AHA as a peel-
ing  agent.  AHA  peels  are  nontoxic,  systemically  safe, 
and  well  tolerated  by  patients  and  are  associated  with 
a  low  incidence  of  manageable  complications.  In  low 
concentrations  (5%  to  15%),  glycolic  acid  can  be  used 
for  daily  skin  care.  Concentrations  of  20%  to  70%  are 
used to perform chemical peels. The higher the concen-
tration of the solution and the longer the exposure time, 
the deeper the penetration depth of the peel.

When using a glycolic acid peel, the peeling agent has 
to  be  neutralized  after  a  certain,  predetermined  time, 
usually  3  to  5  minutes.  Once  the  desired  penetration 
depth has been reached or the predetermined applica-
tion time is reached, AHA peels must be neutralized to 
terminate their effect.

If  erythema  or  epidermolysis  occurs,  which  often 
appears  as  a  greyish  white  discoloration  of  the  epider-
mis or small blisters (so-called “frost”), the peeling agent 
must be neutralized immediately regardless of the time. 
For  neutralization,  10%  to  15%  sodium  bicarbonate 
solution or neutralization lotion is used, which is then 
washed off with water, which causes a fizzing on the face. 
The  acid  can  also  be  neutralized  by  washing  the  face 
with  water.  Care  must  be  taken  to  make  sure  that  the 
complete acid is neutralized.

Glycolic  acid  solutions  with  a  low  pH  value  cause 
erythema, irritation, stinging, and burning pain and are 
less tolerated by patients. They also do not penetrate the 
skin  evenly.  Therefore  it  is  recommended  to  use  solu-
tions with a higher pH value.

According  to  the  penetration  depth  of  a  superficial 
peeling,  the  skin  first  turns  pink,  then  red,  signifying 
intraepidermal wounding. The occurrence of frost signi-
fies dermal injury. A bland emollient is suitable for post-
treatment. Glycolic acid peels can be repeated at 2 to 4 
week intervals until the desired result is achieved. These 
peels are particularly suitable for the treatment of mot-
tled  hyperpigmentation,  fine  wrinkles,  and  sun-dam-
aged skin (Fig. 4.7). They can also be applied on other 
sun-damaged  areas  like  the  dorsum  of  the  hands,  the 
neck, and the chest, but the peel needs to be superficial 
outside the face to avoid scarring.8 Dark pigmentation 
and  moderate  wrinkling  are  mostly  resistant  to  the 
treatment with glycolic acid.

A

B

Fig.  4.6  A,  Patient  with  melasma  (darker  skin  type)  who 
received four very superficial chemical peels with glycolic and 
salicylic acid (20%) every 2 weeks in combination with a 2.5% 
hydroquinone  formulation:  before  treatment.  B,  Eight  weeks 
after  last  chemical  peeling  (ongoing  home  care  regimen  with 
depigmenting formulation and alpha-hydroxy acids).

proceeds to the right temple and cheek, nose, left temple 
and  cheek,  to  the  chin.  If  a  treatment  of  the  upper  or 
lower eyelids or perioral region is required, these areas 
are treated last. To avoid demarcation lines and to blend 
with the surrounding untreated skin, feathering strokes 
are applied on the edges.

The  application  of  SA  peels  leads  to  crystallization, 
which  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  “pseudofrost.”  In  SA 
peels, one to three layers are usually applied to achieve an 
even pseudofrost. After 3 to 5 minutes, the peel is washed 
off with water once the burning has subsided. The patient 
is asked to continue washing the face with cold water until 
the burning sensation ceases. The face is then dabbed dry 
with gauze. Rubbing the skin should be avoided.

Tretinoin peels are yellow peels. They are left on for 
an exposure time of 4 to 5 hours and are then washed 
off.

44

PART 2  Light Peels

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 4.7  A–C, Patient with mottled skin and melasma before treatment, baseline. D, Directly after chemical 
peeling (third time) with glycolic and salicylic acid (20%) every 2 weeks in combination with a 2.5% hydro-
quinone formulation. E–F, Immediately after the peel. G–I (see next page), After eight chemical peelings with 
glycolic and salicylic acid (20%) every 2 weeks in combination with a 2.5% hydroquinone formulation.

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

45

F

G

H

I

Fig. 4.7, cont’d 

46

PART 2  Light Peels

Jessner’s Solution Peels
Jessner’s solution consists of the following components: SA 
14 g, lactic acid (85%) 14 g, and resorcinol 14 g with ethanol 
to make 100 mL.8 It is used for light peels or as a priming 
agent before a TCA peel. The penetration depth of the peel-
ing depends on the number of coats of solution applied.

For  a  very  superficial  peel  (level  A),  one  to  three 
coats are applied. A slight erythema is formed, which 
can  be  associated  with  a  slightly  whitish-powdery 
appearance of the skin. This white precipitate is caused 
by  the  precipitation  of  SA  on  the  skin  and  can  easily 
be wiped off. There is no coagulation (frost). For 1 to 2 
days a slight exfoliation of the skin may occur, or none 
at all.

For a superficial peel (level B) 4 to 10 coats are applied. 
An  erythema  is  formed  and  pinpoints  of  white  frost 
occur. For 15 to 30 minutes, mild to moderate burning 
and stinging occurs. The following 1 to 3 days, the skin 
turns slightly red-brown and feels very tight. For 2 to 4 
days there is exfoliation with flaking, but rarely peeling 
of the skin.

If  more  layers  of  Jessner’s  solution  are  applied,  a 
deeper penetration depth is achieved, which is accom-
panied by increasing formation of frost and subsequent 
exfoliation lasting 8 to 10 days.

The penetration depth depends not only on the num-
ber of coats of solution applied, but also on the prepara-
tion or priming of the skin, the thickness of the stratum 
corneum, and the sensitivity of the skin. It may therefore 
vary slightly from patient to patient. The solution should 
be left on the skin for 4 to 6 minutes to assess the full 
effect of the solution on the skin.

In the healing phase, a mild moisturizing treatment 
should be applied to offset the tight and mask-like feel-
ing  of  the  skin.  In  case  of  persistent  stinging  or  per-
sistent sensitivity, a mild topical steroid can be applied. 
Makeup  may  be  used  during  the  healing  phase.  Facial 
toners, peels, scrubs, masks, or RAs may only be used 48 
hours after the peeling has healed.

The advantages of a Jessner’s peel are its very super-
ficial  effect,  that  it  goes  rarely  deeper  than  expected, 
and that it is safe and has few side effects. Because of 
the  low  amount  of  resorcinol  and  SA,  toxicity  only 
plays a role in the treatment of very large areas, such 
as the simultaneous treatment of face, chest, arms, and 
lower legs.8

Trichloroacetic Acid Peels
TCA peels with a concentration of 10% to 25% TCA are 
suitable  for  intraepidermal  peels.  With  concentrations 
of  30%  to  40%,  a  deeper  peel  reaching  the  papillary 
dermis can be achieved. TCA peels are often used as a 
medium-depth peel to treat pigmentation disorders and 
early facial rhytids.

The application of several coats or overlap of coats should 
be avoided to prevent deep wounding. It is recommended 
to treat the region of the eyebrows and also a little beyond 
the  hairline  and  jawline.  A  very  light  peel  results  in  some 
erythema, and irregular patches of light frosting (speckled 
frosting) may occur, which heals after 2 to 4 days of mild 
flaking. A light TCA peel that penetrates the entire epider-
mis results in erythema and an “almost” uniform white frost, 
which heals within 5 days (Figs. 4.8 and 4.9). The TCA peel is 
washed off with cold water and a gentle cleanser.2,4,8

POSTPEEL CARE

The  goal  of  a  good  aftercare  routine  is  to  minimize  the 
risk of side effects and complications and to achieve an 
early  “restitutio  ad  integrum”  regeneration  of  the  skin. 
This is particularly important for darker skinned patients, 
who have an increased risk of postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation. A careful postpeeling treatment is crucial 
for most patients to maximize the results of the peel.

After the chemical peel, erythema, mild edema, and 
desquamation occur. These last for 1 to 3 days in super-
ficial  peels.  After  3  to  5  days,  the  epidermis  is  usually 
completely reepithelialized.

A  mild  soap  or  gentle  nonsoap  cleanser  can  be 
used. In case of crusting, a topical antibacterial therapy 
should be used to avoid bacterial superinfections. The 
patients must be given clear instructions for the post-
peel period. To soothe the skin, cold compresses can be 
used. Patients should be instructed to the daily use of 
broad-spectrum  sunscreen  (SPF  50+)  and  sun  avoid-
ance  and  to  use  only  light  moisturizing  lotions  until 
the skin has completely healed. Patients are instructed 
to avoid manipulating, picking, or scratching the skin 
or treated areas. They must avoid all sports and sweat-
ing during the healing process. Usually analgesics are 
not necessary.

In  addition,  patients  should  be  informed  of  early 
warning  signs  of  complications  such  as  severe  and 

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

47

A

B

C

D

E

F

H

G

I

Fig.  4.8  A–C,  Patient  before  treatment.  D,  Chemical  peeling  with  trichloroacetic  acid  20%,  beginning  of 
frost. E, Directly after, treatment with cream. F–G, After 1 month. H–I, After 2 months. (Courtesy Dr. Luitgard 
Wiest.)

48

PART 2  Light Peels

A

C

E

B

D

F

Fig. 4.9  A, Patient before treatment. B, Marking of the area to treat. C, Beginning of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 
frost (15% TCA). D, TCA frost. E, Three days after chemical peeling. F, Seven days after chemical peeling. 
(Courtesy Dr. Luitgard Wiest.)

prolonged  erythema,  edema,  burning  sensation,  crust-
ing, hyperpigmentation, or formation of pustules or ves-
icles. In addition to close postpeel follow-up treatment, 
patients should be instructed to immediately report any 
early  signs  of  complications  to  initiate  a  therapy  at  an 
early stage. Patients should be given a contact number 
for such emergencies.1-4,8,9

CONTRAINDICATIONS AND 
COMPLICATIONS
Contraindications
Absolute contraindications of superficial chemical peels 
include active bacterial, viral, or fungal infections; open 
wounds; pregnancy; and breastfeeding.

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

49

Additional relative contraindications include the use 
of photosensitizing drugs or the presence of inflamma-
tory skin diseases. Patients with unrealistic expectations 
and  noncompliant  patients,  for  example  patients  who 
presumably do not adhere to strict sun protection and 
sun  avoidance  or  do  not  perform  the  preconditioning 

or  priming  before  and  after  treatment,  should  not  be 
treated.2,9

Complications
Superficial peels are quite safe and have fewer side effects 
and complications than deeper peels (Table 4.3).3

TABLE 4.3  Complications
Tears

By tears running down the cheeks, the peeling agent in the area of the cheeks can be 

neutralized prematurely and may cause the tears to transfer the peel solution to areas 
such as the neck or the ears. It is very important to dab off all tears immediately and to 
wash and neutralize the fallen tears as quickly as possible with water.

Premature peeling

Premature peeling of the skin is associated with an increased risk of several side effects 

Infections

Acneiform eruptions

such as infection, persistent erythema, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, and 
scarring. It may occur accidentally or by manipulation of peeled skin (e.g., picking at the 
treated skin). Early and aggressive therapy with oral antibiotic is recommended until 
complete reepithelialization.

The risk of infections increases with the depth of the peeling.
	 •	  Bacterial infections (staphylococci, streptococci, pseudomonas, nitrobacteria)
	 •	  Viral infections (herpes simplex, varicella)
	 •	  Mycoses (Candida)
An adequate, early, and aggressive therapy is indispensable to avoiding scarring.
Acneiform eruptions may present as multiple erythematous follicular papules and may 

occur during or shortly after the peel. They are treated with oral antibiotics, commonly 
used in the treatment of acne.

Postinflammatory  

Patients with dark skin type are particularly at higher risk for PIH. It may occur very soon 

hyperpigmentation (PIH)

Persistent erythema

or several months after the peel, is often associated with a too early sun exposure 
after the peeling, persists, and is very difficult to treat. The daily use of broad-spectrum 
sunscreen (SPF 50+) and sun avoidance is indispensable for the treatment.

Epidermal PIH responds well to therapy with topical steroids, tretinoin, hydroquinone, 
Kojic acids, alpha-hydroxy acids, and light peels (e.g., with 10% trichloroacetic acid, 
Jessner’s solution, or 50%–70% glycolic acid).

Erythema lasting longer than 3 weeks after the peeling may be a sign of an impending 
hypertrophic scarring. A therapy with highly potent topical corticosteroids (class 1) for 
about 2 weeks is recommended.

Scarring

Scarring is a rare side effect in light peels. The risk of scarring can be reduced with 

appropriate priming or prepeel treatment, the right choice of exfoliating agents, and 
appropriate follow-up treatment and care. Particularly at risk are patients with a history 
of poor wound healing, hypertrophic scars and keloids, a recent therapy with isotreti-
noin in the last 1–2 months, infection in the treatment area, deep peels, or too short of 
a time interval between peels, or a peel that is performed too soon after surgery in the 
treatment area.

Data from Drake LA, Dinehart SM, Goltz RW et al 1995 Guidelines of care for chemical peeling. Guidelines/Outcomes Committee: 
American Academy of Dermatology. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology 33:497–503; Khunger N 2008 Standard 
guidelines of care for chemical peels. Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology 74 Suppl:S5-12; Rendon MI, 
Berson DS, Cohen JL, et al 2010 Evidence and considerations in the application of chemical peels in skin disorders and aesthetic 
resurfacing. Journal of Clinical Aesthetic Dermatology 3:32–43; Clark E, Scerri L 2008 Superficial and medium-depth chemical 
peels. Clinical Dermatology 26:209–218; Kontochristopoulos G, Platsidaki E 2017 Chemical peels in active acne and acne scars. 
Clinical Dermatology 35:179–182; Garg VK, Sinha S, Sarkar R 2009 Glycolic acid peels versus salicylic-mandelic acid peels in active 
acne vulgaris and post-acne scarring and hyperpigmentation: a comparative study. Dermatologic Surgery 35:59–65; and Berar-
desca E, Cameli N, Primavera G, Carrera M 2006 Clinical and instrumental evaluation of skin improvement after treatment with a 
new 50% pyruvic acid peel. Dermatologic Surgery 32:526–531.

50

PART 2  Light Peels

PRACTICAL TIPS AND CONCLUSION

The  best  way  to  avoid  complications  is  to  identify 
patients at risk and to use lighter peels or to avoid peels 
altogether. The deeper the chemical peel and the darker 
the  skin  type,  the  higher  the  risk  of  complications. 
Patients at risk are those with dark skin type, a history 
of hyperpigmentation, hypertrophic scarring or keloids, 
high  exposure  to  sunlight,  outdoor  occupations  (e.g., 
field  workers),  history  of  photosensitivity  or  patients 
taking photosensitizing drugs, patients who were treated 
with isotretinoin in the last 1 to 2 months, patients with 
very  sensitive  skin  or  atopic  dermatitis  or  who  do  not 
tolerate  topical  sun  protection  or  hydroquinone,  those 
with  dry  skin  and  a  reddish  skin  tone,  patients  with 
recurrent herpes infections, and uncooperative patients 
or patients with low compliance and unrealistic expec-
tations.2,3,8

AHAs  peels  are  particularly  suited  for  priming 
patients  with  very  sensitive  skin,  reddish  complexion, 
or telangiectasias or patients with severe sun exposure. 
Glycolic acid peels are also suitable for other sun-dam-
aged areas like the neck, dorsum of the hands, and the 
chest  but  are  currently  most  popular  in  the  treatment 
of  melasma.  They  lead  to  an  improvement  of  mottled 
hyperpigmentation  and  fine  wrinkling.  Glycolic  acid 
peels are also used in the treatment of acne, postinflam-
matory  hyperpigmentation,  shallow  acne  scars,  pap-
ulopustular  rosacea,  seborrheic  and  actinic  keratoses, 
keratosis  pilaris,  and  some  verrucae  that  are  resistant 
to  conventional  treatments.  AHAs  increase  ultraviolet 
(UV)  sensitivity,  whereas  LHA  leads  to  an  increased 
resistance of the skin to UV-induced damage.3,8,16-18

Beta-hydroxy acids peels, especially SA or LHA, are 
excellent for treating patients with acne because of their 
lipophilic  and  strong  comedolytic  effect.  Kessler  et  al. 
showed in a split-face study that both glycolic acid and 
SA are similarly effective, but SA peels had better sus-
tained efficiency 2 months after the treatment (blinded 
evaluator  and  number  of  acne  lesions)  and  fewer  side 
effects.  SA  peels  are  also  effective  in  the  treatment 
of  dyschromias  like  melasma  and  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation,  oily  skin,  rough  skin  texture,  and 
mild  photodamage,  but  less  effective  in  patients  with 
significant photodamage.

Salicylic-mandelic  combination  acid  peels,  in  con-
centration  of  20%  SA  and  10%  mandelic  acid,  are 
proven effective in treating acne vulgaris and acne scars 

and seem to be well tolerated and therefore suitable in 
treating Indian patients with melasma, compared with 
glycolic acid peels (35%).3,8,11,12,19-21

RA peels are often used in combination with AHAs 
peels,  particularly  in  patients  with  oily  and  thick  skin. 
AHA peels act mainly on stratum granulosum, whereas 
RA peels mainly act on stratum corneum. LHA and RA 
improve the surface texture.3,8

Jessner’s peels are ideal for patients with dyschromias 
because they create a fairly uniform peel with a distinc-
tive  amount  of  exfoliation.  Jessner’s  solution  peels  are 
also used in the therapy of mild acne scarring, often as 
a  combined  peel  with  TCA.  Disadvantages  of  Jessner’s 
solution  peels  include  erythema  and  discoloration, 
which are often not easy to cover up with makeup.3,8

RA peels are very suitable for treating patients with 

melasma and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

TCA peels are mostly used to treat pigmentation disor-
ders and early facial rhytides with medium-depth peels.3,8

REFERENCES

  1.   Drake LA, Dinehart SM, Goltz RW, et al. Guidelines of 
care for chemical peeling. Guidelines/Outcomes Com-
mittee: American Academy of dermatology. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 1995;33(3):497–503.

  2.   Khunger N. Standard guidelines of care for chemical 
peels. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2008;74(sup-
pl):S5–S12.

  3.   Rendon MI, Berson DS, Cohen JL, Roberts WE, Starker I, 

Wang B. Evidence and considerations in the application 
of chemical peels in skin disorders and aesthetic resurfac-
ing. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2010;3(7):32–43.
  4.   Rubin MGS, Nanna Y. / Wiest, Luitgard G. / Gout, 

 Uliana. Illustrated Guide to Chemical Peels: Basics, Prac-
tice, Uses (Aesthetic Methods for Skin Rejuvenation). 1st 
ed. London; Chicago: Quintessence Publishing/KVM; 
2014:280.

  5.   Wiest LG, Habig J. [Chemical peel treatments in derma-

tology]. Hautarzt. 2015;66(10):744–747.

  6.   Baumann L. Cosmetic Dermatology: Principles and 

Practice. 2nd ed. United States: McGraw-Hill Education / 
Medical; 2009.

  7.   Rullan P, Karam AM. Chemical peels for darker skin types. 
Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am. 2010;18(1):111–131.
  8.   Clark E, Scerri L. Superficial and medium-depth chemi-

cal peels. Clin Dermatol. 2008;26(2):209–218.

  9.   Kontochristopoulos G, Platsidaki E. Chemical peels in  

active acne and acne scars. Clin Dermatol. 
2017;35(2):179–182.

CHAPTER 4  Light Chemical Peels

51

 10.   Bennett M L, Henderson R L. Introduction to cosmetic 
dermatology. Curr Probl Dermatol. 2003;15(2):43–83.
 11.   Sarkar R, Garg V, Bansal S, Sethi S, Gupta C. Compar-
ative evaluation of efficacy and tolerability of glycolic 
acid, salicylic mandelic acid, and phytic acid combination 
peels in melasma. Dermatol Surg. 2016;42(3):384–391.
 12.   Garg VK, Sinha S, Sarkar R. Glycolic acid peels versus 

salicylic-mandelic acid peels in active acne vulgaris and 
post-acne scarring and hyperpigmentation: a compara-
tive study. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(1):59–65.

 13.   Berardesca E, Cameli N, Primavera G, Carrera M. Clini-
cal and instrumental evaluation of skin improvement af-
ter treatment with a new 50% pyruvic acid peel. Dermatol 
Surg. 2006;32(4):526–531.

 14.   Guidelines for chemical peeling in Japan (3rd edition). 

Jdermatol. 2012;39(4):321–325.

 16.   Erbil H, Sezer E, Tastan B, Arca E, Kurumlu Z. Efficacy 
and safety of serial glycolic acid peels and a topical regi-
men in the treatment of recalcitrant melasma. J Derma-
tol. 2007;34(1):25–30.

 17.   Rani S, Sharma P. Glycolic acid peel in disseminated 

facial verrucae. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2017;19(8):475–478.

 18.   Sharad J. Glycolic acid peel therapy - a current review. 

Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2013;6:281–288.

 19.   Grimes PE. The safety and efficacy of salicylic acid chem-
ical peels in darker racial-ethnic groups. Dermatol Surg. 
1999;25(1):18–22.

 20.   Kessler E, Flanagan K, Chia C, Rogers C, Glaser DA. 

Comparison of alpha- and beta-hydroxy acid chemical 
peels in the treatment of mild to moderately severe facial 
acne vulgaris. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(1):45–50; discus-
sion 1.

 15.   Chen X, Wang S, Yang M, Li L. Chemical peels for acne 

vulgaris: a systematic review of randomised controlled 
trials. BMJ Open. 2018;8(4):e019607.

 21.   Pierard GE, Rougier A. Nudging acne by topical beta-li-
pohydroxy acid (LHA), a new comedolytic agent. Eur J 
Dermatol. 2002;12(4):Xlvii–xlviii.

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

5

Medium-Depth Peels and 
Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

Suzan Obagi

INTRODUCTION

Medium-depth chemical peels remain very important and 
highly versatile tools for skin resurfacing and rejuvenation. 
Although newer laser technology has added to the arsenal 
of tools for skin resurfacing, these lasers are either cost-pro-
hibitive for certain patients, not advisable for certain skin 
types, or, most importantly, not as flexible for the physi-
cians who like to tailor their skin-resurfacing approach for 
each  patient.  When  performed  correctly,  chemical  peels 
can  play  an  important  role  in  cosmetic  surgery  and  can 
be tailored to address most skin issues. Advanced chemi-
cal peel techniques can be used in combination with laser 
resurfacing, nonablative lasers, and surgical procedures to 
enhance the overall outcome for patients.

AGING SKIN (INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC)

Many  complex  changes  are  occurring  in  the  skin  that 
reflect  both  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  aging.  Starting 
around the age of 18 years, there is a natural decline in 
fibroblast function resulting in decreased collagen and 
elastin  production,  which  is  referred  to  as  “intrinsic 
aging.” This reduction is on the order of approximately 
1% per year starting at the age of 18 years. External fac-
tors  such  as  ultraviolet  radiation  (UVR),  high-energy 
visible light, and infrared light act on the skin to acceler-
ate the aging process and is known as “extrinsic aging.” 
At the epidermal level, the normal cycling of the kera-
tinocytes  slows  with  age,  but  with  extrinsic  aging,  the 
epidermis  begins  to  show  roughness,  dyschromia,  and 
keratinocyte atypia.

INDICATIONS FOR MEDIUM-DEPTH 
CHEMICAL PEELS

PATIENT EVALUATION

Indications for light and deep peels will be covered in 
other chapters in this textbook. This chapter will focus 
on  medium-depth  peels.  Knowledge  of  skin  anatomy 
and where in the skin a particular skin pathology (wrin-
kles, lentigines, melasma, scars, actinic keratosis) exists 
is crucial to performing a safe and effective resurfacing 
procedure (Table 5.1). If one resurfaces too superficially, 
the patient’s chief complaint may be missed. Conversely, 
resurfacing  deeper  than  is  required  only  increases  the 
risk of complications and prolongs the recovery time.

Chapter 2 of this textbook covers patient evaluation in 
more  depth.  Some  points  worth  reiterating  are  men-
tioned here. Of utmost importance is the proper selec-
tion of the resurfacing modality for the patient and the 
patient’s  concerns  and  the  proper  preparation  of  the 
patient’s skin before and after skin resurfacing (see Chap-
ter 3). Be sure to evaluate the patient for skin flaws and 
scars  and  to  document  skin  imperfections  at  the  time 
of  consultation  and  to  take  high-quality  before-and- 
after photographs for each procedure. Similarly, showing 

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

53

TABLE 5.1  Clinical Indications for Skin Resurfacing

Anatomical Skin Level

Clinical Presentation

Treatment Options

Epidermis

Dermis

Epidermis and dermis

Epidermal melasma
Actinic keratosis
Seborrheic keratosisa
Solar lentigines (sunspots)
Ephelides (freckles)
Dermal melasma
Wrinkles: depth varies
Scars: depth varies
Telangiectasiasb
Sebaceous hyperplasiasa
Syringomas*
Mixed-type melasma

Topical products
Superficial peels
Pigment lasersc

Medium-depth resurfacing to deep peels
Vascular lasers

Medium-depth resurfacing

aBest treated with electrodessication (using an epilating needle for dermal lesions)
bBest treated with chromophore specific lasers
cUse cautiously in melasma patients

TABLE 5.2  Patient Social and Medical History

Pertinent History

Relative Contraindications

Absolute Contraindications

Medical

Social

Medications
Systemic illnesses
Psychiatric illnesses
Depression
OCD
BDD

MRSA history
Radiation to the treated area
HSV or VZV tendency
Hormone contraceptives 
including hormone IUDs

Smoking history
Chronic sun exposure

Active inflammatory skin disease 

Active infection at the treatment 

such as acne, rosacea, CTD

site

Vitiligo
Bariatric surgery with nutritional 

deficiency diabetes

History of keloids at the treatment 
site: avoid reticular dermis level 
procedures

Isotretinoin current or recent

Pregnancy

Smoking/vaping/nicotine use

Inability to follow instructions
Unrealistic expectations

BDD,  Body  dysmorphic  disorder;  CTD,  connective  tissue  disease;  HSV,  herpes  simplex  virus;  IUD,  intrauterine  device;  MRSA, 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder; VZV, varicella zoster virus.

patients  high-quality  before-and-after  photographs  is 
extremely useful and allows the patient to gauge whether 
this treatment is giving the amount of improvement they 
seek. Showing photographs also helps the physician to 
identify patients with unrealistic expectations.

Patient evaluation should include a thorough medical, 
social, and family history to identify any possible contra-
indication to skin resurfacing (Table 5.2). Patients should 
be examined with no makeup on in a well-lit room. Acne 
scar patients should be examined with indirect overhead 

light  to  allow  shadows  to  be  cast  on  the  skin  to  better 
delineate  scar  morphology.  Skin  conditions  that  can 
Koebnerize to areas that are resurfaced should be iden-
tified as well (i.e., flat warts, vitiligo, psoriasis) (Fig. 5.1).
Patients  being  treated  for  melasma  should  be  ques-
tioned  about  the  use  of  hormone  intrauterine  devices 
(IUDs), hormone cervical rings, or oral contraceptives. 
The  use  of  hormone  contraceptives  will  continue  to 
stimulate the melasma and may lead to treatment failure 
or worsening of the condition.

54

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

Fig. 5.1  A patient with vitiligo is at risk for Koebnerization.

CONSIDERATIONS IN MEDIUM-DEPTH 
SKIN RESURFACING

Chapter 2 offers a more detailed discussion on contrain-
dications for skin resurfacing. The beauty of a properly 
performed chemical peel is that with the correct patient 
skin  preparation  and  proper  peel  depth  penetration, 
patients of most skin types can be treated. Furthermore, 
areas  that  are  usually  not  amenable  to  laser  resurfac-
ing can be safely peeled with the proper chemical peel 
(Table  5.3),  allowing  for  safe  combination  resurfacing 
in one sitting to give overall rejuvenation with no lines 
of demarcation. Similarly, with the proper skin precon-
ditioning,  patients  of  most  ethnicities  can  be  treated. 
Patients with darker complexions still remain at higher 
risk  for  temporary  postinflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion (PIH) with any peel and permanent hypopigmen-
tation  with  peels  that  reach  the  reticular  dermis.  The 
risk of PIH in a darker-skinned patient can be reduced 
by  extending  the  length  of  skin  preconditioning  to  3 
months  rather  than  the  usual  6  weeks.  Thus,  although 
the risk of PIH is not a contraindication to resurfacing, it 
should be anticipated and addressed before resurfacing.
Medium-depth  and  deep  peels  require  a  healthy 
nutritional status and well-functioning immune system 

TABLE 5.3  Anatomical Areas Safe for 
Light and Medium-Depth Peels

Peel Depth

Light peels 

to the basal 
layer of the 
epidermis

Clinical  
Presentation

Epidermal melasma
Actinic keratosis
Solar lentigines 

(sunspots)

Ephelides (freckles)

Medium-depth 
peels to the 
papillary der-
mis level

Dermal melasma
Lentigines
Actinic cheilitis
Wrinkles: depth 

varies

Scars: depth varies

Deep peels to 
the reticular 
or mid-reticu-
lar dermisa

Scars: ice-pick 

(CROSSb tech-
nique)

Wrinkles: deep

Anatomical 
Areas

Hairline
Eyebrows
Eyelids
Ears
Lips
Neck
Décolletage of 

chest
Hairline
Eyebrows
Eyelids
Ears
Lips
Neck
Décolletage of 

chest
Cheeks
Perioral
Periorbitalc

aProper patient selection is crucial.
bChemical reconstruction of skin scars
cSee  chapters  on  phenol  peels  for  various  peel  strengths  to 
safely address these areas.

for uneventful wound healing. Patients who have under-
gone bariatric surgery often are deficient in vital nutri-
ents, iron, and protein. Blood laboratory tests can help 
identify issues. Transplant patients or those on medica-
tions for autoimmune diseases are functionally immu-
nologically impaired, putting them at risk for infection. 
These patients may require coverage with an oral antibi-
otic during the healing period (penicillin, cephalospo-
rin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole).

Recent oral retinoid use was once considered an abso-
lute  contraindication  for  skin  resurfacing  due  to  con-
cerns of increased hypertrophic scar formation in these 
patients. Many recent studies and case series have shown 
that this concern may not be valid. Patients having laser 
hair removal, laser skin resurfacing, or medium- depth 
peels  in  these  studies  did  not  demonstrate  increased 
adverse  outcomes.  Although  these  studies  may  be 
small,  they  do  show  the  complexities  associated  with 
keloid  formation,  and  they  challenge  the  conventional 
thinking  that  isotretinoin  impairs  wound  healing.  As 

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

55

described  in  Chapter  12,  the  author  uses  isotretinoin 
during  the  recovery  phase  if  indicated  to  control  oili-
ness and inflammation, but the same author does wait 6 
months out from isotretinoin treatment before perform-
ing a deep peel. For medium-depth peels, it may be pru-
dent to stop isotretinoin 3 to 4 months before the peel. If 
a patient has an inflammatory condition such as acne or 
rosacea, oral antiinflammatory antibiotics (doxycycline) 
can be used temporarily.

The  timing  of  skin  resurfacing  with  surgical  pro-
cedures  is  important,  because  patients  like  the  idea  of 
maximizing their treatments and reducing the amount 
of time they have to take off from work or daily activ-
ities. Studies have shown the safety of skin resurfacing 
with  browlifts,  blepharoplasties,  and  rhytidectomies. 
Care has to be taken to minimize the depth of resurfac-
ing over flaps (basal layer or papillary dermis level peel) 
and kept away from incisions, whereas the peel or laser 
resurfacing can be deeper over the central face (nonun-
dermined skin).

As  with  any  elective  procedure,  the  absolute  con-
traindications  to  resurfacing  include  pregnancy,  active 
infection  at  the  treatment  site,  significant  tendency  to 
develop keloids, and the inability to adhere to postoper-
ative instructions.

MEDIUM-DEPTH SKIN RESURFACING
Mechanisms of Action
Peels  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  light  or  deep 
depending on the acid used and the concentration of 
the acid. However, by classifying peel depth solely by 
acid  or  concentration  is  misleading  and  dangerous, 
because there are many factors that affect peel depth. 
One should take into consideration the following vari-
ables  that  can  affect  peel  depth:  acid  concentration, 
the volume of acid applied, skin thickness, percentage 
body  surface  area  treated,  skin  preconditioning,  and, 
in  some  cases,  the  duration  of  contact  of  the  acid  on 
the skin. Chapter 1 covers, in depth, the various types 
of chemical peel acids and their physical and chemical 
properties.

For  medium-depth  peeling,  it  is  important  to 
understand the main mechanism of action of the acid 
on the skin, especially when performing combination 
peels (Table 5.4). This is either a keratolytic effect or a 
protein  denaturant  effect.  The  keratolytics  are  mainly 

TABLE 5.4  Chemical Peel Formulas

Acid Properties

Keratolytics

Protein denatur-

ants

Commonly Used Concentrations 
& Formulations

Salicylic acid peels 15%–30%
Glycolic acid 50%–70%
Jessner’s solution
Phenol 25%–50%a
Trichloroacetic acid 15%–100%
Phenol 60%–88%
Baker-Gordon phenol peel: 50% 

phenol, 2.1% croton oil

Hetter phenol peels: 50% phenol, 

0.7% croton oil

Hetter “all around”: 35% phenol, 

0.4% croton oil

Hetter VL (neck and eyelid): 30% 

phenol, 0.1% croton oil

Stone V-K: 62% phenol, 0.16% 

croton oil

Stone 2: 60% phenol, 0.2% croton 

oil

aPhenol  at  concentrations  below  50%  has  keratolytic 
 properties.

used  for  superficial,  exfoliative  procedures,  whereas 
the protein denaturants can be used for superficial or 
deeper peels.

Keratolytics
As  the  name  implies,  keratolytic  agents  disrupt  the 
adhesion of the keratinocyte cells to one another. These 
agents  can  be  used  to  break  up  the  stratum  corneum 
and  various  levels  into  the  epidermis  to  allow  for  a 
light  chemical  exfoliation  to  occur.  However,  as  will 
be  discussed,  keratolytic  peels  can  also  help  enhance 
the depth of penetration of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 
peels when used in combination. The two main acids 
used for combination peels are glycolic acid and Jess-
ner’s  solution.  Jessner’s  solution  is  composed  of  14% 
each of resorcinol, salicylic acid, and lactic acid mixed 
in ethanol.

Jessner’s solution has an advantage over glycolic acid 
in  that  the  salicylic  acid  in  it  is  lipophilic.  Therefore 
Jessner’s solution can penetrate acne lesions or oily skin 
better  than  a  hydrophilic  agent  such  as  glycolic  acid. 
An additional advantage of Jessner’s solution is that the 

56

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

physician  does  not  have  to  monitor  the  skin  contact 
time closely as one would with a glycolic acid solution.

Protein Denaturants
Phenol and TCA are the two protein denaturant peeling 
agents. TCA is one of the main peeling acids used for 
medium-depth peels with a long, proven safety record. 
Similarly, phenol is the main peeling acid used in vari-
ous formulas for deep peels. TCA and phenol work by 
causing protein coagulation and denaturation as they 
penetrate the skin. TCA and phenol coagulate proteins 
that make up the cells of the epidermis and dermis as 
well as the blood vessels. Once a certain amount of the 
acids  have  been  applied,  they  will  continue  to  coag-
ulate proteins until they are used up. They cannot be 
neutralized  once  they  begin  to  be  absorbed  into  the 
skin. After about 2 minutes, the depth of TCA pene-
tration can be observed and a decision can be made if 
more  acid  is  needed  to  drive  the  peel  deeper.  Phenol 
is  a  lot  more  rapid  in  its  penetration,  and  the  depth 
is  apparent  almost  immediately.  Subsequent  appli-
cation  of  acid  will  continue  to  drive  the  peel  deeper 
until it is used up by coagulating proteins deeper in the 
skin. When used correctly, these acids can be used to 
achieve a variety of peel depths ranging from exfolia-
tion to deep peels.

There  are  four  methods  by  which  TCA  concentra-
tion can be calculated. The safest and most agreed-upon 
method  is  the  weight-to-volume  (W:V)  calculation. 
Thus it is of outmost importance that the physician pur-
chase TCA from a reliable source. The author personally 
only purchases TCA from Delasco (Council Bluffs, IA). 
Similarly,  there  are  many  variations  on  phenol/croton 
oil peel formulas requiring a reliable pharmacy to for-
mulate these solutions.

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEELS

As  mentioned  previously,  it  is  incorrect  to  refer  to 
TCA peels as light, medium, or deep solely based on 
TCA  concentration.  Acid  concentration  is  only  one 
variable  affecting  peel  depth.  For  example,  1  mL  of 
40% TCA applied to the face will result in penetration 
to the basal layer, whereas 6 mL of 40% TCA applied 
over the same body surface area will result in penetra-
tion to the mid-dermis or deeper. Higher volumes will 
drive the peel even deeper.

One  can  perform  peels  of  various  depth  with  the 
same aptitude that one uses to dial in laser settings for 
skin  resurfacing.  The  variations  in  peel  formulas  have 
given  the  physician  unprecedented  control  over  the 
depth of skin resurfacing.

TCA, 10% to 50%, can be used as a sole peeling agent. 
It  is  hydrophilic  by  nature;  thus  it  may  have  patchy 
absorption through the lipid-containing and thickened 
stratum corneum. For this reason, higher doses of TCA 
are harder to work with. It is tough to reapply TCA at 
high concentrations in areas that need it without risking 
too deep of a peel. To facilitate even TCA penetration, 
the skin should be prepared in advance with a skincare 
regimen  geared  at  making  the  stratum  corneum  more 
even and compact. Oily skin needs to have adequate oil 
control before performing the peel. This can be achieved 
with  a  short  course  of  isotretinoin  for  a  few  months, 
ending about 3 to 6 months before the peel. On the day 
of the peel, the skin needs to be properly degreased with 
70% alcohol and, in some instances, acetone.

To reduce the risks associated with high-concentration 
TCA peels, combination peels have been developed. These 
peels help to facilitate the penetration of the TCA solution, 
allowing for a lower concentration of TCA to be used while 
still allowing a medium-depth peel to be achieved.

The three most commonly used modified TCA peels 
are  the  Jessner’s  solution–TCA  peel,  glycolic  acid–
TCA  peel,  and  the  Blue  Peel  (Table  5.5).  These  peels 
are designed to peel to a depth of the papillary dermis 
and at most to the most superficial aspect of the retic-
ular  dermis.  The  main  indications  for  TCA  and  mod-
ified  TCA  peels  are  for  epidermal  and  upper  dermal 
pathology:  photodamage,  actinic  keratoses,  lentigines, 
ephelides, fine rhytides, and very superficial, nonfibrotic 
(stretchable) scars. These peels are not suited for fibrotic 
scars, deep nonstretchable rhytides, or extensive laxity. 
If a rhytid or scar improves with stretching the skin, a 
medium-depth peel can help improve it. However, if the 
scar  or rhytid is etched into  the skin  or is  fibrotic,  the 
tightening effect of the peel may not be enough to give 
adequate clinical improvement.

It  is  easiest  to  think  of  the  combination  TCA  peels 
as being “accelerated” or “decelerated.” Accelerated peels 
use a keratolytic agent such as Jessner’s solution or gly-
colic  acid  to  speed  the  penetration  and  depth  of  the 
TCA  peel.  The  Jessner’s–TCA  peel  uses  Jessner’s  solu-
tion (keratolytic), applied before the application of TCA. 

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

57

TABLE 5.5  Modified Trichloroacetic Acid Peel Formulas

Modified Trichloroacetic Acid Peels

Solutions

Technique

Glycolic acid–TCA peel

Jessner’s solution–TCA peel

TCA Blue Peel

70% glycolic acid
35% TCA

Jessner’s solution
35% TCA

Blue Peel base
30% TCA

70% glycolic acid applied
Neutralized after 2 minutes
Light application of 35% TCA
Jessner’s solution applied
Rinsed with water after 6 minutes
Light application of 35% TCA
2 mL (1 tube) Blue Peel base mixed with:
2 mL 30% TCA = 15% TCA Blue Peel
4 mL 30% TCA = 20% TCA Blue Peel
6 mL 30% TCA = 22.5% TCA Blue Peel
8 mL 30% TCA = 24% TCA Blue Peel

TCA, Trichloroacetic acid.

Application of the Jessner’s solution allows for faster and 
deeper  penetration  of  the  subsequently  applied  35% 
TCA.  A  similar  mechanism  is  used  with  the  glycolic 
acid–TCA  peel,  which  uses  70%  glycolic  acid  (kerato-
lytic)  before  application  of  35%  TCA.  The  amount  of 
35% TCA required to peel into the papillary dermis is 
minimized  by  performing  the  preceding  keratolytic 
peel.

A decelerated peel, such as the Blue Peel (Obagi Cos-
meceuticals, Long Beach, CA), allows the entire peeling 
process to be slowed down so that one has greater con-
trol over the depth of penetration of the peel. The Blue 
Peel  incorporates  a  nonionic  blue  dye,  glycerin,  and  a 
saponin with a specific volume of 30% TCA to yield a 
15%, 20%, 22.5%, or 24% TCA–Blue Peel solution (see 
Table 5.5). The blue coloring, which stains the stratum 
corneum, allows the physician to see where the solution 
has been applied while still allowing the signs of depth 
penetration, such as frosting and erythema, to be visu-
alized. On the flipside, a regular TCA peel is a colorless 
solution  that  requires  close  attention  to  avoid  reappli-
cation  over  previously  treated  areas.  Because  TCA  is 
hydrophilic, the use of a saponin as an emulsifying agent 
creates  a  homogenous  TCA-oil-water  emulsion  that 
penetrates the skin in a slower and more even fashion.

Phenol Peels
Phenol peels are covered in several subsequent chapters 
in relation to the treatment of deeper skin pathologies 
such  as  deep/rigid  rhytides,  certain  acne  scars,  or  as  a 
means to tighten and lift certain areas such as the eyelids 
or lips.

In a manner similar to TCA, phenol exerts its actions by 
protein denaturation and coagulation. The rapid speed by 
which phenol penetrates the skin requires careful applica-
tion and constant vigilance by the physician. Additionally, 
when treating a large area such as the face, serum phenol 
levels can quickly become elevated, resulting in systemic 
toxicity and cardiac arrhythmias. Once absorbed, phenol 
is partially detoxified in the liver and excreted by the kid-
neys. Therefore all patients must be cleared from a cardiac, 
renal, and hepatic standpoint preoperatively. Intraopera-
tive  cardiac  monitoring  and  high-volume  intravenous 
fluid  hydration  are  imperative  to  avoid  cardiac  issues. 
However, using lower-concentration formulas such as the 
Hetter VL and limiting the phenol peel to one cosmetic 
unit  (perioral  or  periorbital),  one  can  usually  peel  the 
patient without cardiac monitoring or IV hydration if the 
patient is healthy.

The systemic absorption of phenol is related to body 
surface  area  treated  more  so  than  the  concentration 
used. To minimize toxicity, phenol peels are usually per-
formed in small anatomical sections of the face with a 
15-minute break before the application of the acid to the 
next anatomical unit. This allows the body to metabolize 
the phenol that is absorbed before the reapplication of 
the solution. The face is usually treated in sections such 
as the forehead, right cheek, left cheek, nose and peri-
oral, and periorbital region.

Techniques
Trichloroacetic Acid Peels
TCA is usually used to peel to a medium-depth peel. The 
goal is to reach the papillary dermis with the peel solution. 

58
58

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

BOX 5.1  Peel Tips

Ways to enhance 

peel depth

Degrease the skin with acetone
Apply firmer pressure when apply-

ing the peel solution

Apply more peel solution volume
Apply a higher acid concentration
Perform  a  light  peel  or  microderm-
the 

abrasion  before  applying 
deeper peel solutiona

Ways to enhance 

comfort

Cooling air units or strong fans
Oral analgesics: ibuprofen, meperi-

dine, hydrocodone

Music or relaxing atmosphere
Intravenous sedation
Nerve blocksb

aCaution is recommended with more aggressive techniques.
bMay not give complete analgesia

Once  applied  to  the  skin,  the  TCA  solution  generates  a 
stinging and burning sensation that builds up and peaks 
then  subsides.  Until  the  desired  depth  of  penetration  is 
achieved, more coats of TCA solution are applied, resulting 
in the cycle of burning/stinging then resolution. However, 
once the patient finishes the peel, there should only be little 
to no discomfort left. To make this peel easier to tolerate, a 
combination of oral meperidine (50–100 mg), hydroxyzine 
(50 mg), diazepam (5 mg), and ibuprofen (400–600 mg) is 
given (Box 5.1). Some physicians perform the peel under 
IV sedation or general anesthesia (usually in combination 
with a surgical procedure for which the patient is sedated). 
The author does not use topical anesthetics for fear of alter-
ing the TCA penetration by altering skin hydration. Addi-
tionally, topical anesthesia does not offer enough pain relief 
once the peel exceeds the depth of the epidermis. The use of 
a refrigerated air cooling unit (Zimmer Aesthetic Division, 
Germany) in combination with oral sedation can improve 
patient tolerance of the peel.

Chemical peel resurfacing is all about “reading” the 
skin  depth  signs.  Regardless  of  the  type  of  TCA  peel 
performed, the evolving clinical depth signs remain the 
same. The only difference between the various peels is 
the speed by which these signs appear if one is using an 
accelerated or decelerated formula.

Until a physician has gained enough experience per-
forming  medium-depth  peels,  he  or  she  should  start 
with lighter peels and then proceed to deeper peels. In 
the  same  vain,  it  is  best  to  start  with  relatively  slower 
peeling techniques before proceeding to faster peels. As 

Fig.  5.2  Peel  setup:  Epilating  needle,  electrodessication  nee-
dle, 70% alcohol, 30% trichloroacetic acid, one tube Blue Peel 
base, sponge, tissue, and cotton-tipped applicators.

mentioned,  skin  thickness  can  vary  patient  to  patient 
and  anatomically  on  the  face:  the  cheeks,  perioral 
region, and nose having thicker skin, the eyes having the 
thinnest skin, and the forehead being variable.

The  peel  setup  is  fairly  simple  with  the  TCA,  70% 
alcohol and/or acetone, the electrodessication tip, tissue 
(to blot tears or acid run off), cotton-tipped applicators 
(for the eyelids and nose), and the sponge to apply the 
acid (Fig. 5.2). Nearby there should be water or saline to 
flush the eyes if needed.

The  patient  is  instructed  to  come  to  their  appoint-
ment with clean skin and without any lotions or mois-
turizers. Residual oil or thick scale may lead to a patchy 
peel; therefore it is essential to cleanse and degrease the 
face well with 70% alcohol and possibly acetone before 
proceeding. While a peel is being performed, the physi-
cian should not leave the room, as one may miss some 
of the peel depth signs (Box 5.2) that are very transient.
The penetration of TCA in the skin starts to coagulate 
epidermal  proteins  first,  resulting  in  a  light,  nonorga-
nized  frost  (level  1  frost)  (Fig.  5.3A).  Further  applica-
tion of the peel solution will result in a solid frost with a 
reactive pink background (level 2 frost) (Fig. 5.3B). The 
pink background of the frost is referred to as the “pink 
sign” and will be apparent as long as the blood vessels of 
the  papillary  dermis  are  still  intact  with  normal  blood 
flow (Figs. 5.3A–C). The level 2 frost is the endpoint for 
the standard, papillary dermis–level peel. There may be 
noticeable edema in the skin upon pinching it. Yet fur-
ther TCA application will penetrate to or into the upper 

BOX 5.2  Peel Depth Signs  

Frost

Level 1: light, nonorganized speckled frost
Level 2a: solid frost with background erythema “pink sign”
Level 3b: solid frost with loss of “pink sign”
Defrost: Once the peel has penetrated and the acid is consumed, the skin frost will start to dissipate.

Pink sign

Reactive erythema seen beneath a solid frost indicates that the superficial vascular plexus is still intact, 

whereas the peel has reached the papillary dermis levela

Loss of 

Loss of the background erythema indicates that the superficial vascular plexus is now coagulated by the 

pink sign

peel solutionb

Epidermal 
sliding

Once the peel penetrates the epidermis but has not coagulated dermal proteins, there is a transient time when 

pinching the skin shows exaggerated wrinkling or epidermal sliding. Continued peel application results in a loss of 
this sign as the epidermis and dermis become coagulated to one another. Once this sign appears then disap-
pears, it is the maximum recommended peel application for a medium-depth peel.

May be difficult to assess in thick skin.

Edema

As the peel penetrates into the dermis, edema is noted upon pinching the skin. This sign takes some prac-
tice to pick up on. Once edema is felt upon pinching the skin, this is the endpoint of a medium-depth peel.

aMaximum recommended depth of penetration for most medium-depth peels.
bMaximum recommended depth of penetration for a deep peel

A

C

B

D

Fig. 5.3  A, Level 1 frost. Light speckled frost with pink background on the cheek compared with a level 2 frost on the 
forehead. B, Level 2 frost. Solid white frost with pink background on the cheek; pay attention to the area on the fore-
head that has already defrosted. C, Level 3 frost. Seen as a solid white frost with loss of the pink background sug-
gesting that the superficial vascular plexus has been obliterated. D, Defrosting of skin occurs in the order in which 
the peel was performed. It is crucial to pay attention to this to avoid repeeling an area that has already been done.

60

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

Fig. 5.4  Epidermal sliding sign. Pinching of the skin results in 
exaggerated  skin  wrinkling,  suggesting  the  anchoring  fibrils 
between the epidermis and dermis have been disrupted.

reticular  dermis,  resulting  in  a  solid  frost  with  a  loss 
of the pink background (level 3 frost) (Fig. 5.3C). The 
level  3  frost  implies  that  the  whole  papillary  dermis  is 
involved  with  the  peel  and  the  upper  reticular  dermis 
has been reached. This is the maximum recommended 
level  for  a  TCA  peel.  Continued  TCA  application  will 
drive the peel into the mid-reticular dermis, resulting in 
a “gray” appearance to the skin. Penetrating to this level 
correlates with an increased risk of scarring and perma-
nent hypopigmentation.

On  darker  skin  patient,  the  “pink  sign”  may  be  dif-
ficult  to  visualize.  For  this  reason,  on  darker-skinned 
patients, one may have to rely on the “epidermal sliding” 
sign to gauge peel depth. The “epidermal sliding” sign is 
a transient sign that demonstrates exaggerated wrinkling 
of the skin that occurs before complete precipitation and 
coagulation of papillary dermis proteins (Fig. 5.4). Pap-
illary dermal edema and disruption of anchoring fibrils 
allows the epidermis to be more freely movable, result-
ing in exaggerated wrinkling when the skin is pinched. 
This sign disappears when the papillary dermis proteins 
become coagulated and adherent to the epidermal coag-
ulated proteins, thus indicating that the peel depth has 
reached  the  superficial  reticular  dermis.  Once  this  is 
achieved,  the  pink  background  goes  away  and  edema 
sets  in  (Fig.  5.5).  In  thicker  skin,  “epidermal  sliding” 
may not be very obvious, and monitoring the “pink sign” 
alone has to be used to indicate the peel depth.

Glycolic Acid–Trichloroacetic Acid Peel
The  skin  is  degreased  by  cleansing  it  with  soap  and 
water. Quickly and evenly, unbuffered 70% glycolic acid 

Fig. 5.5  Edema. Once the peel continues, the epidermal slid-
ing sign is lost, and firm edema sets in as the epidermis and 
dermis are now fused together.

is applied. After 2 minutes of contact time, it is neutral-
ized with a copious amount of water.

A  small  amount  of  35%  TCA  is  applied  in  even 
strokes to the skin using gauze or a large cotton swab. 
A 2 to 3 minute waiting time is given to allow the TCA 
to  penetrate  and  to  assess  whether  further  application 
is  indicated.  To  avoid  lines  of  demarcation,  the  TCA 
should be feathered down along the jawline and should 
extend to the hairline.

Jessner’s Solution–Trichloroacetic Acid Peel
The  skin  is  adequately  cleansed  with  soap  (preferably 
a foaming cleanser) and water. The face is then further 
degreased by acetone.

A  2-inch  by  2-inch  gauze  or  cotton-tipped  applica-
tors are used to apply the Jessner’s solution evenly, just 
enough to cause a very light frost. After 6 minutes, this 
is followed by the application of a small amount of 35% 
TCA in even strokes using either gauze or cotton-tipped 
applicators.  A  2-  to  3-minute  waiting  time  is  given  to 
allow the TCA to penetrate and to assess whether fur-
ther  application  is  indicated.  To  avoid  lines  of  demar-
cation,  the  TCA  should  be  feathered  down  along  the 
jawline and should extend to the hairline.

Trichloroacetic Acid–Blue Peel
The skin surface is gently cleansed with alcohol only or 
acetone for very oily skin. The Blue Peel base is mixed 
with 30% TCA immediately before use (see Table 5.5). 
Novice peelers should begin with lower concentrations 

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

61

and work themselves up. Similarly, the number of coats 
(volume)  applied  to  the  skin  has  to  be  adjusted  to  the 
skin  thickness.  Thinner  skin  requires  fewer  coats, 
whereas thicker skin may require additional coats. The 
solution is applied evenly to the face and feathered into 
the  hairline,  the  earlobes,  and  along  the  jawline.  The 
Blue Peel solution will only temporarily stain hair blue.

Each application or coat is allowed to penetrate for 2 
to 3 minutes before further application so that the peel 
depth  can  be  properly  assessed.  A  level  2  frost  is  the 
usual endpoint of this peel. If more TCA is applied, there 
will be a loss of the pink background, indicating pene-
tration beyond the papillary dermis and into the super-
ficial  reticular  dermis  (level  3  frost).  A  level  3  frost  in 
certain areas is the maximum recommended depth of a 
facial TCA–Blue Peel. Fig. 5.6 shows the stages of frost-
ing, epidermal sliding, pink background, and edema as 
they occur over time.

Peeling  nonfacial  skin  can  be  rewarding  and  chal-
lenging  at  the  same  time,  because  nonfacial  skin  has 
fewer  adnexal  structures  to  repair  the  skin  after  the 
peel. For this reason, caution is necessary when peeling 
these areas. When feathering from the face to the neck, 
the deeper peel should be up closer to the jawline and 
should get progressively lighter as it nears the clavicles 
(Fig. 5.7A). This helps create a blending effect between 
the skin on the face and the neck.

Phenol Peels
Hetter VL Peel
Lighter  phenol  peels  (less  phenol  and  less  croton  oil) 
have  made  it  easier  to  achieve  a  reticular  dermis  level 
peel  with  fewer  complications  than  the  traditional 
Baker- Gordon peels. The modified, lighter phenol peels, 
like the Hetter VL solution, can be used to treat a “single” 
cosmetic unit without the need for cardiac monitoring 
or IV hydration. Treating more than one area will require 
cardiac clearance, assessing hepatic and renal function, 
and appropriate IV hydration and cardiac monitoring.

Clean skin is further degreased by using 70% alcohol 
or acetone. The bottle is shaken gently to mix the vari-
ous components, and some of the solution is pulled into 
another bowl using a pipette. While performing the peel 
and  in  between  applications,  the  phenol  mixture  must 
be  swirled,  because  the  oil  and  water  components  of 
the solution have a tendency to separate (Fig. 5.8A–B). 
The solution is applied to the skin with a cotton-tipped 
applicator (Fig. 5.8C). Care must be taken not to let the 

solution  drip  or  run  down  the  face.  The  frost  appears 
very quickly following the application of the peel solu-
tion  (Fig.  5.8D).  The  endpoint  for  deep  wrinkles  or 
redundant  skin  is  an  even  white  frost.  The  frost  dissi-
pates quickly, so one must pay close attention to make 
sure that one does not apply more solution and peel the 
skin too deeply.

Combination Procedures
In the day and age of fractionated laser resurfacing, one 
may feel that there is no role for chemical peels. How-
ever, this couldn’t be further from the truth. Peels allow 
an unparalleled flexibility to treat areas on the face, neck, 
and chest that lasers cannot while also allowing a wider 
range of skin types to be resurfaced safely. In fact, peels 
can be safely combined with laser resurfacing, nonabla-
tive lasers, and surgical procedures.

The  best  method  to  plan  out  a  combination  proce-
dure at the consultation noting which areas need a vas-
cular  laser,  which  need  electrodessication  of  adnexal 
structures  (syringomas,  sebaceous  hyperplasia,  cherry 
angiomas, seborrheic keratosis), and which need medi-
um-depth resurfacing and which need deep resurfacing. 
The order of the procedures is critical as well (Fig. 5.9). 
Peel solutions should be kept out of contact with open 
wounds created by surgery or laser resurfacing. Preop-
erative markings should be made to help demarcate the 
areas that will be treated more deeply from those to be 
treated more lightly.

During  a  facelift  or  eyelift  procedure,  a  light-  to 
medium-depth peel can be performed safely to improve 
skin appearance without compromising the flap. Under-
mined  skin  is  peeled  to  a  lighter  level  (not  more  than 
papillary dermis) than the skin that will not be under-
mined.  The  solution  is  kept  away  from  the  incisions. 
Alternatively,  the  resurfacing  can  be  performed  first, 
the skin cleansed, and then the surgery performed (Fig. 
5.10).

Neck  and  chest  rejuvenation  is  more  challenging 
than facial skin rejuvenation, because the neck has fewer 
adnexal structures, which are crucial to wound healing. 
A  series  of  papillary  dermis–level  peels  may  be  more 
beneficial and less risky than one deeper peel on these 
areas.  Some  physicians  will  address  more  pronounced 
neck  rhytides  with  a  modified  phenol  peel  using  the 
Hetter VL formulation.

In summary, the correct order of procedures is crucial 
for controlling the depth of resurfacing when performing 

62

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

A

D

G

J

B

E

H

K

C

F

I

L

M

N

Fig. 5.6  A, Patient’s skin is degreased with acetone or 70% alcohol. B, Low-energy electrodessication with 
a  spatula  tip  for  flat  seborrheic  keratosis,  nevi,  angiofibromas.  C,  Low-energy  electrodessication  with  an 
epilating needle for dermal lesions such as syringomas, angiomas, and sebaceous hyperplasia. D, After elec-
trodessication, some of the treated areas are now open wounds. E–N, The natural progression of the peel as 
each anatomical area is completed.

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

63

combination  procedures:  (1)  nonablative  or  minimally 
ablative  lasers  (vascular  or  pigment  lasers)  is  performed 
first;  (2)  electrodessication  next;  (3)  the  medium-depth 
peel is performed next; (4) if a phenol peel is to be used in 
certain cosmetic units, this is then performed; (5) the skin is 
cleansed to remove all residual acids; and (6) the laser resur-
facing of certain areas can then be performed (Fig. 5.11).

Postoperative Care
At the end of medium-depth and deep peels, the author pre-
fers to cleanse the skin gently with soap and water. If a Blue 
Peel is performed, the blue dye is removed with a cleanser 
that comes in the kit or even with Dawn foaming dishwash-
ing soap. The patient is told that some of the blue color will 
remain and will come off during the healing process. Any 
blue tinting of the hair will resolve with shampooing.

Fig. 5.7  Feathering onto the neck, chest, and ears to blend all 
the areas. It is important that the peel becomes less strong the 
more  caudal  one  proceeds,  to  create  a  nice  transition.  Peels 
can  be  feathered  onto  the  brows  and  into  the  hairline,  and 
some can be applied to the mucosal lips.

A

C

B

D

Fig. 5.8  A and B, Hetter VL Phenol–Croton Oil Formula. The bottle is clearly labeled to avoid errors. The solu-
tion separates, thus requiring constant mixing before application. C and D, The Hetter VL being applied to the 
cutaneous upper lip with a wet but not dripping cotton-tipped applicator. Firm, even strokes are applied until 
a solid white frost appears.

64

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

Surgical Procedure

Deeper Peel or Laser 
Resurfacing*

-
Medium  Depth Peel

Electrodessication 
of adnexal lesions

Nonablative 
Laser 
(vascular or 
pigment)

*Skin is cleansed with soap and water before laser resurfacing or surgery is performed.

Fig.  5.9  Algorithm  for  safely  combining  procedures.  Procedures  begin  with  the  nonablative  and  minimally 
ablative procedures followed by the lighter of the peels, then the deepest peel, then, after the skin is cleansed, 
the laser resurfacing. Usually the last step is the surgical procedure. Alternatively, the surgical procedure can 
be performed first, but care must be taken to keep any acids away from the incisions.

Medium Depth Peels
Medium-depth  peels  usually  take  6  to  7  days  to  heal 
fully. The first day patients are told to take it  easy and 
apply frozen peas to the face 10 minutes per hour (no 
ice  to  nonfacial  skin).  Patients  are  asked  to  sleep  at  a 
45-degree angle the first couple of days to reduce facial 
edema.  Facial  edema,  especially  with  phenol  peels, 
begins shortly after the procedure and peaks at 24 to 48 
hours.  By  72  hours,  most  of  the  swelling  has  resolved, 
but skin begins to look like a mask or a snake about to 
shed its skin. Patients will notice a progressive darkening 
and tightening of their skin into a mask-like appearance.
Areas  that  have  been  treated  with  phenol  or  laser 
resurfacing  will  have  a  fair  amount  of  proteinaceous 
exudate that may look yellowish on appearance. These 
areas will look different during the entire healing pro-
cess. This  exudate  may  look  like  pus  to  the  patient,  so 
reassurance  should  be  given  that  it  is  normal  and  will 
resolve.

There  are  variations  among  physicians  in  terms  of 
postoperative  regimens.  The  author  has  modified  and 
simplified the postoperative care for patients  based on 
20  years  of  experience.  Unless  the  patient  is  immuno-
compromised  or  has  had  recent  orthopedic  surgery, 
prophylactic antibiotics are not given. To reduce the risk 
of  postoperative  staphylococcal  infection,  patients  are 
instructed to start applying mupirocin ointment to the 
nostrils three times a day starting 1 week before resur-
facing  and  continuing  until  the  skin  has  fully  healed. 
This simple step has reduced the number of postopera-
tive infections tremendously.

The author does not routinely prescribe oral predni-
sone for the swelling unless the patient has a history of 
very exaggerated swelling. Simple measures with sleep-
ing at 45 degrees and applying frozen peas 10 minutes 
per hour the first day help reduce edema.

Patients should cleanse their skin twice a day using a 
gentle cleanser and avoiding the use of a washcloth. At 

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

65

an inert emollient onto the skin, such as Vaniply oint-
ment  (Pharmaceutical  Specialties,  Rochester,  MN)  or 
Aquaphor ointment (Beiersdorf, Hamburg, Germany).

All cleansing and ointment applications are performed 
using a “patting” technique. Patients are instructed to avoid 
rubbing their skin even when cleansing or applying oint-
ments, because this can cause skin to come off prematurely.
Areas treated with phenol peels or laser resurfacing 
are treated with dilute vinegar soaks during the healing 
process.  This  is  1  teaspoon  white  vinegar  in  2  cups  of 
purified or distilled water. Patient will soak gauze in this 
solution, wring out the gauze, and lay it on the phenol 
or laser areas for 10 minutes per hour. This will soothe 
the  skin,  reduce  the  exudate  buildup,  and  make  for  a 
much more comfortable recovery. After each skin wash 
or soak, patients apply an inert emollient onto the skin, 
such as Vaniply ointment or Aquaphor ointment.

The first day, the TCA areas should only feel slightly 
tight or warm. The phenol or laser resurfacing areas may 
feel like a light sunburn. After 24 hours, there should be 
no  associated  pain.  In  fact,  pain  is  usually  a  hallmark 
of infection or an area that has been traumatized. This 
must be addressed promptly.

After 4 to 5 days, the skin will proceed to come off in 
thick  sheets  starting  in  areas  of  movement  (perioral  or 
periorbital) and last in areas of less movement (forehead). 
Papillary  dermis  peels  should  heal  in  7  days,  whereas 
peels  reaching  the  superficial  reticular  dermis  will  take 
10 days to heal. Any healing time that is faster or more 
prolonged is a sign that the peel was either too superfi-
cial or too deep, respectively. Compared with aggressive 
CO2 laser skin resurfacing, chemical peeling is generally 
much easier for the patient, surgeon, and staff.

Patients are seen midweek at day 3 or 4 to make sure 
they are following instructions and to assess their level of 
compliance with the soaks and postoperative care. Any 
early signs of infection or contact dermatitis can usually 
be picked up early at this point. Patients are seen again 
at day 7 to make sure that all areas have healed and that 
any remaining exudate is soaked off in the office and the 
underlying  skin  is  assessed.  Furthermore,  patients  are 
seen  to  ensure  they  are  using  the  mupirocin  ointment 
and taking their valacyclovir as prescribed.

During  the  entire  healing  process,  patients  are  to 
avoid  exercise,  heat  exposure,  bathtubs,  swimming 
pools/Jacuzzis,  and  sun.  They  are  to  wash  their  hands 
after using the restroom or petting their animals. They 
are to keep their pets away from their faces and pillow-
cases.

Fig.  5.10  Patient  safely  undergoing  trichloroacetic  acid  Blue 
Peel followed by laser resurfacing, followed by an upper bleph-
aroplasty.

Fig.  5.11  Patient  underwent  a  full-face  trichloroacetic  acid 
Blue  Peel  with  feathering  off  of  the  face.  The  skin  was  then 
cleansed, eye protection was used, and periorbital resurfacing 
with a fractionated CO2 laser was performed.

midday and late afternoon patients perform an astrin-
gent wash using gauze soaked in Domeboro Astringent 
Solution (Moberg Pharma, Cedar Knolls, NJ) for about 
10 minutes. After each skin wash or soak, patients apply 

66

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

A

B

Fig. 5.12  A and B, Patient with melasma showing nice resolution of her dyschromia with a medium-depth 
trichloroacetic acid Blue Peel.

Patients  should  be  encouraged  to  resume  their 
skin-conditioning program upon complete reepithelial-
ization of the skin. This is usually restarted 1 week after 
they  have  healed  or  even  2  weeks  later  to  the  laser  or 
deeper peel areas. Absolute avoidance of sun exposure is 
recommended for the first 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively. 
Skin  firming  can  become  apparent  in  as  little  as  a  few 
weeks and continue for up to 3 months afterward.

CONCLUSION

All  physicians  performing  skin  rejuvenation  proce-
dures should be adept at chemical peel resurfacing to 

offer  patients  improved  results  either  as  stand-alone 
procedures or in combination with lasers and surger-
ies.  Peels  can  be  tailored  to  reach  different  depths, 
address areas that cannot be lasered, and be used on 
a wide variety of skin types. Peels have withstood the 
test of time despite the introduction into the market 
of a wide variety of laser and energy devices. In fact, 
many  physicians  who  regularly  perform  chemical 
peels find them indispensable and would trade their 
lasers in before giving up their peels. Optimizing out-
comes  hinges  on  proper  patient  evaluation,  proce-
dure selection, depth selection, and proper technique 
(Figs. 5.12–5.15).

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

67

A

B

Fig.  5.13  A  and  B,  Patient  showing  improvement  of  overall  skin  firmness,  dyschromia,  and  wrinkles  with 
electrodessication of adnexal structures and a full-face trichloroacetic acid Blue Peel, Hetter VL of the glabella, 
crow’s feet, buccal region, and upper lip lines.

A

B

Fig. 5.14  A and B, Patient with improvement following a trichloroacetic acid Blue Peel of the face as well as 
a Hetter VL peel of the periorbital region and laser resurfacing of the perioral and glabellar region.

68

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

A

B

Fig. 5.15  A and B, Patient with improvement following a properly planned combination procedure of pulsed 
dye laser for telangiectasias; Q-Switch laser for lentigines; trichloroacetic acid Blue Peel of the face, neck, and 
chest; and a Hetter VL peel of the periorbital region and laser resurfacing of the perioral and glabellar region.

FURTHER READING

Abdel-Meguid Am, Taha EA, Ismail SA. Combined Jessner 
solution and trichloroacetic acid versus trichloroacetic 
acid alone in the treatment of melasma in dark-skinned 
patients. Dermatol Surg. 2017;0:1–6.

Agarwal N, Gupta LK, Khare AK, Kuldeep CM, Mittal A. 

Therapeutic response of 70% trichloroacetic acid CROSS 
in atrophic acne scars. Dermatol Surg. 2015;41:597–604.
Coleman WP, Futrell JM. The glycolic acid and trichloroace-

tic acid peel. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1994;20:76–80.

Dalpizzol M, Weber MB, Mattiazzi AP, Manzoni AP. 

Comparative study of the use of trichloroacetic acid and 
phenolic acid in the treatment of atrophic-type acne scars. 
Dematol Surg. 2016;42:377–383.

Hantash BM, Stewart DB, Cooper ZA, Rehmus WE, Koch 

RJ, Swetter SM. Facial resurfacing for nonmelanoma skin 
cancer prophylaxis. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:976–982.
Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: part 
IV. Face peel results with different concentrations of phe-
nol and croton oil. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105(3):1061–
1083; discussion 1084-1087.

Holzer G, Pinkowicz A, Radakovic S, Schmidt RB, Tanew A. 
Randomized controlled trial comparing 35% trichloro-
acetic acid peel and 5-aminolevulinic acid photodynamic 

therapy for the treatment of multiple actinic keratosis. Br J 
Dermatol. 2016.

Kumari R, Thappa DM. Comparative study of trichloro-
acetic acid versus glycolic acid chemical peels in the 
treatment of melasma. Indian J Dermatol Venerol Leprol. 
2010;76:447.

Lee JB, Chung WG, Kwahck H, Lee KH. Focal treatment of 
acne scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruc-
tion of skin scars method. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:1017–
1021.

Leheta T, El Tawdy A, Hay RA, Farid S. Percutaneous colla-
gen induction versus full-concentration trichloroacetic 
acid in the treatment of atrophic acne scars. Dermatol 
Surg. 2011;37:207–216.

Li YT, Yang KC. Comparison of the frequency-doubled 

Q-switched Nd:YAG laser and 35% trichloroacetic acid 
for the treatment of face lentigines. Dermatol Surg. 
1999;25:202–204.

Monheit GD. The Jessner’s-trichloroacetic acid peel. An 

enhanced medium-depth chemical peel. Dermatol Clin. 
1995;13(2):277–283.

Moubasher AE, Youssef EM, Abou-Taleb DA. Q-switched 
Nd:YAG laser versus trichloroacetic acid peeling in the 
treatment of melasma among Egyptian patients. Dermatol 
Surg. 2014;40:874–882.

CHAPTER 5  Medium-Depth Peels and Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel

69

Nofal E, Helmy A, Nofal A, Alakad R, Nasr M. Plate-

let-rich plasma versus CROSS technique with 100% 
trichloroacetic acid versus combined skin needling 
and platelet rich plasma in the treatment of atro-
phic acne scars: a comparative study. Dermatol Surg. 
2014;40:864–873.

Obagi Z, Obagi S, Alaiti S, Stevens M. TCA-Based Blue peel: 
a standardized procedure with depth control. Dermatol 
Surg. 1999;25(10):773–780.

Puri N. Comparative study of 15% TCA peel versus 35% 

glycolic acid peel for the treatment of melasma. Indian 
Dermatol Online J. 2012;3(2):109–113.

Ramadan SA, El-Komy MH, Bassiouny DA, El-Tobshy 

SA. Subcision versus 100% trichloroacetic acid in the 
treatment of rolling scars. Dermatol Surg. 2011;37: 
626–633.

Raziee M, Balighi K, Shabanzadeh-Dehkordi H, Robati RM. 
Efficacy and safety of cryotherapy vs. trichloroacetic acid 
in the treatment of solar lentigo. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2008;22(3):316–319.

Safoury OS, Saki NM, El Nabarawy EA, Farag EA. A study 

comparing chemical peeling using modified Jessner’s solu-
tion and 15% trichloroacetic acid versus 15% trichloroace-
tic acid in the treatment of melasma. Indian J Dermatol. 
2009;54(1):41–45.

Soliman MM, Ramadan AR, Bassiouny DA, Abdelmalek M. 
Combined trichloroacetic acid peel and topical ascorbic 
acid versus trichloroacetic acid peel alone in the treatment 
of melasma: a comparative study. J Cosmetic Dermatol. 
2006;6:89–94.

Stone PA. The use of modified phenol for chemical face peel-

ing. Clin Plast Surg. 1998;25(1):21–44. Review.

6

Trichloroacetic Acid Peels  
of the Neck, Chest, and  
Arms and Hands

Carolyn Willis

INTRODUCTION

The  face  is  frequently  the  focus  of  antiaging  and  skin 
rejuvenation  interventions.  It  is  important  to  remem-
ber,  however,  that  there  are  other  areas  that  should  be 
targeted  for  rejuvenation  efforts  to  avoid  a  discordant 
appearance  between  the  face  and  other  visible  areas. 
As we age, both intrinsic and extrinsic factors affect the 
appearance  of  the  dorsal  hands,  neck,  and  décolletage 
and  can  “give  away”  a  person’s  true  age  if  care  is  not 
taken to treat them along with the face.

Typical signs of aging and sun damage include solar 
lentigines and other dyschromias. External factors, like 
ultraviolet  light,  smoking,  and  secondhand  smoking, 
contribute to extrinsic aging of the skin. Extrinsic aging 
leads to skin changes that many patients find cosmeti-
cally unappealing and prompt them to seek evaluation 
and  treatment.1,2  These  include  actinic  keratoses,  seb-
orrheic  keratoses,  and  tactile  and  visible  roughness. 
Intrinsic aging that results from internal factors, such as 
dermal and fat atrophy, contribute to wrinkles, promi-
nent tendon and vein visibility, and bony prominence.1,2 
Procedures  that  target  these  common  signs  of  aging 
will enhance a patient’s overall rejuvenation results. The 
most  cosmetically  pleasing  results  often  come  from  a 
combination  of  modalities  focused  on  addressing  the 
internal and external factors that are contributing to the 
appearance of the aged hand, neck, and chest (Figs. 6.1 
and 6.2).  Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peels,  when  used 
appropriately,  can  be  an  important  step  in  an  overall 
rejuvenation plan.

70

INDICATIONS AND EVALUATION FOR 
CHEMICAL PEELS OF THE HANDS, NECK, 
AND CHEST

Chemical peels can address the extrinsic signs of aging. 
Proper  patient  selection  is  paramount  for  a  reproduc-
ibly good outcome. It is important in the preprocedure 
consultation  to  identify  the  role  that  chemical  peeling 
may play in overall rejuvenation and to discuss realistic 
expectations for improvement and review that the pro-
cedure is likely just one part of a therapeutic plan.

Unrealistic  expectations  or  an  inability  to  follow 
through  on  pretreatment  recommendations  should 
be red flags. A thorough medical history is necessary 
for identifying those at risk for poor or delayed heal-
ing.  Those  with  diabetes  mellitus,  immunodeficiency, 
chronic  kidney  or  liver  disease,  or  connective  tissue 
disease,  or  those  on  chronic  steroids  or  immunosup-
pressive  or  immunomodulatory  medications,  deserve 
special  attention.  A  history  of  medications  that  can 
lead  to  pigment  deposition  in  areas  of  trauma,  like 
minocycline,  should  also  be  elicited.  Any  allergies  or 
medication  sensitivities  should  be  recorded.  A  his-
tory  of  herpes  simplex  virus  (HSV),  varicella  zoster 
virus  (VZV),  or  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus 
aureus  (MRSA)  would  indicate  the  need  for  more 
stringent  preoperative  and  postoperative  prophylaxis 
and surveillance. Patients with skin disorders with risk 
of  Koebnerization,  like  psoriasis  and  lichen  planus, 
should also be counseled about potential increased risk 

CHAPTER 6  Trichloroacetic Acid Peels of the Neck, Chest, and Arms and Hands

71

from  the  procedure.  It  is  important  to  solicit  a  social 
history  as  well.  Smokers,  including  those  who  vape 
nicotine-containing  solutions,  due  to  reduced  blood 
flow,  are  at  increased  risk  for  poor  wound  healing.3 
Occupation  would  also  be  relevant  due  to  potential 
exposures  that  may  affect  healing.  Those  who  work 
outdoors  may  be  expected  to  have  increased  risk  of 
ultraviolet  (UV)-induced  side  effects  like  postinflam-
matory  hyperpigmentation  and  dyschromia.  Those 
who work in the healthcare setting may have increased 
risk for infection depending on their exposure level.

A  patient’s  tendency  to  heal  appropriately  should  be 
assessed  and  a  history  of  poor  healing,  hypertrophic  or 
keloidal  scarring,  or  a  tendency  to  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation should be elicited. Absolute contrain-
dications to peels include pregnancy and active infection at 
the procedure site.
PREPROCEDURE SKIN PREPARATION

Proper  preoperative  skin  conditioning  is  essential  for  an 
optimal  outcome.  The  pretreatment  regimen  is  prefera-
bly started a minimum of 6 to 8 weeks before the planned 
procedure to avoid the irritant dermatitis that may occur 
at the initiation of therapy and allow for the active ingre-
dients to manifest their effectiveness (Table 6.1). It is used 
in combination with strict sun protection that includes sun 
avoidance, sun protective clothing, and a titanium dioxide 
or zinc oxide–containing sunblock. An antioxidant, usually 

Fig. 6.1  Comparison of “youthful” chest (upper) with a “mature” 
chest (lower) showing changes due to aging, sun, and environ-
mental factors.

Fig. 6.2  Comparison of “youthful” hand on left with “mature” hand on right. Prominent veins, tendons, and 
tactile roughness characterize the aging hand.

72

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

TABLE 6.1  Preoperative Skin Care 
Regimen

Product

AM or PM Use Reason for Use

Sun protection

AM

Vitamin C  

10%

AM/PM, 6 
drops

Hydroquinone 

AM/PM, 1 g

4%

Retinoic acid/
tretinoin/ 
retinaldehyde

PM, 1 g

Reduce further sun 
damage and pro-
tect the skin from 
the increased pho-
tosensitivity from 
topical retinoids

Antioxidant, 

epidermal barrier 
support; improves 
uneven skin tone
Bleaching cream; 

improves uneven 
skin tone, down-
regulates melano-
cyte activity

Promotes collagen 
production and 
cellular turnover, 
improves uneven 
skin tone

a vitamin C serum–containing stabilized L-ascorbic acid, is 
started as part of the regimen. Vitamin C has been shown 
in vitro to regulate keratinocyte viability and support epi-
dermal barrier and basement membrane function.4

A topical retinoid is also initiated to promote dermal 
collagen production and to normalize keratinocyte turn-
over.5 It has also been shown to speed healing after a TCA 
peel.6 Tretinoin 0.05% cream is usually recommended for 
use two to three times per week on the neck and chest and 
5 to 7 nights per week on the dorsal hands as tolerated. 
For those who cannot tolerate the tretinoin cream, a reti-
naldehyde 0.1% gel is recommended. The vitamin C and 
the  retinoid  also  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  melanocyte 
activity and appear to speed recovery and reduce the risk 
of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Hydroquinone,  a  tyrosinase  inhibitor,  is  also  an 
important component of the preconditioning regimen, 
especially in the higher Fitzpatrick skin types. Suppres-
sion of melanogenesis has a beneficial effect on the pre-
existing pigmented lesions that patients complain about 
and is essential in reducing the risk of recurrence after 
the peel and the risk of postinflammatory hyperpigmen-
tation.  The  treatment  regimen  has  a  synergistic  effect, 
because  the  thinning  of  the  stratum  corneum  induced 

BOX 6.1  Potential Complications

 •   Infection
 •   Scarring
 •   Prolonged erythema
 •   Postinflammatory hypopigmentation
 •   Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
 •   Unhappy patient

by the retinoid allows for deeper and more uniform pen-
etration of the chemical peel.

The preoperative period is also a good time to address 
any  precancerous  lesions  on  the  areas  to  be  treated.  A 
course  of  topical  1%  to  5%  5-fluorouracil  or  imiquimod 
3.75% to 5% cream or ingenol mebutate will improve the 
health of the skin and improve the cosmetic appearance, 
because  these  lesions  contribute  to  the  tactile  roughness 
and irregularity that is often part of the patient’s complaint. 
Usually a full treatment course of one of these agents is pre-
scribed and the area is allowed to fully heal before initiating 
the aforementioned preprocedure regimen.

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEEL 
COMPLICATIONS

With proper preprocedure preparation and diligent after-
care, the risk of complications from a properly performed 
TCA  peel  is  low.  It  is  important  to  recognize  potential 
complications  in  the  early  stages,  because  prompt  inter-
vention can often improve the chance of a good outcome 
(Box 6.1). Infection is a risk because of the open wound 
that is created by the peel. It is important that the patient be 
aware of the risk and the importance of proper handwash-
ing before wound care. Environmental risk factors include 
the  patient’s  occupation  and  the  presence  of  pets  in  the 
household. When the hands and forearms are treated, care 
must be taken with activities of daily living and household 
tasks like cooking and cleaning. One step we have taken 
to greatly reduce the risk of bacterial infections, especially 
staphylococcal infection, is to have all resurfacing patients 
swab the inside of their nostrils with mupirocin ointment 
three times a day starting 1 week before their procedure 
and continuing until postoperative day 7.

If  an  infection  is  suspected,  the  patient  should  be 
immediately  evaluated  in  the  office,  and  a  skin  swab 
should  be  sent  for  gram  stains  and  proper  cultures. 
Empiric  antibiotics  can  be  started  if  the  suspicion 
for  bacterial  infection  is  high,  keeping  in  mind  the 

CHAPTER 6  Trichloroacetic Acid Peels of the Neck, Chest, and Arms and Hands

73

increasing rates of MRSA and the patient’s occupation 
and exposures when choosing an antibiotic.

Herpes simplex and herpes zoster infections can also 
complicate  the  procedure  and  can  lead  to  devastating 
scarring. The risk of viral infections occurring on non-
facial skin is lower than when peeling the face. If a viral 
infection is suspected, a direct fluorescent antibody test 
can be taken, and the patient should be started immedi-
ately on antiviral therapy while awaiting results.

The  postoperative  use  of  occlusive  ointments  can 
sometimes lead to yeast infections. These can often be 
diagnosed clinically by the appearance of small, pruritic 
papules and pustules and confirmed by a KOH examina-
tion. Proper antiyeast medications can be initiated, and 
wound care can be adjusted.

The risk for scarring is higher on the hands, neck, and 
chest compared with the face because of the lower density 
of pilosebaceous units but should still be low in the set-
ting of proper wound care. Risk of hypertrophic scarring 
should be reviewed and the treatment avoided in patients 
with increased susceptibility to such scarring or keloids. 
Prolonged erythema is often the first sign of impending 
scarring, and the patient should be counseled to call if the 
redness persists longer than expected. Early intervention 
with pulse dye laser (PDL) treatment and topical steroids 
can attenuate the risk of permanent scarring.7

Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  or  hypopig-
mentation can also occur. These adverse effects can be 
mostly  avoided  by  proper  pretreatment  and  posttreat-
ment preparation and vigilant sun protection. Initiation 
of bleaching agents once the skin has fully reepitheliali-
zed will play a role both prophylactically and therapeu-
tically  in  management  of  hyperpigmentation.  A  series 
of light peels such as salicylic acid 30% or Jessner’s solu-
tion can be used to hasten the resolution of the hyper-
pigmentation.  Hypopigmentation  is  more  common  in 
higher  Fitzpatrick  skin  types  and  is  usually  the  result 
of  inadvertently  peeling  too  deeply.  Mild  hypopig-
mentation usually resolves without intervention (other 
than the regular aftercare regimen) over time. Marked 
hypopigmentation may be permanent.

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEEL PROTOCOL

Written informed consent should be obtained as the ini-
tial step in the peel protocol. Potential risks and adverse 
effects  of  the  peel  should  be  clearly  reviewed  with  the 
patient, and the patient should be given an opportunity 

BOX 6.2  Trichloroacetic Acid Blue Peel 
Protocol

 •   Verify patient name, date of birth, procedure, medica-

tions, and allergies.

 •   Determine whether any of the medications are new 

or there any new medical issues since preop.

 •   Ensure the patient has a driver.
 •   Ask whether the patient ate breakfast.
 •   Ask whether the patient feels well.
 •   Check blood pressure.
 •   Have the patient review and sign consent.
 •   Administer preoperative medications.
 •   Take photos.
 •   Review aftercare.
 •   Confirm 48-hour and 1-week postoperative appoint-

ments.

 •   Prepare for the procedure:
  •   Prepare Blue Peel solution of the desired concen-

tration.

  •   Move the patient to the operating room.
  •   Wipe the area to be treated well with alcohol.
  1)   Electrodessicate adnexal lesions—sebaceous gland 
hyperplasia,  milia,  seborrheic  keratoses—and/or 
treat  lentigines  with  the  appropriate  wavelength 
laser.

  2)   Apply  the  peel  (while  the  assistant  operates  the 
dynamic cooler) with a slightly moistened sponge 
to one subunit at a time, making sure not to allow 
solution to pool in any one area, to achieve a uni-
form frost with a pink background.

Look for epidermal sliding or exaggerated wrinkling.
Have tissue ready for any drips.
  3)   When all areas have been treated to the desired 
depth,  apply  EMLA  cream,  then  gently  cleanse 
the area with Dawn soap.

  4)   Review aftercare.
  5)   Call the patient the night of the procedure.

to  ask  questions  and  indicate  understanding  of  the 
potential risks and benefits of the procedure. It is helpful 
to  follow  a  consistent  protocol  to  ensure  reproducibly 
good outcomes (Box 6.2).

Preoperative  photos  should  be  taken  to  document 
the patient’s baseline. Any scars or pigment or textural 
irregularities that are present before the peel should be 
pointed out to the patient.

TCA  peels  cause  a  mild  to  moderate  amount  of 
burning or “icy-hot” discomfort, and depending on the 
patient’s pain threshold, dynamic cooling may be all that 

74

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

Fig. 6.3  Typical setup for an Obagi Blue Peel.

is  needed  for  analgesia.  Topical  anesthetics  should  be 
avoided  because  they  can  affect  the  penetration  of  the 
peel solution. If analgesia is required, ibuprofen, meper-
idine, diazepam or hydroxyzine, or other agents depend-
ing on the provider’s preference, can be used alone or in 
combination if the patient has no contraindications and 
there is a driver available to take the patient home.

The skin to be treated is degreased with one to two 
passes  of  either  70%  alcohol  or  acetone  to  allow  more 
even  penetration  of  the  TCA  solution.  TCA  10%  to 
25% is typically used for a superficial to superficial-me-
dium  depth  peel  of  the  neck,  chest,  dorsal  hands,  and 
forearms.  These  lower  concentrations  give  the  physi-
cian  more  control  over  peel  depth.  A  deeper  peel  can 
be achieved by simply applying more layers of the peel 
solution.  Higher  concentrations  should  be  reserved 
for  patients  with  thicker  skin  and  surgeons  with  more 
experience  with  cosmetic  peels.  The  peel  solution  can 
be applied with either gauze or a sponge applicator. Care 
should be taken to apply the solution with the applicator 
saturated to the same degree and applied with the same 
pressure to all areas.

Conventional TCA peel solutions are colorless, mak-
ing  even  application  of  the  solution  more  difficult.  An 
alternative  solution  would  be  to  use  a  product  with  a 
color indicator. The Obagi Blue Peel (Obagi Cosmeceu-
ticals,  Long  Beach,  CA)  incorporates  a  Blue  Peel  base 
containing glycerin, saponins, and a US Food and Drug 
Administration  (FDA)–approved  blue  dye  that  can  be 
combined with the TCA solution (Fig. 6.3). The homo-
geneous  TCA-oil-water  solution  that  is  generated  per-
mits the surgeon to control the uniformity of application 

TABLE 6.2  Blue Peel Solution Preparation

Blue Peel  
Base

30%  
Trichloroacetic  
Acid

Final  
Trichloroacetic Acid 
Concentration

2 mL
2 mL
2 mL
2 mL

2 mL
4 mL
6 mL
8 mL

15%
20%
22.5%
24%

by using the intensity of the blue color as a guide.8 An 
appropriate  amount  of  30%  (W:V)  TCA  solution  is 
added to the 2 mL Blue Peel base to generate the desired 
concentration of the peel solution (Table 6.2). The com-
bination  solution  slows  the  penetration  of  the  acid, 
allowing for even application and more precise control 
of the depth of the peel, because the clinical endpoints 
occur at a slower rate, making the different stages of the 
peel easier to identify. This reduces the risk of “overpeel-
ing” the area as a result of too rapid absorption related 
to the excessive volume application of the colorless TCA 
solution.  Regardless  of  the  peel  solution  chosen,  ade-
quate time needs to be given between coats to allow for 
the penetration of the acid and frost development—typi-
cally 2 to 6 minutes between coats. Proceeding with cau-
tion,  additional  coats  should  be  applied  to  achieve  the 
desired level of frost. For the chest and neck, it is recom-
mended to stop at a pink background with speckled or 
nonorganized frost (frost level 1) (Figs. 6.4 and 6.5). For 
the dorsal hands, the peel can be taken slightly deeper, 
to  barely  a  uniform  frost  with  a  pink  background.  For 
the dorsal forearms, where there is a significant density 

CHAPTER 6  Trichloroacetic Acid Peels of the Neck, Chest, and Arms and Hands

75

of pilosebaceous units, the peel can be taken to a more 
uniform light, even frost with a pink background (frost 
level 2) (Figs. 6.6 and 6.7). It may be especially desirable 
to  peel  to  a  deeper  level  at  this  location  in  individuals 
with  significant  actinic  damage  and  for  patients  prone 

Fig.  6.4  Background  pink  erythema  with  “lacy”  frosting  indi-
cating a level 1 peel.

to senile purpura. By repeatedly peeling to the papillary 
dermis on the forearms, it will significantly cut down on 
the density of precancerous lesions and will thicken the 
papillary dermis, thus helping to minimize easy bruising.
It  is  important  to  feather  the  peel  solution  lightly 
to  the  surrounding  areas  to  avoid  lines  of  demarca-
tion between treated and untreated areas. When using 
the Blue Peel kit, the blue dye can be washed off at the 
conclusion of the peel with a gentle foaming cleanser. A 
bland ointment like Vaniply ointment (Pharmaceuticals 
Specialties, Inc., Rochester, MN), Aquaphor (Beiersdorf 
AG, Hamburg, Germany), or petroleum jelly should be 
applied postprocedure.

For optimal results, a series of TCA peels may be nec-
essary, and it is reasonable to consider a repeat treatment 
at 3- to 6-month intervals until the desired endpoint is 
met (Fig. 6.8).

POSTPEEL WOUND AND SKIN CARE

Written postpeel wound care should be provided to the 
patient.  In  the  immediate  postoperative  period,  cool 
compresses  and  nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory  drugs 
are beneficial. The discomfort after a TCA peel is usu-
ally minimal, because the pain usually subsides shortly 
after  the  completion  of  the  peel  itself.  Patients  can  be 
instructed  to  cleanse  with  a  mild  unscented  foaming 
wash,  making  sure  to  only  pat  the  area  and  not  scrub 
or  rub  the  area.  Burow’s  soaks  are  also  useful  because 

Fig. 6.5  TCA Blue Peel of the chest: before, intraoperative, and after photos. Progression from pink back-
ground with “lacy” frosting to the desired endpoint of a pink-red background with an almost uniform “see-
through” frost is evident. The after photo shows improvement in texture and tone.

76

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

of  their  astringent  and  antiseptic  properties.  The  area 
should be gently patted dry after cleansing and a bland 
ointment  applied.  The  patient  should  be  given  strict 
instructions  to  avoid  sun  and  any  exercise  that  would 
induce sweating. Follow-up visits at postoperative days 
2  or  3,  day  7,  and  if  needed,  day  10  or  12,  allow  close 
monitoring  and  early  identification  of  healing  issues 
(Fig.  6.9).  The  patient  should  be  reminded  that  they 
should not pick or try to peel of the desquamating skin 
prematurely, as this can lead to scarring. Reepitheliali-
zation typically takes 10 to 14 days, and the patient can 
switch to a regimen of mild foaming cleanser and bland 

emollients  at  that  point.  Daily  sun  protection  should 
also  be  initiated.  The  preprocedure  regimen  of  topical 
retinoids,  vitamin  C  serum,  and  hydroquinone  should 
be restarted approximately 2 weeks after the peel.

COMBINATION AND ADJUNCT 
PROCEDURES

Additional  procedures  can  be  performed  along  with 
the  TCA  peel  to  address  other  signs  of  aging.  Epider-
mal growths, such as seborrheic or actinic keratoses, can 
be treated with electrodessication (ED) the same day of 

Fig.  6.6  Progression  of  Blue  Peel  on  hands.  Note  that  “thinner”  skin  will  defrost  more  quickly,  and  close 
observation is necessary to identify safe peel endpoints.

CHAPTER 6  Trichloroacetic Acid Peels of the Neck, Chest, and Arms and Hands

77

Fig. 6.7  Exaggerated wrinkling—a clinical endpoint—is appar-
ent.

the peel, just before the application of the peel solution. 
Lentigines may also respond to light ED or alternatively 
to a laser of the appropriate wavelength (Fig. 6.10). Epi-
dermal melanin has a broad absorption spectrum (250 
to 1200 nm) and will respond to a variety of lasers; the 
proper  choice  of  device  is  based  on  patient  skin  color 
and  the  nature  of  the  pigmented  lesion.9  Q-switched 
lasers (ruby [694 nm], Alexandrite [755 nm], Neodym-
ium-doped:yttrium  aluminum  garnet  [Nd:YAG,  1064 
nm] or frequency doubled Nd:YAG [532 nm]), or pico-
second lasers are frequently used for this indication. For 
significant poikiloderma on the neck and chest, a series 
of PDL and pigmented lesion–specific laser treatments 
before the peel (on the same day) may yield a superior 
cosmetic outcome.

TCA  peels  may  induce  some  tissue  tightening,  but 
for optimal results in patients with significant skin lax-
ity of the décolletage it may be preferred to perform a 
tissue-tightening  procedure  several  months  before  the 
peel. Ultherapy (Merz Aesthetics) and Thermage (Solta) 
both have an indication for tissue tightening in this area.
Volume loss contributes to formation of wrinkles on 
the chest and hands and is a main factor contributing to 
the appearance of prominent vessels and tendons on the 

Fig.  6.8  Before  (upper)  and  after  (lower)  trichloroacetic  acid 
Blue Peel of the chest.

dorsal hands. Volume restoration is an important step in 
an overall rejuvenation plan. There are a variety of fillers 
that are appropriate for these indications.

Poly-L-lactic acid (Sculptra, Galderma, Fort Worth, 
TX), which is a synthetic polymer of lactic acid, exerts its 
volumizing effect through the induction of neocollagen-
esis.10 It has been used successfully to revolumize both 
the  décolletage,  neck,  and  the  dorsal  hands.11,12  Poly-
L-lactic acid is supplied as a sterile freeze-dried prepa-
ration that needs to be reconstituted with sterile water 
before  use  (Sculptra  package  insert). The  advantage  of 
a biostimulatory filler is that it yields a natural and lon-
ger-lasting result than synthetic fillers. The disadvantage 
is the risk of nodule formation. To reduce the risk, it is 
recommended to reconstitute the product a minimum 
of  72  hours  in  advance,  to  only  inject  a  highly  diluted 
preparation,  and  ensure  that  the  patient  understands 

78

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

Fig.  6.10  Left  hand  after  treatment  with  the  Medlite  (Cyno-
sure, Westford, MA) q-switched 532 nm laser and right hand 
treated by electrodesiccation.

the importance of regular massage during the first 3 to 
5 postprocedure days. The product is typically injected 
with 25- to 27-gauge, 1.5-inch needles into the subcuta-
neous plane. A 27-gauge cannula may also be used for 
the dorsal hands. Retrograde fanning or cross-hatching 
techniques can be used. It may helpful to mark the chest 
into quadrants to ensure an even distribution of prod-
uct.  Product  placement  should  be  followed  immedi-
ately by vigorous massage, and the technique should be 
demonstrated to the patient. Caution should be used to 
not “overcorrect,” because the neocollagenesis will lead 
to greater volumization than initially obtained.

Calcium  hydroxylapatite  (Radiesse,  Merz  Aesthet-
ics, Raleigh, NC) is an FDA-approved filler for soft tis-
sue  augmentation  of  the  dorsal  hands.  It  is  composed 
of  calcium  hydroxylapatite  microspheres  suspended  in 
a sterile water/glycerin/sodium carboxymethylcellulose 
gel  carrier  (Radiesse  package  insert).  The  gel  provides 
immediate  correction,  whereas  the  microspheres  trig-
ger  fibroblast  proliferation  and  collagen  production, 
which  contributes  to  prolonged  volume  correction.13 
The product can be mixed with 0.2 to 0.5 mL 2% lido-
caine or 1% lidocaine with epinephrine solution before 
injection. It is typically administered in 0.5- mL boluses 
with a 25- to 27-gauge needle or cannula from a point at 
the dorsal wrist crease. The skin should be tented with 
the nondominant hand to avoid vessels and tendons and 
place the filler in the correct deep subcutaneous plane. 
Two depot injections are typically made, and the hand is 
then massaged to distribute the product. There can be a 

Fig.  6.9  Healing  progression  post–Blue  Peel.  Days  2,  7,  and 
14 are shown.

CHAPTER 6  Trichloroacetic Acid Peels of the Neck, Chest, and Arms and Hands

79

fair amount of swelling, and cool compresses and hand 
elevation  postprocedure  may  be  beneficial.  As  with 
poly-L-lactic  acid,  it  is  important  to  anticipate  further 
volume  correction  through  collagen  induction  and  to 
not “overcorrect.”

Hyaluronic acid fillers are another option for revolu-
mization.  Restylane  Lyft  (Galderma  USA,  Fort  Worth, 
TX)  is  an  FDA-approved  hyaluronic  acid  filler  for  the 
treatment of the dorsal hands. There are multiple options 
for filler choice and injection techniques.14-16 They can 
be  used  in  both  the  décolletage  and  the  dorsal  hands. 
These fillers have the advantage of being reversible. One 
of their disadvantages is the lack of longevity of the result.
Autologous fat transfer is a good option for the dor-
sal hands and is an excellent “add-on” treatment when 
doing  a  facial  revolumization  procedure.  Autologous 
fat  is  soft,  natural  appearing,  and  cost  effective  when 
comparing the per-milliliter cost of various fillers. The 
fat  is  harvested  under  local  anesthetic,  processed,  and 
injected with a cannula via small incisions made at the 
dorsal hand crease. Because autologous fat is considered 
a  graft  and  requires  the  development  of  its  own  blood 
supply, there are more posttreatment activity restrictions 
than would be the case with biostimulatory or synthetic 
fillers. As an added benefit, improvement has also been 
noted in overlying skin texture and appearance after fat 
transfer.17 Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) may also play an 
increasing  role  in  rejuvenation  efforts,  whether  com-
bined with fat transfer or as a stand-alone procedure.

All  filler  procedures  come  with  potential  complica-
tions.  Discomfort  with  injection  can  be  managed  with 
topical and local anesthetic. Bruising or hematoma for-
mation may occur from injection. Bromelain or arnica 
supplements and cool compresses can be of benefit. For 
hand  injections,  elevation  of  the  extremity  may  has-
ten the clearance of swelling. The most feared compli-
cation  is  inadvertent  blood  vessel  injection  leading  to 
the potential for skin necrosis and scarring. Slow, low- 
pressure injections and the use of cannulas can help to 
reduce this risk.

MAINTENANCE OF RESULTS

Once the patient has completed their therapeutic plan, 
they will need a maintenance regimen to preserve their 
results.  Continued  vigilance  regarding  sun  protection 
is  of  central  importance.  Sunblock  containing  tita-
nium  dioxide  or  zinc  oxide  should  be  used  on  a  daily 

basis—patients often need to be reminded to use them 
on their neck, chest, forearms, and hands because they 
may  not  realize  how  much  unintended  UV  exposure 
they are receiving. Topical retinoid and antioxidant use 
should  continue  indefinitely.  The  hydroquinone  can 
usually be discontinued 3 months postoperatively.

Nonablative  fractional  lasers,  such  as  the  Clear  and 
Brilliant  laser  (1440/1927  nm)  or  the  Fraxel  DUAL 
(1550/1927 nm) (both by Solta Medical, Hayward, CA), 
are useful in maintaining and augmenting the results of 
chemical  peel  treatments.  It  is  reasonable  to  suggest  a 
follow-up maintenance treatment every 6 to 12 months 
to address the continued aging process.

The  cosmetic  surgeon  can  enhance  the  results  of 
patient-specific antiaging regimens by paying attention 
to  maintaining  and  improving  the  appearance  of  the 
neck, décolletage, and hands as part of an overall reju-
venation plan.

REFERENCES

  1.   Abrams HL, Lauber JS. Hand rejuvenation: the state of 

the art. Dermatol Clin. 1990;8(3):553–561.

  2.   Butterwick K, Sadick N. Hand rejuvenation using a com-
bination approach. Dermatol Surg. (42):S108-S118.

  3.   Khunger N, Force IT. Standard guidelines of care 

for chemical peels. Indian J Dermatol Venerol Leprol. 
2008;74(suppl):S5–S12.

  4.   Boyce ST, Supp AP, Swope VB, Warden GD. Vitamin C 

regulates keratinocyte viability, epidermal barrier, and base-
ment membrane in vitro, and reduces wound contraction 
after grafting of culture skin substitutes. J Invest Dermatol. 
2002;118(4):565–572.

  5.   Kircik LH Histologic improvement in photodamage after 
12 months of treatment with tretinoin emollient cream. J 
Drug Dermatol. 2012;11:1036–1040.

  6.   Hevia O, Nemeth AJ, Taylor JR. Tretinoin accelerates heal-
ing after trichloroacetic acid chemical peel. Arch Dermatol. 
1991;127:678–682.

  7.   Khatri KA, Mahoney DL, McCartney MJ. Laser scar 

revision: a review. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2011;13(2):54–62.
  8.   Obagi ZE, Obagi S, Alaiti S, Stevens MB. Tca-based Blue 
peel: a standardized procedure with depth control. Der-
matol Surg. 1999;25:773–780.

  9.   Patil UA, Dhami LD. Overview of Lasers. Indian J Plast 

Surg. 2008;41(suppl):S101–S113.

 10.   Stein P, Vitavska O, Kind P, Hoppe W, Wieczorek H, 
Schurer NY. The biological basis for poly-L-lactic-ac-
id-induced augmentation. J Dermatol Sci. 2015;78(1): 
26–33.

80

PART 3  Medium Depth Peels

 11.   Peterson JD, Goldman MP. Rejuvenation of the aging 
chest: a review and our experience. Dermatol Surg. 
2011;37:555–571.

 12.   Palm MD, Woodhall KE, Buterwick KJ, Goldman MP. 
Cosmetic use of poly-l-lactic acid: a retrospective study 
of 130 patients. Dermatol Surg. 2010;36:161–170.

 13.   Berlin AL, Hussain, Goldberg DJ. Calcium hydroxylapa-
tite filler for facial rejuvenation: a histologic and immu-
nohistochemical analysis. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(suppl 
1):S64–S67.

 14.   Man J, Rao J, Goldman M. A double-blind, comparative 
study of nonanimal-stabilized hyaluronic acid versus 
human collagen for tissue augmentation of the dorsal 
hands. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(8):1026–1031.

 15.   Fabi SG, Goldman MP. Hand rejuvenation: a review and 
our experience. Dermatol Surg. 2012;38:1112–1127.
 16.   Sadick NS, Anderson D, Werschler WP. Addressing 
volume loss in hand rejuvenation: a report of clinical 
experience. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2008;10:237–241.
 17.   Coleman S. Structural fat grafting: more than a perma-
nent filler. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2006;118(suppl 3):108S–
120S.

PART 4  Deep Peels

7

Phenol-Croton Oil Peels

Richard H. Bensimon

had  the  reputation  of  being  cardiotoxic.  These  beliefs 
became ingrained in the fields of dermatology and plas-
tic surgery and went unchallenged for decades. Despite 
the remarkable results, the risks were too intimidating, 
and “phenol peels” did not see widespread acceptance.

The next significant step in the evolution of the peels 
was  brought  about  by  plastic  surgeon  Gregory  Hetter 
in Las Vegas. Hetter experimented with the ingredients 
of the Baker peel and convincingly proved that croton 
oil  and  not  phenol  was  the  peeling  agent.  Moreover, 
the  Baker  formula  contained  a  high  concentration  of 
croton  oil  at  2.1%,  responsible  for  the  results  and  the 
feared complications. With this information, the croton 
oil concentration could be manipulated to be clinically 
effective while avoiding hypopigmentation. An import-
ant difference is that the peel could be performed super-
ficial or deep, increasing the versatility.

The ability to alter the croton oil concentration has great 
utility  and  completely  changes  the  nature  of  the  peel.  By 
using  weaker  croton  oil  concentrations  the  application 
technique becomes one of the important factors in deter-
mining  the  depth  reached.  The  entire  process  is  slowed 
down, and now the surgeon can observe the skin changes 
and have the opportunity to stop at whatever depth seems 
appropriate.  The  all-or-none  phenomenon  seen  with  the 
Baker peel was simply that the croton oil concentration was 
so high that it immediately resulted in a peel deep enough to 
cause hypopigmentation. The peel can now be customized, 
and  by  choosing  the  appropriate  concentration  and  how  
the solution is applied, the practitioner is in precise control.
It is now feasible to peel to the desired clinical result 
without  reaching  a  depth  that  causes  hypopigmenta-
tion.  A  critical  difference  is  that  now  the  practitioner 

81

INTRODUCTION

The  history  of  phenol–croton  oil  peels  dates  back  to 
the  1920s,  when  they  were  introduced  into  the  United 
States by “lay peelers” coming from Europe. The formu-
las involved boiling crystals to obtain liquid phenol, to 
which  were  added  drops  of  the  caustic  acid  croton  oil, 
among  other  ingredients.  How  these  original  formulas 
came to be is unknown, but what is clear is that the treat-
ments were quite effective. Eventually these peels came 
to the attention of the medical community, and in 1961, 
plastic surgeon Thomas Baker from Miami published a 
formula that was straightforward and easily reproduced. 
The formula contained liquid phenol, three drops of cro-
ton oil, water, and the surgical soap Septisol, which acted 
as a surfactant to allow the aqueous and oily parts to mix. 
The belief at the time was that the phenol was the peeling 
agent and the purpose of the croton oil was unclear.

In 1962, Dr. Baker altered the volumes of the ingre-
dients but left the three drops of croton oil unchanged. 
This  simple  change  raised  the  concentration  of  the 
croton  oil  to  2.1%  and  became  the  standard  formula, 
unchanged for decades. This peel was highly effective in 
treating  deep  wrinkles,  but  this  was  always  at  the  cost 
of creating significant hypopigmentation and an unnat-
ural alabaster look. Due to the need to constantly wear 
makeup,  this  peel  was  reserved  for  older,  significantly 
wrinkled individuals with light eyes.

The  peel  was  considered  difficult  to  perform,  and 
phenol  had  the  reputation  of  having  an  “all-or-none” 
quality  that  was  out  of  the  practitioner’s  control.  A 
weaker concentration of phenol was thought to be prob-
lematic, because it would peel deeper, and phenol also 

82

PART 4  Deep Peels

can choose different concentrations on different areas of 
the face depending on need and relative skin thickness. 
The Baker formula was all one high concentration, and 
many  practitioners  were  reluctant  to  treat  the  eyelids 
because of fear of scarring. With the modern formulas, 
a weak concentration such as 0.1% can now safely and 
effectively treat the eyelid skin.

During my career as a plastic surgeon, the term “com-
prehensive facial rejuvenation” is frequently mentioned as 
an idealized goal. An excellent facelift that leaves promi-
nent lip lines and an etched periorbital area is an aesthetic 
failure. Now at last there is an excellent tool available for 
facial resurfacing; the goal is to understand the process, 
simplify the delivery, and explore the potential.

PATIENT SELECTION

As  a  plastic  surgeon,  I  have  historically  promoted  sur-
gery,  but  now  that  I  have  a  viable  option,  I  have  learned 
that many patients place greater importance on the over-
all appearance of their skin and may be satisfied by a peel 
alone. Lighter peels that can be done on younger patients 
to  target  pigmentation  and  segmental  peels,  particularly 
around  the  eyes,  are  a  useful  adjunct  to  treatment  plans. 
The main contraindication is a patient who is expected to 
be  uncooperative  in  the  postoperative  care  and  may  not 
refrain from picking. A relative contraindication is a patient 
whose skin is severely sun damaged and judged to be frag-
ile. Staged lighter peels may be an option in these situations.

PREOPERATIVE PLANNING

Preparation of the skin before the peel is done to prevent 
hyperpigmentation and put the skin in a hyperprolifera-
tive state. The treatment begins 4 to 6 weeks before peel-
ing, with tretinoin 0.05% or 0.1% and hydroquinone 4% 
twice  daily  (see  Chapter  3).  An  exfoliating  agent  such 
as  glycolic  acid  or  phytic  acid  may  be  used  to  remove 
desquamated  cells.  The  preparation  is  stopped  4  to  5 
days before the peel to allow the epidermis to normal-
ize. There is controversy whether this skin preparation is 
absolutely necessary, but my recommendation is to use 
it, especially in darker-skinned individuals.

Preparation of the Solution
The  preparation  of  the  acid  solutions  is  a  critical  step 
that should be performed by the operator. The ingredi-
ents are the same as the Baker peel and consist of water, 
phenol, croton oil, and Septisol/Novisol.

Liquid phenol is 88% or 89%, and its corrosive effect 

allows passage into the dermis.

Croton  oil  is  extracted  from  the  seeds  of  Croton 
Tiglium, a tree indigenous to Asia. Full-strength croton 
oil  is  highly  caustic  and  will  result  in  a  full-thickness 
burn  if  applied  to  the  skin.  However,  when  correctly 
diluted  and  appropriately  applied,  croton  oil  will  yield 
remarkable aesthetic improvement.

Septisol is a surgical soap that has been historically 
used  as  a  surfactant  to  allow  miscibility  of  the  aque-
ous and oil components. Septisol contains triclosan as 
a  preservative,  and  this  has  become  problematic  as  of 
late. Safety issues regarding triclosan have been raised 
resulting  in  a  ban  of  Septisol  in  Europe  and  more 
recently by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
in  the  United  States.  The  triclosan  is  inconsequential 
to the peel, but the reality is that Septisol is no longer 
available.

Pure  soaps  may  work,  but  recent  work  by  Young 
Pharmaceuticals  (Wethersfield,  CT)  has  resulted  in  a 
viable alternative for Septisol and further understanding 
into the role of the surfactant. The necessity of replac-
ing  Septisol  may  have  brought  about  an  unexpected 
improvement.

Analysis of Septisol as a surfactant shows that it is an 
anionic detergent and results in a cruder, larger particle 
emulsion. The action of this emulsion is that the ingre-
dients separate within seconds and a gradient forms. As 
the solution is applied, there may be different concen-
trations  presented  across  the  gauze  leading  to  uneven 
action. The solutions need to be constantly shaken to try 
to mix the ingredients as best as possible.

The product that has been developed (Novisol) is a 
nonionic  detergent  that  yields  an  emulsion  of  smaller 
particle size leading to a much more stable suspension. 
Once shaken, the ingredients mix evenly and stay in sus-
pension during the entire course of the peel. As the solu-
tion  is  applied,  the  concentration  is  unchanged  across 
the gauze and ultimately it is an improved product.

The  ingredients  are  arranged  in  glass  bowls  in  the 
order  they  will  be  added,  and  this  routine  should  be 
repeated  every  time  to  prevent  confusion.  Once  pre-
pared,  the  acids  can  be  stored  in  opaque  bottles  with 
leak-proof caps for extended periods of time.

The  original  Baker  formulas  were  based  on  drops  of 
croton oil. Droppers have the disadvantage of variability in 
the volume of drops and limiting the possible concentra-
tions by the inability to split a drop. Hetter simplified the 
process of creating a standard phenol–croton oil solution 

83

TABLE 7.1  Formulas With 35% Phenol Concentration

Water
Surfactant (i.e., Novisol)
USP phenol 88%
Stock solution (containing phenol and croton oil)
Total volume

0.2%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
3.5 mL
0.5 mL
10 mL

0.4%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
3.0 mL
1.0 mL
10 mL

0.8%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
2.0 mL
2.0 mL
10 mL

1.2%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
1.0 mL
3.0 mL
10 mL

Stock Solution:
24 mL USP 88% Phenol + 1 mL croton oil (0.04 mL croton oil/1 mL stock solution or 4% croton oil)
Dilute formulas with 35% phenol concentration:

0.1%: 1 mL of 0.4% solution + 1.2 mL phenol + 1.8 mL water (total 4 mL)
0.05%: 1 mL of 0.2% solution + 1.2 mL phenol + 1.8 mL water
0.025%: 1 mL of 0.1% solution + 1.2 mL phenol + 1.8 mL water
¼X% = 1 mL of X% solution + 1.2 mL phenol + 1.8 mL water

Phenol Solution for Preliminary Anesthesia

50% phenol without croton oil: 10 mL 88% phenol + 7.6 mL water

using larger volumes, which would then be further diluted 
with the other ingredients (Table 7.1). The standard solu-
tion, or “stock solution,” is prepared by mixing 24 mL of 
88% phenol and 1 mL of croton oil. Eighty-nine percent 
phenol can be used without appreciable difference. Using 
larger  volumes  allows  easy  measurement  with  standard 
syringes and avoids the awkwardness of drops.

Standard tables further delineate the specific volumes 
of each ingredient needed to arrive at a specific croton 
oil  concentration.  The  phenol  concentration  in  these 
formulas as devised by Hetter is approximately 35% in 
contrast with the Baker formula that was 50%.

In the croton oil concentration of 0.2%, 0.4%, 0.8%, 
and 1.2% listed in Table 7.1, the volumes of water and 
surfactant remain constant at 5.5 mL and 0.5 mL, respec-
tively. The values that change are the relative volumes of 
phenol and stock solution (which contains phenol and 
croton oil). The sum of the volumes of phenol and stock 
solution is 4 mL in each of the formulas.

To better understand the basis of these formulas, it is 
valuable to examine them more closely. The stock solu-
tion consists of 24 mL of phenol and 1 mL of croton oil. 
Each 1 mL of stock solution has 0.04 mL of croton oil, 
or a 4% croton oil solution. For example, the formula for 
0.8% croton oil is made up of 5.5 mL of water, 0.5 mL of 
surfactant, 2.0 mL of phenol, and 2.0 mL stock solution. 
The 2.0 mL of stock solution contains 0.08 mL of croton 
oil (2 x 0.04 mL). As the total volume of the solution is 
10 mL, the final concentration of croton oil is 0.08 mL of 
croton oil in 10 mL total volume, or 0.8%. By comparing 
the volume of stock solution in any of the formulas with 

the  known  content  of  croton  oil  in  the  stock  solution, 
the final concentration of croton oil can easily be deter-
mined. It is important to note that the concentration of 
croton oil in the stock solution is extremely high at 4% 
and should never be applied to the skin without further 
dilution.

To  make  weaker  concentrations,  0.4%  or  0.2%  are 
first mixed and these are further diluted using the for-
mulas  in  Table  7.1.  The  final  volume  is  4  mL  and  the 
phenol concentration is kept at 35%. Whatever starting 
concentration is used with this dilution formula will be 
diluted by one fourth, or 1ml X% solution + 1.2 mL phe-
nol + 1.8 mL water will yield 0.025% solution.

ANESTHETIC TECHNIQUE

The  Baker  peel  was  traditionally  done  under  general 
anesthesia  followed  by  a  painful  early  recovery.  The 
addition of sensory nerve blocks is helpful in decreasing 
the intense stimulation from the caustic croton oil, but 
it is not complete. A serendipitous personal observation 
has led to a useful addition to the peeler’s armamentar-
ium.

While experimenting with different solutions on my 
own hands, I noticed that a dilute phenol solution (i.e., 
50%) caused an initial stinging that lasted 10 to 15 sec-
onds  after  which  the  skin  appeared  insensate.  Testing 
with a needle, there was no sensation, even to the point 
of bleeding.

Utilizing this information, I began peeling by apply-
ing  a  first  pass  of  50%  phenol  to  one  segment  of  skin 

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels84

PART 4  Deep Peels

(such  as  one-half  of  the  forehead).  The  patient  would 
experience definite stinging for 10 to 15 seconds, after 
which  the  discomfort  dissipated  completely.  At  this 
point, the skin treated with phenol is numb and can be 
comfortably peeled. If the entire face is to be peeled, it 
is first gradually treated with 50% phenol for the anes-
thetic effect and then peeled. The addition of oral seda-
tion  significantly  improves  the  overall  experience.  The 
degree of sedation depends on the practitioner’s comfort 
and experience, but it does not have to be so deep as to 
require oxygen supplementation.

To  perform  a  full-face  peel  as  described  can  be 
challenging;  therefore  the  addition  of  intramuscular 
pain  medication,  if  regulations  allow,  is  very  helpful. 
Small  segmental  peels,  such  as  eyelids,  are  easily  done 
with  these  techniques  as  an  informal  office  procedure. 
A more recent addition is the use of an apparatus that 
delivers 50% oxygen and 50% nitrous oxide on demand 
by  the  patient  (Pro-Nox  CAREstream  Medical  LTD, 
Altamonte  Springs,  FL).  This  concentration  of  nitrous 
oxide is not anesthetic, but it is a potent anxiolytic that 
clears  very  quickly  when  stopped.  A  lower  eyelid  peel 
can  be  completely  done  with  this  alone  to  soothe  the 
preliminary stinging of the phenol.

MEDICATION

The  possibility  of  a  herpetic  breakout  must  always  be 
considered;  therefore  antiviral  prophylaxis  is  routinely 
prescribed.  Valacyclovir  hydrochloride,  500  mg  two 
times  per  day,  is  begun  3  days  before  the  procedure 
and  continued  for  7  days  after  peeling.  Although  the 
recovery is not particularly painful, narcotic pain med-
ication is prescribed along with ibuprofen 800 mg three 
times daily. Sleep medication is prescribed along with a 
mild sedative to help deal with the inconvenience of the 
recovery.

SURGICAL ROUTINE

Traditionally, deep chemical peels are performed under 
general  anesthesia  or  intravenous  sedation  because  of 
the intense stimulation of the chemical burn. After the 
induction of anesthesia, local sensory nerve blocks with 
bupivacaine 0.25% without epinephrine are performed. 
The skin is carefully degreased with acetone, and a pre-
liminary pass of 50% phenol is done for the anesthetic 
effect.

Ophthalmic ointment and corneal protection are not 
used  because  the  phenol  can  dissolve  in  the  ointment 
and prevent flushing out if necessary.

The fear of cardiac toxicity has been historically asso-
ciated with phenol, and recent personal experience has 
provided some elucidation. There had been speculation 
that arrhythmias seen with Baker peels were due to cat-
echolamine  release  caused  by  the  intense  stimulation. 
The addition of sensory blocks and performing the peel 
in no less than 45 minutes appeared to have resolved the 
problem. When I used 50% phenol as a first pass under 
oral  sedation,  I  had  to  proceed  slowly  by  necessity. 
When I first used the technique under intravenous seda-
tion and did it faster, I saw transient tachyarrhythmias. 
Simply slowing down the application while monitoring 
the electrocardiogram (ECG) took care of this issue.

A small handheld fan is used to dissipate the fumes, 
and gauze should always be available in case rapid dry-
ing  is  needed.  A  calm,  focused,  deliberate  manner  is 
important.

JUDGING PEEL DEPTH

Any  resurfacing  modality  involves  a  controlled  injury 
with  healing  that  results  in  improved  appearance  and 
quality of the skin. Success is defined by choosing and 
safely  reaching  the  appropriate  endpoint.  Phenol–cro-
ton oil peels go deeper than the epidermis, with medi-
um-depth  peels  reaching  the  papillary  dermis.  To 
significantly  improve  wrinkles,  deep  peels  must  injure 
the upper to middle reticular dermis. The price to pay 
for a deeper peel is a longer and more involved recovery. 
Procedures with minimal downtime also yield minimal 
results.

As  the  peel  progresses,  the  degree  of  opacity  of  the 
frost is constantly evaluated to gauge the depth. A thin, 
transparent frost with a pink background indicates that 
the peel has passed through the epidermis into the der-
mis. The translucent quality of the frost reveals the der-
mal  vessels—hence  the  pink  color.  Depending  on  the 
circumstance and location, this may be the correct end-
point. With more passes, the peel proceeds to the upper 
and  middle  dermis.  The  frost  forms  a  solid,  opaque, 
even white frost. The pink hue is lost because the acid 
has  destroyed  the  intradermal  vessels  and  the  opacity 
hides  the  deeper  subdermal  plexus.  Without  further 
peeling, the frost is gradually lost in about 15 minutes 
(“defrosting”),  and  the  skin  turns  into  a  red-brown  or 

85

Fig.. 7.1  Red-tan appearance is indicative of reaching the retic-
ular dermis.

Fig. 7.2  Custom tray to keep the various solutions organized 
during peeling.

tan color (Fig. 7.1). This is a reliable sign that the upper 
to midreticular dermis has been reached. Further peel-
ing after a solid white frost results in a gray-white color 
indicative of reaching the lower reticular dermis, which 
is not advisable.

The  progression  from  superficial  to  deep  is  orderly, 
slow,  and  easily  recognizable.  The  experienced  peeler 
can control the process by peeling slow enough to rec-
ognize the visual cues and stop at the chosen depth and 
go  no  deeper.  The  all-or-none  phenomenon  attributed 
to the Baker peel was simply that the croton oil concen-
tration was so high that it instantly went to a depth that 
resulted in hypopigmentation.

Another sign to evaluate depth of peeling is epidermal 
sliding. This occurs when the peel reaches the papillary 
dermis  and  the  normal  bonds  between  epidermis  and 
dermis are broken and the epidermis can now slide as a 
thin independent sheet. This sliding disappears when the 
peel reaches the reticular dermis and a solid protein block 
is formed. Epidermal sliding is best seen in thin-skinned 
areas such as the eyelids and lateral forehead and is a reli-
able sign that the papillary dermis has been reached.

Defrosting  times  are  also  an  indicator  of  depth  but 

not as practical because it is already after the fact.

APPLICATION AND PRACTICAL 
RECOMMENDATIONS

Of primary importance is to always be mindful and pro-
tective  of  the  eyes.  As  corneal  protectors  and  ophthal-
mic  ointment  are  not  used,  extreme  care  is  necessary. 
The  head  of  the  bed  is  gently  elevated  to  prevent  acid 

running into the eye, never using an applying sponge so 
wet that it can drip, and never crossing over the eye with 
an applying gauze in hand. To keep the operator’s hands 
dry, a surgical towel can be clipped to the shoulder of the 
scrub skirt and draped over the front to easily wipe the 
hands. Clearly labeled containers are lined up with glass 
bowls  and arranged in  ascending  strength  in  a  consis-
tent manner to prevent confusion (Fig. 7.2).

The  applying  materials  include  2-inch  by  2-inch 
gauze (preferably synthetic fiber, which is less abrasive), 
large  cotton-tipped  applicator,  small  cotton-tipped 
applicator, and toothpicks. The solution is shaken before 
being poured into the bowl, and as described before, the 
new surfactant ensures that the mixture will not separate 
during the length of the peel. The gauze is folded twice 
to decrease the area of contact and carefully wrung out. 
This gauze should be moist and not so saturated that it 
can drip. The gauze is set down, and the hands are dried 
with the aforementioned towel. This is very important in 
segmented peels, where errors are obvious.

As the gauze is passed over the skin, the effect of the 
acid is seen in 10 to 15 seconds, depending on the con-
centration of the solution and the wetness of the gauze. 
The specific action of the acid is to precipitate and coag-
ulate the protein of the skin, forming a “frost,” of vary-
ing degrees of white appearance. The frosting becomes 
progressively more dense and opaque as the peel passes 
through the papillary dermis into the upper and midre-
ticular dermis. Once the acid is applied the effect is irre-
versible, because there is no neutralizing agent available. 
As will be explained later, the process is slow enough to 
give the operator adequate control.

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels86

PART 4  Deep Peels

Fig. 7.3  The frosting becomes more dense and opaque as multiple passes are made. In this case, the perioral 
area and commissures were peeled to the reticular dermis.

The key concept is that with weaker concentrations 
(0.8%  and  1.2%  versus  2.1%  of  the  Baker  formula), 
the main factor of the depth reached is the application 
technique, which is directly controlled by the surgeon. 
Nuance in the technique can involve how wet the gauze 
is, how many passes are made, and how much pressure 
is applied. The same depth can be reached using differ-
ent techniques or even different concentrations.

The key to chemical peeling is that the correct depth 
is reached, and although various concentrations will be 
recommended, the visual endpoint is what is important, 
and each area must be visually assessed. Similar depths 
can be reached with different concentrations and appli-
cation  techniques.  The  main  advance  of  modern  deep 
chemical  peels  is  that  the  process  is  slow,  giving  the 
operator ample time to gauge the depth, with the vari-
ous concentrations and application techniques being the 
means to getting there.

After degreasing with acetone, sensory nerve blocks 
can  be  performed  if  the  patient  is  anesthetized,  and  a 
preliminary pass of 50% phenol is performed with cau-
tion,  monitoring  the  ECG  for  increasing  heart  rate.  If 
seen, slow down.

My  routine  is  to  start  on  the  upper  lip  with  0.4%  or 
0.8%. The progressive degrees of frosting are easily seen 
on  this  thick  skin.  A  light  frost  appears,  and  as  further 
passes  are  made,  the  frost  becomes  denser  and  more 
organized. Continuing with the peel, redipping the gauze 
as  needed,  the  frost  becomes  denser,  whiter,  and  more 
opaque  as  the  pink  background  is  lost  when  the  upper 
reticular dermis is reached. This process is slow and pre-
dictable,  giving  the  operator  the  opportunity  to  stop  at 
any point if a lesser peel is chosen. The speed at which a 
specific depth is reached depends on how wet the gauze 
is, what concentration is used, how many passes are made, 
and how hard one rubs.

87

Fig. 7.5  The midface has been peeled to the papillary dermis; 
translucent frost with a pink background is visible.

Fig.  7.6  The  thin  eyelid  skin  responds  well  to  dilute  solution 
such as 0.1% croton oil and possible 0.05% for the upper lids 
depending on the laxity.

the geniomandibular groove is delicate and rarely wrin-
kled, and therefore should be peeled with care (Fig. 7.5).
The eyelids are an excellent area for peeling because 
they  show  remarkable  improvement  and  are  rarely 
troublesome despite their thinness. A 0.1% solution is 
applied with one or two cotton-tipped applicators that 
have been dipped into the solution then touched to a 
gauze  or  cloth  to  lightly  dry  them.  The  peeling  pro-
ceeds from inferior to superior, gradually approaching 
the ciliary margin (Fig. 7.6). The relative dampness of 

Fig. 7.4  In the lateral forehead the peel has reached the pap-
illary dermis, denoted by a transparent frost with a pink back-
ground.  The  frost  in  the  glabella  is  dense  and  more  opaque, 
indicating that the peel has crossed into the reticular dermis.

Wrinkles  in  the  perioral  area  are  stretched  to  allow 
even penetration of the acid. The commissures can also 
be stretched and peeled deeply. The vermilion itself can 
be peeled with 0.2% or 0.4% solution. A lighter peel is 
continued onto the submandibular border to prevent a 
line of demarcation (Fig. 7.3).

The glabella and nose are addressed next because they 
often mimic the thickness and wrinkling of the perioral 
area and are typically peeled to the upper to midreticular 
dermis. The rational for the described sequence is to let 
some time pass while other areas are peeled, and after 15 
to  20  minutes,  the  appearance  of  reddish-brown  over-
tone will confirm having reached the reticular dermis. 
If this color is absent or faint, the area can be repeeled.

The forehead, which is next, is an area of variable thick-
ness. The  central  area  is  thickest  and  thins  out  laterally, 
with the temporal area being especially delicate. Generally 
speaking, the forehead does not have significant wrinkles, 
except for transverse lines and oblique sleep lines laterally. 
A common approach is to peel centrally with 0.4% and 
0.2%  laterally  to  the  papillary  dermis.  Deeper  glabellar 
and transverse lines can be specifically targeted later. The 
peel is carried to the hairline to avoid a demarcation line 
and does not affect hair growth (Fig. 7.4).

The lateral face is peeled with 0.2%, with particular 
attention to the preauricular area, which is delicate. The 
peel should continue into the sideburn, the tragus, and 
the earlobe. The medial face is usually peeled with 0.4%, 
and  dominant  wrinkles  are  specifically  targeted  later. 
The inferior corridor between the mandibular angle and 

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels88

PART 4  Deep Peels

Fig. 7.7  Targeting of deeper wrinkles with a wetter applicator is very valuable in the perioral area.

the  applicator  and  the  number  of  passes  made  deter-
mine  the  depth.  Epidermal  sliding  will  become  evi-
dent, and the frost will be an even white. After the other 
lid  is  peeled,  the  original  lid  is  assessed  and  possibly 
repeeeled  at  midheight  with  0.05%  where  dominant 
wrinkles and redundancy are seen. Some tension may 
be  present  in  the  lower  lids  early  on,  but  it  responds 
well to massage.

The upper lids respond to peeling by shrinking of 
the skin, possibly even resembling an upper blepha-
roplasty. Depending on the degree of laxity, the upper 
lids  are  peeled  with  0.05%  or  0.1%.  If  there  is  laxity 
below the tarsal fold, a light peel is possible. A minor 
inconvenience  of  peeling  the  upper  lids  is  that  the 
eyes  may  swell  shut  for  a  day  or  less,  but  it  is  well 
worth it.

The peel can be extended onto the neck to prevent 
a  line  of  demarcation,  but  extreme  caution  is  neces-
sary. The neck skin is delicate and does not have the 
recuperative  potential  of  facial  skin.  The  purpose  is 
not to improve wrinkles, because this would result in 
hypopigmentation or even scarring. The neck should 
be  peeled  with  0.025%  or  weaker  with  very  light, 
wispy  strokes  leaving  minimal  or  no  frosting.  If  the 
practitioner  is  familiar  and  more  comfortable  with 
trichloroacetic acid, this is an option. “Less is more” 
is good advice.

Now  is  the  time  to  examine  deeper  wrinkles  in  the 
lips, glabella, forehead, and midface. Precise deeper peel-
ing of individual rhytids is a most valuable advantage of 
phenol–croton oil peels. The technique is to use a wetter 
cotton-tipped applicator to paint the individual line and 
quickly dry it as dense frost is seen. This is repeated until 
the desired endpoint is reached (Fig. 7.7). An alternative 
is to saturate a toothpick, wooden end of an applicator, or 
fine artist’s brush and fill the valley of the wrinkle, leave it 
for a few seconds, then dry it. In the perioral and glabellar 
area, 1.2% solution may be used as described previously 
depending  on  severity.  Lesser  concentrations  are  used 
in  the  midface  and  crow’s  feet;  an  intact  or  splintered 
wooden  end  of  an  applicator  are  useful  tools  in  these 
instances. If there is obvious demarcation between areas 
peeled with different concentrations a weak concentra-
tion such as 0.1% or 0.2% can be used to blend them.

The case has been made that these peels are very valu-
able and should be embraced by any practitioner involved 
in  facial  rejuvenation.  The  impediment  may  be  that  this 
is  unknown,  intimidating  territory.  If  the  inherent  value 
is accepted, my advice is to begin gradually. The crux and 
nuance of these peels is visual, making it difficult to teach. 
Good-quality photographs and videos are available that are 
very useful. Live surgery workshops are an excellent way to 
advance rapidly in the practice. One way to gain experience 
is to deliberately underpeel a cooperative patient with the 

89

Fig. 7.8  Increased results are possible with multiple peels. Upper left, preoperatively; upper right; after one 
peel; below, center, after a second peel

thought  of  repeeling.  Another  approach  is  to  downgrade 
the recommended concentrations by half (i.e., 0.8% to 0.4% 
to 0.2%, etc.) and gain experience with the mechanism and 
appearance of the peel. I believe that if the interested practi-
tioner will accept this new territory in the spirit of learning, 
he or she will quickly advance into seasoned peelers, giving 
their patients results heretofore unattainable. The rewards 
over a career in appearance and skin health are unparalleled.

SEGMENTAL PEELS

Partial or segmental peels are possible if care and good 
judgment are exercised. Patients with widespread solar 
damage are at an increased risk for demarcation; there-
fore  a  full-face  peel  is  preferable.  An  isolated  perioral 
peel to a medium depth is possible, and the color will 
take 8 to 12 weeks to blend without camouflage makeup. 
In  select  patients  with  isolated  upper  lip  lines,  a  mus-
tache peel can give excellent results.

Eyelid  skin  responds  particularly  well  to  chemical 
peeling,  making  this  an  excellent  area  for  segmental 
peeling. If the peel is kept within the boundaries of the 
orbital rim, the skin color change is well tolerated and 
easily managed with makeup or glasses. The peel can be 
extended  to  the  crow’s  feet,  but  the  erythema  will  last 
longer and be more noticeable. The lower eyelid skin is 
often the first place to show aging, usually in the early to 
mid-40s. This is a frustrating situation for patients, and 
the myriad creams and treatments are not particularly 
satisfactory.  A  simple  peel,  usually  without  anesthesia, 
can take care of the situation.

Lower  eyelid  peeling  has  significant  advantages. 
If  the  peel  is  repeated,  additive  results  are  seen,  and 
lower eyelids can usually be treated to the patient’s sat-
isfaction (Fig. 7.8). Because these changes are so com-
mon, it opens up treatment to a very large population. 
At  whatever  point  there  is  further  deterioration,  the 
lid can be repeeled and therefore keep up with aging.

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels90

PART 4  Deep Peels

Treatment  of  the  lower  lids  is  relatively  easy  and  pre-
dictable; problems with healing are a rarity. This is a good 
place to start peeling, and in fact, any practitioner that does 
not want to undertake the complexity of a full-face peeling 
will benefit many patients by peeling the eyelids. Upper lid 
peeling can result in a very natural, refreshed look.

POSTPEEL CARE

Caring for the patient after a peel can be the most chal-
lenging aspect of the entire process. The peel creates a 
wound, and the goal is to guide reepithelialization com-
fortably and without problems. There are many options 

Fig. 7.9  Zinc oxide tape applied to all areas peeled.

available  in  the  field  of  resurfacing,  and  there  is  not  a 
clear consensus.

In  the  first  part  of  my  peeling  experience,  I  treated 
the skin open by mixing triple antibiotic ointment and 
lidocaine  jelly  to  all  peeled  areas.  The  patient  contin-
ued applying this over the next 10 to 12 days as the skin 
recovered. This approach works but is messy, and prob-
lems with sensitization to the antibiotic can occur, lead-
ing to breakouts and rashes. Milia and intense erythema 
related to the occlusive nature are also problems.

In  an  attempt  to  improve  the  patient  experience,  a 
variation of an older technique has become the preferred 
routine. At the end of the peel, all frosting is allowed to 
subside, and no further action is taken; the peeled areas 
are then covered with zinc oxide tape, and a dressing net  
is applied to stabilize the tape (Fig. 7.9). If the upper lids 
are peeled and tape applied, opening of the lids may be 
impeded  the  first  night.  Petrolatum  jelly  is  applied  to 
the  brows  and  hairline  to  prevent  pulling  hair  during 
removal.  A  bouffant  surgical  cap  overlaps  the  hairline 
tape and is taped in place.

The  patient  returns  the  next  day  and  the  mask  is 
removed  from  inferior  to  superior,  typically  without 
pain. The peeled skin is washed with saline and gently 
debrided with the edge of a tongue depressor (Fig. 7.10).
Following  this,  a  paste  of  bismuth  subgallate  pow-
der and saline is mixed and applied to all peeled areas 
with  a  tongue  depressor  or  makeup  brush  (Fig.  7.11). 
The  paste  is  allowed  to  dry  to  a  solid  crust  and  from 

A

B

Fig. 7.10  A, Tape mask after removal on postpeel day 1. B, Appearance after tape mask removal.

91

A

B

Fig. 7.11  A, Bismuth subgallate paste. B, Bismuth paste applied to all peeled areas.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 7.12  A-D, Sequential shedding of bismuth subgallate over the first week.

this point, the patient does nothing and does not touch 
the  face.  Over  the  next  7  to  12  days,  the  healing  skin 
underneath  the  mask  will  reepithelialize  and  shed  the 
crust.  The  patient  is  strongly  advised  not  to  pick  or 
touch the face. The patient is usually seen at day 7, and 
a heavy balm or petrolatum is applied to any crust that 
remains  attached. This  is  allowed  to  seep  in,  and  they 
can gently shower the next day. The process is repeated, 
and the bismuth is usually shed between days 10 and 12. 

The exposed skin, which will be pink to red, is treated 
with a nonfragrant moisturizer or postprocedure cream 
such as Epidermal Repair (SkinCeuticals, Garland, TX) 
(Figs. 7.12 and 7.13).

The  surprising  reaction  has  been  overwhelming 
acceptance of this bizarre appearance and appreciation of 
the hands-off approach. Patients have shown remarkable 
good  humor  and  great  ingenuity  for  covering  up  (Fig. 
7.14). They are much more at peace with this technique, 

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels92

PART 4  Deep Peels

Fig. 7.13  63-year-old woman seen in Fig. 7.12. Before and 4 months after peel.

RESULTS

Croton  oil  peels,  like  other  resurfacing  modalities, 
injure the skin and elicit a healing response that stimu-
lates the deposition of collagen. A significant difference 
is that new elastin is also stimulated, and the layer of col-
lagen is thick, orderly, and remarkably stable over many 
years. The result is a modification in the skin anatomy 
with  improvement  of  wrinkles  and  histologically  skin 
that  looks  younger  because,  in  essence,  younger  skin 
has been created. Light penetrates this new skin and is 
reflected back brightly, doing away with the dull, ashen 
look  of  sun-damaged  skin.  No  surgical  procedure  can 
do this. The peeled skin not only looks better, it is actu-
ally  healthier.  Histological  studies  show  eradication  of 
actinic keratoses and early cancer cells. The peels reach 
the depth where these nests of cells exist, and it is cumu-
lative  impression  of  experienced  peelers  that  patients 
who  have  been  peeled  do  not  develop  facial  basal  cell 
or  squamous  cell  cancers.  This  is  an  important  obser-
vation that warrants further investigation and confirms 
the common intuition that beautiful skin is healthy skin.
Figs.  7.15  through  7.23  chronicle  the  dramatic 
improvement that can be obtained with phenol–croton 
oil peels.

Fig. 7.14  Example of clever cover-up.

and  it  has  significantly  cut  down  on  worried  calls  and 
visits.  The  typical  care  results  in  less  irritated  skin  and 
decreased  erythema.  Postpeel  erythema  lasts  8  to  12 
weeks, fading gradually and easily managed with makeup.

93

A

B

C

E

D

F

Fig.. 7.15  A, A 49-year-old woman with advanced wrinkling, elastosis, and smoker’s lines. B, Postpeel at 8 
months. Notable improvement in the quality of the skin and abatement of dominant wrinkles are evident. C, 
Prepeel and, D, postpeel of orbital and glabellar area. Visible shrinking of upper lid skin and improvement of 
deep wrinkles are evident. E, Prepeel and, F, postpeel views of the perioral area.

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels94

PART 4  Deep Peels

A

B

C

D

Fig.. 7.16  A, A 47-year-old woman with severe sun damage, elastosis, and thick, lifeless skin. B, Four years 
postpeel. Overall improvement in the quality of the skin and even pigmentation. C, Prepeel. D, One year post-
peel with evident softening of the brittle, unnatural skin and improvement of the lids.

COMPLICATIONS

As  with  any  resurfacing  technique,  treating  too 
deep  can  result  in  scarring  (see  Chapter  16).  Any 
skin  thickening  is  suspicious  and  should  be  treated 
with  topical  steroids.  If  an  early  scar  forms,  intral-
esional  injection  of  5-fluorouracil  (5-FU)  is  recom-
mended. This is an off-label use. A newer approach 
is  microneedling  with  nanofat,  which  shows  great 
promise.

Hypopigmentation  can  occur  if  the  peel  goes  too 
deep.  A  patient  with  very  pronounced  wrinkles  may 
need to be peeled to a depth that causes hypopigmen-
tation. Even if this is the case, it tends not to have the 
unnatural appearance seen with older peels.

Hyperpigmentation is usually the result of early sun 
exposure;  therefore  prevention  is  the  key.  Hyperpig-
mentation responds to tretinoin and hydroquinone 4%.
Herpetic  infection  is  always  a  possibility,  and  all 
patients are treated 3 days before the peel and continued 
for 7 days after.

Other,  lesser  complications  include  mild  ectropion,  
which resolves with massage, milia, and prolonged ery-
thema.

CONCLUSION

A missing piece in facial rejuvenation is an effective tech-
nique  for  skin  resurfacing.  Modern  phenol–croton  oil 

95

A

B

C

Fig.. 7.17  A, A 59-year-old woman with ashen, dull look of sun damage and pronounced lines of the upper 
lip. B, One year postpeel showing overall improvement and, C, dramatic effacement of perioral radial lines.

A

B

Fig.. 7.18  A, A 65-year-old woman whose main aging component is textural. Resurfacing takes precedent 
over surgical correction. B, One year postpeel with greatly improved appearance and normal pigmentation.

peels are a new tool that provide impressive, long-lasting 
results  without  hypopigmentation.  Newer  techniques 
make the peel more convenient and the recovery more 
tolerable for the patient. By manipulating the formulas 

and  application  technique,  the  peels  are  available  to 
younger patients and are a means to keep up with aging. 
Phenol–croton  oil  peels  are  an  excellent  alternative  to 
expensive lasers.

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels96

PART 4  Deep Peels

A

B

Fig.. 7.19  A, A 75-year-old woman with significant structural and textural aging. B, Results at age 81 years, 5 
years after a facelift and 1 year after a peel, demonstrating the value of correcting both aspects.

B

A

C

Fig.. 7.20  A, A 63-year old woman demonstrating all three aspects of facial aging: typical laxity, jowling, and 
wrinkling. B, One year after facelift and fat transfer with noticeable structural and volume improvements. C, 
One and a half years postpeel. The improvement of texture and wrinkling is the final component that ties 
everything together in a comprehensive result.

97

A

B

Fig.. 7.21  A, A 44-year-old man whose dominant aging change is the wrinkled and crepey appearance 
of the lower lid skin. B, Six months after a segmental peel of the lower lids alone. The improvement of 
the lower lid has been achieved without altering the shape of the lateral canthus.

Fig..  7.22  Left,  A  61-year-old  woman,  smoker,  with  generalized  wrinkling,  widespread  sun  damage, 
pigment  changes,  and  obvious  aging  appearance.  Right,  Six  months  postpeel  without  surgery.  This 
case demonstrates the considerable power that a phenol–croton oil peel alone can have in overall reju-
venation. The postpeel appearance is that of a much younger, vital person.

continued

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels98

PART 4  Deep Peels

Fig.. 7.22, cont’d 

99

Fig.. 7.23  Left, A 69-year-old woman with advanced wrinkling and general deflation of face not wishing sur-
gery. Right, At 14 months after complete face lipofilling with microfat and nanofat plus peeling at the same 
time. This is an example of impressive centrofacial rejuvenation without surgery.

FURTHER READING

Baker TJ. Chemical face peeling and rhytidectomy for facial 
rejuvenation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1962;29:199–207.
Baker TJ. Is the phenol-croton oil peel safe? Plast Reconstr 

Surg. 2003;112:353–354.

Baker TJ, Stuzin JM, Baker TM. Facial Skin Resurfacing. St 

Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1998.

Bensimon RH. Croton oil peels. Aesthet Surg J. 2008;28:33–45.
Demas PN, Bridenstine JB. Diagnosis and treatment of 

postoperative complications after skin resurfacing. J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 1999;57:837–841.

Demas PN, Bridenstine JB, Braun TW. Pharmacology of 

agents used in the management of patients having skin 
resurfacing. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1997;55:1255–1258.

De Rossi-Fattaccioli D. Histologic comparison between 
deep chemical peels (modified Litton’s formulae) and 
extreme pulsed laser CO2 resurfacing. Dermatol Peru. 
2005;15:181–184.

Dinner MI, Artz JS. The art of trichloroacetic acid chemical 

peel. Clin Plast Surg. 1998;25:53–62.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part III. The plastic surgeon’s role. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:752–763.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 

part IV. Face peel results with different concentrations of 
phenol and croton oil. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:1061–
1083.

Johnson JB, Ichinose H, Obagi ZE, et al. Obagi’s modified tri-
chloroacetic acid (TCA)-controlled variable-depth peel: a 
study of clinical signs correlated with histological findings. 
Ann Plast Surg. 1996;36:225–237.

Kligman AM, Baker TJ, Gordon HL. Long-term histologic 
follow-up of the phenol face peels. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1985;75:652–659.

Landau M. Cardiac complications in deep chemical peels. 

Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:190–193.

Obagi ZE. Obagi Skin Health Restoration and Rejuvenation. 

New York: Springer-Verlag; 2000.

Rubin MG. Chemical Peels: Superficial and Medium Depth. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Williams; 1995.
Stagnone JJ, Stagnone GJ. A second look at chemabrasion. J 

Edison RB. Lighter phenol peels allow faster recovery and less 

Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1982;8:701–705.

discomfort. Aesthet Surg J. 1996;16:239–240.

Hantash BM, Stewart DB, Cooper ZA, et al. Facial resurfacing 
for non-melanoma skin cancer prophylaxis. Arch Derma-
tol. 2006;142:976–982.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part I. Dissecting the formula. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:227–239.

Stegman SJ. A comparative histologic study of the effects 
of three peeling agents and dermabrasion on nor-
mal and sun-damaged skin. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 
1982;6:123–125.

Tonnard PL, Verpaele AM, Bensimon RH. Centrofacial 

Rejuvenation. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 
2018.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 

Truppman ES, Ellenby JD. Major electrocardiographic 

part II. The lay peelers and their croton oil formulas. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:240–248.

changes during chemical face peeling. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1979;63:44–48.

CHAPTER 7 Phenol-Croton Oil Peels8

Deep Chemical Peels

Marina Landau

The results of phenol–croton oil peeling, also known as 
deep chemical peeling, are considered the gold standard 
in  the  treatment  of  the  aged  face.  Historically,  in  the 
“pre–energy-based devices era,” it was almost the only 
option  for  radical  facial  skin  rejuvenation.  The  main 
advantages of a deep peeling procedure are its efficacy, 
predictability, and longevity of results. The dissection of 
phenol–croton oil formulas discloses that more than one 
formula is safe and effective. The success of the proce-
dure depends on the surgeon’s qualification, the patient’s 
education, and adhering to safety standards.

HISTORY

Almost all the modern formulas for deep peeling con-
tain phenol and croton oil. The early use of phenol peel 
was documented by two dermatologists, George Miller 
MacKee  and  Florentine  Karp,  in  their  publication  on 
treating  patients  with  postacne  scars.1  The  first  time 
that croton oil was mentioned as an ingredient of deep 
peeling solution was by Adolph M. Brown, in his 1959 
patent  application  entitled  “Skin  Treating  Method  and 
Composition.”2 Among other contributors to the medi-
cal development of phenol–croton oil peels at that time 
were Bames,3 Urkov,4 Combes et al.,5 Brown et al.,6 and 
Litton.7

The final revival of deep chemical peeling is attributed 
to two American plastic surgeons, Thomas J. Baker and 
Howard  L.  Gordon,  who  during  the  1960s  legitimized 
this  procedure  by  discussing  it  in  national  meetings 
and  demonstrating  their  impressive  results.8,9  The  sci-
entific  landmark  breakthrough  in  phenol–croton  oil 
peeling came from a publication of Gregory Hetter, who 
showed that by varying the amount of croton oil in the 

100

peel solution the strength of the peel can be modified.10 
Other authors, such as Stone and Lefer,11 Spira et al.,12 
and Fintsi,13 contributed to the procedure, allowing it to 
emerge from semiobscurity to its respectable and valued 
place in a field of aesthetic surgery.

CHEMICAL BACKGROUND

The active ingredients in the solution for deep peeling 
are a combination of croton oil and phenol.

Phenol (C5H5OH), or carbolic acid, is an aromatic 
hydrocarbon  derived  originally  from  coal  tar,  but  pre-
pared  synthetically  in  a  process  that  uses  monochlo-
robenzene  (Fig.  8.1).  After  this  process,  98%  phenol 
appears as transparent crystals, and the liquefied phenol 
consists of 88% USP solution of phenol in water.

Croton oil is an extract of the seed of the plant Cro-
ton tiglium and has been commercially prepared as cro-
ton  resin  since  1932.  Its  activity  on  the  skin  is  related 
to  free  hydroxyl  groups,  which  cause  skin  vesiculation 
even in low doses.

Other  ingredients  in  deep  chemical  peel  formulas 
include  Septisol  or  Novisol,  water,  and  vegetable  oils 
(glycerin, olive, sesame).

Formulations
The  concentration  of  phenol  in  different  formulations 
ranges  between  45%  and  80%,  whereas  croton  oil  is 
between  0.16%  and  2.05%.  The  role  of  Septisol  is  to 
reduce  the  skin  surface  tension  and  to  improve  solu-
tion  penetration.  Despite  this,  Septisol  is  not  included 
in all of the formulas. Some of the formulas contain oils. 
The  role  of  the  oils  in  the  formula  has  not  been  clari-
fied yet. Our personal experience shows that oily phenol 

1

6

5

2

3

4
Benzene ring

OH

Phenol
(1-Hydroxy Benzene)

Fig. 8.1  Chemical formulas of benzene and phenol.

solutions penetrate the skin in a more controllable fash-
ion.

Few  dogmas  regarding  phenol-based  peeling  solu-
tions have been challenged in the last two decades. The 
concept of the “all-or-none” effect of the Baker-Gordon 
formula on the skin was confronted by Gregory Hetter,10 
who showed that depth of the penetration and clinical 
outcomes of the peel can be manipulated by a change in 
the amount of croton oil. A major advantage of this con-
cept is that by decreasing the croton oil concentration, 
the  surgeon  is  able  to  accommodate  the  depth  of  the 
peel according to the skin type, area treated, or expected 
clinical outcome, by changing the amount of the solu-
tion applied and the number of coats.14,15

Histology
Biopsies obtained 48 hours after phenol peeling demon-
strate necrosis of the epidermis, extending through the 
papillary  dermis,  surrounded  by  a  marked  inflamma-
tory  reaction.6  Epidermal  regeneration  is  completed 
within  7  days,  whereas  dermal  healing  usually  lags 
behind. Histological changes in human skin induced by 
deep chemical peeling include a newly formed band of 
dermis found directly beneath the epidermis consisting 
of horizontal compact bundles of collagen and a dense 
network  of  fine  elastic  fibers,  as  well  as  even  and  uni-
formly  shaped  keratinocytes  in  epidermis.  Although 
peeled skin tends to be hypopigmented, melanocytes are 
present.16 These changes are evident even as long as 20 
years after the peel.17

INDICATIONS AND PATIENT SELECTION

The  main  indications  for  deep  chemical  peels  include 
dyschromia,  especially  solar  lentigines;  wrinkles;  solar 
keratosis; and acne scars. Deep peels can be used to treat 
periorbital melanosis, benign skin growths, or deposits, 

CHAPTER 8  Deep Chemical Peels

101

such as xanthelasma or epidermal nevus. Recently, the 
efficacy  of  phenol–croton  oil  peels  was  shown  for  lip 
enhancement.18

Thick  male  skin  is  usually  less  responsive  to  deep 
peels, but men with severe actinic damage or acne scar-
ring benefit significantly from the procedure.

Deep  peeling  can  be  performed  on  the  eyelids  to 
improve  excess  eyelid  laxity,  periorbital  pigmentation, 
or wrinkling or as an adjunct procedure to surgical or 
micropunch blepharoplasty.19,20

A  combination  of  deep  peeling  performed  on  one 
cosmetic unit with a medium-depth peel performed on 
the rest of the face is called a segmental peel. Segmental 
peeling is a procedure of choice if a limited area (usually 
perioral  or  periorbital)  is  significantly  more  wrinkled 
than others (Fig. 8.2). Use of deep chemical peels on an 
area smaller than 1% of the body area does not require 
cardiac monitoring.21

Contraindications
There are few absolute contraindications for deep peel-
ing,  mainly  physical  or  mental  instability.  Originally, 
the ideal patient for a deep chemical peel was a blond, 
blue-eyed,  fair-complexioned  woman.  Our  experience 
shows that phenol-based peels can be safely performed 
on olive- and dark-skinned patients with dark eyes and 
hair.22 As long as a patient is aware and cooperative in 
using a skin-lightening preparation (see Chapter 3) and 
potent sunscreens during the postpeel period, the pro-
cedure is equally effective and safe for dark skins.23

During pregnancy and lactation, any cosmetic inter-
vention is considered to be undesirable. Although patients 
with controlled hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and thy-
roid  malfunction  can  be  peeled  safely,  any  preexisting 
heart condition requires special precautions. All patients 
are required to have an electrocardiogram before the pro-
cedure.  Medications  prolonging  QT  interval  should  be 
stopped  or  switched  before  the  procedure,  because  QT 
interval prolongation has been reported during phenol–
croton oil peels.24 It is always recommended to work in 
cooperation with a patient’s cardiologist.

Systemic isotretinoin (Accutane) used to be an abso-
lute contraindication to any cosmetic intervention. This 
approach  has  been  recently  challenged.25  We  feel  that 
minimal  interval  to  peeling  after  stopping  this  medi-
cation can be shortened from the traditional 6 months, 
especially  when  performing  a  procedure  on  a  patient 
with thick sebaceous skin.

102

PART 4  Deep Peels

A

B

Fig. 8.2  Segmental peel. A, Candidate. B, Peeling procedure: perioral phenol–croton oil peel combined with 
Jessner’s trichloroacetic acid 35% peeling elsewhere.

According  to  our  experience,  smoking  does  not 
adversely affect the postpeel healing or the extent of the 
results.  We  suggest  adding  frontal  fibrosing  alopecia 
(FFA)  as  a  relative  contraindication  for  the  procedure. 
Once a rare disease, FFA has recently become a preva-
lent condition. Inflammation and fibrosis of the hair fol-
licles in facial skin, as happens in this disease, may affect 
the healing process after deep peeling.26

Prepeeling Preparation
Honest dialog with the patient is important before any 
cosmetic intervention, and its value cannot be overesti-
mated for a deep chemical peel.

It  should  be  verified  that  the  patient  completely 

understands the following points:
 1.   Until  reepithelization  is  accomplished,  the  patient 
should expect to look extremely “unattractive.” Pic-
tures of real patients during this phase are shown to 
make  the  idea  more  concrete  (Fig.  8.3).  Supportive 
family significantly eases this phase for the patient.
 2.   Full  rehabilitation  of  the  skin,  including  complete 
fading of the redness, takes a few months. Strict com-
pliance  with  postprocedural  instructions,  including 
sun  avoidance,  is  necessary  for  an  uneventful  post-
peel course.

 3.   Complying with the strict and frequent follow-up vis-
its is necessary to assure that any developing adverse 
reaction is addressed in a timely manner.
Prophylactic acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir is 
given to patients with a history of recurrent herpes sim-
plex, starting a day before the procedure and continuing 
for 10 days or until full reepithelialization is achieved.

Standard  photography  is  performed  and  a  consent 

form is signed before the procedure.

Preparation of the Skin
It  is  still  debatable  whether  preparation  of  the  skin  is 
required for deep chemical peeling. Topical application 
of retinoic acid cream for 3 to 6 weeks before the pro-
cedure may create better and more even penetration of 
the peeling solution, especially in thick sebaceous skin.

Monitoring and Pain Control
Phenol-based peels can be performed as a full-face or a 
segmental procedure. When conducting full-face peels, 
intravenous  fluids  should  be  administered  throughout 
the  procedure  to  reduce  cardiac  complications  related 
to  phenol  toxicity.  For  segmental  peels,  patients  are 
instructed to drink a minimum of 1 L of water through-
out the procedure.

CHAPTER 8  Deep Chemical Peels

103

A

B

C

Fig. 8.3  A–C, Post–full-face peel course, used for patient consultation and preparation for the procedure.

The critical period of procedure-related discomfort is 
during the peeling and up to 4 hours after it. Variations of 
oral and intravenous anesthesia as well as regional nerve 
blocks can be used. Although full cardiopulmonary mon-
itoring is required during full-face peeling, no cardiopul-
monary monitoring is needed during segmental peel.

PREPARATION OF THE PEELING 
SOLUTION

The formulation of the peeling solution is of uppermost 
importance  for  the  efficacy,  safety,  and  reproducibility 
of  the  results.  Experienced  peelers  prepare  their  own 
solutions, altering the solution strength by changing the 
concentration of croton oil, according to Hetter’s prin-
ciples.10

For less experienced or beginner peelers, commercial 
formulas  with  fixed  croton  oil  concentration  might  be 
a better and safer choice. In this case, the depth is con-
trolled mainly by the number of passes performed.

The first step in preparing the peeling solution is to 
mix 1 mL of croton oil in 24 mL of 88% phenol to create 
a stock solution, to be further diluted following Hetter’s 
protocols (Table 8.1). This stock is not a peeling solution 
and should not be used on the skin.

From the stock solution light to very strong peeling 
solutions are prepared according to the clinical indica-
tion and treatment area (Table 8.2).

To make a strong solution containing 1.2% croton oil, 
3 mL of stock solution is mixed with 1 mL phenol 88%, 

TABLE 8.1  Hetter’s Stock Solutiona

24 mL phenol 88% USP

1 mL croton oil

aUsed  for  mixing  the  other  peel  solutions  and  NOT  for  use 
directly on skin.

5.5 mL water, and 0.5 mL Septisol. For medium-strength 
solution,  2  mL  of  stock  is  mixed  with  2  mL  of  phenol 
88%, 5.5 mL water, and 0.5 mL Septisol (Table 8.3).27

If left nonagitated, the solutions tend to separate into 
two phases. Repetitively mixing the phases is necessary 
during the application.

PEELING TECHNIQUE

On  the  day  of  the  procedure,  a  patient  is  required  to 
avoid using any cosmetics or creams. Before the peeling, 
meticulous  cleaning  of  the  skin  is  performed.  While  a 
patient is on the operating table, the skin is degreased by 
acetone-soaked gauze sponges. This step is imperative to 
obtain an even penetration of the solution into the skin.
Cotton-tipped  applicators  (CTAs)  or  4-inch  by 
4-inch  gauzes  are  used  to  apply  the  peeling  solution. 
The ready-to-use applicators come in different sizes, but 
usually a CTA is too dense and has only limited absorp-
tion ability. Therefore, we suggest adding regular cotton 
to soften the tip (Fig. 8.4).

The volume of peeling solution, pressure of the appli-
cation,  and  number  of  strokes  are  the  main  technical 
variables to control the depth of penetration. To control 

104

PART 4  Deep Peels

TABLE 8.2  Hetter’s Standard Solutions and Indications

Croton oil %
Indications
Areas

Very Strong

1.6%
Deep wrinkles
Perioral, nose

Strong

1.2%
Moderate wrinkles
Forehead, cheeks

Medium

0.8%
Mild wrinkles
Temples

Light

0.4%
Laxity
Eyelids and neck

TABLE 8.3  Hetter’s Standard Solutions 
Preparation to Make 10 mL of Peeling 
Solution

Very Strong Strong Medium Light

4 mL

3 mL

2 mL

1 mL

Hetter’s 
stock

Phenol 88% -
Water
Septisol

5.5 mL
0.5 mL

2 mL

1 mL
5.5 mL 5.5 mL
0.5 mL 0.5 mL

3 mL
5.5 mL
0.5 mL

Fig. 8.4  Cotton tips are used to apply the peeling solution.

the amount of the peeling solution, semidry applicators 
or gauze are used. In the most sensitive areas, such as the 
periorbital skin, barely wet applicators should be used, 
and only a single layer of the solution is applied.

The procedure starts on the forehead, and the solu-
tion  is  feathered  into  all  hair-bearing  areas,  including 
the scalp and eyebrows. Peeling solution does not affect 
hair  growth.  All  the  cosmetic  units  are  gradually  cov-
ered,  including  the  earlobes  and  a  “hidden”  triangle 
above  the  ears.  The  usual  endpoint  is  ivory-white  to 
gray-white color of skin (Fig. 8.5). In the most wrinkled 
facial areas additional application of peeling solution is 
advisable, after the frosting fades. It is important to keep 
the final volume of the solution used on the face at no 
more than 5 mL.

Full-face peels should be carried out under full car-
diopulmonary  monitoring  with  intravenous  sedation 
and hydration throughout the procedure.

Fig. 8.5  Application of the peeling solution. Ivory-white color of 
the skin is the endpoint of the application.

Air circulation and safety pauses are recommended 
to allow phenol to be metabolized and excreted from the 
circulation. In addition to central ventilation, an electric 
fan to vent the phenol fumes out or masks with activated 
carbon are recommended for the comfort of the staff.28
Postpeel occlusion of the most wrinkled areas deep-
ens the penetration of the solution. In an animal study, 
no difference in terms of depth of necrosis and neutro-
philic infiltrate was noted when comparing occlusion by 
adhesive  tape,  petrolatum,  or  bacitracin  ointment  and 
nonoccluded areas.29 However, the study was performed 
using the traditional Baker’s solution, for which the “all 
or none” principle is applicable, as previously discussed.
The  most  wrinkled  areas  are  occluded  using  short 
strips  of  waterproof  zinc  oxide  nonpermeable  tape 
applied  in  an  overlapping  fashion  (Fig.  8.6).  Overlap-
ping  allows  slight  motion  and  flexibility  between  the 
strips; therefore the swelling of the face during the post-
operative period does not cause separation of the tape 
from the skin surface.

AFTERCARE

After 24 hours, the tape is easily removed, because the 
exudate  separates  it  from  the  skin.  Analgesia  is  not 
required,  because  the  procedure  is  almost  painless. 
After removing the tape mask, the exudate is cleaned by 
sterile saline. We cover the face with bismuth subgallate 

 
CHAPTER 8  Deep Chemical Peels

105

activities. In males, faster disappearance of erythema is 
expected.  In  cases  of  darker-skinned  patients  (Fitzpat-
rick  skin  type  III  or  IV),  application  of  retinoic  acid–
hydroquinone preparation is recommended to prevent 
reactive hyperpigmentation.

Immediate  and  long-term  results  of  phenol–croton 
oil peels for various indications in patients of different 
skin phototypes, as well as segmental peeling, are shown 
next (Figs. 8.7–8.14).

COMPLICATIONS

Complications occur with any type of skin resurfacing. 
Understanding the risks and identifying the complica-
tions early allows for quick intervention with little long-
term consequences (see also Chapter 16).

Cardiac Arrhythmias
The  most  important  potential  complication  of  phenol- 
based  peels  is  cardiotoxicity.  Phenol  is  directly  toxic  to 
myocardium.  Studies  in  rats  showed  a  decrease  in  myo-
cardial contraction and in electrical activity after systemic 
exposure to phenol.30 Because fatal doses ranged widely in 
these studies, it seems that individual sensitivity of myo-
cardium  to  this  chemical  exists.  In  humans  neither  sex, 
age, nor previous cardiac history or blood phenol levels are 
accurate predictors for cardiac arrhythmia susceptibility.31 
The arrhythmias include tachycardia, premature ventricu-
lar beats, bigeminy, and atrial and ventricular tachycardia.32
After  the  application  of  the  peeling  solution,  there 
is  a  quick  absorption  of  phenol  from  the  skin  surface 
into the circulation.33 Approximately 75% of phenol is 
excreted  directly  through  kidney  or  detoxified  by  the 
liver. The other 25% is metabolized to CO2 and water.

Phenol  blood  levels  measured  after  application  of  
3 mL of 50% solution of phenol is 0.68 mg/dL, whereas 
in patients who survived an accidental oral ingestion of 
phenol a blood level of 23 mg/dL was found. Application 
of phenol to one cosmetic unit is equivalent to the appli-
cation of phenol into a nail matrix for matrixectomy.

In  a  recent  study,  cardiac  arrhythmia  was  recorded 
in  6.6%  of  the  patients  during  the  procedure,  but  not 
afterward.  Cardiac  arrhythmia  was  more  common  in 
patients  taking  medication  for  diabetes,  hypertension, 
and depression, probably related to the medications pro-
longing the QT interval.34

If an arrhythmia occurs, the application of the solu-
tion  should  be  stopped  until  normal  sinus  rhythm 

Fig.  8.6  Waterproof  zinc  oxide  nonpermeable  tape  is  applied 
to  the  most  wrinkled  areas  to  deepen  the  penetration  of  the 
solution to enhance the effect of the procedure.

antiseptic  powder  for  seven  days  (see  Fig.  8.6).  Other 
options  include  occlusive  moisturizers,  antibiotic  oint-
ments,  and  biosynthetic  occlusive  dressings,  such  as 
Meshed Omiderm (ITG-Medev, San Francisco, CA).

We  prescribe  regular  painkillers  to  be  taken  every 
4 hours for the first 2 postoperative days. Some physi-
cians administer systemic corticoids to reduce the swell-
ing  and  inflammation  after  the  peel.  Neck  swelling  is 
expected after a deep peel. It resolves after 4 to 6 days.

Bismuth subgallate powder acts as regenerative mask 
and  absorbs  skin  exudate  and  gradually  creates  a  firm 
and  rigid  mask.  It  may  crack  in  some  areas,  usually 
around the mouth and eyes. Some patients experience 
itching and can be helped by oral antihistamines. On the 
eighth day, wet soaking with tap water while standing in 
the shower is used to soften the powder mask. Repeated 
applications of petroleum jelly enhance the detachment 
of the “second mask” from the newly formed skin.

After  the  procedure,  the  patient  is  advised  to  use 
water-based  lotion  creams  and  potent  sunscreens.  The 
erythema  is  extremely  intense  the  first  6  weeks  and 
gradually resolves over a period of 3 to 6 months (Fig. 
8.7). During this time, patients are encouraged to wear 
makeup with a green foundation and to resume all daily 

106

PART 4  Deep Peels

A

B

C

Fig. 8.7  A 69-year-old patient before (A), 10 days after (B), and 3 month after (C) the procedure.

A

B

Fig. 8.8  A 72-year-old patient before (A) and 2 weeks after (B) the peel. The patient is wearing makeup with 
a green foundation to conceal redness.

returns.  Medications  are  sometimes  needed  to  control 
arrhythmias. Ensure the patient received adequate intra-
venous hydration during the phenol peel.

No hepatorenal or central nervous system toxicities 
have been reported in the literature with properly per-
formed chemical peels.35

Pigmentary Changes
Delayed  hypopigmentation  is  a  reason  some  doctors 
disliked  the  long-term  results  of  the  traditional,  high 

croton  oil  concentration  in  the  Baker-Gordon  peel. 
Hypopigmentation  after  phenol  peels  is  proportional 
to  the  depth  of  the  peel,  amount  of  the  solution  used, 
inherent skin color, and postpeel sun-related behavior.

Reactive  hyperpigmentation  can  occur  after  any 
chemical peel. Usually lighter-complexion patients have 
a lower risk for hyperpigmentation. Retinoic acid– and 
hydroquinone-based creams are reintroduced to prevent 
or  treat  postpeel  pigmentation.  The  return  of  pigment 
in previously existing intradermal nevi is a well-known 

CHAPTER 8  Deep Chemical Peels

107

A

B

Fig. 8.9  An 82-year-old patient before (A) and 4 weeks after (B) the peel.

A

B

Fig. 8.10  A dark-skinned patient before (A) and 6 months after (B) the peel.

phenomenon  and  should  not  alarm  the  physician  or 
patient.

Scarring
Scarring  remains  the  most  dreadful  complication  of 
chemical  peels.  The  contributing  factors  are  not  well 
defined  yet.  The  incidence  of  scarring  with  a  tradi-
tional  Baker’s  formula  is  less  than  1%,  whereas  with 
less aggressive phenol–croton oil peels, the incidence is 
even lower.34 The most common location of the scars is 
in the lower part of the face, probably related to more 

aggressive treatment in this area or to the greater tissue 
movement, because of eating and speaking, during the 
healing  process.  Delayed  healing  and  focal  persistent 
redness  are  important  alarming  signs  for  forthcoming 
scarring. Topical or intralesional steroids together with 
vascular laser treatments should be introduced as soon 
as this diagnosis is made.

Infection
Bacterial  and  fungal  complications  in  deep  chem-
ical  peels  are  rare,  because  phenol  is  bactericidal 

108

PART 4  Deep Peels

A

B

Fig. 8.11  A 50-year-old patient with severe postacne scarring before (A) and 6 months after (B) a deep peel.

A

B

Fig. 8.12  A 60-year-old patient before (A) and 5 years after (B) the peel.

and  fungicidal.  Patients  with  a  positive  history  of  
herpes simplex infection should be prophylactically 
treated.

Milia
Milia can appear 6 to 8 weeks postresurfacing in up to 
20% of patients. Electrosurgery is a simple and effective 
method to treat this postpeel complication.

Acneiform Dermatitis
Acneiform eruption after deep chemical peels is a common 
phenomenon appearing immediately after reepithelializa-
tion.  Its  etiology  is  multifactorial  and  is  related  to  either 
exacerbation of previously existing acne or the overgreas-
ing of newly formed skin. Short-term systemic antibiotics 
together with discontinuation of any oily preparations will 
usually provide a satisfactory resolution.

CHAPTER 8  Deep Chemical Peels

109

A

B

C

Fig. 8.13  A dark-skinned patient before (A), 3 months after (B), and 12 years after (C) the peel.

A

B

Fig. 8.14  A 70-year-old patient before (A) and 6 months after (B) segmental peeling.

SUMMARY

The  main  advantage  of  phenol–croton  oil  peels  is  in 
treating photodamaged skin with wrinkles, dyschromia, 
and  precancerous  lesions.  In  general,  a  deep  peel  is  the 
most powerful and legitimate tool in the hands of prac-
ticing dermatologists for facial skin rejuvenation. Perioral 

wrinkling is a condition in which a deep peel has an obvi-
ous advantage over other medical and surgical methods. 
Facial  scars,  such  as  acne  scars,  especially  of  atrophic 
character, may be significantly improved by deep chem-
ical peels.

The main disadvantage of a deep peel is the special 
setup needed for the procedure, because of the potential 

110

PART 4  Deep Peels

risk of cardiotoxicity with phenol. Segmental peels are 
easier to adopt as a first step to learn the technique.

REFERENCES

  1.   Mackee GM, Karp FL. The treatment of post acne scars 

with phenol. Br J Dermatol. 1952;64:456–459.

  2.   Brown AM. Inventor; mount Sinai Hospital Corp; Foun-
dation for Prosthetic Research, assignee. Skin treating 
method and composition. US Patent. 1959;3:067–106. 
Issued April 7.

  3.   Bames HO. Truth and fallacies of face peeling and face 

lifting. Med J Record. 1927;126:86–87.

  4.   Urkov JC. Surface defects of the skin: treatment by con-

trolled exfoliation. Ill Med J. 1946;89:75.

  5.   Combes FC, Sperber PA, Reisch M. Dermal defects: treat-

ment by a chemical agent. NY Physician Am Med. 1960;56:36.

  6.   Brown AM, Kaplan LM, Brown ME. Phenol induced 

histological skin changes: hazards, techniques and users. 
Br J Plast Surg. 1960;13:158.

  7.   Litton C. Chemical face lifting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 

1962;29:371.

 20.   Gatti JE. Eyelid phenol peel: an important adjunct to 
blepharoplasty. Ann Plast Surg. 2008;60:14–18.

 21.   Lee KC, Sterling JB, Wambier CG, et al. Segmental phe-
nol-Croton oil chemical peels ortreatment of periorbital 
or perioral rhytides. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.11.044.

 22.   Fintsi Y, Landau M. Exoderm: phenol-based peeling 
in olive and dark skinned patients. Int J Cosm Surgery 
Aesthet Dermatol. 2001;3:173–178.

 23.   Park JH, Choi YD, Kim SW, Kim YC, Park SW. Effec-
tiveness of modified phenol peel (Exoderm) on facial 
wrinkles, acne scars and other skin problems of Asian 
patients. J Dermatol. 2007;34:17–24.

 24.   Wambier CG, Wambier SPDF, Pilatti LEP, Grabicoski 
JA, Wambier LF, Schmidt A. Prolongation of rate-cor-
rected QT interval during phenol-croton oil peels. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2018;78:810–812.

 25.   Mysore V, Mahadevappa OH, Barua S, et al. Standard 
guidelines of care: performing procedures in patients 
on or recently administered with Isotretinoin. J Cutan 
Aesthet Surg. 2017;10:186–194.

 26.   Bomar L, McMichael A. Frontal fibrosing alopecia. Br J 

  8.   Baker TJ. Chemical face peeling and rhytidectomy. Plast 

Dermatol. 2017;177:e58–e59.

Reconstr Surg. 1962;29:199.

  9.   Baker TJ, Gordon HL. The ablation of rhytids by chemical 
means: a preliminary report. J Fla Med Assoc. 1961;48:541.

 10.   Hetter G. An examination of the phenol-croton oil 

peel: Part I. Dissecting the formula. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:239–248.

 11.   Stone PA, Lefer LG. Modified phenol chemical face peels: 
recognizing the role of application technique. Clin Facial 
Plast Surg. 2001;9:351–376.

 12.   Spira M, Dahl C, Freeman R, et al. Chemosurgery: a 

histological study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1970;45:247.
 13.   Fintsi Y. Exoderm—a novel phenol-based peeling 

method resulting in improved safety. Am J Cosm Surgery. 
1997;14:49–54.

 14.   Larson DL, Karmo F, Hetter GP. Phenol-croton oil peel: 
establishing an animal model for scientific investigation. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2009;29:47–53.

 15.   Bensimon RH. Croton oil peels. Aesthet Surg J. 2008;28:33.
 16.   Baker TJ, Gordon HL, Seckinger DL. A second look at 

chemical face peeling. Plast Reconstruc Surg. 1966;37:487.
 17.   Baker TJ, Gordon HL, Mosienko P, et al. Long-term his-
tological study of skin after chemical face peeling. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1974;53:522.

 18.   Wambier CG, Neitzke IC, Lee KC, et al. Augmentation 

and eversion of lips without injections: the lip peel. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2019;80:e119–e120.

 19.   Sterling JB. Micropunch blepharopeeling of the upper 

eyelids: a combination approach for periorbital rejuvena-
tion—a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2014;40:436–440.

 27.   Wambier CG, Lee KC, Soon SL, et al. Advanced chemical 
peels: phenol-croton oil peel. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.11.060.

 28.   Wambier CG, Beltrame FL. Air safety and personal 

protctive equipment for phenol-croton oil peels. Derma-
tol Surg. 2018;44:1035–1037.

 29.   Zukowski ML, Mossie RD, Roth SI, Giese S, McKinney 
P. Pilot study analysis of the histologic and bacteriologic 
effects of occlusive dressings in chemosurgical peel using a 
minipig model. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1993;17:53–59.
 30.   Stagnone GJ, Orgel MB, StagnoneJJ. Cardiovascular 

effects of topical 50% trichloroacetic acid and Baker’s 
phenol solution. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1987;13: 
999–1002.

 31.   Litton C, Trinidad G. Complications of chemical face 
peeling as evaluated by a questionnaire. Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 1981;67:738–744.

 32.   Truppman F, Ellenbery J. The major electrocardiograph-
ic changes during chemical face peeling. Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 1979;63:44.

 33.   Wexler MR, Halon DA, Teitelbaum A, et al. The pre-

vention of cardiac arrhythmias produced in an animal 
model by topical application of a phenol preparationin 
common use for face peeling. Plast Recontsr Surg. 
1984;73:595–598.

 34.   Landau M. Cardiac complications in deep chemical peels. 

Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:190–193.

 35.   Brody HJ. Chemical Peeling and Resurfacing. 2nd ed. 

Mosby; 1997:188–189.

PART 5  Special Topics

9

Peels in Men: Special 
Considerations

Jeave Reserva, David Surprenant, Rebecca Tung

INTRODUCTION

The  low  cost  and  reliable  results  of  chemical  peeling 
have made it a staple procedure in aesthetic medicine. 
The American Society of Plastic Surgeons ranked chem-
ical peels as the third most popular cosmetic minimally 
invasive  procedure  in  2018,  with  an  annual  total  of 
1,384,327  chemical  peel  procedures  performed.  Based 
on  estimates  by  the  American  Society  for  Aesthetic 
Plastic  Surgery,  consumers  spent  over  $64.5  million 
on chemical peel procedures in 2017. Men account for 
only 5.5% and 9.3% of all chemical peel procedures per-
formed in the United States and worldwide, respectively, 
but the aesthetic market for men is continually growing. 
The  modern  aesthetic  practitioner  understands  men’s 
top cosmetic concerns and can effectively address them 
using chemical peels as monotherapy or in combination 
with surgical or minimally invasive procedures.

INTRINSIC GENDER-LINKED SKIN 
DIFFERENCES RELEVANT TO CHEMICAL 
PEELING

Basic background information about the different parts 
of a chemical treatment plan (e.g., pretreatment, prepa-
ration,  peel  technique,  etc.)  are  discussed  in  detail  in 
the previous chapters. Because chemical peeling can be 
very  operator-dependent  and  requires  careful  consid-
eration of many variables, practical knowledge of gen-
der-linked skin differences may increase the likelihood 
of achieving excellent peeling outcomes. The Obagi Skin 

Classification assesses skin variables such as color, oil-
iness,  thickness,  laxity,  and  fragility  to  systematically 
create  a  chemical  treatment  plan.  Although  the  litera-
ture on chemical peels in men is scant, an understand-
ing  of  how  intrinsic  (cutaneous  biology)  and  extrinsic 
(psychology/sociology)  skin  variables  differ  between 
genders  provides  a  solid  foundation  to  effectively  exe-
cute  chemical  peeling  in  men.  Table  9.1  summarizes 
male-specific intrinsic and extrinsic skin variables and 
relevant peeling considerations.

Based  on  intraethnic  group  comparative  studies  of 
skin  tone,  men  display  darker  and  less  reflective  com-
plexions,  possibly  because  they  have  more  epidermal 
melanin and a more highly vascularized superficial der-
mis. Men’s constitutive and sun-induced facultative pig-
mentation  states  are  more  robust  with  longer  pigment 
retention  than  women.  Given  these  inherent  features, 
men  may  benefit  from  relatively  longer  pretreatment 
and more aggressive photoprotection than their female 
individual  genetico racial  skin 
counterparts  within 
groups.  When  evaluating  postprocedural  erythema,  it 
may be important to consider that chromacity studies, 
which  assess  color  differences  between  erythema  and 
normal skin, have demonstrated higher basal values in 
men because of a relatively more vascularized dermis.

The  androgenic  stimulation  in  men  causes  higher 
sebum  production  with  resultant  pore  enlargement 
and predisposition to acne vulgaris and impaired bar-
rier  function.  Sebum-induced  alterations  in  intercel-
lular  lipid  structure  and  poor  corneocyte  maturation 

111

1
1
2

P
A
R
T
5

S
p
e
c
i
a
l

T
o
p
i
c
s

TABLE 9.1 

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Skin Variables in Men and Relevant Peeling Considerations

Gender-Specific Skin-Related Variables

Peeling Considerations in Men

Intrinsic Elasticity

	•	  Lower eyelid sagging presents much earlier

Thickness
	•	  Increased dermal collagen in men due to androgen 

receptor activation
	•	  Thicker epidermis
Color
	•	  Robust facultative pigmentation after sun exposure
Oiliness
	•	  Higher sebum production
	•	  Predisposition to acne vulgaris

Pain perception
	•	  Ablative CO2 laser-evoke potentials are lower in 
amplitude than females suggesting better pain  
tolerance

Reepithelialization rate
	•	  Slower wound healing due to androgens
Histamine response
	•	  More robust response in men and increasing age

Extrinsic Ultraviolet radiation exposure

	•	  Higher occupational risks
	•	  Inadequate photoprotective behavior
	•	  Reduced skin antioxidant capacity
Smoking
	•	  More prevalent in men (25%) than women (5%)

Facial skin care habits
	•	  Aggressive scrubbing quite common
	•	  Avoidance of face products due to fear of worsening 

	•	  Discuss the efficacy of segmental peels in periorbital rejuvenation and syn-
ergistic aesthetic outcomes when combined with other minimally invasive 
procedures

	•	  May require longer pretreatment and more aggressive degreasing
	•	  Commonly need higher volumes and higher concentrations of peeling agent
	•	  Firmer peel application pressure
	•	  Additional treatment sessions may be necessary
	•	  May require longer pretreatment
	•	  Higher risk for PIH → need more aggressive photoprotection
	•	  May require longer pretreatment and more potent topical retinoids
	•	  Must aggressively degrease (hard “scrub” as opposed to “wipe”)
	•	  Better candidates for lipophilic peeling agents (e.g., salicylic acid)
	•	  High risk for postpeel acne flare → consider continuing or restarting oral acne 

meds

	•	  May require less aggressive pain management (although individual variations 

likely)

	•	  Set realistic expectation regarding postprocedural downtime

	•	  Aggressive antihistamine prophylaxis and/or systemic steroids to mitigate 

postprocedural edema especially in periorbital rejuvenation with medium or 
deep peeling agent

	•	  Increased skin cancer risks → Discuss benefits of chemical peeling for actinic 

keratosis reduction/skin cancer prevention

	•	  May need additional counseling on photoprotective behavioral modification

	•	  Discuss resultant accelerated aging, poor wound healing, and increased 

scarring risks → counsel on smoking cessation

	•	  For deep peels, at least 1-year cessation recommended
	•	  Counsel on gentle skin care practices
	•	  Emphasize high risks for scarring and PIH if aggressive exfoliation is per-

formed postpeel

tacky skin sensation from sebum

	•	  Poor skin barrier function → need more counseling on consistent daily skin 

regimen

Skin care product preferences
	•	  Cleansers: thin, clear blue or green-tinged
	•	  Emollients: preference for less occlusive vehicles

	•	  Always consider vehicle preferences when recommending pretreatment or 
other skin conditioning medication (e.g., adapalene 0.3% gel may be pre-
ferred than tretinoin 0.1% cream)

	•	  For medium- or deep-peel postprocedure emollients, explain the barrier func-
tion rationale for using occlusive vehicles which may help ensure adherence

PCP, Primary care provider; PIH, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

 
 
 
CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

113

cause  transepidermal  water  loss  that  can  be  further 
worsened  by  behavioral  tendencies  related  to  excess 
sebum. Men with excess sebum tend to avoid skin care 
products  because  of  the  perceived  fear  of  exacerbat-
ing  their  already  tacky-feeling  skin.  Because  of  men’s 
relatively oilier skin, a longer or more aggressive pre-
treatment (e.g., more potent retinoid, gel versus cream 
vehicle)  and/or  more  aggressive  degreasing  may  be 
warranted. Postprocedure acne flares may also be more 
likely.

Conversely, men’s significantly higher average num-
ber  of  appendageal  structures  (e.g.,  sebaceous  glands, 
dermal blood vessels) may dampen their rate of rhytid 
development,  particularly  in  the  perioral  area.  Their 
higher  sebaceous  gland  density  may  also  render  lipo-
philic peels (e.g., salicylic acid [SA], Jessner’s solution) 
more effective. For example, sebum production, which 
is  critical  in  the  growth  of  Malassezia  restricta  and 
Malassezia  globosa,  may  be  improved  by  these  peels, 
thus preventing flares of seborrheic dermatitis. Facility 
in performing focal deep peels for sebaceous hyperpla-
sia may also be of value, because men may be more likely 
to seek treatment for this condition.

The  heterogeneity  of  study  design,  research 
instruments,  sample  size,  and  genetic  background 
likely  played  a  role  in  some  studies’  conflicting  find-
ings  regarding  gender  differences  in  skin  thickness. 
Although the extent of differences varies by anatomical 
region, dermal thickness is greater in men, particularly 
on the forehead and neck, as a result of increased der-
mal collagen, resulting in part from androgen receptor 
activation.  Similarly,  epidermal  thickness  is  greater  in 
men’s  cheeks  and  back  than  that  in  women.  Thus  to 
achieve the intended depth of peel penetration in men, 
greater  peel  application  pressure,  larger  volumes,  and 
higher  concentrations  of  peeling  agent  are  required. 
The relatively thicker male skin may also entail a need 
for longer pretreatment to ensure that the peeling agent 
penetrates evenly.

Although there are no significant differences in skin 
elasticity between men and women, lower eyelid sagging 
is significantly more severe in men starting middle age. 
Indeed, the periorbital area, among all facial features, is 
of most concern to men and is their top treatment prior-
ity. Counseling men about the efficacy of segmental (tar-
geted  peeling  of  a  specific  cosmetic  unit)  combination 
(use  of  multiple  peeling  agents)  chemical  peeling  can 

guide their selection from among the various resurfac-
ing modalities available to address their most common 
cosmetic concerns.

In general, higher skin perfusion is observed in men 
than  in  women.  Studies  investigating  susceptibility  of 
the  male  skin  to  persistent  erythema  is  lacking.  This 
complication  is  thought  to  result  from  angiogenic  fac-
tors stimulating vasodilation and is a sign of a prolonged 
phase of fibroplasia that may lead to scarring. In theory, 
the larger number of microvessels in the male face could 
predispose men to these complications.

Although  men  may  be  more  likely  to  tolerate  pain 
from chemical resurfacing, androgen-associated decel-
erated  reepithelialization  may  extend  their  expected 
postprocedural  downtime.  Furthermore,  more  robust 
histamine  response  is  observed  in  men  and  older  age. 
Men’s  propensity  for  postprocedural  edema  should  be 
kept  in  mind,  especially  when  performing  periorbital 
rejuvenation, during which significant edema may cause 
the eyes to swell shut, but may be mitigated by aggres-
sive prophylaxis and treatment with antihistamines and 
systemic corticosteroids.

EXTRINSIC GENDER-LINKED SKIN 
DIFFERENCES RELEVANT TO CHEMICAL 
PEELING

As  previously  alluded  to,  men  may  be  more  likely  to 
avoid healthy skin care practices. Higher prevalence of 
smoking  (tobacco  and  nicotine-containing  electronic 
cigarettes) and ultraviolet (UV) light exposure are also 
observed  in  men  and  contribute  significantly  to  skin 
aging.  Patients  who  fail  to  modify  these  behaviors 
should be thoroughly counseled on their higher risks 
for suboptimal peeling outcomes and worse complica-
tions and hence are generally not candidates for chem-
ical peeling.

Tobacco exposure–related mechanisms of skin aging 
include  vasoconstriction,  increased  oxidative  damage, 
inhibition  of  fibroblastic  activity,  and  upregulation  of 
matrix metalloproteinases. Given the higher prevalence 
of daily smoking in men (25%) than women (5%) and 
smoking’s association with disastrous resurfacing com-
plications,  tobacco  exposure  assessment  and  smoking 
cessation  are  crucial  in  chemical  peeling.  This  caution 
extends  to  the  use  of  nicotine-containing  vaping  solu-
tion or electronic cigarettes.

114

PART 5  Special Topics

TABLE 9.2  Peeling Considerations in Sexual-Minority Men

Skin-Related Variables in Sexual-Minority Men

Peeling Considerations

Transgender Men on Cross-Hormone Testosterone 
therapy
	 •	  Acne vulgaris on face and trunk peak after 4 to 6 

months of therapy

Gay and Bisexual Men
UV exposure
	•	  Indoor tanning six times more prevalent than  

heterosexual counterpart

Anabolic Androgenic Steroid Use
	•	  More prevalent among ethnic minority gay and bisex-

ual men and adolescents

	 •	  Unlikely for many to openly discuss steroid misuse

	•	  Consider serial salicylic acid peels as adjunct to standard 

acne treatment.

	•	  For body peeling: Consider salicylic acid in polyethylene 

glycol vehicle given lower absorption and decreased risks 
for salicylism.

	•	  Photoprotective behavior counseling should focus on 
concepts of UV-associated accelerated aging/wrinkle 
formation.

	•	  Serial chemical peeling may circumvent the need and 
associated risks from using oral antibiotics to improve 
acne in patients concomitantly on anabolic steroids.

Outdoor  occupations  overwhelmingly  comprise 
men. To make matters worse, men, including those with 
personal history of skin cancer, are less likely to practice  
sun-protective behaviors. On a cellular level, such a non-
chalant approach can compound UV damage because of 
male skin’s reduced antioxidant capacity and increased 
tendency  for  UV-induced  immunosuppression.  These 
behaviors place men at a higher risk for postinflamma-
tory hyperpigmentation (PIH) after a peel. Apart from 
UV-exposure behavior modification, aggressive and/or 
prolonged  skin  conditioning  may  be  necessary  to  pre-
vent  pigmentary  complications.  Moreover,  chemical 
peeling  can  be  of  unique  benefit  to  those  seeking  cos-
metic resurfacing but who also have medical conditions 
such as actinic keratoses or history of keratinocyte car-
cinoma.  Trichloroacetic  acid  medium-depth  peels  can 
be  used  to  prevent  and  reduce  the  incidence  of  these 
UV-induced disorders.

Peeling  practitioners  should  also  be  familiar  with 
current  research  on  men’s  preferences  regarding  skin 
care products. Men’s adherence to various aspects of a 
chemical treatment plan may be augmented by catering 
to  some  extent  to  their  preferences  toward  particular 
skin  care  products  (e.g.,  blue/green-tinged  cleansers, 
emollients  in  “lighter”  vehicles).  Familiarity  with  new 
and  existing  skin  care  products  that  conform  to  men’s 
preferences  but  also  fulfill  their  necessary  role  in  the 
chemical  peeling  process  may  improve  peeling  out-
comes  by  virtue  of  improving  patient  experience  and 
treatment adherence.

PEEL CONSIDERATIONS IN SEXUAL-
MINORITY MEN

About  3.9%  of  men  in  the  United  States  identify  as  a 
sexual minority (gay, bisexual, or transgender). The lit-
erature  specifically  addressing  chemical  peel  consider-
ations in sexual-minority men appear even more sparse 
than that in heterosexual men. This section aims to syn-
thesize known epidemiological, behavioral, and physio-
logical data pertaining to sexual-minority men that are 
relevant to chemical peeling procedures (Table 9.2).

Homosexual  men  engage  in  riskier  UV-exposure 
behaviors,  with  rates  of  indoor  tanning  reported  up 
to  six  times  more  than  that  observed  in  heterosexual 
men.  Additional  counseling  on  photoprotection  may 
be necessary for peel candidates who are light skinned 
but  whose  perceived  ideal  skin  tones  are  darker,  as 
these  individuals  are  more  likely  to  engage  in  indoor 
and outdoor tanning. UV-exposure behavior modifica-
tion among sexual-minority men whose cultures value 
lighter skin may be much less of a challenge, although 
this  remains  to  be  investigated.  Although  they  have 
a  higher  prevalence  of  skin  cancer  than  their  hetero-
sexual  counterparts,  photoprotection  counseling  in 
sexual-minority  men  may  be  most  effectively  relayed 
by  emphasizing  wrinkle  and  skin  aging  prevention. 
Knowing that homosexual men are more likely to con-
sider  noninvasive  and  invasive  cosmetic  procedures, 
those who present to the clinic with expressed interest 
in chemical peels should be explicitly forewarned that 

CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

115

inadequate  photoprotection  can  jeopardize  their  can-
didacy and/or the outcomes of their chemical peeling 
procedure.

Up  to  94%  of  transgender  men  undergoing  cross-
sex  hormone  treatment  with  testosterone  develop 
acne  vulgaris  on  their  face,  chest,  and  back,  with 
symptoms  peaking  4  to  6  months  after  testosterone 
initiation.  Although  the  majority  improve  in  severity 
after  12  months  and  respond  adequately  to  standard 
acne  management,  some  cases  may  be  severe  and/or 
persistent.  Face  or  body  peeling  using  serial  SA  and 
other  peels  should  be  considered,  because  they  can 
offer immediate and reliable improvement of comedo-
nal and inflammatory acne. Severe cases may require 
treatment  with  isotretinoin,  which  requires  nuanced 
comprehension of the complexities surrounding con-
traception  and  pregnancy  testing  in  this  population. 
Superficial  peels  such  as  SA  or  Jessner’s  solution  (JS) 
may still be safely performed in patients concomitantly 
on isotretinoin and may serve as an effective adjunc-
tive treatment.

A  higher  prevalence  of  anabolic  androgenic  steroid 
(AAS)  use  is  reported  among  sexual-minority  men 
compared  with  their  heterosexual  counterparts.  These 
behaviors  may  start  early  in  life,  because  AAS  mis-
use among sexual-minority adolescent boys is three to 
four times higher than in heterosexual boys, especially 
among Black and Hispanic males. Although addressing 
misuse of AAS in these populations is well beyond the 
scope of this chapter, similar peeling recommendations 
as discussed in transgendered men applies to this group 
and may improve self-esteem in this population known 
to have a pervasive unhealthy body image. The potential 
role of chemical peels in acne management in cisgender 
and  transgender  men  undergoing  testosterone  therapy 
is an area in need of research.

OVERVIEW OF TREATMENT STRATEGY
Indications
Indications  for  chemical  peeling  in  men  (Table  9.3) 
are  very  similar  to  those  for  women.  As  with  any  aes-
thetic procedure, proper patient selection, preoperative 
consultation,  and  procedural  planning  are  tantamount 
to  desirable  outcomes.  The  histopathological  changes 
present  in  the  condition  to  be  treated  and  the  depth 
at  which  they  occur  dictates  which  peeling  agent(s) 
may  be  used.  However,  peel  agent  selection  must  also 

incorporate patient preferences, such as those regarding 
postprocedural  downtime  and  postpeel  skin  regimen. 
For example, although the outcomes of phenol–croton 
oil  peel  rivals  that  of  fully  ablative  CO2  laser  resurfac-
ing and would produce outstanding improvement of the 
very deep static rhytids that can be seen in men, full-face 
phenol–croton oil peels may not be realistic options for 
some men given the expected postprocedure erythema 
that is difficult to camouflage without makeup.

Prepeel Consultation
A  comprehensive  prepeel  consultation  is  crucial  to 
ensure  that  both  the  physician  and  patient  have  com-
municated their expectations and that risks and benefits 
are appropriately discussed. Few differences exist in the 
approach to the prepeel consultation between men and 
women. Aspects of the prepeel consultation most rele-
vant to men’s cosmetic preferences and men’s behavioral 
tendencies are discussed.

As covered in prior sections, gender-specific extrin-
sic  factors  relevant  to  peeling,  such  as  UV  radiation 
(recreational  outdoor,  occupational,  or  indoor  tan-
ning)  exposure,  should  be  thoroughly  assessed.  Ideal 
peel candidates should be both willing to be and actu-
ally  adherent  to  prepeel  and  postpeel  care  regimen. 
Poor adherence to prepeel skin conditioning could be a 
tell-tale sign of inability to closely follow postoperative 
instructions.  Men  who  work  or  regularly  exercise  out-
doors  may  present  a  relative  contraindication  depend-
ing  on  the  patient’s  ability  and/or  willingness  to  avoid 
sun exposure of the treated area postpeel.

Although  superficial  chemical  peels  may  be  safely 
performed  during  or  within  6  months  after  isotreti-
noin  therapy,  current  evidence  precludes  recommen-
dation  on  the  use  of  medium  or  deep  chemical  peels 
while on isotretinoin. Hence the reported and potential 
risks of concomitant isotretinoin and medium or deep 
peels should be discussed thoroughly with the patient. 
Patients  with  acne  concurrently  taking  oral  antibiotics 
such  as  doxycycline  may  continue  therapy,  although 
photosensitivity  should  be  emphasized  during  coun-
seling.  Similarly,  potential  increased  risk  for  hyper-
pigmentation  should  be  discussed  in  patients  taking 
minocycline.  Concurrent  exogenous  testosterone  use 
may portend the need for ongoing serial chemical peel-
ing procedures.

A broad knowledge of men’s cosmetic concerns may 
allow peeling practitioners to identify peeling regimens 

1
1
6

P
A
R
T
5

S
p
e
c
i
a
l

T
o
p
i
c
s

TABLE 9.3  Summary of Chemical Peel Indications for Men and Corresponding Peel Selection

Indication

Example of Peel Selection

Practical Considerations

Acne vulgaris and scarring
Comedonal and mild/moderate inflammatory
Truncal acne or skin of color patients  
(Fitzpatrick Skin Types IV, V, and VI)

Rolling acne scars
Ice-pick and/or box-car acne scars

Salicylic acid (20%–30%)
Glycolic acid (70%)
Salicylic acid (30%) in polyethylene glycol
Salicylic acid (30%) + TCA (10%–20%)
Combination medium-depth TCA peels (e.g., 

Combine with other modalities: microneedling, 

PDL, subcision, Erb:Glass laser

Polyethylene glycol vehicle may decrease risk of 

salicylism and PIH-prone “hot spots”

CROSS via phenol–croton oil contraindicated in 

Brody combination)

skin phototype VI

Rosacea
Erythrosis
Papulopustular
Keratosis pilaris

Melasma/PIH

Actinic keratosis

Sun damage/periorbital rejuvenation
Mild photoaging

Moderate to severe photoaging

CROSS method TCA (50%–100%)
CROSS method phenol–croton oil (88%/4%)

Salicylic acid (20%)
Salicylic acid (20%–30%)
Glycolic acid (50%–70%)

Salicylic acid (20%–30%) ± TCA (10%)
Glycolic acid (50%–70%)
TCA (10%–30%)
Phenol–croton oil peels (light or very light Hetter 

formulation for resistant cases)

Salicylic acid (30%) + TCA (10%–35%)
Jessner’s solution + spot TCA (35%)
Glycolic acid (70%)

Jessner’s solution
Glycolic acid (70%)
Salicylic acid (30%) + TCA (10%)
Jessner’s-TCA (35%)
Solid CO2-TCA (35%)
Glycolic acid (70%)-TCA (35%)
Hetter phenol–croton oil
Phenol (88%) in micropunch blepharopeeling

Pseudofolliculitis barbae

Salicylic acid (30%)
Glycolic acid (50%–70%)
Jessner’s solution

1 application
2–3 applications
Daily maintenance therapy with glycolic acid 

lotion (12–20%) 48 hours postpeel

Perform at 2-week intervals
May start at lower glycolic acid concentrations 

(30%) for PIH

May pretreat with 5-FU (5%) cream for 1 week or 

perform as “pulse peels”

Use in combination with other minimally inva-

sive procedures including neurotoxins, fillers, 
microneedling, and/or skin tightening devices

Segmental peeling (not full face) recommended 
when using phenol–croton oil in men due to 
difficulty camouflaging postprocedural erythema 
without makeup

Always perform “snap-back” test when treating 

lower eyelid with medium/deep peel.

Repeat every 2–4 weeks as needed.

PIH, Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation; TCA, trichloroacetic acid.
Data from Reserva J, Champlain A, Soon SL, et al. 2017. Chemical peels: Indications and special considerations for the male patient. Dermatological Surgery 43 
Suppl 2:S173.

 
 
 
CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

117

best suited for those indications. The periorbital region 
(crow’s feet, tear troughs, dark circles and bags under the 
eyes) as well as dyschromias, acne scars, and pseudofol-
liculitis are among the most common cosmetic concerns  
in men. Because men tend to be more direct when dis-
cussing  their  desired  outcomes  and  have  very  specific 
self-perceived  cosmetic  flaws,  evaluation  of  each  cos-
metic  unit  and  selecting  peels  best  suited  to  treat  the 
pathology in that specific facial area can be very effective 
(e.g., combination segmental peeling).

Similar  absolute  and  relative  contraindications  to 
chemical peels apply to men as they do in women. Because 
of smoking prevalence in men, it is important to note that 
some authors recommend smoking cessation for at least 
12 months before proceeding with any deep peeling pro-
cedure. Although there are no absolute contraindications 
for periorbital peeling, unless corrected before the chemi-
cal peel, preexisting ectropion or moderate to severe lower 
lid  laxity  are  relative  contraindications  for  lower  eyelid 
peeling. If a lag or ectropion is observed after the lower lid 
is pulled down and away from the globe for several sec-
onds (snap-back test), deep resurfacing of the lower eye-
lid  with  phenol–croton  oil  or  ablative  fractionated  laser 
should be avoided because it can lead to an ectropion.

Skin type assessment is an integral part of the prepeel 
consultation.  Common  classification  has  been  primar-
ily based on degree of skin pigmentation and tanning/
burning  susceptibility.  Similar  to  the  Obagi  skin  clas-
sification,  another  reliable  skin  type  classification  for 
chemical  peeling  has  been  proposed  by  Fanous  and 
Zari.  that  uses  a  genetico-racial  category  (Table  9.4). 
Inhabitants from the three ancient continents—Europe, 
Africa,  and  Asia—exhibit  predictably  lighter,  thinner 
skin and smaller features as one moves north, and grad-
ually  display  darker,  thicker  skin  with  larger  features 
as  one  moves  south.  A  useful  peeling  guideline  that 
incorporates this genetico-racial classification is as fol-
lows: (1) medium to deep peels for mid-Europeans and 
southern Europeans (Mediterraneans), (2) medium and 
light  to  medium  peels  for  northern  Europeans  (Nor-
dics) and Asians, (3) light peels for southern Caucasians 
(Indo-Pakistanis), and (4) very light peels for Africans.

Prepeel Skin Conditioning
Skin  priming  (pretreatment  and  preparation)  facili-
tates  uniform  peeling  agent  penetration,  prevention  of 
postinflammatory  dyspigmentation,  and  predictable 
and  more  rapid  reepithelialization.  Because  of  various 

intrinsic and extrinsic factors previously discussed, men 
may  require  a  longer  pretreatment  regimen  as  well  as 
more  aggressive  skin  preparation.  Agents  used  during 
the  pretreatment  phase  can  include  topical  retinoids 
(tretinoin,  retinaldehyde,  adapalene,  or  tazarotene), 
keratolytics (lactic acid, SA, kojic acid, or glycolic acid), 
and  lightening  agents  (hydroquinone  or  azelaic  acid) 
(Table 9.5). Because men gravitate toward simple, quick 
therapeutic strategies, their adherence to regimens that 
entail multistep daily routines may be dismal. Because 
men typically value convenience and simplicity, agents 
already  commercially  available  in  combination  or  an 
individually  compounded  topical  prescription  may  be 
more ideal. For genetico-racial groups at risk for post-
peel hyperpigmentation, as well as those with history of 
dyschromia, expert consensus recommends cessation of 
topical retinoid 1 week before chemical peel to prevent 
potential peel overpenetration.

Pretreatment of the entire face should be performed, 
including  the  upper  eyelids,  which  should  be  treated 
once to twice a week, especially if periorbital rejuvena-
tion is planned. Pretreatment feathering into the hairline, 
jawline,  and  preauricular  areas  is  also  recommended, 
noting  that  the  hairline  may  extend  significantly  into 
the  scalp  in  some  men  due  to  androgenetic  alopecia. 
The  daily  regimen  should  include  a  broad-spectrum 
UVA/UVB sunscreen with a minimum SPF 30. Visible 
light protection, present in tinted sunscreens, should be 
strongly  considered  in  skin  of  color  patients  (Fitzpat-
rick Skin Types IV, V, and VI) and is a must for those 
with dyschromia, because visible light has been shown 
to induce pigment darkening in these individuals. Men 
with facial hair in the areas to be treated should shave 
the  day  before  (except  in  pseudofolliculitis  barbae)  or 
trim to a length (approximately 3 mm or shorter) that 
does not interfere with even peel application.

Regarding skin preparation, no difference in efficacy 
has been found among degreasers (alcohol, acetone, or 
chlorhexidine  gluconate).  In  general,  men  will  require 
more vigorous scrubs given the higher sebaceous quality 
of  their  skin  and  higher  prevalence  of  deeper  rhytids. 
Skin  preparation  may  also  involve  application  of  topi-
cal anesthesia and/or administration of a mild sedative. 
Nonsedating  antihistamines  should  be  administered 
before the procedure to minimize edema and be contin-
ued after the procedure to minimize pruritus. Antiviral 
prophylaxis  for  medium  and  deep  peels  is  identical  in 
men  and  women.  In  addition,  for  patients  undergoing 

1
1
8

P
A
R
T
5

S
p
e
c
i
a
l

T
o
p
i
c
s

TABLE 9.4  Genetico-Racial Skin Classification Categories and Trichloroacetic Acida Peel Outcomes

Southern 
Caucasians/Indo-
Pakistanis (e.g., 
Saudi Arabian, 
Indian,  
or Egyptian)

Northern Africa 
and Western 
Asia
Light

Central and 
Southern 
Africans

Central and 
Southern 
Africa
Very light

Northern, Central, and 
Southern Asians (e.g., 
Chinese, Japanese, or 
Filipino)

Northern Europeans/
Nordics (e.g., Irish, 
Scandinavian, or 
Scottish)

Eastern Asia

Northern Europe

Southern 
Europeans/
Mediterraneans 
(e.g., Spanish, 
Greek, Italian, or 
Turkish)

Southern Europe, 
Northern Africa, 
and Western Asia

Mid-Europeans 
(e.g., English, 
French, or 
German)

Central Europe

Light to medium

Medium

Medium to deep

Deep

Large

Moderately large Moderately large

Fine

Slightly large

Medium

Thick, with black 
to deep black

Thick, with a 

Thick, with light 

Thin white, with a pink 

Slightly thick, with a 

deep tan to dark 
brown

medium, or dark 
brown

element

medium tan

Average thickness, 
white, or light tan

Geographic 

Origin

Recom-

mended 
Maximum 
TCA Peel 
Depth
Facial Fea-
tures

Skin Charac-
teristics

Hyperpigmen-

+++

+++

++

+/-

tation

Hypopigmen-

(If deep peel)

(If deep peel)

(Rare with deep peel)

-

tation

  Erythema

+/-

+/-

++ (later turns into 

+++

hyperpigmentation)

++

-

++

+

-

+

TCA, Trichloroacetic acid.
aVery light peels with TCA is less than 30%; light is 30%–35%; medium is 35%–40%; and deep is 40%–45%.
Data from Fanous N, Zari S. 2017. Universal trichloroacetic acid peel technique for light and dark skin. JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery 19(3):219.

 
 
 
CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

119

TABLE 9.5  Pretreatment Regimena

Indication

Medication and Dosing

PIH prevention and peel absorption 

optimization

Topical retinoids: Start at least 4–6 weeks before peel (8–12 weeks in skin of 
color); stop 1–2 weeks if treating PIH or melasma; 1–2 days for photoaging.

Tretinoin 0.02%–0.1% cream or gel QHS
Adapalene 0.3% gel QHS
For more sensitive skin, consider:
Glycolic acid 8%–10% lotion/cream
Adapalene 0.1% lotion or cream
For patients with moderate to severe acne scars, consider:
Tazarotene 0.05% cream QHS
Lightening agents: Start 4–6 weeks before peel; stop 1–2 days before peel
Hydroquinone 4%–10% BID
Azelaic acid 15% gel or 20% cream BID
Fluocinolone cream (0.01%–0.025%) twice a day for 2–12 weeks
Tinted sunscreen for visible light protection
Broad-spectrum SPF (titanium dioxide and zinc oxide–based sunscreen prefer-

able)

Preexisting melasma or PIH

UV radiation protection

BID, Twice daily; QHS, nightly; PIH, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation; SPF, sun protectant factor; UV, ultraviolet.
aConsider commercially available combination products or having pretreatment agents compounded together to potentially improve 
adherence.
Data from Rullan P, Karam AM. 2010. Chemical peels for darker skin types. Facial Plastic Surgery Clinics of North America 
18(1):111–131.

medium and deep peels, the authors prefer empiric dox-
ycycline 100 mg twice daily for 7 to 10 days beginning 
the day of the procedure, with the patient understanding 
that photoprotection becomes even more crucial.

Postpeel Skin Care
Immediate  postpeel  skin  care,  which  occurs  up  until 
full reepithelialization, may vary based on chemical peel 
depth but is identical in both genders, with a few cave-
ats. Men should avoid shaving the treated area until fully 
reepithelialized. The postpeel skin care regimen should 
be  initiated  immediately  upon  full  reepithelialization, 
which may begin as early as 3 days for superficial peels 
to as late as 14 days for deep peels. Once again, keeping 
regimens simple may promote better adherence in men; 
hence  restarting  the  same  pretreatment  combination 
topical formulation that the patient previously used may 
be a wise recommendation.

TREATMENT TECHNIQUES

It  is  best  to  contain  one’s  peeling  repertoire  to  a  select 
number  of  agents.  This  way,  one  becomes  intimately 
familiar  with  all  aspects  and  nuances  of  such  peel-
ing  agents,  which  in  turn  increases  the  likelihood  of 

delivering  outstanding  outcomes,  as  opposed  to  only 
possessing a limited experience using a broad variety of 
peels. Similar peeling agents and techniques can be used 
in men and women. Key points relevant to men’s chemi-
cal peeling are discussed within each peeling agent.

Salicylic Acid Peel
SA, a lipophilic beta-hydroxy acid, is known for its effi-
cacy  in  treating  inflammatory  and  noninflammatory 
acne lesions and its safety profile in all skin types. The 
most commonly used formulations are SA 20% to 30% 
in ethanol, which crystallizes upon ethanol evaporation. 
This  leaves  a  pseudofrost  that  can  be  a  visual  aid  that 
facilitates uniform peel application (Fig. 9.1). SA peels 
should be repeated in 2- to 4-week intervals, with opti-
mal results seen after a series of three to six sessions.

SA 30% in a polyethylene glycol (SA-PEG) vehicle is 
a newer SA formulation that is associated with minimal 
to no discomfort after application and has shown supe-
rior results in improving acne compared with SA in eth-
anol.  SA-PEG  causes  minimal  desquamation  and  little 
to no risk of the PIH often associated with “hot spots” 
of  ethanolic  SA  overpenetration.  Because  of  minimal 
peel  absorption  beyond  the  cornified  layer,  salicylism 
risks  for  SA-PEG  may  be  clinically  insignificant  even 

120

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig.  9.1  Even  pseudofrost  after  two  applications  of  ethanolic 
salicylic acid (30%).

with use over large surface areas. This may be of clini-
cal value when performing body peeling in those with 
a propensity to develop truncal acne, such as cisgender 
or transgender men on exogenous testosterone therapy. 
SA-PEG  must  have  at  least  5  minutes  of  contact  time 
and requires thorough rinsing after application because 
of its occlusive vehicle. When performing body peeling 
for truncal acne, three to five sessions of ethanolic SA or 
SA-PEG peels may be performed at 2- to 4-week inter-
vals for optimal results.

Glycolic Acid Peel
Glycolic  acid  (GA)  is  the  most  commonly  used 
alpha-hydroxy  acid,  applied  as  a  single  peeling  agent. 
Combining topical 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (5%) with GA 
(70%) peel increases 5-FU’s efficacy for treating actinic 
keratosis (AK) when performed as “pulse peels” every 1 
to 2 weeks. GA (70%) is applied evenly to the treatment 
areas and left on until even erythema is achieved for up 
to 2 minutes before neutralization. The area is cleansed 
with a gentle cleanser before application of a thin layer 
of 5-FU, which is left on for at least 12 hours and up to 
a maximum of 24 hours as tolerated before washing off 
thoroughly.

Trichloroacetic Acid, Combination Medium-
Depth Peels, and Chemical Reconstruction of 
Skin Scars Technique
Trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  is  a  reliable  and  versatile 
peeling agent that can be used in superficial, medium, 
or deep peeling. TCA (35%) alone or preceded by solid 
CO2, GA (70%), or JS can be repeated every 12 weeks 
as  needed  to  achieve  desired  results  (Fig.  9.2).  The 
chemical reconstruction of skin scars (CROSS) method 
involves the firm and focal application of TCA at high 
concentrations  (50%–100%)  deep  into  the  depressed 
area of atrophic acne scars (Fig. 9.3) or enlarged pores. 
This method is discussed in detail in a separate chapter. 
Boxcar  and  icepick  acne  scars  are  the  acne  scar  types 
most responsive to CROSS technique.

Phenol–Croton Oil Peel
The  role  of  phenol–croton  oil  peels  in  men  tends  to 
revolve primarily around segmental peeling techniques 
for specific indications such as periorbital rejuvenation. 
This  is  because  the  postpeel  erythema  from  phenol–
croton oil can be expected to last for 3 to 6 months after 
the  procedure.  Segmental  single  cosmetic  unit  deep 
peels can address the most bothersome facial cosmetic 
concerns in men and circumvent the need for cardiac 
monitoring or intravenous hydration typical of phenol–
croton oil peeling of larger surface areas. Other indica-
tions  for  phenol–croton  oil  peel  in  men  include  acne 
scars  by  CROSS  technique,  actinic  keratosis,  actinic 
cheilitis, and lip rejuvenation.

Newer formulations by Hetter have allowed for phe-
nol-croton oil peels to be used in the treatment of mild 
to  moderate  photoaging  and  acne  scarring.  The  light 
(35%–0.4%)  and  very  light  (27.5%–0.12%)  phenol– 
croton  oil  Hetter’s  Heresy  formulas  are  considered 
appropriate  for  the  periorbital  areas.  For  example,  in 
men who are not yet seeking surgical interventions and 
only have lower eyelid textural changes and minimal fat 
protrusion, a single session using the very light formu-
lation can provide significant tightening of the anterior 
lamella.  Light  or  very  light  phenol–croton  oil  peel-
ing  may  also  be  performed  as  a  “touch-up”  procedure 
after a lower eyelid transconjunctival blepharoplasty to 
improve persistent skin wrinkling.

Alternatively,  periorbital  rejuvenation  may  be 
achieved  by  micropunch  blepharopeeling  performed 
using straight phenol (89%). This procedure has shown 
excellent  aesthetic  outcomes  in  treating  periocular 

CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

121

A

B

C

Fig.  9.2  Solid  CO2–trichloroacetic  acid  (35%)  (Brody  combination)  medium-depth  peel.  A,  Before.  B,  Four 
days after the procedure. C, Eight days after the procedure.

rhytides without the associated volume loss and linear 
scarring  seen  in  conventional  surgical  blepharoplasty. 
Phenol (89%) is applied to the area between the upper 
eyelid’s  superior  tarsal  plate  border  and  the  eyebrow’s 
inferior border, as well as within 1 to 2 mm of the lower 

eyelid  margin.  Immediately  after  frosting,  multiple 
(5–20) 3- to 5-mm snip excisions arranged in a random 
grid-like pattern are performed on the central and lat-
eral areas of the upper eyelid, which are left to heal by 
secondary intention.

122

PART 5  Special Topics

A

B

C

Fig. 9.3  A, Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, comedonal acne, and mild atrophic acne scarring in a Fitz-
patrick phototype V male. B, After two sessions of ethanolic salicylic acid (30%) and one session of trichlo-
roacetic acid (TCA) (100%) CROSS (5 days postpeel) performed at 2-week intervals. C, After an additional 
session of salicylic acid (30%) and TCA (100%) CROSS.

CHAPTER 9  Peels in Men: Special Considerations

123

Similar safety precautions are used in men and women 
when  performing  a  phenol–croton  oil  peel,  including 
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and hydra-
tion  (orally  or  intravenously)  when  total  body  surface 
area to be peeled exceeds 1%. Because phenol can pen-
etrate into latex and nitrile gloves, neoprene gloves must 
be  worn  when  performing  phenol  peeling,  especially  if 
gauze pads will be used to apply the agent or catch any 
inadvertent  drip.  Use  of  activated  carbon-containing 
masks is also recommended.

Combination of Chemical Peeling With Other 
Minimally Invasive Procedures
Combining chemical peels with other minimally inva-
sive  procedures  can  optimize  aesthetic  outcomes.  Per-
forming  a  TCA  (20%)  peel,  extensive  subcision,  and 
fractional  CO2  laser  in  a  single  session  has  shown 
excellent  improvement  of  rolling  acne  scars.  Prepeel 
treatment with botulinum toxin and/or hyaluronic acid 
filler has also shown synergistic effects in the treatment 
of  rhytides.  In  patients  previously  treated  with  neuro-
toxin,  some  authors  recommend  neurotoxin  injection 
2  to  3  weeks  before  a  medium  or  deep  chemical  peel, 
which  may  also  facilitate  healing  due  to  diminished 
facial  movement.  For  treatment-naïve  patients,  neu-
rotoxin  injection  10  to  14  days  after  a  phenol–croton 
oil peel may prolong desired neuromuscular blockade. 
Although same-day neurotoxin treatment and chemical 
peeling is generally not recommended (due to potential 
neurotoxin diffusion from edema), soft tissue augmen-
tation may be performed on the same day if superficial 
or  medium-depth  peels  are  used  or  different  areas  are 
treated. Otherwise, filler treatment should be performed 
4 to 6 months after a deep chemical peel.

COMPLICATIONS

As previously discussed, intrinsic and extrinsic male skin 
variables can predispose men to slower reepithelializa-
tion rates, more exuberant postprocedural edema, and 
bruising. Chemical peeling complications are discussed 
in detail in a separate chapter. Although early identifica-
tion, treatment, and prevention of chemical peel com-
plications are not gender-specific, special circumstances 
are worthy of discussion. In an atrophic bald scalp with 
multiple  actinic  keratoses,  chemexfoliated  areas  show-
ing delayed reepithelialization may be a consequence of 
diminished  adnexal  structures  or  actinically  damaged 

skin itself. In these patients, adherence to postoperative 
wound care should be further emphasized while main-
taining  a  high  index  of  suspicion  for  infection  or  ero-
sive pustular dermatosis of the scalp. Certain areas are 
prone  to  hypertrophic  scarring  from  medium  or  deep 
peels and should be peeled less vigorously, even in men. 
These  areas  are  the  medial  upper  eyelids,  lateral  lower 
eyelids,  zygomatic  arch,  preauricular  area,  and  neck. 
Medium-depth  peels  have  unpredictable  outcomes  on 
the  neck  and  a  tendency  to  cause  scarring;  superficial 
peels in combination with skin-tightening devices, neu-
rotoxin, and/or biostimulatory fillers should be consid-
ered instead.

CONCLUSION

Chemical peels are a mainstay of aesthetic medicine and 
an increasingly popular cosmetic procedure performed 
in men. The approach to chemical peels in men includes 
consideration of intrinsic and extrinsic skin variables that 
affect various aspects of the peeling process. Because of 
the increased sebaceous quality of their skin and thicker 
dermis, male patients, in general, may require a greater 
number of treatments, larger volumes of peeling agent, 
more aggressive degreasing and peel application, and/or 
higher  concentration  of  peeling  agent  to  achieve  opti-
mal  results.  Patient  selection  is  of  utmost  importance, 
because poor photoprotective behavior and nonadher-
ence to prepeel and postpeel regimens could jeopardize 
clinical outcomes. Facility in performing chemical peels 
and understanding gender-specific nuances of this tech-
nique may be well rewarded in today’s growing aesthetic 
market.

FURTHER READING

Bagatin E, Teixeira SP, Hassun KM, Pereira T, Michalany 

NS, Talarico S. 5-fluorouracil superficial peel for multiple 
actinic keratoses. Int J Dermatol. 2009;48(8):902–907.
Brody HJ. Commentary on chemical peels in men. Dermatol 

Surg. 2017;43(suppl 2):S175.

Crudele J, Kim E, Murray K, Regan J. The importance of 

understanding consumer preferences for dermatologist 
recommended skin cleansing and care products. J Drugs 
Dermatol. 2019;18(s1):75.

Dainichi T, Ueda S, Imayama S, Furue M. Excellent clinical 
results with a new preparation for chemical peeling in 
acne: 30% salicylic acid in polyethylene glycol vehicle. 
Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(7):9; discussion 899.

124

PART 5  Special Topics

Fanous N, Zari S. Universal trichloroacetic acid peel tech-
nique for light and dark skin. JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 
2017;19(3):219.

Giacomoni PU, Mammone T, Teri M. Gender-linked differ-
ences in human skin. J Dermatol Sci. 2009;55(3):144–149.
Handler MZ, Goldberg DJ. Cosmetic concerns among men. 

Dermatol Clin. 2018;36(1):5–10.

Hantash BM, Stewart DB, Cooper ZA, Rehmus WE, Koch 

RJ, Swetter SM. Facial resurfacing for nonmelanoma skin 
cancer prophylaxis. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142(8):976–982.
Jagdeo J, Keaney T, Narurkar V, Kolodziejczyk J, Gallagher 
CJ. Facial treatment preferences among aesthetically ori-
ented men. Dermatol Surg. 2016;42(10):1155–1163.
Keaney TC. Aging in the male face: intrinsic and extrinsic 

factors. Dermatol Surg. 2016;42(7):797–803.

Landau M, Bensimon RH. Chemical peels. In: Cantisa-

no-Zilkha M, Haddad A, eds. Aesthetic oculofacial rejuve-
nation. New York, NY: Elsevier; 2010:29–37.

Lee KC, Wambier CG, Soon SL, et al. Basic chemical peel-

ing-superficial and medium-depth peels. J Am Acad Der-
matol. 2018. https://doi.org/S0190-9622(18)33049-4 [pii].
Mancuso JB, Maruthi R, Wang SQ, Lim HW. Sunscreens: an 

update. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2017;18(5):643–650.

Marrero GM, Katz BE. The new fluor-hydroxy pulse peel. A 

combination of 5-fluorouracil and glycolic acid. Dermatol 
Surg. 1998;24(9):973–978.

Montes JR, Santos E. Evaluation of men’s trends and 

experiences in aesthetic treatment. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2018;17(9):941–946.

Rahrovan S, Fanian F, Mehryan P, Humbert P, Firooz 

A. Male versus female skin: what dermatologists and 
cosmeticians should know. Int J Womens Dermatol. 
2018;4(3):122–130.

Reserva J, Champlain A, Soon SL, Tung R. Chemical peels: 
indications and special considerations for the male pa-
tient. Dermatol Surg. 2017;43(suppl 2):S173.

Rullan P, Karam AM. Chemical peels for darker skin 
types. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am. 2010;18(1): 
111–131.

Sterling JB. Micropunch blepharopeeling of the upper 

eyelids: a combination approach for periorbital rejuve-
nation—a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(4): 
436–440.

Wambier CG, de Freitas FP. Combining phenol-croton oil 

peel. In: Issa MCA, Tamura B, eds. Chemical and physical 
procedures. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 
2018:101–113.

Wambier CG, Lee KC, Soon SL, et al. Advanced chemical 

peels: phenol-croton oil peel. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018. 
https://doi.org/S0190-9622(18)33051-2 [pii].

10

Combination Therapy in Acne: 
Peels as Adjuvant Therapy

David Surprenant, Jeave Reserva, Rebecca Tung

INTRODUCTION

Acne  vulgaris  is  an  exceedingly  common  inflamma-
tory  condition  with  a  lifetime  prevalence  approaching 
80%.  Acne  has  been  associated  with  depression,  anxi-
ety, and low self-esteem; untreated or poorly managed 
acne often has major effects on patient quality of life and 
has significant associated socioeconomic and healthcare 
costs.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  an  effective 
and cost-conscious approach to acne treatment.

An accurate understanding of the disease process is 
essential to formulating a therapeutic plan for acne. The 
pathogenesis  of  acne  is  multifactorial  and  begins  with 
corneocyte adhesion (Box 10.1). As corneocytes collect 
and obstruct the pilosebaceous unit, sebum is simulta-
neously produced by sebaceous glands, in part because 
of hormonal stimulation. This combination of follicular 
obstruction  and  continued  sebum  production  creates 
an environment that is conducive to the growth of bac-
teria,  namely  gram-positive  Propionibacterium  acnes 
(Cutibacterium  acnes).  The  resulting  inflammatory 
response  results  in  clinically  visible  acne:  comedones, 
pustules, inflammatory papules, and cysts. If severe, this 
inflammatory process can result in significant and per-
manent scarring. There are several approaches to treat-
ing acne, and various treatments target specific steps in 
the  disease  process:  decreasing  corneocyte  adhesion, 

BOX 10.1  Pathogenesis of Acne Vulgaris: 
A Disease of the Pilosebaceous Unit

Abnormal  follicular  keratinization  →  microcomedo  for-
mation  →  comedo  rupture  →  release  of  keratin  and 
sebum → inflammatory papule/pustule → nodule/cyst

minimizing  sebum  production,  and  lowering  bacterial 
counts. Management is often approached in a stepwise 
fashion: topical retinoids and topical antibiotics for pri-
marily comedonal acne, adjunctive systemic antibiotics 
and/or  antiandrogens  for  inflammatory  acne,  and  sys-
temic  retinoids  for  severe  or  recalcitrant  cases.  There 
are  also  several  adjuvant  therapies  available  for  both 
active  acne  and  acne  scarring,  including  light-based 
therapies (photodynamic therapy, pulsed dye laser, CO2 
laser) and mechanical-based therapies (microneedling, 
microdermabrasion). Chemical peels represent an addi-
tional effective, well-tolerated, and economical adjuvant 
treatment option for acne and acne scarring. As an often 
under  utilized  acne  treatment  modality,  this  chapter 
aims  to  reintroduce  chemical  peels  as  a  valuable  tool 
worthy  of  consideration  when  approaching  the  acne 
patient. Chemical peels are low cost, have minimal side 
effects,  and  are  an  effective  method  for  treating  acne 
and  acne  scarring.  For  patients  with  severe  inflamma-
tory acne, the adjuvant use of chemical peels should be 
considered only after first improving the condition with 
a systemic medication. Nonetheless, even these patients 
can frequently benefit from chemical peels.

ACNE: WHY CHEMICAL PEELS?

Broadly  speaking,  chemical  peels  work  by  inducing 
controlled  cutaneous  damage  and  fostering  dermal 
and  epidermal  regeneration. The  mechanism  of  action 
and characteristics of many chemical peels make them 
well  suited  for  the  treatment  of  active  acne  and  acne 
scarring.  Many  chemical  peels  exhibit  keratolytic  and 
comedolytic effects, especially helpful for noninflamma-
tory comedonal acne. Chemical peels may also decrease 
sebum  production  and  pore  size,  and  many  have 

125

126

PART 5  Special Topics

TABLE 10.1  Selected Peeling Regimens for Mild to Moderate Comedonal and Inflammatory 
Acne

Peel

Properties

Regimen

Contact Time

Considerations

Salicylic acid

Keratolytic, comedolytic, 

antibacterial,  
antiinflammatory

Glycolic acid

Keratolytic, comedolytic, 

antibacterial,  
antiinflammatory

30% salicylic acid every 
2–4 weeks for 3–6 
sessions

30%–70% glycolic acid 
every 2 weeks for 3–5 
sessions

∼6 minutes

Safer for darker skin 

types

∼3–5 minutes

Requires neutralization 

Safe in pregnancy

Mandelic acid

Keratolytic, comedolytic, 

10% mandelic acid + 20% 

∼3–5 minutes

Trichloroacetic acid 
(lower strength)

antibacterial,  
antiinflammatory

Desquamation induced 

via protein denaturation, 
antibacterial

salicylic acid every 2 
weeks for 6 sessions
25% trichloroacetic acid 
every 2 weeks for 4 
sessions

N/A

Jessner’s Solution

Keratolytic, comedolytic, 

Jessner’s every 2 weeks 

N/A

antibacterial

for 3–6 sessions

Requires neutralization
May help with skin 

lightening
Higher risk of  

procedure-related 
dyspigmentation
May help with skin 

lightening

Pyruvic acid

Keratolytic, comedolytic, 

antibacterial

50% pyruvic acid every 2 
weeks for 5 sessions

∼3–5 minutes

Requires neutralization

antibacterial and antiinflammatory properties useful in 
decreasing  bacterial  counts  on  acne-prone  skin.  Addi-
tionally,  the  controlled  cutaneous  damage  induced  by 
chemical peels promotes the absorption of other topical 
acne  medications,  augmenting  their  pharmacological 
effect. By increasing the efficacy of topical medications, 
systemic  medications  and  their  associated  health  risks 
and economic costs may be avoided. Although chemi-
cal peeling can be an excellent adjuvant modality in the 
treatment of mild and moderate comedonal and inflam-
matory acne, chemical peels are not appropriate for the 
treatment of severe inflammatory or nodulocystic acne. 
Severe  inflammatory  or  nodulocystic  acne  must  first 
be improved with other medications before initiating a 
peeling regimen.

PEELING AGENTS AND PATIENT 
CONSIDERATIONS

A variety of chemical peel formulations and treatment 
regimens exist. When treating active acne vulgaris, the 
most commonly used peels are superficial or light peels 
(Table 10.1; see also Chapter 4). Peel depth depends on 
type of peel agent and concentration used, skin prepa-
ration  technique,  and  skin  contact  time.  Superficial 
chemical  peels  induce  controlled  cutaneous  damage 
limited primarily to the epidermis. Their limited depth 

of  penetration  affords  notable  clinical  improvement 
with minimal (if any) patient discomfort or downtime. 
Salicylic  acid  (SA)  (5%–30%)  and  glycolic  acid  (GA) 
(20%–70%) are the most commonly used agents for the 
treatment of mild to moderate comedonal and inflam-
matory acne. Additional agents used include lactic acid 
(LA), mandelic acid (MA), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 
and  Jessner’s  solution  (JS).  Unique  qualities  of  each 
agent, coupled with practitioner confidence and patient 
characteristics, help guide chemical peel selection. Fur-
thermore,  the  use  of  combination  chemical  peel  treat-
ments—treating  patients  in  a  sequential  manner  with 
one peeling agent followed by a different agent—can be 
considered when developing a treatment plan.

Salicylic Acid
SA  is  a  beta-hydroxy  acid  commonly  used  for  the 
treatment  of  acne  vulgaris.  Its  strong  keratolytic  and 
comedolytic  properties  make  it  particularly  suitable  as 
an  acne  treatment.  SA  promotes  desquamation  of  the 
upper lipophilic layers of the stratum corneum, result-
ing  in  superficial  desquamation  and  rejuvenation.  SA 
also  penetrates  pores  and  has  antibacterial  and  antiin-
flammatory  properties.  SA  may  also  decrease  sebum 
production  in  acne-prone  patients.  In  clinical  studies, 
SA  peels  have  been  shown  to  reduce  the  number  of 
inflammatory and noninflammatory lesions in patients 

CHAPTER 10  Combination Therapy in Acne: Peels as Adjuvant Therapy

127

Fig.  10.1  The  typical  setup  for  a  30%  salicylic  acid  chemical 
peel  for  acne  treatment  is  quite  simple.  A  degreasing  agent, 
the peeling agent, cotton-tipped applicators (CTAs), and some 
gauze  should  be  on  hand.  A  handheld  fan  and/or  ice  packs 
should also be available to help minimize patient discomfort.

Fig.  10.3  Three  days  after  30%  salicylic  acid  chemical  peel. 
There  is  very  minimal  superficial  peeling  resulting  in  minimal 
to no downtime.

Fig. 10.2  Clinical endpoint for a 30% salicylic acid (SA) chem-
ical  peel.  Application  yields  pseudofrosting  as  SA  crystal-
izes.  Typically,  one  to  three  layers  are  applied  until  a  uniform 
pseudofrost is achieved. The face is then washed with water 
after approximately 6 minutes.

Fig. 10.4  One week after 30% salicylic acid chemical peel.

with  active  acne.  Although  several  concentrations  and 
treatment  regimens  exist,  the  most  commonly  utilized 
concentrations for treatment of acne is 30% SA. A com-
mon  regimen  includes  30%  SA  applied  every  2  to  4 
weeks for a total of three to six sessions (Figs. 10.1–10.4). 
Lower concentrations can be used but typically require 

a  greater  number  of  treatment  sessions  to  achieve  an 
equivalent treatment effect. SA peels are self-neutraliz-
ing and generally very well tolerated. Patients occasion-
ally  note  minimal  procedural  discomfort  (i.e.,  tingling 
and  burning)  that  is  easily  mitigated  with  the  use  of  a 

128

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig.  10.5  The  typical  setup  for  a  35%  glycolic  acid  chemical 
peel. One must ensure that a neutralizing agent (either water or 
10%–15% sodium bicarbonate) is readily available when using 
GA.

handheld  fan.  Downtime  is  minimal,  with  postproce-
dural erythema and desquamation often resolving in 1 
to 3 days and with reepithelialization complete in 7 to 
10 days. SA peels represent a safe peeling agent even in 
darker-skinned  patients,  because  postprocedural  dys-
pigmentation is rare.

Glycolic Acid
GA is an alpha-hydroxy acid that shares many benefi-
cial  qualities  with  SA.  In  particular,  GA  reduces  cor-
neocyte adhesion and keratinocyte plugging. GA also 
has  proven  antibacterial  efficacy  against  P.  acnes.  The 
only  published  randomized-controlled  clinical  trial 
comparing a chemical peel to placebo in the treatment 
of acne vulgaris demonstrated statistical improvement 
in  both  inflammatory  and  noninflammatory  lesions 
with  GA.  GA  acne  treatment  outcomes  are  largely 
comparable  to  outcomes  with  SA.  One  clinical  study 
found a patient preference for GA over SA (41% ver-
sus  35%),  but  the  underlying  reason  and  clinical  sig-
nificance  of  this  preference  was  unclear  and  has  not 
been replicated in additional studies. GA does require 
neutralization with an alkaline solution to halt exfolia-
tive effects, which should be considered when selecting 
this agent. A longer application time interval prior to 
neutralization  results  in  increased  penetration  of  the 
chemical  peel.  Treatment  regimens  typically  use  30% 
to 50% GA every 2 weeks for 3 to 5 minutes for three 
to six sessions (Figs. 10.5–10.8). Higher concentrations 
typically  require  shorter  treatment  times  and  fewer 

Fig. 10.6  Clinical endpoint for 35% glycolic acid chemical peel. 
The  peel  is  typically  neutralized  after  a  predetermined  period 
of  time,  usually  3  to  5  minutes.  Erythema  or  a  grayish-white 
appearance of the skin should prompt more rapid neutralization.

Fig.  10.7  Three  days  after  35%  glycolic  acid  (GA)  chemical 
peel. Superficial GA chemical peels do not usually induce any 
visible peeling or erythema and consequently cause minimal to 
no downtime.

CHAPTER 10  Combination Therapy in Acne: Peels as Adjuvant Therapy

129

in  addressing  acne  scarring,  especially  with  the  chem-
ical  reconstruction  of  skin  scars  (CROSS)  technique, 
described later.

Jessner’s Solution
JS  is  a  superficial  peeling  agent  composed  of  14%  SA, 
14% resorcinol, and 14% LA in 95% ethanol. JS is com-
monly used to augment the penetration and efficacy of 
medium-depth peeling agents for resurfacing but can be 
used alone to treat acne vulgaris. JS is well tolerated, and 
adverse effects are limited to procedural discomfort (i.e., 
burning  or  stinging),  erythema,  and  postprocedural 
desquamation. Dyspigmentation is rare. JS is commonly 
applied every 2 weeks for three to six sessions. Modified 
JS (17% LA, 17% SA, and 8% citric acid in 95% ethanol) 
can also be considered for the treatment of acne. Mod-
ified  JS  lacks  resorcinol,  an  ingredient  that  can  occa-
sionally result in unwanted side effects such as allergic 
reactions and syncope.

Lactic Acid
LA  is  another  alpha-hydroxy  acid  frequently  used  in 
combination  with  other  peeling  agents  to  treat  acne. 
LA decreases corneocyte adhesion and also has a mois-
turizing effect on the skin. This latter effect can be par-
ticularly helpful because many topical acne treatments, 
such as retinoids and benzoyl peroxide, are particularly 
drying.  In  vitro  analysis  has  demonstrated  the  ability 
of  LA  (300  μg/mL)  to  suppress  tyrosinase  and  inhibit 
melanogenesis. Thus the addition of LA may help with 
skin lightening and may decrease the risk of procedural 
hyperpigmentation. Several premixed peeling products 
containing lactic acid are available commercially includ-
ing  Vitalize  Peel  (Allergan  Plc)  and  Ultra  Peel  Forte 
(PCA  SKIN).  There  is  no  published  data  investigating 
the use of LA monotherapy for the treatment of active 
acne  vulgaris,  although  the  use  of  high-concentration 
(46%–92%) LA has demonstrated benefit for superficial 
acne  scars.  LA  has  a  lower  pH  than  glycolic  acid,  and 
thus lower concentrations of LA can generally be used 
to achieve a similar treatment effect. Just as with glycolic 
acid, neutralization is required with lactic acid.

Mandelic Acid
MA  is  a  large-molecule  alpha-hydroxy  acid  with  slow  
epidermal  penetration.  Similar  to  the  other  alpha- 
hydroxy  acids  described,  MA  decreases  corneocyte 
adhesion and is keratolytic. Aside from acne treatment, 

Fig. 10.8  One week after 35% glycolic acid chemical peel.

sessions  but  are  likely  to  result  in  increased  patient 
discomfort  and  carry  a  higher  risk  of  complications. 
Generally,  GA  peels  are  safe  and  well  tolerated,  with 
common adverse effects limited to transient procedural 
burning and erythema and postprocedural desquama-
tion. Although safety data are limited, GA is generally 
considered safe for pregnant patients given its limited 
dermal penetration.

Trichloroacetic Acid
TCA is a crystalline inorganic compound that induces 
controlled tissue damage through epidermal and dermal 
protein  denaturation.  Various  concentrations  of  TCA 
cause varying degrees of tissue damage. Although higher 
concentrations  are  frequently  used  for  resurfacing  and 
rejuvenation, 20% to 25% TCA can be used to treat acne 
vulgaris. Published literature suggests 25% TCA applied 
every  2  weeks  for  four  sessions  has  the  same  efficacy 
as  30%  SA  applied  every  2  weeks  for  four  sessions  in 
treating  active  acne  vulgaris.  Higher  concentrations  of 
TCA are associated with a higher risk of potential post-
peel dyspigmentation and should be used cautiously in 
patients with dark skin types or in any individuals prone 
to hyperpigmentation. Although self-neutralizing, neu-
tralization  with  an  alkaline  solution  is  recommended 
to  avoid  unintentional  overtreatment.  Focal  TCA,  in 
concentrations  of  90%  to  100%,  is  particularly  useful 

130

PART 5  Special Topics

MA is often used for skin rejuvenation and lightening. 
MA can be combined with SA for the treatment of acne 
vulgaris. One clinical study found combination therapy 
with 10% MA and 20% SA (every 2 weeks for six ses-
sions)  superior  to  35%  GA  (every  2  weeks  for  six  ses-
sions) for reducing comedones, pustules, inflammatory 
papules, and total acne score. The combination of MA 
and  SA  induced  more  visible  postprocedural  peeling 
compared with GA alone. As monotherapy, MA is less 
aggressive  than  glycolic  acid,  and  shorter  treatment 
intervals  may  be  used.  Some  sources  recommend  lim-
iting  MA  contact  time  to  5  minutes.  Neutralization  is 
required at the conclusion of the peel.

Pyruvic Acid
Pyruvic  acid  (PA)  is  an  α-ketoacid  used  to  induce 
superficial  peeling.  With  keratolytic,  antibacterial,  and 
sebostatic properties, PA can also be used for active acne 
vulgaris. Fifty percent PA can be applied every 2 weeks 
for  approximately  five  sessions  to  augment  the  treat-
ment of acne vulgaris. Typical treatment contact time is 
3 to 5 minutes, and acid neutralization with an alkaline 
solution is required. PA is a well-tolerated peeling agent 
with adverse events similar to those associated with sal-
icylic acid.

Commercially Available Peeling Blends
There are numerous skin care companies with commer-
cially available proprietary chemical peel products that 
can be used as adjuvant therapy for acne vulgaris. These 
products  often  contain  blends  of  a  variety  of  different 
agents  and  come  with  manufacturer-suggested  treat-
ment protocols. Many of the premixed products contain 
a  combination  of  lower-concentration  TCA  (6%–20%) 
or salicylic acid (14%) mixed with a combination of one 
or  several  other  ingredients  such  as  lactic  acid  (12%–
20%),  Kojic  acid,  azelaic  acid,  L-ascorbic  acid,  retinol, 
citric acid, etc. These additional ingredients aim to add 
to  or  augment  peel  benefits  such  as  skin  lightening, 
hydration, and exfoliation.

ACNE SCARRING

Chemical  peels  are  commonly  used  for  skin  resurfac-
ing and to improve texture and scarring. Although skin 
resurfacing with chemical peels can in general improve 
texture and dyspigmentation, the CROSS technique can 
be particularly helpful for the treatment of atrophic or 

“icepick” acne scars. First described by Lee et al. in 2002, 
this  technique  involves  focal  application  of  high-con-
centration  TCA  (50%–100%)  directly  to  acne  scars 
using  a  precise  applicator,  commonly  a  sharp  wood-
en-tipped  applicator  or  even  a  needle.  This  technique 
can be repeated every 4 to 6 weeks for typically five or 
more  sessions.  CROSS  has  demonstrated  significant 
improvement,  especially  in  correcting  icepick  scarring 
secondary to acne. Efficacy is a result of stimulated col-
lagen  production  and  dermal  thickening  induced  by 
high-concentration TCA. The focal application of TCA 
to only scarred areas limits the risk of procedural dys-
pigmentation. Studies in darker skin types (particularly 
the  Asian  population)  have  demonstrated  an  excellent 
safety  profile.  Focused  TCA  application  to  acne  scars 
spares normal surrounding skin and results in minimal 
down  time.  Patients  should  nevertheless  be  counseled 
on the possibility, although rare, of hyperpigmentation 
should the TCA inadvertently contact normal skin.

THE AUTHORS’ APPROACH

When  approaching  a  patient  with  mild  to  moderate 
inflammatory  acne,  the  authors  introduce  the  idea  of 
using  chemical  peels  as  adjuvant  therapy  early  in  the 
treatment  course.  For  the  typical  patient  with  mild  to 
moderate acne requiring systemic medication in addition 
to  topical  modalities,  chemical  peels  can  be  initiated  as 
soon as desired by the patient. Chemical peels should be 
not be reserved as a last resort, because they can hasten 
improvement and potentially avoid the need to advance 
up the “therapeutic ladder” of topical and oral prescrip-
tion medications. Although chemical peels are relatively 
affordable, they almost always represent an out-of-pocket 
expense for patients, which can be a barrier to implemen-
tation.  Without  dermatologic  guidance,  many  patients 
fail to recognize the financial and clinical value of chemi-
cal peels for the treatment of their acne. It is important for 
clinicians  to  present  patients  with  all  treatment  options 
and guide patients through the decision-making process.
For  patients  who  proceed  with  chemical  peel  treat-
ments, adherence to prepeel and postpeel care regimens 
is imperative (Table 10.2). Strong emphasis is placed on 
regular broad-spectrum sunscreen use both before and 
after  a  peel.  Mineral-based  sunscreens  are  often  pre-
ferred in the postpeel period. The authors do not recom-
mend chemical peels in patients who tan or will be in an 
environment where they anticipate greater than normal 

TABLE 10.2  Approaching the Use of Chemical Peels as Adjuvant Therapy for Mild to Moderate Inflammatory and 
Comedonal Acne

Prepeel

Immediately

Chemical Peel

Immediately

Postpeel Care

Treatment

Treatment

Prepeel

Topical or systemic 

Low-dose anti-

Consider less-aggres-

therapies as medically 
indicated for acne 
vulgaris

histamine (i.e., 
loratadine 10 mg)

Discontinue topical acne 
medications 48 hours 
before chemical peel 
(consider longer for 
darker skin types)

Consider concom-
itant pulsed dye 
laser to comple-
ment peel results 
with minimal 
downtime

sive degreasing with 
only alcohol versus 
acetone in darker skin 
types or patients with 
sensitive skin

Peeling agent based on 
patient considerations, 
physician preference, 
and product availability

Postpeel

Application of topi-
cal corticosteroid 
in the office to 
minimize proce-
dural discomfort 
and erythema
Application of 
sunscreen

Expect erythema and 
peeling for 3–7 days 
following peel (longer 
with deeper peels)

Daily photoprotection 
with sunscreen and 
sun avoidance

Interval

Repeat treatment 

depending on peeling 
agent used and patient 
response to therapy 
(typically 2–4 week 
intervals).

Consider maintenance 

therapy with chemical 
peels every 4–12 weeks 
once acne is controlled.

+/− Application 

of manufacturer 
recommended 
topicals if using 
proprietary peel 
blends

+ Topical corticosteroids 
if inflammation and 
discomfort intolerable 
(+ short course of sys-
temic corticosteroids if 
needed)

Resume topical acne 
medications once 
acute peeling and ery-
thema resolve (usually 
day 5–7)

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
1
0

i

C
o
m
b
n
a
t
i
o
n
T
h
e
r
a
p
y

i

n
A
c
n
e
:

P
e
e
l
s

j

a
s
A
d
u
v
a
n
t
T
h
e
r
a
p
y

1
3
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132

PART 5  Special Topics

sun  exposure  (i.e.,  a  tropical  vacation)—even  with  the 
use of “low-risk” superficial peels such as low-concen-
tration  salicylic  acid.  Immediately  before  the  chemi-
cal  peel,  we  pretreat  all  patients  with  an  antihistamine 
(i.e., 10 mg of loratadine). This helps reduce procedural 
swelling  and  erythema.  Patients  with  Fitzpatrick  skin 
type I and II are typically instructed to hold their topical 
retinoid for at least 2 days before the procedure. Patients 
with  darker  skin  (Fitzpatrick  type  III  and  greater)  are 
instructed  to  stop  retinoids  and  any  other  potentially 
irritating  topicals  a  week  before  the  peel.  In  patients 
with darker skin types, we also perform a less-aggressive 
pretreatment skin degreasing using only 70% alcohol in 
place of acetone and alcohol. Less aggressive degreasing 
can decrease the efficacy of the peel by limiting peel pen-
etration, but the risk of procedural dyspigmentation is 
minimized.

In patients with significant erythema or who desire 
more rapid results, we offer combination therapy of laser 
and chemical peeling. Erythematous papules and mac-
ular scars are first lasered with 595 nm pulsed-dye laser 
(PDL) (VBeam Perfecta, Syneron-Candela, Inc, Irvine, 
CA) at settings of 7 mm spot size, energy 8 to 10 Joules, 
6-  to  10-millisecond  pulse  duration,  cooling  setting  2, 
before peel application. Laser settings will vary by laser 
manufacturer. If a PDL laser is unavailable or if a patient 
has  darker  skin,  an  Nd:YAG  laser  (1064  nm),  Alexan-
drite laser (755 nm), or long-wavelength Nd:YAG laser 
(1320 nm) can be used, because these lasers either target 
the  P.  acnes  bacteria  or  heat  the  underlying  sebaceous 
glands to reduce oil production. This combination laser 
and chemical peel regimen has minimal downtime and 
can  also  result  in  enhanced  acne  clearance  compared 
with chemical peels alone.

The authors prefer SA given its low side-effect profile, 
its ease of use, and its well-established efficacy for acne 
vulgaris. Typically, two to three coats of the 30% SA peel 
are applied to the entire face and left to sit for approx-
imately 6 minutes. As SA precipitate first appears, cool 
compresses are applied. A handheld fan is used to mit-
igate any procedural burning or discomfort. This treat-
ment is performed every 3 to 4 weeks as tolerated by the 
patient and as directed by clinical response. The typical 
patient requires three sessions of treatment.

After  a  peel,  patients  are  counseled  to  expect  some 
degree  of  erythema  and  desquamation  for  3  to  5  days 
(longer if stronger peeling agents are used). Topical tri-
amcinolone 0.1% cream is typically applied after the peel 

to help minimize postprocedure discomfort and inflam-
mation—this is not continued beyond the single appli-
cation  in  the  office.  Should  a  patient  have  an  extreme 
inflammatory reaction to their chemical peel, additional 
topical  corticosteroids  can  be  considered  to  mitigate 
inflammation. In the rare patient, a short course of oral 
steroid  taper  (methylprednisolone  dose  pack)  may  be 
used to help with an exuberant or intolerable peel reac-
tion. For all patients, fastidious sun protection and sun 
avoidance  are  mandatory.  Patients  are  continued  on 
their topical acne medications after their acute peeling 
is completed (3–7 days after the peel). Patients are gen-
erally very satisfied with their peel treatments, and many 
patients choose to continue with intermittent superficial 
chemical  peels  every  4  to  12  weeks  for  maintenance 
therapy once their acne is controlled.

ADVERSE EVENTS AND SPECIAL 
CONSIDERATIONS

Clinicians  should  be  aware  of  several  potential  adverse 
events  and  special  considerations  when  using  chemical 
peels  as  adjuvant  therapy  for  acne.  First,  peeling  is  not 
indicated for individuals with severe inflammatory or nod-
ulocystic  acne.  Chemical  peels  are  not  helpful  for  these 
patients because they can induce an exacerbation of acne. 
Although chemical peels have proven efficacy in treating 
mild to moderate inflammatory acne, they are particularly 
helpful in addressing comedonal, noninflammatory acne.

Often patients with facial acne will additionally have 
issues with acne on their chest and/or back. Superficial 
chemical  peels  may  also  be  used  off  the  face  in  areas 
such as the neck, chest, and back. However, the authors 
caution against the use of medium-depth or deep peels 
off of the face, because the regenerative capacity in these 
areas is not equivalent to facial skin and complications 
are more likely to arise. The authors suggest using super-
ficial peels to treat acne on the neck, chest, and back in 
individuals of all skin types.

Many  patients  with  acne  are  taking  medications 
that should be considered before initial treatment with 
chemical peels. Doxycycline is a common oral antibiotic 
with antiinflammatory properties used in patients with 
acne vulgaris. The photosensitizing effect of doxycycline 
further underscores the importance of fastidious photo-
protection before and after a peel procedure to minimize 
the risk of potential adverse effects—particularly postin-
flammatory hyperpigmentation. For many adult women 

CHAPTER 10  Combination Therapy in Acne: Peels as Adjuvant Therapy

133

with  cyclical  acne,  oral  contraceptives  and/or  spirono-
lactone may be used safely alongside intermittent chem-
ical  peels  to  control  symptoms.  Topical  tretinoin  and 
other  retinoids  can  augment  the  effects  of  a  chemical 
peel if used nightly for 6 weeks before the procedure. We 
have patients discontinue their retinoid at least 48 hours 
before the peel to limit the risk of dyspigmentation and 
scarring related to enhanced penetration of the peeling 
solution. Darker-skinned patients stop their retinoid 7 
days before the procedure. When using oral isotretinoin 
for the treatment of acne, the shrinking of the piloseba-
ceous unit theoretically could impede regeneration and 
healing following a chemical peel. Historically, a general 
recommendation was to avoid any procedural interven-
tion,  such  as  chemical  peels,  for  6  to  12  months  after 
completion of isotretinoin. However, a recent systemic 
review and consensus recommendation concluded there 
was no evidence to suggest peeling needs to be delayed 
and that performing superficial peels on patients taking 
isotretinoin is likely safe.

Finally, do not peel in patients with active facial her-
pes  simplex  virus  (HSV)  infections.  In  patients  with 
frequent HSV outbreaks, prophylactic antiviral medica-
tions should be given for 1 week, starting on the day of 
the peel.

CONCLUSION

Chemical  peels  represent  an  effective,  safe,  and  low-
cost  adjuvant  therapy  for  patients  with  acne  vulgaris. 
The unique qualities of chemical peels make them well 
suited  to  address  the  underlying  pathogenic  mecha-
nisms of acne vulgaris. Their ability to augment the effect 
of topical acne medications may allow patients to avoid 
the adverse effects associated with systemic acne med-
ications and could in fact help reduce the cost burden 
of acne treatment on the healthcare system. Clinicians 
should familiarize themselves with the use of chemical 
peels as adjuvant therapy for acne so they can offer their 
patients a low-risk, efficacious, and cost-effective option 
to achieve clear skin.

FURTHER READING

Al-Talib H, Al-Khateeb A, Hameed A, Murugaiah C. Efficacy 
and safety of superficial chemical peeling in treatment of 
active acne vulgaris. An Bras Dermatol. 2017;92(2):212–
216. https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20175273. 
Review. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5429107 28538881.

Atzori L, Brundu MA, Orru A, Biggio P. Glycolic acid peeling 
in the treatment of acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
1999;12(2):119–122. PubMed PMID: 10343939.

Castillo DE, Keri JE. Chemical peels in the treatment of acne: 
patient selection and perspectives. Clin Cosmet Investig 
Dermatol. 2018;11:365–372. https://doi.org/10.2147/
CCID.S137788. eCollection 2018. Review. PubMed PMID: 
30038512; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6053170.
Chen X, Wang S, Yang M, Li L. Chemical peels for acne vul-

garis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 
BMJ Open. 2018;8(4):e019607. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-019607. PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC5931279 29705755.

de Vries FMC, Meulendijks AM, Driessen RJB, van Dooren AA, 
Tjin EPM, van de Kerkhof PCM. The efficacy and safety of 
non-pharmacological therapies for the treatment of acne vul-
garis: a systematic review and best-evidence synthesis. J Eur 
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018;32(7):1195–1203. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jdv.14881. Epub 2018 Mar 6. Review 29444375.

Dréno B, Fischer TC, Perosino E, et al. Expert opinion: 

efficacy of superficial chemical peels in active acne man-
agement—what can we learn from the literature today? 
Evidence-based recommendations. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2011;25(6):695–704. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1468-3083.2010.03852.x. Epub 2010 Oct 3. Review. 
PubMed PMID: 21029205.

Jae J, Dong Ju H, Dong Hyun K, Yoon MS, Lee HJ, eds. 

Comparative study of buffered 50% glycolic acid (pH 3.0) + 
0.5% salicylic acid solution vs Jessner’s solution in patients 
with acne vulgaris. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2018;17(5):797–801. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.12445. Epub 2017 Nov 21.  
PubMed PMID: 29164826.

Jartarkar SR, Gangadhar, et al. Single-blind, active controlled 
study tocompare the efficacy of salicylic acid and mandelic 
acid chemical peel in the treatment of mild to moderately 
severe acne vulgaris. Clin Dermatol Rev. 2017;1(1):15–18.
Kaminaka C, Uede M, Matsunaka H, Furukawa F, Yamomoto 
Y. Clinical evaluation of glycolic acid chemical peeling in 
patients with acne vulgaris: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, split-face comparative study. Der-
matol Surg. 2014;40(3):314–322. https://doi.org/10.1111/
dsu.12417. Epub 2014 Jan 21. PubMed PMID: 24447110.
Kessler E, Flanagan K, Chia C, Rogers C, Glaser DA. Com-
parison of alpha- and beta-hydroxy acid chemical peels 
in the treatment of mild to moderately severe facial acne 
vulgaris. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(1):45–50; discussion 51. 
Epub 2007 Dec 5. PubMed PMID: 18053051.

Kim RH, Armstrong AW. Current state of acne treatment: 

highlighting lasers, photodynamic therapy, and chemical 
peels. Dermatol Online J. 2011;17(3):2. Review. PubMed 
PMID: 21426868.

Kim SW, Moon SE, Kim JA, Eun HC. Glycolic acid versus 

Jessner’s solution: which is better for facial acne patients? 

134

PART 5  Special Topics

A randomized prospective clinical trial of split-face model 
therapy. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(4):270–273.  PubMed 
PMID: 10417580.

org/10.15171/jlms.2015.13. Epub 2015 Oct 27. PubMed 
PMID: 26705462; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4688384.
Nofal E, Nofal A, Gharib K, Nasr M, Abdelshafy A, Elsaid E. 

Kontochristopoulos G, Platsidaki E. Chemical peels in active 
acne and acne scars. Clin Dermatol. 2017;35(2):179–182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.10.011. Epub 
2016 Oct 27. PubMed PMID:  28274356.

Lee HS, Kim IH. Salicylic acid peels for the treatment of acne 

vulgaris in Asian patients. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29(12):1196–
1199; discussion 1199. PubMed PMID: 14725662.

Lee JB, Chung WG, Kwahck H, Lee KH. Focal treatment of acne 
scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruction of 
skin scars method. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(11):1017–1021; 
discussion 1021. PubMed PMID: 12460296.

Lekakh O, Mahoney AM, Novice K, et al. Treatment of acne 
vulgaris with salicylic acid chemical peel and pulsed dye 
laser: a split face, rater-blinded, randomized controlled 
trial. J Lasers Med Sci. 2015;6(4):167–170. https://doi.

Combination chemical peels are more effective than single 
chemical peel in treatment of mild-to-moderate acne 
vulgaris: a split face comparative clinical trial. J Cosmet 
Dermatol. 2018;17(5):802–810. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jocd.12763. Epub 2018 Sep 10. PubMed PMID: 30203434.

Soleymani T, Lanoue J, Rahman Z. A Practical approach to 

chemical peels: a review of fundamentals and step-by-step 
algorithmic protocol for treatment. J Clin Aesthet Derma-
tol. 2018;11(8):21. PubMed PMID: 30214663.

Trivedi MK, Kroumpouzos G, Murase JE. A review of the 
safety of cosmetic procedures during pregnancy and 
lactation. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2017;3(1):6–10. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijwd.2017.01.005. eCollection 2017 Mar-
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC541895428492048.

11

Treatment of Acne Scars With 
a Combination of Chemical 
Peels and Microneedling

Jaishree Sharad

INTRODUCTION

Postacne  scarring  is  the  most  important  sequelae  for 
acne and can be psychologically traumatic to the patient. 
It  can  occur  even  in  patients  with  milder  degrees  of 
acne. The pathogenesis of atrophic acne scarring is most 
likely related to inflammatory mediators and enzymatic 
degradation  of  collagen  fibers  and  subcutaneous  fat.1 
Picking at acne lesions adds to scarring. Postacne pig-
mentation  and  pigmented  scars  are  very  common  in 
acne patients with darker skin types. The pathogenesis 
of such hyperpigmentation is complex and seems to be 
related to many factors, including skin color and lesion 
trauma,  and  may  also  be  related  to  the  acne  disease 
itself, especially the severity of inflammation.2 Scars fol-
lowing acne are usually atrophic and sometimes hyper-
trophic. Atrophic acne scars have been best described by 

Fabbrocini et al. as rolling scars, icepick scars, and super-
ficial and deep boxcar scars3 (Fig. 11.1). Icepick scars are 
narrow, sharply demarcated, V-shaped tracts, less than 
2 mm in diameter, that extend into the deep dermis or 
even  subcutaneous  layer.  Boxcar  scars  are  wider  (1–4 
mm in diameter), U-shaped tracts, with sharp, vertical 
edges that extend 0.1 to 0.5 mm into the dermis. Roll-
ing scars are characterized by tethering of the dermis to 
the subcutis. They are generally at least 4 mm in diam-
eter, irregular, with a rolling or undulating appearance. 
Rolling scars are best visualized with indirect lighting to 
cast a shadow upon the skin, thus highlighting the scars. 
This classification helps in planning a treatment proto-
col for the scars. From simple excision; subcision; and 
a  variety  of  punch  techniques  such  as  punch  excision, 
punch  grafting,  and  punch  elevation,  we  have  come  a 

Icepick
scar

Rolling scar

Superficial
boxscar

Deep
boxscar

Fibrous
adhesions

Epidermis

Dermis

Fatty tissue

Fig. 11.1  Icepick, rolling, and boxcar (superficial and deep) scars. The yellow line represents the superficial 
musculoaponeurotic system to which fibrous bands adhere, creating rolling scars. SMAS, superficial muscu-
loaponeurotic system.

Skin
surface

SMAS

135

136

PART 5  Special Topics

long way. Chemical peels, fractional and nonfractional 
ablative  and  nonablative  lasers,  microneedling,  radiof-
requency microneedling, fat grafts, and filler injections 
are other modalities of treatment for acne scars. Because 
one individual may have various forms of scars, no sin-
gle modality of treatment helps all the scars. It is always 
a  combination  treatment  that  gives  the  best  treatment 
outcome. Treatments also depend on the severity of acne 
scars. The most commonly used acne scar severity grad-
ing scale has been proposed by Goodman and Baron.4 
Most techniques induce collagen remodeling to improve 
the scars. The degree of collagen remodeling seems to be 
proportional to the severity of the injury, and the result 
is hard to judge prospectively. The final result may not 
manifest until 4 to 6 months after treatment, and multi-
ple therapies are often required.5

A combination of microneedling and chemical peels 
can be done for the treatment of atrophic acne scars in 
dark  skin  with  promising  results.  Although  micronee-
dling  helps  reduce  atrophic  boxcar  and  rolling  scars, 
chemical peels will help in reducing postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation (PIH). This combination has mini-
mum risk of PIH or scarring in patients with dark skin.

MICRONEEDLING

Pioneered in 1995, Orentreich and Orentreich described 
subcision or dermal needling for scars.6 This approach 
involves  pricking  or  puncturing  the  skin  and  then 
 subcising  the  dermis  with  the  needle  to  build  up 
 connective tissue beneath the scars. In 1997, Camirand 
and Doucet used a tattoo gun to “needle abrade” scars.7 
Based  on  these  principles,  Fernandes  and  Signorini 
developed  a  new  technology  called  microneedling  or 
percutaneous collagen induction therapy to initiate the 
natural  posttraumatic inflammatory cascade.8

The Instrument
The manual drum-roller, also known as a dermaroller, 
is a handheld device equipped with medical-grade solid 
steel microneedles, projecting from a cylindrical roller. 
There are 24 circular arrays of eight needles, each located 
on the roller for a total of 192 needles. The needles vary 
in length ranging from 0.2 to 3 mm. The microneedles 
are  synthesized  by  reactive  ion  etching  techniques  on 
silicon  or  medical-grade  stainless  steel.  For  adequate 
and uniform penetration, the needles are arranged at an 
angle of 15 degrees to the center of the instrument. The 

Fig. 11.2  Manual dermaroller.

Fig. 11.3  Electric Dermapen.

most  preferred  needle  length  for  treating  acne  scars  is 
1.5 to 2 mm. The depth of penetration varies from 0.1 
to 1.3 mm depending on the pressure and extent of skin 
stretching.  The  instrument  is  presterilized  by  gamma 
irradiation (Fig. 11.2).

The other microneedling device that is gaining more 
popularity now is the electric-powered pen, which can 
be  either  operated  with  a  battery  pack  or  an  alternat-
ing current power cord. When used with corded power, 
the device speed can be adjusted, ranging from 10,250 
to 23,750 rpm. With battery power, the device speed is 
fixed at 13,500 rpm. Sterile disposable needle cartridges 
are  made  of  12  array  count/32  gauge  and  36  array 
count/30  gauge.  Skin  on  the  forehead  is  treated  with 
needle depths ranging from 0.5 to 1.0 mm, whereas on 
the rest of the face, needle depths of 1.5 to 3.0 mm are 
preferred. Thicker or more fibrotic skin is usually treated 
with deeper needle depths9 (Fig. 11.3 and Box 11.1).

Mechanism of Action
Microneedling  involves  the  use  of  a  handheld  rolling 
instrument or electric-powered pens with tiny  needles 
that create multiple superficial puncture wounds in the 
skin  until  fine  pinpoint  bleeding  is  achieved.  The  tiny 

BOX 11.1  Advantages of the Electric 
Pen Versus the Drum Roller

Operating speeds can be easily adjusted.
Penetration  depth  is  uniform  because  it  does  not 

depend on manual pressure.

Small focal scars such as varicella scar or scars on the 

upper lip can be treated easily.

Needle depth can be altered on various parts of the face 

using the same cartridge.

There  is  no  risk  of  a  tram-track  appearance,  which  can 
sometimes occur with manual microneedling devices.

microinjuries  in  the  upper  dermis  release  numerous 
growth  factors,  such  as  fibroblast  growth  factor,  plate-
let-derived  growth  factor,  and  transforming  growth 
factors  alpha  and  beta,  which  all  facilitate  the  produc-
tion  and  propagation  of  intercellular  matrix  proteins. 
The fibroblasts line up along the axis of the fibronectin 
matrix, and it is here that they synthesize collagen and 
elastin.  Collagen  type  III  is  the  dominant  form  in  the 
early wound-healing phase. Fibroblast collagen synthe-
sis causes tissue remodeling over the next few months. 
Collagen  type  III  is  gradually  replaced  by  collagen  I 
over a period of 1 year or more. Scar collagen synthe-
sis  related  to  thermal  injury  involves  upregulation  of 
TGF-β1 and β2, whereas natural collagen synthesis after 
microneedling is related to upregulation of TGF-β3.10

Liebl  et  al.  have  proposed  another  hypothesis  to 
explain how microneedling works. When new wounds 
are formed in microneedling, the cells create a “demar-
cation current” that is further increased by the needles’ 
own electric potential.11 This demarcation current (also 
called bioelectricity) triggers a cascade of growth factors 
that stimulate the healing phase and help in the prolifer-
ation and synthesis of collagen fibers.

Histopathology After Microneedling
In a study done by Fernandes et al., histological exam-
ination showed thicker skin, with greatly increased colla-
gen type I and type III deposition and significantly more 
elastin,  but  otherwise  was  unremarkable  from  normal 
skin.12 Type VII collagen, which is the main component 
of anchoring fibrils, also increases significantly. The col-
lagen bundles are laid down in a normal lattice pattern 
rather than in parallel arrangement.

Aust et al. reported a considerable increase in colla-
gen and elastin deposition at 6 months postprocedure. 

137

The  epidermis  showed  40%  thickening  of  the  stratum 
spinosum  and  normal  rete  ridges  at  1  year  postopera-
tively.12

CHEMICAL PEELS

Chemical peels are applied on the skin to even skin pig-
mentation, exfoliate, and revitalize through promotion 
of the fibroblasts, glycosaminoglycans, and  remodeling 
of  the  elastin  and  collagen  fibers.  Superficial  and 
 medium-depth peels are very safe in dark skin and have 
been established in the treatment of acne scars.

The following peels can be combined with micronee-

dling for the treatment of atrophic acne scars:
	•	

 Glycolic  acid  (GA)  is  an  alpha-hydroxy  acid  peel 
that  in  high  strength  and  acidic  pH  has  keratolytic 
properties. The peel causes enzymatic degradation at 
the corneocyte surface and facilitates peeling. Subse-
quent regeneration results in a thin stratum corneum 
and  compact  epidermis.  There  is  dispersion  of  epi-
dermal melanin and thus evening of skin color.
 Because  of  its  small  molecular  size,  GA  penetrates 
through  the  horny  layer  rapidly,  increases  the  den-
sity of collagen by increasing collagen synthesis, and 
improves the quality of elastin, thus helping improve 
scars. Glycolic acid peels can be done in the same ses-
sion as microneedling safely. Concentrations of 20% 
to 35% GA are preferable for dark skin.
 Mandelic  acid  is  an  alpha-hydroxy  acid  with  a 
slow  penetration  rate,  thus  reducing  the  chances  of 
skin  irritation.  It  causes  dissolution  of  intercellular 
cement substance, stimulates collagen synthesis, and 
promotes  cellular  regeneration.  It  has  antibacterial 
and antiinflammatory properties. A concentration of 
20% to 50% mandelic acid is also known to improve 
hyperpigmentation.  Hence  it  can  be  used  to  treat 
hyperpigmented  atrophic  acne  scars  in  people  with 
sensitive skin or a history of PIH or in people who 
have scars as well as a few comedones. Mandelic acid 
peels can be done in the same session as micronee-
dling, but there are no studies supporting it yet.
 Salicylic acid (SA) is a beta-hydroxy acid with kerato-
lytic properties. It exfoliates pigmented keratinocytes 
and accelerates cell cycle turnover, thus reducing new 
pigment transfer. A 20% SA peel can be done in com-
bination with microneedling in alternate sessions in 
patients with seborrhea or in those who have a mild, 
active  acne  along  with  scars.  It  is  not  suggested  to 

	•	

	•	

	•	

CHAPTER 11 Treatment of Acne Scars138

PART 5  Special Topics

Contraindications
 1.   Active infection like verrucae vulgaris, herpes labia-

lis, and active acne

 2.   Keloids and hypertrophic scars
 3.   Uncontrolled diabetes, neuromuscular disease, colla-

gen vascular disease

 4.   Rosacea
 5.   Chronic  skin  condition  like  scleroderma,  psoriasis, 

and eczema
 6.   Pregnancy
 7.   Skin malignancy, moles, actinic keratosis
 8.   Patients with blood clotting disorders (It is advisable 
to stop the anticoagulants a week before the proce-
dure.)

Fig. 11.4  Atrophic rolling and boxcar acne scars.

 9.   Patients with unrealistic expectations

	•	

	•	

perform the SA peel at the same time as micronee-
dling in patients who have seborrhea or active acne 
to prevent PIH or infection.
 Trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  peel  in  concentrations 
of  15%  to  20%  causes  precipitation  of  epidermal 
protein,  epidermal  necrosis,  dermal  inflammation, 
and  collagen  remodeling.  It  helps  in  reducing  pig-
ment and aids in microneedling to reduce atrophic 
scars.  Microneedling  and  TCA  peel  in  the  same 
session  should  be  done  with  precaution  and  care 
in patients with dark skin. Although a single study 
has  been  published  on  same-day  treatment  with 
both  modalities,  the  risk  of  PIH  may  be  higher  if 
the  peel  is  done  in  the  same  session  in  skin  types 
IV through VI. The peel can be done safely 2 weeks 
after microneedling.
 Tretinoin  peels  have  keratolytic,  sebolytic,  comedo-
genic, and antiinflammatory properties. They can be 
used in dark skin when the skin is primed well. They 
help in smoothing the skin in those with thick skin in 
addition to aiding in pigment reduction and reduc-
tion of superficial scars. They should be done alter-
nately  with  microneedling  rather  than  on  the  same 
session.

Indications (Fig. 11.4)
	•	

 Atrophic  rolling  acne  scars  and  boxcar  scars  in  all 
skin types
 Hyperpigmented atrophic acne scars in all skin types, 
especially dark skin

	•	

Protocol
After priming the skin (see Chapter 3 and see the fol-
lowing information), the patient can be scheduled for 
microneedling. After a session of microneedling, 20% 
to 35% glycolic acid is applied immediately onto the 
skin surface. The peel is neutralized after 5 minutes. 
The procedure is repeated after 3 weeks. In those with 
a history of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or 
with a history of frequent outdoor activities, it is bet-
ter to do a session of microneedling separately from 
the peel, which can be performed 3 weeks later. Every 
3 weeks the patient can alternate microneedling with 
light peels. The cycle can continue for four to five ses-
sions of each treatment. One may opt for 20% to 35% 
glycolic acid or 15% TCA peels for dark scars. If there 
are  comedones,  mandelic  acid  or  SA  is  preferred.  If 
the  patient  has  patchy  hyperpigmentation  or  wants 
an overall even skin tone, or in males with acne scars 
and thick sebaceous skin, tretinoin peels can also be 
done.

Preprocedure Preparation13
	•	

 Any active infection or active acne should be treated 
before doing the microneedling  procedure. Patients 
should  be  put  on  topical  anticomedogenic  creams 
about  2  to  3  weeks  before  doing  the  procedure  if 
there is a history of acne flare-ups. If there is a past 
history of recurrent herpes simplex, it is important to 
administer a prophylactic course of oral acyclovir or 
valacyclovir starting the night before the procedure.

	•	

	•	

	•	

	•	

 Microneedling has been found to be safe in patients 
who are on low-dose isotretinoin.
 Priming  a  patient  before  microneedling  is  very 
important.  Topical  bleaching  agents  such  as  hydro-
quinone, vitamin C, or Kojic acid and peeling agents 
such as glycolic acid or vitamin A cream can be used 
for priming 2 to 3 weeks before the procedure. This 
enhances  the  efficacy  and  prevents  postprocedural 
pigmentation.
 Patients should also be counseled about the impor-
tance of strict sun protection and should be advised 
to  use  a  broad-spectrum  sunscreen  regularly.  Topi-
cal  preparations  containing  hyaluronic  acid  help  in 
faster healing.
 A written informed consent must be obtained before 
the  procedure.  Standardized  photographs  using 
identical  patient  positioning,  lighting,  and  cam-
era  settings  should  be  obtained.  The  patient  should 
understand what the procedure(s) entails.

THE MICRONEEDLING PROCEDURE14

The area to be treated should be thoroughly cleansed to 
remove makeup and dirt. Apply a topical anesthetic in 
the form of a eutectic mixture of 2.5% lidocaine and 2.5% 
prilocaine  under  occlusion.  After  an  hour,  remove  the 
anesthetic cream with acetone, and the area to be treated 
can be cleansed with chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, or 
70% isopropyl alcohol solutions. Clean the skin one last 
time with normal saline.

With one hand, stretch the skin to be treated. With 
the other hand, grip the roller like a pen and roll it on 
the  skin.  The  needles  will  penetrate  at  a  greater  depth 
if  the  skin  is  stretched.  Roll  the  instrument  to  and  fro 
six  to  ten  times  in  four  directions;  horizontally,  verti-
cally, and diagonally right and left, to cover an area of 
roughly  2-inch  by  2-inch  (Fig.  11.5).  This  ensures  an 
even  pricking  pattern,  resulting  in  about  250  to  300 
pricks/cm2. Pinpoint bleeding is considered the clinical 
end point. (Fig. 11.6) The movements have to be short 
and the pressure has to be moderate to ensure a uniform 
depth of penetration. The technique is operator-depen-
dent,  and  therefore  depth  of  penetration  also  depends 
on  the  pressure  applied.  Aggressive  rolling  or  lateral 
pressure  can  lead  to  scarring  and  breakage  of  needles. 
Certain  areas  need  special  consideration.  Lesser  pres-
sure  is  required  over  bony  areas  like  the  forehead  and 
nose.  When  treating  the  orbital  area,  a  needle  length 

139

Fig. 11.5  Technique of microneedling.

Fig. 11.6  Pinpoint bleeding (endpoint).

of 0.5 mm or less should be used to minimize the pain 
and also to prevent hematoma formation. The number 
of  roller  movements  should  also  be  less  in  the  orbital 
region. While treating the skin around the lips, ask the 
patient to purse lips together so that the vermillion bor-
ders touch. Every needle initially penetrates at an angle 
and then goes deeper as the roller turns. Finally the nee-
dle is extracted at a converse angle, therefore curving the 
tracts and redirecting the path of the needle as it rolls 
into and then out of the skin for about 1.5 to 2 mm into 
the dermis.

Wipe  the  blood  and  the  serous  fluid  using  normal 
saline  after  the  procedure.  If  performing  a  peel  in  the 
same session, apply the peel, such as 20% to 35% glycolic 
acid, sequentially all over the face (Fig. 11.7). Neutralize 
the peel after 5 minutes with sodium bicarbonate. Then 
apply an antibacterial cream and sunscreen.

CHAPTER 11 Treatment of Acne Scars140

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 11.8  Electric microneedling pen.

BOX 11.2  Pearls for Microneedling

 •   Avoid  lateral  movement  and  aggressive  downward 
pressure when rolling, because this can cause scar-
ring.

 •   To  increase  the  intensity,  increase  the  number  of 

passes, not the pressure applied.

 •   Avoid abrasive substances such as scrubs and cleans-

ing granules at least for a week after treatment.

 •   Patients are advised to not pick at the crusts.
 •   Do not use one roller for more than one patient.
 •   There should be a minimum gap of 6 weeks between 
two  sessions  of  microneedling  to  prevent  scarring 
and to get optimum results.

and  oral  nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory  drugs  may  be 
prescribed if indicated. The patient is advised to avoid 
any  irritant  substances  like  chloroxylenol,  astringent, 
or  abrasive  scrubs.  An  interval  of  6  weeks  is  preferred 
between sessions of microneedling. An interval of 2 to 3 
weeks in preferred between a session of microneedling 
and  a  chemical  peel  if  they  are  done  as  two  separate 
treatments (Box 11.2).

COMPLICATIONS

The  procedure  is  usually  well  tolerated.  Erythema  and 
swelling  occur  a  few  hours  after  the  procedure.  The 
complications of microneedling include the following:
 1.   Bruising
 2.   Mild scabbing for a few days after the procedure
 3.   Hematoma on the bony areas
 4.   Secondary bacterial infection
 5.   Milia formation6

Fig. 11.7  Application of 35% glycolic acid peel.

For  staged  procedures,  once  the  microneedling  is 
performed,  a  topical  antibiotic  and  a  sunscreen  are 
applied. The patient should return after 2 to 3 weeks for 
a chemical peel. This cycle is repeated four to five times 
for each of the procedures.

Microneedling creates multiple microchannels in the 
epidermis that close within minutes of the treatment. In 
case of deeper scars, dermarollers with 2-mm needles are 
used to achieve deeper penetration and thus give better 
results. Also, longer needles result in better conductivity 
and lesser electrical resistance. Electric pens are easier to 
use and are gently moved sequentially on the entire face 
or targeted specifically on the scars (Fig. 11.8).

POSTPROCEDURE CARE

There may be erythema, edema, and mild crusting for 2 
to 4 days posttreatment. The crusts usually fall off after 
a few days, and the patient should be instructed to avoid 
scratching  or  picking  at  the  crusts.  Patients  should  be 
advised to use a broad-spectrum sunscreen and to avoid 
sun  exposure  for  a  week  to  prevent  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.  Antibacterial  creams  containing 
mupirocin should be used twice a day for 5 to 7 days. 
Moisturizers  containing  hyaluronic  acid  help  in  faster 
repair  of  the  skin.  A  short  course  of  an  oral  antibiotic 

141

Fig. 11.9  Before combination treatment.

Fig. 11.11  Before combination treatment.

Fig.  11.10  After  microneedling  and  35%  glycolic  acid  peel  in 
alternate sessions.

 6.   Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
 7.   Tram track effect seen mainly on bony prominences15
 8.   Allergic and foreign body granulomatous reaction16
 9.   Reactivation of herpes simplex and activation of acne

DISCUSSION

Macular  hyperpigmented  scars  and  mild  boxcar  scars 
improve  with  superficial  and  medium-depth  chemi-
cal  peels.  However,  moderate  to  deep  boxcar  and  roll-
ing  scars  do  not  disappear  completely  with  chemical 
peels.  Moreover,  in  dark-skinned  individuals,  deep 
chemical peels carry a higher risk of PIH and scarring. 
Microneedling  helps  in  reducing  moderate  to  deep 
boxcar  and  rolling  scars.  A  combination  of  superficial 
or  medium-depth chemical peels along with micronee-
dling can be opted for in dark-skinned individuals (Figs. 
11.9–11.12).

Fig.  11.12  After  microneedling  and  35%  glycolic  acid  peel  in 
the same session.

The author reported a study of 30 patients, 22 women 
and 8 men in the age group of 20 to 40 years, with atro-
phic boxcar and rolling scars. All the patients had skin 
type  III  through  V  by  the  Fitzpatrick  skin  type  classi-
fication.  Group  A  patients,  15  out  of  the  30  patients, 
underwent microneedling once every 6 weeks for a total 
of five sessions. Group B patients, 15 patients out of 30, 
underwent  five  treatments  of  microneedling  and  five 
sessions  of  35%  glycolic  acid  peels.  They  were  treated 
every 3 weeks alternately with microneedling and 35% 
GA peel. Patients from both groups were assessed and 
photographed  at  the  end  of  each  treatment  and  again 
3  months  after  their  last  treatment  session.  Scars  were 
assessed and graded objectively as well as on the basis of 
photographs by the treating dermatologist. All the data 

CHAPTER 11 Treatment of Acne Scars142

PART 5  Special Topics

were analyzed using SPSS 15 (Statistical Package for the 
Social Sciences, IBM, New York). A ‘‘t’’ test was used to 
compare  the  results.  Three  months  after  all  the  treat-
ment sessions were completed, the mean improvement 
in scars in group A was 31.33%, whereas in group B it 
was found to be 62%. The difference was statistically sig-
nificant (P = 0.001). Patients from group B showed bet-
ter improvement compared with group A. In addition to 
the improvement in scars, there was an improvement in 
skin texture and tone. Reduction in pore size was also 
seen.  These  were  more  evident  in  group  B.  There  was 
an excellent improvement in postacne pigmentation in 
group B.17

In a study by Leheta et al., 39 patients with Fitzpat-
rick skin types III and IV with postacne atrophic scars 
were randomly equally divided into three groups. Group 
1 was subjected to six sessions of microneedling (2 mm) 
combined with 20% TCA in the same session; group 2 
was subjected to six sessions of 1540 nm fractional laser; 
and group 3 was subjected to microneedling combined 
with 20% TCA in one session followed by 1540 nm frac-
tional laser in the next session for a total of three ses-
sions  of  each.  It  was  seen  that  the  scar  severity  scores 
improved by a mean of 59.79% (95% CI 47.38–72.21) (P 
< 0.001) in group 1, a mean of 61.83% (95% CI 54.09–
69.56) (P < 0.001) in group 2, and a mean of 78.27% (95% 
CI 74.39–82.15) (P < 0.001) in group 3. The difference in 
the  degree  of  improvement  was  statistically  significant 
when  comparing  the  three  groups  using  the  ANOVA 
test (P = 0.004). Hence they concluded that combining 
1540 nm nonablative fractional laser in alternation with 
microneedling and chemical peel with 20% TCA was a 
better option for the treatment of atrophic acne scars.18
In another study by Garg and Baveja, 50 patients with 
Fitzpatrick skin types III, IV, and V with atrophic acne 
scars  underwent  subcision,  after  which  microneedling 
with dermaroller (1.5 mm) was performed alternatively 
with  15%  TCA  peel  at  2-week  intervals  for  a  total  of 
six sessions of each. Grading of acne scar photographs 
was  done  pretreatment  and  1  month  after  all  six  ses-
sions. The patient’s own evaluation of improvement was 
assessed. It was found that all the patients showed signif-
icant improvement in their scars.19

With  microneedling,  there  is  increased  collagen 
deposition  and  significantly  more  elastin.  This  leads 
to  improvement  in  the  scar  depth.  Microneedling  also 
helps break up collagen strands in the superficial layers 
of  the  dermis,  which  leads  to  the  untethering  of  scars 

and  stimulates  revascularization.  Hence  rolling  scars, 
which  are  characterized  by  dermal  tethering,  improve 
with  microneedling.  The  epidermis  remains  intact,  so 
there is very little chance of infection. Aust et al. showed 
that  microneedling  does  not  cause  any  damage  to  the 
stratum corneum, other layers of the epidermis, or the 
basal membrane, and there is no dermabrasive reduction 
of  epidermal  thickness  evident  24  hours  after  the  pro-
cedure.  The  number  of  melanocytes  neither  increased 
nor decreased in any of the groups.12 This explains why 
microneedling can be repeated safely in dark skin and 
is also suited in cases where laser treatments and deep 
peels cannot be performed.

Superficial  and  medium-depth  chemical  peels  have 
shown good results in both postacne pigmentation and 
PIH in skin types III through V. The author has treated 
postacne  pigmentation  in  patients  with  Fitzpatrick’s 
skin types III through IV with 20% to 35% glycolic acid 
peels without any adverse effects and complete clearance 
of lesions.20

Wang et al. studied 35% to 50% GA peels in Taiwan-
ese patients and saw improvement in the lesions. Only 
5.6%  patients  reported  PIH  or  a  flareup  of  acne.21  In 
another study, in 16 cases, there was rapid and greater 
improvement  in  postacne  PIH  in  patients  who  were 
treated with GA peels compared with those treated with 
topical lightening agents.22 Grimes studied 20% to 30% 
SA peels in skin of color and reported marked clearance 
in PIH in all patients. Some patients had mild dryness 
and crusting with transient hyperpigmentation.23

Microneedling can be combined with chemical peels 
either in consecutive sessions or in the same session. It 
is safe to do 20% to 35% GA, tretinoin peel, mandelic–
SA  peels,  and  15%  to  20%  TCA  peels  alternately  with 
microneedling every 2 to 3 weeks in dark skin.24 There is 
one study of 20% TCA done in the same session imme-
diately after microneedling, and there was no PIH found 
in  this  study.25  The  author  also  chooses  to  perform  a 
35%  GA  peel  in  the  same  session  as  microneedling 
with better results in rolling and boxcar scars as well as 
postacne pigmentation. Combining microneedling and 
a peel in the same session facilitates the penetration of 
the solution deeper into the skin without causing great 
epidermal  damage. This  allows  better  collagen  remod-
eling with minimal chances of PIH or scarring in dark 
skin.  Fresh  scars  or  scars  less  than  1  year  old  respond 
best to this treatment. Old fibrosed scars may not show 
an excellent response (Boxes 11.3 and 11.4).

BOX 11.3  Advantages of Combination 
of Microneedling and Chemical Peels

Peels help in elimination of pigment and improve skin 

texture.

Patient tolerance and compliance are better.
Peels are synergistic to microneedling in treating atro-

phic scars.

Both  are  simple  office  procedures  done  under  topical 

anesthesia.

Combining both treatments results in less downtime.
Both treatments are cost effective.
Microneedling  is  safe  in  dark  skin  (skin  types  III–V), 
because there is no thermal damage and the epider-
mis is not injured.

BOX 11.4  Disadvantages of 
Microneedling

Multiple  sessions,  compared  with  ablative  CO2  laser, 
because it a relatively milder procedure and less col-
lagen is synthesized in a single sitting.

The  instrument  cannot  be  used  for  multiple  sittings, 
because the needles become blunt in one sitting.
Proper aseptic precautions have to be taken to prevent 

any infection.

Icepick scars do not show any improvement.

CONCLUSION

Microneedling has established its place in the manage-
ment  of  scars  as  a  simple  and  affordable  office  proce-
dure. It is the most useful for the improvement of boxcar 
and rolling acne scars. It is also an effective modality of 
treatment for open pores, facial rejuvenation, alopecia, 
transdermal drug delivery, and many more indications. 
It  has  gained  popularity  because  of  its  simplicity,  cost 
effectiveness, decreased downtime, and side effects com-
pared with other treatment modalities. It is considered 
safe  in  treating  patients  with  Fitzpatrick  skin  types  IV 
and V because it overcomes the side effects of scarring 
and hyperpigmentation resulting from other procedures 
in which the epidermis is compromised.

Combining  chemical  peels  and  microneedling  can 
enhance  the  outcome  in  case  of  atrophic  boxcar  and 
rolling  scars  in  dark  skin.  There  have  been  studies  to 
prove the efficacy of both individually and a few studies 

143

on  the  combination  as  well.  Studies  need  to  be  con-
ducted  on  combining  peels  other  than  GA  and  TCA 
with  microneedling  for  the  treatment  of  atrophic  acne 
scars, although the author already performs them in her 
practice with satisfactory results.

REFERENCES

  1.   Fife D. Practical evaluation and management of atrophic 
acne scars: tips for the general dermatologist. J Clin Aes-
thet Dermatol. 2011;4:50–57.

  2.   Ho SGY, Yeung CK, Chan NPY, Shek SY, Kono T, Chan 
HHL. A retrospective analysis of the management of 
acne post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation using topical 
treatment, laser treatment, or combination. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2011;43:1–7.

  3.   Fabbrocini G, Annunziata MC, D’’Arco V, et al. Acne 

scars: pathogenesis, classification and treatment. Derma-
tol Res Pract. 2010;2010:893080.

  4.   Goodman GJ, Baron JA. Post acne scarring: a quali-
tative global scarring grading system. Dermatol Surg. 
2006;32(12):1458–1466.

  5.   Goodman Greg, Van Den Broek Amanda. The modi-
fied tower vertical filler technique for the treatment of 
post-acne scarring. Aus J Dermatol. 2015;57. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/ajd.12390.

  6.   Orentreich DS, Orentreich N. Subcutaneous incisionless 
(subcision) surgery for the correction of depressed scars 
and wrinkles. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:543–549.

  7.   Camirand A, Doucet J. Needle dermabrasion. Aesthetic 

Plast Surg. 1997;21:48–51.

  8.   Fernandes D, Signorini M. Combating photoaging 

with percutaneous collagen induction. Clin Dermatol. 
2008;26:192–199.

  9.   Alster Tina, Graham Paul. Microneedling: a review and 
practical guide. Dermatol Surg. 2017;44:1. https:// 
doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000001248.

 10.   Fabbrocini G, Fardella N, Monfrecola A, Proietti I, In-

nocenzi D. Acne scarring treatment using skin needling. 
Clin Exp Dermatol. 2009;34:874–879.

 11.   Liebl Horst, Kloth Luther C. “Skin cell proliferation 

stimulated by microneedles”. J Am Coll Clin Wound Spec. 
2012;4(1):2–6. PMC. Web. 2016.

 12.   Aust MC, Fernandes D, Kolokythas P, et al. Percutane-

ous collagen induction therapy: an alternative treatment 
for scars, wrinkles and skin laxity. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2008;21:1421–1429.

 13.   Sharad J. microneedling. In: Venkataram Mysore, ed. 
ACS(I) Ttextbook on Ccutaneous & Aaesthetic Surgery. 
Jaypee medical publishers; 2012:572–579.

CHAPTER 11 Treatment of Acne Scars144

PART 5  Special Topics

 14.   Sharad J. Microneedling. In: Khunger Nz, ed. Step by 

Sstep Ttreatment of Aacne Sscars. Jaypee Medical Publish-
ers; 2014:102–113.

 15.   Pahwa M, Pahwa P, Zaheer A. “Tram track effect” after 
treatment of acne scars using a microneedling device. 
Dermatol Surg. 2012;38(7 Pt 1):1107–1108.

 16.   Soltani-Arabshahi R, Wong JW, Duffy KL, Powell DL. 
Facial allergic granulomatous reaction and systemic 
hypersensitivity associated with microneedle therapy for 
skin rejuvenation. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;1501:68–72.
 17.   Sharad J. Combination of microneedling and glycolic 
acid peels for the treatment of acne scar in dark skin. J 
Cosmet Dermatol. 2011;10:317–323.

 18.   Leheta Tahra M, Rania M, et al. Do combined alternating 

sessions of 1540 nm nonablative fractional laser and per-
cutaneous collagen induction with trichloroacetic acid 
20% show better results than each individual modality 
in the treatment of atrophic acne scars? A randomized 
controlled trial. J Dermatol Treat. 2014;25(2):137–141. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/09546634.2012.698249.
 19.   Garg S, Baveja S. Combination therapy in the man-

agement of atrophic acne scars. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 
2014;7;(1):18–23.

 20.   Sharad J. Glycolic acid peel therapy—a current review. 
Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2013;6:281–288. https://
doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S34029. Published 2013 Nov 11.

 21.   Wang CM, Huang CL, Hu CT, Chan HL. The effect 

of glycolic acid on the treatment of acne in Asian skin. 
Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:23–29.

 22.   Burns RL, Prevost-Blank PL, Lawry MA, Lawry TB, Faria 
DT, et al. Glycolic acid peels for post inflammatory hy-
perpigmentation in black patients. A comparative study. 
Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:171–174.

 23.   Grimes PE. The safety and efficacy of salicylic acid 

peels in darker racial-ethnic groups. Dermatol Surg. 
1999;25:18–22.

 24.   Grimes PE. Chemical peels in dark skin. In: Tosti A, 
Grimes P, De Padova M, eds. Color Atlas of Chemical 
Peels. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2011.

 25.   Leheta TM, Abdel Hay RM, El Garem YF. Deep peeling 
using phenol versus percutaneous collagen induction 
combined with trichloroacetic acid 20% in atrophic 
post-acne scars; a randomized controlled trial. J Derma-
tolog Treat. 2014;25:130–136.

12

The Rullan Two-Day Croton  
Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel

Peter Rullan

INTRODUCTION

The phenol peel has been called a chemical facelift because 
it removes photodamage-related wrinkles and tightens the 
skin  more  effectively  than  other  ablative  techniques.  To 
accomplish this, a deep croton oil–phenol peel extends to the 
upper to midreticular dermis (approximately 600 microns). 
Many physicians who perform cosmetic surgery still equate 
deep phenol peels with the well-known Baker-Gordon phe-
nol peel. However, formula modifications made in the last 
20 years have led to much lower croton oil concentrations, 
resulting in phenol peels that are much less cardiotoxic, are 
less melanotoxic, and have less risk of scarring, as long as 
published formulas and techniques are followed.

The 2-day phenol chemabrasion technique that I devel-
oped1 is useful for deep wrinkles or acne scars. As a modi-
fied version of the chemabrasion technique introduced by 
Dr. Yoram Fintsi (2001)2,3 this technique includes the use 
of HyTape occlusion for 24 hours, the concept of debride-
ment,  the  reapplication  of  a  phenol  formula  into  deep 
scars or wrinkles on day 2, and the use of a powder mask 
(bismuth subgallate) to absorb the ensuing drainage for 7 
days. Additionally, this technique includes intravenous (IV) 
titratable  conscious  sedation,  regional  nerve  blocks,  and 
variations from the published formulas. A tongue depressor 
and varied curettes are used on day 2 (instead of sandpaper) 
to perform debridement of the necrotic coagulum and the 
remaining epithelium lining acne scars and deep wrinkles.

BENEFITS OF THE RULLAN METHOD

 1.   The use of a lower croton oil concentration lowers the 

risk of hypopigmentation.

 2.   Useful  for  all  skin  types,  especially  among  acne  scar 
patients (44% of Dr. Rullan’s patients have ethnic skin).

 3.   Following  these  methods  for  application,  hydration 
and pain control have been shown to reduce the risk 
of cardiac arrhythmias.

 4.   Chemabrasion with curettes allows better removal of 
epithelium and inflammatory coagulum, promoting 
secondary healing inside scars and wrinkles.

 5.   Segmental croton oil/phenol is effective and does not 

require monitoring

SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS

 1.   Follow medical screening and Advanced Cardiac Life 

Support (ACLS) protocols.

 2.   Maintain PO2 above 90%, and prevent tachycardia.
 3.   Avoid  pain-related  adrenergic  chaos  by  using  effec-

tive sedation and analgesia.

 4.   Peel the neck and chest using either low percentage 

croton oil and phenol or TCA (15%–20%).

 5.   Consider  peeling  nonfacial  regions  with  an  intense 

pulsed light (IPL)/Erbium combination.

PATIENT SELECTION AND PREOPERATIVE 
PROTOCOL

The most common indication for deep peels is to treat mod-
erate to severe wrinkles (Glogau scale wrinkles III through 
IV) in Fitzpatrick skin types I to III (Figs. 12.1 and 12.2). 
If a patient has facial wrinkling accompanied by significant 
tissue laxity or volume deficiency, dermal fillers or cosmetic 
surgery may also be needed to achieve optimal results. In 
the case of acne scars, dark skin types IV through VI can 
be peeled as long as the patient understands the face–neck 
skin color tones will be discordant for almost 2 years (Figs. 
12.3 and 12.4). The patient must be willing to adopt strict 
avoidance  of  sun  and  the  chronic  use  of  skin  lighteners 

145

146

PART 5  Special Topics

A

B

Fig. 12.1  A, Before peel for deep wrinkles. B, Six weeks postpeel.

A

C

B

D

Fig. 12.2  A–B, Before peel. C–D, Five months postpeel.

147

on  the  neck  during  those  2  years.  For  patients  with  dark 
skin who do not want to make these long-term changes, a 
recommended alternative is to perform three to four ses-
sions of chemical reconstruction of skin scars (CROSS), as 
discussed by Lee et al. (2002).4 See Chapter 13 for further  
discussion on effective treatment of acne scars using CROSS.
During  the  initial  consultation  for  the  peel,  the 
physician  should  make  note  of  the  patient’s  risk  for 
demarcation  lines  and  the  tendency  for  postinflam-
matory  hyperpigmentation  (PIH).  Assess  factors  that 
may  impact  the  pigmentary  healing  process,  such  as 
the presence of a suntan or the patient’s exercise habits 
(specifically any temperature-increasing activities). The 
patient’s available downtime and ability or willingness to 
conceal  lingering  redness  with  makeup  should  also  be 
taken into consideration. The patient will need to have 
family  or  nursing  support  for  the  first  3  days  postpeel 
and must accept having a “mask” on their face for 8 days. 
During this time, they will only be able to eat liquefied 
food through a plastic bottle (provided by physician).

Patients with active acne should be treated with oral 
and topical antibiotics, retinoid creams, acne surgery, or 
isotretinoin  before  receiving  the  peel.  The  peel  should 

A

B

Fig.  12.3  A,  Phenol  peel  offers  significant  improvement  for 
acne scarring in skin types IV and V. B, Four weeks after 2-day 
chemabrasion; skin is still erythematous but will have natural 
color tones by 12 weeks.

A

B

Fig. 12.4  A, Phenol peel offers significant improvement for acne scars. B, Postpeel. Scars have filled in and 
natural pigmentation has returned.

CHAPTER 12 The Rullan Two-Day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel148

PART 5  Special Topics

be  delayed  until  the  patient  has  discontinued  isotreti-
noin for 6 months or until the skin has regained its nor-
mal sebaceous activity. For patients with acne scarring, 
photographic  documentation  should  be  obtained  with 
direct lighting and indirect (shadow) lighting.

Most patients with an oily complexion are prescribed 
a low-dose, 30-day course of isotretinoin after the peel, 
because  I  (and  other  experienced  peelers,  including 
Zein Obagi) believe excessive sebum is an inflammatory 
state that can lead to PIH. However, no controlled stud-
ies have been conducted on this yet.

The preoperative procedure for this technique requires 
a laboratory workup with hepatic, renal, and cardiac tests 
(10-lead electrocardiogram). Because phenol is hepatically 
metabolized and renally excreted, blood levels of phenol can 
become cardiotoxic if the liver or kidneys are not function-
ing well. The patient must procure a letter from their primary 
physician clearing them for the peel. Patients should also be 
screened for risk factors of QTc prolongation before the peel. 
Dr. Carlos Wambier (2018)5,6 has reported that phenol may 
cause  a  QTc  prolongation,  especially  when  other  additive 
factors  are  present,  such  as  certain  medications  (erythro-
mycin, fluconazole, antimalarials, amiodarone, antidepres-
sants, antipsychotics, terfenadine, hydrochlorothiazide, and 
others)  or  electrolytic  abnormalities  (hypomagnesemia, 
hypokalemia). When two or more of these factors are pres-
ent, the risk for QTc interval prolongation occurs (danger-
ous if above 480 ms), triggering a potentially fatal torsade de 
pointe (TdP) ventricular arrhythmia during a phenol peel.

Skin Preparation
Tretinoin  and  hydroquinone  (or  similar)  are  used  to 
prime  the  skin  for  4  to  6  weeks  leading  up  to  the  peel, 
because they are known to improve healing and reduce 
pigmentary  complications.  Tretinoin  0.05%  to  0.1% 
should be applied thoroughly across every area of the face 
except the sensitive upper eyelids. Apply one pea size per 
cheek and apply a ceramide-based moisturizer along with 
it. This can also be mixed with a barrier cream if needed, 
to dilute and reduce irritation. Application should extend 
past every edge of the area to be peeled, which may include 
the neck. By doing this, the stratum corneum is thinned, 
epidermal turnover is increased, dermal collagen is stim-
ulated, and the transfer of melanin is normalized.

Patients  may  experience  minimal  flaking  skin  as 
a  side  effect  of  this  treatment,  which  should  not  be  a 
concern. The frequency of application should be deter-
mined by skin sensitivity; it can be applied two to three 
times  a  day  or  nightly,  as  tolerated,  to  avoid  excessive 

peeling and redness. Application of tretinoin and hydro-
quinone is discontinued 4 to 5 days before the peel and 
will resume a few weeks after the peel.

PROCEDURE PROTOCOL
Anesthesia, Medications, and Monitoring
During the peripeel period, patients should be hydrated 
and monitored for cardiac arrhythmias. To avoid adverse 
effects, the peels should be administered slowly in a cos-
metic  subunit  approach.  Typically,  peel  administration 
should span 60 minutes (15 minutes per section).

Intravenous  (IV)  access  is  always  required  to  com-
ply  with  ACLS  guidelines  for  conscious  sedation  and 
to  ensure  adequate  hydration  for  the  patient  through-
out  the  peel.  Patient  comfort  is  paramount  to  avoid  an 
adrenergic  chaos,  which  can  lead  to  arrhythmias.  Seda-
tion  and  analgesia  can  be  accomplished  with  oral  (diaze-
pam,  triazolam,  or  hydromorphone),  intramuscular  (IM; 
ketorolac 30–60 mg), or IV agents (midazolam, fentanyl).  
I  recommend  following  the  oral  sedation  strategy  popu-
larized by Dr. Lawrence Kass (2017)7 in which the patient 
takes 1 mg of Alprazolam at 4 hours, 2 hours, and 1 hour 
before  the  peel  and  10  mg  of  Zolpidem  upon  arriving  at  
the appointment for the peel. This provides real amnesia and 
sedation. The use of facial nerve blocks is effective at reduc-
ing the need for systemic medication. The use of epinephrine 
has been avoided or minimized in these blocks to reduce the 
risk  of  tachycardia  and  arrhythmias.  Clonidine  (0.1  mg) 
used orally as a preoperative medication also reduces this 
risk and provides mild sedation. General anesthesia is not 
recommended  because  of  respiratory  and  pH  issues.  The 
PO2 must be kept above 90% throughout the procedure, and 
sinus tachycardia must be brief and minimized.

The patient is discharged home with diazepam, hydro-
morphone, triazolam, and ondansetron for nausea. Acy-
clovir  is  started  one  day  before  the  peel  (400  mg  three 
times daily for 10 days). If antibiotics are prescribed, they 
should not be  used until the third  day to avoid nausea. 
The IV access should be maintained overnight, and the 
nurse or family member must be trained in assisting with 
medications.  Antibacterial  and  antiviral  prophylaxis  are 
prescribed (start 1 day before the peel and take for total of 
10 days) along with vinegar compresses to prevent bacte-
rial and yeast infections or flares of herpes simplex during 
the healing process. In addition, patients send daily photo 
updates  via  text  message  after  the  peel.  This  allows  the 
physician to monitor their progress between office visits 
and promptly identify any complications.

149

TABLE 12.1  Hetter Peel Formulas Containing 35% Phenol

Water
Septisol
USP phenol 88%
Stock solution containing phenol and croton oil
Total

0.2%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
3.5 mL
0.5 mL
10 mL

0.4%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
3.0 mL
1.0 mL
10 mL

0.8%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
2.0 mL
2.0 mL
10 mL

1.2%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
1.0 mL
3.0 mL
10 mL

1.6%

5.5 mL
0.5 mL
0.0 mL
4.0 mL
10 mL

Note: 0.1% = 1 mL of 0.4% + 1.2 mL phenol + 1.8 mL water.

TABLE 12.2  Alternative Way to Compound Hetter Formulas Using “Drops” to Measure 
Croton Oil

Hetter 35% Phenol

Croton Oil %

Phenol 88%

Water

Septisol

Drops Croton Oil

Medium light
Medium heavy
Heavy

0.35%
0.7%
1.1%

4 mL
4 mL
4 mL

6 mL
6 mL
6 mL

16 gtts
16 gtts
16 gtts

1
2
3

Note: Very Light Peel (0.1%, 28% phenol) = 3 mL of medium light formula plus 2 mL of 88% phenol and 5 mL water.

Croton Oil–Phenol Peel Formulas
The Hetter and Baker-Gordon phenol formulas (Tables 12.1 
and 12.2) typically consist of 88% phenol (carbolic acid), 
croton  oil,  Septisol  (hexachlorophene),  and  water.  Alter-
natively, lay peelers’ formulas (such as Gradé) may contain 
croton oil, carbolic acid, water, olive oil, and glycerin.

Phenol  disrupts  sulfide  bonds,  resulting  in  keratoly-
sis  and  protein  coagulation.  Phenol  is  also  melanotoxic. 
Hexachlorophene is an antiseptic with surfactant proper-
ties, which allows a more uniform and deeper penetration 
by decreasing surface tension. Croton oil is a vesicant (and 
therefore epidermolytic) that greatly enhances the absorp-
tion of phenol. Croton oil is now commonly considered the 
most  important  ingredient  in  phenol  formulas.  In  some 
formulas, olive oil is added to slow the cutaneous absorp-
tion rate of these agents and reduce any systemic toxicity.

Commonly  used  phenol  formulas  (see  Table  12.1) 
include Hetter’s Heresy formulas, which have 35% phenol. 
The  croton  oil  concentration  for  these  formulas  ranges 
from  1.6%  (perioral  and  tip  of  nose)  to  0.7%  (for  mid-
cheeks),  0.35%  (forehead,  temples,  upper  cheeks),  and 
0.1%  (for  eyelids  and  neck—this  concentration  is  also 
known  as  very  light)  (Fig.  12.5).  For  example,  the  Hetter 
medium light formula is made by adding one drop of cro-
ton to 4 mL phenol 88%, 6 mL water, and 16 gtts Septisol 
(as shown in Table 12.2). Use two drops of croton oil for 
the 0.7% formula, three drops for the 1.1% formula, or four 
drops for the 1.6% formula (see Table 12.2). Dr. Richard 

Bensimon’s (2008)8 review of the newer croton oil–phenol 
peels emphasizes the advantage of using the range of Het-
ter formulas (based on varying croton oil concentrations)  
customized  for  the  thickness  of  the  skin  being  peeled  to 
attain the best peel for each area. Using the right applica-
tion technique is equally important to achieve appropriate 
endpoints with different Hetter formulas.

DR. RULLAN’S TWO-DAY CROTON OIL–
PHENOL CHEMABRASION TECHNIQUE
Day 1
Ringer’s lactate (1–2 L) is infused for 2 hours. The face 
is thoroughly cleansed and degreased using alcohol and 
acetone. IV sedation is given. Nerve blocks and degreas-
ing are performed immediately before each anatomical 
area  being  peeled.  A  full  face  peel  can  be  done  using 
Dr. Rullan’s modification of the Gradé II formula (with 
0.35% croton oil and 64% phenol); Stone’s Gradé II for-
mula of 0.2% croton oil and 64% phenol with glycerin 
and  olive  oil;  or  Hetter’s  “all-around  stock”  formula  of 
0.35% croton oil and 33% phenol (Table 12.3).

These  are  slowly  applied  with  regular  cotton-tipped 
applicators,  which  are  first  rolled  against  the  edge  of  the 
stainless-steel cup to remove excess fluid. Apply the solu-
tion slowly, one “stripe” at a time. The depth of peel is deter-
mined by the concentration used, the amount applied, and 
how firmly it is applied (apply gently at first, then harder if 
the skin is not frosting). Therefore it is crucial to recognize 

CHAPTER 12 The Rullan Two-Day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel150

PART 5  Special Topics

0.35%

0.7%

0.1%

0.1%

1.1%

Fig.  12.5  Croton  oil  percentages.  (Adapted  from  an  article  published  in  Advances  in  Ophthalmology  and 
Optometry, Vol. 2.1, Kass L, The lost art of chemical peeling: my fifteen year experience with croton oil peel, 
401, copyright Elsevier (2017), Fig. 5, with permission from Dr. Lawrence Kass.)

TABLE 12.3  Rullan’s Modification of 
Stone’s Gradé II Formula

Rullan 0.35%

Stone 0.2%

Phenol
Glycerin
Olive oil
Croton oil
Water

40 mL
1.13 mL
0.025 mL
0.21 mL
18.5 mL

40 mL
1.13 mL
0.025 mL
0.1 mL
18.5 mL

the  appropriate  depth  and  endpoints  for  each  area.  The 
endpoint  varies  according  to  skin  thickness  and  can  be 
identified  by  the  level  of  frosting.  Thin  eyelid  or  lateral 
forehead skin is peeled until a transparent frost with a pink 
background  is  achieved,  representing  a  medium-depth 
peel down to the papillary dermis. For thicker skin, such as 
the perioral or glabellar regions, a thicker, solid white frost 
signifies  that  the  upper  to  midreticular  dermis  has  been 
reached. In addition, a sustained red-brown microvesicu-
lation  (called  epidermolysis)  appears  as  another  endpoint 
when  performing  a  deep  peel  to  thick  skin  such  as  the 
perioral region. Medium peels should reach the papillary 
dermis, whereas deep peels extend to the upper or midre-
ticular dermis. Peeling to the lower reticular dermis may 
cause scarring and should be avoided.

Each of the five anatomical areas (forehead, each cheek, 
perioral-chin, and periorbital-nose) are peeled according 
to these endpoints. This takes 10 to 15 minutes per area, 
meaning  overall  application  of  the  peel  takes  approxi-
mately  60  minutes.  Icepick  scars  receive  an  additional 
peel  application  with  a  fine  paintbrush  to  ensure  com-
plete wetting of each lesion. A complete, organized frost 
must be achieved in each area, and a yellowish edematous 
appearance  indicating  epidermolysis  should  be  noted 

after 15 to 30 minutes (Fig. 12.6). Once complete, the face 
is  completely  taped  (except  the  upper  lids)  with  1-inch 
to 2-inch strips of waterproof HyTape (HyTape Interna-
tional, Patterson, NY, USA), and covered with a surgical 
face net (Fig. 12.7). No rinsing is needed. See Table 12.4 
for a step-by-step checklist of the peel procedure.

Day 2
The patient is usually groggy but pain-free when return-
ing to the clinic. The HyTape  is easily  removed.  Addi-
tional sedation and analgesia are sometimes given if the 
patient  has  severe  acne  scarring  or  deep  wrinkles  and 
aggressive abrasion is expected. The necrotic coagulum 
is  debrided  using  a  tongue  blade  or  a  large  6  mm  Fox 
curette (Fig. 12.8). Icepick scars and box scars or deep 
wrinkles are debrided using 1 to 2 mm chalazion-type 
curettes  to  achieve  punctate  bleeding  inside  the  scars 
and ensure deepithelialization of these types of lesions. 
The  goal  is  to  create  a  true  open  wound  within  the 
lesions to induce secondary healing and wound closure 
(Fig.  12.9).  Additional  phenol  solution  (Rullan  0.35% 
croton oil, 64% phenol, glycerin, water, and olive oil; see 
Table 12.3) is applied with a fine paint brush into icepick 
and box scars (for acne) or into deep rhytides or rugae 
anywhere  in  the  face.  An  additional  swipe  with  a  cot-
ton-tipped applicator is done in areas where additional 
tightening  is  desired  (for  example,  on  the  marionette 
lines  and  buccal  cheeks  where  wrinkles  and  “draping” 
occurs).  An  antiseptic,  antiinflammatory  powder,  bis-
muth subgallate (Delasco or Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, 
Irvine, CA), is then applied to the entire face except the 
upper lids (where we use Aquaphor), before the patient 
is discharged home (Fig. 12.10). This dries into a protec-
tive mask that will stay in place for the next 7 to 8 days. 

151

12.11).  Vaseline  is  then  applied  over  the  entire  mask, 
allowed  to  soak  in,  and  left  on  overnight. The  mask  is 
gently  removed  the  next  morning  by  applying  more 
petroleum jelly under the slowly separating mask while 
showering. Medical barrier creams (Epionce) or Aqua-
phor ointment (Eucerin, Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Ger-
many) is used until the skin is no longer tender or red. 
Most  patients  are  99%  reepithelialized  by  day  9. There 
has been no incidence of infections following this pro-
cedure in the author’s clinic.

Days 8 to 30 and Beyond
After the mask falls off, using white vinegar compresses (1 
Tbsp vinegar in 1 cup of water) can be very soothing and 
reduces the risk of infection. Pain medication should not be 
needed anymore. The skin is fragile and sensitive, so using 
gentle cleansers, light noncomedogenic and hypoallergenic 
creams, and lotions is recommended. For oily patients who 
may still have active acne, a short course of isotretinoin (10–
20 mg a day for 2–4 weeks) has significantly helped prevent 
acneiform eruptions, milia, and postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation.  This  is  especially  effective  in  darker  skin 
types. Other sebolytic measures such as spironolactone and 
acne  medications  have  also  been  effective.  Although  sun 
and heat avoidance are required for 30 days, many patients 
begin a gradual return to their normal lifestyle by slowly 
increasing their activity in measure with how red their skin 
gets when hot. During this time, easily removable makeup 
is recommended to camouflage redness.

Touchups
Two to three months after the peel has healed, a regional 
or lesional (CROSS) peel can be repeated for persistent 
acne  scars  or  perioral  wrinkles,  even  in  skin  types  IV 
to  VI.  These  lighter  skin  types  can  tolerate  a  regional 
peel. The intent is to recreate an open wound inside the 
icepick scars or wrinkles, adding new collagen so they 
eventually fill in almost completely.

Postoperative Skin Care
Sweating should be avoided for 30 days to reduce red-
ness,  and  tinted  sunscreens  or  powder  makeup  (Oxy-
genetix,  ColoreSCience)  should  be  applied  regularly 
once  the  skin  has  reepithelialized.  More  deeply  peeled 
areas  should  be  treated  with  Aquaphor.  Previous  skin 
conditioning can be reinitiated once the skin is no lon-
ger sensitive, red, and peeling (around day 14). Fluoci-
nolone 0.01% cream can be used when PIH is noted or 
when redness persists longer than 30 days.

Fig. 12.6  Frosting shows when the appropriate endpoint has 
been  reached  with  gray-white  edema  and  yellow-red  epider-
molysis.

Fig. 12.7  Patient leaves the procedure wearing HyTape and a 
surgical net, to be removed by the physician on day 2.

Patients should be sent home with limited sleeping pills, 
a sedative, and analgesics (for details see Table 12.4)

Days 3 to 8
The  patient  is  restricted  to  home  and  is  not  allowed 
to  shower  until  the  mask  is  ready  to  be  removed.  On 
approximately  the  eighth  day,  the  mask  spontaneously 
begins  to  separate  due  to  skin  reepithelialization  (Fig. 

CHAPTER 12 The Rullan Two-Day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel152

PART 5  Special Topics

TABLE 12.4  Sequence of Two-day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel

Day 1 (one hour)

  1.   Certify patient’s medical qualifications for peel.

a.   Labs (electrocardiogram, liver and kidney).
b.   Medications explained to patient and assistant.
c.   Provide bottles for water, food, and mouth rinse for 7 days.

  2.   Perform with ACLS-certified personnel, equipment, and medications.
  3.   Start IV Ringer’s lactate, administer titratable sedative and analgesic, and connect all monitors.

d.   IM triamcinolone 20 mg/2 mL

  4.   Administer oral medications:
e.   Clonidine 0.1 mg p.o.
f.   Ondansetron 4 mg

  5.   Mark five facial regions and degrease first region.
  6.   Perform nerve blocks to anesthetize perioral region, nose, and glabella (first region).
  7.   Apply selected croton oil–phenol formula with one cotton-tipped applicator to achieve uniform 

white frost.
g.   Ensure that vital signs and pain control are normal and adequate.

  8.   After waiting 15 minutes (can perform nerve blocks during this time), repeat degreasing, nerve 
blocks, and peel applications to second (forehead), third (right cheek to temple), fourth (left 
cheek and temple), and fifth (upper and lower lids) regions.

  9.   Review all regions to make sure endpoints are noted, such as gray edema and epidermolysis. If 

not, then consider applying additional peel solution.
h.   Perform CROSS into acne scars.
i.   Apply solution into deep wrinkles.
j.   Perform subcision if patient has rolling acne scars.

 10.   Apply HyTape to entire face except upper and lower eyelids; secure with Surgilast netting for 

24 hours.

Day 2 (30 
 minutes)

 11.   Send home with a “trained” assistant and with pain medications and antivirals for 10 days.
  1.   Restart IV Ringer’s and administer IV medications (as preferred by doctor).
  2.   Remove HyTape and begin debridement of coagulum of necrotic epidermis.

Days 2–8

a.   Tongue depressor, 6 mm Fox curette.

  3.   Debride individual acne scars and deeper wrinkles.

a.   Chalazion curette 1–2 mm

  4.   Apply peel solution with a fine brush into scars and/or deeper wrinkles.
  5.   Apply a small amount of peel solution in regions with more severe skin laxity or acne scars.
  6.   Apply bismuth subgallate powder everywhere except the upper and lower lids (use Aquaphor).
  1.   Follow instructions for antiviral/pain medications.
  2.   Explain that swelling is worst on day 3 but improves quickly after that.
  3.   Ensure that the mask remains securely on the face and remind patient to minimize facial 

expressions or mastication.

  4.   On day 8 (assuming the mask is already spontaneously separating from the reepithelialized 

underlying skin), apply a petrolatum ointment all over mask and sleep with it on.

  5.   The next day take a long warm shower, allowing a soft water spray to melt off the mask. Do 

not remove any portion of the mask still adhering to skin. Instead reapply ointment for another 
24 hours.

Days 8–30

  1.   Use Aquaphor daily and apply white vinegar compresses to sensitive areas.
  2.   By day 9, 99% of patients should have 99% reepithelialization of the face.
a.  Most patients return to work by day 12–14 and can wear makeup.

  3.   Slowly move away from ointments and start using barrier repair creams instead.
  4.   Consider low-dose isotretinoin for 2–4 weeks if the patient is very oily, breaking out, or devel-

oping postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
153

Fig.  12.8  Curettes  of  varying  sizes  are  used  for  debriding  on 
day 2.

Fig. 12.10  Once debriding is complete, the mask of bismuth 
subgallate powder is applied and remains in place for 7 days.

Fig. 12.9  The necrotic tissue has been removed and the epi-
dermis  can  begin  healing.  Additional  Rullan  0.35%  croton  oil 
was applied to deeper wrinkles of the perioral region.

Full-face phenol peels are not always necessary. Seg-
mental  croton  oil–phenol  peels  can  be  combined  with 
TCA peels; regionalizing the peels by combining deeper 
and  lighter  peels  can  result  in  sufficient  improvement 
without the risk of dyschromias or prolonged downtime. 
This technique for segmental croton oil–phenol peels is 

Fig.  12.11  Day  7.  Once  the  bismuth  subgallate  mask  begins 
separating, it is ready to melt off in the shower.

summarized later and has been described elsewhere in 
detail (Rullan et al., 2004; Rullan & Karam, 2010).

SEGMENTAL CROTON OIL–PHENOL PEELS

For  many  dermatologists,  doing  a  full-face  croton 
oil–phenol  peel  is  not  a  reality.  The  need  for  cardiac 
monitoring,  sedation,  and  analgesia  is  too  restrictive. 

CHAPTER 12 The Rullan Two-Day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel154

PART 5  Special Topics

However, for many, a combination of segmental croton 
oil–phenol peel and using TCA or an ablative laser on 
the rest of the face is a quite real option. There is no need 
for IV fluids (however, being hydrated is important) or 
for  cardiac  monitoring,  provided  that  only  one  or  two 
cosmetic subunits (less than 2% body surface area) are 
being peeled and that the peel is performed slowly over 
10 to 15 minutes.

The  most  common  cosmetic  subunits  that  would 
benefit  from  a  deeper  peel  are  the  upper  lip  and  the 
periorbital  region.  The  Hetter  formulas  recommended 
for  these  are  0.7%  to  1.2%  croton  oil–phenol  for  the 
upper  lip  and  Hetter  VL  0.1%  croton  oil–phenol  for 
the  periorbital  skin.  I  always  tape  the  upper  lip  for  24 
hours (with HyTape and Surgilast) and then debride the 
coagulum on day 2, before reapplying additional phenol 
to the deepest rhytides. The postoperative care is either 
bismuth powder mask for 5 days or the open technique 
with daily showers and Aquaphor (Fig. 12.12). For the 
periorbital unit, only Aquaphor is needed afterward.

For  these  segmental  peels,  the  TCA  peel  should  be 
applied first. The croton oil–phenol is applied next, care-
fully overlapping over the TCA in the smile-line cheek 
region or on the chin. The biggest challenge is blending 
skin tones in darker skin types III and IV in the chin and 
cheek regions. The safest option for these is to just peel 
the upper lip and only the lower lip’s vermilion border. 
The ideal candidates are nonsuntanned skin types II and 
III. If performed in combination with laser resurfacing, 
the laser should be used after the peel is finished and the 
face is fully dry. Laser can be overlapped approximately 
1 cm over peel areas to feather the results.

COMPLICATIONS

Chemical  peeling  complications  can  occur  in  any 
patient  regardless  of  skin  color.  The  early  recognition 
and management of these complications is essential for 
a successful resolution.

Possible  complications  are  listed  below,  along  with 

suggestions for their management:
 1.   Herpes  simplex  virus  (HSV)  infection:  Appears  as 
erosions;  can  be  prevented  with  a  course  of  oral 
antivirals beginning 1 day before peel and extend-
ing  until  reepithelialization  is  completed.  If  there 
is a breakthrough of HSV despite the prophylactic 
dosing, the dose should be increased (valacyclovir 
is  recommended  at  1  g  orally  2–3  times  a  day  for 
7–10 days).

Fig. 12.12  Regional peel. Trichloroacetic acid 26% peel on the 
face, Hetter 0.1% on the lower eyelids, and Rullan 2-day 0.35% 
croton oil peel periorally.

 2.   Bacterial or yeast infection: Both have to be cultured 
and  treated  with  white  vinegar  compresses.  This  is 
different from the acneiform eruption typically seen 
while using occlusive ointments postpeel.

 3.   Prolonged erythema: Treatment options include top-
ical steroids class VI (or stronger) twice a day (fluo-
cinolone 0.01% cream or clobetasol recommended), 
pulsed  dye  laser  every  2  weeks,  barrier  or  silicone 
creams,  and  makeup.  Symptoms  will  subside  over 
time if treatment is consistent.

 4.   Contact  dermatitis:  Recognize  with  good  history; 
return to petrolatum and white vinegar compresses.
 5.   Scarring:  Weekly  to  biweekly  low  dose  of  intral-
esional  triamcinolone  5  mg/mL;  pulsed  dye  laser 
every  2  weeks;  may  need  to  add  intralesional  5-FU 
(monthly) to triamcinolone (equal parts); topical ste-
roids and barrier creams.

 6.   PIH:  Hydroquinone  4%  as  discussed  earlier  in  the 
chapter;  may  add  30%  salicylic  peel  every  2  to  4 
weeks.  Consider  low-dose  isotretinoin  for  30  days 
when PIH starts appearing in oily skin of color.

 7.   Hypopigmentation:  Appears  insidiously  and  cre-
ates lines of demarcation; most obvious when peel-
ing  the  chest  and  neck  area.  Repigmentation  will 
happen  gradually  over  a  period  of  2  years  but  can 

be  accelerated  via  targeted  phototherapy  with  nar-
row-band ultravioletB (UVB).
To  prevent  hypopigmentation,  avoid  medium  to 
deep peels in deeply tanned patients (or at the very least, 
get informed consent). For the neck and chest, intense 
pulsed  light  and  fractional  erbium  may  be  a  better 
option than chemical peels.

SUMMARY

The croton oil–phenol peel is the gold standard for facial 
rejuvenation using a resurfacing technique, even though 
it has been limited in usage because of inadequate train-
ing  in  dermatology  residencies.  It  stands  alone  in  its 
ability to correct deep wrinkles and long-term tighten-
ing  of  skin.  It  can  be  combined  with  any  other  resur-
facing  technique  when  doing  a  segmental  perioral  or 
periorbital croton oil–phenol peel.

Peels are commonly used in combination with other 
dermatologic procedures, or as a component of a multi-
modal approach, including laser ablation, electrocautery 
(for benign tissue growths), cosmetic surgery (blepharo-
plasty, rhytidectomy), dermal fillers, and neurotoxins. All 
peels  require  a  preconditioning  regimen  and  a  rigorous 
postoperative schedule to ensure long-term satisfaction.

Patients’  expectations  need  to  be  clarified.  Some 
expect  peels  to  control  or  shrink  pores  in  a  lasting 
manner,  but  this  does  not  happen.  Patients,  particu-
larly those with large pores or active acne, need to con-
trol the oiliness of their skin by using cleansers, drying 
agents,  and  acne  medications  such  as  spironolactone 
and  especially  isotretinoin.  Lifestyle  changes  may  also 
be required for an extended period, including avoidance 
of sun and the reduction of exercise-induced heat (e.g., 
swimming  rather  than  running).  These  measures  will 
help  to  ensure  patients’  lifelong  satisfaction  with  their 
appearance after a croton oil–phenol peel.

REFERENCES

 1.   Rullan PP, Karam AM. Chemical peels for darker skin 

types. Facial Plast Surg Cl. 2010;18:111–131.

 2.   Fintsi Y. Exoderm—a novel, phenol-based peeling 

method resulting in improved safety. Int J Cosmet Surg. 
2001a;1:40–44.

 3.   Fintsi Y. Exoderm chemoabrasion original method for the 
treatment of facial acne ars. Int J Cosmet Surg. 2001b;1: 
45–52.

155

 4.   Lee JB, Chung WG, Kwahck H, et al. Focal treatment of 

acne scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruc-
tion of skin scars method. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:1017–
1021; discussion 1021.

 5.   Wambier CG. Prolongation of rate-corrected QT inter-
val during phenol-croton oil peels. J Am Acad Derm. 
2018;78:810–811.

 6.   Wambier CG, Lee KC, Botini de Olivera P, et al. Com-

ment on “surgical smoke: risk assessment and mitigation 
strategies” and chemical adsorption by activated carbon 
N95 masks. J Amer Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(4):e79–e80. 
Epub 2018 Nov 14.

 7.   Kass L, Kass K. The lost art of chemical peeling: my fifteen 
year experience with croton oil peel. Adv Opthalmol Op-
tomet. 2017;2:391–407.

 8.   Bensimon R. Croton oil peels. Aesthe Surg J. 2008;28: 

33–45.

FURTHER READING

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part I. Dissecting the formula. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:227–239.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 

part II. The lay peelers and their croton oil formulas. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:240–248.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part III. The plastic surgeons’ role. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000;105:752–763.

Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 

part IV. Face peel results with different concentrations of 
phenol and croton oil. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:1061–
1083.

Landau M. Cardiac complications in deep chemical peels. 

Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:190–193.

Obagi S, Bridenstine JB. Chemical skin resurfacing. Oral 
Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 2000;12:541–553.

Obagi S, Bridenstine JB. Lifetime skin care. Oral Maxillofac 

Surg Clin North Am. 2000;12:531–540.

Rullan P, Lemmon J, Rullan JM. The 2-day phenol chem-

abrasion technique for deep wrinkles and acne scars. Am J 
Cosmet Surg. 2004;21:199–210.

Stone PA. The use of modified phenol for chemical face peel-

ing. Clin Plast Surg. 1998;25:21–44.

Stone PA, Lefer LG. Modified phenol chemical face peels: 

recognizing the role of application technique. Clin Plast 
Surg. 2001;28:13–36.

Truppman ES, Ellenby JD. Major electrocardiographic 

changes during chemical face peeling. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1979;63:44–48.

CHAPTER 12 The Rullan Two-Day Croton Oil–Phenol Chemabrasion Peel13

New Advances Combining the  
Chemical Reconstruction of Skin 
Scars (CROSS) and Subcision

Peter Rullan

INTRODUCTION

Minor acne scarring occurs in up to 95% of acne cases, and 
22% of these patients are affected with a more significant and 
psychologically disturbing degree of scarring (as reported by 
Layton et al., 1994).1 Various treatment modalities are used 
for reconstructing and improving the appearance of acne 
scars, including dermabrasion, punch excision, punch ele-
vation, dermal fillers, microneedling (with/without radiof-
requency), subcutaneous incision (subcision), and chemical 
and laser skin resurfacing (ablative and nonablative). The 
chemical reconstruction of skin scars (CROSS) technique 
significantly  added  to  this  armamentarium  of  options  by 
allowing physicians to treat boxcar and icepick scars in all 
skin types, with little downtime required and small risk of 
complications (especially postinflammatory hyperpigmen-
tation). The challenge many patients still face is that their 
physicians rely on resurfacing options alone instead of using 
combination therapies to treat their different types of scars.

REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

The first published reference to applying an acid on the skin 
to treat skin scars came from Dr. G. MacKee in 1952,2 when 
he  used  88%  phenol  to  produce  an  inflammatory  action 
similar  to  that  of  90%  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  to  treat 
skin alterations that affect the deeper layers of the skin. In 
2002, Dr. J B Lee3 and his colleagues published the landmark 
article on CROSS. They reported the use of high-concentra-
tion TCA applied focally to atrophic acne scars. The authors 
treated 65 patients with acne scars and Fitzpatrick skin types 
IV  and  V.  The  study  demonstrated  that  27  of  33  patients 

156

(82%) treated with 65% TCA and 30 of 32 patients (94%) 
treated with 100% TCA experienced a good clinical result.

The  article  describes  how  the  application  of  TCA  to 
the skin causes precipitation of proteins and coagulative 
necrosis of cells in the epidermis and necrosis of collagen 
in  the  papillary  to  upper  reticular  dermis.  Over  several 
days the necrotic layers slough and the skin reepithelializes 
from the adnexal structures that are spared from chemi-
cal damage. Dermal collagen remodeling after chemical 
peel may continue for several months. Many investigators 
have observed that the clinical effects of TCA are due to 
both a reorganization in dermal structural elements and 
an increase in dermal volume as a result of an increase in 
collagen content, glycosaminoglycan, and elastin.

Lee’s article describes their technique, where they washed 
the skin with soap, cleansed it with alcohol, and then applied 
either  65%  TCA  or  100%  TCA  focally,  by  pressing  hard 
on the entire depressed area of atrophic acne scars using a 
sharpened wooden applicator. The skin was monitored care-
fully until it reached a frosted appearance after a single appli-
cation within 10 seconds. CROSS was repeatedly performed 
every 1 to 3 months to allow dermal thickening and collagen 
production. There were no cases of significant complication.
Lee  and  his  colleagues  later  refined  their  technique 
(2007), developing a method using a 1-mL syringe and a 
fine-gauge needle. They filled the 1-mL syringe with 0.1 to 
0.2 mL of 100% TCA; connected a disposable fine-gauge 
needle, preferably a 30- or 31-gauge needle for acne scars 
and a 33-gauge for enlarged pores; carefully removed the 
piston from the syringe (being held upright); and applied 
the TCA onto the affected area using the needle. They felt 

this  made  it  easier  to  control  the  amount  and  depth  of 
TCA applied. Lee’s article also states that they believe that 
a drug history of isotretinoin is not a relative contraindi-
cation and does not influence the clinical results, because 
CROSS spares the adjacent normal skin.

Complications  of  the  CROSS  method  include  ery-
thema, hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, scar-
ring, and development of hypertrophy and atrophy. The 
atrophy  produced  by  TCA  acid  resembles  that  some-
times generated by intralesional corticosteroids. Weber 
et  al.  (2011)4  reported  a  large  atrophic  defect  caused 
by  acid  covering  normal  tissue  beyond  the  bounds  of 
the  scar.  This  article  emphasizes  the  care  taken  with 
this  technique  and  that  only  small  amounts  accurately 
placed in the depth of the scar should be used.

Dr. Agarwal et al. (2015)5 published a clinical study 
of  52  patients  that  provides  an  excellent  review  on 
CROSS. They showed that 70% TCA CROSS was more 
effective in treating boxcar scars than rolling or icepick 
scars. Their patients’ sampling of scar types were 37.8% 
icepick  scars,  39.6%  rolling  scars,  and  22.6%  boxcar 
scars. Patients were treated every 2 weeks for four ses-
sions and followed monthly for 3 months.

Dr.  Leheta  et  al.  (2011)6  compared  dermarolling 
(manual microneedling) to 100% TCA CROSS to treat 
different  types  of  scars  in  30  patients  and  concluded 
that  CROSS  was  superior  in  boxcar  and  icepick  scars, 
whereas dermarolling was better for rolling scars. Their 
patients  underwent  four  sessions  (4  weeks  apart)  of 
either dermarolling or 100% TCA CROSS.

Dr. Yug et al. (2006)7 performed a histological study 
of treating atrophic acne scars with 95% TCA CROSS, at 
6-week intervals, for a total of six treatments. Punch biop-
sies  approximating  the  diameter  of  representative  acne 
scars were performed at baseline and at 1 year. At base-
line, he found that depressed acne scars exhibit a loss of 
collagen and adnexal structures resulting in a downward 
pull of the epidermis. Ice pick scars also have a decrease 
in elastin manifested by smaller fragmented elastin fibers, 
an increase in type III collagen, and fibroblasts oriented 
parallel  to  the  epidermis.  At  1  year,  during  the  dermal 
remodeling phase, type III collagen is gradually replaced 
by new type I collagen and elastin and presents clinically 
as more elevated and improved acne scars.

This author has extensive experience doing CROSS with 
either croton oil–phenol formulas or TCA, but the results 
published by Dr. Dalpizzol et al. (2016)8 led him to change 
his  technique  to  using  88%  carbolic  (phenol)  instead  of 
TCA. This Brazilian group compared 88% carbolic to 90% 

157

TCA, a hemifaced paired comparison; for 15 patients with 
icepick and boxcar scars, they applied TCA to one cheek 
and carbolic to the other. This was done every 3 weeks for 
four sessions and assessed 1 month later. Their study con-
firmed  the  efficacy  of  both  TCA  and  phenol  for  treating 
such scars but showed that CROSS phenol resulted in less 
severe complications such as hypopigmentation and scar 
enlargement (Figs. 13.1 and 13.2).

TRIPLE COMBINATION OF CARBOLIC 
CROSS, CANNULA SUBCISION, AND 
MICRONEEDLING

The successful treatment of acne scars is very challenging 
and  requires  a  serial,  multimodal  approach  (Table  13.1). 
Most patients are young and thus very adept at using the 
Internet (acne.org, etc.) to assess and find what they feel are 
the best options. The author’s evolution into the following 
technique is the result of 35 years of practice and feedback 
from  experienced  patients.  Many  of  these  complain  they 
obtained none or very little benefit from CO2 laser resur-
facing (even multiple times), yet our specialty considers this 
treatment the gold standard. Indeed, it is a great resurfacing 
technique, but by itself lacks the ability to treat acne scar 
types  such  as  rolling  and  icepick  scars.  Comments  such 
as “lasers do not treat the scars under the skin” make per-
fect sense once a physician experiences the rasping sounds 
heard  while  performing  subcision  of  rolling  and  dermal 
scars. These deeper scars can be best measured with over-
head  shadow  photography.  Three  sessions  of  the  author’s 
combined  triple  therapy,  6  to  8  weeks  apart,  are  usually 
recommended (Fig. 13.3 and Box 13.1). Dermal fillers are 
essential to complete the regimen, because atrophic scars 
are improved but not corrected. However, the triple com-
bination  helps  release  scars  so  they  become  distensible, 
and changes icepick and boxcar scars to make their shoul-
ders less angled and more filled in. These changes greatly 
improve the effectiveness of dermal fillers when used.

All three treatments are performed in one sitting, one 
cheek at a time, beginning with degreasing the skin aggres-
sively with acetone, then applying 88% carbolic acid with 
a fine paint brush, into each icepick or boxcar scar pres-
ent on the face (Figs. 13.4 and 13.5). Some spillover onto 
the shoulders of a scar is allowed (only with carbolic acid; 
this should be avoided with TCA). After the extent of the 
rolling  scars  is  marked,  the  cheeks  are  tumesced;  a  peri-
staltic  pump  is  used  (as  for  liposuction),  and  one  single 
entry point is created with a 20-gauge spinal needle. From 
that  entry  point,  the  skin  is  punctured  with  an  18-gauge 

CHAPTER 13 New Advances Combining the CROSS and Subcision158

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig.  13.1  Before  (left)  and  after  (right)  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA):  A  case  of  TCA  CROSS  causing  widened 
acne scars.

Fig. 13.2  Side-by-side comparison of 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) vs. Stone (0.2% croton oil/55% phenol 
solution)  CROSS,  before  and  after.  Notice  the  TCA-treated  scar  remains  deep  with  equal  or  wider  edges, 
whereas the Stone-treated scar has filled in more and has much softer shoulders.

needle and an 18-gauge, 7-cm, fat transfer cannula (Soft-
fil) is inserted, attached to an empty 3 mL syringe. A piston 
movement and fanning technique are used to break up the 
fibrotic fibers that are both vertical (tethers) and horizontal 
(dermal fibrosis). The face is swollen from the anesthesia, 
but  bleeding  and  hematomas  are  very  uncommon.  This 
is in stark contrast with the author’s experience using an 
18-gauge  Nokor  for  subcision,  where  significant  bleed-
ing and hematomas were very common. After subcision, 

microneedling  (Collagen  PIN)  is  performed  with  a  der-
mal infusion of a topical hyaluronic acid blend (Induction 
Therapies, Louisville, KY, USA) on the involved areas. The 
goal is to achieve punctate bleeding. The depth of the nee-
dle is around 0.5 to 1.0 mm on the temples and forehead 
and 1.5 to 2.5 mm on the cheeks. The hyaluronic acid gel is 
applied topically before and after microneedling.

Alternatively, in skin types I–III, fractional Erbium/
CO2  laser  may  be  substituted  for  microneedling. 

TABLE 13.1  Various Treatments for Acne Scarring: Defect-Oriented Therapy

159

Icepick scars

Rolling scars

Boxcar scars

Atrophic scars

 1   Incisional Removal, punch Excision or elevation
 2   CROSS with 30%, 60%, or 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) or 88% carbolic acid (can 

be combined with any other resurfacing technique)
 1   Subcision: 18-gauge cannula or Nokor 18-gauge needle
 2   Surgical facelift
 1   Fractional ablative laser resurfacing: erbium and CO2
 2   Nonablative laser resurfacing
 3   Microneedling (skin types IV–VI)
 4   Dermabrasion
 5   2-day phenol chemabrasion: spot or full-face scarring
 6   TCA peels
 7   Excision
 8   Punch elevation or punch grafting
 9   Radiofrequency (microneedling)
 1   Fillers (most effective in distensible scars with soft shoulders)
 2   Fillers are usually needed for atrophic scars on temples
 3   Surgical facelift

Fig.  13.3  Before  (left)  treatment  and  after  (right)  three  rounds  of  CROSS  combined  with  subcision  and 
microneedling.

Occasionally, based on the degree of fat atrophy of the 
cheek, L-poly-lactic acid (10 mL) is injected subcutane-
ously or platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) is injected into deep 
dermis after the microneedling.

The downtime ranges from 5 to 6 days, with surface crusts 
from the CROSS falling off and leaving behind a pink mark. 
It takes 4 to 6 weeks for the boxcar scars and icepick scars 
to fill in. The following are the goals of this triple approach:
 1.   Make icepick and boxcar scars more shallow.
 2.   Round out and soften the sharp edges of these scars.
 3.   Make rolling scars more distensible.
 4.   Make all scars more responsive to dermal fillers and 

to resurfacing techniques.

 5.   Provide  fastest  recovery  with  the  lowest  risk  of 

adverse effects.

 6.   Be financially affordable.
 7.   Provide a fly-in and fly-out option for out-of-towners.

REFERENCES

 1.   Layton AM, Henderson CA, Cunliffe WJ. A clinical 

evaluation of acne scarring and its incidence. Clin Exp 
Dermatol. 1994;19:303–308.

 2.   Mackee GM, Karp FL. The treatment of post acne scars 

with phenol. Br J Dermatol. 1952;64:456–459.

 3.   Lee JB, Chung WG, Kwahck H, et al. Focal treatment of acne 

CHAPTER 13 New Advances Combining the CROSS and Subcision160

PART 5  Special Topics

BOX 13.1  Steps for the Rullan Triple 
Combination

 1.  Take shadow photographs.
 2.  Degrease with acetone.
 3.  Apply  88%  carbolic  acid  into  all  icepick  and  boxcar 

scars using a fine paint brush.

 4.  Mark the facial areas with rolling scars.
 5.  Tumesce one hemifacial region at a time.
 6.  From  one  18-gauge  needle  puncture,  insert  an 
18-gauge,  7-cm,  fat  transfer  cannula  and  perform  bi-
level subcision until resistant fibrotic bands are broken.
 7.  Next  perform  device-assisted  microneedling  to 

achieve punctate bleeding.

 8.  Repeat steps 4–7 on the other side of the face.

Fig. 13.4  CROSS application with a fine-tipped brush.

scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruction of 
skin scars method. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:1017–1021.

 4.   Weber MB, Machado RB, Hoefel IR, et al. Complication of 
CROSS-technique on boxcar acne scars: atrophy. Derma-
tol Surg. 2011;37:93–96.

 5.   Agarwal N, Gupta LK, Khare AK, et al. Therapeutic 

response of 70% trichloroacetic acid cross in atrophic acne 
scars. Dermatol Surg. 2015;41:597–604.

 6.   Leheta T, El Tawdy A, Abdel Hay R, et al. Percutaneous 

collagen induction versus full-concentration trichloroace-
tic acid in the treatment of atrophic acne scars. Dermatol 
Surg. 2011;37:207–216.

 7.   Yug A, Lane J, Howard M, et al. Histologic study of de-

pressed acne scars treated with serial high-concentration 
(95%) trichloroacetic acid. Dermatol Surg. 2006;32:985–990.
 8.   Dalpizzol M, Weber MB, Mattiazzi AP, et al. Comparative 
study of the use of trichloroacetic acid and phenolic acid 

Fig.  13.5  In  contrast  to  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA),  carbolic 
CROSS  produces  edema  and  mild  epidermolysis  inside  the 
icepick  and  boxcar  scars,  effectively  removing  the  epidermal 
barrier of these scars.

in the treatment of atrophic-type acne scars. Dermatol 
Surg. 2016;42:377–383.

FURTHER READING

Alam M, Dover JS. Treatment of acne scarring. Skin Ther Lett. 

2006;11:7–9.

Brodland DG, Roenigk RK, Cullimore KC, et al. Depths of 
chemexfoliation induced by various concentrations and 
application techniques of trichloroacetic acid in a porcine 
model. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:967–971.
Brody HJ. Variations and comparisons in medium-depth 
chemical peeling. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:953–
963.

Butler PE, Gonzalez S, Randolph MA, et al. Quantitative and 
qualitative effects of chemical peeling on photo-aged skin: 
an experimental study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;107:222–
228.

Fabbrocini G, Cacciapuoti S, Fardella N, et al. CROSS 

technique: chemical reconstruction of skin scars method. 
Dermatol Ther. 2008;21(s3):S29–S32.

Goodman GJ. Post-acne scarring: a short review of its patho-

physiology. Australas J Dermatol. 2001;42:84–90.
Rivera AE, Missouri K. Acne scarring: a review and current 

treatment modalities. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;59:659–676.

Stegman SJ. A comparative histologic study of the effects of 

three peeling agents and dermabrasion on normal and sun 
damaged skin. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1982;6:123–135.
Whang SW, Lee KH, Lee JB, et al. Chemical reconstruction 
of skin scars (CROSS) method using a syringe technique. 
Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:1539–1540.

14

Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct 
to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery

Joe Niamtu III

In this day and age of high technology, younger patients 
and surgeons often think that only devices or new tech-
nology  is  the  answer  to  skin  rejuvenation.  Although 
contemporary  technology  has  in  fact  opened  new 
doors,  the  historic  chemical  peel  still  stands  as  a  stal-
wart in skin rejuvenation. Many colleagues have spent 
upward  of  $200,000  for  a  skin  rejuvenation  device 
that  produced  the  same  results  that  could  have  been 
achieved with $1.50 worth of 30% trichloroacetic acid 
(TCA).  Just  because  something  is  new  does  not  mean 
it is better. Chemical peeling has been around in some 
shape or form for millennia and is one of the few cos-
metic procedures that has withstood the test of time in 
safety and results.

Chemical  peeling  is  an  appealing  procedure  for 
cosmetic  practitioners  for  many  reasons.  First  and 
foremost, it is predictable and is capable of producing 
significant  results.  Another  important  factor  associ-
ated with the popularity of chemical peeling is the low 
cost  of  the  materials.  In  reality,  TCA  chemical  peel-
ing may be the most profitable treatment in the entire 
cosmetic panoply. One ounce of 30% TCA can be pur-
chased  (at  the  time  of  this  writing)  for  $28.00  from 
dermatologic supply companies (www.Delasco.com). 
Similar products can be purchased on the Internet for 
much  less,  but  practitioners  should  only  trust  prod-
ucts purchased from a qualified and certified vendor. 
There  are  numerous  ways  to  concoct  TCA  prepara-
including  volume/volume,  weight/volume, 
tions, 
etc.  In  addition,  the  quality  of  product  is  unpredict-
able  when  purchasing  medications  on  the  Internet. 
Remember, this is an acid, and it can cause permanent 
scarring and other health problems. There is no such 

thing as a good deal on fire extinguishers, parachutes, 
seat belts, and TCA!

Chemical peeling is seemingly a very simple proce-
dure,  right?  After  all,  it  was  performed  by  laypersons 
long  before  it  became  an  accepted  medical  procedure. 
The  skin  is  degreased  with  acetone,  and  a  coat  of  acid 
solution  is  placed  on  the  skin  surface.  There  are  even 
self-peeling videos available online. However, this sen-
timent is far from the truth. When I reflect on my own 
25-year  experience  with  chemical  peeling,  I  believe  I 
had some of my most sleepless nights related to chem-
ical peeling and laser resurfacing. This is a simple pro-
cedure with a lot that can go wrong. It is imperative that 
the novice peeler has a complete understanding of the 
anatomy and healing of the skin, as well as the specific 
agents used for wounding the epidermis and dermis. As 
I will mention numerous times in this chapter, failure to 
do so can result in complications, permanent scarring, 
and lawsuits.

There are many articles and textbooks about chemi-
cal peeling, and Dr. Suzan Obagi is internationally rec-
ognized as an expert in this field. I recommend reading 
the  articles  and  various  book  chapters  she  has  written 
on the subject. Another excellent source is an older text 
by expert cosmetic dermatologist Mark Rubin, MD. The 
first edition (1995) of Manual of Chemical Peels: Superfi-
cial and Medium Depth (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins) 
was truly my bible. Dr. Rubin has more contemporary 
texts on peeling, and they are all good. The first edition, 
however,  was  especially  useful  because  it  covered  skin 
anatomy,  skin  aging,  skin  pathology,  peeling  agents, 
peeling technique, peeling case presentations, and com-
plications in one compact text.

161

162

PART 5  Special Topics

PEELING AGENTS

There  are  more  peeling  agents  than  chapters  in  this 
book, and these are covered in depth in other chapters. 
It  makes  sense  for  the  prudent  practitioner  to  experi-
ment  with  various  agents  and  techniques  to  see  what 
works best in his or her hands. I use the word “exper-
iment”  very  cautiously,  because  any  peeling  agent  can 
cause serious and permanent damage. A doctor new to 
chemical peeling should never “experiment.” Before ever 
peeling  a  patient,  a  novice  doctor  should  study  books 
and  videos  and  observe  seasoned  practitioners.  After 
that, the first series of peels should be performed with 
a proctor to ensure safety. The golden rule of cosmetic 
surgery is to start conservatively, because one can always 
go back and do more. On the other hand, it is impossi-
ble to reverse some complications. Walk before you run, 
and you will rarely go wrong. After experimenting with 
Jessner’s,  TCA,  glycolic  acid,  and  phenol,  I  personally 
settled on TCA. It is not only important what agent one 
uses, but how it is used. The depth of penetration is sub-
ject to many variables, including but not limited to the 
following:
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	
	•	

 Type of acid
 Strength of acid (%)
 Number of coats applied (volume)
 Patient’s skin thickness
 Patient’s skin oiliness
 The body part being peeled (thin eyelid skin versus 
thicker forehead skin)
 The amount of actinic damage and rhytids a patient 
has
All of these variables and many others can influence 
the depth of wounding of the skin. The effectiveness of 
any peel is directly related to the depth of wounding and 
the related healing. A very aggressive peel can equal the 
skin  rejuvenation  of  a  CO2  laser,  whereas  a  light  peel 
may not produce any noticeable difference.

	•	

DEPTH OF PEELING

Peels  can  vary  from  very  superficial  to  superficial, 
medium, and deep, and the depth of wounding is gen-
erally proportional to the length of healing and the final 
result. Medium-depth peels are among the safest types of 
chemical peeling, producing noticeable results and hav-
ing low complications. Peels that do not extend into the 
papillary  dermis  provide  minimal  results  for  wrinkles 

and more pronounced photodamage. A medium-depth 
TCA peel will extend into the papillary dermis.

SKIN TYPES

With  all  resurfacing,  lighter-skinned  patients  (Fitzpat-
rick  I  and  II)  are  safer  to  peel,  as  they  have  less  pig-
mentation  problems.  The  same  can  be  said  for  very 
dark-skinned patients. It is the midrange patients (Fitz-
patrick IV and V) that can have the most pigmentation 
problems, and too aggressive of a peel can make them 
permanently  lighter  or  darker.  In  my  experience,  any 
patient  with  brown  eyes  will  have  a  higher  incidence 
of  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  (PIH).  PIH 
will generally manifest at about 30 days and is generally 
responsive to hydroquinone 4%, retin A, and sunscreen 
within several weeks. PIH can be very disconcerting to 
patients, so it is imperative to educate them preopera-
tively about the possibility.

Technically, any skin type can be peeled with expe-
rience.  I  frequently  peel  Asians,  Latinos,  and  African- 
Americans who I would not think of treating with a CO2 
laser.

PREPEEL SKIN CONDITIONING

The basis of chemical peeling requires that the peeling 
agent be able to penetrate the skin. Preconditioning the 
skin is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3. Precon-
ditioning the skin with retin A will thin the stratum cor-
neum and facilitate penetration as well as afford many 
other positive attributes to the skin health. Starting 4% 
hydroquinone  will  also  help  precondition  the  melano-
cytes,  which  many  doctors  feel  can  lessen  PIH  after  a 
peel. Sunscreen should also be added to this basic reg-
imen. Pretreating patients also gives the doctor an idea 
of the patient’s level of compliance. If a patient cannot 
maintain a simple three-step cream regimen, they may 
not  be  great  candidates  for  proper  postpeel  aftercare. 
I  start  all  light-skinned  chemical  peel  patients  on  this 
triad  30  days  before  a  peel  in  the  ideal  situation.  On 
patients with pigmented skin, I prefer an 8- to 12-week 
pretreatment cycle.

ANESTHESIA

Depending on the setup of the physician’s practice, one 
can perform the chemical peel using oral sedation, nerve 

163

Fig. 14.1  A subciliary approach to the lower eyelids involves removing skin from the lower eyelid. This treat-
ment will improve skin quantity but not quality and can also contribute to lower eyelid retraction.

blocks,  intravenous  (IV)  sedation,  or  general  anesthe-
sia. The author performs all peels and laser resurfacing 
procedures with IV sedation or general anesthesia. It is 
crucial to have the patient as comfortable as possible to 
allow for the desired peel depth to be achieved.

CHEMICAL PEEL INDICATIONS

The great thing about a chemical peel is that virtually any 
adult (and sometimes younger) patient is a candidate. This 
varies from light to deep peels depending on the reason 
for peeling. A younger patient may benefit from a light 
peel  to  clean  out  pores,  improve  skin  texture,  and  help 
acne. A middle-aged patient may benefit from a deeper 
peel for the same reasons and to improve fine lines. Older 
patients  benefit  from  all  of  these  plus  improvement  of 
dyschromias and deeper lines and wrinkles.

In a surgical practice the main indications for chem-

ical peels are as follows:
	•	

 Nonsurgical  patients  desiring  better  skin  health, 
reduction  of  fine  lines  and  wrinkles,  and  improve-
ment of pigmentation abnormalities
 Patients  undergoing  cosmetic  blepharoplasty  who 
are not candidates for or do not desire CO2 laser skin 
resurfacing of the eyelids
 As  an  adjunct  to  facelifting  when  concomitant  lift 
and peel are performed
 As  a  “hybrid”  treatment  with  full-face  CO2  laser 
resurfacing to blend the lasered skin into the hairline

	•	

	•	

	•	

Chemical Peel as an Adjunct to Cosmetic 
Blepharoplasty
Many  contemporary  cosmetic  surgeons 
that 
transconjunctival blepharoplasty is a superior approach 
to lower lid rejuvenation compared with subciliary skin 
muscle approaches.

feel 

Fig.  14.2  One  disadvantage  of  the  external  subciliary,  skin 
muscle  approach  is  the  increased  incidence  of  lower  eyelid 
malposition.

The subciliary skin muscle approach involves mak-
ing  a  skin  incision  under  the  lower  lid  lash  line  and 
dissecting  the  skin  and  muscle  to  access  the  lower 
lid  fat  pads.  After  the  fat  is  reduced,  a  strip  of  skin 
(and  sometimes  muscle)  is  removed  from  the  lower 
lid (Fig. 14.1).

Removing  this  excess  skin  causes  stretching  of  the 
remaining  lower  lid  skin,  which  improves  the  appear-
ance of the wrinkles. There are two main problems with 
this method of blepharoplasty. First, this approach vio-
lates the orbital septum, which can cause septal contrac-
tion and contribute to lower eyelid malposition. Second, 
and most critical, is the fact that even with care, exces-
sive skin can be removed inadvertently and also produce 
lower lid malposition with scleral show, canthal round-
ing, and dry eyes (Fig. 14.2).

Not all patients experience this by any means, but it 
is more common with this external approach. These are 
good reasons to perform the transconjunctival approach, 
which  is  retroseptal  and  does  not  carry  the  liability  of 
lower  lid  retraction.  The  biggest  problem  with  subcil-
iary  blepharoplasty  is  that  they  improve  skin  quantity 
(stretching)  but  do  not  improve  inherent  skin  quality 
such as pigmentation and collagen production. So, the 
safety of the transconjunctival approach is desirable but 

CHAPTER 14 Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery164

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 14.3  CO2 laser resurfacing (top) and TCA chemical peeling 
(bottom) are mainstay treatments for eyelid rejuvenation when 
performing transconjunctival blepharoplasty.

requires a separate procedure to address the excess and 
wrinkled  skin  (dermatochalasis).  Simultaneous  skin- 
resurfacing  procedures  will  improve  skin  quality  and 
skin quantity at the same time with less chance of lower 
lid malposition. Having said this, it is possible to over-
treat the lower lid skin with laser or chemical peel and 
produce lower lid malposition.

The  author’s  preferred  techniques  for  lower  eyelid 
dermatochalasis are CO2 laser resurfacing and chemical 
peel (Fig. 14.3).

There are pluses and minuses for either procedure. In 
general, I feel that laser treatment is more effective but 
has a more unpleasant recovery (Fig. 14.4).

The  chemical  peel  is  effective  but  is  more  tolerable 
for patients because it is a dry wound. A medium-depth 
TCA  peel  on  the  lower  lids  is  not  equally  as  dramatic 
as the laser but is a great alternative for those patients 
who do not want laser, need a faster recovery, or in dark-
skinned  patients  who  may  not  be  candidates  for  laser. 
Patients  are  told  that  if  the  laser  is  100%  effective,  the 
peel is 80% as effective but heals much quicker with less 
prolonged erythema and can easily be repeated at a later 
date with local anesthesia. There is also less chance (but 
still possible) to have eyelid malposition compared with 
aggressive laser treatment.

Fig.  14.4  Laser  procedures  generally  produce  more  dramatic 
results  than  chemical  peels  but  have  a  more  unpleasant  and 
extended recovery. The patient on the left is 1 week postmulti-
pass, high-fluence laser skin resurfacing, and the patient on the 
right  is  1  week  post–30%  trichloroacetic  acid  medium-depth 
chemical peel.

LOWER EYELID CHEMICAL PEEL 
TECHNIQUE

After the lower transconjunctival blepharoplasty is per-
formed,  the  lower  lid  skin  is  degreased  with  acetone. 
Light-skinned patients are generally treated with several 
coats  of  30%  TCA  to  a  solid  white  frost  (Fig.  14.5).  A 
delay of at least 2 minutes is taken between coats of acid 
to allow the effect to take place and the frost (which deter-
mines the endpoint) to mature. When the desired level of 
frost  is  reached,  either  a  white  frost  with  a  pink  back-
ground or a solid white frost, the procedure is stopped 
and the skin coated with a suitable wound dressing.

For  darker-skinned  patients,  a  single  coat  of  30% 
TCA  or  several  coats  of  20%  is  applied.  The  endpoint 
frost is less dense, because darker-skinned patients tend 
to have less wrinkling, and this will prevent overtreat-
ment in this patient population.

Postoperatively  patients  are  instructed  to  use  either 
Vanicream  or  Vaniply  Ointment  (Pharmaceutical  Spe-
cialties,  Inc,  MN)  (Fig.  14.6).  These  products  are  the 
least irritating because they do not contain preservatives, 
dyes,  parabens,  lanolin,  or  other  potentially  irritating 
ingredients. They are very affordable and easily found.

Postpeel care consists of 24/7 application of Vaniply 
until  fully  peeled.  The  patient  washes  the  peeled  area 
or entire face twice a day with the Vaniply cleanser and 

165

reapplies the Vaniply ointment continually. After com-
plete  reepithelialization,  the  patient  applies  Vanicream 
moisturizer and sunscreen. I have had excellent healing 
and compliance with these products.

It is important for patients not to pick or peel off the 
dead  skin,  because  this  can  cause  scarring  and  expose 
the  underlying  skin  that  is  not  yet  reepithelialized.  In 
some cases, the dead skin can be safely removed by the 
doctor (Fig. 14.7).

HYBRID LASER/PEEL TECHNIQUES

Although chemical peeling is a useful treatment in and 
of itself, combining peeling with laser skin resurfacing 
has  distinct  advantages.  My  most  common  combi-
nation  of  peel  and  laser  is  using  the  peel  to  blend  in 
the hairline when performing full-face CO2 laser. The 
hair-bearing scalp will be untreated when performing 
laser  resurfacing,  because  treatment  would  burn  the 
hair.  Failing  to  blend  this  area  can  produce  a  drastic 
transition of treated and untreated skin. By lasering up 
to the hairline, then peeling into the hair, a blending is 
achieved (Fig. 14.8).

Another indication for a peel/laser combo is when 
a  specific  area  such  as  the  lower  lids  requires  more 
aggressive  treatment  than  the  rest  of  the  face.  I  see 
this  occasionally  in  younger  patients  with  moderate 
full-face sun damage but accelerated lower eyelid skin 
aging.  In  these  patients  I  may  perform  a  multicoat 
30%  TCA  peel  on  the  entire  face  but  laser  the  lower 
lids,  which  require  a  more  aggressive  treatment  and 
deeper wounding (Fig. 14.9).

FACELIFT WITH SIMULTANEOUS 
TRICHLOROACETIC ACID CHEMICAL PEEL

Facelift  with  simultaneous  peel  or  laser  resurfacing  is 
controversial, because the undermined facelift flaps are 
dissected  from  the  underlying  tissues  and  more  sensi-
tive to devitalization. I have performed more than 1200 
facelifts and necklifts at the time of this writing and per-
formed simultaneous CO2 laser or TCA chemical peel in 
almost one-third of the facelifts.

This is done after the lift is completed and all suture 
lines are closed. The face is degreased with acetone and 
the  central  oval  (nonundermined  regions)  is  treated 
with  multiple  coats  of  30%  TCA  to  the  desired  end-
point. The flaps are marked to show the demarcation of 

Fig. 14.5  Different depths of peeling are chosen depending on the 
amount of skin damage and the skin color. The top image shows 
two  coats  of  20%  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  on  a  dark-skinned 
patient. The center picture shows a single coat of 30% TCA on a 
patient with minor to moderate wrinkling, and the bottom photo 
shows a denser white frost from two coats of 30% TCA for more 
penetration on a patient with increased dermatochalasis.

Fig. 14.6  The “Vani” line of post-resurfacing skin care products 
is easy to use, affordable, and nonallergenic.

CHAPTER 14 Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery166

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 14.7  Although it is not recommended to remove dead skin, in some cases it can be removed by the doctor 
if the underlying tissues are healed. This very compliant patient presented at 1 week, and the remnant skin 
was removed. Note the minor hypopigmentation that will improve to normal skin tone over the coming weeks.

Fig. 14.8  This image shows a representation of a full-face CO2 laser treatment with chemical peeling into the 
hairline to blend the treatment and avoid a frank line of demarcation.

the  undermined/nonundermined  area,  and  the  under-
mined regions are treated with a single pass of 20% TCA 
(Figs. 14.10 and 14.11).

Experienced  facelift/peel  surgeons  can  treat  some-
what  deeper,  but  it  is  prudent  to  always  be  more  con-
servative  on  the  undermined  skin.  Identical  treatment 
can be performed with laser as well, treating the central 
oval in a normal fashion with decreased fluence over the 
undermined flaps.

CASE PRESENTATIONS

The following patients were treated with surgical proce-
dures and simultaneous TCA chemical peel (Figs. 14.12-
14.20):

COMPLICATIONS

It  is  imperative  to  protect  the  eye  when  peeling  in  the 
periorbital region. The doctor and team must pay close 
attention  to  acid  flowing  into  unwanted  areas.  A  large 
volume of water should always be on the treatment tray 
to lavage the eye in the event acid comes in contact with 

Fig. 14.9  This patient underwent blepharoplasty with full-face 
chemical  peel.  Because  the  lower  lids  had  significant  derma-
tochalasis, a CO2 laser treatment was performed on this area.

167

Fig. 14.10  The left image shows the undermined facelift flaps being marked to delineate the undermined 
region that will be treated in a more conservative manner. The right image shows the central oval (non-under-
mined skin) treated with two coats of 30% trichloroacetic acid and the undermined flap treated with a single 
coat of the same.

Fig. 14.11  This image shows another patient treated with multiple coats of 30% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) on 
the central oval of the face and a single coat of 30% TCA over the undermined flap.

CHAPTER 14 Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery168

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 14.12  This patient is shown 5 days after facelift with simultaneous 30% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peel 
(two coats) on the central face and two coats of 20% TCA on the facelift flaps.

Fig. 14.13  This patient is shown 90 days after facelift with simultaneous 30% TCA chemical peel.

Fig. 14.14  The same patient shown in Fig. 14.13 is shown in the lateral view.

169

Fig. 14.15  This patient was treated with upper and lower laser-assisted blepharoplasty with lower-lid 30% TCA peel.

Fig. 14.16  The same patient as shown in Fig. 14.15 is shown in the right three-quarter view.

Fig. 14.17  The same patient as shown in Fig. 14.15 and 14.16 is shown in the left three-quarter view.

CHAPTER 14 Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery170

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 14.18  This patient was treated with upper and lower laser-assisted blepharoplasty with lower lid 30% 
trichloroacetic acid peel.

Fig. 14.19  The same patient as shown in Fig. 14.18 is shown in the right three-quarter view.

Fig. 14.20  The same patient as shown in Fig. 14.18 and 14.19 is shown in the left three-quarter view.

171

Fig. 14.21  This patient is shown immediately after a 30% tri-
chloroacetic acid peel in which some of the acid reached the 
lower eyelid margin and opacified a strip of the cornea. The eye 
was painful and irritated but healed uneventfully.

the cornea. Minor contact is very irritating but generally 
heals in several days without problems. Fig. 14.21 shows 
such an incident.

Chemical peel sequalae such as extended erythema 
and  PIH  are  common,  but  more  serious  complica-
tions  are  rare.  Pigmentation  changes  are  the  most 
common considerations, especially in darker-skinned 
patients. It is important to discuss these potential pig-
mentation problems in the informed consent process. 
I show all patients pictures of hypopigmentation and 
hyperpigmentation and have them initial the pictures 
to  indicate  that  they  realize  these  changes  are  pos-
sible.  If  patients  experience  pigmentation  problems 
without warning or understanding, they can become 
very unhappy and more difficult to manage. One key 
to  managing  these  sequalae  is  to  get  these  patients 
back  to  work  or  play  as  soon  as  possible;  makeup  
can  be  the  surgeons’  best  friend  in  these  circum-
stances.

Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  is  very  com-
mon in darker-skinned patients and can be disconcert-
ing to the patient and surgeon. This condition generally 
responds well to treatment with bleaching creams such 
as 4% hydroquinone and sunscreen. Fig. 14.22 shows a 
patient with postpeel PIH.

Hypopigmentation  can  also  occur  after  a  peel  and 
generally repigments spontaneously over several weeks 
or  months  (Fig.  14.23).  It  is  important  to  help  these 
patients  choose  an  appropriate  makeup  to  cover  these 
areas.

Fig. 14.22  This patient is shown in the upper picture 90 days 
postpeel  with  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  of  her 
upper  lid  laser  scar  and  periorbital  regions  that  were  peeled 
with several coats of 20% trichloroacetic acid. The bottom pic-
ture shows the patient 30 days after treatment with 4% hydro-
quinone and sunscreen.

a  steroid  cream  such  as  Clobetasol  0.05%  twice  daily. 
Actual scars are injected with very small aliquots of tri-
amcinolone 10 mg/mL. Fig. 14.24 shows a patient with 
textural  changes  and  minor  hypertrophic  scarring  6 
weeks post 30% TCA peel.

Although  a  more  prevalent  complication  with  laser 
treatment, lower eyelid retraction can occur with chem-
ical  peeling.  This  is  more  common  in  patients  with 
previous  lower  lid  skin  excision  but  can  occur  in  the 
unoperated patient as well (Fig. 14.25). It is not uncom-
mon  for  postpeel  patients  to  have  retracted  lids  upon 
animation in the early postpeel phase, but this generally 
resolves spontaneously and can be improved with lower 
lid skin stretching.

CONCLUSION

Scarring can occur but is uncommon. Textural heal-
ing  changes  of  the  lower  lids  can  be  intercepted  with 

TCA  chemical  peel  is  a  very  useful  and  safe  adjunct 
to  procedures  such  as  blepharoplasty  and  facelift.  The 

CHAPTER 14 Chemical Peeling as an Adjunct to Facelift and Eyelid Surgery172

PART 5  Special Topics

1 Week

2 Months

1 Month

8 Months

Fig. 14.23  This patient is shown at 1 week, 1 month, 2 months, and 8 months after several coats of 20% 
trichloroacetic acid peel of her lower eyelids.

Fig.  14.24  This  patient  shows  textural  changes  and  minor 
hypertrophic scarring after chemical peel. She responded well 
to topical steroid and triamcinolone injection.

Fig. 14.25  This patient is shown 10 days after 30% trichloro-
acetic acid peel. The patient is opening his mouth wide, which 
is  stretching  the  lower  lids  and  causing  retraction.  This  gen-
erally  improves  spontaneously  and  can  be  accelerated  with 
stretching the lower lids. In patients who have had lower eyelid 
skin removed with previous blepharoplasty, this can be a per-
manent situation.

procedure  is  quick,  inexpensive,  and  predictable.  Any 
unpredictability  is  related  to  skin  color,  the  peeler’s 
experience, and the variances of skin healing. Although 
these  factors  can  be  unpredictable,  they  all  generally 

heal  without  consequence  with  normal  peeling  meth-
ods. Overtreatment is the cause of more severe compli-
cations.

15

Segmental Phenol Croton  
Oil Peels for Brow Lifting,  
Eyelid Tightening, 
and Lip Eversion

Carlos G. Wambier

INTRODUCTION

This  special  topic  chapter  explores  a  still  pioneering 
aspect of deep chemical peeling using phenol–croton oil 
formulas. Although the basic concepts of safety, perioper-
ative care, formulas, and the application of deep chemical 
peeling were well covered by Dr. Richard Bensimon, Dr. 
Marina Landau, and Dr. Peter Rullan in Chapters 7, 8, and  
12, some extremely important phytochemical aspects are 
reinforced in this chapter for adequate understanding of 
the mechanisms of action involved in surface retraction 
and dermal neocollagenesis of such procedures.

Physicians who want to focus their expertise in deep 
peeling should further read about the shift of paradigms 
that  occurred  with  the  awareness  of  strength  grada-
tion by titration of the Croton tiglium oil concentration 
introduced by Dr. Hetter1-5 in an up-to-date, condensed 
review  article  recently  published  by  the  International 
Peeling  Society  (IPS)  in  the  Journal  of  the  American 
Academy of Dermatology continued medical education 
article,6 which also has videos.

MECHANISM OF ACTION

Dr.  Adolph  M.  Brown,  the  plastic  surgeon  who  first 
introduced  to  medical  applications  mixtures  of  phe-
nol with croton oil, brought a premature rationale that 
phenol was the active ingredient of his formulas, which 
contained vegetable oils to “retard” its action, and that 
phenol  penetrated  deeper  when  it  was  more  dilute.7 

Brown’s  original  phenol–croton  oil  formula,  shown  as 
“Example 3” in his April 1959 US patent application enti-
tled  “Skin  treating  method  and  composition,”  was  the 
first mixture of phorbol esters with phenol in a chemical 
peel  formula.  It  consisted  of  0.5%  croton  oil  in  a  mix-
ture of water, 50% phenol, and 5% cresols (methylated 
phenol).7  To  celebrate  the  60th  anniversary  of  Brown’s 
invention, let’s further elaborate on this formula and his 
efforts. Possibly because Brown apparently had no dis-
ciples to continue the application of his initial formula, 
and because of the patent, which would have commercial 
implications, his formula was never disseminated in the 
dermatology  or  plastic  surgery  practice.  Also,  Brown’s 
actual  phenol–croton  oil  formula  was  never  published 
in  a  medical  journal.  Brown  and  his  wife,  Dr.  Marthe 
Erdos Brown, a dermatologist who trained in Paris, pub-
lished the results of their technique in the British Journal 
of Plastic Surgery8; however, the formula omitted croton 
oil for unknown reasons. Two aspects of the 1960 publi-
cation were interesting: the sequential taping technique, 
which is performed as soon as each small area of the face 
is peeled, which is appropriate for occlusion of a volatile 
compound, and the “thick and stout applicator,” which 
allows better control of the surface spread of the formula.
Brownian dogmas about mechanisms of action were 
popularized among plastic surgeons and some dermatol-
ogists after the standard adoption of the Baker-Gordon 
classical  formula,9  which  was  published  shortly  before 
Brown’s death in 1963, not leaving enough time for sci-
entific discussions or further scientific elucidations.

173

174

PART 5  Special Topics

Brown’s rationale at that time for the mechanisms 
of action of deep peeling was appropriate given that 
the field of dermatopathology was still in its infancy. 
Neither  the  Herovici  stain  nor  immunohistochem-
istry  methods  existed  to  differentiate  newer  type  III 
collagen  from  older  type  I  collagen.  “The  principal 
concept … is to induce a controlled fibrosis of some 
of  the  inner  layers  of  the  skin  to  cause  shrinkage  by 
noticeable condensations of the collagenous fibers of 
the dermis and by lamination and flattening of some 
elements of the connective tissue parallel to the skin 
surface.”7

Phorbol esters were initially discovered in croton oil 
itself in the late 1920s,10 and such molecules were since 
thought to explain the paradox of toxic and stimulative 
effects  of  croton  oil  for  millennia  in  Eastern  medicine 
and since the 1800s in Western medicine.11 Croton oil 
is still recognized as the richest matrix of these complex 
vegetable metabolites, which were later found in other 
species of Euphorbiaceae.

Probably,  the  interaction  of  these  tetracyclic  diter-
penes  of  croton  oil  with  follicular  and  dermal  stem 
cells and other cells of the connective tissue create the 
observed  rejuvenation,  although  science  still  seeks 
data to elucidate the direct and indirect mechanisms of 
action of phorbol esters in the connective tissue. Phor-
bol  12-myristate  13-acetate  (PMA)  and  other  phorbol 
esters trigger numerous biochemical functions in cells; 
the  most  well  understood  are  related  to  the  rapid  and 
strong membrane activation of protein kinase C (PKC) 
isoforms.12  PMA,  the  most  potent  tumor-promoting 
agent  known,  is  extracted  from  croton  oil.13  Phorbol 
esters are not considered carcinogens, but when applied 
in  combination  with  a  carcinogen,  they  may  promote 
tumor  growth.  PMA  also  has  anticancer  properties, 
causing  differentiation  of  immature  cell  lines.14,15  The 
vast historical experience of phenol–croton oil peeling 
points to anticancer results by many authors, and no case 
of carcinogenesis was ever reported.16-18 Baker stated in 
2003 that in thousands of facial peels performed during 
his career, he never observed a single case of skin cancer 
during decades of follow-up.16 The deep action of phor-
bol  esters  during  a  deep  chemical  peel  might  provide 
superior  chemoprevention  for  field  cancerization  than 
any other  known method; however, proper studies are 
still pending.19,20

By  current  dermatopathology  methods,  after  the 
application of phenol–croton oil formulas, the superficial 

layers  of  the  skin  clearly  undergo  coagulative  necrosis. 
The  deeper  layers  remain  viable  and  undergo  severe 
inflammation. The epidermal cells from follicles prolif-
erate under the necrotic eschar, whereas type III colla-
gen is formed below the newly formed epidermis. Once 
the  eschar  is  detached,  epithelization  completes  with  a 
new,  thicker  epidermis.  A  thick  neocollagenesis  band 
continues  to  form  for  some  weeks  under  the  new  epi-
dermis.21 Thus skin tightening seems to occur by a deep, 
thick neocollagenesis band and longitudinal superficial 
surface shrinkage.

To better understand the effects of a deep chemical 
peel, one may think of the old skin as an old pillow that 
has a very loose, wrinkled cover over a flattened, non-
elastic,  old  stuffing  (deep  dermis).  The  cover  is  com-
pletely removed, and the superficial part of the stuffing 
is scratched. Subsequently, in a few days, a new thicker 
and  tightly  fitted  cover  forms  over  the  stuffing.  After 
that, a new thicker and more elastic stuffing is formed 
between the cover and the scratched old stuffing, mak-
ing the pillow more round and tight, with less cover sur-
face area as well.

STRENGTH AND EFFECTS

	•	

The current unequivocal ways to increase the penetra-
tion of a deep chemical peel are as follows:
	•	
	•	
	•	

 Increasing the concentration of croton oil
 Increasing friction and pressure (hand weight)
 Increasing the total volume applied: in each applica-
tion or sets of applications/passes
 Priming  the  epidermal  barrier:  degreasing,  topical 
retinoids, and abrasion
The  belief  that  there  is  increased  action  by  postop-
erative  occlusion  with  petrolatum  jelly  or  tape  after 
complete  absorption  of  the  formula  is  still  debatable, 
because  animal  models  are  extremely  impractical  and 
the evidence in patients is still limited to a single split-
body case report with tape performed in an extra-facial 
area.22  Because  postoperative  occlusion  for  increasing 
the depth of wounding is still debatable, the physician 
should  use  the  controlled  environment  in  the  office 
to  apply  the  peel  to  the  desired  depth  of  penetration. 
The  depth  of  penetration  correlates  to  all  the  effects 
observed,  including  treatment  goals:  fading  of  deep 
wrinkles, superficial shrinkage, and collagen formation 
in the mid-dermis. However, along with deeper penetra-
tion, there is a trade-off with the risk of complications, 

175

including  postoperative  pain,  edema,  longer  reepithe-
lization  time,  longer  periods  of  persistent  erythema, 
skin  dryness,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  in 
susceptible patients, and finally increased risks of pro-
nounced hypopigmentation after full recovery.

recovery time as “the tunnel of metamorphosis,” given 
the  way  patients  feel  while  entering  the  procedure: 
unsafe  during  the  downtime  period  and  happy  when 
leaving this tunnel.

SEGMENTAL (PARTIAL) PEELS

Not all patients need a full-face peel. Many patients are 
strictly  concerned  with  the  perioral  area,  periocular 
area, forehead,23 or lips.24 Some patients with acne scars 
or thin wrinkles may be concerned with the cheeks only. 
With the appropriate application technique, the surgeon 
may in most cases avoid demarcation lines by feathering 
the transition of the peeled area to an unpeeled area by 
some centimeters (Fig. 15.1). Some cases may be peeled 
without feathering, by combining a different resurfacing 
technique to the adjacent area, such as a medium-depth 
peel or a Q-switched laser peel.21

A major advantage of performing a segmental peel is 
safety.23 If the peeled area is less than 0.5% of the body 
surface  area  (palm  without  fingers),  the  peel  may  be 
performed  slowly,  but  without  the  10-minute  waiting 
period  between  each  cosmetic  area  (safety  pause)  and 
without intravenous hydration with Ringer’s lactate.

A segmental peel is also easier for the patient during 
the  7-day  recovery  period.  The  author  refers  to  the 

SAFETY IS THE NUMBER ONE PRIORITY

Although arguments could be made for not monitoring 
patients due to the extreme safety of a short procedure, 
the author prefers to monitor most patients due to their 
age, concurrent medications, and high blood pressure. 
Monitoring  is  harmless  and  brings  a  “vital  awareness” 
of  the  electrocardiogram  (ECG)  status  and  vital  signs. 
Awareness creates a safer environment. For example, if 
the  patient  complains  of  their  heart  “beating”  or  “rac-
ing,”  one  quick  glance  at  the  monitor  can  reassure  the 
team and the patient, instead of reaching for a  stetho-
scope or running for a 12-lead ECG. Most importantly, 
if  clinically  relevant  changes  are  noted,  the  physician 
can execute a plan instantly. Furthermore, the monitor 
might show a preexisting arrhythmia or extremely high 
blood pressure before the procedure even begins.

A  thorough  medical  history  (with  a  focus  on  skin 
healing issues, nutrition, autoimmune status, and heart 
and respiratory conditions), simple laboratory tests such 
as a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and a 
12-lead ECG to evaluate the rate-corrected QT interval 

Fig. 15.1  Periocular and perioral peel with 1.2% croton oil in 35% phenol. Skin color may be blended to the 
untreated area by feathering. On the fourth postoperative day and after 9 months, with polarized light pho-
tographs, cautious observation reveals no demarcation lines, but the unpeeled skin presents mild melanosis 
that could be addressed with segmental peels using a medium-depth peel or even with 532-nm Q-switched 
laser peel.

CHAPTER 15 Segmental Phenol Croton Oil Peels for Brow Lifting176

PART 5  Special Topics

(QTc)  could  also  bring  important  awareness  of  hid-
den  risks  of  undergoing  a  procedure  that  could  cause 
an  arrhythmia  and  severe  skin  inflammation.  Because 
phenol–croton  oil  peels  do  prolong  the  QTc25  even  in 
segmental peels, the peel is contraindicated in patients 
with long QTc by Fridericia calculation (such as above 
450 ms). QTc over 500 ms is an absolute contraindica-
tion and requires therapy by a cardiologist. Medications 
known  to  prolong  QTc  are  antidepressants,  thiazide 
diuretics, antiemetics, some antibiotics, antifungals, and 
opiates. CredibleMeds is available as an app for smart-
phones  and  may  be  used  through  the  website  https://
crediblemeds.org;  it  is  the  most  comprehensive  and 
up-to-date list of medications known to cause QTc pro-
longation. The CredibleMeds list categorizes each medi-
cation by risk to cause torsades des pointes.

Technique Limitations
Although the skin is tightened to a certain point by deep 
chemical peels, a thick superficial muscular layer is cer-
tainly not tightened. To tighten and lift ptotic muscles, 
one  must  incorporate  surgical  procedures  to  shorten 
the supralabial area and to lift the forehead. However, in 
areas where the superficial musculoaponeurotic system 
(SMAS) is thin, such as the eyelids, cheeks, and lateral 
forehead, it is possible to achieve tightening effects with 
deep peels. Such retraction is best observed in the eye-
lids, where both epidermis and dermis are the thinnest.

Special  attention  must  be  given  during  the  preoper-
ative  period  to  the  evaluation  of  the  lower  eyelid,  with 
particular attention for a tendency to have ectropion by 
the open-mouth maneuver, and also evaluating for exces-
sive laxity by the snap-back test. A negative snap-back is 
a  contraindication  to  deep  peels,  especially  when  using 
strong formulas or application methods.21 Previous lower 
eyelid blepharoplasty may cause lower eyelid retraction, 
which may be accentuated by a deep peel (Fig. 15.2).

The peeled area is also an important predictor of the 
total volume of the neocollagenesis band created parallel 
to the peeled area. More collagen is built with wider areas 
of peeling, which creates tightening and increased volume.

THE BLEPHAROPEEL

When  performing  a  blepharopeel,  the  periocular  zone 
is peeled, and the area that would be excised during an 
upper blepharoplasty is peeled more deeply, either with 
higher concentrations of croton oil, such as 2% croton oil 
in the classical Baker-Gordon formula,26 or with the same 
Hetter’s formula that was used in the superior eyelid, but 
after the frosting is set, the “excision area” is peeled with 
more passes, more friction, and more solution.

An effective method to create this is to use the Wam-
bier-Simão  blade,  which  consists  of  a  cotton-tipped, 
split  wooden  tongue  depressor. The  surface  created  by 
the split has a thin area, and creates more pressure and 

Fig. 15.2  Ectropion noticeable only with open mouth, after a lower eyelid peel with 1.2% croton oil in 35% 
phenol. Patient was previously submitted to blepharoplasty, facelift, and full-face peel with 1.6% croton oil in 
35% phenol sparing the lower eyelids (initially contraindicated due to preexisting retraction). The photodam-
age in the lower eyelids became so obvious that the patient and physician decided to complete the peel in 
those areas. Complete spontaneous resolution occurred after 6 months. The open mouth accentuates lower 
eyelid retraction and cicatricial ectropion. This demonstrates how the skin contracts after the peel and how 
movement and time cause collagen remodeling to occur.

is not polished, so that it creates more friction. By using 
the  “saw”  surface  of  the  Wambier-Simão  blade,  with 
repeated movements, peel depth is increased by modi-
fying three factors: number of passes, pressure/friction, 
and skin abrasion. The area peeled with the “saw” takes 
longer to heal, which is the most objective measurement 
of peeling depth (Fig. 15.3).

Blepharopeelings  are  not  able  to  shrink  very  abun-
dant  skin  and  do  not  address  prolapsed  fat  pads. 
However,  deep  peels  may  substitute  for  minor  blepha-
roplasties  with  the  benefit  of  not  leaving  a  scar  if  per-
formed properly (Fig. 15.4).

When performing blepharopeels, various areas may 
be addressed: (1) upper blepharopeeling; (2) upper and 
lower  blepharopeeling;  (3)  periocular  peeling—“the 
Raccoon”; (4) periocular peeling including temples, eye-
brows, and glabella—“the Robin Mask”; (5) and perioc-
ular, temples, the full forehead, glabella with feathering 
to the tip of the nose, with a coincident lower limit of 
feathering in the malar area to the cheeks—“El Zorro” 
(which basically spares the lower face only).

Currently,  the  most  used  formula  by  the  author  for 
periocular  peels  is  Hetter’s  light  formula,  containing 
0.4% croton oil in 35% phenol,6 with the recent modifica-
tion of the replacement of Septisol (banned by the Food 
and  Drug  Administration  [FDA]  because  of  triclosan) 
for  Novisol  (Young  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc.).  Emulsions 
created  with  Novisol  are  more  stable  than  those  cre-
ated using Septisol (Fig. 15.5 and 15.6). Some cases will 
require stronger formulas, such as Hetter’s heavy, which 
contains 1.2% croton oil in 35% phenol. Regarding the 
stability  of  the  emulsion,  the  author  recommends  that 
the vial or cup used during the peel to dip the applicator 
be  completely  transparent  so  the  surgeon  can  observe 
whether  the  formula  is  evenly  emulsified.  That  means 
that surgical steel cups are not appropriate for phenol–
croton oil emulsions. Use glass shot glasses or the Novi-
sol Emulsivial instead, which has a cap to close the vial 
tight  to  allow  better  agitation,  and  a  smaller  diameter, 
which reduces the volatilization of organic compounds.

THE BROWLIFT PEEL

Although  the  muscular  area  of  the  forehead  is  amenable 
to skin tightening by deep peels (see limitations sections), 
a mild lift is obtained if the skin is peeled deeply from the 
upper half of the eyebrows to about 2 cm above the eyebrow, 

177

A

B

C

Fig. 15.3  Detail of the periocular area of a full-face procedure 
with 1.6% croton oil in 35% phenol. A, Before. Vigorous appli-
cation in the crease of the upper eyelid causes increased retrac-
tion, with expected delayed healing. B, Tenth postoperative day 
(POD). C, No visible scar on the 30th POD.

CHAPTER 15 Segmental Phenol Croton Oil Peels for Brow Lifting178

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 15.4  Detail of the periocular area of a full-face procedure with 1.6% croton oil in 35% phenol. A, Before. 
B, Marked improvement and tightening after 1-year follow-up.

Preshaking

3 Seconds
Postshaking

90 Seconds
Postshaking

3 Minutes
Postshaking

17 Minutes
Postshaking

Fig. 15.5  Instability precipitated by Septisol of Hetter’s phenol–croton oil peel formula containing 1.6% cro-
ton  oil  in  35%  phenol.  The  upper  layer  is  opaque  and  white;  the  lower  layer  has  a  yellowish  hue.  Mixing 
the  formula  creates  a  temporary  emulsion  that  quickly  separates  back  into  two  distinct  layers.  In  animal 
studies performed at the State University of Ponta Grossa in collaboration with Dr. Beltrame and his team of 
researchers at the Laboratory of Phytotherapy, Phytotherapy Technology and Chemistry of Natural Products, 
the lower layer was observed to be active, while the upper layer was found to be inactive. Therefore agitation 
before placing the applicator into the emulsion was of paramount importance. (Photographs courtesy of John 
Kulesza, Young Pharmaceuticals, Inc.)

179

3 Seconds
Post-Shaking

30 Minutes
Post Shaking

60 Minutes
Post Shaking

90 Minutes
Post Shaking

120 Minutes
Post Shaking

Fig. 15.6  Improved stability facilitated by Novisol of Hetter’s phenol-croton oil peel formula containing 1.6% 
croton oil in 35% phenol. The emulsion is stable throughout the usual procedure time. This results in improved 
safety by maintaining formula consistency including frost uniformity.

which is exactly the area that is not usually injected with 
botulinum toxin due to the risk of eyebrow ptosis.

Some patients with deep and multiple forehead wrin-
kles  develop  these  lines  because  of  brow  ptosis  or  mild 
upper  eyelid  ptosis.  Thus  a  correct  diagnosis  must  be 
made  for  adequate  planning.  Sometimes,  inspection 
during full frontalis relaxation will reveal a primary cause.
A  surgical  browlift  usually  has  temporary  effects 
using tread fixation to the bone, or even more tempo-
rary  effects  with  noninvasive  technology  or  dermal/
subcutaneous  threads.  Surgical  interventions  may 
cause  a  hard-to-disguise  scar  over  the  eyebrow  or  in 
the  frontal  scalp.  Thus  a  chemical  peel  may  be  indi-
cated  in  cases  where  brow  ptosis  is  not  severe,  and 
when  the  forehead  skin  actually  requires  resurfacing 
due to wrinkles, with a secondary gain of some milli-
meters of brow lift.

The  peel  is  performed  usually  in  combination  with 
blepharopeeling.  Rarely,  a  stand-alone  frontal  peel  is 
indicated  (Fig.  15.7),  and  the  zones  mentioned  can  be 
peeled more heavily. It is very rare to execute a stand-
alone browlift peel because of the risk of color mismatch 

Fig. 15.7  Before and after 4 months of partial-face intervention 
with phenol 35% and croton oil 1.6% forehead peel (pseudo-hy-
popigmentation seen). The eyelids and crow’s feet were peeled 
after 2 weeks with Jessner’s solution followed by 35% trichloro-
acetic acid, as the patient only wanted to remove the forehead 
wrinkles. An expected discrete lateral browlift is achieved.

CHAPTER 15 Segmental Phenol Croton Oil Peels for Brow Lifting180

PART 5  Special Topics

Fig. 15.9  Typical frosting of the vermilion, while the Wambier- 
Simão blade is soaked with 1.2% croton oil in 35% phenol for 
a second, more aggressive pass around the contour of the lips. 
The patient has petrolatum jelly over her eyelids, still shut soon 
after a “Robin’s mask” periocular and glabellar segmental peel.

of Novisol Cleanser and 5.5 mL of distilled water. For a 
smaller volume, mix 2 mL of Hetter’s stock with 3 mL of 
the following mixture: 0.25 mL of Novisol Cleanser and 
2.75 mL of distilled water. This makes a total of 5 mL. To 
prepare 25 mL of Hetter’s stock, mix 24 mL of phenol 
88% with 1 mL of croton oil. The stock solution is not to 
be used undiluted on normal skin surfaces.

THE LIP PEEL

The application of this tightening concept for the lips,20 
the “lip peel,” may be used as a stand-alone procedure or 
in combination with a full-face peel or segmental peel 
for the perioral area. In contrast to a hyaluronic acid lip 
injection, the peel is able to create some volume by neo-
collagenesis, which is limited by the surface area peeled, 
while  addressing  surface  changes  related  to  chronic 
solar  damage  (deep  wrinkles  and  actinic  keratoses). 
Additionally, by shrinking the vertical outer surface of 
the lip, the lip edge everts.

The  lips  are  one  of  the  few  facial  areas  that  can 
be  peeled  strongly  without  having  to  feather  onto 
surrounding  skin,  because  the  lip  color  is  sharply 
demarcated from the surrounding areas. However, by 
feathering onto the perilabial area or treating the entire 
perioral area, one can create a stronger eversion effect, 
because  the  surrounding  skin  tightening  assists  to 
evert the lips.

For lip peels, the author uses Hetter’s heavy or very 

heavy formula.

The  schematics  of  the  main  areas  discussed  in  this 
chapter are illustrated in Fig. 15.8. A typical lip peel in 

Fig. 15.8  Schematic of the most important areas to be peeled 
heavily  to  achieve  skin  contraction  (painted  in  orange),  and 
the surrounding adjuvant areas that also contribute to a better 
effect by a contraction at distance (surrounding yellow lines). 
For a mild eyebrow lift: top half of the eyebrows and supraor-
bital area with a wider lateral zone, with the respective fronto-
temporal adjuvant area. For upper eyelid tightening/contraction: 
the  area  hidden  in  sulcus  (wider  area  with  the  eyes  closed) 
should  be  more  heavily  peeled  for  an  effective  blepharopeel. 
The adjuvant area is the remainder of the upper eyelid. For the 
eversion of the lips, the most important area to be peeled is the 
vermilion to the vermilion border. The inner part of the vermil-
ion (near the wet-dry line) actually causes some inversion of the 
lip  but  further  contributes  to  volume  by  neocollagenesis.  For 
eversion, the outer part of the lips is peeled, leaving the inner 
part without peeling. The adjuvant area is about 1 cm around 
the lips/perioral area.

to  the  forehead,  but  with  adequate  feathering  or  com-
bination  with  other  modalities  for  color  blending,  a 
smaller area can be treated. Peeling these areas appro-
priately is of greatest importance to enhance results of 
a full-face peel or an “El Zorro” peel regarding the brow 
area.

For browlifts, the formulas most used by the author 
are the Hetter’s heavy to very heavy (1.2%–1.6% croton 
oil in 35% phenol emulsion). For very heavy, add 4 mL 
of Hetter’s stock into a Novisol Emulsivial that contains 
6 mL of water/surfactant, for 10 mL of a peel formula. 
Or, mix in a glass cup 4 mL of Hetter’s stock with 0.5 mL 

181

Fig. 15.10  Before, after 7 days, and the third day (middle of the “tunnel of metamorphosis”) of a lip peel to 
improve the contour in a male patient with Hetter’s heavy formula: 1 mL of phenol 88% + 3 mL of Hetter’s 
stock + 0.5 mL of Novisol Cleanser + 5.5 mL of distilled water.

concentration of chlorhexidine gluconate, as it is used in 
contact  lenses  antiseptic  solutions28  and  eyedrops  pre-
scribed for healing corneal ulcers.29

Patients  usually  do  not  require  debridement  if  the 
eschars are kept moist and proper hygiene is maintained 
with compresses and face washes. However, if needed, it 
is important to be very gentle when removing the eschar 
or  fibrin  without  damaging  the  healing  epidermis  or 
fragile dermis. Soft compresses with saline or bacterio-
static water assist the in-office cleaning or debridement 
when needed Fig. 15.11.

FINAL WORD

The  learning  curve  for  deep  chemical  peels  is  long, 
but  it  is  a  procedure  that  gives  undisputed  resurfacing 
results if performed with the correct manual skills and 
peel formulas. Training in continued medical education 
hands-on courses/workshops or during residency or fel-
lowships is irreplaceable for the proper technique.

REFERENCES

Fig. 15.11  Removal of eschar in the saw zone of upper eyelids 
in  a  combination  of  medium-depth  peel  with  periocular  deep 
peel containing 0.8% croton oil in 35% phenol (2 mL of phenol 
88% + 2 mL of Hetter’s stock + 0.5 mL of Novisol Cleanser + 
5.5 mL of distilled water).

combination  with  “Robin’s  mask”  peel  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  15.9,  and  a  typical  evolution  of  a  lip  peel  is  illus-
trated in Fig. 15.10.

STANDARD TOPICAL POSTOPERATIVE 
CARE

Petrolatum jelly (Vaseline) is applied as needed through-
out the first week.20 The first application is performed by 
the physician after the procedure. The author currently 
prescribes a water-based jelly containing chlorhexidine 
(K-Y) during the first 1 to 2 days, if the patient prefers, 
after  testing  both  during  the  critical  initial  edema  and 
exudative  phase.  K-Y  has  been  used  by  ophthalmol-
ogists  during  contact  lens  placement  for  gonioscopy, 
without ocular side effects,27 possibly because of a low 

  1.   Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil 

peel: part I. Dissecting the formula. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000a;105:227–251.

  2.   Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part II. The lay peelers and their croton oil formulas. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000b;105:240–251.

  3.   Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil peel: 
part III. The plastic surgeons’ role. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000c;105:752–763.

  4.   Hetter GP. An examination of the phenol-croton oil 
peel: part IV. Face peel results with different concen-
trations of phenol and croton oil. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2000d;105:1061–1083; discussion 1084–1087.

CHAPTER 15 Segmental Phenol Croton Oil Peels for Brow Lifting182

PART 5  Special Topics

  5.   Larson DL, Karmo F, Hetter GP. Phenol-croton oil peel: 
establishing an animal model for scientific investigation. 
Aesthetic Surg J. 2009;29:47–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j 
.asj.2008.11.008.

  6.   Wambier CG, Lee KC, Soon SL, Sterling JB, Rullan PP, 
Landau M, et al. Advanced chemical peels: phenol-cro-
ton oil peel. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;81(2):327–336. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2018.11.060.

  7.   U.S. Patent 3,067,106 filed April 7, 1959. Issued Decem-

ber 4, 1962.

  8.   Brown AM, Kaplan LM, Brown ME. Phenol induced 

histological skin changes: hazards, techniques, and uses. 
Br J Plast Surg. 1960;13:158.

  9.   Baker TJ. Chemical face peeling and rhytidectomy: a 

combined approach for facial rejuvenation. Plast Reconstr 
Surg Transpl Bull. 1962;29:199–207.

 10.   Böhm R, Flaschenträger B. Über den giftstoff im 
krotonöl. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Exp Pathol 
Pharmakol. 1930;157:115–116. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01972119.

 11.   Hutchinson R. Croton oil. Bost Med Surg J. 1833;8:411–
414. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM183308070082602.
 12.   Newton AC. Protein kinase c: structural and spatial regu-
lation by phosphorylation, cofactors, and macromolecu-
lar interactions. Chem Rev. 2001;101:2353–2364. https://
doi.org/10.1021/cr0002801.

 13.   Bertolini TM. Is the phenol-croton oil peel safe? Plast 

Reconstr Surg. 2002;110:715–717.

 14.   Polliack A. 12-0-Tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-ace-

tate (TPA) and Its effect on leukaemic cells, in-vi-
tro—a review. Leuk Lymphoma. 1990;3:173–182. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/10428199009050993 
10.3109/10428199009050993.

 19.   Wambier Carlos Gustavo, Lee KC, Bertolini TM, Rullan 
PP, Beltrame FL. About “anti-aging effects of inge-
nol mebutate for patients with actinic keratosis” and 
phenol-croton oil peelings. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2019.01.065.

 20.   Wambier Carlos G, Neitzke IC, Lee KC, Soon SL, Rullan 
PP, Landau M, et al. Augmentation and eversion of lips 
without injections: the lip peel. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2019;80:e119–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j 
.jaad.2018.06.030.

 21.   Wambier CG, Pires F. Combining phenol-croton peeling. 
In: Issa MC, Tamura BM, eds. Chemical  Physical Proced. 
Clinical Approach Procedure Cosmetic Dermatology (Vol 1). 
1st ed., London: Springer; 2017.

 22.   Stegman SJ. A comparative histologic study of the effects 
of three peeling agents and dermabrasion on normal and 
sundamaged skin. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1982;6:123–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01570631.

 23.   Lee KC, Sterling JB, Wambier CG, Soon SL, Landau M, 
Rullan P, et al. Segmental phenol-croton oil chemical 
peels for treatment of periorbital or perioral rhytides. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j 
.jaad.2018.11.044.

 24.   Wambier Carlos G, Korgavkar K, Beltrame FL, Lee KC. 

Response to “clinical and histologic evaluation of ingenol 
mebutate 0.015% gel for the cosmetic improvement of 
photoaged skin”. Dermatol Surg. 2019;45(6):857–859. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000001948.
 25.   Wambier CG, Wambier SP de F, Pilatti LEP,  

Grabicoski JA, Wambier LF, Schmidt A. Prolongation 
of rate-corrected QT interval during phenol-croton 
oil peels. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78(4):810–812. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2017.09.068.

 15.   Totterman TH, Nilsson K, Sundstrom C. Phorbol 

ester-induced differentiation of chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia cells. Nature. 1980;288:176–178.

 16.   Baker TJ. Is the phenol-croton oil peel safe? Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 2003;112:353–354. https://doi.org/10.1097/01 
.PRS.0000067107.16672.04.

 26.   Parada MB, Yarak S, Gouvêa LG, Hassun KM, Talarico 
S, Bagatin E. “Blepharopeeling” in the upper eyelids: a 
nonincisional procedure in periorbital rejuvenation--a 
pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34:1435–1438. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-4725.2008.34304.x.

 27.   Mehta HK. A new use of K-Y jelly as a gonioscopy fluid. 

 17.   Kligman AM, Baker TJ, Gordon HL. long-term histo-

Br J Ophthalmol. 1984;68:765–767.

logic follow-up of phenol face peels. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1985;75:652–659. https://doi.org/10.1097/00006534-
198505000-00006.

 18.   Pyun S-H, Shim I-S, Ahn G-B. Xeroderma pigmentosum 
treated with advanced phenol-based peeling solution. J 
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2008;22:879–880. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2007.02476.x.

 28.   Tabor E. Corneal damage due to eye contact with chlor-

hexidine gluconate. JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 1989;261:557. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1989.03420040091021.
 29.   Geffen N, Norman G, Kheradiya NS, Assia EI. Ch-
lorhexidine gluconate 0.02% as adjunct to primary 
treatment for corneal bacterial ulcers. Isr Med Assoc J. 
2009;11:664–668.

PART 6  Complications

16

Skin Resurfacing Complications

Suzan Obagi

INTRODUCTION

Considering that skin resurfacing is, for the most part, 
an  elective  procedure,  the  tolerance  for  complications 
is  very  low  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  For  the  physi-
cian, resurfacing the skin involves creating a controlled 
injury to the skin surface followed by the natural heal-
ing process of the skin. The recovery period for a medi-
um-depth to deep peel can range from 7 to 14 days. Any 
adverse event during the healing process can push this 
time out even further and may take a large emotional toll 
on the patient. Unlike other cosmetic procedures where 
the  healing  process  is  hidden  under  the  skin  surface, 
during skin resurfacing, the healing process is visible to 
the patient, family, and the physician. Thus any compli-
cation is also highly visible and disturbing to the patient.
One must remember that the role of skin is to serve 
as a physiological barrier to prevent fluid loss and to pro-
tect the human body from exposure to trauma, ultraviolet 
radiation, infections, and toxins. Other major functions of 
the skin include sensory perception, immune recognition, 
and thermoregulation. The skin is composed of two layers, 
epidermis and dermis, that overlie the subcutaneous fat. 
The epidermis is about 50 μm in thickness and consists of 
three major resident cells, keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, 
and melanocytes. The main substance of the dermis con-
tains collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans along with 
vascular structures and nerve endings and provides circu-
lation, nutrition, and structural support for the epidermis. 
Fibroblasts, macrophages, and dendritic cells are the main 
resident cells in the dermis. Fibroblasts produce the colla-
gen,  elastin,  and  glycosaminoglycans  that  constitute  the 

dermal matrix. Adnexal structures include eccrine glands, 
apocrine glands, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles. It is 
these  adnexal  structures  that  help  to  reepithelialize  the 
skin after skin resurfacing.

COMPLICATIONS

Early  recognition  and  management  of  complications 
is  key.  Regardless  of  the  type  of  resurfacing  modality, 
whether  peels  or  lasers,  many  of  the  post-resurfacing 
complications are the same (Table 16.1).

Swelling
Skin-resurfacing procedures that generate a lot of heat or 
that penetrate to the papillary dermis or reticular dermis 
level will result in a variable amount of swelling that dif-
fers among patients. Typically, swelling begins the night 
of or the day after the procedure, peaks at 48 hours, and 
then  begins  to  resolve  starting  at  72  hours  (Fig.  16.1). 
Management of swelling is by having the patient apply 
“crushed-ice” bags or frozen peas in small plastic bags to 
the cheeks and periorbital areas 10 minutes an hour for 
the first 48 hours. Sleeping with the head elevated to at 
least 45 degrees helps reduce swelling. Finally, if swelling 
is severe and the patient’s eyes are swollen almost shut, 
an oral steroid taper can be given as long as the patient 
has no contraindications to systemic steroid therapy.

Contact Dermatitis
Contact  dermatitis,  usually  irritant  in  nature,  is  com-
monly  seen  after  skin  resurfacing  because  of  an 
impaired  epidermal  barrier  function.  Patch  testing  is 
183

184

PART 6  Complications

not  generally  helpful  during  the  postoperative  period, 
because  time  is  of  the  essence  in  managing  this  issue. 
However, once healed, patch testing can be performed if 
desired. However, the dermatitis is rarely a true type IV 
delayed hypersensitivity reaction, because patch testing 
fails to reveal the allergens in most cases.

Presenting  symptoms  are  often  new-onset  burning 
and  itching  of  the  skin  along  with  increased  redness. 
Healing regression and eczematous eruptions may also 
occur (Fig.  16.2).  Patients can develop contact derma-
titis  at  any  time  during  the  postoperative  period.  The 
denuded  or  deepithelialized  skin  allows  for  ingredi-
ents  to  easily  penetrate  through  the  skin,  thus  making 

TABLE 16.1  Classification of 
Complications

Potentially Permanent 
Complications

Persistent erythema
Scarring
Texture change

Hypopigmentation
Lines of demarcation

Temporary Complication

Swelling
Contact dermatitis
Infection (viral, bacterial, 

fungal)

Milia
Acne flare/rosacea flare
Postinflammatory  

hyperpigmentation

Ocular injury

the  skin  more  susceptible  to  topical  irritants  such  as 
fragrances,  propylene  glycol,  lanolin,  and  allergens  in 
cleansers,  moisturizes,  and  topical  ointments.  Patients 
should  be  instructed  to  adhere  strictly  to  the  postop-
erative products given to them to avoid self-prescribed 
topical “herbal” regimens or topical antibiotics (such as 
Neosporin [Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ] or 
bacitracin) during the healing process.

If  contact  dermatitis  is  suspected,  the  patient  should  
be  instructed  to  stop  all  topical  lotions  and  cleansers. 
Instead, the patient should wash the skin twice a day with 
plain water and apply a bland petrolatum ointment two to 
three times a day until healed. If the reaction is severe or the 
patient is very uncomfortable, a mid-potency topical ste-
roid and oral antihistamines are helpful to alleviate pruritus 
and the cutaneous eruptions. If the patient has significant 
skin  weeping,  topical  gauze  dilute  vinegar  compresses  (1 
teaspoon white vinegar in 2 cups of water) can be applied 
for 5 to 10 minutes per hour. In severe cases, systemic ste-
roids may be warranted to decrease the risks of postinflam-
matory hyperpigmentation (PIH) and scarring.

Infection
Denuded skin is a prime site for infection, because the skin 
barrier function is impaired. Early recognition and manage-
ment of skin infections will help mitigate the risk of scarring. 
Postoperative infections can be yeast, viral, or bacterial. The 
timing of the onset of symptoms can be helpful (Table 16.2).

A

B

Fig. 16.1  A, Patient is postoperative day 2 following a blue peel, periorbital fractionated laser resurfacing, and 
an upper eyelift. B, Patient is postoperative day 3 following a blue peel, periorbital fractionated laser resurfac-
ing, and a Hetter VL peel of the cutaneous upper lip.

Bacterial Infection
Rapid  onset  of  discomfort,  pruritic  papules  and  pus-
tules,  focal  areas  of  increased  erythema,  purulence, 
malodorous discharge, and crusting are signs of bacte-
rial infection. Staphylococcus aureus (Fig. 16.3A) is the 

Fig.  16.2  Patient  developed  contact  dermatitis  to  one  of  the 
postoperative products. Her symptoms were pruritus and heal-
ing regression manifesting on postoperative day 4 following a 
blue peel.

TABLE 16.2  Timeline of Skin Infection

Infectious 
Agent

Onset

Bacteria Any time after  

24 hours

Virus

Yeast

Usually after 48 hours but 
can occur at any time 
until skin is fully reep-
ithelialized up to postop-
erative days 7–14
Usually after day 5

Diagnosis

Gram stain
Culture and sensi-

tivities

Empiric coverage 
until culture and 
sensitivity results 
are in 

Adjust antibiotic if 

needed
Tzank prep
PCR, DIF, or DFA
Viral culture

KOH prep

DFA, Direct fluorescent antibody assay; DIF, direct immunofluores-
cence; KOH, potassium hydroxide; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

185

most  commonly  isolated  species,  but  even  Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa and Serratia marcescens (Fig. 16.3B) can 
occur. S. marcescens is a gram-negative anaerobic bacil-
lus  belonging  to  the  Enterobacteriaceae  family.  How-
ever, if the wound is occluded for more than 48 hours 
or if prophylactic antibiotics are used, the incidence of a 
gram-negative infection, including P. aeruginosa, is sig-
nificantly increased.

Any  patient  suspected  to  have  an  infection  should 
have  skin swabs sent for Gram  stain as  well  as culture 
and sensitivity. An antibiotic can be prescribed to treat 
the suspected infection and then modified once the sen-
sitivities are available. In the author’s practice, bacterial 
skin  infection  post-resurfacing  is  almost  nonexistent 
once patients were instructed to apply mupirocin oint-
ment to the nares of the nose three times a day starting 
1 week before their procedure and for 1 to 2 weeks after-
ward (until fully healed).

Minimizing  the  risk  of  infection  is  key.  Therefore 
meticulous  wound  care  with  decreased  duration  of 
occlusion,  frequent  dressing  changes,  and  thorough 
cleaning of the wound with 0.25% acetic acid solution 
are effective in reducing the bacterial colonization. The 
routine use of prophylactic antibiotics is  controversial, 
although it is recommended in patients with increased 
risks of infections.

Viral Infection
A flare of herpes simplex virus (HSV) or an eruption of 
varicella zoster virus (VZV) during the recovery period 
can be disastrous. It is critical to recognize and treat the 
infection  to  prevent  delayed  wound  healing,  dissemi-
nated viral infection, secondary bacterial infection with S. 
aureus, and, most importantly, scarring. The nature of the 
infection with VZV and HSV viruses results in deep ero-
sions that can heal with extensive scarring. Because the 
skin is deepithelialized, viral infection may only present 
as superficial erosions that spread and enlarge, as opposed 
to  the  classic  vesiculopustules  that  appear  on  normal 
skin (Fig. 16.4A–B). Typically, the patient presents with 
new-onset healing regression and rapidly spreading ero-
sions that do not necessarily start on the lips. These ero-
sions are accompanied by pain and discomfort. Touching 
them  and  then  touching  other  areas  of  open  skin  can 
transmit  the  virus  to  that  region.  Prior  HSV  infections 
can  be  subclinical;  therefore  all  patients  who  plan  to 
undergo  full-face  or  perioral  resurfacing  should  receive 
oral  antiviral  prophylaxis  such  as  acyclovir,  famciclovir, 

CHAPTER 16 Skin Resurfacing Complications186

PART 6  Complications

A

B

Fig. 16.3  A, Staphylococcus aureus infection manifesting as crusting, tenderness, and healing regression on 
postoperative day 4. B, Serratia marcescens manifesting as pruritic papules, tenderness, and healing regres-
sion on postoperative day 6.

A

B

Fig.  16.4  Disseminated  viral  infection  (herpes  simplex  virus  or  varicella  zoster  virus)  can  manifest  aggres-
sively  as  quickly  spreading  erosions  and  ulcerations  with  a  high  likelihood  to  scar  if  early  intervention  is 
missed. A, Patient at postoperative day 5 from a trichloroacetic acid blue peel of the face and a Hetter VL peel 
of the eyes. B, Same patient several weeks later still with erosions. In between, she developed a secondary 
S. aureus infection requiring oral antibiotics.

or valacyclovir. The prophylaxis should be initiated 1 to 
2  days  before  the  resurfacing  and  continued  for  7  days 
(medium-depth  peels  or  light  laser  resurfacing)  to  15 
days  (dermabrasion,  laser  resurfacing,  and  deep  peels) 
until reepithelialization of the skin is complete.

However,  despite  appropriate  prophylactic  antiviral 
therapy,  some  patients  can  still  experience  an  outbreak 
while on a suppressive regimen. If an HSV or VZV infec-
tion is suspected, a viral culture or a swab for polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) for VZV and HSV should be sent as 

soon as possible, and the dosing of antiviral therapy should 
be increased to the dose used to treat a zoster infection (i.e., 
valacyclovir 1000 mg three times a day for 10 days). Viral 
infections can sometimes yield a false negative if the lesion 
that is cultured is older than 48 hours. Therefore, even if 
the viral culture or PCR are negative, the course of antiviral 
therapy should be continued. I believe strongly that many 
viral infections are reactivated VZV rather than dissemi-
nated HSV. Both can then spread quickly to denuded areas; 
thus they may not appear as a typical viral infection would.

Yeast Infection
Candida albicans is the most common fungal/yeast spe-
cies  causing  wound  infections  after  skin  resurfacing. 
Typically,  around  postoperative  day  5  patients  begin  to 
develop regression of wound healing along with pruritic 
papules and pustules. An in-office potassium hydroxide 
(KOH) slide preparation should be performed if Candida 
infection is suspected. If an occlusive dressing was used, 
switching to an open wound care protocol will help. Fur-
thermore,  cleaning  the  wound  with  diluted  acetic  acid, 
topical antiyeast cream, and oral fluconazole can be used.

Other Infections
One  must  keep  in  mind  that  other  unusual  infections 
may also occur after skin resurfacing. Atypical mycobac-
terial infection with Mycobacterium fortuitum after full-
face skin resurfacing with CO2 laser has been reported. 
The patient developed nontender erythematous nodules 
that resolved after multiple incisions and drainage and a 
4-week course of oral ciprofloxacin. Another case series 
cites two cases of mycobacterial infection following frac-
tionated laser resurfacing. If a mycobacterial infection is 
suspected, one must specify this on the culture request so 
that the culture can be held long enough to grow these 
slow-growing  organisms.  Although  atypical  mycobacte-
rial infection is a rare complication of skin resurfacing, it 
is important to keep it in the differential diagnosis when a 
patient does not respond to traditional wound care, anti-
biotics, or antifungal or antiviral therapies.

Milia
The  development  of  multiple  small  keratin-retention 
cysts, milia, usually occurs between 3 and 8 weeks after 
ablative  skin  resurfacing  and  is  often  related  to  the 
depth of wounding. In most cases, milia resolve sponta-
neously as the skin continues to reepithelialize. Topical 
application of retinoic acid, alpha- or poly-hydroxy acid 

187

Fig.  16.5  Prolonged  erythema  after  healing  from  a  medi-
um-depth trichloroacetic acid peel. Healing was complicated by 
overly icing the skin (frostbite).

creams, and manual extraction are also helpful modali-
ties to facilitate the resolution of milia.

Acne and Rosacea Flare
Postoperative acne and rosacea flares are relatively com-
mon  after  skin  resurfacing.  Patients  whose  acne  and 
rosacea  are  not  well  controlled  before  skin  resurfacing 
are  more  prone  to  flares  after  the  procedure.  Proper 
topical  regimens  in  combination  with  oral  antibiotics 
such  as  tetracycline  and  doxycycline  should  be  used 
to curtail the flare before any scarring occurs. Rarely, a 
more aggressive systemic agent, such as isotretinoin, is 
required to control a significant flare-up.

Prolonged Erythema
Postoperative  erythema  is  an  expected  consequence  of 
skin  resurfacing.  However,  prolonged  erythema  (more 
than 3 weeks postoperatively) can be a challenging com-
plication (Fig. 16.5) because it may be a harbinger of an 
impending scar or it may just be the natural course of a 
deep  skin  resurfacing  (with  laser  resurfacing  or  phenol 
peels). When it lasts for more than 3 months, it can be 
very frustrating to both patients and physicians. Although 
prolonged  erythema  can  occur  with  any  skin  resurfac-
ing  modality,  it  appears  to  occur  more  often  with  abla-
tive laser resurfacing and deep chemical peels. It is more 

CHAPTER 16 Skin Resurfacing Complications188

PART 6  Complications

likely to occur in areas that had delayed wound healing 
or in areas resurfaced to the level of the reticular dermis. 
The exact mechanism of prolonged erythema is uncertain 
but may be associated with resurfacing-induced inflam-
matory response, reduced absorption of light by melanin, 
and decreased optical scattering in the dermis.

Treatment  of  prolonged  erythema  should  not  be 
started  until  the  skin  has  healed  fully.  Topical  therapy 
consists of conservative use of retinoic acid or retinalde-
hyde to normalize cell turnover and collagen production, 
ascorbic acid to mitigate erythema, a mineral sunscreen 
for daily protection, and judicious use of a mid-potency 
topical  steroid  2  days  a  week  (i.e.,  0.1%  triamcinolone 
cream).  The  role  of  topical  corticosteroids  in  the  treat-
ment  of  postoperative  erythema  is  controversial.  Some 
studies  indicate  that  postoperative  use  of  topical  corti-
costeroids appeared to be a cause of prolonged erythema 
and telangiectasias because of the effects of vasoconstric-
tion and vasodilation through a nonintact barrier.

However, if the area of erythema is very “angry” or 
is  showing  textural  changes  (fibrosis,  thickening),  it 
could be a sign of impending scarring. In this instance, 
the  topical  application  of  ultrapotent  class  I  steroids 
(i.e., 0.05% clobetasol cream or ointment) to the area 2 
days  a  week  for  several  weeks  can  be  used  to  prevent 
scar formation. These patients require close monitoring 

to ensure improvement or to intervene with laser treat-
ment  or  intralesional  steroid  injections  if  no  improve-
ment is seen. Pulsed dye lasers (PDL) are indispensable 
tools  in  the  treatment  of  postresurfacing  erythema  by 
targeting  the  redness,  aberrant  telangiectasias,  and  to 
help with collagen remodeling. Treatment with PDL can 
be performed using nonpurpuric energy settings at 2 to 
4 week intervals until the erythema subsides (Fig. 16.6).

Scarring
To achieve “tightening” of the skin, skin resurfacing must 
reach the level of the papillary dermis. At this level, it will 
strengthen  the  anchoring  fibrils  that  span  the  epidermis 
to dermis, thus tightening the skin. On the other hand, to 
level the skin, as one would for deep wrinkles or deep scars, 
the wound depth must approach the upper to midreticu-
lar dermis. Thus skin laxity is addressed with “tightening” 
levels of skin resurfacing, whereas certain acne scars and 
deeper rhytides require a “leveling” depth of wounding.

The trade-off with leveling types of procedures is the 
significant  risk  of  permanent  pigmentary  change,  tex-
tural  change,  and  scarring  that  goes  with  it.  Therefore 
it  is  essential  to  control  the  depth  of  the  wounding  to 
obtain the maximal desired clinical effects with minimal 
complications. One of the most devastating and serious 
complications of skin resurfacing is scarring.

A

B

Fig. 16.6  A, Patient in Fig. 16.4 at 1 year postoperatively with overall healing but still with persistent ery-
thema. During this time she was seen weekly for pulsed dye laser, when indicated, intralesional steroids, and 
proper skincare. B, Patient is shown 4 years later fully healed with only one small area (8 mm) of hypertrophic 
scarring at the jawline.

Scarring  can  take  the  form  of  reticulate  atrophy  or 
can  be  hypertrophic  or  keloidal  in  appearance  (Fig. 
16.7).  Scars  often  develop  in  areas  of  pruritus,  infec-
tion  (especially  viral),  prolonged  erythema,  or  delayed 
wound  healing.  Patients  at  increased  risk  for  scarring 

Fig. 16.7  Hypertrophic scarring following a combination trichlo-
roacetic acid peel (face) and dermabrasion (perioral). No opera-
tive report was available to determine the order of procedures, 
but either the dermabrasion was too deep or the peel got onto 
the dermabraded skin and penetrated deeply.

189

are those with a tendency to develop keloids, a history of 
radiation therapy to the treated area, and perioperative 
isotretinoin use within 3 months of a reticular dermis–
level  peel.  Furthermore,  certain  anatomic  areas  such 
as  the  thin  skin  of  the  neck,  perioral,  and  periorbital 
regions, or areas over bony projections such as the chin, 
mandibular border, and malar areas are more prone to 
scar formation.

Mitigation  of  the  scarring  hinges  on  early  detec-
tion  and  intervention  (Fig.  16.8).  Areas  of  delayed 
wound  healing  should  be  treated  with  low-level  lasers 
(low-fluence  Nd:YAG  laser,  low-fluence  alexandrite 
laser,  low-fluence  broadband  light)  or  sub-purpuric 
PDL  weekly  to  encourage  wound  healing.  Areas  that 
are healed but have become indurated/thickened or are 
very red should be treated with low-level laser or PDL 
in addition to the topical application of ultrapotent class 
I  corticosteroids  (two  times  a  week)  and  silicone  gel 
sheeting daily.

Alternatively, the hypertrophic or keloidal scars can be 
treated with intralesional steroids with or without intral-
esional  5%  5-fluorouracil.  The  combination  of  intrale-
sional  triamcinolone  acetonide  and  5-fluorouracil  has 
shown favorable results in the treatment of hypertrophic 
scars and keloids with less risk of atrophy and telangiec-
tasias. The concentration of triamcinolone acetonide used 
(ranging  from  1–10  mg/mL)  and  the  injection  interval 

A

B

Fig. 16.8  A, Healing regression seen at postoperative day 9 after an uneventful early recovery process. B, Same 
patient at postoperative day 13 showing improvement with low-level laser, bland topical emollient, and conservative 
topical steroid use. This patient went on to a full recovery but required weekly visits until the skin had fully healed.

CHAPTER 16 Skin Resurfacing Complications190

PART 6  Complications

(every 2–4 weeks) are based on the scar thickness. Thicker 
scars require more frequent injections at a higher concen-
tration,  whereas  thinner  scars  require  lower  concentra-
tions. Rarely should the concentration of triamcinolone 
acetonide exceed 10 mg/mL.

Delayed Wound Healing
Rarely,  cases  of  wound  healing  regression  have  been 
reported  with  no  underlying  identifiable  causes.  Sev-
eral  case  reports  and  one  case  series  describe  patients 
with  actinic  damage  who  underwent  uneventful  laser 
or chemical  peel skin resurfacing that developed heal-
ing regression, erosions, or pustules with no identifiable 
viral,  bacterial,  or  fungal/yeast  etiology.  Skin  biopsies 
were  nonspecific.  Lacking  any  other  identifiable  etiol-
ogy, patients were given a diagnosis of facial erosive pus-
tular  dermatosis,  a  very  recalcitrant  and  hard  to-treat 
condition. Treatment included long-term minocycline, 
isotretinoin, systemic steroids, or dapsone.

Pigmentary Alteration
Hyperpigmentation
PIH can occur as the skin heals following medium-depth 
and deep skin resurfacing in susceptible patients. PIH can 
even occur with light peels if a patient with darker skin does 
not start a proper preconditioning regimen (see Chapter 3) 
before starting the light peels. Although typically not per-
manent, PIH can be distressing to the patient and can take 
away from the overall success of the procedure. The sever-
ity  and  longevity  of  PIH  usually  correlates  with  wound 
depth. It can occur in about one-third of patients postoper-
atively regardless of their skin type. In Caucasian patients, 
those with darker skin tones (brunettes) are more at risk for 
PIH compared with more fair-complexion patients. How-
ever in Asian skin or Black skin, patients with lighter skin 
tones are more prone to PIH. A red flag is a darker-skinned 
individual who presents with freckling, melasma, or other 
dyschromia at baseline. This shows that their pigment cells 
are more unstable or reactive. Darker-skinned patients with 
uniform skin color or a lack of freckling are less likely to 
develop PIH. Tanned skin also puts the patient at increased 
risk for PIH, because their melanocytes are already stimu-
lated. Although most PIH is transient, it is usually notice-
able, and the majority of patients would like to speed up its 
resolution (Fig. 16.9).

The  regular  use  of  broad-spectrum  sunscreens  for 
at  least  6  to  8  weeks  before  the  resurfacing  procedure 

Fig. 16.9  Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation following a tri-
chloroacetic acid peel of the chest. This resolved with topical 
retinoic  acid,  4%  hydroquinone,  sunscreen,  and  several  30% 
salicylic acid peels.

and  postoperatively  are  critical  to  prevent  ultraviolet 
light–induced  melanin  synthesis  and  thus  to  achieve 
and maintain the optimal result of resurfacing. Topical 
bleaching agents such as hydroquinone (gold standard), 
Kojic  acid,  retinoic  acid,  azelaic  acid,  ascorbic  acid, 
glycolic acid, and physical sunblock are first-line treat-
ments for PIH. A typical regimen would include twice 
daily  4%  hydroquinone  to  the  whole  face  and  extra  to 
the browner areas, 6% glycolic acid lotion or 8% poly-
hydroxy  acid  lotion  in  the  morning,  50  SPF  mineral 
sunscreen daily, and 0.5% retinoic acid or 0.1% retinal-
dehyde in the evenings.

In  recalcitrant  cases,  superficial  light  chemical 
peels  with  30%  salicylic  acid  biweekly  can  hasten 
the resolution of hyperpigmentation. Before tackling 
PIH, once must ensure that the skin has fully healed. 
Starting a topical treatment regimen before reepithe-
lialization of the skin can further aggregate the sever-
ity of PIH.

Reducing the risk of PIH is crucial before perform-
ing  a  skin  resurfacing  procedure.  The  proper  use  of  a 
skin-conditioning program both before and after resur-
facing  greatly  reduces  the  risk  of  PIH  (see  Chapters  2 
and 3). The duration of the preconditioning program is 
adjusted to the patient’s skin type and their risk of PIH. 
Therefore patients deemed to be at risk for PIH should 
be preconditioned for 3 months rather than the standard 
6 weeks. Likewise, the duration of the postconditioning 
program should be prolonged in patients prone to PIH.

Hypopigmentation
Hypopigmentation  is  an  uncommon  late  complication 
of deep skin resurfacing that usually becomes apparent 
6 to 12 months after the procedure once the initial ery-
thema and PIH subside. Once the depth of resurfacing 
reaches the reticular dermis, permanent hypopigmenta-
tion can occur. However, true hypopigmentation is rare 
with  most  medium-depth  procedures.  Skin  lightening 
in post–medium-depth peels is most likely pseudo-hy-
popigmentation.  Pseudo-hypopigmentation  appears  as 
a  lighter  skin  color  in  the  newly  resurfaced  skin  com-
pared with the surrounding skin because of its health-
ier  state  (lack  of  photodamaged)  compared  with  the 
adjacent  photodamaged  skin  (Fig.  16.10).  The  newly 
resurfaced skin is simply skin color that is back to the 
patient’s baseline skin color. It can also be seen tempo-
rarily  in  darker-skinned  patients  until  their  pigment 
fully  returns.  To  minimize  this  contrast  and  minimize 
lines of demarcation, one should consider using topical 
agents or lighter peels to blend in the skin adjacent to 
the treated area.

When  multiple  facial  areas  need  to  be  resurfaced, 
treating the entire face instead of individual areas might 
be a better option to avoid lines of demarcation. Alter-
natively, one can choose variable-level resurfacing pro-
cedures to address areas with the most prominent scars 
or rhytides more deeply while areas that are not quite as 
damaged can be resurfaced in a lighter manner so that 
all the areas blend together nicely after healing is com-
plete.

Ocular Injury
Getting the peeling solution into the eye can cause cor-
neal damage and be very uncomfortable for the patient, 
may  require  an  ophthalmology  consultation,  and  will 
add  to  the  discomfort  during  the  postoperative  days. 
Sedated patients sometimes will manifest with lag oph-
thalmos and be at risk of solution getting into their eyes. 
Because they are sedated, they will not be able to vocal-
ize that the peel solution has gotten into their eyes (Fig. 
16.11).  Therefore  extreme  caution  and  constant  vigi-
lance  is  needed  while  performing  a  peel  on  a  sedated 
patient.  All  physicians  should  adhere  to  the  following 
measure to reduce the risk of ocular injury (Table 16.3): 
Acid  should  never  be  passed  over  the  patient’s  eyes  to 
avoid  accidental  dripping  into  the  eyes.  Furthermore, 
if  peeling  the  eyelids,  a  slightly  moist  cotton-tipped 

191

Fig.  16.10  Pseudo-hypopigmentation.  This  patient  has  had 
many medium-depth peels and laser resurfacing over 15 years 
for her facial skin. She protects her face extremely well from 
the sun, but comparing her face to the neck and chest (which 
is  tan  on  examination)  makes  the  skin  on  the  face  look  even 
lighter.

Fig.  16.11  Ocular  injury  following  trichloroacetic  acid  peel  of 
the face and eyes. A linear band of coagulated protein (frosting) 
is seen across the globe where the acid trickled into the eye 
during the procedure. (Photo courtesy Dr. Joe Niamtu.)

applicator should be used and the physician should con-
trol the position of the eyelid during the application of 
the peel (Fig. 16.12). During the course of applying the 
peel to the eyes, do not allow the cooling units or fans to 
blow the acid toward the lid margins.

CHAPTER 16 Skin Resurfacing Complications192

PART 6  Complications

TABLE 16.3  Reducing the Risk of Ocular Injury During Peels

Measures for Prevention

Management of Acid into the Eye

Keep a tissue in your nondominant hand to  
constantly blot excess acid from the skin

Make sure fans and cooling devices are turned  

down or off while the eyelid skin is being peeled to reduce the 
risk of the acid being “blown” into the eye

Nonphenol solutions—flush the eye with copious  

amounts of saline or water

Phenol solutions—flush the eye with mineral oil
Ophthalmology consultation if phenol or a  

strong TCA solution was used

Never pass the acid-soaked gauze or sponge across  

Ophthalmology lubricants two to three  

or over the eyes

Keep the gauze or sponge on the drier side, and  

make sure there is no acid on your fingertips that  
might accidentally drip onto the eyelids

Remove all contact lenses or corneal eye shields  

before performing a peel

TCA, Trichloroacetic acid.

A  delayed  ocular  risk  is  scleral  show  and  exposure 
keratitis  if  the  lower  eyelid  overly  retracts  during  the 
healing process. Patients at risk for this are those with 
lower  lid  laxity  or  preexisting  scleral  show  or  prior 
upper and lower eyelid surgery. Preoperatively, this can 
be  assessed  by  retracting  the  lower  lid  inferiorly  and 
holding  it  down  for  5  seconds;  if  it  takes  more  than  2 
seconds for the lid margin to pull back up to the globe, 
tightening  the  lateral  canthus  is  indicated  before  deep 
skin  resurfacing  periorbitally.  If,  during  the  healing 
process,  the  physician  begins  to  notice  lower  eyelid 
retraction, ectropion, or scleral show, the patient should 
be instructed to perform firm eyelid massage and pull 
the skin in an upward and cephalic-lateral direction to 
slowly stretch the skin as it is healing. This may need to 
be continued for 4 to 6 weeks while the healing process 
is ongoing.

Last,  a  disturbing  permanent  complication  with 
lower eyelid resurfacing is the folding of the lower eye-
lid upon itself during the healing process and creating a 
permanent fold along the lower eyelid. Keeping an eye 
on the healing skin and gently pulling it apart with two 
cotton-tipped applicators can help spread apart a fold as 
it is forming.

Uneven Peel Penetration
Early on as one learns to perform peels, they may find 
that they are getting variable depths of penetration with 
the peel solutions. The main reason could be “hot spots” 
(Fig. 16.13) where there is a collection of acid sitting on 
the skin. The acid will keep penetrating into the skin in 

times a day until healed

these spots. The key to even acid penetration is to pre-
pare the skin so that the stratum corneum is smooth and 
compact; the acid should be applied in firm even strokes 
without  leaving  “hot  spots,”  and  care  should  be  taken 
to  wait  long  enough  between  passes  to  see  the  extent 
of frosting and to see where more solution is needed. If 
laser resurfacing is being performed the same day, the 
peel should be performed first and the skin cleansed of 
residual acid. Otherwise, if the laser is performed first, 
the peel can trickle into the open wound and penetrate 
very deeply.

Complications From Deep Phenol Peels
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Phenol is absorbed through skin, subsequently metabo-
lized by the liver, and excreted by the kidneys. Patients 
who have impaired liver or kidney functions are more 
susceptible  to  the  toxicity  of  phenol.  In  addition,  the 
extent  of  cutaneous  absorption  of  phenol  is  associated 
with the total area of exposed skin rather than the con-
centration  of  the  phenol  used.  Cardiac  arrhythmias 
including  tachycardia,  premature  ventricular  contrac-
tions, bigeminy, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, ventric-
ular  tachycardia,  and  atrial  fibrillation  can  be  seen  in 
phenol-based  peels  with  rapid  application  in  the  full-
face treatment. Therefore it is important to use cardiac 
monitoring during the resurfacing procedure and in the 
recovery  period,  allowing  for  immediate  detection  of 
potential  cardiac  complications.  Hydrating  the  patient 
with intravenous fluids just before and during the peel 
further  reduces  the  cardiac  risk.  Probably  the  most 

193

A

B

Fig. 16.12  Proper technique for peeling eyelids. A, Upper eye-
lid: Hold the brow up and approach the eye either from the side 
or from the cephalad region to avoid having to cross the open-
ing  of  the  eye.  The  cotton-tipped  applicator  should  be  moist 
but  not  dripping.  The  physician  should  have  tissue  in  his/her 
non-dominant hand to blot any drips. B, Lower eyelid: Similar 
technique with holding the brow taut enough to pull the upper 
eyelid up a little to help expose the entire lower eyelid region. 
Approach the eye from the side or from the caudal direction to 
avoid crossing the opening of the eye.

important manner in which to reduce cardiac risk is by 
treating the face in small cosmetic units with a 15 to 20 
minute  pause  before  moving  on  to  the  next  area.  This 
allows  a  total  of  90  to  120  minutes  for  the  whole  face 
procedure, thus allowing for ongoing metabolism of the 
phenol  when  treating  the  entire  face.  Other  important 
points made by authors in this textbook (see Chapters 7 
and 8) is keeping the patient comfortable to reduce any 
adrenergic surge and to avoid the use of epinephrine in 
any local anesthetics or nerve blocks.

Laryngeal Edema
Laryngeal  edema  is  an  uncommon  complication  in 
patients  undergoing  phenol  peels.  There  is  one  case 

Fig. 16.13  A wet streak of acid is shown on the skin. If this is 
not  quickly  blotted,  it  will  penetrate  more  deeply  in  this  area 
and create a “hot spot.”

series of  three patients (all heavy  smokers)  developing 
laryngeal  edema  along  with  stridor,  hoarseness,  and 
tachypnea  within  24  hours  after  phenol  peeling  that 
resolved within another 24 hours after heated mist inha-
lation therapy. The hypothesis is that this was an addi-
tive effect of irritation to the larynx by ether fumes and 
cigarette smoke or a hypersensitivity reaction to phenol.

CONCLUSION

Chemical skin resurfacing is a very gratifying procedure 
that  yields  amazing  rejuvenative  results.  However,  as 
beautiful as the ultimate outcome may be, any scarring 
or prolonged erythema or dyschromia can detract from 
the end result and require a lot of hand holding on the 
part of the physician. The best way to reduce the like-
lihood  of  long-term  sequelae  from  resurfacing  proce-
dures is to correctly identify and manage these issues as 
they arise. Having the patient come in frequently during 
the first 1 to 2 weeks and having them call to notify the 
physician of any changes during the recovery period is 
essential.

FURTHER READING

Alam M, Pantanowitz L, Harton AM, Arndt KA, Dover JS. A 
prospective trial of fungal colonization after laser resurfac-
ing of the face: correlation between culture positivity and 
symptoms of pruritus. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29(3):255–260.
Alster TS, Lupton JR. Prevention and treatment of side effects 
and complications of cutaneous laser resurfacing. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2002;109(1):308–316; discussion 317-8.

CHAPTER 16 Skin Resurfacing Complications194

PART 6  Complications

Alster TS, Nanni CA. Famciclovir prophylaxis of herpes 
simplex virus reactivation after laser skin resurfacing. 
Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(3):242–246.

Lowe NJ, Lask G, Griffin ME. Laser skin resurfacing. Pre- and 
posttreatment guidelines. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:1017–
1019.

Alster TS, Williams CM. Treatment of keloid sternotomy 

Mervak JE, Gan SD, Smith EH, Wang F. Facial erosive pustu-

scars with 585 nm flashlamp-pumped pulsed-dye laser. 
Lancet. 1995;345:1198–1200.

Beeson WH, Rachel JD. Valacyclovir prophylaxis for herpes 
simplex virus infection or infection recurrence following 
laser skin resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(4):331–336.
Beeson WH. The importance of cardiac monitoring in super-
ficial and deep chemical peeling. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 
1987;13(9):949–950.

Bernstein LJ, Kauvar AN, Grossman MC, Geronemus RG. 
The short- and long-term side effects of carbon dioxide 
laser resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1997;23(7):519–525.
Botta SA, Straith RE, Goodwin HH. Cardiac arrhythmias in 
phenol face peeling: a suggested protocol for prevention. 
Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1988;12(2):115–117.

Brody HJ. Complications of chemical resurfacing. Dermatol 

Clin. 2001;19(3):427–438, vii–viii.

Costa IMC, Damasceno PS, Costa MC, Gomes KGP. 

Review in peeling complications. J Cosmet Dermatol. 
2017;16(3):319–326.

Culton DA, Lachiewicz AM, Miller BA, et al. Nontuberculous 
mycobacterial infection after fractionated CO2 laser resur-
facing. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013;19(3):365–370.

Dan Li, Lin Shi-Bin, Cheng Biao. Complications and posttreat-
ment care following invasive laser skin resurfacing: a review. 
J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2018;20(3):168–178. https://doi.org/10 
.1080/14764172.2017.1400166. Epub 2017 Dec 13.
Demas PN, Bridenstine JB. Diagnosis and treatment of 

postoperative complications after skin resurfacing. J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 1999;57(7):837–841.

Gross BG. Cardiac arrhythmias during phenol face peeling. 

Plast Reconstr Surg. 1984;73(4):590–594.

Khetarpal S, Kaw U, Dover JS, Arndt KA. Laser advances in 
the treatment of burn and traumatic scars. Semin Cutan 
Med Surg. 2017;36(4):185–191. https://doi.org/10.12788/j 
.sder.2017.030.

lar dermatosis after cosmetic resurfacing. JAMA Dermatol. 
2017;153(10):1021–1025.

Nanni CA, Alster TS. Complications of carbon dioxide laser 
resurfacing. An evaluation of 500 patients. Dermatol Surg. 
1998;24:315–320.

Nikalji N, Godse K, Sakhiva J, Patil S, Nadkarni N. Complica-
tions of medium depth and deep chemical peels. J Cutan 
Aesthet Surg. 2012;5:254–260.

Ozturk MB, Ozkaya O, Karahangil M, Cekic O, Oreroğlu AR, 

Akan IM. Ocular complication after trichloroacetic acid peel-
ing: a case report. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2013;37(1):56–59.
Rao J, Golden TA, Fitzpatrick RE. Atypical mycobacterial in-
fection following blepharoplasty and full-face skin resur-
facing with CO2 laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(8):768–771; 
discussion 771.

Rapaport MJ, Rapaport V. Prolonged erythema after facial 
laser resurfacing or phenol peel secondary to cortico-
steroid addiction. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(10):781–784; 
discussion 785.

Sriprachya-Anunt S, Fitzpatrick RE, Goldman MP, Smith 

SR. Infections complicating pulsed carbon dioxide laser 
resurfacing for photoaged facial skin. Dermatol Surg. 
1997;23:527–535; discussion 535-526.

Truppman ES, Ellenby JD. Major electrocardiographic 

changes during chemical face peeling. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1979;63:44–48.

van Gemert MJ, Bloemen PR, Wang W, et al. Periocular CO2 
laser resurfacing: severe ocular complications from multi-
ple unintentional laser impacts on the protective metal eye 
shields. Lasers Surg. Med. 2018;50:980–986. https://doi 
.org/10.1002/lsm.22951.

Walia S, Alster TS. Cutaneous CO2 laser resurfacing infection 

rate with and without prophylactic antibiotics.  
Dermatologic Surgery. 1999;25(11):857–861. https://doi 
.org/10.1046/j.1524-4725.1999.99114.x.

Klein DR, Little JH. Laryngeal edema as a complication of chem-

Zhang AY, Obagi S. Diagnosis and management of skin re-

ical peel. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1983;71(3):419–420.

Landau M. Cardiac complications in deep chemical peels. 
Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(2):190–193; discussion 193.

surfacing–related complications. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin 
North Am. 2009;21(1):1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j 
.coms.2008.11.002.

