second edition

Cosmetic
Dermatology

Products and Procedures
edited by Zoe Draelos

Cosmetic Dermatology
Products and Procedures

Cosmetic 
Dermatology
Products and Procedures

Edited by

Zoe Diana Draelos MD
Consulting Professor
Department of Dermatology
Duke University School of Medicine
Durham, North Carolina
USA

Second Edition

This edition first published 2016
© 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
© 2010 by Blackwell Publishing, Ltd

Registered office:  

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK

Editorial offices: 

 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK 
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA

For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the 
copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell

The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.

Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names 
used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher 
is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not 
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent 
professional should be sought.

The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not 
intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by health 
science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect 
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation 
any implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose.  In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in 
governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader 
is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or 
device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions.  
Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a 
citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information 
the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites 
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.  No warranty may be 
created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any  
damages arising herefrom.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Cosmetic dermatology (Draelos)
  Cosmetic dermatology : products and procedures / edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.—Second edition.

  p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-65558-0 (cloth)
I.  Draelos, Zoe Kececioglu, editor. 
[DNLM: 1.  Cosmetics.  2.  Dermatologic Agents.  3.  Cosmetic Techniques.  4.  Dermatologic Surgical Procedures. 

II.  Title. 

  5.  Skin Care—methods.  QV 60]
  RL87
  646.7′2—dc23

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic 
books.

2015030110

Cover images: background © Getty Images/Ian Hooton/SPL; middle © Getty Images/Renee Keith

Set in 9.5/12pt Minion Pro by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India

1     2016

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

Contributors, viii

Foreword, xii

Preface, xiii

Part I: Basic Concepts, 1

Section 1:  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic 
Dermatology, 3

  1  Epidermal Barrier, 3

Sreekumar Pillai, Megan Manco, and Christian Oresajo

  2  Photoaging, 13

Kira Minkis, Jillian Havey Swary, and Murad Alam

  3  Pigmentation and Skin of Color, 23

Jasmine C. Hollinger, Chesahna Kindred, and Rebat M. 
Halder

  4  Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System, 33

Francis McGlone and David Reilly

  5  Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for 

Evaluating Cosmetic Products, 42
Thomas J. Stephens, Christian Oresajo, Lily I. Jiang, and 
Robert Goodman

  6  Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents, 52

David E. Cohen, Alexandra Price, and Sarika 
Ramachandran 

Section 2:  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives, 65

  7  Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to 

the Skin, 65
Sreekumar Pillai, Surabhi Singh, and Christian Oresajo

  8  Creams and Ointments, 75

Irwin Palefsky

Part II: Hygiene Products, 81

Section 1:  Cleansers, 83

  9  Bar Cleansers, 83

Anthony W. Johnson, K.P. Ananthapadmanabhan, Stacy 
Hawkins, and Greg Nole

 10  Personal Cleansers: Body Washes, 96

Keith Ertel and Heather Focht

 11  Facial Cleansers and Cleansing Cloths, 103

Thomas Barlage, Susan Griffiths-Brophy, and Erik J. 
Hasenoehrl

 12  Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers, 110

Duane Charbonneau

 13  Shampoos for Normal Scalp Hygiene and Dandruff, 124
James R. Schwartz, Eric S. Johnson, and Thomas L. 
Dawson, Jr.

Section 2:  Moisturizers, 132

 14  Facial Moisturizers, 132

Yohini Appa

 15  Hand and Foot Moisturizers, 139

Teresa M. Weber, Andrea M. Schoelermann, Ute 
Breitenbach, Ulrich Scherdin, and Alexandra Kowcz

 16  Sunless Tanning Products, 148

Angelike Galdi, Peter Foltis, and Christian Oresajo

 17  Sunscreens, 153

Dominique Moyal, Angelike Galdi, and Christian Oresajo

Section 3:  Personal Care Products, 160

 18  Antiperspirants and Deodorants, 160

Eric S. Abrutyn

 19  Blade Shaving, 166

Kevin Cowley, Kristina Vanoosthuyze, Gillian McFeat, 
and Keith Ertel

Part III: Adornment, 175

Section 1:  Colored Facial Cosmetics, 175

 20  Facial Foundation, 177

Sylvie Guichard and Véronique Roulier

 21  Camouflage Techniques, 186

Anne Bouloc

 22  Lips and Lipsticks, 193

Catherine Heusèle, Hervé Cantin, and Frédéric Bonté

v

vi

Contents

 23  Eye Cosmetics, 199

Sarah A. Vickery, Robyn Kolas, and Fatima Dicko

Section 2:  Nail Cosmetics, 207

 24  Nail Physiology and Grooming, 207

Anna Hare and Phoebe Rich

 25  Colored Nail Cosmetics and Hardeners, 217

Paul H. Bryson and Sunil J. Sirdesai

 26  Cosmetic Prostheses as Artificial Nail Enhancements, 226

Douglas Schoon

 39  The Contribution of Dietary Nutrients and Supplements 

to Skin Health, 357
Helen Knaggs, Steve Wood, Doug Burke, Jan Lephart, and 
Jin Namkoong

Section 2:  Injectable Anti-aging Techniques, 364

 40  Botulinum Toxins, 364

J. Daniel Jensen, Scott R. Freeman, and Joel L. Cohen

 41  Hyaluronic Acid Fillers, 375

Mark S. Nestor, Emily L. Kollmann, and Nicole Swenson

 42  Calcium Hydroxylapatite for Soft Tissue 

Section 3:  Hair Cosmetics, 234

 27  Hair Physiology and Grooming, 234

Augmentation, 380
Stephen Mandy

Maria Hordinsky, Ana Paula Avancini Caramori, and Jeff 
C. Donovan

 43  Autologous Skin Fillers, 385

Amer H. Nassar, Andrew S. Dorizas, and Neil S. Sadick

 28  Hair Dyes, 239

Rene C. Rust and Harald Schlatter

 29  Permanent Hair Waving, 251

Annette Schwan-Jonczyk, Gerhard Sendelbach, Andreas 
Flohr, and Rene C. Rust

 30  Hair Straightening, 262

 44  Polylactic Acid Fillers, 390

Kenneth R. Beer and Jacob Beer

Section 3:  Resurfacing Techniques, 395

 45  Superficial Chemical Peels, 395

M. Amanda Jacobs and Randall Roenigk

Harold Bryant, Felicia Dixon, Angela Ellington, and 
Crystal Porter

 46  Medium Depth Chemical Peels, 402

Gary D. Monheit and Virginia A. Koubek

 31  Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations, 270

 47  CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated, 412

Thomas Krause and Rene C. Rust

Mitchel P. Goldman and Ana Marie Liolios

Part IV: Anti-aging, 281

Section 1:  Cosmeceuticals, 283

 32  Botanicals, 283

Carl R. Thornfeldt

 33  Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories, 295

Bryan B. Fuller

 34  Peptides and Proteins, 308

Karl Lintner

 35  Cellular Growth Factors, 318

Rahul C. Mehta and Richard E. Fitzpatrick

 36  Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids, 325

Olivier Sorg, Gürkan Kaya, and Jean H. Saurat

 48  Nonablative Lasers, 429

Adam S. Nabatian and David J. Goldberg

 49  Dermabrasion, 437

Christopher B. Harmon and Daniel P. Skinner

Section 4:  Skin Modulation Techniques, 445

 50  Laser-assisted Hair Removal, 445

Keyvan Nouri, Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Nidhi Avashia, 
and Jinda Rojanamatin

 51  Radiofrequency Devices, 451

Vic Narurkar

 52  LED Photomodulation for Reversal of Photoaging and 

Reduction of Inflammation, 456
David McDaniel, Robert Weiss, Roy Geronemus, Corinne 
Granger, and Leila Kanoun-Copy

 37  Topical Vitamins, 336

Donald L. Bissett, John E. Oblong, and Laura J. Goodman

 38  Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids, 346

Barbara A. Green, Eugene J. Van Scott, and Ruey J. Yu

Section 5:  Skin Contouring Techniques, 463

 53  Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser 

Assisted, 463
Anne Goldsberry, Emily Tierney, and C. William Hanke

Contents

vii

 54  Liposuction of the Neck, 476

Kimberly J. Butterwick

 58  Rosacea Regimens, 509

Joseph Bikowski

 55  Hand Recontouring with Calcium Hydroxylapatite, 485

 59  Eczema Regimens, 517

Kenneth L. Edelson

Section 6:  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology 
into Therapeutics, 492

 56  Anti-aging Regimens, 492

Karen E. Burke

 57  Over-the-counter Acne Treatments, 501
Emmy M. Graber and Diane Thiboutot

Zoe D. Draelos

 60  Psoriasis Regimens, 522

Laura F. Sandoval, Karen E. Huang, and Steven  
R. Feldman

Index, 529

Contributors

Eric S. Abrutyn
TPC2 Advisors Inc., Boquete, Chiriqui, Republic of Panama

Kimberly J. Butterwick
Cosmetic Laser Dermatology, San Diego, CA, USA

Murad Alam
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Hervé Cantin
LVMH Recherche, Saint Jean de Braye, France

K.P. Ananthapadmanabhan
Unilever HPC R&D, Trumbull, CT, USA

Yohini Appa
Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA

Nidhi Avashia
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

Thomas Barlage
Procter & Gamble Company, Sharon Woods Technical Center,  
Cincinnati, OH, USA

Jacob Beer
Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA

Kenneth R. Beer
General, Surgical and Esthetic Dermatology, West Palm Beach, FL, USA

Joseph Bikowski
Bikowski Skin Care Center, Sewickley, PA, USA

Ana Paula Avancini Caramori
Department of Dermatology, Complexo Hospitalar Santa Casa de Porto Alegre,  
Porto Alegre, Brazil

Duane Charbonneau
Procter and Gamble Company, Health Sciences Institute, Mason, OH, USA

David E. Cohen
The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University  
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA

Joel L. Cohen
AboutSkin Dermatology and DermSurgery, Englewood, and Department of 
Dermatology, University of Colorado at Denver, Aurora, CO, USA

Kevin Cowley
Gillette Innovation Centre, Reading, UK

Thomas L. Dawson, Jr.
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Institute for  
Medical Biology, Singapore

Donald L. Bissett
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, The Procter & Gamble Co., Sharon Woods 
Innovation Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Fatima Dicko
Procter & Gamble Cosmetics, Hunt Valley, MD, USA

Frédéric Bonté
LVMH Recherche, Saint Jean de Braye, France

Anne Bouloc
Vichy Laboratoires, Cosmétique Active International, Asnières, France

Ute Breitenbach
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany

Harold Bryant
L'Oréal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research, Chicago, IL, USA

Paul H. Bryson
OPI Products Inc., Los Angeles, CA, USA

Doug Burke
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

Karen E. Burke
The Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

viii

Felicia Dixon
L'Oréal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research, Chicago, IL, USA

Jeff C. Donovan
Division of Dermatology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Andrew S. Dorizas
Sadick Dermatology, New York, NY, USA

Kenneth L. Edelson
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and Private Practice, New York, NY, USA

Angela Ellington
L'Oréal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research, Chicago, IL, USA

Keith Ertel
Procter & Gamble Co., Cincinnati, OH, USA

Steven R. Feldman
Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA

Contributors

ix

Richard E. Fitzpatrick (deceased)
Department of Dermatology, UCSD School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA

C. William Hanke
Laser and Skin Surgery Center of Indiana, Carmel, IN, USA

Andreas Flohr
Wella/Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany

Anna Hare
Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA

Heather Focht
Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Peter Foltis
L'Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

Scott R. Freeman
Sunrise Dermatology, Mobile, AL, USA

Bryan B. Fuller
DermaMedics LLC, Oklahoma City, OK, USA

Angelike Galdi
L'Oréal Research and Innovation, Clark, NJ, USA

Christopher B. Harmon
Surgical Dermatology Group, Birmingham, AL, USA

Erik J. Hasenoehrl
Procter & Gamble Company, Ivorydale Technical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Jillian Havey Swary
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Stacy Hawkins
Unilever HPC R&D, Trumbull, CT, USA

Catherine Heusèle
LVMH Recherche, Saint Jean de Braye, France

Roy Geronemus
Maryland Laser Skin and Vein Institute, Hunt Valley, MD, and Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

Jasmine C. Hollinger
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

David J. Goldberg
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, and Skin Laser and Surgery 
Specialists of New York and New Jersey, USA

Mitchel P. Goldman
Cosmetic Laser Dermatology and Volunteer Clinical Professor of Dermatology at the 
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA

Anne Goldsberry
Laser and Skin Surgery Center of Indiana, Carmel, IN, USA

Laura J. Goodman
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, The Procter & Gamble Co., Sharon Woods 
Innovation Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Robert Goodman
Thomas J. Stephens & Associates Inc., Texas Research Center, Carrollton, TX, USA

Emmy M. Graber
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

Corinne Granger
Director of Instrumental Cosmetics, L'Oreal Research, Asnieres, France

Barbara A. Green
NeoStrata Company, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA

Maria Hordinsky
Department of Dermatology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

Karen E. Huang
Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest University School of Medicine; 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA

M. Amanda Jacobs
Division of Dermatology, Geisinger Health Systems, Danville, PA, USA

J. Daniel Jensen
Scripps Clinic, Bighorn Mohs Surgery and Dermatology Center, La Jolla, CA, USA

Lily I. Jiang
Thomas J. Stephens & Associates Inc., Texas Research Center, Richardson,  
TX, USA

Anthony W. Johnson
Unilever HPC R&D, Trumbull, CT, USA

Eric S. Johnson
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Leila Kanoun-Copy
L'Oréal Research, Chevilly Larue, France

Gürkan Kaya
Department of Dermatology, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland

Susan Griffiths-Brophy
Procter & Gamble Company, Sharon Woods Technical Center, Cincinnati,  
OH, USA

Chesahna Kindred
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

Sylvie Guichard
L'Oréal Research, Chevilly-Larue, France

Helen Knaggs
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

Rebat M. Halder
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

Robyn Kolas
Procter & Gamble Cosmetics, Hunt Valley, MD, USA

x

Contributors

Emily L. Kollmann
Center for Clinical and Cosmetic Research, Aventura, FL, USA

Amer H. Nassar
Sadick Dermatology, New York, NY, USA

Virginia A. Koubek
Total Skin and Beauty Dermatology Center, PC, and Departments of Dermatology 
and Ophthalmology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA

Mark S. Nestor
Center for Clinical and Cosmetic Research, Aventura, FL, USA

Alexandra Kowcz
Beiersdorf Inc, Wilton, CT, USA

Thomas Krause
Wella/Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany

Greg Nole
Unilever HPC R&D, Trumbull, CT, USA

Keyvan Nouri
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Jan Lephart
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

John E. Oblong
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, The Procter & Gamble Co., Sharon Woods 
Innovation Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Karl Lintner
KAL'IDEES SAS, Paris, France

Ana Marie Liolios
Private Practice, Fairway, Kansas, MO, USA

Megan Manco
L'Oréal Recherche, Clark, NJ, USA

Christian Oresajo
L'Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

Irwin Palefsky
Cosmetech Laboratories, Inc., Fairfield, NJ, USA

Sreekumar Pillai
L'Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

Stephen Mandy
Volunteer Professor of Dermatology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, and Private 
Practice, Miami Beach, FL, USA

Crystal Porter
L'Oréal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research, Chicago, IL, USA

David McDaniel
McDaniel Institute of Anti Aging Research, Virginia Beach, VA, Eastern Virginia 
Medical School, Norfolk VA and Old Dominion University Norfolk VA, USA

Alexandra Price
The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA

Gillian McFeat
Gillette Innovation Centre, Reading, UK

Sarika Ramachandran
The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA

Francis McGlone
School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University, 
Liverpool, UK

David Reilly
Unilever Research, Colworth Science Park, Sharnbrook, Bedford, UK

Rahul C. Mehta
SkinMedica, Inc, An Allergan Company, Carlsbad, CA, USA

Phoebe Rich
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA

Kira Minkis
Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA

Randall Roenigk
Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

Gary D. Monheit
Total Skin and Beauty Dermatology Center, PC, and Departments of Dermatology 
and Ophthalmology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA

Dominique Moyal
La Roche-Posay Laboratoire Dermatologique, Asnières sur Seine, France

Adam S. Nabatian
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA

Jinda Rojanamatin
Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand

Véronique Roulier
L'Oréal Research, Chevilly-Larue, France

Rene C. Rust
GSK/Stiefel, Brentford, Middlesex, UK

Jin Namkoong
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

Neil S. Sadick
Sadick Dermatology, New York, NY and Department of Dermatology, Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA

Vic Narurkar
Bay Area Laser Institute, San Francisco, CA, and University of California Davis 
Medical School, Sacramento, CA, USA

Laura F. Sandoval
Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, USA

Contributors

xi

Jean H. Saurat
Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

Nicole Swenson
Center for Clinical and Cosmetic Research, Aventura, FL, USA

Ulrich Scherdin
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany

Diane Thiboutot
Private Practice, Boston, MA, USA

Harald Schlatter
Procter & Gamble German Innovation Centre, Schwalbach am Taunus, Germany

Carl R. Thornfeldt
Episciences, Inc., Boise, ID, USA

Andrea M. Schoelermann
Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany

Douglas Schoon
Schoon Scientific and Regulatory Consulting, Dana Point, CA, USA

Annette Schwan-Jonczyk
Private Practice, Darmstadt, Germany

James R. Schwartz
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Gerhard Sendelbach
Darmstadt, Germany

Surabhi Singh
L'Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

Sunil J. Sirdesai
OPI Products Inc., Los Angeles, CA, USA

Daniel P. Skinner
Surgical Dermatology Group, Birmingham, AL, USA

Olivier Sorg
Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

Thomas J. Stephens
Thomas J. Stephens & Associates Inc., Texas Research Center, Carrollton, TX, USA

Emily Tierney
Department of Dermatology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,  
MA, USA

Eugene J. Van Scott
Private Practice, Abington, PA, USA

Kristina Vanoosthuyze
Gillette Innovation Centre, Reading, UK

Voraphol Vejjabhinanta
Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand

Sarah A. Vickery
Procter & Gamble Cosmetics, Hunt Valley, MD, USA

Teresa M. Weber
Beiersdorf Inc, Wilton, CT, USA

Robert Weiss
Maryland Laser Skin and Vein Institute, Hunt Valley, MD, and Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

Steve Wood
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

Ruey J. Yu
Private Practice, Chalfont, PA, USA

Foreword

Dermatology began as a medical specialty but over the last half 
century it has evolved to combine medical and surgical aspects 
of  skin  care.  Mohs  skin  cancer  surgery  was  the  catalyst  that 
propelled  dermatology  to  become  a  more  procedurally  based 
specialty.  The  combination  of  an  aging  population,  economic 
prosperity, and technological breakthroughs has revolutionized 
cosmetic aspects of dermatology in the past few years. Recent 
minimally  invasive  approaches  have  enhanced  our  ability  to 
prevent  and  reverse  the  signs  of  photoaging  in  our  patients. 
Dermatologists have pioneered medications, technologies, and 
devices in the burgeoning field of cosmetic surgery. Cutaneous 
lasers, light, and energy sources, the use of botulinum exotoxin, 
soft  tissue  augmentation,  minimally  invasive  leg  vein  treat-
ments,  chemical  peels,  hair  transplants,  and  dilute  anesthesia 
liposuction have all been either developed or improved by der-
matologists. Many scientific papers, reviews and textbooks have 
been published to help disseminate this new knowledge.

Recently it has become abundantly clear that unless photoag-
ing is treated with effective skin care and photoprotection, cos-
metic surgical procedures will not have their optimal outcome. 
Cosmeceuticals are integral to this process but, while some rig-
orous studies exist, much of the knowledge surrounding cosme-
ceuticals is hearsay and non-data based marketing information. 
Given increasing requests by our patients for guidance on the 
use of cosmeceuticals, understanding this body of information 
is essential to the practicing dermatologist.

In  Cosmetic  Dermatology:  Products  and  Procedures,  Zoe 
Draelos has compiled a truly comprehensive book that addresses 
the broad nature of the subspecialty. Unlike prior texts on the 

subject she has included all the essential topics of skin health. 
The  concept  is  one  that  has  been  long  awaited  and  will  be 
embraced by our dermatologic colleagues and other health care 
professionals who participate in the diagnosis, and treatment of 
the skin.

No one is better suited to edit a textbook of this scope than 
Dr. Zoe Draelos. She is an international authority on Cosmetic 
Dermatology and she has been instrumental in advancing the 
field of cosmeceuticals by her extensive  research, writing, and 
teachings. This text brings together experts from industry, man-
ufacturing,  research,  and  dermatology  and  highlights  the  best 
from each of these fields.

Dr. Draelos has divided the book into four different segments. 
The  book  opens  with  Basic  Concepts,  which  includes  physiology 
pertinent to cosmetic dermatology, and delivery of cosmetic skin 
actives. This section is followed by Hygiene Products, which include 
cleansers, moisturizers, and personal care products. The section on 
Adornment  includes  colored  facial  products,  nail  cosmetics,  and 
hair cosmetics. The book concludes with a section on Anti-aging, 
which  includes  cosmeceuticals,  injectable  anti-aging  techniques, 
resurfacing techniques, and skin modulation techniques.

You  will  enjoy  dipping  into  individual  chapters  or  sections 
depending on your desires, but a full read of the book from start 
to finish will no doubt enhance your knowledge base and pre-
pare you for the full spectrum of cosmetic dermatology patients.

Enjoy.

Jeffrey S. Dover
August 2009

Addendum

Who  better  to  author  and  edit  a  textbook  on  cosmeceuticals 
than Zoe Draelos. She is the recognized leader in the field, hav-
ing done most of the premier studies and written many of the 
definitive articles on the topic over the last decades.

In her first edition, Dr. Draelos set the standard for compre-
hensive  texts  on  the  subject  of  cosmeceuticals.  With  this  sec-
ond  edition,  she  has  raised  the  bar  even  further,  producing  a 
near  encyclopedic,  comprehensive  tome  on  the  subject.  It  is  a 

 treasure trove of information on the subject, without which any-
one interested in the topic would be sorely lacking.

Use it as a reference text, dip into chapters or sections from 
time to time, or if you really want to know this subject, read it 
from cover to cover.

Enjoy and treasure this work.

Jeffrey S. Dover
Boston, April 2015

xii

Preface

This text is intended to function as a compendium on the field 
of  cosmetic  dermatology.  Cosmetic  dermatology  knowledge 
draws  on  the  insight  of  the  bench  researcher,  the  innovation 
of the manufacturer, the formulation expertise of the cosmetic 
chemist, the art of the dermatologic surgeon, and the experience 
of the clinical dermatologist. These knowledge bases heretofore 
have  been  presented  in  separate  textbooks  written  for  specific 
audiences. This approach to information archival does not pro-
vide for the synthesis of knowledge required to advance the sci-
ence of cosmetic dermatology.

The book begins with a discussion of basic concepts relat-
ing  to  skin  physiology.  The  areas  of  skin  physiology  that  are 
relevant to cosmetic dermatology include skin barrier, photo-
aging, sensitive skin, pigmentation issues, and sensory percep-
tions. All cosmetic products impact the skin barrier, it is to be 
hoped in a positive manner, to improve skin health. Failure of 
the skin to function optimally results in photoaging, sensitive 
skin, and pigmentation abnormalities. Damage to the skin is 
ultimately  perceived  as  sensory  anomalies.  Skin  damage  can 
be  accelerated  by  products  that  induce  contact  dermatitis. 
While the dermatologist can assess skin health visually, non‐
invasive  methods  are  valuable  to  confirm  observations  or  to 
detect slight changes in skin health that are imperceptible to 
the human eye.

An important part of cosmetic dermatology products is the 
manner in which they are presented to the skin surface. Deliv-
ery systems are key to product efficacy and include creams, oint-
ments, aerosols, powders, and nanoparticles. Once delivered to 
the skin surface, those substances designed to modify the skin 
must penetrate with aid of penetration enhancers to ensure per-
cutaneous delivery.

The  most  useful  manner  to  evaluate  products  used  in  cos-
metic  dermatology  is  by  category.  The  book  is  organized  by 
product, based on the order in which they are used as part of 
a  daily  routine.  The  first  daily  activity  is  cleansing  to  ensure 
proper hygiene. A variety of cleansers are available to maintain 
the biofilm to include bars, liquids, non‐foaming, and antibac-
terial varieties. They can be applied with the hands or with the 
aid of an implement. Specialized products to cleanse the hair are 
shampoos, which may be useful in prevention of scalp disease.
Following  cleansing,  the  next  step  is  typically  moisturiza-
tion. There are unique moisturizers for the face, hands, and feet. 

Extensions of moisturizers that contain other active ingredients 
include sunscreens. Other products with a unique hygiene pur-
pose  include  antiperspirants  and  shaving  products.  This  com-
pletes the list of major products used to hygiene and skincare 
purposes.

The  book  then  turns  to  colored  products  for  adorning  the 
body.  These  include  colored  facial  cosmetics,  namely  facial 
foundations, lipsticks, and eye cosmetics. It is the artistic use of 
these cosmetics that can provide camouflaging for skin abnor-
malities of contour and color. Adornment can also be applied 
to the nails, in the forms of nail cosmetics and prostheses, and 
to the hair, in the form of hair dyes, permanent waves, and hair 
straightening.

From  adornment,  the  book  addresses  the  burgeoning  cat-
egory  of  cosmeceuticals.  Cosmeceuticals  can  be  divided  into 
the broad categories of botanicals, antioxidants, anti‐inflamma-
tories, peptides and proteins, cellular growth factors, retinoids, 
exfoliants,  and  nutraceuticals.  These  agents  aim  to  improve 
the appearance of aging skin through topical applications, but 
injectable  products  for  rejuvenation  are  an  equally  important 
category  in  cosmetic  dermatology.  Injectables  can  be  catego-
rized as neurotoxins and fillers (hyaluronic acid, hydroxyapatite, 
collagen, and polylactic acid).

Finally,  the  surgical  area  of  cosmetic  dermatology  must  be 
addressed  in  terms  of  resurfacing  techniques,  skin  modula-
tion  techniques,  and  skin  contouring  techniques.  Resurfacing 
can  be  accomplished  chemically  with  superficial  and  medium 
depth chemical peels or physically with microdermabrasion and 
dermabrasion. The newest area of resurfacing involves the use of 
lasers, both ablative and nonablative. Other rejuvenative devices 
affecting collagen and pigmentation include intense pulsed light, 
radiofrequency, and diodes. These techniques can be combined 
with liposuction of the body and face to recontour the adipose 
tissue underlying the skin.

The  book  closes  with  a  discussion  of  how  cosmetic  derma-
tology  can  be  implemented  as  part  of  a  treatment  regimen 
for  aging  skin,  acne,  rosacea,  psoriasis,  and  eczema.  In  order 
to  allow  effective  synthesis  of  the  wide  range  of  information 
included  in  this  text,  each  chapter  has  been  organized  with  a 
template  to  create  a  standardized  presentation.  The  chapters 
open with basic concepts pertinent to each area. From these key 
points, the authors have developed their information to define 

xiii

xiv

Preface

the  topic,  discuss  unique  attributes,  advantages  and  disadvan-
tages, and indications.

It is my hope that this book will provide a standard textbook 
for  the  broad  field  of  cosmetic  dermatology.  In  the  past,  cos-
metic dermatology has been considered a medical and surgical 
afterthought in dermatology residency programs and continuing 

medical education sessions. Perhaps this was in part because of 
the lack of a textbook defining the knowledge base. This is no lon-
ger the case. Cosmetic dermatology has become a field unto itself.

Zoe D. Draelos
Durham, NC

Part I

Basic Concepts

Sec tion 1:  Skin Physiology Pertinent to cosmetic Dermatology

ChaPter 1
epidermal Barrier

Sreekumar Pillai, Megan Manco, and christian oresajo
L’Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

BasIC ConCePts

•	 The	outermost	structure	of	the	epidermis	is	the	stratum	corneum	(SC)	and	it	forms	the	epidermal	permeability	barrier	which	prevents	

the	loss	of	water	and	electrolytes.

•	 Understanding	the	structure	and	function	of	the	stratum	corneum	and	the	epidermal	barrier	is	vital	because	it	is	the	key	to	healthy	skin.
•	 Novel	delivery	systems	play	an	increasingly	important	role	in	the	development	of	effective	skin	care	products.	Delivery	technologies	such	

as	lipid	systems,	nanoparticles,	microcapsules,	polymers	and	films	are	being	pursued.

•	 Cosmetic	companies	will	exploit	this	new	knowledge	in	developing	more	efficacious	products	for	strengthening	the	epidermal	barrier	

and	to	enhance	the	functional	and	aesthetic	properties	of	the	skin.

Introduction

Skin  is  the  interface  between  the  body  and  the  environment. 
There are three major compartments of the skin, the epidermis, 
dermis  and  the  hypodermis.  Epidermis  is  the  outermost 
structure and it is a multi‐layered epithelial tissue divided into 
several layers. The outermost structure of the epidermis is the 
stratum corneum (SC) and it forms the epidermal permeability 
barrier which prevents the loss of water and electrolytes. Other 
protective/barrier  roles  for  the  epidermis  include:  immune 
defense, UV protection, and protection from oxidative damage. 
Changes in the epidermal barrier caused by environmental fac-
tors,  age  or  other  conditions  can  alter  the  appearance  as  well 
as  the  functions  of  the  skin.  Understanding  the  structure  and 
function of the stratum corneum and the epidermal barrier is 
vital because it is the key to healthy skin and its associated social 
ramifications.

structural components of the epidermal 
barrier

The  outer  surface  of  the  skin,  the  epidermis,  mostly  consists 
of epidermal cells, known as keratinocytes, that are arranged 
in several stratified layers – the basal cell layer, the spinous cell 
layer and the granular cell layer whose differentiation eventu-

ally produces the stratum corneum (SC). Unlike other layers, SC 
is made of anucleated cells called corneocytes that are derived 
from keratinocytes. SC forms the major protective barrier of 
the skin, the epidermal permeability barrier. Figure 1.1 shows 
the different layers of the epidermis and the components that 
form the epidermal barrier. SC is a structurally heterogeneous 
tissue  composed  of  non‐nucleated,  flat,  protein‐enriched 
corneocytes and lipid‐enriched intercellular domains [1]. The 
lipids for barrier function are synthesized in the keratinocytes 
of the nucleated epidermal layers, stored in the lamellar bodies, 
and extruded into the intercellular spaces during the transition 
from the stratum granulosum to the stratum corneum forming 
a system of continuous membrane bilayers [1,2]. In addition to 
the lipids, other components such as melanins, proteins of the 
SC and epidermis, free amino acids and other small molecules 
also play important roles in the protective barrier of the skin. A 
list of the different structural as well as functional components 
of the stratum corneum is shown in Table 1.1.

Corneocytes
Corneocytes  are  formed  by  the  terminal  differentiation  of 
the  keratinocytes  from  the  granular  layer  of  the  epidermis. 
The epidermis contains 70% water as do most tissues, yet the 
SC  contains  only  15%  water.  Alongside  this  change  in  water 
content  the  keratinocyte  nuclei  and  virtually  all  the  subcel-
lular  organelles  begin  to  disappear  in  the  granular  cell  layer 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

3

4

BasIC ConCePts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

Keratohyalin and
lamellar granules 
of the stratum 
granulosum

Desmosomes

Melanocyte

Langerhans cell

Stratum corneum

Stratum granulosum

Stratum spinosum

Stratum basale

Dermis

Figure 1.1  Diagram of the epidermis indicat-
ing the different layers of the epidermis and 
other structural components of the epidermal 
barrier.

leaving a proteinaceous core containing keratins, other struc-
tural  proteins,  free  amino  acids  and  amino  acid  derivatives, 
and  melanin  particles  that  persist  throughout  the  SC.  From 
an oval or polyhedral shape of the viable cells in the spinous 
layers the keratinocyte starts to flatten off in the granular cell 
layer and then assumes a spindle shape and finally becomes a 
flat corneocyte. The corneocyte itself develops a tough chemi-
cally resistant protein band at the periphery of the cell, called 
cornified cell envelope, formed from cross‐linked cytoskeletal 
proteins [3].

Proteins of the cornified envelope
Cornified  envelope  (CE)  contains  highly  cross‐linked  pro-
teins  formed  from  special  precursor  proteins  synthesized  in 
the  granular  cell  layer,  particularly  involucrin,  loricrin,  and 
cornifin.  In  addition  to  these  major  protein  components, 
several  other  minor  unique  proteins  are  also  cross‐linked  to 
the  cornified  envelope.  These  include  proteins  with  specific 
functions such as calcium binding proteins, antimicrobial and 
immune functional proteins, proteins that provide structural 
integrity  to  SC  by  binding  to  lipids  and  desmosomes,  and 

table 1.1  Structural	and	functional	components	of	the	stratum	corneum

components

Stratum	corneum	(SC)

Function

Protection

Cornified	envelope	(CE)

Resiliency	of	SC

Cornified	envelope		
Precursor	proteins

Lamellar	granules	(LG)

SC	interfacial	lipids

Structural	proteins	that	are	cross‐linked	to	
form	CE

Permeability	barrier	of	skin

Permeability	barrier	of	skin

Location

Topmost	layer	of	epidermis

Outer	surface	of	the	SC

Outer	surface	of	the	SC

Granular	cells	of	epidermis

Lipid	bilayers	between	SC

Lipid‐protein	cross‐links

Scaffold	for	corneocytes

Between	SC	and	lipid	bilayers

Desmosomes	and	
corneodesmosomes

Keratohyalin	granules

Intercellular	adhesion	and	provide	shear	
resistance

Formation	of	keratin	“bundles”	and	NMF	
precursor	proteins

Between	keratinocytes	and	corneocytes

Stratum	granulosum

Natural	Moisturizing	Factor	(NMF)

Water	holding	capacity	of	SC

Within	SC

pH	and	calcium	gradients

Provides	differentiation	signals	and	LG	
secretion	signals

All	through	epidermis

Specialized	enzymes	(lipases,	
glycosidases,	proteases)

Processing	and	maturation	of	SC	lipids,	
desquamation

Within	LG	and	all	through	epidermis

Melanin	granules	and	“dust”

UV	protection	of	skin

Produced	by	melanocytes	of	basal	layer,	melanin	“dust”	
in	SC

1. Epidermal Barrier

5

protease  inhibitors.  The  cross‐linking  is  promoted  by  the 
enzyme transglutaminase that is detectable histochemically in 
the granular cell layer and lower segments of the stratum cor-
neum. The γ‐glutamyl link that results from transglutaminase 
activity is extremely chemically resistant and this provides the 
cohesivity and resiliency to the SC.

Lamellar granules and inter‐corneocyte lipids
Lamellar  granules  or  bodies  (LG  or  LB)  are  specialized 
lipid  carrying  vesicles  formed  in  suprabasal  keratinocytes, 
destined for delivery of the lipids in the interface between the 
corneocytes.  These  lipids  form  the  essential  component  of 
the epidermal permeability barrier and provide the “mortar” 
into which the corneocyte “bricks” are laid for the permeability 
barrier formation. When the granular keratinocytes mature to 
the stratum corneum, specific enzymes within the LB process the 
lipids, releasing the non‐polar epidermal permeability barrier 
lipids,  namely,  cholesterol,  free  fatty  acids  and  ceramides, 
from 
their  polar  precursors‐  phospholipids,  glucosyl 
ceramides,  and  cholesteryl  sulphate,  respectively.  These 
enzymes include: lipases, phospholipases, sphingomyelinases, 
glucosyl ceramidases, and sterol sulphatases [8,9]. The lipids 
fuse together in the stratum corneum to form a continuous 
bi layer. It is these lipids along with the corneocytes that con-
stitute the bulk of the water barrier property of the SC [4,21].

Lipid–protein cross‐links at the cornified envelope
LG are enriched in a specific lipid unique to the keratinizing 
epithelia such as the human epidermis. This lipid (a ceramide) 
has  a  very  long  chain  omega‐hydroxy  fatty  acid  moiety  with 
linoleic acid linked to the omega hydroxyl group in ester form. 
This lipid is processed within SC to release the omega hydroxyl 
ceramide  that  gets  cross‐  linked  to  the  amino  groups  of  the 
cornified envelope proteins. The molecular structure of these 
components  suggests  that  the  glutamine  and  serine  residues 
of  CE  envelope  proteins  such  as  loricrin  and  involucrin  are 
covalently linked to the omega hydroxyl ceramides [5,21]. In 
addition,  other  free  fatty  acids  (FFA)  and  ceramides  (Cer), 
may also form protein cross‐links on the extracellular side of 
the CE, providing the scaffold for the corneocytes to the lipid 
membrane of the SC.

Desmosomes and corneodesmosomes
Desmosomes are specialized cell structures that provide cell‐
to‐cell adhesion (Figure 1.1). They help to resist shearing forces 
and are present in simple and stratified squamous epithelia as 
in human epidermis. Desmosomes are molecular complexes of 
cell adhesion proteins and linking proteins that attach the cell 
surface adhesion proteins to intracellular keratin cytoskeletal 
filaments  proteins.  Some  of  the  specialized  proteins  present 
in  desmosomes  are  cadherins,  calcium  binding  proteins, 
desmogleins  and  desmocollins.  Cross‐linking  of  other  addi-
tional  proteins  such  as  envoplakins  and  periplakins  further 

stabilizes  desmosomes.  Corneodesmosomes  are  remnants  
of  the  desmosomal  structures  that  provide  the  attachment 
sites  between  corneocytes  and  cohesiveness  for  the  corneo-
cytes  in  the  stratum  corneum.  Corneodesmosomes  have  
to  be  degraded  by  specialized  proteases  and  glycosidases, 
mainly serine proteases, for the skin to shed in a process called 
desquamation [6].

Keratohyalin granules
Keratohyalin granules are irregularly shaped granules present 
in  the  granular  cells  of  the  epidermis,  thus  providing  these 
cells  the  granular  appearance  (Figure  1.1).  These  organelles 
contains  abundant  amount  of  keratins  “bundled”  together 
by  a  variety  of  other  proteins,  most  important  of  which  is 
filaggrin  (filament  aggregating  protein).  An  important  role 
of  this  protein,  in  addition  to  bundling  of  the  major  struc-
tural  protein,  keratin  of  the  epidermis,  is  to  provide  the 
Natural Moisturizing Factor (NMF) for the stratum corneum. 
Filaggrin contains all the amino acids that are present in the 
NMF. Filaggrin, under appropriate conditions is dephospho-
rylated  and  proteolytically  digested  during  the  process  when 
granular cells mature into corneocytes. The amino acids from 
filaggrin  are  further  converted  to  the  NMF  components  by 
enzymatic processing and are retained inside the corneocytes 
as components of NMF [7,8].

Functions of epidermal barrier

Water evaporation barrier (epidermal 
permeability barrier)
Perhaps  the  most  studied  and  the  most  important  function 
of  SC  is  the  formation  of  the  epidermal  permeability  barrier 
[1,7,8]. SC limits the transcutaneous movement of water and 
electrolytes, a function that is essential for terrestrial survival. 
Lipids,  particularly  ceramides,  cholesterol,  and  free  fatty 
acids, together form lamellar membranes in the extracellular 
spaces of the SC that limit the loss of water and electrolytes. 
Corneocytes  are  embedded  in  this  lipid‐enriched  matrix, 
and  the  cornified  envelope,  which  surrounds  corneocytes, 
provides  a  scaffold  necessary  for  the  organization  of  the 
lamellar membranes. Extensive research, mainly by Peter Elias' 
group has elucidated the structure, properties and the regula-
tion  of  the  skin  barrier  by  integrated  mechanisms  [9,11,12]. 
Barrier disruption triggers a cascade of biochemical processes 
leading  to  rapid  repair  of  the  epidermal  barrier.  These  steps 
include  increased  keratinocyte  proliferation  and  differen-
tiation, increased production of corneocytes and production, 
processing and secretion of barrier lipids, ultimately leading to 
the repair of the epidermal permeability barrier. These events 
are described in more detail in the barrier homeostasis section 
below. A list of the different functions of human epidermis is 
shown in Table 1.2.

6

BasIC ConCePts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

table 1.2  Barrier	functions	of	the	epidermis

table 1.3  Antimicrobial	components	of	epidermis	and	stratum	corneum

Function

Localization/components involved

component

class of compound

Localization

Water	and	electrolyte	
permeability	barrier

SC/corneocyte	proteins	and	
extracellular	lipids

Mechanical	barrier

SC/corneocytes,	cornified	envelope

Microbial	barrier/immune	
function

SC/lipid	components/viable	epidermis

Hydration/moisturization

SC/NMF

Protection	from	
environmental	toxins/drugs

Desquamation

SC/corneocytes,	cornified	envelope

SC/epidermis/proteases	and	
glycosidases

UV	barrier

SC/melanins	of	SC/epidermis

Oxidative	stress	barrier

SC,	epidermis/antioxidants

Free	fatty	acids

Lipid

Glucosyl	ceramides Lipid

Lipid

Lipid

Peptides

Peptides

Protein

Nucleic	acid

Protons

Ceramides

Sphingosine

Defensins

Cathelicidin

Psoriasin

RNAse	7

Low	pH

“Toll‐like”	
receptors

Proteases

Stratum	corneum

Stratum	corneum

Stratum	corneum

Stratum	corneum

Epidermis

Epidermis

Epidermis

Epidermis

Stratum	corneum

Protein	signaling	molecules

Epidermis

Proteins

Stratum	corneum	
and	epidermis

Mechanical barrier
Cornified  envelope  provides  mechanical  strength  and  rigidity 
to  the  epidermis,  thereby  protecting  the  host  from  injury. 
Specialized  protein  precursors  and  their  modified  amino  acid 
cross‐links  provide  the  mechanical  strength  to  the  stratum 
corneum. One such protein, trichohyalin is a multi‐functional 
cross‐bridging protein that forms intra and inter protein cross‐
links between cell envelope structure and cytoplasmic keratin fil-
ament network [13]. Special enzymes called transglutaminases, 
some  present  exclusively  in  the  epidermis  (transglutaminase 
3),  catalyzes  this  cross‐linking  reaction.  In  addition,  adjacent 
corneocytes  are  linked  by  corneodesmosomes,  and  many  of 
the  lipids  of  the  stratum  corneum  barrier  are  also  chemically 
cross‐linked to the cornified envelope. All these chemical links 
provide the mechanical strength and rigidity to the SC.

antimicrobial barrier and immune protection
The  epidermal  barrier  acts  as  a  physical  barrier  to  patho-
genic organisms that attempt to penetrate the skin from the 
outside  environment.  Secretions  such  as  sebum  and  sweat 
and  their  acid  pH  provide  antimicrobial  properties  to  skin. 
Microflora that normally inhabit human skin can contribute 
to the barrier defenses by competing for nutrients and niches 
that  more  pathogenic  organisms  require,  by  expressing 
antimicrobial  molecules  that  kill  or  inhibit  the  growth  of 
pathogenic  microbes  and  by  modulating  the  inflammatory 
response [32]. Desquamation that causes the outward move-
ment  of  corneocytes  and  their  sloughing  off  at  the  surface 
also  serves  as  a  built‐in  mechanism  inhibiting  pathogens 
from colonizing the skin. Innate immune function of kerati-
nocytes  and  other  immune  cells  of  the  epidermis  such  as 
Langerhans cells and phagocytes provide additional immune 
protection  in  skin.  Epidermis  also  generates  a  spectrum  of 
antimicrobial  lipids,  peptides,  nucleic  acids,  proteases  and 
chemical  signals  that  together  forms  the  antimicrobial  bar-
rier (Table 1.3). The antimicrobial peptides are comprised of 
highly  conserved  small  cysteine  rich  cationic  proteins  that 

are  expressed  in  large  amounts  in  skin.  They  contain  com-
mon secondary structures that vary from α helical to β sheets, 
and their unifying characteristic is the ability to kill microbes 
or  inhibit  them  from  growing.  Pathways  that  generate  and 
regulate the antimicrobial barrier of the skin are closely tied 
to pathways that modulate the permeability barrier function. 
Expression  of  endogenous  AMPs  coincides  with  the  pres-
ence  of  a  number  of  epidermal  structural  components  that 
may  become  part  of  the  permeability  barrier.  For  instance, 
murine  cathelin‐related  antimicrobial  peptide  CRAMP  and 
mBD‐3 are essential for permeability barrier homeostasis. In 
addition,  acute  and  chronic  skin  barrier  disruption  lead  to 
increased expression of murin β‐defensins (mBDs)‐1, ‐3, and 
‐14  and  this  increase  in  expression  is  diminished  when  the 
barrier is artificially restored [32].

nMF and skin hydration/moisturization
Natural moisturizing factor (NMF) is a collection of water‐soluble 
compounds that are found in the stratum corneum (Table 1.4). 
These compounds compose approximately 20–30% of the dry 
weight of the corneocyte. Many of the components of the NMF 
are  derived  from  the  hydrolysis  of  filaggrin,  a  histidine‐  and 
glutamine‐ rich basic protein of the keratohyalin granule. SC 
hydration  level  controls  the  protease  that  hydrolyze  filaggrin 
and histidase that converts histidine to urocanic acid. As NMF 
is water soluble and can easily be washed away from SC, the 
lipid layer surrounding the corneocyte helps seal the corneo-
cyte to prevent loss of NMF.

In  addition  to  preventing  water  loss  from  the  organism, 
SC also acts to provide hydration and moisturization to skin. 
NMF components absorb and hold water allowing the outer-
most  layers  of  the  stratum  corneum  to  stay  hydrated  despite 
exposure to the harsh external environment. Glycerol, a major 
component  of  the  NMF,  is  an  important  humectant  present 
in skin that contributes skin hydration. Glycerol is produced 

table 1.4  Approximate	composition	of	skin	Natural	Moisturizing	Factor

components

Amino	acids	and	their	salts	(over	a	dozen)

Pyrrolidine	carboxylic	acid	sodium	salt	(PCA),	urocanic	
acid,	ornithine,	citruline	(derived	from	filaggrin	
hydrolysis	products)

Urea

Glycerol

Glucosamine,	creatinine,	ammonia,	uric	acid

Cations	(sodium,	calcium,	potassium)

Anions	(phosphates,	chlorides)

Lactate

Citrate,	formate

% levels

30–40

7–12

5–7

4–5

1–2

10–11

6–7

10–12

0.5–1.0

locally within SC by the hydrolysis of triglycerides by lipases, 
but also taken up into the epidermis from the circulation by 
specific receptors present in the epidermis called Aquaporins 
[14]. Other humectants in the NMF include urea, sodium and 
potassium lactates and PCA [7].

Protection from environmental toxins and topical 
drugs penetration
The  SC  also  has  the  important  task  of  preventing  toxic 
substances  and  topically  applied  drugs  from  penetrating  the 
skin.  SC  acts  as  a  protective  wrap  due  to  the  highly  resilient 
and cross‐linked protein coat of the corneocytes and the lipid 
enriched  intercellular  domains.  Pharmacologists  and  topical 
or  “transdermal”  drug  developers  are  interested  in  increasing 
SC  permeation  of  drugs  into  the  skin.  The  multiple  route(s) 
of  penetration  of  drugs  into  the  skin  can  be  via  hair  follicles, 
interfollicular  sites  or  by  penetration  through  corneocytes 
and lipid bilayer membranes of the SC. The molecular weight, 
solubility, and molecular configuration of the toxins and drugs 
greatly  influence  the  rate  of  penetration.  Different  chemical 
compounds adopt different pathways for skin penetration.

Desquamation and the role of proteolytic 
enzymes
The  process  by  which  individual  corneocytes  are  sloughed 
off  from  the  top  of  the  SC  is  called  desquamation.  Normal 
desquamation  is  required  to  maintain  the  homeostasis  of  the 
epidermis.  Corneocyte  to  corneocyte  cohesion  is  controlled 
by  the  intercellular  lipids  as  well  as  the  corneodesmosomes 
that bind the corneocytes together. The presence of specialized 
proteolytic enzymes and glycosidases in the SC help in cleavage 
of  desmosomal  bonds  resulting  in  release  of  corneocytes  [6]. 
In  addition,  SC  also  contains  protease  inhibitors  that  keep 
these proteases in check and the balance of protease – protease 
inhibitors play a regulatory role in the control of the desquama-
tory process. The desquamatory process is also highly regulated 
by the epidermal barrier function.

1. Epidermal Barrier

7

The SC contains three families of proteases (serine, cysteine, 
and aspartate proteases), including the epidermal‐specific serine 
proteases  (SP),  kallikrein‐5  (SC  tryptic  enzyme,  SCTE),  and 
kallikrein‐7 (SC chymotryptic enzyme), as well as at least two 
cysteine proteases, including the SC thiol protease (SCTP), and 
at least one aspartate protease, cathepsin D. All these proteases 
play specific roles in the desquamatory process at different lay-
ers of the epidermis.

Melanin and UV barrier
Although  melanin  is  not  typically  considered  a  functional 
component of epidermal barrier, its role in the protection of the 
skin  from  UV  radiation  is  indisputable.  Melanins  are  formed 
in  specialized  dendritic  cells  called  melanocytes  in  the  basal 
layers  of  the  epidermis.  The  melanin  produced  is  transferred 
into  keratinocytes  in  the  basal  and  spinous  layers.  There  are 
two  types  of  melanin,  depending  on  the  composition  and  the 
color. The darker eumelanin is most protective to UV than the 
lighter, high sulphur containing pheomelanin. The keratinocytes 
carry the melanins through the granular layer and into the SC 
layer  of  the  epidermis.  The  melanin  “dust”  present  in  the  SC 
is  structurally  different  from  the  organized  melanin  granules 
found in the viable deeper layers of the epidermis. The content 
and composition of melanins also change in SC depending on 
sun exposure and skin type of the individual.

Solar ultraviolet radiation is very damaging to proteins, lip-
ids  and  nucleic  acids  and  cause  oxidative  damage  to  these 
macromolecules.  The  SC  absorbs  some  ultraviolet  energy  but 
it  is  the  melanin  particles  inside  the  corneocytes  that  provide 
the most protection. Darker skin (higher eumelanin content) is 
significantly  more  resistant  to  the  damaging  effects  of  UV  on 
DNA than lighter skin. In addition, UV‐induced apoptosis (cell 
death that results in removal of damaged cells) is significantly 
greater  in  darker  skin,  This  combination  of  decreased  DNA 
damage  and  more  efficient  removal  of  UV‐damaged  cells 
play  a  critical  role  in  the  decreased  photocarcinogenesis  seen 
in  individuals  with  darker  skin  [15].  In  addition  to  melanin, 
trans‐urocanic acid (tUCA), a product of histidine deamination 
produced in the stratum corneum, also acts as an endogenous 
sunscreen and protects skin from UV damage.

oxidative stress barrier
The stratum corneum has been recognized as the main cutaneous 
oxidation  target  of  UV  and  other  atmospheric  oxidants  such 
as  pollutants  and  cigarette  smoke.  Depletion  of  atmospheric 
“ozone layer” allows most energetic UV wavelength of sun radi-
ation, i.e. UVC and short UVB to reach earth level. This high 
energy  UV  radiation  penetrates  deep  into  papillary  dermis. 
UVA  radiation  in  addition  to  damaging  DNA  of  fibroblasts, 
also  indirectly  causes  oxidative  stress  damage  of  epidermal 
keratinocytes. The oxidation of lipids and carbonylation of pro-
teins of the SC lead to disruption of epidermal barrier and poor 
skin condition [16]. In addition to its effects on SC, UV also ini-
tiates and activates a complex cascade of biochemical reactions 

8

BasIC ConCePts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

within the epidermis, causing depletion of cellular antioxidants 
and antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
and  catalase.  Acute  and  chronic  exposure  to  UV  has  been 
associated  with  depletion  of  SOD  and  catalase  in  the  skin  of 
hairless  mice  [17].  This  lack  of  antioxidant  protection  further 
causes DNA damage, formation of thymine dimers, activation 
of  proinflammatory  cytokines  and  neuroendocrine  mediators, 
leading to inflammation and free radical generation [18]. Skin 
naturally uses antioxidants to protect itself from photodamage. 
UV  depletes  antioxidants  from  outer  stratum  corneum.  A 
gradient  in  the  antioxidant  levels  (alpha‐tocopherol,  Vitamin 
C,  glutathione  and  urate)  with  the  lowest  concentrations  in 
the outer layers and a steep increase in the deeper layers of the 
stratum corneum protects the SC from the oxidative stress [19]. 
Depletion  of  antioxidant  protection  leads  to  UV  induced  bar-
rier  abnormalities.  Topical  application  of  antioxidants  would 
support these physiological mechanisms and restore a healthy 
skin barrier [20,21].

regulation of barrier homeostasis

Epidermal  barrier  is  constantly  challenged  by  environmental 
and  physiological  factors.  Since  a  fully  functional  epidermal 
barrier is required for terrestrial life to exist, barrier homeostasis 
is tightly regulated by a variety of mechanisms.

Desquamation
Integral components of the barrier, corneocytes and the inter-
cellular lipid bilayers are constantly synthesized and secreted by 
the keratinocytes during the process of terminal differentiation. 
Continuous renewal process is balanced by desquamation that 
removes individual corneocytes in a controlled manner by deg-
radation  of  desmosomal  constituent  proteins  by  the  stratum 
corneum proteases. The protease activities are under the control 
of  protease  inhibitors  that  are  co‐localized  with  the  proteases 
within the SC. In addition, the activation cascade of the SC pro-
teases is also controlled by the barrier requirement. Lipids and 
lipid precursors such as cholesterol sulphate also regulate desq-
uamation by controlling the activities of the SC proteases [22].

Corneocyte maturation
Terminal differentiation of keratinocytes to mature corneocytes 
is controlled by calcium, hormonal factors and by desquamation. 
High calcium levels in the outer nucleated layers of epidermis 
stimulate  specific  protein  synthesis  and  activate  the  enzymes 
that induce the formation of corneocytes. Variety of hormones 
and  cytokines  control  keratinocyte  terminal  differentiation, 
thereby regulating barrier formation. Many of the regulators of 
these hormones are lipids or lipid intermediates that are synthe-
sized  by  the  epidermal  keratinocytes  for  the  barrier  function, 
thereby exerting control of barrier homeostasis by affecting the 
corneocyte maturation. For example, the activators / ligands for 
the nuclear hormone receptors (example: PPAR – peroxisome 

proliferation  activator  receptor  and  vitamin  D  receptor)  that 
influence keratinocyte terminal differentiation are endogenous 
lipids synthesized by the keratinocytes.

Lipid synthesis
Epidermal  lipids,  the  integral  components  of  the  permeability 
barrier, are synthesized and secreted by the keratinocytes in the 
stratum  granulosum  after  processing  and  packaging  into  the 
LB. Epidermis is a very active site of lipid synthesis under basal 
conditions  and  especially  under  conditions  when  the  barrier 
is disrupted. Epidermis synthesizes ceramides, cholesterol and 
free  fatty  acids  (major  component  of  phospholipids  and  cera-
mides). These three lipid classes are required in equimolar dis-
tribution for proper barrier function. The synthesis, processing 
and secretion of these lipid classes are under strict control by the 
permeability  barrier  requirements.  For  example,  under  condi-
tions  of  barrier  disruption,  rapid  and  immediate  secretion  by 
already packaged LB occurs as well as transcriptional and trans-
lational increases in key enzymes required for new synthesis of 
these lipids to take place. In addition, as explained in the pre-
vious section, many of the hormonal regulators of corneocyte 
maturation are lipids or lipid intermediates synthesized by the 
epidermis.  Stratum  corenum  lipid  synthesis  and  lipid  content 
are also altered with various skin conditions such as inflamma-
tion and winter xerosis [23,24].

environmental and physiological factors
Barrier  homeostasis  is  under  control  of  environmental  fac-
tors  such  as  humidity  variations.  High  humidity  (increased 
SC  hydration)  downregulates  barrier  competence  (as  assessed 
by  barrier  recovery  after  disruption)  whereas  low  humidity 
enhances  barrier  homeostasis.  Physiological  factors  can  also 
have influence on barrier function. High stress (chronic as well 
as  acute)  increases  corticosteroid  levels  and  causes  disruption 
of barrier homeostasis. During periods of psychological stress 
the cutaneous homeostatic permeability barrier is disturbed, as 
is the integrity and protective function of the stratum corneum. 
Many  skin  diseases,  including  atopic  dermatitis  and  psoriasis 
are precipitated or exacerbated by psychological stress [34]. Cir-
cadian rhythmicity also applies to skin variables related to skin 
barrier  function.  Significant  circadian  rhythmicity  has  been 
observed  in  transepidermal  water  loss,  skin  surface  pH,  and 
skin temperature. These observations suggest skin permeability 
is higher in the evening than in the morning [35]. Conditions 
that  cause  skin  inflammation  can  stimulate  the  secretion  of 
inflammatory cytokines such as interleukins, induce epidermal 
hyperplasia, cause impaired differentiation and disrupt epider-
mal barrier functions.

hormones
Barrier  homeostasis/SC  integrity,  lipid  synthesis  is  all  under  the 
control  of  different  hormones,  cytokines  and  calcium.  Nuclear 
Hormone Receptors for both well‐known ligands, such as thyroid 
hormones, retinoic acid, and vitamin D, and “liporeceptors” whose 

1. Epidermal Barrier

9

ligands are endogenous lipids control barrier homeostasis. These 
liporeceptors  include  peroxisome  proliferator  activator  receptor 
(PPAR alpha, beta and gamma) and Liver X receptor (LXR). The 
activators  for  these  receptors  are  endogenous  lipids  and  lipid 
intermediates or metabolites such as certain free fatty acids, leu-
kotrienes,  prostanoids  and  oxygenated  sterols.  These  hormones 
mediated by their receptors control barrier at the level of epidermal 
cell maturation (corneocyte formation), transcriptional regulation 
of terminal differentiation proteins and enzymes required for lipid 
processing, lipid transport and secretion into LB.

ph and calcium
Outermost  stratum  corneum  pH  is  maintained  in  the  acidic 
range, typically in the range of 4.5–5.0 by a variety of different 
mechanisms.  This  acidity  is  maintained  by  formation  of  free 
fatty  acids  from  phospholipids;  sodium  proton  exchangers 
in  the  SC  and  by  the  conversion  of  histidine  of  the  NMF  to 
urocanic acid by histidase enzyme in the SC. In addition, lactic 
acid,  a  major  component  of  the  NMF,  plays  a  major  role  in 
maintaining the acid pH of the stratum corneum. Maintenance 
of  an  acidic  pH  in  the  stratum  corneum  is  important  for  the 
integrity/cohesion of the SC as well as the maintenance of the 
normal skin microflora. The growth of normal skin microflora 
is  supported  by  acidic  pH  while  a  more  neutral  pH  supports 
pathogenic microbes invasion of the skin.

This acidic pH is optimal for processing of precursor lipids to 
mature barrier forming lipids and for initiating the desquamatory 
process. The desquamatory proteases present in the outer stratum 
corneum such as the thiol proteases and cathepsins are more active 
in the acidic pH, whereas the SCCE and SCTE present in the lower 
stratum corneum are more active at the neutral pH. Under condi-
tions when the pH gradient is disrupted, desquamation is decreased 
resulting in dry scaly skin and disrupted barrier function.

In the normal epidermis, there is a characteristic intra‐epidermal 
calcium  gradient,  with  peak  concentrations  of  calcium  in  the 
granular layer and decreasing all the way up to the stratum corneum 
[10]. The calcium gradient regulates barrier properties by control-
ling  the  maturation  of  the  corneocytes,  regulating  the  enzymes 
that process lipids and by modulating the desquamatory process. 
Calcium stimulates a variety of processes including the formation 
and  secretion  of  lamellar  bodies,  differentiation  of  keratinocytes, 
formation of cornified envelope precursor proteins, and cross‐link-
ing of these proteins by the calcium inducible enzyme transgluta-
minase. Specifically, high levels of calcium stimulate the expression 
of proteins required for keratinocyte differentiation, including key 
structural proteins of the cornified envelope, such as loricrin, invo-
lucrin,  and  the  enzyme,  transglutaminase  1,  which  catalyzes  the 
cross linking of these proteins into a rigid structure.

Coordinated regulation of multiple barrier 
functions
Co‐localization of many of the barrier functions allows regulation 
of the functions of the epidermal barrier to be co‐ordinated. For 
example, epidermal permeability barrier, antimicrobial barrier, 

mechanical protective barrier and UV barrier are all co‐localized 
in the stratum corneum. A disruption of one function can lead 
to multiple barrier disruptions, and therefore, multiple barrier 
functions are coordinately regulated. Disruption of permeability 
barrier leads to activation of cytokine cascade (increased levels 
of primary cytokines, interleukin‐1 and tumor necrosis factor‐
alpha)  which  in  turn  activates  the  synthesis  of  antimicrobial 
peptides  of  the  stratum  corneum.  Additionally,  the  cytokines 
and  growth  factors  released  during  barrier  disruption  lead  to 
corneocyte  maturation  thereby  strengthening  the  mechanical 
and  protective  barrier  of  the  skin.  Hydration  of  the  skin  itself 
controls barrier function by regulating the activities of the desq-
uamatory proteases (high humidity decreases barrier function 
and  stimulates  desquamation).  In  addition,  humidity  levels 
control  filaggrin  hydrolysis  that  release  the  free  amino  acids 
that  form  the  NMF  (histidine,  glutamine  arginine  and  their 
biproducts) and trans‐urocanic acid (deamination of histidine) 
that serves as UV barrier.

Methods for studying barrier structure  
and function

Physical methods
Stratum  corneum  integrity/desquamation  can  be  measured 
using tape stripping methods. Under dry skin conditions, when 
barrier  is  compromised,  corneocytes  do  not  separate  singly 
but  as  “clumps”.  This  can  be  quantified  by  using  special  tapes 
and  visualizing  the  corneocytes  removed  by  light  microscopy. 
Another  harsher  tape‐stripping  method  involves  stripping  of 
SC using cyanoacrylate glue. These physical methods provide a 
clue to the binding forces that hold the corneocyte together. The 
efficacy of treatment with skin moisturizers or emollients that 
improve skin hydration and reduce scaling can be quantitated 
using these methods.

Instrumental methods
The flux of water vapor through the skin (transepidermal water 
loss or TEWL) can be determined using an evaporimeter [25]. 
This instrument contains two water sensors mounted vertically 
in a chamber one above the other. When placed on the skin in 
a stable ambient environment the difference in water vapor val-
ues between the two sensors is a measure of the flow of water 
coming from the skin (TEWL). There are several commercially 
available evaporimeters [e.g., Tewameter® Courage & Khazaka 
(Köln,  Germany)],  which  are  widely  used  in  clinical  practice 
as well as in investigative skin biology.  Recovery of epidermal 
barrier (TEWL) after barrier disruption using physical methods 
(e.g.: tape strips) or chemical methods  (organic  solvent wash-
ing)  provide  valuable  information  on  the  epidermal  barrier 
properties [26].

Skin  hydration  can  be  measured  using  Corneometer®. 
The  measurement  is  based  on  capacitance  of  a  dielectric 
medium.  Any  change  in  the  dielectric  constant  due  to  skin 

10

BasIC ConCePts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

surface  hydration  variation  alters  the  capacitance  of  a  preci-
sion  measuring  capacitor.  The  measurement  can  detect  even 
slightest  changes  in  the  hydration  level.  Another  important 
recent  development  in  skin  capacitance  methodology  is  using 
SkinChip®.  Skin  capacitance  imaging  of  skin  surface  can  be 
obtained  using  SkinChip.  This  method  provides  information 
regarding skin microrelief, level of stratum corneum hydration 
and  sweat  gland  activity.  SkinChip  technology  can  be  used  to 
quantify regional variation in skin, skin changes with age, effects 
of  hydrating  formulations,  surfactant  effects  on  corneocytes, 
acne and skin pore characteristics [27].

Several  other  recently  developed  methods  for  measuring 
epidermal thickness such as confocal microscopy, dermatoechog-
raphy and dermatoscopy can provide valuable information on 
skin  morphology  and  barrier  abnormalities  [28].  Other  more 
sophisticated (although not easily portable) instrumentation 
techniques such as ultrasound, optical coherence tomography 
and the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can provide use-
ful  information  on  internal  structures  of  SC/epidermis  and 
its improvements with treatment. MRI has been successfully 
used to evaluate skin hydration and water behavior in aging 
skin [29].

Biological methods
Ultrastructural details of SC and the intercellular spaces of the SC 
can be visualized using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 
of thin vertical sections and freeze‐fracture replicas, field emission 
scanning electron microscopy and immunofluorescence confocal 
laser scanning microscopy [30]. The ultrastructural details of the 
lipid bilayers within the SC can be visualized by EM after fixation 
using ruthenium tetroxide. The existence of corneodesmosomes 
in the SC, and their importance in desquamation can be measured 
by Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of skin surface replicas.

The constituent cells of the SC, the corneocytes, can be visualized 
and quantitated by scraping the skin surface or by use of detergent 
solution. The suspension so obtained can be analyzed by micros-
copy, biochemical or immunological techniques.

Punch or shaved biopsy techniques can be combined with immu-
nohistochemistry  using  specific  SC/epidermis  specific  antibod-
ies to quantify the SC quality. Specific antibodies for keratinocyte 
differentiation  specific  proteins,  desmosomal  proteins  or  specific 
proteases can provide answers relating to skin barrier properties.

relevance of skin barrier to cosmetic 
product development

include  changes 

topical products that influence barrier functions
The  human  skin  is  constantly  exposed  to  hostile  environment. 
These 
in  relative  humidity,  extremes  of 
temperature,  environmental  toxins  and  daily  topically  applied 
products. Daily exposure to soaps and other household chemicals 
can  compromise  skin  barrier  properties  and  cause  unhealthy 
skin conditions. Prolonged exposure to surfactants removes the 

epidermal barrier lipids and enhances desquamation leading to 
impaired  barrier  properties  [7,8].  Allergic  reactions  to  topical 
products  can  result  in  allergic  or  irritant  contact  dermatitis, 
resulting  in  itchy  and,  scaly  skin  and  skin  redness  leading  to 
barrier perturbations.

Cosmetics that restore skin barrier properties
Water  is  the  most  important  plasticizer  of  SC.  Cracking  and 
fissuring  of  skin  develops  as  SC  hydration  declines  below  a 
critical threshold. Skin moisturization is a property of the outer 
SC  (also  known  as  stratum  disjunctum)  as  corneocytes  of  the 
lower SC (stratum compactum) are hydrated by the body fluids. 
“Moisturizers”  are  substances  that  when  applied  to  skin  add 
water and/or retains water in the SC. Moisturizers affect the SC 
architecture and barrier homeostatsis, that is, topically applied 
ingredients are not as inert to the skin as one might expect. A 
number of different mechanisms behind the barrier‐influencing 
effects  of  moisturizers  have  been  suggested,  such  as  simple 
deposition  of  lipid  material  outside  the  skin.  Ingredients  in 
the  moisturizers  may  also  change  the  lamellar  organization 
and  the  packing  of  the  lipid  matrix  and  thereby  change  skin 
permeability  [33]. The  NMF  components  present  in  the  outer 
SC act as humectants, absorb moisture from the atmosphere and 
are  sensitive  to  humidity  of  the  atmosphere.  The  amino  acids 
and their metabolites, along with other inorganic and organic 
osmolytes such as urea, lactic acid, taurine and glycerol act as 
humectants  within  the  outer  SC.  Secretions  from  sebaceous 
glands  on  the  surface  of  the  skin  also  act  as  emollients  and 
contribute  to  skin  hydration.  A  lack  of  either  or  any  of  these 
components can contribute to dry, scaly skin. Topical applica-
tion of all of the above components can act as humectants, and 
can relieve dry skin condition and improve skin moisturization 
and barrier properties. Film forming polysaccharide materials 
such  as  hyaluronic  acid,  binds  and  retains  water  and  helps  to 
keep skin supple and soft.

In  addition  to  humectants,  emollients  such  as  petroleum 
jelly, hydrocarbon oils and waxes, mineral and silicone oils and 
paraffin wax provide an occlusive barrier to the skin, preventing 
excessive moisture loss from the skin surface.

Topically  applied  barrier  compatible  lipids  also  contribute 
to  skin  moisturization  and 
improved  skin  conditions. 
Chronologically aged skin exhibits delayed recovery rates after 
defined barrier insults, with decreased epidermal lipid synthesis. 
Application of a mixture of cholesterol, ceramides, and essential/
nonessential  free  fatty  acids  (FFAs)  in  an  equimolar  ratio  was 
shown  to  lead  to  normal  barrier  recovery,  and  a  3:1:1:1  ratio 
of  these  four  ingredients  demonstrated  accelerated  barrier 
recovery [31].

Topical  application  of  antioxidants  and  anti‐inflammatory 
agents  also  protects  skin  from  UV‐induced  skin  damage  by 
providing  protection  from  oxidative  damage  to  skin  proteins 
and lipids [20,21].

Topically  applied  substances  may  penetrate  deeper  into  the 
skin  and  interfere  with  the  production  of  barrier  lipids  and 

the maturation of corneocytes. Creams may influence the des-
quamatory  proteases  and  change  the  thickness  of  the  SC. The 
increased  understanding  of  the  interactions  between  topically 
applied  substances  and  epidermal  biochemistry  will  enhance 
the  possibilities  to  tailor  skin  care  products  for  various  SC 
abnormalities [33].

skin irritation from cosmetics
Thousands of ingredients are used by the cosmetic industry. These 
include pure compounds, mixtures, plant extracts, oils and waxes, 
surfactants,  detergents,  preservatives  and  polymers.  Although 
all  the  ingredients  used  by  the  cosmetic  industry  are  tested  for 
safety, some consumers may still experience reactions to some of 
them. Most common reactions are irritant contact reactions while 
allergic contact reactions are less common. Irritant reactions tend 
to  be  more  rapid  and  cause  mild  discomfort  and  redness  and 
scaling of skin. Allergic reactions can be delayed, more persistent 
and sometimes severe. Ingredients previously considered safe can 
be irritating in a different formulation because of increased skin 
penetration into skin. More than 50% of the general population 
perceives their skin as sensitive. It is believed that the perception 
of sensitive skin is at least in part, related to skin barrier function. 
People with impaired barrier function may experience higher irri-
tation to a particular ingredient due to its increased penetration 
into deeper layers of the skin.

summary and future trends

Major advances have been made in the last several decades in 
understanding  the  complexity  and  functions  of  the  stratum 
corneum.  Extensive  research  by  several  groups  has  elucidated 
the metabolically active role of the SC and have characterized the 
major components and their importance in providing protection 
for the organism from the external environment. New insights 
into the molecular control mechanisms of desquamation, lipid 
processing, barrier function and antimicrobial protection have 
been elucidated in the last decade.

Knowledge of other less well known epithelial organelles such 
as intercellular junctions, tight junctions, and gap junctions and 
their  role  in  barrier  function  in  the  skin  is  being  elucidated. 
Intermolecular  links  that  connect  intercellular  lipids  with  the 
corneocytes  of  the  SC  and  their  crucial  role  for  maintaining 
barrier function is an area being actively researched.

New  knowledge  in  the  corneocyte  envelope  structure  and 
the  physical  state  of  the  intercellular  lipid  crystallinity  and 
their interrelationship would lead to development of new lipid 
actives  for  improving  SC  moisturization  and  for  treatment  of 
skin barrier disorders. Further research in the cellular signaling 
events  that  control  the  communication  between  SC  and  the 
viable epidermis will shed more light into barrier homeostasis 
mechanisms.

Novel  delivery  systems  play  an  increasingly  important  role 
in  the  development  of  effective  skin  care  products.  Delivery 

1. Epidermal Barrier

11

technologies such as lipid systems, nanoparticles, microcapsules, 
polymers and films are being pursued not only as vehicles for 
delivering cosmetic actives through skin, but also for improving 
barrier properties of the skin.

Undoubtedly, skin care and cosmetic companies will exploit this 
new  knowledge  in  developing  novel  and  more  efficacious  prod-
ucts for strengthening the epidermal barrier and to improve and 
enhance the functional and aesthetic properties of the human skin.

references

  1  Elias PM. (1983) Epidermal lipids, barrier function, and desquama-

tion. J Invest Dermatol 80, 44s–9s.

  2  Menon GK, Feingold KR, Elias PM. (1992) Lamellar body secretory 

response to barrier disruption. J Invest Dermatol 98, 279–89.

  3  Downing DT. (1992) Lipid and protein structures in the permeability 

barrier of mammalian epidermis. J Lipid Res 33, 301–13.

  4  Elias  PM.  (1996)  Stratum  corneum  architecture,  metabolic  activity 
and interactivity with subjacent cell layers. Exp Dermatol 5, 191–201.
  5  Uchida  Y,  Holleran  WM.  (2008)  Omega‐O‐acylceramide,  a  lipid 

essential for mammalian survival. J Dermatol Sci 51,77–87.

  6  Harding CR, Watkinson A, Rawlings AV, Scott IR. (2000) Dry skin, 
moisturization and corneodesmolysis. Int J Cosmet Sci 22, 21–52.
  7  Schaefer H, Redelmeier TE, eds. (1996) Skin Barrier. Principles of 

Percutaneous Absorption. Basel: Karger.

  8  Rawlings  AV,  Matts  PJ.  (2005)  Stratum  corneum  moisturization  at 
the molecular level: an update in relation to the dry skin cycle. J Invest 
Dermatol 124, 1099–11.

  9  Elias  PM  (2005).  Stratum  corneum  defensive  functions:  an  inte-

grated view. J Invest Dermatol 125, 183–200.

10  Menon GK, Grayson S, Elias PM. (1985) Ionic calcium reservoirs in 
mammalian epidermis: Ultrastructural localization by ion‐capture 
cytochemistry. J Invest Dermatol 84, 508–512.

11  Elias  PM,  Menon  GK.  (1991)  Structural  and  lipid  biochemical 
correlates of the epidermal permeability barrier. Adv Lipid Res 24, 
1–26. 

12  Elias  PM,  Feingold  KR.  (1992)  Lipids  and  the  epidermal  water 
barrier: metabolism, regulation, and pathophysiology. Semin Der-
matol 11, 176–82.

13  Steinert PM, Parry DA, Marekov LN. (2003) Trichohyalin mechanically 
strengthens the hair follicle: multiple cross‐bridging roles in the inner 
root shealth. J Biol Chem 278, 41409–19.

14  Choi  EH,  Man  M‐Q,  Wang  F,  Zhang  X,  Brown  BE,  Feingold  KR, 
Elias PM. (2005) Is endogenous glycerol a determinant of stratum 
corneum hydration in humans. J Invest Dermatol 125, 288–93.
15  Yamaguchi  Y,  Takahashi  K,  Zmudzka  BZ,  Kornhauser  A,  Miller 
SA,  Tadokoro  T,  Berens  W,  Beer  JZ,  Hearing  VJ.  (2006)  Human 
skin  responses  to  UV  radiation:  pigment  in  the  upper  epidermis 
protects against DNA damage in the lower epidermis and facilitates 
apoptosis. FASEB J 20, 1486–8.

16  Sander CS, Chang H, Salzmann S, Muller CSL, Ekanayake‐Mudiya-
nselage S, Elsner P, Thiele JJ. (2002) Photoaging is associated with 
protein oxidation in human skin in vivo 118, 618–25.

17  Pence BC, Naylor MF. (1990) Effects of single‐dose UV radiation 
on skin SOD, catalase and xanthine oxidase in hairless mice. J Invest 
Dermatol 95, 213–16.

12

BasIC ConCePts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

18  Pillai S, Oresajo C, Hayward J. (2005) UV radiation and skin aging: 
roles of reactive oxygen species, inflammation and protease activation, 
and strategies for prevention of inflammation‐induced matrix degra-
dation. Int J Cosmet Sci 27, 17–34.

19  Weber SU, Thiele JJ, Cross CE, Packer L. (1999) Vitamin C, uric acid, 
and glutathione gradients in murine stratum corneum and their sus-
ceptibility to ozone exposure. J Invest Dermatol 113, 1128–32. 

20  Pinnell  SR.  (2003)  Cutaneous  photodamage,  oxidative  stress,  and 
topical antioxidant protection. J Am Acad Dermatol 48, 1–19.
21  Lopez‐Torres  M,  Thiele  JJ,  Shindo  Y,  Han  D,  Packer  L.  (1998) 
Topical application of alpha‐tocopherol modulates the antioxidant 
network and diminishes UV‐induced oxidative damage in murine 
skin. Br J Dermatol 138, 207–15.

22  Madison KC. (2003) Barrier function of the skin: “La Raison d'Etre” 

of the epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 121, 231–41.

23  Chatenay F, Corcuff P, Saint‐Leger D, Leveque JL. (1990) Alterations 
in the composition of human stratum corneum lipids induced by 
inflammation. Photoderamtol Photoimmunol Photomed 7, 119–22.
24  Saint‐Leger D, Francois AM, Leveque JL, Stoudemayer TJ, Kligman 
AM, Grove G. (1989) Stratum corneum lipids in skin xerosis. Der-
matologica 178, 151–5.

27  Leveque JL, Querleux B. (2003) SkinChip, a new tool for investigating 

the skin surface in vivo. Skin Research Technol 9, 343–7.

28  Corcuff  P,  Gonnord  G,  Pierard  GE,  Leveque  JL.  (1996)  In  vivo 
confocal microsocopy of human skin: a new design for cosmetology 
and dermatology. Scanning 18, 351–5.

29  Richard S, Querleux B, Bittoun J, Jolivet O, Idy‐Peretti I, de Lacharriere 
O, Leveque JL. (1993) Characterization of skin in vivo by high reso-
lution  magnetic  resonance  imaging:  water  behavior  and  age‐related 
effects. J Invest Dermatol 100, 705–709.

30  Corcuff  P,  Fiat  F,  Minondo  AM.  (2001)  Ultrastructure  of  human 

stratum corneum. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 1, 4–9.

31  Zettersten EM, Ghadially R, Feingold KR, Crumrine D, Elias PM. 
(1997)  Optimal  ratios  of  topical  stratum  corneum  lipids  improve 
barrier recovery in chronologically aged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 
37, 403–8.

32  Gallo  R,  Borkowsk,  A.  (2011)  The  coordinated  response  of  the 
physical and antimicrobial peptide barriers of the skin. J Invest Der-
matol 131, 285–7.

33  Loden  M.  (2012)  Effect  of  moisturizers  on  epidermal  barrier 

function. Clin Dermatol 30, 286–96.

34  Slominski A. (2007) A nervous breakdown in the skin: stress and 

25  Nilsson  GE  (1977)  Measurement  of  water  exchange  through  the 

the epidermal barrier. J Clin Invest 11, 3166–9.

skin. Med Biol Eng Comput 15, 209.

26  Pinnagoda J, Tupker RA. (1995) Measurement of the transepidermal 
water loss. In: Serup J, Jemec GBE, eds. Handbook of Non‐Invasive 
Methods and the Skin. Boca Raton, Fl: CRC Press, pp. 173–8. 

35  Yosipovitch G, Xiong G, Haus E, Sackett‐Lundeen L, Ashkenzai I, Mai-
bach H. (1998) Time‐dependent variations of the skin barrier function 
in  humans:  transepidermal  water  loss,  stratum  corneum  hydration, 
skin surface pH, and skin temperature. J Invest Dermatol 1, 20–23.

Chapter 2
photoaging

Kira Minkis,1 Jillian Havey Swary,2 and Murad Alam2
1Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA
2Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

BasIC ConCepts

•	 UV	radiation	damages	human	skin	connective	tissue	through	several	interdependent,	but	distinct,	processes.
•	 The	normal	dermal	matrix	is	maintained	through	signaling	transduction	pathways,	transcription	factors,	cell	surface	receptors,	and	

enzymatic	reactions.

•	 UV	radiation	produces	reactive	oxygen	species	which	inhibit	procollagen	production,	degrade	collagen,	and	damage	fibroblasts.

Introduction

Skin,  the  largest  human  organ,  is  chronically  exposed  to  UV 
radiation  from  the  sun. The  skin  is  at  the  frontline  of  defense 
of the human body against the harmful effects of UV exposure. 
Chronic absorption of UV radiation leads to potential injuries 
to the skin which includes photoaging, sunburn, immunosup-
pression,  and  carcinogenesis.  Photoaging,  the  most  common 
form of skin damage caused by UV exposure, produces damage 
to connective tissue, melanocytes, and the microvasculture [1]. 
Recent  advances  in  understanding  photoaging  in  human  skin 
have  identified  the  physical  manifestations,  histologic  charac-
teristics, and molecular mechanisms of UV exposure.

Definition

Photoaging  is  the  leading  form  of  skin  damage  caused  by  sun 
exposure, occurring more frequently than skin cancer. Photoag-
ing describes clinical, histologic, and functional changes that are 
characteristic of older, chronically sun‐exposed skin. Photoaging 
culminates  from  a  combination  of  predominantly  chronic  UV 
radiation  superimposed  on  intrinsic  aging  of  the  skin.  Chronic 
UV exposure results in premature skin aging, termed cutaneous 
photoaging, which is marked by fine and coarse wrinkling of the 
skin, dyspigmentation, sallow color, textural changes, loss of elas-
ticity, and premalignant actinic keratoses. Most of these clinical 
signs are caused by dermal alterations. Pigmentary disorders such 
as seborrheic keratoses, lentigines, and diffuse hyperpigmentation 
are characteristic of epidermal changes [2].

These  physical  characteristics  are  confirmed  histologically  by 
epidermal thinning and disorganization of the dermal connective 

tissue. Loss of connective tissue, interstitial collagen fibrils, and 
accumulation  of  disorganized  connective  tissue  elastin  leads  to 
solar  elastosis,  a  condition  characteristic  of  photoaged  skin  [3]. 
Similar alterations in the cellular component and the extracellular 
matrix  of  the  connective  tissue  of  photoaged  skin  may  affect 
superficial capillaries, causing surface telangiectasias [4].

The  significance  of  photoaging  lies  in  both  the  cosmetic  and 
medical  repercussions,  i.e.  in  the  demand  for  agents  that  can 
prevent or reverse the cutaneous signs associated with photoaging 
and its strong association with cutaneous malignancies.

physiology

photoaged versus chronically aged skin
Skin, like all other organs, ages over time. Aging can be defined 
as intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic aging is a hallmark of human 
chronologic  aging  and  occurs  in  both  sun‐exposed  and  non‐
sun‐exposed skin. Extrinsic aging, on the contrary, is affected by 
exposure to environmental factors such as UV radiation. While 
sun‐protected  chronically  aged  skin  and  photoaged  chronically 
aged  skin  share  common  characteristics,  many  of  the  physical 
characteristics of skin that decline with age show an accelerated 
decline with photoaging [5]. Compared with photodamaged skin, 
sun‐protected  skin  is  characterized  by  dryness,  fine  wrinkles, 
skin atrophy, homogeneous pigmentation, and seborrheic kera-
toses [6]. Extrinsically aged skin, on the contrary, is characterized 
by  roughness,  dryness,  fine  as  well  as  coarse  wrinkles,  atrophy, 
uneven pigmentation, and superficial vascular abnormalities (e.g. 
telangiectasias) [6]. It is important to note that these attributes are 
not absolute and can vary according to Fitzpatrick skin type clas-
sification and history of sun exposure.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

13

14

BasIC ConCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

While  the  pathophysiology  of  photoaged  and  photo‐protected 
skin differ, the histologic features of these two entities are distinct. 
In photo‐protected skin, a thin epidermis is present with an intact 
stratum corneum, the dermoepidermal junction and the dermis are 
flattened, and dermal fibroblasts produce less collagen. In photoaged 
skin, the thickness of the epidermis can either increase or decrease, 
corresponding to areas of keratinocyte atypia. The dermoepidermal 
junction  is  atrophied  in  appearance  and  the  basal  membrane 
thickness is increased, reflecting basal keratinocyte damage.

Changes in the dermis of photoaged skin can vary based on 
the amount of acquired UV damage. Solar elastosis is the most 
prominent histologic feature of photoaged skin. The quantity of 
elastin in the dermis decreases in chronically aged skin, but in 
UV‐exposed skin, elastin increases in proportion to the amount 
of UV exposure [7,8]. Accumulated elastic fibers occupy areas 
in  the  dermal  compartment  previously  inhabited  by  collagen 
fibers [9]. This altered elastin deposition is manifest clinically as 
wrinkles and yellow discoloration of the skin.

Another feature of photoaged skin is collagen fibril disorgani-
zation. Mature collagen fibers, which constitute the bulk of the 
skin's connective tissue, are degenerated and replaced by collagen 
with a basophilic appearance, termed basophilic degeneration. 
Additional photoaged skin characteristics include an increase in 
the deposition of glycosaminoglycans and dermal extracellular 
matrix  proteins  [10,11].  In  fact,  the  overall  cell  population  in 
photodamaged skin increases, leading to hyperplastic fibroblast 
proliferation  and  infiltration  of  inflammatory  substrates  that 
cause chronic inflammation (heliodermatitis) [12]. Changes in 
the  microvasculature  also  occur,  as  is  clinically  manifested  in 
surface telangiectasias and other vascular abnormalities.

photobiology
In order to fully understand the molecular mechanisms responsible 
for photoaging in human skin, an awareness of the UV spectrum 
is crucial. The UV spectrum is divided into three main compo-
nents: UVC (270–290 nm), UVB (290–320 nm), and UVA (320–
400 nm). While UVC radiation is filtered by ozone and atmos-
pheric moisture, and consequently never reaches the Earth, UVA 
and UVB rays do reach the terrestrial surface. Although the ratio 
of UVA to UVB rays is 20:1 [13] and UVB is greatest during the 
summer months, both forms of radiation have acute and chronic 
effects on human skin.

Photoaging is the superposition of UVA and UVB radiation on 
intrinsic aging. In order to exert biologic effects on human skin, 
both  categories  of  UV  rays  must  be  absorbed  by  chromophores 
in  the  skin.  Depending  on  the  wavelength  absorbed,  UV  light 
interacts with different skin cells at different depths (Figure 2.1). 
More  specifically,  energy  from  UVB  rays  is  mostly  absorbed  by 
the epidermis and affects epidermal cells such as the keratinocytes, 
whereas  energy  from  UVA  penetrates  deeper  into  the  skin,  with 
~50% of UVA penetrating into the skin in a fair‐skinned individual 
(versus <10% of UVB photons). UVA therefore affects both epider-
mal keratinocytes and the deeper dermal fibroblasts. The absorbed 
energy is converted into varying chemical reactions that cause his-
tologic and clinical changes in the skin. UVA absorption by chro-
mophores mostly acts indirectly by transferring energy to oxygen 
to  generate  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS),  which  subsequently 
causes several effects such as transcription factor activation, lipid 
peroxidation, and DNA-strand breaks. On the contrary, UVB has 
a  more  direct  effect  on  the  absorbing  chromophores  and  causes 
cross-linking of adjacent DNA pyrimidines and other DNA-related 

UV-B

UV-A

Epidermis

Keratinocytes

AP-1
NF- B

Dermis

ROS

Fibroblasts

MMP and mtDN A

Figure  2.1  Ultraviolet  light  interacts  with 
different  skin  cells  at  different  depths.  More 
specifically,  energy  from  UVB  rays  is  mostly 
absorbed  by  the  epidermis  and  affects  epi-
dermal cells such as the keratinocytes. Energy 
from UVA rays affects both epidermal kerati-
nocytes  and  the  deeper  dermal  fibroblasts. 
AP‐1,  activator  protein  1;  NF‐κB,  nuclear 
factor  κB;  MMP,  matrix  metalloproteinase; 
mtDNA,  mitochondrial  DNA;  ROS,  reactive 
oxygen species. (Source: Berneburg et al., 2000 
[30].  Reproduced  with  permission  of  John 
Wiley & Sons.)

2. Photoaging

15

damage  [14].  Approximately  50%  of  UV‐induced  photodamage 
is from the formation of free radicals, while mechanisms such as 
direct cellular injury account for the remainder of UV effects [15]. 
Thus UVB induced photodamage is implicated as the predominant 
cause  of  photoaging.  The  important  role  of  UVA  in  photoaging, 
however, stems from the fact that in distinction to UVB, UVA is 
also transmitted through glass. This enables exposure indoors, near 
windows, as well as while driving allowing for significant long‐term 
exposure. Evidence for this includes dramatic unilateral dermato-
heliosis as evident in some chronic occupational drivers [16].

Cutaneous microvasculature
Intrinsically aged skin and photodamaged skin share similar cuta-
neous  vasculature  characteristics,  such  as  decreased  cutaneous 
temperature, pallor, decreased cutaneous vessel size, reduced ery-
thema, reduced cutaneous nutritional supply, and reduced cuta-
neous  vascular  responsiveness  [17-19].  However,  there  are  also 
significant  differences  in  the  microvasculature  of  chronologic 
sun‐protected versus photoaged skin. Studies have reported that 
the blood vessels in photoaged skin are obliterated and the overall 
horizontal architecture of the vascular plexuses is disrupted [20]. 
In  contrast  to  photodamaged  skin,  intrinsically  aged  skin  does 
not display a greatly disturbed pattern of horizontal vasculature. 
Additionally,  while  cutaneous  vessel  size  has  been  reported  to 
decrease with age in both scenarios, only photoaged skin exhibits 
a large reduction in the number of dermal vessels. This reduction 
is  especially  highlighted  in  the  upper  dermal  connective  tissue, 
where it is hypothesized that chronic UV‐induced degradation of 
elastic and collagen fibers is no longer able to provide the physical 
support required for normal cutaneous vessel maintenance [17].

Furthermore,  preliminary  studies  have  reported  that  the 
effects  of  exposure  to  acute  UV  radiation  differ  from  chronic 
exposure. Recent studies have implied that a single exposure to 
UVB radiation induces skin angiogenesis in human skin in vivo 
[21,22]. The epidermis‐derived vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) is an angiogenic factor that is significantly upregulated 
with  UV  exposure  in  keratinocytes  in  vitro  and  in  human  skin 
in vivo. Chung and Eun [17] have demonstrated, that compared 
to  low  VEGF  expression  in  non‐UV‐irradiated  control  skin, 
epidermal VEGF expression increased significantly on days 2 and 
3 post‐UV‐irradiation, consequently inducing cutaneous angio-
genesis. Therefore, acute UV exposure has been shown to induce 
angiogenesis. However, chronic UV‐exposed photodamaged skin 
exhibits a significant reduction in the number of cutaneous blood 
vessels.  The  reasons  for  this  discrepancy  between  the  effects  of 
acute and chronic UV exposure on angiogenesis in vivo are still 
under investigation.

Molecular mechanisms of photoaging

few  years  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  exposing  the 
molecular  mechanisms  accountable  for  photoaging  in  human 
skin. One major theoretical advance that has been elucidated by 
this work is that UV irradiation damages human skin by at least 
two interdependent mechanisms:
 1.  Photochemical generation of ROS; and
 2.  Activation of cutaneous signal transduction pathways.
These  molecular  processes  and  their  underlying  components 
are described in detail below. Before these processes are high-
lighted, however, it is important to consider the structure and 
function  of  collagen  and  its  role  in  maintain  the  strength  and 
integrity of the skin.

Collagen
Type I collagen accounts for greater than 90% of the protein in 
the human skin, with type III collagen accounting for a smaller 
fraction (10%). The unique physical characteristics of collagen 
fibers are essential for providing strength, structural integrity, 
and  resilience  to  the  skin.  Dermal  fibroblasts  synthesize 
individual collagen polypeptide chains as precursor molecules 
called  procollagen.  These  procollagen  building  blocks  are 
assembled  into  larger  collagen  fibers  through  enzymatic 
cross‐linking and form the three‐dimensional dermal network 
mainly made of collagen types I and III. This intermolecular 
covalant  cross‐linking  step  is  essential  for  maintenance  and 
structural  integrity  of  large  collagen  fibers,  especially  type  I 
collagen.

Natural  breakdown  of  type  I  collagen  is  a  slow  process  and 
occurs through enzymatic degradation [23]. Dermal collagen has 
a half‐life of greater than 1 year [23], and this slow rate of type I 
collagen turnover allows for disorganization and fragmentation 
of collagen which impair its functions. In fact, fragmentation and 
dispersion  of  collagen  fibers  is  a  feature  of  photodamaged  skin 
that is clinically manifest in the changes associated with photo-
damaged human skin.

The  regulation  of  collagen  production  is  an  important 
mechanism to understand before discussing how this process 
is impaired. In general, collagen gene expression is regulated 
by the cytokine, transforming growth factor β (TGF‐β), and 
the transcription factor, activator protein (AP‐1), in human 
skin  fibroblasts.  When  TGF‐βs  bind  to  their  cell  surface 
receptors  (TβRI  and  TβRII),  transcription  factors  Smad2 
and Smad3 are activated, combine with Smad4, and enter the 
nucleus, where they regulate type I procollagen production. 
AP‐1 has an opposing effect and inhibits collagen gene tran-
scription  by  either  direct  suppression  of  gene  transcription 
or obstructing the Smad complex from binding to the TGF‐β 
target gene (Figure 2.2) [24]. Therefore, in the absence of any 
inhibiting factors, the TGF‐β/Smad signaling pathway results 
in a net increase in procollagen production.

Mechanisms of intrinsic aging and extrinsic aging (photoaging) 
have a significant amount of overlap ultimately culminating in 
DNA  damage  as  the  underlying  mechanism.  During  the  last 

how does UV irradiation stimulate photoaging?
UV irradiation stimulates photoaging through several molecular 
mechanisms, discussed in detail below.

16

BasIC ConCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

TGF-

TGF-

Smad 2,3

Smad 7

T  R I/II

*
Smad 2,3

Smad 4

*
Smad 2,3

Smad 4

AP-1

*
Smad 2,3

Smad 4

TGF-  target gene

Collagen

Figure 2.2  The regulation of procollagen production: the TGF‐β/Smad sig-
naling  pathway.  AP‐1,  activator  protein  1;  TβR,  TGF‐β  receptor;  TGF‐β, 
transforming  growth  factor  β.  (Source:  Kang  et  al.,  2001  [3].  Reproduced 
with permission of Elsevier.)

reactive oxygen species
Approximately  50%  of  UV‐induced  photodamage  is  from  the 
formation  of  free  radicals,  while  mechanisms  such  as  direct 
cellular  injury  account  for  the  remainder  of  UV  effects  [15]. 
Proposed in 1954, the free radical theory of aging suggests that 
aging is a result of reactions caused by excessive amounts of free 
radicals,  which  contain  one  or  more  unpaired  electrons  [25]. 
Generation of ROS occurs during normal chronologic aging as 
well  as  in  response  to  UV  light  exposure  in  photoaging  [26]. 
ROS  mediate  deleterious  post‐translational  effects  on  aging 
skin  through  direct  chemical  modifications  to  mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA), cell lipids, deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA), and 
dermal matrix proteins, including collagens. In fact, a marker of 
UVA photodamage in human dermal fibroblasts is a 4977 base‐
pair deletion of mtDNA that is induced by UVA via ROS [27].

The role of ROS in photoaging is not limited to UVA induced 
photodamage.  UVB  enhances  the  levels  of  NF‐κB  responsive 
proteins,  such  as,  inducible  nitric  oxide  synthase  (iNOS)  and 
cyclooxygenase‐2  (COX‐2),  and  induces  the  production  of 
nitric oxide (NO). NO is a central player in the regulation of 
skin  cell  apoptosis.  Furthermore,  upon  reacting  with  ROS, 
NO  is  transformed  into  cytotoxic  peroxynitrite  (ONOO‐) 
which  causes  lipid  peroxidation.  Lipid  peroxidants  are,  in 
part, responsible for the wrinkle formation that is indicative of 
photoaging [28].

UV radiation inhibits procollagen production: 
tGF‐β/smad signaling pathway
UV light inhibits procollagen production through two signaling 
pathways:  downregulation  of  TβRII  and  inhibition  of  target 
gene  transcription  by  AP‐1.  UV  radiation  has  been  reported 

to  disrupt  the  skin  collagen  matrix  through  the  TGF‐β/Smad 
pathway [1]. More specifically, UV radiation downregulates the 
TGF‐β type II receptor (TβRII) and results in a 90% reduction of 
TGF‐β cell surface binding, consequently reducing downstream 
activation of the Smad 2, 3, 4 complex and type I procollagen 
transcription.

Additionally, UV radiation activates AP‐1, which binds factors 
that  are  part  of  the  procollagen  type  I  transcriptional  complex. 
This,  in  turn,  reduces  TGF‐β  target  gene  expression,  such  as 
expression of type I procollagen [29].

UV‐induced matrix metalloproteinases stimulate 
collagen degradation
It  has  been  demonstrated  that  UV  irradiation  affects  the  post‐
translational  modification  of  dermal  matrix  proteins  (through 
ROS)  and  also  downregulates  the  transcription  of  these  same 
proteins  (through  the  TGF‐β/Smad  signaling  pathway).  UVA 
and UVB light also induces a wide variety of matrix metallopro-
teinases  (MMPs)  [30].  As  their  name  suggests,  MMPs  degrade 
dermal matrix proteins, specifically collagens, through enzymatic 
activity. UV‐induced MMP‐1 initiates cleavage of type I and III 
dermal collagen, followed by further degradation by MMP‐3 and 
MMP‐9.

Recall  that  type  I  collagen  fibrils  are  stabilized  by  covalent 
cross‐links. When undergoing degradation by MMPs, collagen 
molecules can remain cross‐linked within the dermal collagen 
matrix, thereby impairing the structural integrity of the dermis. 
In  the  absence  of  perfect  repair  mechanisms,  MMP‐mediated 
collagen damage can accrue with each UV exposure. This type of 
collective damage to the dermal matrix collagen is hypothesized 
to have a direct effect on the physical characteristics of photo-
damaged skin [14].

In addition to UV induction of MMPs, transcription factors 
may  cause  MMP  activation.  It  has  been  reported  that  within 
hours  of  UV  exposure,  the  transcription  factors  AP‐1  and 
NF‐κB are activated which, in turn, stimulate transcription of 
MMPs [31].

Fibroblasts regulate their own collagen synthesis
Fibroblasts have evolved to regulate their output of extracellular 
matrix  proteins  (including  collagen)  based  on 
internal 
mechanical  tension  [32].  Type  I  collagen  fibrils  in  the  dermis 
serve  as  mechanical  stabilizers  and  attachment  sites  for 
fibroblasts  in  sun‐protected  skin.  Surface  integrins  on  the 
fibroblasts attach to collagen and internal actin–myosin micro-
filaments provide mechanical resistance by pulling on the intact 
collagen. In response to this created tension, intracellular scaf-
folding  composed  of  intermediate  filaments  and  microtubules 
pushes outward to causing fibroblasts to stretch. This stretch is 
an essential cue for normal collagen and MMP production by 
fibroblasts [32].

This  mechanical  tension  model  is  different  in  photoaged 
human skin. Fibroblast–integrin attachments are lost, which pre-
vents collagen fragments from binding to fibroblasts. Collagen–

2. Photoaging

17

fibroblast  binding  is  crucial  for  maintenance  of  normal 
mechanical stability. When mechanical tension is reduced, as 
in photoaged skin, fibroblasts collapse, which causes decreased 
procollagen  production  and  increased  collagenase  (COLase) 
production  [32].  Collagen  is  continually  lost  as  this  cycle 
repeats itself.

elastosis and cathepsins
One of the histologic hallmarks of photoaging is elastolysis and 
an accumulation of abnormal elastin in the superficial dermis 
known as elastosis. One of the most potent enzymes involved in 
the degradation of elastin is cathepsin K [33]. This enzyme was 
recently shown to be induced in young fibroblasts in response to 
UVA irradiation which lead to digestion and clearance of extra-
cellular elastin. This, induction was not seen in fibroblasts from 
old donors [34]. Thus, cathepsin K appears to play a critical part 
in clearing MMP‐digested elastin in the ECM, a function which 
is lost with age and leads to the histologic (and corresponding 
clinical effects) of elastosis [35]. Other studies have also dem-
onstrated  the  downregulation  of  cathepsins  B,  D,  and  K  and 
upregulation  of  cathepsin  G  was  seen  in  photoaged  skin  and 
senescent fibroblasts in vitro [36].

UVa induces the aging‐associated progerin
Recent data has implicated a protein called progerin as a mecha-
nism  of  UV  induced  aging.  Patients  with  Hutchinson–Gilford 
progeria  syndrome  (HGPS)  have  a  mutation  in  LMNA,  which 
encodes an abnormal and truncated form of Lamin A, called pro-
gerin  [37].  Accumulation  of  progerin  has  been  shown  to  result 
in misshapen nuclei with disrupted nuclear functions, including 
reduced DNA repair capacity, increased telomere shortening, and 
increased activation of p53, which ultimately result in a reduced 
cellular lifespan due to early senescence [38-44].

Progerin has been reported to contribute to aging not only 
of  HPGS  cells,  but  also  of  normal  cells  with  increasing  accu-
mulation  of  progerin‐expressing  cells  in  skin  with  increasing 
age [45].

Hirotaka Takeuchi and Thomas M. Rünger recently showed 
that UVA induced progerin expression in the progerin protein 
of  cultured  primary  human  fibroblasts,  specifically  in  “aged 
cells,” obtained from older donors. These cells had subsequent 
abnormal  nuclear  shapes  and  presumably  abnormal  nuclear 
functions,  suggesting  a  novel  mechanism  by  which  UV  light 
accelerates aging of the skin [40].

evolving data
Genetics may also play a role in photoaging. A recent study in 
France evaluated genetic factors that may affect the severity of 
skin aging. The authors carried out a genome‐wide association 
study and found a single‐nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that 
was in significantly associated with global photoaging. This SNP 
linkage disequilibrium (LD) with two genes which are expressed 
in the skin, STXBP5L gene and FBXO40 gene, perhaps involved 
in photoaging [44].

ethnic skin: photoaging

All  races  are  susceptible  to  photoaging.  However,  people  with 
Fitzpatrick skin phototypes IV–VI are less susceptible to the del-
eterious effects of UV irradiation than people with a lower Fitz-
patrick skin type classification. This phenomenon is most likely 
a result of the protective role of melanin [45]. Studies reporting 
ethnic skin photoaging are few and far between. However, for 
the purposes of this discussion, characteristics of photoaging in 
different ethnic skin categories are briefly highlighted.

In one of the first studies comparing UV absorption amongst 
different  skin  types,  Kaidbey  et  al.  [46]  compared  the  photo-
protective properties of African‐American skin with Caucasian 
skin exposed to UVB irradiation. It was known that only 10% of 
the total UVB rays penetrated the dermis. However, the mean 
UVB transmission into the dermis by African‐American dermis 
(5.7%)  was  found  to  be  significantly  less  than  for  Caucasian 
dermis  (29.4%).  Similar  experiments  were  performed  with 
UVA irradiation. Although only 50% of the total UVA exposure 
penetrates  into  the  papillary  dermis,  UVA  transmission  into 
African‐American  dermis  was  17.5%  compared  to  55%  for 
white  epidermis  [46].  The  physiologic  reason  behind  this  dif-
ference in black and white skin lies at the site of UV filtration. 
The  malpighian  layer  (basal  cell  layer)  of  African‐American 
skin  is  the  main  site  of  UV  filtration,  while  the  stratum  cor-
neum  absorbs  most  UV  rays  in  white  skin.  The  malpighian 
layer  of  African‐American  skin  removes  twice  as  much  UVB 
radiation as the overlying stratum corneum, thus mitigating the 
deleterious effects of UV rays in the underlying dermis [47].

In  African‐Americans,  photoaging  may  not  be  clinically 
apparent until the fifth or sixth decade of life and is more common 
in  individuals  with  a  lighter  complexion  [48].  The  features  of 
photoaging in this ethnic skin group manifest as signs of laxity 
in the malar fat pads sagging toward the nasolabial folds [49]. In 
patients of Hispanic and European descent, photoaging occurs 
in the same frequency as Caucasians and clinical signs are pri-
marily  wrinkling  rather  than  pigmentary  alterations. The  skin 
of East and South‐East Asian patients, on the contrary, mainly 
exhibits  pigmentary  alterations  (seborrheic  keratoses,  hyper-
pigmentation,  actinic  lentigines,  sun‐induced  melasma)  and 
minimal  wrinkling  as  a  result  of  photoaging  [50,51].  Finally, 
very  few  studies  have  reported  on  the  signs  of  photoaging  in 
South  Asian  (Pakistani,  Indian)  skin.  UV‐induced  hyperpig-
mentation, dermatosis papulosa nigra, and seborrheic keratosis 
are noted [52].

Despite  all  of  these  differences,  it  is  important  to  note  that 
the number of melanocytes per unit area of skin does not vary 
across ethnicities. Instead, it is the relative amount of melanin 
packaged  into  melanocytes  that  accounts  for  the  physiologic 
differences  between  Caucasian  skin  and  ethnic  skin  [53]. 
Increasing  age  leads  to  senescence  of  melanocytes.  Senescent 
melanocytes,  in  turn,  can  cause  greater  melanin  production 
that  has  been  observed  in  some  darker‐skinned  individuals 
[54].  This  may  be  responsible  for  the  general  ‘‘bronzing,’'  and 

18

BasIC ConCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

darkening,  appearing  as  a  “permanent  tan''  observed  in  some 
photoaged individuals of darker skin‐tones.

prevention

Although the effects of the sun's rays appear daunting, there are 
some ways to avoid the deleterious effects of photoaging. Avoiding 
photoaging can often prove to be more cost‐effective than trying 
to reverse the signs of photoaging after they have manifested.

primary prevention
Sun protection
UV rays are especially prevalent during the hours of 10 am–4 pm 
and sun protection should be encouraged during this time. Sun 
protection can be offered to patients in the form of sunscreens, 
sun‐protective  clothing,  and/or  sun  avoidance.  Sun‐protective 
clothing  includes  any  hats,  sunglasses,  or  clothing  that  would 
help block the sun's rays. Photoprotective clothing is given a UV 
protection factor (UPF) rating, which is a measurement of the 
amount of irradiation that can be transmitted through a specific 
type of fabric. A UPF of 40–50 is recommended by most der-
matologists, as it transmits less than 2.6% of UV irradiation [5].
Traditionally, sunscreens contain one or more chemical filters – 
those that physically block, reflect, or scatter specific photons of 
UV irradiation and those that absorb specific UV photons. UVA 
sunblocks contain the inorganic particulates titanium dioxide or 
zinc oxide, while UVA‐absorbing suncreens contain terephthalyli-
dene  dicamphor  sulfonic  acid  or  avobenzene.  UVB‐absorbing 
sunscreens  can  contain  salicylates,  cinnamates,  p‐aminobenzoic 
acid,  or  a  combination  of  these  [55].  The  US  Food  and  Drug 
Administration (FDA) recommended dose of sunscreen applica-
tion is 2 mg/cm2 [56].

The sun protection factor (SPF) is an international laboratory 
measure used to assess the efficacy of sunscreens. The SPF can 
range from 1 to over 80 and indicates the time that a person can 
be exposed to UVB rays before getting sunburn with sunscreen 
application relative to the time a person can be exposed without 
sunscreen. SPF levels are determined by the minimal amount of 
UV irradiation that can cause UVB‐stimulated erythema and/
or pain. The effectiveness of a particular sunscreen depends on 
several  factors,  including  the  initial  amount  applied,  amount 
reapplied, skin type of the user, amount of sunscreen the skin 
has  absorbed,  and  the  activities  of  the  user  (e.g.  swimming, 
sweating).

The  sun  protection  factor  is  an  inadequate  determination 
of  skin  damage  because  it  does  not  account  for  UVA  rays. 
Although  UVA  rays  have  an  important  role  in  photoaging, 
their effects are not physically evident as erythema or pain, as 
are  UVB  rays.  Therefore,  it  has  been  suggested  that  SPF  may 
be an imperfect guide to the ability of a particular sunscreen to 
shield  against  photoaging  [5].  As  a  result,  combination  UVA–
UVB sunscreens have been developed and are recommended to 
protect the human skin from both types of irradiation. Recent 

changes  to  labeling  of  sunscreens  in  the  US  require  that  sun-
screens be labeled as broadspectrum if they provide both UVA 
and UVB protection.

A recent Australian study investigating the effects of daily use 
of sunscreen (with or without beta‐carotene supplementation) 
found  that  consistent  use  of  sunscreen  had  a  significant  effect 
on photoaging relative to a matched group of individuals with 
discretionary sunscreen usage [57]. Thus, individuals should be 
encouraged to use daily broadspectrum sunscreen in adequate 
quantity and frequency of application to gain benefit from the 
photoprotective effects of these agents. The authors saw no effect 
on aging with β‐carotene use, however power was limited.

secondary prevention
Retinoids
A large number of studies have reported that topical application 
of 0.025–0.1% all‐trans retinoic acid (tRA) improves photoaging 
in human skin [58,59]. Results vary based on treatment duration 
and applied tRA dose. Retinoids exert their effects by binding to 
two groups of receptors belonging to the nuclear receptor super-
family:  the  retinoic  acid  receptors  (RARs)  and  the  retinoid  X 
receptors. Activation of RARs and retinoid X receptors, in turn, 
results  in  molecular  changes  which  favor  collagen  deposition 
and  increasing  epidermal  thickness.  Retinoic  acids  have  been 
used in an ex post facto manner to reverse the signs of photo-
damage and in a preventative fashion to avoid photoaging.

More specifically, tRA has been shown to induce type I and III 
procollagen gene expression in photoaged skin [60]. It has been 
observed that topical tRA induces TGF‐β in human skin [61], 
which stimulates the production of type I and III procollagen.

In addition, tRA has been used in a preventive fashion to avert 
UV‐induced  angiogenesis.  Kim  et  al.  [21]  demonstrated  that 
topical application of retinoic acid before UV exposure inhibited 
UV‐induced angiogenesis and increases in blood vessel density. 
In  general,  extracellular  signal‐related  kinases  (ERKs,  or  classic 
MAP  kinases)  positively  regulate  epidermally  derived  VEGF. 
VEGF stimulates angiogenesis upon UV induction. Retinoic acid 
inhibits ERKs, which can potentially lead to downregulation of 
VEGF expression, UV‐induced angiogenesis, and angiogenesis‐
associated photoaging (Figures 2.3 and 2.4) [17].

Finally, tRA has been reported to prevent UV‐stimulated MMP 
expression. The transcription factor, c‐Jun, is a key component in 
forming the AP‐1 complex. Recall that the AP‐1 complex both 
inhibits types I and III procollagen and stimulates transcription 
of MMPs. Retinoic acid blocks the accumulation of c‐Jun pro-
tein, consequently inhibiting the formation of the AP‐1 complex 
and dermal matrix‐associated degradation [62].

Most  scientific  and  clinical  evidence  in  support  of  topi-
cal  prescription  formulations  of  retinoids  in  the  treatment  of 
photoaging  exist  for  tretinoin  cream  (0.02%  and  0.05%)  and 
tazarotene cream (0.1%) [63].

These formulations are FDA‐approved for the treatment of fine 
line wrinkles, skin roughness, and mottled hyperpigmentation 
caused  by  aging  and  sun  exposure.  However,  in  contrast  to 

UV

Acute effects

Skin angiogenesis
VEGF
TSP

ECM degradation
Collagen
MMPs

Inflammation

Worse environment
for normal vasculature

Photoaged human skin
ECM (collagen fibers,
elastic fibers)
Dermal vasculature

Chronic effects

Figure  2.3  Model  depicting  the  acute  and  chronic  effects  of  UV  irradia-
tion  on  skin  angiogenesis  and  extracellular  matrix  (ECM)  degradation  in 
human  skin.  MMP,  matrix  metalloproteinase;  TSP,  thrombospondin‐1 
(ECM protein; inhibitor of angiogenesis in epithelial tissues); VEGF, vascu-
lar endothelial growth factor. (Source: Chung & Eun, 2007 [17]. Reproduced 
with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

Aged and photoaged human skin
ECM (collagen fibers, elastic fibers)
Dermal vasculature

Retinoic acid

ECM degradation
Collagen
MMPs

Skin angiogenesis

VEGF
Vascularization

Better environment
for normal vasculature

Improve skin aging

Figure  2.4  Model  depicting  the  effect  of  topical  retinoids  on  photoaged 
human  skin.  ECM,  extracellular  matrix;  MMP,  matrix  metalloproteinase; 
VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. (Source: Chung  and  Eun,  2007 
[17]. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

topical retinoids, limited data exists in support of the use of oral 
retinoids for photoaging [64–66].

Antioxidants
It  is  important  to  highlight  briefly  the  role  of  antioxidants  in 
the reduction of photoaging. In vitro studies have discovered a 
large number of antioxidants that either forestall or reverse the 

2. Photoaging

19

clinical  signs  of  photodamage  caused  by  ROS.  In  vivo  studies 
investigating  these  same  antioxidants  are  ongoing.  One  such 
antioxidant, vitamin C, has been shown to mitigate photodam-
aged  keratinocyte  formation  and  erythema  post‐UV‐irradia-
tion [67]. Evidence exists indicating benefit of topical retinols, 
as well as vitamin C, vitamin B3, and vitamin E in the treatment 
and prevention of photoaging [68]. Effects of other antioxidants 
on  human  skin  fibroblasts  have  also  been  studied,  including 
green tea antioxidants (green tea polyphenols (GTPs)), caffeine 
(to  a  limited  degree  alone  and  more  so  in  combination  with 
GTP),  and  Resveratrol  (a  phytoalexin,  a  naturally  occurring 
compound  derived  from  plants).  These  have  been  shown  to 
inhibit the generation of free radicals and ROS in human skin 
fibroblasts in vitro [69,70]. However, the effects of antioxidants 
remains  controversial  as  numerous  studies  have  evaluated  the 
effects of a variety of antioxidants on photoaging with variable 
effectiveness  and  in  vitro  studies  do  not  necessarily  equate  to 
clinical  improvement  in  randomized  controlled  clinical  trials 
[71–73].

Inherent defense mechanisms
Although  science  has  developed  exogenous  mechanisms  to 
prevent and reverse the clinical signs of photoaging, the human 
skin possesses endogenous machinery built to protect the skin 
from UV‐induced damage. These inherent defense mechanisms 
include, but are not limited to, increased epidermal thickness, 
melanin  distribution,  DNA  repair  mechanisms  and  apoptosis 
of  sunburned  keratinocytes,  MMP  tissue  inhibitors,  and 
antioxidants [5,46,74-76].

Failure of prevention: immunosuppression

Although  photoaging  is  the  most  prevalent  form  of  skin 
damage,  local  and  systemic  immunosuppression,  leading  to 
skin carcinoma, can result from overexposure to the sun's rays. 
This immunosuppression is mediated by a combination of DNA 
damage,  epidermal  Langerhans'  cell  depletion,  and  altered 
cytokine expression [77,78].

Conclusions

The pathophysiology of photoaging derives from the ability of 
UV irradiation to exploit established molecular mechanisms 
which  have  evolved  to  maintain  the  internal  milieu  of 
human skin connective tissue. Disruption of the normal skin 
architecture does not occur through one pathway, but rather 
is  the  culmination  of  several  interdependent,  but  distinct, 
processes that have gone  awry. The  integrity  of the normal 
dermal matrix is maintained through signaling transduction 
pathways,  transcription  factors,  cell  surface  receptors,  and 
enzymatic reactions that are intertangled and communicate 
with  one  another.  When  UV  irradiation  is  introduced  into 

20

BasIC ConCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

this  homeostatic  picture,  deleterious  effects  can  be  imple-
mented.  Production  of  ROS,  inhibition  of  procollagen 
production,  collagen  degradation,  and  fibroblast  collapse 
are  only  a  few  known  processes  amongst  the  medley  of 
mechanisms still waiting to be discovered that contribute to 
photoaging. Although human skin is equipped with inherent 
mechanisms  to  protect  against  photoaging  and  methods  of 
prevention and therapeutics are widely available, these alter-
natives  are  not  absolute  and  do  not  necessarily  guarantee 
a  perfect  escape  from  the  sun's  UV  irradiation.  Consumer 
demand  for  agents  capable  of  preventing  or  improving  the 
stigmata  of  photoaging,  association  of  photoaging  with 
malignancies  of  the  skin,  as  well  as  incites  gained  into  the 
process of aging overall provide stimulus to scientists for the 
continuous  study  and  discover  of  pathways  and  molecules 
involved  in  extrinsic  aging.  Novel  cutaneous  molecular 
mechanisms affected by UV irradiation are being discovered 
and  consequently,  research  is  underway  to  discover  new 
solutions to photodamage.

references

1  Quan T, He T, Kang S, Voorhees JJ, Fisher GJ. (2004) Solar ultraviolet 
irradiation reduces collagen in photoaged human skin by blocking 
transforming  growth  factor‐beta  type  II  receptor/Smad  signaling. 
Am J Pathol 165, 741–51.

2  Gilchrest B, Rogers G. (1993) Photoaging. In: LimH, SoterN, eds. 
Clinical Photomedicine. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 95–111.
3  Kang  S,  Fisher  GJ,  Voorhees  JJ.  (2001)  Photoaging:  pathogenesis, 

prevention, and treatment. Clin Geriatr Med 17, 643–59.

4  Weiss RA, Weiss MA, Beasley KL. (2002) Rejuvenation of photo-
aged skin: 5 years results with intense pulsed light of the face, neck, 
and chest. Dermatol Surg 28, 1115–9.

5  Rabe  JH,  Mamelak  AJ,  McElgunn  PJ,  Morison  WL,  Sauder  DN. 
(2006)  Photoaging:  mechanisms  and  repair.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol 
55, 1–19.

6  Rokhsar CK, Lee S, Fitzpatrick RE. (2005) Review of photorejuve-
nation: devices, cosmeceuticals, or both? Dermatol Surg 31, 1166–
78; discussion 1178.

7  Bernstein E, Brown DB, Urbach F, Forbes D, Del Monaco M, Wu 
M,  et  al.  (1995)  Ultraviolet  radiation  activates  the  human  elastin 
promoter in transgenic mice: a novel in vivo and in vitro model of 
cutaneous photoaging. J Invest Dermatol 105, 269–73.

8  Lewis  KG,  Bercovitch  L,  Dill  SW,  Robinson‐Bostom  L.  (2004) 
Acquired disorders of elastic tissue: part I. Increased elastic tissue 
and solar elastotic syndromes. J Am Acad Dermatol 51, 1–21.

9  El‐Domyati  M,  Attia  S,  Saleh  F,  Brown  D,  Birk  DE,  Gasparro 
F,  et  al.  (2002)  Intrinsic  aging  vs  photoaging:  a  comparative 
histopathological, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study 
of skin. Exp Dermatol 11, 398–405.

12  Lavker R, Kligman A. (1988) Chronic heliodermatitis: a morpho-
logic  evaluation  of  chronic  actinic  damage  with  emphasis  on  the 
role of mast cells. J Invest Dermatol 90, 325–30.

13  Urbach F. (1992) Ultraviolet A transmission by modern sunscreens: 
Is  there  a  real  risk?  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  Photomed  9, 
237–41.

14  Fisher  G,  Kang  S,  Varani  J,  Bata‐Csorgo  Z,  Wan  Y,  Datta  S, et  al. 
(2002)  Mechanisms  of  photoaging  and  chronological  skin  aging. 
Arch Dermatol 138, 1462–70.

15  Bernstein  EF,  Brown  DB,  Schwartz  MD,  Kaidbey  K,  Ksenzenko 
SM. (2004) The polyhydroxy acid gluconolactone protects against 
ultraviolet radiation in an in vitro model of cutaneous photoaging. 
Dermatol Surg 30, 189–96.

16  Gordon JR, Brieva JC. (2012) Images in clinical medicine. Unilateral 

dermatoheliosis. N Engl J Med 366(16), e25.

17  Chung  JH,  Eun  HC.  (2007)  Angiogenesis  in  skin  aging  and 

photoaging. J Dermatol 34, 593–600.

18  Chung JH, Yano K, Lee MK, Youn CS, Seo JY, Kim KH, et al. (2002) 
Differential effects of photoaging vs intrinsic aging on the vasculari-
zation of human skin. Arch Dermatol 138, 1437–42.

19  Kelly RI, Pearse R, Bull RH, Leveque JL, de Riqal J, Mortimer PS. 
(1995) The effects of aging on the cutaneous microvasculature. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 33, 749–56.

20  Kligman AM. (1979) Perspectives and problems in cutaneous ger-

ontology. J Invest Dermatol 73, 39–46.

21  Kim MS, Kim YK, Eun HC, Cho KH, Chung JH. (2006) All‐trans 
retinoic acid antagonizes UV‐induced VEGF production and ang-
iogenesis via the inhibition of ERK activation in human skin kerati-
nocytes. J Invest Dermatol 126, 2697–706.

22  Yano K, Kadova K, Kajiya K, Hong YK, Detmar M. (2005) Ultraviolet 
B  irradiation  of  human  skin  induces  an  angiogenic  switch  that  is 
mediated  by  upregulation  of  vascular  endothelial  growth  factor 
and  by  downregulation  of  thrombospondin‐1.  Br  J  Dermatol  152, 
115–21.

23  Verzijl N, DeGroot J, Thorpe S. (2000) Effect of collagen turn over 
on  the  accumulation  of  advanced  glycation  end  products.  J  Biol 
Chem 275, 39027–31.

24  Massague J. (1998) TGF‐β signal transduction. Annu Rev Biochem 

67, 753–91.

25  Herman  D.  (1998)  Expanding  functional  life  span.  Exp  Geriatr 

Ontol 33, 95–112.

26  Sohal R, Weindruch R. (1996) Oxidative stress, caloric restriction 

and aging. Science 273, 59–63.

27  Berneburg M, Plettenberg H, Medve‐Konig K, Pfahlberg A, Gers‐
Barlaq H, Gefeler O, et al. (2004) Induction of the photoaging‐asso-
ciated  mitochondrial  common  deletion  in  vivo  in  normal  human 
skin. J Invest Dermatol 122, 1277–83.

28  Park  MH,  Park  JY,  Lee  HJ,  Kim  DH,  Chung  KW,  Park  D,  et  al. 
(2013)  The  novel  PPAR  α/γ  dual  agonist  MHY  966  modulates 
UVB‐induced  skin  inflammation  by  inhibiting  NF‐κB  activity. 
PLoS One 8(10), e76820.

29  Karin M, Liu ZG, Zandi E. (1997) AP‐1 function and regulation. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol 9, 240–6.

10  Mitchell  R.  (1967)  Chronic  solar  elastosis:  a  light  and  electron 
microscopic study of the dermis. J Invest Dermatol 48, 203–20.
11  Smith JG Jr, Davidson EA, Sams WM Jr, Clark RD. (1962) Alterations 
in human dermal connective tissue with age and chronic sun damage. 
J Invest Dermatol 39, 347–50.

30  Berneburg  M,  Plettenberg  H,  Krutmann  J.  (2000)  Photoaging  of 
human skin. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 16, 239–44.
31  Fisher G, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, Varani J, Kang S, Voorhees JJ. (1997) 
Pathophysiology  of  premature  skin  aging  induced  by  ultraviolet 
light. N Engl J Med 337, 1419–28.

2. Photoaging

21

32  Fisher  GJ,  Varani  J,  Voorhees  JJ.  (2008)  Looking  older:  fibroblast 
collapse and therapeutic implications. Arch Dermatol 144, 666–72.
33  Chapman HA, Riese RJ, Shi GP. (1997) Emerging roles for cysteine 

53  Szabo G, Gerald AB, Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB. (1969) Racial dif-
ferences  in  the  fate  of  melanosomes  in  human  epidermis.  Nature 
222, 1081–2.

proteases in human biology. Annu Rev Physiol 59, 63–88.

34  Codriansky KA, Quintanilla‐Dieck MJ, Gan S, Keady M, Bhawan J, 
Rünger TM. (2009) Intracellular degradation of elastin by cathep-
sin K in skin fibroblasts – a possible role in photoaging. Photochem 
Photobiol 85(6), 1356–63.

35  Gilchrest BA. (2013) Photoaging. J Invest Dermatol 133(E1), E2–6. 

Review.

36  Zheng Y, Lai W, Wan M, Maibach HI. (2011) Expression of cathe-
psins  in  human  skin  photoaging.  Skin  Pharmacol  Physiol  24(1), 
10–21.

37  Eriksson M, Brown WT, Gordon LB, Glynn MW, Singer J, Scott L, 
et al. (2003) Recurrent de novo point mutations in lamin A cause 
Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature 423(6937), 293–8.
38  Scaffidi P, Misteli T. Lami. (2006) A‐dependent nuclear defects in 

human aging. Science. 312(5776), 1059–63. 

39  Busch  A,  Kiel  T,  Heupel  WM,  Wehnert  M,  Hübner  S.  (2009) 
Nuclear protein import is reduced in cells expressing nuclear envel-
opathy‐causing lamin A mutants. Exp Cell Res 315(14), 2373–85. 
40  Decker  ML,  Chavez  E,  Vulto  I,  Lansdorp  PM.  (2009)  Telomere 
length  in  Hutchinson–Gilford  progeria  syndrome.  Mech  Ageing 
Dev 130(6):377–83. 

41  Musich PR, Zou Y. (2009) Genomic instability and DNA damage 
responses in progeria arising from defective maturation of prelamin 
A. Aging (Albany NY) 1(1), 28–37.

42  McClintock  D,  Ratner  D,  Lokuge  M,  Owens  DM,  Gordon  LB, 
Collins  FS,  Djabali  K.  (2007)  The  mutant  form  of  lamin  A  that 
causes Hutchinson–Gilford progeria is a biomarker of cellular aging 
in human skin. PLoS One 2(12), e1269.

43  Takeuchi  H,  Rünger  TM.  (2013)  Longwave  UV  light  induces  the 
aging‐associated progerin. J Invest Dermatol 133(7), 1857–62.
44  Le Clerc S, Taing L, Ezzedine K, Latreille J, Delaneau O, Labib T, et al. 
(2013) A genome‐wide association study in Caucasian women points 
out a putative role of the STXBP5L gene in facial photoaging. J Invest 
Dermatol 133(4), 929–35.

45  Pathak  M.  (1974)  The  role  of  natural  photoprotective  agents  in 
human  skin.  In:  Fitzpatrick  T,  Pathak  M,  eds.  Sunlight  and  Man. 
Toyko: University of Toyko Press.

46  Kaidbey KH, Agin PP, Sayre RM, Kligman AM. (1979) Photopro-
tection by melanin: a comparison of black and Caucasian skin. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 1, 249–60.

47  Munavalli GS, Weiss RA, Halder RM. (2005) Photoaging and non-
ablative photorejuvenation in ethnic skin. Dermatol Surg 31, 1250–
60; discussion 1261.

48  Taylor  SC.  (2002)  Skin  of  color:  biology,  structure,  function,  and 
implications  for  dermatologic  disease.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol  46 
(Suppl 2), S41–62.

49  Matory W. (1998) Skin care. In: Matory W, ed. Ethnic Considerations 
in Facial Aesthetic Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott‐Raven, p. 100.
50  Chung  JH,  Lee  SH,  Youn  CS,  Park  BJ,  Kim  KH,  Park  KC,  et  al. 
(2001) Cutaneous photodamage in Koreans: influence of sex, sun 
exposure, smoking, and skin color. Arch Dermatol 137, 1043–51.
51  Goh  SH.  (1990)  The  treatment  of  visible  signs  of  senescence:  the 

Asian experience. Br J Dermatol 122 (Suppl 35), 105–9.

52  Valia  R,  ed.  (1994)  Textbook  and  Atlas  of  Dermatology.  Bombay: 

Bhalani Publishing House.

54  Bandyopadhyay  D,  Medrano  EE.  (2000)  Melanin  accumulation 
accelerates  melanocyte  senescence  by  a  mechanism  involving 
p16INK4a/CDK4/pRB and E2F1. Ann NY Acad Sci 908, 71–84.
55  Seite  S,  Colige  A,  Piquemal‐Vivenot  P,  Montastier  C,  Fourtanier 
A, Lapiere C, et al. (2000) A full‐UV spectrum absorbing daily use 
cream protects human skin against biological changes occurring in 
photoaging. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 16, 147–55.
56  Bowen D. (1998) www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/dailys/00/Sep00/090600/

c000573_10_Attachment_F.pdf.

57  Hughes MC, Williams GM, Baker P, Green AC. (2013) Sunscreen 
and prevention of skin aging: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 
158(11), 781–90.

58  Griffiths CE, Kang S, Ellis CN, Kim KJ, Finkel LJ, Ortiz‐Ferrer LC, 
et al. (1995) Two concentrations of topical tretinoin (retinoic acid) 
cause similar improvement of photoaging but different degrees of 
irritation:  a  double‐blind,  vehicle‐controlled  comparison  of  0.1% 
and 0.025% tretinoin creams. Arch Dermatol 131, 1037–44.

59  Kang S, Voorhees JJ. (1998) Photoaging therapy with topical tretin-
oin: an evidence‐based analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, S55–61.
60  Griffiths  CE,  Russman  AN,  Majmudar  G,  Singer  RS,  Hamilton 
TA,  Voorhees  JJ.  (1993)  Restoration  of  collagen  formation  in 
photodamaged  human  skin  by  tretinoin  (retinoic  acid).  N  Engl  J 
Med 329, 530–5.

61  Kim HJ, Bogdan NJ, D'Agostaro LJ, Gold LI, Bryce GF. (1992) Effect 
of topical retinoic acids on the levels of collagen mRNA during the 
repair of UVB‐induced dermal damage in the hairless mouse and 
the possible role of TGF‐beta as a mediator. J Invest Dermatol 98, 
359–63.

62  Fisher GJ, Talwar HS, Lin J, Lin P, McPhillips F, Wang Z, et al. (1998) 
Retinoic  acid  inhibits  induction  of  c‐Jun  protein  by  ultraviolet 
radiation that occurs subsequent to activation of mitogen‐activated 
protein kinase pathways in human skin in vivo. J Clin Invest 101, 
1432–40.

63  Weiss  JS,  Ellis  CN,  Headington  JT,  Tincoff  T,  Hamilton  TA, 
Voorhees JJ. (1988) Topical tretinoin improves photoaged skin. A 
double‐blind vehicle‐controlled study. JAMA 259(4), 527–32.
64  Bagatin  E,  Parada  MO,  Miot  HA,  Hassun  KM,  Michalany  N, 
Talarico S. (2010) A randomized and controlled trial about the use 
of oral isotretinoin for photoaging. Int J Dermatol 49(2), 207–14.
65  Hernandez‐Perez  E,  Khawaja  HA,  Alvarez  TY.  (2000)  Oral 
isotretinoin as part of the treatment of cutaneous aging. Dermatol 
Surg 26(7), 649–52.

66  Rabello‐Fonseca RM, Azulay DR, Luiz RR, Mandarim‐de‐Lacerda 
CA,  Cuzzi  T,  Manela‐Azulay  M.  (2009)  Oral  isotretinoin  in  pho-
toaging:  clinical  and  histopathological  evidence  of  efficacy  of  an 
off‐label indication. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 23(2), 115–23.
67  Lin JY, Selim MA, Shea CR, Grichnik JM, Omar MM, Monteiro‐
Riviere  NA,  et  al.  (2003)  UV  photoprotection  by  combination 
topical antioxidants vitamin C and vitamin E. J Am Acad Dermatol 
48, 866–74.

68  Zussman J, Ahdout J, Kim J. (2010) Vitamins and photoaging: do sci-
entific data support their use? J Am Acad Dermatol 63(3), 507–25.
69  Jagdeo  J,  Brody  N.  (2011)  Complementary  antioxidant  function  of 
caffeine and green tea polyphenols in normal human skin fibroblasts. 
J Drugs Dermatol 10(7), 753–61.

22

BasIC ConCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

70  Jagdeo J, Adams L, Lev‐Tov H, Sieminska J, Michl J, Brody N. (2010) 
Dose‐dependent antioxidant function of resveratrol demonstrated 
via  modulation  of  reactive  oxygen  species  in  normal  human  skin 
fibroblasts in vitro. J Drugs Dermatol 9(12):1523–6.

71  Janjua R, Munoz C, Gorell E, Rehmus W, Egbert B, Kern D, Chang 
AL. (2009) A two‐year, double‐blind, randomized placebo‐controlled 
trial of oral green tea polyphenols on the long‐term clinical and histo-
logic appearance of photoaging skin. Dermatol Surg 35(7), 1057–65.
72  Cho S, Lee DH, Won CH, Kim SM, Lee S, Lee MJ, Chung JH. (2010) 
Differential effects of low‐dose and high‐dose beta‐carotene supple-
mentation on the signs of photoaging and type I procollagen gene 
expression in human skin in vivo. Dermatology 221(2), 160–71.
73  Zussman J, Ahdout J, Kim J. (2010) Vitamins and photoaging: do sci-
entific data support their use? J Am Acad Dermatol 63(3), 507–25.
74  Huang LC, Clarkin KC, Wahl GM. (1996) Sensitivity and selectivity 
of the DNA damage sensor responsible for activating p53‐dependent 
G1 arrest. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 4827–32.

75  Oh  JH,  Chung  AS,  Steinbrenner  H,  Sies  H,  Brenneisen  P.  (2004) 
Thioredoxin  secreted  upon  ultraviolet  A  irradiation  modulates 
activities of matrix metalloproteinase‐2 and tissue inhibitor of metal-
loproteinase‐2  in  human  dermal  fibroblasts.  Arch  Biochem  Biophys 
423, 218–26.

76  Soter N. (1995) Sunburn and suntan: immediate manifestations of 
photodamage. In: Gilchrest B, ed. Photodamage. Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell Science, pp. 12–25.

77  Vink AA, Moodycliffe AM, Shreedhar V, Ullrich SE, Roza L, Yarosh 
DB,  et  al.  (1997)  The  inhibition  of  antigen‐presenting  activity  of 
dendritic  cells  resulting  from  UV  irradiation  of  murine  skin  is 
restored by in vitro photorepair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94, 5255–60.

78  Toews  GB,  Bergstresser  PR,  Streilein  JW.  (1980)  Epidermal 
Langerhans cell density determines whether contact hypersensitivity 
or unresponsiveness follows skin painting with DNFB. J Immunol 
124, 445–53.

Chapter 3
pigmentation and Skin of Color

Jasmine C. Hollinger, Chesahna Kindred, and Rebat M. Halder
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

BaSIC ConCeptS

•	 Differences	in	the	structure,	function,	and	physiology	of	the	hair	and	skin	in	individuals	of	skin	of	color	are	important	in	understanding	

the	structural	and	physiologic	variations	that	exist	and	influence	disease	presentations.

•	 Melanin,	the	major	determinant	of	skin	color,	absorbs	UV	light	and	blocks	free	radical	generation,	protecting	the	skin	from	sun	damage	

and	aging.

•	 UV	irradiation	of	keratinocytes	induces	pigmentation	by	the	upregulation	of	melanogenic	enzymes,	DNA	damage	that	induces	

melanogenesis,	increased	melanosome	transfer	to	keratinocytes,	and	increased	melanocyte	dendricity.

•	 Racial	differences	in	hair	include	the	hair	type,	shape,	and	bulb.

Introduction

The demographics of the USA reflect a dynamic mixture of people 
of various ethnic and racial groups. According to the 2010 census, 
just over one third of the United States population reported their 
ethnicity and race as something other than non‐Hispanic white 
[1]. Persons of skin of color include Africans, African‐Americans, 
Afro‐Caribbeans, Asians, Latinos (Hispanics), Native Americans, 
Middle  Easterners,  Alaskan  natives,  pacific  islanders,  native 
Hawaiians and Mediterraneans. The term “black” as in black skin 
refers  to  individuals  with  African  ancestry,  including  Africans, 
African‐Americans, and Afro‐Caribbeans. Subgroups exist within 
each ethnoracial group. The differences in the structure, function, 
and physiology of the hair and skin in individuals of skin of color 
are  important  in  understanding  the  structural  and  physiologic 
variations that exist and influence disease presentations. Pigmen-
tation is especially important in patients of skin of color because 
pigmentary disorder is the most common reason for a visit to a 
dermatologist in this group [2].

Melanocytes

Melanin, the major determinant of skin color, absorbs UV light 
and  blocks  free  radical  generation,  protecting  the  skin  from 
sun  damage  and  aging.  Melanocytes,  the  cells  that  produce 
melanin, synthesize melanin in special organelles, melanosomes. 
Melanin‐filled melanosomes are transferred from one melanocyte 
to 30–35 adjacent keratinocytes in the basal layer [3]. The number 
of melanocytes also decreases with age.

There is more than one  type of melanin:  eumelanin, a dark 
brown–black  pigment;  and  pheomelanin,  a  yellow–reddish 
pigment.  Eumelanin  is  deposited  in  ellipsoidal  melanosomes 
which  contain  a  fibrillar  internal  structure.  Synthesis  of 
eumelanin  increases  after  UV  exposure  (tanning).  Pheomela-
nin  has  a  higher  sulfur  content  than  eumelanin  because  of 
the  sulfur‐containing  amino  acid  cysteine.  Pheomelanin  is 
synthesized  in  spherical  melanosomes  and  is  associated  with 
microvesicles [4]. Although not obvious to the naked eye, most 
melanin pigments of the hair, skin and, eyes are combinations 
of eumelanin and pheomelanin [5]. It is generally believed that 
genetics determine the constitutive levels of pheomelanin and 
eumelanin.  Eumelanin  is  more  important  in  determining  the 
degree of pigmentation than pheomelanin. Eumelanin, and not 
pheomelanin,  increases  with  visual  pigmentation  [5].  Lighter 
melanocytes have higher pheomelanin content than dark mela-
nocytes. In one study [5], white persons had the least amount 
of eumelanin, Asian Indians had more, and African‐Americans 
had the highest. Of note, adult melanocytes contain significantly 
more pheomelanin than cultured neonatal melanocytes.

Melanosomes  also  differ  among  different  races.  In  black 
persons  they  are  mostly  in  the  basal  layer,  but  those  of  white 
persons  are  mostly  in  the  stratum  corneum.  This  is  evident 
in  the  site  of  UV  filtration:  the  basal  and  spinous  layers  in 
blacks and the stratum corneum in white persons. Of note, the 
epidermis  of  black  skin  rarely  shows  atrophied  areas  [6].  In 
black skin, melanocytes contain more than 200 melanosomes. 
The  melanosomes  are  0.5–0.8  mm  in  diameter,  do  not  have  a 
limiting membrane, are stuck closely together, and are individu-
ally  distributed  throughout  the  epidermis.  In  white  skin,  the 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

23

24

BaSIC ConCeptS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

melanocytes  contain  less  than  20  melanosomes.  The  melano-
somes  are  0.3–0.5  mm  in  diameter,  associated  with  a  limiting 
membrane,  and  distributed  in  clusters  with  spaces  between 
them. The melanosomes of lighter skin degrade faster than that 
of  dark  skin.  As  a  result,  there  is  less  melanin  content  in  the 
upper layers of the stratum corneum. Thus, the melanocytes in 
black skin are larger, more active in making melanin, and the 
melanosomes are packaged, distributed, and broken down dif-
ferently than in white skin.

There is also a difference in melanosomes between individuals 
within  the  same  race  with  varying  degrees  of  pigmentation. 
Despite greater melanin content in darker skins, there is no evi-
dence  of  major  differences  in  the  number  of  melanocytes  [7]. 
Also, dark Caucasian skin resembles the melanosome distribution 
observed  in  black  skin  [8].  Black  persons  with  dark  skin  have 
large, non‐aggregated melanosomes and those with lighter skin 
have a combination of large non‐aggregated and smaller aggre-
gated  melanosomes  [9].  White  persons  with  darker  skin  have 
non‐aggregated  melanosomes  when  exposed  to  sunlight  and 
white  persons  with  lighter  skin  have  aggregated  melanosomes 
when not exposed to sunlight [7,8,10]. It has also been shown that 
the number of melanosomes transferred to keratinocytes is sig-
nificantly higher in skin of African descent versus white skin [11].
The  steps  of  melanogenesis  are  as  follows.  The  enzyme 
tyrosinase  hydroxylates  tyrosine  to  dihydroxyphenylalanin 
(DOPA)  and  oxidizes  DOPA  to  dopaquinone.  Dopaquinone 
then undergoes one of two pathways. If dopaquinone binds to 
cysteine, the oxidation of cysteinyldopa produces pheomelanin. 
In  the  absence  of  cysteine,  dopaquinone  spontaneously 
converts  to  dopachrome.  Dopachrome  is  then  decarboxylated 
or  tautomerized  to  eventually  yield  eumelanin.  Melanosomal 
P‐protein is involved in the acidification of the melanosome in 
melanogenesis [12]. Finally, the tyrosinase activity (not simply 
the amount of the tyrosinase protein) and cysteine concentration 
determine the eumelanin–pheomelanin content [5].

Tyrosinase  and  tyrosinase‐related  proteins  1  and  2  (TRP‐1 
and  TRP‐2)  are  upregulated  when  α‐melanocyte‐stimulat-
ing  hormone  (α‐MSH)  or  adrenocorticotropin  binds  to  mela-
nocortin‐1  receptor  (MC1R),  a  transmembrane  receptor 
located  on  melanocytes  [12–15].  The  MC1R  loss‐of‐function 
mutation  increases  sensitivity  to  UV‐induced  DNA  damage. 
Gene  expression  of  tyrosinase  is  similar  between  black  and 
white  persons  despite  tyrosinase  activity  being  significantly 
higher in darker versus lighter skin, but other related genes are 
expressed differently. The expression of RAB27A, encoding for 
the melanosome transport molecule, plays an important role in 
melanocyte melanin content as evident in Griscelli syndrome. In 
a study by Yoshida‐Amano et al., darkly pigmented melanocytes 
were found to have a substantially higher RAB27A expression 
and thus able to transfer more to keratinocytes. It was concluded 
that RAB27A is essential in determining ethnic skin color differ-
ences [11]. The MSH cell surface receptor gene for melanosomal 
P‐protein is expressed differently between races. This gene may 
regulate tyrosinase, TRP‐1, and TRP‐2 [5].

In  addition  to  the  MC1R,  protease‐activated  receptor  2 
(PAR‐2) is another important receptor that regulates epidermal 
cells and affect pigmentation [16]. PAR‐2 is expressed on many 
cells  and  several  different  organs.  Accordingly,  the  receptor  is 
involved in several physiologic processes, including growth and 
development, mitogenesis, injury responses, and cutaneous pig-
mentation. In the skin, PAR‐2 is expressed in the keratinocytes 
of the basal, spinous, and granular layers of the epidermis, endo-
thelial cells, hair follicles, myeoepithelial cells of sweat glands, 
and dermal dendritic‐like cells [17,18]. PAR‐2 is a seven trans-
membrane  domain  G‐protein‐coupled  receptor  which  under-
goes  activation  via  proteolytic  cleavage  of  the  NH2  terminus 
which acts as a tethered ligand which then activates the receptor 
(autoactivation).

PAR‐2  activating  protease  (PAR‐2‐AP),  endothelial  cell‐
released  trypsin,  mast  cell‐released  trypsin  and  chymase,  and 
SLIGKV (Ser-Leu-Ile-Gly-Lys-Val) all irreversibly activate PAR‐2 
while  serine  protease  inhibitors  interfere  with  the  activation  of 
the receptor [19-21]. SLIGKV and trypsin activate PAR‐2 to use 
a  Rho‐dependent  signaling  pathway  to  induce  melanosomal 
phagocytosis  by  keratinocytes.  The  result  is  an  increase  in  pig-
mentation  to  the  same  degree  as  UV  radiation  [18-22].  Serine 
proteases  are  regulatory  proteins  involved  in  tumor  growth, 
inflammation, tissue repair, and apoptosis in various tissues [17]. 
In the skin, serine protease inhibitors prevent the keratinocytes 
from phagocytosing melanosomes from the presenting dendritic 
tip of the melanocyte. This leads to a dose‐dependent depigmen-
tation without irritation or adverse events.

PAR‐2 also has a proinflammatory effect in the skin [18]. The 
activation of PAR‐2 expressed on endothelial cells by tryptase, 
trypsin, or PAR‐2‐AP leads to an increase in proinflammatory 
cytokines  interleukin  6  (IL‐6)  and  IL‐8  and  also  stimulates 
NF‐κB,  an  intracellular  proinflammatory  regulator  [19].  Mast 
cells  interact  with  endothelial  cells  to  regulate  inflammatory 
responses, angiogenesis, and wound healing, and PAR‐2 has a 
regulatory role in this cell–cell interaction [18,19].

UV irradiation of keratinocytes induces pigmentation in sev-
eral ways: upregulation of melanogenic enzymes, DNA damage 
that induces melanogenesis, increased melanosome transfer to 
keratinocytes and increased melanocyte dendricity. UV radia-
tion  (UVR)  increases  the  secretion  of  proteases  by  keratino-
cytes  in  a  dose‐dependent  manner.  Specifically,  UVR  directly 
increases  the  expression  of  PAR‐2  de  novo,  upregulates  prote-
ases that activate PAR‐2, and activates dermal mast cell degran-
ulation [22].

According  to  the  literature,  PAR‐2  expression  is  different 
in  skin  of  color  compared  to  white  skin  thus,  suggesting  the 
involvement  of  PAR‐2  in  ethnic  skin  color  phenotypes.  One 
study  demonstrated  that  PAR‐2  and  its  activator  trypsin  are 
expressed in higher levels in darker skin. PAR‐2 was also found 
to have higher cleavage ability in highly pigmented skin [23].

Another  study  did  find  differences  in  skin  phototypes  I,  II, 
and III [22]. UVR increases the expression of PAR‐2 in the skin 
and activated PAR‐2 stimulates pigmentation. This study found 

that  the  response  of  PAR‐2  to  UVR  is  an  important  determi-
nant  of  one's  ability  to  tan.  In  the  non‐irradiated  skin,  PAR‐2 
expression  was  confined  to  the  basal  layer  and  just  above  the 
basal  layer.  Irradiated  skin  showed  de  novo  PAR‐2  expression 
in  the  entire  epidermis  or  upper  two‐thirds  of  the  epidermis. 
Skin phototype I had a delayed upregulation of PAR‐2 expres-
sion compared to phototypes II and III.

Dyspigmentation

After cutaneous trauma or inflammation, melanocytes can react 
with normal, increased, or decreased melanin production; all of 
which are normal biologic responses. Increased and decreased 
production  results  in  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
or  hypopigmentation.  Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
(PIH) is an increase in melanin production and/or an abnormal 
distribution of melanin resulting from inflammatory cutane-
ous  disorders  or  irritation  from  topical  medications  [24,25]. 
Examples include acne, allergic contact dermatitis, lichen pla-
nus,  bullous  pemphigoid,  herpes  zoster,  and  treatment  with 
topical retinoids. Often, the PIH resulting from acne is more 
distressing to darker skinned individuals than the initial acute 
lesion. The color of the hyperpigmentation in PIH depends on 
the location of the melanin. Melanin in the epidermis appears 
brown, while melanin in the dermis appears blue–gray. Wood's 
lamp  examination  distinguishes  the  location  of  the  melanin: 
the  epidermal  component  is  enhanced  and  the  dermal  com-
ponent becomes unapparent [25]. Postinflammatory hypopig-
mentation shares the same triggers as PIH but instead results 
from  decreased  melanin  production  with  clinically  apparent 
light areas [24]. The Wood's lamp examination does not accen-
tuate hypopigmentation in postinflammatory hypopigmenta-
tion; it is useful for depigmented disorders such as vitiligo and 
piebaldism.

The pathogenesis of PIH and postinflammatory hypopigmen-
tation are unknown. It is likely that an inflammatory process in the 
skin  stimulates  keratinocytes,  melanocytes,  and  inflammatory 
cells  to  release  cytokines  and  inflammatory  mediators  that 
lead  to  the  hyperpigmentation  or  hypopigmentation.  The 
cytokines  and  inflammatory  mediators  include  leukotriene 
(LT), prostaglandins (PG), and thromboxane (TXB) [26]. Spe-
cifically  for  PIH,  in  vitro  studies  revealed  that  LT‐C4,  LT‐D4, 
PG‐E2,  and  TXB‐2  stimulate  human  melanocyte  enlargement 
and  dendrocyte  proliferation.  LT‐C4  also  increases  tyrosinase 
activity  and  mitogenic  activity  of  melanocytes.  Transforming 
growth factor‐α and LT‐C4 stimulate movement of melanocytes. 
In  postinflammatory  hypopigmentation,  the  pathogenesis 
likely  involves  inflammatory  mediators  inducing  melanocyte 
cell‐surface  expression  of  intercellular  adhesion  molecule  1 
(ICAM‐1)  which  may  lead  to  leukocyte–melanocyte  attach-
ments that inadvertently destroy melanocytes. These inflamma-
tory mediators include interferon‐gamma, tumor necrosis fac-
tor α (TNF‐α), TNF‐β, IL‐6, and IL‐7.

3. Pigmentation and Skin of Color

25

natural sun protective factor in skin of color

It is clear that those who fall within Fitzpatrick skin phototypes 
IV–VI are less susceptible to photoaging; this is most likely due 
to the photoprotective role of melanin [27,28]. The epidermis of 
black skin has a protective factor (PF) for UVB of 13.4 and that 
of white skin is 3.4 [29]. The mean UVB transmission by black 
epidermis is 5.7% compared to 29.4% for white epidermis. The 
PF  for  UVA  in  black  epidermis  is  5.7  and  in  white  epidermis 
is 1.8 [29]. The mean UVA transmission by black epidermis is 
17.5% and 55.5% for white epidermis. Hence, 3–4 times more 
UVA  reaches  the  upper  dermis  of  white  persons  than  that  of 
black persons.

The  main  site  of  UV  filtration  in  white  skin  is  the  stratum 
corneum,  whereas  in  black  skin  it  is  the  basal  layer  [29].  The 
malphigian  layer  of  black  skin  removes  twice  as  much  UVB 
radiation as the stratum corneum [30]. It is possible that even 
greater removal of UVA occurs in black skin basal layers [30]. 
While the above characteristics of natural sun protective factor 
were studied in black skin, they can probably be extrapolated to 
most persons of skin photoypes IV–VI.

Skin of color

epidermis
The  epidermal  layer  of  skin  is  made  up  of  five  different  layers: 
stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum 
lucidum, and stratum corneum. The stratum basale (also termed 
the basal layer) is the germinative layer of the epidermis. The time 
required for a cell to transition from the basal layer through the 
other epidermal layers to the stratum corneum is 24–40 days. The 
morphology and structure of the epidermis is very similar among 
different races, although a few differences do exist.

Stratum corneum
The  stratum  corneum,  the  most  superficial  layer,  is  the  layer 
responsible for preventing water loss and providing mechanical 
protection. The cells of the stratum corneum, the corneocytes, 
are flat cells measuring 50 μm across and 1 μm thick. The cor-
neocytes are arranged in layers; the number of layers varies with 
anatomic site and race. There are no differences between races in 
corneocyte surface area, which has a mean size of 900 μm [2,31]. 
The stratum corneum of black skin is more compact than that of 
white skin. While the mean thickness of the stratum corneum 
is the same in black and white skin, black skin contains 20 cell 
layers while white skin contains 16. The answer to whether or 
not there are racial differences in spontaneous desquamation is 
inconclusive [30–32]. It was observed in a study by Wesley et al. 
[32] that blacks have a 2.5 times greater spontaneous desquama-
tion compared with whites and Asians [33]. Parameters for skin 
barrier function (stratum corneum hydration, sebum secretion, 
erythema, and laser Doppler flowmetry) are similar, even after 
an objective epicutaneous test with sodium lauryl sulfate [34].

26

BaSIC ConCeptS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

transepidermal water loss
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) is the amount of water vapor 
loss from the skin,  excluding  sweat. TEWL  increases  with the 
temperature of the skin. Concrete evidence regarding the differ-
ence in TEWL between different races has yet to be established. 
In most studies, TEWL has been found to be greater in black skin 
compared to white skin but the opposite has also been reported. 
A study reported no difference in TEWL amongst blacks, whites,  
and  Hispanics  [33].  Aside  from  TEWL,  hydration  is  also  a 
characteristic  of  skin.  One  of  the  ways  to  measure  hydration, 
or water content, is conductance. Conductance, the opposite of 
resistance, is increased in hydrated skin because hydrated skin 
is more sensitive to the electrical field [35]. Skin conductance is 
higher in black persons and Hispanics than white persons [35]. 
Lipid content in black skin is higher than that of white skin [36]. 
However, black skin is more prone to dryness, suggesting that a 
difference in lipid content has a role. This includes the ratio of 
ceramide : cholesterol : fatty acids, the type of ceramides, and the 
type of sphingosine backbone. The total levels of ceramides was 
approximately 50% lower in the stratum corneum of blacks when 
compared  to  whites  and  Hispanics  according  to  a  study  [37].  
One study suggests that the degree of pigmentation influences 
lipid differences [39].

Pigmentation affects skin dryness. Skin dryness is greater on 
sun‐exposed (dorsal arm) sites for lighter skin, such as Cauca-
sian and Chinese skin, than sites that are primarily out of the 
sun  (ventral  arm)  [40].  There  is  no  difference  in  skin  dryness 
between  sites  for  darker  skin,  such  as  African‐Americans  and 
Mexicans. For adults less than 51 years of age, skin dryness does 
not change as a function of ethnicity (African‐American, Cau-
casian,  Chinese,  and  Mexican)  for  sun‐exposed  sites  and  sites 
that  are  not  primarily  sun‐exposed.  For  those  51  years  of  age 
and  older,  skin  dryness  is  higher  for  African‐Americans  and 
Caucasians than for Chinese and Mexicans. As a function of age, 
skin dryness in African‐American skin increases 4% on the dor-
sal site and 3% on the ventral site; in Caucasian skin, it increases 
11%  on  the  dorsal  site  and  10%  on  the  ventral  site.  All  of  the 
above findings suggest that sun exposure can dry the skin and 
that melanin provides protection.

Skin reactivity
Mast cells
Sueki et al. [41] studied the mast cells of four African‐American 
men  and  four  white  men  (mean  age  29  years)  by  evaluating 
punch biopsies of the buttocks with electron microscopy, with 
the  following  results.  The  mast  cells  of  black  skin  contained 
larger  granules  (the  authors  attributed  this  to  the  fusion 
of  granules).  Black  skin  also  had  15%  more  parallel‐linear 
striations and 30% less curved lamellae in mast cells. Tryptase 
reactivity  was  localized  preferentially  over  the  parallel‐linear 
striations  and  partially  over  the  dark  amorphous  subregions 
within  granules  of  mast  cells  from  black  skin,  whereas  it  was 
confined  to  the  peripheral  area  of  granules,  including  curved 
lamellae, in white skin. Cathepsin G reactivity was more intense 

over the electron‐dense amorphous areas in both groups, while 
parallel‐linear  striations  in  black  skin  and  curved  lamellae  in 
white skin were negative.

Patch test antigens
Contact dermatits
Irritant  contact  dermatitis  (ICD)  is  the  most  common  form 
of  dermatitis  and  loosely  defined  as  non‐specific  damage 
to  the  skin  after  exposure  to  an  irritant.  The  various  clini-
cal  manifestations  are  influenced  by  the  concentration  of 
chemicals,  duration  of  exposure,  temperature,  humidity,  and 
anatomic location, and other factors. Acute contact dermatitis 
presents  with  the  classic  findings  of  localized  superficial 
erythema, edema, and chemosis. Cumulative contact derma-
titis presents with similar findings, but with repeated exposure 
of a less potent irritant [42].

The susceptibility to ICD differs between black and white skin 
[43]. The structural differences in stratum corneum of black skin 
(e.g. compact stratum corneum, low ceramide levels) are credited 
with decreasing the susceptibility to irritants. Reflectance confo-
cal microscopy (RCM) is an imaging tool that permits real‐time 
qualitative and quantitative study of human skin; when used with 
a near‐infrared laser beam, one can create “virtual sections” of live 
tissue with high resolution, almost comparable with routine his-
tology. Measuring skin reactivity to chemical irritants with RCM 
and TEWL reveal that white skin had more severe clinical reac-
tions than black skin. The pigmentation in darker skin can make 
the assessment of erythema difficult and interfere with identifi-
cation  of  subclinical  degrees  of  irritancy.  Even  without  clinical 
evidence  of  irritation,  RCM  and  histology  reveal  parakeratosis, 
spongiosis, perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, and microvesicle 
formation. Mean TEWL after exposure to irritants is greater for 
white skin than for black skin. This supports the concept that the 
stratum  corneum  of  black  skin  enhances  barrier  function  and 
resistance to irritants.

There are no differences between white persons and African‐ 
Americans  in  objective  and  subjective  parameters  of  skin 
such  as  dryness,  inflammation,  overall  irritation,  burning, 
stinging,  and  itching  [44].  Acute  contact  dermatitis  with 
exudation,  vesiculation,  or  frank  bullae  formation  is  a  more 
common reaction in white skin whereas dyspigmentation and 
lichenification is more common in black skin [45].

The response to irritation in Caucasian and African‐American 
skin differs in the degree of severity. Caucasian skin has a lower 
threshold for cutaneous irritation than African‐American skin 
[46]. Caucasian skin also has more severe stratum corneum dis-
ruption, parakeratosis, and detached corneocytes. Both groups 
have the same degree of intra‐epidermal spongiosis epidermal 
(granular and spinous layer) vesicle formation. The variability in 
human skin irritation responses sometimes creates difficulty in 
assessing the differences in skin reactivity between human sub-
populations. There are conflicting results in studies comparing 
the sensitivity to irritants in Asian skin with that in Caucasian 
skin [34,47–50].

3. Pigmentation and Skin of Color

27

Dermis
The  dermis  lies  deep  to  the  epidermis  and  is  divided  into  two 
layers: the papillary and reticular dermis. The papillary dermis is 
tightly connected to the epidermis via the basement membrane at 
the dermoepidermal junction. The papillary dermis extends into 
the epidermis with finger‐like projections, hence the name “papil-
lary”. The reticular dermis is a relatively avascular, dense, collagen-
ous structure that also contains elastic tissue and glycosaminogly-
cans. The dermis is made up of collagen fibers, elastic fibers, and 
an interfibrillar gel of glycosaminoglycans, salt, and water. Collagen 
makes up 77% of the fat‐free dry weight of skin and provides tensile 
strength. Collagen types I, II, V, and VI are found in the dermis. The 
elastic fiber network is interwoven between the collagen bundles.

There are differences between the dermis of white and black 
skin.  The  dermis  of  white  skin  is  thinner  and  less  compact 
than  that  of  black  skin  [51].  In  white  skin,  the  papillary  and 
reticular layers of the dermis are more distinct, contain larger 
collagen fiber bundles, and the fiber fragments are sparse. The 
dermis of black skin contains closely stacked, smaller collagen 
fiber  bundles  with  a  surrounding  ground  substance. The  fiber 
fragments are more prominent in black skin than in white skin. 
One  study  showed  on  histological  examinations  that  African 
skin  type  had  greater  convoluted  appearance  of  the  dermal 
epidermal  junction  (DEJ)  than  the  Caucasian  skin  type.  This 
same study also revealed on immunostaining that laminin 332, 
type  IV  and  VII  collagens,  and  nidogen  proteins  at  the  DEJ 
were lower in African skin compared with Caucasian skin [52]. 
While the quantity is similar in both black and white skin, the 
size of melanophages is larger in black skin. Also, the number of 
fibroblasts and lymphatic vessels are greater in black skin. The 
fibroblasts are larger, have more biosynthetic organelles, and are 
more multinucleated in black skin [6]. The lymphatic vessels are 
dilated and empty with surrounding elastic fibers [51]. No racial 
differences  in  the  epidermal  nerve  fiber  network  have  been 
observed using laser‐scanning confocal microscopy, suggesting 
that there is no difference in sensory perception between races, 
as suggested by capsaicin response to C‐fiber activation [53].

Skin  extensibility  is  how  stretchable  the  skin  is.  Elastic 
recovery is the time required for the skin to return to its original 
state after releasing the stretched skin. Skin elasticity is elastic 
recovery divided by extensibility. Studies that investigated skin 
extensibility, elastic recovery, and skin elasticity between races 
yield conflicting results [32,54]. It is likely that elastic recovery 
and extensibility vary by anatomic site, race, and age.

Intrinsic skin aging in ethnic skin
The majority of literature regarding facial aging features Caucasian 
patients. Facial aging is result of the combination of photodamage, 
fat  atrophy,  gravitational  soft  tissue  redistribution,  and  bone 
remodeling. Figure 3.1 demonstrates the morphologic changes of 
the face caused by aging. The onset of morphologic aging appears 
in the upper face during the thirties and gradually progresses to the 
lower face and neck over the next several decades [55].

Early signs of facial aging occur in the periorbital region. In 
the late thirties, brow ptosis, upper eyelid skin laxity, and descent 
of the lateral portion of the eyebrow (“hooding”) lead to excess 
skin of the upper eyelids. During the mid‐forties, “bags” under 
the  eyes  result  from  weakening  of  the  inferior  orbital  septum 
and prolapse of the underlying intraorbital fat. Lower eyelid fat 
prolapse may occur as early as the second decade in those with 
a  familial  predisposition.  Photodamage  produces  periocular 
and brow rhytides [55]. The periorbital and midface regions in 
skin of color tend to have more pronounced signs of facial aging 
as  compared  with  the  upper  third  of  the  face.  There  is  also  a 
decreased tendency toward perioral rhytides and radial lip lines 
in skin of color [56].

Brow ptosis in African‐Americans appears to occur to a lesser 
degree and in the forties opposed to the thirties compared to that 
in whites [57]. Prolapse of the lacrimal gland may masquerade 
as lateral upper eyelid fullness in African‐Americans [58]. For 
Hispanics, the brow facial soft tissues sag at an earlier age [59]. 
In Asians, the descent of thick juxtabrow tissues in the lateral 
orbit coupled with the absences of a supratarsal fold may create 
a prematurely tired eye [55].

High brow

Prominent upper
eyelid crease

High protuberant
cheek
Soft nasolabial fold

Full lips

Smooth jawline

Figure  3.1  Morphologic  signs  of  aging.  (Source: 
Halder,  2006  [55].  Adapted  with  permission  of 
Taylor & Francis.)

Facial expression lines

Low brow

Excess upper eyelid skin

Prominent fat pockets
Lower lid hollowing 
‘dark circles’
Low cheek
Prominent nasolabial fold

Jowl

Fat accumulation

28

BaSIC ConCeptS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

The midface show signs of aging during the forties. The malar 
soft  tissue  adjacent  to  the  inferior  orbital  rim  descends,  accu-
mulating  as  fullness  along  the  nasolabial  fold.  The  malar  soft 
tissue  atrophy  and  ptosis  result  in  periorbital  hollowing  and 
tear  trough  deformity.  Early  aging  is  evident  in  individuals  of 
African, Asian, and Hispanic origin in the midface region more 
so  than  the  upper  or  lower  regions.  Signs  include  tear  trough 
deformity,  infraorbital  hollowing,  malar  fat  ptosis,  nasojugal 
groove  prominence,  and  deepening  of  the  nasolabial  fold. 
This  predisposition  to  midface  aging  is  likely  the  result  of  the 
relationship  of  the  eyes  to  the  infraorbital  rim,  basic  midface 
skeletal morphology, and skin thickness [55].

The  soft  tissue  of  the  lower  face  is  supported  in  a  youthful 
anatomic  position  by  a  series  of  retaining  ligaments  within 
the  superficial  musculo‐aponeurotic  system  (SMAS)  [60]. 
The SMAS is a discrete fascial layer that envelops the face and 
forms the basis for resuspending sagging facial tissues [15]. The 
SMAS fascia envelope maintains tension on facial muscles and 
offsets soft tissue sagging. In the late thirties, gradual ptosis of 
the SMAS and skin elastosis sets the stage for jowl formation. 
Accumulation of submandibular fat and a sagging submandibu-
lar gland may have a role in interrupting the smooth contour of 
a youthful jaw line. Changes in the lower face lead to changes 
in the neck because the SMAS is anatomically continuous with 
the platysma muscle. Sagging of the SMAS–platysma unit and 
submandibular fat redistribution gradually blunts the junction 
between the jaw and neck. A “double chin” appears at any age 
as  a  result  of  cervicomental  laxity  with  excess  submental  fat 
deposits.  During  the  fifties,  diastasis  and  hypertrophy  of  the 
anterior  edge  of  the  platysma  muscle  may  produce  vertical 
banding  in  the  cervicomental  area.  During  the  sixth,  seventh, 
and  eighth  decades,  progressive  soft  tissue  atrophy  and  bony 
remodeling of the maxilla and mandible create a relative excess 
of  sagging  skin,  further  exaggerating  facial  aging.  Jowling  is  a 
sign of lower facial aging in black persons [55]. In some cases, 
a bony chin underprojection make create excess localized sub-
mental  fatty  deposits  despite  a  smoothly  contoured  jaw  line. 
However,  in  Asians,  jowl  formation  may  result  from  fat  accu-
mulation  in  the  buccal  space  [55].  The  “double  chin”  is  more 
common in Caucasians under 40 years of age than Asians of the 
same age group, but more common in Asians over 40 years of 
age because of redundant cervical skin [61].

extrinsic aging (photoaging) of ethnic skin
Sunlight  is  a  major  factor  for  the  appearance  of  premature 
aging, independent of facial wrinkling, skin color, and skin elas-
ticity. By the late forties, individuals with greater sun exposure 
appear older than those with less sun exposure. However, the 
perceived age of individuals in their late twenties is unaffected 
by  sun  exposure.  Solar  exposure  greatly  increases  the  total 
wrinkle length by the late forties. The extent of dermal degen-
erative change seen by the late forties correlates with premature 
aging.  There  is  a  high  correlation  between  perceived  age  and 
facial wrinkles; perceived age and elastosis; and perceived age 

and the quantity of collagen. The grenz zone is a subepidermal 
band of normal dermis consisting of normal collagen fibers and 
thought to be a site of continual dermal repair. The grenz zone 
becomes visually apparent only after there is sufficient elastotic 
damage.  With  progressive  elastosis,  the  grenz  zone  becomes 
thinner [62].

Histopathology
Epidermis
The absolute number of Langerhans cells vary from person to 
person  but  chronic  sun  exposure  decreases  their  number  or 
depletes  them  [63].  The  severely  sun‐damaged  skin  has  many 
vacuolated  cells  in  the  spinous  layer,  excessively  vacuolated 
basal keratinocytes and melananocytes, cellular atypia, and loss 
of cellular polarity. Apoptosis in the basal layer is increased. A 
faulty stratum lucidum and horny layer result from intracellular 
vesicles  in  the  cells  of  the  basal  and  spinous  layers  (sunburn 
cells),  apoptosis,  and  dyskeratosis.  There  is  focal  necrobiosis 
in the epidermis and dermis in sun‐exposed skin. While histo-
logic findings of photoaging in white sun‐exposed skin include 
a  distorted,  swollen,  and  distinctly  cellular  stratum  lucidum, 
the  stratum  lucidum  of  African‐American  sun‐exposed  skin 
remains  compact  and  unaltered  [6].  The  stratum  lucidum  in 
black skin is not altered by sunlight exposure [6].

With  age,  the  dermoepidermal  junction  becomes  flattened 
with  multiple  zones  of  basal  lamina  and  anchoring  fibril 
reduplication.  Microfibrils  in  the  papillary  dermis  become 
more irregularly oriented. Compact  elastic fibers show cystic 
changes  and  separation  of  skeleton  fibers  with  age.  The  area 
occupied  by  the  superficial  vascular  plexus  in  specimens  of 
equal  epidermal  surface  length  decreases  from  the  infant  to 
young adult (21–29 years) to adult (39–52 years) age groups, 
then  increased  in  the  elderly  adult  (73–75  years)  age  group 
[64]. With the exception of the vascularity in the elderly adult 
group,  the  above  features  are  similar  to  those  seen  in  aging 
white  skin,  and  suggest  that  chronologic  aging  in  white  and 
black  skin  is  similar.  Oxytalan  fibers  are  found  in  the  papil-
lary dermis of sun‐exposed skin of white individuals in their 
twenties and early thirties but disappear in the forties. In black 
skin, the oxytalan fibers are still found in the dermis of indi-
viduals in their fifties. No solar elastosis is seen in specimens of 
black sun‐exposed skin. Older black subjects have an increased 
number and thickness of elastic fibers that separate the collag-
enous fiber layer in the reticular dermis. The sun‐exposed skin 
of a 45‐year‐old light‐ complexioned black female shared the 
same amount and distribution of elastic fibers as those in white 
sun‐exposed skin [6].

The  grenz  zone  consists  of  small  fibers  oriented  horizontally 
and replaces the papillary dermis. When elastotic material accu-
mulates  in  the  dermis,  it  crowds  out  all  the  collagenous  fibers, 
which are resorbed. As the elastic material is resorbed, wisps of 
collagenous  fibers  form  in  its  place.  Widely  spaced,  larger  col-
lagenous fiber bundles lie between the waning elastotic masses. 
The total volume of the dermis gradually diminishes as the spaces 

3. Pigmentation and Skin of Color

29

between the remaining collagenous and elastic fibers are reduced. 
When the epidermis rests directly on top of the horizontally ori-
ented, medium‐sized collagenous fiber bundles of the intermedi-
ate dermis, the dermis lacks a papillary and grenz zone and the 
dermis cannot sufficiently support the epidermis. As a result, the 
shrinking  dermis  crinkles  and  small  wrinkles  form.  This  may 
be the reason for the absence of a structural basis in secondary 
wrinkles and may explain why wrinkles flatten out when fluids 
are injected into the skin or when edema occurs [63].

Photoaging  in  skin  of  color  has  variable  presentations. 
Wrinkling is not as common a manifestation of photoaging in 
black persons, South Asians, or darker complexioned Hispanics 
as  in  white  persons  because  of  the  photoprotective  effects  of 
melanin. All racial groups are eventually subjected to photoaging. 
Within most racial groups, the lighter complexioned individuals 
show  evidence  of  photodamaged  skin.  Caucasian  skin  has  an 
earlier onset and greater skin wrinkling and sagging signs than 
darker  skin  types.  Visual  photoaging  assessments  reveal  that 
white skin has more severe fine lines, rhytides, laxity, and overall 
photodamage than African‐American skin [45].

Photoaging is uncommon in black persons but is more often seen 
in African‐Americans than in Africans or Afro‐Caribbeans. The 
reason may be the heterogeneous mixture of African, Caucasian, 
and Native American ancestry often seen in African‐Americans. 
In  African‐Americans,  photoaging  appears  primarily  in  lighter 
complexioned  individuals  and  may  not  be  apparent  until  the 
late  fifth  or  sixth  decades  of  life  [65].  Photoaging  in  this  group 
appears as fine wrinkling and mottled pigmentation. In spite of 
the  photoprotective  effects  of  melanin,  persons  of  skin  of  color 
are  still  prone  to  photoaging,  but  the  reason  is  not  completely 
known.  Infrared  radiation  may  also  contribute  to  photodam-
age. There  is  evidence  that  chronic  exposure  to  natural  or  arti-
ficial heat sources can lead to histologic changes resembling that 
of  UV‐induced  changes,  such  as  elastosis  and  carcinoma  [66]. 
The  pigmentary  manifestations  of  photoaging  common  in  skin 
of color include seborrheic keratoses, actinic lentigines, mottled 
hyperpigmentation, and solar‐induced facial melasma [67]. How-
ever,  African‐American  skin  has  greater  dyspigmentation,  with 
increased hyperpigmentation and unevenness of skin tone [44].

hair

There are two types of hair fibers: terminal and vellus. Terminal 
hair is found on the scalp and trunk. Vellus hair is fine and shorter 
and softer than terminal hair. The hair fiber grows from the epi-

thelial follicle, which is an invagination of the epidermis from 
which the hair shaft develops via mitotic activity and into which 
sebaceous glands open. The hair follicle is one of the most pro-
liferative cell types in the body and undergoes growth cycles. The 
cycles include anagen (active growth), catagen (regression), and 
telogen (rest). Each follicle follows a growth pattern independent 
of the rest. The hair follicle is lined by a cellular inner and outer 
root  sheath  of  epidermal  origin  and  is  invested  with  a  fibrous 
sheath derived from the dermis. Each hair fiber is made up of 
an outer cortex and a central medulla. Enclosing the hair shaft 
is a layer of overlapping keratinized scales, the hair cuticle that 
serves as protective layers.

Racial  differences  in  hair  include  the  hair  type,  shape,  and 
bulb.  There  are  four  types  of  hair:  helical,  spiral,  straight,  and 
wavy. The spectrum of curliness is displayed in Figure 3.2. The 
vast majority of black persons have spiral hair [68]. The hair of 
black persons is naturally more brittle and more susceptible to 
breakage and spontaneous knotting than that of white persons. 
The  kinky  form  of  black  hair,  the  weak  intercellular  cohesion 
between cortical cells, and the specific hair grooming practices 
among  black  persons  account  for  the  accentuation  of  these 
findings [68]. The shape of the hair is different between races: 
black  hair  has  an  elliptical  shape,  Asian  hair  is  round‐shaped 
straight  hair,  and  Caucasian  hair  is  intermediate  [69,70].  The 
bulb determines the shape of the hair shaft, indicating a genetic 
difference  in  hair  follicle  structure  [31].  The  cross‐section  of 
black  hair  has  a  longer  major  axis,  a  flattened  elliptical  shape, 
and  curved  follicles.  Asian  hair  has  the  largest  cross‐sectional 
area and Western European hair has the smallest [70,71]. Black 
persons  have  fewer  elastic  fibers  anchoring  the  hair  follicles 
to  the  dermis  than  white  subjects.  Melanosomes  were  in  the 
outer  root  sheath  and  in  the  bulb  of  vellus  hairs  in  black,  but 
not in white persons. Black hair also has more pigment and on 
microscopy  has  larger  melanin  granules  than  hair  from  light‐
skinned and Asian individuals. Similarities between white and 
black hair include: cuticle thickness, scale size and shape, and 
cortical cells [71].

While the curly nature of black hair is believed to result from the 
shape of the hair follicle [71], research has shown that the curliness 
of hair correlates with the distribution of cortical cells independent 
of ethnoracial origin [72]. Black hair follicles have a helical form, 
whereas the Asian follicle is completely straight and the Caucasian 
hair  form  is  intermediate  [71].  Mesocortical,  orthocortical,  and 
paracortical  cells  are  the  three  cell  types  in  the  hair  cortex.  In 
straight hair, mesocortical cells predominate [72]. In wavy hair, 
the  orthocortical  and  mesocortical  cells  are  interlaced  around 

Figure  3.2  The  spectrum  of  curliness  in  human  hair.  (Source:  Loussouarn  et  al.,  2007  [Int  J  Dermatol  46  (Suppl  1),  2-6.]  Reproduced  with  permission  of 
John Wiley & Sons.)

30

BaSIC ConCeptS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

paracortical cells. In tightly curled hair, the mesocortex disappears, 
making orthocortical cells the majority. Distinct cortical cells express 
the acidic hair keratin K38. Figure 3.3 displays the distribution of 
K38 cells in straight, wavy, and tightly curled hair. Straight hair has a 
patchy but homogenous pattern of positively charged K38cells sur-
rounding a core of negatively charged cells. As the degree of curl 
decreases,  the  K38pattern  becomes  asymmetric,  independent  of 
ethnic origin. In tightly curled hair, K38 accumulates on the concave 
side of the hair fiber and the medulla compartment disappears.

There are no differences in keratin types between hair from 
different  races  and  no  differences  in  amino  acid  composition 

of hair from different races [73]. Among Caucasian, Asian, and 
Africans, there are no differences in the intimate structures of 
fibers,  whereas  geometry,  mechanical  properties,  and  water 
swelling  differed  according  to  ethnic  origin  [74].  One  study 
[75] in 1941 did find variation in the levels of some amino acids 
between  black  and  white  hair.  Black  subjects  had  significantly 
greater  levels  of  tyrosine,  phenylalanine,  and  ammonia  in  the 
hair, but were deficient in serine and threonine.

The morphologic features of African hair were examined using 
the transmission and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) tech-
niques in an unpublished study. The cuticle cells of African hair 

(a)

(b)

(c)

Convex

Concave

(d)

(e)

Figure 3.3  K38 hair keratin distribution in hair follicles. K38 pattern in (a) straight, (b) wavy, and (c) curly hair longitudinal sections. K38 pattern in (d) 
straight and (e) curly hair cross‐sections. (Source: Thibaut et al., 2007 [72]. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

were compared with those of Caucasian hair. Two different elec-
tronic density layers were shown. The denser exocuticle is derived 
from the aggregation of protein granules that first appear when 
the  scale  cells  leave  the  bulb  region. The  endocuticle  is  derived 
from the zone that contains the nucleus and cellular organites. The 
cuticle of Caucasian hair is usually 6–8 layers thick and constant 
in  the  hair  perimeter,  covering  the  entire  length  of  each  fiber. 
However, black hair has variable thickness; the ends of the minor 
axis of fibers are 6–8 layers thick, and the thickness diminishes to 
1–2 layers at the ends of the major axis. The weakened endocu-
ticle is subject to numerous fractures (Handjur C, Fiat, Huart M, 
Tang D, Leory F, unpublished data).

references

1  US Census Bureau. (2010) Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin: 
2010: 2010 Census Briefs. March 2011 online at: www.census.gov/
prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br‐02.pdf. Accessed 24 May 2015.

2  Halder RM, Nandedkar MA, Neal KW. (2003) Pigmentary disorders 

in ethnic skin. Dermatol Clin 21, 617–28.

3  Fitzpatrick  TB,  Szabo  G.  (1959)  The  melanocytes:  cytology  and 

cytochemistry. J Invest Dermatol 32, 197–209.

4  Jimbow K, Oikawa O, Sugiyama S, Takeuchi T. (1979) Comparison 
of eumelanogenesis and pheomelanogenesis in retinal and follicular 
melanocytes: role of vesiculo‐globular bodies in melanosome dif-
ferentiation. J Invest Dermatol 73, 278–84.

5  Wakamatsu  K,  Kavanagh  R,  Kadekaro  AL,  Terzieva  S,  Sturm  RA, 
Leachman  S,  et  al.  (2006)  Diversity  of  pigmentation  in  cultured 
human  melanocytes  is  due  to  differences  in  the  type  as  well  as 
quantity of melanin. Pigment Cell Res 19, 154–62.

6  Montagna W, Carlisle K. (1991) The architecture of black and white 

facial skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 24, 929–37.

7  Taylor SC. (2002) Skin of color; biology, structure, function, impli-
cations for dermatologic disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 46, S41–62.
8   Toda K, Fatnak MK, Parrish A, Fitzpatrick TB. (1972) Alteration of 
racial differences in melanosome distribution in human epidermis 
after exposure to ultraviolet light. Nat New Biol 236, 143–4.

9  Olson  RL,  Gaylor  J,  Evertt  MA.  (1973)  Skin  color,  melanin,  and 

erythema. Arch Dermatol 108, 541–4.

10  Jimbow  M,  Jimbow  K.  (1989)  Pigmentary  disorders  in  Oriental 

skin. Clin Dermatol 7, 11–27.

11  Yoshida‐Amano  Y,  Hachiya  A,  Ohuchi  A,  Kobinger  GP,  Kitahara 
T, Takema Y, et al. (2012) Essential role of RAB27A in determining 
constitutive human skin color. PLoSOne 7, e41160.

12  Abdel‐Malek Z, Swope VB, Suzuki I, Akcali C, Harriger MD, Boyce 
ST, et al. (1995) Mitogenic and melanogenic stimulation of normal 
human melanocytes by melanotropic peptides. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 92, 1789–93.

13  Sturm  RA,  Teasdale  RD,  Box  NF.  (2001)  Human  pigmentation 
genes:  identification,  structure  and  consequences  of  polymorphic 
variation. Gene 277, 49–62.

14  Rees  JL.  (2003)  Genetics  of  hair  and  skin  color.  Annu  Rev  Genet 

37, 67–90.

15  Suzuki  I,  Cone  RD,  Im  S,  Nordlund  J,  Abdel‐Malek  ZA.  (1996) 
Binding  of  melanotropic  hormones  to  the  melanocortin  receptor 

3. Pigmentation and Skin of Color

31

MC1R on human melanocytes stimulates proliferation  and  mela-
nogenesis. Endocrinology 137, 1627–33.

16  Hou  L,  Kapas  S,  Cruchley  AT,  Macey  MG,  Harriott  P,  Chinni  C, 
et  al.  (1998)  Immunolocalization  of  protease‐activated  receptor‐2 
in  skin:  receptor  activation  stimulates  interleukin‐8  secretion  by 
keratinocytes in vitro. Immunology 94, 356–62.

17  Steinhoff  M,  Neisius  U,  Ikoma  A,  Fartasch  M,  Heyer  Gisela, 
Skov PS, et al. (2003) Proteinase‐activated receptor‐1 mediates 
itch: a novel pathway for pruritus in human skin. J Neurosci 23, 
6176–80.

18  Shpacovitch VM, Brzoska T, Buddenkotte J, Stroh C, Sommerhoff 
CP, Ansel JC, et al. (2002) Agonists of proteinase‐activated recep-
tor 2 induce cytokine release and activation of nuclear transcription 
factor κB in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. J Invest 
Dermtol 118, 380–5.

19  Seiberg M, Paine C, Sharlow E, Andrade‐Gordon P, Constanzo M, 
Eisinger M, et al. (2000) Inhibition of melanosome transfer results 
in skin light‐ening. J Invest Dermatol 115, 162–7.

20  Nystedt S, Ramakrishnan V, Sundelin J. (1996) The proteinase‐acti-
vated receptor 2 is induced by inflammatory mediators in human 
endothelial  cells:  comparison  with  the  thrombin  receptor.  J  Biol 
Chem 271, 14910–5.

21  Bohm  SK,  Kong  W,  Bromme  D,  Smeekens  SP,  Anderson  DC, 
Connolly A, et al. (1996) Molecular cloning, expression and potential 
functions  of  the  human  proteinase‐activated  receptor‐2.  Biochem  J 
314, 1009–16.

22  Scott G, Deng A, Rodriguez‐Burford C, Seiberg M, Han R, Babiarz 
L, et al. (2001) Protease‐activated receptor 2, a receptor involved in 
melanosome transfer, is upregulated in human skin by ultraviolet 
irradiation. J Invest Dermatol 117, 1412–20.

23  Babiarz‐Magee L, Chen N, Seiberg M, Lin CB. (2004) The expression 
and activation of protease‐activated receptor‐2 correlate with skin 
color. Pigment Cell Res 17, 241–51.

24  Gilchrest BA. (1977) Localization of melanin pigmentation in skin 

with Wood's lamp. Br J Dermatol 96, 245–7.

25  Morelli JG, Norris DA. (1993) Influence of inflammatory mediators 
and  cytokines  on  human  melanocyte  function  (Review).  J  Invest 
Dermatol 100 (2 Suppl), 191S–5S.

26  Grover R, Morgan BDG. (1996) Management of hypopigmentation 

following burn injury. Burns 22, 727–30.

27  Johnston  GA,  Svukabd  KS,  McLelland  J.  (1998)  Melasma  of  the 
arms  associated  with  hormone  replacement  therapy  (letter).  Br  J 
Dermatol 139, 932.

28  Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB. (1974) The role of natural photoprotective 
agents  in  human  skin.  In:  FitzpatrickTB,  PathakMA,  HarberLC, 
SeijiM, KukitaA, eds. Sunlight and Man. Tokyo: University of Tokyo 
Press, pp. 725–50.

29  Kligman  AM.  (1974)  Solar  elastosis  in  relation  to  pigmentation. 
In:  FitzpatrickTB,  PathakMA,  HarberLC,  SeijiM,  KukitaA,  eds. 
Sunlight and Man. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, pp. 157–63.
30  Kaidbey KH, Agin PP, Sayre RM, Kligman AM. (1979) Photoprotection 
by melanin: a comparison of black and Caucasian skin. J Am Acad Der-
matol 1, 249–60.

31  Manuskiatti W, Schwindt DA, Maibach HI. (1998) Influence of age, 
anatomic site and race on skin roughness and scaliness. Dermatol-
ogy 196, 401–7.

32  Courcuff P, Lotte C, Rougier A, Maibach HI. (1991) Racial differences 
in  corneocytes:  a  comparison  between  black,  white,  and  Oriental 
skin. Acta Dermatol Venereol 71, 146–8.

32

BaSIC ConCeptS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

33  Warrier  AG,  Kligman  AM,  Harper  RA,  Bowman  J,  Wickett  RR. 
(1996)  A  comparison  of  black  and  white  skin  using  noninvasive 
methods. J Soc Cosmet Chem 47, 229–40.

34  Wesley NO, Maibach HI. (2003) Racial (ethnic) differences in skin 
properties: The objective data. Am J Clin Dermatol 4, 843–60.
35  Aramaki  J,  Kawana  S,  Effendy  I,  Happle  R,  Löffler  H.  (2002) 
Differences  of  skin  irritation  between  Japanese  and  European 
women. Br J Dermatol 146, 1052–6.

36  Triebskorn A, Gloor M. (1993) Noninvasive methods for the determi-
nation of skin hydration. In: ForschPJ, KligmanAM, eds. Noninvasive 
Methods for the Quantification of Skin Functions. Berlin; New York 
(NY): Springer‐Verlag, pp. 42–55.

37  La Ruche G, Cesarini JP. (1992) Histology and physiology of black 

skin. Ann Dermatovenereologica 119, 567–74.

38  Rawlings AV. (2006) Ethnic skin types: Are there differences in skin 

structure and function? Int J Cosmet Sci 28, 79–93.

39  Reed JT, Ghadially R, Elias MM. (1995) Skin type but neither race 
nor  gender,  influence  epidermal  permeability  barrier  function. 
Arch Dermatol 131, 1134–8.

40  Diridollou S, de Rigal J, Querleux B, Leroy F, Holloway Barbosa V. 
(2007) Comparative study of the hydration of the stratum corneum 
between  four  ethnic  groups:  influence  of  age.  Int  J  Dermatol  46 
(Suppl 1), 11–4.

41  Sueki  H,  Whitaker‐Menezes  D,  Kligman  AM.  (2001)  Structural 
diversity of mast cell granules in black and white skin. Br J Dermatol 
144, 85–93.

42  Modjtahedi SP, Maibach HI. (2002) Ethnicity as a possible endog-
enous factor in irritant contact dermatitis: comparing the irritant 
response among Caucasians, blacks, and Asians. Contact Dermatitis 
47, 272–8.

43  Hicks  SP,  Swindells  KJ,  Middelkamp‐Hup  MA,  Sifakis  MA, 
González E, González S. (2003) Confocal histopathology of irritant 
contact  dermatitis  in  vivo  and  the  impact  of  skin  color  (black  vs 
white). J Am Acad Dermatol 48, 727–34.

44  Grimes P, Edison BL, Green BA, Wildnauer RH. (2004) Evaluation of 
inherent differences between African‐American and white skin surface 
properties using subjective and objective measures. Cutis 73, 392–6.
45  Berardesca F, Maibach H. (1996) Racial differences in skin patho-

53  Reilly  DM,  Ferdinando  D,  Johnston  C,  Shaw  C,  Buchanan  KD, 
Green MR. (1997) The epidermal nerve fiber network: characteri-
zation of nerve fibers in human skin by confocal microscopy and 
assessment of racial variations. Br J Dermatol 137, 163–70.

54  Berardesca E, Rigal J, Leveque JL, et al. (1991) In vivo biophysical 
characterization of skin physiological differences in races. Derma-
tologica 182, 89–93.

55  Harris  MO.  (2006)  Intrinsic  skin  aging  in  pigmented  races.  In: 
Halder RM, ed. Dermatology and Dermatological Therapy of Pigmented 
Skins. Taylor & Francis Group, pp. 197–209.

56  Alexis  AF,  Alam  M.  (2012)  Racial  and  ethnic  differences  in  skin 
aging:  Implications  for  treatment  with  soft  tissue  fillers.  J  Drugs 
Dermatol 11, s30; discussion s32.

57  Matory  WE.  (1998)  Aging  in  people  of  color.  In:  MatoryWE,  ed. 
Ethnic  Considerations  in  Facial  Aesthetic  Surgery.  Philadelphia: 
 Lippincott‐Raven, 151–70.

58  Bosniak SL, Zillkha MC. (1999) Cosmetic Blepharoplasty and Facial 

Rejuvenation. New York: Lippincott‐Raven.

59  Ramirez  OM.  (1998)  Facial  surgery  in  the  Hispano‐American 
patient. In: MatoryWE, ed. Ethnic Considerations in Facial Aesthetic 
Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott‐Raven, pp. 307–20.

60  Stuzin  JM,  Baker  TJ,  Gordon  HL.  (1992)  The  relationship  of  the 
superficial  and  deep  facial  fascias:  relevance  to  rhytidectomy  and 
aging. Plast Reconstr Surg 89, 441–9.

61  Shirakable  Y.  (1988)  The  Oriental  aging  face:  an  evaluation  of  a 
decade  of  experience  with  the  triangular  SMAS  flap  technique. 
Aesthetic Plast Surg 12, 25–32.

62  Warren R, Garstein V, Kligman AM, Montagna W, Allendorf RA, 
Ridder GM. (1991) Age, sunlight, and facial skin: a histologic and 
quantitative study. J Am Acad Dermatol 25, 751–60.

63  Montagna  W,  Kirchner  S,  Carlisle  K.  (1989)  Histology  of  sun‐ 

damaged human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 12, 907–18.

64  Herzberg AJ, Dinehart SM. (1989) Chronologic aging in black skin. 

Am J Dermatopathol 11, 319–28.

65  Halder  RM.  (1998)  The  role  of  retinoids  in  the  management  of 
cutaneous  conditions  in  blacks.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol  39  (Part  3), 
S98–103.

66  Kligman LH. (1982) Intensification of ultraviolet‐induced dermal 

physiology. J Am Acad Dermatol 34, 667–72.

damage by infrared radiation. Arch Dermatol 272, 229–38.

46  Galindo, GR, Mayer JA, Slymen D, Almaguer DD, Clapp E, et al. 
(2007) Sun sensitivity in 5 US ethnoracial groups. Cutis 80, 25–30.
in  acute  skin 
irritation responses. Race, sex, age, sensitive skin and repeat subject 
comparisons. Contact Dermatitis 46, 86–93.

47  Robinson  MK.  (2002)  Population  differences 

67  Halder RM, Richards GM. (2006) Photoaging in pigmented skins. 
In:  Halder  RM,  ed.  Dermatology  and  Dermatological  Therapy  of 
Pigmented Skins. Taylor & Francis Group, pp. 211–20.

68  Halder  RM.  (1983)  Hair  and  scalp  disorders  in  blacks.  Cutis  32, 

378–80.

48  Foy V, Weinkauf R, Whittle E, Basketter DA. (2001) Ethnic variation 

69  Bernard BA. (2003) Hair shape of curly hair. J Am Acad Dermatol 

in the skin irritation response. Contact Dermatitis 45, 346–9.

48 (6 Suppl), S120–6.

49  Robinson  MK.  (2000)  Racial  differences  in  acute  and  cumulative 
skin irritation responses between Caucasian and Asian populations. 
Contact Dermatitis 42, 134–43.

50  Tadaki T, Watanabe M, Kumasaka K, Tanita Y, Kato T, Tagami H, et al. 
(1993) The effect of tretinoin on the photodamaged skin of the Japa-
nese. Tohoku J Exp Med 169, 131–9.

51  Montagna  W,  Giusseppe  P,  Kenney  JA.  (1993)  The  structure  of 
black skin. In: MontagnaW, GiusseppeP, KenneyJA, eds. Black Skin 
Structure and Function. Academic Press, pp. 37–49.

52  Girardeau‐Hubert S, Pageon H, Asselineau D. (2012) In vivo and in 
vitro approaches in understanding the differences between Cauca-
sian and African skin types: Specific involvement of the papillary 
dermis. Int J Dermatol 51 Suppl 1, 1–4.

70  Vernall DO. (1961) Study of the size and shape of hair from four 

races of men. Am J Phys Anthropol 19, 345.

71  Brooks O, Lewis A. (1983) Treatment regimens for “styled” black 

hair. Cosmet Toiletries 98, 59–68.

72  Thibaut  S,  Barbarat  P,  Leroy  F,  Bernard  BA.  (2007)  Human  hair 
keratin network and curvature. Int J Dermatol 46 (Suppl 1), 7–10.
73  Gold  RJ,  Scriver  CG.  (1971)  The  amino  acid  composition  of  hair 

from different racial origins. Clin Chim Acta 33, 465–6.

74  Franbourg A, Hallegot P, Baltenneck F, Toutain C, Leroy F. (2003) 
Current research on ethnic hair. J Am Acad Dermatol 48 (6 Suppl), 
S115–9.

75  Menkart J, Wolfram L, Mao I. (1966) Caucasian hair, Negro hair and 
wool: similarities and differences. J Soc Cosmet Chem 17, 769–87. 

ChaPter 4
Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System

Francis McGlone1 and David Reilly2
1 School of Natural Sciences & Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK
2 Unilever Research, Colworth Science Park, Sharnbrook, Bedford, UK

BaSIC ConCePtS

•	 The	primary	sensory	modality	subserving	the	body	senses	is	collectively	described	as	the	somatosensory	system	and	comprises	all	those	

peripheral	afferent	nerve	fibers,	and	specialized	receptors,	subserving	cutaneous,	and	proprioceptive	sensitivity.

•	 Individuals	with	sensitive	skin	demonstrate	heightened	reactivity	of	the	cutaneous	somatosensory	system.
•	 A	separate	set	of	neurons	mediates	itch	and	pain.	The	afferent	neurons	responsible	for	histamine‐induced	itch	in	humans	are	

unmyelinated	C‐fibers.

•	 Low	threshold	mechanoreceptors	are	responsible	for	the	sensation	of	touch,	a	wide	range	of	receptor	systems	code	for	temperature,	

and	as	the	skin’s	integrity	is	critical	for	survival,	there	are	an	even	larger	number	of	sensory	receptors	and	nerves	that	warn	us	of	damage	
to	the	skin.

•	 With	the	recent	discovery	of	a	class	of	neurones	that	respond	optimally	to	gentle	stroking	touch	(sharing	commonality	with	the	itch	and	

pain	nerves)	our	understanding	of	the	skin’s	sensitivity	is	entering	a	new	chapter.

Introduction

The  primary  sensory  modality  subserving  the  body  senses  is 
collectively  described  as  the  somatosensory  system,  and  com­
prises all those peripheral afferent nerve fibers, and specialized 
receptors, subserving cutaneous and proprioceptive sensitivity. 
The latter processes information about limb position and mus­
cle forces which the central nervous system uses to monitor and 
control limb movements and, via elegant feedback and feedfor­
ward mechanisms, ensure that a planned action or movement is 
executed fluently. This chapter focuses on sensory inputs arising 
from the skin surface – cutaneous sensibility – and describes the 
neurobiological processes that enable the skin to “sense.” Skin 
sensations are multimodal and are classically described as sens­
ing the four submodalities of touch, temperature, itch and pain. 
We also consider the growing evidence for a fifth submodality, 
present only in hairy skin, which is preferentially activated by 
slowly moving, low force, mechanical stimuli.

This  brief  introduction  to  somatosensation  starts  with  the 
discriminative  touch  system.  Sensation  enters  the  peripheral 
nervous system via sensory axons that have their cell bodies sit­
ting just outside the spinal cord in the dorsal root ganglia, with 
one ganglion for each spinal nerve root. Neurons are the build­
ing  blocks  of  the  nervous  system  and  somatosensory  neurons 
are  unique  in  that,  unlike  most  neurons,  the  electrical  signal 
does  not  pass  through  the  cell  body  but  the  cell  body  sits  off 

to one side, without dendrites. The signal passes directly from 
the distal axon process to the proximal process which enters the 
dorsal half of the spinal cord, and immediately turns up the spi­
nal  cord  forming  a  white  matter  column,  the  dorsal  columns, 
which relay information  to  the first brain relay nucleus in the 
medulla. These axons are called the primary afferents, because 
they  are  the  same  axons  that  carry  the  signal  into  the  spinal 
cord. Sensory input from the face does not enter the spinal cord, 
but instead enters the brainstem via the trigeminal nerve (one 
of the cranial nerves). Just as with inputs from the body, there 
are  four  modalities  of  touch,  temperature,  itch  and  pain,  with 
each modality having different receptors traveling along differ­
ent tracts projecting to different targets in the brainstem. Once 
the pathways synapse in the brainstem, they join those from the 
body on their way up to a relay in the thalamus and then on to 
higher cortical structures. Sensory information arising from the 
skin is represented in the brain in the primary and secondary 
somatosensory cortex, where the contralateral body surfaces are 
mapped in each hemisphere.

Peripheral nervous system

The skin is the most extensive and versatile organ of the body 
and  in  a  fully  grown  adult  covers  a  surface  area  approaching 
2 m2.  This  surface  is  far  more  than  a  just  a  passive  barrier.  It 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

33

34

BaSIC ConCePtS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

contains in excess of 2 million sweat glands and 5 million hairs 
covering  all  surfaces,  apart  from  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  the 
palms of the hands (glabrous skin). Evidence is also emerging 
that  non‐glabrous  skin  contains  a  system  of  nerves  that  code 
specifically for the pleasant properties of touch. Skin consists of 
an outer, waterproof, stratified squamous epithelium of ectoder­
mal origin – the epidermis – plus an inner, thicker, supporting 
layer  of  connective  tissue  of  mesodermal  origin  –  the  dermis. 
The thickness of this layer varies from 0.5mm over the eyelid to 
>5.0 mm over the palm and sole of the foot.

touch
Of  the  four  “classic”  submodalities  of  the  somatosensory  sys­
tem, discriminative touch subserves the perception of pressure, 
vibration, and texture and relies upon four different receptors in 
the digit skin:
 1.  Meissner corpuscles;
 2.  Pacinian corpuscles;
 3.  Merkel disks; and
 4.  Ruffini endings.

These  are  collectively  known  as  low  threshold  mech­
anoreceptors  (LTMs),  a  class  of  cutaneous  receptors  that  are 
specialized to transduce mechanical forces impinging the skin 
into  nerve  impulses.  The  first  two  are  classified  as  fast  adapt­
ing  (FA)  as  they  only  respond  to  the  initial  and  final  contact 
of a mechanical stimulus on the skin, and the second two are 
classified as slowly adapting (SA) as they continue firing during 
a constant mechanical stimulus. A further classification relates 
to the LTM’s receptive field (RF; i.e. the surface area of skin to 
which  they  are  sensitive). The  RF  is  determined  by  the  LTM’s 
anatomic location within the skin, with those near the surface 
at  the  dermal–epidermal  boundary,  Meissner  corpuscles  and 
Merkel disks, having small RFs, and those lying deeper within 
the  dermis,  Pacinian  corpuscles  and  Ruffini  endings,  having 
large RFs (Figure 4.1).

Psychophysical procedures have been traditionally employed 
to study the sense of touch where differing frequencies of vibro­

tactile stimulation are used to quantify the response properties 
of this sensory system. Von Bekesy [1] was the first to use vibra­
tory stimuli as an extension of his research interests in audition. 
In a typical experiment participants were asked to respond with 
a simple button‐press when they could just detect the presence of 
a vibration presented to a digit, within one of two time periods. 
This two alternative force choice paradigm (2‐AFC) provides a 
threshold‐tuning  curve,  the  slopes  of  which  provide  informa­
tion about a particular class of LTM’s response properties.

Bolanowski  et  al.  [2]  proposed  that  there  are  four  distinct 
psychophysical  channels  mediating  tactile  perception  in  the 
glabrous  skin  of  the  hand.  Each  psychophysically  determined 
channel is represented by one of the four anatomic end organs 
and  nerve  fiber  subtypes,  with  frequencies  in  the  40–500 Hz 
range  providing  a  sense  of  “vibration,”  transmitted  by  Pacin­
ian corpuscles (PC channel or FAI); Meissner corpuscles being 
responsible for the sense of “flutter” in the 2–40 Hz range (NPI 
channel  or  FAII);  the  sense  of  “pressure”  being  mediated  by 
Merkel disks in the 0.4–2.0 Hz range (NPIII or SAI); and Ruffini 
end organs producing a “buzzing” sensation in the 100–500 Hz 
range  (NPII  or  SAII).  Neurophysiologic  studies  support  this 
model, but there is still some way to go to link the anatomy with 
perception (Table 4.1).

There  have  been  relatively  few  studies  of  tactile  sensitivity 
on  hairy  skin,  the  cat  being  the  animal  of  choice  for  most  of 
these studies. Mechanoreceptive afferents (Aβ fibers) have been 
described  that  are  analogous  to  those  found  in  human  gla­
brous skin (FAI, FAII, SAI, SAII), and Essick and Edin [3] have 
described sensory fibers with these properties in human facial 
skin. The relationship between these sensory fibers and tactile 
perception is still uncertain.

Sensory  axons  are  classified  according  to  their  degree  of 
myelination, the fatty sheath that surrounds the nerve fiber. The 
degree of myelination determines the speed with which the axon 
can conduct nerve impulses and hence the nerves conduction 
velocity. The largest and fastest axons are called Aα and include 
some of the proprioceptive neurons, such as the muscle stretch 

Table 4.1  Main	characteristics	of	primary	sensory	afferents	innervating	human	skin

Class

Modality

Axonal diameter 
(μm)

Conduction velocity 
(m s−1)

Myelinated

Aα

Aβ

Aδ

Unmyelinated

C‐pain

C‐tactile

C‐tutonomic

Proprioceptors	from	muscles	
and	tendons

Low	threshold	
mechanoreceptors

Cold,	noxious,	thermal

Noxious,	heat,	thermal

Light	stroking,	gentle	touch

Autonomic,	sweat	glands,	
vasculature

20

10

2.5

1

1

1

120

80

12

<1

<1

<1

4. Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System 35

Epidermis
Cuticle
Scarf skin

Stratum
mucosum

Stratum corneum

Stratum lucidum
Stratum granulosum

Melanocyte
Stratum spinosum

Stratum granulosum
Lamina basilaris
Meissner’s corpuscle
Merkel’s disks

Pars papillaris or
Papillary dermis
(loose connective tissue)

Dermal nerve networks

Ruffint endings

Dermis
Cuticle
True skin

Epidermis
Cuticle
Scarf skin

Dermis
Cuticle
True skin

Pars reticularis or
Reticular dermis
(dense connective tissue)

Pacinian corpuscles

Stratum subc utaneum
Tela subcutanea

Muscle, ligament, or bone

Eccrine gland

Tactile pad

Stratum corneum
Stratum lucidum
Stratum granulosum
Stratum spinosum

Stratum granulosum
Lamina basilaris

Blood vessels

Pars papillaris or
Papillary dermis
(loose connective tissue)

Ruffint endings

Dermal nerve networks

Eccrine gland

Pars reticularis or
Reticular dermis
(dense connective tissue)

Pacinian corpuscles

Stratum subcutaneum
Tela subcutanea

Muscle, ligament, or bone

(a)

Hair shaft

Melanocyte

Erector
pilorum
muscle

Sebaceous
gland

Hair follicle
network

Apocrine gland

Blood vessels

(b)

Figure 4.1  A cross‐sectional perspective of (a) glabrous and (b) hairy skin. (Source: R.T. Verrillo, artist. Reproduced with permission.)

36

BaSIC ConCePtS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

receptors.  The  second  largest  group,  called  Aβ,  includes  all  of 
the discriminative touch receptors being described here. Pain, 
itch and temperature include the third fourth and fifth groups, 
Aδ and C‐fibers.

Electrophysiological studies on single peripheral nerve fibers 
innervating the human hand have provided a generally accepted 
model of touch that relates the four anatomically defined types 
of  cutaneous  or  subcutaneous  sense  organs  to  their  neural 
response  patterns  [4].  The  technique  used  in  these  studies  is 
called microneurography and involves inserting a fine tungsten 
microelectrode, tip diameter <5 μm, through the skin and into 
the underlying median nerve which innervates the thumb and 
first two digits (Figure 4.2).

temperature
The cutaneous somatosensory system detects changes in ambient 
temperature over an impressive range, initiated when thermal 
stimuli that differ from a homeostatic set‐point excite tempera­
ture specific sensory nerves in the skin, and relay this informa­
tion to the spinal cord and brain. It is important to recognize 
that  these  nerves  code  for  temperature  change,  not  absolute 
temperature, as a thermometer does. The system does not have 
specialized receptor end organs such as those found with LTMs 
but uses free nerve endings throughout skin to sense changes 
in  temperature.  Within  the  innocuous  thermal  sensing  range 
there  are  two  populations  of  thermosensory  fibers,  one  that 
responds  to  warmth  (warm  receptors)  and  one  that  responds 
to cold (cold receptors), and include fibers from the Aδ and C 

range.  Specific  cutaneous  cold  and  warm  receptors  have  been  
defined  as  slowly  conducting  units  that  exhibit  a  steady‐state 
discharge at constant skin temperature and a dynamic response 
to temperature changes [5,6]. Cold‐specific and warm‐specific 
receptors  can  be  distinguished  from  nociceptors  that  respond 
to noxious low and high temperatures <20°C and >45°C) [7,8], 
and also from thermosensitive mechanoreceptors [5,9]. Stand­
ard  medical  textbooks  describe  the  cutaneous  cold  sense  in 
humans as being mediated by myelinated A‐fibers with CVs in 
the range 12–30 ms−1 [10], but recent work concludes that either 
human cold‐specific afferent fibers are incompletely myelinated 
“BC” fibers, or else there are C as well as A cold fibers, with the 
C‐fiber group contributing little to sensation (Figure 4.3) [11].
The  free  nerve  endings  for  cold‐sensitive  or  warm‐sensi­
tive nerve fibers are located just beneath the skin surface. The 
terminals  of  an  individual  temperature‐sensitive  fiber  do  not 
branch  profusely  or  widely.  Rather,  the  endings  of  each  fiber 
form  a  small,  discretely  sensitive  point,  which  is  separate 
from the sensitive points of neighboring fibers. The total area 
of skin occupied by the receptor endings of a single tempera­
ture‐sensitive  nerve  fiber  is  relatively  small  (approximately 
1 mm in diameter), with the density of these thermosensitive 
points varying in different body regions. In most areas of the 
body  there  are  3–10  times  as  many  cold‐sensitive  points  as 
warm‐sensitive points. It is well‐established from physiologic 
and  psychologic  testing  that  warm‐sensitive  and  cold‐sensi­
tive fibers are distinctively different from one another in both 
structure and function.

Small, sharp borders

l

s
d
e
fi
e
v

i
t
p
e
c
e
R

Large, obscure borders

Adaptation

Fast,
no static responses

Slow,
static response present

Edge sensitive

Edge sensitive

Irregular

FAI

(43%)
Meissner

SAI

(25%)
Merkel

Regular

Sensitive to lateral
skin stretch

(13%) Pacini
Golgi–Mazzoni

SAII

FAII

(19%)
Ruffini

y
t
i
s
n
e
d
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
n
n

I

Figure 4.2  The four types of low threshold mechanoreceptors in human glabrous skin are depicted. The four panels in the center show the nerve firing 
responses to a ramp and hold indentation and the frequency of occurrence (%) and putative morphologic correlate. The black dots in the left panel show the 
receptive fields of type I (top) and type II (bottom) afferents. The right panel shows the average density of type I (top) and type II (bottom) afferents with 
darker area depicting higher densities. (Source: Westling, 1986 [29]. Reproduced with permission.)

 
 
4. Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System 37

Over 50% of the unmyelinated axons (C‐fibers) of a periph­
eral nerve respond, not only to intense mechanical stimulation, 
but also to heat and noxious chemicals, and are therefore classi­
fied as polymodal nociceptors [12] or C‐mechano‐heat (CMH) 
nociceptors  [13].  Receptive  fields  consist  of  single  zones  with 
distinct  borders  and  in  this  respect  they  differ  from  Aδ  noci­
ceptors  that  have  multipoint  fields.  Innervation  densities  are 
high and responses have been reported to a number of irritant 
chemicals such as dilute acids, histamine, bradykinin, and cap­
saicin. Following inflammation some units can acquire respon­
siveness to stimuli to which they were previously unresponsive. 
Recruitment of these “silent nociceptors” implies spatial sum­
mation to the nociceptive afferent barrage at central levels, and 
may therefore contribute to primary hyperalgesia after chemi­
cal irritation and to secondary hyperalgesia as a consequence of 
central sensitization.

Nociceptors  do  not  show  the  kinds  of  adaptation  response 
found with rapidly adapting LTMs (i.e. they fire continuously 
to  tissue  damage),  but  pain  sensation  may  come  and  go  and 
pain  may  be  felt  in  the  absence  of  any  nociceptor  discharge. 
They  rely  on  chemical  mediators  around  the  nerve  ending 
which  are  released  from  nerve  terminals  and  skin  cells  in 
response to tissue damage. The axon terminals of nociceptive 
axons possess no specialized end organ structure and for that 
reason are referred to as free nerve endings. This absence of any 
encapsulation renders them sensitive to chemical agents, both 
intrinsic  and  extrinsic,  and  inflammatory  mediators  released 
at a site of injury can initiate or modulate activity in surround­
ing  nociceptors  over  an  area  of  several  millimeters  leading 
to  two  kinds  of  sensory  responses  termed  hyperalgesia  –  the 
phenomenon of increased sensitivity of damaged areas to pain­
ful  stimuli.  Primary  hyperalgesia  occurs  within  the  damaged 
area; secondary hyperalgesia occurs in undamaged tissues sur­
rounding this area.

Itch
One further sensation mediated by afferent C‐fibers is that of 
itch. The sensation of itch has, in the past, been thought to be 
generated by the weak activation of pain nerves, but with the 
recent finding of primary afferent neurons in humans [14] and 
spinal  projection  neurons  in  cats  [15],  which  have  response 
properties that match those subjectively experienced after his­
tamine application to the skin, it is now recognized that sepa­
rate sets of neurons mediate itch and pain, and that the afferent 
neurons responsible for histamine‐induced itch in humans are 
unmyelinated C‐fibers. Until relatively recently it was thought 
that  histamine  was  the  final  common  mediator  of  itch,  but 
clinical observations where itch can be induced mechanically, 
or  is  not  found  with  an  accompanying  flare  reaction,  cannot 
be  explained  by  histamine‐sensitive  pruriceptors  leading  to 
evidence  for  the  existence  of  histamine‐independent  types 
of  itch  nerves  [16]  in  which  itch  is  generated  without  a  flare 
reaction by cowhage spicules. As with the existence of multiple 

35˚C

31˚C

(a)

35˚C

31˚C

(b)

5s

Figure 4.3  Resting discharge of a C cold fiber at room temperature [11]. (a) 
The resting discharge is suppressed by warming of the receptive field (RF) 
from 31°C to 35°C. (b) From a holding temperature of 35°C, at which the 
unit is silent, activity is initiated by cooling the RF to 31°C. (Time bar: 5 s.)

Pain
Here  we  consider  a  system  of  peripheral  sensory  nerves  that 
innervate  all  cutaneous  structures  and  whose  sole  purpose  is 
to  protect  the  skin  against  potential  or  actual  damage.  These 
primary afferents include Aδ and C‐fibers which respond selec­
tively and linearly to levels of thermal, mechanical, and chemical 
stimuli that are tissue‐threatening. This encoding mechanism is 
termed nociception and describes the sensory process detecting 
any overt, or impending, tissue damage. The term pain describes 
the  perception  of  irritation,  stinging,  burning,  soreness,  or 
painful sensations arising from the skin. It is important to rec­
ognize  that  the  perception  of  pain  not  only  depends  on  noci­
ceptor input, but also on other processes and pathways giving 
information  about  emotional  or  contextual  components.  Pain 
is  therefore  described  in  terms  of  an  “experience”  rather  than 
just  a  simple  sensation.  There  are  again  submodalities  within 
the nociceptive system (Aδ and C) subserving nociception. Aδ 
fibers are thin (1–5 μm), poorly myelinated axons of mechani­
cal nociceptors, thermal receptors, and mechanoreceptors with 
axon potential conduction velocities of approximately 12 ms−1. 
C‐fibers are very thin (<1 μm) unmyelinated slowly conducting 
axons of <1 ms−1. Mechanical nociceptors are in the Aδ range 
and possess receptive fields distributed as 5–20 small sensitive 
spots over an area approximately 2–3 mm in diameter. In many 
cases  activation  of  these  spots  depends  upon  stimuli  intense 
enough to produce tissue damage, such as a pinprick. Aδ units 
with a short latency response to intense thermal stimulation in 
the  range  40–50°C  have  been  described  as  well  as  other  units 
excited by heat after a long latency – usually with thresholds in 
excess of 50°C.

38

BaSIC ConCePtS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

types of pain afferents, different classes of itch nerves are also 
likely to account for the various experiences of itch reported 
by patients [17].

Pleasure
In recent years a growing body of evidence has been accumu­
lating,  from  anatomical,  psychophysical,  electrophysiological, 
and neuroimaging studies, that a further submodality of affer­
ent, slowly conducting, unmyelinated C‐fibers exists in human 
hairy  skin  that  are  neither  nociceptive  nor  pruritic,  but  that 
respond  preferentially  to  low  force,  slowly  moving  mechani­
cal stimuli. These nerve fibers have been classified as C‐tactile 
afferents (CT‐afferents) and were first described by Nordin [18] 
and Johansson et al. [19]. Evidence of a more general distribu­
tion of CT‐afferents have subsequently been found in the arm 
and the leg, but never in glabrous skin sites such as the palms 
of the hands or the soles of the feet [20]. It is well known that 
mechanoreceptive innervation of the skin of many mammals is 
subserved  by  A  and  C  afferents,  but  until  the  observations  of 
Nordin  and  Vallbo  C‐mechanoreceptive  afferents  in  human 
skin appeared to be lacking entirely.

The  functional  role  of  CT‐afferents  is  not  fully  known,  but 
their  neurophysiological  response  properties,  fiber  class,  and 
slow  conduction  velocities  preclude  their  role  in  any  rapid 
mechanical  discriminative  or  cognitive  tasks,  and  point  to  a 
more limbic function, particularly the emotional aspects of tac­
tile perception [21]. However, the central neural identification 
of  low‐threshold  C  mechanoreceptors,  responding  specifically 
to light touch, and the assignment of a functional role in human 
skin  has  only  recently  been  achieved.  In  a  study  on  a  unique 
patient  lacking  large  myelinated  Ab‐fibers,  it  was  discovered 
that  activation  of  CT‐afferents  produced  a  faint  sensation  of 
pleasant touch, and functional neuroimaging showed activation 
in the insular cortex but no activation the primary sensory cor­
tex, identifying CT‐afferents as  a system  for  limbic  touch that 
might  underlie  emotional,  hormonal,  and  affiliative  responses 
to skin–skin contacts between individuals engaged in grooming 
and bonding behaviors – pleasant touch [22]. If pain is elicited 
via sensory C‐ and Aδ‐fibers then it is reasonable to speculate 
that the same system may be alternatively modulated to deliver 
a  sensation  of  pleasure.  A  study  employing  the  pan‐neuronal 
marker PGP9.5 and confocal laser microscopy has identified a 
population of free nerve endings in the epidermis that may be 
the putative anatomic substrate for this submodality [23].

Sympathetic nerves
Although this chapter deals with sensory aspects of skin inner­
vation it is important to acknowledge the role of a class of effer­
ent  (motor)  nerves  that  innervate  various  skin  structures:  (a) 
blood vessels; (b) cutaneous glands; and (c) unstriated muscle in 
the skin (e.g. the erectors of the hairs). In sensitive skin condi­
tions, and some painful neuropathic states, sympathetic nerves 
have  a  role  in  exacerbating  inflammation  and  irritation  (for 
review see Roosterman et al. [24]).

the central projections

The submodalties of skin sensory receptors and nerves that con­
vey  information  to  the  brain  about  mechanical,  thermal,  pru­
ritic and painful stimulation of the skin are grouped into three 
different  pathways  in  the  spinal  cord  and  project  to  different 
target  areas  in  the  brain.  They  differ  in  their  receptors,  path­
ways, and targets, and also in the level of decussation (crossing 
over) within the CNS. Most sensory systems en route to the cer­
ebral cortex decussate at some point, as projections are mapped 
contralaterally. The discriminative touch system crosses in the 
medulla,  where  the  spinal  cord  joins  the  brain,  the  pain/itch/
pleasure system crosses at the point of entry into the spinal cord.

Spinal cord
All the primary sensory neurons have their cell bodies situated 
outside the spinal cord in the dorsal root ganglion, there being 
one ganglion for every spinal nerve root.

Tactile  primary  afferents,  or  first  order  neurons,  immedi­
ately  turn  up  the  spinal  cord  towards  the  brain,  ascending  in 
the dorsal white matter and forming the dorsal columns. In a 
cross‐section of the spinal cord at cervical levels, two separate 
tracts can be seen: the midline tracts comprise the gracile fas­
ciculus conveying information from the lower half of the body 
(legs and trunk), and the outer tracts comprise the cuneate fas­
ciculus conveying information from the upper half of the body 
(arms and trunk). At the medulla, situated at the top of spinal 
cord, the primary tactile afferents make their first synapse with 
second  order  neurons  where  fibers  from  each  tract  synapses 
in  a  nucleus  of  the  same  name  –  the  gracile  fasciculus  axons 
 synapse in the gracile nucleus, and the cuneate axons synapse in 
the cuneate nucleus. The neurons receiving the synapse provide  
the  secondary  afferents  and  cross  immediately  to  form  a  
new tract on the contralateral side of the brainstem – the medial 
lemniscus – which ascends through the brainstem to the next 
relay station in the midbrain, the thalamus.

As  with  the  tactile  system,  pain,  itch,  CTs  and  thermal  pri­
mary  afferents  synapse  ipsilaterally  and  then  the  secondary 
afferents cross, but the crossings occur at different levels. Pain 
and temperature afferents enter the dorsal horn of the spinal and 
synapse within one or two segments, forming the Lissauer tract 
as  they  do  so. The  dorsal  horn  is  a  radially  laminar  structure. 
The two types of pain fibers, C and Aδ, enter different layers of 
the dorsal horn. Aδ fibers enter the posterior marginalis and the 
nucleus proprius, and synapse on a second set of neurons. These 
are  the  secondary  afferents  which  will  relay  the  signal  to  the 
thalamus. The secondary afferents from both layers cross to the 
opposite side of the spinal cord and ascend in the spinothalamic 
tract. The C‐fibers enter the substantia gelatinosa and synapse, 
but  they  do  not  synapse  on  secondary  afferents.  Instead  they 
synapse on interneurons – neurons that do not project out of the 
immediate area but relay the signal to the secondary afferents 
in either the posterior marginalis or the nucleus proprius. The 
spinothalamic tract ascends the entire length of the cord and the 

4. Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System 39

entire brainstem and by the time it reaches the midbrain appears 
to be continuous with the medial lemniscus. These tracts enter 
the thalamus together.

It is important to note that although the bulk of afferent input 
adheres to the plan outlined above there is a degree of mixing 
that goes on between the tracts.

We  have  concentrated  on  somatosensory  inputs  from  the 
body thus far, but as facial skin is often the source of sensitive 
reactions to topical applications, its peripheral and central anat­
omy and neurophysiology is briefly summarized here. The tri­
geminal nerve innervates all facial skin structures (including the 
oral mucosa) and, just as with the spinal afferents, these neurons 
have their cell bodies outside of the CNS in the trigeminal gan­
glion with their proximal processes entering the brainstem. Just 
as in the spinal cord, the three modalities of touch, temperature, 
and pain have different receptors in the facial skin, travel along 
different tracts, and have different targets in the brainstem – the 
trigeminal  nucleus  –  a  relatively  large  structure  that  extends 
from the midbrain to the medulla.

The  large  diameter  (Aβ)  fibers  enter  directly  into  the  main 
sensory  nucleus  of  the  trigeminal  and,  as  with  the  somato­
sensory  neurons  of  the  body,  synapse  and  then  decussate,  the 

secondary afferents joining the medial lemniscus as it projects 
to the thalamus. The small diameter fibers conveying pain and 
temperature  enter  midbrain  with  the  main  Vth  cranial  nerve, 
but  then  descend  down  the  brainstem  to  the  caudal  medulla 
where they synapse and cross. These descending axons form a 
tract, the spinal tract of V, and synapse in the spinal nucleus of 
V, so called because it reaches as far down as the upper cervi­
cal spinal cord. The spinal nucleus of V comprises three regions 
along its length: the subnucleus oralis, the subnucleus interpo­
laris, and the subnucleus caudalis. The secondary afferents from 
the subnucleus caudalis cross to the opposite side and join the 
spinothalamic tract where the somatosensory information from 
the  face  joins  that  from  the  body,  entering  the  thalamus  in  a 
separate nucleus, the ventroposterior medial (VPM) nucleus.

Brain
The  third  order  thalamocortical  afferents  (from  thalamus  to 
cortex) travel up through the internal capsule to reach the pri­
mary somatosensory cortex, located in the post‐central gyrus, a 
fold of cortex just posterior to the central sulcus (Figure 4.4a).

The  thalamocortical  afferents  convey  all  of  the  signals, 
whether from the ventroposterior lateral (VPL) or VPM nucleus, 

Leg

Arm

Face

Cortex

Medulla

Spinal cord

Somatosensory cortex of
left hemisphere of brain

Thalamus

Dorsal column
nucleus

Cell body of
sensory nerve

Finger of
right hand

l

s
r
e
d
u
o
h
S

k
c
e
N

d
a
e
H

p
i
H

k
n
u
Tr
Leg
Foot
Toes
Genitals

m
r
A

w
o
b
l
E

m
r
a
e
r
o
F

Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Index
Thumb
Eye
Nose
Face
Upper lip
Lips
Lower lip
Teeth, gums and jaw
Tongue
Pharynx
Intra-abdominal

(a)

Midline

Primary afferent ﬁber

(b)

Figure 4.4  (a) Outline of the somatosensory pathways from the digit tip to primary somatosensory cortex, via the dorsal column nuclei and the thalamus. (b) 
Penfield’s somatosensory homunculus. Note the relative overrepresentation of the hands and lips, and the relative underrepresentation of the trunk and arms.

40

BaSIC ConCePtS  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

to  primary  somatosensory  cortex  where  the  sensory  informa­
tion from all body surfaces is mapped in a somatotopic (body‐
mapped) manner [25], with the legs represented medially, at the 
top of the head, and the face represented laterally (Figure 4.4b). 
Within the cortex there are thought to be eight separate areas 
primarily subserving somatosensation: primary somatosensory 
cortex, SI, comprised of four subregions (2, 1, 3a and 3b); sec­
ondary  somatosensory  cortex,  SII,  located  along  the  superior 
bank of the lateral sulcus [26]; the insular cortex; and the poste­
rior parietal cortex, areas 5 and 7b (Figure 4.5).

As  with  studies  of  the  peripheral  nervous  system,  outlined 
above,  the  technique  of  microneurography  has  again  been 
used, in this case to study the relationship between skin sensory 
nerves  and  their  central  projections,  as  evidenced  by  the  use 
of concurrent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
Microstimulation  of  individual  LTM  afferents,  projecting  to 
RFs on the digit, produces robust, focal, and orderly (somato­
topic)  hemodynamic  (BOLD)  responses  in  both  primary  and 
secondary somatosensory cortices [27]. It is expected that this 
technique  will  permit  the  study  of  many  different  topics  in 
somatosensory neurophysiology, such as sampling from FA and 
SA  mechanoreceptors  and  C‐fibers  with  neighboring  or  over­
lapping RFs on the skin, quantifying their spatial and temporal 
profiles  in  response  to  electrical  chemical  and/or  mechanical 
stimulation of the skin areas they innervate, as well as percep­
tual responses to microstimulation.

Finally, the forward projections from these primary somato­
sensory areas to limbic and prefrontal structures has been stud­
ied with fMRI in order to understand the affective representa­
tions of skin stimulation for both pain and pleasure [28] and it 
is hoped that studies of this nature will help us to understand 
better the emotional aspects of both negative and positive skin 
sensations.

Central sulcus

Intraparietal
sulcus

7

40

39

3,1,2

43

Lateral sulcus

Figure 4.5  Cortical areas subserving somatosensation. Primary somatosen­
sory cortex is located in the posterior bank of the central sulcus and the pos­
terior gyrus and comprises areas 2, 1, 3a and 3b, secondary somatosensory 
cortex  is  located  in  the  upper  bank  of  the  lateral  sulcus  with  two  further 
somatosensory regions in the posterior parietal cortex, areas 5 and 7b.

Conclusions

In this chapter we describe the neural architecture of the skin 
senses, where it has been shown that the skin surfaces we groom 
when applying cosmetic agents are receptive to a wide variety 
of physicochemical forms of stimulation. Low threshold mech­
anoreceptors are responsible for the sensation of touch, a wide 
range  of  receptor  systems  code  for  temperature,  and,  as  the 
skin’s  integrity  is  critical  for  survival,  there  are  an  even  larger 
number of sensory receptors and nerves that warn us of damage 
to the skin – the pain and itch systems. In addition to this “clas­
sic” description of the skin senses, we also provide recent evi­
dence for the existence of another skin receptor system which 
shares many of the same characteristics as the pain system with 
one  important  distinction  –  this  system  of  sensory  nerves  is 
excited by low force, slowly moving tactile stimulation – such as 
that employed when grooming the body surfaces. This C‐fiber‐
based system of peripheral mechanosensitive cutaneous sensory 
nerves is therefore serving both a protective and hedonic role 
in body grooming behaviours and may well provide the neural 
substrate  driving  the  rewarding  (pleasant)  sensations  experi­
enced during grooming – if personal care of the skin were not 
pleasant would we do it?

references

1  von  Bekesy  G.  (1939)  Uber  die  Vibrationsempfindung.  [On  the 

vibration sense.] Akust Z 4, 315–34.

2  Bolanowski SJ, Gescheider GA, Verrillo RT, Checkosky CM. (1988) 
Four  channels  mediate  the  mechanical  aspects  of  touch.  J  Acoust 
Soc Am 84, 1680–94.

3  Essick  GK,  Edin  BB.  (1995)  Receptor  encoding  of  moving  tactile 
stimuli in humans: the mean response of individual low‐threshold 
mechanoreceptors to motion across the receptive field. J Neurosci 
15, 848–64.

4  Valbo  AB,  Johansson  RS.  (1978)  The  tactile  sensory  innervation 
of the glabrous skin of the human hand. In: GordonG, ed. Active 
Touch. New York: Pergamon, pp. 29–54.

5  Hensel H, Boman KKA. (1960) Afferent impulses in cutaneous sen­

sory nerves in human subjects. J Neurophysiol 23, 564–78.

6  Hensel  H.  (1973)  Cutaneous  thermoreceptors.  In:  IggoA,  ed. 

Somatosensory System. Berlin: Springer‐Verlag, pp. 79–110.

7  Torebjörk  H.  (1976)  A  new  method  for  classification  of  C‐unit 
activity in intact human skin nerves. In: BonicaJJ, Albe‐FessardD, 
eds.  Advances  in  Pain  Research  and  Therapy.  New  York:  Raven, 
pp. 29–34.

8  Campero  M,  Serra  J,  Ochoa,  JL.  (1966)  C‐polymodal  nociceptors 
activated by noxious low temperature in human skin. J Physiol 497, 
565–72.

9  Konietzny  F.  (1984)  Peripheral  neural  correlates  of  temperature 

sensations in man. Hum Neurobiol 3, 21–32.

10.  Darian‐Smith I. (1984) Thermal sensibility. In: Darian‐SmithI, ed. 
Handbook  of  Physiology,  Vol.  3,  Sensory  Processes.  Bethesda,  MD: 
American Physiological Society, pp. 879–913.

4. Sensitive Skin and the Somatosensory System 41

11.  Campero M, Serra J, Bostock H, Ochoa JL. (2001) Slowly conduct­
ing  afferents  activated  by  innocuous  low  temperature  in  human 
skin. J Physiol 535, 855–65.

21.  Essick G, James A, McGlone FP. (1999) Psychophysical assessment 
of the affective components of non‐painful touch. Neuroreport 10, 
2083–7.

12.  Bessou M, Perl ER. (1969) Response of cutaneous sensory units with 
unmyelinated fibres to noxious stimuli. J Neurophysiol 32, 1025–43.
13.  Campbell JN, Raja SN, Cohen RH, Manning DC, Khan AA, Meyer 
RA.  (1989)  Peripheral  neural  mechanisms  of  nociception.  In: 
WallPD,  MelzackR.  eds.  Textbook  of  Pain.  Edinburgh:  Churchill 
Livingstone, pp. 22–45.

14.  Schmelz M, Schmidt R, Bickel A, Handwerker HO, Torebjörk HE. 
(1997) Specific C‐receptors for itch in human skin. J Neurosci 17, 
8003–8.

15.  Andrew  D,  Craig  AD.  (2001)  Spinothalamic  lamina  1  neurons 
selectively sensitive to histamine: a central neural pathway for itch. 
Nat Neurosci 4, 72–7.

16.  Ikoma  A,  Handwerker  H,  Miyachi  Y,  Schmelz  M.  (2005)  Electri­

cally evoked itch in humans. Pain 113, 148–54.

17.  Yosipovitch  G,  Goon  ATJ,  Wee  J,  Chan  YH,  Zucker  I,  Goh  CL. 
(2002)  Itch  characteristics  in  Chinese  patients  with  atopic  der­
matitis using a new questionnaire for the assessment of pruritus. 
Int J Dermatol 41, 212–6.

18.  Nordin M. (1990) Low threshold mechanoreceptive and nocicep­
tive units with unmyelinated (C) fibres in the human supraorbital 
nerve. J Physiol 426, 229–40.

19.  Johansson  RS,  Trulsson  M,  Olsson  KA,  Westberg  KG.  (1988) 
Mechanoreceptor activity from the human face and oral mucosa. 
Exp Brain Res 72, 204–8.

20.  Valbo AB, Hagbarth K‐E, Torebjork HE, Wallin BG. (1979) Som­
atosensory,  proprioceptive  and  sympathetic  activity  in  human 
peripheral nerves. Physiol Rev 59, 919–57.

22.  Olausson H, Lamarre Y, Backlund H, Morin C, Wallin BG, Starck S, 
et al. (2002) Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and project 
to the insular cortex. Nat Neurosci 5, 900–4.

23.  Reilly  DM,  Ferdinando  D,  Johnston  C,  Shaw  C,  Buchanan  KD, 
Green  M.  (1997)  The  epidermal  nerve  fibre  network:  characteri­
zation of nerve fibres in human skin by confocal microscopy and 
assessment of racial variations. Br J Dermatol 137, 163–70.

24.  Roosterman D, Goerge T, Schneider SW, Bunnett NW, Steinhoff M. 
(2006)  Neuronal  control  of  skin  function:  the  skin  as  a  neuroim­
munoendocrine organ. Physiol Rev 86, 1309–79.

25.  Maldjian  JA,  Gotschalk  A,  Patel  RS,  Detre,  JA,  Alsop  DC.  (1999) 
The sensory somatotopic map of the human hand demonstrated at 
4T. Neuroimage 10, 55–62.

26.  Maeda K, Kakigi R, Hoshiyama M, Koyama S. (1999) Topography 
of the secondary somatosensory cortex in humans: a magentoen­
cephalographic study. Neuroreport 10, 301–6.

27.  Trulsson  M,  Francis  ST,  Kelly  EF,  Westling  G,  Bowtell  R, 
McGlone FP. (2001) Cortical responses to single mechanorecep­
tive  afferent  microstimulation  revealed  with  fMRI.  Neuroimage 
13, 613–22.

28.  Rolls  E,  O’Doherty  J,  Kringelbach  M,  Francis  S,  Bowtell  R, 
McGlone F. (2003) Representation of pleasant and painful touch in 
the human orbitofrontal cortex. Cereb Cortex 10, 284–94.

29.  Westling GK. (1986) Sensori‐motor mechanisms during precision 
grip in man. Umea University medical dissertation. New Series 171, 
Umea, Sweden.

Chapter 5
Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive techniques for 
evaluating Cosmetic products

Thomas J. Stephens,1 Christian Oresajo,2 Lily I. Jiang,1 and Robert Goodman1
1Thomas J. Stephens & Associates Inc., Texas Research Center, Richardson, TX, USA
2 L’Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

BasIC CoNCepts

•	 Skin	care	products	must	be	studied	for	safety	and	efficacy.
•	 Non-invasive	techniques	were	developed	to	assess	the	skin	without	a	biopsy.
•	 Non-invasive	techniques	are	used	to	evaluate	visual	appearance,	moisturization,	barrier	integrity,	oiliness,	elasticity,	firmness,	erythema,	

and	skin	color.

•	 New	photography	techniques	have	been	developed	to	detect	photoaging	features	of	the	skin.

Introduction

Clinical  trials  for  substantiation  of  cosmetic  claims  should  be 
designed  with  good  scientific  rigor.  In  1999,  Rizer  et  al.  [1] 
described an integrated, multidimensional approach for achiev-
ing this goal. The multistep process consisted of the following: 
careful subject selection, subject self-assessment of product per-
formance,  clinical  grading,  documentation  photography,  non-
invasive bioengineering methods, and statistical analysis.

Clinical expert grading has been the key endpoint for many 
clinical trials. Many grading scales and atlases have been devel-
oped over the years that provided guidance for clinical grading 
[2,3,4,5].  Although  it  takes  rigorous  training  and  cumulative 
experience to achieve a level of consistency, expert graders are 
able to provide accurate assessment of skin conditions that no 
other bioinstrumentation or device could match. This is because 
during in-clinic live grading, experts can feel, touch and observe 
the skin’s response from various angles.

Multiple bioinstrumentation devices have been developed over 
the years to assess the skin’s physical and mechanical properties 
[6]. These devices provide an objective and quantitative assess-
ment  of  the  skin  condition.  Additionally,  bioinstrumentation 
studies can provide valuable information about the mechanism 
of  action  of  cosmetics  on  skin.  Use  of  the  bioinstrumentation 
does  have  limitations  in  certain  clinical  situations.  Most  bio-
instrumentation  devices  focus  on  a  very  small  area  of  the  skin 
which may not be representative of changes in other areas of the 

face. In some trials products are applied to the surface of the skin 
prior  to  a  measurement  which  results  in  poor  surface  contact 
with the device and/or false readings. It is for these reasons that 
bioinstrumentation data may not provide the needed evidence to 
substantiate a product performance claim.

Digital  photography  has  been  widely  used  to  document  of 
changes before and after product applications. In recent years, 
the development of specialized digital photography and image 
analysis  tools,  has  provided  clinical  investigators  with  a  new 
objective and quantitative tools for assessing changes in skin. 
Digital photography of skin when combined with image anal-
ysis  can  be  a  powerful  tool  for  quantifying  improvements  in 
wrinkles, hyperpigmentation, pore size, skin tone evenness and 
skin  tone  brightness.  Unlike  bioinstrumentation,  digital  pho-
tography  and  image  analysis  can  capture  changes  on  the  face 
or  area  of  interest  globally,  providing  a  more  comprehensive 
and  realistic  assessment;  this  is  especially  true  in  the  case  of 
colorimetry.

This  chapter  was  written  to  introduce  dermatologists,  cos-
metic  surgeons  and  clinical  researchers  to  the  cost-effective, 
non-invasive  methods  for  substantiating  cosmetic  claims. 
The chapter will include an overview of commonly used non-
invasive bioinstrumentation methods in cosmetic studies and 
a  description  of  various  types  of  high  resolution  digital  pho-
tography and their application for evaluating changes in skin. 
Emerging  technologies  for  skin  imaging  will  be  discussed  at 
the end.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

42

5. Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for Evaluating Cosmetic Products

43

Commonly used non-invasive 
bioinstrumentation methods in cosmetic 
studies

the  same  way  as  the  graders  see.  However,  these  two  issues 
can be overcome using the combined digital photography and 
image  analysis  approach  discussed  in  the  following  sections 
of this chapter.

Approximately 90% or more of the cosmetic studies performed 
today are designed to support claims relating to improvements 
of fine lines or wrinkles, uneven skin pigmentation associated 
with  sun  exposure  and/or  hormonal  changes,  enlarged  pores, 
skin radiance, skin roughness, skin tone, and skin dryness. Table 
5.1  provides  a  listing  of  commonly  used,  non-invasive  tech-
niques that are used to help support these specific claims. For 
the reader who would like to learn more about these techniques 
or other non-invasive methods, there are a number of excellent 
books and articles available in the chapter’s reference list [6–12].
Ideally, an investigator would like to see agreement between 
the clinical grading, non-invasive bioinstrumentation measure-
ments and subject self-perception questionnaires. Occasionally, 
investigators  get  good  concordance  between  clinical  grading 
and  self-perception  questionnaires,  but  discordance  with  the 
more  “objective”  non-invasive  technique.  There  are  two  main 
reasons  for  this  discordance.  First,  most  bioinstrumentation 
devices focus on a small area of a few millimetres in diameter. 
Going  back  to  the  exact  same  location  during  post  baseline 
assessment is tricky and changes in that particular spot may 
not reflect changes on the face or area of interest globally. Sec-
ond, most of those devices do not directly assess the features 
of  photodamage,  such  as  wrinkles,  pores,  and  pigmentation, 

Table 5.1  Commonly	used	bioinstruments	and	non-invasive	procedures.

Name

NOVA	Meter

SKICON

Corneometer

TEWA	Meter

Derma	Lab

Use

Moisturization

Moisturization

Moisturization

Skin	barrier	function	assessment

Skin	barrier	function	assessment

AquaFlux®	Closed	System

Skin	barrier	function	assessment

Delfin	VapoMeter®	Closed	
System

Skin	barrier	function	assessment

Cutometer

ChromaMeter

Mexameter

Sebumeter

Sebutapes

D-Squames

Firmness	and	elasticity

Skin	tone,	erythema,	skin	lightening,	
brightness

Skin	tone,	erythema,	skin	lightening

Oiliness	(sebum)

Oiliness

Scaling,	exfoliation,	and	cell	renewal

Silicone	replica	impressions

Skin	texture,	wrinkling

Ultrasound

Skin	density,	skin	thickness

Optical	Coherence	
Tomography	(OCT)

Visualizing	the	fine	structures	of	skin

Confocal	imaging

Visualizing	cell	structures	of	skin

Use of digital photography as a non-invasive 
technique for assessing skin features

Unlike bioinstrumentation devices, digital photography has the 
advantage  of  capturing  the  changes  before  and  after  product 
usage of the whole assessment area, thus allowing comprehen-
sive  global  analysis  similar  to  the  assessment  done  by  expert 
graders.

The challenge for clinical documentation photography is two-
fold: to choose the best photographic technique relative to the 
aims of the study and to maximize consistency of the imaging at 
each clinic visit throughout the trial. The key to successful pho-
tography in clinical trials is the application of standardization, 
which includes the control subject’s positioning, dress, lighting 
conditions,  depth  of  field,  background,  and  facial  expression 
from  visit  to  visit.  The  goal  is  to  have  images  that  accurately 
show  treatment  effects  for  use  in  medical  and  scientific  jour-
nals. There is no place for misrepresenting clinical outcomes by 
changing viewing angles, altering lighting conditions, or having 
the subject apply facial makeup after using a product [13,14].

The first step to successful photography is to create the appro-
priate  lighting  and  other  photographic  techniques  specific  to 
the  skin  conditions  of  interest  in  the  clinical  study.  A  study 
involving a product designed to reduce the appearance of fine 
lines and wrinkles demands significantly different lighting than 
would  trials  involving  acne,  photoaging  skin,  skin  dryness  or 
flakiness,  scars,  wound  healing,  postinflammatory  hyperpig-
mentation (PIH), or pseudofolliculitis barbae. In order to ensure 
a high degree of color consistency in photographic technique, 
the photographer should include color standard chips in each 
documentation image. Typically, these standards include small 
reference chips of white, 18% reflectance gray, black, red, green, 
and blue, as well as a millimeter scale for size confirmation. In 
addition,  a  more  comprehensive  color  chart  such  as  a  Color-
Checker® (X-Rite America Inc., Grand Rapids, MI, USA) should 
be photographed under the exact standard lighting immediately 
before starting each photo visit.

Equally  crucial  is  the  careful  and  detailed  recording  of  all 
aspects of lighting, camera, and lens settings in order to achieve 
maximum consistency of documentation photographs. Photo-
graphing each different photographic set-up provides more cer-
tainty that photographs at subsequent sessions are identical to 
the images made at baseline visit.

Prior  to  photography,  all  makeup  and  jewelry  must  be 
removed,  and  hair  kept  clear  of  the  subject’s  face  by  use  of  a 
neutral-color headband. Clothing should be covered by a gray 
or black cloth drape to prevent errors caused by color reflected 
from  colored  clothing.  Subject  must  adopt  a  neutral  facial 

44

BasIC CoNCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

expression, no smiling, frowning, or squinting during the photo 
shoot. Subject’s body position, such as seat height, orientation 
of  legs,  position  of  head  and  neck,  will  also  be  marked  since 
body position often affects the positioning of the face. At each 
subsequent visit in the study, it is essential to use image ghosting 
software  to  match  post  baseline  images  with  baseline  images. 
Subject’s position and facial expression need to be maintained 
the same way as baseline images. Only under these conditions 
we can be assured that changes in the skin are due to product 
effect,  and  are  not  artifacts  caused  by  careless  photographic 
technique.  When  the  study  is  over,  the  sequence  of  images 
should look almost like a time-lapse video; the only difference 
from one image to another is the condition of the subject’s skin.
At  Stephens  &  Associates,  Inc.  we  have  designed  fully 
equipped photographic studios within our clinics so that sub-
jects can be photographed under standardized conditions from 
visit  to  visit  (Figure  5.1).  These  studios  are  manned  by  expe-
rienced  medical  photographers  who  have  been  trained  in  the 
basic science of conducting a clinical trial. While it is not pos-
sible for many clinics to have fully equipped studios with medi-
cal  photographers  in  their  office,  there  are  other  off-the-shelf 
alternatives which will allow them to control the quality of the 
images in clinical research.

Canfield’s VISIA CR and VISIA CR2 are standardized cam-
era systems that have been designed for use in clinical research. 
VISIA systems are composed of an oval shaped plastic shell con-
taining a digital camera and lighting system. Subject positioning 
is controlled by forehead and chin rests. The unit is controlled 
by Mirror software. Multiple lighting modes are equipped and 
a series of pictures under different lighting modes can be taken 
quickly. Image ghosting is also included to allow position align-
ment at post baseline visits. VISIA systems can be operated by 
individuals with little to no experience in photography.

VISIA systems, while easy to use, have limitations in certain 
situations. The chin and head rests are sometimes too small for 

Figure 5.1  An example of a Stephens & Associates, Inc. photographic studio. 
The studio is equipped for taking photographs using standard lighting, par-
allel and polarized lighting, cross polarized lighting and raking light.

individuals  with  large  faces,  resulting  in  “jammed  in”  appear-
ance. The chin rest also interferes with the assessment of jaw-
lines and facial sagging. Because of the close proximity of the 
subject’s  face  and  the  flash  and  camera,  images  can  only  be 
taken  with  the  subject’s  eyes  closed.  Pictures  with  the  eyes 
closed do not capture effectively conditions such as dark circles 
and under-eye puffiness; therefore they are not suitable for clini-
cal studies testing an eye treatment. In addition, the VISIA sys-
tems are limited to capture the face only.

review of terminology in clinical 
photography

As mentioned earlier, it is important to create the appropriate 
lighting and other photographic techniques specific to the skin 
conditions of interest in the clinical study. Individuals incorpo-
rating  digital  photography  into  a  clinical  trial  are  often  faced 
with  the  difficult task of understating  the vocabulary  used by 
staff  at  clinical  research  organizations  (CROs).  This  section 
provides  a  concise  description  of  commonly  used  terms  and 
techniques in clinical photography.

Visible light photography
This refers to images made with unfiltered full-spectrum (white) 
light. It is the most common type of photography used in clini-
cal  trials.  Proper  positioning  of  the  strobe  flashes  is  a  critical 
step for capturing various skin conditions in cosmetic clinical 
trials. Clinical studies involving evenness of color and skin tone 
require a more generalized, evenly distributed, visible lighting 
method  while  the  imaging  of  fine  lines,  wrinkles,  under  eye 
bags,  skin  texture,  and  scaling  is  best  achieved  by  placing  the 
flashes in an off-axis direction. Off-axis lighting refers to light-
ing that is placed somewhat above and to the side to create small 
shadows  and  highlights  on  the  skin  thereby  giving  a  three-
dimensional quality to the image. Once the lighting conditions 
have been optimized, it is imperative that the photographer uses 
documentation  notes,  setup  photographs,  light  metering  and 
color charts to prevent lighting changes from visit to visit.

Visible  light  photography  is  recommended  for  all  clinical 
studies  as  all  clinical  grading  and  subject  self-assessments  are 
done under visible light. Photos taken under visible light serve 
as  good  documentation  and  communication/advertising  tools 
for demonstrating changes occurring before and after product 
usage.

raking light photography
This  refers  to  images  taken  with  unfiltered  full-spectrum 
(white)  light  at  a  scant  angle  (∼20–45  degrees,  depending  on 
condition) relative to the surface of interest. This kind of light-
ing casts certain features as shadows, such as facial wrinkles and 
cellulite dimples, thus enhancing those features. A comparison 
of  photos  taken  under  regular  visible  light  vs.  raking  light  is 
shown in Figure 5.2.

5. Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for Evaluating Cosmetic Products

45

polarized photography
This involves the placement of linear polarizing filters on both 
the lighting flash head(s) and in front of the lens of the digital 
camera. This allows the documentation of skin in two different 
ways [15].

The  parallel-polarized  lighting  technique  accentuates  the 
reflection of light from the skin and tends to obscure fine topical 
detail because of strong reflections from the lighting source(s). 
Parallel-polarized  light  minimizes  subsurface  details,  such  as 
erythema and pigmentation, while allowing for enhanced view-
ing of the surface features of the skin, such as sweat, oily skin, 
and pores.

The  cross-polarized  lighting  technique  involves  fixing  the 
transmission axis of the lens polarizer 90° to the axis of the lighting 
polarizer. This virtually eliminates the reflection of light (glare) 
from the surface of the skin and accentuates the color element of 
the skin, such as pigmentation, the appearance of inflammation 
from  acne  lesions,  erythema,  rosacea,  and  telangiectasia.  Pho-
todamaged  skin  becomes  somewhat  more  apparent,  and  some 
subsurface  vascular  features  are  made  visible.  Cross-polarized 
photography is useful for evaluating products designed to miti-
gate the appearance of dyschromic lesions,  erythema, acne, and 
postinflammatory pigmentation (PIH) resulting from acne. This 
technique is highly recommended for acne studies [16].

Examples of a parallel-polarized lighting technique and cross-

polarized lighting technique can be found in Figure 5.3.

UV reflectance photography
This is a technique designed to highlight or enhance hyperpig-
mentation on the face. This is accomplished through filtering a 
flash source to only allow UV light to pass on to the subject’s 
skin allowing visualization of subsurface melanin distribution. 

(a)

(b)

Figure 5.2  An example of raking light photography technique accentuating 
cellulite condition on the back of the thighs. (a) Standard light; (b) raking 
light.

Figure  5.3  Examples  of  a  parallel-
polarized  lighting  technique  (a) 
and  cross-polarized  lighting  tech-
nique (b).

(a)

(b)

46

BasIC CoNCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

(a)

Figure 5.4 shows before and after UV reflectance photographs of 
a subject treated with a skin lightening product. A UV-blocking 
filter is placed in front of the lens of the digital camera. Note the 
improvement in the appearance and distribution of mottled and 
diffuse hyperpigmentation in the photograph on the right.

UV fluorescence photography
This  is  primarily  used  to  visualize  the  locations  of  Propioni-
bacterium acnes in the pores of subjects with acne. Porphyrins 
produced by P. acnes exhibit an orange–red fluorescence under 
UVA  light.  Excitation  of  P.  acnes  on  skin  is  achieved  using  a 
xenon  flash  lamp  equipped  with  an  UVA  bandpass  filter.  The 
resulting fluorescence can be recorded using a high-resolution 
digital camera equipped with an UV barrier filter. An example 
of this technique can be found in Figure 5.5.

Figure 5.5  Ultraviolet fluorescence technique.

Figure  5.4  Before  and  after  UV 
reflectance  photographs  of  a  sub-
ject  treated  with  a  skin  lightening 
product.  (a)  Ultraviolet  reflectance 
at  baseline.  (b)  Ultraviolet  reflect-
ance at 12 weeks.

(b)

Researchers have reported that UV fluorescence photography 
is a reliable, fast, and easy screening technique to demonstrate 
the suppressive effect of topical antibacterial agents on P. acnes 
[17]. Investigators need to be aware of a problem that can occur 
with using this technique to monitor P. acnes on the face. Many 
soaps,  cosmetics,  or  sunscreen  products  contain  quenching 
agents that can interfere with the accuracy of this imaging pro-
cess. This can lead to an erroneous conclusion about the elimi-
nation of P. acnes from the face.

Digital  fluorescence  photography  has  other  applications  in 
dermatologic  research.  The  technique  can  be  used  to  detect 
salicylic  acid  in  the  skin  and  follicles  of  subjects  participating 
in  claim  studies,  as  well  as  follow  the  migration  of  sunscreen 
products  over  the  surface  of  face.  Following  the  migration  of 
sunscreen products over the surface can help explain why some 
sunscreen products find their way into the eyes producing sting-
ing, burning, and ocular discomfort.

Guide  photographs  refer  to  photographs  taken  of  mock 
subjects  before  the  clinical  trial  begins  to  provide  the  spon-
sor and investigator with choices of techniques to best capture 
the dermatologic condition being studied. The chosen image 
becomes the guide, or standard, for photographing all subjects 
in the trial.

Use of raking light optical profilometry 
(rLop) to detect improvements in periocular 
fine lines and wrinkles

Optical  profilometry  refers  to  a  technique  in  which  photo-
graphic  images  of  silicone  rubber  impressions  taken  of  facial 
skin can be analyzed for changes in lines and wrinkles. Grove et 
al. [18] reported that optical profilometry provides an element 
of  objectivity  that  can  complement  clinical  assessment  in  the 
study of agents that are useful for treating photodamaged skin.

While  no  one  would  argue  that  optical  profilometry  is  a 
time  proven  method  for  assessing  textural  changes,  prepar-
ing quality silicone replicas can be quite challenging even for 

5. Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for Evaluating Cosmetic Products

47

veteran  clinicians.  Making  skin  replicas  is  labor  intensive, 
highly variable due to the procedure, and is typically done on a 
small area. Common problems include replicating positioning 
errors, air bubbles in  the replica  impression,  and controlling 
the  polymerization  process.  Slight  variations  in  temperature, 
humidity, and body temperature can produce unsuitable rep-
lica impressions.

In an effort to reduce the frustration level associated with 
preparing silicone replicas, we began investigations into using 
high-resolution  digital  photographs  for  quantifying  changes 
in fine line and wrinkles on the face. Off-axial lighting, a com-
mon lighting technique used for clinical photography, could 
be used to create small shadows and highlights that could help 
define the surface texture of skin. Flash lighting can be placed 

above and at a 45° angle to the side of the face to create a three-
dimensional effect of texture in a two-dimensional plane. The 
raw image files can be analyzed for fine lines and wrinkles on 
the face. The term to describe this technique is RLOP.

This  method  was  further  improved  and  automated  by  Dr. 
Jiang  at  Stephens  &  Associates,  Inc.  We  named  the  method 
SWIRL (Stephens Wrinkle Imaging using Raking Light) [19]. 
The  SWIRL  method  reports  five  wrinkle  parameters,  wrinkle 
count, length, width, area, and relative depth. Importantly, the 
SWIRL method has been fully validated through clinical studies 
and all five wrinkle parameters show excellent correlation with 
clinical grading scores for wrinkle severity [19]. An example of 
this method is shown in Figure 5.6.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 5.6  Before and after photographs using Raking Light Optical Profilometry. Top row: Digital photographs from a trial of a subject before (a) and 8 
weeks after (b) treatment. Note the improvement in the appearance of wrinkling under the eye. Bottom row: Photographs shows wrinkles and fine lines 
highlighted in red after SWIRL analysis. (c) Baseline. (d) Eight weeks after. The area of interest (AOIs) were + located in each digital image by using anatomic 
landmarks as anchors.

48

BasIC CoNCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

RLOP technology and SWIRL method complement and sup-
port the results of clinical grading of fine line and wrinkles. They 
have several advantages over traditional optical profilometry on 
silicone replicas.

These advantages include:

•	 RLOP and SWIRL can be performed on multiple sites on the 

face using a single digital photograph.

•	 RLOP technology and SWIRL method allow for precise loca-
tion of the area of interest in each digital photograph through 
imaging software.

•	 Digital images can be archived electronically for an indefinite 

period of time.

•	 Results are expressed in meaningful units and endpoints.
•	 The area of interest is significantly larger than can be captured 

in a replica impression.

•	 RLOP  and  SWIRL  can  measure  the  full  length  of  a  wrinkle 
unlike traditional optical profilometry which limits the meas-
ured area to the size of the replica impression.

a non-invasive method for assessing 
the antioxidant protection of topical 
formulations in humans

It is well-documented that the addition of antioxidants such as 
vitamins C, E, and A to skin care formulation can be beneficial 
in preventing and minimizing skin damage associated with UV 
light [20–22]. Manufacturers often face a difficult task when for-
mulating with antioxidants, because they are easily destroyed or 
altered by oxidation which can occur during product manufac-
turing, filling, or storage.

To address these concerns, Pinnell and colleagues developed 
a human antioxidant assay which assesses the potential of topi-
cal  antioxidants  to  enter  into  the  skin  and  provide  adequate 
protection against UV damage generated by a solar simulator. 
Antioxidants provide protection from UVR-induced damage by 
diminishing or blocking the formation of reactive oxygen species 
which is clinically manifested by erythema [22].

The technique involves the open applications of antioxidant 
products and a vehicle control to the demarcated areas on the 
lower back of subjects for four consecutive days. On day 3 the 
minimal erythema dose (MED) is determined for each subject. 
This is the dose of UV light that produces slight redness on fair-
skinned individuals.

On day 4, the demarcated sites treated with the antioxidant 
product,  vehicle  control,  and  an  untreated  site  receive  solar-
simulated  UV  irritation  of  1–5X  MED  at  1X  MED  intervals. 
On day 5, the erythema level of each site can be assessed and 
the  investigator  has the option of collecting  punch  biopsies at 
the  treatment  sites  and  analyzing  the  tissues  for  multiple  bio- 
markers such as thymine dimers, interleukins, metaloproteins, 
Langerhans cells (CD1a), p53, and sunburn cells [17,18]. Tradi-
tionally, erythema level can be qualitatively graded or quantita-
tively measured using the Minolta Chromameter or Mexameter. 
To  maintain  accuracy  of  the  measurements,  both  instruments 
must  be  appropriately  calibrated  and  care  must  be  taken  to 
measurement same anatomical location with the light pressure 
of  the  instrument  to  the  skin  surface  so  as  not  to  cause  skin 
blanching.  Both  instruments  can  only  sample  a  small  area  of 
the skin which sometimes may not be representative of the total 
required assessment area. In order to avoid these issues, Pinnell 
and  colleagues adopted using digital images taken using cross-
polarized photography to assess the erythema level.

Figure 5.7 shows a pattern of UV responses for a site treated 
with  an  antioxidant  and  a  site  treated  with  a  vehicle  control. 
Using image analysis, the regular RGB photos can be converted 
to Lab color space, allowing accurate determination of the “a*” 
(degree of redness according to the CIE color standard) value of 
each irradiated spot. The result can then be used to calculate a 
protection factor for the antioxidant product (Table 5.2).

Using this technique, Pinnell and associates have been able to 
formulate a third generation antioxidant product that provides 
protection against the damaging effects of UV light. The formu-
lation  containing  15%  ascorbic  acid,  1%  alfa-tocopherol,  and 
0.5% ferulic acid was found to be effective in reducing thymine 
dimers known to be associated with skin cancer [23,24].

Erythema

Control

Test material

1

2

3

xMED

4

5

Figure 5.7  Pattern of UV responses for a site 
treated with an antioxidant and a site treated 
with a vehicle control.

5. Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for Evaluating Cosmetic Products

49

Table 5.2  Results	of	theoretical	antioxidant	protection	factor	calculations.

Increase from 
unexposed (adjusted 
for MED)

Protection 
factor (%)

No	treatment	(control)

Antioxidant

Vehicle	control

10.50

		6.30

10.23

0.0

40.0

2.6

MED,	minimal	erythema	dose.

Use of image analysis for assessing a variety 
of skin conditions

At  Stephens  &  Associates,  Inc.  we  have  combined  the  various 
photography  techniques  with  image  analysis  methods  to  pro-
vide objective and quantitative analyses for assessing a variety of 
skin conditions and supporting a wide range of clinical claims. 
Table 5.3 lists the image analysis tools we have developed so far.
Various other methods of image analysis for photoaging and 
other skin features have been developed in recent years by many 
research  companies  including  P&G  and  Amway.  In  order  for 
these methods to work well in support of clinical claims, correct 
photography technique and high precision digital photos are a 
must. In addition, these methods need to be tested and validated 
through large clinical trials.

emerging technology for skin imaging 
and assessment

Clinical studies demand more objective, quantitative, and non-
invasive  tools  for  skin  assessments.  There  are  three  areas  that 
are of particular interest. First, devices that allow visualization 

Table 5.3  Image	analysis	tools	developed	by	Stephens	&	Associates,	Inc.

of skin structure underneath the skin surface. Second, imaging 
of  the  skin  in  3-dimensions. Third,  quantitative  assessment  of 
skin radiance. In this section of the chapter we highlight several 
emerging technologies and methodologies.

SIAScope  (MedX  Health)  is  a  device  based  on  the  spectro-
photometric intracutaneous analysis method pioneered by Dr. 
Cotton [25]. The light can penetrate about 2 millimeters deep 
into the skin and remitted light is analyzed to differentiate chro-
mophores and assess the quantity of melanin, hemoglobin, and 
collagen (Figure 5.8). This device has been used for diagnostic 
of melanomas but its application in clinical trials is at the begin-
ning stage.

SiaScope Images

color

hemoglobin

collagen

melanin

Figure 5.8  An example of images captured using SiaScope.

Feature of interest

Photography lighting

Analysis and output parameters

Wrinkles/fine	lines

Raking

SWIRL:	wrinkle	count,	length,	width,	area,	relative	depth

Hyperpigmentation

Cross	polarized,	UV

Hyperpigmentation:	count	of	pigmented	spots,	area,	and	average	size
UV	damage:	number	of	damaged	area	and	total	area	covered	by	UV	damage

Skin	tone	evenness

Skin	brightness

Pore

Oily	skin

Cross	polarized

Cross	polarized

Cross	polarized
Parallel	polarized

Parallel	polarized

Skin	tone	evenness	index

Skin	brightness	index	L*

Pores:	number	of	pores,	area,	and	relative	depth

Oily	skin:	percentage	of	area	with	oily	skin

Makeup	removal

UV

Bare	face:	percentage	of	makeup	removed

Acne

UV	protection

Eczema

Lip

Cross	polarized

Cross	polarized

Cross	polarized

Visible

Erythema:	a*

Erythema:	a*	and	protection	factor

Erythema:	a*

Lip	wrinkle	analysis:	wrinkle	count,	length,	width,	area,	and	relative	depth

Note:	L*	and	a*	are	coordinates	in	the	CIELAB	colorimetric	system	where	L*	is	the	total	quantity	of	light	reflected	or	skin	brightness	(described	as	light,	dark,	etc.)	
and	a*	represents	color	ranging	from	red	(positive	values)	to	green	(negative	values).

50

BasIC CoNCepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

OCT image of skin on volar forearm

references

1  Rizer  RL,  Sigler  ML,  Miller  DL.  (1999)  Evaluating  performance 
benefits of conditioning formulations on human skin. In: Schuel-
lerR,  RomanowskiP,  eds.  Conditioning  Agents  for  Hair  and  Skin, 
pp. 345–51.

2  Carruthers A, Carruthers J, Hardas B, Kaur M, Goertelmeyer R, 
et al. (2008) A validated grading scale for crow’s feet. Dermatol Surg 
34 Suppl 2, S173–8.

3  Fitzpatrick RE, Goldman MP, Satur NM, Tope WD. (1996) Pulsed 
carbon  dioxide  laser  resurfacing  of  photo-aged  facial  skin.  Arch 
Dermatol 132(4), 395–402.

4  Griffiths  CEM,  Wang  TS,  Hamilton  TA,  Voorhees  JJ,  Ellis  CN. 
(1992)  A  photonumeric  scale  for  the  assessment  of  cutaneous 
photodamage. Arch Dermatol 128(3), 347–51.

5  Kappes  UP.  (2004)  Skin  ageing  and  wrinkles:  clinical  and  photo-

graphic scoring. J Cosmet Dermatol 3(1), 23–5.

6  Elsner P, Berardecsa E, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. (1995) Bioengi-
neering of the Skin: Methods and Instrumentation. London: Taylor 
& Francis.

7  Berardesca E. (1997) EEMCO guidance for the assessment of stra-
tum  corneum  hydration:  electrical  methods.  Skin  Res  Technol  3, 
126–32.

8  Elsner  P,  Barel  AO,  Berardesca  B,  Gabard  B,  Serup  J.  (1998)  Skin 

Bioengineering. Basel; New York: Karger.

9  Flosh PJ, Kligman AM. (1993) Non-Invasive Methods for the Quan-

tification of Skin Functions. New York: Springler-Verlag.

10  Serup J, Jemec GBE. (1995) Handbook of Non-Invasive Method and 

the Skin. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

11  Elsner P, Berardecsa E, Wilhelm KP, Maibach HI. (2006) Bioen-
gineering  of  the  Skin:  Skin  Biomechanics.  Boca  Raton,  FL:  CRC 
Press.

12  Elsner  P,  Berardesca  E,  Wilhelm  KP.  (2006)  Bioengineering  of  the 
Skin: Skin Imaging and Analysis, 2nd edn. Informaworld (London: 
Taylor & Francis).

13  Stack LB, Storrow AB, Morris MA, Patton DR. (1999) Handbook of 
Medical Photography. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus, pp. 15–20.
14  . Ratner D, Thomas CO, Bickers D. (1999) The use of digital photog-

raphy in dermatology. J Am Acad Dermatol 41, 749–56.

15  Phillips SB, Kollias N, Gillies R, Muccini A, Drake LA. (1997) Polar-
ized  light  photography  enhances  visualization  of  inflammatory 
lesions of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 37, 948–52.

16  Rizova E, Kligman A. (2001) New photographic technique for clini-
cal evaluation of acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 15 (Suppl 3), 
13–8.

17  Pagnoni  A,  Kilgman  AM,  Kollias  N,  Goldberg  S,  Stoudemeyer  T. 
(1999) Digital fluorescence photography can assess the suppressive 
effect of benzoyl peroxide on Propionibacterium acnes. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 41, 710–6.

18  Grove  GL,  Grove  MJ,  Leyden  JJ.  (1989)  Optical  profilometry:  an 
objective method for quantification of facial wrinkles. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 21, 631–7.

19  Jiang LI, Stephens TJ, Goodman R. (2013) SWIRL, a clinically vali-
dated, objective, and quantitative method for facial wrinkle assess-
ment. Skin Res Technol 19(4), 492–8.

20  Rabe  JH,  Mamelak  AJ,  EcElgunn  JS,  Morrison  WL,  Sauder  DN. 
(2006)  Photoaging:  mechanisms  and  repair.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol 
55, 1–19.

Figure 5.9  An example of images taken using VivoSight.

A non-invasive method for reviewing sub-layers or the cel-
lular structure of the skin would be helpful to reveal changes 
happening  underneath  the  surface  of  the  skin  and  provide 
insight  on  product  functions.  VivoSight  (Michelson  Diag-
nostics)  is  a  device  based  on  optical  coherence  tomography 
(OCT)  technology.  It  converts  reflected  light  from  a  laser 
beam  into  images  of  skin  layers  with  axial  resolution  less 
than  7.5  micrometers  (Figure  5.9).  VivaScope  (Caliber  ID) 
is a confocal laser scanning microscope that reveals the cel-
lular  structure  underneath  the  skin  with  axial  resolution  of 
less than 5 micrometers. Both devices are great research tools; 
however,  image  analysis  and  result  interpretation  is  convo-
luted at current stage.

To capture skin sagging conditions and wrinkle depth it is 
best to use a 3D imaging system. There are several 3D imaging 
systems  on  the  market,  such  as  PRIMOS  (Canfield),  Antera 
3D  (Miravex),  and  Clarity  Research  3D  (BPBT).  The  PRI-
MOS  and  Clarity  Research  3D  systems  utilize  photo  booths 
designed  for  the  face,  while  Antera  3D  is  a  handheld  device 
with flexibility on the target area. As with 2D imaging, subject 
positioning is the key for consistent assessment using the 3D 
imaging system.

Skin radiance is an important attribute for photoaging; how-
ever it is also the most difficult attribute to quantify. There are 
two papers aimed at dissecting the definition of skin radiance 
and proposing different ways to quantify skin radiance [26,27]. 
This  is  definitely  an  area  which  deserves  further  research  and 
exploration.

Conclusions

Photography and other non-invasive techniques are important 
to assess the efficacy and safety of cosmetic products. Often, the 
non-invasive  assessments  provide  confirmation  of  the  expert 
grader  assessments.  It  is  reassuring  to  see  consistency  within 
the data sets to confirm a positive effect of cosmetics and skin 
care  products.  This  validation  technique  is  necessary  to  truly 
evaluate  products.  This  chapter  presents  several  cutaneous 
research tools.

5. Novel, Compelling, Non-invasive Techniques for Evaluating Cosmetic Products

51

21  Dreher  F,  Denig  N,  Gabard  B,  Schwindt  Da,  Maibach  MI.  (1999) 
Effect of topical antioxidants on UV-induced erythema formation 
when administered after exposure. Dermatology 198, 52–5.

22  Pinnell  SR.  (2003)  Cutaneous  photodamage,  oxidative  stress  and 
topical antioxidant protection. J Am Acad Dermatol 48(1), 1–19.
23  Murray  JC,  Burch  JA,  Streilein  RD,  Iannacchione  MA,  Hall  RP, 
Pinnell  SR.  (2008)  Atopical  antioxidant  solution  containing  vita-
mins  C  and  E  stabilized  by  ferulic  acid  provides  protection  for 
human skin against damage caused by ultraviolet irradiation. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 59, 418–25.

24  Oresajo  C,  Stephens  T,  Hino  PD,  Law  RM,  Yatskayer  M,  Foltis 
P, et al. (2008) Protective effects of a topical antioxidant mixture 
containing  vitamin  C,  and  phloretin  against  ultraviolet-induced 
photodamage in human skin. J Cosmet Dermatol 7, 290–7.

25  Matts  PJ,  Cotton  SD.  (2009)  Spectrophotometric  Intracutaneous 
Analysis  (SIAscopy).  In:  BarelAO,  PayeM  and  MaibachHI,  eds. 
Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology, 3rd edn, Chapter 25. 
Oxford: OUP.

26  Petitjean  A,  Sainthillier  JM,  Mac-Mary  S,  Muret  P,  Closs  B, 
Gharbi  T,  Humbert  P.  (2007)  Skin  radiance:  how  to  quantify? 
Validation of an optical method. Skin Res Technol. 13(1), 2–8.
27  Matsubara  A,  Liang  Z,  Sato  Y,  Uchikawa  K.  (2012)  Analysis  of 
human perception of facial skin radiance by means of image his-
togram parameters of surface and subsurface reflections from the 
skin. Skin Res Technol. 18(3), 265–71.

ChaPter 6
Contact Dermatitis and topical agents

David E. Cohen, Alexandra Price, and Sarika Ramachandran
The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA

BaSIC CONCePtS

•	 Hypersensitivity	reactions	can	occur	in	response	to	topical	agents.
•	 Adverse	reactions	can	include	irritant	contact	dermatitis	and	allergic	contact	dermatitis.
•	 Patch	testing	is	a	reliable	method	for	determining	the	etiology	of	adverse	reactions	to	topical	products.
•	 Treatment	of	hypersensitivity	reactions	involves	prompt	recognition	with	identification	and	withdrawal	of	the	offending	agent.

Introduction

Topical  cosmetic  medications,  cosmeceuticals,  and  minimally 
invasive  cosmetic  procedures  play  an  important  role  in  der-
matologic practice. Recent advances have led to a tremendous 
expansion in the repertory of non‐surgical cosmetic treatment 
modalities.  In  addition,  the  wide  use  of  cosmetics  and  skin 
care  products  worldwide  increases  the  possibility  of  exposure 
to irritants and contact allergens [1]. Adverse skin reactions to 
cosmetics  include  irritant  contact  dermatitis,  allergic  contact 
dermatitis, phototoxic dermatitis, contact urticaria, and foreign 
body  reactions  [2,3].  The  clinician  should  be  aware  of  these 
potential skin reactions and seek to identify the causative agents 
and other contributing factors. Most of these reactions are treat-
able  without  sequelae  once  the  offending  agent  is  recognized 
and avoided [2].

Approximately 15 million Americans are diagnosed with con-
tact dermatitis [2]. Among patch‐tested patients with suspected 
allergic contact dermatitis, cosmetic agents are implicated in 4% 
to 9% of cases [4]. Women between 20–55 years of age are most 
affected by cosmetic contact dermatitis [4–6]. The US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) regulations on cosmetics are based 
on two important laws: the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act  (FD&C)  which  prohibits  the  marketing  of  adulterated  or 
misbranded cosmetics, and the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act 
(FPLA) which states that improperly labeled or deceptively pack-
aged  products  are  subject  to  regulatory  action  [7].  Ingredient 
labeling is mandatory in the USA and Europe, and compounds 
are listed in descending order of amount using the nomencla-
ture format of the International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary 
[8,9]. Currently, listing specific fragrance allergens is voluntary, 

which allows cosmetic manufacturers to include individual fra-
grances under a generic “fragrance” listing [10]. With the excep-
tion  of  color  additives,  cosmetic  products  and  ingredients  are 
not  subjected  to  FDA  premarket  approval  and  manufacturers’ 
reporting  of  adverse  reactions  is  a  voluntary  process  [7].  In 
order to review the safety of the cosmetic ingredients, the Cos-
metic,  Toiletries  and  Fragrance  Association  (CTFA)  sponsors 
the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR). In 2012, CIR identified 
eleven ingredients that were unsafe for use in cosmetics [11]. In 
addition, CIR identified 38 ingredients that were not supported 
for use in cosmetics [11]. The Safe Cosmetics and Personal Care 
Products Act introduced to Congress in March of 2013 seeks to 
greatly  expand  FDA  oversight  of  chemicals  in  cosmetic  prod-
ucts. This legislation would require companies to report adverse 
events  and  demonstrate  that  cosmetics  meet  safety  standards 
prior to marketing [12,13]. Reactions to cosmetics can present 
with a wide range of clinical signs. Therefore, it is important for 
the clinician to be familiar with the diversity of these presenta-
tions to enable prompt diagnosis and treatment.

Pathophysiology and clinical presentation

Irritant contact dermatitis
Most skin reactions to cosmetics are classified as irritant con-
tact dermatitis (ICD) [8]. Irritant contact dermatitis is caused by 
endogenous and environmental factors and is defined as local 
inflammation that is not initially mediated by the immune sys-
tem. The  three  main  pathophysiological  changes  observed  are 
stratum  corneum  disruption,  epidermal  cellular  changes,  and 
proinflammatory  cytokine  release  [14].  Ceramides,  a  major 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

52

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

53

component of the stratum corneum, play a key role in the pro-
tection  against  irritants  [15].  Repeated  exposure  to  irritants 
disrupts  the  epidermal  barrier  and  increases  transepidermal 
water  loss  [16]. The  severity  of  irritant  dermatitis  depends  on 
the chemical properties, amount and strength of the agent, and 
length  and  frequency  of  exposure.  Repetitive  exposures  even 
to mild agents, such as soaps and detergents, can result in irri-
tant  dermatitis.  In  addition,  harsh  scrubbing  with  mechanical 
assistance (brushes, synthetic sponges, or cosmetics containing 
microabrasive  spheres)  increases  the  risk  of  irritation.  Psychi-
atric  disorders  leading  to  obsessive‐compulsive  skin  cleansing 
can also damage the barrier function of the skin and cause irri-
tant dermatitis [17]. Predisposing factors for the development 
of irritant dermatitis also include endogenous disorders, such as 
atopic dermatitis and filaggrin gene defects [18].

allergic contact dermatitis
Allergic  contact  dermatitis  (ACD)  comprises  a  substantial 
number  of  cases  of  contact  dermatitis  and  represents  a  true 
delayed‐type  (type  IV)  immune  reaction.  Previous  exposure 
and sensitization to the causative agent is necessary [2]. Chemi-
cal agents act as haptens, which are small electrophilic molecules 
that bind to carrier proteins and penetrate the stratum corneum 
barrier of the skin. The antigen‐presenting cells (APCs) of the 
skin (Langerhans cells and/or dermal dendritic cells) digest and 
display  the  hapten‐protein  complex  on  their  surface  for  pres-
entation to T lymphocytes. The hapten‐specific T lymphocytes 
differentiate  into  memory  T  cells,  which  then  undergo  clonal 
expansion.  The  clinical  manifestations  of  ACD  are  mediated 
by the activation of hapten‐specific memory T cells in the skin 
upon re‐exposure to the offending allergen.

Sensitization depends on product composition, the potency 
of the sensitizer, the amount of product applied, the frequency 
and  duration  of  application,  and  the  physical  integrity  of  the 
epidermal barrier [19,20]. Filaggrin gene mutation carriers with 
concurrent atopic dermatitis or hand eczema have an increased 
risk of developing contact sensitization [21].

While there are no pathognomonic features that unequivocally 
distinguish ACD and ICD, there are certain clinical features that 
favor ACD over ICD. While itching can be present in both condi-
tions, it is a key symptom in ACD [22] whereas burning, sting-
ing, soreness, and pain are more characteristic of ICD [22]. ACD 
occurs upon re‐exposure to the allergen following an initial phase 
of sensitization, whereas ICD is not predicated on prior sensitiza-
tion and can occur on first exposure to the causative agent [23]. 
Peak reaction occurs slower in ACD (within 3–4 days) than in 
acute ICD (within minutes to hours), whereas chronic ICD devel-
ops gradually after repeated exposure to milder irritants [22]. The 
clinical  distinction  between  irritant  and  allergic  dermatitis  can 
be challenging because both conditions can result in eczematous 
reactions.  Clinical  manifestations  range  from  mild  erythema 
and  scaling  with  minimal  itch  to  highly  pruritic  vesicular,  bul-
lous,  and  lichenified  plaques.  Furthermore,  the  two  conditions 
can sometimes be superimposed since an irritated and impaired 

epidermal barrier can facilitate the absorption of haptens that can 
elicit an immune response in susceptible individuals.

Phototoxic dermatitis
Phytophotodermatitis  is  a  non‐immunologic  phototoxic  skin 
eruption  caused  by  topical  exposure  to  plant‐derived  photo-
sensitizing compounds and subsequent exposure to ultraviolet 
(UV)  light.  Furocoumarins  (psoralens  and  angelicins)  are  the 
most  common  photosensitizing  chemical  agents  [24].  Plant 
families  that  produce  these  compounds  include  the  Apiaceae 
(parsley,  celery),  Rutaceae  (citrus  fruits),  Moraceae  (figs),  and 
Fabaceae  (peas).  Long‐wave  UVA  radiation  (340–400  nm)  is 
responsible  for  the  majority  of  phototoxic  reactions  resulting 
in phytophotodermatitis [3]. The skin eruption of phytophoto-
dermatitis occurs on sun‐exposed areas in contact with plants 
containing  these  photosensitizing  compounds  [25].  Marked 
hyperpigmentation, usually in a bizarre configuration or linear 
pattern, is often the dominant physical finding on clinical pres-
entation.  Occasionally,  bullous  and  vesicular  lesions  can  also 
develop. These phototoxic reactions cause both DNA interstrand 
crosslinking between UVA activated psoralens and the pyrimi-
dine bases of DNA and cellular membrane damage [26,27].

Contact urticaria
Contact  urticaria  syndrome  is  divided  into  immunologic  and 
non‐immunologic  subtypes.  Non‐immunologic  contact  urti-
caria  is  the  most  common  form  and  occurs  in  the  absence  of 
previous exposure. Localized wheals appear within 30–60 min-
utes  of  exposure  and  are  not  followed  by  systemic  symptoms. 
Allergic contact urticaria is an immediate‐type (type I) hyper-
sensitivity reaction and occurs in sensitized individuals within 
minutes to hours following exposure to the allergen. The bind-
ing  between  allergens  and  immunoglobulin  E  (IgE)  triggers 
mast cell degranulation and subsequent release of inflammatory 
products, such as histamine, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and 
cytokines. As a consequence, individuals experience erythema, 
swelling,  and  pruritus,  which  may  be  localized  (wheals  and 
fares) or generalized (angioedema, conjunctivitis, bronchocon-
striction, hypotension). Severe reactions may be fatal.

Foreign body reactions
Injectable fillers are a group of exogenous substances used for 
soft tissue augmentation. Fillers are subdivided into agents that 
are  degradable  (hyaluronic  acid,  poly‐L‐lactic  acid,  calcium 
hydroxylapatite) and non‐degradable (polymethylmethacrylate 
and silicone). Some injectable agents such as hyaluronic acids 
restore  volume  primarily  through  their  space‐filling  effects. 
Others, including silicone, calcium hydroxylapatite, polymeth-
ylmethacrylate  and  poly‐L‐lactic  acid  fillers,  act  as  scaffolds 
for  endogenous  collagen  formation.  Adverse  immunologic 
reactions  have  been  reported  with  practically  all  the  products 
used. The frequency and degree of these reactions varies based 
on  filler  material,  injection  technique,  and  host  immunologic 
response.

54

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

The  normal  initial  host  response  to  foreign  body  implanta-
tion  is  the  formation  of  a  blood‐based  matrix  on  and  around 
the biomaterial, called the provisional matrix. The tissue injury 
may also lead to activation of the innate immune response and 
thrombus formation. The provisional matrix is rich in mitogens, 
chemoattractants, growth factors, and cytokines, providing an 
excellent  medium  both  for  wound  healing  and  foreign  body 
reaction. Acute inflammation is characterized by the presence 
of neutrophils, mast cell degranulation, and fibrinogen adsorp-
tion. The degree of the inflammation is highly dependent upon 
the injury produced, the site of injection, the material used, and 
the extent of the provisional matrix formed. The acute phase is 
followed  by  a  chronic  phase  inflammatory  response,  which  is 
characterized by the presence of monocytes, lymphocytes, and 
plasma  cells.  After  resolution  of  the  acute  and  chronic  phases 
of  inflammation,  granulation  tissue  formation  and  neovascu-
larization  in  the  new  healing  tissue  ensue  [28].  A  prolonged 
inflammatory  phase  (i.e.  longer  than  3  weeks)  should  prompt 
an  investigation  to  exclude  complications,  such  as  infection, 
allergic reaction, migration, abscess formation, or granuloma-
tous reaction [29]. Foreign body granulomatous reactions have 
been  reported  with  the  use  of  hyaluronic  acid,  poly‐L‐lactic 
acid, silicone, and other fillers [30]. Biofilm formation, protein 
impurities,  microsphere  irregularities  have  been  implicated  in 
causing local granulomatous reactions to fillers [29‐31]. Granu-
lomatous reactions are delayed reactions that occur as a result of 
ineffective phagocytosis. An organized collection of epitheloid 
macrophages  wall  off  the  foreign  material  with  a  surrounding 

infiltrate of lymphocytes. The surrounding lymphocytes secrete 
a variety of cytokines that cause ongoing macrophage activation 
and recruitment of inflammatory cells [32]. Clinically, foreign 
body  granulomatous  reactions  develop  over  a  variable  period 
of time ranging from 5 months to 15 years [33]. Clinical mani-
festations can include swelling and indurated papules, nodules, 
or plaques (with or without ulceration). Although rare, granu-
lomatous  reactions have  been reported  to  migrate  beyond  the 
injection site [34].

Common irritants and allergen groups

Irritants
In the clinical setting, irritant substances are used to treat acne, 
hyperpigmentation  and  sun  damaged  skin. The  depth  of  pen-
etration  varies  with  the  agent,  the  concentration  of  the  agent, 
and  time  of  exposure.  A  myriad  of  “peeling”  agents  include 
retinoic, glycolic, trichloroacetic and salicylic acids, resorcinol, 
and phenol. Irritant reactions and photosensitivity manifested 
by erythema, scaling and irritation can also occur following the 
use of topical retinoids. Decreasing the frequency of application 
and applying a barrier moisturizer along with a sunscreen may 
improve tolerance [35].

A wide variety of substances can act as irritants given sufficient 
exposure  time  and/or  concentration  (Table  6.1).  Mechanical, 
chemical, and environmental factors can act alone or in com-
bination to produce skin irritation. Mechanical factors include 

Table 6.1  List	of	common	skin	irritants:	mechanical,	chemical,	and	environmental	factors	known	to	cause	irritant	dermatitis.	The	agents	can	act	alone	or	in	
combination	to	produce	contact	dermatitis,	therefore	recognition	of	all	factors	involved	is	crucial	for	proper	management	of	patients.

Mechanical

Shaving

Waxing

Laser	treatment

Abrasive	scrubs

Dermabrasion

Chemical

Water	(wet	work)

Environmental

Excessive	heat	or	sun	exposure

Alkalis	(soaps	and	cleansers)

Food	handling

Detergents

Saunas	andjacuzzis	(chlorine)

Surfactants	(sodium	lauryl	sulfate)

Extreme	cold	and	windburn

Microdermabrasion

Acids	(salicylic,	glycolic,	tricholoracetic	acid)

Whitening	agents

Stress

Dry	air

Rubbing	of	the	skin	(e.g.	when	using	a	soap	or	
scrubbing)

Skin	cleansing	tools	(face	brushes,	synthetic	
sponges,	loofahs)

Closed‐weave	face	cloths

Fragrances	and	color	additives

Hot	and/or	prolonged	showers

Sunscreens

Spicy	foods,	peppers,	condiments

Oxidizing	agents	(sodium	hypochlorite	(bleach)	
or	benzoyl	peroxide)

Increased	humidity	(e.g.	sweating	from	
prolonged	wearing	of	occlusive	gloves)

Friction	(wool,	synthetic	fibers,	or	jewelry)

Solvents	(benzene,	toluene,	acetone,	alcohol)

Low	humidity	(air	conditioning)

Intense	exercise

Vitamin	A	derivatives	(retinoids,	retinol)

Plant	parts	(thorns,	spines,	and	sharp‐edged	leaves)

Microtrauma	(fiberglass)

Pressure	(spectacle	frames)

Occlusion	tight	clothes,	rubber/latex	gloves)

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

55

cosmetic procedures (shaving, waxing, laser therapy, cleansing, 
dermabrasion),  personal  habits  (excessive  rubbing  of  the  skin 
with soaps, scrubs, wearing tight clothes or shoes, intense exer-
cise), and occupational exposure (latex gloves, microtrauma of 
the skin). Wet work (i.e. skin exposure to liquids or use of occlu-
sive gloves for longer than two hours per day or frequent hand 
cleaning)  is  one  of  the  most  common  and  important  causes 
of skin irritation [36]. Professions at risk include hairdressers, 
healthcare workers, and food handlers.

The  list  of  the  chemical  compounds  capable  of  producing 
irritation of the skin is extensive. Some substances are consid-
ered universal irritants. For example, strong acids (hydrofluoric, 
hydrochloric, sulfuric, nitric acids) and strong caustics (sodium 
hydroxide, potassium hydroxide) produce severe burns even in 
brief and small exposures. Solvents, including alcohol, turpen-
tine, ketones, and xylene, remove lipids from the skin, produc-
ing direct irritation and facilitating irritant reactions from other 
substances such as soap and water. Inappropriate skin cleansing 
with solvents to remove grease, paints, or oils is a common cause 
of skin irritation. Alkali substances such as soaps are more likely 
to  produce  irritation  by  disrupting  the  skin  barrier,  whereas 
cleansing  agents  with  a  pH  of  approximately  5.5  and  alcohol‐
based  hand‐cleansing  gels  are  less  irritating  and  preferred  for 
sensitive skin.

Environmental elements such as dry air, extremes of tempera-
ture, and weather variations may render the skin more suscep-
tible to cutaneous irritants. Food allergies may cause urticarial 
reactions; spicy foods and condiments may cause lip and peri-
oral irritant dermatitis. Prolonged exposure to water can cause 
maceration and desiccation of the skin.

Follicular  plugging  has  been  reported  secondary  to  use  of 
isopropyl  myristate,  an  emollient  and  lubricant  used  in  shav-
ing lotions, shampoos, oils, and deodorants [37]. Sodium lauryl 
sulfate  (SLS),  a  surfactant  found  in  many  topical  medications 
including those for acne, has also been used to study the effects 
of sequential exposure to irritants on skin barrier function [38].
Subjective irritation, described as a tingling, burning, sting-
ing,  or  itching  sensation  without  visible  skin  alteration  is  also 
observed following application of topical medications. Propyl-
ene  glycol,  hydroxy  acids,  and  ethanol  are  capable  of  eliciting 
sensory  irritation  in  susceptible  individuals.  Commonly  used 
medications such as benzoic acid, azelaic acid, lactic acid, ben-
zoyl peroxide, mequinol, and tretinoin can elicit sensory irrita-
tion. Sorbic acid is an organic compound used as a preservative 
in  concentrations  up  to  0.2%  in  foods,  cosmetics,  and  drugs. 
Subjective  irritation  has  been  demonstrated  with  0.5%  sorbic 
acid and to 1% benzoic acid in susceptible individuals [39].

“Sensitive skin” or cosmetic intolerance syndrome is a condi-
tion of cutaneous hyperreactivity secondary to substances that 
are  not  defined  as  irritants  [40].  The  condition  encompasses 
a  complex  combination  of  objective  and  subjective  irritative 
symptoms and may coexist with underlying allergic processes, 
urticarial  reactions,  and/or  photodermatitis.  Endogenous 
causes include seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, rosacea/perioral 

dermatitis,  atopic  dermatitis,  and  body  dysmorphobia.  Elimi-
nation of all cosmetic products for an extended period of time 
(6–12 months) followed by slow reintroduction (a new product 
every  2–3  weeks)  is  helpful  when  managing  cosmetic  intoler-
ance syndrome.

Fragrances
Fragrances are a common cause of cosmetic dermatitis. Allergic 
reactions to fragrances affect 1.7% to 4.1% of the general popula-
tion [41]. The eruption can be restricted to areas of application 
(face, neck, hands, axillae) or it can present as a generalized der-
matitis. Myroxylon pereira (balsam of Peru) should be considered 
as a potential allergen in patients presenting with a generalized 
dermatitis [42].

Products  containing  scents  are  ubiquitous  and  include  cos-
metics, topical medications, toiletries, cleansers, and household 
cleaning products. The cosmetic products most commonly asso-
ciated  with  allergy  to  fragrances  in  descending  order  include 
deodorants, scented lotions, and fine fragrances [43,44].

In  2005,  the  European  Union  mandated  that  26  fragrance 
ingredients known to cause contact allergy be listed individually 
on the label of cosmetic products sold in Europe [45]. Only eight 
of  these  fragrance  ingredients  are  included  in  fragrance  mix  I 
(FM  I)  and  six  in  fragrance  mix  II  (FM  II)  (Table  6.2).  Patch 
testing to these 26 fragrances was performed to investigate the 
frequency of sensitization to these allergens and to assess their 
importance  as  screening  markers  for  fragrance  hypersensitiv-
ity  [45].  Patch  testing  with  FM  1,  FM  2,  balsam  of  Peru,  and 
hydroxyisohexyl 3‐cyclohexene carboxaldehyde (HICC) in the 
European baseline series failed to detect 12% of those with fra-
grance  hypersensitivity.  Non‐immunologic  contact  urticaria 
reactions can also be triggered by fragrances that contain cin-
namaldehyde,  a  pale  yellow,  viscous  liquid  extracted  from  the 
oil of cinnamon, or from balsams such as styrax.

According to the North American Contact Dermatitis Group 
(NACDG), the prevalence of positive patch test reactions to fra-
grances in the United States is approximately 20%, with positive 
patch  test  results  to  FM  I  in  8.5%  of  cases,  Myroxylon  pereira 
in 7.2% of cases, and FM II in 4.7% of cases [46]. Since FM II 
has been added to the NACDG standard screening series, the 
incidence  of  reactivity  to  this  fragrance  screening  panel  has 
been increasing while reactivity to FM I and balsam of Peru has 
been decreasing [46]. Changes in the frequency of sensitization 
to  specific  fragrances  highlight  the  importance  of  continually 
reviewing and updating patch test screening markers and patch 
testing with individual fragrance ingredients in suspected cases 
of fragrance allergy.

Preservatives
Preservative  allergy  is  a  common  cause  of  skin  care  product 
allergy  [47].  Preservatives  are  low  molecular  weight,  biologi-
cally  active  compounds  that  prevent  product  contamination 
and degradation by microorganisms. The shift from organic sol-
vents and mineral oils to water‐based products in the cosmetic 

56

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

Table 6.2  List	of	the	26	fragrances	that	must	be	specified	on	the	labels	of	
cosmetic	products,	according	to	the	seventh	amendment	to	the	European	
Directive	on	Cosmetic	Products

International Nomenclature of Cosmetic Ingredients Name

Alpha‐isomethyl	ionone

Alpha‐Amyl	cinnamaldehydea

Anisyl	alcohol

Benzyl	alcohol

Benzyl	benzoate

Benzyl	cinnamate

Benzyl	salicylate

Butylphenylmethylpropional

Cinnamaldehydea

Cinnamylalcohola

Citralb

Citronellolb

Coumarinb

Eugenola

Everniafurfuracea	(tree	moss)

Everniaprunastria	(oak	moss)

Farnesolb

Geraniola

Hexyl	cinnamalb

Hydroxycitronellala

Hydroxyisohexyl	3‐cyclohexane	carboxaldehyde	(HICC)b

Isoeugenola

Linalool

Limonene

Methyl	2	octynoate

1Fragrance	ingredients	constituting	fragrance	mix	I.
2Fragrance	ingredients	constituting	fragrance	mix	II.

industry has increased the need for preservatives. Allergic con-
tact dermatitis due to preservatives most commonly affects the 
face, neck, hands, and axillae but also can occur in a generalized 
distribution.

Formaldehyde  allergy  is  common  and  is  most  often  caused 
by formaldehyde‐releasing biocides in cosmetics, toiletries, and 
other  products.  In  the  USA,  approximately  20%  of  cosmetics 
and  personal  care  products  contain  a  formaldehyde‐releaser 
(quaternium‐15, imidazolidinyl urea, diazolinyl urea, DMDM‐
hydantoin,  and  2‐bromo‐2‐nitropropane‐1,3,‐diol)  [48].  In 
Europe, formaldehyde releasers are contained in approximately 
8%  of  cosmetic  products,  often  in  combination  with  other 
preservatives such as parabens and phenoxyethanol [49]. In a 
review of 81 formaldehyde‐allergic patients, allergic reaction to 
at least one of the 12 formaldehyde‐releasing substances were 
detected in 79% of the cases and isolated reactions to releasers 
were  rare  [50].  Although  the  role  of  contact  allergy  in  atopic 
dermatitis  is  controversial  [51],  in  one  study  patients  with 

atopic  dermatitis  were  found  to  be  statistically  more  likely  to 
have contact hypersensitivity to formaldehyde releasers, but not 
formaldehyde [52]. Formaldehyde allergy is also reported as a 
common cause of occupational contact dermatitis. The profes-
sions  at  risk  include  hairdressers,  healthcare  workers,  paint-
ers,  photographers,  housekeeping  personnel,  metalworkers, 
masseurs, and workers dealing with creams, liquid soaps, and 
detergents [50].

The  preservatives  methylchloroisothiazolinone  (MCI)  and 
methylisothiazolinone  (MI)  are  also  important  contact  aller-
gens.  A  common  preservative  in  some  brands  of  moist  toilet 
paper  (baby  wipes  and  moist  towelettes),  MCI/MI  can  cause 
perianal and perineal allergic contact dermatitis [53]. MCI/MI 
in fixed combination (MCI/MI at a ratio of 3:1) is widely used 
for the preservation of aqueous systems in cosmetics, toiletries, 
and  several  industrial  applications.  Despite  European  restric-
tions on the use of the mixture of methylchloroisothiazolinone 
and methylisothiazolinone (MCI/MI) the frequency of positive 
patch test reactions to MCI/MI has not decreased [54]. Factors 
that increase the risk of sensitization include chronic dermatitis 
and the frequent use of leave‐on products containing MCI/MI 
[55]. MI without MCI has also increasingly been used as a pre-
servative in cosmetics and skin care products [56,57]. Standard 
patch testing screening misses approximately 33% to 60% cases 
of allergy to MI likely due to the low concentration of MI in the 
MCI/MI combination patch test [58–60].

Parabens are also one of the most frequently used preserva-
tives in cosmetics. Parabens are present in approximately 40% 
of European cosmetic products, including make‐up, facemasks, 
hair cleansing products, and liquid soaps [61,62]. Despite their 
common use, these compounds are weak sensitizers at the usual 
concentrations of 0.1–0.3% and are uncommon causes of con-
tact dermatitis. Some patients sensitized to paraben‐containing 
medications  can  use  cosmetic  products  containing  parabens 
with  no  adverse  effects  [63].  However,  parabens  may  have  a 
greater  sensitization  potential  when  used  on  previously  dam-
aged or broken skin. A multicenter study in patients suffering 
from chronic leg ulcers suggested paraben sensitivity in 3% of 
patients [64].

Preservatives are also commonly implicated in allergy to oph-
thalmic  preparations.  Phenylmercuric  acetate  has  been  impli-
cated  as  a  leading  preservative  allergen,  although  it  has  been 
suggested that positive patch tests are due to an irritant reaction 
rather than true contact allergy [65]. In contact lens solutions, 
previously  thimerosal  was  one  of  the  most  frequent  positive 
patch tested preservatives. However, it has been largely replaced 
by benzalkonium chloride (BAK) [66]. Eyelid dermatitis can be 
triggered by allergens in ophthalmic products but occurs more 
commonly as a result of sensitization to environmental allergens 
[65].  Young  females  with  skin  atopy  and  allergies  to  cosmetic 
and skin care products, as well as older subjects with allergy to 
topical  medications are particularly  at  risk  for allergic contact 
dermatitis in the periorbital area [65]. The thinness of perior-
bital skin makes it particularly susceptible to allergens.

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

57

Botanicals
The  widespread  use  of  botanicals  in  topical  cosmetics  and 
therapeutic  preparations  increases  the  likelihood  of  exposure 
to a variety of potential herbal allergens. Botanicals commonly 
implicated in cosmetic contact allergy include the Compositae 
family plants, tea tree oil, propolis (honeybee hive derivative), 
peppermint,  lavender,  lichens,  henna,  among  others  [67,68]. 
Some  plant‐derived  compounds  have  the  potential  to  cause 
phototoxic effects; for example, bergapten (aka 5‐methoxyspo-
ralen)  is  a  naturally  occurring  furanocoumarinin  bergamot 
oil  that  causes  phototoxicity  [3].  While  the  International  Fra-
grance Association has set limits on the amount of bergamot oil 
allowed in leave on products applied to sun‐exposed skin, ber-
gamot essential oil remains one of the most widely used ingre-
dients  in  modern  perfumery  and  there  are  no  restrictions  for 
bergamot in rinse‐off products [69]. Bergapten and psoralens in 
fig leaves used to prepare a homemade tanning lotion have also 
been reported to cause phytophotodermatitis [70,71].

Specific cosmetic products

Cleansing agents
Washout products are in contact with the skin for brief periods, 
making detection of allergy to these agents challenging. Cleans-
ers are applied to remove sebum, desquamated cells, sweat, and 
microorganisms.  Allergens  in  body‐cleansing  products  and 
facial  cleansers  include  fragrances,  preservatives,  surfactants 
(cocamidopropylbetaine),  and  vehicle  components  (lanolin 
alcohols) [72].

Shampoos  contain  a  combination  of  cleansing  agents  and 
surfactants that act to remove sebum, scales, and microorgan-
isms  from  the  hair  and  scalp.  Conditioner  agents  neutralize 
static charge and soften the hair. In a database survey of sham-
poos,  the  most  common  allergens  found  in  order  of  decreas-
ing prevalence were: fragrances, cocamidopropylbetaine, meth-
ylchloroisothiazolone  and  methylisothiazolone  (MCI/MI), 
formaldehyde releasers, propylene glycol, vitamin E, parabens, 
iodopropynylbutylcarbamate,  and  methyl-
benzophenones, 
dibromolutaronitrile/phenoxyethanol  [73].  Allergic  reactions 
are less common compared to leave‐on products because of the 
limited amount of time the substance is in contact with the skin. 
However,  cocamidopropylbetaine  (surfactant),  formaldehyde, 
and MCI/MI have been reported as causative agents of allergic 
contact dermatitis in rinse‐off agents.

Moisturizers
Moisturizers  are  an  important  source  of  sensitizing  allergens 
due to their widespread use, distribution over large body areas, 
repeated exposure, and increased penetration due to their fre-
quent use after cleansing [74]. Common allergens include fra-
grances,  preservatives  (formaldehyde  releasing  and  non‐for-
maldehyde releasing), vitamin E, essential oils, benzyl alcohol, 
propylene glycol, and lanolin [75].

Moisturizers/emollients serve to reduce transepidermal water 
(TEWL)  and  increase  epidermal  water  content  [76].  Emol-
lients  and  moisturizers  that  reduce  transepidermal  water  loss 
by occlusion may contain lanolin and lanolin derivatives [76]. 
Inflammatory  conditions  such  as  stasis  dermatoses  can  be  a 
predisposing  factor  for  allergic  contact  dermatitis  to  common 
moisturizing  ingredients  such  as  lanolin  and  lanolin  deriva-
tives [77]. Although moisturizers are often used in treatment of 
xerosis and atopic dermatitis, these patients may have a greater 
risk of sensitization to fragrances and other potential allergens 
due  to  impaired  skin  barrier  function  [78].  Older  individuals 
are also more likely to react to preservative systems in moistur-
izers (methyldibromo glutaronitrile, quaternium‐15, formalde-
hyde, diazolidinyl urea, and imidazolidinyl urea) as compared 
to younger individuals [79].

Skin bleaching agents
Skin lightening products contain a variety of active ingredients 
including  hydroquinone,  corticosteroids,  mercury  and  cos-
meceutical and botanical skin lighteners such as arbutin, kojic 
acid,  licorice,  ascorbic  acid,  soy  and  retinoids,  among  others 
[80,81]. Hydroquinone is a whitening agent present in up to 2% 
in  over‐the‐counter  creams  and  4%  in  prescription  bleaching 
creams.  Irritant  and  allergic  reactions,  hypopigmentation  and 
hyperpigmentation, and exogenous ochronosis are known side 
effects  [82].  Contact  hypersensitivity  to  monobenzyl  ether  of 
hydroquinone  and  other  hydroquinone  derivatives  have  been 
reported to cause contact allergy in addition to hydroquinone 
which  is  a  weak  sensitizer  [83].  Although  the  FDA  prohibits 
the  use  of  mercury  as  an  active  ingredient  in  cosmetics  and 
limits mercury as an impurity to 1 ppm, mercury in excess of 
1000 ppm can be found in 6% of skin lightening products glo-
bally and 3.3% of lightening products purchased in the United 
States [84].

topical corticosteroids
Topical  corticosteroids  are  used  to  treat  a  broad  spectrum  of 
dermatologic disorders. Some skin lightening agents may also 
contain topical corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone and fluo-
cinolone acetonide. Contact allergy to topical steroids has been 
reported  to  occur  in  between  0.2%  and  5%  of  users  [85,86]. 
Topical  corticosteroids  can  be  divided  into  four  groups  based 
on  stereochemical  structure  of  the  steroid  moiety:  A  (hydro-
cortisone‐tixocortol  pivalate  type),  B  (triamcinolone  aceto-
nide type), C (betamethasone type), and D (hydrocortisone‐17 
butyrate type) [87]. Group D is divided into two subgroups, D1 
(stable esters) and D2 (labile esters). Intragroup cross‐reactivity 
is reported more frequently than intergroup contact reactivity 
[88]. Group C corticosteroids have the lowest reported rate of 
allergenicity, however, are the least studied group to date [89]. 
Non‐halogenated  topical  steroids  (hydrocortisone,  budeso-
nide) may be more frequent sensitizers than halogenated ster-
oids.  Halogenation  reduces  the  ability  of  the  steroid  molecule 
to bind to arginine, which has been shown to be a factor in the 

58

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

allergenicity  of  corticosteroids  [90].  Contact  allergy  should 
be  considered  in  patients  with  dermatitis  that  fail  to  respond 
to  appropriate  corticosteroid  therapy  or  when  a  worsening  of 
their skin condition occurs with treatment. Patients reported at 
greatest risk include those with stasis dermatitis and chronic leg 
ulcers, followed by those with hand eczema, atopic dermatitis, 
anogenital, foot, and facial dermatitis [91]. When patch testing 
with the comprehensive corticosteroid series, the reactions may 
be delayed due to the corticosteroid’s intrinsic anti‐inflamma-
tory effects [92].

permanent wave lotions, can cause extensive hair damage and 
acute  contact  irritant  dermatitis.  Glycerol  monothioglycolate 
(GMTG), also known as an “acid” perm, can cause allergic con-
tact dermatitis and may persist as active allergen in hair shafts 
in concentrations as low as 0.25% [101]. Cysteamine hydrochlo-
ride  (CHC),  another  ingredient  in  permanent  wave  solutions 
preferentially used for color‐treated or damaged hair, has also 
been identified to cause allergic contact dermatitis in hairdress-
ers [102].

hair dyes and bleaches
Hair  dyes  are  classified  as  semi‐permanent  and  permanent. 
Semi‐permanent  dyes  are  derived  from  nitroanilines,  nitro-
phenylenediamines,  and  nitroaminophenols,  which  use  low 
molecular  weight  elements  that  penetrate  the  hair  cuticle. 
Permanent  dyes  act  by  the  means  of  primary  intermediates 
(p‐phenylenediamine  [PPD]  or  p‐aminophenol),  which  are 
oxidized  by  hydrogen  peroxide  and  react  with  different  cou-
plers to produce a wide range of colors. Once oxidized to para‐
benzo‐quinonediamine, PPD is no longer allergenic [93]. The 
distribution  of  the  reaction  is  often  along  the  hairline,  scalp, 
and face. Consort dermatitis, the presence of the allergic erup-
tion in the partner of the subject using the allergenic substance, 
has been described for PPD [93]. Oxidative hair dye products 
often contain other potent skin sensitizers, such as resorcinol, 
m‐Aminophenol, toluene‐2,5,‐diamine (PTD), 2‐methylresor-
cinol  [94].  While  the  self‐test  suggested  by  hair  dye  industry 
may  provide  valuable  information  about  a  patient’s  potential 
reactivity, it is dependent on the individual’s ability to interpret 
the test [95,96].

Hair bleaches include hydrogen peroxide solutions that oxi-
dize melanin and ammonium persulfate, a very strong oxidiz-
ing agent and a radical initiator, which can be used as a booster 
supplement  in  hair  dyes.  Direct  contact  with  these  oxidizing 
agents can cause irritant dermatitis and rarely, chemical burns 
[97–99]. Type I and IV hypersensitivity reactions to ammonium 
persulfate have also been reported [99].

Occupational  hand  eczema  among  hairdressers  and  cosme-
tologists is a significant health problem and common sensitizers 
include PPD and glycerylthioglycolate [100]. The use of gloves, 
mild soaps, and moisturizing creams alleviate the condition but 
severe refractory cases may require interruption of the occupa-
tional activity.

Permanents
A permanent wave is a method of setting the hair in waves or 
curls  followed  by  treatment  with  chemicals  that  can  maintain 
the style for several months. While not as popularly used today 
as in the past, permanent wave solutions are still used by many 
consumers. Permanents use mercaptans to cleave disufide bonds 
in  hair;  neutralizers  are  then  added  to  reshape  the  configura-
tion. Ammonium thioglycolate (ATG), a cleaving agent in cold 

Nail products
Nail  polish  and  hardener  contain  nitrocellulose,  resins,  plas-
ticizers, solvents and diluents, colors, and suspending agents. 
Nail product sensitizers include additives, impurities, byprod-
ucts  that  form  during  polymerization  or  degradation,  and 
residual monomers [103]. The most common allergen in nail 
polish and hardeners is tosylamide formaldehyde resin (tolu-
ene  sulfonamide/formaldehyde  resin)  closely  followed  by 
acrylics (ethy acrylate, 2‐hydroxy ethyl acrylate, ethylene gly-
col dimethacrylate, ethyl cyanoacrylate, methyl methacrylate, 
and  triethylene  glycol  diacrylate)  [46,104].  Copolymers  such 
as  phthalic  anhydride/trimellitic  anhydride/glycols  in  nail 
lacquers  have  also  been  reported  as  allergens  [103,105–107]. 
The dermatitis tends to affect places commonly reached by the 
fingers  (e.g.  face,  eyelids,  sides  of  the  neck,  mouth),  sparing 
the hands and fingers, a phenomenon known as ectopic con-
tact dermatitis. However, localized dermatitis in the periungal 
area can occur with acrylic agents, sometimes leading to nail  
dystrophy [108].

Cosmetic application devices
Sponges,  eyelash  curlers,  and  mascara  brushes  used  to  apply 
cosmetic  powders  and  eye  makeup  can  be  a  potential  source 
of  contact  allergy  in  individuals  allergic  to  latex  or  synthetic 
rubber [109–111]. Sensitization to thiurams contained in latex 
or synthetic rubber gloves is often implicated in causing hand 
dermatitis  in  hairdressers  and  healthcare  professionals  [100]. 
Nickel containing eyelash curlers and mascara brushes should 
also be considered as a potential cause of recalcitrant eyelid der-
matitis [112].

Contact urticaria to latex is triggered by exposure to the pro-
teins derived from Hevea brasiliensis tree. Risk factors include 
the presence of spina bifida, genitourinary tract abnormalities, 
previous  contact  to  latex  (from  multiple  surgical  procedures, 
or  occupational  exposure),  hand  dermatitis,  atopy,  and  spe-
cific food allergies (avocado, banana, chestnut, potato, tomato, 
kiwi, pineapple, papaya, eggplant, melon, passion fruit, mango, 
wheat, and cherimoya).

tattoos
Although  relatively  uncommon,  hypersensitivity  reactions  to 
tattoo pigments are clinically relevant because of the increasing 
popularity and prevalence of tattoos [113]. Tattoo pigments are 

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

59

composed of inorganic metals such as mercury (red), chrome 
(green), manganese (purple), cobalt (blue), and cadmium (yel-
low) and of organic preparations such as sandalwood (red) and 
Brazilwood  (red)  [114].  These  pigments  have  been  implicated 
in  allergic  contact  dermatitis  and  eczematous  hypersensitivity 
reactions,  as  well  as  photoallergic,  lichenoid,  granulomatous, 
sarcoidal and pseudolymphomatous reactions. Allergic contact 
dermatitis is the most common hypersensitivity reaction to pig-
ments in tattoos, with red pigments representing the most com-
mon cause of tattoo related allergic contact dermatitis [115]. ID 
reaction, also known as autoeczematization or autosensitization 
reaction, a reaction that develops distant to an initial site of sen-
sitization, has also been associated with contact allergy to tattoo 
ink [116]. Contact dermatitis has also been reported following 
temporary  henna  tattooing.  Henna,  a  natural  product  derived 
from  the  leaves  of  Lawsonia  inermis,  rarely  causes  hypersen-
sitivity  reactions.  However,  temporary  henna  tattoos  that  also 
contain PPD have been implicated in allergic contact dermatitis 
and  autosensitization  reactions  [117,118].  Given  the  variable 
and often changing chemical nature of tattoo pigments, and the 
poor solubility of the ink pigments, it is often difficult to identify 
the offending agent through patch testing. Further investigation 
and  regulation  of  these  color  additives  is  warranted  to  better 
elucidate ink components responsible for these cutaneous aller-
gic reactions.

Local anesthetics
Anesthetic agents can be divided in two groups: esters (benzo-
caine, tetracaine, and procaine) and amide derivates (lidocaine, 
mepivacaine, bupivacaine, etidocaine, and prilocaine). Cases of 
eczematous dermatitis have been reported secondary to the use 
of topical ester agents and rarely secondary to amide derivates. 
Contact  sensitization  to  2.5%  lidocaine  and  2.5%  prilocaine 
emulsion (EMLA, Astra Zeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilming-
ton, DE, USA) is rare. Uncommon reactions include purpuric 
eruption, rash, redness, itching, and edema [2].

IgE‐mediated  reactions 

injectable  anesthetics  rep-
to 
resent  less  than  1%  of  all  adverse  events.  Delayed‐type  
reactions  manifest  within  12–48  hours  and  present  as  an 
acute  dermatitis  (erythema,  papules,  vesicles  and  itching) 
[2,119].  Systemic  toxicity  occurs  when  excessive  dosage  is 
administered and manifests as light‐headedness, tremors, rest-
lessness, seizures, and depressed myocardial contractility. Met-
hemoglobulinemia  is  an  idiosyncratic  reaction  reported  with 
local injectable anesthetics [119].

A European retrospective study over a 10‐year period found 
that patch testing with a caine mix (benzocaine, tetracaine, and 
cinchocaine) was more sensitive in detecting contact allergy to 
local anesthetics than testing to benzocaine alone [120].

Injectables
Hypersensitivity  reactions  to  fillers  are  reported  infrequently. 
Adverse  reactions  to  soft  tissue  augmentation  include  foreign 
body granulomas, bacterial infections, abscesses, local inflam-

mation, discoloration, ulceration, necrosis, migration, and vas-
cular and neurologic compromise [29,30].

Botulinum  toxin  is  a  highly  potent  neurotoxin  that  inhibits 
acetylcholine  release  at  the  neuromuscular  junction,  blocking 
neuromuscular transmission and reversibly paralyzing striated 
muscle. Allergic reactions are extremely rare and include gener-
alized pruritus, psoriasiform eruption, urticaria, and erythema 
multiforme‐type reactions [2,121]. The botox formulation also 
contains  human  albumin,  which  can  cause  rare  but  severe 
hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis [122].

Fillers  are  subdivided  into  gels  that  are  degradable  (hyal-
uronic  acid,  poly‐L‐lactic  acid,  calcium  hydroxylapatite,  col-
lagen)  and  non‐degradable  (polymethylmethacrylate  and 
silicone). Degradable polymer gels resemble the elements com-
monly found in the tissues, and therefore are degraded by natu-
rally occurring enzymes, located in the extracellular matrix and/
or  within  macrophages  [123].  Hence,  fibrous  response  gener-
ated  by  these  hydrophilic  gels  is  minimal.  The  nonbiodegrad-
able fillers may rarely provoke a chronic granulomatous foreign 
body reaction that stimulates fibroblastic deposition of collagen 
around the nonabsorbable filler material. The permanent nature 
of  the  nonbiodegradable  fillers  can  make  their  complications 
long‐lasting and difficult to treat [29].

Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a glucosaminoglycan polysaccharide 
occurring naturally in skin, connective tissue, and the vitreous 
humor of the eye. Hyaluronic acid fillers currently available in 
the  United  States  include  Restylane  and  Restylane  L  (QMed/
Galderma, Uppsala, Sweden; Valeant, Bridgewater, New Jersey, 
USA), Juvederm Ultra, Ultra Plus, XC, and Voluma (Allergan, 
Santa  Barbara,  California,  USA),  Perlane  (QMed/Galderma), 
Prevelle  Silk  (Genzyme  Corp.,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts, 
USA) and Belotero (Merz Pharmaceuticals, Greensboro, North 
Carolina, USA). Hyaluronic acid is not reported to cause aller-
gic contact dermatitis and rarely are hypersensitivity reactions 
described. Non‐inflammatory nodules can occur as a result of 
superficial injection or uneven distribution of the injected prod-
uct [30]. Hyaluronidase is a soluble enzyme that can be injected 
locally at the site of filler placement to break down and hydro-
lyze HA implants [124,125].

Sculptra (Valeant, Bridgewater, New Jersey, USA) is a poly‐L‐
lactic acid injectable that volumizes the face by stimulating the 
production of new collagen [126]. This product is indicated for 
use in HIV‐associated lipoatrophy [127]. Like HA, Sculptra can 
cause  superficial  skin  nodules  [128,129].  Early‐onset  nodules 
appear gradually 1–3 months after injection and are often pal-
pable  but  nonvisible.  Histologically,  early‐onset  nodules  show 
material  surrounded  by  a  scarce  cellular  reaction  [130].  Late‐
onset inflammatory nodules may appear abruptly 6–36 months 
after injection and have been reported to wax and wane [130]. 
These delayed‐onset nodules are often visible and accompanied 
by edema and skin discoloration. Histologically, late‐onset nod-
ules typically show a foreign body granulomatous reaction with 
heavy  lymphocytic  infiltrate,  histiocytes,  epitheliod  cells,  and 
multinucleated giant cells [131].

60

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

Calcium  hydroxylapatite  (Radiesse,  Merz  Aesthetics,  San 
Meteo, California, USA) consists of 35% calcium hydroxyapetite 
(CaHa) microspheres suspended in a 70% gel carrier [126]. The 
carboxymethylcellulose carrier gel is absorbed and the micro-
spheres remain in the tissue to serve as scaffolding for new col-
lagen formation [126]. Although rare, these CaHa microspheres 
can elicit a foreign body reaction seen as blue‐gray round micro-
spheres  in  the  extracellular  matrix  or  within  multinucleated 
giant  cells  [30].  Delayed‐onset  nodules  secondary  to  calcium 
hydroxylapatite implantation can occur anywhere the substance 
is injected, but occurs most commonly in the lips [132,133].

Polymethylmethacrylate  (Artefill,  Suneva  Medical  Inc.,  San 
Diego, CA) is a polymer of microspheres suspended in a bovine 
collagen and lidocaine. The PPMA microspheres represent the 
permanent  implant  whereas  the  bovine  collagen  suspension 
is  degradable.  Collagen  of  bovine  origin  induces  allergy  reac-
tions in approximately 3% to 4% of the patients and therefore 
skin testing at least 1 month prior to injection is suggested [30]. 
Other rare complications include persistent redness, telangiec-
tasia, hypertrophic scarring, nodules, and delayed granuloma-
tous reactions [134].

Silicone  refers  to  a  group  of  compounds  derived  from  sili-
cone‐containing  synthetics.  Polydimethylsiloxanes  are  the 
most  commonly  substances  used  and  contain  silicon,  oxygen, 
and  methane  [135].  The  silicone  gel  is  hydrophobic  and  once 
introduced in the tissues it is dispersed in vacuoles or droplets, 
which may be absorbed by macrophages and foreign body giant 
cells. The cells may then migrate to the reticuloendothelial sys-
tem and/or evoke a local foreign body reaction in the surround-
ing  tissue.  Phagocytes  enter  and  traverse  the  gel,  followed  by 
gradual replacement with connective tissue [123]. Silicone can 
cause  inflammatory  and  granulomatous  reactions  at  injection 
sites. Delayed and persistent granulomatous reactions can occur 
years after injection and can be recalcitrant to treatment [136].

Collagen  fillers  were  voluntarily  withdrawn  from  the  US 
market  in  2010  and  are  currently  rarely  used  in  Europe  and 
other parts of the world. Formulations of bovine‐derived prod-
ucts previously available included collagen I (Zyderm I and II, 
Allergan,  Irvine,  California,  USA)  and  cross‐linked  collagen 
(Zyplast,  Allergan,  Irvine,  California,  USA).  Potential  hyper-
sensitivity reactions necessitating prior skin testing limited the 
usability  of  the  bovine‐derived  fillers.  Human  collagen  fillers 
including Cosmoderm I (Allergan), Cosmoderm II (Allergan) 
and  Cosmoplast  (Allergan)  were  also  discontinued  following 
the expansion of hyaluronic acid fillers, which have better safety 
and tolerability profiles [137].

and source remain elusive, patch testing may provide additional 
insight. When the field of potential culprits is wide ranging, patch 
testing with a comprehensive series of clinically relevant allergens 
provides a greater opportunity to detect the causative agent(s).

Epicutaneous  application  of  standardized  concentrations  of 
allergen  chemicals  contained  in  chambers  is  occluded  for  48 
hours  and  then  removed. The  skin  reaction  is  observed  and  a 
second reading is performed in 1–5 days. The presence of indu-
ration, erythema, and/or vesicles denotes a positive reaction.

Additionally,  prick  tests  and  radio  allergo‐sorbent  tests 
(RASTs)  can  be  used  to  detect  IgE  antibodies  to  a  suspected 
allergen causing type I hypersensitivity reactions. Very limited 
data exists regarding the utility of patch testing in chronic idio-
pathic urticaria [138–140].

Allergy  to  bovine  collagen  can  be  detected  by  intradermal 
challenge  of  0.1  mL  of  filler  substance  on  the  volar  forearm, 
which is evaluated at 48–72 hours post‐implantation. A positive 
test is defined as induration, erythema, tenderness, or swelling 
that  persists  or  occurs  longer  than  6  hours  after  the  injection. 
Positive subjects must be excluded from the procedure. Repeat 
testing has been suggested for those with negative reactions [2]. 
The diagnosis of granulomatous reactions to fillers is often ren-
dered through history and physical examination and may require 
histologic confirmation and assessment of foreign material [30].

treatment

Treatment is based on identifying the offending agent with subse-
quent avoidance. Type I reactions require appropriate interven-
tions with antihistamines, systemic corticosteroids, epinephrine, 
and supportive therapy based on the severity of the reaction.

Mild allergic and irritant contact dermatitis are treated with 
avoidance  and  emollients  free  of  sensitizers.  Topical  steroids 
and  calcineurin  inhibitors  may  be  used  to  hasten  resolution, 
whereas  serious  reactions  may  require  addition  of  systemic 
immunosuppressant  medication.  Irritant  dermatitis  requires 
proper  hygiene  including  personal  protective  equipment  such 
as gloves, mild cleansers, and emollients.

The  treatment  of  filler  induced  granulomatous  reactions 
includes  intralesional  and  systemic  corticosteroids  and  surgi-
cal excision in refractory cases [141]. Treatments that have been 
used  for  granulomatous  reactions  secondary  to  fillers  include 
tetracyclines, tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, topical and sys-
temic  calcineurin  inhibitors,  imiquimoid,  antimalarials,  and 
isotretinoin [141,142].

Diagnosis

Conclusions

A  thorough  history  of  occupational  and  environmental  expo-
sures  is  necessary  to  ascertain  potential  sources  of  allergic  and 
irritant  contact  dermatitis.  When  history  suggests  a  cause  of  a 
reaction, avoidance and observation is informative. When cause 

Cosmetic products are widely used and reactions to those products 
are commonly seen in daily dermatologic practice. Prompt recog-
nition with identification and withdrawal of the offending agent 
are key elements for successful management of such reactions.

references

1  Berne B, Tammela M, Farm G, Inerot A, Lindberg M. (2008) Can 
the reporting of adverse skin reactions to cosmetics be improved? 
A prospective clinical study using a structured protocol. Contact 
Derm 58(4), 223–7.

2  Cohen  DE,  Kaufmann  JM.  (2003)  Hypersensitivity  reactions  to 
products  and  devices  in  plastic  surgery.  Facial  Plast  Surg  Clin 
North Am 11(2), 253–65.

3  Pathak  MA.  (1986)  Phytophotodermatitis.  Clin  Dermatol  4(2), 

102–21.

4  Warshaw EM, Buchholz HJ, Belsito DV, Maibach HI, Fowler JF, Jr., 
Rietschel RL, et al. (2009) Allergic patch test reactions associated 
with cosmetics, retrospective analysis of cross‐sectional data from 
the North American Contact Dermatitis Group, 2001–2004. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 60(1), 23–38.

5  Eiermann HJ, Larsen W, Maibach HI, Taylor JS. (1982) Prospec-
tive  study  of  cosmetic  reactions,  1977–1980.  North  American 
Contact Dermatitis Group. J Am Acad Dermatol 6(5), 909–17.
6  Adams  RM,  Maibach  HI.  (1985)  A  five‐year  study  of  cosmetic 

reactions. J Am Acad Dermatol 13(6), 1062–9.

7  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Guidance,  Compliance  and 
Regulatory Information – FDA Authority Over Cosmetics [Web-
Content].  Center  for  Food  Safety  and  Applied  Nutrition  (2013) 
[updated  August  3,  cited  December  19].  Available  from:  www.
fda.gov/cosmetics/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/
ucm074162.htm.

8  Engasser PG, Maibach HI. (2003) Cosmetics and skin care in der-
matologic practice. In: FreedbergIM, EisenAZ, WolffK, AustenKF, 
GoldsmithLA,  KatzSI,  eds.  Fitzpatrick’s  Dermatology  in  General 
Medicine, 6th edn. New York: McGraw‐Hill, pp. 2369–79.

9  Cosmetic  Toiletry  and  Fragrance  Association  (CFTA).  (2010) 
International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook, 13th 
edn. Washington, DC: CFTA.

10  American Academy of Dermatology and AAD Association. (1998) 
Position Statement on The Chemical Identity of Fragrances.
11  Cosmetic Ingredient Review (2012) CIR Annual Report Washing-
ton, DC, Cosmetic Ingredient Review; 2013 [cited December 19, 
2013].  Available  from:  www.cir‐safety.org/sites/default/files/2012 
CIR Annual Report.pdf.

12  H.R.  1385,  Safe  Cosmetics  and  Personal  Care  Products  Act  of 
2013,  GovTrack.us;  2013  [cited  December  19,  2013].  Available 
from: www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/113/hr1385.

13  Safe  Cosmetics  and  Personal  Care  Products  Act  of  2013:  Mir-
rors TSCA proposals, would greatly expand FDA authority over 
cosmetics.  Washington,  DC.,  Beveridge  &  Diamond,  P.C.;  2013 
[updated April 16; cited December 19, 2013].

14  Smith HR, Basketter DA, McFadden JP. (2002) Irritant dermatitis, 
irritancy and its role in allergic contact dermatitis. Clin Exp Derma-
tol 27(2), 138–46.

15  Heinemann  C,  Paschold  C,  Fluhr  J,  Wigger‐Alberti  W,  Schlie-
mann‐Willers S, Farwanah H, et al. (2005) Induction of a hard-
ening  phenomenon  by  repeated  application  of  SLS,  analysis  of 
lipid changes in the stratum corneum. Acta Derm Venereol 85(4), 
290–5.

16  Schliemann S, Schmidt C, Elsner P. (2014) Tandem repeated appli-
cation  of  organic  solvents  and  sodium  lauryl  sulphate  enhances 
cumulative skin irritation. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 27(3), 158–63.

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

61

17  Shab A, Matterne U, Diepgen TL, Weisshaar E. (2008) Are obses-
sive‐compulsive  disorders  and  personality  disorders  sufficiently 
considered  in  occupational  dermatoses?  A  discussion  based  on 
three case reports. J Germ Soc Dermatol, JDDG 6(11), 947–51.
18  Visser MJ, Landeck L, Campbell LE, McLean WH, Weidinger S, 
Calkoen F, et al. (2013) Impact of atopic dermatitis and loss‐of‐
function  mutations  in  the  filaggrin  gene  on  the  development  of 
occupational  irritant  contact  dermatitis.  Br  J  Dermatol  168(2), 
326–32.

19  Friedmann PS, Pickard C. (2014) Contact hypersensitivity, quan-
titative aspects, susceptibility and risk factors. EXS 104, 51–71.
20  Park ME, Zippin JH. (2014) Allergic contact dermatitis to cosmet-

ics. Dermatol Clin 32(1), 1–11.

21  Thyssen JP, Linneberg A, Ross‐Hansen K, Carlsen BC, Meldgaard 
M, Szecsi PB, et al. (2013) Filaggrin mutations are strongly asso-
ciated  with  contact  sensitization  in  individuals  with  dermatitis. 
Contact Derm 68(5), 273–6.

22  Ale  IS,  Maibacht  HA.  (2010)  Diagnostic  approach  in  allergic 
and  irritant  contact  dermatitis.  Expert  Rev  Clin  Immunol  6(2), 
291–310.

23  Section  2.  Eczema/Dermatitis.  In:  WolffK,  JohnsonRA,  Saave-
draAP, eds. (2013) Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical 
Dermatology, 7th edn. New York: McGraw‐Hill.

24  McGovern, TW. (2012) Dermatoses due to plants. In: BologniaJL, 
JorizzoJL, SchafferJV, eds. Dermatology, 3rd edn. London: Mosby, 
pp. 273–90.

25  Weber IC, Davis CP, Greeson DM. (1999) Phytophotodermatitis, 

the other “lime” disease. J Emerg Med 17(2), 235–7.

26  Mogi S, Butcher CE, Oh DH. (2008) DNA polymerase eta reduces 
the gamma‐H2AX response to psoralen interstrand crosslinks in 
human cells. Exp Cell Res 314(4), 887–95.

27  Almeida HL, Jr., Sotto MN, Castro LA, Rocha NM. (2008) Trans-
mission  electron  microscopy  of  the  preclinical  phase  of  experi-
mental  phytophotodermatitis.  Clinics  (Sao  Paulo,  Brazil)  63(3), 
371–4.

28  Anderson JM, Rodriguez A, Chang DT. (2008) Foreign body reac-

tion to biomaterials. Semin Immunol 20(2), 86–100.

29  Funt D, Pavicic T. (2013) Dermal fillers in aesthetics, an overview 
of adverse events and treatment approaches. Clin Cosmet Investig 
Dermatol 6, 295–316.

30  Requena L, Requena C, Christensen L, Zimmermann US, Kutzner 
H, Cerroni L. (2011) Adverse reactions to injectable soft tissue fill-
ers. J Am Acad Dermatol 64(1), 1–34; quiz 5–6.

31  Alijotas‐Reig  J,  Miro‐Mur  F,  Planells‐Romeu  I,  Garcia‐Aranda 
N,  Garcia‐Gimenez  V,  Vilardell‐Tarres  M.  (2010)  Are  bacterial 
growth and/or chemotaxis increased by filler injections? Implica-
tions for the pathogenesis and treatment of filler‐related granulo-
mas. Dermatology 221(4), 356–64.

32  Alijotas‐Reig J, Fernandez‐Figueras MT, Puig L (2013) Late‐onset 
inflammatory  adverse  reactions  related  to  soft  tissue  filler  injec-
tions. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 45(1), 97–108.

33  Poveda R, Bagan JV, Murillo J, Jimenez Y. (2006) Granulomatous 
facial reaction to injected cosmetic fillers – a presentation of five 
cases. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal 11(1), E1–5.

34  Cecchi R, Spota A, Frati P, Muciaccia B. (2014) Migrating granulo-
matous chronic reaction from hyaluronic Acid skin filler (Restylane), 
review  and  histopathological  study  with  histochemical  stainings. 
Dermatology 228(1), 14–17.

62

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

35  Schorr ES, Sidou F, Kerrouche N. (2012) Adjunctive use of a facial 
moisturizer SPF 30 containing ceramide precursor improves tol-
erability  of  topical  tretinoin  0.05%,  a  randomized,  investigator‐
blinded, split‐face study. J Drugs Dermatol: JDD 11(9), 1104–7.
36  Diepgen TL, Kanerva L. (2006) Occupational skin diseases. Eur J 

Dermatol 16(3), 324–30.

37  Nguyen  SH,  Dang  TP,  Maibach  HI.  (2007)  Comedogenicity  in 
rabbit,  some  cosmetic  ingredients/vehicles.  Cutan  Ocul  Toxicol 
26(4), 287–92.

38  Kartono  F,  Maibach  HI.  (2006)  Irritants  in  combination  with  a 
synergistic or additive effect on the skin response, an overview of 
tandem irritation studies. Contact Derm 54(6), 303–12.

39  Lammintausta K, Maibach HI, Wilson D. (1988) Mechanisms of 
subjective  (sensory)  irritation.  Propensity  to  non‐immunologic 
contact urticaria and objective irritation in stingers. Derm Beruf 
Umwelt 36(2), 45–9.

40  Primavera  G,  Berardesca  E.  (2005)  Sensitive  skin,  mechanisms 

and diagnosis. Internat J Cosmet Sci 27(1), 1–10.

41  Arribas MP, Soro P, Silvestre JF. (2012) Allergic contact dermatitis 

to fragrances. Part 1. Actas Dermosifiliogr 103(10), 874–9.

42  Zug KA, Rietschel RL, Warshaw EM, Belsito DV, Taylor JS, Mai-
bach  HI,  et  al.  (2008) The  value  of  patch  testing  patients  with  a 
scattered  generalized  distribution  of  dermatitis,  retrospective 
cross‐sectional  analyses  of  North  American  Contact  Dermatitis 
Group data, 2001 to 2004. J Am Acad Dermatol 59(3), 426–31.
43  Heisterberg MV, Menne T, Andersen KE, Avnstorp C, Kristensen 
B, Kristensen O, et al. (2011) Deodorants are the leading cause of 
allergic contact dermatitis to fragrance ingredients. Contact Derm 
64(5), 258–64.

44  Thyssen  JP,  Linneberg  A,  Menne  T,  Nielsen  NH,  Johansen  JD. 
(2009) The prevalence and morbidity of sensitization to fragrance 
mix I in the general population. Br J Dermatol 161(1), 95–101.
45  Heisterberg MV, Menne T, Johansen JD. (2011) Contact allergy to 
the 26 specific  fragrance  ingredients to be  declared  on cosmetic 
products in accordance with the EU cosmetics directive. Contact 
Derm 65(5), 266–75.

46  Warshaw  EM,  Belsito  DV,  Taylor  JS,  Sasseville  D,  DeKoven  JG, 
Zirwas  MJ,  et  al.  (2013)  North  American  Contact  Dermatitis 
Group  patch  test  results,  2009  to  2010.  Dermatitis:  Contac  Atop 
Occupat Drug 24(2), 50–9.

47  Wetter DA, Yiannias JA, Prakash AV, Davis MD, Farmer SA, el‐
Azhary RA. (2010) Results of patch testing to personal care prod-
uct  allergens  in  a  standard  series  and  a  supplemental  cosmetic 
series: an analysis of 945 patients from the of Clinic Contact Der-
matitis Group, 2000‐2007. J Am Acad Dermatol 63(5), 789–98.
48  de Groot AC, White IR, Flyvholm MA, Lensen G, Coenraads PJ. 
(2010) Formaldehyde‐releasers in cosmetics, relationship to for-
maldehyde  contact  allergy.  Part  1.  Characterization,  frequency 
and relevance of sensitization, and frequency of use in cosmetics. 
Contact Derm 62(1), 217.

49  Uter W, Yazar K, Kratz EM, Mildau G, Liden C. (2014) Coupled 
exposure  to  ingredients  of  cosmetic  products,  II.  Preservatives. 
Contact Derm 70(4), 219–26.

50  Aalto‐Korte K, Kuuliala O, Suuronen K, Alanko K. (2008) Occu-
pational  contact  allergy  to  formaldehyde  and  formaldehyde 
releasers. Contact Derm 59(5), 280–9.

51  Fonacier  LS,  Aquino  MR.  (2010)  The  role  of  contact  allergy  in 
atopic dermatitis. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 30(3), 337–50.

52  Shaughnessy  CN,  Malajian  D,  Belsito  DV.  (2013)  Cutaneous 
delayed‐type  hypersensitivity  in  patients  with  atopic  dermatitis: 
Reactivity to topical preservatives. J Am Acad Dermatol 9.

53  Gardner KH, Davis MD, Richardson DM, Pittelkow MR. (2010) 
The hazards of moist toilet paper: allergy to the preservative meth-
ylchloroisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone.  Arch  Dermatol 
146(8), 886–90.

54  Uter W, Gefeller O, Geier J, Schnuch A. (2012) Methylchloroiso-
thiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone contact sensitization, diverg-
ing trends in subgroups of IVDK patients in a period of 19 years. 
Contact Derm 67(3), 125–9.

55  Maio P, Carvalho R, Amaro C, Santos R, Cardoso J. (2012) Con-
tact allergy to methylchoroisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone 
(MCI/MI),  findings  from  a  contact  dermatitis  unit.  Cutan  Ocul 
Toxicol 31(2), 151–3.

56  Geier J, Lessmann H, Schnuch A, Uter W. (2012) Recent increase 
in  allergic  reactions  to  methylchloroisothiazolinone/methyliso-
thiazolinone, is methylisothiazolinone the culprit? Contact Derm 
67(6), 334–41.

57  Lundov  MD,  Opstrup  MS,  Johansen  JD.  (2013)  Methylisothia-
zolinone contact allergy – growing epidemic. Contact Derm 69(5), 
271–5.

58  Castanedo‐Tardana  MP,  Zug  KA.  (2013)  Methylisothiazolinone. 

Dermatitis: Contact Atop Occupat Drug 24(1), 2–6.

59  Lundov MD, Thyssen JP, Zachariae C, Johansen JD. (2010) Preva-
lence and cause of methylisothiazolinone contact allergy. Contact 
Derm 63(3), 164–7.

60  Ackermann  L,  Aalto‐Korte  K,  Alanko  K,  Hasan  T,  Jolanki  R, 
Lammintausta K, et al. (2011) Contact sensitization to methyli-
sothiazolinone in Finland – a multicentre study. Contact Derm 
64(1), 49–53.

61  Yazar  K,  Johnsson  S,  Lind  ML,  Boman  A,  Liden  C.  (2011)  Pre-
servatives and fragrances in selected consumer‐available cosmet-
ics and detergents. Contact Derm 64(5), 265–72.

62  Uter W, Yazar K, Kratz EM, Mildau G, Liden C. (2013) Coupled 
exposure  to  ingredients  of  cosmetic  products,  II.  Preservatives. 
Contact Derm 17.

63  Final amended report on the safety assessment of Methylparaben, 
Ethylparaben,  Propylparaben,  Isopropylparaben,  Butylparaben, 
Isobutylparaben, and Benzylparaben as used in cosmetic products 
(2008) Int J Toxicol 27 Suppl 4, 1–82.

64  Barbaud A, Collet E, Le Coz CJ, Meaume S, Gillois P. (2009) Con-
tact allergy in chronic leg ulcers, results of a multicentre study car-
ried out in 423 patients and proposal for an updated series of patch 
tests. Contact Derm 60(5), 279–87.

65  Landeck L, John SM, Geier J. (2013) Periorbital dermatitis in 4779 
patients – patch test results during a 10‐year period. Contact Derm 11.
66  Itskaya  ES,  Dean  SJ,  Craig  JP,  Alexandroff  AB.  (2011)  Current 
dilemmas and controversies in allergic contact dermatitis to oph-
thalmic medications. Clin Dermatol 29(3), 295–9.

67  Jack AR, Norris PL, Storrs FJ. (2013) Allergic contact dermatitis to 
plant extracts in cosmetics. Semin Cutan Med Surg 32(3), 140–6.
68  Corazza M, Borghi A, Gallo R, Schena D, Pigatto P, Lauriola MM, 
et al. (2014) Topical botanically derived products, use, skin reac-
tions,  and  usefulness  of  patch  tests.  A  multicentre  Italian  study. 
Contact Derm 70(2), 90–7.

69  Cosmetic Ingredient Review. (2013) Safety Assessment of Citrus‐

Derived Ingredients as Used in Cosmetics. Washington, DC.

6. Contact Dermatitis and Topical Agents

63

70  Bollero  D,  Stella  M,  Rivolin  A,  Cassano  P,  Risso  D,  Vanzetti  M. 
(2001) Fig leaf tanning lotion and sun‐related burns: case reports. 
Burns 27(7), 777–9.

90  Baeck M, Chemelle JA, Rasse C, Terreux R, Goossens A. (2011) 
C(16)‐methyl corticosteroids are far less allergenic than the non‐
methylated molecules. Contact Derm 64(6), 305–12.

71  Bassioukas  K,  Stergiopoulou  C,  Hatzis  J.  (2004)  Erythrodermic 
phytophotodermatitis after application of aqueous fig‐leaf extract 
as  an  artificial  suntan  promoter  and  sunbathing.  Contact  Derm 
51(2), 94–5.

72  Travassos  AR,  Claes  L,  Boey  L,  Drieghe  J,  Goossens  A.  (2011) 
Non‐fragrance  allergens  in  specific  cosmetic  products.  Contact 
Derm 65(5), 276–85.

73  Zirwas  M,  Moennich  J.  (2009)  Shampoos.  Dermatitis:  Contact 

Atop Occupat Drug 20(2), 106–10.

74  Loden M. (2005) The clinical benefit of moisturizers. J Eur Acad 

Dermatol Venereol 19(6), 672–88; quiz 86–7.

91  English  JS.  (2000)  Corticosteroid‐induced  contact  dermatitis:  a 

pragmatic approach. Clin Exp Dermatol 25(4), 261–4.

92  Dooms‐Goossens  A,  Andersen  KE,  Brandao  FM,  Bruynzeel 
D,  Burrows  D,  Camarasa  J,  et  al.  (1996)  Corticosteroid  contact 
allergy: an EECDRG multicentre study. Contact Derm 35(1), 40–4.
93  Veysey EC, Burge S, Cooper S. (2007) Consort contact dermatitis 
to paraphenylenediamine, with an unusual clinical presentation of 
tumid plaques. Contact Derm 6(6), 366–7.

94  Yazar K, Boman A, Liden C. (2009) Potent skin sensitizers in oxi-
dative  hair  dye  products  on  the  Swedish  market.  Contact  Derm 
61(5), 269–75.

75  Zirwas MJ, Stechschulte SA. (2008) Moisturizer allergy, diagnosis 

95  Orton D, Basketter D. (2012) Hair dye sensitivity testing, a critical 

and management. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol 1(4), 38–44.

commentary. Contact Derm 66(6), 312–6.

76  Draelos ZD. (2013) Modern moisturizer myths, misconceptions, 

and truths. Cutis 91(6), 308–14.

77  Wilson  CL,  Cameron  J,  Powell  SM,  Cherry  G,  Ryan  TJ.  (1991) 
High incidence of contact dermatitis in leg‐ulcer patients–impli-
cations for management. Clin Exp Dermatol 16(4), 250–3.

78  Thyssen JP, McFadden JP, Kimber I. (2014) The multiple factors 
affecting  the  association  between  atopic  dermatitis  and  contact 
sensitization. Allergy 69(1), 28–36.

79  Warshaw EM, Raju SI, Fowler JF, Jr., Maibach HI, Belsito DV, Zug 
KA, et al. (2012) Positive patch test reactions in older individuals, 
retrospective analysis from the North American Contact Dermati-
tis Group, 1994–2008. J Am Acad Dermatol 66(2), 229–40.

80  Ladizinski B, Mistry N, Kundu RV. (2011) Widespread use of toxic 
skin  lightening  compounds,  medical  and  psychosocial  aspects. 
Dermatol Clin 29(1), 111–23.

81  Badreshia‐Bansal S, Draelos ZD. (2007) Insight into skin lighten-
ing  cosmeceuticals  for  women  of  color.  J  Drugs  Dermatol:  JDD 
6(1), 32–9.

82  Draelos ZD. (2007) Skin lightening preparations and the hydro-

quinone controversy. Dermatol Ther 20(5), 308–13.

83  van  Ketel  WG.  (1984)  Sensitization  to  hydroquinone  and  the 
monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone. Contact Dermat 10(4), 253.
84  Hamann  CR,  Boonchai  W,  Wen  L,  Sakanashi  EN,  Chu  CY, 
Hamann K, et al. (2014) Spectrometric analysis of mercury con-
tent in 549 skin‐lightening products, Is mercury toxicity a hidden 
global health hazard? J Am Acad Dermatol 70(2), 281–7.

85  Baeck M, Chemelle JA, Terreux R, Drieghe J, Goossens A. (2009) 
Delayed  hypersensitivity  to  corticosteroids  in  a  series  of  315 
patients: clinical data and patch test results. Contact Derm 61(3), 
163–75.

86  Isaksson M, Bruze M. Corticosteroids. (2005) Dermatitis: Contact 

Atop Occupat Drug 16(1), 3–5.

87  Coopman  S,  Degreef  H,  Dooms‐Goossens  A.  (1989)  Identifica-
tion of cross‐reaction patterns in allergic contact dermatitis from 
topical corticosteroids. Br J Dermatol 121(1), 27–34.

88  Torres MJ, Canto G. (2010) Hypersensitivity reactions to corticos-

teroids. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 10(4), 273–9.

89  Davis  MD,  el‐Azhary  RA,  Farmer  SA.  (2007)  Results  of  patch 
testing  to  a  corticosteroid  series,  a  retrospective  review  of  1188 
patients during 6 years at Mayo Clinic. J Am Acad Dermatol 56(6), 
921–7.

96  Thyssen JP, Sosted H, Uter W, Schnuch A, Gimenez‐Arnau AM, 
Vigan M, et al. (2012) Self‐testing for contact sensitization to hair 
dyes–scientific considerations and clinical concerns of an indus-
try‐led screening programme. Contact Derm 66(6), 300–11.
97  Lund  JJ,  Unwala  R,  Xia  L,  Gottlieb  V.  (2010)  Chemical  scalp 
burns secondary to the hair highlighting process, clinical and his-
topathologic features. Pediatr Dermatol 27(1), 74–8.

98  Chan  HP,  Maibach  HI.  (2010)  Hair  highlights  and  severe  acute 
irritant dermatitis (“burn”) of the scalp. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 29(4), 
229–33.

99  Hoekstra  M,  van  der  Heide  S,  Coenraads  PJ,  Schuttelaar  ML. 
(2012) Anaphylaxis and severe systemic reactions caused by skin 
contact with persulfates in hair‐bleaching products. Contact Derm 
66(6), 317–22.

100  Warshaw EM, Wang MZ, Mathias CG, Maibach HI, Belsito DV, 
Zug  KA,  et  al.  (2012)  Occupational  contact  dermatitis  in  hair-
dressers/cosmetologists: retrospective analysis of North American 
Contact Dermatitis Group data, 1994 to 2010. Dermatitis: Contact 
Atop Occupat Drug 23(6), 258–68.

101  Storrs  FJ.  (1984)  Permanent  wave  contact  dermatitis:  contact 
allergy to glyceryl monothioglycolate. J Am Acad Dermatol 11(1), 
74–85.

102  Isaksson M, van der Walle H. (2007) Occupational contact allergy 
to cysteamine hydrochloride in permanent‐wave solutions. Con-
tact Derm 56(5), 295–6.

103  Quartier S, Garmyn M, Becart S, Goossens A. (2006) Allergic con-
tact dermatitis to copolymers in cosmetics–case report and review 
of the literature. Contact Derm 55(5), 257–67.

104  Drucker  AM,  Pratt  MD.  (2011)  Acrylate  contact  allergy,  patient 
characteristics and evaluation of screening allergens. Dermatitis: 
Contact Atop Occupat Drug 22(2), 98–101.

105  Moffitt  DL,  Sansom  JE.  (2002)  Allergic  contact  dermatitis  from 
phthalic  anhydride/trimellitic  anhydride/glycols  copolymer  in 
nail varnish. Contact Derm 46(4), 236.

106  Gach  JE,  Stone  NM,  Finch  TM.  (2005)  A  series  of  four  cases  of 
allergic contact dermatitis to phthalic anhydride/trimellitic anhy-
dride/glycols  copolymer  in  nail  varnish.  Contact  Derm  53(1), 
63–4.

107  Nassif AS, Le Coz CJ, Collet E. (2007) A rare nail polish allergen, 
phthalic anhydride, trimellitic anhydride and glycols copolymer. 
Contact Derm 56(3), 172–3.

64

Basic Concepts  Skin Physiology Pertinent to Cosmetic Dermatology

108  Cruz  MJ,  Baudrier  T,  Cunha  AP,  Ferreira  O,  Azevedo  F.  (2011) 
Severe onychodystrophy caused by allergic contact dermatitis to 
acrylates in artificial nails. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 30(4), 323–4.
109  Furman D, Fisher AA, Leider M. (1950) Allergic eczematous con-
tact‐type dermatitis caused by rubber sponges used for the appli-
cation of cosmetics. J Invest Dermatol 15(3), 223–31.

110  Vestey JP, Buxton PK, Savin JA. (1985) Eyelash curler dermatitis. 

Contact Derm 13(4), 274–5.

111  Curtis GH. (1945) Contact dermatitis of eyelids caused by an anti-
oxidant in rubber fillers of eyelash curlers; report of 7 cases. Arch 
Dermatol Syphilol 52, 262–5.

112  Thyssen  JP,  Linneberg  A,  Menne  T,  Nielsen  NH,  Johansen  JD. 
(2010) No association between nickel allergy and reporting cos-
metic  dermatitis  from  mascara  or  eye  shadow,  a  cross‐sectional 
general  population  study.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol  Venereol  24(6), 
722–5.

113  Garcovich S, Carbone T, Avitabile S, Nasorri F, Fucci N, Cavani A. 
(2012)  Lichenoid  red  tattoo  reaction,  histological  and  immuno-
logical perspectives. Eur J Dermatol 22(1), 93–6.

114  Cruz FA, Lage D, Frigerio RM, Zaniboni MC, Arruda LH. (2010) 
Reactions  to  the  different  pigments  in  tattoos:  a  report  of  two 
cases. An Bras Dermatol 85(5), 708–11.

115  Mortimer  NJ,  Chave  TA,  Johnston  GA.  (2003)  Red  tattoo  reac-

tions. Clin Exp Dermatol 28(5), 508–10.

116  Litak J, Ke MS, Gutierrez MA, Soriano T, Lask GP. (2007) General-
ized lichenoid reaction from tattoo. Dermatol Surg 33(6), 736–40.
117  Evans CC, Fleming JD. (2008) Images in clinical medicine. Aller-
gic contact dermatitis from a henna tattoo. N Engl J Med 359(6), 
627.

118  Farrow  C.  (2002)  Hair  dye  and  henna  tattoo  exposure.  Emerg 

Nurse 10(3), 19–23.

119  Phillips  JF,  Yates  AB,  Deshazo  RD.  (2007)  Approach  to  patients 
with suspected hypersensitivity to local anesthetics. Am J Med Sci 
334(3), 190–6.

120  Brinca  A,  Cabral  R,  Goncalo  M.  (2013)  Contact  allergy  to  local 
anaesthetics‐value of patch testing with a caine mix in the baseline 
series. Contact Derm 68(3), 156–62.

121  Brueggemann  N,  Doegnitz  L,  Harms  L,  Moser  A,  Hagenah  JM. 
(2008) Skin reactions after intramuscular injection of Botulinum 
toxin  A,  a  rare  side  effect.  J  Neurol  Neurosurg  Psychiatr  79(2), 
231–2.

122  Albumin (Human) 5%. Food and Drug Administration.
123  Christensen L. (2007) Normal and pathologic tissue reactions to 

soft tissue gel fillers. Dermatol Surg 33 Suppl 2, S168–75.

124  Hirsch RJ, Stier M. (2008) Complications of soft tissue augmenta-

tion. J Drugs Dermatol: JDD 7(9), 841–5.

125  Brody HJ. (2005) Use of hyaluronidase in the treatment of granu-
lomatous hyaluronic acid reactions or unwanted hyaluronic acid 
misplacement. Dermatol Surg 31(8 Pt 1), 893–7.

126  Kontis TC. (2013) Contemporary review of injectable facial fillers. 

JAMA Facial Plast Surg 15(1), 58–64.

127  Keni SP, Sidle DM. (2007) Sculptra (injectable poly‐L‐lactic acid). 

Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 15(1), 91–7, vii.

128  Levy  RM,  Redbord  KP,  Hanke  CW.  (2008)  Treatment  of  HIV 
lipoatrophy  and  lipoatrophy  of  aging  with  poly‐L‐lactic  acid:  a 
prospective  3‐year  follow‐up  study.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol  59(6), 
923–33.

129  Palm  MD,  Woodhall  KE,  Butterwick  KJ,  Goldman  MP.  (2010) 
Cosmetic  use  of  poly‐L‐lactic  acid:  a  retrospective  study  of  130 
patients. Dermatol Surg 36(2), 161–70.

130  Hamilton  DG,  Gauthier  N,  Robertson  BF.  (2008)  Late‐onset, 
recurrent facial nodules associated with injection of poly‐L‐lactic 
acid. Dermatol Surg 34(1), 123–6; discussion 6.

131  Andre  P,  Lowe  NJ,  Parc  A,  Clerici  TH,  Zimmermann  U.  (2005) 
Adverse reactions to dermal fillers, a review of European experi-
ences. J Cosmet Laser Ther 7(3–4), 171–6.

132  Tzikas TL. (2008) A 52‐month summary of results using calcium 
hydroxylapatite for facial soft tissue augmentation. Dermatol Surg 
34 Suppl 1, S9–15.

133  Sadick NS, Katz BE, Roy D. (2007) A multicenter, 47‐month study 
of  safety  and  efficacy  of  calcium  hydroxylapatite  for  soft  tissue 
augmentation of nasolabial folds and other areas of the face. Der-
matol Surg 33 Suppl 2, S122–6; discussion S6–7.

134  Kadouch JA, Kadouch DJ, Fortuin S, van Rozelaar L, Karim RB, 
Hoekzema  R.  (2013)  Delayed‐onset  complications  of  facial  soft 
tissue augmentation with permanent fillers in 85 patients. Derma-
tol Surg 39(10), 1474–85.

135  Chasan PE. (2007) The history of injectable silicone fluids for soft‐
tissue augmentation. Plast Reconstr Surg 120(7), 2034–40; discus-
sion 41–3.

136  Ledon JA, Savas JA, Yang S, Franca K, Camacho I, Nouri K. (2013) 
Inflammatory nodules following soft tissue filler use: a review of 
causative agents, pathology and treatment options. Am J Clin Der-
matol 14(5), 401–11.

137  Sundaram  H,  Cassuto  D.  (2013)  Biophysical  characteristics  of 
hyaluronic acid soft‐tissue fillers and their relevance to aesthetic 
applications. Plast Reconstr Surg 132(4 Suppl 2), 5S–21S.

138  Guerra L, Rogkakou A, Massacane P, Gamalero C, Compalati E, 
Zanella  C,  et  al.  (2007)  Role  of  contact  sensitization  in  chronic 
urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol 56(1), 88–90.

139  Cancian M, Fortina AB, Peserico A. (1999) Contact urticaria syn-
drome from constituents of balsam of Peru and fragrance mix in a 
patient with chronic urticaria. Contact Derm 41(5), 300.

140  Hession MT, Scheinman PL. (2012) The role of contact allergens 
in chronic idiopathic urticaria. Dermatitis: Contact Atop Occupat 
Drug 23(3), 110–6.

141  Alijotas‐Reig  J,  Fernandez‐Figueras  MT,  Puig  L.  (2013)  Inflam-
matory, immune‐mediated adverse reactions related to soft tissue 
dermal fillers. Semin Arthritis Rheum 43(2), 241–58.

142  Lopiccolo  MC,  Workman  BJ,  Chaffins  ML,  Kerr  HA.  (2011)  Sili-
cone granulomas after soft‐tissue augmentation of the buttocks, a 
case report and review of management. Dermatol Surg 37(5), 720–5.

Sec tion 2  Delivery of cosmetic Skin Actives

chapter 7
percutaneous Delivery of cosmetic actives to the skin

Sreekumar Pillai, Surabhi Singh, and christian oresajo
L’Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA 

Basic concepts

•	 Percutaneous	delivery	is	the	penetration	of	substances	into	the	skin.
•	 The	goal	of	effective	percutaneous	delivery	is	to	provide	an	effective	amount	of	an	active	to	the	skin	target	site	and	thereby	optimize	

efficacy	while	minimizing	side	effects.

•	 The	main	barrier	of	the	active	permeation	through	the	skin	is	the	stratum	corneum.	The	active	must	cross	this	skin	barrier	and	permeate	

transepidermally	to	be	delivered	to	the	target	site.

•	 Molecules	with	a	molecular	weight	of	less	than	500	Daltons	penetrate	the	skin	better	than	molecules	with	a	larger	molecular	weight.	

The	net	charge	of	a	molecule	is	important	in	enhancing	penetration.

introduction

Recent developments in new technologies combined with new 
knowledge  in  skin  biology  have  advanced  innovations  in  skin 
availability of actives and novel methods of substance delivery. 
The goal of this chapter is to review new advances in delivery of 
actives to the skin and the effects of penetration enhancers. An 
understanding of the structure of the skin is very important in 
managing active delivery.

the basics

The main barrier of active permeation through the skin is 
the stratum corneum. The active must cross this skin barrier 
and permeate transepidermally to be delivered to the target 
site, and the penetration can be moderated by the secretion 
activity  of  the  appendages.  This  structure  is  located  at  the 
outermost  layer  of  the  epidermis  [1].  This  transepidermal 
route can be further subdivided into transcellular and inter-
cellular  routes  [2].  Delivery  of  hydrophilic  substances  can 
be achieved through sweat gland route; however, this is also 
minimal  in  total  volume.  Therefore,  the  principal  pathway 
for  skin  penetration  of  actives  is  the  transepidermal  route 
(route 1 in Figure 7.1).

The  goal  of  percutaneous  delivery  is  to  provide  an  effective 
amount of an active to the skin target site and thereby optimize 
efficacy while minimizing side effects. This can be achieved by 
an understanding of the skin’s complex structure and by relying 
on  physical  and  chemical  parameters  of  vehicles  applied  to  
the skin.

skin physiology
There  are  defined  compartments  and  biologic  structures  within 
the skin that provide opportunities to deliver actives (Figure 7.1). 
Within these compartments there are many chemical and biologic 
processes at work that may alter a given active or the physiology of 
skin target.

active composition
One  of  the  first  steps  in  understanding  the  phenomenon  of 
active delivery is to completely characterize the active that is 
intended for delivery to the skin. There are well‐known physi-
cal  and  chemical  parameters  that  are  specific  to  all  chemical 
compounds. The essentials for characterization of actives are 
typically described in the literature or can be measured in the 
laboratory.  This  includes  the  active’s  molecular  weight,  dis-
sociation  constant  (pK),  solubility,  and  octanol/water  [O/W] 
partition  coefficient  (log  P).  These  parameters,  along  with  a 
thorough understanding of the net ionic charge (cationic, ani-
onic, and amphoteric) of the active will help in understanding 
its penetration profile.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

65

66

Basic concepts  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

2

1

3

Figure  7.1  Possible  pathways  for  a  penetrant  to  cross  the  skin  barrier. 
(1)  Across  the  intact  horny  layer;  (2)  through  the  hair  follicles  with  the 
associated  sebaceous  glands;  or  (3)  via  the  sweat  glands.  (Source:  Daniels 
R. Strategies for skin penetration enhancement. Skin Care Forum37, www.
scf‐online.com.)

As  general  rule,  molecules  with  a  molecular  weight  of 
less  than  500 Da  penetrate  the  skin  better  than  molecules 
with a larger molecular weight. It is also known that the net 
charge of a molecule is important in enhancing penetration. 
An  un‐ionized  molecule  penetrates  the  skin  better  than  an 
ionized  molecule.  A  thorough  understanding  of  the  rela-
tionship between the dissociation constant and formulation 
pH  is  critical.  In  many  cases  it  is  advantageous  to  keep  the 
pH  of  a  formulation  near  the  pK  of  the  active  molecule  in 
an  attempt  to  enhance  penetration.  When  looking  at  the 
partition coefficient, molecules showing intermediate partition 
coefficients (log P O/W of 1–3) have adequate solubility within 
the lipid domains of the stratum corneum to permit diffusion 
through this domain while still having sufficient hydrophilic 
nature  to  allow  partitioning  into  the  viable  tissues  of  the 
epidermis [3].

Fick’s law
The  permeation  of  active  across  the  stratum  corneum  is  a 
passive  process,  which  can  be  approximated  by  Fick’s  first 
law:

J

=

DK
L

(

C

)  

(equation 7.1)

This  defines  steady‐state  flux  (J)  is  related  to  the  diffusion 
coefficient (D) of the active in the stratum corneum over a dif-
fusional path length or membrane thickness (L), the partition 
coefficient  (K)  between  the  stratum  corneum  and  the  vehicle, 
and the applied drug concentration (C) which is assumed to be 
constant.

Novel  formulation  strategies  allow  for  manipulation  of  the 
partition coefficient (K) and concentration (C). Skin penetration 
can be enhanced by the following strategies:
 1.  Increasing drug diffusion in the skin;
 2.  Increasing drug solubility in the skin; and/or
 3.  Increasing the degree of saturation of the drug in the formu-

lation [4].
Equation (7.1) aids in identifying the ideal parameters for the 
diffusion of the active across the skin. The influence of solubility 
and partition coefficient on diffusion across the stratum corneum 
has been extensively studied in the literature [5].

Vehicle effect

Delivery of actives from emulsions
The  key  for  evaluation  of  the  vehicle  effect  is  to  understand 
the dynamics between the vehicle and the active. Based on the 
physical  and  chemical  nature  of  the  active  there  are  specific 
formulation strategies that can be designed to enhance delivery 
of actives.

The primary vector for topical delivery of actives is a semi‐
solid ointment or emulsion base. The main reason for selection 
of  this  dosage  form  is  convenience  and  cosmetic  elegance. 
Emulsions  are  convenient  because  they  typically  have  two 
phases  (hydrophilic  and  hydrophobic).  The  bi‐phasic  nature 
allows for placement of actives based on solubility and stabil-
ity. This allows the formulator to bring lipophilic and hydro-
philic  actives  into  the  dosage  form  while  maintaining  the 
optimized  stability  profile.  The  effect  of  the  type  of  vehicle 
has  been  well  described  in  the  literature  [6].  Numerous 
references  are  available  for  altering  the  delivery  of  actives 
from  various  emulsion  forms  (O/W,  W/O,  multiple  emul-
sions, and nano‐emulsions).

Formulation strategies
A basic formulation has many components. Table 7.1 provides 
an overview of these formula components and also provides a 
brief summary of the anticipated effect on active delivery. Some 
of these chemical functions are  more  clearly  defined below in 
discussion on chemical penetration enhancers.

The ability of vehicles to deliver actives is tied to an under-
standing  of  diffusion  of  actives  through  various  skin  com-
partments  (epidermal  and  dermal).  Diffusion  of  actives 
across  the  skin  is  a  passive  process.  Compounds  with  low 
solubility  and  affinity  for  the  hydrophilic  and  lipophilic 
components  of  the  stratum  corneum  would  theoretically 
partition at a slow rate. These difficulties may be overcome by 
adding a chemical adjunct to the delivery system that would 
promote partitioning into the stratum corneum. Partitioning 
of actives from the dosage form is highly dependent on the 
relative  solubility  of  the  active  in  the  components  of  the 
delivery system and in the stratum corneum. Thus, the for-
mulation of the vehicle may markedly influence the degree of 

 
7. Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to the Skin

67

chemical function

effect on delivery

table 7.1  Formulation	components.

ingredient

Water

Alcohol

Carrier/solvent

Carrier/solvent

Propylene	glycol

Co‐solvent/humectant

Surfactant

Emollient

Emulsifier/stabilizer

Skin	conditioner,	
active	carrier

Hydration

Fluidizes	stratum	corneum,	alters	permeability	of	
stratum	cornuem

Alter	permeability	of	stratum	corneum
Alter	vehicle	stratum	corneum	partition	coefficient

Emulsion	particle	size	reduction,	active	solubilizer

Alter	stratum	corneum	permeability
Alter	vehicle	stratum	corneum	partition	coefficient

Delivery	system

Protect/target	actives

Targeted/enhanced	active	penetration

penetration  of  the  active.  Percutaneous  absorption  involves 
the following sequences:
•	 Partitioning of the molecule into the stratum corneum from 

the applied vehicle phase;

•	 Molecular diffusion through the stratum corneum;
•	 Partitioning from the stratum corneum into the viable epidermis; 

and

•	 Diffusion through the epidermis and upper dermis and capillary 

uptake [7].
One of the most effective formulation techniques to boost 
active  penetration  is  supersaturation.  This  chemical  process 
happens  when  an  active’s  maximum  concentration  in  solu-
tion  is  exceeded  by  the  use  of  solvents  or  co‐solvents.  This 
type  of  solution  state  can  happen  during  the  evaporation  of 
an  emulsion  on  the  skin.  As  water  evaporates  from  a  cream 
rubbed on the skin a superconcentrate depot of active forms 
on the skin. This creates a diffusional concentration gradient 
across  the  stratum  corneum.  One  can  attempt  to  boost  this 
effect  even  further  in  the  formulation  by  slightly  exceeding 
the  maximum  solubility  of  the  active  in  the  formula  using 
co‐solvents. Supersaturation is an effective technique but the 
disadvantage is that active recrystallization can take place in 
this highly concentrated solution state. There are crystalliza-
tion inhibitors that can  be  added to  supersaturated  solution 
but many experimental data need to be collected on this type 
of formulation strategy.

Eutectic  blends  are  formulation  techniques  that  can 
enhance penetration of actives. The melting point of an active 
influences solubility and hence skin penetration. According 
to  solution  theory,  the  lower  the  melting  point,  the  greater 
the solubility of a material in a given solvent, including skin 
lipids.  The  melting  point  can  be  lowered  by  formation  of  a 
eutectic mixture. This mixture of two components which, at 
a certain ratio, inhibits the crystalline process of each other 
such  that  the  melting  point  of  the  two  components  in  the 
mixture  is  less  than  that  of  each  component  alone.  In  all 
cases, the melting point of the active is depressed to around 
or below skin temperature thereby enhancing solubility. This 
technique has been used to enhance the penetration of ibu-
profen through the skin [8].

Manipulation of the vehicle skin partition coefficient of a for-
mulation can be used as an overall formulation strategy to boost 
penetration of actives. This can be done by altering the solubility 
of the active in the vehicle via selection of different excipients. 
This  change  in  the  solubility  parameter  (δ)  of  the  excipients 
can be tuned so that the active is more soluble in the stratum 
corneum than in the vehicle. Hence the diffusional gradient is 
altered towards the skin and thereby enhancing penetration. It 
has been shown that a solvent capable of shifting the solubility 
parameter (δ) of the skin closer to that of the activate will active 
flux rate [9]. Another strategy is to add a penetration enhancer 
that alters the membrane permeability of the skin. This strategy 
is discussed in more detail below.

Skin  occlusion  can  increase  stratum  corneum  hydration,  and 
hence influence percutaneous absorption by altering partitioning 
between the surface chemical and the skin because of the increasing 
presence of water, swelling corneocytes, and possibly altering the 
intercellular  lipid  phase  organization,  also  by  increasing  the  skin 
surface temperature, and increasing blood flow [10].

Different substances penetrate different depth levels in the skin 
for best results. An effective cosmetic is designed so that active 
substances  gets  inside  the  appropriate  skin  cells,  affecting  their 
metabolism in a way that improves their health, yet not damaging 
overall  skin  integrity.[30]  The  ultimate  goal  of  penetration 
enhancement is to target the active in the stratum corneum and/
or  epidermis  without  allowing  for  systemic  absorption.  This 
remains the biggest challenge for active penetration enhancement 
and it is one of the keys for targeted active delivery.

penetration enhancers

In this section, the influence of penetration enhancers on the 
diffusion coefficient and solubility of the active in the stratum 
corneum is evaluated. The use of topically applied chemical 
agents  (surfactants,  solvents,  emollients)  is  a  well‐known 
technique  to  modify  the  stratum  corneum  and  also  modify 
the chemical potential of selected actives. Collectively, these 
materials can be referred to as penetration enhancers (PEs). 
Based on the chemical structure, PEs can be categorized into 

68

Basic concepts  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

several groups such as fatty acids, fatty alcohols, terpene fatty 
acid esters, and pyrrolidone derivatives [11]. PEs commonly 
used  in  skin  care  products  have  well‐known  safety  profiles 
but their ability to enhance penetration of an active is chal-
lenging  because  of  the  manifold  ingredients  used  in  many 
formulations.

chemical enhancers
They  are  also  known  as  absorption  promoters  and  accelerants 
which  are  “pharmacological  inert,  nontoxic,  non‐irritating, 
non‐allergic,  rapid  onset  of  action,  and  suitable  duration  of 
action, inexpensive and cosmetically acceptable [32].” A number 
of  solvents  (e.g.  ethanol,  propylene  glycol,  Transcutol®  [Gatte-
fossé, Saint‐Priest, France] and N‐methyl pyrrolidone) increase 
permeant  partitioning  into  and  solubility  within  the  stratum 

corneum, hence increasing KP in Fick’s equation (equation 7.1). 
Ethanol was the first penetration enhancer co‐solvent incorpo-
rated into transdermal systems [12]. Synergistic effects between 
enhancers  (e.g.  Azone®  [PI  Chemicals,  Shanghai,  China],  fatty 
acids) and more polar co‐solvents (e.g. ethanol, propylene glycol) 
have also been reported suggesting that the latter facilitates the 
solubilization of the former within the stratum corneum, thus 
amplifying the lipid‐modulating effect. Similarly, solvents such 
as Transcutol are proposed to act by improving solubility within 
the  membrane  rather  than  by  increasing  diffusion.  Another 
solvent,  dimethylsulfoxide  (DMSO),  by  contrast,  is  relatively 
aggressive and induces significant structural perturbations such 
as  keratin  denaturation  and  the  solubilization  of  membrane 
components [13]. Table 7.2 is a list of the more commonly uti-
lized chemical penetration enhancers [33].

table 7.2  Commonly	utilized	chemical	penetration	enhancers

chemical penetration enhancer

Description/function

Pyrrolidones

Oxazolidinones

Urea

Azone

Fatty	acid

Alcohol,	glycol	and	glycerides

Alkyl‐n,	n‐disubstituted	amino	
acetates

Surfactants

Essential	oil,	terpenes	and	terpenoids

Cineole

Eugenol

Farnesol

Menthol

Permeation	enhancer	for	numerous	molecules	(hydrophilic	and	lipophilic).	They	partition	well	into	human	
stratum	corneum	within	tissue,	act	by	altering	the	solvent	nature	of	the	membrane,	and	generate	reservoirs	
which	offer	potential	release	of	a	permeant	from	the	stratum	corneum	over	extended	time	periods	[33].

New	class	of	chemical	agents	that	have	the	ability	to	localize	co‐administered	active	(i.e.	retinoic	acid)	in	skin	
layers,	due	to	their	structural	features	being	closely	related	to	sphingosine	and	ceramide	lipids	found	in	the	
upper	skin	layers,	resulting	in	low	systemic	permeation	[31].

Mechanism	may	be	a	consequence	of	both	hydrophilic	activity	and	lipid	disruption	from	these	
biodegradable	and	non‐toxic	molecules	consisting	of	a	polar	parent	moiety	and	a	long	chain	alkyl‐ester	
group	[31].

Partitions	into	a	bilayer	to	disrupt	their	packing	arrangement.	This	non‐	homogeneous	integration	of	
molecules	may	be	dispersed	within	the	barrier	lipoid	or	separate	domains	within	the	bilayer	[31].

Oleic	acid	are	mono‐saturated	fatty	acids	that	increase	the	permeation	of	lipophilic	actives	through	the	skin	
and	buccal	mucosa	by	transdermal	cellular	pathway	[31].

Low	molecular	weight	alkanols	solvents	enhance	the	solubility	of	the	active	into	the	matrix	of	stratum	
corneum	by	disrupting	its	integrity	and	contributing	to	enhancing	the	mass	transfer	of	biochemicals	
through	this	tissue	[33].

Insoluble	in	water,	but	soluble	in	organic	solvents	and	water‐alcohol	mixtures	with	low	skin‐irritating	
potential.	Skin	penetration	is	increased	by	the	interaction	with	stratum	corneum	keratin	which	results	in	
increasing	the	hydrating	efficiency	[31].

Solubilize	lipophilic	active	ingredients	and	lipids	within	the	stratum	corneum.	Anionic	and	cationic	
surfactants	swell	the	stratum	corneum	and	interact	with	intercellular	keratin.	They	have	the	potential	to	
damage	human	skin	as	powerful	irritants,	increasing	transepidermal	water	loss	of	human	skin	[31].

Operational	mechanism	modifies	the	solvent	nature	of	the	stratum	corneum	thereby	improving	the	active	
partitioning	into	the	tissue.	Terpenes	and	terpenoids	are	constituents	of	volatile	oils	that	are	considered	
to	be	less	toxic	with	low	irritancy	when	compared	to	surfactants	and	other	synthetic	skin	penetration	
enhancers.

Natural	organic	compound	(eucalyptol)	that	promotes	the	percutaneous	absorption	of	lipophilic	actives	[31].

Enhances	the	permeability	coefficient	of	the	active	with	lipid	extraction	and	improvement	in	the	partitioning	
of	the	active	to	the	stratum	corneum.	Slightly	soluble	in	water	and	soluble	in	organic	solvents.	An	
allylbenzene	class	of	chemical	compound	(extract	of	clove	oil,	nutmeg,	cinnamon,	and	bay	leaf)	that	reduces	
ability	to	feel	and	react	to	painful	stimulation.

Sesquiterpene	alcohol	(citronella,	neroli,	lemon	grass,	tuberose,	balsam	and	tolu)	enhances	the	permeation	
of	diclofenac	sodium	with	its	use	in	perfumery	products.

Highly	effective	penetration	enhancer	used	for	transdermal	delivery	of	variety	of	actives	and	shown	to	
increase	the	effect	when	paired	with	iontophoresis	[33].	Used	in	medical	and	cosmetic	preparations	
enhancing	absorption	of	desirable	molecules	to	the	internal	layers	of	the	skin	while	also	functioning	as	an	
effective	counter‐	irritant	[30].

physical enhancers
In  addition  to  the  chemical  penetration  enhancers  discussed 
above, there is another class of penetration enhancers known as 
physical penetration enhancers. These materials stand between 
chemical  enhancers  and  penetration  enhancer  devices.  This 
unique classification is because in most cases the materials are 
particles of chemical origin (polyethylene, salt, sugar, aluminum 
oxide)  but  require  physical  energy  to  exert  an  action  on  the 
skin. These materials are used to physically débride or excoriate 
the stratum corneum by abrasive action. This is typically done 
by  rubbing  the  particles  by  hand  on  the  skin.  New  high‐tech 
devices are now available that propel an abrasive against the skin 
thereby stripping away the stratum corneum.

penetration enhancement vectors

There  are  customized  carriers  (vectors)  for  delivery  of  actives 
to  the  skin.  These  vectors  are  a  type  of  vehicle  that  allow  for 
enhanced penetration via their small size and unique physical 
chemical composition. These vectors are known as submicron 
delivery systems (SDS). Discussion focuses on liposomes, nio-
somes, lipid particles, and nanocapsules.

Liposomes
Liposomes are colloidal particles formed as concentric biomo-
lecular layers that are capable of encapsulating actives. The lipid 
bilayer  structure  of  liposomes  mimics  the  barrier  properties 
of  biomembranes,  and  therefore  they  offer  the  potential  of 
examining the behavior of membranes of a known composition. 
Thus,  by  altering  the  lipid  composition  of  the  bilayer  or  the 
material  incorporated,  it  is  possible  to  establish  differences  in 
membrane  properties.  Liposomes  store  water‐soluble  sub-
stances  inside  like  biologic  cells.  The  phospholipids  forming 
these  liposomes  enhance  the  penetration  of  the  encapsulated 
active agents into the stratum corneum [14].

There  is  debate  on  liposome  formulations  and  their  mode  of 
action  regarding  penetration  enhancement.  Variation  in  perfor-
mance may be caused by the variation in formulation and method 
of manufacture used to prepare this delivery form. Several factors 
such as size, lamellarity (unilamellar vs. multilamellar), lipid com-
position, charge on the liposomal surface, mode of application, and 
total lipid concentration have been proven to influence deposition 
into the deeper skin layers. It is reported by several authors that the 
high elasticity of liposome vesicles could result in enhanced trans-
port across the skin as compared to vesicles with rigid membranes.
Liposomes have a heterogeneous lipid composition with several 
coexisting domains exhibiting different fluidity characteristics in 
the bi‐layers. This property can be used to enhance the penetra-
tion of entrapped actives into the skin. It is supposed that once in 
contact with skin, some budding of liposomal membrane might 
occur.  This  could  cause  a  mixing  of  the  liposome  bi‐layer  with 
intracellular lipids in the stratum corneum which may change the 
hydration conditions and thereby the structure of lipid lamellae. 

7. Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to the Skin

69

This may enhance the permeation of the lipophilic active into the 
stratum  corneum  and  ease  the  diffusion  of  hydrophilic  actives 
into the interlamellar spaces [15].

niosomes
Niosomes  are  formed  by  blending  non‐ionic  surfactants  of  the 
alkyl or dialkyl polyglycerol ether class and cholesterol with subse-
quent hydration in aqueous media. These vesicles can be prepared 
using a number of manufacturing processes: ether injection, mem-
brane  extrusion,  microfluidization,  and  sonication.  Niosomes 
have  an  infrastructure  consisting  of  hydrophilic,  amphiphilic, 
and lipophilic moieties together and as a result can accommodate 
active  molecules  with  a  wide  range  of  solubilities.  They  can  be 
expected to target the active to its desired site of action and/or to 
control its release [16]. Niosomes are similar to liposomes in that 
they both have a bi‐layer structure and their final form depends 
on the method of manufacture. There are structural similarities 
between niosomes and liposomes but niosomes do not contain 
phospholipids.  This  provides  niosomes  with  a  better  stability 
profile because of improved oxidative stability.

solid lipid nanoparticles
Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNP) were developed at the beginning of 
the 1990s as an alternative carrier system to emulsions, liposomes, 
and polymeric nanoparticles. SLNP have the advantage of requir-
ing no solvents for production processing and of relatively low cost 
for the excipients. SLNP represents a particle system that can be 
produced with an established technique of high‐pressure homog-
enization allowing production on an industrial scale. This method 
also protects the incorporated drug against chemical degradation 
as there is little or no access for water to enter the inner area core 
of the lipid particle [17]. Lipid particles can be used as penetration 
enhancers of encapsulated actives through the skin because of their 
excellent occlusive and hydrating properties. SLNP have recently 
been  investigated  as  carriers  for  enhanced  skin  delivery  of  sun-
screens, vitamins A and E, triptolide, and glucocorticoids [18].

nanocapsules
Nanocapsules  are  a  type  of  submicron  delivery  system  (SDS). 
This  technology  can  segregate  and  protect  sensitive  materials 
and also control the release of actives. The more obvious oppor-
tunity  for  penetration  enhancement  of  actives  is  because  of 
their small size (20–1000 nm in diameter). Nanocapsules can be 
formed by preparing a lipophilic core surrounded by a thin wall 
of a polymeric material prepared by anionic polymerization of 
an alkylcyanoacrylate monomer. These very safe types of system 
have  been  proposed  as  vesicular  colloidal  polymeric  drug 
carriers. Nanocapsules have the ability to enhance penetration 
but they can also control delivery of actives to the skin.

In a recent study, indomethacin was nano‐encapsulated for topical 
use.  This  study  compared  cumulative  release  of  indomethacin 
dispersed  in  gel  base  with  indomethacin  nano‐encapsulated  and 
indomethacin nano‐encapsulated in a gel. The highest delivery was 
achieved with the nanoencapsulated indomethacin (Figure 7.2).

70

Basic concepts  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

f
o
t
n
u
o
m
a

e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C

20

)
2
m

c
/
g
μ
(
d
e
t
a
e
m
r
e
p
n
i
c
a
h
t
e
m
o
d
n

i

15

10

5

0

PNBCA nanocapsules in pH 7.4
phosphate buffer (I)

PNBCA nanocapsules in
PLF-127 gel (II)

25% w/w PLF-127 gel (III)

Figure  7.2  Cumulative  amount  of  indomethicin  (initial 
loading  0.5%  w/v)  per  unit  area,  permeating  through 
excised rat skin when released from PNBCA nanocapsule 
dispersion  in  pH  7.4  phosphate  buffer,  PNBCA  nano-
capsule  dispersion  in  Pluronic  F‐127  gel  and  25%  w/w 
Pluronic F‐127 gel. Each value is the mean ± SE of four 
determinations. (Source: Miyazaki et al., 2003 [J Pharm 
Pharmaceut  Sci  6,  238–45].  Creative  Common  license 
(Attribution‐ShareAlike) License.)

0

2

4
Time (hours)

6

8

Devices for penetration enhancement

Devices  for  enhancing  skin  penetration  of  actives  are  at  the 
leading  edge  of  skincare  technology.  When  utilizing  devices 
for enhanced penetration of actives it is imperative to look into 
the regulatory classification of these instruments. The FDA has 
several guidelines and requirements for medical devices (510K). 
The  510K  regulatory  classification  is  important  for  safety  and 
efficacy of any consumer device product and an understanding 
of the regulatory landscape in this area is essential. Four device 
technologies are reviewed. They range from moderately invasive 
to mildly invasive in terms of effect on the skin. In all cases, the 
goal is to reversibly alter the skin barrier function by physical 
techniques  or  electro‐energetic  means.  Box  7.1  is  a  list  of  the 
some  methods  and  tools  [31];  and  further  discussion  on  the 
more common skin enhancing topics.

Ultrasound waves
Ultrasound  waves  are  sound  waves  that  are  above  the  audible 
limit  (>20 kH).  During  ultrasound  treatment  the  skin  is 
exposed to mechanical and thermal energy which can alter the 
skin barrier property. Thermal and non‐thermal characteristics 
of  high‐frequency  sound  waves  can  enhance  the  diffusion  of 

Box 7.1  Skin	enhancers:	physical	methods	and	
penetration	devices.

Iontophoresis

Ultrasound	(phonophoresis	and	sonophoresis)

Magnetophoresis

Electroporation

Radio	frequency

Thermophoresis

Suction	ablation

Skin	puncture	and	perforation

Skin	stretching

Skin	abrasion

topically  applied  actives.  Heating  from  ultrasound  increases 
the kinetic energy of the molecules in the active and in the cell 
membrane. These physiologic changes enhance the opportunity 
for active molecules to diffuse through the stratum corneum to 
the capillary network in the papillary dermis. The mechanical 
characteristics of the sound wave also enhance active diffusion 
by  oscillating  the  cells  at  high  speed,  changing  the  resting 
potential  of  the  cell  membrane  and  potentially  disrupting  the 
cell membrane of some of the cells in the area [19].

A recent study on the use of ultrasound and topical skin light-
ening  agents  showed  the  effect  of  high‐frequency  ultrasound 
together with a gel containing skin‐lightening agents (ascorbyl 
glucoside and niacinamide) on facial hyperpigmentation in vivo 
in Japanese women [20].

patches
Delivery  patches  have  been  available  for  some  time.  One  of 
the first applications of patch technology was in a transdermal 
motion  sickness  (scopolamine)  patch.  There  are  commercial 
products  that  provide  actives  in  a  patch  formula.  They  utilize 
adhesive  technology  or  a  rate‐limiting  porous  membrane  to 
target and localize the actives. Some common patch applications 
are  directed  towards  reduction  of  age  spots  or  dark  circles 
under  the  eye.  The  key  delivery  enhancement  for  patches  is  a 
combination of localized delivery and occlusion.

Microneedles
Another  type  of  delivery  device  is  the  microneedle.  Micro-
needles are similar to traditional needles, but are fabricated at 
the micro size. They are generally 1 μm in diameter and range 
1–100 μm  in  length  (Figure  7.3).  The  very  first  microneedle 
systems  consisted  of  a  reservoir  and  a  range  of  projections 
(microneedles 50–100 mm long) extending from the reservoir, 
which penetrated the stratum corneum and epidermis to deliver 
the  active.  The  microneedle  delivery  system  is  not  based  on 
diffusion  as  in  other  transdermal  drug  delivery  products  but 
based on the temporary mechanical disruption of the skin and 
the placement of the active within the epidermis, where it can 

 
 
 
 
7. Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to the Skin

71

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.3  Solid microneedles fabricated out of silicon, 
polymer, and metal, imaged by scanning electron micro-
scopy. (a) Silicon microneedle (150 μm tall) from a 400‐
needle array etched out of a silicon substrate. (b) Section 
of  an  array  containing  160 000  silicon  microneedles 
(25 μm tall). (c) Metal microneedle (120 μm tall) from 
a  400‐needle  array  made  by  electrodepositing  onto  a 
polymeric  mold.  (d–f)  Biodegradable  polymer  micro-
needles with beveled tips from 100‐needle arrays made 
by  filling  polymeric  molds.  (d)  Flat‐bevel  tip  made  of 
polylactic acid (400 μm tall). (e) Curved‐bevel tip made 
of polyglycolic acid (600 μm tall). (f) Curved‐bevel tip 
with a groove etched along the full length of the needle 
made of polyglycolic acid (400 μm tall). (Source: McAl-
lister et al., 2003 [Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 13755–
60]. Reproduced with permission.)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

more  readily  reach  its  site  of  action.  Microneedles  have  been 
fabricated with various materials such as metals, silicon, silicon 
dioxide, polymers, glass, and other materials. There are already 
patents granted for these types of moderately invasive delivery 
system [21].

iontophoresis
Iontophoresis  is  a  technology  that  has  been  brought  to  the 
cosmetic  industry  via  the  pharmaceutical  development  field. 
Iontophoresis passes a small direct current through an active‐
containing  electrode  placed  in  contact  with  the  skin,  with  a 
grounding  electrode  to  complete  the  circuit.  Three  important 
mechanisms enhance transport:
 1.  The driving electrode repels oppositely charged species;
 2.  The electric current increases skin permeability; and
 3.  Electro‐osmosis moves uncharged molecules and large polar 

peptides [22].

There are limitations related to this technique. The active ingre-
dient must be water‐soluble, ionic, and with a molecular weight 

below 5000 Da. Even with all of these limitations, reported data 
show  that  the  drug  delivery  effectiveness  can  be  increased  by 
one‐third through iontophoresis [23].

In vitro and in vivo delivery assessment

A  key  in  any  evaluation  assessment  of  skin  bioavailability  of 
actives is a quantitative measurement of activity by in vitro and 
in vivo methods. In early development phases in vitro methods 
provide a quick, reproducible way to identify promising formu-
lations for next phase development studies. There are different 
techniques for evaluating percutaneous absorption of actives.

Franz cell
A well‐known technique for measuring in vitro skin permeation is 
the Franz cell apparatus (Figure 7.4). The test apparatus and tech-
nique have been well documented for use within the pharmaceuti-
cal and cosmetic industries [24]. The technique utilizes a sampling 

72

Basic concepts  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

Cell cap

Sampling port

Cell clamp

Water jacket

Cell body

Figure 7.4  The Franz diffusion chamber.

cell which contains a solution reservoir and a sampling port, the top 
portion of the Franz cell is covered with a biologic membrane or 
skin substitute. The formulation is added to the top of the cell and 
periodic samples are taken from the cell reservoir and assays are 
plotted versus time to develop a time–penetration profile.

tape stripping
Tape stripping is a technique used for in vivo active penetration 
evaluation. In this procedure, penetration of the active is esti-
mated  from  the  amount  recovered  in  the  stratum  corneum 
by  adhesive  tape  stripping  at  a  fixed  time  point  following 
application [25]. This technique is also recognized by FDA as a 
viable screening option for dermatologic evaluation [26].

Microdialysis
During the last decade, microdialysis has been shown to be a prom-
ising technique for the assessment of in vivo and ex vivo cutaneous 
delivery of actives. The technique is based on the passive diffusion 
of compounds down a concentration gradient across a semi‐per-
meable membrane forming a thin hollow “tube” (typically, a few 
tenths of a millimeters in diameter), which – at least, in theory – 
functionally represents a permeable blood vessel (Figure 7.5.). Two 
kinds of probe are in common use: linear and concentric.

confocal raman microspectroscopy
Confocal Raman microspectroscopy (CRS) is a new, non‐inva-
sive technique which can be used for in vivo skin penetration 

evaluation. This technique combines Raman spectroscopy with 
confocal microscopy. CRS is a non‐destructive and rapid tech-
nique that allows information to be obtained from deep layers 
under the skin surface, giving the possibility of a real‐time track-
ing of the drug in the skin layers. The specific Raman signature 
of the active agent enables its identification within the skin [27].
There is a range of techniques of in vitro and in vivo evalua-
tion for following penetration of actives through the skin. Some 
are  more  invasive  than  others  and  some  are  more  predictive 
across  various  dosage  forms  utilized  on  the  skin.  In  Table  7.3 
a summary chart shows a good comparison of the techniques 
based on strengths and weaknesses.

conclusions and future trends

There  are  many  formulation  options  available  for  delivering 
actives to targets within the skin. Understanding the skin and 
its interaction with various actives allows the chemist to select 
delivery options that provide safe and effective properties.

A good understanding of the physicochemical parameters of the 
active and the desired skin target are needed before deciding on a 
particular delivery option. Human studies are the “gold standard” 
against which all methods for measuring percutaneous absorption 
should be judged. The conduct of human volunteer experiments is 
well regulated. Study protocols and accompanying toxicologic data 
must be submitted to an ethics committee for approval [28].

Microdialysis
pump

Stratum corneum
Viable epidermis
Dermis

Perfusate

Membrane

Application site

Dialysate

Solute

Diffuson of solutes
into the perfusate

Figure 7.5  The microdialysis apparatus for the evaluation 
of  penetration  through  the  human  skin  barrier.  (Source: 
Schnetz  &  Fartasch,  2001  [Eur  J  Pharm  Sci12,  165–74]. 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.)

table 7.3  Methods	to	assess	drug	penetration	into	and/or	across	the	skin.

Method

Measure

Measurement site

temporal resolution

technical simplicity

7. Percutaneous Delivery of Cosmetic Actives to the Skin

73

Transport	into	and	across	skin

++

In vitro

In vivo:	non‐	or	
minimally	invasive

Diffusion	cell

Tape	stripping

ATR‐FTIR

Raman

Q

Q

Q

Q/L

Stratum	corneum

Stratum	corneum

Upper	skin

In vivo:	invasive

Microdialysis

Q	(free)

Dermis	(or	subdermis)

Vasoconstriction

Blister

Biopsy

Biopsy

A

Q

Q

Microcirculation

Extracellular	fluid

Skin

Q + L

Skin	(depth)

Q,	quantity	of	drug;	A,	pharmacological	activity	of	drug;	L,	drug	localization.
Source:	Herkenne	et al.,	2008	[Pharm Res	25,	87–103].	Reproduced	with	permission	of	Plenum	Publishers.

0

+

+

++

+

0

0

0

+

+

+

+

−

±

±

+

±

Next  generation  delivery  technologies  are  being  devel-
oped and in some cases are already on the way to the market. 
Researchers  from  device  and  skincare  companies  are  already 
in  collaboration  to  bring  combinations  of  devices  and  actives 
to  the  field  of  cosmetic  dermatology.  The  approach  can  vary 
from  non‐invasive  LEDs  all  the  way  to  more  invasive,  laser‐
based enhanced penetration of actives. There are many home‐
use  devices  coming  to  the  market  today.  These  advances  in 
delivery  technology  will  likely  culminate  in  a  commercially 
available topical product that has its efficacy boosted by some 
type of chemical or physical delivery device as demonstrated in 
the  delivery  of  estradiol  using  either  a  delivery  vesicle  (ultra‐
deformable liposomes) or a device (iontophoresis) [29].

references

1  Chien YW. (1992) Novel Drug Delivery Systems, 2nd edn. New York: 

Marcel Dekker Inc., p. 303.

2  Barry BW. (1987) Penetration enhancers in pharmacology and the 
skin.  In:  ShrootB,  SchaeferH,  eds.  Skin  Pharmacokinetics.  Basel: 
Karger; Vol. 1, pp. 121–37.

3  Heather  A,  Benson  E.  (2005)  Current  drug  delivery,  penetration 

enhancement techniques. Curr Drug Deliv 2, 23–33.

4  Moser  K,  Kriwet  K,  Naik  A,  Kalia  YN,  Guy  RH.  (2001)  Passive 
skin penetration enhancement and its quantification in vitro. Eur J 
Pharm Biopharm 52, 103–12.

5  Katz M, Poulsen BJ. (1971) Absorption of drugs through the skin. 
In: Brodie BB, Gilette J, eds. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacol-
ogy. Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 103–74.

6  Forster T, Jackwerth B, Pittermann W, Rybinski WM, Schmitt M. 
(1997)  Properties  of  emulsions:  structure  and  skin  penetration. 
Cosmet Toiletries 112, 73–82.

7  Albery WJ, Hadgraft J. (1979) Percutaneous absorption: theoretical 

description. Pharm Pharmacol 31, 129–39.

8  Stott  PW,  Williams  AC,  Barry  BW.  (1998)  Transdermal  delivery 
from eutectic systems: enhanced permeation of a model drug, ibu-
profen. J Control Release 50, 297–308.

9  Sloan  KB,  ed.  (1992)  Prodrugs,  Topical  and  Ocular  Drug  Delivery 

Sloan. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 179–220.

10  Bucks  D,  Guy  R,  Maibach  HI.  (1991)  Effects  of  occlusion.  In: 
BronaughRL,  MaibachHI,  eds.  In  Vitro  Percutaneous  Absorption: 
Principles, Fundamentals, and Applications. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 
pp. 85–114.

11  Osborne DW, Henke JJ. (1997) Skin penetration enhancers. Pharm 

Technol November, 58–66.

12  Walters KA. (1988) Penetration enhancer techniques. In: HadgraftJ, 
GuyRH, eds. Transdermal Drug Delivery. New York: Marcel Dekker, 
pp. 197–246.

13  Harrison E, Watkinson AC, Green DM, Hadgraft J, Brain K. (1996) 
The relative effect of Azone and Transcutol on permeant diffusivity 
and solubility in human stratum corneum. Pharm Res 13, 542–6.
14  Abeer A, Elzainy W, Gu X, Estelle F, Simons R, Simons KJ.  (2003) 
Hydroxyzine  from  topical  phospholipid  liposomal  formulations: 
evaluation of peripheral antihistaminic activity and systemic absorp-
tion in a rabbit model. AAPS PharmSci 5, 1–8.

15  Cevc G, Blume G. (1992) Lipid vesicles penetrate into intact skin 
owing  to  the  transdermal  osmotic  gradients  and  hydration  force. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 1104, 226–32.

16  Baillie  AJ,  Florence  AT,  Hume  LR,  Rogerson  A,  Muirhead  GT. 
(1985) The preparation and properties of niosomes‐non‐ionic sur-
factant vesicles. J Pharm Pharmacol 37, 863–8.

17  Kreuter  J.  (1994)  Nanoparticles.  In:  KreuterJ,  ed.  Colloidal  Drug 

Delivery Systems. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 219–342.

18  Müller  RH,  Mäder  K,  Gohla  S.  (2000)  Solid  lipid  nanoparticles 
(SLN) for controlled drug delivery: a review of the state of the art. 
Eur J Pharm Biopharm 50, 161–77.

19  Dinno MA, Crum LA, Wu J. (1989) The effect of therapeutic ultra-
sound on the electrophysiologic parameters of frog skin. Med Biol 
25, 461–70.

20  Hakozaki T, Takiwaki H, Miyamot K, Sato Y, Arase S. (2006) Ultra-
sound  enhanced  skin‐lightening  effect  of  vitamin  C  and  niacina-
mide. Skin Res Technol 12, 105–13.

21  Yuzhakov VV, Gartstein V, Owens GD. (2003) US Patent 6565532. 
Micro needle apparatus semi‐permanent subcutaneous makeup.
22  Barry BW. (2001) Is transdermal drug delivery research still impor-

tant today? Drug Discov Today 6, 967–71.

74

Basic concepts  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

23  Yao N, Gnaegy M, Haas C. (2004) Iontophoresis transdermal drug 

delivery and its design. Pharmaceut Form Quality 6, 42–4.

24  COLIPA Guidelines for Percutaneous Absorption/Penetration. (1997) 

29  Essa A, Bonner MC, Barry BW. (2002) Iontophoretic estradiol skin 
delivery  and  tritium  exchange:  ultradeformable  liposomes.  Int  J 
Pharm 240, 55–66.

European Cosmetic, Toiletry and Perfumery Association.

30  DeHaven  C.  (2007)  Delivery  of  cosmetic  ingredients  to  the  skin. 

25  Rougier A, Dupuis D, Lotte C. (1989) Stripping method for meas-
uring  percutaneous  absorption  in  vivo.  In:  BronaughRL,  Mai-
bachHI, eds. Percutaneous Absorption: Mechanisms, Methodology, 
Drug Delivery, 2nd edn. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 415–34.
26  Shah VP, Flynn GL, Yacobi A, Maibach HI, Bon C, Fleischer NM, 
et  al.  (1998)  Bioequivalence  of  topical  dermatological  dosage 
forms:  methods  of  evaluation  of  bioequivalence.  Pharm  Res  15, 
167–71.

27  Tfayli A, Piot O, Pitre F, Manfait M. (2007) Follow‐up of drug per-
meation through excised human skin with confocal Raman micro-
spectroscopy. Eur Biophys J 36, 1049–58.

28  World  Health  Organization  (WHO).  (1982)  World  Medical  Asso-
ciation:  Proposed  International  Guidelines  for  Research  Involving 
Human Subjects. Geneva: WHO, p. 88.

Science of Skincare

31  Singla  V,  Saini  S,  Singh  G,  Rana  AC,  Joshi  B.  (2011)  Penetration 
enhancers: a novel strategy for enhancing transdermal drug delivery. 
Int Res J Pharmacy 2(12), 32–36.

32  Vieria R. (2010) Overcoming biological barriers‐chemical penetra-
tion enhancement. UK and Ireland Controlled Release Society News-
letter 14–15.

33  Jungbauer FHW, Coenraods PJ, Kardaun SH. (2001) Toxic hygros-
coic contact reaction to N‐methyl‐2‐Pyrrolidone. Contact Derma-
titis 45, 303–304.

34  Chun‐Ying CUI, Wan‐Liang LU. (2005) Sublingal delivery of insu-
lin: Effects of enhancers on the mucosal lipid fluidity and protein 
conformation,  transport,  and  in  vivo  hypoglycemic  activity.  Biol 
Pharm Bull 28, 2279–88.

ChAPTEr 8
Creams and Ointments

Irwin Palefsky
Cosmetech Laboratories, Inc., Fairfield, NJ, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Creams	and	ointments	are	vehicles	and	delivery	systems	for	dermatological	products.
•	 Creams	(and	lotions)	are	emulsions,	either	oil-in-water	(O/W)	or	water-in-oil	(W/O).
•	 Ointments	are	semisolid	preparations	used	topically	for	protective	emollient	effects	or	as	a	vehicle	for	local	administration	of	

medicaments.

•	 Changes	in	composition	can	alter	the	delivery	of	active	ingredients	to	the	skin	as	well	as	change	the	aesthetics	of	the	product.
•	 A	big	challenge	is	patient	compliance.	Users	must	be	happy	with	the	feel/smell/color,	etc.	of	a	dermatological	cream	or	ointment.

Definitions of creams (and lotions)  
and ointments

Creams (and lotions)
Creams (and lotions) are emulsions. While this may seem very 
basic it is important that we understand what an emulsion is, the 
different types of emulsions and the role that they play as a vehicle 
and delivery systems for functional and drug active materials.

In looking for a generally accepted definition I came across the 
following:  “In  classic  terms,  emulsions  are  colloidal  dispersions 
comprising  two  immiscible  liquids  (e.g.  oil  and  water),  one  of 
which (the internal or discontinuous phase) is dispersed as droplets 
within  the  other  (the  external  phase)  [1]”.  What  is  missing  from 
this  definition  is  the  inclusion  of  the  emulsifier(s)  or  dispersing 
agent(s)  that  are  responsible  for  keeping  these  two  immiscible 
phases together for an extended period of time. All emulsions are  
unstable – they will eventually separate into two or more phases. 
There  are  no  legal  definition  differences  between  a  cream  and 
a  lotion.  The  determination  of  what  to  call  an  emulsion  is  
usually guided by the viscosity. If an emulsion is thick and can be 
poured out from a bottle, or pumped out, it is usually described as a 
lotion. If the emulsion requires a jar or a tube, and does not readily 
flow it is usually referred to as a cream.

Further in this chapter we will use the term emulsion to refer 

to creams and lotions.

The other part of a definition of an emulsion is based on the 
materials that make up the internal phase and the materials that 
make up the external or continuous phase. The two general cat-
egories  of  emulsions  are  oil-in-water  (O/W)  and  water-in-oil 
(W/O) emulsions (Figure 8.1). The names themselves describe 
the composition of the emulsion.

Water in oil

Oil in water

Figure 8.1  Different emulsion types.

Oil-in-water emulsions can also be described by their emulsi-
fier type, i.e. anionic, cationic, nonionic. This terminology refers 
to the ionic charge (or lack of charge) on the emulsifier system 
that is predominant in the emulsion.

We  also  now  have  oil-in-water  emulsions  that  are  based  on 
polymeric  emulsifiers  and  “liquid  crystal”  emulsifiers.  These 
emulsions hold the two phases together and prevent them from 
separating by different mechanisms from those seen in traditional 
emulsions, which use more conventional emulsifying systems.

For more information on this I refer you the chapter on phar-
maceutical  emulsions  and  microemulsions  in  the  book  Phar-
maceutical Dosage Forms: Disperse Systems, Volume 2, edited by 
H.A. Lieberman et al. published by Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1996.

Water-in-oil  emulsions  are  becoming  increasingly  popular 
as  emulsion  types  for  dermatological  products.  In  water-in-oil 
emulsions the “oil phase” is the external phase and as such these 
emulsions  have  become  increasingly  popular  for  delivering 
enhanced  skin  barrier  protection,  water  resistance  and  a  more 
effective delivery system for hydrophobic ingredients. In addition, 
the technology has dramatically improved so that one can now 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

75

76

BASIC CONCEPTS  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

develop  water-in-oil  formulations  that  have  a  high  degree  of 
 consumer/patient acceptance and are not greasy or oily.

Each of the components of this formulation has an effect on 

aesthetics.

Ointments
In searching for a definition of an ointment the best one that I came 
up with was on the Internet: “Semisolid preparations used topically 
for protective emollient effects or as a vehicle for local administration 
of medicaments; ointment bases are various mixtures of fats, waxes, 
animal and plant oils and solid and liquid hydrocarbons“ [2]. This 
definition is as comprehensive as any I have seen. Ointments are 
traditionally  anhydrous  bases  and  therefore  pose  less  microbial 
contamination issues than emulsions. In addition, because they are 
anhydrous in nature and are a combination of water insoluble com-
ponents, they tend to be more water resistant than emulsions. Oint-
ments tend to have less aesthetic appeal for skin care/dermatology 
products that need to be used on a regular basis or for an extended 
period of time. Ointments are frequently described as “oily”, “waxy”, 
“greasy”, “sticky/tacky”, and “heavy”. They do however have a more 
medicinal connotation.

Composition of a cream and an ointment

Oil-in-water cream
The most popular type of emulsion used in everyday skin care 
products  and  in  “cosmeceutical  products”  are  oil-in-water 
(O/W emulsions). A generic composition for an O/W emulsion 
is shown in Table 8.1 [3].

Table 8.1  Composition	of	an	oil-in-water	emulsion.

Ingredients

Water phase

Deionized	water

Humectant

Preservative**

Water	soluble	emulsifier***

Thickener(s)

Water	soluble	emollient

Chelating	agent

Oil phase

% (weight/weight)

60.0–90.0

2.00–7.0

0.05–0.5

0.25–2.5

0.1–1.0

0.5–2.0

0.05–0.20

Emollient	system	–	oils,esters,silicones	etc.

3.0–15.0

Oil	soluble	emulsifiers

“Active	ingredients”

Oil	soluble	antioxidants

Fragrance/essential oil etc.

Color

Preservative**

pH adjustments

2.0–5.0

As	required	by	regulations

0.05–0.5

0.1–2.0

As	required

0.05–1.0

As	required

**Preservatives	are	frequently	added	in	two	places	in	the	formulation.
***May	also	be	added	into	the	oil	phase.

Emulsifiers
•	 The  choice  of  emulsifier  will  also  determine  the  pH  of  the 
emulsion, will affect its application and stability, and affect the 
delivery of materials into the skin.

•	 Recently  we  have  seen  emulsifier  systems  focusing  around 
“skin friendly emulsifiers.” These are emulsifiers that tend to not 
adversely  affect  the  barrier  properties  of  the  skin  and  in  some 
cases even help with maintaining its barrier properties. Since the 
route of delivery into the skin is primarily accomplished through 
the lipid layer (the mortar in the “bricks and mortar” construc-
tion of the skin) the election of emulsifier can determine whether 
this delivery function disrupts the lipid barrier or is friendly to 
it.  Liquid  crystal  forming  emulsifiers  are  being  used  more  fre-
quently because of their skin friendly nature. These emulsifiers 
act like the phospholipids and ceramides found in the skin, and 
therefore  do  not  disrupt  the  barrier  properties  and  function 
because of their compatibility with the skin lipids. Some of the 
more popular of these liquid crystal forming emulsifiers is leci-
thin or hydrogenated lecithin. There have been a number of new 
emulsifiers that have structures similar to lecithin and phospholi-
pids and are therefore very skin friendly [4].

•	 Another recent trend is the use of emulsifiers that also become 
part of the emollient system. The most popular of these type 
of emulsifiers are “cationic” emulsifiers – emulsifiers that have 
a net positive charge to the skin. Since the skin, because of its 
amino acid composition has a net “negative charge”, a positively 
charged  emulsifier  will  be  attached  to  the  skin  and  remain 
on  the  skin  because  of  electrostatic  attraction.  Examples  of  
these  emulsifiers  are  behentrimonium  methosulfate  and 
dicetyldimonium chloride. Cationic emulsifiers are also very 
effective when there is a need to formulate low pH emulsions 
(less than pH 4.5) as cationic emulsifiers are very stable in low 
pH environments.

Emollients
•	 The  choice  of  emollient  or  combination  of  emollients  will 
have a dramatic effect on feel, application and delivery of the 
“active” to the skin. Matching solubility of “active” with the oil 
phase has a great effect in determining the material to be used. 
Matching the solubility parameter of an organic sunscreen to 
the solubility parameter of the oil phase has a significant effect 
on the sunscreen performance.

•	 The emollient category has been greatly expanded because of 
the  increased  use  of  silicones  and  the  increasing  number  of 
“natural” emollients.

•	 The selection of the emollient combinations is where art and 
science  are  combined.  Selecting  the  right  combination  that 
provides the proper initial, middle and end feel is one of the 
biggest  challenges  affecting  the  successful  development  of  a 
cream. Concepts such as “cascading effect” describe this type 
of change that occurs as you apply an emollient system.

8. Creams and Ointments

77

Active ingredients
Examples  of  active  ingredients  are  sunscreen  materials  (i.e. 
octinoxate,  titanium  dioxide,  avobenzone),  anti-acne  actives 
(i.e. salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide) and skin lighteners (hyd-
roquinone) etc.

Humectants
The  humectant,  usually  a  glycol  or  polyol,  will  have  an  effect 
on “skin cushion” and can also be part of the solvent system for 
an  active  ingredient.  Glycols,  such  as  propylene  glycol,  buty-
lene glycol etc. are very good solvents for salicylic acid (an FDA 
approved OTC active ingredient used to treat acne) and are fre-
quently used for this purpose in an emulsion system. In addi-
tion they also function to help with freeze/thaw stability.

Thickeners
•	 The thickener(s) are used to control the viscosity and the rheol-
ogy of the emulsion and can also help in maintaining the stability 
or product integrity of the emulsion, especially at elevated tem-
peratures. Even in water-in-oil creams thickeners are used for vis-
cosity control. The viscosity of a cream is primarily determined 
by the thickener used and the viscosity of the external phase.
•	 The choice of thickeners, to a large extent, depends upon the 
compatibility of the thickener with the rest of the ingredients 
in the formulation, the pH of the formulation and the desired 
feel that is trying to be achieved.

•	 The predominant thickeners used in oil-in-water emulsions are 
acrylic based polymers. The most popular materials are carbom-
ers and their derivatives. Carbomers are a cross-linked polyacr-
ylate  polymers  and  their  derivatives  which  are  high  molecular 
weight  homopolymers  and  copolymers  of  acrylic  acid,  cross-

linked with a polyalkenyl polyether [4]. These polymeric thick-
eners are very effective in stabilizing emulsions at elevated tem-
peratures. (In water-in-oil emulsions the predominant thickeners 
for the external phase are waxes – natural or synthetic.)

The composition of a water-in-oil emulsion may not look much 
different  on  paper  from  an  oil-in-water  emulsion,  except  that 
the emulsifier system would be different and would be designed 
to make a W/O emulsion. The ratio of the two phases is not an 
indication of the type of emulsion. There are many O/W emul-
sions in which the oil phase may be at a higher percentage than 
the water phase and in a W/O emulsion the water phase is fre-
quently at a higher percentage than the oil phase (see Tables 8.2 
and 8.3).

Ointments

As with emulsions there can be different ointments. The tradi-
tional type of ointment contained very high levels of petrolatum 
as this material is a very good water resistant film former and 
serves as a very effective delivery system for “drug actives” on 
the skin. In Table 8.4 is an example of a traditional petrolatum-
based ointment.

In reviewing this formulation you will notice that there is no 
antimicrobial preservative present. Some ointment formulations 
put in low levels of antimicrobial preservatives for added protec-
tion during consumer use, but anhydrous ointments are hostile 
environments for bacteria and are generally “self preserving”.

The use of an oil soluble emulsifier helps with the application 
properties  of  the  ointment  as  well  as  the  ability  to  wash  it  off 
the skin.

Table 8.2  A	typical	“nonionic”	oil-in-water	emulsion	base.

Ingredients

Function

% weight/weight

Water phase

Deionized	water

Carbomer

Disodium	EDTA

Butylene	glycol

Oil phase

External	phase	vehicle

Thickener

Chelating	agent

Humectant

Cetearyl	alcohol	(and)	
ceteareth-20

Emulsifier

Cyclopentasiloxane

Silicone	emollient

Dimethicone

Silicone	emollient

Caprylic/capric	triglyceride

Organic	emollient

Glyceryl	stearate	(and)	
PEG100	stearate

Emulsifier

Triethanolamine (99%)

Neutralizing	agent	and	pH	adjuster

Preservative

Antimicrobial

The	pH	of	this	cream	would	be	5.5–6.5.
The	viscosity	would	be	approx.	15,000-25,000 cps.

82.95

	 0.20

	 0.10

	 2.00

	 2.00

	 4.00

	 1.00

	 5.00

	 1.25

	 0.50

	 1.00

78

BASIC CONCEPTS  Delivery of Cosmetic Skin Actives

Table 8.3  A	typical	water-in-oil	emulsion	base	that	can	also	be	used	as	a	water	resistant	sunscreen	emulsion	base.

Ingredients

Water phase

Deionized	water

Xanthan	gum

Disodium	EDTA

Butylene	glycol

Preservative

Sodium	chloride

Oil phase

Cetyl	dimethicone

Cyclopentasiloxane

Dimethicone

Caprylic/capric	
triglyceride

Cetyl	PEG/PPG	10/1	
dimethicone

Oil	soluble	actives

Jojoba	oil

C12-15	alkyl	benzoate

Function

% weight/weight

External	phase	vehicle

Water	phase	thickener/cohesiveness

Chelating	agent

Humectant

Antimicrobial

Emulsion	stabilizer

Oil	phase	thickener

Silicone	emollient

Silicone	emollient

Organic	emollient

Emulsifier

Bio-active	ingredients

Natural	emollient

Solvent/emollient

55.65

	 0.25

	 0.10

	 2.00

	 1.00

	 1.00

	 2.00

10.00

	 3.00

	 8.00

	 4.00

	 3.00

	 5.00

	 5.00

The	anticipated	viscosity	of	this	formulation	would	be	50,000-80,000	cps.

Table 8.4  A	traditional	petrolatum-based	ointment.

Table 8.5  A	“natural	ointment”	composition.

Ingredients

White	petrolatum	USP

Lanolin

Natural	and/or	synthetic	waxes

Oil	soluble	emulsifier

“Drug	actives”

Antioxidants

Fragrance/essential	oils

Skin	feel	modifiers

% (weight/weight)

Ingredients

% (weight/weight)

50.0–80.0

1.0–5.0

2.0–10.0

1.0–3.0

As	required

0.1–0.5

0.1–1.0

1.0–5.0

Soy	bean	oil	(and)	
hydrogenated	cottonseed	oil

Lanolin

Natural	waxes

Oil	vegetable	soluble	emulsifier

“Drug	actives”

Natural	antioxidants

Natural	fragrance/essential	oils

Natural	skin	feel	modifiers

50.0–80.0

1.0–5.0

2.0–10.0

1.0–3.0

As	required

0.1–0.5

0.1–1.0

1.0–5.0

Recently there has been an increased interest in “natural oint-
ments” – ointments that do not use petrochemicals (i.e. petrolatum) 
and are primarily based on plant derived materials.

The  primary  difference  is  in  the  use  of  the  material  that 
replaces  petrolatum  in  the  formulation.  There  are  a  number 
of hydrogenated oil/wax mixtures that are offered and used as 
“natural petrolatums”. In Table 8.5 is a typical “natural ointment” 
composition.

“Natural ointments” generally do not have the same unctuous, 
heavy feel that petrolatum-based ointments have and they usually 
do not leave as much residual feel on the skin. As with petrola-
tum-based  ointments  little  or  no  antimicrobial  preservative  is 

needed because of the anhydrous nature of the ointment. Anti-
oxidants,  however,  are  a  very  important  components,  as  these 
“natural oil-based” ointments have a tendency to turn color and 
go rancid (similar to what you would see in a vegetable oil) with-
out adequate protection.

While the number of different ingredients that can be used in 
an emulsion or an ointment can sometimes seem overwhelming, 
once you break down the product into the attributes and benefits 
and aesthetics that are desired, the choices become less daunting.
Once the formulations have been put together and evaluated, the 
next step is the stability testing. This testing is done to determine 
what happens to the product once it is on the market. The ideal test 

 
 
 
 
8. Creams and Ointments

79

would be to store the product at ambient temperature for 2–3 years 
and observe any changes that may occur in product integrity and 
determine the stability of the “active” ingredient(s) that are present. 
Since this timeframe is not practical, accelerated stability testing is 
conducted to predict the long-term stability of the product.

For  most  pharmaceutical  emulsions,  this  testing  involves 
storage of the finished product at 5°C, 25°C (RT), and 40°C and 
sometimes at 50°C. Stability at 40°C is traditionally carried out 
for 3 months [5]. This testing is accepted by the U.S. FDA for 
expiration dating until a full 2 or 3-year study is complete. Its 
purpose is to ascertain product integrity and the stability of the 
drug actives in the product.

Elevated  temperature  testing  (40°C  for  3  months)  is  con-
ducted  so  that  a  determination  can  be  made  in  a  reasonable 
amount of time as to the integrity and stability of the product 
and to allow the product to be marketed in a reasonable amount 
of time from the completion of formulation development.

As was mentioned previously in this chapter, the development 
of the final formulation is a combination of art and science, and 
both  play  an  important  role  in  the  use  of  the  product  by  the 
patient or consumer.

Once the type of formulation is determined, the ingredients have 
been  selected,  the  formulation  developed,  the  appropriate  safety, 
efficacy, preservative testing, and the stability testing completed, the 
product can now be ready to introduce to the market.

references

1  Block LH. (1996) Pharmaceutical emulsions and microemulsions; 
emulsions  and  microemulsion  characteristics  and  attributes.  In: 
LiebermanHA, RiegerMM, BankerGS, eds. Pharmaceutical Dosage 
Forms: Disperse Systems, Vol 2. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 47.
2  www.biology-online.org/dictionary/Ointments.  Biology  on  Line; 

Dictionary-O-Ointments, 2008.

3  “Emulsions” presentation from Cognis Corp, August 2004.
4  www.personalcare.noveon.com/products/carbopol,  “Carbopol  Rhe-

ology Modifiers”.

5  Block  LH.  (1996)  Pharmaceutical  emulsions  and  microemul-
sions; emulsions and microemulsion characteristics and attributes.  
In:  LiebermanHA,  RiegerMM,  BankerGS,  eds.  Pharmaceutical 
Dosage Forms: Disperse Systems, Vol 2. New York: Marcel Dekker, 
pp. 94–95.

Part II

Hygiene Products

Sec tion 1  cleansers

cHaPter 9
Bar cleansers

Anthony W. Johnson, K.P. Ananthapadmanabhan, Stacy Hawkins, and Greg nole 
Unilever HPC R&D, Trumbull, CT, USA

BasIc concePts

•	 There	are	two	basic	types	of	cleansing	bar	–	soap	bars	and	synthetic	detergent	bars.
•	 Like	all	surfactant‐based	products,	cleansing	bars	can	be	harsh	or	mild	to	skin.
•	 Mild	cleansing	bars	have	a	key	role	in	fundamental	skin	care.
•	 Mild	cleansing	bars	have	positive	benefits	for	patients	with	skin	diseases.

Introduction

cleansing bars – historical perspective
Anecdotally, soap was discovered by prehistoric man, noticing a 
waxy reside in the ashes of an evening camp fire around a burnt 
piece of animal carcass. The waxy material was soap. Potash from 
the ashes (KOH) had hydrolyzed triglyceride from animal fat to 
produce  potassium  soap  and  glycerol.  Actual  historical  records 
show  soap‐like  materials  in  use  by  Sumerians  in  2500 bc  and 
there are references to soap in Greek and Roman records and by 
the Celts in northern Europe. As European civilizations emerged 
from the Dark Ages in the 9th and 10th centuries soap making 
was well‐established and centered in Marseilles (France), Savona 
(Italy),  and  Castilla  (Spain).  In  those  days  soap  was  a  luxury 
affordable only by the very rich. Mass manufacture of soap started 
in the 19th century and was well‐established by the turn of the 
century with individually wrapped and branded bars.

Synthetic  detergents  emerged  in  the  20th  century,  primarily 
for fabric washing products. While there are many types of syn-
thetic detergent, very few are suitable for making cleansing bars. 
It is difficult to make a solid product that is able to retain a solid 
form during multiple encounters with water and at the same time 
able  to  resist  cracking,  crumbling,  and  hardening  when  drying 
between  uses.  Soap  is  ideal  for  making  bars  but  that  is  not  to 
say that some of the early soap bars did not dry out and develop 
cracks  or  become  soft  and  mushy  in  humid  environments. 
Modern manufacturers are able to formulate soap bars to control 
the  physical  behaviour  in  use  and  when  drying  between  uses. 
Despite conversion of many bar uses to liquid format, bars remain 
an important format in US and even more so globally. Figure 9.1 

U.S. Personal Wash Cleansing  Segmentation

(by value)

Total PW Market Value= $4.37 Billion

Body Wash
42%

Liquid Hand
Soap
17% 

Waterless Hand 
Sanitizers 
4% 

Soap Bars
11%

Syndet Bars
26%

Figure 9.1  Dollar segmentation of U.S. cleanser market shows that bars con-
tinue to command significant share. Bars in the U.S. alone have a total value 
of $1.6billion of which syndet bars are the majority share. (2013 data.)

shows  the  segmentation  of  the  US  Personal  Wash  market  with 
all  bar  cleansers  holding  37%  share  of  value.  While  soap‐based 
bars  continue  to  dominate  in  total  volume,  the  higher  value  of 
synthetic detergent bars command 70% of the dollar share.

The wide range of soap bars available in the skin marketplace 
today might suggest a wide range of functionality but this is not 
the case. To develop new claims and gain shelf space in big super-
markets,  manufacturers  create  variants  by  minor  modifications 
of  their  basic  bar  types  –  the  functional  properties  of  soap  bar 
variants are usually very similar – they all lather and they all clean.

Formulation technology of cleansing bars
Cleansing  bars  are  made  of  surfactants  that  are  solid  at  room 
temperature and readily soluble in water. While there are scores 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

83

84

HygIene Products  Cleansers

Sodium acyl isethionate (syndet)

O-
OS

O

Na+

Sodium alkyl carboxylate (soap)

O

O

O-

Na+

O

Figure  9.2  Schematic  representation  of  the  molecular  structures  of  soap 
(sodium  alkyl  carboxylate)  and  syndet  (sodium  acyl  isethionate)  showing 
the difference in head group structure and size.

of  commercially  available  surfactants  only  two,  alkyl  carboxy-
late  (soap)  and  acyl  isethionate  (syndet),  are  used  on  a  large 
scale for manufacture of cleansing bars (Figure 9.2).

These two surfactant types are quite different, leading to different 
sensory experiences for the consumer and also differences in their 
interactions with skin. Soap and syndet have in common that they 
have the physical properties required to be processed into bars that 
can withstand the challenges of use in the home. As bars they must 
have a consistent performance – they must lather easily when new 
but just as readily as the bar is used up over a period of weeks or 
months. They should produce lather quickly and easily and should 
not feel gritty in use. The rate of wear should be optimum, neither 
too fast nor too slow. They must dry quickly after use but must 
not crack; they should not break apart if dropped, and should not 
absorb water and become mushy in a humid environment, like a 
bathroom. There are not many surfactants that can satisfy this list 
of seemingly simple practical requirements.

Broadly speaking, there are two types of manufacturing process 
for  making  cleansing  bars:  (a)  a  continuous  process  of  milling, 
extrusion, and stamping; and (b) a batch process of melt casting.

continuous processing
The continuous process starts with synthesis of the basic surfactant, 
alkyl carboxylate, and then processing this as a solid through various 
steps during which other ingredients are added until the final com-
position is attained. After milling and mixing steps to ensure homo-
geneity, the compounded soap it is extruded as a continuous bar 
which is chopped and stamped into the individual bar shape of the 
final  product.  The  technical  demands  of  the  continuous  process 
impose constraints on composition and ingredient addition – but it 
is the fastest and cheapest way to make a cleansing bar.

Batch processing
The  essence  of  the  melt  cast  approach  is  to  make  the  sur-
factant  and  add  any  desired  ingredients  to  form  a  hot  liquid 
melt which is poured into individual bar size casts and allowed 
to  set  as  it  cools.  This  is  a  much  more  expensive  process  but 
allows for a wider range of additional ingredients in the product 
formulation.  The  continuous  process  is  used  for  most  of  the 

mass market bars and the melt cast process for specialist bars 
often sold in boutiques, custom outlets, and department stores.

soap bars
There  are  several  major  compositional  types  of  soap  bar  with 
distinct  bar  properties  and  in  use  behaviors  –  speed  and  type 
of lather, rate of use up, aroma, skin compatibility, tendency for 
mush, etc. Most bars are either basic or superfatted soap. Basic 
soaps are blends of medium chain length fatty acid sodium salts 
(Figure  9.2).  Superfatted  soaps  are  similar  but  with  additional 
fatty acid. There are other categories of soap bars based on the use 
of specialist ingredients: transparent bars, antibacterial bars, and 
deodorant bars. There  are  large numbers  of  specialist  bars that 
are  simply  soap  containing  a  wide  range  of  colors,  fragrances, 
and emotive ingredients such as vitamins, aloe, chamomile, and 
other natural extracts. The emotive ingredients in specialist bars 
are there to appeal to the senses and emotions with no real expec-
tation that they have any detectable benefit for the skin.

Basic soap
Soap is the sodium salt of a fatty acid. As the salts of weak acids, 
soaps form alkaline solutions as they dissociate in water. The pH 
of soap is typically in the pH range 9–11. This is not sufficient to 
be  overtly  irritating  to  skin  but  is  sufficiently  high  to  negatively 
impact  the  pH‐dependent  processes  of  the  stratum  corneum 
which has a natural pH of around 5.5. The fatty acids used in soap 
making are natural, derived from animal or plant sources, with the 
most common chain lengths in the range C12 (e.g. coconut fatty 
acid) to C18 (e.g. tallow/rendered animal fat). C12–14 soaps are 
soluble and lather easily. C16–18 soaps are less soluble but good 
for  forming  solid  bars.  The  plant  oils  used  in  soap  making  are 
mostly triglycerides and when treated with lye and/or caustic soda 
they hydrolyze to the fatty acid sodium salts (soap) and glycerol.

Superfatted soap bars
Simple  soaps  are  good  cleansers  but  also  drying  to  skin.  Less 
drying soaps are made by adjusting the soap making process to 
leave an excess of free fatty acid in the final soap composition 
(superfatted soaps). This excess fatty acid reduces the lipid strip-
ping and drying effects of a soap bar to a small extent. Beauty 
soaps are typically superfatted soaps.

Transparent soaps
There are several types of transparent or semi‐transparent soap bars. 
The  earliest  was  a  rosin  glycerin  soap  bar  developed  by  Andrew 
Pears in 1789. The ingredients of Pears patented transparent soap 
were sodium palmitate, natural rosin, glycerine, water, C12 soap, 
rosemary extract, thyme extract, and fragrance. The Pears soap of 
today is made by essentially the same process, which involves dis-
solving the raw soap and other ingredients in alcohol, pouring into 
moulds followed by up to 3 months of evaporation and drying.

A different type of transparent bar was introduced in 1955 by 
Neutrogena based on a patented formulation invented by a Belgian 
cosmetic  chemist,  Edmond  Fromont.  His  novel  formulation  was 

9. Bar Cleansers

85

based  on  triethanolamine  soap  (in  other  words,  soap  where  the 
neutralizing cation is triethanolamine instead of the usual sodium). 
The ingredients of the Neutrogena bar are triethanolamine stearate, 
C12–18 soaps, glycerine, water, and a range of minor ingredients 
including a little lanolin derivative and fragrance. Triethanolamine 
forms  acid  soaps  so  the  pH  of  the  Neutrogena  bar  at  pH  8–9  is 
lower than a regular soap with sodium as the cation.

Antibacterial and deodorant soap bars
Medicated or antibacterial soaps are a large subcategory of the bar 
soap market. These products are basic soaps containing one of a lim-
ited number of approved antibacterial agents. Some of these prod-
ucts are positioned as deodorant soap to inhibit the odor‐ producing 
bacteria of the axilla. However, some are positioned for germ inhibi-
tion which has come under increased scrutiny. Washing with any 
soap is effective for removing and killing the bacteria on skin and 
the contribution of added antibacterial agents is controversial.

Non‐soap detergent bars – syndet bars
Because soap is cheap and easy to manufacture the cleansing bar 
market has remained predominantly soap bars. However, there has 
been one non‐soap bar technology that has achieved a significant 
place in the US market over the last 50 years and is now extending 
its reach to other regions of the world. This product, introduced 
to  the  US  market  in  1957  as  the  Dove  bar,  is  based  on  patented 
acyl isethionate as the surfactant component in combination with 
stearic  acid  which  has  a  dual  function  of  providing  the  physical 
characteristics for forming a stable bar and also acting as a signifi-
cant skin protecting and moisturizing ingredient. The high level of 
stearic acid in the Dove bar is the basis of the one‐quarter moistur-
izing cream in the product. When the patents for this novel tech-
nology ran out, several other acyl isethionate bars were introduced 
in the USA market including Caress, Olay, Cetaphil, and Aveeno.

Interestingly,  this  mild  non‐soap  technology  pioneered  in 
bar  with  acyl  isethionate  has  only  recently  been  translated  in 
2009 as a mild and moisturizing surfactant component in liquid 
cleanser formats. Similar to what was observed in the approach 
to developing ultra‐mild bars, it is expected that this liquid acyl 
isethionate technology will spread widely where liquid cleansers 
comprise a large portion of market share, thus reaffirming the 
value of this “bar technology” for cleansing.

Preservatives
It is of interest that soap bars and syndet bars are self‐preserved 
in the sense that they provide a hostile environment for micro-
organisms and do not need to contain a preservative to maintain 
product quality.

Impact of cleansing bars on skin structure 
and function

Washing  with  soap  removes  dirt  and  grime  from  skin  and  is 
very effective for removing germs and preventing the spread of 
infection. There is an appreciation that some soaps are harsh and 

others mild, but washing with soap is so routine and common-
place that most people give no thought to the cleansing process 
or its impact on skin. This is a mistake. Research over the last few 
years has revealed several mechanisms by which soap interacts 
with skin structures to adversely affect normal functioning. It is 
now clear that mild cleansing has significant benefits for both 
diseased and healthy skin. Mild cleansing can help reduce the 
dry skin symptoms of common skin conditions such as eczema, 
acne, and rosacea simply by eliminating of the aggravations of 
harsh soap. Mild cleansing can also enhance the attractiveness 
of normal skin by allowing it to better retain moisture.

surfactant interaction with the skin–stratum 
corneum
As described in other chapters of this book, the outer layer of 
skin,  the  stratum  corneum,  is  a  very  effective  barrier  to  the 
penetration of microorganisms and chemicals unless compro-
mised  by  damage,  disease,  or  a  intrinsic  weakness  caused  by 
one  of  the  genetic  variations  now  known  to  impact  the  func-
tioning of the stratum corneum. Whatever the normal state of 
the  stratum  corneum  for  an  individual,  the  most  challenging 
(i.e.  potentially  damaging)  environmental  factor,  apart  from 
industrial  exposure  to  solvents  and  other  harsh  chemicals,  is 
cleansing. And yet cleansing is a key element of good everyday 
skincare and there is much variation in the damaging potential 
of different cleansing products including cleansing bars. Under-
standing how cleansing products impact skin and knowing the 
mildest  cleansing  product  technologies  is  a  basic  requirement 
for achieving fundamental skin care.

soap bar interactions with the stratum corneum
The  properties  of  soap  that  make  it  an  effective  cleanser  also 
determine that it can be drying and irritating to skin. The high 
charge density of the carboxyl head group of the soap molecule 
promotes strong protein binding which is bad for skin. Soap binds 
strongly  to  stratum  corneum  proteins  and  disturbs  the  water‐
holding  mechanisms  of  the  corneocytes.  Soaps  also  denature 
stratum corneum enzymes essential for corneocytes maturation 
and desquamation. The result is an accumulation of corneocytes 
at the skin surface and the characteristic scaly, flaky, roughness 
associated with dry skin.

In addition to damaging proteins, soap and other cleansers can 
disrupt and strip out the lipid bi‐layers of the stratum corneum. 
The bipolar structure of the soap molecule is similar to the bipolar 
structure  of  the  three  major  lipid  types  that  make  up  the  lipid 
bi‐layers  of  the  stratum  corneum  (fatty  acids,  cholesterol,  and 
ceramides).  Soap  disrupts  the  bi‐layer  structure  of  these  lipids 
in the stratum corneum and thereby reduces the effectiveness of 
the  stratum  corneum  water  barrier.  Transepidermal  water  loss 
(TEWL) is increased through the leaky barrier. Also, disruption 
of  the  structured  lipid  matrix  around  stratum  corneum  cells 
(corneocytes) allows the highly soluble components of the skin’s 
natural  moisturizing  factor  (NMF),  contained  in  the  protein 
matrix of the corneocytes, to leach out. Leaching is increased by 

86

HygIene Products  Cleansers

further cleansing or even simply by contact with water. This pro-
cess  explains  the  paradox  that  water  is  often  a  major  factor  for 
causing dry skin. Effects on the key lipid structures of the stratum 
corneum add to the damage caused by soap–protein interactions 
and exacerbate the development of skin dryness – remembering 
that dry skin is not simply a lack of moisture but a disturbance of 
normal stratum corneum function with retention and accumula-
tion of superficial corneocytes. The build up of corneocytes at the 
skin  surface  is  responsible  for  many  symptoms  associated  with 
“dry” skin – scaling, flaking, roughness, dull appearance (due to 
light  scattering),  tightness,  loss  of  resilience/flexibility/elasticity, 
and ultimately cracking and irritation.

All soaps have the ability to induce dry and irritated skin and 
these  effects  are  most  evident  in  challenging  environmental 
condition – cold or hot temperatures with low humidity, exces-
sive exposure to solar UV radiation, and prolonged exposure to 
wind. The drying potential of soap varies according to composi-
tion such as the balance between soluble (C12–14) and less sol-
uble chain lengths (C16–18) of the fatty acids most commonly 
used to make soap – the higher the soluble component the more 
drying the soap. Superfatted soaps are a little milder than simple 
soaps, and triethanolamine soap and glycerol bars the mildest of 
the commonly available soap bars.

synthetic detergent bar interactions with the 
stratum corneum
Synthetic  detergent  bars  (syndet  bars)  have  been  available  on 
the US market for 50 years and represent a clear technological 
difference from soap‐based cleansing bars. Nearly all common 
synthetic detergent bars are based on an anionic surfactant, acyl 
isethionate. At the time of writing (2015) these bars account for 
40% of the cleansing bars sold in the USA. Alkyl glycerol ether 
sulfonate  (AGES)  and  monoalkyl  phosphate  (MAPS)  are  two 
of a small number of other synthetic detergents that have been 
tried for manufacture of cleansing bars but none of these have 
been successful in the US market.

Ironically, because syndet bars are shaped like soap bars and used 
for cleansing just like a soap bar, most people believe that synthetic 
detergent  bars  are  just  another  variety  of  soap.  Most  consumers 
are unaware that there is a fundamental compositional difference 
between soap and syndet bars that impacts their interactions with 
skin such that syndet bars are milder than soap bars during cleansing. 
There is a greater difference between soap and syndet cleansing in 
terms of healthy and attractive skin than most people realize. It is 
important for healthcare professionals and dermatologists to appre-
ciate the difference between soap and syndet bars because studies 
show  the  difference  in  mildness  is  very  relevant  for  their  patient 
groups (see studies described below).

Soap (alkyl carboxylate) and syndet (acyl isethionate) are both 
anionic surfactants and like all anionic surfactants they interact 
with skin proteins and skin lipids. But because of the difference 
in  head  group  physical  chemistry  soap  interactions  are  more 
intense leading to a higher potential for inducing dryness and 
irritation. The carboxylate head group is compact, leading to a 

high  charge  density  that  facilitates  binding  and  denaturing  of 
proteins. By contrast, the isethionate head group is large and dif-
fused, producing a low charge density and less ability to interact 
with proteins (Figure 9.2).

A second and most important factor contributing to the mild-
ness of the isethionate syndet bar is the ability to formulate acyl 
isethionate  with  high  levels  of  stearic  acid  without  losing  the 
ability  to  lather.  In  fact,  the  lather  is  more  dense  and  creamy 
than the lather of a typical soap bar. The stearic acid component 
of the isethionate syndet bar acts as a moisturizing cream and 
deposits on skin during cleansing, adding to the relative mild-
ness of these types of bar. Superfatting is, in principle, a similar 
way  to  reduce  the  harshness  of  plain  soap  but  the  results  are 
much  more  modest  because  the  initial  harshness  of  soap  is 
higher than syndet and the upper limit of practical superfatting 
is closer to 10% compared to the 20–25% fatty acid that can be 
formulated in an isethionate bar.

the role of pH
Another important difference between soap and syndet bars is 
pH. Soap has an alkaline pH typically around pH 10–11 whereas 
isethionate/stearic acid bars are close to pH neutral with a pH 
of a little over 7. The pH of glycerol bars is in the range pH 8–9. 
These  differences  in  pH  have  an  effect  on  the  interaction  of 
cleansing  bars  with  the  stratum  corneum.  Skin  proteins  swell 
markedly if the cleanser pH is highly alkaline (pH > 8). Optical 
coherence  tomography  (OCT)  pictures  of  stratum  corneum 
after  exposure  to  acidic,  neutral,  and  alkaline  pH  conditions 
and the corresponding swelling show that there is significantly 
higher swelling in alkaline pH solutions (Figure 9.3). Strongly 
binding detergent molecules can increase the swelling further.

High pH also has an impact on stratum corneum lipids. An 
alkaline pH can ionize fatty acids in the lipid bi‐layers making 
them  more  like  “soap”  molecules  and  destabilizing  the  highly 
organized structure of the bi‐layers.

These factors contribute to the differences in mildness of soap 
and  syndet  bars.  Environmental  scanning  electron  microscopy 
pictures of the skin surface and the corresponding transmission 
electron microscopy images of the protein‐lipid ultrastructure of 
human  skin  washed  under  exaggerated  conditions  (nine  repeat 
washes) with a syndet and a soap bar are seen in Figure 9.4. It is 
evident from the micrographs that the syndet bar washed sample 
exhibits well‐preserved cells with intact proteins and lipids com-
pared with the soap washed sample.

More recently, a new class of syndet bars with a combination 
of syndet surfactants such as acyl isethionate and sulfosuccinate 
has begun to appear in some of the global markets. These bars 
have pH values in the range of 5 to 5.5. Since the latter is close 
to skin’s natural pH, “skin friendly” claims are used to imply that 
the bar being close to skin pH is less damaging to skin. However, 
it is not clear that a cleanser formulated to match the skin pH 
is  de  facto  milder  because  it  depends  on  the  harshness  of  the 
surfactant under skin pH conditions and how it interacts with 
the stratum corneum.

pH 4

pH 6.5

pH 10

Figure 9.3  Swelling of the stratum corneum 
in different pH buffer solutions. (a) Optical 
coherence tomography (OCT) images of ex 
vivo skin treated with different buffer solu-
tions.  The  arrows  show  the  position  and 
thickness of the stratum corneum. (b) The 
bar chart provides a graphic representation 
of the same difference.

(a)

9. Bar Cleansers

87

(b)

100

m
u
e
n
r
o
c

m
u
t
a
r
t
s

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

)

m
μ
(
g
n

i
l
l
e
w

s

80

60

40

20

0

*

*

pH 4

pH 6.5

pH 10

Different from pH 10 P<0.05

*

In order to determine if a commercially available “skin pH” 
cleansing bar is milder to skin than a neutral pH syndet bar, a 
forearm controlled application test (FCAT) was carried out. The 
results  for  skin  dryness  and  TEWL  given  in  Figure  9.5  shows 
that the two commercially available pH 5.5 bars were more dry-
ing  than  the  pH  7  bar.  Since  this  comparison  was  made  with 
bars having different surfactants, a further study was designed 
with prototype bars using the same surfactant composition but 
at two different pH values. The results given in Figure 9.6 show 
that here again, the pH 5.5 bar is relatively more drying to skin 
than the neutral pH bar. These studies clearly show that being at 
skin pH does not itself result in a milder Bar as compared to a 
Bar at neutral pH. The drying potential of the bar depends upon 
the nature of surfactants used in making the Bar and its interac-
tion with the corneum.

The  question  is  why  cleansing  bars  consisting  of  typical 
anionic surfactants are more drying and damaging to the bar-
rier at skin pH compared to neutral pH conditions. The answer 
may  be  in  the  interaction  of  anionic  surfactants  with  the  cor-

neum under weak acidic conditions. The isoelectric point (IEP, 
where the net charge on the surface is zero) of stratum corneum 
and keratin is around pH 5. As pH is lowered from neutral to 
acidic pH conditions, net negative charge on the corneum will 
decrease and will eventually become positive below the IEP. An 
increase in the number of positively charged sites on the protein 
with decrease in pH from neutral pH can be thus expected to 
increase the binding of anionic surfactants to proteins. Results 
of surfactant binding to human stratum corneum published in 
the literature and reproduced in Figure 9.7 show that binding of 
lauroyl isethionate increases with decrease in pH in the acidic 
range  and  increases  with  increase  in  pH  above  about  pH  9.0. 
Thus the isethionate binding shows a minimum in the neutral 
pH region. The binding results do correlate with the increased 
drying  tendency  of  cleansers  with  typical  anionic  surfactant 
such as isethionate. These results clearly demonstrate that even 
though pH 5.5 may be “good for skin”, it may not be good for a 
skin cleanser unless the cleanser surfactant is mild under weak‐
acid conditions.

 
 
 
88

HygIene Products  Cleansers

(ESEM)

(ESEM)

(ESEM)

Water

Soap bar

Syndet bar

(TEM)

Water

Soap bar

Syndet bar

Figure 9.4  Environmental scanning electron micrographs (ESEM) and transmission electron micrographs (TEM) images of human skin washed with water, 
soap, and a syndet bar (9 repeat washes). Water washed and mild syndet bar washed skin shows well‐preserved lipids and plumped (hydrated) corneocytes. 
By contrast, images of harsh soap‐washed skin show significant removal of lipids and damage to proteins.

Commercial Syndet Bars
FCAT Study -Visual Dryness

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Bar1 pH 5.5

Bar2 pH 5.5

Bar3 pH 7.0

Untreated

* pH7 bar signiﬁcantly less drying than pH5.5 bars at p <0.1

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
h
C

2

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0

-0.4

Identical Test Bars Buffered to Different pH
FCAT Study - Visual Dryness

*

*

*

*

Bar at pH 5.5

Bar at pH 7.0

Untreated

* pH7 bar significantly less drying than pH5.5 bar at p <0.1

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
m
o
r
f
e
g
n
a
h
C

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

1

2

3

4

6

7

5
Study day

8

9

10

11

12

1

2

3

4

5

7

6

8
Study day

9 10 11 12

Figure 9.5  Visual dryness change observed in a forearm controlled applica-
tion  test  (FCAT)  using  two  commercially  available  syndet  Bars  at  pH  5.5 
based compared to neutral pH syndet bar. Bars at pH 5.5 cause more dry-
ness than the one at pH 7.0.

Figure 9.6  Visual dryness change observed in a forearm controlled application 
test (FCAT) using two syndet bars identical in surfactant composition and dif-
fering only in pH. The pH 5.5 bars appears to cause more dryness than the 
one at pH 7.0.

In summary, high (basic soap) pH cleansing has a number of 
negative effects such as destabilization of bilayer lipid structure 
which exist in a naturally weak acid mantle. Under weakly acidic 
conditions, on the other hand, there is an increase in the posi-
tively charged sites on the keratin proteins leading to increased 
anionic surfactant binding. This evidence suggests that neutral 

pH  cleansing  is  the  ideal  point  for  minimizing  damage  with 
conventional cleansers.

cycle of dryness
Many consumers are not aware of the differences in drying and irri-
tation potential between soap bars and synthetic detergent bars. In 

 
 
 
 
)
g
m

0.4

/
g
m

i

(
C
S
H
o
t
g
n
d
n
b
t
n
a
t
c
a
f
r
u
S

i

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

2

Normal skin pH

Sodium lauroyl isethionate
Human stratum corneum, 37ºC

60 min

10 min

4

6

8

10

pH of solution

Figure 9.7  Binding of anionic surfactant, sodium lauroyl isethionate, increases 
with  decrease  in  pH  from  neutral  pH  region.  Binding  shows  a  minimum 
around the neutral pH region. Increase in binding with decrease in pH in the 
acidic region is thought to be due to increase in the number of positive sites and 
reduction in the negative sites. IEP (isoelectric point of keratin is around pH 5)

practice, most cleansing products are not drying to an extent that 
is readily perceivable and under normal conditions of use cleansing 
bars  seldom  produce  irritation  and  inflammation.  However,  in 
other circumstances, particularly drying environmental conditions 
or with compromised diseased skin, some cleansing bars can cause 
severe dryness and irritation. Why is this?

Under normal conditions it is likely that the skin is superficially 
dried by most cleansers but is rapidly able to restore its ability to 
hold moisture and maintain healthy functioning. However, under 
challenging environmental conditions, particularly the harsh cold 
winters of Canada and the northern USA and the hot dry summers 

9. Bar Cleansers

89

of the central plains and western desert areas of the USA, recovery 
after  washing  is  likely  to  be  less  rapid.  Without  supplemental 
moisturization, a vicious cycle of damage and inadequate recovery 
is quickly established, leading initially to dry skin but quickly pro-
gressing to deeper damage with fissuring of the stratum corneum 
(cracking),  deeper  penetration  of  the  surfactant,  irritation,  and 
ultimately full‐thickness cracking of the stratum corneum leading 
to  chapping  and  bleeding. This  may  sound  extreme  but  anyone 
with a tendency to develop dry skin will recognize this scenario of 
rapid deterioration to more severe irritation when the weather is 
drying – particularly for hand washing.

While we have described the various interactions of soap and 
syndet surfactants with skin proteins and lipids, these effects are 
never in isolation. They are cumulative and mutually reinforcing 
for inducing skin dryness. To better understand how they work 
in concert, it is helpful to see them as a sequence of events in the 
cycle of dryness (Figure 9.8).

Beginning  with  intact  skin,  soap  is  used  to  remove  surface 
dirt and oils, however, it will also solubilize and remove lipids at 
the surface of which the smaller fatty acids (C18–20) are most 
readily depleted. The loss of these protective lipids increase the 
exposure of corneocytes to water.

Within corneocytes is Natural Moisturizing Factor, a mixture of 
hydrophilic materials that help hold water within the corneocyte. 
The increased exposure due to lipid loss allows water to more eas-
ily penetrate the corneocyte and wash away the water‐loving NMF. 
Excess water exposure overhydrates exposed corneocytes and cou-
pled with high pH of soap causes the corneocytes to swell. Rapid 
deswelling as they lose their excess moisture after washing causes 
a drying‐stress that can cause detachment of corneocytes from the 

The Dryness Cycle

SOAP

Lipids WATER

Soap &
Water

1

2

3

1.   Soap removes lipids

2.   Water enters and washes NMF away

3.   Swelling and deswelling of corneocytes leads to
      debonding creating pathways for inﬁltration

4.   Poor barrier to moisture loss; surface gets dry
      and stiff 

5.   Cracks form, barrier gets leakier, soap and water
      drive deeper into the SC

6.   Skin is visibly dry, SC function is impaired and
      thus more vulnerable to future washing episode

4

5

6

Figure 9.8  Harsh cleansing leads to loss 
of  lipids  leaving  skin  more  vulnerable 
to irritation, decreased barrier function 
and  further  damage  to  future  washing 
episodes.

 
 
 
 
90

HygIene Products  Cleansers

surrounding  lipid  matrix.  The  drying  stress  is  often  perceived  as 
after‐wash skin tightness usually lasting about 15 minutes while skin 
equilibrates. The detachment of corneocytes from the lipid matrix 
also creates micro pathways for infiltration of soap molecules into 
deeper layers causing progressive damage in sub‐surface layers.

With loss of protective barrier lipids and Natural Moisturizing 
Factor to hold water in skin, the outermost cell layer becomes 
superficially dry, perhaps unperceivable at first but with two con-
sequences. Dry corneocytes are stiff and inflexible making skin 
more  vulnerable  to  cracking  with  fissures.  The  loss  of  barrier 
function  increases  skin  vulnerability.  The  SC  will  compensate 
for the increased epidermal water loss by converting filaggrin to 
NMF, but as NMF gets depleted, this conversion needs to take 
place lower within the SC leaving the surface dry.

Desmosomes are sometimes called “molecular rivets” as they 
are  proteins  that  connect  corneocytes  together.  In  the  normal 
process  of  desquamation,  the  desmosomes  are  enzymatically 
degraded  so  that  surface  corneocytes  are  free  to  desquamate. 
However,  loss  of  moisture  at  the  surface  impedes  the  process 
of desmolysis to leave surface cells connected together forming 
visible skin flakes. Initially seen as  light powdery appearance, as 
dryness increase and skin is less able to hold moisture, the size 
of bound squames can increase to visible skin flakes.

With  impaired  barrier  function,  loss  of  NMF,  and  increased 
water loss, the SC is more vulnerable to subsequent washing events 
which continue to drive dryness deeper. While lotion application 
can help temporarily replace the moisture in the SC it cannot undo 
the soap damage, thus underscoring the need to reduce surfactant 
damage in the first place through mild cleansing.

studies comparing mildness properties of 
soap and syndet cleansing bars

As we have shown, the effects of cleansers on skin are more than 
simply due to direct topical exposure. The potential for dryness 
is greatly impacted by weather, humidity, skin condition as well 
as intrinsic factors such as age and genetic skin type.

controlled exposure trials
The first practical demonstration that syndet bars are fundamen-
tally less damaging to skin than soap bars was a study published 
by Frosh and Kligman [1]. Using a new and simple method, the 
soap chamber test, they examined the skin irritation potential of 
all the cleansing bars they could purchase locally in Philadelphia 
at that time. One bar stood out as exceptionally mild compared 
with the rest of the marketplace (17 other bars tested) and this 
was a patented alkyl isethionate bar called Dove. Now that the 
Dove patent has expired a number of manufacturers sell similar 
isethionate syndet bars.

The  difference  in  relative  mildness  of  soap  and  isethionate/
stearic  acid  syndet  bars  is  easily  demonstrated  in  the  stan-
dard  wash  and  rinse  tests  used  by  manufacturers  of  cleansing 
products. The forearm controlled application test (FCAT) and 
leg controlled application test (LCAT) are 5‐day repeat washing 
tests. Skin condition is evaluated daily by a variety of techniques 
including  visual  dryness,  superficial  and  deeper  hydration 
measured instrumentally, TEWL to assess barrier performance, 
and erythema to assess irritation. As example of the compari-
son of soap to syndet cleansers in a FCAT, typical TEWL and 
dryness results are shown in Figure 9.9.

An increase in stratum corneum dryness has a negative effect 
on the mechanical properties of the corneum. Changes in stratum 
corneum elasticity/stiffness measured in a standard clinical test 
after washing with soap and syndet bars are shown in Figure 9.10. 
While soap washing increases skin stiffness markedly, the milder 
syndet bar maintains the original skin condition. Such effects are 
magnified further under low humidity and winter conditions and 
can lead to microcracks in the stratum corneum and increased 
water loss, plus increased vulnerability to penetration of external 
chemicals into skin.

normal usage trials
Concern  is  sometimes  expressed  that  industry  standard  tests 
are  exaggerated  and  do  not  reflect  real  consumer  experience. 
The evidence accumulated by manufacturers and published in 
peer‐reviewed  journals  demonstrates  that  effects  in  standard 

TEWL

10

8

6

4

2

0

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
h
c
n
a
e
M

(a)

*

* Syndet sig. less barrier impairment
than soaps 1,2,3,4 (P<0.05)

4

3

2

1

0

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
h
c
n
a
e
M

(b)

Visual dryness

*

* Syndet less dryness than all soaps
(P<0.05)

Syndet
Soap 1
Soap 2
Soap 3
Soap 4
TeaSoap

Figure  9.9  Skin  changes  after 
5  days  of  twice  daily  washing 
with soaps and syndet using the 
forearm  controlled  application 
test  (FCAT)  method.  (a)  Tran-
sepidermal water loss rate and (b) 
Visual  dryness  are  significantly 
lower for syndet bar as compared 
to regular soaps

 
 
 
 
 
 
)
r
e
t
e
m
o
e
h
r
(

s
s
e
n
f
f
i
t
s
n

i

e
g
n
a
h
C

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

–0.5

0

Soap

Syndet

2.5

3.5
Days

4.5

5.5

Figure 9.10  Changes in skin mechanical properties (stiffness) after 5 days 
of twice daily washing with soap and syndet using the FCAT method. Soap 
washing  induced  a  progressive  increase  in  stratum  corneum  stiffness  as 
measured  using  a  linear  skin  rheometer  whereas  the  syndet  bar  did  not 
induce stiffness.

tests are indeed predictive of what can be experienced in normal 
use  under  realistic  but  challenging  environmental  conditions. 
Figure  9.11  compares  results  of  a  controlled  wash  trial  with  a 
normal  use  study  where  women  used  soap  or  syndet  for  face 
washing for a week during the Canadian winter. They were not 
allowed to use a facial moisturizer during the study. Under the 
cold drying conditions of this study the soap users rapidly expe-
rienced  intense  drying  and  soreness  whereas  the  syndet  users 
were  mostly  able  to  tolerate  the  withdrawal  of  their  normal 
after‐wash moisturizer for a week. Despite differences in magni-
tude, the in‐use trial was fully aligned with the controlled wash 
study indicating that controlled study results are very “real”.

Benefits of mild cleansing for ashy skin
The mild cleansing effects discussed so far have focused on reducing 
the induction of dryness. However, there are also very real positive 

Ashiness Clinical Grading
Mean Change from Baseline

*

* Significant at p≤ 0.05

*

0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

9. Bar Cleansers

91

2–7 day normal use
for daily face wash

5-day controlled
arm wash test

Less
dry

0

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
m
o
r
f

e
g
n
a
h
c

y
a
d
5

–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–2.0

More
dry

Less
dry

0

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
s
u
n
m
e
r
o
c
s

i

7

y
a
D

–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–2.0

More
dry

Soap

Syndet

Figure 9.11  Skin dryness induced by soap and syndet bars in a 5‐day con-
trolled arm wash test compared to dryness induced by 2–7 days of normal 
use once daily for facial cleansing. Arm wash test carried out on the same 
subjects  as  the  7‐day  facial  wash  test.  Most  soap  users  were  unable  to 
continue soap use for a full week. Most syndet users were able to complete 
a full week of daily face washing – dryness scores are based on assessments 
made on day 7 for the whole panel.

benefits to mild cleansing. Ashy skin, sometimes referred to as grey 
skin, is a significant problem among darker skinned individuals. It 
is caused by refraction of light by a superficial layer of dryness lead-
ing to a dull cast. In a clinical trial of female subjects, Fitzpatrick  
Type  IV–VI,  with  a  moderate  degree  of  visual  skin  ashiness,  the 
subjects  replaced  their  normal  cleanser  with  the  syndet  bar  pro-
vided  and  washed  daily  for  3  weeks.  During  this  time,  subjects 
refrained from using moisturizers on their arms or legs.

As shown in Figure 9.12, the severity of skin ashiness was sig-
nificantly reduced on dorsal forearms and outer legs while visual 
dryness significantly improved on dorsal forearms and elbows. 
Subjects  perceived  significant  improvement  to  moisturization, 

Visual Dryness Clinical Grading
Mean Change from Baseline

0.00

-0.10

-0.20

-0.30

-0.40

-0.50

-0.60

-0.70

-0.80

*

*

* Significant at p ≤ 0.05

Dorsal
Forearms

Elbows

Lower Outer
Legs

Dorsal
Forearms

Elbows

Lower Outer
Legs

Figure 9.12  Use of a syndet bar instead of a soap bar reduced severity of skin ashiness on arms and legs while visual dryness significantly improved on 
forearms and elbows.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92

HygIene Products  Cleansers

softness,  and  smoothness,  as  well  as  reduced  itch,  and  dry-
ness. These results demonstrate a mild, moisturizing syndet bar 
provides a positive skin condition benefit for ashy skin.

Benefits of mild cleansing for photodamaged skin
Facial photodamage is another area where mild cleansing can pro-
vide a positive skin benefit. In this clinical trial, 25 women, who 
were current soap users (non‐syndet), with mild‐to‐moderate facial 
photodamage participated in a double‐blind, split‐face application 
face  wash  study.  All  subjects  discontinued  use  of  moisturizers  3 
days prior to the study and were not permitted to use moisturizers 
or other skin care products for the duration of the study. Subjects 
washed their face using a split‐face application with a syndet bar 
on one side, and a regular bar soap on the other twice daily for 4 
weeks. As shown in Figure 9.13, the syndet bar showed significant 
improvement compared to the soap bar to dermatologist‐assessed 
skin texture, brightness, clarity and tone within the first 2 weeks. 
Moreover, 3D texture of periorbital fine lines and wrinkles showed 
significant reduction with the syndet bar compared to the soap bar 
treated side. As expected, deeper wrinkles are not affected solely by 
use of cleanser and thus overall photodamage remained unchanged. 
Nevertheless, the superficial appearance of the photodamaged skin 
was shown to be significantly improved and these clinical effects 
were further confirmed in panellist self‐assessments. Thus, across a 
range of parameters – dermatological, clinical, self‐assessment, and 

objective instrumental measures, it is evident that the syndet bar 
improved skin appearance and barrier integrity compared to use 
of the harsh soap bar for daily cleansing in subjects with mild‐to‐
moderate photodamage.

Practical implications of mild cleansing for 
patients with common skin disease

The studies described above [2-5 ] were based on a simple hypoth-
esis that switching patients from their harsh soap bar cleanser to 
a  milder  syndet  bar  cleanser  would  minimize  dryness  and  thus 
generally  help  improve  skin  condition.  This  same  hypothesis 
extends  directly  to  diseased  skin  conditions  that  suffer  from  a 
compromised skin barrier and are aggravated by dryness. In the 
following section we discuss clinical trials on a variety of patient 
populations  to  demonstrate  the  benefit  of  mild  bar  cleansing  as 
part of the management program. The patient groups studied were 
atopic dermatitis, acne, and rosacea. The results show that patient 
symptoms were reduced and general skin quality improved.

Benefits of mild cleansing for adults and children 
with mild atopic dermatitis
A  total  of  50  patients  with  mild  atopic  dermatitis  were 
enrolled  for  a  4‐week  double‐blind  study  carried  out  under 

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
−0.25
−0.5
−0.75
−1
−1.25
−1.5
−1.75
−2

Dermatologist Assessment of Photodamage Appearance
Mean Change from Baseline after 2 Weeks 

*

Texture

*

Clarity

*

Brightness

*

Uneven Tone

*

Overall Appearance

Overall Photodamage

Syndet Bar

Soap Bar

N = 25
* Signiﬁcantly improved compared to Soap Bar, p<0.05

Figure 9.13  Use of a syndet bar instead of a soap bar reduced clinically assess appearance of photodamaged facial skin, with significant effects on texture, 
clarity brightness and tone.

the  supervision  of  a  certified  dermatologist.  One  group  of 
25 patients (19 adults and 6 children > 15 years) used a mar-
keted  syndet  cleansing  bar  instead  of  their  normal  cleansing 
bar for showering during the 4 weeks of the study. A second 
group  of  25  patients  (17  adults  and  8  children)  used  a  dif-
ferent  syndet  bar  based  on  the  same  acyl  isethionate  cleans-
ing  system.  Eczema  severity  was  measured  at  baseline  and  4 
weeks  using  the  eczema  area  severity  index  (EASI)  clinical 
assessment  system.  Other  evaluations  at  these  times  were 
dermatologist  assessment  of  non‐lesional  skin,  hydration  by 
conductance  meter,  and  patient  self‐assessment  by  question-
naire. Results indicated good compatibility with the syndet bar 
as a substitute for patient’s usual bar cleanser for both adults 
and children. In addition, it was observed that the severity of 
eczematous lesions reduced with both bars, general skin con-
dition was improved, and hydration was maintained. The main 
results are shown in Figure 9.14.

I
S
A
E
n
a
e
m
p
u
o
r
G

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Dermatologist clinical evaluation
EASI (Eczema Area/Severity Index)

*

*

Day 0
Day 28

Syndet bar A
Day 28 eczema area/severity score
*
sig. less than day 0 score (P<0.02)

Syndet bar B

Patient self assessment of change in skin condition
from day 0 to day 28

Decreases from baseline

Increases from baseline

Symptom

Dryness

Itching

Irritation

Tightness

Tingling

Change
from day 0

Bar A Bar B

-1.5

-1.3

-1.1

-0.9

-0.7

-2.1

-2.8

-2.7

-1.3

-1.4

Attribute

Change
from day 0

Bar A Bar B

Complexion

Smoothness

Softness

Appearance

0.2

0.7

0.4

1.3

1.3

2.7

2.8

2.3

Red numbers - sig. diff from baseline at day 28 (P<0.05)

Figure 9.14  Changes in dermatologist and patient assessment of skin condi-
tion after 4 weeks’ daily use of syndet cleansing bars by adult and child (7–15 
years) patients with atopic dermatitis (AD). A total of 25 patients used bar 
A and 25 used bar B. The patients were patients with chronic AD stabilized 
using a variety of treatment regimens which they continued during the trial. 
The bars were similar in composition with the same acyl isethionate syn-
thetic surfactant system and different ratios of emollients.

9. Bar Cleansers

93

Benefits of mild cleansing for acne and rosacea 
patients
In  one  study,  a  group  of  50  patients  with  moderate  acne  and 
using  topical  acne  medications  (benzamycin  or  benzamycin/
differin)  were  split  into  two  treatment  cells  (25  patients  per 
cell) and instructed to use either a syndet bar or a soap bar for 4 
weeks in place of their normal cleansing bar. Patient skin condi-
tion was assessed at baseline and after 4 weeks of use. Although 
the clinical differences between soap and syndet in this test were 
not statistically significant, there was a clear trend that patients 
using soap experienced worsening of measures relating to skin 
compatibility  and  irritation  during  the  4‐week  period  of  the 
study  and  little  or  no  change  in  patients  using  the  syndet  bar 
(Figure 9.15).

A  similar  protocol  was  used  in  a  study  of  rosacea  patients. 
Seventy patients were enrolled and divided into two subgroups 
for a 4‐week study period. Evaluations were performed at base-
line and at 4 weeks. The results show a similar trend in favor of 
using the syndet bar (Figure 9.15).

The studies indicate a benefit for cleansing with a syndet bar 
as  compared  to  a  soap  bar,  for  patients  with  disease  compro-
mised skin.

the future of cleansing bars

Bar soaps have been the most common product for skin cleans-
ing  for  so  long  that  most  people  never  give  them  a  second 
thought. Since the late 1990s there has been a slow but steady 
decline in bar sales in favor of liquid cleansing products in the 
developed markets, however globally, bars (both soap based and 
syndet)  are  continuing  to  grow  and  will  remain  an  important 
format into the foreseeable future.

Like  many  market  trends,  the  decline  in  developed  mar-
kets is brought about by changes in consumer needs, habits, 
and  attitudes.  Cleansing  liquids  are  becoming  the  product 
of  choice  for  the  shower,  liquid  soaps  are  increasingly  used 
for  hand  cleansing,  and  quick  foaming  liquids,  creams,  and 
wipes  have  largely  replaced  soap  bars  for  facial  cleansing. 
Nevertheless, there is little doubt that low cost and universal 
access  of  cleansing  bars  will  continue  to  make  them  a  rel-
evant format for hand, body and facial cleansing. New inno-
vations will continue to bring new skin benefits to this well‐
established format.

This  chapter  describes  the  negative  effects  for  skin  asso-
ciated  with  cleansing  and  provides  evidence  that  there  are 
real benefits for patients and consumers generally to use the 
mildest  bar  cleansers  available.  It  has  long  been  recognized 
that  environmental  factors  facilitate  the  drying,  irritating 
actions of surfactants and that people differ in their suscep-
tibility to these effects. Only recently has it become evident 
that genetic variations are direct drivers of individual varia-
tions  in  susceptibility  to  develop  dry  and  sensitive  skin.  It 
appears that loss‐of‐function mutations in the filaggrin gene 

 
 
94

HygIene Products  Cleansers

Change in acne symptoms – dermatologist assessed

0.6

0.3

0

8
2

y
a
d
o
t

0
y
a
d
e
g
n
a
h
C

–0.3

Erythema

Soap bar
Syndet bar

Peeling

Dryness

Burning

Stinging

Itching

Tightness

Trend differences
(day 28 not statistically signiﬁcantly different from day 0)

Change in rosacea symptoms – dermatologist assessed

0.3

0

–0.3

8
2

y
a
d
o
t

0

y
a
d
e
g
n
a
h
C

–0.6

Erythema

Peeling

Dryness

Burning

Stinging

Itching

Tightness

Soap bar
Syndet bar

Trend differences
(day 28 not statistically signiﬁcantly different from day 0)

Figure  9.15  Dermatologist  assessed  changes  in 
skin  condition  of  patients  with  mild  to  moderate 
acne or mild to moderate rosacea after 4 weeks’ use 
of soap or syndet bar for daily cleansing. In the acne 
study were 50 patients using topical benzamycin or 
benzamycin plus differin. In the rosacea study were 
70 patients using topical metronidazole. The syndet 
bar  was  acyl  isethionate  synthetic  surfactant  and 
the soap bar was a standard 80/20 soap.

are relatively common in humans and are the cause of mild 
and severe forms of ichthyosis vulgaris and atopic dermatitis. 
The  insight  that  filaggrin  gene  mutations  and  variations 
lead to a compromised barrier that makes skin vulnerable to 
dryness  is  changing  how  scientists  and  professionals  think 
about  dry  skin  and  healthy  skin  functioning.  Some  people 
have a good barrier but others are much more susceptible to 
environmental challenges – including cleansing.

Gene  profiling  is  not  yet  a  routine  diagnostic  procedure 
but  susceptibility  to  develop  dry  skin  is  a  strong  indication 
of  a  compromised  barrier  and  the  need  for  mild  cleansing 
to prevent surfactant‐induced exacerbation of a poor barrier. 
The  future  will  see  new  and  more  precise  diagnostic  tests 
enabling  dermatologists  and  healthcare  professionals  to 
more readily identify consumers and patients who have less 
than  optimal  stratum  corneum  functioning.  In  parallel,  the 
need to identify mild products and good cleansing  practice 
will come into sharper focus. It will be interesting to see if the 
future  consumer  product  trend  is  a  rebalancing  from  soap 
bars to milder syndet bars or if the trend will be a more direct 
move  from  bars  to  liquid  cleansers.  Most  likely  the  market 
will develop in both directions – milder bars and more use of 
liquid cleansers.

conclusions

Cleansing is a basic human need and cleansing bars are the universal 
way to satisfy this need. Liquid products may be gaining in popu-
larity but it will be decades before bars become redundant, if ever.

Cleansing  is  a  challenge  to  skin  for  everyone,  but  for  patients 
with skin problems the choice of cleansing product is the difference 
between  exacerbation  and  minimization  of  symptoms.  There  is 
ample  evidence  in  the  literature  that  syndet  bars  are  milder  than 
soap‐based bars and better for patients with common dermatological 
conditions such as atopic dermatitis, eczema, acne, and rosacea. Not 
everyone needs to use a syndet bar, but it is fairly safe to say that all 
consumers and patients currently using harsh soap bars could expe-
rience a practical benefit by switching to a mild syndet bar.

references

1  Frosch  PJ,  Kligman  AM.  (1979)  The  soap  chamber  test:  a  new 
method  for  assessing  the  irritancy  of  soaps.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol 
1, 35–41.

2  Current  Stratum  Corneum  Research.  (2004)  Optimizing  barrier 
function through fundamental skin care. Dermatol Ther 17(1), 1–68. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Bar Cleansers

95

[A full issue of the journal (9 papers) dedicated to the biology of the 
stratum corneum barrier and the impact of cleansing and moistur-
izing products.]

Matts PJ. (2002) Understanding and measuring the optics that drive visual 
perception of skin appearance. In: MarksR, LevequeJL, VoegeliR, eds. 
The Essential Stratum Corneum. London: Martin Dunitz, p. 333.

3  Subramanyan K. (2004) Role of mild cleansing in the management 

of patient skin. Dermatol Ther 17(1), 26–34.

4  Subramanyan K, Hawkins S, Johnson A (2005) Cosmetic benefits 
of mild cleansing syndet bars versus soap. Poster P1018 presented 
at American Academy of Dermatology Annual Meeting, Feb 18‐22, 
2005, New Orleans, LA.

5  Hawkins  S,  Feng  L,  Ananthapadmanabhan  KP  (2013)  Reducing 
ashiness  in  skin  of  color  –  the  impact  of  mild  cleansing.  Poster 
P1018  presented  at  American  Academy  of  Dermatology  Annual 
Meeting, Mar 22–24, 2012, Denver, CO.

Further reading

Ananthapadmanabhan KP, Lips A, Vincent C, Meyer F, Caso S, Johnson 
A, et al. (2003) pH‐induced alterations in stratum corneum proper-
ties. Int J Cosmet Sci 25, 103–112.

Ananthapadmanabhan  KP,  Subramanyan  K,  Rattinger  GB.  (2002) 
Moisturizing cleansers. In: LeydenJJ, RawlingsAV, eds. Skin Mois-
turization. New York: Marcel Decker, pp. 405–32.

Ananthapadmanabhan  KP,  Yu  KK,  Meyers  CL,  Aronson  MP,  (1996) 
Binding of surfactants to stratum corneum. J Soc Cosmet Chem 47, 
185‐200

Ertel K, Keswick B, Bryant P. (1995) A forearm controlled application 
technique for estimating the relative mildness of personal cleansing 
products. J Soc Cosmet Chem 46, 67–76.

Imokawa G. (1997) Surfactant mildness. In: RiegerMM, RheinLD, eds. 
Surfactants in Cosmetics. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 427–71.
Johnson AW. (2004) Overview. Fundamental skin care: protecting the 

barrier. Dermatol Ther 17, 213–22.

Matts PJ, Goodyer E. (1998) A new instrument to measure the mechan-
ical properties of human stratum corneum in vivo. J Cosmet Sci 49, 
321–33.

Meyers  CL,  Thorn‐Lesson  D,  Subramanyan  K.  (2004)  In  vivo  confo-
cal fluorescence of skin surface: a novel approach to study effect of 
products on stratum corneum. J Am Acad Dermatol 50, 130.

Misra M, Ananthapadmanabhan KP, Hoyberg K, et al. (1997) Correla-
tion between surfactant‐induced ultrastructural changes in epider-
mis and transepidermal water loss. J Soc Cosmet Chem 48, 219–34.
Murahata RI, Aronson MP, Sharko PT, et al. (1997) Cleansing bars for 
face and body: in search of mildness. In: RiegerMM, RheinLD, eds. 
Surfactants in Cosmetics. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 427–71.
Nicholl G, Murahata R, Grove G, Barrows J, Sharko P. (1995) The rela-
tive sensitivity of two arm‐wash methods for evaluating the mild-
ness of personal washing products. J Soc Cosmet Chem 46, 129–40.
Prottey C, Ferguson T. (19750) Factors which determine the skin irrita-
tion potential of soaps and detergents. J Soc Cosmet 26, 29–46.
Rawlings AV, Harding CR. (2002) Moisturization and the skin barrier. 

Dermatol Ther 17, 43–8.

Rawlings  AW,  Watkinson  A,  Rogers  J,  et  al.  (1994)  Abnormalities  in 
stratum  corneum  structure,  lipid  composition,  and  desmosome 
degradation in soap‐induced winter zerosis. J Soc Cosmet Chem 45, 
203–20.

Strube  D,  Koontz  S,  Murahata  R,  et  al.  (1989)  The  flex  wash  test:  a 
method for evaluating the mildness of personal washing products.  
J Soc Cosmet Chem 40, 297–306.

Wihelm  KP,  Wolff  HH,  Maibach  HI.  (1994)  Effects  of  surfactants  on 
skin  hydration.  In:  ElsnerP,  BerardescaE,  MaibachHI,  eds.  Bioen-
gineering of the Skin: Water and the Stratum Corneum. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, pp. 257–74.              

chapter 10
personal cleansers: Body Washes

Keith Ertel and Heather Focht 
Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Dry	skin	on	the	body	is	a	particular	issue	for	most	consumers.	Leave‐on	lotion	application	is	not	always	viewed	as	a	convenient	

intervention,	so	relief	is	sought	from	alternative	sources	such	as	moisturizing	personal	cleansing	products.

•	 Body	washes	are	a	relatively	new	introduction	into	the	armamentarium	of	personal	cleansing	products	and	their	use	is	growing	rapidly,	

particularly	in	developed	countries.

•	 Body	washes	present	unique	formulation	challenges	and	benefit	opportunities	compared	to	traditional	cleansing	bar	forms.
•	 There	are	several	distinct	types	of	body	washes.	Of	these,	moisturizing	body	washes	represent	the	greatest	departure	from	traditional	

personal	cleaners,	having	the	potential	to	improve	dry	skin	condition.

•	 Moisturizing	body	washes	vary	widely	in	terms	of	their	skin	effects	(i.e.	their	ability	to	mitigate	dryness).	A	product	must	deposit	an	

effective	amount	of	benefit	agent	on	the	skin	during	the	wash–rinse	process.	Understanding	the	basis	for	a	product’s	designation	as	
“moisturizing”	is	key.

Background

Cleansing to remove soils from the skin’s surface is a basic human 
need  that  serves  both  a  cosmetic  and  a  health  function.  While 
cleansing  needs  for  the  face  receive  considerable  attention  and 
few  question  the  logic  of  specialized  facial  cleansers,  cleansing 
needs for the body are often given little thought, the assumption 
being that any personal cleanser will suffice. This view is some-
what surprising given that body skin accounts for more than 90% 
of the body’s total surface area and, as we will show, consumers 
have diverse needs and expectations from a body cleanser.

Water alone cannot effectively remove all soils from the skin 
and surfactant‐based materials have been the cleansing aids of 
choice throughout recorded history. Soap was among the first 
cleansing aids and some of the earliest references to soap prepa-
ration are found in Sumerian and Egyptian writings, although 
legend  holds  that  the  article  we  know  as  soap  originated  by 
chance at Mount Sapo in Ancient Rome when fat and wood ash 
from sacrifices were mixed with rainwater.

Regardless  of  its  origin,  soap  was  the  cleansing  aid  of  choice 
and remained largely unchanged for centuries. The next real step‐
change in personal cleanser technology occurred around the time 
of World War I, when the first non‐soap surfactant was introduced. 
However,  bars  continued  as  the  predominant  form  for  body 
cleansing and it was not until the latter part of the 20th century that 
liquid personal cleansing products for the body (i.e. body washes) 
were introduced and began to gain a foothold in some regions.

Body  washes  are  generally  less  messy  in-use  than  bars  (e.g. 
no  soap  mush),  are  more  hygienic,  and  offer  greater  potential 
to  deliver  skin  benefits,  including  dry  skin  improvement. 
However, body washes can be less convenient to transport and 
are generally more expensive on a per use basis than commodity 
cleansing bars. As a result, body wash adoption tends to reflect 
countries’ economic development status.

types of body wash

Body  washes  currently  available  in  the  market  generally  fall 
into three distinct categories. Regular body washes are products 
whose primary function is to provide skin cleansing. As such, 
they are typically based on a relatively simple chassis, although 
fragrance is sometimes used to define product character or to 
provide a higher order benefit (e.g. lavender scent may be used 
to produce a calming effect during use).

Moisturizing body washes are intended to provide a dry skin 
improvement in addition to performing the base skin cleansing 
function. However, there are different ways to define dry skin 
improvement  for  moisturizing  body  washes.  In  some  cases  a 
product’s benefit is judged relative to another (drying) personal 
cleanser and “improvement” amounts to producing less dryness 
than the benchmark. In other cases a product’s benefit is judged 
relative to an untreated control and “improvement” reflects the 
effect of the product relative to the condition of untreated skin. 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

96

10. Personal Cleansers: Body Washes

97

Thus, moisturizing body washes can provide markedly different 
levels of dry skin improvement depending on the criterion used 
to judge their performance.

Finally,  there  are  products  that  fall  into  a  broad  category  best 
described as specialty body washes. These are extensions of regular 
and moisturizing body washes that contain ingredients intended to 
provide additional function or benefit. Examples include products 
that contain beads or other grit material (e.g. pulverized fruit seeds) 
to provide exfoliation and an enhanced dry skin benefit, and prod-
ucts that contain menthol or other sensates to provide a “cooling” 
or “tingling” sensation to the skin.

Major formula components of body washes

Water
Unlike  their  cleansing  bar  counterparts,  body  wash  formulas 
contain a high percentage of water. This situation is a double‐
edged  sword.  On  the  one  hand,  eliminating  the  need  to  form 
materials into a bar that will hold its shape while maintaining 
good performance and wear characteristics removes a number 
of  formulation  constraints,  and  this  introduces  the  possibility 
of incorporating relatively high levels of non‐cleanser materials 
(e.g.  benefit  agents)  into  the  formulation.  On  the  other  hand, 
the aqueous milieu present in liquid cleansers and body washes 
introduces issues not present in bars. For example, many benefit 
agents  are  lipophilic  in  nature  and  an  improperly  formulated 
liquid  cleaner  may  exhibit  phase  separation  or  creaming,  not 
unlike  the  separation  of  oil  and  water  phases  that  occurs  in 
some salad dressings. Chemical stability is also a consideration; 
the greater mobility afforded by a liquid environment increases 
the  likelihood  of  molecular  interactions,  and  water  itself  can 
participate  in  decomposition  reactions  (e.g.  hydrolysis).  An 
aqueous environment also increases the potential for microbial 
contamination.  Thus,  formulating  a  liquid  cleanser  or  body 
wash  presents  a  number  of  unique  challenges,  particularly  if 
the  product  is  intended  to  perform  a  function  beyond  simple 
cleansing such as delivering a benefit agent to the skin.

surfactants
Surfactants  are  the  workhorse  ingredient  in  any  personal 
cleansing product. Water is capable of removing some soils from 
the  skin;  however,  sebum  and  many  of  the  soils  acquired  on 
the  skin  through  incidental  contact  or  purposeful  application 
(e.g. topical medicaments) are lipophilic in nature and are not 
effectively removed from the skin’s surface by water alone. Sur-
factants,  or  surface‐active  agents,  have  a  dual  nature;  part  of 
a  surfactant  molecule’s  structure  is  lipophilic  and  part  of  it  is 
hydrophilic. This structural duality allows surfactant molecules 
to localize at the interface between water and lipophilic soils and 
lower  the  interfacial  tension  to  help  remove  the  soil.  Further, 
surfactants allow water to more effectively wet the skin’s surface 
and to solubilize lipopilic soils after removal, which prevents the 
soils from redepositing on the skin during rinsing. Surfactants 

are  also  responsible  for  the  formation  of  bubbles  and  lather, 
which most consumers view as necessary for effective cleansing.
As with cleansing bars, the surfactants used in liquid personal 
cleansers  and  body  washes  fall  into  two  primary  groups:  soaps 
and  non‐soaps,  also  known  as  synthetic  detergents  or  syndets. 
Soap is chemically the alkali salt of a fatty acid formed by reacting 
fatty  acid  with  a  strong  base,  a  process  known  as  saponification. 
The fatty acids used in soap manufacture are derived from animal 
(e.g.  tallow)  or  plant  sources  (e.g.  coconut  or  palm  kernel  oil). 
These sources differ in their distribution of fatty acid chain lengths, 
which determines properties such as skin compatibility and lather. 
Soap’s properties are also affected by external factors such as water 
hardness; soaps are generally more irritating and lather and rinse 
more  poorly  in  hard  water.  Some  specialty  body  washes  contain 
soaps derived from “natural” fatty acid sources such as coconut or 
soybean oil; these products will behave similarly to products con-
taining soaps derived from traditional fatty acid sources.

Syndets, which are derived from petroleum, were developed to 
overcome shortcomings associated with soaps (e.g. the influence 
of  water  hardness  on  performance)  and  to  expand  the  pool 
of  available  raw  materials  used  in  manufacture.  Syndets  vary 
widely  in  terms  of  their  chemical  structure,  physicochemical 
properties, and performance characteristics, including skin com-
patibility.  Syndets  are  not  necessarily  less  irritating  than  soaps. 
Sodium lauryl sulfate is an example; many dermatologists view 
alkyl  sulfates  as  model  skin  irritants.  Most  body  washes  are 
based  on  syndet  surfactant  systems,  and  because  syndets  have 
a wide range of performance characteristics, most body washes 
combine several surfactant types to achieve specific performance 
in the finished product. For example, alkyl sulfates, while having 
relatively poor skin compatibility, lather well. Combining an alkyl 
sulfate  with  an  amphoteric  surfactant  such  as  cocamidopropyl 
betaine  can  improve  both  lather  and  skin  compatibility.  Thus,  
formulating  a  body  wash  with  syndets  involves  choosing 
surfactants  to  optimize  performance  and  aesthetics,  balanced 
with cost considerations.

skin benefit agents
Some body washes contain ingredients that are intended to provide 
skin benefits beyond simple cleansing. Dry skin, which is a perva-
sive dermatologic issue, is one of the most common benefit targets 
for body washes. Not surprisingly, moisturizing ingredients such 
as  petrolatum,  various  oils,  shea  butter,  or  glycerin,  which  are 
found  in  leave‐on  moisturizers,  are  often  used  in  moisturizing 
body  washes.  However,  simply  including  a  moisturizing  ingre-
dient  in  a  rinse‐off  product  is  not  sufficient;  the  product  must 
deposit  an  effective  amount  of  the  material  on  skin  during  the 
cleansing  and  rinsing  process.  As  noted  earlier,  standards  for 
judging  moisturizing  efficacy  differ.  Clinical  testing  shows  that 
moisturizing body washes vary widely in their ability to provide a 
dry skin benefit, and that some may actually worsen dryness and 
irritation.

In  addition  to  moisturizing  ingredients  to  improve  dry  skin, 
body  washes  might  also  contain  particulates  such  as  beads  or 

98

hygiene products  Cleansers

pulverized fruit seeds to aid exfoliation. A particulate’s size, surface 
morphology (i.e. smooth or rough), and in‐use concentration will 
determine its ability to provide this benefit. Finally, body washes 
may contain ingredients that are intended to protect from or to 
reduce the effects of environmental insults. As with moisturizing 
ingredients, an efficacious amount of these materials must remain 
on skin after washing and rinsing.

other ingredients
Body wash formulas contain additional ingredients that act as for-
mulation and stability aids. The addition of polymers and salt alter 
a product’s viscosity, which can modify performance characteristics 
or improve  physical stability. Feel modifiers  such as  silicones  are 
sometimes  used  to  improve  the  in‐use  tactile  properties  of  body 
washes  that  deposit  lipophilic  benefit  agents  on  skin.  Chelating 
agents such as ethylenediamenetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and anti-
oxidants such as butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and are added to 
improve chemical stability, and buffering a body wash formula to 
a specific pH value can help inhibit microbial growth and improve 
the product’s chemical and physical stability.

Color and fragrance are an important part of the in‐use expe-
rience for many body washes. Colors are US Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic  Act  (FD&C)  approved  dyes  and  are  usually  present 
in relatively low amounts, so the likelihood of experiencing an 
issue with a body wash product because of dye is low. Fragrances 
are also usually present in relatively low amounts, although the 
apparent concentration may seem higher as a result of “bloom” 
that  results  from  lathering  a  body  wash  on  a  mesh  cleansing 
puff, the recommended application procedure for many of these 
products. The incidence of issues with modern fragrances is low. 
Some body washes incorporate natural oils to impart fragrance 
but these products are not necessarily without potential issues 
because some of these natural materials can cause sensitization.

in‐use performance considerations  
for body washes

cleansing ability
The  mechanical  action  associated  with  applying  a  personal 
cleanser to the body helps to loosen and remove some soils, but 
surfactants  are  the  primary  agents  responsible  for  aiding  soil 
removal, particularly lipophilic soils. However, surfactants and 
the cleansing products based on them differ in their abilities to 
remove sebum and lipophilic soils [1]. These cleansing perform-
ance differences are a greater consideration in body washes than 
in bars because of the relatively lower surfactant concentrations 
present in the former compared with the latter.

Because  lipophilic  soils  present  the  greatest  cleansing  chal-
lenge, oil‐based makeup materials are often used as model soils in 
tests intended to measure cleansing efficiency. These materials are 
poorly removed from the skin by water alone and their inherent 
color makes them easy to detect visually or instrumentally and 
measure on the skin’s surface.

To  test  the  cleaning  efficiency  of  various  methods  of  skin 
cleansing, we conducted a study comparing a moisturizing pet-
rolatum‐depositing body wash, a syndet detergent bar, and water 
for  cleansing  ability.  A  commercial  oil‐based  makeup  product 
served as a model soil and was applied to discrete treatment sites 
on the volar forearms of light‐skinned females. The makeup was 
allowed  to  dry  for  15  minutes  and  baseline  colorimeter  (L*) 
values  were  recorded  at  each  site.  Lather  was  generated  from 
each cleansing product in a controlled manner and applied to a 
randomly assigned site for 10 seconds with gloved fingers. Sites 
were rinsed with warm water for 15 seconds, allowed to air dry 
for 30 minutes then chromameter measurements were repeated. 
Data were analyzed by a mixed‐model procedure.

The results show that water has little effect on removing the model 
soil from the skin and while the makeup used in this study is per-
haps an extreme challenge, it nonetheless exemplifies why personal 
cleansing products are needed for soil removal. Not surprisingly, 
both personal cleansing products removed a significantly greater 
amount of the model soil than did water (P < 0.01), but the petro-
latum‐depositing body wash showed significantly greater makeup 
removal (i.e. cleansing efficiency) than the syndet bar (mean ΔL* 
values of 5.2 and 3.2, respectively; P < 0.02). Thus, this study shows 
that a petrolatum‐depositing body wash can clean efficiently and 
demonstrates that consumers are not restricted to the traditional 
bar form for their skin cleansing needs.

consumer understanding and need for 
moisturizing body washes
Patients with dry skin that accompanies a dermatologic condition 
often  require  a  high  level  of  skin  moisturization  and  may  be 
willing to tolerate poor moisturizer product aesthetics (e.g. skin 
feel) to obtain relief. A recent habits and practices study among 
a group of 558 adult females demonstrates that a consideration 
of  consumers’  varied  moisturization  needs  and  their  desired 
product  aesthetics  must  be  made  in  order  to  create  products 
that  improve  patient  compliance.  These  participants  answered 
questions that provided a range of information about their needs 
for body moisturization and their expectations for a moisturizing 
personal cleansing product (i.e. body wash).

Dry  skin  was  a  source  of  discomfort  for  a  majority  of  par-
ticipants;  62%  said  they  were  “very  bothered”  or  “bothered” 
by discomfort due to dry skin, while 20% said they were “not 
bothered”  by discomfort due  to dry skin.  Dry  skin  also  drove 
these consumers to apply leave‐on moisturizers; 68% said they 
“strongly  agreed”  or  “agreed”  that  they  needed  to  use  a  mois-
turizer  every  day  because  of  their  dry  skin,  while  only  16% 
“disagreed”  that  their  dry  skin  necessitated  daily  moisturizer 
application.  With  regard  to  moisturizing  cleanser  needs,  97% 
of  the  participants  stated  that  they  want  more  moisturization 
from their personal cleansing product. The needs fell into three 
groups that aligned with self‐perceived body skin type. Women 
in one group (very dry skin, 32% of the population) want a body 
wash product that delivers a high level of moisturization and a 
substantial skin feel; women in a second group (dry skin, 35% 

10. Personal Cleansers: Body Washes

99

of  the  population)  want  a  body  wash  product  that  delivers  a 
moderate  level  of  moisturization  and  a  somewhat  perceivable 
skin feel; and women in a third group (combination skin, 22% 
of the population) want a body wash that provides a low level of 
moisturization, rapid absorption of the moisturizing agent, and 
no residual skin feel.

This study is just one example of work conducted to under-
stand female consumers’ needs and expectations with regard to 
dry skin and moisturization. Traditionally, the needs and expec-
tations of their male counterparts were at best little studied and 
poorly understood, or at worst assumed to be the same as those 
of females. To gain insights into male consumers’ needs we con-
ducted a habits and practices study among an adult panel repre-
sentative of the US adult population comprising 303 males and 
313 females. As in the study above, participants responded to a 
series of questions related to attitudes towards body skin condi-
tion, body skin care habits and practices, and attitudes towards 
various cosmetic interventions.

This consumer research showed a strong contrast between the 
sexes in terms of their usage of products to care for their body 
skin. Males were on the whole less likely to use a treatment on 
their  body  than  were  females.  However,  dry  skin  ranked  high 
on the list of body skin care needs for both sexes. Moisturizer 
application was identified as the best treatment for dry skin, but 
males were less likely to apply moisturizer to their bodies than 
were females because of a perceived time constraint. Skin‐feel 
parameters  were  also  more  important  to  males  than  females; 
males  wanted  to  feel  clean,  not  sticky  or  greasy.  Surprisingly, 
the study results indicate that males are more likely to seek help 
from a dermatologist for their dry skin than females.

Moisturization from body washes
Dry skin on the body is a finding in many dermatologic con-
ditions and the results presented in the previous section show 
that even in the absence of frank skin disease dry skin ranks as 
one of the most common body skin complaints for both sexes. 
Skin that is dry can itch, and flaking on “problem” areas such 
as  legs,  knees,  and  elbows  is  aesthetically  unpleasing  and  can 
negatively  impact  self‐confidence.  Dry  skin  worsens  with  age, 

and  low  relative  humidity,  certain  medications,  and  excessive 
hot  water  exposure  are  among  the  factors  that  can  exacerbate 
dry skin. Personal cleansing products are also frequently cited 
as  agents  that  cause  or  worsen  dry  skin  via  removal  of  essen-
tial  skin  lipids  following  excessive  cleansing  or  cleansing  with 
“harsh” surfactants.

Dry skin signals that there is an insufficient level of moisture 
in  the  stratum  corneum.  Dermatologists  often  recommend 
application of leave‐on moisturizers to relieve symptoms and to 
provide  an  environment  in  which  the  skin  can  repair  stratum 
corneum  damage  associated  with  dry  skin.  However,  surveys 
show that a high percentage of dermatologists believe that their 
(female) patients do not moisturize as recommended, a lack of 
convenience being cited as the primary reason for the perceived 
non‐compliance.  This  pattern  is  consistent  with  the  results 
found in our consumer habits and practices research.

Coupling moisturization with an existing habit such as show-
ering  can  improve  compliance  but,  as  noted  earlier,  there  are 
different ways to define a moisturization or dry skin improve-
ment benefit, and simply including a moisturizing ingredient in 
a body wash formula does not guarantee that it will deposit on 
skin or remain in a sufficient amount after rinsing to provide a 
benefit.

We  conducted  a  leg  wash  clinical  study  using  the  industry 
standard  method  (leg  controlled  application  test)  comparing 
the dry skin improvement efficacy of a water control and three 
marketed moisturizing body wash products [2]. Treatment sites 
on the legs were washed in a controlled manner once daily for 
7  days  with  the  randomly  assigned  treatments.  Expert  visual 
scores and instrumental measurements collected at baseline and 
study end were used to assess the change in dry skin condition 
produced  by  the  treatments.  Expert  scoring  shows  a  range  of 
skin effects from these moisturizing products (Figure 10.1). Two 
of the body washes delivered significant (P < 0.05) improvement 
in dry skin relative to the water control, while one of the prod-
ucts had little effect on visible dry skin. Skin capacitance mea-
surements  showed  the  former  body  washes  improved  stratum 
corneum hydration (P < 0.05), while the latter reduced stratum 
corneum hydration relative to the control (P < 0.05), i.e. it dried 

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

s
s
e
n
y
r
d

l

a
u
s
i
V

)

M
E
S

±

e
g
n
a
h
c
n
a
e
M

(

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

–0.5

A

B

A

B

D

C

C

C

Pre-wash

3 hours
post-wash

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

r
e
t
a
e
r
G

Moisturizing body wash #1
Moisturizing body wash #2
Moisturizing body wash #3
Control

Letters show P    0.05 groupings
at each evaluation

Figure  10.1  Expert dryness scores after 7 days 
of  once‐daily  washing  with  marketed  body 
wash products. The results show marked differ-
ences in the products’ abilities to provide a dry 
skin  improvement  (i.e.  a  skin  moisturization 
benefit).

 
 
 
 
 
 
100

hygiene products  Cleansers

the skin. Expert erythema scoring and transepidemal water loss 
(TEWL) showed a similar pattern; two of the body wash prod-
ucts improved skin condition relative to control, while the third 
significantly  (P  <  0.05)  increased  erythema  and  TEWL.  This 
highlights the importance of understanding how products that 
are labeled as “moisturizing” perform clinically whenever pos-
sible. Simply recommending that a patient should use a mois-
turizing  body  wash  may  not  produce  an  optimal  benefit,  and 
the wrong product recommendation could actually worsen skin 
condition.

The  consumer  research  presented  in  the  previous  section 
also highlights the need for personal cleansing products that 
deliver  different  levels  of  moisturization  and  different  use 
aesthetics. Many personal cleansers are available in versions 
that ostensibly are designed for different skin needs, but such 
products  often  involve  relatively  minor  changes  in  formula-
tion  and  performance.  Body  washes,  because  of  the  greater 
formulation  flexibility  they  offer,  provide  an  opportunity  to 
develop product versions that offer different levels of perfor-
mance  to  meet  specific  needs.  For  example,  the  habits  and 
practices  study  conducted  among  females  identified  three 
primary consumer groups in terms of body skin moisturiza-
tion and body wash performance needs. Body wash products 
were  created  that  provide  different  levels  of  moisturization 
and dry skin improvement to meet the specific needs of these 
groups.

Who will benefit from using body washes?

The body wash is a relatively new‐to‐market personal cleanser 
form that will initially appeal to users with practical concerns 
or  to  users  seeking  experiential  benefits  such  as  better  lather 
and  in‐use  scent  intensity,  which  are  often  greater  than  a  bar 
can  deliver.  Where  body  washes  really  distinguish  themselves 
from traditional bar forms, however, is in their ability to pro-
vide higher order skin benefits. As we have shown, some body 
washes  can  provide  a  marked  skin  moisturization  benefit  that 
can affect not only the quantity but also the morphology of dry 
skin  flakes  (Figure  10.2).  A  large  segment  of  the  population 
can benefit from using this type of personal cleansing product. 
However, the following are two examples of conditions that may 
derive a particular benefit from a moisturizing body wash.

ashy skin
African‐Americans  and  other  dark‐skinned  individuals  fre-
quently  suffer  from  ashy  skin,  a  condition  in  which  the  skin’s 
surface  appears  grayish  or  chalky  as  a  result  of  excessive  dry-
ness. The condition is often exacerbated by soap bar use which 
is  common  among  this  population.  Moisturizers  or  other  oils 
can provide temporary relief but, as discussed earlier, conven-
ience  often  limits  willingness  to  use  leave‐on  products.  Pet-
rolatum  is  an  effective  moisturizer  but  neat  application  to  the 
skin is limited by both convenience and aesthetics. However, a 

Subject 17: Baseline 

Subject 3: Baseline 

Subject 13: Baseline 

Subject 17: Endpoint

Subject 3: Endpoint

Subject 13: Endpoint

(a)

(b)

Figure 10.2  Scanning electron microscope (SEM) photomicrographs of skin flakes adhering to tape strips taken from subjects’ legs before (a) and after 
(b) using a petrolatum‐depositing body wash for 3 weeks. Baseline samples show numerous large, thick, dry skin flakes; endpoint samples show fewer and 
thinner flakes.

'I am satisfied with the
appearance of my leg skin'

'I am confident in letting
others see my legs'

)

M
E
S
(
g
n
i
t
a
r
n
a
e
M

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

–3

P < 0.01

Baseline Endpoint

)

M
E
S
(
g
n
i
t
a
r
n
a
e
M

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

–3

P < 0.01

Baseline Endpoint

)

M
E
S
(
g
n
i
t
a
r
n
a
e
M

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

–3

10. Personal Cleansers: Body Washes

101

'Based on the appearance
of my leg skin, I feel good
about myself'

P < 0.01

Syndet bar
Body wash

Baseline Endpoint

Figure 10.3  Responses to psychosocial questions answered by African‐American subjects before and after using a syndet bar or petrolatum‐depositing body 
wash for 4 weeks. Items were rated on a +3 (strongly agree) to −3 (strongly disagree) scale. Ratings were not significantly different at baseline (P ≥ 0.48); endpoint 
ratings given by subjects assigned to use the body wash were significantly better than those given by subjects assigned to use the syndet bar (P < 0.01).

petrolatum‐depositing body wash may circumvent these issues 
while still delivering a skin benefit.

To test this hypothesis, we conducted a study among a group 
of 83 African‐American females who normally applied a leave‐
on  moisturizer  to  relieve  their  ashy  skin  [3].  Subjects  used  a 
randomly  assigned  syndet  bar  or  a  moisturizing  petrolatum‐ 
depositing  body  wash  product  for  daily  home  showering  for 
a  4‐week  period.  Endpoint  evaluations  showed  that  the  body 
wash  produced  significantly  greater  dermatologist‐scored  dry 
skin  improvement  and  subject  satisfaction  for  items  such  as 
ashy  skin  improvement  and  reducing  itchy/tight  feeling.  Per-
haps  most  importantly,  subjects  assigned  to  the  petrolatum‐
depositing  body  wash  noted  marked  improvement  in  their 
level of satisfaction with the appearance of their leg skin, their 
level of confidence in letting others see their legs, and in feeling 
good  about  themselves  because  of  the  appearance  of  their  leg 
skin  (Figure  10.3). These  results  indicate  that  proper  personal 
cleanser choice can not only improve the physical symptoms of 
dry skin but also impact how users feel about themselves.

atopic dermatitis
Atopic  dermatitis  is  a  chronically  relapsing  skin  disorder  that 
currently affects an estimated 10% of children and adults in the 
Western  Hemisphere  and  whose  incidence  is  growing  world-
wide. Symptoms include xerosis, skin hyperirritability, inflam-
mation,  and  pruritus.  Personal  cleansing  products  are  viewed 
as  a  triggering  factor  for  atopic  dermatitis  and  dermatologists 
frequently recommend that their patients avoid harsh cleansers. 
Therapy typically involves application of a prescription topical 
corticosteroid,  using  a  mild  cleanser  for  bathing  or  shower-
ing,  and  applying  a  moisturizer  within  3  minutes  of  the  bath 
or  shower  to  seal  in  moisture  [4].  The  latter  suggests  that  a 
moisturizing body wash may be ideally suited as a therapeutic 
adjunct in atopic dermatitis.

We conducted two studies among subjects undergoing treat-
ment for mild to moderate active atopic dermatitis to examine 
the  effect  of  using  a  moisturizing  petrolatum‐depositing  body 
wash  for  cleansing.  In  both  studies  a  moisturizing  syndet  bar, 
which  is  often  recommended  to  patients  undergoing  therapy, 
was used as a control. In one study both cleansers were paired 
with 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide cream. Subjects applied the 
topical corticosteroid as directed and used their assigned per-
sonal cleanser for daily showering. After 4 weeks SCORAD for 
subjects who used the moisturizing body wash was significantly 
(P  <  0.01)  lower  than  for  subject  who  used  the  bar.  Subjects 
using the body wash also noted significantly (P < 0.01) greater 
improvement in skin dryness and itching.

The  second  study  again  involved  subjects  with  mild  to 
moderate  active  atopic  dermatitis,  but  in  this  case  subjects 
assigned  to  use  the  petrolatum‐containing  moisturizing  body 
wash were prescribed a medium potency topical corticosteroid, 
while  subjects  assigned  to  use  the  moisturizing  syndet  bar 
were prescribed a standard high potency topical corticosteroid 
[5].  At  study  end  the  dermatologist  investigator  judged  that 
subjects  assigned  to  cleanse  with  the  petrolatum‐containing 
moisturizing  body  wash  showed  a  significantly  (P  <  0.01) 
greater  incidence  of  disease  clearing  than  did  subjects  who 
used the syndet bar. The greater therapeutic response observed 
in  the  body  wash  group  is  important,  but  so  is  the  fact  that 
it  was  achieved  using  a  lower  potency  topical  corticosteroid, 
which can potentially reduce cost and the risk of steroid‐related 
side effects. Subjects in the moisturizing body wash group also 
rated  their  skin  condition  better  for  a  number  of  parameters 
related  to  their  atopic  condition.  The  results  from  both  these 
studies indicate that therapeutic response in atopic dermatitis 
is  influenced  by  personal  cleanser  choice  and  again  highlight 
the  importance  of  personal  cleansing  product  choice  when 
treating skin disease.

 
 
 
 
 
 
102

hygiene products  Cleansers

conclusions

references

Body washes represent a new possibility in personal cleansing 
products,  not  only  because  of  their  ability  to  provide  effective 
cleansing and deliver an improved in‐use experience (e.g. lather 
amount,  rinse  feel,  scent  display)  compared  with  bar  cleanser 
forms,  but  also  because  they  have  a  potential  to  improve  skin 
condition  by  mitigating  dry  skin.  Moisturizing  body  washes 
are  in  a  position  to  meet  a  key  consumer  need  for  both  men 
and  women  –  dry  skin  improvement  on  the  body.  However, 
delivering a skin benefit from a rinse‐off product is challenging 
and  the  product  must  leave  an  effective  amount  of  benefit 
agent  on  the  skin  after  washing  and  rinsing.  Not  surprisingly, 
moisturizing body washes vary widely in their ability to deliver 
a benefit and recommenders must understand these differences 
when evaluating moisturizing body wash products.

1  Bechor  R,  Zlotogorski  A,  Dikstein  S.  (1988)  Effect  of  soaps  and 
detergents on the pH and casual lipid levels of the skin surface. J 
Appl Cosmetol 6, 123–8.

2  Ertel  KD,  Neumann  PB,  Hartwig  PM,  Rains  GY,  Keswick  BH. 
(1999)  Leg  wash  protocol  to  assess  the  skin  mositurization 
potential  of  personal  cleansing  products.  Int  J  Cosmet  Sci  21, 
383–97.

3  Grimes PE. (2001) Double‐blind study of a body wash containing 
petrolatum for relief of ashy, dry skin in African American women. 
Cosmet Dermatol 14, 25–7.

4  Hanifin J, Chan SC. (1996) Diagnosis and treatment of atopic der-

matitis. Dermatol Ther 1, 9–18.

5  Draelos ZD, Ertel K, Hartwig P, Rains G. (2004) The effect of two 
skin cleansing systems on moderate xerotic eczema. J Am Acad Der-
matol 50, 883–8.

ChAPTEr 11
Facial Cleansers and Cleansing Cloths

Thomas Barlage ,1 Susan Griffiths-Brophy,1 and Erik J. Hasenoehrl2
1Procter & Gamble Company, Sharon Woods Technical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA
2Procter & Gamble Company, Ivorydale Technical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 History	of	facial	cleansing.
•	 How	facial	cleansers	work.
•	 Types	of	facial	cleanser.
•	 Selecting	a	facial	cleanser.
•	 Cleansing	devices.

Do  you  think  that  choosing  a  cleanser  to  wash  your  face  is  a 
simple  task?  You  may  think  so,  but  with  the  myriad  of  spe-
cialty  cleanser  product  forms  and  devices  that  currently  exist, 
the  choice  may  prove  daunting.  Today,  more  than  ever,  facial 
cleansing plays an important role in the lives of many consum-
ers.  Cleansing  is  not  only  a  means  to  remove  dead  skin,  dirt, 
sebaceous  oil,  and  cosmetics,  but  also  a  first  step  in  the  over-
all skin care routine, preparing skin for moisturizers and other 
treatments.  Facial  cleansing  also  plays  an  important  role,  well 
beyond skin care, in maintaining the psychological wellbeing of 
women by helping to provide a ritualistic sense of renewal and 
rejuvenation.

Dermatologists have a wide variety of cleansing technologies 
– ranging from water to a traditional bar of soap – at their dis-
posal to meet the facial cleansing needs of different skin types 
and  soil  loads  and  can  usually  incorporate  patient  preference 
into selection as well. This chapter will (1) provide an overview 
of the many specialty facial cleanser technologies available; (2) 
recommend which technologies are best suited to each skin type 
and cleansing need; (3) provide an in-depth understanding of 
substrate-based  facial  cleansers;  and,  (4)  give  an  overview  of 
cleansing devices, which represent newest technology available 
for cleansing one’s face.

A brief history of facial cleansing

The  earliest  form  of  facial  cleansing  existed  well  before  Homo 
sapiens inhabited earth. Early facial cleansing consisted prima-
rily of a quick splash or rinse of the face with cold water. In fact, 

this  habit  can  still  be  observed  in  the  animal  kingdom  today 
among many primates [1].

The first recorded use of facial cleansing utilizing more than 
water was among the ancient Egyptians in 10000 BC [2]. Egyp-
tians were heavy users of makeups made from a base of metal-
lic  ores  which  contained  natural  dyes  for  color;  this  mixture 
was then painted onto the face. In this period, early Egyptians 
typically bathed and removed makeup in a river. Their cleans-
ers consisted of animal fat mixed with lime and perfume, and 
were  similar  to  some  of  the  homemade  natural  soaps  in  use 
today. Facial cleansing and body cleansing were done with the 
same soap. During the Middle Ages, the crusaders brought back 
soap from the Far East to Europe which was used for bathing 
and  facial  cleansing.  In  the  early  1900 s,  bar  soap  was  used  to 
cleanse the face, and in the mid-1950 s, cold cream, an emulsi-
fied cleanser, was introduced.

In  the  past  20  years,  specialty  facial  cleansers  have  become 
quite  mainstream,  a  result  of  an  explosion  in  cleansing  tech-
nology which has led to a multitude of high-quality, relatively 
low-cost cleansers. More recently, cleansing devices have been 
introduced to the consumer. Over the years, technical develop-
ments in facial cleansing have focused on three primary areas: 
(1) better removal of exfoliated skin, dirt, soil, excess sebaceous 
oil, and makeup; (2) synthetic surfactants that induce less skin 
barrier  damage  and  are  thus  less  likely  to  dry  skin;  (3)  incor-
poration of cleansing chemistry onto cleansing cloths; and (4) 
introduction of cleansing devices that assist the performance of 
facial cleansers.

Patients tend to take more care with cleaning and maintain-
ing  their  face  than  the  rest  of  their  body.  As  such,  consumer 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

103

104

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

product  companies  have  developed  many  different  technolo-
gies and cleansing forms that benefit different facial skin types, 
cleansing  rituals,  and  soil  loads.  Since  there  is  such  a  broad 
array  of  cleansing  forms,  specialty  facial  cleansers  (including 
devices)  have  become  a  very  fragmented  category  of  prod-
ucts  which  utilize  more  different  technologies  than  most 
other  cleaning  applications.  Although  a  wide  range  of  prod-
ucts is available, these products share four common goals: (1) 
to  clean  skin  (removing  surface  dirt  and  all  makeup);  (2)  to 
provide  a  basic  level  of  exfoliation;  (3)  to  remove  potentially 
harmful micro-organisms (bacteria); and (4) to cause minimal 
damage to the epidermis and stratum corneum. Additionally, 
facial cleansers are required to remove a myriad of chemicals 
and  biological  materials,  ranging  from  the  latest  waterproof 
makeup to excess skin oils and upper layers of stratum corneum  
(exfoliated skin).

how facial cleansers work

It  is  well-understood  that  the  use  of  harsh  surfactants  and/or 
over-washing  skin  can  result  in  over-removal  or  distortion  of 
stratum  corneum  and  intercellular  lipids,  which  can  lead  to 
reduced skin barrier function [3].

While the wide array of facial cleanser technologies all pro-
vide  basic  levels  of  skin  cleansing,  they  all  clean  skin  slightly 
differently.  The  mechanisms  by  which  cleansing  is  accom-
plished can be grouped into three main categories: (1) cleans-
ing  by  chemistry;  (2)  cleansing  by  physical  action;  and  (3)  in 
many cases, cleansing by a combination of both chemistry and 
physical action.

Chemistry of cleansing
Two classes of chemicals are used in facial cleansers and are 
responsible for the cleaning effect: surfactants and solvents. 
Both of these types of chemicals interact with dirt, soil, and 
skin  to  remove  unwanted  material.  Surfactants  and  sol-
vents work via two different chemical mechanisms to effect 
removal of these materials. Understanding these mechanistic 
differences provides dermatologists with the insight needed 
to prescribe a cleansing regimen based on individual patient 
needs.

Surfactants
Surfactants  or  “surface  acting  agents”  are  usually  organic 
compounds  that  are  amphiphilic,  meaning  they  contain  both 
hydrophilic groups and hydrophobic groups. The combination 
of  both  hydrophilic  and  hydrophobic  groups  uniquely  makes 
surfactants soluble in both oil and water.

enough concentration to form a micelle, a level called the “criti-
cal micelle concentration” (CMC), which is also the minimum 
surfactant  concentration  required  to  clean  sebaceous  oil,  cos-
metics, etc. When micelles form in water, their tails form a core 
that  encapsulates  an  oil  droplet,  and  their  (ionic/polar)  heads 
form an outer shell that maintains contact with water. This pro-
cess is called emulsification.

Surfactants  clean  skin  by  emulsifying  oily  components  on 
the surface of skin with water. Once emulsified, the oil can be 
easily rinsed from skin during the post wash or rinse process. 
The stronger the surfactant, the more hydrophobic (oil-based) 
material  removed,  the  greater  the  potential  skin  damage  due 
to excessive removal of naturally occurring skin lipids, and the 
greater the ensuing compromise of optimal skin barrier func-
tion, therefore correct/careful formulation of these surfactants 
is  required  to  ensure  proper  mildness.  Recently  marketed 
products, show that with careful formulation very strong sur-
factants such as sodium laurel sulfate (SLS) can be well toler-
ated by skin. All surfactant-based cleansers require water and 
generally include a rinsing step. They are best suited to removal 
of oily residue. Unfortunately, two problems have been associ-
ated with cleansing with surfactants (one real and one largely 
folk-lore).  First,  because  of  their  powerful  cleansing  action, 
overuse  may  completely  eliminate  the  protective  lipid  barrier 
on the surface of skin, resulting in irritation and dryness. Sec-
ond, consumers for years have heard negative stories regarding 
the alkaline (pH around 9) nature of these products. Wrongly 
assuming that since skin pH is about 5, washing with these high 
pH surfactants can lead to an increase in skin pH. Recent data 
suggest  that  that  the  skins  natural  buffering  capacity  is  more 
than adequate to eliminate any unwarranted impact of the pH 
of these products.

Classical surfactants used  in facial  cleansers  are  categorized 
into  four  primary  groups:  cationic,  anionic,  amphoteric,  and 
non-ionic.
•	 Cationic  surfactants  used  alone  are  generally  poorly  toler-
ated, and are now rarely used in skin care products without 
carful formulation into coaceravate systems.

•	 Anionic surfactants,  such  as  linear  alkyl  sulfates,  consist  of 
molecules with a negatively charged “head” and a long hydro-
phobic “tail”. Anionic surfactants are widely used because of 
their good lathering and detergent properties.

•	 amphoteric  (zwitterionic)  surfactants,  such  as  the  betaines 
and alkylamino acids, are well-tolerated and lather well, and 
are used in facial cleansers.

•	 Non-ionic  surfactants,  such  as  polyglucosides  and  sorbitan 
esters, consist of overall uncharged molecules. They are very 
mild  (tolerated  better  than  anionic,  cationic  surfactants  on 
skin), but do not lather particularly well.

Surfactants  work  by  reducing  the  interfacial  tension  (the 
energy that keeps water and oil separated) between oil and water 
by being adsorbed at the oil–water interface. Once adsorbed at 
the  interface,  cleaning  surfactants  assemble  into  a  low-energy 
aggregate called a micelle. Surfactant needs to be present at high 

Some  surfactants  are  harsh  to  the  skin  while  others  are  very 
mild.  Because  of  the  wide  variety  of  available  surfactants,  not 
all surfactant-based cleansers are the same. It is important for 
patients to use products that best fit their skin type. Today, most 
cleansers use synthetic surfactants.

11. Facial Cleansers and Cleansing Cloths

105

Solvents
A solvent is a liquid that dissolves a solid or another liquid into 
a  homogeneous  solution.  Solvent-based  systems  clean  skin  by 
dissolving natural sebaceous oil and external oils applied to skin 
via  cosmetics  and  similar  materials.  Solvents  work  under  the 
chemical premise that “like dissolves like”. Solvents can be clas-
sified broadly into two categories: polar and non-polar. Typical 
non-polar solvents used in facial cleansing, such as mineral oil 
or petrolatum, are from the oil family, whereas typical polar sol-
vents used in cleansing, such as isopropyl alcohol and ethanol, 
are from the alcohol family. Solvent-based cleansers are usually 
not used in conjunction with water; rather, they are applied and 
then “wiped” off with a tissue or cotton ball.

Solvent-based  cleansers  should  be  chosen  carefully  on  the 
basis  of  cleansing  need.  Non-polar  solvents  work  well  for 
removing  oil-based  makeups  and  cosmetics  but  have  little 
effect  on  water-based  formulations.  Similarly,  alcohol-based 
systems work well on water-based makeups. It is also impor-
tant to note that alcohol-based systems can dry skin, a benefit 
for  younger  consumers  with  acne-prone  skin  but  a  potential 
disadvantage for older consumers and those with dry skin. On 
the other hand, oil-based products can leave a greasy or oily 
residue, which is beneficial for consumers with dry skin, but 
undesirable  for  those  with  normal.  However,  recent  studies 
have shown that a patient with oily skin can benefit from using 
an oil-based or emollient cleanser. By using an oil to cleanse 
the skin, dirt and excess oil are removed while leaving the skin 
conditioned. Hence, the skin is not totally void of the natural 
skin  oils  and  the  body  does  feel  the  need  to  generate  excess 
oil.  Choosing  a  solvent-based  cleanser  based  on  skin  type  is 
critical.

Physical cleaning
An alternative to chemical cleansing is physical cleaning of skin. 
Essentially physics, primarily in the form of friction, also plays 
an  important  role  in  cleansing.  In  facial  cleansing,  friction  is 
generated primarily by the direct interaction of a washcloth, tis-
sue, cotton ball, cleansing cloth, or mechanical device with the 
surface of skin. Friction works to help dislodge soils, as well as 
increase the interaction of chemical cleaning agents (surfactants 
and solvents) with soils. The role of friction will be covered in 
more detail in the section on substrate cleansers.

Types of facial cleanser

Seven primary and popular forms of facial cleansers exist (other 
rarely  used  forms  exist  but  are  not  covered  in  this  chapter). 
These cleansers can be categorized as follows: lathering cleans-
ers, emollient cleansers, milks, scrubs, toners, dry lathering cleans-
ing  cloths,  and  wet  cleansing  cloths.  Each  form  is  described  in 
detail below. A summary of cleansers, technologies, and uses is 
shown in Table 11.1.

Lathering cleansers
While  lathering  cleansers  constitute  one  broad  classification, 
they all have one unique characteristic that separates them from 
all other cleansing forms – they all generate lather when used in 
the cleansing process. Typically, these cleansers are formulated 
with a surfactant level greater than the CMC, such that excess 
surfactant  can  incorporate  air  and  form  lather.  Additionally, 
these cleaners contain surfactants that have short hydrophobic 
chains; shorter chains enable faster and higher levels of lather. 

Table 11.1  	Cleanser	technology	and	skin	types.

Type of facial cleanser

Primary cleaning mechanism

Key characteristics

Liquid	lathering	cleansers

Emulsification

Forms	lather	when	wet

Emollient	cleansers

Emulsification

Non-lathering

Primary recommended 
skin type

Oily

Dry

Scrubs

Milks

Toners

Emulsification

Dissolution

Dissolution

Non-lathering,	particulates	provide	exfoliation	
benefit

Dry,	flakey

High	conditioning,	generally	not	used	with	water

Dry	skin

Low	viscosity	liquid,	pore	tightening

Oily/young
Acne	prone

All	skin	types

Dry	cleansing	cloths

Emulsification	and	physical	removal

Provide	multiple	benefits:	cleansing,	conditioning,	
exfoliating,	toning

Wet	cleansing	cloths

Dissolution	and	physical	removal

Cleansing	device	+	cleanser Mechanical	dissolution	and	physical	removal

Provide	multiple	benefits:	cleansing,	conditioning,	
exfoliating,	toning.	Generally	not	used	with	
water.

Dry	skin

Provide	multiple	benefits:
cleansing,	exfoliation,	conditioning.	Generally	
used	with	appropriate	cleanser	for	skin	type.

All	skin	types

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

Most lathering cleansers sold today utilize synthetic surfactants 
that  have  been  especially  designed  to  be  mild  to  skin.  These 
synthetic surfactants have little interaction with skin lipids and 
therefore produce substantially less skin damage than naturally 
derived surfactants. However, this quality also compromises to 
a  small  extent  their  capability  to  remove  oil-soluble  makeups. 
Many classes of surfactants are used in facial cleansers two com-
mon ones include sarcosinates and betaines [4]. Even formula-
tions with newer surfactants tend to exhibit some skin barrier 
damage in clinical studies. Thus, lathering cleansers are gener-
ally warranted for patients with normal to oily skin or those who 
are removing a high cosmetic load (makeup, lipstick, or other 
cosmetic  load).  Interestingly,  there  is  a  strong  consumer  bias 
towards  lathering  cleansers  since  high  levels  of  lather  provide 
a very strong signal to consumers that the cleanser is working.

Lathering  cleansers  clean  through  the  chemical  process  of 
emulsification. In other words, the cleanser emulsifies dirt and 
oils,  by  suspending  or  emulsifying  materials,  thus  permitting 
them to be removed from skin during the rinse process. Many 
formulators of lathering cleanser products have tried to incor-
porate  skin  conditioning  technologies  that  enable  deposition 
of  skin  conditioners  onto  skin.  Unfortunately,  these  technolo-
gies have generally been less successful at providing skin benefit 
ingredients than other cleansing forms.

Emollient (oil-based) cleansers
Emollient  cleansers  are  a  milder  alternative  to  lather  cleans-
ers.  Although  they  clean  via  emulsification,  they  do  not  form 
lather  in  the  presence  of  water.  Surprisingly,  however  they  do 
form a structure that suspends dirt and makeup within formula-
tion. Typically, these cleansers provide a very high level of soil 
removal without drying the skin to the same degree as lather-
ing cleansers. Emollient cleansers generally consist of a special 
formulation of lathering surfactants in which either lathering is 
suppressed by an oil (e.g., mineral oil) or the surfactant forms a 
complex  with  another  charged  molecule  to  inhibit  the  forma-
tion of the air-water interface necessary to provide lather.

Clinically, emollient cleansers are generally less harsh on skin 
than lathering cleansers. However, consumers sometimes com-
plain that emollient cleansers leave a residual film on skin that 
does  not  satisfy  some  cleansing  expectations.  Typically,  these 
cleansers  are  best  suited  to  those  patients  with  high  cleansing 
needs who also suffer from dry skin or patients with very oily 
skin.

Scrubs
Facial  scrubs  can  be  either  lathering  of  emollient-based.  They 
generally contain small particles of natural or polymeric ingre-
dients. Scrubs are intended to provide a deep cleansing experi-
ence including a higher level of skin exfoliation due to abrasion 
with the particles. A non-exhaustive list of natural scrub parti-
cles  includes  seeds  of  many  fruits  (e.g.,  peach,  apple,  apricot), 
nut shells (e.g., almond, walnut), grains (e.g., oats, wheat), and 
sandalwood.  Synthetic  scrub  particles  include  polyethylene  or 

polypropylene beads. Because of their abrasive nature, patients 
with sensitive skin may not want to use these as their daily use 
cleanser. For those with sensitive skin, it is recommended that 
scrub  cleansers  be  used  only  once  or  twice  a  week  in  normal 
cleansing routines, due to the abrasive nature of a facial scrub.

Cleansing milks
Milks  are  a  form  of  cleansers  that  are  generally  not  used  in 
conjunction with water. Because they are not used in conjunc-
tion  with  a  water  rinse,  cleansing  milks  are  ideal  for  deposit-
ing beneficial agents, such as humectants, petrolatum, vitamins, 
and  desquamatory  ingredients,  onto  the  skin.  These  cleansers 
are a good choice for cleaning dry or other diseased skin. One 
drawback is that the residual ingredients left on skin can make 
skin feel as though cleansing is incomplete. Milks work by dis-
solving, as opposed to emulsifying, oils and dirt. Typically they 
are applied like a lotion and then wiped off with a tissue, cotton 
ball, or towel.

Toners
Toners are a class of facial cleansers formulated to clean skin and 
minimize the appearance of pores. This class of cleanser utilizes 
solvency  as  the  primary  mode  of  cleaning.  Toners  are  usually 
applied with a physical substrate, such as cotton balls, tissues, 
or wash cloths; however, some newer toners can be sprayed on 
and wiped off. In most cases, toners are used in the absence of 
water.  Toner  formulations  generally  utilize  alcohol  as  the  sol-
vent  of  choice  and  some  level  of  humectants.  Toners  usually 
exist in three strengths: (1) mild (0–10% alcohol, refresher); (2) 
medium (10–20% alcohol; tonic); and (3) strong (20–60% alco-
hol, astringent). More recently, some companies have developed 
two-phase toners, which consist of a solvent and an immiscible 
oil formulated to provide astringent benefits while minimizing 
the dry skin feeling. Typical uses of toners are makeup removal 
and pore cleaning associated with acne care. Toners are popular 
with teenagers and young adults because of the perceived acne 
benefits and pore tightening associated with this technology.

Substrate cleansers
Introduced  in  the  early  2000 s,  cleansing  cloths  are  disposable 
substrates that are pretreated with low levels of mild detergents. 
Cleaning is driven by both physics (friction from the interaction 
between  cloth  and  skin)  and  chemistry  (either  emulsification 
or  dissolution).  This  combined  action  often  results  in  cleaner 
skin and offers several key advantages for product formulation. 
Conditioning ingredients can be incorporated into or placed on 
the  substrate  which  can  help  to  maintain  surfactant  mildness 
while  providing  the  patient  with  additional  skin  benefits  [5]. 
Additionally, the cloths themselves can be designed to meet the 
needs of different skin types.

Substrates used in cleansing cloths generally consist of natural 
fibers, such as cotton; synthetic fibers, such as rayon, polyester 
terphalate (PET) or polypropylene; or a blend of one or more of 
these fibers. Depending upon the fibers used and the nonwoven 

11. Facial Cleansers and Cleansing Cloths

107

manufacturing process, the substrate texture can be tailored to 
meet  differing  expectations  from  very  soft  to  rough,  meaning 
that different exfoliation levels can be delivered to the consumer. 
Technologies used on cleansing cloths include the printing of a 
polymer on the cloth itself, which further improves exfoliation 
and cleansing capabilities.

Cleansing  cloths  utilize  multiple  cleansing  mechanisms  and 
can be formulated with as little as 25% of the surfactant used in 
liquid cleansers [6]. This lower surfactant level can translate to 
less skin damage. Another key trait of substrate cleansing cloths 
is  that  dirt,  makeup  and  oil  are  picked  up  by  and  contained 
within the cloth. The visible dirt and oils on the cloth provide a 
subtle clue to patients that the cleansing step is complete, reduc-
ing  over  cleansing,  another  contributor  to  skin  damage.  Two 
popular forms of substrate-based cleansers exist today: (1) dry, 
or water activated cleansing cloths; and (2) wet cleansing cloths.

Dry lathering cleansing cloths
Dry  cleansing  cloths  are  disposable  cloths  that  have  lathering 
surfactants  dried  onto  the  cloths  during  the  manufacturing 
process.  They  are  purchased  dry  and  are  used  after  activated 
with water. These cloths generate a generous lather, similar to a 
liquid lathering cleanser, due to the cloth structure incorporat-
ing air as the cloth is rubbed together with water during use. The 
combination of rich lather and enhanced tactile feel of the cloth 
provides an enhanced cleansing experience to the consumer.

Many  of  these  products  contain  and  deposit  on  to  stratum 
corneum moisturizing ingredients like petrolatum and glycerin. 
This  enables  dry  cleansing  cloths  to  deliver  multiple  skin  care 
benefits in one product: (1) high level of cleansing; (2) high level 
of exfoliation; (3) minimal reduction in skin barrier function; 
(4) rich lather; (5) and, in the case of at least one product, sig-
nificant  moisturization  [7].  This  combination  of  benefits  can 
eliminate the need for other specialty cleansing products such 
as toners and exfoliators.

One  unique  advantage  of  dry  cleansing  cloth  technology, 
which  enables  multiple  benefits,  is  that  different  ingredients 
can be placed in different “zones” on a cloth. This enables for-
mulators to use ingredients that are not compatible in a liquid 
cleanser. Olay Daily Facials is one example in which the cleans-
ing surfactant, skin conditioner, and fragrance are applied sepa-
rately and to different zones of a cloth. This permits the product 
to  deposit  conditioning  ingredients  directly  onto  skin  during 
washing. Studies have shown that separate addition of petrola-
tum onto a cleansing cloth provided hydration and transepider-
mal waterloss (TEWL) benefits and resulted in a smoother skin 
surface, a more compact SC, and well-defined lipid bilayers at 
the surface of the SC [8].

Wet cleansing cloths
Wet  cleansing  cloths  are  shipped  pre-moistened  and  designed 
to cleanse without water or rinsing. They originated from dis-
posable  wipe  technology  for  use  with  babies.  However,  these 
cleansing cloths have recently become quite popular for water-

less cleansing and makeup removal. Wet cloths are non-lather-
ing and since they are not rinsed with water they have the ability 
to incorporate and deposit small amounts of beneficial ingredi-
ents such a humectants and lipids onto the skin. Similar to dry 
cloths, differences in formulation and substrate choices enable 
wet cloths to suit varying skin types.

Wet cleansing cloths are often marketed as makeup removers 
and can be used either for full face cleansing or as a first step to 
remove makeup prior to traditional cleansing. As this product is 
not designed to be rinsed, there is generally a trade-off between 
efficacy and skin feel. Wet cloths formulated to remove difficult 
makeup require additional cleansing agents which can impact 
skin  feel.  Conversely,  wet  cloths  that  feel  very  refreshing  may 
not have the level of surfactants needed to remove all makeup.

While wet cloths do not provide the typical cleansing experi-
ence, due to the fact that some patients do not like the cleansing 
agents left on the skin (when used without rinsing), wet cleans-
ing  cloths  continue  to  be  popular  from  a  convenience  stand-
point. Patients can use wet cleansing cloths while on-the-go or 
when a sink or shower is not available.

Cleansing devices
Cleansing  devices  were  recently  introduced  to  patients  and 
are  motor-powered  implements  with  a  very  soft  brush  head. 
The  facial  cleanser  is  applied  to  the  brush  head  and  generates 
later  when  pressed  gently  against  the  skin’s  surface.  Cleansing 
devices clean the skin better than cleanser alone across any dirt 
substrate  [9].  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  surfactant-based 
cleansers work more efficiently with a device than an emulsion 
cleanser  alone.  Cleansing  devices  have  the  ability  to  clean  the 
more difficult areas of the face, including the area at the base of 
the nose. However, harsh cleansers and facial scrubs containing 
large-sized exfoliant particles should not be used with cleansing 
devices. This could potentially cause the skin to become void of 
natural oils. Thus, it is very important to be selective in choosing 
the appropriate cleanser to use with a cleansing device.

guide to selecting facial cleansers

Recommending  a  facial  cleansing  regimen  can  be  a  daunting 
task given the multitude of cleansing forms available. To choose 
the most appropriate cleanser, physicians should consider skin 
type, skin problems, and any skin allergies.

The  following  section  provides  a  short  reference  guide  and 
tools to help in selection of cleansers based on patient skin type, 
cleansing  need,  and  preference.  The  selection  guide  is  broken 
into three parts or strategies: (1) selection based on skin type; 
(2) selection based on cleansing form; and, (3) selection based 
on skin problems.

Selection based on skin type
The first step in selecting a facial cleanser is to assess the patient’s 
skin type and to categorize it as dry, oily or normal. Once skin 

108

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

type  has  been  determined,  assess  the  skin  for  any  problems, 
such  as  acne,  excessive  flakiness,  and  dryness.  Table  11.1 sys-
tematically lists the main facial cleansers covered in this chapter, 
and highlights the key characteristics of each cleanser and the 
best cleanser for each skin type.

Selection based on cleanser form/cleansing ritual
The second strategy for selecting facial cleansers is to first assess 
a patient’s cleansing ritual preference. Figure 11.1 depicts one of 
the main cleansing ritual preferences: no substrate/substrate and 
lathering/non-lathering. To use this approach most effectively, 
first, identify the quadrant of Figure 11.1 that best describes the 
patient’s  ritual  preference,  and  then  use  Table  11.1 to  select  a 
facial cleanser that best matches the patient’s skin type. This may 
be  the  best  approach  to  selecting  a  cleanser  when  compliance 
with skin care is critical.

Selection based on skin problems
In many cases, cleanser selection may be somewhat subjective. 
The  charts  in  the  figures  which  follow  provide  a  hierarchy  of 
the primary benefits associated with facial cleansers ranked by 
cleanser type. The benefits described in this section are clean-
ing excess sebaceous oil, cleaning dirt and makeup loads, exfo-
liation, and mildness to skin. Considering these benefits when 
prescribing a cleansing routine may prove useful in providing a 
cleanser that fully meets patient expectation and needs.

Cleaning excess sebaceous oil
Removal of excess sebaceous oil is a significant concern of teens 
and  young  adults.  Cleansing  of  sebaceous  oil  is  best  accom-
plished with either lathering products that emulsify the oils or 
toners that are specifically formulated to solubilize sebaceous oil. 
These products and can also give users a sense of control over 
oily skin by providing pore tightening benefits (Figure 11.2).

Cleansing (sebaceous oil)

Emollient

Milk

Poor

Scrub

Wet wipe

Lathering
cleanser

Toner
(alcohol-based)

Dry wipe

Excellent

Figure 11.2  Products for the removal of excess sebaceous oil.

Cleaning dirt and makeup
One  of  the  primary  benefits  of  a  facial  cleanser  is  removal  of 
high makeup loads and dirt. By a wide margin, dirt and makeup 
removal  is  best  performed  by  substrate  cleansers.  The  high 
cleansing capability of these cleansers is due to their capability 
to provide both physical and chemical cleaning, in addition to 
the substrates’ ability to trap and hold dirt and oil within their 
fibers (Figure 11.3).

Exfoliation: removing dry dead skin cells
When high exfoliation is required, because of aging or for other 
reasons, products that provide physical cleansing are an appro-
priate choice because they also provide the highest level of exfo-
liation. Exfoliation is due to physical abrasion, which removes 
the  top  layers  of  skin.  As  a  side  note,  most  cleansers  provide 
low  to  insignificant  levels  of  exfoliation;  thus,  if  exfoliation  is 
the main skin need, a substrate-based cleanser or facial scrub is 
highly recommended (Figure 11.4).

Cleanser mildness
For  much  of  facial  cleansing  history,  cleanser  mildness  was  a 
significant  concern.  Now,  with  new  surfactant  and  cleansing 
technologies, most specialty facial cleansers (with the exception 

e
t
a
r
t
s
b
u
S

e
t
a
r
t
s
b
u
s
o
N

Cleanser form

Cleansing (makeup)

Dry cleansing cloth

Toner

Wet cleansing cloth

Milk

Poor

Milk

Scrub

Emollient

Toner (for non-
waterproof makeup)

Lathering
cleanser

Dry wipe

Wet wipe

Excellent

Figure 11.3  Products for the removal of dirt and makeup.

Emollient

Exfoliation

Lathering

Lathering

Scrub

Non lathering

Figure 11.1  One of the main cleansing ritual preferences: no substrate/sub-
strate and lathering/non-lathering.

Milk

Lathering cleanser

Scrub

Emollient

Toner

Low

Wet wipe

Dry wipe

High

Figure 11.4  Products for the removal of dry, dead skin cells.

 
Mildness/conditioning

Dry wipe

Emollient

Lathering cleanser

Toner

Scrub

Low

Wet wipe

Milk

High

references

11. Facial Cleansers and Cleansing Cloths

109

for removing the new and more durable makeups and mascaras 
that are entering the market. Technical development will con-
tinue to focus on low damage to skin and improved delivery of 
specially directed skin ingredients during the cleansing process.

Figure 11.5  Products for patients for whom dry skin is a key complaint.

of toners) provide close to neutral or better mildness. This chart 
ranks cleansing forms for skin for patients for whom dry skin is 
a key complaint (Figure 11.5).

Summary

Many different facial cleansing forms exist today. All can be cat-
egorized on the basis of three factors: (1) the type of chemistry 
used, either surfactant or solvent-based; (2) whether or not the 
cleansing form creates lather; and (3) whether or not the cleans-
ing  form  incorporates  physical  cleansing  as  well  as  chemical 
cleansing. All of these facial cleansing forms provide the basic 
level  of  cleansing  required  to  maintain  healthy  skin;  however, 
different skin types benefit from different cleansing forms, and 
patient preference drives usage and compliance.

The future of the facial cleansing category is bright. Significant 
innovation  is  expected  to  continue  for  the  foreseeable  future, 
particularly in substrate cleanser applications and formulations 

1  Bolles  RC.  (1960)  Grooming  behavior  in  the  rat.  J  Comp  Physiol 

Psychol 53(3), 306–310.

2  Nicholson PT, Shaw I. (2000) Ancient Egyptian Materials and Tech-

nology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

3  Ananthapadmanabhan  KP,  Moore  DJ,  Subramanyan  K,  Misra  M, 
Meyer  F.  (2004)  Cleansing  without  compromise:  the  impact  of 
cleansers on the skin barrier and the technology of mild cleansing. 
Dermatol Ther 17(1), 16–25.

4  Paye M, Barel AO, Maibach HI. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and 

Technology, 2 nd edn. London: Informa Health Care.

5  Kinderdine S, et al. (2004) The evolution of facial cleansing: Substrate 
cleansers provide mildness benefits of leading soap and syndet. P&G 
Beauty. Science poster presentation, 62 nd Annual Meeting of the 
American Academy of Dermatology, February 6–11, 2004.

6  Unpublished data. P & G Beauty, Cincinnati, Ohio. Comparison of 
surfactant level in Olay Foaming Face Wash, and Olay Daily Facials.

7  McAtee D, et al. US patent 6280757 8–28–2001.
8  Coffindaffer  T,  et  al.  Assessment  of  leading  facial  skin  cleansers  by 
microscopic evaluation of the stratum corneum. P&G Beauty Science 
poster presentation. 62 nd Annual Meeting of the American Acad-
emy of Dermatology, February 6–11, 2004.

9  Czetty,  B,  et  al.  Powered  devices  for  facial  cleansing:  Should  they 
occupy space in the facial cleansing device toolbox? Presented at the 
SCC Annual Scientific Meeting, December 2010.

CHAPTEr 12
Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

Duane Charbonneau
Procter and Gamble Company, Health Sciences Institute, Mason, OH, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Hands	are	common	sources	for	microbial	contamination	and	microbial	pathogen	transfer.
•	 Cleansers	and	sanitizer	products	reduce	transient	microbes	on	the	skin	surface	with	the	goal	of	reducing	the	spread	of	infectious	

disease.

•	 Hand	cleansing	products	include	liquid	soaps	with	and	without	antimicrobial	agents,	alcohol-based	hand	sanitizers,	and	non-alcohol-

based	sanitizers.

•	 Hands	with	damaged	skin	harbor	more	transient	microorganisms	than	healthy	hands.
•	 Hand	hygiene	technologies	have	been	demonstrated	to	reduce	the	spread	of	nosocomial	infections.

Introduction

Hand  cleansers  and  hand  sanitizers  were  developed  to  reduce 
transient microbes on the skin to help limit the spread of infec-
tious disease. This class of products includes liquid soaps, anti-
microbial liquid soaps, alcohol-based hand sanitizers, and non-
alcohol-based hand sanitizers.

Growing  concern  exists  about  the  spread  of  infectious  dis-
ease.  Despite  historical  expectations  that  such  disease  would 
wane in the United States over the course of the 20th century, 
between 1980 and 1992, the death rate due to infectious diseases 
increased 58% from 41 to 65 deaths per 100 000 population [1]. 
In the United States, about 1 in 6 people contract a foodborne 
illness each year [2], resulting in an estimated 52 million cases 
annually. A growing number of outbreaks have been associated 
with Campylobacter or Escherichia coli O157:H7 through con-
sumption of contaminated meats and produce in the home. Half 
of all cases of norovirus, the most common cause of food-borne 
illness in the US, occur in long-term care facilities [3]. Rotavi-
rus, another viral cause of gastroenteritis, spreads by the fecal–
oral route among children cared for in group settings [4]. More 
recently, the cross-species transfer of infectious viral agents to 
humans, which initiated the 2002–2003 outbreak of severe acute 
respiratory  syndrome  (SARS),  the  2004  outbreak  of  H5N1-
linked  avian  influenza  [5],  and  the  2009  US  outbreak  H1N1-
linked porcine influenza [6], have elevated concerns about the 
potential for human pandemics.

Healthcare  associated  infections  have  gained  attention  as 
the leading cause of death in US healthcare settings [7] and the 
fourth leading cause of death overall in Canada [8]. Pathogens 

once largely confined to healthcare facilities, such as methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Clostridium difficile 
(C. difficile), have now moved into the community. Multi-drug 
resistant  Acinetobacter  baummanii  has  entered  nursing  homes 
and  long-term  care  facilities  through  discharge  of  hospital 
patients into these settings [9]. The emergence of these antibi-
otic resistant organisms limits the therapeutic arsenal available 
to combat infection; moreover, it has become economically less 
desirable for pharmaceutical companies to develop and register 
novel antibiotics, further limiting potential new therapeutics.

Because of these concerns, reducing the burden of infectious 
disease must emphasize strategies to limit transmission. Good 
hygiene is a cornerstone of preventive measures, for the spread 
of infectious agents. Because hand contact plays such a crucial 
role  in  the  transmission  of  infectious  agents,  effective  hand 
hygiene products are a vital component of preventive regimens. 
This chapter reviews the formulation, mode of action and effi-
cacy of hand cleansers and sanitizers, discusses regulatory and  
safety  issues  related  to  the  use  of  antimicrobial  ingredients,  
and  proposes  future  directions  for  improving  these  products 
and technologies.

Hand microbiota

The skin is an ecosystem coinhabited by symbiotic and commen-
sal microbes collectively termed the skin microbiome [10]. Most 
skin  bacteria  fall  into  four  dominant  phyla  –  Actinobacteria, 
Firmicutes, Bacteriodetes, and Proteobacteria – but a great deal 
of diversity exists at the species level [11]. Compared to the oral 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

110

or gut microbiota, the skin microbiota shows the greatest vari-
ability over time [12]. Although a core set of taxa inhabits skin 
surfaces, considerable intra-individual and interindividual vari-
ability  in  skin  microbiome  composition  exists,  reflecting  both 
host and environmental influences. Diversity is greater between 
individuals: only 13% of bacterial phylotypes on the surface of 
the palms are shared between unrelated people [13]. Members 
of the same household share more of their skin microbiota, par-
ticularly  on  the  palms,  than  people  from  different  households 
[14]. The diversity of microbial populations within households 
arise  from  various  internal  and  external  sources,  but  surfaces 
with  high  contact  bear  the  signature  of  the  occupants’  skin 
microbiome [15].

Microbes  that  inhabit  the  hand  are  generally  divided  into 
two  categories:  the  transient  and  the  resident  microbiota 
(Figure 12.1). The transient microbiota are microbes that inad-
vertently  become  attached  to  the  hands  by  touching  contami-
nated materials and surfaces, such as raw food items during food 
preparation, body fluids in healthcare or group care settings, or 
fomites in the daily environment. Microbiota on the dominant 
and non-dominant hands of the same individual are quite sig-
nificantly different [13], most likely because the dominant hand 
comes into contact with different types of surfaces than the non-
dominant  hand.  Furthermore,  the  transfer  of  transient  micro-
biota from hands to mouth or to other parts of the body, either 
in a single person or between individuals, is well documented in 
the literature. The classic example is the work of Gwaltney and 
others in the 1970 s [16,17], which demonstrated the importance 
of hand-to-hand transmission of the common cold virus.

The  resident  hand  microbiota  comprise  the  community  of 
microbes  that  consistently  inhabit  the  hand  and  routinely  are 
not washed off with non-medicated soaps. A summary of bacte-
ria reportedly isolated as resident flora is presented in Table 12.1. 
Handwashing alters overall community composition in a tem-
porary, limited fashion, either because washing fails to remove 

Figure 12.1   The common microbiota of the hand.

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

111

Table 12.1  	Constituents	of	the	resident	microbiota	of	the	hand.

Organism

Acinetobacter baumannii

Acinetobacter johnsonii

Acinetobacter lwoffii

Corynebacterium	spp.

Enterobacter agglomerans

Enterobacter cloacae

Klebsiella pneumoniae

Propionibacterium acnes

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Staphylococcus aureus

Staphylococcus epidermidis

Staphylococcus warneri

Streptococcus mitis

Streptococcus pyogenes

most taxa on the skin surface (resident taxa) or because depleted 
communities rapidly reestablish themselves [13]. In a University 
population,  taxa  such  as  Staphylococcaceae,  Streptococcaceae, 
and Lactobacillacaeae were relatively more abundant on hands 
that  have  been  recently  washed,  whereas  Proprionibacteria, 
Neisseriales, Burkholderiales, and Pasteurellaceae taxa became 
more abundant with longer times after handwashing [13]. Fre-
quent exposure to certain transient microbes may lead to them 
becoming established as constituents of the resident microbiota. 
For example, nurses who perform similar tasks within a hospital 
share similarities in their resident microbiota but exhibit differ-
ences from those assigned to other tasks [18–21]. Furthermore, 
the resident hand microbiota of homemakers include microbes 
that  are  identical  to  those  environmental  isolates  identified 
within the home [22].

The functional role of the skin microbiota in health and dis-
ease is incompletely understood, but it is speculated that the res-
ident skin microbes are as essential to the health of the skin as the 
gut microorganisms are to overall health of the individual [23]. 
Staphylococcus epidermidis, a commensal bacterium, maintains 
health by modulating the host immune response (reviewed in 
[24]). However, the organism is also the most common cause of 
hospital-acquired  infection,  for  example,  when  virulent  forms 
create biofilms on in-dwelling medical devices such as catheters 
and  heart  valves  [25].  Proprionibacterium  acnes,  a  commensal 
skin  bacterium,  causes  acne,  an  inflammatory  disorder  of  the 
pilosebaceous unit that occurs when this structure matures dur-
ing puberty. In addition, it is estimated that approximately 32% 
of the population carries the common pathogen, Staphylococcus 
aureus (S. aureus), as a member of the resident skin microbiota 
[23]. As many as 90% of patients with atopic dermatitis are colo-
nized with S. aureus on lesional and non-lesional skin [26] and 
colonization rates are highest on acute lesions [27]. Treatment of 

112

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

patients with atopic dermatitis leads to a more diversified skin 
microbiota [28,29].

Hand Hygiene Techniques and Compliance

Hand hygiene guidelines

The critical role of hand hygiene as means of infection control 
dates back to the mid-1800 s, when the groundbreaking work of 
Professor Ignaz Semmelweis demonstrated a reduction in puer-
peral sepsis after initiating a mandatory handwashing policy for 
medical personnel [30]. By 1980, the role of hand transmission 
of bacterial and viral pathogens was well-documented [16,31]. 
Today,  handwashing  with  soap  and  water,  or  hand  antisepsis 
using  antimicrobial  washes  or  hand  sanitizers,  is  the  corner-
stone of many infection control programs.

Guidelines  for  handwashing  and  hand  antisepsis  in  health-
care settings were published by the Association for Profession-
als  in  Infection  Control  (APIC)  in  1988 and  updated  in  1995 
[32]. In 2002, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC)  published  guidelines  for  hand  hygiene  in  healthcare 
settings in collaboration with the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA 
hand hygiene task force [33]. This guideline recommends using 
alcohol-based  hand  rubs  routinely  for  hand  antisepsis  unless 
hands are visibly dirty, contaminated, or if exposure to spores is 
suspected; in such cases, washing with soap (non-antimicrobial 
or antimicrobial) and water is recommended.

In  2009,  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  published 
Guidelines  for  Hand  Hygiene  in  Healthcare  as  part  of  their 
“Clean  Care  Is  Safer  Care”  Initiative  [34].  The  guidelines  are 
intended to apply to all healthcare settings, whether care is deliv-
ered continually (as in healthcare institutions), or occasionally 
(e.g. home care by birth attendants). WHO recommended the 
adoption of alcohol-based hand rubs to rapidly and effectively 
inactivate a wide array of potentially harmful microorganisms 
on hands. Consistent with the earlier CDC guidelines, this body 
recommends the routine use of alcohol-based hand rubs unless 
hands are visibly soiled or contaminated. Posters and brochures 
depicting optimal methods for using hand rubs or washing with 
soap  and  water  (and  the  situations  in  which  they  apply)  are 
available online [35].

The  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  Food  Code, 
most  recently  updated  in  2013,  contains  specific  hand  hygiene 
guidance for retail and food service workers that describes when, 
where, and how to wash and sanitize hands [36]. The Food Code 
calls for proper handwashing with soap and water to control the 
transmission  of  enteric  bacteria,  enteric  non-lipophilic  viruses, 
and protozoan oocysts that may be encountered in settings where 
food is prepared. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are not effective 
enough against these particular microbes. Furthermore, fatty or 
proteinaceous  soils  encountered  during  food  preparation  may 
interfere with alcohol efficacy [37]. Consequently, hand sanitiz-
ers that meet specific criteria described in section 2–301.16 of the 
Food Code may be used in retail and food service settings only 
after proper handwashing is used to remove soil.

When done properly, handwashing is considered to be the gold 
standard  for  removing  transient  pathogenic  bacteria  from  the 
hands.  The  CDC  has  published  a  description  of  handwash-
ing technique for healthcare settings in both text and pictorial 
poster  format  [38].  The  CDC  also  promulgates  general  hand-
washing advice aimed at homes, schools and businesses as part 
of a “Handwashing: Clean Hands Save Lives” initiative [39]. The 
handwashing protocol for healthcare providers provides explicit 
descriptions  for  each  step,  including  activating  the  faucet,  the 
modes  of  scrubbing  all  aspects  or  the  dorsal  and  palmar  sur-
faces and fingers, drying the hands, and shutting off the faucet. 
It specifies that the full procedure should have a 60 second dura-
tion from start to finish. The description aimed at consumers is 
consistent with this healthcare protocol, but uses much simpler 
instructions, being most explicit about lathering and scrubbing 
for 20 seconds (see Table 12.2 for comparison).

Table 12.2  	Comparison	of	hand	hygiene	instructions	for	healthcare	workers	
and	consumers.

Hand hygiene in healthcare 
settingsa

Hand hygiene consumer 
guidelinesb

Wet	hands	with	water

Apply enough soap	to	cover	all	
hand	surfaces

Rub hands	palm	to	palm

Wet	your	hands	with	clean,	
running	water	(warm	or	cold),	
turn	off	the	tap,	and	apply	soap.

Lather	your	hands	by	rubbing	
them	together	with	the	soap.	Be	
sure	to	lather	the	backs	of	your	
hands,	between	your	fingers,	
and	under	your	nails.

Scrub	your	hands	for	at	least	
20	seconds.	Need	a	timer?	Hum	
the	“Happy	Birthday”	song	from	
beginning	to	end	twice.

Right palm over left dorsum	with	
interlaced	fingers	and	vice	versa

Rinse	your	hands	well	under	
clean,	running	water.

Palm to palm	with	fingers	interlaced

Dry	your	hands	using	a	clean	
towel	or	air	dry	them.

Backs of fingers to opposing 
palms	with	fingers	interlocked

Rotational rubbing of left thumb	
clasped	in	right	palm	and vice versa

Rotational rubbing,	backwards	and	
forwards	with	clasped	fingers	of	right 
hand in left palm and vice versa

Rinse	hands	with	water

Dry	hands	thoroughly	with	a	single-
use	towel

Use	towel	to	turn off faucet

Your	hands	are	now	safe.

a	Centers	for	Disease	Control/World	Health	Organization.	Hand	Hygiene	in	Health	Care	Set-
tings.	Hand	Hygiene	Basics	2012.	www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/Basics.html.
b	Centers	for	Disease	Control	and	Prevention.	Hand	Washing:	Clean	Hands	Save	Lives.	When	and	
How	to	Wash	Your	Hands.	2013.	www.cdc.gov/handwashing/when-how-handwashing.html.

The basic elements of proper handwashing are as follows:
•	  Wet your hands with clean, running water and apply soap.
•	   Lather  well  by  rubbing  the  hands  together,  making  sure  to 
lather the back of the hands, the palms, between the fingers 
and under the nails.

•	  Scrub for at least 20 seconds.
•	  Rinse well.
•	 Dry  your  hands  with  a  clean  or  disposable  towel  or  air-dry 

them.

Although healthcare professionals recognize the importance of 
handwashing, observational studies indicate that compliance is 
poor.  A  CDC  review  of  available  studies  found  that  the  base-
line  level  of  compliance  with  hand  hygiene  guidelines  among 
healthcare  workers  averaged  40%  (range  5%  to  81%)  [33]. 
Handwashing  compliance  also  tends  to  fall  to  lower  levels  at 
night [40], and fewer than 50% of hospital healthcare workers 
washed their hands after toileting [41].

A  similar  deficiency  exists  in  the  community.  An  obser-
vational  study  of  food  service  workers  found  that  30%  were 
compliant  with  standard  guidelines  [42].  Studies  in  public 
restrooms  on  a  university  campus  indicated  that  61%  of  the 
women and 37% of the men observed washed their hands with 
soap  in  the  absence  of  a  visual  prompt;  97%  of  the  women 
and  35%  of  the  men  washed  their  hands  in  the  presence  of 
a  sign  prompting  handwashing  [43].  When  college  students 
were evaluated in four restroom settings (presence of soap and 
water; soap and water and visual prompts; soap and water and 
hand sanitizers; or soap and water, hand sanitizers, and visual 
prompts), 72.9% of students either washed or just rinsed their 
hands,  58.3%  practiced  hand  hygiene  (using  either  soap  or 
hand  sanitizer),  and  26.1%  washed  their  hands  for  the  ade-
quate length of time [44].

The duration of handwashing averages about 8 to 9 seconds in 
both healthcare and community settings [45,46]. These condi-
tions are not ideal, as evidenced by studies showing mean cell 
densities on the hands of homemakers to be 5.72 CFU before 
washing and a 5.69 CFU after handwashing [47]. Compliance 
with handwashing guidelines at a teaching hospital was shown 
to be inversely proportional to education levels, so understand-
ing the guidelines is not the issue [48].

In certain situations where handwashing compliance is low, 
hand sanitizers, especially those with a persistent benefit, may 
be considered to promote hand hygiene if appropriate to the 
setting  in  question.  However,  merely  providing  the  product 
is insufficient. University students typically do not use hand 
sanitizers  when  they  are  installed  in  restrooms  without  any 
reinforcement of their use [44,49]. However, prospective tri-
als  have  shown  that  when  hand  sanitizers  were  provided  in 
elementary  school  classrooms  along  with  appropriate  edu-
cation  about  their  use,  or  when  sanitizers  were  used  in  the 
classroom as an adjunct to handwashing, intervention groups 
had  significantly  lower  absenteeism  due  to  illness  [50–52]. 
Formulation choices must be appropriate to the target patho-
gens of concern. For example, alcohol-based hand sanitizers 

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

113

may  exhibit  limited  effectiveness  against  norovirus  unless 
alcohol  concentrations  are  high  enough  or  the  formula  is 
supplemented  with  other  actives  [53,54].  It  bears  repeating 
that substituting alcohol-based hand sanitizers for soap and 
water cleansing is inappropriate in food service settings; how-
ever,  regimens  that  combine  handwashing  with  the  subse-
quent application of high efficacy hand sanitizers can be very 
effective  in  reducing  hand  contamination  in  food  handling 
situations [55].

Antimicrobial handwash and hand sanitizer 
formulations

Antimicrobial  handwashes  are  primarily  water-based  formu-
lations  composed  of  mixtures  of  surfactants,  antimicrobial 
actives,  perfumes,  and,  in  some  cases,  emollients.  Because 
frequent  use  of  surfactants  can  be  drying  to  the  skin,  emol-
lients and other agents to improve skin feel are incorporated 
to improve the consumer experience with the hope of raising 
compliance.

In the US, antimicrobial actives for handwash and handrub 
products are regulated under the Food and Drug Administra-
tion’s  1994 Tentative  Final  Monograph  (TFM)  for  over-the-
counter  (OTC)  antiseptic  drug  products  [56]. The  ingredients 
are classified into three categories:
  I.  Category 1 – Ingredients determined to be safe and effective;
  II.  Category 2 – Ingredients determined to be neither safe nor 

effective;

 III.  Category 3 – Ingredients for which there is insufficient evi-
dence; however, the FDA is not objecting to marketing or 
sale of these products.

Only  active  ingredients  in  categories  I  and  III  can  be  lawfully 
marketed in products within the US. Antimicrobial actives used 
in handwashes include chlorhexidine gluconate, chloroxylenol, 
hexachlorophene,  iodine  and  iodophors,  quaternary  ammo-
nium  compounds,  and  triclosan.  Antimicrobial  soaps  vary  in 
the  nature  of  the  active  ingredient  as  well  as  their  overall  for-
mulation.  Each  antiseptic  agent  has  a  distinct  range  of  activ-
ity  against  various  bacteria  and  viruses  (reviewed  in  [33,34]). 
Apart  from  iodophors  (at  concentrations  higher  than  used  in 
antimicrobial washes or handrubs), neither alcohol or any of the 
agents listed above is reliably efficacious against spore-forming 
bacteria, such as against Clostridium spp. or Bacillus spp. [57]. 
Glove use and strict adherence to recommended handwashing 
protocols are critical if there is reason to suspect contamination 
with such microbes.

Hand sanitizers can be categorized into three main classes:

 1.  Alcohol-based: containing ≥ 62% alcohol.
 2.  Alcohol-based,  supplemented:  containing  ≥  62%  alcohol 

plus antimicrobial agent.

 3.  Non-alcohol based: the main ingredient is water, with added 

surfactant and antimicrobial agent.

114

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

Previously  in  the  US,  the  FDA’s  1994 TFM  classified  ethanol 
60–95% as a Category I agent (i.e., generally safe and effective 
for  use  in  antiseptic  handwash  or  healthcare  worker  hand-
wash  products)  [56].  Although  the  TFM  placed  isopropanol 
70–91.3%  in  category  III  (i.e.,  insufficient  data  to  classify  as 
effective),  60%  isopropanol  has  subsequently  been  adopted  in 
Europe  as  the  reference  standard  against  which  alcohol-based 
hand-rub products are benchmarked [58].

Hand  sanitizer  product  forms  include  liquids,  gels  and 
foams. Germicidal efficacy is based on the fact that they are 
leave-on products that rapidly kill microbes. Hand sanitizers 
based solely on alcohol as the antiseptic deliver an immedi-
ate benefit but provide no residual activity. Supplementation 
of  the  alcohol-based  formula  with  chlorhexidine,  quater-
nary ammonium compounds, or triclosan can provide more 
persistent activity, delaying the reestablishment of transient 
microbiota.  Other  combinations  have  also  proved  effica-
cious. For example, a synergistic combination of a humectant 
(octoxyglycerine)  and  preservatives  has  resulted  in  pro-
longed activity of an alcohol-based handrub against transient 
pathogens without raising the concentration of antimicrobial 
active  [59].  An  experimental  alcohol-based  surgical  hand 
disinfectant containing a synergistic combination of farnesol 
and  benzethonium  chloride  demonstrated  both  immediate 
and persistent activity against resident hand flora of volun-
teers [60].

In its 2009 guidelines, the WHO recommended two alcohol-
based  handrub  formulations  for  hand  hygiene  in  healthcare 
settings,  taking  into  account  cost  and  efficacy  for  resource-
poor  countries.  The  first  has  final  concentrations  of  ethanol 
80%  v/v,  glycerol  1.45%  v/v,  and  hydrogen  peroxide  (H2 O2) 
0.125% v/v; the second has final concentrations of isopropyl 
alcohol  75%  v/v,  glycerol  1.45%  v/v,  and  hydrogen  peroxide 
0.125%  v/v.  However,  these  formulations  did  not  meet  the 
most  stringent  European  efficacy  requirements  for  surgi-
cal  hand  disinfection  (the  prEN  12791 standard).  Proposed 
modifications  (raising  alcohol  content,  reducing  glycerol, 
modifying rub times) raise efficacy to the required standards  
[61–63].

The  formulation  of  non-alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  or 
antimicrobial  handwashes  must  take  into  consideration  the 
bioavailability  of  the  antimicrobial  active.  Certain  surfactants 
may complex with or otherwise inactivate the antiseptic, which 
results  in  products  with  the  same  antimicrobial  active  having 
different levels of antimicrobial efficacy [64].

The final variable to be considered in formulating antimicro-
bial handwashes and hand rubs is pH. The relatively acidic pH 
of the skin plays a role in the innate antimicrobial hostility of 
the hand surface. The normal pH of the hands is approximately 
4–5, but alkaline soaps often raise the skin pH. In one report, 
pH  increased  between  0.6 to  1.8  units  after  handwashing  with 
plain soap and then gradually declined to baseline levels over a 
period of 45 min to 2 h [65]. A low pH matrix has been used in 
newer handwash formulations with triclosan.

Efficacy of antimicrobial handwashes and 
hand sanitizers

Historically,  three  approaches  have  traditionally  been  used  to 
demonstrate the efficacy of antimicrobial hand soaps and hand 
sanitizers:
 1.  In vitro assays to assess potency and the spectrum and dura-

tion of activity.

 2.  In vivo models to assess germicidal activity against an artifi-

cial inoculate.

 3.  Clinical studies to demonstrate efficacy in reducing the bur-
den of hand microbiota, limiting the transfer from one per-
son to another, and reduction in infectious disease.

In 2013, the FDA issued a proposed rule to update the condi-
tions for establishing that OTC antimicrobial products are gen-
erally recognized as safe and effective (GRASE) [66]. The pro-
posal would to require manufacturers of antimicrobial hand or 
body washes to demonstrate that the products are more effective 
than plain soap and water in preventing illness and the spread 
of  infection.  Currently,  the  regulations  rely  on  in  vivo  models 
of germicidal activity to determine efficacy. The proposed rule, 
which does not include over the counter antiseptic hand sanitiz-
ers or antiseptics used by healthcare professionals, is available 
for  comment  for  180 days,  with  a  concurrent  one-year  period 
for companies to submit new data and information, followed by 
a 60-day rebuttal period [66].

In vitro assays for potency and spectrum of 
activity
Standard in vitro assays evaluate the minimum inhibitory con-
centration  (MIC)  for  germicidal  activity  or  assess  the  time  to 
kill target organisms, using indicator bacteria or viruses of inter-
est. The research community has debated the relevance of such 
assays for decades, as they describe the potency and spectrum of 
activity of a formulation or antiseptic under very specific labo-
ratory conditions.

Other in vitro assays model the removal of transient flora from 
the hands by employing artificial substrates such as pig skin. The 
substrate  is  inoculated  in  a  controlled  fashion  and  microbial 
reductions following treatment with the antimicrobial formula-
tion are assessed [60]. Efficacy is determined relative to either an 
untreated control or to a placebo lacking the active ingredient. 
Such  models  have  been  employed  to  establish  a  residual  anti-
microbial benefit such as that afforded by low pH hand sanitiz-
ers with triclosan. Formulations containing chlorhexidine were 
historically used as the gold standard for residual antimicrobial 
efficacy.

In vivo models with artificial inoculate to mimic 
transient flora
In Europe and the United States, regulatory bodies require that 
specific  in  vivo  test  protocols  be  used  to  demonstrate  efficacy 
[34,67]. In both regions, these protocols involve artificially con-
taminating  subjects’  hands  with  large  inoculums  of  indicator 

bacteria, treating the hands with the test formulation, neutraliz-
ing the active ingredient, and enumerating the remaining viable 
bacteria on the skin.

In  Europe,  the  most  widely  accepted  protocols  are  EN 
1499 for hygienic antimicrobial hand washes and EN 1500 for 
hygienic leave-on hand sanitizers [67]. In both standard pro-
tocols,  12 to  15 subjects  first  wash  their  hands  with  a  plain 
soap and water; inoculation is achieved by having the subjects 
immerse  their  hands  half-way  to  metacarpals  in  a  24-hour 
broth  culture  of  a  non-pathogenic  strain  of  E.  coli;  after  dry-
ing,  bacterial  recovery  is  achieved  by  kneading  the  fingertips 
and palms separately into 10 mL of Trypticase Soy Broth with 
neutralizers.  The  hands  are  disinfected,  contaminated  again, 
and  the  antimicrobial  treatments  are  applied  for  30 to  60 sec-
onds,  with  or  without  a  rinsing  step,  depending  on  product 
type  (rinse-off  or  leave-on).  Bacterial  recovery  is  performed 
as described above, and the extracted bacteria are enumerated 
using traditional microbiological plating techniques. The Euro-
pean  standard  protocols  require  that  efficacy  be  determined 
relative  to  internal  standards.  With  EN  1499,  rinse-off  anti-
microbial  hand  soaps  must  provide  a  superior  log  reduction 
relative  to  a  60-second  wash  with  plain  soap  (sapo  kalinus). 
With EN 1500, leave-on products such as hand sanitizers must 
deliver a benefit no  less  than that  observed  with a 60-second 
application of 2-propanol (60% w/v).

In  the  United  States,  methods  for  determining  efficacy  are 
described in FDA’s 1994 TFM for OTC Antiseptic Drug Prod-
ucts (although, as noted earlier, a proposed rule to amend the 
1994 TFM has recently been promulgated) [56]. Currently, the 
standard method used to evaluate antimicrobial handwash and 
hand sanitizer formulations is the American Society of Testing 
and  Materials  (ASTM)  protocol,  E  1174.  In  this  test,  subjects 
refrain  from  utilizing  any  antimicrobial  products  for  1 week 
prior to the start of the study (“washout period”). At study initia-
tion, the subjects perform a cleansing wash to remove transient 
bacteria. Then, in order to establish a baseline level of artificial 
contamination, the subjects’ hands are treated with 4.5–5.0 mL 
of a 24-hour broth culture of either a non-pathogenic strain of 
E.  coli  or  Serratia  marcescens.  Bacteria  are  recovered  by  sepa-
rately placing each hand into a glove containing 75 mL of sam-
pling  solution  containing  neutralizers.  The  hand  is  massaged 
for  1 minute  and  bacteria  are  enumerated  using  traditional 
microbiological  plating  techniques.  Following  baseline  treat-
ment,  another  cleansing  wash  is  performed  and  hands  are  re-
inoculated.  The  test  formulation  is  then  applied  according  to 
the manufacturer’s instructions for the product type in question 
(rinse-off  antimicrobial  soap  or  leave-on  hand  sanitizer).  Fol-
lowing treatment, bacterial recovery is again achieved using the 
glove method, as described above. The cycle of cleansing wash, 
inoculation, treatment, and enumeration is performed 10 times. 
No internal standard is used. Efficacy is determined by the mag-
nitude of the log reduction from baseline. Wash 1 must deliver 
a  minimum  2-log  reduction  and  Wash  10,  a  minimum  3-log 
reduction from baseline, respectively.

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

115

Table 12.3  	Comparison	of	US	and	European	standard	methods	for	assessing	
presurgical	hand	antisepsis.

Parameter

US method

prEN 12791

Product	application

Hands	and	lower	forearm

Hands	only

Number	of	applications

11	applications	over	5	days

Single	application

Sampling	times

0,	3,	6	hours	post-
application

Sample	method

Glove	juice

Success	criteria

Absolute	bacterial	
reduction

0,	3	hour	post-
application

Fingertip	sampling

Non-inferiority	to	
reference	standard

Besides  the  above-described  standards  for  hygienic  hand-
washes,  a  more  stringent  European  standard,  prEN  12791, 
applies to scrubs for presurgical antisepsis. Differences between 
this  European  Standard  and  the  US  standard  are  shown  in 
Table 12.3.

The standard methods have been the subject of considerable 
critique [68]. Both European and US standard protocols employ 
treatment times and product volumes far outside the norm. A 
further  critique  of  the  US  ASTM  E1174  protocol  is  that  bac-
teria are sampled from areas such as the back of the hand that 
are  usually  not  involved  in  transmission. The  relevance  of  the 
inoculum  has  also  been  challenged,  as  in  the  natural  setting, 
transient bacteria would rarely be present without being incor-
porated  into  a  soil  matrix.  Consequently,  some  investigators 
employ methodologies that incorporate the use of a soil matrix, 
such as chicken or hamburger, in lieu of simple inoculum with 
marker microbial organisms; these methods also focus on con-
tamination of the palms of the hands [37,55,69]. In the presence 
of a greasy soil matrix such as chicken, the alcohol-based hand 
sanitizers  lack  appreciable  efficacy,  whereas  hand  sanitizers 
supplemented  with  more  potent  antimicrobial  actives  such  as 
triclosan or benzalkonium chloride demonstrate a higher level 
of effectiveness (Figure 12.2).

Besides  these  standardized  methodologies,  a  commonly 
used research tool is referred to as the fingerpad method [70]. 
With  this  approach,  subjects  who  have  previously  refrained 
from using antimicrobial products have their fingerpads con-
taminated  with  either  bacteria  or  viruses.  The  fingerpads  are 
then  treated  with  test  product  and  the  residual  microbes  are 
enumerated. With this protocol, the residual activity of a hand 
sanitizer was assessed by first treating the fingerpads with the 
sanitizer  and  then  challenging  with  a  bacterial  or  viral  inoc-
ulate  3 hours  later.  Enumeration  demonstrated  that  the  hand 
sanitizer was protective for up to 3 hours post-application [71]. 
Another test model assesses the transfer of microbes to surfaces 
by applying fingerpads to agar or to hard surfaces such as metal 
disks [72].

Hence,  several  models  besides  the  regulatory  standards  are 
useful for research purposes. The standard protocols are help-
ful  for  determining  efficacy  under  defined  conditions.  Using 

116

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

Untreated

Triclosan-based

Alcohol-based

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 12.2  Effects of different hand sanitizer formulations on greasy soil.

large  inocula  allows  small  differences  to  be  discerned;  small 
changes potentially could have a public health impact. Although 
European  and  US  standard  protocols  often  yield  similar  con-
clusions  regarding  efficacy,  this  is  not  necessarily  the  case  for 
all  formulations  [73,74].  A  stringent  assessment  of  the  effi-
cacy of a formulation could compare results with both testing 
methodologies.

In vivo models with artificial inoculate to mimic 
resident flora
Other models have been developed to assess the effects of anti-
microbial cleansers on resident microbiota. A commonly used 
method is the Cade test, which measures the impact of several 
washes over a period of 5 days [25]. Like the ASTM E1174 test, 
the test begins with a washout period. This is followed by a 5-day 
baseline period, during which samples are collected over 2 days 
to  control  for  day-to-day  variations.  Following  the  baseline 
assessment, subjects use the product multiple times daily over 
2 days, during which hand microbiota are sampled. Efficacy is 
determined by comparing reductions from baseline during the 
treatment phase.

Clinical studies to demonstrate efficacy in 
reducing the burden of hand microbiota
Although  prospective,  randomized  trials  are  generally  con-
sidered  the  most  rigorous  approach  to  assess  outcomes,  some 
investigators  argue  that  controlled  clinical  testing  on  human 
hands, with a well-designed protocol that simulates use condi-
tions,  is  the  most  practical  means  to  assess  antimicrobial  effi-
cacy [68].

A few examples illustrate this approach. One study examined 
the ability of five, 30-second handwashes with a non-antiseptic 
lotion soap to remove a range of nosocomial pathogens applied 
to fingertips at 108 CFU [75]. A reduction of 10 to 15 CFU was 
observed  after  the  first  handwash  but  no  further  reductions 

occurred  thereafter.  Wiping  hands  with  an  antiseptic  sponge 
(70% isopropyl alcohol or 10% povidone-iodine) removed the 
remaining contamination.

Another study examined the impact of three product types 
on  existing  hand  microbiota  using  varying  wash  time  dura-
tions in a healthcare setting [76]. Six hand hygiene interven-
tions were implemented, in random order, immediately after 
patient  care  by  43 healthcare  workers  (26 nurses,  nine  nurse 
assistants, and eight physicians). The interventions were: hand-
washing with non-antiseptic soap for either 10 or 30 seconds; 
and  handwashing  with  povidone  iodine-  or  chlorhexidine-
based  soap  for  either  10,  30 or  60  s;  and  use  of  a  commer-
cially  available  alcohol-based  handrub  [76].  Log  reductions 
in total bacterial counts were assessed by pressing the finger-
tips of the dominant hand onto agar both before and after the 
intervention  in  question.  Relative  efficacies  (based  on  log10-
transformed  bacterial  count  reductions)  were:  alcohol-based 
handrub > antiseptic soap (60 s) > antiseptic soap (30 s) > anti-
septic soap (10 s) > non-antiseptic soap (30 s) > non-antiseptic  
soap (10 s).

Alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  and  soap  and  water  washing 
were compared with for germicidal activity against rhinovirus 
[77].  Alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  were  significantly  more 
effective than handwashing with soap and water at reducing rhi-
novirus levels on artificially inoculated hands. Adding organic 
acids  to  the  sanitizer  formulation  provided  residual  virucidal 
activity that persisted for at least 4 h.

Following the 2009 outbreak of H1N1 influenza (swine flu), 
the  efficacy  of  soap  and  water  and  alcohol-based  hand-rub 
preparations against live H1N1 influenza virus on the hands of 
human volunteers was evaluated [78]. Twenty vaccinated, anti-
body-positive healthcare workers had their hands contaminated 
with 1 mL of a 107 tissue culture infectious dose of live human 
influenza A virus (H1N1; A/New Caledonia/20/99). Five hand 
hygiene  protocols  were  assessed:  no  hand  hygiene  (control); 
handwashing with soap and water; and the application of 1 of 

3 alcohol-based hand rubs (61.5% ethanol gel, 70% ethanol plus 
0.5%  chlorhexidine  solution,  or  70%  isopropanol  plus  0.5% 
chlorhexidine  solution).  H1N1 concentrations  were  assessed 
before and after each intervention by viral culture and real-time 
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In the 
absence  of  hand  hygiene,  minimal  reductions  in  H1N1 were 
observed after 60 minutes, whereas all four hand hygiene pro-
tocols  eliminated  viral  contamination  based  on  both  culture 
results and PCR results.

Effects on the microbial burden of the hands have also been 
studied  under  real-world  conditions.  For  example,  two  hand 
hygiene regimes (2% chlorhexidine gluconate-containing anti-
septic  wash  and  a  waterless  handrub  containing  61%  ethanol 
with  emollients)  were  compared  in  a  four-week,  prospective 
randomized  trial  of  among  50 full-time  staff  members  (physi-
cians, nurses, housekeepers, respiratory therapists) of a medical 
and a surgical intensive care unit at a large academic healthcare 
center [79]. Samples were obtained at baseline, on day 1, and at 
the end of 2 and 4 weeks. No significant differences in numbers 
of colony-forming units were observed between the two inter-
vention groups at any time point.

In 2002, studies comparing the relative efficacy of plain soaps, 
antimicrobial soaps, and alcohol-based antiseptics for reducing 
counts of viable bacteria on hands (based on log10 reductions 
achieved in either existing hand microbiota or artificially con-
taminated hands) were summarized by the CDC [33]. In 2009, 
WHO published an updated review with particular reference to 
antisepsis  in  the  healthcare  setting.  They  concluded  that  anti-
septic  washes  were  generally  more  efficacious  than  plain  soap 
and  that  alcohol-based  rubs  were  generally  more  efficacious 
than antiseptic detergents in these settings [34]. On this basis, 
the  use  of  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  was  recommended 
unless hands are visibly soiled.

A  2011 meta-analysis  of  25 studies  in  which  the  efficacy  of 
antimicrobial  and  non-antimicrobial  handwashes  were  com-
pared  found  that,  in  general,  antimicrobial  soap  consistently 
produced  statistically  significantly  greater  reductions  in  the 
burden of microbiota relative to plain soap and water, provided 
group sizes were sufficient to detect a difference (n > 20). This 
was true regardless of the active ingredient evaluated (chlorhex-
idine gluconate, iodophor, triclosan, or povidone-iodine). The 
magnitude of the difference was small when existing hand con-
tamination  was  examined  (approximately  0.5-log  CFU  reduc-
tion difference); larger differences were observed when artificial 
inoculation with Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria was 
employed.

The efficacy of antimicrobial hand washes and hand sanitizers 
will vary depending on the antimicrobial spectrum of the active 
ingredients and bioavailability, the potency of the formulations 
employed, the specific microbial contaminants present, the type 
of  setting  (healthcare,  schools,  long-term  care,  food  service), 
and levels of compliance with recommended practice. Product 
choices  and  hygiene  regimens  must  be  determined  with  these 
considerations in mind.

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

117

Effectiveness of antimicrobial hand washes 
and hand sanitizers in institutional and 
community settings

Impact on nosocomial infections
The causal connection between hand contamination and disease 
transmission has long been established [30,80], but because so 
many uncontrolled variables also play a role, substantiating the 
impact of hand hygiene practices on infection rates is challeng-
ing. A 2004 review of 1120 articles on the subject found “a lack 
of rigorous evidence linking specific hand hygiene interventions 
with  the  prevention  of  healthcare-acquired  infections”.  Never-
theless, studies do exist that substantiate significant reductions 
in  healthcare  associated  infections  following  hand  hygiene 
interventions.  For  example,  after  an  outbreak  of  methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in a neonatal intensive 
care  unit  that  had  persisted  for  7 months,  aggressive  infection 
control measures failed to slow transmission until the hand and 
bath  washes  were  changed  to  a  preparation  containing  0.3% 
triclosan [81]. This change halted the outbreak so effectively that 
at the time of publication, the unit had remained infection-free 
for 3½ years.

Another  study  compared  the  effectiveness  of  implementing 
two standardized hand hygiene programs in separate periods on 
reducing  nosocomial  infections  among  very  low  birth-weight 
infants in a neonatal intensive care unit [82]. In the first period, 
handwashing with plain fluid detergent was performed; in the 
second,  a  hand  hygiene  program  employing  an  antimicrobial 
soap  (4%  chlorhexidine  gluconate)  along  with  alcohol-based 
hand  rubs  was  instituted.  The  incidence  of  nosocomial  infec-
tion after 72 hours of life fell from 18.8% on infants in the first 
period to 6.25% of infants in the second period. The rate of cen-
tral venous catheter colonization also was significantly lower in 
the second period (5.8%) than in the first (16.6%).

Encouraging  results  have  emerged  in  other  healthcare  set-
tings.  In  2005,  the  medical  intensive  care  unit  of  a  major  US 
metropolitan hospital discontinued bathing patients daily with 
soap  and  water  and  substituted  skin  cleansing  with  no-rinse, 
2%  chlorhexidine  gluconate-impregnated  cloths.  Daily  bath-
ing  with  the  antimicrobial  cloths  resulted  in  a  large,  statisti-
cally significant decrease in the rate of central venous catheter 
associated  bloodstream  infections  (from  5.31 to  0.69 cases  per 
1000 catheterization-days; P  =  0.006).

The infection control benefits of alcohol-based hand sanitiz-
ers  also  have  been  substantiated.  An  observational  survey  in 
an inner-city, tertiary-care medical center, performed between 
1998 and 2003, assessed the impact on the spread of infection 
with antibiotic resistant pathogens of providing wall-mounted 
dispensers  of  an  alcohol-based  handrub  (62.5%  ethyl  alcohol 
with 0.3% triclosan) for staff hand hygiene in all inpatient and 
outpatient  clinic  rooms.  [83].  All  nosocomial  infections  with 
isolates of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 
vancomycin-resistant  Enterococcus  (VRE),  and  Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea were recorded occurring in the full 

118

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

6-year time frame, and the handrub was made available after the 
first 3 years had elapsed. From the first to the second three-year 
period,  a  21%  decrease  in  new,  nosocomially  acquired  MRSA 
(from 90 to 71 isolates per year; P  =  .01) and a 41% decrease in 
VRE (from 41 to 24 isolates per year; P < .001) were observed. 
The incidence of new infections with C. difficile was unchanged.
The  use  of  alcohol-based  handrubs  is  not  optimal  for  all 
pathogens. Alcohol is ineffective against norovirus, C. difficile, 
and spore forming bacteria. After an outbreak of norovirus ill-
nesses  in  long-term  care  facilities  in  New  England,  the  state 
health  departments  determined  that  facilities  in  which  staff 
were equally or more likely to use alcohol-based hand sanitizers 
than soap and water for routine hand hygiene had higher odds 
of a norovirus outbreak (adjusted odds ratio, 6.06; 95% confi-
dence interval: 1.44–33.99) [84].

Studies have found alcohol to be relatively ineffective against 
Norwalk  virus  regardless  of  concentration  in  both  suspension 
assays and in the ASTM standard finger pad assay [53]. Antisep-
tic handrubs containing 10% povidone-iodine (equivalent to 1% 
available iodine) were more efficacious against feline calicivirus 
(a surrogate for norovirus) than either alcohol-based products 
or triclosan-containing antimicrobial soaps, and sanitizers con-
taining 99.5% ethanol are more virucidal against this microbe 
than formulations containing 62% ethanol, 70% isopropanol or 
91% isopropanol [54]. An investigative, modified ethanol-based 
hand sanitizer (supplemented with a synergistic blend of poly-
quaternium  polymer  and  an  organic  acid  known  to  be  active 
against  non-enveloped  enteric  viruses)  was  significantly  more 
efficacious in in  vitro  assays  against  human  norovirus,  human 
rotovirus,  and  poliovirus  than  a  benchmark  hand  sanitizer 
product [85].

In summary, clinical evidence exists that hand hygiene regi-
mens employing antimicrobial washes and hand sanitizers can 
substantially  reduce  healthcare  acquired  infections.  However, 
the clinical experience also illustrates the ongoing challenge of 
optimizing  hand  hygiene  regimens  for  various  pathogens  and 
institutional settings.

Effectiveness of hand hygiene in  
the community setting
Community-based clinical trials of hand hygiene regimes are 
complex  and  expensive  to  execute,  and  such  interventions 
have  been  limited  in  scope.  A  2008 meta-analysis  of  30 com-
munity  studies  performed  between  1960 and  2007 concluded 
that improvements in hand hygiene resulted in average reduc-
tions in gastrointestinal illness of 31% (95% confidence intervals 
[CI]    =    19%,  42%)  and  average  reductions  in  respiratory  ill-
ness of 21% (95% CI  =  5%, 34%). The review concluded that 
the most beneficial intervention for reducing such illnesses was 
hand-hygiene education coupled with use of non-antibacterial 
soap; it failed to find evidence of an added benefit with antibac-
terial handwashes [86].

Since  then,  prospective  trials  have  documented  the  infec-
tion  control  benefits  of  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  in  the 

school setting. An 8-week prospective, randomized, controlled 
trial among third to fifth grade students at a single elementary 
school evaluated the use of an alcohol-based hand sanitizer for 
hand  hygiene  together  with  quaternary  ammonium  wipes  for 
daily  classroom  surface  disinfection,  while  control  classrooms 
followed usual hand-washing and cleaning practices [87]. The 
adjusted  absenteeism  rate  for  gastrointestinal  illness  was  sig-
nificantly  lower  in  the  intervention  group,  but  no  difference 
was  observed  in  the  adjusted  absenteeism  rate  for  respiratory 
illness. In this study, norovirus was the only virus detected and 
was found less frequently on surfaces in intervention classrooms 
compared with control classrooms (9% vs. 29%).

A  similar  outcome  was  observed  in  a  more  extensive  study 
conducted in two primary schools over a 17-week period that 
began before and lasted throughout the time frame of seasonal 
gastroenteritis  [52].  The  intervention  consisted  of  consistent, 
teacher-monitored  hand  hygiene  with  an  alcohol-based  sani-
tizer in one of the two schools. The average number of gastro-
enteritis episodes was 0.31 in the intervention group and 0.53 in 
the control group (P < 0.001).

Hand hygiene in the home has been shown to be important in 
limiting community acquired MRSA. A study of risk factors for 
household transmission of community-associated MRSA found 
that household contacts of infected children who helped bathe 
the child or who shared skin balms or ointments with the child 
were more likely to be colonized, whereas household contacts 
who reported using antibacterial versus non-antibacterial soap 
for handwashing were less likely to be colonized with an isolate 
clonally related to the infection isolate from the child [88].

The above examples provide evidence that community use of 
antibacterial hand sanitizers and handwashes has infection con-
trol benefits. As noted earlier, in late 2013, the FDA issued a pro-
posed rule that would to require manufacturers of antimicrobial 
hand or body washes to demonstrate that the products are more 
effective than plain soap and water in preventing illness and the 
spread  of  infection  [89].  Given  the  challenges  and  prohibitive 
expense of conducting such studies routinely, the feasibility of this 
proposal has yet to be determined. A consumer product indus-
try-sponsored expert panel has proposed the alternative of a sur-
rogate infection model; it employs a modified but realistic hand 
contamination procedure with Shigella flexneri as a test organism 
to assess the efficacy of consumer antibacterial handwash prod-
ucts but this method needs further assessment [90]. The process 
of commenting on the proposed rule, generation of new data by 
interested parties, review and comment, and eventual publication 
of a final monograph is expected to take 2–3 years.

Handwash and hand sanitizer safety

Irritation associated with handwashes  
and hand sanitizers
Historically, skin irritation secondary to handwashing has been 
observed in up to 25% of healthcare workers [91]. The irritation 

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

119

is attributed to repeated contact with detergents, exacerbated by 
occlusion from wearing gloves [92]. Repeated handwashing with 
soap and water removes the protective lipid layer, compromis-
ing skin integrity and leading to redness, scaling and dermatitis. 
Allergic contact dermatitis to product constituents is a theoreti-
cal risk but reports of such reactions are rare [93]. Skin damage 
also alters the skin microbiota of healthcare workers: relative to 
healthy hands, damaged hands presented higher frequencies of 
Staphylococcus aureus (16.7% vs. 10%); Gram-negative bacteria 
(20% versus 6.7%); and yeast (26.7% vs. 20%, respectively) [94]. 
Moreover, when hands are damaged, handwashing becomes less 
effective in reducing microbial contamination [95]. Prospective 
multicenter studies conducted through the winter and summer 
seasons revealed that disinfection with an alcohol-based hand 
sanitizer is better tolerated than classic handwashing with mild 
soap and water [96], and its use improves compliance with hand 
hygiene guidelines in healthcare settings [92,97].

Recently,  toxicological  investigations  of  possible  endocrine 
disruptor activity of triclosan have been performed in cell cul-
ture  and  in  laboratory  animals  and  reported  in  the  literature 
[98–102].

Safety concerns specific to alcohol-based  
hand sanitizers
Several safety issues specific to alcohol-based products should 
be considered. In the occupational setting, precaution must be 
taken against excessive contact with alcohol, which could dilapi-
date the skin. In institutional settings, the flammability of these 
alcohol-based  formulations  should  be  considered  so  that  dis-
pensers are not located where the potential for ignition exists. 
In  community  settings,  there  have  been  reports  of  intentional 
ingestion by people with alcoholism [103] and accidental intoxi-
cation in children [104]. As previously discussed, conventional 
alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  have  limited  efficacy  against 
norovirus or C. difficile and are not a substitute for handwashing 
in food service settings.

development of microbial resistance to 
antimicrobial agents
A  major  question  within  the  scientific  community  is  whether 
widespread  use  of  antimicrobial  hand  hygiene  products,  par-
ticularly by consumers, may lead to the development of resist-
ance to the antimicrobial ingredients [38]. Most investigations 
of  this  question  have  focused  on  triclosan,  which  has  been 
utilized as an antibacterial agent in consumer products for 30 
years.  Chronic,  sub-lethal  exposure  of  laboratory  strains  of  E. 
coli to triclosan produced some clones with reduced susceptibil-
ity, but these were nevertheless inhibited by triclosan concentra-
tions relevant to consumer use [105]. A comparative analysis of 
256 clinical isolates of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus over a 10-year 
period found no difference in triclosan sensitivity between anti-
biotic sensitive and resistant strains [106]. A similar conclusion 
was  drawn  when  comparing  clinical  isolates  of  methicillin-
resistant  or  sensitive  strains  of  S.  aureus  [107].  Furthermore, 

continuous exposure of a triclosan-sensitive S. aureus strain to 
sub-inhibitory triclosan concentrations for one month did not 
decrease  susceptibility  either  to  triclosan  or  to  other  antibiot-
ics. In addition, exposing mixed microbial communities derived 
from natural environments to triclosan for 6 months resulted in 
no change in sensitivity to triclosan or to antibiotics [108].

Investigations of this question have moved beyond the laboratory 
to community settings. A 2003 study, performed in three geograph-
ical  areas  in  USA  and  UK,  evaluated  antibiotic  and  antibacterial 
cross-agent resistance in environmental and clinical samples from 
the homes of antibacterial product users (n  =  30) and non-users (n  
=  30) [109]. Selected antibiotic-resistant and antibiotic-susceptible 
isolates were tested against four common antibacterial agents (tri-
closan, para-chloro-meta-xylenol, pine oil and quaternary ammo-
nium  compounds).  No  evidence  of  antibiotic  and  antibacterial 
agent  cross-resistance  was  observed  from  homes  of  antibacterial 
product users and non-users. There was a higher increased preva-
lence of potential pathogens in non-user homes.

In  2005,  a  12-month  study  of  224 households  evaluated  the 
impact of household use of antibacterial products and carriage 
of antimicrobial resistant bacteria on the hands [110]. Antibac-
terial product use did not lead to a significant increase in anti-
microbial drug resistance after 1 year, nor did it have an effect on 
bacterial susceptibility to triclosan.

A  2011 study  investigated  antimicrobial  and  antibiotic  sus-
ceptibilities  of  staphylococcal  skin  isolates  from  community 
users of antibacterial wash products compared to isolates from 
non-users [111]. The study compared three groups of 70 users: 
those that frequently used wash products containing triclosan; 
those that frequently used products containing triclocarban; and 
a control group that used no antibacterial wash products. The 
study found no evidence that the use of antibacterial wash prod-
ucts facilitated antibiotic resistance and antibiotic/antibacterial 
cross-resistance.  No  statistically  significant  difference  in  anti-
biotic resistance in Staphylococcus isolates was found between 
regular antibacterial wash product users and non-users. None of 
the isolates were resistant to vancomycin, and the rate of methi-
cillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) detected was appreciably less 
than that reported in the literature. The study found a definitive 
lack of antibiotic/antibacterial cross-resistance.

In summary, laboratory and epidemiologic research provides 
no evidence that use of triclosan in consumer products contrib-
utes to the societal burden of antibiotic resistance or decreases 
susceptibility  to  antimicrobials  agents  employed  in  hygienic 
antiseptic products.

Long-term effects on the skin microbiota
With  the  advent  of  the  human  microbiome  project,  there  is 
growing  interest  in  understanding  the  mutuality  between 
human physiology and the microbiota that inhabit the human 
body. Although these complex relationships are still the subject 
of active research, regulatory bodies are considering requiring 
long-term safety studies in an effort to understand the impact of 
antimicrobial agents on the skin microbiome.

120

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

Future directions

Future  epidemiological  studies  may  better  dimension  the  role 
of  hand  hygiene  products  and  regimens  in  preventing  infec-
tions in hospitals and long-term care institutions, as well as in 
the school, the workplace and the home. Developing improved 
products with a broad spectrum of activity and improved skin 
compatibility could be beneficial. Educational efforts on the best 
hand hygiene practices for health and safety can be developed 
for  different  audiences  and  settings  using  the  variety  of  mod-
ern  media  channels  that  are  now  available.  Ongoing  research 
to  extend  our  understanding  of  the  skin  microbiome  and  the 
broader implications of hand hygiene practices on the microbial 
ecology of the skin are needed.

references

1  Pinner  RW,  Teutsch  S  M,  Simonsen  L,  et  al.  (1996)  Trends  in 
infectious  diseases  mortality  in  the  United  States.  Jama  275, 
189–93.

2  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  Estimates  of 
Foodborne  Illness  in  the  United  States.  (2011)  www.cdc.gov/
foodborneburden/2011-foodborne-estimates.html 
Accessed 
28 May 2015.

3  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  Norovirus.  Trends 
and outbreaks. (2013) www.cdc.gov/norovirus/trends-outbreaks.
html Accessed 28 May 2015.

4  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Rotavirus.  (2013) 

www.cdc.gov/rotavirus/index.html Accessed 28 May 2015.

5  Abbott A, Pearson H. (2004) Fear of human pandemic grows as 

bird flu sweeps through Asia. Nature 427, 472–3.

6  Zimmer  SM,  Burke  DS.  (2009)  Historical  perspective  –  Emer-
gence of influenza A (H1N1) viruses. N Engl J Med 361, 279–85.
7  Klevens RM, Edwards JR, Richards CL, Jr., et al. (2007) Estimat-
ing healthcare-associated infections and deaths in U.S. hospitals, 
2002. Public Health Rep 122, 160–6.

8  Baker  GR,  Norton  PG,  Flintoft  V,  et  al.  (2004)  The  Canadian 
Adverse  Events  Study:  the  incidence  of  adverse  events  among 
hospital patients in Canada. Cmaj 170, 1678–86.

9  Sengstock  DM,  Thyagarajan  R,  Apalara  J,  et  al.  (2010)  Multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii, an emerging pathogen among 
older  adults  in  community  hospitals  and  nursing  homes.  Clin 
Infect Dis 50, 1611–6.

10  Grice EA, Segre JA. (2011) The skin microbiome. Nat Rev Micro-

biol 9, 244–53.

11  Grice EA, Kong HH, Renaud G, et al. (2008) A diversity profile of 

the human skin microbiota. Genome Res 18, 1043–50.

12  Costello EK, Lauber CL, Hamady M, et al. (2009) Bacterial com-
munity variation in human body habitats across space and time. 
Science 326, 1694–7.

13  Fierer N, Hamady M, Lauber CL, et al. (2008) The influence of sex, 
handedness, and washing on the diversity of hand surface bacte-
ria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105, 17994–9.

14  Song  SJ,  Lauber  C,  Costello  EK,  et  al.  (2013)  Cohabiting  family 
members share microbiota with one another and with their dogs. 
Elife 2, e00458.

15  Dunn  RR,  Fierer  N,  Henley  JB,  et  al.  (2013)  Home  life,  factors 
structuring  the  bacterial  diversity  found  within  and  between 
homes. PLoS One 8, e64133.

16  Gwaltney  JM,  Jr.,  Moskalski  PB,  Hendley  JO.  (1978)  Hand-to-
hand transmission of rhinovirus colds. Ann Intern Med 88, 463–7.
17  Hendley JO, Wenzel RP, Gwaltney JM, Jr. (1973) Transmission of 

rhinovirus colds by self-inoculation. N Engl J Med 288, 1361–4.

18  Aiello AE, Cimiotti J, Della-Latta P, et al. (2003) A comparison of 
the  bacteria  found  on  the  hands  of  ‘homemakers’  and  neonatal 
intensive care unit nurses. J Hosp Infect 54, 310–5.

19  McBride  ME,  Montes  LF,  Fahlberg  WJ,  et  al.  (1972)  Microbial 
flora  of  nurses’  hands.  I.  Quantitative  differences  in  bacterial 
population between nurses and other occupational groups.  Int  J 
Dermatol 11, 49–53.

20  McBride  ME,  Montes  LF,  Fahlberg  WJ,  et  al.  (1974)  Microbial 
flora of nurses’ hands. II. Qualitative differences in occupational 
groups. Int J Dermatol 13, 197–204.

21  McBride ME, Montes LF, Fahlberg WJ, et al. (1975) Microbial flora 
of nurses’ hands. III. The relationship between staphylococcal skin 
populations and persistence of carriage. Int J Dermatol 14, 129–35.
22  Pancholi P, Healy M, Bittner T, et al. (2005) Molecular characteri-
zation of hand flora and environmental isolates in a community 
setting. J Clin Microbiol 43, 5202–7.

23  Cogen AL, Nizet V, Gallo RL. (2008) Skin microbiota, a source of 

disease or defence? Br J Dermatol 158, 442–55.

24  Christensen GJ, Bruggemann H. (2013) Bacterial skin commen-

sals and their role as host guardians. Benef Microbes 1–15.

25  Uckay I, Pittet D, Vaudaux P, et al. (2009) Foreign body infections 

due to Staphylococcus epidermidis. Ann Med 41, 109–19.

26  Hanifin JM, Rogge JL. (1977) Staphylococcal infections in patients 

with atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 113, 1383–6.

27  Park HY, Kim CR, Huh IS, et al. (2013) Staphylococcus aureus col-
onization in acute and chronic skin lesions of patients with atopic 
dermatitis. Ann Dermatol 25, 410–6.

28  Bourrain M, Ribet V, Calvez A, et al. (2013) Balance between ben-
eficial microflora and Staphylococcus aureus colonisation, in vivo 
evaluation in patients with atopic dermatitis during hydrotherapy. 
Eur J Dermatol 23, 786–94.

29  Kong  HH,  Oh  J,  Deming  C, et  al.  (2012)  Temporal  shifts  in  the 
skin microbiome associated with disease flares and treatment in 
children with atopic dermatitis. Genome Res 22, 850–9.

30  Best M, Neuhauser D. (2004) Ignaz Semmelweis and the birth of 

infection control. Qual Saf Healthcare 13, 233–4.

31  Hendley JO, Gwaltney JM, Jr. (1988) Mechanisms of transmission 

of rhinovirus infections. Epidemiol Rev 10, 243–58.

32  Larson  EL.  (1995)  APIC  guideline  for  handwashing  and  hand 
antisepsis in healthcare settings. Am J Infect Control 23, 251–69.
33  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  (2002)  Guideline 
for  Hand  Hygiene  in  Healthcare  Settings:  Recommendations  of 
the  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee 
and  the  HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA  Hand  Hygiene  Task  Force. 
MMWR  51  (No.  RR-16).  www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/Guidelines.
html Accessed 28 May 2015.

34  WHO  Guidelines  on  Hand  Hygiene  in  Healthcare.  (2009)  First 
Global Patient Safety Challenge Clean Care Is Safer Care. Geneva: 
World Health Organization.

35  World  Health  Organization.  (2014)  Clean  Care  is  Safer  Care. 
Five  moments  for  hand  hygiene.  Tools  for  5 Moments.  How  to 

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

121

handrub:how 
moments/en/ Accessed 28 May 2015.

to  handwash.  www.who.int/gpsc/tools/Five_

36  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  (2013)  Food  Code  2013. 
www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/RetailFoodProtection/
FoodCode/ucm374275.htm Accessed 28 May 2015.

37  Charbonneau DL, Ponte JM, Kochanowski BA. (2000) A method 
of assessing the efficacy of hand sanitizers, use of real soil encoun-
tered in the food service industry. J Food Prot 63, 495–501.

38  Centers for Disease Control. (2012) Hand Hygiene in Healthcare 
Settings. Hand Hygiene Basics, 2012. www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/
Basics.html Accessed 28 May 2015.

39  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  (2013)  Handwash-
ing, Clean Hands Save Lives. When and How to Wash Your Hands. 
www.cdc.gov/handwashing/when-how-handwashing.html 
Accessed 28 May 2015.

40  Sahay  S,  Panja  S,  Ray  S,  et  al.  (2010)  Diurnal  variation  in  hand 
hygiene compliance in a tertiary level multidisciplinary intensive 
care unit. Am J Infect Control 2010; 38, 535–9.

41  van der Vegt DS, Voss A. (2008)  Hand hygiene  after toilet visits. 
18th European Congress of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious 
Disease [Abstract P1103].

42  Green LR, Selman CA, Radke V, et al. (2006) Food worker hand-
washing practices: an observation study. J Food Prot 69, 2417–23.
43  Johnson HD, Sholcosky D, Gabello K, et al. (2003) Sex differences 
in public restroom handwashing behavior associated with visual 
behavior prompts. Percept Mot Skills 97, 805–10.

44  Anderson JL, Warren CA, Perez E, et al. (2008) Gender and ethnic 
differences in hand hygiene practices among college students. Am 
J Infect Control 36, 361–8.

45  Garbutt C, Simmons G, Patrick D, et al. (2007) The public hand 
hygiene practices of New Zealanders: a national survey. NZ Med 
J 120, U2810.

46  Quraishi ZA, McGuckin M, Blais FX. (1984) Duration of hand-
washing  in  intensive  care  units:  a  descriptive  study.  Am  J  Infect 
Control 12, 83–7.

47  Larson EL, Gomez-Duarte C, Lee LV, et al. (2003) Microbial flora 

of hands of homemakers. Am J Infect Control 31, 72–9.

48  Duggan JM, Hensley S, Khuder S, et al. (2008) Inverse correlation 
between level of professional education and rate of handwashing 
compliance in a teaching hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
29, 534–8.

49  Burusnukul  P,  Broz  CC.  (2013)  Drivers  and  motivators  in  con-

sumer handwashing behavior. Nutr Food Sci 43, 596–604.

54  Lages SL, Ramakrishnan MA, Goyal SM. (2008) In-vivo efficacy of 
hand sanitisers against feline calicivirus: a surrogate for norovirus. 
J Hosp Infect 2008; 68, 159–63.

55  Edmonds  SL,  McCormack  RR,  Zhou  SS,  et  al.  (2012)  Hand 
hygiene regimens for the reduction of risk in food service envi-
ronments. J Food Prot 75, 1303–9.

56  Food and Drug Administration. (1994) Tentative final monograph for 
healthcare antiseptic drug products; proposed rule. Federal Register 59, 
31441–52.  www.federalregister.gov/articles/1994/06/17/94–14503/
topical-antimicrobial-drug-products-for-over-the-counter-human-
use-tentative-final-monograph.

57  Russell AD. (1991) Chemical sporicidal and sporostatic agents. In: 
BlockSS, ed. Chemical Sporicidal and Sporostatic Agents, 4th edn. 
Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991, 365–76.

58  European  Committee  for  Standardization.  (1997)  Chemical  dis-
infectants  and  antiseptics  –  hygienic  handrub  –  test  method  and 
requirements (phase2/step2) [European standard EN 1500]. Brus-
sels, Belgium, Central Secretariat.

59  Gaonkar TA, Geraldo I, Caraos L, et al. (2005) An alcohol hand 
rub  containing  a  synergistic  combination  of  an  emollient  and 
preservatives,  prolonged  activity  against  transient  pathogens. 
 J Hosp Infect 59, 12–8.

60  Shintre  MS,  Gaonkar  TA,  Modak  SM.  (2007)  Evaluation  of  an 
alcohol-based surgical hand disinfectant containing a synergistic 
combination of farnesol and benzethonium chloride for immedi-
ate and persistent activity against resident hand flora of volunteers 
and with a novel in vitro pig skin model. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 28, 191–7.

61  Kampf  G,  Ostermeyer  C.  (2011)  World  Health  Organization- 
recommended hand-rub formulations do not meet European effi-
cacy requirements for surgical hand disinfection in five minutes. J 
Hosp Infect 78, 123–7.

62  Suchomel  M,  Kundi  M,  Pittet  D,  et  al.  (2013)  Modified  World 
Health  Organization  hand  rub  formulations  comply  with  Euro-
pean efficacy requirements for preoperative surgical hand prepa-
rations. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 34, 245–50.

63  Suchomel M, Kundi M, Pittet D, et al. (2012) Testing of the World 
Health Organization recommended formulations in their applica-
tion  as  hygienic  hand  rubs  and  proposals  for  increased  efficacy. 
Am J Infect Control 40, 328–31.

64  Fuls JL, Fischer G. (2004) Antimicrobial efficacy of activated tri-
closan in surfactant-based formulation versus Pseudomonas put-
ida. Am J Infect Control 32, E22.

50  Guinan M, McGuckin M, Ali Y. (2002) The effect of a comprehen-
sive handwashing program on absenteeism in elementary schools. 
Am J Infect Control 30, 217–20.

65  Gunathilake HM, Sirimanna GM, Schurer NY. (2007) The pH of 
commercially available rinse-off products in Sri Lanka and their 
effect on skin pH. Ceylon Med J 52, 125–9.

51  Azor-Martinez  E,  Cobos-Carrascosa  E,  Gimenez-Sanchez  F,  
et  al.  (2014)  Effectiveness  of  a  multifactorial  handwashing  pro-
gram  to  reduce  school  absenteeism  due  to  acute  gastroenteritis. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J 33, e34–9.

52  Prazuck  T,  Compte-Nguyen  G,  Pelat  C,  et  al.  (2010)  Reducing 
gastroenteritis occurrences and their consequences in elementary 
schools with alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Pediatr Infect Dis J 29, 
994–8.

53  Liu P, Yuen Y, Hsiao HM, et al. (2010) Effectiveness of liquid soap 
and hand sanitizer against Norwalk virus on contaminated hands. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 76, 394–9.

66  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  (2013)  Safety  and  effectiveness 
of consumer antiseptics: Topical antimicrobial drug products for 
over-the-counter human use; proposed amedment of the Tenta-
tive Final Monograph; reopening of adminstrative record. Fedral 
Register 78, 76444–78.

67  Rotter ML. (2004) European norms in hand hygiene. J Hosp Infect 

56 Suppl 2, S6–9.

68  Rotter  M,  Sattar  S,  Dharan  S,  et  al.  (2009)  Methods  to  evaluate 
the  microbicidal  activities  of  hand-rub  and  hand-wash  agents.  
J Hosp Infect 73, 191–9.

122

HygIENE PrOduCTS  Cleansers

69  Hansen TB, Knochel S. (2003) Image analysis method for evalu-
ation  of  specific  and  non-specific  hand  contamination.  J  Appl 
Microbiol 94, 483–94.

70  Sattar SA, Ansari SA. (2002) The fingerpad protocol to assess hygi-
enic hand antiseptics against viruses. J Virol Methods 103, 171–81.
71  Zukowski  C,  Boyer  A,  Andrews  S,  et  al.  (2007)  Immediate  and 
persistent antibacterial and antiviral efficacy of a novel hand sani-
tizer. Presented at: 47th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial 
Agents and Chemotherapy; Chicago, IL, September 17–20, 2007.

72  Mbithi JN, Springthorpe VS, Boulet JR, et al. (1992) Survival of 
hepatitis A virus on human hands and its transfer on contact with 
animate and inanimate surfaces. J Clin Microbiol 30, 757–63.
73  Kampf G, Ostermeyer C, Heeg P, et al. (2006) Evaluation of two 
methods of determining the efficacies of two alcohol-based hand 
rubs  for  surgical  hand  antisepsis.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol  72, 
3856–61.

74  Heeg P, Ostermeyer C, Kampf G. (2008) Comparative review of the 
test design Tentative Final Monograph (TFM) and EN 12791 for 
surgical hand disinfectants. J Hosp Infect 70 Suppl 1, 22–6.

75  Bottone  EJ,  Cheng  M,  Hymes  S.  (2004)  Ineffectiveness  of  hand-
washing with lotion soap to remove nosocomial bacterial patho-
gens  persisting  on  fingertips,  a  major  link  in  their  intrahospital 
spread. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 25, 262–4.

76  Lucet JC, Rigaud MP, Mentre F, et al. (2002) Hand contamination 
before and after different hand hygiene techniques: a randomized 
clinical trial. J Hosp Infect 50, 276–80.

77  Turner RB, Fuls JL, Rodgers ND. (2010) Effectiveness of hand san-
itizers with and without organic acids for removal of rhinovirus 
from hands. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 54, 1363–4.

78  Grayson ML, Melvani S, Druce J, et al. (2009) Efficacy of soap and 
water and alcohol-based hand-rub preparations against live H1N1 
influenza virus on the hands of human volunteers. Clin Infect Dis 
48, 285–91.

85  Macinga DR, Sattar SA, Jaykus LA, et al. (2008) Improved inactiva-
tion of nonenveloped enteric viruses and their surrogates by a novel 
alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Appl Environ Microbiol 24, 5047–52.
86  Aiello  AE,  Coulborn  RM,  Perez  V,  et  al.  (2008)  Effect  of  hand 
hygiene  on  infectious  disease  risk  in  the  community  setting:  a 
meta-analysis. Am J Public Health 98, 1372–81.

87  Thomas JA, Sandora TJ, Shih MC, et al. (2009) Reducing absen-
teeism from gastrointestinal and respiratory illness in elementary 
school  students:  A  randomized,  controlled  trial  of  an  infection-
control intervention. Pediatrics 121, 1555–62.

88  Nerby  JM,  Gorwitz  R,  Lesher  L,  et  al.  (2011)  Risk  factors  for 
household  transmission  of  community-associated  methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Pediatr Infect Dis J 30, 927–32.
89  Kuehn BM. (2014) FDA pushes makers of antimicrobial soap to 

prove safety and effectiveness. Jama 311, 234.

90  Boyce JM, Dupont HL, Massaro J, et al. (2012) An expert panel 
report of a proposed scientific model demonstrating the effective-
ness of antibacterial handwash products. Am J Infect Control 40, 
742–9.

91  Larson  E,  Friedman  C,  Cohran  J,  et  al.  (1997)  Prevalence  and 
correlates of skin damage on the hands of nurses. Heart Lung 26, 
404–12.

92  Kampf  G,  Loffler  H.  (2010)  Hand  disinfection  in  hospitals  –  

benefits and risks. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 8, 978–83.

93  Berthelot C, Zirwas MJ. (2006) Allergic contact dermatitis to chlo-

roxylenol. Dermatitis 17, 156–9.

94  Rocha  LA,  Ferreira  de  Almeida  EBL,  Gontijo  Filho  PP.  (2009) 
Changes  in  hands  microbiota  associated  with  skin  damage 
because  of  hand  hygiene  procedures  on  the  healthcare  workers. 
Am J Infect Control 37, 155–9.

95  de  Almeida  e  Borges  LF,  Silva  BL,  Gontijo  Filho  PP.  (2007) 
Handwashing: changes in the skin flora. Am J Infect Control 35, 
417–20.

79  Larson  EL,  Aiello  AE,  Bastyr  J,  et  al.  (2001)  Assessment  of  two 
hand hygiene regimens for intensive care unit personnel. Crit Care 
Med 29, 944–51.

96  Chamorey E, Marcy PY, Dandine M, et al. (2011) A prospective 
multicenter  study  evaluating  skin  tolerance  to  standard  hand 
hygiene techniques. Am J Infect Control 39, 6–13.

80  Larson E. (1988) A causal link between handwashing and risk of 
infection? Examination of the evidence. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 9, 28–36.

81  Zafar AB, Butler RC, Reese DJ, et al. (1995) Use of 0.3% triclosan 
(Bacti-Stat) to eradicate an outbreak of methicillin-resistant Sta-
phylococcus aureus in a neonatal nursery. Am J Infect Control 23, 
200–8.

82  Capretti MG, Sandri F, Tridapalli E, et al. (2008) Impact of a stand-
ardized  hand  hygiene  program  on  the  incidence  of  nosocomial 
infection in very low birth weight infants. Am J Infect Control 36, 
430–5.

83  Gordin  FM,  Schultz  ME,  Huber  RA,  et  al.  (2005)  Reduction  in 
nosocomial transmission of drug-resistant bacteria after introduc-
tion of an alcohol-based handrub. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
26, 650–3.

84  Blaney DD, Daly ER, Kirkland KB,  et  al. (2011) Use of alcohol-
based hand sanitizers as a risk factor for norovirus outbreaks in 
long-term  care  facilities  in  northern  New  England,  December 
2006 to March 2007. Am J Infect Control 39, 296–301.

97  Kampf G, Loffler H, Gastmeier P. (2009) Hand hygiene for the pre-

vention of nosocomial infections. Dtsch Arztebl Int 106, 649–55.

98  Kumar  V,  Balomajumder  C,  Roy  P.  (2008)  Disruption  of  LH-
induced  testosterone  biosynthesis  in  testicular  Leydig  cells  by 
triclosan, probable mechanism of action. Toxicology 250, 124–31.
99  Kumar  V,  Chakraborty  A,  Kural  MR,  et  al.  (2009)  Alteration  of 
testicular steroidogenesis and histopathology of reproductive sys-
tem in male rats treated with triclosan. Reprod Toxicol 27, 177–85.
100  Gee RH, Charles A, Taylor N, et al. (2008) Oestrogenic and andro-
genic activity of triclosan in breast cancer cells. J Appl Toxicol 28, 
78–91.

101  Stoker  TE,  Gibson  EK,  Zorrilla  LM.  (2010)  Triclosan  exposure 
modulates estrogen-dependent responses in the female wistar rat. 
Toxicol Sci 117, 45–53.

102  Zorrilla  LM,  Gibson  EK,  Jeffay  SC,  et  al.  (2009)  The  effects  of 
triclosan on puberty and thyroid hormones in male Wistar rats. 
Toxicol Sci 107, 56–64.

103  Emadi A, Coberly L. (2007) Intoxication of a hospitalized patient 
with  an  isopropanol-based  hand  sanitizer.  N  Engl  J  Med  356, 
530–1.

12. Hand Cleansers and Sanitizers

123

104  Anon. (2012) Alcohol-based hand sanitizers, severe intoxication 

in children. Prescrire Int 21, 184.

105  Levy CW, Roujeinikova A, Sedelnikova S, et al. (1999) Molecular 

basis of triclosan activity. Nature 398, 383–4.

106  Lambert RJ. (2004) Comparative analysis of antibiotic and antimi-
crobial biocide susceptibility data in clinical isolates of methicillin-
sensitive  Staphylococcus  aureus,  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococ-
cus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa between 1989 and 2000. J 
Appl Microbiol 97, 699–711.

107  Suller MT, Russell AD. (2000) Triclosan and antibiotic resistance 
in Staphylococcus aureus. J Antimicrob Chemother 46, 11–8.
108  McBain  AJ,  Bartolo  RG,  Catrenich  CE,  et  al.  (2003)  Exposure 
of  sink  drain  microcosms  to  triclosan,  population  dynamics 

and  antimicrobial  susceptibility.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol  69, 
5433–42.

109  Cole  EC,  Addison  RM,  Rubino  JR,  et  al.  (2003)  Investigation 
of  antibiotic  and  antibacterial  agent  cross-resistance  in  target  
bacteria from homes of antibacterial product users and nonusers. 
J Appl Microbiol 95, 664–76.

110  Aiello AE, Marshall B, Levy SB, et al. (2005) Antibacterial cleaning 
products and drug resistance. Emerg Infect Dis 11, 1565–70.
111  Cole  EC,  Addison  RM,  Dulaney  PD,  et  al.  (2011)  Investigation 
of antibiotic and antibacterial susceptibility and resistance in sta-
phylococcus from the skin of users and non-users of antibacterial 
wash  products  in  home  environments.  Internat  J  Microbiol  Res 
3, 90–96.

ChAPTEr 13
Shampoos for Normal Scalp hygiene and Dandruff

James R. Schwartz,1 Eric S. Johnson,1 and Thomas L. Dawson, Jr.2
1Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, Cincinnati, OH, USA
2Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Institute for Medical Biology, Singapore

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Frequent	scalp	cleansing	is	important	to	prevent	formation	of	unhealthy	scalp.
•	 Three	classes	of	shampoos	can	be	delineated:	(1)	cosmetic	shampoos	and	two	types	of	therapeutic	products;	(2)	standard	and	(3)	

cosmetically	optimized	therapeutics.

•	 Both	therapeutic	scalp	care	shampoos	are	effective	for	normal	scalp	to	prevent	unhealthy	conditions	and	for	dandruff/seborrheic	

dermatitis	scalp	to	treat	the	condition	and	subsequently	prevent	its	reoccurrence.

•	 All	therapeutic	shampoos	are	not	equally	efficacious,	even	though	they	may	contain	the	same	active.
•	 Cosmetically	optimized	therapeutic	shampoos	are	desirable	as	they	increase	compliance	long-term,	due	to	having	no	aesthetic	trade-offs	

and	their	affordability.

•	 All	shampoos,	including	cosmetics,	must	be	mild	to	the	skin	while	being	effective	cleansers	to	minimize	irritation	that	could	initiate	scalp	

problems.

Definition

Effective scalp care includes both treatment of conditions such 
as dandruff and seborrheic dermatitis as well as prevention of 
these  conditions  among  susceptible  individuals.  This  chapter 
covers product choice, explanation of benefits and mechanism 
and how best to maximize benefits via patient compliance and 
usage regimens.

Introduction

The scalp is a unique environment of the skin combining a high 
level of sebaceous lipid production with a physical covering of 
hair. The hair beneficially physically protects the scalp from UV 
light,  increases  the  skin  surface  temperature  and  traps  mois-
ture  vapor;  but  it  can  also  detrimentally  inhibit  the  cleansing 
efficiency  of  the  scalp  surface  by  shampoos.  These  conditions 
favor  the  colonization  of  Malassezia  yeasts.  Such  colonization 
is normal as these are commensal scalp species and essentially 
everybody  is  culture-positive  for  such  organisms.  Under  cer-
tain conditions, theses yeasts can become pathogenic, initiating 
skin reactions including inflammation and hyper-proliferation 
[1] leading to symptoms [2] of itch and flakes (see Figure 13.1), 

respectively. The mechanism by which Malassezia yeasts exert 
their pathogenicity, while likely not completely understood, is at 
least partially delineated. Lipases are secreted by the yeast into 
the surrounding medium to liberate fatty acids from the triglyc-
erides of the sebaceous lipids that are constantly and copiously 
produced in the hair follicles and excreted onto the scalp surface. 
Malassezia selectively consume long chain saturated fatty acids 
to live, the unsaturated fatty acids left behind can then diffuse 
into the upper layers of the skin and be the initiators of inflam-
mation. Cutaneous inflammation leads to hyper-proliferation in 
the epidermis resulting in immature stratum corneum cells with 
incompletely degraded adhesive function resulting in removal 
as macroscopic visible clumps/flakes.

The resultant condition is called either dandruff or sebor-
rheic  dermatitis  (D/SD),  depending  on  the  severity  of  flak-
ing and the presence of outward manifestations of inflamma-
tion (such as redness). The occurrence of the scalp condition 
places special requirements on effective scalp care and cleans-
ing; in general, the lower the frequency of scalp cleansing, the 
greater  the  chances  that  scalp  conditions  such  as  D/SD  will 
occur [3]. Since the sebaceous lipids are one of the key factors 
required for formation of D/SD, infrequent removal leads to 
the build-up of the pro-inflammatory by-products of Malas-
sezia metabolism.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

124

Normal Scalp

Dandruff

Seborrheic Dermatitis

13. Shampoos for Normal Scalp Hygiene and Dandruff

125

Loosely adherent white or gray flakes 
often occurring in patches. 

Larger, yellow greasy scales with 
underlying erythema. 

C

Figure 13.1  (A) Image of normal scalp skin. (B) Dandruff scalp image showing adherent white flakes. (C) Seborrheic dermatitis with more evidence of 
sebum yellowing on flakes and underlying erythema.

Product and formulation technology 
overview

Three categories of shampoos can be delineated (Figure 13.2). 
Cosmetic  shampoos  are  primarily  designed  to  cleanse  the 
hair,  but  of  course  the  scalp  skin  is  cleansed  simultaneously. 
Modern  versions  of  these  shampoos  also  condition  the  hair 
by depositing certain ingredients on the hair to improve cos-
metic  benefits  such  as  ease  of  combing,  shine  maintenance 
and other attributes important to all consumers. Therapeutic 
scalp  care  shampoos  (often  termed  “anti-dandruff ”)  contain 
active ingredients to control the D/SD conditions, most often 

Cosmetic shampoos

Therapeutic shampo

os

Cosmetically-
optimized
therapeutics

- Mild to skin and hair for
  everyday
- Conditions hair while
  cleaning
- Pleasant fragrance and
  appearance
- Cost effective
- Does not harm scalp

- Can be harsh due to
   excessive cleaning
- Little or no hair
  conditioning
- Often very “medicinal”
   esthetics
- Can be prohibitively expensive

- Provides anti-dandruff technology

Figure 13.2   Representation of the shampoo segments, differentiating cos-
metic from therapeutic shampoos and their key attributes. The category of 
cosmetically  optimized  therapeutics  achieves  therapeutic  benefits  without 
diminishing esthetic attributes.

by reducing the Malassezia population on the scalp. Classical 
therapeutic products tend to focus on the drug active without 
full consideration of product in-use a esthetics. Cosmetically 
optimized therapeutic products also contain a drug active to 
achieve therapeutic benefits, but without the common a esthetic 
trade-offs  (odor,  hair  conditioning)  of  therapeutic  products. 
Cosmetically  optimized  therapeutic  shampoos  do  not  neces-
sarily compromise on the magnitude of the therapeutic bene-
fit. Recommendations involving the best products to use must 
take into consideration patient’s needs for a pleasant use expe-
rience and delivery of cosmetic hair benefits. This is because 
compromises  on  these  attributes  significantly  reduce  patient 
compliance. No matter how therapeutically effective a product 
is,  benefits  will  be  minimized  if  usage  frequency  is  compro-
mised. This is a critically important situation in the case of D/
SD since the condition is chronic and prophylaxis is the most 
effective long-term strategy.

The primary component (see Table 13.1) of all shampoos is 
the surfactant system which helps to remove sebaceous lipids, 
keratin debris, particulates from the environment, and residues 
from  styling  products.  The  surfactants  are  responsible  for  the 
lathering action of a product, the volume and quality of lather 
are perceived as important signals of cleansing action. Most of 
the surfactants tend to be negatively charged (anionic), though 
some  contain  both  positive  and  negative  charges  in  the  same 
molecule  (amphoteric)  and  others  are  uncharged  (non-ionic); 
these latter types are considered co-surfactants and function to 
optimize the lather quality and amount and cleaning ability of 
the primary anionic surfactant.

The surfactant system is optimized to achieve two opposing 
objectives – cleaning effectively while minimizing irritation of 
the skin. All surfactants have the potential to irritate the skin 
to  various  degrees.  The  goal  of  the  formulator  is  to  achieve 
effective  cleaning  and  lathering  while  minimizing  the  irrita-
tion potential of the product by using the right surfactants. The 
addition  of  co-surfactants  can  synergistically  decrease  irrita-
tion  potential  without  harming  cleaning.  Some  anti-dandruff 
actives also can minimize the irritation potential of surfactants 

126

hygIENE PrODuCTS  Cleansers

Table 13.1  	Summary	of	common	formulation	components	of	various	shampoo	types.

Function(s)

Material class(es)

Common examples

Lather/cleaning

Hair	conditioning	
agents

Primary		
surfactants

Optimization

Co-surfactants

Silicones

Cationic	polymers

Shine,	
manageability

De-tangling,
anti-static

Hydration

Hair	health

Deposition	aids

Benefit	delivery

Cationic	polymers

Preservatives

Fragrance

Thickeners

Viscosity

Anti-dandruff	
components

Scalp	care

Biocides

Salts

Particles

Anti-fungals

Sodium	lauryl	sulfate,
ammonium	lauryl	sulfate,
sodium	laureth	sulfate,
ammonium	laureth	sulfate

Cocamidopropyl	betaine,	
cocamide	MEA

Dimethicone,	dimethiconol,	
amodimethicone

Polyquaternium-10,		
cationic	guar	derivatives

Panthenol	and	derivatives

Polyquaternium-10,		
cationic	guar	derivatives

Isothiazalinone	derivatives,	
parabens

Sodium	chloride

Glycol	distearate

Zinc	pyrithione	(ZPT),	
selenium	sulfide,	
ketoconazole	(see	Table	13.2)

Humectants

Glycerin,	urea

Potentiators

Zinc	carbonate

Presence in …

Cosmetic
shampoo

cosmetically-
optimized
therapeutic

Standard
therapeutic
shampoo

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Some

Some

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Some

Yes

Yes

Yes

Some

Some

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Some

Yes

Some

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Some

Yes

(see  below);  this  is  especially  important  for  treatment  of  the 
D/SD condition which can be exacerbated by an irritating sur-
factant system.

In addition to surfactants for cleaning, shampoos contain 
a wide range of other materials to care for the hair and scalp, 
deliver cosmetic benefits, enhance the usage experience and 
to maintain the physical integrity of the product itself (pre-
servatives,  viscosity  adjusters,  pH  control,  etc.)  Hair  condi-
tioning  agents  result  in  shiny,  manageable  hair  and  include 
such  materials  as  silicones,  cationic  (positively  charged) 
polymers  that  enhance  deposition  and  retention  of  benefit 
agents  to  the  hair  fiber  to  provide  conditioning  and  reduce 
static  electricity,  humectants  to  maintain  hydration  and 
materials that penetrate the hair shaft to maintain a healthy-
looking appearance.

The  cationic  polymers  mentioned  as  conditioning  aids  also 
are a critical component of the delivery system of many sham-
poos.  While  shampoos  are  first  and  foremost  designed  to 
clean, the delivery of additional hair and scalp benefits requires 
selected materials to be left behind after rinsing. The combina-
tion of oppositely charged surfactants and polymers results in 

an  electrostatic  association  complex  called  coacervate  which 
forms upon product dilution (lathering and rinsing). The coac-
ervate is an aqueous gel that aids in the delivery of hair and scalp 
benefit agents to their respective surfaces.

The  manipulation  of  surfactant  and  cationic  polymer  types 
and  levels  affects  deposition  efficiency,  and  together  with  the 
type  and  level  of  hair  benefit  agent(s),  affects  how  much  con-
ditioning  is  delivered  to  the  hair.  This  is  the  basis  for  a  wide 
offering of shampoo versions, to meet the diverse hair and scalp 
needs of users to deliver cosmetic benefits and a pleasant in-use 
experience, especially in terms of how much hair conditioning 
is needed and desired. Standard therapeutic shampoos tend to 
be deficient in hair conditioning benefits. They also do not tend 
to have a range of versions to meet the esthetic needs of the user. 
Together these two factors limit compliance with classical thera-
peutic products.

Therapeutic  scalp  care  shampoos  will  additionally  contain 
active  materials  for  resolving  dandruff/seborrheic  dermatitis 
(D/SD) and preventing its re-occurrence. Since the commensal 
scalp  fungus  Malassezia  clearly  plays  a  role  in  the  etiology  of 
the condition [1], the primary function of most scalp care active 

13. Shampoos for Normal Scalp Hygiene and Dandruff

127

Table 13.2  Overview	of	scalp	care	active	materials.

Common actives

Primary
mechanism

Typical 
amount used

Appearance

Odor

Usage

Physical characteristics

Most potent anti-fungal activity

Zinc	pyrithione	(ZPT)

Anti-fungal

0.5–2%

White	powder

Neutral

White	powder

Neutral

Wide.	Positive	impact	on	esthetics	and	
hair	care	benefits.

Limited.	Is	expensive	and	requires	
regulatory	approval.

Red	powder

Sulfur-like

Limited.	Color	and	odor	affect	esthetics.

Ketoconazole

Anti-fungal

Selenium	sulfide

Anti-fungal

Moderately potent anti-fungal activity

1–2%

1–2%

Climbazole

Anti-fungal

0.5–2%

White	powder

Neutral

Octopirox

Anti-fungal

0.5–2%

White	powder

Neutral

Limited.	Not	accepted	globally	by	
regulatory	bodies

Limited.	Not	accepted	globally	by	
regulatory	bodies

Sulfur

1%

Yellow	powder

Sulfur

Limited.	Color	and	odor	affect	esthetics.

Least potent anti-fungal activity

Salicylic	acid

Keratolytic	agent

1.8–3.0%

White	powder

Neutral

Limited.	Low	anti-fungal	potency.

Coal	tar

Regulator	of	keratinization

0.5–1.0%

Black	viscous	liquid

Off-odor

Limited.	Color	and	odor	affect	esthetics.

materials is anti-fungal; the most common are summarized in 
Table 13.2, grouped by their intrinsic anti-Malassezia potency. 
Some of the materials are accepted by global regulatory status 
agencies, while others are limited to use in only some geograph-
ical regions.

The  most  commonly  used  scalp  active  is  zinc  pyrithione 
(ZPT), a material developed as part of a program to identify 
biocides based on the naturally occurring antibiotic aspergil-
lic acid [4]. Screening of over one thousand prospective anti-
dandruff  materials  in  the  late  1950 s  led  to  the  selection  of 
ZPT;  novel  formulation  work  then  led  to  commercialization 
of shampoos with ZPT in the early 1960 s [5]. Since that time, 
the  efficacy,  ease  of  formulation,  cost  and  compatibility  with 
shampoo esthetic attributes has resulted in very broad use and 
acceptance of ZPT. The magnitude of therapeutic benefit deliv-
ered  by  ZPT-containing  shampoos  is  formulation  dependent 
(see below).

Other  effective  actives  such  as  ketoconazole  and  selenium 
sulfide are used fairly broadly, but tend to be more limited to the 
classical therapeutic class of shampoos due either to cost, regu-
latory or esthetic limitations. Such products are generally used 
when especially difficult cases of D/SD occur. If such products 
are  needed,  subsequently  switching  to  cosmetically  optimized 
therapeutic shampoos should be advised for long-term prophy-
lactic  usage.  Materials  such  as  climbazole  and  octopirox  have 
been used regionally, but have been limited by the lack of accep-
tance in some geographies such as the US by the FDA. Although 
the FDA does accept the safety and efficacy of salicylic acid, coal 
tar and sulfur, either low potency or poor esthetics have limited 
their broad utilization.

unique attributes of scalp care products

The complexity of the shampoo delivery vehicle briefly described 
above, in combination with the unique attributes of the active 
material, results in seemingly similar products delivering differ-
ent magnitudes of efficacy even though they contain the same 
level of the same active material. The pharmacological delivery 
factors are just as important in realizing efficacy as is the selec-
tion of active material. The case is well-illustrated for shampoos 
based on ZPT, in which both the physical form of the material 
as well as the shampoo composition affect resultant activity [1] 
by three factors (Table 13.3).

retention of active on scalp
Regardless  of  the  specific  active  material  used  in  shampoos, 
activity is substantially dependent upon how much material is 
retained on the scalp surface after rinsing. As described above, 
this is a complex formulation technology task since cleaning is 
occurring simultaneously and, in the case of a shampoo, is the 
primary  product  benefit.  Coacervate  technology  is  used  as  a 
delivery system for ZPT (in addition to hair benefit agents) to 
control how much of a material like ZPT is retained on the scalp 

Table 13.3  	Formulation	factors	affecting	the	realization	of	full	efficacy.

	 1.	 Retention	of	active	material	on	scalp	after	rinsing.
	 2.	 Physical	bio-availability:	Spatial	coverage	of	active	on	scalp	surface	

and	in	infundibula.

	 3.	 Chemical	 bio-availability:	 Prevalence	 of	 bio-active	 species	 of	 active	

material.

 
128

hygIENE PrODuCTS  Cleansers

after rinsing. The efficiency of this deposition can vary dramati-
cally between commercial products and will directly affect the 
magnitude  of  efficacy  [6].  The  achievement  of  effective  active 
delivery  is  a  complex  balancing  of  parameters  to  maximize 
delivery while not compromising the esthetic properties of the 
product.  This  is  because  the  coacervate  that  efficiently  depos-
its on the scalp also deposits on the hair and can compromise 
the  perception  of  hair  cleanliness  if  not  optimized  correctly. 
Successful  formulation  of  cosmetically  optimized  therapeutic 
shampoos containing ZPT demands control over the coacervate 
formation upon dilution and rinsing. This is done by careful bal-
ancing of cationic polymer type and level and surfactant system 
optimizing to control the amount, texture and subsequent size 
of the coacervate gel phase formed. By controlling these factors 
the coacervate that deposits on the hair will provide ideal con-
ditioning properties while also entraining ZPT on the scalp in a 
spatially optimized form (see below).

Spatial distribution of deposited active
While  the  amount  of  material  remaining  on  the  scalp  sur-
face  is  critically  important,  the  physical  distribution  is  just  as 
important as it affects the bio-availability to Malassezia of what 
has been deposited. For a particulate material like ZPT, activ-
ity is derived from molecular dissolution into the surrounding 
medium,  sebaceous  lipids  returning  to  and  covering  the  scalp 

surface  after  shampooing  (Figure  13.3 A).  Thus  the  effective 
anti-fungal activity zone surrounding a given particle is limited 
by the contradictory rates of dissolution of ZPT and replenish-
ment of new sebaceous liquid. Thus, to maximize activity, par-
ticles  must  be  evenly  spread  out  on  relevant  surfaces  as  their 
zones of activity are spatially limited.

There  are  two  factors  and  two  physical  domains  relevant  to 
this spatial distribution. The two factors involved are the active 
particle morphology and the coacervate entrainment. There are 
two types of ZPT in use today, standard ZPT has a sub-micron 
size  and  a  nondescript  morphological  shape.  Optimized  ZPT 
is  used  by  one  manufacturer  where  the  morphology  is  plate-
let  (see  Figure  13.4)  and  the  particle  size  has  been  optimized 
to 2.5 microns. Both of these parameters are designed to maxi-
mize the efficiency of scalp surface coverage to achieve uniform 
benefits throughout the micro-environment of the scalp. By use 
of  platelet  morphology  particles,  the  spatial  coverage  is  more 
efficient than use of a three-dimensionally symmetric particle. 
Particle size of the platelet also is important to achieve unifor-
mity  of  coverage.  Ideally,  smaller  particles  are  better,  but  they 
suffer  from  a  trade-off  that  they  are  more  difficult  to  retain 
through the rinsing step. Thus, practically, it has been observed 
[1]  that  an  optimum  particle  size  is  2.5 microns,  which  repre-
sents the average size of the optimized ZPT material. While the 
active material morphology plays a role in efficiency of spatial 

Effective zone

PTZ
particle

(a)

(b)

Active
species

alumrof ZTP dradnatS

S

O

N

Zn

N

O

S

alumrof ZTP detaitnetoP

S

O

N

Zn

N

O

S

Plus
zinc
carbonate

N

O

S

+

nZ

N

O

S

+

Zn

Figure 13.3  (a) Conceptual representation of the zone of inhibition of fungal growth surrounding ZPT particles and the importance of spatial distribution 
of particles to achieve uniformity of coverage. (b) ZPT can dissociate into component pyrithione (PT) and zinc (Zn) which reduces the presence of the intact 
bioactive species. The addition of zinc carbonate alters this equilibrium to maintain ZPT in its bioactive intact form.

13. Shampoos for Normal Scalp Hygiene and Dandruff

129

the equilibrium is shifted (exploiting LeChâtelier’s Principle) 
to the intact and more effective ZPT; this unique potentiated 
ZPT formula thus maximizes bio-availability of the deposited 
material.

Another  important  aspect  in  product  selection  is  that  the 
cleaning activity of the shampoo not result in irritation of the 
scalp. For D/SD sufferers this would interfere with the natural 
cutaneous repair processes that occurs upon Malassezia popula-
tion reduction. In addition to appropriate selection of the sur-
factant system as described above, some anti-fungal actives such 
as ZPT have been shown [10] to reduce the irritation potential 
of the surfactants as well.

Advantages and disadvantages of the use of 
therapeutic shampoos

The use of therapeutic shampoos for effective treatment of D/
SD as well maintenance of normal scalp hygiene is very conven-
ient since this is part of the normal habit and practice already. 
By choice of a cosmetically optimized therapeutic product, the 
therapeutic benefit can be achieved without any cosmetic ben-
efit trade-offs that could result in reduced patient compliance. 
This  product  category  also  tends  to  be  more  affordable  than 
standard therapeutic products, which also increases long-term 
(prophylactic) usage. Importantly, the cosmetic benefits can be 
delivered  without  reducing  efficacy,  i.e.,  classical  therapeutic 
products  are  not  necessarily  any  more  effective  than  cosmeti-
cally-optimized therapeutic products. No diminution of benefit 
(i.e.,  tachyphylaxis)  occurs  upon  long-term  use  of  ZPT-based 
products; this is based on both designed clinical studies [11] as 
well as anecdotal evidence associated with over 50 years of usage 
history. The only disadvantage of using such scalp care products 
occurs when a strict therapeutic product is chosen. The expense 
and esthetic negatives that normally accompany such products 
limit patient compliance leading to frequent, frustrating condi-
tion re-occurrence; these products should be limited to the most 
recalcitrant of cases.

Table 13.4  	Summary	of	advantages	and	disadvantages	of	using	scalp	care	
shampoos.

Advantages
–	Convenient	form	for	treatment	and	prevention	of	dandruff/seborrheic	
dermatitis
–	For	cosmetically	optimized	therapeutics,	compliance	is	increased

 ° Affordability
 ° No	esthetic	trade-offs

–	For	ZPT-based	products,	over	50	years	of	safe	utilization
–	For	ZPT-based	products,	no	tachyphylactic	responses

Disadvantages
–	For	straight	therapeutic	products,	compliance	is	reduced

 ° Can	be	very	expensive
 ° Can	have	substantial	esthetic	trade-offs

Figure  13.4  Electron micrograph of a unique form of ZPT, optimized for 
size and morphology to maximize the efficiency of surface coverage.

distribution of the active, the nature of the coacervate does as 
well. The particles are deposited on the scalp surface associated 
with  the  aqueous  gel  coacervate.  The  optimum  coacervate  for 
this purpose is one that forms into small dispersed gel particles 
entraining ZPT that facilitate even active distribution by easily 
flowing and not overly agglomerating the ZPT particles on the 
scalp surface. Use of a coacervate that forms large dispersed gel 
phases and is also thick or overly agglomerated in texture, while 
potentially increasing amount of ZPT deposited, inhibits its spa-
tial distribution, thereby negating any benefits from increasing 
the amount deposited.

In addition to these two factors affecting spatial distribution, 
there are two domains in which the spatial distribution is con-
sidered relevant. The classical focus has been on the scalp sur-
face, but it is now realized that Malassezia reside in the upper 
hair  follicles  (infundibula)  and  that  effective  D/SD  treatment 
requires  delivery  of  active  materials  to  these  relatively  inac-
cessible  spaces  [7].  Specialized  techniques  such  as  confocal 
microscopy  allow  the  quantification  of  both  amount  and  spa-
tial distribution of ZPT in the infundibulum, demonstrating the 
superior anti-dandruff efficacy that results from increasing ZPT 
bio-availability in the infundibulum [8].

Chemical bio-availability
The third factor affecting delivered efficacy is optimization of 
chemical bio-availability [9]. Chemically, ZPT is considered a 
coordination complex between inorganic zinc ion (Zn) and the 
pyrithione (PT) organic moiety. In such a material, the bonds 
are weak and an equilibrium exists between the intact species 
and  the  separate  components  (Figure  13.3B).  Neither  of  the 
separated components (Zn and PT) are effective anti-fungals, 
thus  to  the  extent  this  dissociation  occurs,  ZPT  chemical 
bio-availability and resultant efficacy is reduced. By adding a 
common  ion  to  the  system  (in  the  form  of  zinc  carbonate), 

130

hygIENE PrODuCTS  Cleansers

Effective use of products (see Table 13.5)

D/SD is a chronic condition characterized by frequent re-occur-
rence  resulting  in  frustration  on  the  part  of  the  patient  [12]. 
Initial treatment of the condition appears to be managed fairly 
effectively by either independent use of therapeutic anti-fungal 
shampoos or by combination with topical corticosteroid usage. 
However, preventative treatment is required for long-term man-
agement of the condition. Since the Malassezia easily recolonize, 
using  a  cosmetically  optimized  therapeutic  product  for  each 
shampoo experience is the optimum method for preventing re-
occurrence.

If  cosmetic  shampoo  usage  is  alternated  with  therapeutic 
products, efficacy is decreased [13]: not only does the cosmetic 
shampoo  have  no  active  to  deliver  to  the  scalp,  it  washes  off 
some of the deposited active material from the prior exposure 
to the active-containing shampoo. The desire to switch between 
a  cosmetic  shampoo  and  therapeutic  product  is  motivated  by 
either the real or perceived esthetic trade-offs in use of a thera-
peutic product. It has been shown [14] that therapeutic products 
do not provide all of the desired esthetic benefits and that this 
will drive patients to choose cosmetically optimized therapeutic 
shampoos for treating scalp conditions. Even with cosmetically 
optimized therapeutic products, there is often a perception that 
these products are not equivalent to cosmetic shampoos; while 
this may have been true in the past, modern technologies can 
deliver efficacious therapeutic and cosmetic benefits without the 
traditional trade-offs of standard therapeutic treatments.

A wide range of D/SD shampoo treatments are available [15] 
with  widely  ranging  costs.  By  recommending  a  therapeutic 
product  that  has  been  cosmetically  optimized  and  one  that  is 
affordable for on-going usage, the patient is best advised to use 
this product as their normal product to prevent reoccurrence.

Even by selection of an effective therapeutic product, how it is 
used can make a difference to the magnitude of benefit achieved. 
The length of time the lather is exposed to the scalp is generally 
not important as it is the material that is retained on the scalp 
after rinsing that provides the benefit. Using coacervate-based 
deposition  technologies,  it  is  the  dilution  that  occurs  during 
rinsing that triggers the deposition. Repeating the lathering and 
rinsing  process  twice  will  more  thoroughly  remove  the  seba-
ceous lipid and allow more active to be deposited.

Table 13.5  	Summary	of	usage	habits	to	maximize	the	therapeutic	benefit.

	 1.	 Use	 the	 therapeutic	 shampoo	 for	 every	 shampooing	 to	 prevent	 a	

relapse

	 2.	 Use	a	therapeutic	product	that	is	cosmetically	optimized	and	affordable
	 3.	 Shampoo	as	frequently	as	possible
	 4.	 Lather	exposure	time	is	not	important	but	repeating	the	entire	proc-

ess	can	be	beneficial

	 5.	 Product	should	be	utilized	all	year
	 6.	 If	a	rinse-off	conditioner	is	needed,	use	one	that	contains	anti-dan-

druff	active

D/SD  symptoms  occur  year-around  and  should  be  treated 
all  year.  There  is  a  mis-perception  that  it  is  a  seasonal  condi-
tion,  primarily  occurring  in  cold,  dry  seasons.  This  has  been 
shown [13] not to be true. Winter months with less humid air 
combined with the tendency to wear darker clothing make the 
patient  more  able to detect the flaking  symptoms  under these 
conditions,  but  they  occur  throughout  the  year.  Higher  fre-
quency of shampooing may occur in summer months resulting 
in a slight decrease in severity of symptoms.

Another critical usage factor involves whether a rinse-off con-
ditioner is used after the shampoo [13]. Rinse-off conditioners 
that do not contain anti-dandruff actives remove a portion of the 
deposited active from the prior therapeutic shampoo exposure 
thereby reducing efficacy. If the patient desires use of a rinse-off 
conditioner, one containing anti-dandruff active should be rec-
ommended so that loss of retained active does not occur once 
the entire hair care regimen is practiced.

Benefits of use of scalp care shampoos

Resolution of D/SD is the primary motivation for initiation of 
use  of  therapeutic  shampoos.  The  choice  of  shampoo  should 
be  motivated  by,  in  order:  efficacy,  cosmetic  hair  benefits  and 
cost. Assessing the relative efficacy of a product usually involves 
double-blind placebo-controlled clinical studies using medical 
experts  to  assess  the  severity  of  flaking  and  erythema;  recent 
work  has  also  extended  measurement  capability  to  molecular 
indicators of scalp condition as well [16]. A review of the com-
parative  efficacy  of  products  [3]  supports  that  the  most  effec-
tive  products  are  those  that  contain  an  effective  anti-fungal, 
the most potent of which are ZPT, selenium sulfide and keto-
conazole. Further rank-ordering within this group is somewhat 
difficult due to conflicting studies and the role that the specific 
formulation  then  plays.  However,  it  is  clear  that  cosmetically 
optimized therapeutics can be as effective as standard therapeu-
tics;  the  marketing  strategy  used  to  position  these  products  is 
not necessarily a good predictor of the true technical efficacy.

The use of certain scalp care shampoos also demonstrate the 
ability to deliver anti-irritancy effects [17]. There appears to be 
a wide range in activities depending on the specific active used. 
ZPT and especially the potentiated ZPT formula appear to be 
most  effective  at  reducing  irritation.  Irritation  and  inflamma-
tion are early steps in the etiology of D/SD as well as many other 
scalp conditions. Thus, use of the zinc-based therapeutic prod-
ucts may well have general scalp health benefits beyond D/SD 
mitigation [18].

The scalp health benefits associated with use of anti-dandruff 
shampoos  may  extend  to  hair  benefits  as  well.  A  number  of 
studies have demonstrated (for example [19]) that use of these 
products can reduce the rate at which hair is lost. The mecha-
nism  for  this  benefit  is  not  known,  but  may  be  speculated  to 
originate in the reduction of inflammation referred to above as 
follicular inflammation may impede re-growth of lost hairs. A 

13. Shampoos for Normal Scalp Hygiene and Dandruff

131

further benefit of the scalp inflammation being reduced by these 
products is less itch and subsequent scratching which reduces 
hair damage and improves the quality and appearance of hair.

Summary

Normal scalp hygiene requires frequent and effective cleaning of 
the scalp. Cosmetic shampoos do this effectively while provid-
ing conditioning benefits for the hair. For many individuals, this 
frequent  cleaning  is  sufficient  to  prevent  adverse  scalp  effects. 
However,  many  still  suffer  from  the  symptoms  of  D/SD.  For 
this group, therapeutic products are required that contain anti-
dandruff  actives  that  control  the  scalp  Malassezia  population. 
A subset of this class is cosmetically optimized therapeutics in 
which the product delivers the therapeutic benefits without loss 
of the typical cosmetic shampoo esthetics. This leads to much 
higher  compliance,  leading  to  effective  long  term  care  of  the 
chronic condition. Other factors relevant for selecting the most 
useful product are that the active and shampoo composition be 
optimized to maximize the physical and chemical bio-availability 
of  the  active;  this  is  especially  true  for  ZPT-based  treatments. 
Once the best shampoo is chosen, effective habits are required 
to realize the full benefit: frequent use without switching to cos-
metic shampoos, use all year around and the use of a rinse-off 
conditioner that also contains anti-dandruff active.

references

1  Schwartz J. (2007) Treatment of seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp. J 

Cosm Dermatol 6, 18–22.

2  Elewski B. (2005) Clinical diagnosis of common scalp disorders. J 

Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 2005;10:190–3.

3  Schwartz J, Cardin C, Dawson Jr. T. (2005) Dandruff and seborrheic 
dermatitis.  In:  Barran  R,  Maibach  H,  eds.  Textbook  of  Cosmetic 
 Dermatology, 3rd edn. New York: Taylor & Francis, pp. 259–72.
4  Shaw E, Bernstein J, Losee K, Lott W. (1950) Analogs of aspergillic 
acid. IV. Substituted 2-bromopyridine-N-oxides and their conver-
sion to cyclic thiohydroxamic acids. J Am Chem Soc 72, 4362–4.
5  Snyder F. (1969) Development of a therapeutic shampoo. Cutis 5, 

835–8.

6  Bailey P, Arrowsmith C, Darling K, Dexter J, Eklund J, Lane A, et al. 
(2003) A double-blind randomized vehicle-controlled clinical trial 
investigating the effect of ZnPTO dose on the scalp vs. antidandruff 
efficacy and antimicotic activity. Internat J Cosm Sci 25, 183–8.
7  Schwartz J, Shah R, Krigbaum H, Sacha J, Vogt A, Blume-Peytavi U. 
(2011) New insights on dandruff/seborrhoeic dermatitis: the role of 
the scalp follicular infundibulum in effective treatment strategies. 
Br J Derm 165 Suppl 2, 18–23.

8  Schwartz J, Bacon R, Shah R, Mizoguchi H, Tosti A. (2013) Thera-
peutic  efficacy  of  anti-dandruff  shampoos:  A  randomized  clinical 
trial comparing products based on potentiated zinc pyrithione and 
zinc pyrithione/climbazole. Internat J Cosm Sci 35, 381–7.

9  Schwartz  J.  (2005)  Product  pharmacology  and  medical  actives  in 
achieving  therapeutic  benefits.  J  Invest  Dermatol  Symp  Proc  10, 
198–200.

10  Warren  R,  Schwartz  J,  Sanders  L,  Juneja  P.  (2003)  Attenuation  of 
surfactant-induced  interleukin  1α  expression  by  zinc  pyrithione. 
Exog Dermatol 2, 23–7.

11  Schwartz J, Rocchetta H, Asawanonda P, Luo F, Thomas J. (2009) 
Does tachyphylaxis occur in long-term management of scalp sebor-
rheic dermatitis with pyrithione zinc-based treatments? Internat J 
Dermatol 48, 79–85.

12  Chen S, Yeung J, Chren M. (2002) Scalpdex. A quality-of-life instru-

ment for scalp dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 138, 803–7.

13  Schwartz J. (2004) A practical guide for the treatment of dandruff 

and seborrheic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 50, p. 71.

14  Draelos Z, Kenneally D, Hodges L, Billhimer W, Copas M, Margraf 
C.  (2005)  A  comparison  of  hair  quality  and  cosmetic  acceptance 
following the use of two anti-dandruff shampoos. J Invest Dermatol 
Symp Proc 10, 201–4.

15  Schwartz R, Janusz C, Janniger C. (2006) Seborrheic dermatitis: An 

overview. Am Fam Phys 74, 125–30.

16  Schwartz J, Messenger A, Tosti A, Todd G, Hordinsky M, Hay R, 
et  al.  (2013)  A  comprehensive  pathophysiology  of  dandruff  and 
seborrheic dermatitis – towards a more precise definition of scalp 
health. Acta Derm Venereol 93, 131–7.

17  Margraf  C,  Schwartz  J,  Kerr  K.  (2005)  Potentiated  antidandruff/
seborrheic  dermatitis  formula  based  on  pyrithione  zinc  delivers 
irritation mitigation benefits. J Am Acad Dermatol 52(3), p. 56.
18  Schwartz J, Marsh R, Draelos Z. (2005) Zinc and skin health: Over-

view of physiology and pharmacology. Dermatol Surg 31, 837–47.
19  Berger R, Fu J, Smiles K, Turner C, Schnell B, Werchowski K, et al. 
(2003) The effects of minoxidil, 1% pyrithione zinc and a combi-
nation of both on hair density: a randomized controlled trial. Br J 
Dermatol 149, 354–62.

Sec tion 2  Moisturizers

chapter 14
Facial Moisturizers

Yohini  Appa
Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Facial	moisturizers	can	be	used	to	improve	skin	texture,	treat	dry	skin,	and	provide	sun	protection.
•	 Occlusives,	humectants,	emollients,	and	sunscreens	are	important	ingredient	categories	in	facial	moisturizers.
•	 The	efficacy	of	a	facial	moisturizer	can	be	measured	via	transepidermal	water	loss	and	corneometry.
•	 Facial	moisturizers	can	be	an	important	adjunct	in	the	treatment	of	facial	dermatoses,	such	as	atopic	dermatitis	and	eczema.

introduction

The  face  is  the  most  conspicuous  representation  of  age  and 
health. While the eyes are considered the windows to the soul, 
the face is its billboard. No other body part demonstrates per-
sonal past history as convincingly as the face. Wrinkles form on 
the face well before the rest of the body and serve as an indica-
tor of age and lifestyle. The relative color and luminosity of the 
facial skin represents overall health and emotional state. Facial 
skin can be dull to vibrant representing poor to excellent physi-
cal  health.  The  face  mirrors  acute  changes  in  well‐being.  For 
example, persons experiencing cardiac distress appear “ashen” 
while anger or embarrassment may be expressed as a reddened 
face. Thus, the face represents the current physical state of the 
individual. Moisturizers can enhance the appearance of the face 
and are thus important cosmeceuticals.

The  face  is  rarely  covered  and  constantly  subjected  to  the 
elements.  It  is  one  of  the  most  light‐exposed  areas  of  skin  on 
the body, the other areas being the shoulders, upper chest, and 
forearms; as a result it receives high amounts of UV radiation. 
The incidence of cutaneous melanoma as measured by relative 
tumor density is highest on the face in subjects over the age of 50 
years, a statistic that is interpreted as directly correlating to the 
amount of long‐term UV exposure [1]. This means that facial 
photoprotection is of great importance, thus the incorporation 
of efficacious UVA and UVB protection in daily facial moistur-
izers is worthwhile.

Facial skin  is  physiologically  unique. It possesses numerous 
sweat  glands  and  a  relatively  thin  dermis.  It  is  densely  popu-
lated  with  sebaceous  glands,  possessing  400–900 glands  per 
square centimeter [2]. The face is a major point of contact for 

sensory input, the facial skin possesses high innervation and is 
therefore  more  sensitive  than  skin  elsewhere  on  the  body  [3]. 
The skin covering the face also has to allow for the subtleties of 
facial expressions and phonoation. Of all the areas on the body, 
the  skin  on  the  face  has  the  highest  level  of  hydration.  When 
the ratio of transepidermal water loss (TEWL) to skin surface 
hydration was calculated in order to determine the most consis-
tently hydrated area of the body, the forehead and cheek showed 
the lowest ratios (Figure 14.1).

Dry facial skin

Dry  skin  is  a  term  used  to  describe  the  condition  that  arises 
when the normal functioning of the skin is compromised. More 
specifically, it is a manifestation of the consequences that arise 
from  a  loss  of  water  from  the  outermost  layer  of  the  dermis: 
the  stratus  corneum  (SC).  The  SC  is  formed  when  keratinoc-
ytes, cuboidal cells in the lower half of the epidermis, migrate 
from  the  basal  layer  to  the  most  superficial  layer,  producing 
large amounts of the water‐insoluble protein keratin along the 
way.  The  keratinization  and  migration  process  results  in  flat-
tened,  keratin‐filled  keratinocytes,  referred  to  as  corneocytes, 
which create an overlapping barrier with a “brick and mortar” 
appearance that is nearly waterproof. The gaps between the cor-
neocytes, or “bricks,” are filled with intercellular lipids, or “mor-
tar”  that  is  produced  by  keratohyaline  granules.  The  SC  layer 
is also referred to as the “dead layer” because by this point the 
cells  have  stopped  synthesizing  proteins  and  are  unresponsive 
to cellular signaling. Cells in the SC are eventually sloughed off 
and replaced by more cells coming up through the epidermis, 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

132

H2O
TEWL/H2O ratio

Forehead

257

0.055

Cheek

345

0.04

Back of hand

97

0.12

Upper leg

106

0.1

Top of foot

72

0.14

Figure 14.1   Skin surface hydration and transepidermal water loss (TEWL) 
and SciCon ratio.

thereby  maintaining  a  continuous  barrier.  It  normally  takes 
26–42 days for the epidermis to cycle completely [4].

The  process  of  skin  cell  differentiation  and  maturation  is  a 
delicate balance that is easily disrupted. If the water content of 
the  SC  drops  below  20%  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  the 
enzymes involved in desquamation will be unable to function 
and  the  process  of  orderly  epidermis  cycling  will  be  compro-
mised. This especially apparent in dry facial skin.

There are many functions that the epidermal barrier  performs:

 1.  Maintains a 20–35% water content;
 2.  Limits TEWL;
 3.  Preserve water homeostasis in the epidermis;
 4.  Sustains optimal lipid synthesis; and
 5.  Allows for orderly desquamation of SC cells.
A shift away from equilibrium in one of these five functions can 
result in a compromise of the barrier and the basic consequence 
is what we refer to as “dry skin.” More specifically, when TEWL is 
increased to the point that the water content in the SC is reduced 
to below 10%, the clinical signs of xerosis will appear [5].

The  orderly  desquamation  of  the  SC  is  a  complex  process 
which if disturbed can lead to a self‐renewing cycle of dry skin. 
The corneocytes that make up the SC are highly interconnected 

14. Facial Moisturizers

133

and  able  to  withstand  a  large  amount  of  mechanical  stress. 
When  new  cells  are  formed,  enzymatic  digestion  of  the  pro-
teins anchoring the old cells is required for removal. The level 
of humidity in the SC is a critical factor modulating the activity 
of these desquamatory enzymes, specifically stratum corneum 
chymotryptic enzyme (SCCE). When this process breaks down, 
desquamation  becomes  irregular  and  dead  SC  cells  slough  off 
in large clumps; representing the “flaking” seen in so many dry 
facial skin conditions [6].

The sebum‐rich skin of the face can appear moisturized but 
possess a low water content. Sensory symptoms can include but 
are not limited to: dryness, discomfort, pain, itching, stinging, or 
tingling sensations. Tactile signs are rough, uneven, and sand‐
like  feeling  skin.  Visible  signs,  which  can  be  macroscopic  or 
microscopic, are redness, dull surface, dry white patches, flaky 
appearance, and cracks and fissures. There are many causes for 
these signs and symptoms. In all, the presence of dry skin rep-
resents disorder in the complex system that continually renews 
the facial skin.

Facial moisturization

The  physiologic  goal  of  facial  moisturization  is  to  restore  the 
elasticity and flexibility of the SC, thereby restoring its barrier 
function.  Additionally,  the  reintroduction  of  humidity  to  the 
SC allows for proper functioning of desquamation enzymes and 
restores the natural skin renewal cycle. Kligman and Leyden [7] 
defined a moisturizer as “a topically applied substance or prod-
uct  that  overcomes  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  dry  skin.”  The 
esthetic goal of moisturization is achieving soft, supple, glowing, 
healthy looking skin, as subjectively evaluated by the end‐user. 
Regular use of facial moisturizers mitigate and prevent signs of 
aging,  especially  when  formulated  with  broad‐spectrum  sun 
protection for daytime use.

Because the face is one of the most sensitive areas of the body, 
a facial moisturizer must meet esthetic goals in addition to ful-
filling a broad set of performance attributes. Consumers expect 
a facial moisturizer to reduce dryness, improve dull appearance, 
smooth and soften the skin, and increase suppleness [8]. Fur-
thermore, these expectations must be achieved by a moisturizer 
with a minimal presence and pleasant sensory qualities.

A properly formulated moisturizer can supplement the func-
tion of the endogenous epidermal lipids and restore the epider-
mal barrier function. This allows the skin to continue its natural 
process of renewal and desquamation at a normal rate. The sub-
stances utilized by all moisturizers to achieve this desired effect 
fall into a handful of basic categories (Table 14.1). Humectants, 
such as glycerin, attract and hold moisture, facilitating hydra-
tion. Emollients, typically lipids or oils, enhance the flexibility 
and  smoothness  of  the  skin  and  provide  a  secondary  sooth-
ing effect to the skin and mucous membranes. Occlusives cre-
ate  a  hydrophobic  barrier  to  reduce  water  loss  from  the  skin. 
Emulsifiers work to bring together immiscible substances; they 

134

hygiene proDucts  Moisturizers

table 14.1  	Function	of	common	moisturizer	ingredients.	This	listing	represents	the	common	ingredients	found	in	a	moisturizer	formulation	identifying	the	role	
of	each	of	the	substances	in	the	ingredient	disclosure.

Humectant

emollient

occlusive

emulsifier

Preservative

Dimethicone

Trisiloxane

Glycerin

Glyceryl	stearate

PEG	100	stearate

Potassium	cetyl	phosphate

Behenyl	alcohol

Caprylyl	methicone

Hydrogenated	palm	
glycerides

Hexanediol

Caprylyl	glycol

Cetearyl	glucoside

Cetearyl	alcohol

Methylparaben

Propylparaben

Methylisothiazolinone

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

are  a  critical  element  in  the  oil  and  water  mixtures  employed 
in  moisturizer  formulas.  Preservatives  prevent  the  premature 
breakdown  of  components  and  inhibit  microbiologic  growth. 
Fragrances not only add to the esthetic value but can also mask 
the odor of formulation ingredients.

These  components  make  up  the  basic  formulation  of  any 
moisturizer, and the choices available to achieve the preferred 
outcome are vast. The formulation of an acceptable and effective 
moisturizer  for  the  face,  one  that  will  enable  the  natural  pro-
cesses of skin desquamation to occur and maintain healthy bar-
rier function while meeting high esthetic standards, is as much 
an art as it is a science.

Facial moisturizer formulation

Facial  moisturizers  are  typically  oil‐in‐water  emulsions.  The 
water  improves  skin  feel  and  offers  an  acceptable,  universally 
tolerated base for the active ingredients. The water or oil solubil-
ity of components is inconsequential because both are present. 
Emulsions allow for a wide range of properties, such as slow to 
fast absorption rates depending on the final viscosity of the for-
mulation. The  fine‐tuning  of  these  properties  is  important  for 
achieving the high esthetic expectations of a facial moisturizer. 
For  example,  a  daily‐use  formula  with  high  emollient  content 
may  feel  heavy  in  a  cream  but  be  acceptable  in  liquid  form. 
Conversely, overnight creams with antiaging additives may be 
thick in order to remain on the face during sleep and to slow 
the  absorption  of  active  components. Therefore,  by  utilizing  a 

range of water to oil ratios, and varying humectant and emol-
lient mixtures, the desired effects can be formulated within the 
acceptable esthetic parameters for a facial moisturizer.

Moisturizer ingredients and function

humectants
The overall hydration level of the SC affects its mechanical prop-
erties. If the water level in the SC drops below 10%, its flexibility 
can be compromised and it becomes susceptible to damage from 
mechanical stress [9]. Humectants are key substances to main-
tain  skin  hydration.  Natural  humectants,  such  as  hyaluronic 
acid, are found in the dermis, but external humectants can be 
externally applied in moisturizers. Humectants draw water from 
the viable epidermis and dermis, but can draw water from the 
environment if the ambient humidity is over 80%.

Humectants  are  water‐soluble  organic  compounds  that  can 
sequester large numbers of water molecules. Glycerin, sorbitol, 
urea, and sodium lactate are all examples of externally applied 
humectants.  Glycerin,  also  referred  to  as  glycerol,  is  one  of 
the most widely utilized compounds in cosmetic formulations 
because of its effects on multiple targets and its universal appli-
cations.  Its  chemical  structure  brings  together  the  stability  of 
three carbon atoms with three water‐seeking oxygen atoms in 
an anisotropic molecule that is perfectly designed for use in skin 
and hair moisturizers. Glycerin also allows for the construction 
of different product physical forms that cover the spectrum from 

14. Facial Moisturizers

135

sticks to microemulsions to free‐flowing creams that maintain 
stability over time.

The degree of purity to which glycerin can be manufactured 
not only ensures consistency and facilitates microbiologic sta-
bility, but also guarantees the minimization of allergic reactions 
by  contaminants.  The  pure  form  of  glycerin  has  been  tested 
on thousands of patients and millions more have used it with 
extremely few reports of ill effects. Glycerin is generally classi-
fied as a humectant; however, this characteristic is not the sole 
reason  for  its  ability  to  achieve  skin  moisturization,  in  fact,  it 
performs a number of different functions that are not directly 
related to its water‐holding properties.

Glycerin can restore the suppleness of skin without increas-
ing  its  water  content,  a  trait  that  is  exploited  by  its  use  in  the 
cryopreservation  of  skin,  tissue,  and  red  blood  cells,  where 
water  would  freeze  and  damage  them.  Glycerin  enhances  the 
cohesiveness of the intercellular lipids when delivered from high 
glycerin therapeutic formulations, thereby retaining their pres-
ence and function. Furthermore, glycerin has been identified as 
a contributor to the process of desquamation, a critical compo-
nent of the dermal renewal cycle, through its ability to enhance 
desmosome digestion.

In addition to its direct, humectant effects on skin moistur-
ization,  endogenously  produced  glycerin  has  exhibited  effects 
at the molecular level in knockout mouse model studies, con-
firming its role in maintaining SC hydration and barrier main-
tenance. A recent study showed that glycerin content was three 
times  lower,  SC  hydration  was  reduced,  and  barrier  function 
was impaired in mice deficient in the water/glycerin transporter 
protein,  aquaporin‐3  (AQP3)  despite  normal  SC  structure, 
 protein–lipid composition and ion–osmolyte content. Glycerin, 
but not other small poly glycols, restored normal SC moistur-
ization and TEWL values when applied to the AQP3‐deficient 
mice, confirming that glycerin was physiologically necessary in 
the modulation of SC hydration and barrier maintenance [10].

Glycerin  remains  the  gold  standard  for  moisturization.  The 
fact that it acts on so many different parameters with a nearly 
non‐existent side‐effect profile makes it a prime candidate for 
facial moisturizer formulations. It is also an excellent example of 
how moisturizer components, especially those used on the face, 
should be considered for their ability to enhance and protect the 
skin. Glycerin raises the bar for moisturizers in that it is capable 
of enhancing, or even rescuing, the intrinsic processes that are 
in place to maintain the orderly maturation of keratinocytes and 
the barrier function of the skin.

occlusives
Humectants are only partially effective in moisturizing the skin. 
In  order  to  maintain  epidermal  water  content  and  preserve 
the  barrier  function  of  the  SC,  occlusive  agents  are  employed 
in  a  role  meant  to  complement  the  water‐attracting  nature  of 
humectants.  Occlusive  agents  inhibit  evaporative  water  loss 
by forming a hydrophobic barrier over the SC and its intersti-
tial areas. Occlusion is successful in the treatment of dry skin 

because  the  movement  of  water  from  the  lower  dermis  to  the 
outer dermis is a guaranteed source of physiologically available 
water. Moreover, these occlusive agents have an emollient effect, 
as is the case with behenyl alcohol.

Petrolatum  and  lanolin  are  two  historically  popular  occlu-
sives that are slowly being replaced by more sophisticated alter-
natives. Petrolatum is a highly effective occlusive, but it suffers 
from  an  unfavorable  esthetic.  Lanolin  is  not  recommended 
for use in facial formulations because of its odor and potential 
allergenicity [11]. Newly constructed silicone derivatives have 
been  employed  in  moisturizers  for  their  occlusive  properties, 
and they further enhance the esthetic quality of the formula-
tion by imparting a “dry” touch. This technologic advancement 
is  also  an  example  of  how  the  esthetic  parameter  of  a  facial 
moisturizer can have a major effect on compliance and willing-
ness to apply.

emollients
Emollients  are  agents,  usually  lipids  and  oils,  designed  to  sof-
ten and smooth the skin. Lipids are non‐polar molecules and as 
such they repel polarized water molecules, thereby limiting the 
passage of water to the environment. The most prevalent lipids 
in  the  SC,  especially  within  the  extracellular  membranes,  are 
ceramides. They comprise about 40% of the lipid content of the 
SC, the remainder of which is 25% cholesterol, 10–15% free fatty 
acids, and smaller quantities of triglycerides, stearyl esters, and 
cholesterol sulfate. These lipids are synthesized throughout the 
epidermis, packaged in lamellar granules, and eventually differ-
entiate into multilamellar sheets that form the ceramide‐rich SC 
water barrier [12].

The  purpose  of  an  emollient  is  to  replace  the  absent  natu-
ral skin lipids in the space between the corneocytes in the SC. 
Additional  benefits  include  the  smoothing  of  roughened  skin 
thereby  changing  the  skin's  appearance,  and  providing  occlu-
sion  to  attenuate  TEWL  and  enhance  moisturization.  Of  the 
three components of skin moisturizers listed in the CTFA Cos-
metic  Ingredients  Directory,  emollients  outnumber  occlusives 
2 to 1 and the humectants 10 to 1. This is an indication not only 
of  the  number  of  available  compounds  that  can  perform  this 
function, but also the variety of lipids that can be utilized [13].

Fragrance
Fragrance  is  a  component  of  facial  moisturizers  that  is  often 
dismissed as an unnecessary potential irritant, but this idea is 
becoming increasingly antiquated as the science supporting its 
proper use and evaluation is improved. Vigorous protocols have 
been  developed  that  comprehensively  and  conclusively  assess 
the tolerance of formulations on human subjects. Fragrances are 
screened separately first and then together in both normal and 
sensitive populations, and utilized at the minimum concentra-
tion required to mask the smell of certain components, if nec-
essary. Fragrance improves the overall esthetic qualities of the 
moisturizer, which is an important component of any moistur-
izer formulation, especially one that is applied to the face.

136

hygiene proDucts  Moisturizers

preservatives
Preservatives are also subject to the same rigorous testing pro-
tocols as fragrances. The preservative must be strong enough to 
completely  inhibit  bacterial  growth,  but  must  not  be  sensitiz-
ing or irritating. Preservatives are an important component in 
facial moisturizers to prevent the lipids in the formulation from 
becoming rancid. All facial moisturizers have some type of pre-
servative,  because  there  is  really  no  such  thing  as  a  preserva-
tive‐free formulation.

photoprotection and facial moisturizers
Sunscreens could be considered to be the most globally effective 
ingredient added to a facial moisturizer. Because the incidence 
and mortality rates of skin cancer have been steadily rising in 
the USA, the use of sunscreen as a daily protectant has become 
more  important  to  consumers. There  are  both  immediate  and 
long‐term benefits from photoprotection. The immediate ben-
efit is the prevention of a painful sunburn while long photopro-
tection  results  in  reduced  photodamage  manifesting  as  wrin-
kling, inflammation, and dryness.

A  key  immediate  event  that  leads  to  chronic  photoaging  is 
the  production  of  proteases  in  response  to  UV  irradiation  at 
doses well below those that cause skin reddening. Matrix metal-
loproteinases (MMPs), for example, are zinc‐dependent endo-
peptidases expressed in many different cell types and are criti-
cal  for  normal  biologic  processes.  They  may  also  be  involved 
in  desquamation  processes,  and  overexpression  would  lead  to 
early sloughing and increase in TEWL. With a proper sunscreen 
regimen, production of MMPs is minimized and their partici-
pation in chronic photoaging can be avoided. The addition of 
sunscreens to facial moisturizers also contributes to the preven-
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, Langerhans 
cell depletion, and sensitivity to UV radiation, as is observed in 
polymorphous light eruption.

Facial moisturizer testing

The formulation of a moisturizer centers on the primary goal of 
delivering the perception of moisture to the skin. This includes 
not only adding moisture to the skin, but also the improvement 
of  the  barrier  function  and  reinstating  natural  skin  reparative 
processes. The testing of the efficacy of a moisturizer is based on 
barrier function assessment.

There  are  many  ways  to  assess  the  barrier  function  of  the 
skin based on SC integrity. Measurement of the TEWL is one 
method. A damaged SC allows water to evaporate resulting in 
high  TEWL  readings.  These  measurements  are  taken  with  an 
evaporimeter, which measures the amount of water vapor leav-
ing the skin. The amount of water in the skin can also be mea-
sured  via  skin  conductance.  This  technique,  known  as  corne-
ometry, measures the amount of low level electricity conducted 
by the skin. Because water is the conductor of electricity in the 
skin, the amount of current conducted is directly related to the 

water content. Thus, the efficacy of a moisturizer can be mea-
sured by its effect on water vapor loss and skin conductance.

Another  method  for  evaluating  skin  dryness  is  D‐squames. 
D‐squames are circular, adhesive discs placed on the skin sur-
face with firm pressure and then pulled away. The removed skin 
is observed and parameters such as the amount of skin removed, 
size  of  flakes,  and  coloration  can  be  recorded.  Differences 
between dry skin and normal moisturized skin are clearly evi-
dent upon examination of the disc, and further characterization 
can be carried out to differentiate levels of dryness and qualita-
tive differences in desquamation.

The barrier function of the skin can be assessed following appli-
cation  of  an  irritant  to  the  skin  surface.  The  introduction  of  an 
irritant can cause erythema and scaling in the compromised SC. 
A frequent irritant used for the assessment of barrier function is 
sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS). The amount of erythema and TEWL 
is measured following scrubbing of the skin with SLS. Skin with a 
better barrier following use of an efficacious moisturizer will expe-
rience less damage than skin that possesses a compromised barrier.
Finally, after testing the efficacy of the formulation in a con-
trolled,  laboratory  setting,  its  efficacy  must  be  evaluated  on  a 
group  of  consumers.  Consumer  testing  is  usually  carried  out 
in  a  blind  study  involving  200–300 subjects,  from  geographi-
cally disparate locales in order to normalize any differences in 
skin types or backgrounds. This testing will introduce param-
eters  that  are  evaluated  subjectively  by  the  population  of  sub-
jects such as skin feel, perception of texture, ease of application, 
and scent, among other things, that define its esthetic qualities. 
The functional qualities of the moisturizer, such as “immediate 
comfort” and “long‐lasting effect” will also be evaluated by the 
consumer group and incorporated into the overall assessment.

use of facial moisturizers in common 
inflammatory dermatoses

The face presents a set of unique challenges regarding the treat-
ment  of  skin  disorders.  What  may  be  acceptable  for  treatment 
regimens elsewhere on the body, such as a strong occlusive such 
as  petrolatum  or  a  humectant  such  as  urea,  will  be  esthetically 
challenging to the user and stand in the way of compliance. While 
it is easy to think of esthetics as secondary to efficacy of treatment, 
it should be considered of primary importance where the face is 
concerned. This concept cannot be overstressed because the sen-
sitivity of the facial skin to the sensory and olfactory qualities of 
moisturizers is much higher than the rest of the body.

It is generally believed that facial atopic dermatitis and vari-
ous other facial skin diseases are associated with disturbances 
of skin barrier function as evidenced by an increase in TEWL, 
a decrease in water‐binding properties, and a reduction in skin 
surface lipids. When chronic, inflammatory skin diseases mani-
fest on the face, there is the challenge of reducing the lesion as 
quickly  as  possible  to  prevent  it  from  worsening  and  further 
compromising the integrity of the skin involved. Because of the 

14. Facial Moisturizers

137

high sensitivity of the facial skin, what may start as a small lesion 
can  quickly  be  exacerbated  through  physical  intervention  and 
quickly  worsened.  These  problems  can  be  addressed  through 
the continual use of appropriate moisturizers, which have been 
shown to improve skin hydration, reduce susceptibility to irrita-
tion, and restore the integrity of the SC. Some moisturizers also 
supply the compromised SC with lipids that further accelerate 
barrier  recovery.  Moisturizers  can  serve  as  an  important  first‐
line therapeutic option for patients with atopic dermatitis and 
other chronic skin diseases [14].

Historically, moisturizers have been shown to have a steroid‐
sparing effect in patients with atopic dermatitis and eczema. Many 
of  the  elements  in  moisturizers,  from  lipids  to  emollients,  have 
been  shown  to  significantly  improve  the  condition  of  the  skin 
when used by patients with various dermatoses [15]. Glycerin has 
been implicated in the molecular mechanism controlling kerati-
nocyte maturation, an important aspect of normal desquamation 
and  barrier  maintenance.  Furthermore,  its  role  in  maintenance 
of  hydration  for  the  proper  functioning  of  proteases,  especially 
filaggrin, is critical to the successful treatment of eczemas [16,17].
Recently,  a  comprehensive  clinical  study  provided  evidence 
that moisturizers not only enhance the efficacy of topical corti-
costeroids in patients with atopic dermatitis, but may also pre-
vent the recurrence of disease [15]. In general, the maintenance 
of the SC along with rapid repair of disruptions to the barrier 
that would otherwise become larger and increase inflammation 
and discomfort as well seem to be central tenets in the approach 
to treating potential dermatoses on the face with moisturization. 
Therefore, facial moisturizers may represent a valuable first‐line 
treatment option for many dermatologic diseases and confer a 
number  of  important  therapeutic  benefits  that  go  beyond  the 
surface of the facial skin and have a critical role in the molecular 
mechanisms that maintain healthy skin.

conclusions

Facial moisturizers fulfill an important need by providing skin 
comfort and alleviating dryness. Efficacious formulations con-
tain ingredients that work directly to bring moisture to the skin, 
but also indirectly, as is the case with glycerin, induce the trans-
port  and  retention  of  water  molecules  at  the  subcellular  level. 
The goal of facial moisturizers is to enhance, or restart, the proc-
esses intrinsic to the skin's natural ability to maintain its barrier 
function through the multiple pathways utilizing proteases, lip-
ids, cell differentiation and, eventually, desquamation, all while 
maintaining an esthetically pleasant presence.

references

1  Elwood JM, Gallagher RP. (1998) Body site distribution of cutane-
ous malignant melanoma in relationship to patterns of sun expo-
sure. Int J Cancer 78, 276–80.

2  Montagna  W.  (1959)  Advances  in  Biology  of  Skin.  Oxford,  New 

York: Symposium Publications Division, Pergamon Press.

3  Montagna  W,  Kligman  AM,  Carlisle  KS.  (1992)  Atlas  of  Normal 

Human Skin. New York: Springer‐Verlag.

4  Baumann L. (2002) Cosmetic Dermatology: Principles and Practice. 

New York: McGraw‐Hill.

5  Draelos  ZK.  (2000)  Atlas  of  Cosmetic  Dermatology.  New  York: 

Churchill Livingstone.

6  Watkinson A, Harding C, Moore A, Coan P. (2001) Water modula-
tion of stratum corneum chymotryptic enzyme activity and desq-
uamation. Arch Dermatol Res 293, 470–6.

7  Kligman AM, Leyden JJ. (1982) Safety and Efficacy of Topical Drugs 

and Cosmetics. New York: Grune & Stratton.

8  Barton  S.  (2002)  Formualtion  of  skin  moisturization.  In: 
Leyden JJ, Rawlings AV, eds. Skin Moisturization. New York: Marcel 
Dekker, pp. 547–84.

9  Rawlings  AV,  Canestrari  DA,  Dobkowski  B.  (2004)  Moistur-
izer  technology  versus  clinical  performance.  Dermatol  Ther  17 
(Suppl 1), 49–56.

10  Hara M, Verkman AS. (2003) Glycerin replacement corrects defec-
tive skin hydration, elasticity, and barrier function in aquaporin‐3‐
deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 7360–5.

11  Draelos ZK. (1995) Cosmetics in Dermatology, 2 nd edn. New York: 

Churchill Livingstone.

12  Downing S, Stewart ME. (2000) Epidermal composition. In: Loden 
M,  Maibach  HI,  eds.  Dry  Skin  and  Moisturizers:  Chemistry  and 
Function. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2000: pp. 13–26.

13  Draelos ZK, Thaman LA. (2006) Cosmetic Formulation of Skin Care 

Products. New York: Taylor & Francis.

14  Lebwohl  M.  (1995)  Atlas  of  the  Skin  and  Systemic  Disease.  New 

York: Churchill Livingstone.

15  Ghali FE. (2005) Improved clinical outcomes with moisturization 

in dermatologic disease. Cutis 76 (Suppl), 13–8.

16  Hanifin JM. (2008) Filaggrin mutations and allergic contact sensiti-

zation. J Invest Dermatol 128, 1362–4.

17  Presland RB, Coulombe PA, Eckert RL, et al. (2004) Barrier func-
tion in transgenic mice overexpressing K16, involucrin, and filag-
grin in the suprabasal epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 123, 603–6.

Further reading

Bikowski J. (2001) The use of therapeutic moisturizers in various der-

matologic disorders. Cutis 68 (Suppl), 3–11.

Burgess CM. (2005) Cosmetic Dermatology. Berlin: Springer.
Crowther JM, Sieg A, Blenkiron P, et al. (2008) Measuring the effects 
of  topical  moisturizers  on  changes  in  stratum  corneum  thick-
ness, water gradients and hydration in vivo. Br J Dermatol 159, 
567–77.

Del Rosso JQ. (2005) The role of the vehicle in combination acne ther-

apy. Cutis 76 (Suppl), 15–8.

Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, et al. (1996) Molecular basis of sun‐
induced  premature  skin  ageing  and  retinoid  antagonism.  Nature 
379, 335–9.

Fisher GJ, Varani J, Voorhees JJ. (2008) Looking older: fibroblast col-
lapse and therapeutic implications. Arch Dermatol 144, 666–72.
Fisher  GJ,  Voorhees  JJ.  (1996)  Molecular  mechanisms  of  retinoid 

actions in skin. FASEB J 10, 1002–13.

138

hygiene proDucts  Moisturizers

Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, et al. (1997) Pathophysiology of premature 
skin aging induced by ultraviolet light. N Engl J Med 337, 1419–28.
Fluhr J. (2005) Bioengineering of the Skin: Water and Stratum Corneum, 

Loden  M,  Maibach  HI.  (1999)  Dry  Skin  and  Moisturizers:  Chemistry 

and Function. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

Orth DS. (1993) Handbook of Cosmetic Microbiology. New York: Marcel 

2 nd edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

Dekker.

Friedmann  PS.  (1986)  The  skin  as  a  permeability  barrier.  In:  Thody 
AJ, Friedmann PS, eds. Scientific Basis of Dermatology. Edinburgh, 
London: Churchill Livingstone, pp. 26–35.

Page‐McCaw A, Ewald AJ, Werb Z. (2007) Matrix metalloproteinases 
and  the  regulation  of  tissue  remodeling.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol  8, 
221–33.

Held E, Jorgensen LL. (1999) The combined use of moisturizers and occlu-
sive gloves: an experimental study. Am J Contact Dermatol 10, 146–52.
Jungermann E, Norman O, Sonntag V. (1991) Glycerin: A Key Cosmetic 
Ingredient.  Vol.  11,  Cosmetic  Science  and  Technology  Series.  New 
York: Marcel Dekker.

Kafi R, Kwak HS, Schumacher WE, et al. (2007) Improvement of natu-
rally aged skin with vitamin A (retinol). Arch Dermatol 143, 606–12.

Rattan SI. (2006) Theories of biological aging: genes, proteins, and free 

radicals. Free Radic Res 40, 1230–8.

Streicher JJ, Culverhouse WC Jr, Dulberg MS, et al. (2004) Modeling 
the anatomical distribution of sunlights. Photochem Photobiol 79, 
40–7.

Verdier‐Sevrain  S,  Bonte  F.  (2007)  Skin  hydration:  a  review  on  its 

molecular mechanisms. J Cosmet Dermatol 6, 75–82.

Chapter 15
hand and Foot Moisturizers

Teresa M. Weber,1 Andrea M. Schoelermann,2 Ute Breitenbach,2 Ulrich Scherdin,2 and  Alexandra Kowcz1
1Beiersdorf Inc, Wilton, CT, USA
2Beiersdorf AG, Hamburg, Germany

BasIC ConCepts

•	 Xerosis	of	the	hands	and	feet	is	common,	caused	by	a	paucity	of	sebaceous	glands.
•	 Moisturization	of	the	hands	and	feet	can	prevent	eczematous	disease	and	aid	in	disease	eradication.
•	 Effective	moisturizers	provide	occlusive	lipophilic	substances	that	act	as	protectants	and	barrier	replenishers,	as	well	as	hydrophilic	agents	

that	function	as	humectants	to	bind	and	hold	water.

•	 Recent	recognition	of	the	role	of	aquaporins,	special	moisture	regulating	channels,	in	skin	cells	has	provided	the	opportunity	for	a	new	

moisturization	technology,	focusing	on	substances	that	stimulate	and	operate	through	aquaporins.

Introduction

The hands and feet are prone to dryness and impaired barrier 
function because of their unique functional roles, predisposing 
the skin to heightened irritant sensitivity and the development 
of  dermatoses.  Protective  and  regenerative  moisturizing  skin 
care is the foundation for averting and treating dry skin associ-
ated skin diseases and disorders.

Effective moisturizers provide occlusive lipophilic substances 
that act as protectants and barrier replenishers, as well as hydro-
philic  agents  that  function  as  humectants  to  bind  and  hold 
water. The importance of urea as a physiologic humectant and 
natural moisturizing factor is discussed. Application of moistur-
izers containing urea is shown to increase its concentration and 
exert  ultrastuctural  changes  in  the  stratum  corneum,  hydrate 
severely  compromised  skin,  and  support  and  enhance  barrier 
function. In addition, the role of aquaporins and the underlying 
mechanisms of moisture homeostasis of the skin are discussed 
vis‐à‐vis  new  opportunities  to  create  better  actives  and  prod-
uct formulations which can help regulate moisturization from 
within the skin.

Moisturization needs of the hand and foot

Skin  of  the  hands  and  feet  is  different  from  other  body  sites. 
In particular, skin on the palms and soles is thicker, and has a 
high density of eccrine sweat glands; however, it lacks apocrine 
glands. These sites are highly innervated and involved in most 

of the daily activities of life. Repetitive use of the hands and feet 
accompanied by pressure and friction can promote the forma-
tion  of  areas  of  thickened  keratinized  skin  or  calluses,  which 
can  crack  and  fissure.  Site‐specific  requirements  for  hygienic 
care  and  diseases  common  to  these  sites  have  been  described 
[1]. In addition, the hands and feet have special skincare needs 
for efficacious moisturization as well as unique requirements for 
formulations that are compatible with their special sensory and 
functional roles and needs.

Hand skin is particularly susceptible to xerosis and dermati-
tis. Constant use of the hands, frequent washing, and environ-
mental, chemical, and irritant exposure can provoke these prob-
lems. Further, because the hands are especially prone to injury 
and exposure to irritants and pathogens, specific skin protectant 
formulations  can  be  highly  beneficial  to  prevent  irritation  or 
occupational dermatoses such as hand eczema [2].

While  the  feet  may  be  less  likely  to  suffer  from  deleteri-
ous  occupational  exposures,  environmental  factors  can  have 
an  impact  on  the  moisture  status  of  the  foot  skin.  Cold,  dry 
weather  in  winter,  bare  feet  in  summer,  and  the  confinement 
of shoes can compromise the hydration state. Occlusive shoes 
and socks can also trap moisture and render the foot susceptible 
to  microbial  infections,  especially  from  fungus,  damaging  the 
barrier function and dehydrating the skin. In addition, certain 
metabolic  diseases  can  impact  circulation  and  innervation  of 
the  extremities,  which  in  turn  affects  skin  hydration.  In  par-
ticular, reduced circulation and eccrine sweat gland activity in 
diabetics cause severe xerosis which can spiral into other severe 
foot problems.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

139

140

hygIene produCts  Moisturizers

Protective  and  regenerative  moisturizing  skin  care  is  the 
foundation for treating all dry skin associated skin diseases and 
disorders. While the underlying cause of dry skin in any specific 
skin disorder needs to be addressed, frequently the symptom-
atic  control  of  severe  xerosis  by  appropriate  moisturizers  may 
reduce the need for more potent treatments, such as prolonged 
use of topical steroids and immune modulators, which can have 
detrimental side effects.

Moisturizing creams containing urea have been reported to 
improve the physical and chemical nature of the skin surface, 
with  the  manifest  benefits  of  smoothing,  softening,  and  mak-
ing  dry  skin  more  pliable  [2].  Traditional  moisturizing  emul-
sions  have  utilized  non‐physiologic  emollients,  humectants, 
and skin protectants to rehydrate the skin and reduce moisture 
loss. The identification and understanding of the structure and 
function of the stratum corneum barrier lipids and the role of 
water binding physiologic substances, collectively referred to as 
natural moisturizing factors (NMF), led to the development of 
formulations  enriched  in  these  actives.  Recent  recognition  of 
the role of aquaporins, special moisture regulating channels, in 
skin cells has provided the opportunity for a new moisturization 
technology  focusing  on  substances  that  stimulate  and  operate 
through aquaporins.

Moisturizing formulations and technologies

For  thousands  of  years,  oils,  animal  and  vegetable  fats,  waxes 
and butters have been used to moisturize the skin. Recognized 
for their emollient or skin smoothing and softening properties, 
these substances were used to help restore dry skin to a more 
normal skin condition. The first significant advancement from 
these  simple  moisturizers  occurred  over  a  hundred  years  ago 
when emulsifiers were developed to create the first stable water‐
in‐oil emulsion [3].

A simple emulsion can be defined as a heterogeneous system 
that  contains  very  small  droplets  of  an  immiscible  (or  slightly 
miscible) liquid dispersed in another type of liquid. These emul-
sions consist of a hydrophilic (water loving) and a lipophilic (oil 
loving) portion, either of which can make up the external or inter-
nal phases of the emulsion system. The external phase generally 
comprises the majority of the emulsion while the smaller internal 
phase  consists  of  the  dispersed  droplets.  Most  commonly  used 
moisturizer formulations are either oil‐in‐water (O/W) emulsion 
systems, where aqueous components predominate, or water‐in‐
oil (W/O), where the majority of ingredients are non‐aqueous.

Emulsifiers  are  necessary  components  of  emulsion  systems 
as  water‐soluble  and  oil‐soluble  ingredients  are  not  miscible. 
Emulsifiers are surface active agents that reduce the interfacial 
tension  between  the  two  incompatible  phases  to  create  stable 
emulsion  systems.  The  properties  of  the  chosen  emulsifiers 
determine the final emulsion type.

Major progress in recent decades has enabled the formulation 
of  increasingly  complex  emulsions  (e.g.  water‐in‐oil‐in‐water 

emulsions,  multilamellar  emulsions),  which  combine  and  sta-
bilize  many  incompatible  ingredients  for  moisturizing  prod-
ucts  with  unique  delivery  characteristics  that  are  both  highly 
effective and aesthetically pleasing [4,5]. However, it is beyond 
the scope of this chapter to discuss the multitude of emulsion 
technologies which have been developed since the advent of the 
simple W/O system [6].

Occlusive materials and humectants are two major classes 
of  moisturizing  ingredients  in  many  current  moisturizers 
(Table  15.1).  Occlusive  materials  coat  the  stratum  corneum 
to  inhibit  transepidermal  water  loss  (TEWL).  Additionally, 
cholesterol, ceramides, and some essential and non‐essential 
free fatty acids present in oils can help to replenish the natu-
ral  lamellar  barrier  lipids  that  surround  the  squames  in  the 
stratum corneum, fortifying the barrier function of the skin. 
Some  common  examples  of  occlusive  materials  are  petrola-
tum, olive oil, mineral oil, soybean oil, lanolin, beeswax, and 
jojoba oil. Petrolatum, lanolin, and mineral oil are considered 
occlusive  materials,  yet  they  also  serve  as  emollients  on  the 
skin [7,8].

Humectants are materials that are capable of absorbing high 
amounts of water from the atmosphere and from the epidermis, 
drawing  water  into  the  stratum  corneum  for  a  smoother  skin 
feel and look. Examples of well‐known humectants include glyc-
erin (or glycerol), sorbitol, urea, sodium hyaluronate, and pro-
pylene glycol. Glycerin is a widely used humectant with strong 
water binding capacity and holding ability, making it ideal for 
dry skin moisturizing formulations. Because of its importance 
in moisturizing products, it has been extensively reviewed else-
where [9,10].

A number of commercially available hand and foot mois-
turizers  incorporate  combinations  of  both  humectants  and 
occlusive  materials  to  deliver  the  optimal  skin  benefits 
(Table 15.2).

natural moisturizing factors

The NMF are a collection of hygroscopic substances in the skin 
that act synergistically to confer effective water binding proper-
ties. The NMF has been reported to be composed of approxi-
mately 40% amino acids, 12% pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, 12% 
lactates, 7% urea, 18% minerals, and sugars, organic acids, cit-
rates, and peptides [11]. These substances, derived largely from 
the breakdown products of the insoluble protein filaggrin, have 
an  important  role  in  maintaining  moisture  in  the  non‐viable 
layers  of  the  epidermis.  Discovery  of  loss‐of‐function  muta-
tions  in  the  filaggrin  gene  in  many  individuals  with  xerotic 
skin  disorders  including  atopic  dermatitis  and  psoriasis,  and 
associated  diminished  levels  of  the  NMF  have  confirmed  the 
critical importance of filaggrin processing and these humectant 
substances  in  maintaining  skin  hydration  and  plasticity  [12]. 
Due to the moisture gradient that exists from the well‐hydrated 
dermis  to  the  relatively  moisture‐deprived  stratum  corneum, 

15. Hand and Foot Moisturizers

141

Table 15.1  	Key	classes	of	commonly	used	moisturizing	ingredients.

Key classes

Moisturizing ingredients

Function in skin

Occlusives

Humectants

Petrolatum
Waxes
Lanolin
Mineral	oil
Cholesterol
Ceramides
Triglycerides	and	free	fatty	
acids
Sunflower	oil
Soybean	oil
Jojoba	oil
Olive	oil
Evening	primrose	oil
Borage	oil

Glycerin/glycerol
Sorbitol
Sodium	hyaluronate
Propylene	glycol
Amino	acids*
Lactate*
Pyrrolidone	carboxylic	acid*
Urea*
Salts*

Moisturization	by	occlusion	of	the	stratum	
corneum	and/or	replenishment	of	lamellar	
barrier	lipids

Draws	water	from	the	formulation	base,	
atmosphere,	and	from	the	underlying	
epidermis	to	increase	skin	hydration

*Natural	moisturizing	factor	components	
–	absorb	large	amounts	of	water	even	in	
relatively	low	humidities.	Provide	aqueous	
environment	for	key	enzymatic	functions	
in	the	skin

Table 15.2  Examples	of	commercially	available	hand	and	foot	creams.

Key ingredients

Hand cream

Foot cream

Functions and claims

I

I

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

Glycolic	acid,	mineral	oil,	petrolatum

Exfoliation	and	moisturization	by	“occlusives”		
to	both	smooth	and	soften	skin

Glycerin,	shea	butter,	almond	oil,		
olive	oil

Caprylic/capric	triglycerides,	glycerin,	
sunflower	oil,	olive	oil,	almond	oil

Moisturization	of	hands	and	softening	of	cuticles

Moisturization	of	hands,	nails,	and	cuticles

Beeswax,	sweet	almond	oil

Moisturizes	and	softens	dry	skin

Exfoliation	and	moisturization	by	
“occlusives”	to	both	smooth	and	
soften	skin

Moisturizes,	soothes,	and	protects	dry,	
cracked,	and	callused	heels

Soothes	and	heals	severely	dry,	cracked	
heels

Prevents	and	heals	cracked	heels,	
calluses,	corns,	blisters

Lanolin,	allantoin,	glycerin,	sunscreens:	
avobenzone,	octinoxate

Moisturizes	skin	and	helps	treat	the	signs	of		
aging

Glycerin,	petrolatum,	dimethicone,	
mineral	oil

Helps	form	a	protective	moisture	barrier;	heals	and	
protects	dry	hands	with	24‐hour	moisturization

Urea,	sodium	lactate,	glycerin

Gently	exfoliates	and	moisturizes;	relieves	dry	skin	
associated	with	hand	eczema

Intensively	moisturizes,	smoothes	and	
heals	dry,	cracked	feet

Prescription	urea	(25%,	30%,	40%,	or	
50%),	mineral	oil,	petrolatum

Healing	and	debriding	of	hyperkeratotic	skin		
and	nails

Healing	and	debriding	of	hyperkeratotic	
skin	and	nails

the cutaneous moisturization state  is highly influenced by the 
occlusive barrier lipids in the stratum corneum and the humect-
ant  properties  of  the  NMF  [13].  Both  are  critical  to  retain 
moisture  and  resist  TEWL  and  the  dehydrating  effects  of  the 
environment. Therefore, qualitative or quantitative changes in 

either the barrier lipids or the NMF components can alter skin 
hydration.

Urea is a major constituent of the water‐soluble fraction of 
the stratum corneum [14]. Because of the high water binding 
capacity of urea, the water content in the skin depends on its 

142

hygIene produCts  Moisturizers

concentration.  In  dry  skin  and  in  keratinization  disorders,  a 
deficit of urea is often found in the stratum corneum, confirm-
ing its importance in skin moisture balance. The concentration 
of urea has been reported to be reduced by approximately 50% 
in  clinically  dry  skin  compared  to  healthy  skin  [15,16].  The 
stratum corneum of unaffected psoriatic skin reveals no defi-
cit in urea content, but levels in psoriatic lesions are reduced 
by 40% [17]. However, in patients with atopic dermatitis there 
is  a  deficit  of  about  70%  in  unaffected  skin  and  about  85% 
in  involved  skin  [18].  Urea  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  an 
effective  moisturizer  for  a  range  of  dry  skin  conditions  [19], 
especially  xerosis  of  the  elderly  [20,21].  Lodén  has  recently 
compiled a summary of clinical data on the treatment of dis-
eased  skin  with  urea‐containing  formulations  [22].  Besides 
improvements in skin hydration, urea may be enhancing the 
levels of linoleic acid and ceramides [23], providing an addi-
tional skin benefit.

Urea is very soluble in water, but practically insoluble in lipids 
and  lipid  solvents.  By  its  hydrogen‐bond  breaking  effect,  urea 
may expose water binding sites on keratin allowing the trans-
port of water molecules into the stratum corneum, thereby lead-
ing to a plasticizing effect [24]. In addition, urea has proteolytic 
and keratolytic effects in concentrations above 10% [22]. These 
activities are exploited in prescription formulations of 12–50%, 
which are often employed for debriding purposes in keratiniza-
tion disorders.

Lactic acid and salts of lactic acid, other efficacious compo-
nents of NMF, have also been used to treat dry skin conditions 
[11].  Like  urea,  the  principal  moisturizing  effect  is  brought 
about by their humectancy. However, additional benefits of bar-
rier support and restoration may be attributed to these NMF as 
an increase in ceramide synthesis in keratinocytes treated with 
lactic acid has been reported [25].

ultrastructural effects

Differential  changes  in  skin  hydration  state  and  ultrastructure 
after  the  application  of  various  moisturizing  products  can  be 
observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of frozen 
sections from skin biopsies [26]. Figure 15.1 depicts the epider-
mis  of  skin  treated  with  a  commercial  lotion  with  10%  urea, 
sodium lactate, and glycerin (right), and treated with a vehicle 
lotion  without  urea,  sodium  lactate,  and  glycerin  (left).  From 
the  SEM  images  it  could  be  concluded  that  the  product  pen-
etrated  the  entire  stratum  corneum,  resulting  in  a  more  com-
pact  stratum  corneum  layer,  with  a  20–40%  reduction  in  cor-
neocyte thickness. When compared with an untreated control 
(not  shown),  the  vehicle  treatment  did  not  have  an  influence 
on the stratum corneum thickness. The compaction of the stra-
tum  corneum  by  the  urea  product  suggests  an  improved  bar-
rier function which has been confirmed in other clinical studies 
demonstrating a reduction in TEWL [23].

Clinical demonstrations of product efficacy 
of sodium lactate and urea formulations

hand care
Several clinical studies were conducted to evaluate the ability of 
a  fragrance‐free,  O/W  emulsion  containing  5%  urea  and  2.5% 
sodium lactate to fortify the skin of healthy subjects, and to mois-
turize, protect, and treat others with compromised hand skin.

Improvements in urea content
Thirty‐one  volunteers  with  healthy  skin  were  enrolled  in  this 
study.  Subjects  refrained  from  the  use  of  topical  treatments 
for a period of 1 week and then applied the test product twice 

(a)

(b)

Figure 15.1   Freeze–fracture scanning electron micrographs of the stratum corneum of skin treated with a vehicle lotion (a) or the vehicle lotion containing 
10% urea and sodium lactate (b).

s
l
e
v
e
l

a
e
r
u
m
u
e
n
r
o
c

m
u
t
a
r
t
S

)
e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
f
o
%

(

1600

1200

800

400

0

Untreated
Urea cream

*

*

Baseline

2 weeks

3 days
regression

Length of treatment

*Significant difference relative to untreated, p < 0.05

Figure 15.2   Stratum corneum urea content before application, after 2 weeks 
of  daily  use,  and  3 days  after  discontinuing  application  of  an  oil‐in‐water 
emulsion containing 5% urea and 2.5% sodium lactate.

daily for 2 weeks. Urea content of the skin, moisturization state, 
and skin roughness were assessed at baseline, after 2 weeks of 
treatment,  and  3 days  after  the  last  application.  A  significant 
increase  (p  <  0.05)  in  the  urea  content  of  the  skin  compared 
with untreated skin was observed (Figure 15.2) as well as sig-
nificant improvements in skin hydration levels and roughness 
(data  not  shown).  Franz  cell  porcine  skin  penetration  studies 
confirmed  the  penetration  and  distribution  of  urea  through-
out the skin compartments 24 hours after application of a 5% 
urea  body  cream  formulation:  54%  in  the  stratum  corneum, 
7% in the viable epidermis, 22% in the dermis, and 17% in the 
receptor phase.

Improvement in eczema and xerosis
In  a  second  4‐week  controlled  usage  study,  23 subjects  with 
hand  eczema  and  14 subjects  with  hand  dermatitis/xerosis 
were enrolled. The subjects applied the test cream at least twice 
per day (morning and evening), and as often as needed. Clini-
cal  evaluations were made  at baseline, and after 2 and 4 weeks 
of  hand  cream  use  for  cracking/fissuring  and  dryness/scaling 
(0–8 scale), and erythema, edema, burning, stinging, and itch-
ing (0–3 scale). Subjects with eczema were also evaluated using 
an  Investigator’s  Global  Assessment  for  Eczema  (0–5 scale). 
Digital photographs were taken at each of the clinical visits.

Significant improvements (p < 0.05) in clinical grading scores 
at week 4 relative to baseline were observed for dryness/scaling 
and cracking/fissuring, and the Investigators Global Assessment 
for Eczema (Table 15.3). Average irritation scores were also sig-
nificantly reduced and negligible by week 4 for itching, stinging, 
and burning (data not shown).

Digital  photographs  captured  the  dry,  compromised  hand 
skin condition at the baseline visit, and demonstrated improve-
ments that reflected the clinical assessments. Figure 15.3 shows 
the typical improvements observed in subjects at week 4 (right), 
compared with baseline (left).

15. Hand and Foot Moisturizers

143

Table 15.3  	Mean	clinical	grading	scores	at	baseline	and	after	4	weeks	of	
daily	use	of	a	5%	urea	and	sodium	lactate	oil‐in‐water	emulsion.

Cracking/fissuring Dryness/scaling

Eczema severity

Baseline

4.78

Week	4

2.91*

6.61

3.59*

3.04

1.66*

*Significant	difference	relative	to	baseline,	p ≤ 0.05.

In conclusion, appropriate hand care can both treat and pre-

vent common dermatoses such as hand eczema.

Foot care
Patients  with  diabetes  mellitus  can  exhibit  a  number  of  cuta-
neous manifestations as a result of changes in metabolic status 
and/or circulatory and neural degeneration [27]. Management 
of dry skin in these individuals is important to preserve barrier 
integrity which can help prevent bacterial and fungal infections. 
In particular, the heel skin can be very dry and scaly, prone to 
forming cracks and fissures which can lead to wounds that have 
difficulty healing.

A 6‐week controlled usage study of a cream containing 10% 
urea, 5% sodium lactate, and glycerin as a daily treatment for 
the feet was conducted in 31 type I and II diabetic patients. This 
patient population was chosen because of their highly compro-
mised  foot  skin  condition.  The  subjects’  heels  were  evaluated 
for  roughness,  scaling  and  cracking,  and  subjective  irritation 
was  also  documented.  Color  photographs  of  the  heels,  taken 
before and after 6 weeks of treatment, documented the marked 
improvement in heel skin condition (Figure 15.4). In addition, 
significant  reduction  of  roughness,  scaling,  and  cracking  was 
observed. In spite of the severely compromised skin condition 
at  baseline,  only  one  patient  reported  a  mild  irritation  on  the 
application site which did not interfere with his completing the 
study according to the protocol.

A  second  multicenter  study  of  604 patients  with  dry  or 
severely dry, chapped feet and generalized xerosis (258, 42.7%), 
diabetes  (179,  29.6%)  or  atopic  dermatitis  (113,  18.7%)  was 
conducted in Germany and Austria. The patients applied a foot 
cream  containing  10%  urea,  5%  sodium  lactate,  and  glycerin 
at  least  twice  daily  for  2 weeks.  While  319 patients  used  spe-
cific foot treatment products to care for their feet at the base-
line visit, only 20 used other topical products in addition to the 
foot cream during the study period. The foot skin was clinically 
graded  for  xerosis,  scaling,  and  cracking  at  baseline  and  after 
2 weeks of treatment on a 5‐point scale (none, slight, moderate, 
severe, or very severe). Table 15.4 documents the improvement 
in  skin  condition  after  2 weeks  of  foot  cream  usage,  showing 
significant and marked decreases in the percentage of patients 
with  severe  or  very  severe  symptoms,  and  overall  noticeable 
improvements in 95% of the patients. In this large patient popu-
lation, the investigating dermatologists judged the tolerability to 
be very good or good in 96.7% of the patients, recommending 
continued product use.

 
 
 
 
 
144

hygIene produCts  Moisturizers

Figure  15.3  Improvement  in  hand  eczema  (top)  and  xerosis  (bottom)  after  4 weeks  of  daily  usage  (right)  of  a  hand  cream  containing  5%  urea  and 
sodium lactate.

These data and many other published studies [19–23] support 
the therapeutic value and excellent safety profile of urea when 
administered topically to treat various dry skin conditions.

the future: next‐generation moisturizers

Water homeostasis of the epidermis is important for the appear-
ance and physical properties of skin, as well as for the water bal-
ance  of  the  body.  Skin  moisture  balance  depends  on  multiple 
factors  including  external  humidity,  uptake  of  water  into  the 
epidermis, skin barrier quality, and endogenous water binding 
substances. Biosynthesis and degradation of skin components is 
also influenced by water balance, impacting the moisturization 
state of the epidermal layers. In recent times, aquaporins (AQP), 
important  hydration‐regulating  elements  in  the  lower  epider-
mis, have been described [28].

The  first  indications  of  the  critical  importance  of  AQP  in 
regulating tissue hydration came from investigations of other 
organ  systems,  in  particular  the  kidney  [29].  Since  their  
initial  discovery,  AQP  genes  have  been  cloned  and,  to  date, 

13  different  genes  (AQP1–13)  have  been  identified  [30].  The 
first proof for their relevance in skin came from Ma et al. [31] 
who  produced  knockout  mice  lacking  AQP3,  which  exhib-
ited  reduced  stratum  corneum  hydration.  Studies  confirmed 
the importance of these findings in dry human skin. Subjects 
whose epidermal barriers were damaged by a week‐long ten-
side‐based treatment that resulted in dry, compromised skin, 
showed  a  significant  decrease  in  the  number  of  AQP3  pores  
(p  =  0.04).  The  pores  were  quantified  by  analysis  of  West-
ern  blots,  and  a  43%  reduction  in  the  dry  skin  samples  was 
observed.

Further,  in  other  skin  conditions  associated  with  skin  dry-
ness, a reduction in AQP3 has also been observed. Specifically, 
an age‐related decline in AQP3 levels, as well as decreases asso-
ciated with chronic sun exposure were reported [32].

Water and the moisturizing substances glycerol and urea have 
been  found  to  be  transported  through  the  AQP  in  skin,  pro-
viding moisture from within to the epidermis [33]. Expanding 
knowledge on the activity and regulation of AQP3 has led to the 
pursuit of a new class of actives that can modulate the expres-
sion of these water channels [34].

15. Hand and Foot Moisturizers

145

Figure 15.4  Improvement in diabetic foot skin after 6 weeks of daily usage of a foot cream containing 10% urea and 5% sodium lactate. Pretreatment photos 
(left) of two different subjects (top and bottom) and their corresponding week 6 photos (right).

Table 15.4  	Clinical	grading	scores	before	and	after	2	weeks	of	treatment.	
Percentage	of	patients	with	none	or	slight	and	severe	or	very	severe	
symptoms	(100% 	=	604	patients).

None or slight 
(%)

Severe or very 
severe (%)

Xerosis

Scaling

Cracking

Baseline

Week	2

Baseline

Week	2

Baseline

Week	2

5

69

22

79

26

66

67

6

44

6

32

8

enhanced glycerol derivatives
In  vitro  studies  on  human  keratinocytes  demonstrated  a  sig-
nificant increase in AQP3 levels by a specific enhanced glycerol 
derivative (EGD), glyceryl glucoside, designed and synthesized 
to confer specific structural and osmotic properties. Figure 15.5 
depicts the enhanced AQP3 levels of EGD treated human kerati-
nocytes after 48 hours of incubation.

Additional in vitro and in vivo studies measuring AQP3 mRNA 
levels  in  human  keratinocytes  and  skin  confirmed  these  find-
ings  [35].  In  contrast  to  glycerol  treatment,  EGD  increased 

mRNA expression relative to the control. Further, to assess the 
efficacy  of  this  new  active,  in  vivo  placebo‐controlled  studies 
were conducted. Figure 15.6 demonstrates the results of a study 
of  23 subjects,  whose  epidermal  barriers  were  damaged  by  a 
tenside‐based  treatment,  resulting  in  dry,  compromised  skin. 
The restoration of the epidermal barrier was assessed weekly by 
measuring TEWL on treated skin sites. The applied topical test 
lotions included a  vehicle preparation,  vehicle plus 6.5% glyc-
erol, and the vehicle with 6.5% glycerol and 5% EGD.

After damaging the skin’s barrier for 1 week, vehicle treatment 
was ineffective at restoring the barrier to baseline levels, exhibit-
ing greater moisture loss levels in the skin. Treatment with the 
glycerol‐containing  vehicle  showed  a  reduction  of  the  TEWL 
compared with the vehicle. However, a superior and significant 
barrier  restoration  and  fortification  is  observed  with  the  glyc-
erol–EGD containing formulation compared with both vehicle 
and vehicle with glycerol.

The  moisturization  and  barrier‐strengthening  benefits  of 
moisturizing  formulations  containing  glyceryl‐glucoside,  urea 
and other components of the NMF were also investigated [36] 
Vehicle‐controlled  studies  confirmed  the  additive  benefits  of 
these  agents,  underscoring  the  efficacy  of  addressing  the  defi-
ciencies  of  xerotic  skin  conditions  with  topical  formulations 
crafted  with  key  ingredients  that  address  the  multiple  factors 
in  xerosis.  Transported  through  the  AQP3 channel,  urea  was 

146

hygIene produCts  Moisturizers

Figure 15.5  Immunohistochemical localization of the AQP3 protein in keratinocyte monolayers stained with a rabbit antihuman AQP3 antibody. Back-
ground control (left), untreated control (center), treatment with 3% enhanced glycerol derivative for 48 hours (right).

L
W
E
T
n
a
e
m
n

i

e
g
n
a
h
C

)

%

(

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b
o
t

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

110

100

90

80

70

*

*

Vehicle

Vehicle +
glycerol

*Significantly different, p < 0.05.

standing  of  NMF  and  biologic  mechanisms  that  regulate  the 
skin’s  moisture  balance  have  contributed  toward  products 
with greatly enhanced stability, aesthetics, and efficacy. Eluci-
dation  of  the  multiple  effects  of  urea,  and  the  recent  discov-
ery  and  understanding  of  the  function  of  AQP  channels  to 
regulate  water  balance  and  moisturization  from  within  the 
skin provides a new appreciation of the complex mechanisms 
underlying moisture homeostasis of the skin. This knowledge 
provides  new  opportunities  to  create  even  better  actives  and 
multidimensional product formulations that address the mul-
tiple causes of xerotic skin conditions.

Vehicle +
glycerol+
EGD

references

Figure  15.6  In  vivo  study  of  23 volunteers  with  dry  skin.  Transepidermal 
water  loss  (TEWL)  measurement  after  the  following  treatments:  vehicle; 
vehicle with 6.5% glycerol; and vehicle with 6.5% glycerol and 5% enhanced 
glycerol derivative (EGD).

recently  shown  to  upregulate  expression  of  markers  of  kerati-
nocyte differentiation, filaggrin, and lipid biosynthetic enzymes, 
responsible in part for the production of the lamellar lipids that 
constitute the barrier function, confirming a more complex reg-
ulatory function of this “tried and true” moisturizer that tran-
scends its effect as a humectant [37].

Conclusions

Moisturizing substances have been used for thousands of years 
to  improve  the  condition  of  compromised  skin.  The  advent 
of  stable  emulsions  and  subsequent  advancements  in  emul-
sion technologies provided improved elegance and efficacy for 
moisturizing products. More than 100 years of process refine-
ments, discovery of new ingredients, and the growing under-

1  Draelos  ZD.  (2006)  Cutaneous  formulation  issues.  In:  Draelos  Z, 
Thamen L, eds. Cosmetic Formulation of Skin Care Products. New 
York: Taylor & Francis, pp. 3–34.

2  Zhai  H,  Maibach  HI.  (1998)  Moisturizers  in  preventing  irritant 
contact dermatitis: an overview. Contact Dermatitis 38, 241–4.
3  Lifschütz I. (1906) Verfahren zur Herstellung stark wasseraufnah-

mefähiger Salbengrundlagen. Patent DE 167849.

4  Fluhr  JW,  Darlenski  R,  Surber  C.  (2008)  Glycerol  and  the  skin: 
holistic  approach  to  its  origin  and  functions.  Br  J  Dermatol  159, 
23–34.

5  Epstein H. (2006) Skin care products. In: Paye M, Barel A, Maibach H, 
eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology, 2 nd edn. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, pp. 427–39.

6  Schneider G, Gohla S, Kaden W, et al. (1993) Skin cosmetics. In: 
Uhlmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. Weinheim: VCH 
Verlagsgesellschaft, pp. 219–43.

7  Rajka  G.  (1995)  Atopic  dermatitis.  In:  Baran  R,  Maibach  H,  eds. 

Cosmetic Dermatology. London: Martin Dunitz, pp. 253–8.

8  Draelos  ZD.  (2005)  Dry  skin.  In:  DraelosZD,  ed.  Cosmeceuticals. 

Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, pp. 167–8.

9  Zocchi G. (2006) Skin feel agents. In: Paye M, Barrel A, Maibach H, 
eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology, 2 nd edn. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, pp. 247–64.

 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Hand and Foot Moisturizers

147

10  Sagiv  A,  Dikstein  S,  Ingber  A.  (2001)  The  efficiency  of  humect-
ants as skin moisturizers in the presence of oil. Skin Res Technol 
7, 32–8.

11  Harding  CR,  Rawlings  AV.  (2006)  Effects  of  natural  moisturizing 
factor  and  lactic  acid  isomers  on  skin  function.  In:  Maibach  HI, 
Lodén M, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers: Chemistry and Function, 
2 nd edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press LLC, pp. 187–209.

12  Fowler J. (2012) Understanding the role of natural moisturizing fac-

tor in skin hydration. Practical Dermatol 9, 36–40.

13  Rawlings AV, Harding CR. (2004) Moisturization and skin barrier 

25  Rawlings AV, Davies A, Carlomusto M, et al. (1995) Effect of lactic 
acid isomers on keratinocyte ceramide synthesis, stratum corneum 
lipid levels and stratum corneum barrier function. Arch Dermatol 
Res 288, 383–90.

26  Richter  T,  Peuckert  C,  Sattler  M,  et  al.  (2004)  Dead  but  highly 
dynamic:  the  stratum  corneum  is  divided  into  three  hydration 
zones. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 17, 246–57.

27  Nikkels‐Tassoudji N, Henry F, Letawe C, et al. (1996) Mechanical 
properties of the diabetic waxy skin. Dermatology 192, 19–22.
28  Hara‐Chikuma M, Verkman AS. (2008) Roles of aquaporin‐3 in the 

function. Dermatol Ther 17, 43–8.

epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 128, 2145–51.

14  Swanbeck G. (1992) Urea in the treatment of dry skin. Acta Derm 

29  Agre P. (2006) Aquaporin water channels: from atomic structure to 

Venereol 177, 7–8.

clinical medicine. Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med 2, 266–7.

15  Mueller KH, Pflugshaupt C. (1979) Urea in dermatology I. Zbl Haut 

30  Verkman AS. (2008) Mammalian aquaporins: diverse physiological 

142, 157–68.

16  Mueller  KH,  Pflugshaupt  C.  (1982)  Urea  in  dermatology  II.  Zbl 

Haut 167, 85–90.

17  Proksch  E.  (1994)  Harnstoff  in  der  Dermatologie.  Dtsch  Med 

Wochenschr 119, 1126–30.

18  Wellner K, Wohlrab W. (1993)  Quantitative evaluation of urea in 
stratum corneum of human skin. Arch Dermatol Res 285, 239–40.
19  Schölermann A, Filbry A, Rippke F. (2002) 10% urea: an effective 
moisturizer in various dry skin conditions. Ann Dermatol Venereol 
129, 1S422, P0259.

20  Schoelermann A, Banke‐Bochita J, Bohnsack K, et al. (1998) Efficacy 
and safety of Eucerin® 10% urea lotion in the treatment of symptoms 
of aged skin. J Dermatol Treat 9, 175–9.

21  Norman RA. (2003) Xerosis and pruritus in the elderly: recognition 

and management. Dermatol Ther 16, 254–9.

22  Lodén M. (2006) Clinical evidence for the use of urea. In: Lodén M, 
Maibach HI, eds. Dry Skin and Moisturizers. Chemistry and Func-
tion, 2 nd edn. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, pp. 211–25.

23  Pigatto PD, Bigardi AS, Cannistraci C, Picardo M. (1996) 10% urea 
cream  (Eucerin)  for  atopic  dermatitis:  a  clinical  and  laboratory 
evaluation. J Dermatolog Treat 7, 171–6.

24  McCallion R, Wan Po AL. (1993) Dry and photo‐aged skin: mani-

festations and management. J Clin Pharm Ther 18, 15–32.

roles and potential clinical significance. J Exp Med 10, 1–18.

31  Ma T, Hara M, Sougrat R, et al. (2002) Impaired stratum corneum 
hydration in mice lacking epidermal water channel aquaporin‐3. 
J Biol Chem 27, 17147–53.

32  Dumas M, Sadick NS, Noblesse E, et al. (2007) Hydrating skin by 
stimulating biosynthesis of aquaporins. J Drugs Dermatol 6 (Suppl), 
20–4.

33  Hara M, Verkman AS. (2003) Glycerol replacement corrects defec-
tive skin hydration, elasticity, and barrier function in aquaporin‐3‐
deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 7360–5.

34  Draelos Z. (2012) Aquaporins; An introduction to a key factor in 
the mechanism of skin hydration. J Clin Aesthet Derm 5(7), 53–56.
35  Schrader A, Siefken W, Kueper T, Breitenbach U, et al. (2012) Effects 
of  glyceryl  glucoside  on  AQP3  expression,  barrier  function  and 
hydration of human skin. Skin Pharm. Skin Physiol 25, 192–199.
36  Weber  TM,  Kausch  M,  Rippke  F,  Schoerlermann  AM,  Filbry  A 
(2012)  Treatment  of  xerosis  with  a  topical  formulation  contain-
ing glyceryl glucoside, natural moisturizing factors, and ceramide.  
J Clin Aesthet Dermatol 5, 29–39.

37  Grether‐Beck  S,  Felsner  I,  Brenden  H,  et  al.  (2012)  Urea  uptake 
enhances  barrier  function  and  antimicrobial  defense  in  humans 
by  regulating  epidermal  gene  expression.  J  Invest  Derm  132(6), 
1561–72.

CHApter 16
Sunless tanning products

Angelike Galdi, Peter Foltis, and Christian Oresajo
L’Oréal Research, Clark, NJ, USA

BASIC ConCeptS

•	 Tanned	skin	is	considered	attractive	among	fair-skinned	individuals.
•	 Self-tanning	preparations	containing	dihydroxyacetone	(DHA)	induce	a	temporary	safe	staining	of	the	skin	simulating	sun-induced	

tanning.

•	 Self-tanners	are	formulated	into	sprays,	lotions,	creams,	gels,	mousses,	and	cosmetic	wipes.
•	 The	tanning	effect	of	DHA	begins	in	the	deeper	part	of	the	stratum	corneum	before	expanding	over	the	entire	stratum	corneum	and	

stratum	granulosum	resulting	in	the	production	of	brown	melanoidins.

•	 DHA	products	do	not	confer	photoprotection	unless	sunscreen	filters	are	added	to	the	formulation.

Introduction

Social norms for tanning in the USA have dramatically changed 
in recent times. The presence of a tanned body at one time con-
veyed the social status of an outdoor laborer. Now, having a tan, 
especially during the winter months, indicates affluence.

More  information  has  become  available  regarding  the  del-
eterious effects of UV exposure. [1–3]. The public is beginning 
to  understand  the  dangers,  thereby  modifying  their  lifestyle 
choices towards safer practices. However, the change has been 
slow because sun exposure behavior is in part influenced by psy-
chologic  and  societal  factors  [4–6].  Self-tanning  preparations 
are becoming an increasingly important option for those desir-
ing the tanned look but not exposing themselves to undue harm.

Sunless tanning products

Definition
Self-tanning products, or sunless tanners, are preparations that 
when applied topically impart a temporary coloration to the skin 
mimicking skin color of naturally sun-tanned skin. Depending 
on the formulation and the active ingredients, the onset of color 
formation can be anything from immediate to several hours and 
can last up to 1 week.

Self-tanning  formulations  were  introduced  in  the  1960 s. 
Consumers’  acceptability  soon  waned  because  of  unattractive 
results  such  as  orange  hands,  streaking,  and  poor  coloration. 

Because of these drawbacks, consumers today still associate sun-
less tanning with these undesirable results. However, improved 
formulations have appeared on the market. Refinements in the 
dihydroxyacetone  (DHA)  manufacturing  process  has  aided  in 
the creation of formulations that produce a more natural-looking 
color and better longevity.

Active ingredients
The most widely used and most efficacious active ingredient in 
self-tanners  is  DHA.  It  is  the  only  ingredient  that  is  currently 
recognized  as  a  self-tanning  agent  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug 
Administration  (FDA)  [7].  DHA-based  sunless  tanners  have 
been recommended by the Skin Cancer Foundation, the American 
Academy of Dermatology Association, and the American Medical 
Association  [8–10].  DHA  is  a  triose  and  is  the  simplest  of  all 
ketoses (Figure 16.1).

Mechanism of action of DHA
Ketones and aldehydes react with primary amines to form Schiff 
bases [11]. This is similar to the Maillard reaction, also known 
as non-enzymatic browning, and involves, more specifically, the 
reaction between carbohydrates and primary amines [12].

O

HO

OH

Figure 16.1   Chemical structure of dihydroxyacetone (DHA).

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

148

16. Sunless Tanning Products

149

DHA  is  able  to  penetrate  into  the  epidermis  because  of  its 
size.  Pyruvic  acid  is  formed  from  DHA  and  either  can  react 
with sterically unhindered terminal amino groups in the amino 
acids of epidermal proteins. The epsilon amino group of lysine 
and the guanido group of arginine are particularly susceptible 
to nucleophilic attack by the reactive carbonyl oxygen. Epider-
mal proteins contain high concentrations of both of these amino 
acids. Based on photoacoustic depth profilometry, the tanning 
effect of DHA begins in the deeper part of the stratum corneum 
layer (15–22 μm) before expanding over the entire stratum cor-
neum and stratum granulosum [13,14]. Subsequent steps of the 
reaction  mechanism  are  not  fully  understood.  The  resultant 
products are brown in color and are collectively referred to as 
melanoidins.

Alternate actives
As  previously  stated,  US  federal  regulations  recognize  only 
DHA  as  a  sunless  tanning  agent  [7].  Alternative  technologies 
exist, however, with the capability to impart an artificial tan to 
the skin.

Reducing sugars other than DHA can act as Maillard reaction 
intermediates and therefore have the potential for use as sunless 
tanning  agents  [15].  Reducing  sugars,  in  basic  solution,  form 
some aldehyde or ketone. This allows the sugar to act as a reduc-
ing agent in the Maillard reaction of non-enzymatic browning. 
Reducing sugars include glucose, fructose, glyceraldehyde, lac-
tose, arabinose, and maltose.

Unfortunately,  a  large  amount  of  heat  energy  is  required  to 
trigger the glycation reaction between glucose, the most com-
monly known reducing sugar, and free amines. Such properties 
render many reducing sugars useless for sunless tanning prod-
ucts. An exception is the keto-tetrose, erythulose. Although this 
reducing sugar produces a more gradual tan than DHA, it has 
been utilized as a self-tanning enhancer for years.

As corporations continue to aggressively pursue new sunless 
tanning  technologies,  reducing  sugars  may  provide  the  next 
generation of self-tanning actives.

Formulation challenges

The  content  of  DHA  in  self-tanning  products  depends  on  the 
desired browning intensity on the skin and is normally used in 
the range 4–8%. Depending on the type of formulation and skin 
type, a tan appears on the skin about 2–3 hours after use. During 
product storage, the pH of a DHA-containing formulation will 
drift over time to about 3–4. At this pH, DHA is particularly sta-
ble. In order to ensure end product stability, certain key factors 
must be considered.

pH and buffers
The pH of DHA-containing formulation drops during storage. 
The  resulting  pH  lies  in  the  range  of  3–4.  In  the  past,  buffer-
ing was recommended to keep the pH at a level of 4–6. However, 

investigations  have  since  shown  that  the  storage  stability  of 
DHA could be increased when formulations are kept at a pH of 
3–4 and buffering at a higher pH enhances the degradation of 
DHA [16]. The pH of a formulation may be adjusted to approxi-
mately 3–4 by using a small amount of citric acid or using ace-
tate buffers as they do not affect DHA stability [17].

processing and storage of DHA
Storage and heating of DHA above 40 °C should be avoided as it 
causes rapid degradation. During manufacturing processes that 
require heating (as in the case of emulsions), DHA should not 
be added until the formulation has been cooled down to below 
40 °C. Additionally, finished products containing DHA should 
be sold in opaque, or other UV-protective packaging, as well as 
resealable packaging, to limit exposure to air.

nitrogen-containing compounds
Amines  and  other  nitrogen-containing  compounds  should  be 
avoided in DHA-containing formulations. This includes colla-
gen, urea derivatives, amino acids, and proteins. The reactivity 
of DHA towards these compounds can lead to its degradation, 
therefore  resulting  in  the  loss  in  efficacy  and  acceptability  of 
resulting color. However, some commercial formulations com-
bine  DHA  with  nitrogen-containing  containing  compounds 
(e.g.  amino  acids).  This  combination  provides  a  perceptual 
advantage  to  customers  as  provides  within  tanning  1 hour  as 
a  result  of  the  accelerated  reaction  between  DHA  and  amino 
acids. This tan is not substantive, however, and most of it is easily 
washed off [17].

Sunscreens
A tan achieved with DHA alone does not offer sun protection 
comparable  to  that  of  sunscreens.  However,  it  is  possible  to 
combine DHA with sunscreens to achieve a product with sun 
protection. Inorganic sunscreens such as titanium dioxide, zinc 
oxide, and nitrogen-containing sunscreens should be avoided as 
they induce rapid degradation of DHA.

As  a  final  stability  check,  periodic  determination  of  DHA 
dosage is recommended to ensure end product and long-term 
stability and efficacy. A simple high performance liquid chroma-
tography  (HPLC)  method  exists  using  an  amine  column  with 
acetonitrile/water  (75 : 25)  as  a  mobile  phase.  Detection  is  at 
270 nm.

Delivery vehicles

Creams and lotions
Self-tanning creams and lotions tend to be the most widely used 
of all of the self-tanning vehicles. Our studies have confirmed that 
although conventional, creams and lotions are preferred by con-
sumers because of their ease of use and reduced likelihood of hav-
ing streaky color results. This is most likely because of the extended 
play time (e.g. rub-in time) offered by cream and lotion vehicles.

150

HygIene proDuCtS  Moisturizers

In selecting the appropriate ingredients for formulation, the 
use of non-ionic emulsifiers is recommended over ionic emul-
sifiers  because  of  improved  stability  of  the  DHA  [16].  Addi-
tionally, xanthan gum and polyquaternium-10 may be used for 
thickening emulsions.

Emollients have an important role in many self-tanning for-
mulations as they impart hydration to the skin, play time during 
application,  and  a  smooth  and  silky  after  feel.  Types  of  emol-
lients include oils, waxes, fatty alcohols, silicone materials, and 
certain esters.

Emulsions with DHA are particularly susceptible to microbial 
attack. Parabens, phenoxyethanol, and mixtures thereof are rec-
ommended [16].

gels and gelees
Thickening  formulations  containing  DHA,  particularly  to 
produce a clear gel, is relatively difficult because many of the 
conventional thickeners are not compatible with DHA. Stud-
ies  have  found  that  hydroxyethylcellulose,  methylcellulose, 
and  silica  are  good  choices,  whereas  carbomers,  PVM/MA 
decadiene  crosspolymer,  and  magnesium  aluminum  silicate 
are  not  acceptable  as  they  cause  rapid  degradation  of  DHA 
[16].

Silicones  such  as  dimethicone  and  cyclomethicones  have 
increased in popularity over recent years, particularly for pro-
ducing  water-in-silicone  emulsions  (typically  classified  as 
gelees). Gelees are similar in appearance to gels; however, they 
tend to offer improved play time and skin feel over gels as they 
contain high levels of the silicone emollients.

regulatory considerations

The  US  FDA  considers  sunless  tanning  actives  as  color  addi-
tives as they impart color to the skin. According to 21CFR70, 
color  additives  are  defined  as:  “A  dye,  pigment,  or  other  sub-
stance…that,  when  added  or  applied  to  a  food,  drug  or  cos-
metic  or  to  the  human  body  or  any  part  thereof,  is  capable 
(alone or through reaction with another substance) of impart-
ing a color thereto” [18].

The actives permitted in the sunless tanning products in the 
USA are limited to those approved for use as such. The follow-
ing color additives appear in the Code of Federal Regulations in 
Tables 16.1 and 16.2.

Labeling requirements are also specified under current FDA 
guidelines. All sunless tanning products that do not contain sun 
protection factor (SPF) protection must be labeled with the fol-
lowing  warning  statement  (US  Code  of  Federal  Regulations): 
“Warning – This product does not contain a sunscreen and does 
not protect against sunburn. Repeated exposure of unprotected 
skin  while  tanning  may  increase  the  risk  of  skin  aging,  skin 
cancer and other harmful effects to the skin even if you do not 
burn” [18].

Table 16.1  	Color	additives	exempt	from	certification	per	21CFR73	2003	(US	
Code	of	Federal	Regulations).

Aluminum	powder

Copper	powder

Luminescent	zinc

Annatto

β-Carotene

Bismuth	citrate

Dihydroxyacetone

Manganese	violet

Disodium	EDTA	copper Mica

Ferric	ammonium	
ferrocyanide

Potassium	
sodium	copper

Bismuth	oxychloride

Ferric	ferrocyanide

Pyrophyllite

Bronze	powder

Guaiazulene

Caramel

Carmine

Guanine

Henna

Chromium	oxide	greens

Iron	oxides

Chlorophyllin

Lead	acetate

Silver

Sulfide

Titanium	dioxide

Ultramarines

Zinc	oxide

Table 16.2  	Color	additives	per	21CFR73	2003	(US	Code	of	Federal	
Regulations).

Citrus	Red	No.	2

D&C	Red	No.	17

D&C	Yellow	No.	10

D&C	Blue	No.	4

D&C	Red	No.	21

D&C	Yellow	No.	11

D&C	Blue	No.	6

D&C	Red	No.	22

Ext.	D&C	Violet	No.	2

D&C	Blue	No.	9

D&C	Red	No.	27

Ext.	D&C	Yellow	No.	7

D&C	Brown	No.	1

D&C	Red	No.	28

FD&C	Blue	No.	1

D&C	Green	No.	5

D&C	Red	No.	30

FD&C	Blue	No.	2

D&C	Green	No.	6

D&C	Red	No.	31

FD&C	Red	No.	3

D&C	Green	No.	8

D&C	Red	No.	33

FD&C	Red	No.	4

D&C	Orange	No.	4

D&C	Red	No.	34

FD&C	Red	No.	40

D&C	Orange	No.	5

D&C	Red	No.	36

FD&C	Yellow	No.	5

D&C	Orange	No.	10

D&C	Red	No.	39

FD&C	Yellow	No.	6

D&C	Orange	No.	11

D&C	Violet	No.	2

Orange	B

D&C	Red	No.	6

D&C	Yellow	No.	7

Phthalocyaninato2-
Copper

D&C	Red	No.	7

D&C	Yellow	No.	8

product attributes

Coloration
The  onset  of  coloration  starts  at  approximately  2–3 hours  and 
will continue to darken for 24–72 hours after a single applica-
tion,  depending  on  formulation  and  skin  type.  Because  DHA 
forms covalent bonds with epidermal proteins, the tan will not 
sweat off or wash away with soap or water. The color gradually 
fades  over  3–10 days,  in  conjunction  with  stratum  corneum 
exfoliation.  Any  product  or  process  that  increases  the  rate  of 
cell turnover or removes portions of the stratum corneum will 
decrease  the  longevity  of  the  color.  Thus,  preparations  con-
taining alpha- and beta-hydroxyacids and retinoids, as well as 
microdermabrasion creams and the process of shaving, decrease 
the longevity of coloration from self-tanning products.

evaluation
Various  spectrophotometric  methods  can  be  used  to  evaluate 
the coloration parameters of self-tanners such as onset of color 
and  longevity  of  color. The  most  popular  is  the  L*a*b*  stand-
ard  from  Commission  Internationale  d’Eclairage  (CIE).  The 
three coordinates of CIELAB represent the lightness of the color 
(L*    =    0  yields  black  and  L*    =    100  indicates  diffuse  white), 
its position between red/magenta and green (a*, negative values 
indicate green while positive values indicate magenta), and its 
position between yellow and blue (b*, negative values indicate 
blue and positive values indicate yellow). The total color differ-
ence between any two colors in L*a*b* can be approximated by 
treating each color as a point in a three-dimensional space (with 
three components: L*, a*, b*) and taking the Euclidean distance 
between them (ΔE). ΔE is calculated as the square root of the 
sum of the squares of ΔL*, Δa* and Δb* [19]. It is generally rec-
ognized that 1.5 ΔE units is the minimal difference detectable 
to the eye. Comparisons to baseline readings can yield onset of 
tanning  (usually  readings  at  30 minutes,  60 minutes,  etc.)  and 
longevity of tanning (readings at 48 hours, 72 hours, etc.).

Moisturization
The recent trend in cosmetic products is to be multifunctional. 
Moisturizing formulations are increasing in popularity in keeping 
with this trend. Formulations with 8–24 hour hydration claims are 
not uncommon. Current self-tanners are formulated into sprays, 
lotions,  creams,  gels,  mousses,  and  cosmetic  wipes.  In  general, 
there are no obstacles to obtaining satisfactory levels of hydration, 
although there are some compromises that may have to be made. 
Alcohol is often incorporated to achieve quick-drying formula-
tions. The trade-off is sacrificing some level of hydration. This can 
be offset with humectants such as glycerin or sodium hyaluronate.

16. Sunless Tanning Products

151

Sunless tanning spray booths
A growing trend is the professional whole body application in 
aerosolized  form.  The  suitably  clad  consumer  is  sprayed  with 
a uniform fine mist. The consumer is instructed to close their 
eyes or wear suitable eye protection, hold their breath or wear 
nose plugs to avoid inhalation, and wear a shower cap to protect 
the hair. While the cost is generally higher for this application 
compared to self-application of a consumer product, the results 
tend to be more uniform and controlled.

Sunless tanning products with uV protection
The tan imparted by sunless tanners is not adequate to protect 
against UVB and UVA damage. Sunless tanners must therefore 
carry the required FDA warning statement [19]. Sunless tanning 
products  that  do  contain  sunscreen  are  growing  in  popularity 
because  of  their  multifunctional  properties.  If  sunless  tanners 
do  carry  an  SPF  claim,  the  product  labeling  and  testing  must 
comply with the FDA Sunscreen Monograph published in 2011.

Conclusions

With an increasing awareness of the harmful acute and chronic 
effects  of  UV  damage,  sunless  tanning  use  remains  a  popular 
alternative to tan seekers. Modern day formulations are effica-
cious,  well-tolerated,  easy-to-use,  and  provide  natural  looking 
results.  A  probable  increase  in  patient  compliance  of  safe  sun 
practices can therefore be anticipated.

references

trends in sunless tanning

Daily use moisturizers/glow
Face and body moisturizers with low levels of DHA have grown 
in  popularity  over  the  past  5  years.  Although  not  new  to  the 
market,  the  concept  of  using  a  daily  moisturizer  that  imparts 
gradual color was particularly well-received by the faint in heart 
who were afraid of making mistakes and/or turning orange with 
the use of traditional sunless tanners. Typically formulated with 
1–3% DHA, glow moisturizers are easy to apply and, depending 
on  the  formulation  and  user’s  skin  tone,  may  impart  a  darker 
shade to the skin after 1–3 applications.

no-rub mists
No-rub sunless tanning mists have been sought out as the less 
expensive alternatives to the airbrushing trend. These multian-
gle applicator systems allow for simple, even, and often hands-
free  application.  The  formulation  base  systems  are  typically 
hydroalcoholic  or  aqueous  solutions,  therefore  allowing  for 
quick-drying properties.

1  Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. (2006) Cancer statistics, 2006. CA 

Cancer J Clin 56, 106–30.

2  American  Cancer  Society.  (2006)  Cancer  Facts  and  Figures  2006: 

American Cancer Society.

3  Elwood JM (1993). Recent developments in melanoma epidemiology, 

1993. Melanoma Res 3, 149–56.

4  Garvin T, Wilson K. (1999) The use of storytelling for understand-
ing women’s desires to tan: lessons from the field. Professional Geog-
rapher Vol. 51, 2, 297–306.

5  Cokkinides V, Weinstock M, Glanz K, Albano J, Ward E, Thun M. 
(2006) Trends in sunburns, sun protection practices, and attitudes 
toward  sun  exposure  protection  and  tanning  among  US  adoles-
cents, 1998–2004. Pediatrics 118, 853–64.

6  Cokkinides V, Weinstock MA, O’Connell MC, Thun MJ. (2002) Use 
of  indoor  tanning  sunlamps  by  US  youth,  ages  11–18  years,  and 
by their parents or guardian caregivers: prevalence and correlates. 
Pediatrics 109, 1124–30.

7  United States Code of Federal Regulations 21CFR 73.2150, 2002.
8  www.skincancer.org
9  www.aad.org
10  www.ama-assn.org
11  Morrison  RT,  Boyd  RN.  (1973)  Organic  Chemistry.  Boston,  MA: 

Allyn and Bacon.

152

HygIene proDuCtS  Moisturizers

12  Lloyd RV, Fong AJ, Sayre RM. (2001) In Vivo formation of Maillard 
reaction free radicals in mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol 117, 740–2.
13  Puccetti  G,  Tranchant  JF,  Leblanc  RM.  (1999)  The  stability  and 
penetration of epidermal applications visualized by photoacoustic 
depth profilometry. Sixth Conference International Society of Skin 
Imaging, Skin Research and Technology, Berlin, Germany.

14  Puccetti  G,  Leblanc  R.  (2000)  A  sunscreen-tanning  compromise: 
3D  visualization  of  the  actions  of  titanium  dioxide  particles  and 
dihydroxyacetone  on  human  epiderm.  Photochem  Photobiol  71, 
426–30.

15  Shaath N. (2005) Sunscreens Regulation and Commercial Develop-

ment. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group.

16  Chaudhuri  R.  Dihydroxyacetone:  Chemistry  and  Applications  in 

Self-Tanning Products. White Paper; 7.

17  Kurz  T.  (1994)  Formulating  effective  self-tanners  with  DHA. 

Cosmet Toiletries 109, 55–60.

18  United States Code of Federal Regulations. 21CFR740.19, 2003.
19  Minolta.  (1993)  Precise  Color  Communication,  Color  Control 

from Feeling to Instrumentation. Minolta Camera Co. Ltd.

ChapteR 17
Sunscreens

Dominique Moyal,1 Angelike Galdi,2 and Christian Oresajo2
1La Roche-Posay Laboratoire Dermatologique, Asnières sur Seine, France
2L’Oréal Research and Innovation, Clark, NJ, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 Photoprotection	is	required	for	both	UVB	and	UVA	radiation.
•	 Organic	and	inorganic	filters	are	used	in	sunscreens.
•	 Sunscreen	filters	must	be	carefully	combined	to	achieve	esthetically	pleasant	products	with	photo-stability	and	well-balanced	UVB-UVA	

photoprotection,	as	defined	by	UVAPF	being	at	least	one-third	of	the	SPF	value.

•	 International	acceptance	of	the	same	UV	filters	would	benefit	the	consumers.
•	 There	is	a	need	for	harmonization	of	testing	methods	and	labeling	to	afford	the	same	information	of	efficacy	to	the	consumers.

Introduction

Regulatory status of sunscreens

Human  skin  exposure  to  UVR  from  sunlight  can  cause  many 
adverse  effects.  These  involve  both  UVB  (290–320 nm)  and 
UVA  (320–400 nm).  UVB  rays  are  mainly  responsible  for  the 
most  severe  damage  being  acute  such  as  sunburn,  and  long-
term skin cancer included. They directly impact DNA and pro-
teins [1]. Unlike UVB, UVA rays are not directly absorbed by 
biologic targets [2] but can still dramatically impair cell and tis-
sue functions:
•	 UVAs penetrate deeper into the skin than UVB. They particu-
larly affect connective tissue inducing the production of det-
rimental reactive oxygen species (ROS) which in turn damage 
DNA, cells, vessels, and tissues [3–8].

•	 UVAs are potent inducers of immunosuppression [9,10] and 
their contribution to the development of malignant melanoma 
and squamous tumors is a growing concern [11,12].

•	 Photosensitivity reactions and photodermatoses are primarily 

mediated by UVAs [13].
It is important to note that under all weather conditions, the 
UVA irradiance is at least 17 times higher than the UVB irradi-
ance.

For all these reasons, sunscreens must evidently contain both 
UVA and UVB filters to protect skin from these two associated 
harmful rays.

With increased knowledge about UV-induced skin damage and 
particularly  the  effects  of  UVA,  public  educational  programs 
have  been  developed,  emphasizing  on  the  proper  use  of  sun-
screening products. Many new UV filters have been made avail-
able  in  the  last  decade  with  improved  efficacy  and  safety,  of  a 
slow process in some countries for regulatory reasons. In the US 
as  example,  some  UVA  and  UVB  filters  are  still  not  approved 
for use, albeit marketed elsewhere since many years without any 
safety issue for consumers. The availability of efficient sunscreen 
products depends not only upon the regulatory status of the UV 
filters but on the ability to inform the consumer about product 
efficacy with appropriate labels based on sun protection factor 
(SPF) and UVA protection level.

Sunscreen products can be classified in two main categories 

according to their purpose:
 1.  Primary  sunscreens.  Products  directly  intending  to  protect 
skin  from  the  effects  of  the  sun,  such  as  beach  sunscreens 
and products used for outdoor activities.

 2.  Secondary sunscreens. Products that have a primary use other 
than skin protection, such as daily moisturizing creams, anti-
wrinkle/antiaging creams, whitening skin products and make-
up products. In these products, sun protection is necessary to 
optimize the claimed effect. For this category of products, sun 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

153

154

hygIeNe pROduCtS  Moisturizers

protection is an additional claim, i.e. not their main objective, 
despite becoming essential for daily exposed areas.

Sunscreen classification
Sunscreen  products  can  also  be  classified  in  terms  of  regula-
tory  status.  Sunscreen  products  enter  legally  in  the  cosmetic 
category  in  the  European  Union  (EU),  non-EU  Europe  coun-
tries (e.g. Russia), most African and Middle-Eastern countries, 
India, Latin America, and Japan. They are classified as “special” 
cosmetic products in China (special cosmetics), Korea and Ethi-
opia (functional cosmetics), South Africa (under SABS stand-
ard), Australia (under standards) [14], and Taïwan (medicated 
cosmetics). As all products claiming a SPF, they belong to the 
over-the-counter (OTC) drugs in the USA [15]. In Canada, they 
can  be  either  OTC  drugs  or  natural  health  products  (NHP), 
where  in  such  a  case  the  sunscreening  agents  should  only  be 
“natural” ingredients: titanium dioxide, zinc oxide.

approved uV filters
In the EU, 27 UV filters are listed in Annex VII of the Cosmet-
ics Directive. Zinc oxide both under non-nano and nano forms 
should  be  added  in  2015.  In  the  USA,  16 filters  are  included 
in the sunscreen monograph (Table 17.1). There are two main 
regulatory methods to market OTC products: monograph or a 
New Drug Application (NDA). The latter is necessary to obtain 
the approval of a formula containing a new UV filter, a new con-
centration for an approved active ingredient, or a new mixture 
of approved actives.

A  Time  and  Extent  Application  (TEA)  is  a  new  procedure 
established by the FDA in 2002, for an active ingredient already 

Table 17.1  	Sunscreens	approved	in	the	USA.

Sunscreen approved in the USA

Maximum concentration (%)

approved abroad. It allows the FDA to accept commercial data 
obtained on external markets in place of use of an authorized 
drug on the US market. However, toxicologic data file required 
for a TEA is very similar to that for an NDA.

The following 8 UV filters are currently eligible for evaluation 

through a TEA procedure.
  1  Isoamyl p-methoxycinnamate (amiloxate) 10% max.
  2  Methyl benzylidene camphor (enzacamene) 4% max.
  3  Octyl triazone 5% max.
  4  Methylene bis-benzotriazolyl tetramethylbutylphenol (bisoc-

trizole) 10% max.

  5  Bis-ethylhexyloxyphenol  methoxyphenol  triazine  (Bemot-

rizinol) 10% max.

  6  Diethylhexyl butamido triazone (Iscotrizinol) 3% max.
  7  Terephthalylidene dicamphor sulfonic acid (Ecamsule) 10% 

max.

  8  Drometrizole trisiloxane 15% max.

Unfortunately the TEA process is not working because FDA 
has  not  approved  a  sunscreen  ingredient  through  this  process 
since  it  began.  Many  stakeholders  in  USA  consider  that  FDA 
has  failed  consumers  as  the  UV  filters  available  abroad  offer 
enhanced  protection  and  that  the  lack  of  reliable  process  is  a 
disincentive to innovation.

In Australia, 26 UV filters are accepted by the Therapeutic Goods 

Administration (TGA) and in Japan 31 UV filters are allowed.

When comparing the approved UV filters in EU and the USA, 
only 11 filters appear in common. Terephtalilydene dicamphor 
sulfonic  acid  (TDSA)  is  available  in  the  USA  under  NDA  for 
four formulas only.

Because  of  the  importance  of  being  well-protected  against 
UVA radiation, there are many new UVA filters or broad UVB/
UVA  filters,  which  have  been  developed  and  approved  in  EU, 
Australia, and Japan. It is obvious that the number of these fil-
ters is highly limited in the USA (Table 17.2). In addition, the 

p-Aminobenzoic	acid	(PABA)

Avobenzone

Cinoxate

Dioxybenzone

Ensulizole	(phenylbenzimidazole	
sulfonic	acid)

Homosalate

Meradimate	(menthyl	anthranilate)

Octinoxate	(octyl	methoxycinnamate)

Octisalate	(octyl	salicylate)

Octocrylene

Octyl	dimethyl	PABA

Oxybenzone	(Benzophenone-3)

Salisobenzone

Titanium	dioxide

Trolamine	salicylate

Zinc	oxide

15

3

3

3

4

15

5

7.5

5

10

8

6

10

25

12

25

Table 17.2  	Regulatory	approval	status	for	the	main	UVB/UVA	and	UVA	filters.

Benzophenone-3		
(Oxybenzone)

EU,	Japan,	Australia,	Canada,	USA

BMDM	(avobenzone)

EU1,	Japan1,	Australia1,	Canada2,	USA2

TDSA	(Ecamsule,		
Mexoryl	®SX)

EU,	Japan,	Australia,	Canada,	USA	
(NDA)

DTS	(Mexoryl	®XL)

EU,	Japan,	Australia,	Canada

DPDT	(Neo-Heliopan	®AP)

EU,	Australia

DHHB	(Uvinul	®A+)

EU,	Japan,	Australia3

MBBT	(Tinosorb	®M)

EU,	Japan,	Australia

BEMT	(Tinosorb	®S)

EU4,	Japan2,	Australia4

Titanium	dioxide

EU,	Japan,	Australia,	Canada,	USA

Zinc	oxide

Japan,	Australia,	Canada,	USA

1Max	at	5%.
2Max	at	3%.
3Only	in	primary	sunscreens.
4Max	at	10%.

17. Sunscreens

155

use of avobenzone in the USA has some limitations. Combina-
tions with some other UV filters, such as titanium dioxide and 
enzulizole, are not permitted and the maximum level according 
to the sunscreen monograph is restricted to 3% whereas up to 
5% is approved by regulation in EU, Australia, Korea and 10% 
in Japan.

Mutual recognition of UV filters safety by the authorities of 
these countries would have positive repercussions on the inter-
national situation which can benefit consumers.

development of sunscreens

•	 A proper sunscreen product must fulfil the following critical 

requirements:

•	 Provide efficient protection against UVB and UVA radiation;
•	 Being stable to heat and to UVR (photo-stable);
•	 Being  user-friendly  to  encourage  frequent  application  and 

provide reliable protection; and

•	 Cost-effective.
In order to protect against both UVB and UVA, the sunscreen 
product must contain a combination of active ingredients within 
a complex vehicle matrix.

Active  ingredients  can  be  either  organic  or  inorganic  UV 
filters.  According  to  their  chemical  nature  and  their  physical 
properties,  they  can  act  by  absorbing,  reflecting,  or  diffusing 
UVRs.

Organic uV filters

How do organic filters work?
Organic filters are active ingredients that absorb UVR energy 
to  a  various  extent  within  a  specific  range  of  wavelengths 
according  to  their  chemical  structure  [16],  which,  absorbing 
energy,  is  called  a  chromophore.  The  latter  consists  of  elec-
trons  engaged  into  multiple  bond  sequences  between  atoms, 
generally conjugated double bonds. An absorbed UV photon 
contains energy enough to cause electron transfer to a higher 
energy orbit in the molecule [16]. The filter that was in a low-
energy state (ground state) is converted into a higher excited 
energy  state.  From  an  excited  state,  different  processes  can 
occur:
•	 The  filter  molecule  can  simply  deactivate  from  its  excited 
state and resume its ground state while releasing the absorbed 
energy as unnoticeable heat.

•	 Structural transformation or degradation may occur and the 
filter losses its absorption capacity. The filter is then said to be 
photo-unstable.

•	 The excited molecule can interact with its surroundings, other 
ingredients of the formula, ambient oxygen, and thus lead to 
the  production  of  undesirable  reactive  species.  The  filter  is 
said to be photoreactive.

The behavior of the filter under UV exposure is a critical point 
that needs to be investigated when new sunscreen products are 
being developed.

Inorganic uV filters
Pigment grade powders of metal oxides such as titanium diox-
ide  or  zinc  oxide  have  been  used  for  many  years  in  combina-
tion with organic filters to enhance protection level in the longer 
UVA range. Unlike organic filters, they act by reflecting and dif-
fusing UVR. However, as a result of the large particle sizes, these 
powders also diffuse light from the visible range of the sun spec-
trum therefore tending to leave a white appearance on the skin. 
To overcome this drawback, which affects cosmetic acceptance, 
nano-sized  powders  of  both  titanium  dioxide  and  zinc  oxide 
have been made available. Decrease in particle size to nano form 
leads to changes in the protective properties of titanium dioxide: 
the smaller particles shift the protection range from the longer 
UVA toward the UVB.

Zinc oxide has better absorption in the long UVA than tita-
nium dioxide, but it is not very efficient both in the UVB and 
UVA range when used alone.

Because of possible photocatalytic activity, inorganic particles 
are frequently coated with dimethicone or silica for maintenance 
of their efficacy. Nano-sized titanium dioxide (<100 nm), when 
combined with organic UV filters, allows high SPF products to 
be  developed  with  a  lower  dependence  on  organic  UV  filters 
hence a lower concentration of these showing more a synergetic 
than an additive effect.

Steps toward more efficient sunscreens
As  far  as  UVB  protection  is  concerned,  a  large  choice  of  fil-
ters has been available since long. They are photo-stable, at the 
exception of the most common, ethylhexyl methoxy cinnamate 
(EHMC). The  choice  of  UVA  filters  depends  on  the  countries 
and is limited in the USA, as previously mentioned. Inorganic 
pigments  offer  a  poor  level  of  protection  against  UVA  when 
used alone. Benzophenones are photo-stable but are primarily 
UVB filters with some absorption in the short UVA range (peak 
at 328 nm).

Butyl methoxy dibenzoyl methane (BMDM or avobenzone) 
has a high potency in the UVA1 range peaking at 358 nm; how-
ever, it undergoes significant degradation under UV exposure 
leading  to  a  decrease  in  its  UVA  protection  efficacy.  Research 
on  the  photochemistry  of  filters  has  led  to  identifying  some 
potent  photo-stabilizers  (e.g.  octocrylene)  of  avobenzone  and 
developing new UVA filters that show photo-stable. Since 2005, 
diethylamino  hydroxybenzoyl  hexyl  benzoate  (DHHB)  was 
approved in all countries, excepted in the USA and Canada. This 
UVA1 filter  has  UV-spectral  properties  similar  to  BMDM  but 
DHHB is photo-stable.

In order to provide full protection in the entire UVA range, 
it  is  necessary  to  have  efficient  absorption  in  the  short  UVA 
range.  TDSA  or  Mexoryl  SX™  (Chimex,  Le  Thillay,  France), 
with a peak at 345 nm at the boundary between short and long 
UVA wavelengths, was first approved in EU in 1993. This was 
followed by the approval of the broad UVB/UVA filter drom-
etrizole  trisiloxane  (DTS  or  Mexoryl  XL)  with  two  peaks  (at 
303 and 344 nm) in 1998. Since 2000, another short UVA filter, 

156

hygIeNe pROduCtS  Moisturizers

disodium  phenyl  dibenzimidazole  tetrasulfonate  [DPDT]  or 
Neo-Heliopan  AP®  (Symrise,  Holzminden,  Germany,  peak  at 
334 nm) and broadband UVB/UVA filters (MBBT, Tinosorb M 
and  BEMT,  Tinosorb  S)  have  been  approved  in  EU.  All  these 
filters are photo-stable.

products with a good spreadability and aesthetically appealing, 
of a pleasant skin feeling and transparency on the skin. A suit-
able solubility and a homogeneous distribution of UV filters in 
both  the  product  and  onto  skin  are  essential  for  maximizing 
efficacy.

Formulation of sun protection products
The  efficacy  of  the  formulations  depends  upon  a  wide  variety 
of factors.

First,  the  formulator  must  consider  the  chemical  structure 
and  the  concentration  of  filtering  agents  to  design  a  specific 
absorption profile and to reach a given high level of protection. 
As far as broad and well-balanced UVB/UVA protection is con-
cerned, there is a specific issue in formulating UVA photo-stable 
filtering systems.

UV filters are either hydrophilic or lipophilic and, when com-
bined, a synergetic effect can be observed. This property is used 
to obtain higher efficacy against UVB and UVA radiation and to 
limit the concentration of filters.

Different  approaches  can  be  used  to  improve  the  solubility 

and the photo-stability of the UV filters.

Combinations of highly efficient and photo-stable filters pro-
vide  an  optimally  balanced  protection  against  both  UVA  and 
UVB  [17].  Studies  [18–20]  have  shown  that  the  protection 
against UV-induced skin damage provided by sunscreen prod-
ucts with same SPF but different UVA protection factor is mark-
edly different, emphasizing the importance of high UVA protec-
tion in preventing cell damage.

Only  well  balanced  sunscreen  products  characterized  by 
a  UVAPF/SPF  protection  factor  ratio  at  least  1/3,  containing 
photo-stable  sunscreens  with  absorption  over  the  entire  UV 
spectrum of sun radiation have been shown maintaining intact 
essential biologic functions.

The  combined  needs  of  products  with  high  sun  protection 
factor  (SPF),  of  a  well-balanced  UVB-UVA  spectrum,  photo-
stable,  respecting  stringent  regulations,  with  pleasant  sensory 
results is increasingly important. To increase efficacy, improving 
the compliance of consumers is a key factor, implying to develop 

Different strategies based on non-absorbing material can be 
used  to  correct  the  spreading  and  boost  the  efficiency  of  the 
product. Film-forming polymers are very often used to obtain 
more evenly spread product and to enhance SPF.

Criteria and methods for evaluating  
the efficacy of sunscreen products

The  methods  for  assessing  the  efficacy  of  sunscreen  products 
must take into account the photo-instability of products to avoid 
an overestimation of protection. In vivo SPF and in vivo UVAPF 
(Persistent Pigment Darkening) test methods take photo-degra-
dation into account. Appropriate UV doses are used to induce 
erythema on human skin for SPF determination or pigmenta-
tion for UVAPF determination.

When in vitro methods are used, they should also take into 

account this issue to provide relevant evaluation.

determination of the sun protection factor (SpF)
In  2010,  the  International  standardization  organisation  (ISO) 
working  group  7  in  charge  of  the  sun  protection  methods 
within  the  technical  committee  TC  217 Cosmetics  products 
published  the  first  ISO  standard  on  the  determination  of  the 
sun protection factor SPF [22]. This ISO standard (ISO 24444) 
is  based  upon  the  international  test  method  for  SPF  determi-
nation  2006  [23]. This  ISO  standard  has  been  adopted  by  the 
EU  and  South  Africa  in  2010,  by  Australia,  Mercosur,  Japan, 
Mexico in 2012 and Canada in 2013 (Table 17.3). In 2011, the 
US Food and Drug Agency (FDA) published a final monograph 
[15]  including  an  in  vivo  SPF  test  method  which  is  based  on 
the International SPF test method 2006 and similar to the ISO 

Table 17.3  ISO	Standards	adoption/recognition.

Europe

Australia
2012

South Africa
2013

USA
2011

In vivo	SPF

ISO	24444

ISO	24444

ISO	24444

FDA	2011

Canada
2013

FDA	2011
ISO	24444

In vivo
UVA

In vitro
UVA

ISO	24442

No

ISO	24442
JCIA	1995

No

ISO	24442

ISO	24443

ISO24443

ISO24443

FDA	2011

ISO	24443
Colipa	2011
FDA	2011

Colipa	2009	or	all	
updates	(Colipa	
2011,	ISO	24443)

Colipa	2011,		
ISO	24443,		
FDA	2011

Mexico
2012

FDA	2011
ISO	24444

ISO	24442

Mercosur 2012

Interna2006
FDA	1999
or	updates		
(ISO	24444;		
FDA	2011)

JCIA	1995	or
Updates		
(ISO	24442)

17. Sunscreens

157

24444. However, there is no recognition of ISO 24444 by FDA 
USA and no recognition of the FDA method by some countries. 
This  situation  implies  retesting  for  the  same  products  when 
marketed in these countries and finally raises ethical and cost 
issues.

SpF labeling
In some countries like EU, Australia, South Africa, Mexico the 
SPF  values  used  for  the  labeling  are  submitted  to  restrictions. 
Minimum  SPF  varies  from  2 to  6 and  harmonization  on  the 
SPF cap has made progress, SPF50+ being the most frequently 
adopted cap (Table 17.4).

Table 17.4  Efficacy criteria and labeling

EU2006

USA a
2011

Australia
TGA 2012

Australia b
NICNAS 2013

South Africa c
2013

Canada d
2013

Type	of	sunscreen

Primary

All	with	SPF

Primary	and	secondary	
with	SPF	> 15

Secondary	with	SPF	
≤ 15	and	make-up

All	with	SPF

Primary

SPF	min

SPF	max

6

2

4

4

6

2

50+	(at	least	60)

Not	decided

50+	(at	least	60)

Restricted	SPF	
numbers

6,10,15,20,25,
30,50,
50+

No

4,6,8,10,15,20,25,30,
40,50,50+

Make-up	50+	(at	
least	60)	secondary	
sunscreens	max	15

Make-up	
4,6,8,10,15,20,25,30,
40,50,50+
Other	secondary:	
4,6,8,10,15

50+	(at	least	60)

50+	(above	50)

6,10,15,20,25,
30,40,
50,50+

No

UVA	criteria

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3
+	λc	≥ 370 nm

λc	≥ 370 nm

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3
+	λc	≥ 370 nm

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3
+	λc	≥ 370 nm

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	
≤ 3
+	λc	≥ 370 nm

UVA	labeling

UVA	logo

Broad	spectrum
if	at	least	SPF	15
and	λc	≥ 370 nm

Broad	spectrum 

Broad	spectrum 

UVA	logo

λc	≥ 370 nm
and/or
Ratio	SPF/UVAPF		
≤ 3 

Broad	spectrum	if	
λc	≥	370 nm
if	SPF	≥	15	and	
λc	≥ 370 nm,	
decreases	the	risk	
of	skin	cancer	
and	early	skin	
aging
if	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3	
UVA	logo

Mercosur 2012

Mexico 2012

Type	of	sunscreen

Primary

Primary

SPF	min

SPF	max

6

99

Restricted	numbers No

6

50+

6,10,15,20,25,30,50,
50+

UVA	criteria

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3
+	λC	≥ 370 nm

Ratio	SPF/UVAPF	≤ 3
+	λC	≥ 370 nm

UVA	labeling

ND

UVA	logo

a	Broadspectrum	property	not	mandatory.
Sunscreens	that	are	not	broad	spectrum	or	that	lack	an	SPF	of	at	least	15	must	now	carry	a	warning:	“Skin	Cancer/Skin	Aging	Alert:	Spending	time	in	the	sun	
increases	your	risk	of	skin	cancer	and	early	skin	aging.	This	product	has	been	shown	only	to	help	prevent	sunburn,	not	skin	cancer	or	early	skin	aging.”
Sunscreens	that	are	broadspectrum	can	carry	the	following	sentence:	“if	used	as	directed	with	other	sun	protection	measures,	decreases	the	risk	of	skin	cancer	and	
early	skin	aging	caused	by	the	sun.”
b	UVA	criteria	not	mandatory	for	make-up	products	below	SPF30	(mandatory	for	all	primary	and	other	secondary	sunscreens).
c	UVA	criteria	not	mandatory	only	if	UVA	protection	is	claimed.
d	UVA	criteria	not	mandatory	only	if	UVA	protection	is	claimed	(broadspectrum	or	UVA	logo).
If	broadspectrum	and	SPF	≥ 15,	the	following	statement	may	be	made:	“decreases	the	risk	of	skin	cancer	and	early	skin	aging	caused	by	the	sun”.
If	not	broadspectrum	or	with	a	SPF	< 15,	the	following	warning	is	required:	“Skin Cancer/Skin Aging Alert:	Spending	time	in	the	sun	increases	your	risk	of	skin.	
Cancer	and	early	skin	aging.	This	product	has	been	shown	only	to	help	prevent	sunburn	not	skin	cancer	or	early	skin	aging”.

Note	1:	New	Zealand	adopted	the	Australian	Standards	2012	(AS/NZS	2604:2012)	for	sunscreen	products	evaluation	and	classification	but	it	is	not	mandatory.
Note	2:	UVAPF	determination	for	ratio	SPF/UVAPF	can	be	done	using	either	in vivo	UVA	or	in vitro	UVA	methods	depending	on	the	local	regulations,	λc	can	only	be	
measured	using	in vitro	methods.

 
158

hygIeNe pROduCtS  Moisturizers

Table 17.5  	Main	differences	between	the	ISO	24443:2012	and	the	FDA	2011	methods,	and	influence	of	the	test	conditions	on	the	critical	wavelength	results.

Parameters

Plates

Product	amount

Irradiation	dose

FDA 2011

ISO 24443:2012

Differences in results

PMMA	2	to	7 μm

PMMA	5 μm

Between	2	and	5 μm:	+	2 nm
5 μm	to	be	used	for	harmonization

0.75 mg/cm2

4	MEDs	(8 J/cm2)

1.3 mg/cm2

No	significant	difference	due	to	product	amount

1.2 J/cm2 x UVAPF0

Difference	due	to	the	UV	dose	:	1 nm

Number	of	plates

At	least	3

At	least	4

No	difference	if	3	or	4	plates

determination of uVa protection level
The  EU  issued  a  recommendation  on  22 September  2006  [24] 
to use a persistent pigment darkening (PPD) method similar to 
the  JCIA  method  [25]  or  any  in  vitro  method  able  to  provide 
equivalent  and  reliable  results.  In  addition,  the  critical  wave-
length which is an evaluation of the width of the absorbance of 
the sunscreen product must be at least 370 nm. The EU Com-
mission  also  recommends  that  the  methods  used  should  take 
into account photo-degradation.

Japan (JCIA) was first to publish in January 1996 an official in 
vivo method to assess UVA protection level, adopting the PPD 
method for assessment of the UVA efficacy of sunscreen prod-
ucts  [25].  Korea  and  China  adopted  this  method  in  2001 and 
2007,  respectively.  Finally,  the  in  vivo  UVA  method  has  been 
standardized  by  ISO  TC217 and  published  in  2011  under  the 
reference  ISO  24442  [26],  now  adopted  or  accepted  in  many 
countries (Table 17.3).

In 2007, the European Cosmetic industry (Colipa now Cos-
metics Europe) published a guideline on the determination of 
UVA protection factor using an in vitro method. This method 
has  been  developed  to  provide  UVA  protection  factors  which 
are correlated with in vivo UVA protection factors, i.e. an alter-
native to the in vivo method [27]. This method was revised in 
2011 [28, 29] and then published as ISO standard (ISO 24443) 
in  2012  [30].  This  method  allows  determining  both  the  UVA 
protection factor and the critical wavelength value.

In 2011, the US FDA published a final rule including a method 
to determine the critical wavelength [15]. This method is how-
ever not harmonized with the ISO 24443 standard and can lead 
to different results. A summary of the main differences between 
the two methods is provided in Table 17.5.

To obtain the critical wavelength value, the absorbance of the 
thin film of the sunscreen is integrated (starting from 290 nm) 
sequentially across the UV wavelength spectrum until the inte-
gration reaches 90% of the total absorbance of the sunscreen in 
the UV region (290–400 nm).

uVa protection criteria
Combining  both  the  measure  of  the  level  of  UVA  protection 
and the critical wavelength method to measure the broadness of 
UVA absorbance has been first proposed for assessing UVA pro-
tection of sunscreen products by the EU Commission [24] and 
further adopted by other regulations such as Australia, Mercosur, 

Mexico  and  Canada  (Table  17.4).  The  UVA  protection  factor 
(UVAPF) value must be at least 1/3 that of the SPF.

The critical wavelength value must be at least 370 nm to qualify 
the product as “broadspectrum” in the USA and Canada (see Table 
17.4).The  critical  wavelength  determination  (λc)  addresses  the 
broadness of the protection rather than the specific protection in 
the UVA. Products with widely different UVA protection factors 
may have identical critical wavelengths and studies have shown 
that for products of a critical wavelength >370 nm, the higher 
the UVA protection level the better the protection against dam-
ages induced by UVA rays [31].

Conclusions

Over  the  past  20  years,  an  increasing  number  of  publications 
have reported the damaging effects of UVA rays which induce 
molecular, cellular and clinical damage. This lead to photoaging, 
immune system depression, altered gene expression, oncogenes 
and  tumor  suppressor  gene  modulation  partly  responsible  for 
skin cancer development.

In parallel to this increased knowledge, a significant progress 
in  sunscreen  technology  has  been  achieved,  with  a  variety  of 
UVA filters being developed. Formulators combined them with 
UVB filters to reach high photo-stable protection with a mini-
mal concentration of active ingredients. However, some restric-
tions (USA) ground in the availability of the potent UVA filters 
making the UVA protection level limited. A need for harmoni-
zation of testing methods and labeling, to afford the same infor-
mation of efficacy to the consumers, appears crucial.

It is important that a minimal proportionality between UVA 
and UVB protection be ensured to avoid high UVB protection 
with low UVA protection. Accordingly, a UVAPF / SPF ratio of 
at least one-third has been adopted by many countries.

References

1  Urbach F. (2001) The negative effect of solar radiation: a clinical 
overview. In: GiacomoniPU, ed. Sun Protection in Man, ESP Com-
prehensive  Series  in  Photosciences,  Vol.  3.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier 
Sciences, pp. 41–67.

2  Peak  MJ,  Peak  JG.  Molecular  photobiology  of  UVA.  (1986)  In: 
UrbachF,  GangeRW,  eds.  The  Biological  Effects  of  UVA  Radiation. 
New York: Praeger Publishers, pp. 42–52.

3  Lavker RM, Kaidbey K. (1997) The spectral dependence for UVA-
induced cumulative damage in human Skin. J Invest Dermatol 108, 
17–21.

4  Lavker R, Gerberick G, Veres D, Irwin C, Kaidbey K. Cumulative 
effects from repeated exposures to suberythemal doses of UVB and 
UVA in human skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1995; 32, 53–62.

5  Lowe NJ, Meyers DP, Wieder JM, Luftman D, Bourget T, Lehman 
MD, et al. (1995) Low doses of repetitive ultraviolet A induce mor-
phologic changes in human skin. J Invest Dermatol 105, 739–43.
6  Séité S, Moyal D, Richard S, de Rigal J, Lévêque JL, Hourseau C, et 
al. (1997) Effects of repeated suberythemal doses of UVA in human 
skin. Eur J Dermatol 7, 204–9.

7  Séité S, Moyal D, Richard S, de Rigal J, Lévêque JL, Hourseau C, 
et al. (1998) Mexoryl SX: a broadspectrum absorption UVA filter 
protects  human  skin  from  the  effects  of  repeated  suberythemal 
doses of UVA. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol 44, 69–76.

8  Moyal D, Fourtanier A. (2004) Acute and chronic effects of UV on 
skin. In: Rigel DS, Weiss RA, Lim HW, Dover JS, eds. Photoaging. 
New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 15–32.

9  Moyal D, Fourtanier A. Effects of UVA radiation on an established 
immune response in humans and sunscreen efficacy. Exp Dermatol 
2002; 11 (Suppl 1), 28–32.

10  Kuchel J, Barnetson R, Halliday G. (2002) Ultraviolet A augments 
solar-simulated  ultraviolet  radiation-induced  local  suppression  of 
recall responses in humans. J Invest Dermatol 2002; 118, 1032–7.
11  Garland  CF,  Garland  FC,  Gorham  EC.  (2003)  Epidemiologic 
evidence  for  different  roles  of  ultraviolet  A  and  B  radiation  in 
melanoma mortality rates. Ann Epidemiol (AEP) pp. 13395–404.
12  Agar NS, Halliday GM, Barnetson RS, et al. (2004) The basal layer 
in human squamous tumors harbors more UVA than UVB finger-
print mutations: a role for UVA in human skin carcinogenesis. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101, 4954–9.

13  Moyal D, Binet O. (1997) Polymorphous light eruption (PLE): its 
reproduction and prevention by sunscreens. In: LoweNJ, ShaatN, 
PathakM, eds. Sunscreens: Development and Evaluation and Regu-
latory Aspects, 2 nd edn. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 611–7.
14  TGA Australian regulatory guidelines for sunscreens (Nov 2012).
15  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Food  and  Drug 
Administration (USA). (1999) Sunscreen drug products for over-
the-counter human use. Fed Register 43, 24666–93.

16  Health  Canada’s  Health  Products  and  Food  Branch  (2013)  

Sunscreen Monograph, 7 July 2013.

17. Sunscreens

159

17  Kimbrough  DR.  (1997)  The  photochemistry  of  sunscreens.  

J Chem Ed 74, 51–3.

18  Marrot L, Belaidi J, Lejeune F, Meunier J, Asselineau D, Bernerd 
F.  (2004)  Photo-stability  of  sunscreen  products  influences  the 
efficiency of protection with regard to UV-induced genotoxic or 
photoaging-related endpoints. Br J Dermatol 151, 1234–44.

19  Fourtanier A, Bernerd F, Bouillon C, Marrot L, Moyal D, Seité S. 
(2006) Protection of skin biological targets by different types of 
sunscreens. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 22, 22–32.
20  Moyal D, Fourtanier A. (2001) Broad spectrum sunscreens provide 
better  protection  from  the  suppression  of  the  elicitation  phase  of 
delayed-type hypersensitivity response in humans. J Invest Dermatol 
117, 1186–92.

21  Damian DL, Halliday GM, Barnetson RSC. (1997) Broad spectrum 
sunscreens provide greater protection against ultraviolet-radiation-
induced suppression of contact hypersensitivity to a recall antigen 
in humans. J Invest Dermatol 109, 146–51.

22  ISO 24444 (2010) Cosmetics – Sun protection test methods – In vivo 

determination of the sun protection factor (SPF).

23  Colipa, JCIA, CTFA SA, CTFA. (2006) International Sun Protection 

Factor (SPF) Test Method.

24  24 European Commission Recommendation on the efficacy of sun-
screen products and the claims made relating thereto. OJL 265/39, 
(26.9.2006).

25  Japan Cosmetic Industry Association (JCIA). (1995) Japan Cosmetic 
Industry Association measurement standard for UVA protection effi-
cacy. 15 November 1995.

26  ISO 24442 (2011) Cosmetics – Sun protection test methods – in vivo 

determination of sunscreen UVA protection.

27  Matts  P,  Alard  V,  Brown  MW,  Ferrero  L,  Gers-Barlag  H,  Issachar 
N, Moyal D. (2010) The COLIPA in vitro UVA method: a standard 
and reproducible measure of sunscreen UVA protection. Internatl J 
Cosm Sci 32, 35–46.

28  Colipa. (2011) Method for in vitro determination of UVA protec-

tion. COLIPA Guidelines.

29  Moyal D, Alard V, Bertin C, Boyer F, Brown MW, Kolbe L, Matts P, 
Pissavini M. (2013) The revised COLIPA in vitro UVA method. Int 
J Cosm Sci 35, 35–40.

30  ISO  24443  (2012)  UVA  in  vitro  Cosmetics  –  Sun  protection  test 
methods  –  Determination  of  sunscreen  UVA  photoprotection  
in vitro.

31  Fourtanier A, Moyal D, Seité S. (2012) UVA filters in sun-protection 
products:  regulatory  and  biological  aspects.  Photochem  Photobiol 
Sci 11(1), 81–89.

SEc tion 3  Personal care Products

ChaPter 18
antiperspirants and Deodorants

Eric S. Abrutyn
TPC2 Advisors Inc., Boquete, Chiriqui, Republic of Panama

BaSIC ConCePtS

•	 Antiperspirants	are	US	Food	and	Drug	Administration	(FDA)	regulated	drugs	to	be	used	in	the	underarm	axilla	vault	only.
•	 Antiperspirants	are	primarily	complexes	of	aluminum	(e.g.	aluminum	chlorohydrate)	and	aluminum	zirconium	(e.g.	aluminum	

tetrachlorohydrex-GLY).

•	 Deodorants,	not	to	be	confused	with	antiperspirants,	are	cosmetics	and	do	not	typically	contain	any	aluminum-type	salt	complexes.
•	 Antiperspirants	are	associated	with	few	dermatologic	issues;	slightly	irritating	under	certain	conditions,	but	not	scientifically	associated	

with	breast	cancer	or	Alzheimer	disease.

Introduction

This chapter deals with the technologies for wetness and odor pro-
tection of the human axilla, how they are applied, and potential 
adverse effects of use of these products on a regular basis. Anti-
perspirants and deodorants have been used for centuries, evolv-
ing from simple fragrances that masked offensive odors to today’s 
complex ingredients based on aluminum and zirconium chemis-
tries that act to slow or diminish sweat production. Odors (scents) 
and sweating have a biologic significance. Body scents are prime-
val and most likely evolved genetically to attract the opposite sex. 
Sweating is regulated by the sympathetic nervous system and is an 
important body temperature regulator, especially in warm weather 
climates or during heavy exercise, and functions to remove waste 
and  toxic  by-products  of  the  body.  The  axilla  area  of  the  body 
represents a small contribution to sweating to control body tem-
perature and removal of biologic by-products, so the controlling 
of sweat from this area has fewer health risks than other areas of 
the body. There is little scientific evidence that supports the idea 
that the use of antiperspirants, based on aluminum or aluminum– 
zirconium  chemistry  causes  appreciable  lasting  adverse  effects 
other than possible temporary and reversible irritation.

Physiology

Sweat glands and how they work
Sweat by itself is odorless and only establishes a characteristic 
odor when exposed to moisture (humidity) in the presence of 
bacterial  flora  on  the  skin  surface,  breaking  down  the  sweat’s 

composition and resulting in unpleasant odors. The use of anti-
microbial  agents  is  a  good  defense  in  preventing  odor  devel-
opment  from  bacteria  and  yeast  present  on  the  skin.  Another 
defense is the reduction of excretion from the eccrine gland to 
minimize  the  appearance  of  uncomfortable  or  unsightly  wet-
ness production.

According to Gray’s Anatomy [1], most people have several 
million  sweat  glands  distributed  over  their  bodies,  to  include 
the underarm axilla and thus providing plenty of opportunity 
for  underarm  odors  to  develop.  Skin  has  two  types  of  sweat 
gland:  eccrine  glands  and  apocrine  glands  (Figures  18.1  and 
18.2). Eccrine glands open directly on to the surface of the skin 
and  exude  sweat  in  the  underarm,  subsequently  contributing 
to odor formation. These glands are located in the middle layer 
of the skin called the dermis, which is also made up of nerve 
endings, hair follicles, and blood vessels. Sweat is produced in a 
long coil embedded within the dermis where the long part is a 
duct that connects the gland to the opening (pore) on the skin’s 
surface. When body temperature rises, the autonomic nervous 
system  stimulates  these  glands  to  secrete  fluid  on  to  the  sur-
face of skin, where it then cools the body as it evaporates. The 
composition  of  the  eccrine  gland  secretion  is  about  55–60% 
fluid, mostly water with various salts (primarily: sodium chlo-
ride, potassium chloride) and various electrolytic components 
(ammonia,  calcium,  copper,  lactic  acid,  potassium,  and  phos-
phorus). The warmth and limited air flow is conducive to allow-
ing for rapid decomposition of organic matter made up of pri-
marily  low  molecular  weight  volatile  fatty  acids  (Figure  18.3). 
These fatty acids and the steroidal compounds produce the rec-
ognizable body odors.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

160

18. Antiperspirants and Deodorants

161

Eccrine sweat

Apocrine sweat

H2O, Na+, K+, Cl–
Urea, lactic acid, ammonia
Traces of amino acids
and proteins

H2O anorganic substances
S-containing organic substances, lipids
Steroids, pheromones

No odor

Bacterial growth

Unpleasant odor

Deodorants
Less odor or not noticed

Perfume
Antibacterials (preservatives)
Smell ‘catchers’

Antiperspirants
Less sweat

Aluminium derivatives
Water-soluble salts
AlC13 or Al2Cl6 first on market
Al(OH)6Cl3 • H2O
AlZr(OH)Cl • H2O

Figure 18.1  Underarm sweat gland mechanism.

Stratum corneum
Pigment layer

Stratum germinativum:
- Stratum spinosum
- Stratum basale

Dermal papilla

Sensory nerve ending
for touch

Hair follicle

Papilla of hair

Sweat gland

Pacinian corpuscle

Blood and lymph vessels

Sweat pore

Hair shaft

Epidermis

Sebaceous gland

Arrector pili muscle

Dermis

Subcutis
(Hypodermis)

Figure 18.2  Cross-section of skin and sweat glands.

Vein

Artery

Nerve fiber

162

hygIene ProDuCtS  Personal Care Products

Iso-valeric acid

3-methyl 4-hexanoic
acid

Androstenone

COOH

O

COO

Acidic odor

Axillary odor

O
Volatile steroids odor

Brevibacterium
(smell of axillary odor)

Propionibacterium sp.
(smell of steroid odor)

Microorganisms

S.epidermiis
(smell of sweat 
acidic odor)

Sterilizing
pathogens

Suppressing
microorganism
enyzmes

Bacillus spp.
Corynebacterium spp.
(smell of spoiled
socks-like odor)

Eccrine gland

Apocrine gland

Sweat (sebaceous lipid)

Figure 18.3  Sweat metabolism cycle.

The apocrine glands are triggered by emotions. These glands 
are dormant until puberty, at which time they start to secrete. 
Apocrine  glands  secrete  a  fatty  substance.  When  under  emo-
tional stress, the wall of the tubule glands contract to push the 
fatty exudates to the surface of skin where bacterial flora begin 
breaking it down.

In  a  regulatory  monograph  [2]  the  FDA,  through  the  Food 
Drug  and  Cosmetic  Act,  defines  antiperspirants  as  an  over-
the-counter  (OTC)  drug  when  applied  topically  to  reduce 
production of underarm sweat (perspiration). They are consid-
ered drugs because they can affect the function of the body by 
reducing the amount of sweat that reaches the skin surface. In 
the USA, OTC drugs are subjected to monograph rules, which 
define standards and requirements, premarket approval process, 
acceptable  actives,  and  allowable  formulation  percentages  of 
actives. Other countries’ regulations vary in content and scope. 
Some  countries  consider  antiperspirants  as  cosmetics  and  not 
affecting the biologic physiology of the body; as such they are 
not held to the same strict standards as in the USA. As an exam-
ple, Canada (2008) ruled that antiperspirants were no longer be 
considered a drug; their use only needs to comply with cosmetic 
regulations.

Wetness and odor control and testing
The consumer typically confuses what antiperspirants and deo-
dorants do, mostly caused by a misunderstanding of marketing 
claims and product positioning. For the most part, antiperspirants 
are based on aluminum-based cationic salt chloride complexes (as 
well as complexes with zirconium acid salts) and are referred to as 
“actives” on the back label of consumer antiperspirant  products. 

There are numerous types of antiperspirant actives listed in the 
FDA monograph as well as in the US Pharmacopia (USP) [3]. 
Antiperspirant actives are responsible for blocking sweat expul-
sion through the formation of temporary plugs within the sweat 
duct,  thus  stopping  or  slowing  down  the  flow  of  sweat  to  the 
surface of the eccrine gland.

A theory of wetness control that has been accepted over the 
years  is  that  the  hydrated  aluminum  or  aluminum–zirconium 
cationic salt chloride is transported to the eccrine gland, inter-
acting with the protein contained within the gland. In this basic 
protein environment, the antiperspirant active is reduced, pro-
ducing a gelatinous proteinaceous plug. By plugging the gland, 
sweat  is  prohibited  from  transporting  to  the  surface,  causing 
osmotic  pressure.  Eventually,  this  plug  is  pushed  out  of  the 
eccrine gland and the gland is allowed to operate again in a nor-
mal fashion. This can take 14–21 days for all the eccrine gland 
to begin firing; known as a wash-out period.

Without  going  into  detail,  one  can  describe  how  antiper-
spirants  are  tested  for  their  Wetness  Inhibiting  Performance 
(“WIP”™)  effectiveness.  The  FDA  prescribes  a  methodology 
for testing the effectiveness of an antiperspirant by having par-
ticipants tested in a controlled environment – 30–40% relative 
humidity  at  approximately  100°C.  Sweat  is  continuously  col-
lected during 20-minute intervals and reported as the produc-
tion or percentage change in production over the average of two 
20-minute  collection  periods.  To  be  accepted  as  a  participant 

Trademarked 2008 and property of Eric Abrutyn, TPC2 Advisors Ltd., Inc., 
Republic of Panama Corporation.

18. Antiperspirants and Deodorants

163

one  must  exceed  production  of  100  mg  collected  sweat  per 
20-minute period and should not exceed more than 600 mg dif-
ference between the highest and lowest sweat production within 
the test population. The results of testing need to meet a mini-
mum of 20% sweat reduction in 50% of the test population in 
order to be considered an antiperspirant.

Deodorants  cover  odor  through  a  variety  of  mechanisms, 
which include the neutralization or counteracting of odorifer-
ous axilla odor through the retardation of the odor develop-
ment, or the reduction in perception of odor through mask-
ing of the odor. Masking is basically accomplished via use of 
fragrances  and  other  volatile  components.  Neutralization  is 
the  chemical  reaction  to  modify  low  molecular  weight  fatty 
acids that are excreted from the apocrine gland. One type of 
neutralization agent is antimicrobials that disrupt cell barrier 
viability causing the bacterial microbes to perish (triclosan is 
one popular example). Deodorants are designed to minimize 
underarm axilla odor, not to reduce or eliminate perspiration. 
So,  deodorants  are  best  for  those  people  who  do  not  have  a 
problem with sweating yet want to feel fresh and odor free. It 
is  important  to  note  that  deodorants  have  no  antiperspirant 
physiologic  activity,  but  antiperspirants  can  function  both 
as  antiperspirants  and  deodorants;  thus,  consumers  needing 
odor  and  wetness  control  will  require  the  use  of  antiperspi-
rants to achieve their needs.

Chemistry and formulation 
of antiperspirants

It is important to have some understanding of the chemistry of 
antiperspirants to gain a better appreciation of their physiologic 
action in the axilla mantle. Antiperspirants are divided into two 
categories of functional aluminum-based and zirconium-based 
actives  (typically:  aluminum  chlorohydrate,  aluminum  zirco-
nium  tetrachlorohydrex-GLY,  aluminum  zirconium  trichloro-
hydrex-GLY,  or  aluminum  chloride)  plus  an  inactive  formula 
matrix for consumer acceptable esthetics.

The basic building block of antiperspirant actives is based on 
aluminum chemistry in which elemental aluminum is reduced 
in an acidic medium to produce what is traditionally known as 
aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH) with an atomic ratio of 2 : 1 alu-
minum to chloride. These inorganic cationic polymer salts are 
classified as octahedral complexes of a basic aluminum hydrox-
ide, stabilized with an anionic chloride to maintain their water 
solubility.  Within  the  monograph  boundaries  [2],  the  atomic 
ratio of aluminum to chloride can range from 2 : 1 to 1 : 1 within 
three different segmentations (aluminum chlorohydrate, alumi-
num sesquichlorohydrate, and aluminum dichlorohydrate).

Antiperspirant actives can also be complexed with hydrated 
acidic zirconium cationic salts of chloride to make what is tra-
ditionally known as aluminum zirconium chlorohydrate (ZAG 
or AZG). Like ACHs, AZGs can have various ratios of atomic 
aluminum to zirconium of 2 : 1 to 10 : 1 and atomic total metals 

to chloride of 0.9 : 1 to 2.0 : 1. These AZG complexes can be buff-
ered with glycine (an amino acid) to stabilize the complex and 
mitigate the acidic harshness which could result when applied 
to underarm axilla.

There is a growing interest in aluminum-free odor and wet-
ness  controlling  products.  One  product  that  has  emerged  is 
based on a natural stone “crystal.” “Crystal” products are made 
from a mineral known as potassium alum, also known as potas-
sium aluminum sulfate and contain aluminum. Unlike alumi-
num salts used in antiperspirants, alum does not prohibit sweat-
ing; it only helps control the growth of bacteria that can cause 
an underarm odor.

Delivery systems

The  formulation  matrix  delivery  system  is  the  key  to  effec-
tiveness  of  antiperspirant  active  performance  and  acceptable 
consumer application. The most common delivery systems are 
roll-ons (either aqueous or cyclosiloxane suspensions), aerosol 
(hydrocarbon  propellant  suspensions),  extrudable  clear  gels 
(water-in-cyclosiloxane  emulsions),  extrudable  opaque  soft 
solids  (anhydrous  cyclosiloxane  suspension  pastes),  or  sticks 
(anhydrous cyclomethicone suspension solids) (Figure 18.4). 
Within  each  form  there  are  typical  inactive  ingredients  that 
support  a  stable  formula  with  consumer-acceptable  esthetics 
so  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  WIP™  delivery  of  the  antiper-
spirant active.

Although this chapter does not focus on details of formula-
tion development, this subject can be researched in more detail 
in  the  literature  [4,5].  In  general,  aqueous-based  hydrous  for-
mulas (mostly based on roll-on and clear gel delivery systems) 
will have some type of emulsifier or stabilizing agent. In the case 
of aqueous roll-ons, they tend to be polyethylene glycol (PEG) 
or polypropylene glycol (PPG) ethoxylated alcohols (INCI e.g.: 
PEG-2, PEG-20) and for clear gel emulsions they are based on 
PEG and PPG alkoxylated functional siloxanes (INCI e.g.: PEG/
PPG-18/18 dimethicone copolymer). Anhydrous-based formu-
las  (typically:  solid  sticks,  some  types  of  roll-ons,  extrudable 
creams)  include  cyclosiloxane  (preferably  cyclopentasiloxane) 
for transient solvent delivery of the active and its eventual evapo-
ration to leave no residue on the skin, solidification agent (INCI 
e.g.: stearyl alcohol, hydrogenated castor oil, and miscellaneous 
fatty acid ester wax), and dispersing agent (INCI e.g.: PPG-14 
butyl ether). Most antiperspirant formulas include other ingre-
dients  for  cosmetic  purposes,  such  as  fragrance,  antioxidants 
(BHT – butylated hydroxytoluene), chelating agents (disodium 
EDTA – disodium edetate), soft feel powders (talc, corn starch, 
and corn starch modified), and emollients and/or moisturizers 
(petrolatum,  mineral  oil,  fatty  acid  esters,  non-volatile  hydro-
carbons). These ingredients have been used in the industry for 
well  over  25  years  with  accepted  safety  profiles;  reviewed  by 
Cosmetic  Ingredient  Review  (www.cir-safety.org/)  and  other 
governmental or medical agencies.

164

hygIene ProDuCtS  Personal Care Products

Gel

Stick

Soft solid

Roll-on

Aerosol

16% Cyclics

40-50% Cyclics

60% Cyclics

45-75% Cyclics

  8-15% Silicones

1% Dimethicone
       copolyol

20-25% AP salts
           (no water)

25% AP salts

20-25% AP salts

  8-15% AP salts

15-25% Waxes

  0-10% Others

11% Organic
         emulsifier

4% Organic
       thickener

    2-4% Bentone

       2% Bentone

  0-10% Other

75-85% Propellant

50% AP salts in 
        water

15% Propylene 
        glycol

17% Water

Figure 18.4  Antiperspirant formula matrix delivery systems.

Dermatologic concerns

Each manufacturer of antiperspirants keeps a thorough record 
of  adverse  effects  as  reported  by  the  consumer.  For  the  most 
part, there is a low incident of adverse effects when the product 
is use as prescribed.  Issues tend  to revolve  around  skin  irrita-
tion and sensitization. These adverse effects are reversible with 
cessation of use. Irritation can be brought about for a number 
of reasons, but most often by application on broken skin (e.g. 
from shaving) or sensitivity to the fragrance or one of the metal-
lic  components  of  the  antiperspirant  active.  Switching  brands 
or fragrance types is one remedy to alleviate adverse effects. In 
some  cases  a  person  is  so  sensitive  to  an  antiperspirant  active 
that he or she can no longer use a product containing an alumi-
num-based antiperspirant.

Health concerns regarding antiperspirants have been discussed 
in  the  literature  over  the  last  40–50  years  and  mostly  relate  to 
breast cancer or Alzheimer disease. According to the Alzheimer’s 
Association  (www.alz.org/index.asp),  the  linkage  of  aluminum 
and Alzheimer disease is most likely linked to a single study in 
the 1960s where an abnormally high concentration of aluminum 
was  observed  in  the  brains  of  some  Alzheimer  patients.  How-
ever, “After several decades of research,” reports the Alzheimer’s 
Association, “scientists have been unable to replicate the original 
1960s study.” In fact, there is still no scientific correlation on the 
cause and effect relationship for contracting Alzheimer disease. 
The research community is generally convinced that aluminum 
is not a key risk factor in developing Alzheimer disease. Public 
health bodies sharing this conviction include the World Health 
Organization, the US National Institutes of Health, the US Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, and Health Canada.

According  to  the  National  Cancer  Institute  (NCI)  and  the 
American  Cancer  Society,  rumors  connecting  antiperspirant 
use  and  breast  cancer  are  largely  unsubstantiated  by  scientific 
research. The rumors suggest that antiperspirants prevent a per-
son from sweating out toxins and that this helps the spread of 
cancer-causing toxins via the lymph nodes. The NCI discusses 
two studies that address the breast cancer rumor. A 2002 study 
of  over  800  patients  at  the  Fred  Hutchinson  Cancer  Research 
Institute  found  no  link  between  breast  cancer  and  the  use  of 
antiperspirant and/or deodorant [6]; and a study of 437 cancer 
patients,  published  in  2003  in  the  European  Journal  of  Cancer 
Prevention,  found  no  correlation  between  earlier  diagnosis  of 
breast cancer and antiperspirant and/or deodorant use [7]. The 
NCI’s analysis of the second study was that it “Does not demon-
strate a conclusive link between these underarm hygiene habits 
and breast cancer. Additional research is needed to investigate 
this relationship and other factors that may be involved.”

Through the evaluation of these and other independent stud-
ies,  it  can  be  concluded  that  there  is  no  existing  scientific  or 
medical evidence linking the use of underarm products to the 
development of breast cancer. The FDA (Food & Drug Adminis-
tration), the Mayo Clinic, the American Cancer Society, and the 
Personal  Care  Products  Council  (formerly  Cosmetic,  Toiletry, 
and Fragrance Association) have come to a similar conclusion.

Sweating is necessary to control body temperature, especially 
during  times  of  exercise  and  warm  or  hot  surroundings.  In  a 
small  portion  of  the  population  the  sympathetic  nervous  sys-
tem can go awry, affecting the complex biologic mechanism of 
perspiration, resulting in either excessive perspiration (hyperhi-
drosis) or little or no perspiration (anhidrosis). Currently, there 
are no known cures for hyperhidrosis but there are a number of 

18. Antiperspirants and Deodorants

165

treatment options: injectable treatment such as botulinum toxin 
type  A  (Botox),  topical  agents  such  as  prescribed  antiperspi-
rants, oral medications, and surgery.

when properly used in the underarm area. So, the risk–benefit 
is  minimal  and  is  balanced  by  the  ability  to  maintain  a  more 
comfortable and socially appealing state.

Based on information from the International Hyperhidrosis 
Society,  over  87%  of  people  with  hyperhidrosis  say  that  OTC 
antiperspirants do not provide sufficient relief. Thus, it is impor-
tant for the medical community to understand the other options 
available to treat excessive sweating. Botox, a drug that has been 
approved  for  use  as  an  injectable  treatment  in  the  axilla  area, 
works  to  interrupt  the  chemical  messages  (anticholinergic) 
released by nerve endings  to signal  the start  of sweat produc-
tion. It is important to understand how to administer Botox in 
a manner that will not cause medical issues; thus only a trained 
practitioner should administer treatment. Unfortunately, Botox 
is not a permanent solution, and patients require repeat injec-
tions every 6–8 months to maintain benefits.

There  are  other  options  for  treating  excessive  sweating,  but 
none  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  either  safe  or  effective 
for  use  by  consumers.  Most  systemic  medications,  in  particu-
lar  anticholinergics,  reduce  sweating  but  the  dose  required  to 
control sweating can cause significant adverse effects (e.g. diz-
ziness), thus limiting the medications’ effectiveness. Iontopho-
resis is a simple and well-tolerated method for the treatment of 
hyperhidrosis without long-term adverse effects; however, long-
term maintenance treatment is required to keep patient’s symp-
tom free. Psychotherapy has been beneficial in a small number 
of cases.

Strengths and weakness of antiperspirants

Based on all the information known about antiperspirants one 
would  surmise  there  are  few  weaknesses  regarding  their  use. 
Basically,  they  serve  the  purpose  of  reducing  the  discomfort 
and potential observation of underarm wetness, and can lead to 
reduced underarm offensive odors. Except in the case of hyper-
hidrosis, antiperspirants serve to provide cosmetic esthetics and 
social acceptance. It is important to note that, even if used twice 
a day, antiperspirants do not completely stop axilla sweating, but 
provide a significant reduction in the amount of sweating pro-
duced in the axilla. With almost 70 years of use for antiperspi-
rant actives, there is almost no association with adverse effects 

Conclusions

Because they are regulated in the USA and other countries as 
drugs,  it  is  foreseen  that  introduction  of  new  antiperspirant 
actives  will  be  restricted.  To  introduce  new  antiperspirant 
actives, one would have to go through an extensive New Drug 
Application process, requiring costly studies on safety and effec-
tiveness.  Aside  from  the  introduction  of  new  antiperspirant 
drugs,  dermatologists  need  to  continue  monitoring  the  intro-
duction of unregulated new ingredients that would be included 
in existing or new formula matrices. For over 5500 years, every 
major  civilization  has  left  a  record  of  its  efforts  to  mask  body 
odors.  The  early  Egyptians  recommended  following  a  scented 
bath with an underarm application of perfumed oils (special cit-
rus and cinnamon preparations).

references

  1  Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 39th edn. 

(2004) CV Mosby.

  2  USA Department of Health and Human Services: Food and Drug 
Administration.  (2003)  Antiperspirant  Drug  Products  for  Over-
the-Counter  Human  Use,  Final  Rule.  68  CFR,  Part  110.  www.
fda.gov/cder/otcmonographs/Antiperspirant/antiperspirant_
FR_20030609.pdf

  3  USP  27/NF  22  (2004)  United  States  Pharmacopeial  Convention, 

Rockville, MD, pp. 83–91; 93–106.

  4  Abrutyn  E.  (1998)  Antiperspirant  and  Deodorants:  Fundamental 
Understanding. IFSCC Monograph Series No. 6. Weymouth, Dor-
set, UK: Micelle Press.

  5  Abrutyn E. (2000) Antiperspirant and deodorants. In: ReigerMM, 
ed. Harry’s Cosmetology, 8th edn. New York: Chemical Publishing 
Company, Inc.

  6  http://jncicancerspectrum.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/jnci; 

94/20/1578.pdf (Vol. 94, No. 20, Pg 1578, October 16, 2002).

  7  McGrath  KG.  (2003)  An  earlier  age  of  breast  cancer  diagnosis 
related  to  more  frequent  use  of  antiperspirants/deodorants  and 
underarm shaving. Eur J Cancer Prev 12, 479–85.

ChAPTEr 19
Blade Shaving

Kevin Cowley,1 Kristina Vanoosthuyze,1 Gillian McFeat, and Keith Ertel2
1Gillette Innovation Centre, Reading, UK
2Procter & Gamble Co., Cincinnati, OH, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Hair	removal	practices	have	their	roots	in	antiquity.	While	modern	global	attitudes	towards	hair	removal	vary,	consumers	around	the	

world	use	blade	shaving	as	a	method	to	effect	hair	removal.

•	 Modern	blades	and	razors	are	the	product	of	extensive	research	and	technologically	advanced	manufacturing	procedures;	these	

combine	to	provide	the	user	with	an	optimum	shaving	experience.

•	 Effective	blade	shaving	involves	three	steps:	preparation,	including	skin	cleansing	and	hair	hydrating;	hair	removal,	including	the	use	of	

an	appropriate	shaving	preparation;	and	post-shave	skin	care,	including	moisturizer	application.

Introduction

Like many personal care practices, the roots of shaving lie in the 
prehistoric  past.  Hair  removal  for  our  cave  dwelling  ancestors 
was  probably  more  about  function  than  esthetics;  hair  could 
provide  an  additional  handle  for  an  adversary  to  grab  during 
battle,  it  collected  dirt  and  food,  and  it  provided  a  home  to 
insects and parasites. Flint blades possibly dating as far back as 
30000 BC  are  some  of  the  earliest  examples  of  shaving  imple-
ments.  Archaeological  evidence  shows  that  materials  such  as 
horn,  clamshell,  or  shark  teeth  were  used  to  remove  hair  by 
scraping.  Pulling  or  singeing  the  hair,  while  somewhat  more 
painful, were also methods used to effect hair removal.

Attitudes towards hair became more varied in ancient times. 
The Egyptian aristocracy shaved not only their faces, but also 
their  bodies.  The  ancient  Greeks  viewed  a  beard  as  a  sign  of 
virility  but  Alexander  the  Great,  who  is  said  to  have  been 
obsessed with shaving, made the practice popular among Greek 
males.  Greek  women  also  shaved;  a  body  free  from  hair  was 
viewed  as  the  ideal  of  beauty  in  Greek  society.  Shaving  was 
viewed as a sign of degeneracy in early Roman society, but an 
influx  of  clean-shaven  foreigners  gradually  changed  this  atti-
tude. For affluent Romans, shaving was performed by a skilled 
servant or at a barbershop, which was popularized in ancient 
Rome as a place of grooming and socializing. Shaving imple-
ments  at  this  time  were  generally  made  from  metals  such  as 
copper, gold, or iron.

The barbershop took on an expanded role in the Middle Ages. 
In these shops barbers provided grooming services and routinely 
performed other duties such as bloodletting and minor surgical 

and  dental  procedures.  Shaving  injuries  were  common  and  the 
striped pole that is today associated with barbershops has its ori-
gin  in  these  times,  its  red  and  white  stripes  symbolizing  blood 
and the bandages that were used to cover the wound, respectively.
The  Industrial  Revolution  heralded  a  number  of  advance-
ments in shaving technology. The straight razor was first intro-
duced in Sheffield, England and became popular worldwide as a 
tool for facial shaving. While an improvement over earlier shav-
ing implements, the straight razor dulled easily, required regu-
lar sharpening or stropping and a high skill level, and shaving 
injuries were still a problem, which earned it the nickname of 
“cutthroat razor”. Many credit Jean Jacques Perret with invent-
ing  the  safety  razor  in  1762.  His  device,  which  he  apparently 
did not patent, consisted of a guard that enclosed all but a small 
portion  of  the  blade.  Variations  on  the  design  followed  from 
other inventors, many using comb-like structures to limit blade 
contact  with  the  skin.  The  Kampfe  Brothers  filed  a  patent  in 
1880 for a razor, marketed as the Star Safety Razor that used a 
“hoe” design in which the handle was mounted perpendicular 
to the blade housing. The blade, essentially a shortened straight 
razor, was held in place by metal clips. While generally success-
ful,  the  blade  in  the  Star  Safety  Razor  still  required  stropping 
before each use.

In  1904 King  C.  Gillette  introduced  the  real  breakthrough 
that brought shaving to the masses. Unlike its predecessors, the 
Gillette Safety Razor used an inexpensive disposable blade that 
was  replaced  by  the  user  when  it  became  dull. The  new  razor 
quickly gained popularity due a variety of promotional efforts, 
including  a  blades  and  razors  marketing  model  pioneered  by 
Gillette.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

166

19. Blade Shaving

167

Shaving  was  not  only  promoted  to  males.  The  practice  of 
shaving  among  females  was  prompted  by  the  May  1915  issue 
of Harper’s Bazaar Magazine that featured a picture of a female 
model wearing a sleeveless evening gown and sporting hairless 
axillae. The Wilkinson Sword Company built on the idea by run-
ning a series of advertisements targeting women in the 1920 s to 
promote the idea that underarm hair was not only unhygienic, 
it was also unfeminine. Sales of razor blades doubled over the 
next few years.

Razor  developments  during  the  next  several  decades  were 
primarily  limited  to  improvements  in  single  blade  technology, 
including  the  switch  from  carbon  steel  to  stainless  steel  blade 
material  in  the  1960 s  introduced  by  Wilkinson  Sword.  This 
prevented  corrosion  thus  increasing  blade  life.  The  next  major 
change occurred in 1971 with the introduction of the Trac II, the 
first multi-blade razor. Innovation has continued along this track 
and today consumers can choose from a variety of razor models 
having multiple blades contained in a disposable cartridge, with 
specialized designs available to meet the shaving needs of both 
sexes.  The  relatively  simple  appearance  of  these  devices  belies 
their sophistication; they are the product of years of development 
and technically advanced manufacturing processes.

Of course, not all shaving is done with a blade. Electric razors 
remove  hair  without  drawing  a  blade  across  the  skin.  There 
are two basic types of electric razors, both relying on a scissor 
action to cut hairs using either an oscillatory or circular motion. 
When the razor is pressed against skin the hairs are forced up 
into  holes  in  the  foil  and  held  in  place  while  the  blade  moves 
against  the  foil  to  cut  the  trapped  hairs.  Colonel  Jacob  Schick 
patented the first electric razor in 1928. Electric razors were for 
many decades  confined  to use  on  dry skin,  but  some  modern 
battery-powered  razors  are  designed  for  use  in  wet  environ-
ments, including the shower.

hair biology basics

Much  of  the  hair  targeted  for  removal  by  shaving  or  other 
means is terminal hair (i.e. hair that is generally longer, thicker, 
and more darkly pigmented than vellus hair). In prepubescent 
males and females this hair is found primarily on the head and 
eyebrow  regions,  but  with  the  onset  of  puberty  terminal  hair 
begins to appear on areas of the body with androgen-sensitive 
skin, including the face, axillae, and pubic region. Further, vel-
lus hairs on some parts of the body, such as the beard area, may 
convert to terminal hairs under hormonal influence.

The pilosebaceous unit
A pilosebaceous unit comprises the hair follicle, the hair shaft, 
the sebaceous gland, and the arrector pili muscle. The hair fol-
licle is the unit responsible for hair production. Hair growth is 
cyclical, and depending on the stage of hair growth, the follicle 
extends to a depth as shallow as the upper dermis to as deep as 
the subcutaneous tissue during the active growth phase.

The hair shaft is the product of matrix cells in the hair bulb, 
a  structure  located  at  the  base  of  the  follicle.  The  hair  shaft  is 
made up primarily of keratins and binding material with a small 
amount of water. A terminal hair shaft comprises three concen-
tric layers. Outermost is the cuticle, a layer of cells that on the 
external hair are flattened and overlapping. The cuticle serves a 
protective function for external hair, regulates the water content 
of the hair fiber, and is responsible for much of the shine that is 
associated with healthy hair. The cortex lies inside the cuticle and 
is  composed  of  longitudinal  keratin  strands  and  melanin. This 
layer represents the majority of the hair shaft and is responsible 
for  many  of  its  structural  qualities,  e.g.  elasticity  and  curl. The 
medulla  is  the  innermost  layer  found  in  some  terminal  hair-
shafts,  made  up  of  large  loosely  connected  cells  which  contain 
keratin. Large intra- and intercellular air spaces in the medulla 
to some extent determine the sheen and colour tones of the hair.
Each hair follicle is associated with a sebaceous gland. This gland 
lies in the dermis and produces sebum, a lipophilic material com-
posed of wax monoesters, triglycerides, free fatty acids, and squa-
lene. Sebum empties into the follicle lumen and provides a natural 
conditioner for the forming and already extruded hair. The arrector 
pili muscle is a microscopic band of smooth muscle tissue that con-
nects the follicle to the dermis. In certain body sites, when stimu-
lated the arrector pili muscle contracts and causes the external hair 
to stand more erect, resulting in the appearance of goose bumps.

hair growth cycle
Hair growth is not a continuous process but occurs over a cycle 
that  is  conveniently  divided  into  three  stages;  at  any  given  time 
hairs on a given body site are at various points in this cycle. The 
dermal papilla orchestrates the hair growth cycle. Anagen is the 
phase of hair follicle re-growth and hair generation. During this 
stage the hair follicle grows downward into the dermis and epider-
mal cells that surround the dermal papilla undergo rapid division. 
As new cells form they push the older cells upward. The number 
of hairs in anagen varies according to body site. At any given time 
approximately 80% of scalp hairs are in anagen. This is lower for 
beard and moustache hairs (around 70%) and only 20–30% for the 
legs and axillae. The length of the anagen phase also varies; on the 
scalp anagen typically lasts from 3–6 years, in the beard area this 
is  closer  to  1  year  and  in  the  moustache  area  anagen  lasts  from 
4–14 weeks. Anagen is typically 16 weeks for the legs and axillae. 
The time in anagen determines the length of the hair produced [1].
Anagen  is  followed  by  catagen,  a  transitional  phase  in  the 
hair  growth  cycle  that  sets  the  stage  for  production  of  a  new 
follicle. In catagen the existing follicle goes through controlled 
involution,  with  apoptosis  of  the  majority  of  follicular  kerati-
nocytes and some follicular melanocytes. The bulb and supra-
bulbar regions are lost and the follicle moves upward, being no 
deeper than the upper dermis at phase end. The dermal papilla 
becomes more compact and moves upward to rest beneath the 
hair follicle bulge. On the scalp catagen lasts from 14–21 days.

Telogen is a phase of follicular quiescence that follows cata-
gen.  The  final  cells  synthesized  during  the  previous  cycle  are 

168

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Hair Cosmetics

dumped at the end of the hair shaft to form a “club” that holds 
the now non-living hair in place. These hairs are lost by physi-
cal action (e.g. combing) or are pushed out by the new hair that 
grows during the next anagen phase. The percentage of follicles 
in telogen also varies by body site (e.g. 5–15% of scalp follicles 
are normally in telogen, whereas 30% of follicles on the beard 
area  are  normally  in  telogen  and  70–80%  of  leg  and  axillae 
hairs).  Telogen  typically  lasts  for  2–3 months,  although  this  is 
slightly longer for leg hairs [1].

Properties of hair – impact on shaving
The  beard  area  of  an  adult  male  contains  between  6000 and 
25000 hair fibers and beard growth rate has been reported in the 
literature  to  be  0.27  mm  per  24 hours,  although  this  can  vary 
between individuals [2]. There are two types of hair fiber found 
in the beard area. Fine, non-pigmented vellus hairs are distrib-
uted  amongst  the  coarser  terminal  hairs.  While  the  literature 
abounds in publications on the properties of scalp hair, studies 
of beard hair are relatively scarce. Tolgyesi et al. [3] published 
the findings of a comparative study of beard and scalp terminal 
hair with respect to morphological, physical and chemical char-
acteristics. Scalp fibers were reported to have half the number 
of cuticle layers compared to beard hairs from the same subject 
(10–13  in  facial  hair,  5–7  in  scalp  hair).  Scalp  fibers  also  had 
smaller cross-sectional areas (approximately half the area) and 
were  less  variable  in  shape  than  beard  hairs,  which  exhibited 
asymmetrical, oblong and trilobal shapes. These differences can 
be seen in (Figure 19.1). Thozur et al. [4] further showed consid-
erable variations in beard hair follicle shape and diameter within 
and between individuals. A number of factors contribute to this 
variation including anatomical location, ethnicity, age and envi-
ronmental factors.

The structural properties of the hair impact shaving. The force 
required to cut a hair increases with increasing fiber cross-sec-
tional area [5]. Thus, it requires more force to cut a larger fiber. 
Indeed, it requires almost three times the force to cut a beard 
hair compared to a scalp or leg hair. An important property of 
hair is that the force required to cut it can be greatly reduced by 
hydrating the hair. Hydration causes the hair to become signifi-
cantly softer and much easier to cut so that it offers less resis-
tance than dry hair to the blade and minimizes any discomfort.
The human hair follicle and the surrounding skin are richly 
innervated. In particular the terminal hairs of the human skin 
are supplied with several types of nerve endings most of which 
are sensory in nature. It is hypothesized that discomfort associ-
ated with shaving (during shaving or post-shave) is a result of 
localized skin displacement and/or the rotation and extension 
of the beard fiber in its follicle. The current neurological litera-
ture clearly demonstrates that such local cutaneous distortions 
bring  about  the  release  of  various  chemical  communicators 
(histamine, prostaglandins, bradykinins, etc.) that will heighten 
the sensitivity of the response of pain-mediating nerve endings 
for  a  period  of  time  [6].  The  contribution  to  shaving  comfort 
and irritation remains to be elucidated.

Figure  19.1  Optical  micrographs  of  hair  cross-sections  taken  from  the 
beard (a) and scalp (b) area of the same subject. Beard fibers have a greater 
cross-sectional area and more cuticle layers than scalp hair [3]. Magnifica-
tion 915×.

Shaving can also cause irritation due to physical damage. There 
is evidence to suggest that shaving irritation involves the removal 
of irregular elevations of the skin by the razor blade particularly 
around follicular openings [7,8]. The topography of the skin is 
highly variable and combined with the presence of hairs this cre-
ates a very irregular terrain over which an incredibly sharp blade 
traverses  (Figure  19.2).  This  can  result  in  irritation,  generally 

Figure 19.2   A scanning electron micrograph of a replica of an area of cheek 
on a male face. The topography of the skin is highly variable and combined 
with the presence of hairs this creates a very irregular terrain over which an 
incredibly sharp blade traverses.

characterized in this context by the presence of attributes such as 
nicks/cuts, redness, razor burn, sting or dryness. Indeed, shav-
ing-related  skin  irritation  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  noted 
male cosmetic complaints in Europe and the US [9]. In order to 
achieve a close and comfortable shave with minimal irritation it 
is essential to use a good quality, sharp blade and adopt a shave 
care regimen designed to remove as much hair as possible while 
inflicting minimal damage to the underlying skin.

Shaving and the razor explored

Since the invention of the safety razor, consumer product indus-
tries have invested a considerable amount of time, money and 
expertise  in  improving  the  design  of  the  razor  and  blade  in 
order to provide a closer, more comfortable and safer shave.

To  date,  few  reports  have  been  available  in  the  literature 
detailing the shaving process and the mechanisms involved. The 
following section aims to provide an overview of the razor and 
the complex mechanisms by which the blade cuts the beard hair 
and interacts with the underlying skin.

Evolution of the system razor
With a system razor only the cartridge containing the blades is 
replaced, unlike a disposable razor which is thrown away in its 
entirety when blunt.

In  the  first  double  edge  razor  systems,  the  consumer  had 
to position and tension a single blade within the handle. As a 
result, there was variability and inconsistency in how the blade 
interacted with the skin. In contrast, the advanced shaving sys-
tems of today are precisely assembled during manufacture.

Figure 19.3 shows a cross-section of a double edge razor with 
the key parameters of the cartridge geometry indicated. The shav-
ing angle is the angle between the center plane of the blade and 
a plane tangent to the guard. The blade exposure is the amount 
by which the tip of the blade projects beyond the plane tangent 
to the cap and guard. Altering any of these parameters has both 
good and bad effects. For example, an increase in blade exposure 
brings the blades into closer contact with the underlying skin and 
hair, increasing the closeness of a shave at the expense of more 

Shaving
angle

Exposure

Blade

Tangent

Cap

Guard

Figure 19.3   Cross-section of a double-edge razor showing exposure 
geometry.

19. Blade Shaving

169

nicks and cuts, and discomfort. A reduction in the shaving angle 
improves comfort but reduces cutting efficiency. Consequently, 
all  aspects  of  the  double  edge  blade  system  were  compromises 
and the user was able to adjust the razor to suit their individual 
preferences [10]. Modern systems have reduced the need to com-
promise  and  achieved  the  previously  unattainable:  improving 
closeness, safety and comfort simultaneously. The improvement 
in closeness is attributed to, and exploits the mobility of the hairs 
within the follicle. Observation of the movement of hairs during 
shaving  has  shown  that  they  are  not  cut  through  immediately 
upon contact with the blade; rather, they are carried along by the 
embedded blade tip, and effectively extended out of the follicle. 
This extension is primarily due to the distortion of the soft tis-
sue between the hair root and the skin surface layers. Due to the 
visco-elastic nature of the tissue, once severed, the hair rapidly 
retracts  back  into  the  follicle.  If  a  second  blade  follows  closely 
behind the first, it can engage the hair in the elevated state, cut-
ting it further down the hair shaft, before it has time to fully with-
draw into the follicle [10]. By having multiple blades, this process 
can be exploited to give a measurable improvement in closeness. 
It is therefore possible to use a lower blade exposure to achieve 
closeness while minimizing skin contact and thus the potential 
for nicks, cuts and discomfort.

Simply adding more blades to razors is not a new idea (the first 
US patent for a five-blade razor was filed in 1929, US1920711) 
and from the above it is clear that on its own this will not deliver 
a great shave. In addition to precisely controlling the razor geom-
etry, it is essential that the underlying skin is carefully managed 
to  ensure  a  safe  and  comfortable  shave.  Adding  more  blades 
improves  closeness  by  virtue  of  hair  extension  and  probability 
of cutting, but can also create drag and discomfort. The pressure 
exerted on the skin by the additional blades can cause the skin to 
bulge between the inter blade span. By spacing the blades closer 
together, both the drag and skin bulge are reduced and a more 
uniform stress is placed on the skin leading to a safer, more com-
fortable shave (Figure 19.4). Of note, the act of cutting hairs dur-
ing a shave can cause the blades to deflect and can take the blade 
span away from its optimal value. Recent innovations include the 
introduction of a blade stabilizer that supports each blade in a 
multiple-blade cartridge and helps to maintain the optimal dis-
tance between blades during shaving (Figure 19.5).

Manipulating these parameters can greatly alter the charac-
teristics of a shave; consequently cartridge geometry and blade 
spacing are carefully controlled and set during manufacturing 
using  specifications  determined  through  extensive  research. 
This  ensures  that  the  user  receives  a  targeted  and  consistent 
shave with the optimum blade–skin contact.

Cutting edge technology
A further critical component of the shaving process, and central 
to an optimal shave, is the razor blade edge. The narrower the 
blade edge the more easily it can cut through a hair, leading to 
a more comfortable shave compared with less fine blade edges. 
Depending on the razor blade, the radius of the sharpened tip 

170

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Hair Cosmetics

Figure 19.4   Model of multiple blade razors and skin management: five blade razors with lower inter-blade distance (a) distribute the shaving force more 
evenly onto the skin than fewer blades with a larger inter-blade span (b), thus reducing the height of the skin bulges between the blades for a more comfort-
able shave.

Trimmer blade:  
Precision trimming  

Lubricating strip:
Low friction; releases 
skin tension; lubricates 
for next stroke 

Blades:  
Extend and cut hair; 
interact with skin; 
finer blades can 
reduce cutting force  

Blade springs: 
Allows blades to 
react to load 

Guard bar: 
Slots can help guide 
hairs to the blade 

Fin guard: 
Tensions skin ahead of 
blades 

Figure 19.5   The key components of a razor and their functions.

Blade stabilizer: 
To maintain optimal 
blade spacing 

Pivot:
Rotation point of cartridge, 
ensures cartridge follows 
contours

in  advanced  systems  can  be  around  25  nm  [11],  ∼2500 times 
less than the radius of an average beard hair [3]. However, if the 
blade is too narrow it can collapse under the cutting force. Thus, 
the  industry  strives  to  produce  the  finest  blade  edge  possible 
while retaining blade edge strength. This is typically achieved by 
treating a stainless steel substrate with thin film coatings such 

as diamond-like carbon to enhance edge strength or platinum–
chromium to enhance corrosion resistance. The blades are fur-
ther  coated  in  a  telomer-like  material  to  create  a  low  friction 
cutting  surface.  This  greatly  reduces  the  force  required  to  cut 
hair,  minimizing  hair  “pulling”  and  leading  to  lower  localized 
stresses in the skin (Figure 19.6) [12].

Figure 19.6  Illustration showing computer modeling of the stress in skin caused by hair cutting force. Finer blades (a) cut with less force versus thicker 
blades (b). This results in reduced stress in the surrounding skin [12].

Additional key components of a modern razor are shown in 
(Figure 19.5). First introduced in 1985, lubricating strips are now 
found on most disposable and permanent system cartridges. The 
strips distribute water soluble lubricant following each shaving 
stroke,  resulting  in  a  significant  reduction  in  drag  of  the  car-
tridge over the skin and allowing additional strokes to be taken 
comfortably even after most of the shaving preparation has been 
shaved off. The strips also allow the skin to release freely from the 
tension created by the skin guard. The guard on modern razors 
is typically comprised of rigid plastic or soft, flexible microfins 
which precede the blades. These microfins gently stretch the skin 
ahead of the first blade, thus presenting a smoother surface to be 
shaved and causing beard hairs to spring upward so they can be 
cut more efficiently [8]. Some advanced razors have micro slots 
in  the  guard  bar  designed  to  guide  hairs  to  the  blade  prior  to 
being cut. Additional features include pivoting heads that allow 
the cartridge to follow the contours of the face and also trimmer 
blades at the back of the cartridge that allow the user to easily 
shave tricky places like sideburns and under the nose or create 
accurate lines around facial hair. The introduction of oscillating 
wet shaving systems increases razor glide compared with non-
oscillating systems for improved comfort.

Such advances in blade edge and razor technology, coupled with 
an understanding of the needs of the consumer, have significantly 
enhanced the quality, closeness, safety and comfort of the shave. 
This is most evident when combined with a shave care regimen 
designed to maximize hair removal and minimize skin damage.

The shaving process
Drawing  a  sharpened  implement  across  the  skin’s  surface  has 
the potential to cause damage, and blade shaving in the absence 
of  water  or  a  shave  preparation  can  result  in  the  immediate 
appearance  of  uplifting  skin  cells  and  perturbation  of  stratum 
corneum barrier function, with an increase in dryness observed 
several days subsequent to the initial damage [13]. Body site will 
likely influence the response to this insult since the number of 
stratum corneum cell layers varies over the body surface, aver-
aging  10 layers  on  the  cheek  or  neck  and  18 layers  on  the  leg 
[14]. The potential for damage is compounded by non-uniform 
skin surface topography and the presence of hair (Figure 19.2), 
which when dry is relatively tough.

A few simple steps can help prepare the skin and hair for an 
optimum  shaving  experience.  First,  the  skin  should  be  thor-
oughly cleansed. Cleansing removes surface soils that can inter-
fere  with  the  shaving  process  and  also  helps  hydrate  the  hair 
[15]. The latter is especially important; shaving during or after 
showering or bathing is ideal but, short of this, the area to be 
shaved  should  be  washed  with  a  cleanser  and  warm  water.  In 
some situations applying a warm, wet towel or cloth to the skin 
for a few minutes before shaving may also help. Hair is mostly 
keratin,  and  keratin  has  a  high  affinity  for  water.  Hydrating 
softens  the  hair  to  make  it  more  pliable  and  easier  to  cut;  the 
force required to cut a hair decreases dramatically as hydration 
increases (Figure 19.7). Short-term hydration will also improve 

19. Blade Shaving

171

Significant reduction
in cutting force
after 2 min hydration

Dry hair

r
i
a
h
y
r
d
o
t

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

e
c
r
o
f
g
n
i
t
t
u
C

)

%

(

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

0

2

4

6

8
Hydration time (min)

10

12

14

16

Figure 19.7  Effect of hydration time on force required to cut (beard) hair. 
The most significant reduction occurs over the first 2 minutes.

the  skin’s  elasticity  [16],  making  it  better  able  to  deform  and 
recover  as  the  blade  is  drawn  over  its  surface.  However,  more 
is not necessarily better; prolonged soaking can macerate skin 
and cause the surface to become uneven, making effective hair 
removal more difficult and increasing the risk of damaging the 
skin.  Excessive  soaking  can  also  deplete  the  stratum  corneum 
of  substances  such  as  natural  moisturizing  factor  (NMF)  that 
help it hold onto water [17], which can exacerbate any dryness 
induced by the shaving process.

A preparation such as a shaving gel or cream can also improve 
the shaving experience. A preparation serves several functions. 
The  physical  act  of  rubbing  preparation  onto  the  skin  can 
remove oils and dead skin cells from the surface and aid in the 
release of trapped hairs, with the potential to improve the effi-
ciency of the cutting process [11]. Shaving preparation formulas 
typically contain a high percentage of water, which provides an 
additional hydration source for the hair and skin. Finally, shav-
ing  preparations  are  usually  based  on  surfactants  and  contain 
other ingredients such as oils or polymers. For reasons already 
noted  hydrating  hair  and  skin  is  important  for  the  shaving 
process,  but  hydration  increases  the  coefficient  of  friction  for 
an object sliding across the skin’s surface [18]. The surfactants, 
oils, and polymers in shave gels can reduce friction to improve 
razor glide, provide a cushion between the blade and skin, and 
improve cutting efficiency.

Equipment and technique are also important for an optimum 
shaving experience. The razor should be in good condition with 
a  sharp  blade.  A  dull  blade  will  not  cut  the  hair  cleanly  and 
will  pull  the  hair,  increasing  discomfort  and  the  likelihood  of 
nicks and cuts. Shaving in the direction of hair growth with a 
light pressure is preferred to reduce pulling, at least for the first 
few strokes. These preliminary strokes can be followed up with 
strokes  against  the  grain  if  additional  hair  removal  is  needed. 
On the face, feeling the beard with the hand can help identify 
hair growing patterns and guide stroke direction. Skin on some 
areas of the body, such as the underarms, has a naturally uneven 

 
 
 
 
 
172

hygIENE PrOduCTS  Hair Cosmetics

Table 19.1   Summary	of	some	differences	between	males	and	females	related	to	hair	characteristics	and	blade	shaving	behaviors	and	attitudes.

Onset	of	shaving	behavior

Body	areas	shaved

Relative	hair	density

Hair	growth	pattern

Male

Female

Most	males	begin	shaving	between	the	ages	of	
14	and	15

Most	females	begin	shaving	between	the	ages	of	
11	and	13

Most	male	shaving	occurs	on	the	face	and	
neck	areas.	The	average	male	shaves	an	area	of	
∼300 cm2

Female	shaving	is	focused	on	the	leg	and	underarm	
areas.	The	average	female	shaves	an	area	of	
∼2700 cm2

Higher	hair	density.	On	average	the	male	face	has	
500	hair	follicles	per	cm2	[7]

Lower	hair	density.	On	average	the	leg	and	axillae	
have	60–65	hair	follicles	per	cm2	[7]

Hair	on	the	face	tends	to	grow	in	multiple	
directions

Hair	on	the	legs	tends	to	grow	in	the	same	direction;	
hair	in	the	underarm	area	typically	grows	in	multiple	
directions

Location	where	shaving	occurs

Males	tend	to	shave	at	the	bathroom	sink

Females	tend	to	shave	in	the	shower	or	bath

Attitudes	towards	shaving

Males	tend	to	view	shaving	as	a	skill

Females	tend	to	view	shaving	as	a	chore

or very pliable surface. Pulling the skin taut on these areas dur-
ing shaving can improve the efficiency of the hair removal pro-
cess and reduce nicking or cutting. In all cases the razor should 
be rinsed often to keep the blade surface clean.

Following the shave, skin should be thoroughly rinsed with 
water  to  remove  all  traces  of  shaving  preparation,  since  these 
products are generally surfactant-based and leaving surfactant 
in  contact  with  the  skin  can  induce  or  exacerbate  irritation. 
Rinsing with cool water can have a soothing effect on the skin. 
Applying a moisturizer can also have a soothing effect and will 
hydrate the skin to help prevent dryness. Moisturizers can also 
speed the barrier repair process and thus help to mitigate any 
stratum corneum damage that might result from shaving [15].

The benefits of a good regimen apply generally to the blade 
shaving  needs  for  both  sexes.  However,  there  are  differences 
between males and females in terms of hair characteristics and 
blade  shaving  behaviors  and  attitudes.  As  a  result,  razors  for 
females are often designed to accommodate body specific needs. 
Some of these differences are summarized in Table 19.1.

Challenges within male blade shaving
Some situations may require extra care during the shaving proc-
ess.  For  the  growing  number  of  men  with  self-perceived  sen-
sitive  skin,  the  need  or  desire  to  shave  on  a  regular  basis  can 
be  challenging.  In  a  survey  of  more  than  1800 dermatologists, 
over  90%  of  responders  agreed  that  the  selection  of  shaving 
products was important for men with sensitive skin [19]. Indi-
viduals,  including  those  prone  to  sensitive  skin,  should  adopt 
an appropriate regimen that includes thoroughly hydrating the 
hair before shaving, liberally applying a shaving preparation and 
shaving with an advanced multiple-blade razor.

Pseudofolliculitis  barbae  (PFB)  is  a  condition  distinct  from 
sensitive  skin  that  affects  individuals  with  very  tightly  curled 
hair, and is particularly prevalent among those who are of Afri-
can descent. In PFB hairs may grow parallel to, rather than out 
from,  the  skin’s  surface  and  in  some  cases  the  tip  of  the  hair 
curves  back  and  grows  into  the  surface  of  the  skin,  causing 
inflammation.  This  presents  clinically  as  papules  in  the  beard 

area  with  occasional  pustules  or  hypertrophic  scarring,  all  of 
which usually develop in response to shaving, and may be exac-
erbated  by  subsequent  shaving.  Recommendations  to  reduce 
PFB frequently include avoidance of shaving and if this is not 
possible, shaving with a single-bladed razor at least every 3 days 
[20,21]. However, there is a lack of clinical evidence to support 
such recommendations and thus there is a need for randomized, 
blinded clinical trials comparing the use of multi- and single-
edged razors, different shaving techniques and shaving frequen-
cies  to  determine  the  optimal  shaving  recommendations  for 
patients with PFB [22]. Emerging clinical data suggest that PFB 
is not exacerbated by daily shaving with a multiple-blade razor 
as part of a shaving regimen that includes pre-shave hair hydra-
tion and post-shave moisturization steps [23].

Summary

Fundamental understanding of blade shaving has evolved dra-
matically in recent years leading to the development of sophis-
ticated products that more effectively address the hair removal 
and skin care needs of men and women. Extensive research and 
technologically advanced manufacturing procedures are paving 
the way for future innovations with a deeper understanding of 
skin and hair.

references

  1  Richards  R,  Meharg,  G.  (1991)  Cosmetic  and  Medical  Electrolysis 
and  Temporary  Hair  Removal:  A  Practice  Manual  and  Reference 
Guide. Medric Ltd, ISBN 0969474601.

  2  Saitoh M, Uzuka M and Sakamoto M. (1969) Rates of hair growth. 

Adv Biol Skin 9, 183–201.

  3  Tolgyesi E, Coble DW, Fang FS, Kairinen EO. (1983) A comparative 

study of beard and scalp hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 34, 361–82.

  4  Thozhur  SM,  Crocombe  AD,  Smith  AP,  Cowley  K,  Mullier  M. 
(2007)  Cutting  characteristics  of  beard  hair.  J  Mater  Sci  42, 
8725–37.

19. Blade Shaving

173

  5  Deem D, Rieger MM. (1976) Observations on the cutting of beard 

hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 27, 579–92.

  6  Michael-Titus A, Revest P, Shortland P, Britton R. (2007) The Nerv-
ous System: Basic Science and Clinical Conditions. Oxford: Elsevier 
Health Sciences.

  7  Bhaktaviziam C, Mescon H, Matoltsy AG. (1963) Shaving. I. Study 

of skin and shavings. Arch Dermatol 88, 874–9.

  8  Hollander J, Casselman EJ. (1937) Factors involved in satisfactory 

shaving. JAMA 109, 95.

  9  Elsner P. (2012) Overview and trends in make grooming. Br J Der-

matol 166(S1), 2–5.

location on the body, age, sex and physical parameters. Arch Der-
matol Res 291, 555–9.

15  Draelos D. (2012) Male skin and ingredients relevant to male skin 

care. Br J Dermatol 166(S1), 13–16.

16  Auriol  F,  Vaillant  L,  Machet  L,  Diridollou  S,  Lorette  G.  (1993) 
Effects  of  short-term  hydration  on  skin  extensibility.  Acta  Derm 
Venereol [Stockh] 73, 344–7.

17  Visscher  MO,  Tolia  GT;  Wickett  RR,  Hoath  SB.  (2003)  Effect  of 
soaking  and  natural  moisturizing  factor  on  stratum  corneum 
water-handling properties. J Cosmet Sci 54, 289–300.

18  Highley  DR,  Coomey  M,  DenBeste  M,  Wolfram  LJ.  (1977)  Fric-

10  Terry, J. (1991) Materials and design in Gillette razors. Mat Design 

tional properties of skin. J Invest Dermatol 69, 303–5.

12, 277–81.

11  Cowley  K,  Vanoosthuyze  K.  (2012)  Insights  into  shaving  and  its 

impact on skin. Br J Dermatol 166(S1), 6–12.

12  Zupkosky  PJ,  Vanoosthuyze  K.  (2013)  Dermatological  assessment 
of  the  skin  tolerance  of  a  daily  shave  with  a  5-blade  razor  for  men 
with  sensitive  skin.  Poster  presented  at:  71 st  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  American  Academy  of  Dermatologists;  1–5 Mar  2013;  Miami 
Beach, FL.

13  Marti VPJ, Lee RS, Moore AE, Paterson SE, Watkinson A, Rawlings 
AV. (2003) Effect of shaving on axillary stratum corneum. Int J Cos-
met Sci 25, 193–8.

14  Ya-Xian Z, Suetake T, Tagami H. (1999) Number of cell layers of the 
stratum corneum in normal skin – relationship to the anatomical 

19  Vanoosthuyze K, Zupkosky PJ, Buckley K. (2013) Survey of practic-
ing dermatologists on the prevalence of sensitive skin in men. Int J 
Cosmet Sci 35(4), 388–93.

20  Alexis AF, Barbosa VH. (2013) Skin of Color: A Practical Guide to 
Dermatologic Diagnosis and Treatment. New York, NY: Springer, p. 
128.

21  Quarles FN, Brody H, Johnson BA, et al. (2007) Pseudofolliculitis 

barbae. Dermatol Ther 20, 133–6.

22  Coley  MK,  Alexis  AF.  (2009)  Dermatologic  conditions  in  men  of 

African ancestry. Expert Rev Dermatol 4(6), 595.

23  Daniels A, Gustafson CJ, Zupkosky PJ, et al. (2013) Shave frequency 
and regimen variation effects on the management of pseudofollicu-
litis barbae. J Drugs Dermatol 12, 410–18.

Part III

adornment

section 1  colored Facial cosmetics

chaPtEr 20
 Facial Foundation

sylvie Guichard and Véronique Roulier
L’Oréal Research, Chevilly-Larue, France

basIc concEPts

•	 Facial	foundation	places	a	pigment	over	the	skin	surface	to	camouflage	underlying	defects	in	color	and	contour.
•	 Facial	foundations	must	be	developed	to	match	all	ethnicities	and	facial	needs.
•	 New	optic	technologies	have	allowed	modern	facial	foundations	to	create	a	flawless	facial	appearance	more	effectively.
•	 Facial	foundations	impact	skin	health	because	they	are	worn	daily	for	an	extended	period.

Introduction

Complexion makeup is anything but a trifling subject. The prac-
tice is deeply rooted in human history. It has evolved along with 
civilizations,  fashions,  scientific  knowledge,  and  technologies 
to meet the various expectations depending on mood, nature, 
culture,  and  skin  color.  A  prime  stage  to  beautifying  the  face, 
complexion  makeup  creates  the  “canvas”  on  which  coloring 
materials are placed. Women consider it as a tool to even skin 
color, modify skin color, or contribute to smoothing out the skin 
surface. To fulfill these different objectives, substances extracted 
from nature took on various forms over time until formulation 
experts  developed  a  complex  category  of  cosmetics  including 
emulsions, poured compacts, and both compact and loose pow-
ders. These developments have improved the field of skin care 
providing radiance, wear, and sensory effects.

It  remains  a  challenge  to  adequately  satisfy  the  varying 
makeup requirements of women from different ethnic origins, 
who do not apply products in the same way and do not share the 
same diverse canons of beauty. It is therefore necessary to gain a 
thorough understanding of the world’s skin colors.

Finally, as a product intended to be in intimate contact with 
the  skin,  facial  foundations  must  meet  the  most  strenuous 
demands  of  quality  and  safety.  This  has  motivated  evaluation 
teams to develop methods for assessing product performance.

complexion makeup – an ancient practice

Modifying one’s self-appearance by adding color and ornament 
to  the  skin  of  the  face  and  body  skin  is  hardly  a  recent  trend 

[1-3]. From Paleolithic times, man has decorated himself with 
body paint and tattoos for various ritual activities. In the Niaux 
Cavern (Ariège, France), the cave of Cougnac (Lot, France), and 
the  Magdalenian  Galleries  of  le  Mas  d’Azil  (Ariège),  the  past 
ages have left evidence of these practices. Along with the flint 
tools in the Magdalenian Galleries at le Mas d’Azil ochre nodules 
were found that look like “sticks of makeup” as well as grinding 
instruments, jars, spatulas, and needle-like “rods” 8–11 cm long, 
tapered at one end and spatula-shaped on the other end, suitable 
for applying body paint.

From the earliest of ancient civilizations, there are cosmetic 
recipes containing a variety of ingredients which are often closer 
to magic than to rational chemistry, aimed particularly at modi-
fying the complexion. Usually used exclusively by high dignitar-
ies, cosmetics were intended to whiten the complexion.

ancient Mesopotamia (2500 bc)
The queen and the princes of Ur used cosmetics consisting of a 
mixture  of  mineral  pigments  based  on  Talak  (from  which  the 
word “talc” is derived). Nowadays such cosmetics are still com-
monly used in some parts of the Middle East.

ancient Egypt (3rd millennium bc)
The  priests  used  plaster  to  cover  their  faces.  It  was  also  desir-
able  for  women  to  exhibit  very  white  skin  without  blemishes, 
as these were indications of a privileged life of leisure. The com-
plexion  was  whitened  with  mixtures  of  plaster,  calcium  car-
bonate,  tin  oxide,  ground  pearls,  and  lead  carbonate  (ceruse) 
mixed with animal grease, waxes, and natural resins. Evidence 
of  the  complexity  of  the  ancient  recipes  has  been  determined 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

177

178

aDornMEnt  Colored Facial Cosmetics

by chemical analyses carried out jointly by the Centre National 
de  la  Recherche  Scientifique,  L’Oréal’s  Recherche  department, 
the  Research  Laboratory  of  the  Museums  of  France,  and  the 
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility on the content of cos-
metic  flasks  found  in  archeologic  excavations  [4].  The  earliest 
cosmetic  formulary  is  attributed  to  Cleopatra  –  “Cleopatrae 
gyneciarum libri.”

ancient Greece
In  Ancient  Greece,  the  white,  matte  complexion  symbolizing 
purity  was  obtained  through  generous  application  of  plaster, 
chalk,  kaolin  (gypsos),  and  ceruse  (psimythion),  but  Plato  was 
already denouncing the harmfulness of these cosmetics.

ancient rome
Ancient  Rome  raised  the  use  of  makeup  to  the  level  of  an  art 
form. In addition to cosmetics that enhance the beauty of face 
and  body,  cosmetics  were  applied  to  improve  appearance  and 
hide flaws, notably those caused by the aging process.

Women of the upper classes “coated” their face with complex 
mixtures with recipes reported in Ovid’s Cosmetics or in Pliny the 
Elder’s Natural History. For instance, hulled barley, powdered stag 
antlers, narcissus bulbs, spelt, gum, and honey were the compo-
nents of a mixture to make the face shiny. Dried crocodile excre-
ment,  ceruse,  vegetal  extracts,  as  well  as  lanolin  or  suint  (also 
known as oesype) were used to whiten the complexion.

Recently,  an  analysis  was  made  of  an  ointment  can,  chris-
tened  Londinium,  discovered  in  London  when  excavating 
a  temple  dated  at  the  middle  of  the  2nd  century  ad.  It  con-
tained glucose-based polymers, starch, and tin oxide. The white 
appearance of the cream reflects a certain level of technological 
refinement [5].

From the Middle ages to the 19th century
In Europe, from the Middle Ages up to the middle of the 20th 
century, good breeding and good manners were associated with 
a white complexion. In the Middle Ages, makeup was based on 
water, roses, and flour, which did not prevent ceruse from mak-
ing  a  strong  comeback  in  the  Renaissance.  It  was  then  subse-
quently mixed with arsenic and mercury sublimates to give the 
complexion a fine silver hue.

Toxic  effects  of  these  cosmetics,  however,  was  beginning  to 
worry  the  authorities.  In  1779,  following  the  onset  of  a  num-
ber of serious cases, the manufacture of “foundation bases” was 
placed  under  the  control  of  the  Société  Royale  de  Médicine, 
which had just been set up in 1778. The toxic components were 
then removed. This measure seems to have made them disap-
pear from the market, but it was not until 1915 that the use of 
ceruse was officially prohibited.

With  the  birth  of  the  cosmetics  industry,  products  were 
widely  distributed.  Modern  manufacturing  techniques  with 
production on an industrial scale coupled with the beginning of 
mass consumer use started at the beginning of the 20th century.

20th century: the industrial era 
and diversification
In  the  20th  century,  fashionable  powders  for  the  complexion 
became more sophisticated [6,7]. Market choice extended with 
the launch of new brands such as Gemey, Caron, and Elizabeth 
Arden.

The  1930s  saw  the  development  of  trademarks  such  as  
Helena  Rubinstein  and  Max  Factor  created  by  professional 
movie and Hollywood makeup artists. The products were suited 
to  the  requirements  of  the  movie  studios.  Extremely  opaque, 
tinted  with  gaudy  colors,  they  were  compact  and  difficult  to 
apply.  After  the  success  of  Max  Factor’s  Pancake  and  Panstick 
cosmetics, use of the word “makeup” became widespread. Ini-
tiated  by  Chanel  in  1936,  the  fashion  in  Europe  and  the  USA 
began to switch from white to a tanned complexion.

Even though women were more inclined to wear cosmetics, 
makeup was still not part of everyday life. Pancake makeup, a 
mixture of stearate, lanolin, and dry powders, was not easy to 
apply. Technical advances gradually made products more prac-
tical. The box of loose powder was equipped with a sieve in 1937 
(Caron). In 1940, Lancôme launched Discoteint, a creamy ver-
sion of its compact. Coty micronized its powder (Air Spun) in 
1948. Yet, it was not until the 1950s that a real boom occurred 
in  the  number  of  products  on  the  market.  Compact  makeup 
was made available in creamy form; foundation became a fluid 
cream  (Gemey,  Teint  Clair  Fluide,  1954).  It  was  the  start  of  a 
great diversification of formulations: fluids, dry or creamy com-
pacts, sticks, and powders. Makeup became multifaceted, with 
more  sophisticated  effects,  including  moisturizing,  protection 
from damaging environmental factors, and other skincare prop-
erties in addition to providing color.

Since  then,  complexion  makeup  has  followed  the  continu-
ous changes in regulations and advances in biologic knowledge, 
especially in the area of skin physiology. Over the last decades, 
it  has  benefitted  from  technologic  progress  in  the  field  of  raw 
materials,  as  well  as  from  enhanced  understanding  and  gains 
in optics and physical chemistry. Finally, makeup was enriched 
with the diversity of cultures from all over the world prompted 
by globalization. The beginning of the 21st century opens a new 
era of visual effects, sensory factors, and multiculturalism.

Formulation diversity

In 1873, Ludwig Leichner, a singer at the Berlin Opera, sought 
a way to preserve his skin tone by creating his own foundation 
base  from  natural  pigments.  In  1883,  Alexandre  Napoléon 
Bourjois devised the first dry or pastel foundation. Bourjois was 
about to launch his first dry blush, Pastel Joue.

Women expect foundations to effect a veritable transformation 
that hides surface imperfections, blemishes, discolorations, and 
wrinkles, while enhancing a dull complexion and making shiny 
skin more satiny. Whereas making up the eyes and the lips is gen-
erally done playfully, the complexion receives more attention. It 

20. Facial Foundation

179

Throughout the years, the oil phase has been diversified mainly 
as a result of introducing silicone oils, first in conventional then 
in  volatile  forms.  Silicone  oils  have  dramatically  changed  the 
cosmetic attributes of facial foundation. Foundation no longer 
has to be spread evenly over the face. Its slickness makes it slide 
on the skin evenly with a single stroke without caking. The use 
of volatile oils, siliconated or carbonated, gave rise to the design 
of long-lasting foundations. As the volatile phase evaporates, the 
tinted film concentrates on the skin. Adhering during drying on 
the skin surface, the tinted film withstands friction and does not 
stain clothes.

Thus, the “non-transfer” facial foundation was born.
In  the  21st  century,  combining  volatile  oils  with  differ-
ent  volatilities  will  lead  to  novel  cosmetic  attributes;  the  oily 
phase gradually evaporates accompanying finger strokes dur-
ing application. Today, 90% of the foundations on the market 
are water/silicone/oil emulsions. Over the past few years, the 
chemistry of the emulsifying agents have also expanded as new 
functionalized  emulsifiers  become  available.  Either  endowed 
with moisturizing effects or able to enhance optical properties, 
they contribute to the comfort and the performance of facial 
foundations.

Over the past few years, with the push toward a more nat-
ural-looking  result  and  a  nude,  no-makeup  look,  formulae 
have become lighter, making them more transparent. Formu-
lae with a smaller amount of opaque powders, which increase 
coverage  and  mask  blemishes,  remain  just  as  effective  due 
to the addition of transparent fillers that produce a blurring 
effect.

To go with such a trend, formulators designed entirely fluid 
products  by  working  with  high  concentrations  of  alcohol  in 
invert  emulsions.  By  combining  oils  with  various  volatilities 
within a completely anhydrous galenical structure, formulators 
were then able to produce evanescent textures that leave a veil 
of color on the skin In 2012/2013, the market witnessed the cre-
ation of veritable foundation “essences”, products pushed to the 
extreme limit of fluidity. This precise combination of different 
oils, being natural or synthetic, volatile or long lasting, produces 
a thin veil of color.

compact foundations

Compact foundations are made up of waxes and oils in which 
powders and pigment phases are dispersed under heat, but com-
pact  foundations  can  be  greasy,  heavy,  and  streaky.  The  more 
recent use of esters and siliconated oils has made it possible to 
lighten  the  texture  and  improve  application  qualities.  Volatile 
oils also help the facial foundation film remain unaltered for a 
longer time and provide long-lasting coverage. Compact foun-
dations display the advantage of being adjustable with a sponge, 
which  is  ideal  for  concealing  localized  defects.  Packaging  the 
foundation in compact cases makes it practical for touching up 
during the day.

Figure 20.1  Diversity of textures: from fluid emulsion to paste dispersion.

is in this area that women display their greatest expertise and are 
the most demanding. Women have high expectations for their 
foundation including:
•	 Guaranteed evenness and concealment of flaws;
•	 Hiding of wrinkles and pores;
•	 Good adherence to the skin;
•	 Matting of lustrous skin;
•	 Excellent wear all day long;
•	 Unaltered color over time;
•	 Pleasant, easy application; and
•	 Appropriate for sensitive skin.

Variety of formulations
In order to satisfy diverse demands, a large number of products 
types and forms have been developed (Figure 20.1):
•	 Fluid foundations;
•	 Compact,  easy-to-carry  foundations  with  adjustable  effects; 

and

•	 Powders  to  be  used  alone  or  in  combination  with  a  fluid 

foundation.

Fluid foundations: emulsions
Fluid foundations include both oil-in-water (O/W) and water-
in-oil (W/O) emulsions. Until the 1990s, most foundations were 
O/W emulsions. Generally intended for mixed to oily skin, they 
are characterized by:
•	 Very rapid drying, which can complicate even application;
•	 Poor coverage;
•	 Reduced wear;
•	 Appropriate for mixed to oily skin with their external aqueous 
continuous phase, which makes them feel fresh on the skin.
In  the  1990s,  the  first  W/O  formulations  revolutionized  the 
foundation market. The external oil continuous phase gives tex-
tures with longer drying times more suitable for perfect product 
application. The progressive coating of pigments has improved 
their  dispersion  in  the  oil  phase  and  helped  to  stabilize  the 
emulsion.

180

aDornMEnt  Colored Facial Cosmetics

Waterpacts are a special compact type that contain water. They 
consist of W/O or O/W emulsions rich in waxes that are poured 
into  the  compact  under  heat.  The  water  content  makes  it  nec-
essary  to  use  waterproof  packaging.  These  solid  emulsions  are 
difficult  to  manufacture  and  preserve,  but  they  have  the  huge 
advantage of making the compact fresh as well as practical in use.
Compacts can also be packaged as sticks for more precise and 

localized strokes, such as around the eyes.

Powders
Compact powders are distinct from loose powders as they rep-
resent the “portable to go” version of loose powders. They are 
composed  of  fillers  and  pigments.  A  binder  containing  10% 
oils and grease ensures the compact powder particle cohesion, 
while also providing comfort and ease of application. To make a 
high-quality powder a suitable milling procedure must be used 
in order to disperse the pigments finely and evenly throughout 
the powder phase.

Loose powders
A  loose  powder  is  characterized  by  weak  particle  cohesion.  It 
does not contain binder or may contain just enough to provide 
a  degree  of  cohesion  that  controls  the  final  product  volatility. 
Loose powders are generally applied with a puff, but manufac-
turers are developing tricks for easy application by using more 
finely tuned application brushes. Unlike with a puff, the powder 
does not scatter.

Compact powders
There are different kinds of compact powders:

table 20.1  Products	categories	overview.

•	 Finishing  powders  provide  sheer  coverage  and  are  used 
for touch-up during the day. They are usually applied with 
a sponge over a foundation to mask facial shine. The fillers 
used in these powders tend to be organic, because they are 
more transparent. They also have the advantage of absorb-
ing sebum while still leaving a natural look. The formulation 
challenge is to find a good balance between texture quality 
and the ease in placing the proper amount of powder on the 
applicator.

•	 Powder  foundations  are  compact  or  loose  powders  whose 
covering power is equivalent to that of a foundation (i.e. better 
than a finishing powder). They can be used instead of founda-
tion,  for  instance  by  women  who  dislike  fluid  textures.  The 
loose powder version known as mineral makeup is currently 
enjoying considerable success.

•	 Two-way cakes, which are available in compact form, can be 
used either wet or dry. This kind of powder is popular with 
Japanese women. Using it dry gives the same kind of makeup 
as  a  powder  foundation,  while  using  it  wet  gives  more  even 
coverage. This dual usage requires the vast majority of the fill-
ers to be hydrophobic. Treated fillers, coated with silicone oils 
that cannot be wetted, are mostly used. In this way, the com-
pact remains unaltered after contact with water and does not 
cake.  These  two-way  cakes  are  formulated  to  provide  fuller 
coverage  than  powder  foundations.  They  give  a  very  matte 
appearance  that  will  not  wear  off  in  hot,  humid  conditions 
such as in the Asiatic climate.

The main drawback of all powders is a certain discomfort rela-
tive to foundation, mainly because of the absence of any mois-
turizing effect (Table 20.1).

skin type target

Formulations characteristics

name of category

Main objectives

All	types	of	skin	but	
adapted	to	Asian	routine

Uncolored	formulations
To	be	applied	under	foundation

All	types	of	skin

Weakly	colored

All	types	of	skin

Weakly	colored	but	pearly

Foundation	base

Tinted	creams
BB	creams

Bronzers
Highlighters

All	types	of	skin

Greens,	purples,	blues,	apricot

Complexion	correctors

All	types	of	skin

Low	to	full	coverage

Fluid	foundations

Application:	Lasting	effect	–	spreadability
Moisturizing	effect	–	matt	finish

Skincare	attributes
Skincare	and	make-up	performances

Healthy	“glow”	effect,	suntan	color

Correction	of	discoloration	(red	spots	by	
green	tints)
Complexion	freshener	(apricot	–	blue)

Wear	–	matt	finish
Antiaging	–	radiance

Normal	to	oily	skin

Low	to	full	coverage

Compacted	powders,	such	as	two-
way	cakes	(adapted	to	Asian	routine)

Matt	finish	–	complexion	evenness

Normal	to	dry	skin

Medium	to	full	coverage

Compact	foundation

Normal	to	oily	skin

Weak	to	medium	coverage

Waterpacts	(poured	emulsions)

Evenness	–	adjustability	of	the	result.	
Comfort	–	mobility

Same	properties	as	compacts,	plus	
freshness	and	hydrosoluble	actives

Eye	contour

Medium	to	full	coverage

Concealers

Hides	dark	circles	under	the	eyes

All	types	of	skin

Transparent	to	opaque	(mineral	makeup)

Loose	powders

Matt	finish	and	adhesion	–	evenness

color creation
At the core of foundation formulations there is a combination of 
colored powders that must be:
•	 As finely dispersed as possible with optimal stability; and
•	 Able to create a natural-looking tinted film once smeared over 

the skin.

To achieve this end, the formulator has available various colo-
rants  that  comply  with  the  different  cosmetics  legislations 
(positive  lists)  and  are  thus  certified  to  be  harmless,  chemi-
cally  pure,  and  microbiologically  clean.  These  are  inorganic 
pigments such as metallic oxides – yellow, red, and black iron 
oxides – to which colored and uncolored pearls can be added 
to  give  a  lustrous  effect.  To  brighten  foundations  (especially 
the  darkest  ones)  blue  pigment  can  be  substituted  for  black 
(Figure 20.2).

For  improved  pigment  dispersion  and  formula  stability,  the 
process of pigment coating has gradually become the standard. 
In water/silicone emulsions, a silicone coating is most frequently 
used. Coating with an amino acid aims at developing products 
for sensitive skin.

20. Facial Foundation

181

Pigments and coverage
The amount of titanium oxide pigment in the product is an indi-
cation of its ability to cover skin flaws (i.e. the level of coverage 
provided). A foundation is characterized by theoretical cover-
age on a scale from 7 (natural effect) to 50 (corrective makeup). 
However,  this  ignores  the  optical  properties  of  the  product, 
which  may  also  be  able  to  mask  skin  defects  through  a  soft 
focus effect [8]. It also does not take into account the influence 
of  texture,  which  will  determine  how  transparent  or  opaque 
the colored deposit is according to the ability of the product to 
spread evenly as a thin layer over the skin.

Importance of fillers
Fillers are all the non-pigment powders introduced in the prod-
uct to provide:
•	 Covering power;
•	 The ability to absorb sebum and sweat so as to make the skin 

velvety and fix the color to the skin;

•	 Fineness and smoothness, which enhances cosmetic qualities 

of the textures; and

•	 Spreadability, which makes application easier.
Both form and chemical nature govern the final qualities of fill-
ers (Figure 20.3a–c). Talc is an example of a spreadable, lamellar 
powder that is widely used for its extreme softness and absorb-
ing power. Kaolin, starches, and calcium carbonate used to be 
widely employed but they have now been superseded by:
•	 Different varieties of silica, sometimes porous forms;
•	 Polymers  such  as  nylon  and  polymethylmethacrylate 

(PMMA); and

•	 Mica platelets that can also be coated.
Not  only  are  these  powders  essential  to  the  basic  properties 
of a product, but they also contribute to its optical properties. 
Transparent or opaque, lustrous, matte, or soft focus, they help 
to achieve the desired finish on the skin.

While  fillers  remain  a  necessary  ingredient  in  powders, 
smaller  amounts  are  introduced  in  foundations.  Formulators 
favour optically transparent particles rather than white, opaque 
fillers.

When applied, the  product is lighter  and  more transparent, 

Figure 20.2  The four iron oxides used in foundations.

and does not create a caked or mask-like look.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 20.3  Shape variety of fillers (a–c).

182

aDornMEnt  Colored Facial Cosmetics

When color and skincare combine
Progress  in  formulation  technologies  has  allowed  scientists  to 
stabilize  pigments  in  skincare  formulae  designed  to  provide 
short-  and  long-term  results,  such  as  protection,  anti-ageing 
treatment, and long-lasting moisture.

Reconciling comfortable texture and the masking properties 
of  desaturated  color  had  been  the  goal  of  products  designed 
towards  the  user’s  skincare  routine:  such  products  were  very 
successful in South Korea, then called BB creams (blemish balm 
cream).

European versions were just as successful by combining effec-
tive  skincare  with  a  healthy  glow/radiance  (BB)  or  corrective 
(CC) color.

From 2010, these products opened a new category of hybrid 
formulations conceived to provide coverage (through blurring 
or  color)  while  being  effective  through  their  active  ingredi-
ents. These simple, multi-use products combining skincare and 
make-up cosmetics are very popular among women, making the 
frontier between both categories increasingly fuzzier.

Facial foundation application

Most  women  usually  apply  their  facial  foundation  first  when 
applying cosmetics. They may choose to modify their complex-
ion color or make it more glowing and even without changing 
the color. Whatever effect is desired, makeup is used to recreate 
an ideal of color and finish peculiar to each individual according 
to ethnic and cultural practices. It must also be adapted to suit 
the woman’s routine: application of a single product, use over a 
base or under a powder, stroked on by finger or by sponge.

There is a great diversity in the use of complexion makeup. 
The formulator must address several issues. Being familiar with 
the various skin color characteristics is a primary requisite for 
recreating  the  shades  that  closely  match  the  ethnic  origin  of 
the user. For any given product, this is a necessary prerequisite 
for creating a range of shades that will likely satisfy the women 
throughout the world, whether Caucasian, Hispanic, African, or 
Asian.

A  large  study  carried  out  on  a  widely  representative  panel 
demonstrated  significant  differences  in  the  colorimetric  char-
acteristics of skin color of six ethnic groups living in nine dif-
ferent countries [9,10]. The recorded measurements enabled the 
definition of a wide color space showing the various color spec-
tra typical of each ethnic group’s skin color mesh and overlap 
(Figure 20.4).

Further studies showed that the variety of makeup routines 
reflected  the  ethnic  origin  and  cultural  heritage  which  deter-
mines whether a woman feels positive toward her natural skin 
color. For many women, skin color is a major factor in their cul-
tural identity. Complexion makeup is the easiest way to achieve 
even  skin  color  by  erasing  surface  color  variations  or  correct-
ing color unevenness. Some women wish to appear more deeply 
“tanned”  than  their  natural  color.  This  behavior  is  commonly 

found  in  Caucasian  and  Hispanic  women.  Japanese  women, 
however, desire their makeup to give them a lighter complexion 
(Figure 20.5) [10].

The  formulator  works  within  this  defined  scope  to  develop 
shades matching natural skin colors. To meet women’s expecta-
tions, it is necessary to analyze how women self-perceive their 
complexion.  By  identifying  skin  colors  within  a  definite  color 
range  and  precisely  identifying  the  makeup  habits  of  women 
over the world, it is now possible to formulate a variety of shades 
that match up with the wishes of all women.

Emphasis on quality, safety and confirmed 
performance

Complexion  makeup  creates  an  intimate  relationship  between 
the  skin  and  a  complex  formulation  that  is  left  on  for  hours. 
Before being marketed, every product has to undergo a battery 
of tests to confirm its safety and performance. There are several 
steps in this process.

Design stage
The formulator must ensure high quality ingredients are used 
by  defining  specifications  and  analytical  controls  and  carry-
ing out screening for the non-toxicity of the ingredients with 
in vitro tests on reconstructed skin models. Each raw material 
used must be cleared for safety and have a proper toxicologic 
dossier.

Formulation stage
It is necessary to:
•	 Evaluate stability by subjecting products to thermal cycles to 

accelerate aging.

•	 Confirm the level of microbiologic preservation of the formu-
las using challenge tests. The selected method of preservation 
and the nature of the preservatives depend on the technology 
involved (powder emulsion, anhydrous compact). The risk of 
microbiologic  contamination  increases  with  the  water  con-
tent. It also depends on the packaging; a pump bottle provides 
better protection than a jar.

•	 Check  it  is  harmless  through  using  alternate  methods:  in 
vitro  testing  and  including  tests  run  on  reconstructed  skin 
model,  e.g.  (EpiSkin®,  L’Oréal  Episkin  SNC,  Lyon,  France); 
clinical tests (simple patch test [SPT] and repeated patch test 
[RPT]); and, finally, user tests under dermatologic controls, 
carried out on the product’s targeted skin types, particularly 
on  sensitive  skins  and  using  wide  ranging,  representative 
panels. Use testing under ophthalmologic controls is carried 
out systematically on products intended to mask under-eye 
rings.

Performance stage
The performance of the product must be studied to ensure that 
it  complies  with  consumer  wishes  and  to  obtain  an  unbiased 

20. Facial Foundation

183

(a)

Reflectance

(b)

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
350

400

450

500

550

600

650

700

750

Wavelength (nm)

(c)

L*=62.7

C*=27.0

h=58.8

Figure 20.4  (a) The color of the forehead was measured using a spectroradiometer inside a Chromasphere™. (b) The volunteer placed her face into the Chro-
masphere. A standardized camera was used to acquire pictures of the face. (c) A spectroradiometer measured the reflectance of forehead in the visible field 
400–700 nm every 4 nm. The recorded spectrum was expressed in the CIE 1976 standard colorimetric space L*C*h D65/10 ° where each color is described 
through three coordinates that reflect perception by human eye. h, Hue angle (angular coordinate); C*, chroma (radius coordinate); L*, lightness (z axis).

opinion on advertising claims and consumer complaints. Sen-
sorial analysis tests provide qualitative and quantitative assess-
ments  of  a  product’s  features  by  a  trained  panel  of  experts,  as 
well as by untutored panels performing the tests under the for-
mula’s normal user conditions.

Additionally,  a  complexion  product  can  be  tested  with  the 

conventional methods used for skincare cosmetics:

•	 Measurement of moisturizing effects using SkinChip® (L’Oréal, 
Chevilly-Larue, France) or Corneometer® (Courage & Khazaka,  
Köln, Germany).

•	 Effects on skin firmness with using the Dermal Torque Meter® 

(Dia-Stron Ltd, Andover, UK).

•	 Image analysis on skin imprints or, even better, projection of 
light fringes involving no contact with skin (i.e. skin in real 

184

aDornMEnt  Colored Facial Cosmetics

LIGHTNESS L*

80

70

60

50

40

30

Group 5

Group 4

Group 6

Group 3

Group 2

Group 1

20

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

HUE h

Figure 20.5  The worldwide skin color space depicted in (h, L*) and split in six groups of skin tones that reflect the color diversity.

conditions with makeup as applied) to assess antiwrinkle per-
formance.
Also specific tests:

•	 Color appraisal using the Chromasphère® (L’Oréal, Chevilly-
Larue, France): the difference in the color of the skin before 
and  after  applying  makeup  quantifies  the  improvement  in 
color evenness and change in color effect. Moreover, it makes 
it possible to monitor both. As a result, the manufacturer can 
claim that its makeup effects last a given number of hours.
•	 Evaluation of the matt finish with a suitable device (Samba® 

[Bossa Nova Technologies, Venice, CA, USA]).

conclusions and prospects

Beauty is diverse. Textures, tones, matte or lustrous results, play 
time, and sensoriality must all come together to give a woman 
a simple means to recreate her ideal complexion. Complexion 
makeup  products  today  benefit  from  knowledge  of  physical 
chemistry,  resulting  in  better  understanding  of  the  relation-
ships  between  chemical  composition,  texture,  and  application 
behavior. Facial foundations benefit from technologic advances 

in optics, which has generated formulations that are sheer, glow-
ing, matte, able to provide soft focus concealment of flaws, while 
simultaneously giving shades that mirror the natural hues of the 
skin.

Complexion makeup products have been expanded to deliver 
multisensory  effects  and  address  ethnic  diversity  issues.  From 
simple  emulsions  applied  by  finger,  facial  foundations  have 
evolved into mousses, creamy compacts, and soft powders that 
can be applied by brush or sponge, and layered. Facial founda-
tions  contribute  to  beauty  of  the  face  respecting  the  women’s 
own skin, but also addressing their culture and ethnic diversity 
[11,12].  New  forms,  new  optical  effects,  and  new  application 
methods will permit users to attain their ideal complexion irre-
spective of origin or own canons of beauty.

references

1  Claude C. (2006) Histoire du maquillage du teint: une vision croisée 
des  cultures,  des  modes  et  des  évolutions  technologiques.  Thèse 
pour l’obtention du Diplôme d’Etat de Docteur en Pharmacie Fac-
ulté Paris V.

20. Facial Foundation

185

2  Gröning K. (1997) La Peinture du Corps. Arthaud Editions.
3  Gründ F. (2003) Le Corps et le Sacré. Editions du Chêne Hachette 

Livre.

8  Takayoshi I, Miyoji O. (2002) Appealing the technical function of 
the optical characteristic foundation from the view point of market-
ing. Fragrance J 30, 59–63.

4  Walter P, Martinetto P, Tsoucaris G, Breniaux P, Lefebvre MA, Rich-
ard G, et al. (1999) Making make-up in ancient Egypte. Nature 397, 
483–4.

9  Caisey  L,  Grangeat  F,  Lemasson  A,  Talabot  J,  Voirin  A.  (2004) 
Skin color and make-up strategies of women from different ethnic 
groups. Int J Cosmet Sci 28, 427–37.

5  Evershed  RP,  Berstan  R,  Grew  F,  Copley  MS,  Charmant  AJH, 
Barham E, et al. (2004) Formulation of a Roman cosmetic. Nature 
432, 35–6.

6  Chanine N, Deprund MC, De La Forest F, et al. (1996) 100 Ans de 

Beauté. Atlas Editions.

7  Pawin H, Verschoore M. (2001) Maquillage du Teint du Visage. 
Paris:  Encyclopédie  Médicale  Chirurgicale,  Cosmétologie 
Dermatologie  Esthétique  Editions  Scientifiques  et  Médicales 
Elsevier.

10  Baras  D,  Caisey  L.  Skin,  lips  and  lashes  of  different  skins  of  color: 
typology  and  make-up  strategies.  In  AP  Kelly  and  SC  Taylor,  Der-
matology for Skin of Color. McGraw-Hill, Berkshire, UK, pp. 541–9.
11  Mulhern  R,  Fieldman  G,  Hussey  T,  Lévêque  JL,  Pineau  P.  (2003) 
Do cosmetics enhance female Caucasian facial attractiveness? Int J 
Cosmet Sci 25, 199–205.

12  Korichi  R,  Pelle-de-Queral  D,  Gazano  G,  Aubert  A.  (2008)  Why 
women use make-up: implication of psychological traits in make-
up functions. J Cosmet Sci 59, 127–37.

Chapter 21
Camouflage techniques

Anne Bouloc
Vichy Laboratoires, Cosmétique Active International, Asnières, France

BasIC ConCepts

•	 Camouflage	makeup	is	used	to	cover	facial	defects	of	contour	and	color.
•	 Camouflage	makeup	must	be	artistically	applied	to	achieve	an	optimal	result.
•	 Camouflage	techniques	can	improve	quality	of	life.
•	 Camouflage	therapists	can	train	patients	in	the	proper	application	techniques	for	cosmetics.

Introduction

Camouflage techniques can be helpful in patients who do not 
achieve complete or immediately attractive results from derma-
tologic therapy. Because appearance is one of the pivotal factors 
influencing  social  interactions,  facial  blemishes  and  disfigure-
ments  are  a  psychosocial  burden  in  affected  patients  leading 
to low self-esteem and poor body image. Camouflage makeup 
can  normalize  the  appearance  of  skin  and  improve  quality  of 
life. Training in camouflage techniques is essential because the 
application is different from regular foundations. This chapter 
discusses the use of camouflage cosmetics.

Definitions

Camouflage  cosmetics  were  introduced  more  than  50  years 
ago  to  improve  the  appearance  of  World  War  II  pilots  who 
had  sustained  burns.  The  products  provided  an  opaque  cover 
over the damaged skin areas. Modern high quality camouflage 
products provide an excellent coverage, but with a more natural 
appearance (Figure 21.1).

There are several brands of camouflage makeup on the market. 
They aim to conceal skin discoloration and scars and to impart 
a natural, normal appearance. Camouflage products differ from 
makeup products purchased over the counter. They contain up to 
25% more pigment, as well as fillers endowed with optical proper-
ties. Camouflage makeups are waterproof and designed to cover 
and mask a problem, but must be mixed to match the patient's 
skin tone. The goals of camouflage cosmetics are to provide [1]:
 1.  Color:  Camouflage  makeup  must  match  all  skin  tones  as 
it  should  blend  into  the  color  of  the  area  on  the  face  it  is 
intended to cover evenly.

 2.  Opacity: Camouflage makeup must conceal all types of skin 
discoloration, yielding as natural and normal an appearance 
as possible.

 3.  Waterproof:  Camouflage  makeup  must  be  rain  and 
sweat-resistant,  remaining  unaltered  with  athletics  (e.g. 
swimming).

 4.  Holding  power:  Camouflage  makeup  must  adhere  to  skin 

without sliding off.

 5.  Longer wear: Camouflage makeup must provide the assur-
ance of long wear with easy reapplication, if necessary.

 6.  Ease  of  application:  Camouflage  makeup  must  be  easy  to 
apply.  Too  many  steps  and  color  applications  may  create 
patient confusion.
There are several different types of camouflage cosmetics:
 1.  Full concealment: A method referring to complete coverage 
of the damaged skin and extending beyond the boundaries 
of  the  injured  area.  High  coverage  foundation  creams  or 
cover creams should be used for full concealment.

 2.  Pigment  blending:  A  method  that  involves  selection  of  a 
cover cream that matches the color of patient's foundation.
 3.  Subtle coverage: A light application of foundation cream that 

conceals only moderately.
Contouring  is  used  to  minimize  areas  of  hypertrophy  or 
atrophy present in facial scars, using highlighting or shading to 
create the illusion of smoothness.

Camouflage makeup application procedures

It  is  important  to  remember  that  camouflage  makeup  is  most 
effective  when  applied  over  skin  with  color  abnormalities  or 
discoloration. The size of the defect is immaterial, because it is 
as easy to cover a large blemish as a smaller one. However, the 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

186

21. Camouflage Techniques

187

High coverage potential
Difficult to apply
No natural result
Heaviness

IDEAL CORRECTIVE MAKE-UP
  High coverage potential
  Easy to apply
  Natural result

Less coverage potential
Good playtime
Comfortable texture

High level
of coverage

30

20

10

Low level
of coverage

Figure  21.1  Ideal  corrective  makeup:  a  compro-
mise  between  coverage  and  cosmetic  qualities. 
After Sylvie Guichard, L'Oréal Research.

Low 
cosmetic
qualities

Excellent 
cosmetic
qualities

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 21.2  Camouflage makeup technique. (a) Warm the product on the back of the hand. (b) Apply over the imperfection to be covered. (c) Blend in 
round the edges.

camouflage of texture abnormalities is more challenging. Rough 
scars  are  more  difficult  to  conceal  than  smooth  scars  because 
unevenness is exaggerated after camouflaging [2].

This  section  of  the  chapter  presents  the  steps  necessary  to 
complete  a  camouflage  makeup  application  procedure  for 
a  given  patient.  First,  patients  should  be  asked  about  prior 
experience  in  attempting  to  camouflage  their  lesions  with  or 
without medical makeup. If they have no experience, the neces-
sary  steps  should  be  discussed  in  detail.  Second,  the  patient's 
skin  should  be  cleansed  with  a  product  selected  according  to 
patient's skin type. For an optimal camouflage result, the skin 
should  be  well  exfoliated  and  moisturized.  If  using  a  camou-
flage product without sun protection factor (SPF) protection, a 
sunscreen-containing moisturizer should be selected otherwise 
a bland moisturizer can be used.

Third,  the  camouflage  product  must  be  selected  to  match 
the patient's skin. The camouflage therapist should identify the 

underlying  tones  that  contribute  to  skin  color:  haemoglobin 
produces  red,  keratin  produces  yellow,  and  melanin  produces 
brown [3]. Thinner skin possesses more red tones while thicker 
skin appears more yellow. For this reason, it is almost impossible 
to mimic natural skin color with only one shade.

Fourth,  the  camouflage  therapist  must  understand  color. 

There are three color coordinates: hue, value, and intensity.
 1.  Hue  is  the  coordinate  for  the  pure  spectrum  colors  com-
monly referred to as “color name” – red, orange, yellow, blue, 
green,  violet  –  which  appear  in  the  hue  circle  or  rainbow. 
Each different hue is a different reflected wavelength of light. 
White light splitting up through a prism has seven hues: red, 
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet.

 2.  Value  is  defined  as  the  relative  lightness  or  darkness  of  a 
color.  Adding  white  to  a  hue  produces  a  high  value  color, 
often  called  a  tint.  Adding  black  to  a  hue  produces  a  low 
value color, often called a shade.

188

aDornment  Colored Facial Cosmetics

 3.  Intensity,  also  called  chroma  or  saturation,  refers  to  the 
brightness  of  a  color.  A  color  is  at  full  intensity  when  not 
mixed with black or white – a pure hue. The intensity of a 
color  can  be  altered,  making  it  duller  or  more  neutral  by 
adding gray to the color.
Matching a color from one manufacturer to another one is a 
very difficult procedure because of the variety of shades that can 
be  produced  by  combining  various  colors  and  the  tints  of  the 
color that can be made by varying the amount of white. Judg-
ment of color should always be made on the skin and never in 
the  container  because  what  seems  to  be  the  same  shade  may 
appear quite different on the skin.

The  use  of  neutralizers  in  camouflaging  is  somewhat  con-
troversial. Some experts think it is possible to neutralize unde-
sirable  skin  discoloration  [2].  For  example,  green  undertoner 
neutralizes a red complexion and lavender undertoner negates 
a yellow complexion. Other authors think that makeup under-
toners do nothing but create a third color [4]. They consider that 
when two colors are mixed, the result is a third color. Mixing 
opposite colors on the color wheel (e.g. green and red or yellow 
and purple) will result in an unattractive gray–brownish color 
that must be concealed with a color that matches the skin, which 
adds an extra step and thickness to the makeup.

For contouring, several products have to be applied. Hyper-
trophic scars appear lighter than surrounding skin, and have to 
be camouflaged applying a darker product than to surrounding 
skin. Atrophic scars, however, appear darker than surrounding 
skin, and have to be corrected using lighter product.

Once the shades have been selected, the camouflage therapist 
may apply them to the back of the hand as a painter uses a pal-
ette to warm and soften the product (Figure 21.2a). Camouflage 
products are either applied with a sponge in a patting motion or 
with the fingertips (Figure 21.2b). The patting motion applies the 
product to the surface of the skin and does not clog pores, which 
allows the skin to retain its natural characteristics. Distinct bor-
ders are eliminated by blending the edges (Figure 21.2c).

A camouflage product often is not used over the entire face 
like a regular facial foundation, but the surrounding skin must 
be matched as closely as possible. Patients have to be reminded 
that skin color on the hands does not really correspond to skin 
color of the face. The application is generally followed up with 
an application of powder which sets and waterproofs the cam-
ouflage  product.  The  setting  powder  used  should  be  translu-
cent so that the camouflage product does not change color. For 
patients with very dry skin, it is not necessary to use a powder 
as the oils are quickly absorbed into the skin.

Many  patients  may  prefer  using  only  one  shade  even  when 
the color match is not perfect. Men may not wish to mix colors. 
It might be of interest to show the patient the coverage with one 
shade and the coverage using more than one shade while dem-
onstrating that color blending is relatively easy and worthwhile.
For men, common skin flaws must be reproduced in order 
to  prevent  a  “mask-like”  appearance  [5].  Beard  stubble  can 
be recreated by using different sponges and a brown or black 

pigment  that  mimics  surface  irregularities.  Other  colored 
powdered blushes can be used on the cheeks to simulate the 
natural  glow  of  youth  and  around  the  eyes  and  mouth  to 
attract  the  attention  on  other  parts  of  the  face  [6].  Pictures 
should be taken before and after the application to document 
the cosmetic results.

Finally,  the  cosmetics  must  be  removed  each  evening  prior 
to  bed.  Removing  camouflage  makeup  is  more  difficult  than 
regular  makeup.  Alcohol  or  acetone-based  removers  are  too 
irritating for sensitive skin, thus it is better to use water-soluble 
cream-type makeup remover. The remover is applied generously 
to  emulsify  the  makeup  followed  by  wiping  with  cotton  pads. 
The face is then rinsed with tepid water and patted dry [7].

other camouflage therapies

A  few  other  options  than  camouflage  makeup  therapies  have 
been suggested. Dihydroxyacetone, the main ingredient in self-
tanning creams, has been proposed for camouflaging in patients 
with vitiligo [8]. It may be a cheap, safe, and effective alternative 
especially for the hands and the feet as cover creams are water-
proof but not rubproof.

Medical  tatooing  under  local  anesthesia  has  also  been  tried 
to create the appearance of hair in hairless areas [9]. The pig-
ment used is made of ferrous oxide, glycerol, and alcohol. A test 
on a small area should be performed to evaluate the outcome. 
The needle should be introduced into the dermis similarly to the 
natural hair pattern of the patient.

medical indications for camouflage makeup

There are various medical indications for camouflage makeup. 
The lesion requiring camouflage can be permanent or tempo-
rary.  The  best  results  are  obtained  with  macules,  but  papules, 
nodules, or scars can also be camouflaged. Macular lesions for 
camouflaging  include  pigmentary  disorders  such  as  vitiligo 
(Figure  21.3),  chloasma  (Figure  21.4),  lentigenes,  postinflam-
matory hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation (Figure 23.5); 
hypervascular disorders such as telangiectasia (Figure 21.6) and 
angioma  (Figure  23.7);  and  tattoos.  Papulonodular  lesions  for 
camouflaging include discoid lupus, acne (Figure 21.8), derma-
tosis papulosa nigra, and facial scars.

After a graft for oncologic surgery, or for other postsurgical 
scars, there may be variation in pigmentation and/or relief and 
corrective cosmetics may be of interest. Depending on the skin's 
ability  to  heal,  camouflage  therapy  can  be  applied  7–10  days 
after most surgical procedures. However, the premature use of 
makeup  following  epidermal  damage  may  cause  a  secondary 
infection or tattooing effect.

There may be transient injuries or lesions of the skin that can 
be  camouflaged  with  makeup.  An  injury  may  produce  hema-
toma  and  oedema  that  should  be  concealed  for  occupational 

21. Camouflage Techniques

189

Figure 21.3  Perioribital hyperpigmentation: 
(a) before and (b) after camouflage.

(a)

(b)

(ai)

(bi)

)iia(

)iib(

Figure 21.4  Vitiligo: (a) (i & ii) before and (b) (i & ii) after camouflage.

190

aDornment  Colored Facial Cosmetics

(a)

(b)

Figure  21.5  Melasma:  (a)  before 
and (b) after camouflage.

(ai)

(bi)

(aii)

(bii)

Figure  21.6  Vascular  malformation:  (a)  (i  &  ii) 
before and (b) (i & ii) after camouflage.

21. Camouflage Techniques

191

(a)

Figure 21.7  Telangiectasia: (a) before and (b) after camouflage.

(b)

Figure  21.8  Acne:  (a)  before  and  (b) 
after camouflage.

(a)

(b)

reason or social event. Corrective makeup can also be used after 
medical procedures such as laser resurfacing, peels, and micro-
dermabrasion  to  camouflage  erythema.  After  filler  injections, 
redness  may  also  appear.  Laser  hair  removal  will  induce  tem-
porary redness, but following some lasers the skin may become 
purpuric. Camouflage makeup optimizes the patient's postpro-
cedure appearance. Indeed, if the patient knows he or she will be 
red, he or she will require an appointment at the end of the day 
or of the week. With corrective makeup, patients are able to go 
straight back to work. Similarly, after filler or botulinum toxin 
injections, hematomas may appear which can be camouflaged 
with corrective makeup.

Beginning a camouflage clinic

It is important to offer patients camouflaging makeup knowledge 
[6]. In general, the dermatologist will delegate this activity to a staff 
member.  Many  physicians  find  that  a  camouflage  therapist  can 
bring an added value to the practice by enhancing patient recovery.
The room for teaching camouflaging techniques should con-
tain a table with a mirror and fluorescent bulbs to provide ade-
quate light. A chair should be placed in the room tall enough 
to allow the camouflage therapist to stand. Several camouflage 
products  should  be  available  in  various  shades  to  match  the 
different skin colors.

192

aDornment  Colored Facial Cosmetics

the camouflage therapist

In the USA, camouflage therapists are state-licensed and medically 
trained skincare professionals, with both clinical knowledge and 
therapeutic skill [5]. They do not treat patients but educate them 
by providing information on the best way to go about applying 
camouflage makeup. In other countries of the world such a degree 
does not exist. Camouflage therapists should obtain appropriate 
training and education. They should be trained to select and apply 
cosmetics  beyond  the  application  of  standard  cosmetics.  Their 
training should include the study of facial anatomy, highlighting 
and  contouring  techniques,  and  prosthetic  makeup  techniques 
similar to those used in the stage and motion picture industry.

The camouflage therapist should be a good communicator to 
teach patients how to apply various products, which the patient 
can  easily  reproduce  without  assistance.  Camouflage  thera-
pists should be genuinely interested in the patient's well-being. 
Therefore, they should be mature enough to work with people 
who have a severely damaged appearance.

The camouflage therapist must record the patient's history and 
identify needs based on the patient's perception of the problems. 
Because of the clinical knowledge and personal qualities required, 
a trained nurse would be an ideal camouflage therapist [7,10].

The  camouflage  therapist  can  design  a  cosmetic  treatment 
plan. During the interview four issues should be addressed [5]:
 1.  The ability of the patient to follow simple instructions.
 2.  The patient's social activities and job environment.
 3.  The patient's prior makeup experience.
 4.  The financial status of the patient.

Camouflage makeup and quality of life

Psychosocial aspects of skin disease has important implications 
for optimal management of patients. The presence of abnormal 
visible skin lesions may result in significant psychologic impair-
ment.  Health-related  quality  of  life  (QOL)  is  a  measurement 
method to describe physical, social, and psychologic well-being 
and to assess the burden of disease on daily living. Several gen-
eral  measures  have  been  developed  [11].  Surprisingly,  women 
who used facial foundation reported a poorer QOL than those 
who  did  not.  This  was  interpreted  to  mean  that  more  severely 
impacted patients are more likely to hide the disorder using cam-
ouflage cosmetics, albeit inadequately. Yet, wearing makeup may 
improve  appearance  and  looking  better  translates  into  feeling 
better. Those who feel better show signs of higher self-esteem.

Many  studies  have  been  performed  in  order  to  demonstrate 
the  effects  of  corrective  makeup  on  patients'  QOL  [12,13,14] 
and  remove  misconceptions  that  the  use  of  cosmetics  can  be 
tedious and difficult for ordinary people. A wide range of facial 
blemishes  and  disfigurements  such  as  pigmentary  disorders, 
vascular disorders, scars, acne, rosacea, lupus, lichen sclerosus, 
and keratosis pilaris have been included in these studies. QOL 
questionnaires  were  completed  before  the  first  application  and 

after  applying  corrective  makeup.  Results  show  that  corrective 
cosmetics are well-tolerated and patients report high satisfaction 
rates.  There  is  an  immediate  improvement  in  skin  appearance 
and no significant adverse effects. Corrective cosmetics rapidly 
improve QOL, which persists with continued use. There was no 
difference in QOL according to the type of facial disfigurement 
or the size of the affected area. Not only were patients improved 
with pigmentary or vascular disorders, but also with scars.

Camouflage therapy can help patients cope with skin disor-
ders  that  affect  appearance.  The  cosmetics  can  be  used  long-
term without difficulty. Camouflage therapy is of great help to 
patients who cannot be medically improved.

Conclusions

Camouflage  techniques  help  affected  patients  cope  with  the 
psychologic implications of facial blemishes or disfigurements. 
Covering visible signs of the disease minimizes stigmatization. 
Today's  high  quality  camouflage  products  provide  excellent 
good coverage with a natural appearance. Many physicians find 
that  a  camouflage  therapist  can  bring  an  added  value  to  the 
practice by enhancing patient recovery.

references

1  Westmore  MG.  (2001)  Camouflage  and  make-up  preparations. 

Dermatol Clin 19, 406–12.

2  Draelos  ZK.  (1993)  Cosmetic  camouflaging  techniques.  Cutis  52, 

362–4.

3  LeRoy L. (2000) Camouflage therapy. Dermatol Nurs 12, 415–6.
4  Westmore  MG.  (1991)  Make-up  as  an  adjunct  and  aid  to  the 

practice of dermatology. Dermatol Clin 9, 81–8.

5  Rayner VL. (1995) Camouflage therapy. Dermatol Clin 13, 467–72.
6  Deshayes  P.  (2008)  Le  maquillage  médical  pour  une  meilleure 
qualité de vie des patients. Ann Dermatol Venereol 135, S208–10.
7  Rayner  VL.  (2000)  Cosmetic  rehabilitation.  Dermatol  Nurs  12, 

267–71.

8  Rajatanavin  N,  Suwanachote  S,  Kulkllakarn  S.  (2008)  Dihydroxy-
acetone: a safe camouflaging option in vitiligo. Int J Dermatol 47, 
402–6.

9  Tsur  H,  Kapkan  HY.  (1993)  Camouflaging  hairless  areas  on  the 

male face by artistic tattoo. Dermatol Nurs 5, 118–20.

10  McConochie L, Pearson E. (2006) Development of a nurse-led skin 

camouflage clinic. Nurs Stand 20, 74–8.

11  Balkrishnan  R,  McMichael  AJ,  Hu  JY,  et  al.  (2006)  Correlates  of 
health-related quality of life in women with severe facial blemishes. 
Int J Dermatol 45, 111–5.

12  Boehncke WH, Ochsendorf F, Paeslack I, Kaufmann R, Zollner TM. 
(2002) Decorative cosmetics improve the quality of life in patients 
with disfiguring diseases. Eur J Dermatol 12, 577–80.

13  Holme  SA,  Beattie  PE,  Fleming  CJ.  (2002)  Cosmetic  camouflage 

advice improves quality of life. Br J Dermatol 147, 946–9.

14  Balkrishnan R, McMichael AJ, Hu JY, et al. (2005) Corrective cos-
metics  are  effective  for  women  with  facial  pigmentary  disorders. 
Cutis 75, 181–7.

chapter 22
Lips and Lipsticks

Catherine Heusèle, Hervé Cantin, and Frédéric Bonté
LVMH Recherche, Saint Jean de Braye, France 

BasIc concepts

•	 The	lips	possess	a	complex	anatomy	consisting	of	mucosa	and	skin.
•	 Lipsticks	are	designed	to	enhance	the	appearance	of	the	lips.
•	 Lipstick	is	an	anhydrous	paste	of	oils	and	waxes	in	which	pigments	are	dispensed	along	with	other	coloring	agents.

Introduction

MUCOSA

Lip makeup is an essential element in seduction and women fre-
quently use lipsticks to make their faces more attractive. The lips 
are muscular membranous folds surrounding the anterior part 
of the mouth. This tissue is both mucosa and skin and has a com-
plex  anatomy.  Labial  tissue  has  a  dense  population  of  sensory 
receptors, is very sensitive to environmental stress, can present 
pigmentation  defects,  and  is  modified  during  aging.  Lipstick 
formulations are most widely used to enhance the beauty of lips 
and to add a touch of glamour to women’s makeup. The lipstick 
that we know today is a makeup product composed of anhydrous 
pastes such as oils and waxes in which are dispersed pigments 
and other coloring agents designed to accentuate the complex-
ion of the lips. This chapter draws together our knowledge of the 
biology of this special tissue, and gives detailed information on 
the formulation elements of lipsticks.

R
E
D
R
O
B
N
O
I
L
I
M
R
E
V

Lamina propria

Salivary glands

Epithelium

Orbicularis orbis
        muscle

Blood vessels

Follicles

Dermis

Lip anatomy

SKIN

Epidermis

Figure 22.1  Lip histology.

The  lips  are  muscular  membranous  folds  surrounding  the  ante-
rior part of the mouth. The area of contact between the two lips 
is called the stomium and forms the labial aperture. The external 
surfaces of the lips are covered by skin, with its hair follicles, seba-
ceous glands, and sweat glands; the inner surface is covered by the 
labial mucosa, a non-stratified, non-keratinized epithelium bearing 
salivary glands. The transitional zone between these two epithelia 
is the red vermilion border of the lips (Figure 22.1). It has neither 
hair follicles nor salivary glands, but sebaceous glands are present 
in about 50% of adults [1]. The red area is also keratinized, with rete 
ridges more marked than in the neighboring cutaneous zone.

Several studies have identified an intermediate area between 
the vermilion zone and the mucosa that does not contain a cuta-
neous annex; it is covered by a stratified epithelium that lacks a 
stratum granulosum but does have a thick parakeratin surface 
layer. This intermediate zone increases with age [2–4].

The deeper region of this soft tissue forming the lips is made 
up  of  a  layer  of  striated  muscle,  the  orbicularis  orbis  muscle, 
and loose connective tissue. The muscle makes a hooked curve 
towards  the  exterior  at  the  edge  of  the  vermilion  area  which 
gives the lips their shape.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

193

 
194

aDornMent  Colored Facial Cosmetics

Immediately  above  the  transition  between  the  skin  and  the 
vermilion  zone  is  the  Cupidon  arch,  a  mucocutaneous  ridge, 
also  called  a  white  roll,  or  the  white  skin  roll.  Its  physical 
appearance  and  lighter  color  seem  to  be  essentially  caused  by 
the  configuration  of  the  underlying  muscle  [5].  This  region  is 
rich in fine, unpigmented, “vellous” hairs that may influence the 
appearance of this zone.

The lips have great tactile sensitivity. Labial tissue has a dense 
population of sensory receptors, including Meissner corpuscles, 
Merkel cells, and free nerve endings. The sensitivity of the lips 
is somewhere between that of the tongue and the fingertips [6].

Labial epidermis
The  epidermis  of  the  vermilion  region  is  twice  as  thick 
(180 μm) as the adjacent skin [4,7,8]. It still has the markers of 
cutaneous epidermis differentiation, even though it has fewer 
keratinized  layers  than  the  skin  [9].  Barrett  et  al.  [4]  found 
that  the  distribution  of  cytokeratins  (CK)  differed  from  that 
of the intermediate zone, with a loss of the skin cytokeratins 
CK1 and CK10 and the presence of the mucosal cytokeratins 
CK4,  CK13,  and  CK19.  CK5  and  CK14  were  still  present  in 
the basal layer and occasionally in the suprabasal layer. CK8, 
CK18, and CK20 were found only in Merkel cells. Involucrin 
was present in all the zones, but its restricted distribution in 
the  stratum  granulosum  of  the  skin  extended  to  the  stratum 
spinosum and the parabasal keratinocytes of the lip zone and 
the mucosa. Loricrin, profilaggrin, and filaggrin were found in 
the stratum granulosum of the orthokeratinized zones but not 
after  the  junction between the vermilion  zone  and  the  inter-
mediate zone.

The corneocytes in the mucosa are flat, smooth cells. In con-
trast,  most  of  the  corneocytes  on  the  surface  of  the  vermilion 
border are seen to have microvilli on all their internal surfaces 
when examined under the high power microscope [10]. These 
projections  are  rarely  seen  on  the  corneocytes  of  the  adjacent 
skin  [11].  The  cell  turnover  of  the  epidermis  of  the  vermilion 
border  seems  to  be  more  rapid  than  that  of  the  adjacent  skin 
cells.  The  vermilion  border  also  appears  to  lose  water  three 
times as fast as the cheeks and to have only one-third the con-
ductance. Thus, the lips function as a barrier but their capacity 
to retain water is much poorer than that of facial skin [1].

Hikima et al. [11] showed that the surface of the lips, like the 
surface of the skin, has cathepsin D-like activity and chymotryp-
sin-like  activity.  These  enzymes  are  involved  in  the  hydrolysis 
of corneodesmosomes, and hence in the release of corneocytes 
from the skin surface.

Like the skin, the vermilion border epithelium contains mela-
nocytes and there is melanin in the cytoplasm of basal cells [4]. 
However,  as  the  melanin  pigmentation  is  light  and  associated 
with reduced keratinization, the color of the hemoglobin is seen 
more  clearly.  There  are  also  Langerhans  cells  in  this  zone  [8]. 
Cruchley  et  al.  [12]  used  immunodetection  of  CD1a  to  show 
that there were more Langerhans cells per unit area of the lips 
than in abdominal skin.

Sallette  et  al.  [13]  recently  showed  that  there  is  more 
neuropeptide-type  neurotransmitter  in  the  epidermis  of  the  
lips than in the eyelids, which seems to indicate that the lips are 
better innervated.

Lip dermis and lamina propria
The epithelium of the vermilion border lies on a layer of connec-
tive tissue, which ensures the continuity of the cutaneous dermis 
and the lamina propria. This tissue is composed of collagen fibers 
and a network of elastic fibers.

There is a thin layer of fatty tissue between the muscle and the 
dermis in the cutaneous part of the lips with many attachments 
between  the  muscle  and  the  skin  [14].  The  deep  part  of  the 
lamina propria of the mucosa lies above the hypodermis of the 
subcutaneous zone. The invaginations at the junction between 
the epithelium and the connective tissue of the vermilion border 
are  higher  than  those  of  the  skin  [15].  These  papillae  contain 
blood capillaries. The capillary loops in the vermilion border are 
higher than those of the skin, which accentuates the red color of 
the lips because of the hemoglobin in them [16].

The lymph drainage of the red border is not uniform; it flows 
towards  the  cutaneous  system  on  the  external  side  of  the  lips 
and towards the mucosal system on the inner side [17].

Lip topology
The  description  of  lip  topology  first  interested  legal  medicine 
because  each  individual  has  a  different  organization,  much 
like  fingerprints.  The  study  of  lip  prints  is  called  cheiloscopy. 
The  development  of  kiss-proof  lipsticks  led  legal  medicine  to 
develop  protocols  for  revealing  latent  prints  at  a  crime  scene 
[18]. Lip prints can be classified in several ways and their distri-
butions in populations have been quantified [19–22].

sensitivity of lips to the environment
As the lips have little cornified tissue or melanin they are very 
sensitive  to  chemical,  physical,  or  microbial  damage.  Their 
prolonged  exposure  to  sunlight,  particularly  for  fair-skinned 
people, may lead to the appearance of actinic cheilitis and even 
spinocellular carcinoma [23]. Pogoda and Preston-Martin [24] 
suggested  that  frequent  applications  of  sunscreen  can  have  a 
positive protective effect. Smoking has also been found to be a 
major risk factor for lip cancers.

aging of the lips
The esthetic consequences of aging of the superficial lip tissues 
(sagging,  distension,  and  ptosis)  are  aggravated  by  changes  in  
the shape of the bone and dental infrastructure and the aging of 
the underlying muscles and adipose tissue. The orientation of the 
labial  aperture  changes  with  a  drooping  of  the  lateral  commis-
sures: from a concave curve in newborns and children to a hori-
zontal line in adults, and then to an inverted curve in the elderly. 
In profile, the lips, particularly the lower lip, recede with age. The 
upper lip becomes lower and enlarged [3,22]. Tissues become less 
extensible and elastic because of repeated mechanical stresses and 
the weakening of the orbicularis orbis muscle with age [3,25].

22. Lips and Lipsticks

195

The  vermilion  border  becomes  larger,  longer,  and  thicker 
at the corners of the mouth [2]. While wrinkles develop in the 
skin around the lips with age, the outline of the lips themselves 
becomes sunken [22]. The depth and organization of the lips var-
ies greatly from one person to another and some young people 
have deep furrows. Both the spatial resolution and the tactile sen-
sitivity of the lips decrease with age [3,6,25,26]. There may also 
be histologic signs of solar elastosis. The superficial microcircula-
tory network (both papillary and mucosal) may become smaller 
and less dense (reticular and mucosal), together with an apparent 
thinning of the lips in older people who have lost their teeth [15].
Cosmetic surgery can be used to “refresh” and to fill the tis-
sue to rejuvenate the lips. This might involve reducing the upper 
lip or recovering the shape of a young lip by a series of inter-
ventions  to  reinforce  the  shape  and  projection  of  the  lips  and 
restructure the Cupid’s bow, better define the lip outline, and lift 
the corners of the mouth. This surgery is accompanied by a reju-
venation of the perioral region, including removal of peribuccal 
wrinkles, peeling, laser resurfacing, and dermabrasion [27–30].

Lip plumpness and cheilitis
Cheilitis can be caused by a cold or dry environment, repeated 
pressure  on  the  lips  –  as  it  can  develop  in  players  of  wind 
instruments – or by defective dental work. It can also occur in 
people taking oral retinoids, or from a lack of dietary vitamin 
B12 (riboflavin), B6 (pyridoxine), nicotinic acid, folic acid, or 
iron [31].

Hikima et al. [11] reported that the corneocytes at the edges of 
dried out lips become flattened and their surface area increased. 
This suggests that the turnover of these cells is slowed in dried 
out  lips.  The  degree  of  visible  dryness  is  also  correlated  with  a 
reduction in cathepsin D, one of the enzymes involved in desqua-
mation, but the chymotrypsin-like activity remains unchanged.

The upper lip seems to dry out less than the lower lip as it is less 
exposed.  While  the  hydration  measured  by  the  capacitance  does 
not seem to change with age, the loss of water via the lips decreases 
[25]. Clinically assessed drying out increases with age [22].

Defects of lip pigmentation
Pigmentation  defects,  particularly  ephelides  and  lentigos,  may 
also  occur. The  lips  of  some  populations,  like  those  from Thai-
land, may become dark because of the accumulation of melanin 
in  the  basal  layer  of  the  epidermis  without  any  increase  in  the 
number  of  melanocytes  [32].  This  disorder  may  be  congenital, 
caused by smoking, or an allergic reaction to a topical compound. 
Smoking can also increase pigmentation of the buccal mucosa in 
darker-skinned people (Africans, Asians, Indians) [33].

Lipsticks

Lipstick,  a  symbol  of  feminine  beauty  and  sensuality  and  a 
method of attracting attention, has a very long history. The red 
color and bloom (lively, plump) of the lips was first accentuated 

in  the  ancient  world.  Today,  a  woman  uses  lipstick  to  high-
light her individuality, character, and seductive capacity and to 
underline her smile [34]. It is everything but an empty gesture; 
it reflects the image that the woman has of herself and what she 
wants to project in society.

In the 18th century, people distinguished between the red col-
oring used for the lips and the rouge used for the cheeks. Many 
rather  toxic  substances  have  been  used  in  the  past.  The  red 
coloring material used can be of animal, vegetable, or mineral 
origin. It could be obtained from the cochineal beetle imported 
from Mexico, the purple dye extracted from molluscs, red san-
dalwood from Brazil, or the orcanette root. The minerals most 
frequently  used  were  lead  oxide  (minium),  mercuric  sulfate 
(cinnabar), and antimony.

The popularity of lipstick exploded in the 20th century with 
the  use  of  lip  makeup  based  on  a  colored  paste  made  from 
grapes and sold in little jars. These were deep colors. The mouth 
became  much  fuller  with  the  arrival  and  spread  of  talking 
movies in the 1930s. The first “indelible” or “kiss-proof ” lipstick 
was the lipstick Rouge Baiser sold by the French chemist Paul 
Baudecroux in 1927. Red, pouting lips became all the rage in the 
1950s, while in the 1990s lip gloss or brilliant was produced as a 
paste rather than a stick.

Lipstick formulation
The lipstick that we know today is a makeup product composed 
of anhydrous pastes in which are dispersed pigments and other 
coloring  agents  designed  to  accentuate  the  complexion  of  the 
lips. It is formed into a stick by pouring the hot material into a 
mold. A classic lipstick formula is:
•	 Wax (about 15%) which is solid at room temperature. It provides 

hardness and creaminess when applied;

•	 Waxy paste (20%) helps lubricate the lipstick after application;
•	 Oil (30%) for dispersing the pigments;
•	 Texturing agents (about 10%) to improve the texture;
•	 Coloring agents, pigments, and/or pearls (20%) to give color;
•	 Preserving agents and antioxidants (1%) to stabilize the formu-

lation;

•	 Perfume (1%);
•	 Active ingredients including UV filters to improve long-term 

benefit.

Waxes
The wax may be of vegetable, animal, or synthetic origin. They 
are  solid  at  room  temperature  and  must  be  melted  for  use. 
They  create  a  crystalline  network  within  the  formulation  that 
gives the lipstick its shape. The wax is chosen to give the stick 
a  suitable  hardness  so  that  it  does  not  break  during  applica-
tion.  They  also  give  the  lipstick  a  rather  matte  appearance  
(Table 22.1).

Lipsticks  are  currently  made  using  specific  fractions  of  wax 
that provide specific fusion points. These refined fractions are 
whiter and more odorless than the original waxes, which were a 
complex mixture of natural lipids.

196

aDornMent  Colored Facial Cosmetics

Table 22.1  Waxes.

Origin

Wax

Properties

Animal

Beeswax

Plant

Carnuba	wax

Composed	of	fatty	acids	and	alcohols
Thickener

Harder	than	bees	wax
Very	slightly	acid,	but	brittle
Often	used	mixed	with	bees	wax

Source

Bees

Appearance

Relatively	solid,	give	a	
lustrous	appearance

From	the	leaves	of	the	carnuba	
palm	(Brazil)

Relatively	hard,	and	give	a	
lustrous	appearance

Candelilla	wax

Very	hard	wax

From	the	candelilla	plant

Matte	appearance

Mineral

Paraffin
Ozokerite

Non-stick
Non-polar
White,	fairly	transparent	and	odorless

Paraffin	is	obtained	from	oil	refining More	malleable

Table 22.2  Waxy	pastes.

Origin

Name

Properties

Source

Appearance

Synthetic

Polybutene

Adherence
Brilliance
Extremely	hydrophobic

Synthesis	from	ethylene

Very	viscous	transparent,	
viscous	liquid

Synthetic Methyl	hydrogenated	rosinate

Waxy pastes
They are called pastes because they are semi-solid forms of wax 
at room temperature (Table 22.2). They contribute to the cos-
metic function of the lipstick by helping to keep the color on the 
lips. They can do this because they are sticky and because their 
fusion point is close to the temperature of the lips, thus enabling 
the stick to melt during application.

oils
These hydrophobic liquids are solvents for the coloring agents 
that  allow  them  to  diffuse  so  as  to  develop  their  color.  The 
oils provide comfort, lubrication during application, and con-
tribute  greatly  to  the  cosmetic  effect.  They  may  also  provide 
brilliance and subtlety (Table 22.3). Castor oil has been used 
for many years but is now less often utilized. It has excellent 
pigment-dispersing properties because of its polarity; its main 
inconvenience is its unpleasant taste and odor (caused by oxi-
dation). It is gradually being replaced by stable, odorless, fatty 
acid esters.

Table 22.3  Oils.

Name

Properties

Source

Appearance

Di	isostearylmalate

Emollient
Not	oxidized
Colorless
Odorless

Synthetic

Colorless	liquid

Trimethylolpropane	
triisostearate

Emollient
Comfort

Polyglyceryl-2	
triisostearate

Emollient
Comfort
Dispersant

Synthetic

Synthetic

Colorless,	
viscous	liquid

Transparent	pale	
yellow	liquid

texturing agents
These components can be very different; they provide moistur-
izing, brightness, and subtlety. For example, polyamide powders 
bring softness, silica beads provide subtlety and a matte finish, 
titanium  dioxide  flakes  give  a  soft-focus  effect,  while  bismuth 
oxychloride gives a satin, shimmering effect.

pigments
Pigments  are  synthetic  substances  or  of  mineral  origin.  They 
are fine powders when dry and are used because they are very 
opaque and have great coloring properties (Table 22.4).

The solid powders are suspended and dispersed in oil. The cov-
ering property of a lipstick depends on its pigment content; these 
pigments can hide the underlying lip color. International regula-
tions strictly limit the use of pigments. Only a restricted number 
can be used on the face because of the risk of ingestion. The pearly 

Table 22.4  Pigments	and	coloring	agents.

Component

Titanium	(IV)	oxide	–	mica

Ferrous	oxide	(II)

Ferric	oxide	(III)

DC	Red	33

DC	Red	27

DC	Red	21

DC	Red	7

DC	Red	6

DC	Red	28

DC	Red	30

Origin

Mineral

Mineral

Mineral

Organic

Organic

Organic

Organic

Organic

Organic

Organic

22. Lips and Lipsticks

197

and metallic effects are obtained with composite materials, often 
multilayered. These are interference pigments because they create 
long  wavelength  interference  patterns  in  natural  light.  Holo-
graphic  effects  may  be  obtained  by  liquid  crystals  (cholesterol 
derivatives) or multilayer plastic slabs (terephthalates).

quite  classic.  Indeed,  if  raw  materials  are  constantly  evolving, 
cosmetic regulations worldwide lay down some new restrictions 
to  the  manufacturers  of  the  beauty  sector.  Nevertheless,  these 
regulatory evolutions still allow the creation of ever more inno-
vative and qualitative products.

antioxidants and preserving agents
The most frequently used antioxidants are the β-carotenes (provi-
tamins A), ascorbic acid, and tocopherol, which are all powerful, 
natural  antioxidants.  The  preserving  agents  are  used  to  control 
bacterial proliferation. There are few preserving agents (phenox-
yethanol mainly) in anhydrous products such as lipsticks.

perfume
Perfume provides the desired smell to the lipstick. It is generally 
used as an oil-based concentrate that is miscible with the other 
oils in the formulation.

active ingredients
These are used to provide their specific properties to the finished 
product and often permit claims of antiaging or moisturizing. They 
must be included at the considered concentration to be effective. 
Vitamin A, as β-carotene, vitamin E (tocopherol), and vitamin C 
are classically used in lipstick. Sunscreen can be used to protect the 
lips against UV rays for an antiaging quality.

Lip glosses and brilliances
A lip brilliance is a makeup product that generally has low cover-
ing qualities but reflects light and gives the lips a shiny appearance. 
A brilliant lipstick has a gloss effect. So, by extension, the term lip 
gloss includes lip brilliants.

Lip glosses nourish the lips and give them a light, wonderfully 
supple  appearance  and  a  long-lasting  sparkle.  Their  crystalline 
effect  is  brought  about  by  their  ultra-brilliant,  transparent  base. 
They may be used over a lipstick to give a new sparkle to the lipstick 
color, or simply provide the lips with a very pure, superfine color. 
Its formulation differs from that of lipstick only in the quantity and 
nature of the components classically used in lipsticks.

Lip glosses are frequently sold in small flasks and are applied 
with  a  special  applicator.  They  are  not  applied  directly  to  the 
lips, so they do not need to have a solid structure like a lipstick. 
The wax content is lower and the content of waxy paste higher.

conclusions

Lipsticks and lip glosses are essential to a women’s makeup, and 
have a key role in the affirmation of her personality and well-
being. These skin surface products – thanks to their simple for-
mula that contains a limited number of constituents – are usu-
ally well accepted and adverse reactions are very rare.

Pink, purple, even blue, the colors follow the fashion trends, 
and, most of the time, they are coordinated with clothes and nail 
polishes. The shapes and textures that women appreciate remain 

references

1  Kobayashi H, Tagami H. (2005) Functional properties of the sur-
face of the vermilion border of the lips are distinct from those of 
the facial skin. Br J Dermatol 150, 563–7.

2  Binnie WH, Lehner T. (1970) Histology of the muco-cutaneous junc-
tion at the corner of the human mouth. Arch Oral Biol 15, 777–86.
3  Fogel ML, Stranc MF. (1984) Lip function: a study of normal lip 

parameters. Br J Plast Surg 37, 542–9.

4  Barrett AW, Morgan M, Nwaeze G, et al. (2005) The differentia-
tion profile of the epithelium of the human lip. Arch Oral Biol 50, 
431–8.

5  Mulliken JM, Pensler JM, Kozakewich HPW. (1993) The anatomy of 
vermilion bow in normal and cleft lip. Plast Reconstr Surg 92, 395–404.
6  Stevens  JC,  Choo  KK.  (1996)  Spatial  acuity  of  the  body  surface 

over the life span. Somatosens Mot Res 13, 153–66.

7  Lafranchi  HE,  de  Rey  BM.  (1978)  Comparative  morphometric 
analysis  of  vermilion  border  epithelium  and  lip  epidermis.  Acta 
Anat 101, 187–91.

8  Heilman E. (1987) Histology of the mucocutaneous junctions and 

the oral cavity. Clin Dermatol 5, 10–6.

9  Kuffer R. (1982) Pathologie de la muqueuse buccale et des lèvres. 
Encyclopédie Médicochirurgicale (Paris), Dermatologie, 12830 A10.
10  Muto H, Yoshioka I. (1980) Relation between superficial fine struc-
ture and function of lips. Acta Dermatol Kyoto Engl Ed 75, 11–20.
11  Hikima R, Igarashi S, Ikeda N, et al. (2004) Development of lip treat-
ment on the basis of desquamation mechanism. IFSCC Magazine 7, 
3–10.

12  Cruchley AT, Williams DM, Farthing PM, et al. (1994) Langerhans 
cell density in normal human oral mucosa and skin: relationship to 
age, smoking and alcohol consumption. J Oral Pathol Med 23, 55–9.
13  Sallette J, Al Sayed N, Laboureau J, Adem C, Soussaline F, Breton L. 
(2006) Neuropeptide Y may be involved in human lip keratinocytes 
modulation. J Invest Dermatol 126, suppl 3, s13.

14  Choquet P, Sick H, Constantinesco A. (1999) Ex vivo high resolu-
tion MR imaging of the human lip with a dedicated low field sys-
tem. Eur J Dermatol 9, 452–4.

15  Wolfram-Gabel  R,  Sick  H.  (2000)  Microvascularisation  of  lips  in 

ageing edentulous subjects. Surg Radiol Anat 22, 283–7.

16  Iwai I, Yamashita T, Ochiai N, et al. (2003) Can daily-use lipstick 
make  lips  more  fresh  and  healthy?  A  new  lipstick  containg  α- 
glucosyl  hesperidin  can  remove  the  dull-color  from  lips.  22nd 
IFSCC Conference, pp. 162–77.

17  Ricbourg B. (2002) Vascularisation des lèvres. Ann Chir Plast Esthet 

47, 346–56.

18  Ball J. (2002) The current status of lip prints and their use for iden-

tification. J Forensic Odontostomatol 20, 43–6.

19  Sivapathasundharam B, Prakash PA, Sivakumar G. (2001) Lip prints 

(cheiloscopy). Indian J Dent Res 12, 234–7.

20  Hirth L, Göttsche H, Goedde HW. (1975) Lips print: variability and 

genetics. Humangenetik 30, 47–62.

198

aDornMent  Colored Facial Cosmetics

21  Hirth  L,  Goedde  HW.  (1977).  Variability  and  formal  genetics  of 

28  Aiache AE. (1997) Rejuvenation of the perioral area. Dermatol Clin 

labial grooves. Anthrop Anz 36, 51–7.

15, 665–72.

22  Lévêque JL, Goubanova E. (2004) Influence of age on the lips and 

29  Guerrissi JO. (2000) Surgical treatment of the senile upper lip. Plast 

perioral skin. Dermatology 208, 307–14.

Reconstr Surg 92, 938–40.

23  Calvalcante ASR, Anbinder AL, Carvalho YR. (2008) Actinic cheilitis: 
clinical and histological features. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 66, 498–503.
24  Pogoda  JM,  Preston-Martin  S.  (1996)  Solar  radiation,  lip  protec-
tion, and lip cancer risk in Los Angeles County women (California, 
United States). Cancer Causes Control 7, 458–63.

25  Caisey L, Gubanova E, Camus C, Lapatina N, Smetnik V, Lévêque 
JL. (2008) Influence of age and hormone replacement therapy on 
the functional properties of the lips. Skin Res Technol 14, 220–5.
26  Wohlert AB. (1996) Tactile perception of spatial stimuli on the lip 
surface by young and older adults. J Speech Hearing Res 39, 1191–8.
27  Simon  E,  Stricker  M,  Duroure  F.  (2002)  Le  vieillissement  labial: 
composantes  et  principes  thérapeutiques.  [The  lip  ageing.]  Ann 
Chir Plasti Esthét 47, 556–60.

30  Ali MJ, Ende K, Maas CS. (2007) Perioral rejuvenation and lip aug-

mentation. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 15, 491–500.

31  Zugerman C. (1986) The lips: anatomy and differential diagnosis. 

Cutis 38, 116–20.

32  Kunachak  S,  Kunachakr  S,  Kunachark  S,  Leelaudomlipi  P,  Won-
gwaisatawan  S.  (2001)  An  effective  treatment  of  dark  lip  by  fre-
quency-doubled  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser.  Dermatol  Surg  27, 
37–40.

33  Sarswathi TR, Kumar SN, Kavitha KM. (2003) Oral melanin pig-
mentation in smoked and smokeless tobacco users in India: clinico-
pathological study. Indian J Dent Res 14, 101–6.

34  Dong JK, Jin TH, Cho HW, et al. (1999) The esthetics of the smile: a 

review of some recent studies. Int J Prosthodont 12, 9–19.

ChAPTEr 23
Eye Cosmetics*

Sarah A. Vickery, Robyn Kolas, and Fatima Dicko
Procter & Gamble Cosmetics, Hunt Valley, MD, USA 

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Mascara	is	intended	to	darken,	thicken,	and	lengthen	the	lashes	to	make	them	more	noticeable.	Careful	selection	of	mascara	film	
materials	and	new	applicator	technologies	are	enhancing	women’s	ability	to	quickly	and	effectively	accentuate	these	characteristics.
•	 Other	eyelash	products,	beyond	mascara,	such	as	lash	perms	and	lash	tints	are	becoming	more	prevalent	and	are	beginning	to	gain	

mainstream	acceptance.	These	new	products	are	changing	the	way	women	think	about	eyelash	beauty.

•	 Eyebrows	are	groomed	or	shaped	via	the	removal	or	trimming	of	hairs.	Eyebrows	can	be	accentuated,	or	sparse	growth	can	be	filled	in	

via	the	addition	of	eyebrow	cosmetics.

•	 Eyeshadow	is	color	applied	to	the	upper	eyelids	that	is	used	to	add	depth	and	dimension	to	the	eyes,	thus	drawing	attention	to	the	eye	

look	or	eye	color.

•	 Eyeliner	is	used	to	outline	the	eyelids,	serving	to	define	the	eyes	and	to	make	the	eye	look	more	bold	or	to	give	the	illusion	of	a	different	

eye	shape.

•	 New	eye	cosmetic	products	are	being	introduced	that	feature	enhanced	long	wear,	new	applicator	surfaces,	novel	color	effects,	

sustainable	natural	materials,	improved	application,	and	even	lash	growth.

Definition

This  chapter  will  give  a  broad  introduction  to  eye  cosmetics. 
Mascara,  eyeshadows,  eyeliners  and  eyebrow  cosmetics  will 
be presented along with the physiology of eyelashes and future 
trends in the category.

Eye cosmetic history

Cosmetics  have  been  used  to  decorate  the  eyes  for  thousands 
of years. In ancient Egypt materials like charcoal and Kohl were 
mixed with animal fat to create ointment for darkening the lashes 
and eyelids. They used eye cosmetics for the same reasons that we 
do now: in youth to attract by accentuating and drawing attention 
to the eyes, and in age to preserve beauty as it starts to fade [1,2].
Moving  forward  to  more  modern  times,  in  the  eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries, men would condition their hair and 
mustaches with a touch-up product for graying hair called Mas-
caro. This was also used in stage makeup as both an eyelash and 
brow  cosmetic.  In  the  nineteenth  century  women  darkened 
their  lashes  with  lamp  black,  which  they  could  collect  simply 
by holding up a plate to catch the soot above a lamp or candle 
flame.  They  also  used  cake  mascara  (soap,  wax  and  pigment 
wetted with a moistened brush) to darken their lashes or they 
could plump their lashes with petroleum jelly. Since then a wide 

variety of innovations have changed both the way we decorate 
eyes and the penetration of these products into daily use by the 
majority of women [3].

The  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century  saw  a  range  of  new 
product  forms  emerge  including  liner  pencils,  melted  wax 
dripped onto lashes, eyelash curlers, eyebrow pencils, lash dye, 
cream mascara (toothpaste style tube with brush), false lashes, 
liquid drops, and even turpentine based waterproof mascara. As 
the century progressed, more and more women were using eye 
cosmetics, driven in part by the makeup of the popular actresses 
in the Hollywood movies and also because of new distribution 
systems,  such  as  Maybelline’s  mail  order  mascara,  and  avail-
ability at local stores. By the late 1930s the majority of women 
applied cosmetics around their eyes [4].

In  1957,  Helena  Rubenstein  launched  the  first  modern  day 
mascara  –  a  tube  of  mascara  cream  with  the  applicator  stored 
inside  the  tube.  No  longer  was  the  mascara  applicator  separate 
from the mascara formulation. This efficient and more sanitary 
design took off quickly, and by the 1960s, this became the standard 
form of mascara. Once this new product form was established, 
the applicator quickly changed from a simple grooved aluminum 
rod  to  the  ubiquitous  twisted  wire  brush  applicator  that  is  the 
predominant applicator today.

By  the  1970s,  waterproof  mascaras  were  more  appealing 
than  the  past  turpentine-based  versions  due  to  the  availabil-
ity  of  purified  petroleum-based  volatile  solvents.  Fibers  were 

* Original chapter by Sarah A. Vickery, Peter Wyatt and John Gilley

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

199

200

ADOrNMENT  Colored Facial Cosmetics 

introduced into mascaras for a “lengthening” benefit. Eyeshad-
ows,  due  partly  to  the  growth  of  iridescent  pigments  in  the 
1960s,  were  available  in  a  broad  range  of  matte  and  sparkling 
colors. By the 1980s and into the 1990s the rapidly improving 
performance of polymers resulted in more durable eye cosmet-
ics that would glide on with ease and maintain their effect for 
hours [5].

Eyelash physiology

Eyelashes  are  terminal  hairs  growing  from  follicles  around  the 
eye. Like all hair, the eyelash is a mixture of dead cells that have 
been keratinized, binding material, melanin granules, and small 
amounts of water. Keratin makes up ∼95% of the total lash com-
position, providing lash insolubility and chemical resistance. The 
outer surface is comprised of a series of overlapping transparent 
scales called cuticle cells that protect the inside, called the cortex. 
The cortex contributes to the eyelash’s shape, mechanical proper-
ties,  and  color.  Eyelashes  vary  by  ethnicity,  and  as  a  result,  can 
have an elliptical or circular cross section with an average diam-
eter of 60–120 microns, tapering to a fine, barely pigmented tip 
[6–8].  Figure  23.1  is  a  series  of  scanning  electron  micrographs 
that show the shape, cross section, and surface morphology of an 
eyelash.

While hair over the body is likely there for thermal insula-
tion  and  proximity  sensation,  eyelashes  protect  the  eye  from 
debris and signal the eyelid to reflexively close when something 
is  too  close  to  the  eye.  Chemically,  eyelashes  are  the  same  as 
scalp  hair,  and  structurally,  the  eyelash  is  very  close  to  curly 
hair [9]. Eyelashes have a substantially shorter, slower growth 
phase  than  scalp  hair,  hence  their  shorter  length  [6–7],  and 
they typically last for about 3 months before falling out [9]. An 

Figure 23.1  Eyelash SEM images. The eyelash tapers to a fine tip. The cross 
section  may  be  circular  or  elliptical  (A),  and  the  surface  is  composed  of 
overlapping cuticle cells (B).

active follicle, during the anagen (growth) cycle will typically 
produce a lash at approximately 0.12–0.14 mm/day, about half 
the growth rate of scalp hair. Roughly three quarters of the eye-
lash follicles are in the telogen (resting) phase at any point in 
time [6–7].

The direction that the eyelash protrudes from the eyelid is 
based on the follicle’s position in the skin. The curvature of the 
lash is derived from the plane curved, “comma-shape” of the 
follicle, which is about 2 mm long. As the lash forms inside the 
follicle, and the protein strands are bonded together, the lash 
shape  that  is  formed  corresponds  to  the  shape  of  the  follicle 
they are formed within [8–9]. Eyelashes are arranged around 
the eye in a narrow band 1–2 mm wide, growing in imperfect 
rows of five to six in the upper and three to four in the lower 
eyelid  [10].  Lashes  are  longer  (8–12  mm)  and  more  numer-
ous  (90–200)  on  the  upper  eyelid,  while  lower  eyelid  lashes 
number 75–80 and are typically 6–8 mm long [8]. For a single 
person, lash length varies dramatically, and although lash cycle 
duration  is  similar,  longer  lashes  grow  faster  and  for  longer 
than shorter lashes [9].

There  are  a  number  of  ailments  to  which  the  eyelashes  are 

prone, the most common of which are listed in Table 23.1.

Table 23.1  Common	eyelash	ailments.

Ailment

Description

Madarosis,	or	
hypotrichosis

Stye

Poliosis

Trichiasis

Ectropion

Entropion

Thinning,	or	loss,	of	eyelid	and	eyebrow	hairs.	
Can	be	caused	by	aging,	physical	trauma,	burns,	
x-ray	therapy,	overuse	of	glued	false	lashes,	and	
trichotillomania	(impulse	to	pull	out	one’s	hairs,	
including	eyelashes).

A	stye	can	be	caused,	among	other	things,	from	a	
bacterial	infection	of	the	eyelash	follicle’s	sebaceous	
glands,	leading	to	an	inflammation	of	skin	tissue	
around	the	eyelash	follicle.

Lashes	losing	their	pigmentation	with	age,	caused	
by	less	melanin	granules	being	present	in	the	lashes.	
Gray	lashes	are	pigmented,	just	with	less	pigment	
than	those	of	a	younger	person.	Completely	
un-pigmented	lashes	would	be	white.

This	is	the	abnormal	growth	of	lashes	directed	
towards	the	eyeball,	causing	irritation	and	possibly	
leading	to	infection.

Weakening	in	the	muscles	that	hold	the	eyelids	firmly	
against	the	eyeball,	causing	the	eyelid	(usually	the	
lower	eyelid)	to	turn	outward,	giving	the	eye	a	red-
rimmed	appearance.	This	is	usually	associated	with	
aging,	but	can	also	be	attributed	to	scarring	around	
the	eyelid,	or	nerve	damage.

Weakening	in	the	muscles	that	hold	the	eyelids	
firmly	against	the	eyeball,	causing	the	eyelid	(usually	
the	lower	eyelid)	to	turn	inward.	This	can	result	in	
severe	discomfort	and	possible	cornea	damage	as	
the	eyelashes	rub	on	the	eyes,	and	requires	medical	
intervention.

23. Eye Cosmetics

201

Mascara

Over 70% of women who wear cosmetics wear mascara. In fact, 
mascara is a product that women tend to be absolutely passion-
ate about. When asked which cosmetic they would choose if they 
could only choose one, over fifty percent of women would choose 
mascara. Mascara is intended to darken, thicken, and lengthen the 
lashes to make them more noticeable. Through careful selection 
of materials, mascara films can be produced to accentuate these 
characteristics. Mascara formulations can be roughly divided into 
two different types, water-resistant and waterproof.

Mascara composition
Water-resistant  mascaras  typically  deliver  a  combination  of 
waxes, polymers, and pigments in a water-based emulsion to the 
lashes. The water helps contribute to the enhanced lash attributes 
by absorbing into the lash, bloating its diameter by as much as 
30% and in many cases forcing the lashes to curl. The waxes are 
emulsified into the water creating a thick, creamy texture that 
glides onto the lashes in a thick film that resists fading, abrasion, 
and flaking throughout the day, but is still easily removed with 
warm water and soap. Polymers are often included to bind the 
mascara to itself as well as to the lashes. Advances in polymer 
technology over the last twenty years have led to very substan-
tive  films  that  last  throughout  the  day,  even  though  they  are 
delivered to the lash in an aqueous medium [11].

Consumers who desire the longest lasting mascara will select 
the anhydrous waterproof formulations that contain little to no 
water  and  deliver  very  durable,  but  difficult  to  remove  films. 
Waterproof  mascaras  usually  use  hydrocarbon  solvents  and 
anhydrous raw materials. They provide a long wearing film on the 
lashes which is very resistant to water, smudging and smearing. 

Its  anhydrous  nature  makes  it  more  difficult  to  both  apply  and 
remove; however, it may have more eye irritation potential [11].

A  list  of  common  water-resistant  and  waterproof  mascara 

ingredients and their functions can be found in Table 23.2.

Additional ingredients can be added to a formulation to enhance 
particular eyelash characteristics. A common method for produc-
ing lengthening mascara is to include fibers in the formulation so 
that, when applied, the fibers will extend beyond the natural ends 
of the eyelashes. Similarly, large light-weight hollow particles may 
be incorporated into the mascara film to create a thicker film for 
bolder lashes. Synthetic or natural polymers with novel properties 
can also be incorporated to induce a curling effect on the lashes.

Other forms of mascara are available such as clear mascaras, 
waterproofing  topcoats,  pearlescent  topcoats,  and  lash  prim-
ers. Recently, many double-sided mascara products have been 
introduced  which  include  a  basecoat  formula  and  a  topcoat 
formula that deliver different benefits, such as adding volume, 
extending wear and also providing appearance and decoration 
benefits.  This  breadth  of  cosmetic  options  gives  consumers 
many choices to groom and decorate their lashes.

Mascara applicator technology
Consumers will typically judge a better mascara applicator as 
one  that  creates  precise  groups  of  lashes  that  are  uniformly 
spaced  apart  [12].  However,  different  consumers  apply  their 
mascara for different end looks – some aspiring for only a few 
(spiky) clumps of lashes, others working towards well separated 
lashes. The twisted wire brush has been the mainstay mascara 
applicator  for  50  years.  As  seen  in  Figure  23.2,  it  is  simply  a 
metal wire bent back upon itself into two parallel wires. Bris-
tles,  typically  made  of  nylon,  are  inserted  between  the  bent 
wire and it is twisted around to form a helical arrangement of 

Table 23.2  Water-resistant	and	waterproof	mascara	ingredients	and	function.

Class

Material type

Examples

Function

Carrier	fluid

Water,	propylene	glycol

Deliver	mascara	ingredients	to	lashes	in	liquid	vehicle

Water-resistant	
solvent

Waterproof	
solvent

Carrier	fluid

Film	former

Polymers/binder

Isododecane,	cyclomethicone,	petroleum	
distillates

Cellulosic	polymers,	acrylates	copolymer/
xanthan	or	acacia	gum

Structurant

Waxes/clays

Beeswax,	carnauba	wax/bentonite	clay

Surfactant	or	
emulsifier

Anionic/non-ionic,	etc.

Sodium	laureth	sulfate/TEA	soap,	polysorbates

Deliver	mascara	ingredients	to	lashes	in	liquid	vehicle

The	main	constituent	of	the	mascara	film	and	serves	
to	bind	the	other	ingredients	together	in	the	wet	and	
dried	film

Provides	body	and	structure	to	the	mascara	film	
during	application	and	wear

In	a	formulation	with	two	immiscible	substances,	an	
emulsifier	stabilizes	the	two	dissimilar	parts	of	the	
formulation,	preventing	separation

Colorant

Pigments

Iron	oxides,	mica,	ultramarines

Provides	color	to	the	mascara	film

Care	or	attribute

Preservatives

Hair	treatment/
lengthening,	etc.

Anti-microbial/pH	
adjuster/chelator

Panthenol,	keratin/Nylon	or	silk	fiber

Parabens,	potassium	sorbate/citric	acid/EDTA

An	ingredient	included	for	a	specific	effect	in	the	
mascara	film

Prevents	contamination	of	harmful	micro-organisms	
such	as	bacteria,	mold	and	fungus

202

ADOrNMENT  Colored Facial Cosmetics 

make  mascara  application  easier  and  quicker  for  consumers 
to achieve their desired lash appearance. Innovations include 
tapering the end of the applicator, curving the brush, hollow 
bristles, changing the diameter or length of the applicator, and 
even cutting shapes out from the applicator’s profile to create 
channels  within  the  collection  of  bristles.  Despite  the  wide 
variety of twisted wire applicator innovations, the bristles all 
converge around a central shaft and the spacing between adja-
cent  bristles  is  highly  variable.  This  limits  the  consistency  of 
both lash clump size and gaps between clumps of lashes.

In  the  last  eight  years,  technology  advancements  have 
enabled a whole new category of molded mascara applicators 
to  emerge.  The  precisely  engineered  surfaces  of  a  molded 
applicator, shown in Figure 23.3, give control over the place-
ment,  number,  and  physical  properties  of  bristles  or  other 
grooming  surfaces.  The  result  is  consistent  gaps  between 
bristles, enabling the bristles to penetrate deeper into the lashes 
for increased mascara transfer and more efficient and regular 
separation of lashes. In addition, the varieties of colors, shapes, 
and textures that can be created are almost limitless and offer 
new  opportunities  to  delight  consumers.  A  few  examples  of 
these are shown in Figure 23.4. These molded applicators now 
have  the  ability  to  be  molded  in  various  shapes  and  sizes  to 
form configurations that fit the shape of the eye [13].

Other eyelash treatments
The ability to change the appearance of eyelashes extends beyond 
mascara.  For  example,  false  eyelashes  or  eyelash  extensions  are 
designed  to  add  thickness,  fullness  and  length  to  natural  eye-
lashes. False eyelashes significantly change the way the entire eye 

Figure 23.2  Twisted wire brush mascara applicators.

bristles.  The  bristles  are  very  effective  at  depositing  mascara 
onto  lashes,  but  the  inconsistent  spacing  between  bristles  on 
the brush can lead to excessively large clumps of lashes, une-
ven lash separation, and the need for compensatory grooming 
of the lashes.

The  skill  of  the  consumer  plays  a  large  part  in  achiev-
ing  her  desired  look  in  a  timely  manner,  and  the  twisted 
wire  applicator  has  seen  many  adjustments  over  the  years  to 

Figure 23.3  Molded mascara applicator with 
precisely engineered parallel bristles.

23. Eye Cosmetics

203

Blepharopigmentation, or eyelid tattooing, involves application 
of pigmentation into skin at the edges of the eyelid to simulate 
either eyeliner or the appearance of lashes. This is permanent but 
can be reversed with laser surgery.

Over  the  past  ten  years  a  number  of  products  have  launched 
with claims that suggest physiological stimulation of lash growth 
for darker, thicker, longer, and curlier lashes. Many of these make 
use of prostaglandin analogues that are similar to drugs used for 
treating  glaucoma,  but  are  known  to  have  the  above  (beneficial) 
side  effects  [15].  The  only  FDA-approved  treatment  to  stimulate 
the growth of eyelashes is Bimatoprost ophthalmic solution 0.03% 
(marketed under the brand name Latisse). Bimatoprost lengthens 
lashes by increasing the percentage of eyelash follicles in the anagen 
growth phase. It also stimulates melanogenesis, causing the lashes 
to appear darker and also increasing the size of the dermal papilla, 
which affects lash thickness and fullness [16]. Other products may 
contain  one  or  many  of  a  variety  of  peptides,  vitamins,  natural 
extracts  or  conditioning  agents  delivered  as  a  serum,  mascara 
primer or in mascara form. These products claim to either nourish 
eyelash  follicles  to  improve  growth  or  the  lashes  themselves  to 
reduce  breakage  or  eyelash  fallout,  however  there  is  little  to  no 
independent clinical data to support these claims.

Eyebrows

Eyebrows are the strips of short hairs growing from the ridge above 
a person’s eye socket. Throughout history, cultures have focused on 
eyebrow grooming as a way to frame the features of the face. Trends 
in desirable eyebrow thickness and shape in Western culture have 
changed during the twentieth century, from the very thin, tweezed 
brows of the 1920s and 1930s to the ungroomed, natural brow of 
the 1980s. The current trend is toward a thicker but well-shaped 
eyebrow “customized” for each person’s face, and eyebrow groom-
ing specialists and salons have become prevalent [17].

Eyebrow  shaping  is  accomplished  by  trimming  and  by 
removing  unwanted  hairs  from  the  brow  area  using  tweezers, 
wax, or via a technique called threading. Threading originates 
from Middle Eastern and Asian cultures and involves twisting 
a thread around the unwanted hairs and then pulling to remove 
them from the follicle.

Consumers that wish to accentuate their eyebrows, or fill in 
sparse  or  uneven  growth,  may  use  a  variety  of  brow  cosmet-
ics.  Brow  powders  and  pencils  are  available  in  neutral  shades 
and are generally selected in a shade that matches or is slightly 
lighter than the person’s natural brow color. Gels are available 
in  both  colored  and  uncolored  versions,  are  applied  with  a 
mascara-type applicator or spoolie (a stand-alone twisted wire 
brush) and usually contain polymers meant to hold brows in a 
particular style much like hair gel for scalp hair.

Treatments for eyebrows are similar to those available for eye-
lashes/eyelids and include dyeing, tattooing and artificial brows 
or  eyebrow  “wigs”  [18].  As  with  eyelashes,  many  serums  are 
available which claim to aid or enhance brow growth.

Figure 23.4  Various molded mascara applicator designs showing the wide 
range of possibilities that are possible with this versatile applicator type.

looks. False eyelashes can come in two different types: temporary 
and semi-permanent. The temporary eyelashes are applied with 
glue  designed  specifically  for  the  purpose.  One  can  use  a  vari-
ety of different types and colors of glues to adhere false eyelashes 
to natural lashes. False eyelashes may be applied as entire strips 
or as individual groups of lashes. They are adhered to the eyelid 
with a non-permanent adhesive. This allows easy application and 
removal at the end of the day.

Lash tinting involves application of a semi-permanent dye for 
color that lasts about a month. This is a two part product, just 
like  permanent  coloring  for  scalp  hair.  An  oxidative  cream  is 
mixed with an oxidizing agent and then applied onto the lashes 
and  left  for  15  to  20  minutes.  The  dye  forms  while  it  is  pen-
etrating into the lashes. Currently there are no color additives 
approved by FDA for permanent dyeing or tinting of eyelashes 
and eyebrows [14].

Lash perming is done by rolling the lashes of the top eyelid 
around  a  thin  cotton  tube.  The  lashes  are  then  coated  with  a 
high pH gel that penetrates into the lashes and breaks disulfide 
bonds  holding  together  keratin  protein  strands  in  the  cortex. 
After about 15 minutes, a second neutralizing coat is applied to 
the lashes to neutralize the high pH and reform bonds between 
protein strands to hold the lash in its new shape after the cotton 
cylinder is removed. While the FDA has approved these chemi-
cals for use on scalp hair, it has not yet approved them for use 
around the eyes [14].

Eyelash extensions are synthetic fibers that are bonded to indi-
vidual lashes, usually with a cyanoacrylate adhesive. Typically, 
30–80 lashes per eyelid will have eyelash extensions applied, and 
they typically last one to two months, after which they must be 
touched up due to the natural growth cycle of lashes.

Eyelash  transplants  involve  relocating  scalp  follicles  to  the 
eyelids. Small incisions are made in the top and bottom eyelids 
into  which  are  placed  the  transplanted  follicles.  Manual  curl-
ing  and  trimming  is  necessary  because  the  scalp  follicles  will 
continue to grow hair for years in a relatively straight direction.

204

ADOrNMENT  Colored Facial Cosmetics 

Eyeshadow

Eyeshadow is color applied to the upper eyelids. It is used to add 
depth and dimension to the eyes, thus drawing attention to the 
eye  look  or  eye  color.  The  predominant  form  is  powder,  both 
pressed and loose, but eyeshadow is also available in other forms, 
such as creams, sticks, and liquids. In recent years, “baked” eye-
shadows  have  become  widely  available.  These  are  prepared  in 
slurry or liquid form, rather than by pressing into compacts. The 
solvent is evaporated from the slurry, leaving only the pigments 
– this gives denser and truer pigmentation and improves appli-
cation and wear due to the lack of binder present. Eyeshadows 
are very similar to blushes and pressed powder in terms of their 
key ingredients (see Chapter 20). They normally are comprised 
of pigments and pearls, and fillers bound together with a vola-
tile  or  non-volatile  binder.  They  may  also  contain  other  pow-
der particles such as boron nitride or polytetrafluoroethylene to 
improve slip and pay-off on application. An eyeshadow primer, 
typically composed of a volatile solvent base, silicones and film 
formers, may be applied prior to eyeshadow application in order 
to extend wear and reduce creasing on oily eyelids.

Eyeliners

Eyeliner  is  used  to  outline  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids.  This 
serves to define the eyes against the backdrop of the face. Eye-
liner can also be used to make the eye look more bold or to give 
the illusion of a different eye shape. They are typically available 
in liquid form and wood or mechanical pencils. Wood pencils 
excel at creating a softer, more natural look. Mechanical pencils 
tend to be a bit bolder, and the gel forms are great for gliding 
easily across the eyelid. Liquid liners can create a distinctively 
defined eye and provide longer wear, but are difficult to apply 
correctly. Most eye pencils are comprised of colorants dispersed 
in a waxy matrix for ease of application and to help the color 
adhere to the skin. Liquid liners, though not as popular as the 
pencil form, contain colorants that are dispersed in volatile sol-
vents so they can be applied with a brush or pen-like applicator.

Product application

Eyeshadow  application  techniques  vary  according  to  the  look 
you are trying to achieve, but generally, an appealing look can 
be achieved using three complimentary shades in light, medium 
and dark. The lightest shade highlights the area below the eye-
brow, the medium shade is applied to the creased area, and the 
darkest  shade  is  reserved  for  the  area  immediately  above  the 
upper eyelashes. Matte, silky shadows tend to blend nicely and 
are often preferred for mature eye skin over iridescent or sparkly 
shades  which  can  highlight  fine  lines  or  puffiness.  Eyeshadow 
can be applied with a dry applicator for a more natural look, or 
with a wet applicator for a more intense, dramatic look.

Figure 23.5  The impact of eye cosmetics on eye beauty.

Generally,  eyeliner  is  applied  to  the  outer  two  thirds  of  the 
lower lid below the lashes and to the entire upper lid above the 
lashes in a thin line. An angled brush can be used to gently soften 
the look. Although dark liners draw a lot of attention to the eyes, 
softer shades of brown, especially in the day time, can be used to 
avoid looking too harsh.

Curling  the  lashes  with  an  eyelash  curler  prior  to  mascara 
application will make the eyes seem more wide open and bright. 
Usually, mascara is applied generously to upper lashes and to a 
lesser extent to the lower lashes. Color choice of mascaras can 
change the look obtained. For instance, on light-haired individ-
uals brown mascara can be used for a softer, more natural look. 
Black or brown-black is best for deeper skin tones or for a more 
dramatic look.

Figure 23.5 shows the effect of applying eye cosmetics.

Safety and regulatory considerations  
for eye area cosmetics

Most countries or regions regulate cosmetics to a varying degree 
of  complexity,  largely  due  to  safety  considerations.  Since  cos-
metics  touch  and  interact  directly  with  the  human  body,  the 
various regulations are in place to ensure that consumers are not 
exposed to materials that may be harmful. This does of course 
stem from various safety incidents that have occurred with per-
sonal care products. For instance, consumers can have allergic 
reactions to lash dyes, which were becoming a popular product 
in the 1930s. In one case, an allergic reaction to a lash dye led 
to one consumer becoming blind [4]. Ultimately this was one 
of many causes in the United States that led to FDA oversight 
of cosmetics, and in particular it led to a positive list of color-
ants that could be used for eye area cosmetics [19]. In later years 
other  regulatory  bodies,  such  as  the  European  Commission, 
adopted similar restrictions to the FDA’s on colorants for use in 
the eye area [20].

23. Eye Cosmetics

205

One notable regulatory discussion in the area of eye cosmet-
ics in recent years is the use of Carbon Black (also referred to as 
D&C Black No 2). Carbon Black is a fine-particle pigment pro-
duced from the partial combustion of hydrocarbon gas or oil and 
is a desirable cosmetic ingredient, particularly in eye cosmetics, 
because it can deliver much darker blacks than iron oxides. There 
has  been  considerable  debate  about  the  potential  carcinogenic-
ity of Carbon Black. In 2004, the FDA concluded research into 
the safety of the use of Carbon Black in cosmetics and ruled that 
the pigment is safe for use, but is subject to batch certification for 
purity due to the potential presence of PAH contaminants which 
are a byproduct of the production process [21].

Due to intimate contact with the human body, all cosmetics 
should  be  adequately  preserved  from  microbiological  insults. 
This  is  especially  true  for  eye  cosmetics  where  contact  with  a 
contaminated product could lead to an eye area infection and 
the possibility of more serious complications.

The future of eye cosmetics

For  a  mature  category  like  eye  cosmetics,  it  is  surprising  how 
much  potential  still  exists  for  product  innovation.  New  prod-
ucts are being introduced that feature enhanced long wear, new 
applicator surfaces, novel color effects, sustainable natural mate-
rials, improved application, and even lash growth.

Long wear
In the past, there have been two primary classes of mascara: water 
resistant and waterproof. Water-resistant mascara can be removed 
with warm water and soap, whereas waterproof mascara is usu-
ally  removed  with  a  makeup  remover  product.  Both  types  are 
applied and removed during the same day. This does not allow for 
a consumer to enjoy the beauty benefits of mascara all of the time. 

Although  many  consumers  desire  a  semi-permanent  mascara 
benefit, current options are longer wearing waterproof mascaras 
or  semi-permanent  lash  stain  products  that  are  only  designed 
to eliminate reapplication during the day while also being easily 
removable by the user using soap and water or a makeup remover 
product. These technologies do not last through showering and 
sleeping and are therefore not appropriate for wear beyond one 
day.  Furthermore,  the  beauty  look  of  existing  semi-permanent 
lash stain products provides darkness, but not the level of thick-
ening consumers desire from a mascara; moreover, they typically 
degrade quickly after the first day of wear [22].

To address the strong consumer need of semi-permanent mas-
cara,  new  longer  lasting  formula  technologies  have  been  devel-
oped to be abrasion resistant, flexible and insoluble in soap and 
water  so  that  the  initial  beauty  look  is  maintained  for  multiple 
days. These technologies achieve extended wear benefits through 
various  formula  design  elements.  One  example  is  the  choice  of 
polymers.  Polymers  must  be  screened  for  film  flexibility,  abra-
sion  resistance  and  water  and  surfactant  resistance.  Another 
design  element  is  balancing  the  ratio  of  polymer  to  other  non-
volatiles  in  the  formula  such  that  there  is  sufficient  polymer  to 
form a continuous phase. Studies have shown that a continuous 
film modifies many film properties including gloss, film flexibil-
ity  and  abrasion  resistance.  As  the  pigment  volume  concentra-
tion  increases,  film  flexibility  decreases  and  abrasion  resistance 
remains  the  same  or  improves.  The  more  this  pigment  volume 
concentration is increased, the more the film will become brittle 
and abrasion resistance will decrease rapidly. Scanning electron 
microscopy can be used to compare the morphologies of mascara 
films applied to false lashes as shown in Figure 23.6.

Pushing the applicator envelope
In addition to new benefits from advancements in molded appli-
cator  technology,  the  mascara  application  experience  is  being 

(a)

(b)

Figure 23.6  SEM images of mascara film morphology. Rough mascara film of a long wearing waterproof mascara that lasts a day (a), and microscopically 
smooth continuous mascara film of a semi-permanent mascara that lasts multiple days (b).

206

ADOrNMENT  Colored Facial Cosmetics 

improved with automated applicators that use vibrating or rotat-
ing brushes to take away some of the skill necessary to achieve 
beautiful  lashes.  These  applicators  can  be  held  up  against  the 
lashes  while  they  work  for  the  consumer  by  exposing  more  of 
the applicator surface to the lashes, encouraging more deposition 
of mascara and more grooming of the lashes. Other innovative 
eye makeup tools are being developed to make the application of 
makeup easy. These tools are not only meant for applying mas-
cara, but also for curling and perming the eyelashes. They include 
heated  mascara  brushes,  bristle-free  tips,  expandable  brushes, 
precision tips, corkscrew bristles and disposable mascara wands.

Lash conditioners and growers
As  consumers  have  become  more  sensitive  to  the  impact  that 
beauty products have on the health and condition of their skin 
and hair, cosmetic companies have started to adopt healthy hair 
actives commonly used for scalp hair into products intended to 
improve or repair eyelashes. As mentioned previously, products 
are also coming onto the market that claim to actually stimulate 
and  enhance  lash  growth.  While  there  are  regulatory  consid-
erations that make these products controversial, if approved for 
consumer use, they may negate the need of some women to use 
mascara to achieve beautiful lashes.

references

1  Kunzig R. (1999) Style of the Nile. Discover September, p. 80.
2  Ahuja A. (1999) Chemistry and eye makeup – science. Times, Sep-

tember 22.

3  Geibel V. (1991) Mascara. Vogue August.
4  Riordan  T.  (2004)  Inventing  Beauty:  A  History  of  the  Innovations 
that have Made us Beautiful. New York: Broadway Books, pp. 1–31.
5  Balaji Narasimhan R. (2001) Pearl luster pigments. Paintindia 51, 

67–72.

6  Elder MJ. (1997) Anatomy and physiology of eyelash follicles: relevance 

to lash ablation procedures. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 13, 21–5.

7  Na  J,  Kwon  O,  Kim  B  et  al.  (2006)  Ethnic  characteristics  of  eye-
lashes: a comparative analysis in Asian and Caucasian females. Br J 
Dermatol 155, 1170–6.

8  Liotet S, Riera M, Nguyen H. (1977) Les cils: Physiologie, structure, 

pathologie. Arch Opht 37, 697–708.

9  Thibaut E, De Becker E, Caisey L, et al. (2010) Human eyelash char-

acterization. Br J Dermatol 162: 304–310.

10  Montagna  W,  Ford  DM.  (1969)  Histology  and  cytochemistry  of 

human skin. 3. The eyelid. Arch Dermatol 100, 328–35.

11  Cunningham J. (1996) Color cosmetics. In: Williams D. F, Schmitt 
WH, eds. Chemistry and Technology of the Cosmetics and Toiletries 
Industry. New York: Blackie Academic & Professional.

12  Sheffler  RJ.  (1998)  The  revolution  in  mascara  evolution.  Happi 

April, pp. 48–52.

13  Wall  Street  Journal  Online  (2013)  Makeup  to  Women:  Apply  Your-
self.  Finally,  Cosmetics  That  Promise  to  Be  Faster  and  More  Precise; 
Shoppers  Toss  the  Mirror  and  Buy.  http://online.wsj.com/news/arti-
cles/SB10001424127887323419104578372311872888312 (accessed 4 
June 2015).

14  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  (2013)  Eye  cosmetic  safety. 
www.fda.gov/Cosmetics/ProductandIngredientSafety/ProductIn-
formation/ucm137241.htm (accessed 4 June 2015).

15  Wolf R, Matz H, Zalish M, Pollack A, Orion E. (2003) Prostag-
landin analogs for hair growth: great expectations. Dermatology 
9, 7.

16  Cohen  JL.  (2010)  Enhancing  the  growth  of  natural  eyelashes:  the 
mechanism of bimatoprost-induced eyelash growth. Dermatol Surg 
36(9), 1361–71.

17  Sherrow V. (2006) Encyclopedia of Hair: A Cultural History. West-

port (CT): Greenwood Press; Eyebrows; pp. 118–20.

18  O’Donoghue MN. (2000) Eye cosmetics. Dermatol Clin [Internet] 2000 
Oct [cited 2014 Jan 27]; 18(4), 633–9. Available from ScienceDirect: 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S073386350570214X
19  US Federal Regulations. FDA. 21C.F.R. Part 700, Subchapter G.
20  EC Directive 76/768/EC, OJ L 262, p. 169 of 27.9.1976.
21  Color additives subject to certification; D&C Black No. 2. Final rule. 

Fed Regist. 2004 Jul 28; 69(144), 44927–30.

22  Dempsey  JH,  Fabula  AM,  Rabe  TE,  et  al.  (2012)  Development 
of a semi-permanent mascara technology. Int J Cosmetic Sci 34, 
29–35.

Sec tion 2  nail cosmetics

Chapter 24
Nail physiology and Grooming

Anna Hare1 and Phoebe Rich2
1Emory School of Medicine., Atlanta, GA, USA
2Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA 

BasIC CoNCepts

•	 Knowledge	of	nail	unit	anatomy	and	physiology	and	an	understanding	of	nail	plate	growth	and	physical	properties	are	important	

prerequisites	for	understanding	nail	cosmetics.

•	 Disruption	and	excessive	manipulation	of	certain	nail	structures,	such	as	the	hyponychium	and	eponychium/cuticle,	should	be	

discouraged	during	nail	cosmetic	procedures	and	nail	salon	services.

•	 In	addition	to	beautifying	natural	nails,	nail	cosmetics	are	beneficial	in	camouflaging	unsightly	medical	and	infectious	nail	problems,	

especially	during	the	lengthy	treatment	period.

•	 Some	nail	cosmetics	provide	a	protective	coating	for	fragile,	weak,	and	brittle	nails.
•	 Proper	nail	grooming	is	crucial	for	maintaining	nail	health.
•	 Although	most	nail	cosmetics	are	used	safely,	it	is	important	to	be	aware	of	potential	complications	associated	with	nail	cosmetic	

materials	and	application	processes.

Introduction: Nail physiology

Nail unit anatomy
Understanding nail unit anatomy and pathophysiology is essen-
tial to maximizing the benefits of nail cosmetics without inducing 
pathology via cosmetic materials and procedures. The nail unit is 
composed of the nail matrix, proximal and lateral nail folds, the 
hyponychium, and the nail bed (Figure 24.1).

Table 24.1 lists common nail signs and definitions relevant to 

nail cosmetics.

Nail matrix
The  nail  matrix  is  comprised  of  germinative  epithelium  from 
which the nail plate is derived (Figure 24.2). The majority of the 
matrix lies under the proximal nail fold. The distal portion of the 
nail matrix creates the white lunula, visible through the proximal 
nail plate on some digits. It is hypothesized that the white color 
of  the  lunula  can  be  attributed  to  both  incomplete  nail  plate 
keratinization  and  loose  connective  tissue  in  the  underlying 
dermis. The proximal nail matrix generates the dorsal (superfi-
cial) nail plate, while the distal nail matrix generates the ventral 
(inferior)  nail  plate.  This  concept  is  crucial  to  understanding 
nail pathology. Preserving and protecting the matrix during nail 

cosmetic processes is essential for proper nail plate formation. 
Significant  damage  to  the  nail  matrix  can  result  in  permanent 
nail plate dystrophy.

The nail plate is derived from the nail matrix and composed 
of closely packed, keratinized epithelial cells called onychocytes. 
Cells in the matrix become progressively flattened and broad-
ened  and  lose  their  nuclei  as  they  mature  into  the  nail  plate. 
The nail plate is curved in both the longitudinal and transverse 
planes, allowing adhesion to the nail bed and ensheathment by 
the proximal and lateral nail folds. Longitudinal ridging may be 
present on both the dorsal and ventral surface of the nail plate. 
Mildly increased longitudinal ridging on the dorsal nail plate 
is  considered  a  normal  part  of  aging.  Ridging  on  the  ventral 
surface of the nail plate is caused by the structure of the under-
lying nail bed and vertically oriented blood vessels. The com-
position and properties of the nail plate are further discussed 
below.

Nail folds
The  nail  folds  surround  and  protect  the  nail  unit  by  sealing 
out  environmental  irritants  and  microorganisms  through 
tight  attachment  of  the  cuticle  to  the  nail  plate.  This  barrier 
formed by the cuticle, or eponychium, is essential to prevent-

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

207

208

aDorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

table 24.1  Common	nail	signs	associated	with	or	helped	by	nail	cosmetics.

nail sign

Onycholysis

Definition

Association

Separation	of	the	nail	plate	from	the	nail	bed

Onychorrhexis

Increased	longitudinal	ridging

Onychoschizia

Paronychia

Dyschromia	yellow

Green/black	discoloration

Nail	bed	changes	as	in	psoriasis,	
onychomycosis

Lamellar	splitting	of	the	free	end	of	the	nail	plate

Inflammation	of	the	nail	fold

Staining	of	the	surface	of	the	nail	plate	yellow	from	the	dye	
in	nail	polish

Pseudomonas	is	a	bacterium	that	generates	a	green–black	
pigment	that	discolors	the	nail	plate

Vigorous	cleaning	of	hyponychium	exacerbates.	
Polish	hides

Associated	with	aging,	distal	notching.	Polish	may	
help

Free edge
of nail plate

Lunula

Cuticle

Nail bed

Proximal
nail fold

Hyponychium

Distal groove

Lateral nail fold

Figure 24.3  Paronychia.

Figure 24.1  Nail unit with lines indicating important structures.

Nail matrix (nail root)

Cuticle (stratum corneum of the nail fold)

Eponychium

Lunula

Nail plate

Nail bed

Hyponychium

Figure 24.2  Diagram of the nail unit.

ing  invasion of irritants, moisture, bacteria, and yeasts under 
the nail fold. Disruption of this barrier, as often occurs in cos-
metic nail procedures when the cuticle is cut or pushed back, 

can result in infection or inflammation of the nail fold, termed 
paronychia (Figure 24.3). Chronic paronychia may disrupt the 
underlying nail matrix and subsequently lead to nail plate dys-
trophy.

hyponychium
The hyponychium is the cutaneous margin underlying the free 
edge of the nail plate. It is contiguous with the volar aspect of 
the fingertip. The nail bed ends at the hyponychium. The hypo-
nychium functions like the cuticle, acting as an adherent seal 
to protect the nail unit. Overmanipulating of the hyponychium 
during nail grooming can result in onycholysis, or separation 
of the nail plate from the nail bed. This space created between 
the nail plate and bed retains moisture, creating an ideal envi-
ronment  for  potential  pathogens,  such  as  yeast,  bacteria,  or 
fungi.

Nail bed
The nail bed is thin, 2–5 cell layer thick epithelium that underlies 
the  nail  plate.  It  extends  from  the  lunula  to  the  hyponychium. 
The  nail  bed  is  composed  of  longitudinal,  parallel  rete  ridges 
with a rich vascular supply. This vascularity is responsible for the 
pink coloration of the bed as well as longitudinal ridges on the 

24. Nail Physiology and Grooming

209

(a)

Figure 24.4  (a & b) Onycholysis.

(b)

ventral surface of the nail plate. In chronic onycholysis, when the 
nail plate is separated from the nail bed for an extended duration, 
the nail bed epithelium may become keratinized, form a granular 
layer, and lead to permanent onycholysis (Figure 24.4).

other structures
The distal phalanx lies immediately beneath the nail unit. The 
extensor tendon runs over the distal interphalangeal joint and 
attaches to the distal phalanx 12 mm proximal to the proximal 
nail  fold.  Given  that  there  is  little  space  between  the  nail  unit 
and distal phalanx, minor injury to the nail unit may extend to 
the periosteum and lead to infection.

Nail growth
Normal nail growth has been cited to vary from less than 1.8 mm 
to more than 4.5 mm per month. Average fingernail growth is 
0.1 mm per day, or 3 mm per month. This information is useful 
when determining the duration of nail pathology. For example, 
if splinter hemorrhages are located 6 mm from the proximal nail 
fold, it can be estimated that they occurred from injury approxi-
mately  2  months  prior.  Based  on  this  growth  rate,  fingernails 
grow  out  completely  in  6  months.  Toenails  grow  at  one-third 
to half of the rate of fingernails and take 12–18 months to grow 
out completely.

Several  factors  affect  the  rate  of  nail  growth.  Age  affects 
nail  growth  rate,  with  nail  growth  peaking  at  10–14  years 
and  declining  after  20  years.  Nail  growth  is  proportional  to 
finger  length,  with  fastest  growth  of  the  third  fingernail  and 
slowest  growth  of  the  fifth  fingernail,  and  faster  nail  growth 
has  been  noted  in  the  dominant  hand.  Nails  grow  slower  at 
night and during the winter. Other factors causing slower nail 
plate growth include lactation, immobilization, paralysis, poor 
nutrition, yellow nail syndrome, antimitotic drugs, and acute 
infection. Pregnancy, psoriasis, and nail biting are other factors 
linked  to  faster  nail  growth.  Table  24.2  summarizes  factors 
influencing nail growth.

physical properties of nails

Nail composition
The nail plate is composed mainly of keratin, which is embedded 
in  a  matrix  of  non-keratin  proteins.  There  is  wide  variation  in 
reported percentage of inorganic elements found in the nail plate. 
Several  elements,  including  sulfur,  calcium,  iron,  aluminum, 
copper, silver, gold, titanium, phosphorus, zinc, and sodium, are 
constituents of the nail plate. Of these elements, sulfur, contained 
in the cysteine bonds that cross-link nail plate keratin, has the 
greatest  contribution  to  nail  structure  and  comprises  approxi-
mately  5%  of  the  nail  plate.  Some  studies  attribute  brittle  nails 
to decreased cysteine levels. Cytokeratin 16 and 17 are present in 
normal nails but diminished in brittle nails [10].

There  is  a  popular  misconception  that  calcium  content  is 
responsible for nail hardness. However, calcium comprises less 
than 1% of the nail plate by weight [1], and no current evidence 
supports association between calcium deficit and brittle nails or 
shows  increased  nail  strength  with  calcium  supplementation. 
In  fact,  in  kwashiorkor,  a  condition  of  nutritional  deficiency 
caused by insufficient protein intake, nails are thin and soft and 
with increased nail plate calcium.

Water  content  of  the  normal  nail  plate  is  reported  to  range 
between 10% and 30%. The most commonly accepted value is 
18% water content in normal nails and 16% in brittle nails. How-
ever, a study aimed at confirming this demonstrated no statisti-
cally significant difference between normal and brittle nails [2]. 
In addition, this study showed lower water content than previ-
ously thought, with a mean water content of 11.90% in normal 
nails and 12.48% in brittle nails. Some limitations in this study 
were noted, including analysis of only the distal nail plate (clip-
pings) and variable time between sample collection and analysis, 
allowing interval water loss.

Lipids,  including  squalene  and  cholesterol,  are  also  constitu-
ents of the nail plate and comprise 5% of the nail plate by weight. 
These lipids are thought to diffuse from the nail bed to the nail 

210

aDorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

table 24.2  Nail	cosmetic	products:	ingredients	and	uses.

Product

Nail	polish

ingredients

Application procedures

Benefits of use

Potential complications

Film	former:	nitrocellulose
Thermoplastic	resin:	(toluene	
sulfonamide	formaldehyde	
resin)
Plasticizer:	dibutyl	pthalate
Solvents	and	pigments

Polish	is	applied	in	several	
coats	with	a	small	brush	
and	allowed	to	dry	by	
evaporation

Provides	an	attractive	glossy	
smooth	decorative	surface	
and	camouflages	nail	defects
Protects	nail	from	dehydration	
and	irritants

Yellow	staining	of	nail	
plate.	Potential	for	allergy	
to	toluene	sulfonamide	
formaldehyde	resin	and	
other	ingredients

Nail	hardener

Acrylic	nail	extensions
DO	GEL	AND	S

May	contain	formaldehyde	in	a	
nail	polish	base,	also	may	have	
fibers	that	reinforce	the	nail

Application	similar	to	nail	
polish	which	is	applied	in	
several	coats

Acrylic	monomer,	polymer,	
polymerized	to	form	a	hard	
shell	attached	to	the	nail		
plate	or	to	a	plastic	tip	glued	
to	the	nail

Monomer	(liquid)	and	
polymer	(powder)	mixed	
to	form	a	paste	and	
polymerized	with	a	catalyst	
to	a	harden	the	product

Forms	several	layers	of	
protection	on	the	nail	plate

Cover	unsightly	nail	
defects,	may	help	manage	
onychotillomania	and	habit	tic	
disorder

Potential	allergy	to	
formaldehyde	and	possible	
brittleness

Possible	allergy	to	acrylates,	
inflexibility	of	artificial	nail	
may	cause	injury	to	nail	unit

Cuticle	remover

Contains	potassium	hydroxide	
or	sodium	hydroxide	plus	
humectants

Applied	to	cuticle	for	5–10	
minutes	to	soften	cuticle	
adhered	to	nail	plate

Gently	removes	dead	skin	
attached	to	the	nail	plate	
without	mechanical	trauma

Nail	polish	remover

Acetone,	butyl	acetate,	ethyl	
acetate,	may	also	contain	
moisturizer	such	as	lanolin	or	
synthetic	oils

Wiped	across	nail	plate	with	
cotton	or	tissue	to	remove	
nail	polish

Removes	polish	smoothly	
without	removing	layers	of	
nail	plate

Over	removal	of	cuticle	and	
result	in	the	potential	for	
paronychia	and	secondary	
bacteria	and	Candida	
infections.	Can	soften	the	
nail	plate

May	dehydrate	the	nail	
plate	and	periungual	tissue

plate. The water binding capacity of brittle nails is less than that of 
normal nails which may be due to an abnormality in lipid content, 
keratin, or keratin-associated proteins or lipid content [9,10].

Nail flexibility
Most references to nail strength and hardness actually refer to 
nail flexibility. A flexible nail will bend and conform to physical 
force, whereas a hard nail is brittle and breaks more easily. Nail 
flexibility  is  aided  by  plasticizers,  which  are  liquids  that  make 
solids more flexible. Examples of nail plasticizers are water and 
lipids.  Flexibility  is  decreased  by  solvents,  such  as  nail  polish 
removers, which remove both water and lipids, and detergents, 
which remove lipids.

Nail brittleness is caused by loss of flexibility. Brittle nails are a 
common complaint and are found in 20% of the general popu-
lation and more commonly in females (Figure 24.5). Brittleness 
encompasses several nail features including onychoschizia, which 
is lamellar peeling of distal nail plate (Figure 24.6); splitting and 
notching, sometimes associated with ridges; and fragility of the 
distal nail plate, including lamellar splitting of the free end of the 
nail plate. Several attempts have been made to define brittleness 
with objective measurements, including Knoop hardness, which 
evaluates  indentation  at  a  fixed  weight;  modulus  of  elasticity, 
which describes the relationship between force/area and deforma-
tion produced; tensile strength; and a brittleness grading system.

Although there are systemic and cutaneous conditions that may 
cause brittle nails, exogeneous causes are more common. These 
include mechanical trauma, exposure to solvents and extraction 
of plasticizers, and repeated hydration and drying of nails.

Nail thickness
Thickness  of  the  nail  plate  is  determined  primarily  by  matrix 
length and rate of growth. Measurements of distal plate thick-
ness demonstrate greatest thickness in the thumbnail, followed 
by the second, third, fourth, and fifth fingernails. Thickness also 
is  influenced  by  sex,  with  males  having  an  average  nail  plate 
thickness of 0.6 mm, compared to 0.5 mm in females.

Nail grooming principles

Nail care
Several  principles  of  nail  care  should  be  observed  during  nail 
grooming to maintain normal nail structure.

Manicures and pedicures are the processes of grooming the 
fingernails and toenails respectively at home or in a nail salon 
(Figure 24.7). The procedure involves soaking the nails to soften 
prior to trimming and shaping the nail plate. Excess cuticle is 
removed from the nail plate using a chemical cuticle remover 
and often a metal implement. The nails are then finished with a 

24. Nail Physiology and Grooming

211

(b)

(b)

Figure 24.5  (a–c) Brittle nails.

(a)

(c)

(a)

Figure 24.6  Onychoschizia, distal lamallar peeling of the nail plate.

shiny, smooth coat of nail enamel, commonly called nail polish, 
sandwiched between a base coat and top coat, or the nails may 
be buffed to a soft luster.

Other  procedures  such  as  acrylic,  gel  or  silk  wrap  enhance-
ments may be added to the basic manicure to extend nail length, 

improve shape, hide damaged nails, or increase durability of nail 
colors. These nail extension procedures involve applying product 
to the natural nail or to a plastic tip glued to the nail. The material 
are applied and shaped before curing or polymerizing to form a 
hard surface.

212

aDorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 24.7  (a) Manicure; (b–d) Pedicure.

Nail trimming
Most nail experts advocate shaping nails with an emery board 
rather than clipping or cutting nails. Filing should be carried out 
with the file exactly perpendicular to the nail surface to avoid 
inducing onycholysis. Proper filing of the free edge of nail plate 
reduces sharp edges that may catch and cause nail plate tearing. 
If nails must be clipped or cut, this should be performed after 
they  have  been  hydrated  which  maximizes  nail  flexibility  and 
prevents breakage during trimming. Nails should also be kept 
as short as possible. Long nails, especially those that are brittle, 
may act as a lever and create onycholysis.

Nail buffing and filing
The dorsal nail plate surface is often filed to remove shine from 
the natural nail plate at nail salons prior to application of nail 
products or artificial nails. Care must be taken to avoid exces-
sive filing, especially with electric drills. The nail plate is approx-
imately 100 cell layers thick. If filing must be done, only 5% of 
the nail plate thickness, or approximately five cell layers, should 
be  removed  which  is  just  enough  to  remove  the  shine  of  the 

dorsal  nail  plate  in  order  to  facilitate  adherence  of  the  prod-
uct  to  the  nail  plate.  Limited  buffing  to  reduce  nail  ridging  is 
acceptable, but excessive buffing thins the nail plate and should 
be avoided.

Nail painting
Classic  nail  polish  contains  ingredients  allow  it  to  be  painted 
on smoothly, harden, and adhere to the nail (Table 24.2). This 
polish  typically  lasts  2–7  days  without  chipping  or  cracking. 
Gel  polish  became  popular  for  its  increased  durability  over 
time,  lasting  around  2  weeks.  Application  typically  requires 
smoothing the nail via filing, which can weaken the nail plate, 
though application of a thick coating, which is dried using UV 
or LED light, may have a mitigating effect by protecting the nail. 
Removal is often performed in a nail salon, and requires either 
filing the false nail coat off, which can damage the native nail 
if filing extends below the gel coat, or considerable soaking in 
acetone followed by scraping, which contributes to drying of the 
nail. Shellac, a recent development often called a hybrid of the 
two, can be painted on in coats with time to harden under UV 

light between coats. Removal requires 10–15 minutes of soaking 
in acetone before scraping off.

Recent  concern  has  arisen  over  potential  increased  risk  of 
skin cancer due to exposure of the hands to UV light used to 
cure these nail coatings. However, research examining this risk 
has noted that the risk is very small and can be minimized fur-
ther with the use of white cotton gloves with the fingertips cut 
off,  and  application  of  water  resistant  sunscreen  to  the  dorsal 
hands prior to salon services involving UV light [3,4].

Care for brittle nails
Brittle  nails  should  be  treated  by  avoiding  nail  trauma  and 
increasing  flexibility  by  maintaining  nail  hydration.  Nails 
should  be  kept  short  to  prevent  lifting  of  the  nail  plate,  dis-
ruption  of  the  hyponychium,  and  onycholysis.  In  addition, 
nails  should  be  trimmed  after  they  have  been  hydrated  and 
are the most flexible. Avoiding solvents and frequent cycling 
between hydration and desiccation of nails also helps maintain 
flexibility. Humectants hydrate the nail plate and increase flex-
ibility and reduce brittleness. However, frequent use of hand 
moisturizers  is  not  necessarily  recommended.  In  one  study 
of  102  participants,  nail  brittleness  was  positively  associated 
with  frequency  of  professional  manicures,  use  of  nail  polish 
remover, family history of brittle nails, and higher frequency 
of  hand  moisturizer  use  [2].  There  is  also  controversy  over 
avoidance of nail cosmetics in the management of brittle nails. 
The use of nail polish remover, an organic solvent, results in 
drying of the nails and can increase brittleness [5]. Filing nails 
thins the nail plate and increases nail desiccation [5]. However 
application of nail polish can be protective. Coating the nail 
with  a  protective  layer  of  nail  enamel  can  prevent  dehydra-
tion by sealing the moisture in the nail plate and preventing 
rapid evaporation [5], as well as protecting the nail plate from 
some environmental irritants. Biotin has also been advocated 
for  brittle  nails,  but  results  are  inconclusive.  One  open  label 
study by Scher et al. showed that 2.5 mg biotin daily for 6 to 
15 months improved brittle nails and onychoschizia in all sub-
jects  [10].  The  recommended  dose  of  biotin  for  brittle  nails 
is  2.5–5 mg/day,  which  is  100–200  times  the  recommended 
daily  allowance.  Given  that  biotin  has  relatively  few  side 
effects,  most  experts  recommend  its  use,  in  addition  to  the 
above grooming recommendations.

adverse effects from nail grooming
Nail cosmetics are safely used by millions of people worldwide. 
In addition to enhancing the appearance of normal nails, cosmet-
ics are useful for improving the appearance of unsightly nail dys-
trophy caused by medical disease, such as psoriasis (Figure 24.8), 
onychomycosis (Figure 24.9), or trauma. Although nail cosmet-
ics rarely cause problems, it is important to be aware of possible 
adverse effects related to procedures or to materials used in nail 
cosmetics, and to guide or patients toward safe use of nail cosmet-
ics and nail salon services. (Figure 24.10).

24. Nail Physiology and Grooming

213

Figure 24.8  Psoriasis: salmon patch oil drop discoloration.

Figure 24.9  Onychomycosis.

allergic reactions to nail cosmetic ingredients
Allergic  contact  dermatitis  from  nail  cosmetics  not  common 
and occurs it occurs on periungual skin, as well as the eyelids, 
face,  and  neck,  caused  by  touching  these  areas  with  freshly 
polished  fingernails  (Figure  24.11).  The  most  common  aller-
gen  in  nail  polish  is  tosylamide-formaldehyde  resin  (TSFR) 
with  sensitization  occurring  in  up  to  3%  of  the  population. 
TSFR, a product that increases adhesion, gloss, and flow of nail 
polish, is found in most brands of nail polish available in con-
centrations ranging from around .1 to 25% in dried polish(6). 
Some  “hypoallergenic”  labeled  products  have  replaced  TSFR 
with ester resins, though these products may still contain other 
allergens and testing of these products has found TSFR present 
in a few [7]. Formaldehyde, another allergenic ingredient used 
for nail hardening, is often used in conjunction with and corre-
lated with TSFR concentration [6]. Gel nail polish, popular for 

214

aDorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

Figure 24.10  Yellow staining from nail polish.

its increased durability, often contains methyl acrylate, which 
can  also  result  in  sensitization  and  cause  contact  dermatitis. 
Other potential allergens are cyanoacrylate nail glue, formal-
dehyde in nail hardeners, and ethylmethacrylate in sculptured 
nails.

Irritant reactions
Common nail products that cause irritant reactions to periungual 
skin include acetone or acetate nail polish removers and cuticle 
removers  with  sodium  hydroxide.  Reactions  are  manifested  as 
an irritant dermatitis of the periungual skin and as brittle nails, 
including onychoschizia. Prolonged use of nail polish can induce 
development of keratin granulations on the nail plate. This com-
monly is seen when fresh coats of nail enamel are applied on top 
of old enamel for and left in place for an extended period of time. 
These  granulations  cause  superficial  friability  of  the  nail  plate 
(Figure 24.12).

(a)

Figure 24.11  Allergic contact dermatitis from nail cosmetics. (a) On the eyelid. (b) On periungal skin caused by acrylates.

(a)

Figure 24.12  (a & b) Keratin granulations.

(b)

(b)

24. Nail Physiology and Grooming

215

table 24.3  Information	for	patients	for	safe	nail	cosmetic	use.

•	 Be	sure	that	the	salon	sterilizes	instruments,	preferably	with	an	
autoclave.	Some	salons	offer	instruments	for	clients	to	purchase
•	 Stinging,	burning,	or	itching	following	a	nail	salon	treatment	may	

be	signs	of	an	allergic	reaction	to	a	cosmetic	ingredient.	Remove	the	
product	and	seek	medical	evaluation	by	a	dermatologist

•	 If	using	artificial	nail	extensions,	keep	them	short.	Long	nails	can	cause	
mechanical	damage	to	the	nail	bed.	Remove	extensions	at	the	first	sign	
of	onycholysis	and	avoid	enhancements	until	the	nail	is	reattached
•	 Do	not	allow	nail	technician	to	cut	or	clip	cuticles.	Cuticles	serve	an	
important	protective	function	and	should	not	be	cut.	They	may	be	
pushed	back	gently	with	a	soft	towel	after	soaking	the	nails	or	bathing

Source:	Rich,	2001	[8].	Reproduced	with	permission	of	John	Wiley	&	Sons.

references 

1   Reid IR. (2000) Calcium supplements and nail quality. New England 

J Med 14, 343(24), 1817.

2   Stern  DK,  Diamantis  S,  Smith  E,  et  al.  (2007)  Water  content  and 
other  aspects  of  brittle  versus  normal  fingernails.  Journal  of  the 
American Acad Dermatol 57(1), 31–6.

3   Diffey BL. (2012) The risk of squamous cell carcinoma in women 
from exposure to UVA lamps used in cosmetic nail treatment. Br J 
Dermatol 167(5), 1175–8.

4   Markova  A,  Weinstock  MA.  (2013)  Risk  of  skin  cancer  asso-
ciated  with  the  use  of  UV  nail  lamp.  J  Invest  Dermatol  133(4), 
1097–9.

5   Murdan S, Hinsu D, Guimier M. (2008) A few aspects of transony-
chial  water  loss  (TOWL):  inter-individual,  and  intra-individual 
inter-finger, inter-hand and inter-day variabilities, and the influence 
of nail plate hydration, filing and varnish. Eur J Pharmaceut Biophar-
maceut: official journal of Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Pharmazeutische 
Verfahrenstechnik eV. 70(2), 684–9.

6   Sainio EL, Engstrom K, Henriks-Eckerman ML, Kanerva L. (1997) 
Allergenic ingredients in nail polishes. Contact Derm 37(4), 155–62.
7   Hausen BM. (1995) A simple method of determining TS-F-R in nail 

polish. Contact Derm 32(3), 188–90.

8   Rich  P.  (2001)  Nail  cosmetics  and  camouflaging  techniques. 

Dermatol Ther 14(3), 228–36.

9   Forslind  B.  (1970)  Biophysical  studies  of  the  normal  nail.  Acta 

Derm Venereol 50, 161–8.

10   Sasaki M, Kugbata M, Akamatsu H. (2008) Biochemical analysis of 

keratin in the brittle nail. J Invest Dermatol 128, 591.

11   Hochman  LG,  Scher  RK,  Meyerson  MS.  (1993)  Brittle  nails: 
response to daily biotin supplementation. Cutis 51(4), 303–305.

Figure 24.13  Infection caused by Pseudomonas.

Nail cosmetic procedures
Several  nail  problems,  including  paronychia,  onycholysis, 
and thinning of the nail plate, may be mechanically induced 
by  cosmetic  procedures.  Paronychia,  or  inflammation  of  the 
proximal nail fold, is often caused by cutting or pushing back 
the  cuticle,  leading  to  separation  of  the  proximal  nail  fold 
and cuticle from the nail plate. Sharp manicure instruments 
used  to clean under the nail plate may induce onycholysis and 
create an environment for secondary bacterial and fungal infec-
tion. Onycholysis may be exacerbated by long artificial nails 
because of increased mechanical leverage. Nail drills or exces-
sive filing and buffing of the surface of the nail plate may lead 
to  thinning  of  the  nail  plate  and  weak,  fragile  nails.  Breaks 
in  the  integrity  of  the  nail  unit  allow  access  of  microorgan-
isms  such  as  Candida  and  Pseudomonas  (Figure  24.13)  and 
result  in  exacerbation  of  paronychia  and  onycholysis.  Some 
basic principles for safe use of nail cosmetics are outlined in 
Table 24.3.

Conclusions

Further reading

Nail cosmetics is a multibillion dollar industry which contin-
ues to grow. Thorough knowledge of nail anatomy and phys-
iology  is  essential  for  the  safe  use  and  development  of  nail 
cosmetics.

Baran R, Dawber RPR, de Berker DAR, Haneke E, Tosti A. (2001) Dis-
eases  of  the  Nails  and  their  Management,  3rd  edn.  Malden,  MA: 
Blackwell Science.

Chang RM, Hare AQ, Rich P. (2007) Treating cosmetically induced nail 

problems. Dermatol Ther 20, 54–9.

216

aDorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

DeGroot, AC, Weyland JW. (1994) Nail cosmetics. In: Unwanted Effects 
of Cosmetics and Drugs used in Dermatology, 3rd edn. New York, 
Oxford: Elsevier, 524–9.

Draelos Z. (2000) Nail cosmetic issues. Dermatol Clin 18, 675–83.
Iorizzo M, Piraccini B, Tosti, A. (2007) Nail cosmetics in nail disorders. 

Rich P. (2008) Nail surgery. In: Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP, eds. 

Dermatology, 2nd edn. Elsevier, pp. 2259–68.

Schoon  DD.  (2005)  Nail  Structure  and  Product  Chemistry,  2nd  edn. 

Thompson Corporation.

Scher  RK,  Daniel  CR.  (2005)  Nails:  Diagnosis,  Therapy,  Surgery, 

J Cosmet Dermatol 6, 53–6.

3rd edn. Elsevier.

Paus  R,  Peker  S,  Sundberg  JP.  (2008)  Biology  of  hair  and  nails.  In: 
BologniaJL, JorizzoJL, RapiniRP, eds. Dermatology, 2nd edn. Elsevier, 
pp. 965–86.

ChApter 25
Colored Nail Cosmetics and hardeners

Paul H. Bryson
OPI Products Inc, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

BAsIC CoNCepts

•	 Nail	lacquers	contain	resins	that	create	a	thin,	resistant	film	over	the	nail	plate.
•	 Adding	color	to	the	nail	plate	surface	is	accomplished	with	a	variety	of	nail	lacquers	including	a	basecoat,	color	coat,	and	topcoat.
•	 Nail	hardeners	cross-link	nail	protein	to	increase	strength,	but	overuse	may	contribute	to	brittle	nails.
•	 Nail	lacquers	are	resistant	to	contamination	and	cannot	spread	nail	infectious	disease.

Introduction

The use of colored nail polish and nail hardeners has increased 
among consumers with the rise of the manicure industry. With 
nail  salons  found  in  almost  every  strip  mall,  painting  nails  is 
a  very  popular  service  for  the  customers  of  the  professional 
manicurist. The use of nail cosmetics is well rooted in history. 
Ancient Chinese aristocrats colored their nails red or black with 
polishes made with egg white, bees wax, and gelatin. The Ancient 
Egyptians  used  henna  to  dye  the  nails  a  reddish  brown  color  
(J.  Spear,  editor  of  Beauty  Launchpad,  Creative  Age  Publica-
tions, Van Nuys, CA, personal communication). In the 19th and 
early 20th centuries, “nail polish” was a colored oil or powder, 
which was used to rub and buff the nail, literally polishing and 
coloring  the  nail  simultaneously.  Modern  nail  polish  was  cre-
ated in the 1920s, based on early nitrocellulose-based car paint  
technology [1].

The term “nail polish” is somewhat of a misnomer for modern 
products, because no actual polishing is involved in its application.  
The  product  is  composed  of  dissolved  resins  and  dries  to  a 
hard, glossy coat, so the technically correct name is “nail lacquer.” 
However,  the  terms  “nail  polish,”  “nail  enamel,”  “nail  varnish,” 
“nail paint,” and “nail lacquer” are used interchangeably. Several 
specialty products have developed from nail lacquer, including 
basecoats, topcoats, and hardeners. A newer technology involves 
pigmented UV-curable resins. This chapter discusses the current 
use of these modern formulations (Table 25.1).

Application techniques

These  nail  products  are  applied  by  painting  the  nail  with  a 
brush. In best manicuring practices, old nail lacquer is removed 

with a solvent followed by application of a basecoat, two coats of 
colored nail lacquer, and a topcoat allowing sufficient time for 
drying between coats. The basecoat increases the adhesion of the 
colored nail lacquer to the nail while the topcoat increases the 
chip-resistant characteristics of the colored nail lacquer. These 
products  are  applied  on  both  natural  and  artificial  nails.  Nail 
hardener is only applied to natural nails, either as a basecoat or 
a stand alone product. UV-curing nail “lacquers” are hardened 
with a UV light after application; no evaporation is necessary. In 
all cases, best practice dictates that the products be kept off the 
skin. Failure to do so can result in eventual, irreversible sensiti-
zation and allergic contact dermatitis [2].

Proper  nail  cosmetic  application  dictates  the  maintenance 
of  excellent  hygiene  in  the  nail  salon.  Unsanitary  procedures 
may result in medical problems [3]. Nail technicians must use 
cleaned, disinfected, or disposable nail files and tools. Clipping 
or cutting the cuticles before applying nail lacquer can also lead 
to  infection.  Infections  with  staphylococcus  [4]  and  herpetic 
whitlows [5] have been attributed to unsanitary manicures. Nail 
technicians should not perform services on diseased nails.

Lacquers, topcoats, and basecoats

Nail lacquers contain six primary ingredients: resins, solvents, 
plasticizers, colorants, thixotropic agents, and color stabilizers. 
By law, all ingredients must be disclosed on the product pack-
aging,  usually  by  means  of  the  International  Nomenclature 
for  Cosmetic  Ingredients  (INCI)  names.  Understanding  the 
chemistry  nomenclature  is  important  for  isolating  the  causes 
of allergic contact dermatitis. Each of these ingredients is dis-
cussed in detail.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

217

218

ADorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

Table 25.1  Overview	of	product	types.

Product class

Nail lacquer

Basecoat

Topcoat

Nail hardener

UV curable

Coating	created	by

Solvent	evaporation

Solvent	evaporation

Solvent	evaporation

Resin	type	or	mix

Balanced

Biased	toward	adhesion

Biased	towards	
glossiness,	hardness

Mainly	solvent	
evaporation;	some	
polymerization	of	
formalin	may	occur

Balanced	or	biased	
towards	adhesion

Polymerization

Balanced;	resin	
formed	by	reacting	
directly	on	nail

Pigment

Removal

Benefits

Yes

Little	or	none

Little	or	none

Usually	none

Yes

Easily	dissolves	in	
solvent

Easily	dissolves	in	
solvent

Easily	dissolves	in	solvent

Easily	dissolves	in	
solvent

Soften	by	acetone	
soak,	then	peel

Attractive	color;	can	
be	applied	over	natural	
nails	or	enhancements

Helps	color	coat	last	
longer;	protects	natural	
nail	from	staining

Helps	color	coat	last	
longer;	some	contain	
optical	brighteners	or	
UV	protectants

Strengthens	natural	
nail	by	cross-linking	
proteins;	may	be	used	
as	a	basecoat

Attractive	color;	
tough	cured-in-place	
resin	protects	nail

Figure  25.2  Painting  a  nail.  (Source:  OPI  Products,  Inc.,  Los  Angeles, 
CA. Reproduced with permission.)

Figure  25.1  Lacquered  nails.  (Source:  OPI  Products,  Inc.,  Los  Angeles, 
CA. Reproduced with permission.)

Figure  25.3  Be  careful  with  the  cuticle.  (Source:  OPI  Products,  Inc.,  Los 
Angeles, CA. Reproduced with permission.)

25. Colored Nail Cosmetics and Hardeners

219

Figure 25.5  Dermatitis on the finger. (Source: Nails Magazine. Reproduced 
with permission.).

Figure  25.4  Infected  nail.  (Source:  Nails  Magazine.  Reproduced  with 
permission.).

resins
Resins hold the ingredients of the lacquer together while form-
ing a strong film on the nail. Chemically, the resins are polymers 
– long-chain molecules – that are solid or gummy in their pure 
state. Two types of resins are used. Hard, glossy resins give the 
lacquered  nail  its  desired  appearance;  these  include  nitrocel-
lulose  and  the  methacrylate  polymers  or  co-polymers  (usually 
labeled  by  their  generic  INCI  name,  “acrylates  co-polymer”). 
Topcoat formulations have a higher percentage of these harder 
resins. Softer, more pliable resins, which enhance adhesion and 
flexibility, include tosylamide/epoxy resin, tosylamide/formalde-
hyde resin, and several polyester resins. Basecoats incorporate a 
higher proportion of pliable resins. Of all the resins, tosylamide/
formaldehyde resin is the most commonly implicated in allergic 
reactions [6] affecting not only the fingers, but other parts of the 
body by transfer [7].

solvents
Solvents are the carriers of the lacquer. They must dissolve the 
resin,  suspend  the  pigments,  and  evaporate  leaving  a  smooth 
film.  The  drying  speed  must  be  controlled  to  prevent  bub-
bling and skinning; thus faster drying is not necessarily better. 
Optimum  drying  speed  requires  a  careful  blend  of  solvents. 
Ethyl  acetate,  n-butyl  acetate,  and  isopropyl  alcohol  are  com-
mon solvents; other acetates and alcohols are also occasionally 
employed. All solvents have a dehydrating and defatting action 
on the skin, but this usually occurs during the removal of the 
lacquer, not its application.

Formerly, toluene was a commonly used solvent, but the indus-
try trend is to move away from it in response to expressed health 
concerns.  Research  indicates  that  toluene  exposure  for  a  nail 
technician and consumer is far  below  safe  exposure limits  [8]; 

however, consumer perceptions are negative for toluene, neces-
sitating its replacement. A related chemical, xylene, has already 
virtually vanished from the industry. Ketones such as acetone or 
methyl ethyl ketone are not amenable to suspension of pigments 
and are therefore used at low levels, if at all, in lacquers, although 
these substances will dissolve the resins effectively and therefore 
are useful as lacquer removers.

A  few  water-based  nail  “lacquers”  are  now  on  the  market. 
Because of their slow drying time and lesser durability, they are 
unlikely  to  replace  solvent-based  products  in  the  foreseeable 
future. If they are ever perfected, they will completely take over 
the industry, because water is cheaper, non-flammable (which 
reduces shipping costs), and odorless.

plasticizers
Plasticizers keep the resins flexible and less likely to chip. Cam-
phor and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) have long been used for this 
purpose; however, the EU maintains its 2004 ban of DBP, despite 
authoritative  findings  regarding  its  safety  in  nail  lacquer  [9]. 
Because many manufacturers sell globally, DBP has largely been 
replaced  by  other  plasticizers,  including  triphenyl  phosphate, 
trimethyl  pentanyl  diisobutyrate,  acetyl  tributyl  citrate,  ethyl 
tosylamide, and sucrose benzoate.

Colorants
Colorants  are  selected  from  among  various  internationally 
accepted  pigments.  They  are  mostly  used  in  the  “lake”  form, 
meaning that the organic colorants have been adsorbed or co-
precipitated into inorganic, insoluble substrates such as the sili-
cates, oxides, or sulfates of various metals. A shimmer effect is 
created by minerals such as mica, powdered aluminum, or poly-
mer flakes. Guanine from fish scales is falling out of favor but is 
still occasionally used.

Following  INCI  convention,  most  colorant  materials  are 
labeled by their international “Color Index” (CI) numbers. This is 
a convenient way to identify colors, which have different national 

220

ADorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

Color stabilizers
Color stabilizers, such as benzophenone-1 and etocrylene, are 
added  to  prevent  color  shifting  of  the  lacquer  on  exposure  to 
UV light. These substances are better known as sunscreens, but 
their use in nail lacquer is to protect the color. Some specialty 
topcoats have a high level of UV protectants, for application over 
colored nail lacquer to prevent fading during tanning booth use.

Minor ingredients
Minor  ingredients  may  include  vitamins,  minerals,  vegetable 
oils, herbal extracts, or fibers such as nylon or silk. Some com-
panies  may  include  adhesion-enhancing  agents  in  lacquers  or 
basecoats,  or  other  proprietary  ingredients  whose  functions 
they elect not to disclose (Table 25.2).

Antifungal agents
Antifungal agents may be added to nail lacquer for therapeutic pur-
poses. However, as of this writing, there is only one prescription 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved antifungal nail 
lacquer, a topical solution of 8% ciclopirox (Penlac®, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Bridgewater,  NJ,  USA).  According  to  FDA  Consumer  Magazine, 
“There are no approved non-prescription products to treat fungal 
nail infections … fungal infections of the nails respond poorly to 
topical therapy … the agency ruled that any OTC product labeled, 
represented  or  promoted  as  a  topical  antifungal  to  treat  fungal 
infections of the nail is a new drug and must be approved by FDA 
before marketing” [11]. Furthermore, the FDA’s policy is to “pro-
hibit  claims  that  non-prescription  topical  antifungals  effectively 
treat fungal infections of the scalp and fingernails” [12].

preservatives
Preservatives are not present in nail lacquer. Regulatory authori-
ties inquired if microbial cross-contamination could occur when 
the same nail lacquer bottle and brush are used on multiple clients. 
In response, a series of experiments was performed to investigate 
microbe survival in nail lacquer. The results indicate that nail lac-
quers do not support microbial growth in the laboratory or salon 
(OPI Products Inc., and Nail Manufacturers Council, unpublished 
data) [13]. The solvents are sufficiently hostile to microbes that no 
preservative is required. This does not apply to water-based prod-
ucts,  because  water  is  required  for  microbial  growth.  Although 
solvent-based water-free lacquer is hostile to microbes, it would 
be a mistake to assume that it has any curative value for nail fungus 
or other infections.

Nail hardeners

Figure  25.6  Nail  lacquer.  (Source:  OPI  Products,  Inc.,  Los  Angeles,  CA. 
Reproduced with permission.)

designations.  Labeling  colorants  by  their  CI  numbers  is  either 
legal or de facto accepted by most regulatory agencies around the 
world; even so, out of deference to local custom, colors are often 
declared binonially (e.g. CI 77891/Titanium Dioxide).

One  difficulty  with  international  designations  is  that  some 
closely  related  colorant  chemicals  and  their  lakes  are  lumped 
under one CI number. An example is the ubiquitous CI 15850, 
which  covers  D&C  Red  #6,  D&C  Red  #7,  and  all  the  various 
lakes  of  both.  Normally,  the  manufacturer  can  provide  more 
specific information if needed.

Colorants  sometimes  cause  staining  of  the  nail.  Although 
uncommon, it is more often seen with colors at the red end of 
the spectrum. It can usually be prevented by using a basecoat 
between the lacquer and the natural nail [10]. Topcoats can also 
cause apparent yellowing, but this is usually the product rather 
than  the  natural  nail  –  as  can  be  easily  seen  by  removing  the 
product [10].

thixotropic agents
Thixotropic  agents  provide  flow  control  and  keep  the  lacquer 
colorants  dispersed.  They  are  usually  clay  derivatives  such  as 
stearalkonium bentonite or stearalkonium hectorite. Most top-
coats  and  basecoats  are  uncolored  and  do  not  require  these 
additives. Silica is also sometimes used as a thickener.

The  oldest  known  method  of  fingernail  hardening,  is  fire.  On 
the early American frontier, the combat sport called “rough and 
tumble” or “gouging” allowed fingernails to be used as weapons, 
and expert “gougers” hardened their nails by heating them over 
candles [14]. The heat of the candle flame caused cross-linking 
of the nail proteins.

25. Colored Nail Cosmetics and Hardeners

221

Table 25.2  Common	ingredients	of	nail	lacquer	and	related	products.

Ingredient category and examples

Function

Hard resins

Nitrocellulose

Acrylates	co-polymer

Soft resins

Tosylamide/formaldehyde	resin

Polyvinyl	butyral

Solvents

Ethyl	acetate

Butyl	acetate

Gloss

Toughness

Flexibility

Adhesion

Carrier	for	the	resin	and	pigment

Removing	lacquer

Isopropyl	alcohol

Soaking	and	removing	UV-cured	colors

Acetone	(removers	only)

Monomers and oligomers

Polyurethane	acrylate	oligomer

Hardens	to	hold	color	on	nail

Hydroxypropyl	methacrylate

Only	in	UV-curable	colors,	not	standard	lacquer

Various	other	acrylates	and	methacrylates

Photoinitiators

Benzoyl	isopropanol

Initiates	the	light	cure	reaction

Hydroxycyclohexyl	phenyl	ketone

Only	in	UV-curable	colors,	not	standard	lacquer

Colorants

FDA/EU	approved	colorant

Esthetic

Mica

Plasticizers

Camphor

Dibutyl	phthalate	(formerly)

Thixotropic agents

Keeps	resin	flexible	to	prevent	chipping

Stearalkonium	hectorite

Controls	flow

Stearalkonium	bentonite

Suspends	pigment	until	use

UV stabilizers

Benzophenone-1

Etocrylene

Hardeners

Formalin

Dimethyl	urea

Hydrolyzed proteins

Keratin

Wheat,	oats,	etc.

Prevents	light-induced	color	fading

Hardens	nail	protein	by	cross-linking

Only	in	hardener	products

Thought	to	bond	with	formalin	and	nail	protein

Usually	used	in	hardeners

Modern  nail  hardeners  contain  a  chemical  cross-linking 
agent. Otherwise, their composition is similar to ordinary nail 
lacquer.  As  with  lacquers,  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  skin 
contact during application to avoid allergic sensitization, par-
ticularly  to  the  most  common  hardener,  formalin  (hydrated 
formaldehyde).  Formalin  cross-links  proteins  primarily  by 
reacting  with  their  nitrogen-containing  side  groups,  forming 
methylene bridges [15]. Overuse causes too many cross-links, 

reducing the flexibility of the protein and causing brittleness, 
yellowing, and cracking of the nails. Manufacturers generally 
recommend  avoiding  overuse  by  cycling  the  products,  alter-
nating  between  the  hardener  and  a  non-hardening  topcoat 
every week or two.

Other hardeners include dimethyl urea (DMU), which is does 
not cross-link as aggressively as formalin. It is also less allergenic 
[16]. Glyoxal, a relative of formaldehyde, is larger and less able 

222

ADorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

O

C

HO

OH

C

H

H

H

H

Formaldehyde (gas)

Methylene glycol (liquid)

Figure 25.8  Formaldehyde versus methylene glycol. Reproduced by permis-
sion of OPI Products, Inc.

Tosylamide/formaldehyde  resin  is  also  a  cause  for  contro-
versy  solely  because  of  the  word  “formaldehyde”  in  its  name. 
It  is  an  inert  macromolecule,  created  by  reacting  tosylamide 
and  formaldehyde.  However,  the  formaldehyde  is  consumed 
in  the  reaction,  and  any  leftover  formaldehyde  is  hydrated  to 
methylene glycol by the water molecules generated in the reac-
tion. Hence the formaldehyde content of the resin is essentially 
nil.  However,  allergies  nevertheless  occur;  it  has  been  specu-
lated  that  trace  formaldehyde  is  responsible  but  sensitization 
to tosylamide/formaldehyde resin can occur in the absence of 
formaldehyde sensitization [19,20], and tests indicate that side 
products  of  the  synthesis  reaction  can  be  responsible  for  the 
resin allergies [21] (Figure 25.9).

A final concern occasionally raised regarding formaldehyde 
is  its  absence.  Because  formaldehyde-releasing  agents  have  a 
long history  as  preservatives  in  other forms  of  cosmetics, it  is 
sometimes  mistakenly  assumed  that  formaldehyde  was  added 
to  nail  lacquer  for  preservative  purposes.  As  a  result,  public-
ity  regarding  “formaldehyde-free”  products  has  inspired  fears 
of  microbial  cross-contamination  via  nail  lacquer  brushes.  As 
noted  above,  experiments  have  shown  that  solvent-based  nail 
lacquer is hostile to microbes and needs neither formaldehyde 
nor any other preservative.

UV gel “lacquers” (aka UV gel polish)

UV-cured nail enhancements, UV curing lamps, and their safety 
aspects are discussed elsewhere (D.D. Schoon, Chapter 26); how-
ever, a relatively new class of UV-curing nail “lacquers” merits 
mention here. The same pigments are used as in standard nail 
lacquer but instead of a solvent/resin base (a true lacquer), cura-
ble methacrylate or acrylate oligomers and monomers are used, 
with little or no solvent. A photoinitiator causes polymerization 
of the monomers on exposure to UV light, leaving a polymer/
pigment coat. Unlike the products to create nail enhancements, 
these curable colored products are not used to sculpt nails, but 
are designed to apply as a thin coat of color, resembling conven-
tional lacquer. Hybrid systems also exist, which combine tradi-
tional lacquer technology with UV curable components.

Figure  25.7  Brittle  nail.  (Source:  Nails  Magazine.  Reproduced  with 
permission.)

to  penetrate  the  skin,  also  contributing  to  reduced  allergenic-
ity. Hydrolyzed proteins are common additives in hardeners and 
may chemically bond to the formalin. Many nail hardeners are 
simply clear lacquers with no cross-linking agents at all. These 
products rely on the strength of the resins to protect the nails. 
Until  DMU  or  some  other  alternative  proves  itself,  the  most 
effective nail hardeners will likely continue to rely on formalin.

Formaldehyde issues

Formalin,  formaldehyde,  and  tosylamide/formaldehyde  resin 
warrant  some  additional  discussion.  True  formaldehyde  is  a 
highly reactive gas. Obviously, it cannot be a part of nail prod-
ucts in that form. It is therefore combined with water to make a 
product traditionally called “formalin.” Formalin contains water 
(~40%)  and  a  reaction  product  of  water  and  formaldehyde, 
properly known as methylene glycol (~60%). Published litera-
ture [17] on the hydration of formaldehyde reveals a chemical 
equilibrium constant for this reaction, which confirms the near 
complete conversion of formaldehyde to methylene glycol. This 
chemical  equilibrium  constant  yields  the  presence  of  0.0787% 
free  formaldehyde  in  formalin.  A  nail  hardener  that  is  1.5% 
formalin,  therefore  contains  ~0.0007%  or  7  parts  per  million 
of formaldehyde. This is not to dismiss “formaldehyde allergy”, 
which causes significant suffering to some patients, but it would 
be  more  accurately  known  as  methylene  glycol  or  formalin 
allergy (Figure 25.8).

The  near-complete  conversion  of  formaldehyde  to  methy-
lene glycol, which is far less volatile, undoubtedly explains why 
a California study showed that formaldehyde gas levels in nail 
salons were not above the normal background levels found in 
other settings such as offices [8]. This is significant because the 
only identified cancer risk associated with formaldehyde exposure 
results from inhalation in industrial settings [18], not cosmetic 
skin or nail exposure.

CH3

CH3

CH3

CH3

CH3

Figure  25.9  Tosylamide  formaldehyde  resin.  Repro-
duced by permission of OPI Products, Inc.

25. Colored Nail Cosmetics and Hardeners

223

SO2

N

SO2

N

SO2

N

SO2

N

SO2

N

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

Allergic sensitization may result from repeated skin exposure 
to  uncured  or  incompletely  cured  monomers;  the  fully  cured 
polymer is inert. Allergies to the photoinitiators and pigments 
are  also  possible.  Good  manicuring  technique  can  mitigate 
these risks, but once an allergy is established it is irreversible. It 
is important to note, that due to oxygen inhibition of the curing 
reaction,  a  thin  layer  of  uncured  gel  remains  at  the  surface  of 
the nail; properly trained nail technicians will remove this final 
layer to avoid sensitization.

The  low-power  UVA  lights  used  to  activate  the  photoinitia-
tor are comparable to summer sunshine [10], so the use of UV 
cured  nail  products  poses  no  hazard  to  healthy  skin,  despite 
misguided media reports to the contrary (Table 25.3). The cur-
ing lights use either conventional UV fluorescent bulbs with a 
typical peak wavelength (λ-max) of 365 nanometers (nm), or the 
much faster light-emitting diodes (LED) with λ-max of 395 nm 
or  405  nm.  Since  405  nm  is  slightly  outside  the  UVA  range  – 
the visible light range is understood to start at 400 nm – there 
is  a  widespread  erroneous  assumption  that  a  405  nm  LED  is 
“not UV” and therefore “safer”. This is a misunderstanding; the  
λ-max is not the sole frequency emitted by a bulb or diode, only 
the  most  predominant  frequency,  and  the  output  of  a  405  nm 
LED definitely contains some UVA. Though this low UV expo-
sure is quite safe, promoting the LED as a “non-UV” system is 
inaccurate.

Nail lacquer removers

In contrast to nail enhancements for nail elongation purposes, 
no polymerization takes place during the drying of nail lacquer; 
the resin is simply deposited on the nail as the solvent evapo-
rates. Therefore, removing nail lacquer is easy: it can be redis-
solved and wiped off with a solvent-soaked cloth pad, tissue, or 
cotton ball (Figure 25.11). Any solvent that dissolves the resin, 
and is safe for skin exposure, can be successfully used. Although 
UV-curable nail colors are polymerized, they are far less cross-
linked  than  enhancements,  and  can  be  removed  with  a  short 
acetone soak.

Table 25.3  Common	health	effects	of	nail	color	ingredients.

Ingredients

Health concerns

Resins

Solvents

Possible	allergies,	particularly	to	
tosylamide/formaldehyde	resin

Dehydration	and	defatting	of	skin	and	
nails

Irritant	dermatitis

UV-curable	acrylates/
methacrylates

Allergy	after	repeated	exposure	to	
uncured	monomer	or	oligomer

Photoinitiators

Possible	allergies

Colorants

Possible	photosensitization

Occasional	staining

Occasional	allergies

Plasticizers

Possible	allergies

Camphor	exposure	is	contraindicated	for	
some	patients	with	fibromyalgia

Thixotropic	agents

None	known

UV	stabilizers

Possible	allergies

Hardeners	(cross-linkers)

Formalin	sensitization	and	allergies	are	
common

Overuse	may	cause	brittleness	or	splitting	
of	nail

Not	recommended	for	nails	that	are	
already	brittle

Hydrolyzed	proteins

Possible	allergies

May	trigger	gluten	sensitivity	via	transfer	
to	mouth

Acetone, chemically known as dimethyl ketone or 2-propanone, 
is  the  preferred  solvent,  because  it  is  the  least  physiologically 
hazardous. Other removers are based on ethyl acetate or methyl 
ethyl  ketone  (MEK).  Ethyl  acetate  has  the  advantage  of  not 
damaging acrylic nails, so it is used for removing lacquer from 
nail  elongation  enhancements.  However,  because  of  air  qual-
ity regulations in California and Utah, ethyl acetate, MEK, and 
most other acetone alternatives are prohibited for nail lacquer 

224

ADorNMeNt  Nail Cosmetics

Figure 25.10  UV curing lamp. (Source: OPI Products, Inc., Los Angeles, 
CA. Reproduced with permission.)

Figure  25.11  Polish  remover  in  action.  (Source:  OPI  Products,  Inc.,  Los 
Angeles, CA. Reproduced with permission.)

removers, and other states and countries are considering similar 
actions. Acetone is exempt because its atmospheric breakdown 
produces less photochemical smog than almost any other sol-
vent.  One  other  “clean  air”  solvent,  methyl  acetate,  is  allowed 
in  California,  but  has  been  avoided  by  most  manufacturers 
because of toxicity concerns; those who use it add an embitter-
ing agent to deter accidental ingestion. Other hazardous solvents 
such as methanol and acetonitrile are seldom used, and are not 
California-compliant (Figure 25.11).

All solvents can have significant drying and defatting effects 
on the skin, leading to irritation. This can be mitigated by using 
a lacquer remover with added moisturizers, or by using lotion 
afterwards. Drying and cracking of the nail can also result; oil-
ing the nail is the most common way to counteract this. Some 
removers contain fragrances or botanical additives, which may 
pose allergy risks.

Low-odor, non-volatile removers have been created based on 
methylated vegetable oils and/or various dibasic esters. As with 
water-based nail lacquer, however, the slow speed of nail polish 
removal with these products prevents them from finding gen-
eral marketplace acceptance. These products are less damaging 
to the skin barrier.

Conclusions and future developments

Arguably  the  largest  potential  for  future  improvement  lies  in 
cleaner  application  techniques,  not  new  products.  As  more 
cases of manicure-transmitted infection are publicized, custom-
ers and governments will demand that nail technicians practice 
proper sanitation and disinfection.

Most manufacturers are looking to develop “greener” products, 
whether  in  perception  or  reality.  Toluene  and  DBP  have  been 
almost totally abandoned by the industry, and efforts continue to 
find a functional substitute for formalin. As for removers, most 
likely only acetone will survive the regulatory concerns. Water-
based and the increasingly popular UV-cured products have the 
potential to reduce solvent emissions, but still have unresolved 
disadvantages compared to traditional lacquers. Research contin-
ues in the realm of nail polish, as adding nail color is a commonly 
practiced form of adornment.

references

1  Gorton  A.  (1993)  History  of  nail  care.  Nails,  February.  Torrance, 

CA: Bobit Business Media.

2  Schultes SE. (ed.) (2007) Miladay’s Standard Nail Technology, 5th edn. 

New York: Thomson Delmar Learning, pp. 129–32.

3  Baran  R,  Maibach  HI.  (2004)  Textbook  of  Cosmetic  Dermatology. 

New York: Taylor & Francis, p. 295.

4  Lee W. (2005) Bill targets nail salon outbreaks. Los Angeles Times, 

August 25, p. B-1.

5  Anon. (2002) Nightmare manicure: woman who says she got her-
pes from manicure is awarded $3.1 million ABCNews.com, May 29.
6  Linden C, Berg M, Färm G, Wrangsjö K. (1993) Nail varnish allergy 

with far reaching consequences. Br J Dermatol 128, 57–62.

7  Frosh  PJ,  Menne  T,  Lepoittevin  JP.  (2006)  Contact  Dermatitis, 

4th edn. Basel: Birkhäuser, p. 499.

8  McNary JE, Jackson EM. (2007) Inhalation exposure to formalde-
hyde and toluene in the same occupational and consumer setting. 
Inhalat Toxicol 19, 573–6.

9  Dibutyl  phthalate  –  Summary  risk  assessment  (2003,  with  2004 
addendum), European Commission Joint Research Centre, Institute 
for Health and Consumer Protection, European Chemicals Bureau, 
Italy.

10  Schoon DD. (2005) Nail Structure and Product Chemistry, 2nd edn. 

New York: Thomson Delmar Learning.

11  Kurtzweil P. (1995) Fingernails: Looking good while playing safe. 

FDA Consumer Magazine, December.

25. Colored Nail Cosmetics and Hardeners

225

12  US Food and Drug Administration (1993) Answers, September 3. 
Available  from:  www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/ANSWERS/ANS00529.
html; retrieved 5 June 2015.

13  Nail Manufacturers Council (NMC) data, publication forthcoming.
14  Fischer DH. (1989) Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 738.

15  Kiernan  JA.  (2000)  Formaldehyde,  formalin,  paraformaldehyde 
and  glutaraldehyde:  What  they  are  and  what  they  do.  Microscopy 
Today 00-1, 8.

16  Schoon DD. (2005)Formaldehyde vs. DMU; What’s the Difference? 
Vista, CA: Creative Nail Design. Available from: www. beautytech.
com/articles/out.php?ID=354; retrieved August 25, 2008.

17  Winkelman JGM, Voorwinde OK, Ottens M, Beenackers AACM, 
Janssen  LPBM.  (2002)  Kinetics  and  chemical  equilibrium  of  the 
hydration of formaldehyde. Chem Engineering Sci 57, 4067–76.

18  International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) – Summaries 
& Evaluations (Group 2A) (1995) Formaldehyde. 62, 217. Available at: 
www.inchem.org/documents/iarc/vol62/formal.html;  retrieved  5 
June 2015.

19  Fuchs  T,  Gutgesell  C.  (1996)  Is  contact  allergy  to  toluene  
sulphonamide-formaldehyde resin common? Br J Dermatol 135, 
1013–14.

20  Final  Report  on  Hazard  Classification  of  Common  Skin  Sensitisers 
(January 2005), National Industrial Chemicals Notification and Assess-
ment  Scheme,  Australian  Government,  Department  of  Health  and 
Ageing, p. 106.

21  Hausen  BM,  Milbrodt  M,  Koenig  WA.  (1995)  The  allergens  of 
nail  polish.  (I).  Allergenic  constituents  of  common  nail  polish 
and  toluenesulfonamide-formaldehyde  resin  (TS-F-R),  Contact 
Dermatitis 33(3), 157–64.

chapter 26
cosmetic prostheses as artificial nail enhancements

Douglas Schoon
Schoon Scientific and Regulatory Consulting, Dana Point, CA, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Artificial	nail	enhancements	are	commonly	used	to	address	malformed	fingernails.
•	 The	major	forms	of	artificial	nail	enhancements	include	nail	wraps,	liquid	and	powder,	or	UV	gels.
•	 Methacrylate	monomer	liquid	systems	remain	the	most	widely	used	type	of	artificial	nail	enhancement.
•	 Proper	application	of	artificial	nail	enhancements	can	avoid	infection	and	sensitization.

introduction

The  natural  nail  plate  can  not  only  be  cosmetically  elongated 
and  enhanced  to  beautify  the  hands,  but  also  to  effectively 
address  discolored,  thin,  and  weak  or  malformed  fingernails. 
When used properly, these cosmetic products and services pro-
vide  great  value  and  enhance  self-esteem.  Artificial  nails  not 
only  add  thickness  and  strength  to  the  nail  plate,  they  extend 
its  length,  typically  0.25–0.75 inches.  A  skilled  nail  technician 
can closely mimic the length and shape of the final product to 
create natural-looking artificial nails. Certain techniques utiliz-
ing custom blending of colored products allow the appearance 
of  the  nail  bed  to  be  extended  beyond  its  natural  boundary, 
which can dramatically lengthen the appearance of the fingers  
(Figure  26.1).  Different  types  of  artificial  nail  coatings  are 
applied to provide a range benefits, as well as numerous decora-
tive colors and designs, collectively known as “nail art.”

A typical nail salon client wears artificial nail products to cor-
rect problems they are having with their own natural nails such 
as  discoloration,  splitting,  breaking,  unattractive  or  deformed 
nails  (i.e.  median  canal  dystrophy  or  splinter  hemorrhages). 
There are several basic types from which to choose: nail wraps, 
liquid  and  powder,  UV  gels  or  UV  gel  polish/manicures.  An 
overview of each type is given in Table 26.1.

Liquid and powder

Liquid and powder systems (aka acrylic nails) were the original 
artificial nail enhancements designed to extend the length of the 
natural  nail  plate.  These  systems  were  similar  to  certain  dental 
products  made  from  methacrylate  monomers  and  polymers. 

Methacrylates are structurally different from acrylates, have dif-
ferent  safety  profiles,  and  should  not  be  confused  with  one 
another.  The  literature  frequently  confuses  methacrylates  with 
acrylates  and/or  incorrectly  suggests  they  are  a  single  category 
(i.e. [meth] acrylate). The first structure shown in Figure 26.2 has 
a branching methyl group (–CH3) attached to the double bond 
of ethyl methacrylate. The branching changes both the size (10% 
larger)  and  shape  of  the  methacrylate  molecule,  which  reduces 
the potential for skin penetration. This helps explain why meth-
acrylate monomers are less likely to cause adverse skin reactions 
than homologous acrylate monomers (i.e. ethyl acrylate and ethyl 
methacrylate). It is also one important reason why artificial nails 
containing acrylates are more likely to cause adverse skin reac-
tions than those based solely on methacrylate monomers [1]. The 
polymer powders are polymerized to very high molecular weights 
and therefore unlikely to cause adverse skin reactions.

Methacrylate  monomer  liquid  systems  are  among  the  most 
widely  used  type  of  artificial  nail  enhancement  in  the  world. 
The “liquid” is actually a complex mixture of ethyl methacrylate 
(60–95%)  and  other  di-  or  tri-functional  methacrylate  mono-
mers (3–5%) that provide cross-linking and improved durability, 
inhibitors such as hydroquinone (HQ) or methyl ether hydroqui-
none (MEHQ) (100–200 p.p.m.), UV stabilizers, catalysts such as 
dimethyl  tolyamine  (0.75–1.25%),  flexibilizing  plasticizers  and 
other  additives.  The  “powder”  component  is  made  from  poly 
methyl and/or ethyl methacrylate polymer beads (approximately 
50–80 μm), coated with 1–2% benzoyl peroxide as the polymer-
ization  initiator,  colorants,  opacifiers  such  as  titanium  dioxide, 
and other additives.

Liquid  and  powder  systems  are  applied  by  dipping  a  brush 
into the monomer liquid, wiping off the excess on the inside lip 
of a low volume container (3–5 mL) called a dappen dish. The 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

226

26. Cosmetic Prostheses as Artificial Nail Enhancements

227

Table 26.1  The	three	main	types	of	artificial	nail	enhancements.

Type

Chemistry

Also known as

Hardener

Nail	wraps

Cyanoacrylate	monomers

Fiberglass	wraps,	resin	wraps,	
no-light	gels,	silk	or	paper	wraps

Liquid	and	powder

Methacrylate	monomers	and	polymers

Acrylic,	porcelain	nails,	solar	nails

UV	gels

Urethane	acrylate	or	urethane	
methacrylate	oligomers/monomer,	
expoxidized	methacrylate	or	acrylates.

Gel	nails
UV	gels
Soak-off	gels

UV	gel	polish/manicure

Urethane	acrylate	or	urethane	
methacrylate	oligomers/monomer,	
expoxidized	methacrylate	or	acrylates.
solvents,e.g.	acetone,	ethyl	acetate.

Permanent	polish
UV	polish

Spray,	drops,	powder,	or	
fabric	treated	with	an	tertiary	
aromatic	amine

Polymer	powder	treated	with	
benzoyl	peroxide;	monomer	
liquid	contains	tertiary	
aromatic	amine

Low-power	UVA	lamp	to	
activate	the	photoinitiator	
and	tertiary	aromatic	amine	
catalyst

Low-power	UVA	lamp	to	
activate	the	photoinitiator	
and	tertiary	aromatic	amine	
catalyst

O

O

O

O

Ethyl methacrylate

Ethyl acrylate

C6H10O2

Molecular weight 114 Daltons

C5H8O2
Molecular weight 100 Daltons 

Figure  26.2   Chemical  structure  differences  between  methacrylates  and 
 acrylates.

95% of the polymerization occurs in the first 5–10 minutes, but 
complete polymerization can take 24–48 hours [2]. After hard-
ening, the nail is then shaped either by hand filing or with an 
electric file to achieve the desired length and shape. The finished 
nail can be buffed to a high shine or nail color applied.
Length is added to the nail plate in one of two ways:

 1.  Adhering  an  ABS  plastic  nail  tip  to  the  nail  plate  with  a 
cyanoacrylate adhesive, coating the tip with the liquid and 
powder slurry, and filing as described above. This technique 
is called “tip and overlay.”

 2.  A  non-stick  (Mylar©  or  Teflon©  coated  paper)  form  is 
adhered  underneath  the  free  edge  of  the  natural  nail  and 
used as a support and guide to which the liquid and pow-
der slurry is applied, then shaped and filed. This technique is 
called “nail sculpting.”

Proper  preparation  of  the  natural  nail's  surface  is  the  key  to 
ensuring  good  adhesion.  Before  the  service  begins,  natural 
nails should be thoroughly scrubbed with a clean, disinfected, 
soft-bristled  brush  to  remove  contaminants  from  the  service 

Figure 26.1   The use of custom-blended colored powders with methacrylate 
monomers to “illusion sculpt” and extend the apparent length of a short nail 
bed while also correcting a habitually splitting nail plate. (Source: Creative 
Nail Design, Inc., Vista, CA, USA. Reproduced with permission.)

excess monomer is removed by wiping the brush on the edge of 
the dappen dish. The tip of the brush is drawn through the poly-
mer powder, also in a dappen dish, and a small bead or slurry 
forms at the end of the brush. Three to six beads are normally 
applied and smoothed into shape with the brush. Pink powders 
are applied over the nail bed and white powders are used to simu-
late the free edge of the nail plate. The slurry immediately begins 
to polymerize and hardens on the nail within 2–3 minutes. Over 

228

aDornMent  Nail Cosmetics 

thereby covering the area of new growth. This process is called 
“rebalancing” and is essential to maintaining the durability and 
appearance of the artificial nail. Rebalancing is done primarily 
with services designed to be long lasing, e.g. liquid and powder 
nails and UV gels. Other types of nail coatings  and  some UV 
gels typically are removed completely and replaced.

UV gels

Products  that  cure  under  low  intensity  UVA  lights,  typically 
with major spectral outputs from 410–350 nm .These are used 
to create artificial nails called “UV gels or UV polish”. UVB and 
UVC are not used to create UV gel nails [4]. Traditionally, UVA 
fluorescent  style  lamps  were  used  in  these  units.  Newer  types 
of  UV  nail  lamps  utilize  instead  LED  (light  emitting  diodes) 
technology to produce the UVA needed to polymerize UV cur-
able nail coatings of any type. LED produce narrow band width 
emissions centered at either 405 or 395 nm, which allow faster 
and more efficient curing. Due to significant differences in cur-
ing times, artificial nail coatings are formulated to properly cure 
with a specific type of UV nail lamp, either LED or fluorescent-
style (Figures 26.4 and 26.5).

Figure 26.4   Traditional fluorescent-style UV nail lamp (Source: Paul Rollins 
Photography, Inc. Geyserville, CA, USA.)

Figure 26.5   Newer LED-style UV nail lamp (Source: Paul Rollins Photogra-
phy, Inc. Geyserville, CA, USA.)

Figure  26.3  Equipment  used  to  create  liquid  and  powder  artificial  nails. 
1,  Nail  scrub  brush;  2,  Dappen  dishes  containing  liquid  and  powder;  3, 
Mylar nail form; 4, Abrasive files; 5, Nail enhancement application brush; 
6, ABS preformed nail tips; 7, Plastic-backed cotton pad; 8, Nitrile gloves; 
9,  N-95 dust  mask.  (Source:  Paul  Rollins  Photography,  Inc.  Geyserville,  
CA, USA.)

of  the  nail  plate  as  well  as  underneath  the  free  edge  (Figure 
26.3). This removes surface oil and debris that can block adhe-
sion.  The  nail  is  then  lightly  filed  with  a  low  grit  abrasive  file 
(180–240 grit) to increase surface area for better adhesion. Nail 
surface dehydrators containing drying agents such as isopropyl 
alcohol are applied to remove surface moisture and residual oils. 
Adhesion  promoting  “primers”  may  then  applied  to  increase 
surface compatibility between the natural nail and artificial nail 
product.  These  adhesion  promoters  contain  proprietary  mix-
tures of hydroxylated monomers or oligomers, carboxylic acids, 
etc.  In  the  past,  methacrylic  acid  was  frequently  used  but  has 
fallen out of favor because of its potential as a skin and eye cor-
rosive [3].

rebalancing

As  the  natural  nail  grows,  the  artificial  nail  advances  leaving  a 
small  space  of  uncoated  nail  plate.  Every  2–3 weeks  the  nail 
technician  will  file  the  artificial  nail  down  to  one-third  its 
thickness, reapply fresh product, and reshape the artificial nail, 

26. Cosmetic Prostheses as Artificial Nail Enhancements

229

Unlike liquid and powder systems, UV gels are not mixed with 
another substance to initiate the curing process. Historically, UV 
gels have been blends of polymerization photoinitiators (1–5%), 
urethane or epoxy acrylate oligomers, and durability improving, 
cross-linking monomers (approximately 75–95%), and catalysts 
such as dimethyl tolyamine (0.75–1.25%). Newer formulations 
using  urethane  methacrylate  oligomers  and  monomers  lower 
the potential for adverse skin reactions.

Rate  of  cure  is  a  hindrance  for  UV-curable  artificial  nails. 
Slow cure rates allow atmospheric oxygen to prevent curing of 
the uppermost layers of UV gel products. This layer can also be 
observed with certain types of liquid monomers, e.g. lower odor 
or “odorless” products that utilize hydroxyethyl or hydroxypro-
pyl methacrylate as the main reactive monomer. This residual 
sticky  surface  layer  is  called  the  “oxygen  inhibition  layer”  [5]. 
Skin contact with this layer should be avoided since it contains 
unreacted  monomers,  of  in  the  case  of  UV  curing  products, 
unreacted monomer or oligomers.

systems  and  produces  very  similar  looking  results.  In  most 
cases, the same equipment used to create other types of artificial 
nails is used (Table 26.2). Most often UV gel curing achieved by 
placing the artificial nail under a UVA lamp for 2–3 minutes per 
applied layer or 10–30 seconds per layer for LED cured UV nail 
coatings. Because UVA does not efficiently penetrate more than 
a few millimeters into the UV gel, these products are applied and 
cured in several successive layers. UV gels are also applied over 
ABS nail tips or non-stick nail forms to lengthen the appearance 
of the natural nail.

nail wraps

Methyl  and  ethyl  cyanoacrylate  monomer  is  used  not  only  for 
adhering ABS nail tips to the natural nail, but also to create artifi-
cial nail coatings called “nail wraps.” This technique is not widely 
used, but accounts for at least 1% of the worldwide market [6].

UV gels can be clear, tinted, or heavily colored. The natural 
nail  is  cleaned,  filed,  dehydrated,  and  coated  with  adhesion 
promoters. The UV gel is then applied to the nail, shaped, and 
finished  in  the  same  fashion  as  two-part  liquid  and  powder 

The natural nail is precleaned, shaped, and filed as described 
above,  but  the  cyano  functional  group  provides  tremendous 
adhesion  to  the  natural  nail  plate,  eliminating  the  need  for 
adhesion-promoting primers (Figure 26.6). Nail enhancements 

Table 26.2  Specialized	equipment	used	to	create	artificial	nail	enhancements.

Item

Brush

Dappen	dish

Manual	files

Electric	files

Nippers

Wood	stick

Buffers

UV	lamp

Cotton	pads

Scrub	brush

Nail	forms

Nail	tips

Wrap	fabric

Droppers

Scissors

Description

Natural	or	synthetic	hair	brush	for	application,	spreading,	and	shaping	of	monomer	and	oligomers	products	
on	the	nail	plate

Small	containers	that	hold	liquid	artificial	nail	monomer,	oligomers,	or	polymer	powders	during	the	
application	process

Wooden	or	plastic	core	boards	coated	with	abrasive	particles	(e.g.	silicon	nitride,	aluminium	oxide	or	
diamond)	used	to	shape,	shortening,	smooth,	thin,	or	buff	both	natural	and	artificial	nails

Handheld,	variable	speed,	rotary	motors	that	securely	hold	barrel-shaped	abrasive	bits	and	are	used	for	the	
same	purposes	as	manual	files

Small	clippers	sometimes	used	to	remove	old	artificial	nail	product	from	the	nail	plate

A	thin,	pencil-shaped,	plastic	implement	used	to	remove	cuticle	tissue	from	the	nail	plate

Block	shape,	high	grit	abrasive	buffers	use	for	shape	refining	(180–240	grit)	or	buffing	to	a	high	shine	
(>1000	grit)

Electrical	device	that	holds	either	4	or	9 W	UVA	producing	bulbs	and	is	used	to	cure	UV	gel	nail	products

Disposable	pads	or	balls	used	to	remove	old	nail	polish	and/or	dusts	after	filing

Soft	bristle,	disinfectable	brushes	used	to	clean	natural	and	artificial	nails

Mylar©	or	Teflon©	coated	paper	used	as	a	support	and	guide	to	extending	artificial	nails	beyond	the	natural	
nail's	free	edge

Preformed	ABS	plastic	tips	adhered	to	the	natural	nail	to	support	artificial	nail	products	and	create	nail	
extensions	beyond	the	nail's	free	edge

Loosely	woven	silk,	linen,	or	fibreglass	strips	adhered	to	the	natural	nail	plate	with	cyanoacrylate	monomer	to	
create	nail	wraps

Used	to	transfer	product	from	larger	containers	into	dappen	dishes	or	to	apply	nail	wrap	curing	accelerators

Slightly	curved	blades	use	for	trimming	or	cutting	natural	nails	and	wrap	fabrics

Disinfectant	container

Containers	designed	to	hold	EPA	registered	disinfectants	needed	to	properly	disinfectant	tools	and	
implements

Remover	bowl

Container	that	holds	solvents	(e.g.	acetone)	for	artificial	nail	removal

230

aDornMent  Nail Cosmetics 

and  immersed  in  solvent.  Nail  wraps  based  on  cyanoacrylates 
are the easiest to remove because they are not cross-linked poly-
mers  and  have  lower  solvent  resistance;  usually  requiring  less 
than  10 minutes  immersion  for  full  removal.  Liquid  and  pow-
der products are cross-linked polymers structures that can take 
30–40 minutes  to  swell  and  break  apart  for  gentle,  non-damag-
ing  removal  from  the  nail  plate.  UV  gels  are  also  cross-linked 
polymer structures and these urethane acrylate or methacrylate 
based artificial nails have inherently greater solvent resistance so 
removal can take 45–60 minutes. The removal process is greatly 
accelerated by pre-filing to remove the bulk of the artificial nail 
coating. Care must be taken. Improper removal can cause signifi-
cant damage to the nail plate. Prying or picking off the artificial 
nails can lead to onycholysis [7]. A common myth is that artificial 
nail should be regularly removed to allow nails to “breathe”; in 
reality they should only be removed when there is a need.

Gel manicure/polish

A new type of nail coatings called UV gel manicures (aka Gel 
Polish or Gel Lacquer) became popular in 2010 and their popu-
larity continues. These nail coatings provide value to deformed 
or misshapen nails by coating them with a long-lasting colored 
coating capable of camouflaging visible nail defects, e.g. splint 
haemorrhages, nail bed bruising, etc. Gel polish is a unique type 
of  artificial  nail  coating  designed  for  removal  and  subsequent 
replacement  on  a  two  or  three  week  schedule.  These  types  of 
colored nail coatings are designed to duplicate the look of nail 
polish, but are polymerized by UV so the resultant films are far 
superior in scratch resistance and durability, which also makes 
them more difficult to remove.

Improper  removal  may  cause  small,  roundish  white  spots, 
typically 2–5 mm, often with an irregular borders. These appear 
on the surface of the nail plate immediately following incorrect 
removal of the coating. These have been observed after incorrect 
removal of other types of nail coatings, as well, even traditional 
nail polishes. These areas of surface damage somewhat resemble 
white superficial onychomycosis (WS0), but are not caused by 
an infectious organisms; instead as result of damage to the nail 
surface. Over aggressive removal techniques used in the salon 
are a leading cause of this type of damage, but some wearer pick, 
peel or bite the coating from their own nail plate. Excessive fil-
ing of the nail plate before or after application of any nail coating 
is the cause of any nail plate thinning that may result.

When nail plates with these white spots are magnified (186–
3830×) via scanning electron microscopy as in Figure 26.7, the 
observed modes of failure reveal that the damage is caused by pry-
ing and/or scraping residual coating from the plate. The damage 
shown in Image 1 is caused by upward prying, while Images 2 and 
3 are  from  scrapping.  Image  4 shows  pieces  of  residual  coatings 
remaining adhered to the plate after the removal process; usually 
a result of not enough contact time with the solvent remover to 
sufficiently soften nail coating before removal. This type of surface 

Figure  26.6   Materials needed to apply nail wraps. 1, Abrasive file for nail 
preparation and final shaping; 2, Scissors for cutting fabric; 3, Block buffer 
for  high-shining;  4,  Cyanoacrylates;  5,  Spray-on  catalyst;  6,  Silk  fabric;  7, 
Pusher to gently remove skin from the nail plate. (Source: Paul Rollins Pho-
tography, Inc. Geyserville, CA, USA.)

relying on cyanoacrylate monomers do not contain other cross-
linking  monomers  and  therefore  are  inherently  weaker  than 
cross-linking  artificial  nail  enhancement  systems.  To  improve 
durability and usefulness, a woven fabric (silk, linen, or fiber-
glass) is impregnated with cyanoacrylate monomer and adhered 
to the nail plate. Even so, these types of coatings are not strong 
enough to be sculpted on a non-stick nail form and cannot be 
extended beyond the free edge of the natural nail plate, unless 
the  nail  wrap  is  applied  over  an  ABS  nail  tip,  as  previously 
described.  Usually,  cyanoacrylate  monomers  are  very  low  vis-
cosity,  mobile  liquids,  but  they  are  sometimes  thickened  with 
polymers  (e.g.  polymethyl  methacrylate)  and  used  without  a 
reinforcing fabric. Such systems are referred to as “no-light gels.”
Cyanoacrylate monomers are applied without the use of a brush, 
directly from the container's nozzle and will cure upon exposure to 
moisture in the nail plate, but the process can be greatly hastened 
by solvent mixtures containing a tertiary aromatic amine such as 
dimethyl tolylamine (0.5–1%), which is either sprayed on, applied 
with an dropper, or impregnated into the woven fabric. After curing 
(5–10 seconds), the nail wrap coating can be shaped and buffed to 
a high shine or nail color applied. This technique is also used to 
mend cracks or tears in the nail plate, by using the cyanoacrylate 
monomer  to  adhere  a  small  piece  of  fabric  over  the  broken  or 
damaged area of the plate.

artificial nail removal

Improper removal of artificial nails can lead to nail damage; how-
ever, they can be safely removed if the proper procedures are fol-
lowed.  Acetone  (dimethyl  ketone)  is  the  preferred  remover  for 
artificial nail products, but ethyl acetate and methyl ethyl ketone 
(MEK) is also used. The artificial nails are placed in a small bowl 

26. Cosmetic Prostheses as Artificial Nail Enhancements

231

Figure  26.7   Surface  nail  damage  caused  by  improper  removal  of  nail  coatings;  1.  Peeling,  2.  Aggressive  scraping,  3.  Aggressive  filing  and  scraping,  4. 
Residual nail coating left on the nail plate when removal time is improperly shortened. (Source: Doug Schoon, Schoon Scientific, Dana Point, CA, USA.)

nail damage is completely avoidable if the appropriate amount to 
time is allowed for properly soften nail coatings before removal. 
Surface damage may occur more easily after nail plates are soaked 
for more than a minute in solvents such as acetone or water, since 
these  may  soften  the  nail's  surface  making  it  temporarily  more 
susceptible to damage from any implements used to pry, push or 
force off residual nail coats. Those wearing nail coatings applied 
in a salon should be warned not to self-remove their nail coatings 
or avoid overly aggressive and damage removal methods.

adverse reactions

Both  nail  technicians  and  those  wearing  artificial  nails  can 
develop adverse skin reactions if steps are not taken to avoid pro-
longed and/or repeated skin contact with artificial nail products. 

For example, the product should be applied to the nail plate in 
such a manner that skin contact is avoided (i.e. a tiny free margin 
left between the eponychium and artificial nail). Typically, reac-
tions are a result of many months of overexposure to eponychium, 
hyponychium, or lateral side walls (Figure 26.8).

Reactions can appear as paronychia, itching of the nail bed and, 
in  extreme  cases,  paresthesia  and/or  loss  of  the  nail  plate  [8,9]. 
Onycholysis can be a result of allergic reactions, but the nail plate 
is resistant to penetration from external agents and this condition 
is more likely to be caused by overly heavy handed, aggressive fil-
ing techniques with coarse abrasives or overzealous manicuring 
of  the  hyponychium  area  [10].  Allergic  contact  dermatitis  can 
affect the chin, cheeks, and eyelids as a result of touching the face 
with the hands [11]. Filings and dusts may contain small amounts 
of unreacted monomers and oligomers, because it can take more 
than 24 hours for the artificial nails to finish the curing process.

232

aDornMent  Nail Cosmetics 

Figure 26.8  Example of an adverse skin reaction caused by repeated contact 
to the skin. (Source: Paul Rollins Photography, Inc. Geyserville, CA, USA.)

Nail  technicians  should  be  instructed  to  wash  their  hands 
thoroughly  before  touching  the  face  or  eye  area.  They  should 
be warned to avoid contact with the dusts and filings, especially 
the  oxygen  inhibition  layer  created  on  the  surface  of  UV  gels 
and  odorless  monomer  liquid  systems  (see  above),  which  can 
contain  substantial  amounts  of  unreacted  ingredients.  Gloves 
(nitrile)  and/or  plastic-backed  cotton  pads  should  be  used  to 
remove  the  oxygen  inhibition  layer  as  skin  contact  should  be 
avoided. The UV bulbs in the curing lamps should be changed 
every  2–4 months  (depending  on  usage)  to  ensure  thorough 
cure  and  lessen  the  amount  of  unreacted  ingredients,  thereby 
lowering the potential for adverse skin reactions. For liquid and 
powder systems, it is common for technicians to use excessive 
amounts  of  liquid  monomer,  creating  a  wet  consistency  bead. 
Nail  technicians  should  avoid  applying  beads  of  product  with 
a wet mix ratio because this can lower the degree of curing and 
increase the risk of overexposure to unreacted ingredients. Nail 
technicians should be instructed to avoid all skin contact with 
uncured artificial nail products or dusts and not to touch them 
to client's skin prior to curing.

Figure  26.9  Example  of  a  nail  infection  growing  underneath  an  artificial 
nail. (Source: Paul Rollins Photography, Inc., Geyserville, CA, USA.)

who use these liquid monomers frequently abrade away the upper-
most layers of the natural nail plate to achieve significantly more 
adhesion by allowing for deposition into the more porous layers 
underneath.  However,  this  poor  technique  can  compromise  the 
nail plate's strength and durability, so liquid monomer MMA con-
taining products should be avoided [12]. The other artificial nail 
systems described in this chapter have improved adhesion and do 
not require technicians to heavily abrade the nail plate in order to 
achieve proper adhesion.

Infections can occur underneath the artificial nail to produce 
green or yellow stains (Figure 26.9). Several types of bacteria and 
dermatophytes can cause such infections (Pseudomonas  aerugi-
nosa, Staphylococcus aureus, Trichophyton rubrum). To avoid this, 
state  regulations  require  nail  technicians  to  properly  clean  and 
disinfect all implements in an Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) registered disinfectant to avoid transmission of pathogenic 
organisms, and to dispose of all single-use items. Clients should 
wash their hands, scrubbing under the nails with a clean and dis-
infected, soft-bristled brush before receiving any services.

education

nail damage and infection

Avoiding the use of heavy grit abrasives (<180 grit) or electric 
files directly on the nail plate will lessen the potential for dam-
age and injury (e.g. onycholysis). Plate damage can occur when 
nail technicians aggressively file the natural nail, rather than use 
safer, smoother abrasive files (>180 grit). These gentler methods 
also increase the surface area for better adhesion, but without 
overly thinning or damaging the nail plate.

Methyl methacrylate (MMA) monomer is sometimes used ille-
gally in artificial nail monomer liquids because of its low cost when 
compared to better alternatives (e.g. ethyl methacrylate [EMA]). 
MMA has very poor adhesion to the natural nail plate so technicians 

Almost  every  US  state  requires  specialized  nail  training  and 
education,  typically  300–750 hours  depending  on  the  state,  to 
obtain  a  professional  license  and  some  states  have  continuing 
education  requirements.  The  textbooks  teach  a  surprisingly 
wide range of topics including anatomy and physiology of the 
skin  and  nails,  product  chemistry,  an  overview  of  common 
nail  related  diseases  and  disorders,  contamination  and  infec-
tion control and universal precautions, safe working practices, 
as well as manicuring, pedicuring, and the artificial nail tech-
niques described in this chapter [13–15].

Multilingual  information  sources  for  proper  use  and  other 
safety information can be found from a wide range of sources, 
including the EPA [16] and Nail Manufacturers Council [17].

26. Cosmetic Prostheses as Artificial Nail Enhancements

233

UV nail lamp safety

An  observation  by  MacFarlane  and  Alfonso  [18]  inaccurately 
reported UV nail lamps to be a source of “high-dose UV-A” light 
and incorrectly compared UV tanning beds with UV nail lamps 
claiming these may cause NMSC (non-melanoma skin cancer). 
The  authors  mistakenly  assumed  that  UV  bulb  “wattage”  is  a 
measure of UV exposure to the skin, when wattage is actually 
a measure of energy usage, and were in error to rely solely on 
UV bulb wattage to estimate the actual amount of UV exposure 
to skin. They also made incorrect comparisons to UV tanning 
beds, when the skin is not tanned or burned by salon UV nail 
lamps when they are properly used to provide salon services. To 
address the concerns raised, three scientific studies have deter-
mined that UV nail lamps are safe as used in nail salons. Light-
ing Sciences [19] concluded that UV-B output is less than that 
which occurs in natural sunlight, approximately equal to spend-
ing an additional 17 to 26 seconds in sunlight each day and UVA 
exposure  was  found  equivalent  to  an  extra  1.5 to  2.7 minutes, 
depending on the type of nail lamp used. Massachusetts Gen-
eral Hospital and the Alpert Medical School at Brown Univer-
sity [20] confirm the safety of UV nail lamps stating that der-
matologists and primary care physicians may reassure patients 
regarding the safety of these devices. Concerning the potential 
for developing skin cancer, UV nail lamps do not appear to sig-
nificantly  increase  lifetime  risks,  and  they  point  out  that  UV 
medical  lamps  used  in  therapeutic  skin  treatment  are  consid-
ered safe. When compared to these medical devices the authors 
stated, “…one would need over 250 years of weekly UV nail ses-
sions to experience the same risk exposure.” Markova and Wein-
stock [23] and Dowdy and Sayre [21] tested six major brands of 
UV nail lamps to the appropriate International testing standards 
[22] and determined they did not release excessive amounts of 
UV. Risk was determined to be low for developing NMSC (non-
melanoma  skin  cancer)  and  found  to  be  11–46 times  lower  in 
risk than natural noonday sunlight.

The study authors also considered that dorsum of the hand is 
four times more UV resistant than the hands or cheeks, making 
it the most UV resistant part of the body, providing a further 
margin of safety [23] and that the natural nail plate has a natural 
UV resistance equal to that of a high SPF sunscreen [24]. They 
concluded that the UV nail lamps tested are safe as used in nail 
salons and are unlikely to increase risks of NMSC.

references

1  Baran R, Maibach HI. (2005) Cosmetics for abnormal and patho-
logic  nails.  Textbook  of  Cosmetic  Dermatology,  3rd  edn.  Taylor  & 
Francis, London/New York, pp. 304–5.

Manufacturers  Council  to  the  Cosmetic  Ingredient  Review  (CIR) 
Expert Panel.

3  Woolf  A,  Shaw  J.  (1998)  Childhood  injuries  from  artificial  nails 
primer cosmetic products. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 152, 41–6.
4  Newman M. (2001) Essential chemistry of artificial nails. The Com-

plete Nail Technician. London: Thompson Learning, p. 41.

5  Schoon  D.  (2005)  Liquid  and  powder  product  chemistry.  Nail 
Structure  and  Product  Chemistry,  2 nd  edn.  New  York:  Thomson 
Delmar Learning, p. 138.

6  Kanerva S, Fellman J, Storrs F. (1966) Occupational allergic contact 
dermatitis caused by photo bonded sculptured nail and the review 
on (meth) acrylates in nail cosmetics. Am J Contact Derm 7, 1–9.
7  Schoon D. (2005) Trauma and damage. Nail Structure and Product 
Chemistry, 2 nd edn. New York: Thomson Delmar Learning, p. 52.
8  Fisher A, Baran R. (1991) Adverse reactions to acrylate sculptured 
nails with particular reference to prolonged paresthesia. Am J Con-
tact Derm 2, 38–42.

9  Fisher  A.  (1980)  Permanent  loss  of  fingernails  from  sensitization 
and reaction to acrylics in a preparation designed to make artificial 
nails. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 6, 70–6.

10  Baran R, Dawber R, deBerker D, Haneke E, Tosti A. (2001) Cosmet-
ics: the care and adornment of the nail. Disease of the Nails and their 
Management, 3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science, p. 367.

11  Fitzgerald D, Enolish J. (1994) Widespread contact dermatitis from 

sculptured nails. Contact Derm 30, 118.

12  Nail Manufactures Council (NMC). (2001) Update for Nail Techni-
cians: Methyl Methacrylate Monomer. Scottsdale, AZ: Professional 
Beauty Association, www.probeauty.org/NMC

13  Jefford  J,  Swain  A.  (2002)  The  Encyclopedia  of  Nails.  London: 

Thompson Learning.

14  Frangie C, Schoon D, et al. (2007) Milady's Standard Nail Technol-

ogy, 5th edn. New York: Thomson Delmar Learning.

15  Schoon D. (2005) Trauma and damage. Nail Structure and Product 

Chemistry, 2 nd edn. New York: Thomson Delmar Learning.

16  United States Environmental Protection Agency (2007) Protecting 
the  Health  of  Nail  Salon  Workers,  Office  of  Pollution  Prevention 
and Toxics. EPA no. 774-F-07–001.

17  Nail Manufacturers Council (NMC). A series of safety related bro-
chures  for  nail  technicians.  Scottsdale,  AZ:  Professional  Beauty 
Association. www.probeauty.org/NMC.

18  MacFarlane D, Alfonso C. (2009) Occurrence of nonmelanoma skin 
cancers  on  the  hands  after  UV  nail  light  exposure.  Arch  Dermatol 
145(4), 447–9.

19  Lighting Sciences Inc., 7826 East Evans Road, Scottsdale, Arizona 
85260  U.S.A.  www.lightingsciences.com,  (personal  communica-
tion)

20  Markova  A,  Weinstock  M.  (2012)  Risk  of  skin  cancer  associated 

with the use of UV nail lamp. J Invest Dermatol 133, 929–35.

21  Dowdy JC, Sayre RM. (2013) Photobiological safety evaluation of 

UV nail lamps. Photochem Photobiol 89, 961–7.

22  ANSI/IESNA RP-27.3–96, Recommended Practices for Photobiologi-

cal Safety for Lamps – Risk Group Classification & Labeling.

23  Olson RL, Everett MA. (1966) Effect of anatomic location and time 

on ultraviolet erythema. Arch Dermatol 93, 211–5.

2  Schoon D. (1994) Differential scanning calorimeter determinations 
of  residual  monomer  in  ethyl  methacrylate  fingernail  formula-
tions and two addendums. Unpublished data submitted by the Nail 

24  Stern  D,  Creasey  A,  et  al.  (2011)  UV-A  and  UV-B  penetration 
of  normal  human  cadaveric  fingernail  plate.  Arch  Dermatol  147 
(No 4).

Sec tion 3  Hair cosmetics

cHaPter 27
Hair Physiology and Grooming

Maria Hordinsky,1  Ana Paula Avancini caramori,2  and Jeff c. Donovan3
1 Department of Dermatology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
2 Department of Dermatology, Complexo Hospitalar Santa Casa de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil
3 Division of Dermatology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Basic concePts

•	 The	hair	follicle	is	a	complex	structure	that	produces	an	equally	complex	structure,	the	hair	fiber.
•	 Human	hair	keratins	consist	of	at	least	19	acidic	and	basic	proteins	which	are	expressed	in	various	compartments	of	the	hair	follicle.
•	 The	science	behind	modern	shampoos	and	conditioners	has	led	to	the	development	of	rationally	designed	products	for	normal,	dry,	or	

damaged	hair.

Definitions

The use of hair cosmetics is ubiquitous among men and women 
of all ages. Virgin hair is the healthiest and strongest but basic 
grooming  and  cosmetic  manipulation  cause  hair  to  lose  its 
cuticular scale, elasticity, and strength. Brushing, combing, and 
shampooing inflict damage on the hair shaft, much of which can 
be reversed with the use of hair conditioners. In this chapter, the 
physiology of hair, grooming techniques including the science 
and use of shampoos and conditioners, are reviewed.

Physiology

Hair follicle
The  hair  follicle  is  a  complex  structure  that  demonstrates  the 
ability  to  completely  regenerate  itself  –  hair  grows,  falls  out 
and  then  regrows.  Plucked  hairs  can  regrow.  Important  cells 
for  the  development  of  hair  follicles  include  stem  cells  in  the 
bulge region and dermal papilla cells [1]. Hair follicle stem cells 
are  described  as  being  present  just  below  the  entrance  of  the 
sebaceous duct into the hair follicle. The hair follicle’s complex-
ity  is  further  appreciated  when  examining  the  organization  of 
follicles in the scalp and the complexity of its vascular complex 
and nerve innervation. Scalp hair follicles present in groups of 
one, two, three, or four follicular units (Figure 27.1).

The hair follicle is defined histologically as consisting of sev-
eral layers (Figure 27.2). It is the interaction of these layers that 

produces  the  hair  fiber.  The  internal  root  sheath  consists  of  a 
cuticle which interdigitates with the cuticle of the hair fiber, fol-
lowed by Huxley’s layer, then Henle’s layer. Henle’s layer is the 
first to become keratinized, followed by the cuticle of the inner 
root  sheath.  The  Huxley  layer  contains  trichohyalin  granules 
and serves as a substrate for citrulline-rich proteins in the hair 
follicle. The outer root sheath has specific keratin pairs, K5–K16, 
characteristic of basal keratinocytes and the K6–K16 pair char-
acteristic of hyperproliferative keratinocytes, similar to what is 
seen in the epidermis. Keratin K19 has been located in the bulge 
region [2,3].

The  complexity  of  the  hair  follicle  is  further  demonstrated 
by  the  fact  the  follicle  cycles  from  the  actively  growing  phase 
(anagen), through a transition phase (catagen), and finally a loss 
phase (telogen). The signals associated with the transition from 
anagen,  catagen  to  telogen  are  the  subject  of  current  research 
activities in this field.

Product of the hair follicle: the hair fiber
The hair follicle generates a complex fiber which may be straight, 
curly, or somewhere in between. The main constituents of hair 
fibers are sulfur-rich proteins, lipids, water, melanin, and trace 
elements. The cross-section of a hair shaft has three major com-
ponents, from the outside to the inside: the cuticle, the cortex 
and the medulla [4].

Fibers  can  be  characterized  by  color,  shaft  shape  –  straight, 
arched,  or  curly  –  as  well  as  microscopic  features.  The  cuticle 
can be defined by its shape – smooth, serrated, or damaged, and 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

234

27. Hair Physiology and Grooming

235

(a)

(b)

Figure  27.1  (a) Horizontal section of a 4 mm scalp biopsy specimen demonstrating follicular units containing 1, 2, 3, or 5 anagen follicles. (b) Vertical 
 section of a 4-mm scalp punch biopsy specimen from a normal, healthy Caucasian female in her early twenties.

whether or not it is pigmented. The cortex can be described by 
its color and the medulla by its distribution in fibers. It can be 
absent,  uniform,  or  randomly  distributed.  Lastly,  fibers  can  be 
abnormal and present with structural hair abnormalities such as 
trichoschisis  or  trichorrhexis  nodosa.  Both  of  these  structural 
abnormalities can commonly be seen in patients with hair fiber 
injury related to routine and daily cosmetic techniques includ-
ing  application  of  high  heat, frequent  perming  as well  as  from 
weathering, the progressive degeneration from the root to the tip 
of the hair initially affecting the cuticle, then later the cortex [3].
The cuticle is also composed of keratin and consists of 6–8 layers 
of flattened overlapping cells resembling scales. The cuticle consists 
of two parts: endocuticle and exocuticle. The exocuticle lies closer 
to the external surface and comprises three parts: b-layer, a-layer, 
and  epicuticle.  The  epicuticle  is  a  hydrophobic  lipid  layer  of 
18-methyleicosanoic acid on the surface of the fiber, or the f-layer. 
The cuticle protects the underlying cortex and acts as a barrier and 
is considered to be responsible for the luster and the texture of hair. 
When damaged by frictional forces or chemicals and subsequent 
removal of the f-layer, the first hydrophobic defense, the hair fiber 
becomes much more fragile.

The  cortex  is  the  major  component  of  the  hair  shaft.  It  lies 
below the cuticle and contributes to the mechanical properties of 
the hair fiber, including strength and elasticity. The cortex consists 
of elongated shaped cortical cells rich in keratin filaments as well 
as an amorphous matrix of sulfur proteins. Cysteine residues in 
adjacent keratin filaments form covalent disulfide bonds, which 
confer  shape,  stability,  and  resilience  to  the  hair  shaft.  Other 
weaker bonds such as the van der Waals interactions, hydrogen 
bonds  and  coulombic  interactions,  known  as  salt  links,  have 

a minor role. These bonds can be easily broken just by wetting 
the hair. It is the presence of melanin in the cortex that gives hair 
color; otherwise, the fiber would not be pigmented [4].

The medulla appears as continuous, discontinuous, or absent 
under microscopic examination of human hair fibers. It is viewed 
as a framework of keratin supporting thin shells of amorphous 
material bonding air spaces of variable size [4]. Fibers with large 
medullas  can  be  seen  in  samples  obtained  from  porcupines  or 
other animal species. Other than in gray hairs, human hairs show 
great variation in their medullas.

Human hair keratins
Human hair keratins are complex and, until recently, research 
suggested that the hair keratin family consisted of 15 members, 
nine type I acidic and six type II basic keratins, which exhibited 
a  particularly  complex  expression  pattern  in  the  hair-forming 
compartment  of  the  follicle  (Figure  27.2).  However,  recent 
genome analyses in two laboratories has led to the complete elu-
cidation of human type I and II keratin gene domains as well as 
a completion of their complementary DNA sequences revealing 
an additional small hair keratin subcluster consisting of genes 
KRT40 and KRT39. The discovery of these novel genes brought 
the hair keratin family to a total of 17 members [3].

The human type II hair keratin subfamily consists of six indi-
vidual  members  which  are  divided  into  two  groups.  Group  A 
members hHb1, hHb3, and hHb6 are structurally related, while 
group C members hHb2, hHb4, and hHb5 are considered to be 
rather distinct. Both in situ hybridization and immunohistochem-
istry  on  anagen  hair  follicles  have  demonstrated  that  hHb5 and 
hHb2 are present in the early stages of hair differentiation in the 

236

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

a

b

c

d

CO

CO

CO

CO

CO

CO

CU

CU

d
o
m

CU

CU

CU

d
o
m

dp

dp

CU
dp

K39

K32+K39

K40

2:1

1:1#

)
5
3
a
K

(

9
3
K

)
6
3
a
K

(

0
4
K

2:1

1:2

)
5
3
a
K

(

9
3
K

)
4
a
H

(

4
3
K

)
I
-
3
a
H

(

a
3
3
K

)
I
I
-
3
b
H

(
b
3
3
K

)
6
a
H

(

6
3
K

)
7
a
H

(

*
*
7
3
K

)
6
b
H

(

6
8
K

)
1
b
H

(

1
8
K

)
3
b
H

(

3
8
K

)
2
b
H

(

2
8
K

)
5
b
H

(

5
8
K

)
1
a
H

(

1
3
) K
5
b
H

(

5
3
K

1:1

)
5
a
H

(

5
3
K

)
2
a
H

(

2
3
K

2:1

)
8
a
H

(

*
8
3
K

)
5
b
H

(

5
8
K

Cuticle

Matrix/cortex

K39

g

s
i
s
e
h
t
n
y
s
n
i
e
t
o
r
p
A
N
R
m

/

f
o
s
e
n
o
Z

dp

h

s
i
s
e
h
t
n
y
s
n
i
e
t
o
r
p
A
N
R
m

/

f
o
t
r
a
t
S

e

CU

CO

d
o
m

dp

f

CO

CU

CU

dp

K40

K32+K40

Hair fiber

Type I

e
l
c
i
t
u
C

x
e
t
r
o
C

Type II
x
e
t
r
o
C

e
l
c
i
t
u
C

l
c

S
R
O

S
R

I

u
K

u
H

o
H

l

a
s
a
b
a
r
p
u
S

l

a
s
a
B

S
R
O

l
c

S
R

I

l

a
s
a
b
a
r
p
u
S

l

a
s
a
B

o
H

u
H

u
K

*
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
i
t
a
r
e
k

f
o
e
n
o
Z
*

K39

K34

K36
K33a
K33b
K37**

K86
K83
K81

K38*

5
3
K
/
2
3
K

K31

K35

2
8
K

K85

5
8
K

gc

gc

Figure 27.2   Schematic presentation of the complex pattern of hair keratin expression in the human hair follicle. (Source: Langbein, 2007 [2]. Reproduced 
with permission of Nature Publishing.)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matrix  (hHb5)  and  cuticle  (hHb5,  hHb2),  respectively.  Corti-
cal  cells  simultaneously  express  hHb1,  hHb3,  and  hHb6 at  an 
advanced  stage  of  differentiation.  In  contrast,  hHb4,  has  been 
undetectable  in  hair  follicle  extracts  and  sections,  but  has  been 
identified  as  the  most  significant  member  of  this  subfamily  in 
cytoskeletal extracts of dorsal tongue [3].

Grooming

shampoos: formulations and diversity
Cleaning hair is viewed as a complex task because of the area 
that needs to be treated. The shampoo product has to also do 
two things – maintain scalp hygiene and beautify hair. A well-
designed conditioning shampoo can provide shine to fibers and 
improve manageability, whereas a shampoo with high detergent 
properties  can  remove  the  outer  cuticle  and  leave  hair  frizzy 
and dull.

Formulations
Shampoos contain molecules with both lipophilic and hydrophilic 
sites.  The  lipophilic  sites  bind  to  sebum  and  oil-soluble  dirt 
and  the  hydrophilic  sites  bind  to  water,  permitting  removal  of 
the  sebum  with  water  rinses. There  are  four  basic  categories  of 
shampoo  detergents:  anionics,  cationics,  amphoterics,  and 
non-ionics (Table 27.1). A typical shampoo will typically have 
two detergents. Anionic detergents have a negatively charged 
hydrophilic polar group and are quite good at removing sebum; 
however,  they  tend  to  leave  hair  rough,  dull,  and  subject  to 
static  electricity.  In  contrast,  ampotheric  detergents  contain 
both an anionic and a cationic group allowing them to work 
as cationic detergents at low pH and as anionic detergents at 
high pH. Ampotheric detergents are commonly found in baby 
shampoos  and  in  shampoos  designed  for  hair  that  is  fine  or 
chemically treated [5].

The number of shampoo formulations on the market can be 
overwhelming but when the chemistry behind those marketed 
for  “normal  hair”  or  “dry  hair”  is  understood,  recommending 
the  best  product  becomes  easier  (Table  27.2).  Shampoos  for 

table 27.1  Four	categories	of	shampoo	detergents.

1.	 Anionics.

	 Lauryl	sulfate
	 Laureth	sulfates
	 Sarcosines
	 Sulfosuccinates

2.	 Cationics.

3.	 Amphoterics.

	 Betaines	such	as	cocamidopropyl	betaine
	 Sultaines

Imidazolinium	derivatives

4.	 Non-ionics.

27. Hair Physiology and Grooming

237

table 27.2  Categories	of	shampoos	are	available	for	the	following	hair	types.

Normal	hair

Dry	hair

Oily	hair

Tightly	kinked	hair

“normal” hair typically have lauryl sulfate as the main detergent 
and provide good cleaning of the scalp. These are best utilized 
by  those  who  do  not  have  chemically  treated  hair.  Shampoos 
designed  for  “dry  hair”  primarily  provide  mild  cleansing  but 
also excellent conditioning. An addition to shampoo categories 
has been the introduction of conditioning shampoos which both 
clean and condition. The detergents in these types of shampoos 
tend to be amphoterics and anionics of the sulfosuccinate type. 
These  work  well  for  those  with  chemically  damaged  hair  and 
those  who  prefer  to  shampoo  frequently.  For  individuals  with 
significant  sebum  production,  oily  hair  shampoos  containing 
lauryl sulfate or sulfosuccinate detergents can work well, but can 
be drying to the hair fiber.

Hydrolyzed animal protein or dimethicone are added to con-
ditioning  shampoos,  also  commonly  called  2-in-1 shampoos. 
These chemicals create a thin film on the hair shaft to increase 
manageability and even shine. For individuals with tightly kinked 
hair, conditioning shampoos with both cleaning and conditioning 
characteristics  that  are  a  variant  of  the  2-in-1 shampoo  can  be 
beneficial.  These  shampoos  can  be  formulated  with  wheat-
germ  oil,  steartrimonium  hydrolyzed  animal  protein,  lanolin 
derivatives,  or  dimethicone  and  are  designed  for  use  either 
weekly or every 2 weeks.

conditioners
Conditioners can be liquids, creams, pastes, or gels that function 
like  sebum,  making  hair  manageable  and  glossy  appearing. 
Conditioners  reduce  static  electricity  between  fibers  following 
combing  or  brushing  by  depositing  charged  ions  on  the  hair 
shaft  and  neutralizing  the  electrical  charge.  Another  benefit 
from  conditioners  is  improved  hair  shine  which  is  related  to 
hair  shaft  light  reflection.  Conditioners  may  also  improve  the 
quality of hair fibers by reapproximating the medulla and cortex 
in frayed fibers [5,6].

There  are  several  hair  conditioner  product  types  includ-
ing  instant,  deep,  leave-in,  and  rinse.  The  instant  conditioner 
aids  with  wet  combing;  the  deep  conditioner  is  applied  for 
20–30 minutes and works well for chemically damaged hair. A 
leave-in conditioner is typically applied to towel dried hair and 
facilitates  combing.  A  rinse  conditioner  is  one  used  following 
shampooing and also aids in disentangling hair fibers.

There are at least four conditioner categories, summarized in 
Table 27.3. The quaternary conditioners are cationic detergents. 
The film-forming conditioners function by coating fibers with 
a thin polymer layer. Protein-containing conditioners contain 
small  proteins  with  a  molecular  weight  of  1000–10  000  Da. 

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
238

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

table 27.3  Categories	of	hair	conditioners.

category

Primary ingredient

Cationic	detergent

Quaternary	ammonium	compounds

Film-former

Protein-containing

Silicones

Polymers

Hydrolyzed	proteins

Dimethicone

Cyclomethicone

Amodimethicone

These penetrate the hair shaft and are thought to increase fiber 
strength temporarily. Silicone conditioners form a thin film on 
the hair shaft and, by doing so, reduce static electricity and fric-
tion. Dimethicone is the most common form of silicone used.

conclusions

The hair follicle is recognized as being a complex structure con-
sisting  of  at  least  17 different  keratins  as  well  as  lipids,  water, 
melanin,  and  trace  elements.  The  follicle  produces  an  equally 
complicated  structure,  the  hair  fiber  which  may  be  straight, 

wavy, or curly. Hair is cited as a factor contributing to attractive-
ness and is frequently styled to convey cultural affiliations [4].

references

1  Cotsarelis G, Millar SE. (2001) Towards a molecular understanding 

of hair loss and its treatment. Trends Mol Biol 293–301.

2  Langbein L, Rogers MA, Praetzel-Wunder S, Böckler D, Schirmacher 
P, Schweizer J. (2007) Novel type I hair keratins K39 and K40 are the 
last to be expressed in differentiation of the hair: completion of the 
human hair keratin catalog. J Invest Dermatol 127, 1532–5.

3  Langbein L, Rogers MA, Winter H, Praetzel S, Schweizer J. (2001) 
The catalog of human hair keratins. II. Expression of the six type II 
members in the hair follicle and the combined cataloging of human 
type I and type II keratins. J Biol Chem 34, 35123–32.

4  Gray  J.  (2008)  Human  hair.  In:  McMichael  A,  Hordinsky  M,  eds. 
Hair and Scalp Diseases. New York: Informa Healthcare, pp. 1–17.
5  Draelos ZD. (2008) Nonmedicated grooming products and beauty 
treatments.  In:  McMichael  A,  Hordinsky  M,  eds.  Hair  and  Scalp 
Diseases. New York: Informa Healthcare, pp. 59–72.

6  McMullen R, Jachowicz J. (2003) Optical properties of hair: effect 
of treatments on luster as quantified by image analysis. J Cosmet Sci 
54, 335–51.

chaPter 28
hair Dyes

Rene C. Rust1 and Harald Schlatter2
1 GSK/Stiefel, Brentford, Middlesex, UK
2 Procter & Gamble German Innovation Centre, Schwalbach am Taunus, Germany

BasIc concePts

•	 Hair	dyes	are	a	cosmetic	product	category	that	can	be	traced	back	thousands	of	years.	Modern	hair	dyes	have	been	developed	since	the	

late	19th	century	and	are	now	available	in	a	broad	range	of	products	delivering	a	variety	of	color	results	and	usage	conditions.

•	 Hair	dyes	constitute	a	large	product	category	–	over	70%	of	women	in	the	developed	world	color	their	hair	at	least	once,	and	many	do	
so	regularly.	Psychologic	aspects	of	color	transformation	are	a	key	decision	driver	for	using	hair	color	products;	especially	dyeing	gray	
hair	can	contribute	significantly	to	the	confidence	and	self-perceived	attractiveness	of	many	people.

•	 Within	the	category,	permanent	or	oxidative	hair	dyes	represent	the	largest	market	share	with	around	80%	of	all	products.	A	

combination	of	hydrogen	peroxide	and	an	alkalizing	agent	(typically	ammonia)	form	the	basis	to	lighten	the	natural	hair	color	while	at	
the	same	time	depositing	oxidatively	coupled	dyes	inside	the	hair	shaft.

•	 Additional	considerations	for	people	using	permanent	hair	dyes	regularly	include	a	high	maintenance	routine,	and	the	need	for	special	

care	and	attention	to	the	hair	because	of	the	associated	changes	to	the	hair	structure.

•	 Because	of	the	complex	chemistry	of	hair	dyes,	safety	and	regulatory	criteria	are	important	aspects	of	modern	hair	dyes.	Special	

emphasis	needs	to	be	put	on	proper	safety	and	use	instructions,	together	with	recent	technology	advances	these	enable	to	further	
minimize	a	potential	allergy	risk.

Introduction

Modern hair dyes offer a broad range of products and a variety 
of color results. They constitute a large category – over 70% of 
women in the developed world color their hair at least once, and 
many do so regularly. The number one reason for dyeing hair 
is to cover gray hair and look younger, but more women now 
use hair dyes as a means to change their appearance. Within the 
category, permanent or oxidative hair dyes represent the largest 
market share with around 80% of all products. A combination of 
hydrogen peroxide and an alkalizing agent (typically ammonia) 
form the basis to lighten the natural hair color while at the same 
time forming wash-resistant dyes inside the hair shaft. Due to 
the complex chemistry of hair dyes, safety and regulatory cri-
teria  are  important  aspects  of  modern  hair  colorants.  Special 
emphasis  needs  to  be  made  on  proper  safety  and  instructions 
for use – together with recent technology advances these enable 
potential allergy risk to be further minimized.

years humans have attempted to enhance or change their natu-
ral hair color, initially with the help of natural preparations such 
as kohl and henna [1], nowadays with modern products which 
offer a broad range of color results and gray coverage.

Hair dyes can be defined as products that alter the color appea-
rance of hair temporarily or permanently, by removing some of 
the  existing  color  and/or  adding  new  color.  They  constitute  a 
significant category in the cosmetics market – it is estimated that 
over 70% of women in the developed world have used hair color, 
and a large proportion of those do so regularly [2]. Consumers 
have the choice between home hair dye kits, and having their 
hair dyed professionally at a salon. While each woman may have 
a very individual reason for coloring her hair, covering gray can 
be considered a universal key motivator. Other desired perfor-
mance aspects include enhancing the existing color, choosing a 
color different from the natural hair, or achieving a more striking 
appearance.

Definitions

Natural hair color manifests itself in a vast multitude of shades 
and tones – from the lightest blonde and warmest brunette to 
the  most  vibrant  red  and  deepest  black.  Yet,  for  thousands  of 

Product subtypes

•	 Temporary hair dyes.
•	 Semi-permanent hair dyes.
•	 Permanent (oxidative) hair dyes.
•	 Hair bleaching.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

239

240

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Table 28.1  Overview of hair dye product types.

Hair dye 
product types

Temporary

Dye technology

Level of lastingness

Preformed	FD&C	
and	D&C	dyes

Wash	out	(with	one	
wash)

Semi-permanent

Preformed	HC	and	
disperse	dyes

Wash	out	(with		
6–8	washes)

Demi-permanent

Permanent

Bleaching

Oxidative	dyes,	
reduced	peroxide	
concentration

Wash	out	(with	up	to	
24	washes)

Oxidative	dyes

Permanent	(grows	out)

Oxidative	bleaching,	
no	dye	deposition

Permanent	(grows	out)

D&C,	dyes	to	be	used	in	drugs	and	cosmetics;	FD&C,	dyes	allowed	to	be	used	in	food,	
drugs	and	cosmetics;	HC,	dyes	to	be	used	in	hair	colorants.

A wide range of products for changing the color of hair is avail-
able to consumers. Today’s hair dyes can partially remove (lift) 
natural hair color, add (deposit) new artificial color, or indeed 
do both at the same time. They offer a variety of results, from a 
subtle color refresher to a significant change in the natural hair 
color, based on very different dye technologies. The classification 
of hair dyes is based on the permanency of the induced color 
change (Table 28.1). It should be noted that home and salon hair 
dyes are fundamentally based on the same technologies, while 
there are key differences in shade and application variety.

temporary dyes
Temporary dyes or color rinses are usually formulated with high 
molecular weight acid or dispersed dyes, which have little affinity 
for hair and are quite soluble in the dye base. The dye is complexed 
with a cationic polymer to decrease solubility and increase affinity 
for hair, and the complex dispersed in the dye base by surfactants. 
The complex coats the outside of the hair shaft and excess can be 
rinsed off [3]. The binding forces between hair substrate and dyes 
are low, which determines their temporary effect, as they are eas-
ily washed out with the next use of shampoo.

Each product contains a mixture of generally two to five color 
ingredients  to  achieve  the  desired  shade  [4].  Typical  product 
forms include shampoos and sprays. While color results are very 
limited (no lightening, no permanent gray coverage), temporary 
dyes represent a good option to test colors or refresh dyed hair.

semi-permanent dyes
Semi-permanent  hair  dyes  use  a  combination  of  preformed 
(direct) dyes to obtain results that last up to 6–8 shampoos. The 
dyes are generally characterized by their low molecular weight, 
allowing  them  to  diffuse  into  the  outer  cuticle  layers  without 
binding  firmly  to  the  hair  protein  (Figure  28.1).  Nitro-dyes 
are the most important group of dyes used in semi-permanent 
colorants  [5].  These  uncharged  (non-ionic)  dyes  are  barely 
influenced by negative charges on the surface of the hair. As a 
result, and because of their relatively small size, they are able to 

Figure  28.1  Hair  cross-section  showing  color  penetration  after  semi- 
permanent dyeing.

penetrate into the hair cuticle. Washing hair opens the cuticle, 
allowing the added color molecules to be washed out of the cuti-
cle layer because of their solubility in water.

The products contain a mixture of preformed dyes and are usu-
ally left on the hair for approximately 20–30 minutes to achieve a 
meaningful color change. Color results are limited (no lightening, 
subtly blending away first grays).

Demi-permanent and permanent dyes
Demi-permanent  and  permanent  hair  dyes  involve  oxidative 
chemistry, requiring different product components to be mixed 
just  before  they  are  applied.  Oxidative  dyes  are  the  most  fre-
quently used and commercially most relevant hair dyes. Within 
this category two differentiated product groups exist: permanent 
and  demi-permanent  dyes.  The  primary  distinctions  between 
those two groups are the type and level of alkalizing agent and 
the concentration of peroxide, which determine the efficacy of 
color change and formation in the hair and impact color longev-
ity, gray coverage, and lightening performance.

Demi-permanent colors typically use 2% hydrogen peroxide  
(concentration  on  head)  and  low  levels  of  alkalizer  (usually 
monoethanolamine,  not  ammonia),  leading  to  a  less  efficient 
dye  penetration  (ring  dye  effect;  Figure  28.2).  They  wash  out 
after up to 24 shampoo treatments. While they can be used to 
enhance and brighten natural color and blend or cover up gray 
hair up to 50%, they have little or no lightening potential.

Permanent  colorants  use  up  to  6%  peroxide  (concentration 
on  head)  and  typically  contain  ammonia  as  alkalizer  to  bring 
the  pH  of  the  final  product  to  9.0–10.5.  This  allows  complete 
penetration  across  the  cortex  (Figure  28.3).  Permanent  colo-
rants are the most versatile and long-lasting hair dye products 
and are also available in the widest spectrum of shades. Perma-
nent dyes can lighten hair significantly, change color in subtle 

28. Hair Dyes

241

chemistry

natural hair pigmentation
The natural coloration of hair is caused by the presence of mela-
nin in the cortex of the hair shaft, which occurs in the form of 
minute  pigment  granules  formed  by  melanocytes  during  the 
growth  of  the  hair  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  follicle.  All  natural 
hair  color  shades  are  created  by  just  two  types  of  melanin:  the 
more common brownish black eumelanin, and the less common 
reddish yellow pheomelanin. The final color of hair is determined 
by the total amount of melanin it contains, by the size of the pig-
ment granules, their distribution in the hair shaft, and by the ratio 
between the two melanin types [6]. Black hair contains eumela-
nin in high concentration, whereas blonde and red hair contains 
less pigment overall – and also higher ratios of pheomelanin.

Despite clear differences in molecular size and general proper-
ties, the two melanin types are biogenetically related and develop 
from a common metabolic pathway involving dopaquinone as a 
key intermediate [7]. The pigments are present as oval or spheri-
cal granules, generally in the range 0.2–0.8 μm in length, and con-
stitute less than 3% of the total hair mass [4]. Production of the 
pigment particles is located in specialized cells, the melanocytes, 
deep  within  the  hair  follicle.  Melanocytes  are  embedded  in  the 
dermal papilla of the hair bulb where they secrete tiny packages 
called melanosomes into the surrounding keratinocytes.

Natural hair color changes are often observed over the years 
from  birth  to  old  age.  Many  fair-haired  children  gradually 
become  darker  and  by  middle  age  have  brown  hair.  Graying 
hair affects all to a greater or lesser extent as part of the aging 
process. It seems to appear earlier in dark- than in light-haired 
people, and is less common in people of African descent. Gray-
ing of the hair is usually a gradual process and irreversible.

The  reason  for  going  gray  is  not  the  production  of  a  new 
“gray”  pigment,  but  rather  it  is  the  cessation  of  production  of 
the  melanin  pigment.  Hence  gray  hair  is  simply  the  appear-
ance of a pigmentless hair fiber. The gray to white appearance 
of non- pigmented hair fibers is due to scattering of light both at 
the  surface and inside the keratin fiber. The increase in the total 
number of non-pigmented hair fibers on a person’s head is the 
cause of the bulk appearance of the hair color going towards gray 
with increasing age. The precise molecular and cellular causes of 
hair depigmentation are still under discussion. Hereditary fac-
tors  seem  to  be  predominant,  meaning  that  a  change  in  gene 
expression leads to the exhaustion of the pigmentary potential of 
each individual hair follicle which leads to reduced melanogenic 
activity with increasing age. It is likely that the reduced activity 
is due to the loss of the pigment forming melanocytes from the 
bulb and the outer root sheath of the aging hair follicle. Another 
theory is that melanocytes become inactive with age, and may 
also turn into fully committed pigment cells at the wrong place 
within  the  hair  follicle,  where  they  are  ineffective  for  provid-
ing color to hair [8]. Melanocyte activity is under cyclic control 
in  line  with  the  growth  cycle  of  the  hair  follicle  leading  to  an 
apoptosis-driven regression in the catagen and telogen phases. 

Figure  28.2  Hair  cross-section  showing  color  penetration  after  demi- 
permanent dyeing.

Figure 28.3  Hair cross-section showing color penetration after permanent 
dyeing.

or  dramatic  ways,  and  provide  100%  gray  coverage,  even  on 
resistant gray hair. Reapplication is required every 4–6 weeks to 
avoid a noticeable root line from re-growing, not colored hair.

Bleaches
Most hair bleaches are products that lighten hair without add-
ing a new color. In addition to hydrogen peroxide and ammonia 
they  contain  persulfates  to  boost  and  accelerate  the  bleaching 
efficacy.  Bleaching  is  the  most  efficient  method  of  lightening 
natural and precolored hair. In the case of a partial bleaching, 
especially on very dark hair, the results can be an unwanted yel-
low to orange-colored shade due to residual melanin residues in 
the hair’s cortex.

Bleaches can lift the natural hair color most significantly and 
are  often  used  with  special  techniques  to  apply  highlighting 
effects to hair. Just as with permanent dyes, regular reapplication 
is needed to prevent visible re-growth of the naturally darker hair.

242

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

the existing pigment. Melanin is an impressively stable and 
resistant molecule, as a recent study demonstrated by giving 
evidence of melanin molecules being preserved in three fos-
sil  marine  reptiles  for  nearly  200 million  years  [11].  There-
fore, melanin bleaching requires a highly active technology 
that enables it to partly break down and dissolve the mela-
nin granules in the hair shaft. During a complete bleaching 
procedure  the  melanin  granules  are  dissolved  completely, 
leaving behind what appears under the microscope as a tiny 
cavity in the cortex of the hair. The process can be described 
as oxidative degradation of the melanins, leading to a variety 
of  smaller  degradation  products.  The  reaction  is  diffusion-
controlled  and  therefore  time  dependent  [4].  It  has  been 
reported  that  pheomelanins  are  more  resistant  to  photob-
leaching, and probably also chemical bleaching, than eume-
lanins [12].

oxidative dye formation
Permanent  hair  dyes  are  based  on  the  oxidation  by  hydro-
gen  peroxide  of  so-called  dye  precursors  or  primary  inter-
mediates  which  typically  belong  to  the  chemical  groups  of 
p-diamines and p-aminophenols, in the presence of various 
couplers (for examples see Figure 28.5). To start the process, 
the highly alkaline pH of the dye formulations swells the hair 
fiber and allows the small active molecules to penetrate into 
the cortex where the dye formation takes place in three main 
steps. The first step of the dye formation process is the oxi-
dation of the primary intermediates to highly active imines. 
If  no  coupler  is  present,  these  imines  will  react  with  their 
unoxidized form to give polynuclear brown or black colored 
complexes.  In  the  presence  of  couplers  (sometimes  called 
color modifiers) the imines then react preferentially with the 
coupler molecules at the most nucleophilic carbon atom on 
the structure. In step 3 this coupled reaction product is oxi-
dized  to  form  wash-resistant  indo  dyes  (for  an  overview  of 
the dye formation process see Figure 28.6).

Couplers  do  not  themselves  produce  color  but  modify  the 
color produced by the oxidation of the primary intermediates 
(Table 28.2). The final color is a function of the amounts and the 
properties of the individual primary intermediates and couplers 
in the composition. The choice of primary and coupler is large 
hence  leading  to  the  possibility  to  formulate  a  large  range  of 
colors. The size and solubility of the chromophores formed in 
the hair makes them particularly resistant to removal by washing, 
and means they undergo little fading [5].

Formulation

All  permanent  hair  dyes  are  generally  marketed  as  two  com-
ponent  kits  because  of  the  different  components  working  as 
oxidizer and alkalizer respectively. One component (tint) con-
tains  the  dye  precursors  and  an  alkalizer  (typically  ammonia 
or  monoethanolamine)  in  a  surfactant  base,  and  the  other  is 

Figure 28.4  Longitudinal section of hair fiber showing melanin distribution 
across the cortex.

Theories on the mechanism behind the gradual depigmentation 
of  the  hair  fiber  include  impaired  DNA  repair,  anti-apoptotic 
signals, loss of telomerase, and antioxidant mechanisms [8]. A 
key role is currently attributed to oxidative stress in the lower 
hair  follicle  induced  by  excess  levels  H2 O2 caused  by  intrinsic 
production of the melanogenesis pathway [8].

For products designed to change the natural color of hair it is 
important to consider that the melanin granules are distributed 
throughout  the  cortex  of  the  hair  shaft,  showing  the  greatest 
concentration towards the outer edge (Figure 28.4). The cuticle 
layer of the hair shaft typically carries no natural pigments and 
is therefore transparent. It is therefore imperative for any effec-
tive hair dye product to penetrate past the cuticle layer into the 
cortex of the hair fiber.

Permanent hair dyes
There are two chemical processes that take place during the per-
manent dyeing process, both of which contribute to the final color. 
The first is the oxidation of the melanin pigments, lightening the 
underlying color. The second is the oxidation of the dye precur-
sors  to  form  the  actual  colored  chromophores  [10].  Important 
to note is that only the chromophores formed inside the hair are 
retained  permanently,  the  remainder  are  washed  away.  Conse-
quently another important design parameter for permanent col-
orants is that the rates of diffusion of dye precursor in to the fiber 
and the rate of oxidation of the primaries must be balanced [10].

Melanin bleaching
Permanent hair dyes and hair bleach products have the capa-
bility to lighten the natural color of hair by removing some of 

28. Hair Dyes

243

NH2 

NH2 

NH2

NH2 

NH2 

OH

p-Phenylenediamine  

p-Toluenediamine  

p-Aminophenol 

NH2 

OH

OH

Figure  28.5  Some  typical  oxidative  dye  precursors  (top)  and 
couplers (bottom).

m-Aminophenol 

Resorcinol  

1-Naphthol  

OH

OH

OX

NH2 

NH2 

NH

NH

NH

H2N

NH2 

H2N

NH2 

NH2

NH

NH

+

Figure  28.6  The  three  main  steps  in  oxidative  dye  formation 
(here with p-phenylenediamine and m-phenylenediamine).

H2N

NH2 

NH2 

H2N

NH

OX

N

H2N

NH

Table 28.2  Variety	in	color	results	given	by	different	couplers	in	the	presence	
of	p-diamines	and	p-aminophenols.

Coupler

Color on hair with 
p-diamines

Color on hair with 
p-aminophenols

m-Phenylenediamine

Bluish	brown–black

Reddish	brown

1-Napthol

Resorcinol

Blue–violet

Red

Greenish	brown

Light	brown

3-Aminophenol

Warm	brown/magenta

Red–brown

o-Aminophenol

Warm	brown

Warm	brown

a  stabilized  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  (developer).  These 
two components are mixed immediately prior to use and then 
applied to the hair. The developer component is in liquid form, 
whereas  the  tint  is  usually  either  a  cream  or  a  liquid.  Which 
product form to use is mainly a matter of individual preference, 
liquids  might  be  easier  to  mix  while  creams  might  be  applied 
with less dripping.

Table  28.3 summarizes  common  hair  dye  components  and 
their  functions,  while  also  naming  some  specific  examples  as 
they would appear in the ingredients list of a marketed product.

244

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Table 28.3  Overview	of	common	hair	dye	ingredients.

Component

Function

Sample ingredients

Peroxide

Alkalizer

Oxidant,	bleaching

Hydrogen	peroxide

Swell	hair,	bleaching

Ammonia,	monoethanolamine	(MEA),	
aminomethylpropanol	(AMP)

Dye	precursors

Impart	color

p-Aminophenol,	1-naphtol,	p-phenylenediamine,	
4-amino-2-hydroxytoluene

Solvent

Surfactant

Buffer

Fatty	alcohols

Dye	vehicle

Water,	propylene	glycol,	ethanol,	glycerin

Foaming,	thickening

Sodium	lauryl	sulfate,	ceteareth-25,	cocoamide	
MEA,	oleth-5

Stabilizing

Emollients

Disodium	phosphate,	citric	acid

Glyceryl	stearate,	cetearyl	alcohol

Quaternary	compounds

Conditioning

Polyquaternium,	cetrimonium	chloride

advantages and disadvantages

Coloring  hair,  if  performed  well  with  satisfactory  results,  can 
have a profoundly beneficial effect that can be life-transforming; 
however,  there  are  some  considerations  to  take  into  account 
when weighing up advantages and challenges of the use of hair 
colorant products.

advantages
The key strength of hair dye products lies in their transformational 
potential. Changing one’s hair color can have a dramatic physical 
effect but, more importantly, it can also have a strong beneficial 
impact on a psychological level. Patients may not only feel more 
attractive and younger looking, they also report increased confi-
dence both in their private and work environments which can be 
very important for individuals and therefore should not be dis-
counted or belittled [2]. In our appearance- and youth-obsessed 
society coloring gray hair is a simple yet powerful and impactful 
tool in the arsenal of appearance-enhancing and “anti-aging” pro-
cedures and products.

Another advantage of modern hair dyes is the variety of tech-
nologies and benefits that it offers. Virtually everyone can find 
a product that suits them and their personal requirements, and 
new innovative technologies continuously expand the range of 
offered visual effects, treatment experiences, and shades.

challenges
Even though only a small fraction of the population is affected 
(see section on ‘Safety and regulatory considerations’ for more 
detail),  most  hair  dyes,  mainly  permanent,  oxidative  hair  col-
orants  (with  the  exception  of  pure  bleaching  products)  have 
the  potential  to  cause  allergic  reactions.  Recent  technological 
advances,  however,  have  led  to  the  development  of  new  hair 
dye technologies reducing the risk of developing allergy whilst 
delivering permanent hair color change. More details on the risk 
of allergies with hair dyes will be provided in the relevant sec-
tion of this chapter.

All  oxidative  hair  dyes,  including  demi-permanent,  perma-
nent, and bleaching products, contain ingredients such as hydro-
gen peroxide and ammonia, which may cause skin irritation. To 
minimize these risks, it is imperative that usage instructions are 
followed carefully, and that all products are kept well out of the 
reach of children.

It should also be mentioned that permanent hair dyes require 
a  certain  amount  of  upkeep  and  maintenance  from  the  user.  
Visible  root  re-growth,  especially  if  the  natural  hair  color  has 
been  significantly  changed,  necessitates  the  regular  reapplica-
tion  of  product  to  maintain  high  quality  appearance  benefits. 
This is one of the main reasons why a large group of consumers 
who color their hair choose to do so themselves, at home, rather 
than  visiting  a  professional  hairdresser  every  single  time  they 
feel the need to recolor.

Lastly,  one  drawback  of  hair  dyes,  again  mainly  relevant  to 
oxidative  products,  lies  in  the  fact  that  hydrogen  peroxide  at 
alkaline  pH  conditions  can  alter  the  hair  structure,  leading 
to  undesirable  sensorial  attributes  described  by  consumers  as 
poor  shine,  poor  feel,  and  reduced  strength  [13].  It  should  be 
noted that these problems mostly occur with frequent use, and 
with  high  levels  of  lift  or  bleaching  or  even  wrong  use  of  the 
products. Therefore,  these  effects  on  the  hair  structure  can  be 
reduced with the right application techniques. More details on 
these structural changes will be provided in the section “Impact 
of hair dyes on hair structure”.

Product choice and application

The  most  important  step  in  hair  dyeing  is  the  right  choice  of 
product,  considering  both  the  type  of  hair  dye  and  the  color 
shade.  Individuals  with  no  previous  experience  in  using  hair 
colorants who want to blend away some first grays, or who want 
a  subtle  enhancement  of  their  natural  color,  are  perhaps  best 
advised to choose a semi-permanent colorant. If the person has 
a higher percentage of gray (up to 30%) and wants to stay close 

28. Hair Dyes

245

to their natural hair color, a demi-permanent product could be 
the best solution. Covering higher levels of gray and/or achiev-
ing  significant  changes  in  the  natural  hair  color  will  require 
the  application  of  a  permanent  hair  dye  product.  Even  within 
permanent hair color category there are now different technolo-
gies available that allow the creation of a broad range of visual 
effects and color quality from intense block colors to transpar-
ent shades that allow for a more subtle blending of the new hair 
color with the natural hair color.

Once the right type of hair dye has been identified, the key 
decision  is  to  identify  the  right  shade.  The  final  color  result 
is  a  combination  of  the  existing  hair  color  and  the  shade 
produced  by  the  colorant  –  shade  guides  on  the  packaging 
are  usually  very  helpful  in  exploring  which  result  should  be 
expected based on those two parameters. For home hair dyes 
a  useful  guideline  is  to  stay  within  two  shade  differences  of 
one’s natural color, and – if in doubt – choose a lighter over 
a  darker  shade.  To  be  sure  about  the  outcome  of  the  color-
ing  process,  which  will  also  be  affected  by  the  condition  of 
the hair and previous treatments, a strand test can be helpful. 
For  this  test  a  small  strand  of  hair  (0.25 inch)  is  cut  from 
the darkest part of the hair, or area with the most gray hair, 
and covered with the product for the time recommended for 
the  hair  color.  Checking  after  different  time  points  enables 
the optimum processing time to accomplish the desired end 
result to be determined.

Another check that should always be completed before color-
ing  hair  is  an  allergy  alert  test. The  test  should  be  carried  out 
48 hours  prior  to  product  use  and  involves  applying  a  small 
amount  of  the  product  to  an  area  of  the  body  skin  (typically 
recommended is the inside of the elbow). If a rash or redness, 
burning, or itching occurs the patient may be allergic to certain 
product ingredients and must not use the tested product. If an 
individual has such a reaction following an allergy alert test, it is 
strongly advised to consult a dermatologist or physician.

Lastly, it is very important, especially for first time color users, 
to read the product usage directions carefully. Oxidative colorants 

require the mixing of several components before application and 
each product might be slightly different in terms of how it should 
be mixed and used. It is therefore imperative for a successful color 
result and experience to follow the recommended procedure step 
by step.

Impact of hair dyes on hair structure

Oxidative  coloring  and  bleaching  have  been  shown  to  cause 
several  changes  to  the  hair  structure,  especially  with  frequent 
use (Figure 28.7). Alkaline peroxide partially removes the outer 
hydrophobic surface barrier of hair, called the f-layer, made of 
18-methyl eicosanoic acid. This layer functions a natural protec-
tion or conditioning system of hair and its destruction leads to 
significant changes in important hair properties such as feel and 
behavior when it is exposed to changes of the environment [14]. 
At the protein level, peroxide at alkaline pH conditions attacks 
certain amino acids which are part of the hair fiber structure, 
especially  cystine,  leading  to  oxidative  degradation  products. 
The  resulting  physicochemical  changes  of  the  hair  surface  are 
irreversible and can lead to hair that feels coarse, is more diffi-
cult to comb, lacks shine, and is weakened [11,13]. Importantly, 
hair that has been treated and thus changed by oxidative treat-
ments is more prone to physical and environmental stress and 
subsequent  damage  [16]  and  therefore  needs  to  be  regularly 
treated with care and conditioning products.

recent technology strategies to minimize fiber 
damage
While  the  above  described  hair  fiber  changes  can  be  mainly 
attributed to hydrogen peroxide itself, it is also well known that 
hydrogen  peroxide  at  high  pH  is  likely  to  form  reactive  radi-
cal species which can be an additional source of fiber damage 
during hair coloration. The reaction is catalyzed by the presence 
of redox metal ions such as copper and iron which are preva-
lent in tap water. It has been reported that the addition of metal 

(a)

(b)

Figure 28.7  Change in surface hydrophobicity before (a) and after (b) bleaching.

246

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

chelating  agents  to  oxidative  colorants  can  reduce  the  surface 
damage caused in the presence of copper in tap water [17]. Key 
is to find a chelant that selectively binds to transition metal ions 
such as copper in the presence of high concentration of water 
hardness ions, especially calcium. N,N’-ethylenediamine disuc-
cinic acid (EDDS) has been found to fulfill this requirement and 
has therefore since been introduced into hair color and hair care 
products [15].

caring for colored hair
Based on the described changes to the hair surface structure, it 
is important that consumers take the right steps to care for their 
hair before, and especially after coloring. This will help in keep-
ing good color results for as long as possible, and also in protect-
ing the weakened hair structure from further damage from daily 
wear and tear.

The first step in treating colored hair correctly is to use the 
most appropriate application technique when re-coloring. Cov-
ering visible re-growth only requires the hair dye to be used on 
the hair sections affected – the hair roots. This will help to pro-
tect the bulk of the hair from unnecessary exposure and over-
processing.

The basis for a suitable hair care routine after dyeing should 
be the use of a shampoo and conditioner specifically developed 
for colored hair. They contain ingredients that are tailored to the 
altered  hydrophilic  surface  conditions  of  the  hair  and  help  to 
smoothen the cuticle surface, protecting it against mechanical 
damage. Secondly, sun exposure should be minimized because 
UV radiation not only contributes to hair damage but also has 
a direct impact on color fading by inducing degradation of the 
hair dye molecules in the hair shaft. Lastly, it should be pointed 
out that water exposure is a big contributor to color fading (also 
called wash fading). It can therefore be beneficial to adjust the 
wash frequency of freshly colored hair accordingly.

safety and regulatory considerations

As part of cosmetics, hair dyes are thoroughly safety regulated 
by global regulatory authorities such as the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) or EU Cosmetic Directive or Regulation 
(1223/2009 EC), and their scientific advisory board, the Scien-
tific  Committee  on  Consumer  Safety  (SCCS,  formerly  SCCP, 
SCCNFP)  [18,19].  Hair  dyes  are  one  of  the  most  thoroughly 
studied cosmetics and consumer products and there is an over-
whelming amount of safety data on hair dyes [20]. Despite the 
extensive  safety  testing  and  close  safety  regulation  regimen, 
two safety concerns are typically associated with hair dyes: skin 
allergy and allegations regarding a slightly increased cancer risk.

allergy
Like other products such as certain foods or drugs, hair dyes can 
cause allergic reactions in a few individuals. Allergic reactions to 
hair dyes are well known but still relatively rare when compared 

to the daily global use of millions of hair colorants. In general 
allergic  reactions  to  hair  dyes  are  classified  as  delayed  hyper-
sensitivity or type IV reactions. Type IV reactions are normally 
localized to the area where the product is applied. Only in very 
rare  exceptional  cases  more  severe  and  spreading  symptoms 
like facial edema can occur. Type IV reactions are triggered by 
a different immune-response mechanism than type I allergies, 
which are more typically reactions to food or drug ingredients 
and in severe cases may lead to life-threatening symptoms.

Key hair dye allergens
Key hair dye actives such as para-phenylenediamine (pPD), but 
also para-toluenediamine (pTD), are well known skin sensitizers. 
pPD is part of the standard patch test series in certain countries; 
pTD is part of the hairdresser patch test series [21]. This is par-
ticularly important as pPD and pTD are key dye precursors for 
the vast majority of oxidative permanent hair dyes and virtually 
present in all black, brownish and blond shades. Beside pPD and 
pTD, various other hair dye ingredients have been identified as 
allergens. In 2006 and 2013, EU’s SCCS published a Memorandum 
on hair dye chemical sensitization [22]. The SCCS concludes that 
13 hair dyes fulfil the criteria of extreme sensitizers, 23 of strong 
and 20 of moderate sensitizers. This assessment is based on the 
intrinsic allergy potential of hair dyes only. It does not consider 
use concentrations and actual consumer exposure to these hair 
dyes during hair coloring, and hence is of limited relevance for 
the actual allergy induction risk for the consumer. In fact, many 
hair dyes including some of those classified as strong or extreme 
sensitizers  are  commonly  used  because  they  are  non-relevant 
allergens among consumers and clients, due to their low use con-
centrations.

A new risk assessment approach for the allergy induction of 
hair dyes has been jointly developed by academia and industry 
experts.  This  Quantitative  Risk  Assessment  Approach  (QRA) 
for hair dyes builds on the allergy potential, but introduces use 
concentration and actual consumer exposure to individual hair 
dyes during hair coloring to estimate the actual allergy induction 
risk for hair dye users. In fact, pPD was shown to be tolerated 
by most users while sensitive individuals may indeed develop an 
allergic reaction. Other hair dyes also being classified as strong 
allergens do not represent a significant allergy risk according to 
the  QRA  approach,  which  is  confirmed  by  in  market  surveil-
lance data [23].

allergy prevalence of hair dye allergy
There are different ways to quantify the actual hair dye allergy 
frequency and prevalence:

1. Number of allergic reactions to hair colorants
Actual hair dye allergic reactions are relatively rare given the wide 
and frequent use of hair colorants. According to a study of hair 
dye  manufacturers  looking  at  the  number  of  reported  allergy 
cases after hair dye use in various different European countries, 
0.2–4.3 hair  dye  allergic  reactions  are  reported  per  one  million 

28. Hair Dyes

247

sold product units (undesirable effects, UEfs, reasonably attrib-
uted to product use, causality assessment likely and very likely). 
UEfs  vary  between  reporting  countries  and  manufacturers,  but 
overall  show  to  be  rather  stable.  Reporting  rates  of  home  use 
products are altogether higher than the reporting rates for salon 
uses [24].

2. Number of patients with newly diagnosed allergy for 
key hair dye ingredients like pPD
The allergy incidence against key hair dyes like pPD and pTD 
among patients undergoing patch testing have been monitored 
over several decades in different countries. Incidence rates vary 
between countries and are usually in the area of 5% in the US 
and the EU and slightly higher in Asian countries. The allergy 
incidence against pPD has been more or less stable over the past 
years [25]. While a few authors have concluded that pPD allergy 
incidence among patch-tested individuals has slightly increased 
over  the  years  [26],  most  authors  conclude  that  pPD  allergy 
incidence is stable or even slightly decreasing [27–29].

3. Number of individuals in the general population being 
allergic to key hair dye ingredients like pPD
The actual pPD allergy prevalence in the general population was 
assumed  to  be  significantly  lower  compared  to  the  incidence 
among  dermatological  patients  undergoing  diagnostic  patch 
testing  routine.  Using  the  methodology  of  clinical  epidemiol-
ogy (CE) and drug utilization research (DUR) a prevalence of 
1% pPD allergy in the general population was estimated [30]. 
According to a recent study, the prevalence against the key hair 
dye  allergen  pPD  in  the  general  population  was  indeed  con-
firmed to be slightly less than 1% [31].

It is important to note that pPD, as one of the most frequently 
cited key hair dye allergens, is also widely used elsewhere. While 
hair dyes are commonly regarded as one of the contributors to 
pPD allergy, several other key uses have been identified to sub-
stantially  contribute  to  the  overall  pPD  allergy  rates.  One  key 
contributor  being  identified  in  the  recent  past  is  black  henna 
tattooing. Such temporary henna tattoos are often added with 
pPD to darken them and make them longer lasting. Black henna 
tattoo inks have been found to have PPD concentrations as high 
as 15% to 30%, i.e. a use concentration one order of magnitude 
higher than the maximally allowed pPD use concentrations in 
hair  dyes  in  the  EU;  moreover  it  was  left  on  the  skin  and  not 
rinsed after approximately 30 minutes like most permanent hair 
colorants [32].

Beside black henna tattoos, pPD is also widely used in black 
textile  dyes,  leather  dyes,  printing  inks,  photograph  developer 
and the rubber industry. A study of the German “Informations-
verbund  Dermatologischer  Kliniken,  IVDK”  could  attribute 
only 22% of all pPD allergy cases to hair dyeing including clients, 
23% to different occupational exposures including hairdressers 
and 12% to clothing and shoes. About 44% of the pPD allergy 
cases  could  not  be  linked  to  any  specific  exposure  or  product 
use. The majority of pPD allergy cases could not be attributed to 

hair colorant use, but resulted from sources other than hair dye 
exposure [33].

are children at higher risk to develop hair dye 
allergic reactions?
Most permanent hair colorant products come with advice not to 
be used by children. In the EU, hair colorants are mandated to 
be labeled with a disclaimer that the products are not to be used 
by children less than 16 years old. A similar disclaimer is man-
datory also in the US. This however is not related to a higher risk 
of younger individuals developing an allergic contact dermatitis. 
In  fact,  several  studies  have  shown  that  age  is  irrelevant  with 
regard to the allergy risk and that younger individuals are not 
at higher risk for developing an allergic contact dermatitis com-
pared to adults [34,35]. The recommendations given by manu-
facturers and mandated by some regulators are more driven by 
the  opinion  that  users  of  respective  hair  colorants  are  mature 
enough  to  understand  the  potential  allergy  risk  and  to  follow 
the usage and safety instructions properly, including allergy risk 
mitigation measures.

allergy alert test
In order to minimize the risk of an allergic reaction during use, 
which can be severe, most hair dye manufacturers recommend 
conducting  an  Allergy  Alert  Test  (sometimes  called  pre-test 
or skin sensitivity test) with the colorant and shade of interest 
48 hours  before  the  actual  hair  coloration.  Pending  manufac-
turer’s guidance, a small proportion of the colorant of interest 
should be applied at a small skin site either behind the ear or 
the  lower  arm  48 hours  before  the  coloration.  In  case  of  any 
adverse reaction, consumers and clients are advised not to color 
and seek medical advice. While some dermatologists and also 
the  European  Commission’s  SCCS  raised  questions  regarding 
the suitability of the Allergy Alert Test, e.g. with regard to false 
negatives or an allergy risk resulting from the exposure through 
the  test,  manufacturers  claim  that  the  Allergy  Alert  Test  is  an 
important  allergy  risk  management  measure  and  recommend 
the procedure. Similarly, some regulators in the US require the 
Allergy Alert Test or pre-test to be recommended in the product 
use instructions.

Permanent hair dyes with reduced allergy risk
While some direct, non-permanent colorants work without pPD 
and pTD, permanent hair colors offering the full color spectrum 
and long lasting color performance usually require pPD or pTD 
as key building block of mainly black, brown and most blond 
shades. For many years hair dye manufacturers have been inves-
tigating hair dyes with reduced allergy risk, as replacements for 
pPD and pTD. The key challenge in this quest was to find the 
right balance between optimal color performance (gray cover-
age, shade space) and reduced allergy risk.

A  first  invention  was  the  pPD  derivative  hydroxyethyl-
p-phenylenediamine,  which  can  replace  pPD  and  pTD  and 
deliver  some  shade  variability.  While  still  classified  as  strong 

248

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

sensitizer,  its  allergy  potential  is  reduced  compared  to  pPD 
and  pTD.  Cross-reactions  to  existing  pPD  and  pTD  allergies 
however cannot be excluded [36]. It is used in few commercial 
products.

The  latest  innovation  in  this  area  is  2-methoxymethyl-p- 
phenylenediamine  (ME-PPD)  with  further  reduced  allergy 
potential.  It  is  classified  as  moderate  sensitizer  and  offers  full 
color performance and gray coverage. Pre-market data indicate 
a negligible allergy induction risk during use of ME-PPD [37]. 
Also cross-reactivity versus existing pPD-allergy is reduced and 
is  in  the  range  of  approximately  30%  [38].  Net,  ME-PPD  may 
be suitable for pPD-allergic individuals but only following thor-
ough and close dermatological examination and consultation to 
exclude the individual cross-allergy and elicitation risk. ME-PPD 
was first introduced in commercial products in 2014.

Overall it is too early to conclude whether any of the above pPD 
and pTD alternatives with lower allergy induction potency will be 
able to successfully replace pPD or pTD. Future consumer accep-
tance and in-market allergy surveillance data will be needed to 
further verify suitability of either of the alternatives.

In summary, for the time being, hair dye allergy remains an 
issue for a small number of consumers and therefore the follow-
ing safety measures can help to minimize the allergy risk [39]:
•	 Consumers should read and follow the usage instructions of 
hair colorants carefully. All hair dyes carry clear allergy warn-
ing labels, making users aware of the potential allergy risk.
•	 For permanent and most semi-permanent hair colorants, con-
sumers are advised to conduct an Allergy Alert Test (product 
tolerance test) with the product and shade of interest 48 hours 
before hair coloring, by following the recommendations com-
ing  with  each  product.  However,  the  absence  of  a  reaction 
at the test site is no guarantee that a reaction will not occur 
during hair coloring. In case of a skin reaction at the test site, 
consumers should not color their hair and seek dermatologic 
advice. When consumers experience initial signs of an adverse 
reaction at the scalp during the hair coloring session, the hair 
dye should be rinsed off immediately.

•	 Consumers may develop an allergy to hair dyes over time also 
as a result of products other than hair dyes. Temporary black 
henna tattoos are one important contributor to pPD allergy in 
humans [40,41]. This emphasizes the importance of conduct-
ing an Allergy Alert Test.

•	 Professional  hairdressers  should  follow  occupational  safety 
measures, such as wearing protective gloves during prepara-
tion, application, and rinsing of hair colorants [42].

•	 In the case of consumers who have a diagnosed allergy against 
a specific hair dye ingredient, hair dyes should not be applied 
before  they  have  consulted  with  their  dermatologist.  Some 
hair dyes are known to cross-react (e.g. pPD and pTD).

cancer
Cancer  concerns  were  raised  early  in  the  context  of  oxidative 
hair  dyes,  because  of  their  chemical  nature.  Numerous  epide-
miologic studies into hair dye safety have been conducted since 
then, the vast majority concluding that there is no association 
of  hair  dye  use  and  an  increased  cancer  risk.  Occasional,  sin-
gle epidemiologic studies reporting a slightly increased risk for 
certain cancer types such as bladder cancer have not been con-
firmed by multiple epidemiologic studies. Early in 2008, leading 
cancer experts of the International Agency of Cancer Research 
(IARC, a subsidiary of the WHO) reviewed all relevant studies 
and scientific papers published to date and concluded that there 
is no evidence that personal hair dye use is associated with any 
increased cancer risk (“not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in 
humans” (Group 3)) [43]. The US Cosmetic Ingredient Review 
(CIR) panel came to the same conclusion.

Early  in  2000 the  EU  Commission  launched  a  big  hair  dye 
safety  campaign  in  joint  collaboration  with  leading  hair  dye 
manufacturers.  More  than  100  individual  hair  dyes  have  been 
re-assessed and validated, including updated safety studies pro-
vided by manufacturers. Many hair dyes not relevant or in use 
any more have been taken off the list of approved hair dyes. After 
almost  10  years’  work,  the  SCCS  concluded  that  for  hair  dyes 
marketed in the EU, no clear indications for an excess of can-
cer risk was demonstrated, which is in line with the judgement 
of  the  aforementioned  IARC  working  group  [44].  Net,  initial 
or  occasionally  raised  cancer  concerns  have  been  thoroughly 
reviewed by global leading expert panels and safety regulators 
and disproved to be relevant for today’s modern hair colorants.

conclusions

Modern hair dyes are an effective tool in altering the natural color 
of hair and to cover gray hair. Different product types offer a wide 
range of results, from subtly enhancing color to dramatic color 
changes and complete gray coverage. While the potentially huge 
beneficial  effect  on  people’s  perceived  attractiveness  and  self-
esteem is undisputed, a thorough understanding of the different 
available technologies and their benefits and challenges is essen-
tial to advise consumers on the most suitable products to use.

Most relevant are permanent hair colors, allowing a full color 
variability,  most  efficient  gray  coverage  and  long  durability. 
While the vast majority of consumers do tolerate today’s perma-
nent colorants, a small number of consumers and clients may 
show an allergic reaction, mainly to the key hair dye allergens 
pPD  and  pTD.  Allergy  risk  management  measures  have  been 
developed to reduce the risk of allergic reactions for both, hair 
dye consumers and hairdressers.

Overall, it should be emphasized that the vast majority of con-
sumers can safely use hair colorants and that following the use 
and  safety  instructions  plus  the  above  guidance,  will  help  to 
minimize the allergy risk for the small number of individuals at 
risk of allergic reaction to hair dyes.

Most recently, hair dye alternatives to pPD and pTD with signifi-
cantly reduced allergy risk have been developed and introduced in the 
market. The pre-market studies indicate a negligible allergy risk with 
these new technologies; however, future consumer acceptance and in-
market surveillance will be needed to further confirm these data.

28. Hair Dyes

249

The  main  future  challenge  in  hair  coloring  lies  in  prevent-
ing  or  even  reversing  hair  graying  via  stimulating  melanocyte 
activity  at  the  molecular  or  even  genetic  level.  The  recently 
reported modulation of hair follicle melanocyte behavior with 
corticotropin-releasing hormone peptides could be a first step 
towards that direction [45].

acknowledgment
The authors thank Frauke Neuser for her contributions to the 
first edit of this chapter.

references

1  Zviak C. (1986) The Science of Hair Care. New York: Marcel Dekker.
2  Gray J. (2005) The World of Hair Colour. London: Thomson.
3  Brown K. (2000) Hair coloring products. In: SchlossmanM, ed. The 
Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics, Vol. II Formulating. Carol 
Stream, IL: Allured Publishing, pp. 397–454.

4  Robbins  CR.  (2002)  Chemical  and  Physical  Behavior  of  Human 

Hair. New York: Springer.

5  Corbett JF. (1998) Hair Colorants: Chemistry and Toxicology. Cos-

metic Science Monographs. Weymouth, UK: Micelle Press.

6  Schwan-Jonczyk  A.  (1999)  Hair  Structure.  Darmstadt,  Germany: 

Wella AG.

7  Prota  G,  Ortonne  JP  (1993)  Hair  melanins  and  hair  color: 
Ultrastructural  and  biochemical  aspects.  J  Invest  Dermatol  101, 
82 S–9 S.

8  Wood,  J.  M.  Decker  H,  Hartmann  H,  Chavan  B,  Rokos  H,  Spen-
cer JD, Hasse S, Thornton MJ, Shalbaf M, Paus R, Schallreuter KU. 
(2009) Senile hair graying: H2 O2-mediated oxidative stress affects 
human hair color by blunting methionine sulfoxide repair. FASEB 
23(7), 2065–75.

9  Nishimura EK, Granter SR, Fisher DE. (2005) Mechanisms of hair 
graying: incomplete melanocyte stem cell maintenance in the niche. 
Science 307, 720–4.

10  Brown KC, Pohl S, Kezer AE, Cohen D. (1985) Oxidative dyeing of 

keratin fibers. J Soc Cosmet Chem 36, 31–7.

11  Lindgren J, Sjoevall P, Carney RM, Uvdal P, Gren JA, Dyke G, Pagh 
B, Shawkey MD, Barnes KR, Polcyn MJ. (2014) Skin pigmentation 
provides evidence of convergent melanism in extinct marine reptiles. 
Nature doi: 10.1038/nature12899.

12  Wolfram  LJ,  Albrecht  L.  (1987)  Chemical  and  photobleaching  of 

brown and red hair. J Soc Cosmet Chem 38, 179–91.

13  Jachowicz  J.  (1987)  Hair  damage  and  attempts  to  its  repair.  J  Soc 

Cosmet Chem 38, 236–86.

14  Lodge  RA,  Bhushan  B.  (2006)  Wetting  properties  of  human  hair 
by means of dynamic contact angle measurement. J Appl Polym Sci 
102, 5255–65.

15  Wortmann FJ, Schwan-Jonczyk A. (2006) Investigating hair prop-
erties relevant for hair “handle”. Part I: hair diameter, bending and 
frictional properties. Int J Cosmet Sci 28, 61–8.

16  Takada K, Nakamura A, Matsua N, Inoue A, Someya K, Shimogaki H. 
(2003) Influence of oxidative and/or reductive treatment on human 
hair  (I):  Analysis  of  hair  damage  after  oxidative  and/or  reductive 
treatment. J Oleo Sci 52, 541–8.

17  Marsh JM, Flood J, Damaschko D, Ramji N. (2007) Hair coloring 
systems  delivering  color  with  reduced  fiber  damage.  J  Cosmet  Sci 
58, 495–503.

18  European Union Cosmetics Regulation EC 1223/2009: http://eur-lex.
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:2009R1223:
20130711:en:PDF.

19  SCCP/1501/12 Notes of guidance for testing of cosmetic ingredients 
for their safety evaluation, 8th revision, adopted by the SCCS dur-
ing the plenary meeting of December 1, 2012. http://ec.europa.eu/
health/scientific_committees/consumer_safety/docs/sccs_s_006.pdf
20  Nohynek GJ, Fautz R, Benech-Kieffer F, Toutain H. (2004) Toxicity 
and human health risk of hair dyes. Food Chem Toxicol 4, 517–43.
21  Diepgen TL, Coenraads PJ, Wilkinson M, Basketter DA, Lepoittevin 
JP. (2005) Para-phenylendiamine (PPD) 1% pet. is an important aller-
gen in the standard series. Contact Dermatitis 53, 185.

22  SCCS  Memorandum  on  hair  dye  Chemical  Sensitization  (SCCS/ 
1509/13),  adopted  at  its  18th  plenary  meeting  February  26  2013; 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/consumer_
safety/docs/sccs_s_007.pdf

23  Goebel  C,  Diepgen  TL,  Krasteva  M,  Schlatter  H,  Nicolas  JF, 
Blömeke B, Coenraads PJ, Schnuch A, Taylor JS, Pungier J, Fautz 
R, Fuchs A, Schuh W, Gerberick GF, Kimber I. (2012) Quantitative 
risk assessment for skin sensitisation: consideration of a simplified 
approach for hair dye ingredients. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 64(3), 
459–65.

24  Krasteva  M,  Bons  B,  Tozer  S,  Rich  K,  Hoting  E,  Hollenberg  D, 
Fuchs  A,  Fautz  R.  (2010)  Contact  allergy  to  hair  colouring  prod-
ucts. The cosmetovigilance experience of 4 companies (2003–2006). 
Eur J Dermatol. 20(1), 85–95. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2010.0808.

25  Gerberick  GF,  Ryan  CA.  (2005)  Hair  dyes  and  skin  allergy.  In: 
Tobin  DJ,  ed.  Hair  in  Toxicology:  An  Important  Biomonitor.  Lon-
don: CRC Press, pp. 212–28.

26  McFadden JP, White IR, Frosch PJ, Sosted H, Johansen JD, Menne 

T. (2007) Allergy to hair dye. Br Med J 334, 220.

27  Uter W, Lessmann H, Geier J, Schnuch A. (2003) Contact allergy to 
ingredients of hair cosmetics in female hairdressers and clients: an 
8-year analysis of IVDK data. Contact Dermatitis 49, 236–40.
28  DeLeo VA. (2006) p-Phenylenediamine. Dermatitis 17, 53–5.
29  Wetter DA, Davis MDP, Yiannias JA, et al. (2005) Patch test results 
from the Mayo Clinic Contact Dermatitis Group, 1998–2000. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 53, 416–21.

30  Thyssen  JP,  Menne  T,  Schnuch  A,  Uter  W,  White  I,  White  JM, 
Johansen JD. (2009) Acceptable risk of contact allergy in the general 
population assessed by CE-DUR – A method to detect and catego-
rize contact allergy epidemics based on patient data. Regulat Toxicol 
Pharmacol 54, 183–7.

31  Diepgen  T.  (2013)  Annual  ACDS  Meeting  Abstracts,  Dermatitis 

24(4), 1–15.

32  Gawkrodger  DJ,  English  JS.  (2006)  How  safe  is  patch  testing  to 

PPD? Br J Dermatol 154(6), 1025–7.

33  Schnuch A, Lessmann H, Frosch PJ, Uter W. (2008) Para-phenylen-
ediamine: the profile of an important allergen. Results of the IVDK. 
Br J Dermatol. 159(2), 379–86.

34  Felter  SP,  Robinson  MK,  Basketter  DA,  Gerberick  GF.  (2002)  A 
review of the scientific basis for uncertainty factors for use in the 
quantitative  risk  assessment  for  the  induction  of  allergic  contact 
dermatitis. Contact Derm 47, 257–66.

250

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

35  Cassimos  C,  Kanakoudi-Tsakalidis  F,  Spyroglou  K,  Ladianos  M, 
Tzaphi  R.  (1980)  Skin  sensitization  to  2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene 
(DNCB) in the first months of life. J Clin Lab Immunol 3, 111–13.
36  Frosch PJ, Kuegler K, Geier J. (2011) Patch testing with hydroxyethyl-p-
phenylenediaminesulfate – cross-reactivity with p-phenylenediamine, 
Contact Derm 65, 96–100.

37  Goebel C, Troutman J, Hennen J, Rothe H, Schlatter H, Gerberick 
GF, Bloemeke B. Introduction of a methoxymethyl side chain into 
p-phenelyenediamine attenuates its sensitizing potency and reduces 
the risk of allergy induction. Tox Appl Pharm 174(2014), 480–7.
38  Blömeke B1, Pot LM, Coenraads PJ, et al. (2015) Cross-elicitation 
responses  to  2-methoxymethyl-p-phenylenediamine  under  hair 
dye  use  conditions  in  p-phenylenediamine-allergic  individuals.  
Br J Dermatol 172, 976–80.

39  Schlatter H, Long T, Gray J. (2007) An overview of hair dye safety. J 

Cosmet Dermatol 6, 32–6.

40  Onder M. (2003) Temporary holiday “tattoos” may cause lifelong 
allergic contact dermatitis when henna is mixed with PPD. J Cosmet 
Dermatol 2, 126–28.

41  Nawaf  AM,  Joshi  A,  Nour-Eldin  O.  (2003)  Acute  allergic  contact 
dermatitis  due  to  para-phenylenediamine  after  temporary  henna 
painting. J Dermatol 30, 797–800.

42  Dickel H, Kuss O, Schmidt A, Diepgen TL. (2002) Impact of preven-
tive strategies on trend of occupational skin disease in hairdressers: 
population based register study. Br Med J 324, 1422–3.

43  Baan  R,  Straif  K,  Grosse  Y,  Secretan  B,  Ghissassi  FE,  Bouvard  V, 
et  al.(on  behalf  of  International  Agency  for  Research  on  Cancer, 
IARC).  (2008)  Carcinogenicity  of  some  aromatic  amines,  organic 
dyes and related exposures. Lancet Oncol 9, 322–3.

44  SCCS  Opinion  on  reaction  products  of  oxidative  hair  dye  ingre-
dients  formed  during  hair  dyeing  processes  (SCCS/1311/10), 
adopted  during  its  plenary  meeting  of  21 September  2010;  http://
ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/consumer_safety/docs/
sccs_o_037.pdf.

45  Kauser S, Slominski A, Wei ET, Tobin DJ. (2006) Modulation of the 
human hair follicle pigmentary unit by corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone and urocortin peptides. FASEB J 20, 882–95.

cHapter 29
permanent Hair Waving

Annette Schwan-Jonczyk1, Gerhard Sendelbach2, Andreas Flohr3, and Rene C. Rust4
1 Private Practice, Darmstadt, Germany
2 Darmstadt, Germany
3 Wella/Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
4 GSK/Stiefel, Brentford, Middlesex, UK

BasIc concepts

•	 Permanent	hair	waving	is	a	chemical/mechanical	treatment	aimed	at	modifying	hair	protein	to	achieve	and	retain	curly	shapes.
•	 During	the	permanent	waving	process	the	hair	is	wound	on	rods,	then	first	treated	with	a	reduction	agent–	typically	thioglycolate	–	

followed	by	an	oxidation	step	with	hydrogen	peroxide.	The	first	reduction	step	chemically	reduces	the	cystine	inside	the	hair,	breaking	
the	sulfur–sulfur-bridge	of	the	cystine	molecule.	The	hair	fiber	is	weakened	and	can	now	conform	to	its	new	shape.	The	oxidation	step	
then	chemically	locks	the	new	molecular	confirmation	of	the	hair	proteins.

•	 The	intensity	as	well	as	the	durability	of	the	treatment	depends	on	a	variety	of	parameters	which	can	be	chemical	or	mechanical	in	

nature.	As	with	all	other	hair	transformations	involving	reactive	chemistry,	results	vary	with	the	texture	and	quality	of	the	hair.

•	 Due	to	the	chemical	nature	and	the	complexity	of	the	application	process,	for	personal	safety	and	to	avoid	undesirable	hair	damage,	
permanent	waving	products	are	typically	applied	by	a	stylist	in	a	salon.	In	salon	applications	permanent	waving	chemistry	may	also	be	
mixed	with	conventional	hair	masks	to	create	special	effects.

Introduction

Since ancient cultures, curly hair has been regarded one of the 
most  prominent  signs  of  femininity  and  beauty.  Women  with 
straight hair purchased expensive wigs or spent hours for hair 
ondulation  with  water  and  heat  for  a  temporary  success.  A 
ground-breaking  invention  was  made  by  Carl  Nessler  in  1906 
who offered, for the first time, irreversible hair shaping to clients 
by means of heat and borax.

Improvements followed during the 20th century by the cre-
ation of “cold waves,” using sulfite or thioglycolate as actives, still 
the most popular waving agents in home and salon perms.

Hair physiology

Hairs are composed of cells packed in tight cell bundles that grow 
out  from  up  to  3  mm  skin  depth.  About  5  million  hairs  cover 
the human body and scalp classified as vellus hairs (5–10 μm in 
diameter) or terminal hairs (5–120 μm in diameter). The human 
head has 100,000– 50,000 fibers, which grow approximately 1 cm 
per month through rapid cell division in the living, lowest part 
of their hair follicle, known as the hair bulb. Each strand of hair 
is made up of three regions, the medulla, the cortex, and cuticle. 

The  innermost  structure  of  the  hair,  the  medulla,  is  not  always 
present and is an open, spongiform region. The highly structural 
and organized cortex, or middle layer of the hair, is the primary 
source  of  mechanical  strength  and  water  uptake.  The  cortex 
contains  melanin,  which  colors  the  fiber  based  on  the  number, 
distribution and types of melanin granules. It is currently under 
discussion if either the shape of the follicle determines the shape 
of the hair, or if the way the hair forms and hardens determines 
the shape of the hair follicle. There are ethnical differences in hair 
shape and structure, for example Asian hair typically has a round 
fiber diameter and is normally straight. Hair fibers with oval and 
irregularly shaped diameters are generally wavier or even curly. 
The  hair  surface  contains  flattened  cells,  known  as  the  cuticle, 
which  forms  an  imbricate  structure  resembling  shingles  on  a 
roof. The hair surface is covered with a single molecular layer of 
lipid (“f-layer”) which gives the hair surface hydrophobic proper-
ties. However, when the hair fiber swells, for example induced by 
chemical treatments, its complex structure changes and the cuticle 
layer is opened making the hair more porous. The cuticle provides 
protection  and  support  for  the  inner  spindle-shaped  “cortical 
cells,” which make up 80% of the hair mass. During hair growth, 
the  interdigitated  cells  are  organized  into  a  three-dimensional  
network  resembling  a  jigsaw  puzzle. This  construction  contrib-
utes to cell cohesion and hair fiber strength (Figure 29.1).

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

251

252

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics

5

4

3

2

2

1

1

(a)

1

(b)

Figure 29.1  (a) The fracture plane of a hair fiber clearly shows the composite of a fibrillar core with flattened cuticle cell coating (SEM ×1420). (b) Just emerg-
ing hair: 1, scalp surface; 2, cuticle pattern of hair fiber surface; 3, interior of the hair with cortical cells; 4, medullary cells; 5, cell membrane.

The active growth period of scalp hair is known as the anagen 
phase and is limited to 3–6 years. Then the hair disconnects from 
the papilla, a period known as the catagen phase, and enters a 
2-months resting phase, known as the telogen phase, and is sub-
sequently  lost  through  shedding.  Hair  shedding  and  renewal 
results in an average loss of up to 100–125 scalp hairs per day. 
With constant hair growth and no cutting, bulk hair may reach 
up to 1 m in length – depending on the genetically determined 
length of the hair growth cycle (for more hair growth details, the 
reader is referred to more detailed references [1,2]).

permanent wave hair relevant properties

Hair geometry
Usually,  scalp  hair  is  visualized  as  a  circular  fiber  but  cross- 
sections of individual hairs reveal variation in hair shape. The 
typical appearance of a person’s hair is determined by its special 
mixture of thick, thin, elliptical, kidney-shaped, and triangular 
cross-sectional  shapes  [3].  “Unmanageable”  hair  often  com-
prises a high percentage of irregular hair shapes. Irregular hair 
geometry, small diameter, and large hair diameter all create per-
manent waving challenges. Hair thickness has a large influence 
on the shape and hold of permanent wave curls as well [4].

Hair and water interaction
Although hair is not soluble in water, its interaction with water 
is of particular importance for permanent waving [2,6]. The hair 
surface is naturally hydrophobic, and permanent waving lotions 
contain  surfactants  for  enhanced  wetting,  the  first  step  in  the 
curling process. Under certain climatic conditions, hair adsorbs 
atmospheric water up to 30% of its own weight.

Although feeling dry at ambient temperature, hair still con-
tains 15% water. Excess water can be bound by capillary forces. 

Figure 29.2  The intact cuticle pattern of the hair fiber near the scalp (SEM 
×800).

While all hair fibers contain a cuticle, only thicker hair fibers 
with  a  diameter  greater  than  75  μm  contain  a  central  area  of 
hollow cells, the medulla (Figure 29.2). For animals, the medulla 
also enhances thermal insulation.

29. Permanent Hair Waving

253

The hair water content dictates its chemical reactivity as water 
widens  the  hydrogen-bond  network  of  protein  side  chains 
and acts as the vehicle for all permanent waving ingredients. 
Proper water balance is important for a successful permanent 
waving. Moreover, as water functions as a plasticizer for hair, 
permed hair loses curls more rapidly after washing or expos-
ing it to humid conditions, which can be measured in a curl 
retention test [7].

In  presence  of  water,  hair  displays  its  amphoteric  character. 
A  hair  is  at  the  “isoionic  point”  when  the  positive  and  nega-
tive charges of hair proteins are at an equilibrium. The natural 
“intrinsic point of neutrality” of hair is pH 6, which is the point 
of greatest stability of the hair structure. This intrinsic point of 
neutrality must be restored after permanent waving to maintain 
the structural integrity of the hair.

Closely related to hair fiber water hydrophilicity is its thermal 
behavior. Dry hair can withstand temperatures during heat styl-
ing  for  a  short  time  when  it  is  dry;  it  is  recommended  not  to 
exceed 200°C on virgin hair, and 180°C on chemically treated 
hair. In the wet state, however, hair can suffer structural damage 
at much lower temperatures, sometimes even below 100°C.

Hair aging
Hair fibers undergo longitudinal aging when exposed to external 
factors such as grooming or environmental influences [2,6,8]. The 
hair emerges at the scalp surface in a virgin state, but can suffer 
structural damage due to mechanical effects (e.g. friction during 
styling), temperature changes (e.g. heat styling), or UV-radiation. 
Free radicals can further induce structural damage at the surface 
and the cortex of the hair fiber via chemical oxidation.

The result of this range of insults is chemical and mechani-
cal wear of the hair. Some of the chemical changes are cleav-
age of the hair´s proteins, conversion of amino acids, oxida-
tion of cystine to cysteic acid, and decomposition of histidine. 
As a consequence, stability and elasticity of the hair, especially 
at its ends, decreases, flexibility is reduced, and hair fibers get 
more  rigid  and  brittle,  a  process  termed  “hair  weathering”. 
Unsightly split ends often occur and the hair tends to feel dry 
(Figure 29.3).

The  structural  differences  between  hair  roots  and  hair  ends 
require special attention in hair permanent waving because the 
ends of hair – due to their structural and chemical changes – react 
faster to the perming process and tend to break more easily.

Hair chemical structure
The protein content of a normal hair at ambient conditions is 
approximately 80 wt% [2,9]. Further components are approxi-
mately 5 wt% internal lipids; <1 wt% trace elements and metals; 
14  wt%  water.  Of  the  22  amino  acid  types  found  in  hair,  the 
most  important  is  “L-cystine”  (56-89-3),  a  sulfur-containing 
amino  acid  (Figure  29.5),  which  facilitates  covalent  cross-
linking  between  two  different  protein  chains.  Up  to  the  high 
amount of 9 mol% (750 μmol/g hair) [10] is typical for cornified 
tissues, such as hair, nail, hooves, horn, or cornea. Because of the 

Figure 29.3  The worn cuticle-free split end of hair (SEM ×800).

Figure 29.4  Coiled (alfa-helical) and amorphous molecules of hair proteins 
are cross-linked by disulfide bonds inside the cortical cells. Helical proteins 
are stabilized by hydrogen bonds.

covalent cross-links between amino acids of different proteins, 
hair  demonstrates  high  mechanical  strength  and  shear  resist-
ance, insolubility in water, but is also prone to swelling.

254

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics

O

O

OH

S

S

HO

H2

N

HN
2

Figure 29.5  Chemical formula of the amino acid “cystine”.

Two  types  of  proteins  constitute  the  hair  content:  low  and 
high sulfurous proteins. It is their typical arrangement that dif-
ferentiates hair proteins from proteins in the rest of the body:
•	 About  50%  of  the  proteins  are  present  in  an  unorganized, 
amorphous  form,  called  matrix  proteins,  which  feature  fre-
quent disulfide bridges.

•	 The rest of the proteins typically coil up to form a helical 
configuration  in  certain  sections,  to  constitute  micro 
fibrils, which are embedded in and anchored to the matrix 
proteins.
Figure  29.4  shows  the  network  of  hair  proteins,  with  the 
“disulfide bonds” marked in yellow, which gives hair properties 
similar to a fiber-reinforced plastic [11] or the elastic rubber of 
a tire. This special architecture is the source of hair’s elasticity.

Perming agents cleave disulfide bonds in these matrix proteins, 

causing the plasticization that is necessary for shaping hair.

However, an excess of a reducing agent is necessary to achieve 
this, as cross-linked sulfur proteins in the cuticle make the hair 
mantle hard to dissolve and penetrate.

Step 0: Activation

Additional support of the chemical network is provided by 
the acid and basic amino acids in hair protein which make up 
more than 40% of the hair´s substance. These form low energy 
bridges,  salt  linkages,  and  hydrogen  bonds,  which  are  also 
cleaved and reformed during the permanent waving process.

chemophysical principles of hair waving

Because  of  hair’s  great  elasticity  and  strong  resilient  forces,  it 
quickly resumes its original straight shape after being re-shaped 
without structural changes. Therefore it has to be softened and 
subsequently re-hardened chemically to maintain a conforma-
tion change. Especially with permanent waving, it is important 
to select a reversible reaction to allow repeated treatments with-
out hair destruction. The sulfur bridges of the amino acid cys-
tine, linking the proteins, are best suited [6,12,13].

The conditions for permanent waving to be well tolerated are:

•	 Low temperature (20–50°C), convection or contact heat;
•	 Short process time (5–30 minutes); and
•	 Mildness to the skin
A permanent wave occurs with two solutions:
 1.  Solution  1:  the  “perming  lotion”  comprising  a  thiol-com-
pound as reducing agent, designed to split about 20–40% of 
hair cystine bonds.

 2.  Solution  2:  a  “fixing  lotion”  usually  comprising  hydrogen 
peroxide as the oxidizing agent, designed to rebuild cystine 
bridges  between  proteins  at  new  sites  in  the  curled  hair 
shape (Figure 29.6).

R-SH

+

OH–

RS–

Thioglycolic acid

Alkali

Thiolate

Step 1: Reduction

Hair–SS–Keratin

+

2 RS–

2 Hair–S–

+

+

H2O 

Water

R–SS–R 

Thioglycolate

Reduced hair

Dithio-diglycolic acid

Step 2: Oxidation

2 Hair–SH

Reduced hair

+

H2O2

Hair–SS–Keratin

+

Hydrogen

peroxide 

Re-oxidized hair

Hair–SO3H 

Cysteic acid 

2 H2O

Water

Figure 29.6  Chemical reaction formulas 0–2.

29. Permanent Hair Waving

255

)a(

)b(

)c(

Figure 29.7  (a) Sulfur bridges between the proteins are closed. (b) Part of the sulfur bridges are being cleaved, proteins shift, take on the form. (c) Sulfur 
bridges are being rebuilt at a different site, neutralizer fixes the new shape.

)a(

)b(

)c(

Figure 29.8  (a) Shampooed hair is wound on curlers while still moist. Bending strain is applied to the protein chains. (b) Perm-wave lotion 1 is applied to 
the hair and cleaves part of the sulfur bridges by the reducing (thioglycolic acid) and the alkalizing agent. Hair is softened, proteins creep and adjust to the 
shape of the curler. (c) Neutralizing process: an acid neutralizer (peroxide) rebuilds the sulfur bridges at different sites and the new shape is permanent.

It is crucial to keep in mind that permanent waving is a two-
step procedure with the chemical reaction and physical effects 
running in parallel to achieve sufficient results (Figures 29.7 and 
29.8)  [14-16]:  reduction  of  disulfide-bonds,  softening  of  hair, 
lateral swelling and length contraction, stress development and 
protein flow, then re-oxidation of cystine bonds and de-swelling,  
and fixation of the new curly shape. Table 29.1 summarizes how 
hair reacts chemically and physically during each of the perma-
nent waving steps.

Usually only 85% of the cleaved disulfide is reformed during 
neutralization. Some hair cystine oxidizes to give cysteic acid 
(Figure 29.6, formula 2), which renders hair more hydrophilic, 
incompletely cross-linked, and more vulnerable to subsequent 
treatments. Therefore, permed hair gradually loses its curl and 

relaxes  to  a  straight  hair  conformation  again  (for  additional 
details, the reader is referred to Robbins [2] and Wickett and 
Savaides [17]).

perm products and types

Permanent  waving  products  contain  an  elaborate  mixture  of 
ingredients to make the reactions controllable and appropriate 
for different hair types, such as normal hair (N-type), sensitive 
hair (S-type), coarse hair (F-type), and coloured/bleached hair 
(C- or G-type).

Typical formulations for a one-component perm lotion and a 
fixing lotion are shown in Table 29.2. Each ingredient is listed by 

256

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics

Table 29.1  The	usual	steps	of	perming.

Steps in practical permanent waving

Hair reacts chemically/physically

  1.	 	Ask	and	consult	the	client	concerning	the	desired	hairstyle	(curly	head	

or	gentle	waves)

  2.	 	Assess	the	hair	quality	regarding	the	hair	thickness,	hair	and	scalp	

health,	split	ends

  3.	 	Shampoo	the	hair	with	a	mild	shampoo	to	remove	fat	and	residual	

cosmetics

  4.	 	Apply	a	conditioning	pre-product,	aqueous	or	oily

–

–

Water	swells	hair	by	15%	in	diameter,	about	2%	in	length	and	softens	it	at	
the	same	time

Hair	surface,	root	to	tip	differences	in	hair	structure	are	equalized,	lowers	
chemical	reactivity	of	hair	tips

  5.	 	Divide	hair	into	sections	with	comb	to	get	flat	and	small	hair	tresses

–

  6.	 	Take/use	endpapers,	wrap	them	around	the	weathered	hair	tips,	wind	

the	hair	tightly	on	curlers;	up	to	60	on	one	head	of	hair

Paper	helps	to	align	tip	end	hair	fiber,	protects	and	delays	instant	reaction.	
Moistened	hair	is	usually	wound	on	a	rigid	rod.	Bending	hair	around	the	
curler	produces	a	slight	tension	on	hair

  7.	 	Use	gloves,	protect	clients	face	with	cotton	plugs

Protection	for	hands	and	face/neck	skin	against	dripping	solution

  8.	 	Apply	the	permanent	waving	lotion	(about	75 mL),	avoid	dripping

  9.	 	Apply	heat	by	means	of	a	hairdryer,	heat	processor	or	use	ambient	

temperature

10.	 	Develop	process	time	of	permanent	waving	lotion	with	heat	for	5–20	

minutes

11.	 	Monitor	curl	development	unwinding	a	test	curler

12.	 	Rinse-off	thoroughly	the	permanent	waving	lotion	(with	water,	up	to	3	

minutes)

13.	 	Apply	a	neutralizing	liquid	or	foam.	Process	the	neutralizer	for	up	to	10	

minutes	followed	by	rinsing	and	unwinding	the	hair

14.	 	Apply	an	acid	conditioning	product	as	after	treatment

15.	 	Dry	and	style	the	hair	by	means	of	a	brush	or	setting	curlers	and	a	

hairdryer

Fluid	penetrates	into	the	hair,	starts	chemically	reducing	it	from	outside	in,	
softens	hair

Heat	accelerates:	(a)	penetration;	(b)	the	reduction	step;	(c)	move-ability	of	
hair	proteins

Reductive	cleavage	of	the	hair	cystine-network	proceeds,	hair	swells	up	
to	50%,	contracts	approx.	2%,	generates	internal	stress,	which	relaxes	by	
creeping	and	flowing	of	the	protein	mass
The	hair	substance	is	transferred	from	an	elastic	into	a	“plastic”	state	
adopting	the	shape	of	the	curler

Although	wet,	unwound	test	lock	shows	degree	of	wave/hair	deformation	
(measurable	by	an	electronic	test	curler),	cystine	side	chains	changed	their	
position	relative	to	each	other

Chemicals	are	diluted,	removed	from	hair,	reaction	stops,	but	physical	
swelling	and	shrinking	onto	the	curler	peaks	by	osmotic	forces

Re-oxidation	of	cysteine	to	cystine	by	hydrogen	peroxide	restores	hair’s	
protein	network	again,	fixing	new	cystine	cross-links	at	different	positions.	
Residual	cystine	oxidizes	to	cysteic	acid
De-swelling	and	hardening	occurs
Unwinding	the	hair	results	in	curl	relaxation

Restores	hairs	neutrality,	also	neutralizes	residual	perm	molecules.	The	
deformation	process	is	now	complete

Curl	relaxation	starts	in	wet	hair,	brushing,	combing	diminishes	curl	
retention.	Best:	air	drying

its International Nomenclature of Chemical Ingredients (INCI) 
name  as  it  would  be  found  on  the  packaging;  each  ingredient 
has  its  own  distinct  role  in  making  the  solution  active,  effica-
cious, pleasant to the hair, and odor free (for different formula-
tions see [18,19]).

which is active at neutral pH levels. Cysteine [21] and cysteam-
ine  (2-mercaptoethylamine)  are  typically  used  for  perming 
Asian  hair.  Thiolactic  acid,  with  less  reducing  power,  can  be 
used as co-reducing agent. Many home permanent waves con-
tain sulfites.

role of permanent waving product ingredients
This  section  reviews  the  individual  ingredients  important  in 
achieving a successful permanent waving solution [20].

Reducing agents
Reducing agents, most commonly ammonia or sodium salts of 
thioglycolic  acid  (TGA),  have  been  used  since  the  late  1950s 
to avoid skin and hair irritation while producing a lasting hair 
curl. Other alternatives are glycerol monothioglycolate (GMT), 

Alkalizing additives
Alkalizing  additives,  such  as  ammonia  or  monoethanol 
amine, are included in the formulation to achieve the appro-
priate  pH  at  which  the  reducing  agent  as  well  as  the  hair 
disulfide  is  activated,  normally  pH  7–9.5  (Figure  29.6,  step 
0).  Glycerol  monothioglycolate,  the  active  component  of 
an “acidic wave” works best at pH 7; TGA requires a pH of 
8.5–9. Hair damage is often related to products with higher 
pH levels.

Table 29.2  Ingredients	in	a	typical	perm	solution	1	and	neutralizer	solution	2.

Ingredient

Content % w/w

Action

29. Permanent Hair Waving

257

Ammonium	thioglycolate	70%

Ammonium	hydrogen	carbonate

Ammonia	25%

1,2	Propylene	glycol

Styrene/PVP	copolymer

Polyquaternium-6	[poly(dimethyl	diallyl	ammonium	
chloride)]

Perfume

Coceth-10	(alkyl	polyglycol	ether)

Water

pH

Neutralizer

Hydrogen	peroxide	50%

Ammonium	hydrogen	phosphate

Phosphoric	acid

EDTA

Perfume,	conditioning	agent,	surfactant,	water

pH

14

5

1

2

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.4

76.9

8.2–8.5

5

0.3

0.1

0.2

2.5–3.5

Waving	agent

Buffer

Alkalizing	agent

Carrier

Opacifier

Conditioning	agent

Fragrance

Solubilizing	agent

Basis

Oxidizing/fixing	agent

Stabilizing	agent

Stabilizing	agent

Complexing	agent

As	in	perm	solution

Buffer salts
Buffer  salts,  such  as  ammonium  (hydrogen)  carbonate,  affect 
the alkalinity. These ingredients buffer the working pH because 
with  hair  being  a  natural  ion  exchanger,  its  pH  is  typically 
reduced when it comes into contact with the perm solution.

Carriers
Carriers (e.g. urea, ethanol, or 2-propanol) enhance penetration 
of actives into hair and thus the effectiveness of the perm product.

Surfactants
Surfactants  are  included  to  ensure  wet-ability  of  the  origi-
nally  hydrophobic  hair  surface.  They  also  facilitate  foaming 
of perm solutions or neutralizers so they can be better applied 
avoiding  dripping.  In  permanent  wave  foams,  the  type  and 
concentration  of  surfactants  are  especially  critical  for  skin 
compatibility [13].

Conditioning ingredients
Conditioning ingredients such as polymers are often included 
in perm products to allow good manageability of the new shape 
and  mask  the  somewhat  harsh  tactile  properties  of  hair  after 
permanent waving.

Complexing agents
Complexing agents in thioglycolate-based perm lotions prevent 
intensive red–violet colouring with iron contamination. Com-
plexing  agents  are  added  to  the  neutralizing  lotions  to  avoid 
decomposition and boosting of hydrogen peroxide.

Opacifiers
Opacifiers, such as styrene-vinyl-pyrrolidone-copolymers, and 
coloring agents (e.g. azulene) give a pleasant appearance to the 
product but also help with the application of the product.

Thickeners
Thickeners  (e.g.  cellulose  derivatives  or  polyacrylate  salts)  are 
used to convert fluid preparations to gels which enhance accu-
racy during application as they prevent dripping from the hair 
and enable a more intensive perm treatment of the hair root area.

Solubilizing agents
Oily  fragrances  require  a  solubilizing  agent  for  better  integra-
tion into the product formulation.

Neutralizers
Neutralizer ingredients are in principle oxidizing agents, mostly 
hydrogen peroxide at concentrations of approximately 0.5–3% 
and acid at pH 2–4.5. Advantages of including  neutralizers in 
perming products are:
•	 Low solution concentrations;
•	 Excellent environmental compatibility; and
•	 Physiological safety.
Moreover, at acid pH hydrogen peroxide has no bleaching power 
for the natural hair colour, but specifically re-oxidizes hair cys-
teine to cystine and truly neutralizes the alkaline hair. However, 
metal salts can catalyze the rapid decay of hydrogen peroxide, 
which contains as stabilizer inorganic phosphates, phenacetin, 
or 4-acetaminophenol.

258

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics

As  alternatives,  bromate  salts  are  used.  The  concentration  is 
approximately 6–12 wt% at pH 6–8.5. Bromate-based neutralizers 
are preferentially used in Asia because they do not lighten dark 
hair. Less widely used are sodium perborate and percarbamid.

Different product types
The  majority  of  commercial  waving  and  neutralizing  lotions 
are aqueous solutions, but a few are designed as gels, creams, or 
aerosol permanent waves [17,18].
Preparations chiefly differ in:

•	 Mixture of reducing agent;
•	 Concentration of reducing agent;
•	 pH-value;
•	 Form of application.

Alkaline perms
Alkaline  perms  are  alkalinized  with  ammonia  to  a  pH  9–9.5. 
Because of the frequent association of these formulations with 
skin irritations, these products were largely replaced by mildly 
alkaline preparations at pH 7.5–9.

Acidic and neutral permanent wave
Acidic and neutral permanent wave preparations mostly contain 
glycerol  monothioglycolate  (GMTG)  as  reducing  agent.  This 
allows easy control of the processing behavior, leaves hair with 
a pleasant feel, and the danger of over-waving is reduced. It is 
often retained in hair for a sustained period of time, imparts an 
unpleasant smell, and causes sensitization of hairdressers’ hands 
even by touching hair that was processed weeks ago. Therefore, 
esters must not be used according to the technical directives for 
dangerous substances in hair salons [22].

Thermal waves
Thermal  waves  produce  heat  during  the  perming  procedure. 
Hydrogen  peroxide  reacts  with  excess  of  thioglycolic  acid  to 
release heat. Such warming is meant to generate a pleasant feel-
ing on the client’s head and to render the addition of external 
heat unnecessary.

Sulfite perms
Perming lotions containing ammonium sulfite are used in home 
applications for permanent waving. At neutral pH 7 and with-
out thiols, they work best on healthy, undamaged hair. However, 
stable “Bunte” salts are typically formed during their chemical 
reaction with hair which can lead to poor fixation, a rough hair 
feel and hair damage especially on tinted or fine hair.

An overview of product types is summarized in Lee et al. [23].

regulatory aspects of permanent hair waving
Permanent waving formulations are regulated by different leg-
islations  in  a  variety  of  regions  and  countries  [20].  For  exam-
ple, the EC Cosmetics Directive, Annex III, Part 1 [24], restricts 
the  pH  of  permanent  wave  preparations  with  thioglycolic 
acid, its salts and esters to pH 7–9.5, and for the acid and salts,  

pH 6–9.5 for esters. The maximum concentration calculated as 
thioglycolic acid is 8 wt% ready for use in home applications and 
11 wt% for professional use. A special warning label is required 
and hydrogen peroxide concentrations are limited to 12% [24].
In  the  USA,  the  Cosmetic  Ingredient  Review  (CIR)  expert 
panel considers 15.4 wt% maximum of thioglycolic acid as safe 
in  permanent  wave  products.  The  CIR  recommendations  are 
respected by the manufacturers.

In  Japan,  permanent  wave  products  are  classified  as  quasi-
drugs. Thioglycolic acid and its salts are permitted, as is cyste-
ine, but concentration and pH are restricted by the regulatory 
bodies, whereas these don´t permit thioglycolic esters

perming practice – how to achieve  
a perfect curl

The question of perming safety is not only a function of prod-
uct composition, but also depends on the use conditions [6,25]. 
Therefore,  each  package  of  perms  on  the  market  contains  a 
list of instructions for the hairdresser or consumer. Table 29.2 
summarizes the recommended steps and how hair answers (i.e. 
reacts), chemically and physically.

Any  deviations  from  this  course  of  action  will  be  specified 
in the instructions for use. The correct execution of each step 
should produce the desired result, a curl lasting up to 3 months, 
a well-preserved hair structure, and an easy styling of the hair 
assembly (Figure 29.9).

In salons where hairdressers use long-lasting perms, an appro-
priate permanent wave must be selected to achieve the best result. 
The  hair  thickness  and  quality  must  be  assessed  to  determine 
if the hair is healthy or damaged. If the hair feels rough, is of a 
lighter colour, or possesses split ends, it may have a porous struc-
ture produced by previous weathering, bleaching, colouring, or 
permanent  waving. This  increased  porosity  allows  the  perming 
lotion  to  react  faster.  Damaged  hair  requires  bigger  curlers,  a 
reduced perm strength, and shortened processing time.

Heat  from  a  drying  hood  (45°C)  accelerates  the  chemical 
reaction, but should not be used for people with sensitive scalp 
skin as it might increase the risk of skin irritations.

To ensure that the desired waving result has been achieved, 
a test curl should be performed. A test curl is loosely unwound 
from a curler after several minutes to determine the degree of 
curl achieved and whether to extend the processing time.

After  thoroughly  rinsing  off  the  perming  lotion,  complete 
hair neutralization is strongly advised as the second fundamen-
tal step in perming. Three to ten minutes are recommended to 
obtain a lasting perm, to re-oxidize the hair, and to neutralize 
the alkalinity of the reducing step. Hair only gains its physical 
strength and integrity back after thorough neutralization.

Application of an acidic conditioning lotion as an after-treat-
ment, removes residual peroxide, restores the hair internal pH 
to neutrality, helps to stabilize the hold of the curl, and makes it 
less prone to future damage.

29. Permanent Hair Waving

259

(a)

(b)

Figure 29.9  Hair, properly wound, fixed on rollers, and wetted by the perming lotion (a) delivers perfect locks (b).

safety of and adverse reactions  
to perm products

Safety requirements from consumer expectations are adequately 
summarized by the EU Cosmetics Directive: “A cosmetic prod-
uct put on the market within the Community must not cause 
damage to human health when applied under normal or reason-
ably foreseeable conditions of use” [24].

Therefore, as permanent wave preparations contain reactive 
chemicals, these have to pass a complete toxicological charac-
terization. Essentially, the potential for:
•	 acute systemic toxicity;
•	 local compatibility and irritation;
•	 sensitizing potential, allergenicity;
•	 mutagenicity;
•	 tumorigenicity;
•	 teratogenicity; and
•	 percutaneous absorption.
Based  on  experience  with  the  safety  of  waving  products  over 
many years and regularly updated statistics published by intox-
ication  advisory  centers,  manufacturers  today  have  a  solid 
foundation of knowledge about perming formulations. Statis-
tics of adverse reactions from cosmetic products sold between 
1976 and 2004 revealed only 1.1 undesired effects per 1 million 
packages  sold  [26].  This  confirms  that  cosmetic  products  are 
very  safe  (for  more  detailed  information  about  toxicological 
test  methods  and  safety  assessment  processes  see  references 
[20,27,28]).

However,  even  though  a  perm  product  has  been  approved 
as safe by legal authorities, occasional hair or skin damage can 
occur from incorrect use and application:

•	 consumers apply a home wave without reading/understand-

ing instructions; or

•	 new hairdressers in salons are untrained and less skilful.
The first sign of a failure in permanent waving is a lack or excess 
of  curliness.  This  is  typically  not  only  caused  by  the  wrong 
choice  of  product,  but  also  excessive  development  time,  and 
temperature,  and  especially  incomplete  rinsing  of  the  active 
substances  and  shampoo  components  may  lead  to  undesired 
results. Surfactant residues, residual reducing and/or oxidizing 
agents left in the hair can encourage irreversible side reactions 
such as incomplete re-oxidation and cysteic acid formation.

Moreover,  the  stylist  or  the  client  may  try  to  “repair”  the 
unexpected result by repetition of the permanent waving pro-
cess, which is not recommended as multiple treatments, as well 
as  the  combination  of  perming  and  bleaching  or  colouring  in 
the same session lead to heavily damaged hair. Electron micros-
copy reveals residual softening; even severe damage and com-
plete removal of the hair surface (Figures 29.10 and 29.11).

Other instrumental methods can further detect the degree of 
damage. These include hair tensile testing, elasticity, curl hold, 
swelling behavior, and static charging [2,20]. Chemical damage 
of  hair  may  also  be  assessed  by  analyzing  dissolved  hair  pro-
teins [29,30] and hair lipids [30]. Residual presence of cystine 
and  cysteic  acid  are  signs  of  a  weakened  hair  structure  [30].  
Table 29.3 lists examples for hair and skin symptoms indicating 
mistakes during a perm treatment [25,31–34]).

Although ammonium thioglycolate has been reported to have 
a  low  sensitization  potential,  occasionally  sensitization,  skin 
irritation, contact dermatitis [33,34], or seborrhea might occur 
[32].  If  itching,  burning,  and  redness  occur,  they  are  typically 
confined  to  the  neck  and  scalp  margins  after  prolonged  con-

260

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics

Figure  29.10  The  curtain-like  structure  of  a  hair  surface  indicates  heavy 
perming damage.

Table 29.3  Symptoms	of	hair/skin	damage	by	perm	products.

Symptom

How it happened

Hair	loss	(rarely)

Telogen	hair	effluvium
Temporary	contact	allergic	reaction

Hair breakage

False	hair	quality	diagnosis

Near	root

In	hair	length

Near	tip	ends

Hair modification 
(consumer 
complaints)

Unwanted	kinky	
curls

Perm	choice	too	strong	for	fine	or	pre-
damaged/	bleached	hair
Stress	on	root	hair	by	tight	winding	or	rubber	
band
Winding	against	hair	growth	direction

Hair	growth	with	thinning	diameters
Winding	on	curlers	with	“	fish	hooks”
Incomplete	neutralization

Forgot	pre-treatment	with	equalizer
Processing	without	wrap	end	paper	protection
Excess	perm	solution	stored	by	hair	tips

Permanent	waving	power	of	product	too	high
Curler	thickness	too	thin
Processing	time	with	heat	too	long

Limp	hair/curls	
without	springiness

Loose	winding,	impaired	protein	creep
Time	set	incorrectly,	application	levels	too	low,

Wet	hair	feels	
plastified,	spongy,	
extensible

Over-processed	by	extended	application
Loss	of	keratin	elasticity
Increased	hydrophilicity
Neutralization	too	short

Dry	hair	feels	rough,	
brittle,	poor	comb-
ability,	“matting”,	is	
dull,	ready	to	break

Intermediate	rinsing	too	short
Increased	hair	surface	friction	by	shrunken	
cuticle	cells
Loss	of	hair	lipids	and	proteins

Figure 29.11  A bleach applied immediately after a perming treatment chips 
off the cuticle as a whole (SEM ×700).

Highlighted	natural	
colour	or	tint

Dissolution	of	natural	pigment/tint
Excess	perm	conditions

tact with perm solution [31]; however, high levels of alkalinity  
and heat [33,34] may also precipitate irritation. Scalp skin dam-
age seldom occurs. Scalp skin, which contains keratin proteins 
like  hair,  is  less  reactive  to  reduction  by  thioglycolate.  This 
contributes  to  a  lower  swelling  response  of  the  skin  than  hair 
(22% vs. 38%) and the lower cystine content and hydrophobic 
nature of skin vs. more cystine and hydrophilicity in hair [35]. 
The skin is more susceptible to surfactants, however, causing the 
hairdresser’s hands to be affected by an allergy to perms. High 
exposure to surfactants for example by frequently shampooing 
clients´ hair, can lead to the skin of the hairdressers hands to be 
softened and displaying a reduced barrier function. In this case, 
monothio glycolate  esters  found  in  acid  waves  may  cause  skin 
reactions [31].

Permanent  hair  waving  is  a  sophisticated  process  that  can 
achieve a powerful transformation of the appearance of a per-
son with longer hair. Due to the complexity of the use of perm-
ing products, considerable experience and care is needed during 
and after the application process, to ensure a desirable outcome 
of the treatment as well the personal safety.

Too	much	heat	(heat	rollers,	hood	defect)

Skin	swelling	during	extensive	pre-wash

Soaked	cotton	pads	for	face	protection	not	
removed

Skin damage

Redness

Pustules

Irritant	skin

references

1  Jollès P, Zahn H, Höcker H, eds. (1997) Formation and Structure of 

Human Hair. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag.

2  Robbins  CR.  (2012)  Chemical  and  Physical  Behaviour  of  Human 

Hair, 5th edn. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.

3  Schwan-Jonczyk  A,  Schmidt  CU.  (2007)  Hair  geometry  changes 
during lifespan. Proceedings of the 15th International Hair Science 
Symposium, HAIRS 07, Banz.

4  Robbins CR. (1983) Load elongation of single hair fiber coils. J Soc 

Cosmet Chem 34, 227–39.

5  Wolfram  L,  Dika  E,  Maibach  HI  Hair  anthropology,  or  Swift  JA. 
The transverse dimensions of human head hair. (2007) In: Berard-
escaE, LevequeJL, MaibachHI, eds. Ethnic Skin and Hair. New York: 
Informa Healthcare.

29. Permanent Hair Waving

261

6  Schwan-Jonczyk  A,  Arlt  T,  Maresch  G,  Schonert  D.  (2003)  Curls, 

Curls, Curls. Darmstadt: Wella AG (inhouse publication).

7  Franbourg A, et al. (2005) Evaluation of product efficacy. In: Bouil-
lonC,  WilkinsonJ,  eds.  The  Science  of  Hair  Care.  Boca  Raton,  FL: 
CRC Press, pp. 351–76.

21  Shansky  A.  (2008)  Antichaotropic  salts  for  stabilizing  cysteine 
in perm solutions. In: Koslowsky AC, Allured J, eds. Hair Care: 
From  Physiology  to  Formulation.  Carol  Stream,  IL:  Allured,  pp. 
341–6.

22  Technische  Regeln  für  Gefahrstoffe,  Friseurhandwerk  TRGS530 

8  Swift JA. (1997) Fundamentals of Human Hair Science. Weymouth 

(2007) GMBL, Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales.

UK: Micelle Press.

23  Lee AE, Bozza JB, Huff S, Mettric R. (1988) Permanent waves: an 

9  Franbourg  A,  Leroy  F.  (2005)  Hair  structure  and  physicochemi-
cal properties. In: Bouillon C, Wilkinson J, eds. The Science of Hair 
Care. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 351–76.

10  Marshall RC. (1986) Nail, claw, hoof and horn keratin. In: Bereiter-
Hahn J, Matoltsy AG, Richards KS, eds. Biology of the Integument II. 
Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 722–38.

overview. Cosmet Toiletr 103, 37–56.

24  EU Council Directive of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws 
of the Member States relating to cosmetic products (76/768/EEC).
25  Meisterburg M, Riehl U, et al. (2007) Friseurwissen (0Hairdresser’s 
knowledge).  SchmidtW,  ed.  Troisdorf,  Germany:  Bildungsverlag 
EINS. Available at www.bildungsverlag1.de

11  Zahn H. (1977) Wool as a biological composite structure. Lenzinger 

26  IKW information. (2008) Undesireable effects of cosmetics. Avail-

Ber 42, 19–34.

able at www.ikw.org.

12  Umprecht JG, Patel K, Bono KP. (1977) Effectiveness of reduction 
and oxidation in acid and alkaline permanent waving. J Soc Cosmet 
Chem 28, 717–32.

13  Lang  G, Schwan-Jonczyk  A.  (2004) Haarverformungsmittel (Hair 
waving  preparations).  In:  Umbach  W,  ed.  Kosmetik  und  Hygiene, 
3rd edn. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag, pp. 264–78.

14  Schwan  A, Zang  R. (1993) Method and apparatus for the shaping treatment 
of hair wound on to rollers, including human hair. Wella AG EP 0321939B1.
15  Borish ET. (1997) Hair waving. In: JohnsonD, ed. Hair and Hair Care, 
Cosmetic Science and Technology, Vol. 17. Marcel Dekker, pp. 167–90.
16  Garcia ML, Nadgorny EM, Wolfram LJ. (1990) Letter to the Editor: 
Physicochemical changes in hair during permanent waving. J Soc 
Cosmet Chem 41, 149–53.

17  Wickett R, Savaides A. (1993) Permanent waving of hair. In: Knowl-
ton J, Pearce S, eds. Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology, 
1st edn. Oxford: Elsevier Science, pp. 511–34.

18  Shipp JJ. (1996) Hair care products. In: Williams DF, Schmitt WH, 
eds. Chemistry and Technology of the Cosmetics and Toiletries Indus-
try, 2nd edn. Chapman & Hall.

19  Dallal JA. (2000) Permanent waving, hair straightening and depila-
tories.  In:  Rieger  MM,  ed.  Harry’s  Cosmeticology,  8th  edn.  New 
York: Chemical Publishing, Chapter 32.

20  Clausen T, Schwan-Jonczyk A, Lang G, Clausen T, Liebscher KD, 
et al. (2006) Hair preparations. In: Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Indus-
trial Chemistry, 7th edn, Vol. A 12, Weinheim: Wiley, pp. 571.

27  Draelos ZD. (2000) Safety and performance. In: Rieger  MM, ed. Harry’s 
Cosmeticology, 8th edn. New York: Chemical Publishing, Chapter 34.
28  Hourseau C, Cottin M, Baverel M, Meurice P, Riboulet-Delmas G. 
(2005)  Hair  product  safety.  In:  Bouillon  C,  Wilkinson  J,  eds.  The 
Science of Hair Care. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 351–76.

29  Han M, Chun J, Lee J, Chung C. (2008) Effects of perms on changes 
of  protein  and  physicomorphological  properties  in  human  hair.  
J Soc Cosmet Chem 59, 203–15.

30  Hilterhaus-Bong  S,  Zahn  H.  (1989)  Protein  and  lipid  chemical 
aspects of permanent waving treatments. Int J Cosmet Sci 11, 164–
74, 221–34.

31  Wilkinson JD, Shaw S. (2005) Adverse reactions to hair products. 
In:  BoullionC,  WilkinsonJ,  eds.  The  Science  of  Hair  Care.  Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, p. 521.

32  Bergfeld WF. (1981) Side effects of hair products on the scalp and 
hair. In: Orfanos CE, Montagna W, Stüttgen G, eds. Hair Research. 
Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 507–12.

33  Ishihara M. (1981) Some skin problems due to hair preparations. In: 
Orfanos CE, Montagna W, Stüttgen G, eds. Hair Research. Berlin:
 Springer Verlag, pp. 536–42.

34  Orfanos CE, Sterry W, Leventer T. (1979) Hair and hair cosmetic 
treatments. In: Orfanos CE, ed. Hair and Hair Diseases. Stuttgart: 
G. Fischer Verlag, pp. 853–85.

35  Robbins CR, Fernee KM. (1983) Some observations on the swell-
ing of human epidermal membrane. J Soc Cosmet Chem 34, 21–34.

chapter 30
hair straightening

Harold Bryant, Felicia Dixon, Angela Ellington, and Crystal Porter
L’Oréal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research, Chicago, IL, USA 

Basic concepts

•	 Hair	is	straightened	to	improve	manageability	and	provide	style	versatility.
•	 To	straighten	hair,	an	alteration	of	the	cortex	must	occur.
•	 To	achieve	temporary	straightening	–	a	lower	energy	process	–	hydrogen	bonds	and	salt	linkages	are	altered	while	permanent	

straightening	is	achieved	through	the	modification	of	covalent	bonds,	which	requires	more	energy.

•	 Permanent	hair	straightening	can	be	accomplished	with	ammonium	thioglycolate,	sulfites,	and	hydroxide.

introduction

The desire for straight hair was once attributed to a “universal” 
vision of beauty and social status associated with straight hair; 
however,  recent  information  links  this  style  preference  to 
improved manageability and style versatility. In order to achieve 
the  straight  look,  it  is  necessary  to  transform  the  natural  hair 
configuration, which has been linked to the shape of the follicle. 
Bernard et al. [1,2] found that the asymmetric protein expression 
in  curved  follicles  was  associated  with  the  formation  of  curly 
hair. At this time, it is not possible to straighten hair by changing 
the shape of the follicle. However, it is possible to straighten hair 
based on its chemical composition. For mature hair, the compo-
sition is generally the same and consists of roughly 90% protein 
with smaller quantities of water, lipids, and minerals but does 
not vary by degree of curl, despite differences that exist in the 
early stages of hair production. To understand how hair can be 
transformed, it is important to know the different components 
of hair. Hair is made-up of three macro structures including the 
cuticle, cortex, and medulla, the latter being of little significance. 
The  major  morphologic  part  of  the  hair  is  the  cortex,  which  
is  made  up  of  highly  organized  α-helical  proteins  packed  in 
a  cystine-rich  matrix.  To  straighten  hair,  an  alteration  of  the  
cortex must occur.

There are three types of bonds in hair: hydrogen, electro-
static salt linkages, and covalent, each consecutively requir-
ing  more  energy  to  break.  Based  on  the  bonds  that  can  be 
affected, there are two categories of straightening: temporary 
and permanent. To achieve temporary straightening, a lower 
energy  process  is  required  involving  alteration  of  hydrogen 

bonds  and  salt  linkages  while  permanent  straightening  is 
achieved through the modification of covalent bonds, which 
requires  more  energy.  Thermal  appliances  can  be  used  to 
disrupt  and  rearrange  the  weaker  hydrogen  bonds  and  salt 
linkages  required  for  temporary  straightening.  Depending 
on the approach, the results can last from a few days to sev-
eral months. However, permanent straightening is obtained 
through a chemical process that alters the protein structure 
by  cleaving  and  reforming  covalent  bonds,  preventing  the 
hair  from  returning  to  its  natural  curly  state  until  it  grows 
out from the scalp.

The following are usually considered when choosing the type 
of hair straightening process or treatment: degree of curl, degree 
of desired straightness, point of service, convenience, environ-
mental conditions, and the desired frequency of straightening. 
All of these are important; however, the degree of curl in hair 
may  be  the  most  influential  because  it  impacts  other  desired 
attributes.  It  is  often  subjectively  described  and  ranges  from 
various degrees of wavy to tightly curled. These descriptors are 
relative and can be confusing because they often overlap. Thus, 
the L’Oréal Curl Classification was recently developed to quan-
titatively  describe  the  degree  of  curl  in  hair  (Figure  30.1)  [3]. 
This classification used hair from around the world and identi-
fied eight distinct curl types, where the degree of curl increases 
directly  with  number.  People  with  curl  types  I–IV  often  have 
concerns about hair frizz and volume while higher curl types are 
more concerned about manageability. Thermal techniques can 
be used to achieve straight hair for all curl types but, typically, 
curl types V and above are difficult to straighten permanently 
without the use of hydroxide-based systems.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

262

30. Hair Straightening

263

I 

II 

III

IV

V

VI 

VII

VIII

Figure 30.1  Hair classification types to differentiate the degree of curl in hair.

Hair straightening appliances and chemicals are centuries old; 
however,  instrument  designs  and  formulations  have  evolved  to 
improve effectiveness while limiting the negative attributes. New 
materials are used for the heated surface of flat irons and prod-
uct formulas have been modified and developed to protect hair 
and scalp and aid in the ease of application. In some markets, the 
combination  of  heat  and  chemicals  is  often  used.  This  chapter 
briefly reviews the most common straightening practices, includ-
ing a description of the procedures and perceived advantages and 
disadvantages.

thermal processing

The use of thermal appliances dates back to the Egyptian period 
and is still considered to be a necessity to most women in today’s 
world. In the Egyptian period, hot metal was used to straighten 
hair. A less aggressive method was popularized in the late 1800s 
with the invention of the blow-dryer; the handheld version for 
home  use  became  available  in  the  1920s.  This  increased  the 
ability for women with curl types I–IV to have a variety of tem-
porary and permanent styles (hot waving).

Because curl types V–VIII were inherently more resistant to 
reconfiguration,  there  was  a  specific  need  to  straighten  these 

hair types. This was achieved with the popularization of the hot 
comb  combined  with  pressing  oil,  attributed  to  Madame  C.J. 
Walker  in  the  early  1900s. The  hot  comb,  still  in  use  today,  is 
a metal comb heated to temperatures reaching 450°F. Whether 
utilizing a hot comb, professional tongs heated in a Marcel oven, 
or  one  of  the  electronic  devices  such  as  a  blow-dryer,  curling 
iron, or flat iron, the process involves using heat and mechanical 
stress. These common thermal appliances represent an alterna-
tive way for people with naturally curly hair to achieve manage-
ability and straight hair styles.

The combination of heat and mechanical stress, in the form of 
combing or brushing while blow-drying and smoothing with the 
other devices, straightens hair by rearranging hydrogen bonds. 
Once  straightened,  the  new  configuration  of  the  hair  is  only 
temporary and will revert back to its natural state after exposure 
to moisture from any source such as environmental conditions 
and perspiration. Temperatures of thermal appliances typically 
range from 150–232°C (302–450°F). While thermal processing 
is considered temporary in terms of styling, it can have a perma-
nent effect on hair. For example, the proteins in hair can start to 
denature at high temperatures. Protein denaturation is a process 
by which proteins are irreversibly altered by an external stimu-
lus, and for hair can result in decreased fiber integrity. The dena-
turation temperature is 235–250°C (455–482°F) and 155–160°C 

264

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

(311–320°F) for dry and wet hair, respectively [4–6]. The upper 
temperature limits for some of the appliances exceeds the dena-
turation temperature for wet and dry hair so care must be taken 
to avoid repeated applications and overheating.

Of all heat appliances currently available to straighten hair, 
the flat iron is rapidly becoming the most popular; therefore, 
it  is  the  focus  of  technologic  advancements.  Important  attri-
butes  of  a  good  flat  iron  are  the  ability  to  provide  even  heat 
and maintain a consistent temperature. Recent improvements 
in  temperature  control  promote  thermal  stability  and  coat-
ings, including ceramic and titanium, provide durability and 
reduced friction. Reduced friction is critical to maintaining a 
smooth cuticle surface and reducing breakage during thermal 
processing. Other advances in materials include the incorpo-
ration  of  pure  ceramic  heating  elements  and  minerals  (tour-
maline)  that  allow  manufacturers  to  make  claims  about  the 
positive effects of ions and far infrared radiation on the final 
state of the hair.

The  product  offerings  associated  with  the  use  of  thermal 
appliances  typically  contain  hydrocarbon-based  ingredients 
(e.g.  petrolatum  and  mineral  oil)  and  polymers  (e.g.  silicone-
derived,  cationic,  and  non-ionic)  to  condition,  protect,  and 
accommodate  styling  preferences.  Because  blow-drying  typi-
cally starts in the wet state when hair is vulnerable to damage, 
conditioning  polymers  (e.g.  polyquaternium  10)  that  improve 
wet  combing  by  reducing  frictional  forces  are  typically  used. 
Prior to heat application, products that contain ingredients such 
as sugars and silicones can be applied. Sugars help to increase 
thermal integrity while silicones protect the hair by acting as a 
thermal barrier. Silicones also can function as lightweight films 
whereas hydrocarbons are often used when a heavier coating is 
desired for style preferences.

reducing agents

Reducing treatments are traditionally known to curl hair (hot 
and cold permanent waving); however, they can also be used to 
straighten hair. The chemistry involves a two-step process where 
the disulfide bonds in hair keratin are cleaved in the first (reduc-
ing) step followed by oxidization in the second step to form new 
disulfide bonds (Scheme 30.1). The difference between straight-
ening and waving using reducing agents is the configuration of 
hair prior to oxidation and the form of the product during the 
reducing step. The reducing product for waving the hair is usu-
ally a liquid and the hair is curled using rollers before oxidizing. 
For straightening, the product is usually in the form of a thick 
cream so that the viscosity of the product can assist in holding 
hair fibers in a straightened configuration during manipulation. 
The  most  commonly  used  reducing  agents  in  this  process  are 
ammonium thioglycolate (thiols) and sulfite.

ammonium thioglycolate
Thioglycolate  straighteners come  in  several  product strengths. 
Treatment procedures and strength should be based on the hair 
attributes  according  to  product  recommendations.  For  curl 
types V–VIII, these products usually leave the hair with resid-
ual curl so the result can be disappointing if a straight style is 
desired. In addition, the hair can feel dry as a result of the treat-
ment; thus, products that contain glycerin are used to provide 
moisture. Thioglycolate straighteners can be used on hair that 
has been previously colored or permed; however, it is not rec-
ommended for bleached or relaxed hair.

In addition to traditional thiol straighteners, a new technique 
is  becoming  popular  that  includes  the  incorporation  of  heat 
with  thiol-based  cream  products.  These  treatments  are  used 

Reduction step

CO

CO

CO

CH CH2

S

S

CH2

CH

+ 2 R

SH

2 HS

CH2

CH

+

R

S

S

R

NH

NH

NH

Oxidation step

CO

CO

CO

2

HS

CH2

CH

+

1/2O2

CH CH2

S

S

CH2

CH

+

H2O

NH

NH

NH

Scheme 30.1   

30. Hair Straightening

265

Table 30.1  Common	names	for	thiol-based	straighteners	that	use	heat.

Culture that introduced 
the technique

Japanese/Filipino

Brazilian

Popular thiol-based treatments

Hair	rebonding
Thermal	reconditioning	and	restructuring
Ion	retexturizing
Bio	ionic	system
Japanese	hair	restructuring
Straightening	and	reconditioning
Japanese	straightening	perm

Chocolate,	strawberry,	kelp,	milk,	sugar,	
	 passion,	mint,	gold,	orchid,	French,	
gumbo,	etc.	treatment	(or	brushing)
Brazilian	keratin	treatments	(may	contain	
	 up	to	2%	formaldehyde)

Note:	To	be	comprehensive,	it	is	cautiously	noted	that	products	containing	or	that	are	
altered	with	formaldehyde	(formol)	at	higher	than	approved	levels	(0.2%	as	an	antimi-
crobial)	are	sometimes	used	to	straighten	hair.	However,	formaldehyde	is	classified	as	a	
probable	human	carcinogen	by	the	Environmental	Protection	Agency	and	should	not	be	
used	to	straighten	hair.

Even though sulfite straighteners have been around for decades, 
they are less common than hydroxide relaxers because they tend 
to result in less effective straightening of highly curled hair (types 
VI–VIII). However, they are believed to be less irritating to the 
scalp. The decrease in straightening efficacy may be related back 
to the reactivity of the disulfide bonds, which depends on the pH 
of the active solution. The maximum reactivity is reached at pH 
4–6, but sulfites are not stable at such low pH conditions [8,9]. 
Because of this, commercial products generally range in pH from 
6.5 to 7.5. At pH 7, only about 15% of the cystine residues can be 
reduced [10]. The first step of the reaction mechanism involves 
a reduction of the cystine via a nucleophilic reaction similar to 
thioglycolate, with the exception of the formation of Bunte salt 
(Scheme  30.2).  To  lock  the  hair  into  the  desired  conformation, 
a neutralizing solution is used which typically contains sodium 
carbonate  or  bicarbonate.  The  application  procedure  is  similar 
to that of a thioglycolate straightener except no oxidant is used, 
resulting in poor or modest straightening.

to permanently straighten and/or reduce volume in curl types 
I–V. They are commonly used on Asian and Brazilian hair and 
go by several names that are listed in Table 30.1. Even though 
there are several names, they all use similar processes to achieve 
hair characteristics that consumers describe as straight, soft, and 
shiny. The main point of differentiation between this new treat-
ment and the traditional straightening method is the application 
of heat prior to the oxidation step for the Asian and Brazilian 
treatments. Details about the specific procedure can be found in 
the appendix. This straightening technique is not recommended 
for natural hair that is higher than curl type V, particularly hair 
from  people  of  African  descent  because  it  is  inherently  more 
fragile than other hair [7].

After a period of time, the processes described above will need 
to be repeated to the new hair growth because of its natural con-
figuration. The treatment should only be performed on the new 
growth, referred to as a “touch-up,” to minimize overlapping of 
treatments which may result in overprocessed hair. It is recom-
mended  that  the  time  between  treatments  is  maximized,  with 
a minimum of 6 weeks, depending on the rate of hair growth.

sulfite
Sulfites are an additional class of reducing agents that can be used 
for  hot  waving  or  straightening  depending  on  the  procedure. 

hydroxide straighteners

According  to  legend,  Garrett  A.  Morgan  was  the  first  person  to 
stumble  upon  a  chemical  to  permanently  straighten  hair  in  the 
early 1900s [11]. While experimenting with substances to reduce 
the heat of friction during sewing, he wiped his hands on a cloth 
that was made of curly pony fur. Later, he found that the fur had 
been  straightened.  Following  trials  on  different  types  of  hair, 
including his own, he started selling the G.A. Morgan Hair Refining 
Cream. To this day, the identity of this substance is a mystery, but 
the first known composition for chemically straightening hair was 
formulated in household kitchens in the 1930s. This contained a 
chemical mixture of potato starch, lard, egg, and sodium or potas-
sium hydroxide. Because of its corrosive nature, it was advised to 
protect or base the scalp with petrolatum before treatment. The use 
of this concoction led to the development of relaxers.

The  first  commercially  available  relaxer,  based  on  sodium 
hydroxide  (lye),  was  introduced  in  the  1950s  by  Johnson  Prod-
ucts. Even though the relaxer formula included petrolatum, basing 
the scalp was still a requirement to minimize scalp irritation. The 
relaxer technology continued to improve in the early to mid 1960s 
with the invention of the no-base relaxer. This version incorporated 
higher percentages of petrolatum and mineral oil in the formula 
and decreased the amount of sodium hydroxide to make it less irri-
tating, thus it claimed to eliminate the need to base the scalp.

CO

CO

CO

CO

CH CH2

S

S

CH2

CH

2–
+ SO3

CH CH2

S

–
SO3

+

–S

CH2

CH

NH

NH

Scheme  30.2 

NH

Bunte salt

NH

266

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

In  the  late  1970s,  the  first  no-lye  relaxer  was  marketed  that 
significantly reduced the amount of irritation during treatment 
[12].  The  technology  uses  a  two-part  system  where  a  calcium 
hydroxide  cream  is  mixed  with  a  guanidine  carbonate  liquid 
activator to produce guanidine hydroxide.

Several other relaxer versions were introduced over time that 
improved  the  product  attributes,  the  cosmetic  properties,  and 
integrity of the hair. This was achieved through the addition of 
conditioning agents such as cationic polymers and by incorpo-
rating  various  alkali  metal  hydroxides  in  both  product  forms, 
mix  or  no-mix  [13,14].  The  most  commonly  used  hydroxides 
are sodium, guanidine, lithium, and potassium (see Table 30.2 
for definitions of key terms).

chemistry of relaxing
Amino acid analysis of relaxed hair hydrolysates indicates lan-
thionine is the primary product of the reaction. The formation 
of lanthionine can occur via two pathways. The first is through 
a  binuclear  nucleophilic  substitution  reaction  [10].  The  sec-
ond  is  beta-elimination  that  is  initiated  by  abstraction  of  the 
hydrogen beta to the disulfide (Scheme 30.3) [15]. This results 
in the formation of dehydroalanine, cysteinate ion, and sulfur. 
Dehydroalanine is a highly reactive intermediate that continues 
to react with cysteine and lysine moieties in hair to form lan-
thionine  and  lysinoalanine,  respectively.  It  can  also  react  with 
ammonia to form beta-aminoalanine. The new thioether bonds 
(lanthionine) are stable in the presence of reducing agents, such 
as thioglycolate or sulfite, compared to cystine. This is evidenced 
by the decrease in solubility of hair protein and the inability to 
permanently curl relaxed hair.

While lanthionization is popularly believed to be the cause of 
permanent straightening of curly hair, Wong et al. [16] believe 
that it is not the critical step in hair straightening. They propose 
that the permanent straightening depends on supercontraction 
of  the  fiber.  They  report  that  fiber  supercontraction  is  what 
“locks” the fiber into the straight configuration and the forma-
tion of lanthionine is a by-product rather than a requirement.

Table 30.2  Vocabulary	list	of	select	terms	related	to	straightening	curly	hair.

Relaxer

Lye	relaxer

No-lye	relaxer

No-base	relaxer

Texturizer

Perm

Hydroxide	technology	used	to	permanently	
straighten	curly	hair.	It	is	sometimes	mistakenly	
referred	to	as	a	“perm”

Technology	that	commonly	utilizes	sodium	
hydroxide	as	the	active	ingredient

Non-sodium	hydroxide-based	system	that	
includes	but	is	not	limited	to	guanidine	and	
lithium	hydroxides.	Some	of	these	products	
require	mixing	prior	to	use;	those	that	do	not	
are	sometimes	referred	to	as	no-lye	no-mix

A	relaxer	that	may	not	require	basing	the	scalp	
with	a	petrolatum	product	prior	to	relaxer	
application

A	lower	concentration	version	of	relaxer	used	to	
permanently	reduce	or	loosen	curl	in	hair

Thiol-based	products	used	to	permanently	
curl	hair	according	to	a	sequential	reduction–
oxidation	process

application
The  relaxer  process  involves  a  chemical  reaction  in  addi-
tion  to  mechanical  manipulation,  which  involves  the  action 
of  smoothing  the  hair  into  the  desired  configuration  dur-
ing application. This can be accomplished with the back of a 
comb, an application brush, or the fingers. However, the most 
recommended tool is a comb. Applicator brushes can increase 
the  chance  of  scalp  irritation  and  the  use  of  fingers  is  not 
suggested because of the caustic nature of the relaxer ingre-
dients.  The  initial  relaxer  is  applied  to  the  full  length  of  the 
fiber. Subsequent treatments are only applied to new growth, 
which typically occurs within 6–8 weeks. The exact period of 
time should be determined based on the amount of new hair 
growth,  which  varies  with  the  individual.  For  example,  hair 
growth rates can range from approximately 4 mm/month to 
18 mm/month [17].

CO

CO

OH–

CH CH2

S

S

CH2

CH

NH

NH

CO

CH

NH

CO

CH2

+

–S

CH2

CH

+

S

NH

Dehydroalanine

Cysteinate Ion

Lysine

Cysteine

CO

CO

CO

CO

CH CH2

NH

(CH2)4

CH

CH CH2

S

CH2

CH

NH

NH

NH

NH

Lysinoalanine

Lanthionine

Scheme 30.3 

Several key factors are used to determine the relaxer type, such 
as hair diameter, degree of curl, porosity, and type of prior chemical 
treatments. To help maintain the integrity of hair, it is important 
to follow the directions on the package carefully. Overprocessing 
and improper neutralization are problems that are commonly asso-
ciated  with  relaxer  misuse.  Similar  to  thermal  processing,  repeat 
application on the same section of hair and treating the hair longer 
than the recommended time can result in overprocessing and may 
result in hair breakage. Determination of proper application time 
can be achieved by performing the recommended strand test. To 
insure proper removal of the relaxer, hair should be rinsed thor-
oughly  followed  by  the  application  of  a  neutralizing  shampoo, 
sometimes referred to as chelating or decalcifying. These shampoos 
are acidic with a pH typically ranging from 4.5 to 5.5. The neutral-
izing step is an important part of the relaxer process because it helps 
return the hair to a neutral pH. This is necessary because, at high 
pH, hair swells up to 70–80% during relaxing making the hair sus-
ceptible to damage [18].

effect of relaxers on hair
In  2006,  Yang  and  Barbosa  [19]  performed  a  national  study 
to  obtain  consumer  perceptions  of  relaxers.  From  this  study, 
consumer responses on the effects from relaxer use were grouped 
into three categories including scalp irritation, hair quality, and 

30. Hair Straightening

267

relaxer efficiency. Users of lye technology reported a higher inci-
dence of scalp irritation while no-lye users experienced more hair 
quality issues. The same study showed that consumers were more 
likely to take action for hair quality issues and more often seek 
advice from a stylist as opposed to consulting a dermatologist or 
physician.  In  a  separate  study,  it  was  noted  that  those  who  fre-
quently obtain services at a salon, more than 50% of them were 
unaware of the specific relaxer type being used [20].

All hydroxide-based relaxers follow the same chemistry and 
are designed to straighten hair but to varying degrees. Due to 
the high pH, relaxers cause swelling of the fiber, cuticle abrasion, 
loss of the hydrophobic lipid layer, an increase in porosity, a loss 
in  tensile  strength,  and  an  increase  in  plasticity.1  All  of  these 
affects  weaken  the  hair  compared  with  its  natural  state.  The 
swelling and de-swelling of the hair during the process may in 
part, be responsible for loss in fiber strength as it can result in 
cracks proposed to be related to the change in osmotic pressure 
also  associated  with  permanent  waving  [18].  In  addition  to 
cracks,  cuticle  swelling  may  cause  cuticle  erosion.  Figure  30.2 
shows the progression of the cuticle surface during the relaxer 

1 Plasticity: a material property whereby it undergoes irreversible deformation 
when a high enough force is applied.

(a)

Figure  30.2  Scanning  electron  micro-
graph images of hair fibers under differ-
ent  treatment  conditions,  (a)  virgin;  (b) 
after relaxer rinse only; (c) after neutrali-
zation; (d) after conditioning.

(c)

(b)

(d)

268

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Combing force vs. distance

Curly
Straightened

160

120

80

40

)
g
(

e
c
r
o
f
g
n
b
m
o
C

i

0

0

20

40

60
Combing distance (mm)

80

100

120

Figure 30.3  Combing profiles of curly and straightened 
hair.

process. After the relaxer has been rinsed from the hair before 
neutralizing, the image shows the presence of cuticle scales that 
have been abstracted from the hair fiber but still remain on the 
hair. After neutralizing, the loose cuticle scales are removed. The 
images representing neutralized and conditioned fiber surfaces 
show that while relaxers erode cuticle layers from the hair, some 
amount of the protective layer is still present.

In  addition  to  the  cuticle,  the  cortex,  which  is  mainly 
responsible  for  the  hair’s  strength,  is  also  affected  during 
relaxing. The original protein linkages in hair are altered, and 
when this occurs the hair becomes more fragile. The decrease 
in break stress and increase in break extension indicates that 
the  hair  becomes  weaker  and  is  more  prone  to  deformation 
after  relaxing.  Even  though  hair  quality  is  compromised,  the 
straightened  configuration  of  hair  increases  combability  as 
shown in Figure 30.3. This in turn helps to decrease breakage 
that  is  known  to  be  associated  with  combing  curly  hair  and 
mitigates further decreases in mechanical properties [21].

It is important to follow relaxer services with post-relaxer treat-
ments such as conditioners to further enhance manageability and 
improve  the  quality  of  hair.  A  good  conditioner  should  exhibit 
the following qualities: improved wet and dry combing, flyaway 
reduction, and surface protection of the hair. These qualities can 
be  achieved  by  adding  conditioning  agents  that  will  reduce  the 
frictional force during combing. Key ingredients commonly used 
are  conditioning  agents  such  as  polyquaternium-6,  behentri-
monium  chloride,  and  hexadimethrine  chloride.  In  addition, 
ceramides  and  panthenol  are  linked  to  increasing  the  cuticle 
integrity and relative strength of hair [22].

Although  sodium  hydroxide  (lye)  and  guanidine  (no-lye) 
relaxers  straighten  the  hair  via  the  same  chemical  pathway, 
some important differences exist between the two technologies. 
It is well established through published and unpublished studies 
that the guanidine systems are milder to the scalp causing less 
incidence of irritation [23]. In addition, unpublished laboratory 
studies indicate that guanidine systems create more lanthionine 
(7.4% vs 5.2% lanthionine) in the same time than the sodium 
hydroxide  systems.  The  majority  of  sodium  hydroxide  relaxer 
users visit the salon while home users tend to use the guanidine 

system. These differences should be considered by profession-
als, home users, and dermatologists involved in deciding which 
relaxer system is most appropriate for individual use.

conclusions

Hair  straightening  treatments  are  popular  and  can  be  used  to 
achieve individually desired styles. However, care must be taken 
to decrease the chances of overprocessing that may occur when 
processes  and  chemical  treatments  are  performed  improperly. 
The  future  of  straightening  processes  and  treatments  is  only 
limited  by  science  and  technology.  History  shows  that  even 
though  there  have  been  major  scientific  advancements,  the 
technology to straighten hair either temporarily or permanently 
still involves the use of heat with mechanical stress or chemical 
products.  Over  time,  incremental  improvements  in  thermal 
appliances and formulations for chemical treatments will con-
tinue to occur. Despite the advances, it will remain important to 
understand the advantages and disadvantages and proper tech-
niques of each method based on personal style preference, hair 
type, and quality to reduce adverse effects.

appendix

thiol procedure with heat
After the hair is washed and towel-dried, the reducing cream is 
applied to a small section of hair for the recommended time for 
a strand test. The minimum time that it takes to achieve the level 
of curl reduction in that section is noted and the section of hair is 
rinsed after that time. The hair is then saturated with the cream 
and  gently  smoothed  into  a  straight  configuration. The  cream 
should be left on the hair for the minimum time that was noted 
during the strand test; however, the time should not exceed the 
recommended  time.  The  hair  is  rinsed  thoroughly  with  water 
then the hair is 80% dried. A protecting smoother is applied to 
the hair and then a brush in conjunction with a blow-dryer or a 
flat iron is used to straighten the hair in small sections. The hair 

 
 
30. Hair Straightening

269

should be neutralized using an oxidizing solution which should 
be left on the hair for the recommended time during that step. 
To  keep  from  drying  out,  the  neutralizing  solution  is  usually 
reapplied (for 5 minutes) and then the hair is rinsed abundantly 
with warm water followed by towel drying. The hair should be 
conditioned with a rinse-out conditioner and styled as desired. 
The time for the procedure can be up to 6 hours.

references

1  Lindelöf B, Forslind B, Hedblad MA, Kaveus U. (1988) Human hair 
form: Morphology revealed by light and scanning electron micro-
scopy and computer aided three-dimensional reconstruction. Arch 
Dermatol 124, 1359.

2  Thibaut  S,  Gaillard  O,  Bouhanna  P,  Cannell  DW,  Bernard  BA. 
(2005) Human hair shape is programmed from the bulb. Br J Der-
matol 152, 630.

3  De la Mettrie R, Saint-Léger D, Loussouarn G, Garcel AL, Porter C, 
Langaney  A.  (2007)  Shape  variability  and  classification  of  human 
hair: a worldwide approach. Hum Biol 79, 265.

4  Wortmann FJ, Sendelbach G, Popescu C. (2007) Fundamental DSC 
investigations of alpha-keratinous materials as basis for the inter-
pretation  of  specific  effects  of  chemical,  cosmetic  treatments  on 
human hair. J Cosmet Sci 58, 311–7.

5  Marsh JM, Clarke CJ, Meinert K, Dahlgren RM. (2007) High pres-
sure differential scanning calorimetry of colorant products. J Cosmet 
Sci 58, 621–7.

6  Wortmann  FJ,  Deutz  H.  (1993)  Characterizing  keratins  using 
high-pressure differential scanning calorimetry. J Appl Polym Sci 
48, 137.

9  Wolfram  LJ.  (1981)  The  reactivity  of  human  hair:  a  review.  In: 
Orfanos CE, Montagna W, Stuttgen G, eds. Hair Research. Berlin/
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Verlag, pp. 479–500.

10  Zviak C, Sabbagh A. (2008) Permanent waving and hair straighten-
ing. In: Bouillon C, Wilkinson J, eds. The Science of Hair Care, 2nd 
edn. New York: Informa Healthcare, pp. 201.

11  Haber L, Morgan GA. (1991) Black Pioneers of Science and Inven-

tion. Harcourt Trade.

12  de la Guardia MJ. (1981) Hair straightening process and hair curling 
process and compositions therefore. USA: Carson Products Company.
13  Darkwa  AG,  Newell  F.  (1994)  Conditioning  hair  relaxing  system. 

USA: Johnson Products Co. Inc.

14  Nguyen NV, Cannell DW. (2003) Hair relaxer composition utilizing 

complexing agent activators. USA: L’Oreal SA.

15  Tolgyesi E, Fang F. (1981) Action of nucleophilic reagents on hair 
keratin. In: OrfanosCE, MontagnaW, StuttgenG, eds. Hair Research. 
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Verlag, p. 116.

16  Wong M, Wis-Surel G, Epps J. (1994) Mechanism of hair straight-

ening. J Soc Cosmet Chem 43, 347.

17  Loussouarn G, Rawadi C, Genain G. (2005) Diversity of hair growth 

profiles. Int J Dermatol 44, 6.

18  Shansky A. (1963) The osmotic behavior of hair during the perma-
nent waving process as explained by swelling measurements. J Soc 
Cosmet Chem 14, 427.

19  Yang G, Barbosa VH. Relaxer use and side effects. (in press) Int J 

Dermatol.

20  Bryant H, Yang G, Barbosa VH. (2005) Lye vs. no-lye relaxers: com-
parison of laboratory results and end-user perceptions. Presented at 
Ethnic Hair and Skin: Advancing the Scientific Frontier. Chicago, IL.
21  Khumalo NP, Doe PT, Dawer RPR, Ferguson DJP. (2000) What is 
normal  black  African  hair?  A  light  and  scanning  electron-micro-
scopic study. J Am Acad Dermatol 43, 814–20.

7  Porter C, Diridollou S, Dixon F, Bryant H, de la Mettrie R, Barbosa 
VH. Comparisons of curly hair from people of different ethnicities. 
(in press) Int J Dermatol.

22  Bernard BA, Franbourg A, Francois AM, Hallegot P. (2002) Cera-
mide binding to African-American hair fibre correlates with resist-
ance to hair breaking. Int J Cosmet Sci 24, 1–12.

8  Stoves  JL.  (1942)  The  reactivity  of  the  cystine  linkage  in  keratin 

23  Syed AN, Ayoub H, Kuhajda A. (1998) Recent advances in Treating 

fiber. I. The action of alkalies. Trans Faraday Soc 38, 254.

Excessively Curly Hair. Cosmetics & Toiletries 113, 47–56.

chaPter 31
hair styling: technology and Formulations

Thomas Krause1 and Rene C. Rust2
1 Wella/Procter & Gamble Service GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
2 GSK/Stiefel, Brentford, Middlesex, UK

BasIc concePts

•	 Hair	styling	aids	arrange	and	maintain	hair	in	a	groomed	position	and	impart	conditioning,	shine,	body,	and	increased	manageability.
•	 There	are	a	wide	variety	of	styling	aid	product	forms	including	hairsprays,	gels,	mousses,	creams,	waxes,	lotions,	and	brilliantines.	Heated	

styling	implements	such	as	blow-dryers	and	curling	or	straightening	irons	are	also	used	to	achieve	style.

•	 Polymers,	emollients	and	waxes	are	the	main	functional	ingredients	in	styling	aids.	Polymers	bond	hair	strands	together	to	provide	hold.	

Emollients	and	waxes	–	amongst	other	ingredients	–	increase	single	hair	fiber	intercation	and	smooth	cuticles,	imparting	shine	and	
reduced	hair	frizz.

•	 Styling	aids	are	in	general	safe	for	skin	and	hair;	however,	misuse	can	result	in	hair	damage.
•	 Styling	aids	may	be	useful	in	improving	the	appearance	of	hair	dermatologic	conditions	that	result	in	thinning	hair,	hair	dullness,	or	unruliness.

Introduction

Definitions

The appearance of a person’s hair, its length, shine, and smooth-
ness, is a strong indicator of general age, health, and attractive-
ness [1]. Additionally, hair style or link to trends may be used 
to express  personality traits  or may  make a  social  statement. 
Marie Antoinette was said to have changed her iconic hairstyle 
to  promote  her  French  identity  [2],  and  who  can  forget  the 
long  flowing  hair  of  the  rebellious  1960s  flower  child?  How-
ever, today as in the days of Marie Antoinette, hair does not 
grow naturally into the wide variety of hair styles desired by 
men  and  women  –  manipulation  through  brushing,  setting, 
and the use of styling aids is necessary to smooth and arrange 
the hair into the desired style that is also maintained over time. 
The use of hair styling products to help achieve hair styles is 
also  not  new  –  Ancient  Egyptians  were  known  to  use  castor 
and other oils as hair dressings and bees wax to help style and 
plait wigs [3].

Styling  aids  not  only  correct  the  hair,  but  can  also  help 
transform hair for those with hair loss or hair damage result-
ing from medical conditions or other factors – hairsprays and 
other products can give lift to thinning hair, smoothing creams 
help  tame  unruly  frizz,  and  gloss  serums  can  help  restore  a 
more  youthful  shine. This  chapter  describes  the  wide  variety 
of hair styling aids – their basic chemistry, utility, and poten-
tial issues that clinicians need to be aware of in their everyday 
practice.

Hair  styling  is  the  process  of  reshaping  the  hair  mass  to 
an  arrangement  or  style  that  can  be  maintained  over  time. 
Hair, by its nature, is easily reshaped when wet and dried or 
through  the  application  of  heat;  however,  because  of  hair’s 
susceptibility to atmospheric humidity, these changes require 
the assistance of chemical styling aids to maintain the shape 
over time. Styling aids with polymers can help improve hair 
volume and height by increasing hair strand stiffness and hair 
fiber interactions. Styling aids with emollients and waxes can 
help smooth out frizz and increase hair shine by aligning fib-
ers  and  reducing  friction  and  can  also  have  a  conditioning 
effect on the hair fiber (Figure 31.1). Styling products, such 
as sprays, gels, and waxes, modify only the surface of hair – 
not the structure itself. These products are not designed to be 
permanent, unlike permanent waves and chemical straight-
eners,  and  the  majority  of  these  products  are  designed  for 
easy removal by shampooing.

Physiology

Hair strands are made up of lengths of bundles of keratin poly-
mer  chains  [4].  These  chains  are  linked  by  two  main  types  of 
bonds: strong and weak (Figure 31.2). Strong bonds are made 
of cystin amino acids and can only be broken chemically (e.g. 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

270

31. Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations

271

(a)

Figure  31.1  Styling  aids  can  provide  im-
proved  appearance  of  hair  volume  and 
smoothness.  (a)  Frizzy  unruly  hair  dried 
without styling aids. (b) Frizzy unruly hair 
smoothed with application of styling aids. 
(c)  Fine/thin  hair  dried  without  styling 
aids. (d) Fine/thin hair volumized through 
the application of styling aids.

(c)

(b)

(d)

Strong

CH2 – S – S – CH2

Cystein bonds

Only affected by
chemical treatment
(perm)

CH2NH3+

–O2C – CH2

Salt bridging

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

I

C = O . . . HN

CH2 – OH. . . .O = C

Hydrogen bonds

Affected by water

Figure 31.2  Mechanisms to stabilize hair structure and shape 
via  keratin  chain  interactions.  (Source:  Umbach,  2004  [7]. 
Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

Weak

CH2 – CH2 – CH3
CH3 – CH2 – CH2

van der Waals
interaction

by  permanent  wave  solutions).  Weak  bonds  include  van  der 
Waals, salt bonds, and hydrogen bonds which can be affected by 
changes in water concentration alone [5,6].

Wet setting is the mechanism of shaping hair strands through 
controlled wetting and drying conditions. Hydrogen bonds can 
be easily opened by humidity in the air or water accessing the 

272

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Formulation

Because of very different hair structures, needs, and fashion trends a 
very broad range of styling products cover today’s consumer needs 
and demands (Figure 31.4). Fundamentally, two different types of 
technology exist; both of these approaches have strong styling bene-
fits and help to protect the hair, but have different styling properties:
 1.  Polymer-based formulations that cover hair with a film and 

form dry welds between hair strands:
 ° Advantages: high mechanical strength, dry touch, gloss.
 ° Disadvantages: will break with mechanical stress, cannot 

be reformed once broken except by rewetting.

 2.  Wax and emollient-based formulations that deposit hydro-
phobic material on hair. These hydrophobic materials do not 
dry over time and create fluid bonds that can be broken and 
reformed:
 ° Advantages: no spot welds will break, interaction of  single 
hair  fibers  can  be  opened  and  closed  again,  styling  is 
remoldable.

 ° Disadvantages: limited mechanical strength, in high con-
centrations can feel waxy/oily, potentially look negative on 
thin hair.

Polymer formulations
Hairsprays, gels, mousses, and liquid settings work on the prin-
ciple  of  film-forming  polymers.  The  active  ingredients  can  be 
divided into three groups:
 1.  Film-forming polymers: main ingredient in application such 
as hairsprays and gels but also as minor ingredients in waxes.
 2.  Conditioning  and  film-forming  polymers:  usually  in  wet 
applications such as mousses to improve wet combability.
 3.  Rheology  modifier:  usually  does  not  contribute  to  fixation 

but controls consistency of the product.

These  film-forming  active  ingredients  are  modified  to  opti-
mized  performance  by  additional  ingredients  such  as  emol-
lients (including silicone), solvents, plasticizers, fragrance, and 
preservatives.  Table  31.1  provides  a  list  of  typical  ingredients 
found in polymer-based styling aids.

Excellent product 

Poor product 

Wet setting 

Figure  31.3  Curl  retention  with  and  without  addition  of  spray  in  high 
humidity (85% relative humidity. (Source: Wella, 2001 [8]. Reproduced with 
permission of Pocter & Gamble.)

hair  from  the  environment.  Rearrangement  of  the  hydrogen 
bonds will occur by removing water while drying and reforma-
tion  of  new  bridges  into  a  different  shape  by  holding  the  hair 
strand in the desired shape while drying. Unfortunately, these 
new bonds are also susceptible to humidity from the environ-
ment and may revert back to their natural state of frizzy, curly 
or weak, straight hair over time.

Styling aids help make the styling process and finished style 
to be more independent of the molecular interactions inside the 
hair and more robust against environmental influences because 
the  polymers  are  less  affected  by  humidity.  With  the  correct 
polymers,  adequate  deposition,  and  sufficient  distribution  of 
styling product, significant style holding power can be achieved. 
Figure 31.3 shows that hair treated with styling aids in a high 
humidity  environment  will  keep  the  shape  much  longer  than 
wet set hair alone.

Speciality stylers

Core stylers

Smoothers

Emulsions

Microemulsions

Waxes
classic

Soft
waxes

Pomades

Shine
fluids

Aerosol-waxes
and emulsions

Aerosol-
pomade

Wax
sticks

Liquid
settings

Polymer based
speciality
stylers

Pastes
and putty

Aerosols

Hairsprays

Mousses

Gels

Figure  31.4  The broad range of modern styling aid 
forms and chemistries.

Table 31.1  Typical	ingredients	for	polymer-based	styling	aids.

Ingredient (INCI)

PVP	(polyvinylpyrrolidone)

Octylacrylamide/acrylates/butylamino-
ethylmethacrylate	copolymer

PVP/VA	copolymer	(PVP/vinylacetate)

PQ-11

PQ-16

PQ-4

Chitosan	(derived	from	chitin)

Function

Film	former

Film	former

Film	former

Film	former

Film	former

Film	former

Film	former

Carbomer	(cross-linked	acrylic	acid)

Rheology	modifier

Acrylates/ceteth-20-itaconate	copolymer

Rheology	modifier

Hydroxyethylcellulose

Rheology	modifier

Alcohol

Water

Dimethicone

Panthenol

Propane/butane

DME	(dimethylether)

Ethylhexymethoxycinnamate

PEG-40-hydrogenated	castor	oil

Laureth-4

Aminomethylpropanol

Phenoxyethanol

Methylparaben

Fragrance

Solvent

Solvent

Plasticizer

Moisturizer

Propellant

Propellant

UV-absorber

Emulsifier

Emulsifier

Neutralizer

Preservative

Preservative

Scent

31. Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations

273

Hairspray

Gel

Mousse

x

x

x

(x)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

(x)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

(x)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Wax and emollient formulations
The area of waxes and emollients covers a broad range of prod-
ucts with a variety of different benefits and applications:
•	 Pure waxes: water-free formulations, often without preserva-
tives. Mostly compact appearance, provide high hair control. 
Matte (i.e. low shine) derivatives are also called clay, paste, or 
putty.

•	 Cream  emulsions:  contain  three  main  types  of  ingredients: 
water,  emulsifiers,  and  oil/wax  components.  Consistency 
from soft lotion to rich cream.

Table 31.2 provides a list of typical ingredients found in wax and 
emollient-based styling aids.

Product forms, application, and uses

hairsprays and liquid settings
Aerosol hairspray is one of the most widely used styling prod-
ucts. The ease of use and broad application areas make it a ver-
satile tool for stylists and consumers. These products are usually 
finishing products and are applied in the very last step of styling 
on  dry  hair.  Aerosol  hairsprays  contain  a  solution  of  polymer 

ingredients,  alcohol,  water,  and  liquefied  propellants  under 
pressure. The  release  of  propellant  pressure  during  dispensing 
results in a fine mist of polymer-containing liquid that deposit 
on  the  hair  fibers,  spreads,  covers  hair,  and  forms  spot  welds 
between the fibers (Figure 31.5).

Besides  the  aerosol  version,  hairsprays  are  also  sold  in  non-
aerosol sprays where distribution of the liquid to droplets is done 
mechanically by a pump. These sprays are perceived by consum-
ers to be wetter than aerosol hairsprays on application because of 
the bigger droplet size resulting from the pump spray mechanism.

The main ingredients of hairsprays in general are:

•	 Polymer: film-forming polymer.
•	 Solvents: ethanol, water.
•	 Propellant: e.g. dimethylether (DME), propane/butane, fluori-
nated  hydrocarbons  (HF-152  A)  for  VOC-formulations  in 
USA, water.

•	 Additives: e.g. silicones, UV-absorber, vitamins.
•	 Fragrance.
Non-aerosols have similar ingredients only without any propel-
lant.

Hairsprays have been the target of regulatory restrictions ever 
since the banning of CFHC-based propellant compounds in the 

274

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Table 31.2  Typical	ingredients	in	wax	and	emollient-based	styling	aids.

Ingredient (INCI)

Carnauba	wax

Paraffin	liquid

PEG-60	(polyethylene	glycol)

Cetyl	alcohol

PEG-90M	(polyethylene	glycol	high	
molecular)

PVP	(Polyvinylpyrrolidone)

PVP/VA	copolymer	(PVP/vinylacetate)

Carbomer

Hydroxyethylcellulose

Triceteareth-4-phosphate

PEG-24	hydrogenated	castor	oil

PEG-40-hydrogenated	castor	oil

Dimethicone

Panthenol

Ethylhexylmethoxycinnamate

Aminomethylpropanol

Phenoxyethanol

Benzyl	alcohol

Fragrance

Function

Hard	wax

Oil

Wax

Wax

Creates	thread-like	consistency

Film	former

Film	former

Stabilizer

Stabilizer

Emulsifier

Emulsifier

Emulsifier

Care/combability

Moisturizer

UV-absorber

Neutralizer

Preservative

Preservative

Scent

Wax

Cream

x

x

x

x

x

x

(x)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Hairsprays are safe when used as directed; however, there 
are  some  potential  issues  surrounding  misuse.  First,  aero-
sols can create a fine mist of droplets which may be inhaled. 
Hairspray manufacturers carefully check the droplet size and 
proportion of the formulas and dispensers in order to avoid 
significant  inhalable  quantities  of  droplets  to  insure  con-
sumer  safety  during  typical  use  at  home  or  in  a  hair  salon 
[10]. Additionally, hairsprays should to be removed periodi-
cally by shampooing. Hairspray polymers have been formu-
lated to break down in the presence of shampoo surfactants. 
However, if hair is not shampooed frequently, hairspray and 
other styling aids can build up on the hair causing dullness, 
potential hair breakage, and polymer flaking that can be mis-
taken for a symptom of dandruff.

Setting lotions are a special application form of hairspray 
and pump-spray. The formulation is similar but the usage is 
different.  Typically,  the  damp  hair  is  prepared  with  rollers 
and the product is applied from a small bottle with a nozzle. 
After  blow-drying  the  rollers  are  removed  and  the  hair  is 
brushed.  The  deposition  of  polymer  increases  surface  fric-
tion  and  creates  volume,  the  main  benefit  of  this  product 
type. A significant group pf users with gray hair use lotions 
containing  blue  dyes  to  make  their  hair  color  brighter  and 
less  yellowish.  Overdosing  and  build-up  resulting  from  low 
shampoo  frequency  may  cause  a  bluish  appearance  of  the 
hair in these people; however this can easily be removed by 
thorough washing.

Figure 31.5  Hairspray bond – spot weld.

1970s  because  of  concerns  about  the  earth  atmosphere’s  ozone 
layer. A more recent development has been the restriction of vola-
tile organic compounds (VOCs) to 80/55% of hairspray formulas 
in the USA. Formulas have now been developed that substitute 
propellants  judged  to  have  a  lower  risk  of  impacting  the  ozone 
layer water (such as hydrofluorocarbon 152A or HFC 152A) and 
an increased proportion of water in the formulas. While initially 
these technology changes negatively impacted hairspray perfor-
mance, more recently new polymer systems have been developed 
to work at these lower alcohol and higher water contents [9].

31. Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations

275

Mousse
Mousses belong also to the widely used products such as hair-
sprays. Typically, they are wet application products for volume 
in combination with a blow-dryer. As combing and/or brushing 
are important parts of the styling procedure, good wet combabil-
ity is a base requirement. Mousses in general consist of:
•	 Polymer:  mostly  quaternized,  single  or  in  combination  with 

other cationic on non-ionic polymers (“film former”).

•	 Surfactants.
•	 Solvents: water, ethanol.
•	 Additives: e.g. silicones, UV-absorber, vitamins.
•	 Propellant: e.g. propane/butane, DME.
•	 Fragrance.
Non-aerosol mousses have similar composition without propel-
lants, but a mechanical actuator to create the mousse.

As  mousses  contain  cationic  charged  polymers  they  may 
interact in special conditions (hair structure) with anionic poly-
mers  from  hairsprays.  The  resulting  complex  can  be  hard  to 
remove because of its poor solubility. Repeated shampooing in 
combination with a conditioner will remove unwanted deposi-
tions.  Overdosing  may  contribute  to  weighing  down  the  hair, 
residues, reduction of shine, or appearance of white flakes that 
might be mistaken for the symptoms of dandruff.

Gels and spray gels
In the last 20 to 30 years, gels became more popular as they allow 
a highly visible styling effect. Today, gels are designed to create 
every style from smooth hold to extreme looks with spikes to 
express personality or fashion trends. The use depends strongly 
on habits; different looks result if applied to wet hair or dry hair 
or when the hair is blow-dried or air-dried.

Spray gels start at the lower end of the hold scale and pro-
vide a well-groomed look. Spray gels are easy to apply evenly 
throughout the hair. The consistency is usually from water-thin 
to low viscous. Gels offered in tubes typically have a medium 
to high viscosity and represent the upper end of a hold scale. 
The  amount  of  film-forming  polymer  in  the  gel  formulation 
usually determines the hold level. Typical ingredients for gels 
include:
•	 Thickener: e.g. polyacrylates (carbomer), polysaccharides.
•	 Polymer: film former.
•	 Moisturizer: e.g. glycerin for wet look.
•	 Solvents: water, ethanol.
•	 Additives: e.g. silicones, UV-absorber, vitamins.
•	 Preservatives: e.g. paraben types, phenoxyethanol.
•	 Fragrance.
Removal of a gel requires shampooing – in some cases a second 
lathering is recommended in case of high level use and should 
the  first  wash  not  eliminate  all  residues.  Dry,  brittle  gels  with 
high  hold  levels  may  tend  to  generate  flakes  when  the  hair  is 
moved, similar to hairsprays. Build-up is not usually observed 
with regular shampooing. Some gels are also sold in cream form 
and their appearance is not clear, but turbid to white and texture 
is richer and softer than a typical gel.

creams, pomades, and emulsions
Creams, pomades, and emulsions are a growing segment which 
contains very specialized niches for texture and styling results. 
The common base of cream-like products is always:
•	 Hydrophobic base such as wax, oil, or related chemistry.
•	 Water, mainly as the continuous phase (oil-in-water emulsions).
•	 Emulsifier combination.
The  composition  and  structure  of  the  emulsion  controls  the 
application properties. By adding polymers, the level of hold can 
be modified; the texture might be changed by adding polymeric 
thickeners or particles such as bentonite or diathomaceous clay 
to provide a rough, clay-like feel with a matte effect to take away 
shine. The following list shows typical components:
•	 Wax compound:

 ° Synthetic: e.g. paraffin type, polyethylene glycol.
 ° Natural: e.g. carnauba wax, bees wax.

•	 Surfactants/emulsifiers: trideceteareth-4-phosphate.
•	 Solvent water.
•	 Polymers: if required for hold or texture.
•	 Additives: e.g. silicones, UV-filter, vitamins.
•	 Particles (optional): e.g. bentonite, silica for special texture.
•	 Preservatives: e.g. paraben types.
•	 Fragrance.
Application is related to desired effect or style in dry or damp 
hair for finger styling. Usually, this procedure is part of the fin-
ishing touches to a hairstyle. The advantage over polymer-based 
formulations is the softer nature of hair and the remoldability of 
the style without the need for reapplying product. A special type 
of emulsion is the clear jelly-like microemulsion which is also 
called a “ringing gel” because of the sound effect it creates when 
the container is tapped with a finger.

These  formulations  contain  a  high  amount  of  surfactants 
so formulators must keep in mind the potential risk for skin 
irritation,  and  especially  eye  irritation,  in  their  selection  of 
ingredients.  In  combination  with  sweat  there  is  a  possibility 
for  the  product  to  be  dissolved  on  the  hair  and  getting  into 
contact with the eye. Good formulations contain a combina-
tion of emulsifiers and surfactant that are not irritating in vitro 
and in patch testing.

Waxes and clays
Water-free  waxes  are  a  special  group  of  styling  aides  that 
provides  strong  control  and  bigger  effects  than  cream-like 
 products.  Their  consistency  is  harder  and  application  needs 
more education or skills by the consumer – especially to prevent 
overusage and build up.
•	 Wax compound:

 ° Synthetic: e.g. polyethylene glycol.
 ° Natural: e.g. Carnauba wax, bees wax.
•	 Surfactants/emulsifiers: only for washability.
•	 Additives: e.g. silicones, UV-filter, vitamins.
•	 Particles: e.g. bentonite, silica for special texture.
•	 Preservatives: usually not required.
•	 Fragrance: if desired.

276

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

Table 31.3  Typical	ingredients	in	silicone	products.

Ingredient (INCI)

Function

Serum

Spray/Aerosol

Dimethicone

Dimethiconol

Cyclopentasiloxane

Alcohol

Propane/butane

Panthenol

Shine	enhancer

Shine	enhancer

Shine	enhancer

Solvent

Propellant

Moisturizer

Ethylhexymethoxycinnamate

UV-absorber

Fragrance

Scent

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Application is on damp or dry hair similar to creams. The stiff 
consistency requires warming in the hands before application. 
Shampooing and use of conditioning agents remove waxes, but 
in  some  cases  may  require  repeated  application  to  ensure  no 
build-up is created after repeated usage.

silicone serums and sprays
Silicones – mostly used as oils – are a part of many of the for-
mulations  described  above  to  add  care  properties,  improve 
combability,  shine,  or  modify  polymer-based  formulations  as 
plasticizer. Other product formulations are mainly based on sili-
cones and therefore utilize higher levels of this versatile ingredi-
ent. The main benefit of these products is to provide pure shine 
or highlight strands to finish the styling process (Table 31.3).

Formulations differ from application form and heaviness of 

the effect:
 1.  Serums:

 ° oily liquids that provide long-lasting, high gloss effects;
 ° contain low volatile silicones and low amounts of solvents 

such as alcohol;

 ° designed to highlight strands, no fill head application;
 ° have to be carefully applied by hands – need expertise in 

use.
 2.  Pump sprays:

 ° are lighter in effect than serums;
 ° effect is less durable as the silicones are more volatile;
 ° contain solvents such as alcohol;
 ° easier to apply for consumers;
 ° also for full head application.

 3.  Aerosol sprays:

 ° are comparable to pump sprays in performance;
 ° designed to intensify gloss of styling for finish;
 ° also suitable to refresh shine.

Table 31.4 shows hair products according to categories, physical 
description, typical applications, and desired result.

Products designed for african hair types
Hair of people of African descent has always been treated very 
differently  from  Caucasian  or  Asian  hair.  The  structure  of 
African  hair  is  different  from  other  hair  types,  as  its  extreme 

Table 31.4  Hair	products	(categories,	physical	description,	typical	applications,	desired	result).

Category

Physical description

Typical applications

Desired result

Typical packaging

Hairspray	
(aerosol)

Liquid,	clear,	low	viscous

Spray	with	propellant	on	dry	hair	
after	styling

Hold	of	finished	styling,	invisible	
net

Liquid,	clear,	low	viscous

Hairspray	
(non-aerosol	
pump	spray)

Spray	without	propellant	on	dry	
hair	or	on	damp	hair	for	blow-
drying

Hold	of	finished	styling

Aerosol	can,	
aluminum	or	
tinplate	with	
actuator

Bottle	with	
mechanical	
actuator

Gel/gel	spray Medium	to	viscous,	clear	jelly-like	consistency Dry	hair	for	air	drying	or	wet	hair	

for	blow-drying

Mousses

Emulsions

Soft,	creamy	mousse,	semi-stable	that	breaks	
under	mechanical	stress

Wet	hair	with	blow-drying,	rollers	
might	be	used,	typically	brushed

Creamy	consistency,	typically	white	
appearance,	soft	feel,	and	slightly	fatty	touch

Mostly	wet	hair,	but	also	dry	hair	
as	finish	product

Waxes

Tough	to	hard	consistency	that	melts	under	
mechanical	stress

Dry	hair

Visible	styling	effects,	shaping	of	
hair	bundles,	creating	spikes,	etc.

Tube	or	dispenser

Volume	and	hold

Aerosol	can

Weight	down	effect,	antifrizz	
properties,	alignment,	and	
control	of	shape,	moldability

Jar,	tube,	or	
dispenser

Visible	styling	effects,	bundling	
of	hair,	textured	looks,	also	matte	
effects	desired

Jar

Silicones

Clear,	oily	liquids

On	dry	hair	for	styling	purpose	
with	fingers	or	as	spray

Pure	shine	in	addition	to	hold	
provided	by	styling	products	
applied	before

Small	bottles

31. Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations

277

(a)

(b)

Figure  31.6  Comparison  of  African 
(a), Caucasian (b), and Asian (c) hair 
structure.

(c)

curvature is thought to be caused by the different profile of the 
hair shaft, which may be caused by differences in the morphol-
ogy  of  the  upper  hair  follicle.  African  hair  has  a  distinctively 
more oval profile than Caucasian or Asian hair (Figure 31.6).

These structural characteristics go hand in hand with further 
challenges  for  styling  African  hair,  especially  as  the  time  and 
effort spent on styling African hair tends to be higher than on 
Caucasian hair. For example: heightened brittleness of the hair 
shaft, regular use of relaxing chemistry, knotting, braiding, and 
use of extensions. Excessive braiding and the use of extensions 
can often cause strain on the hair shaft in the follicle and there-
fore can lead to temporary hair loss, which is often seen espe-
cially along the hairline of the forehead and the partings.

The majority of the African specialty styling products are tar-
geted at helping to relax and smooth the curly African hair and 

make it easier to manage and maintain. Therefore, most products 
(such as brilliantines and pomades) contain high levels of waxes 
and  oils  and/or  polymers.  These  ingredients  deliver  the  hold 
African hair needs and are typically applied with the fingers and 
whole hand to achieve good coverage and maximum hold ben-
efits.  Another  advantage  of  the  high  levels  of  oils  and  waxes  in 
these products, but also in other products like oil sheens, is that 
they enhance the light reflected from the hair surface, which gives 
especially dark hair a more healthy appearance and striking shine.
Lotions are often used to protect the hair shaft and are useful 
for African hair as it tends to be more brittle and more prone 
to breakage. Lotions are mainly emulsions that offer combina-
tions  of  conditioning  ingredients  and  styling  ingredients.  The 
conditioning  ingredients  (such  as  silicones  and  fatty  alcohols) 
protect the hair and enhance its appearance. Lotions are highly 

278

aDornMent  Hair Cosmetics 

beneficial for African hair as they have a good efficacy as leave-
in  products  and  as  they  can  help  to  counteract  the  negative 
effects of the variety of damaging styling techniques used.

As  the  vast  majority  of  African  specialty  products  tend  to 
have  higher  levels  of  styling  polymers  and/or  waxes/oils,  it  is 
crucial to wash the hair regularly to prevent excessive build up 
and associated hair negatives.

Protecting the hair structure with styling aides
One distinct benefit of styling aides – that has become a stronger 
focus over the last years – is their ability to protect the hair fiber 
from external damaging influences. As styling habits – together with 
chemical treatments and environmental factors – are key drivers in 
hair fiber structural damage, styling aides can be used successfully 
to reduce the damage incurred by these factors. The specific use of 
styling aides being applied to hair, not rinsed out, and not removed 
until the next wash, makes them a preferred technology option to 
reduce the impact of damaging factors during and after the styl-
ing process. A variety of ingredients in styling product technolo-
gies have a protective function on the hair fiber, such as silicones, 
polymers, waxes, and fatty alcohols. The formulation of the styling 
aide can be tailored to provide a homogeneous layer of these ingre-
dients  on  the  hair  fiber  which  then  provides  protective  benefits. 
Furthermore, additional actives such as UV filters can contribute to 
a reduction of hair damage due to environmental influences. This 
can be beneficial during the styling process, i.e. reducing friction, 
increasing smoothness, especially when hair is styled when it is wet 
and particularly vulnerable to damage. Heat protection properties 
offered by some styling products provide additional benefits as the 
polymers contained can help manage the heat transfer into the hair 
as well as smoothing the hair surface to reduce friction which can 
be particularly damaging during heat application. After the styling 
process, the product formulations can continue to protect the hair 
fiber and therefore they are often recommended to be used in com-
bination with dedicated hair care products.

considerations for consultations  
with patients about hair styling

Despite  the  many  advantages  and  fundamental  benefits  for 
appearance  –  and  consequently  confidence  –  misuse  of  styling 
products can have an adverse effect on the hair quality and appear-
ance [11,12]. Often, patients overuse or misuse styling products, 
and especially styling appliances, in their quest for a better appear-
ance.  For  example,  the  excess  use  of  heat  styling  appliances  has 
wide consequences for the hair quality, as studies have shown [13]. 
Some modern heat styling appliances operate with temperatures 
of well over 200°C, which is beyond the temperature that the hair’s 
molecules, especially the proteins like keratin and its amino acids, 
can  withstand  without  major  structural  damage.  Patients  with 
high heat styling needs and habits should be advised to use tailored 
products that have a reduced heat output and/or tailored technol-
ogy  to  minimize  hair  damage  and  overheating.  Furthermore, 

modern  ion  technology  in  heat  styling  appliances  can  help  to 
reduce some adverse effects from excessive heat styling. Mechani-
cal stress whilst heat styling is one factor that can cause damage 
to the hair fiber. Therefore, the use of appliances and styling aides 
especially designed to reduce hair damage during the heat styling 
process is recommended. Design features of these include low fric-
tion styling surfaces such as ceramics, flexible plates, etc.

Other potential issues with styling products include overuse 
or  mix  of  the  wrong  styling  product  technologies.  Overuse  of 
styling products without removal through proper hair hygiene 
can lead to negative effects on the appearance and tactile prop-
erties  of  hair.  The  polymers  used  as  main  actives  can  –  when 
overused and not removed – accumulate on the hair surface and 
can lead to dullness, adhesion of dust and dirt, and to hair being 
less easy to manage and prone to tangling – creating the oppo-
site effect to what users are trying to achieve.

Because of the character of the ingredients used, styling products 
are generally safe to use. However, as with other cosmetic products, 
in rare cases the use of some styling products may be associated 
with allergies or irritations if there is a history of contact allergic 
reactions  to  selected  ingredients.  These  may  stem  from  single 
ingredients in the product formulations such as fragrance ingredi-
ents. Even though the risk of this is low because of limited contact 
of the products with skin, in case of irritations or adverse reactions 
that  could  be  associated  with  styling  products,  it  is  advisable  to 
investigate the type of product used, and the ingredients contained, 
and the way it was used as well as to identify known allergies of the 
patient. In case of an identified allergic reaction, dermatologists are 
advised to run an allergy alert test with the patient and/or to con-
tact the manufacturer of the product to find out about the nature of 
the ingredients used in the product.

In  consultations  with  patients  concerning  styling-related 
issues, it is imperative to assess the specific hair-related issues of 
the patients first and then to understand what styling and haircare 
products were used. This should enable a good understanding of 
what caused the issues and the psychologic impact on the patient. 
The advice to patients with hair styling-related issues should be 
focused  on  the  right  selection,  and  the  right  amount  of  styling 
products  targeted  at  their  hair  needs  and  used  in  combination 
with a good quality haircare regime. Often manufacturers of high 
quality haircare and styling products tailor their different prod-
uct technologies to match and provide maximum styling benefits 
with  minimum  negative  effects.  A  recommendation  to  patients 
who overuse or misuse styling products should include a focus 
on potential reduction of the use amount and frequency of the 
product as well as on the selection the right products.

Future of hair styling aids – trends  
and technologic development

As  there  are  continuous  research  efforts  dedicated  to  hair, 
the knowledge of hair (hair biology, hair structure, and hair 
biochemistry)  is  growing  and  will  continue  to  grow  in  the 

31. Hair Styling: Technology and Formulations

279

future. Styling aides are a prime example that trends and sci-
ence  and  technology  advancements  are  closely  interwoven. 
Over  the  course  of  the  last  50  and  more  years,  emerging 
trends demanded new technologies to be developed to ena-
ble  the  creation  of  new  hair  styles.  Vice  versa,  the  develop-
ment of new styling technologies enabled the creation of new 
trends  in  fashion  and  beauty.  One  example  is  the  trend  for 
“big hair” in the 1980s which drove the development of maxi-
mum volume and hold products, which in turn allowed for 
the creation of even bigger hair styles and laid the foundation 
for the modern variety of product technologies. A key devel-
opment  over  the  years,  which  will  continue  into  the  future, 
is  the  focus  on  ease  of  use  of  the  new  styling  products  to 
enable everybody to create impressive styles. Also, it is likely 
that  a  key  focus  of  future  development  will  be  on  creating 
even  longer  lasting  styling  benefits  and  to  further  improve 
the protective benefits of the different styling technologies to 
further complement hair care product benefits.

Consequently, the current science and technology advancements 
will – no doubt – have a profound effect on future trends and will 
enable new hair styles that everybody can create and recreate, from 
the most advanced fashion stylists to consumers in their homes.

conclusions

Styling aids come in a wide variety of types and are used by many 
to augment hair appearance. Familiarity with the range and use 
of hair styling aids will help a clinician not only diagnose poten-
tial problems arising from misuse or allergy, but can also help 
when counseling those with thinning, aging, or damaged hair. 
Styling products can impart the appearance of healthier hair by 

improving  hair  shine  and  smoothness,  increasing  the  appear-
ance of hair body by building in body and volume.

acknowledgment
The  authors  thank  Dianna  Kenneally  for  her  contributions  to 
the first edit of this chapter.

references

1  Gray J. (2007) Assessment of Hair Quality Using Eye Tracking Tech-

nology. London: Royal Society of Medicine Press, p. 2.

2  Rosenthal A. (2004) Raising hair. Eighteenth Century Studies 38 (1), 

1–16.

3  Lucas A, Harris JR. (1999) Ancient Egyptian Materials and Indus-

tries. Courier Dover Publications, p. 332.

4  Wella AG. (2001) The Fascination of Hair. Available from Procter 
&  Gamble  Service  GmbH,  Berliner  Allee  65,  64274  Darmstadt, 
 Germany, pp. 6–7.

5  Robbins  CR.  (2002)  Chemical  and  Physical  Behavior  of  Human 

Hair, 4th edn. Springer, pp. 133–4.

6  Wella  AG,  Schwan-Jonczyk  A.  (2003)  Haar  umformung,  1st  edn. 

Pocter & Gamble Service, Darmstadt, Germany, pp. 10–11.

7  Umbach  W.  (2004)  Kosmetik  und  Hygiene,  3rd  edn.  Wiley-VCH, 

Weinheim, Germany, pp. 264–7.

8  Wella AG. (2001) The Fascination of Hair. Pocter & Gamble Service, 

Darmstadt, Germany, p. 43.

9  Pfaffernoschke M. (2005) Formulating low VOC aerosol hairsprays. 

Int J Aerosol Spray Pack Technol April.

10  Zviak C. (1986) The Science of Hair Care. New York: Marcel Dekker, 

pp. 167–8.

11  Gray J. (1997) World of Hair: A Scientific Companion. Macmillan Press.
12  Gray J. (2000) Human Hair Diversity. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
13  German  Wool  Research  Institute  (2007)  Study  on  the  Effects  of 

Heat on Human Hair Structure. Aachen, Germany: DWI.

Part IV

anti-aging

Sec tion 1  cosmeceuticals 

ChaPter 32
Botanicals

carl R. thornfeldt
Episciences, Inc., Boise, ID, USA

BaSIC CONCePtS

•	 There	are	many	options	available	to	choose	from	in	the	skin	care/cosmetic	product	arena,	with	an	increasing	interest	in	herbal-based	

products.

•	 Herbal	extracts	may	be	promising	therapy	for	photoaging.
•	 Herbal	products	provide	multiple	beneficial	functionalities	with	highly	reactive	molecules	and	compounds	in	stable	preparations.
•	 Botanicals	contain	terpenoids,	alkaloids,	and	phenolics,	which	have	been	chemically	characterized	for	their	biologic	effects.
•	 Products	using	herbal	ingredients	must	be	carefully	formulated.	Ideally,	the	finished	product	is	then	tested	for	efficacy	and	safety.

Introduction

Herbs are the 14,000 species of higher plants with extracts for 
medicinal,  fragrance  or  flavoring  use  [1].  The  growing  inter-
est  in  herbal  products  has  resulted  in  significant  growth  of 
the number of commercially available natural products in our 
domestic  market  to  over  90,000.  These  products  are  based  on 
over 1100 commercially available herbs. Six wholesale compa-
nies  each  market  over  100  herbal  extracts,  with  one  company 
selling over 1000 [2].

Despite  the  increase  in  the  number  of  herbal  products,  the 
usage rate appears to be flattening after rapid growth over the 
past six years. Supplement consumption rose from 33.8% in the 
general  population  in  1990,  to  55%  in  those  seeking  cosmetic 
procedures in 2006. The incidence of supplement use in the lat-
ter population declined to 49% in 2012. Unfortunately, 60–72% 
of supplement users do not report these to their physician pre-
operatively for cosmetic procedures [3,4].

Herb-based products provide the advantage of having multi-
ple functionalities in stable blends of highly reactive ingredients 
such as antioxidants and antimicrobials. While it is difficult to 
create efficacious and stable cosmeceutical formulations, herbs 
contain blends of multiple, often unique, active ingredients that 
are  biologically  active  [2,4].  Since  most  skin  conditions  and 
diseases are multifactorial with multiple mechanisms of action 

inducing the visible changes, herbal products would be expected 
to produce visible benefit. While 73% of women polled said it 
is important to have younger looking skin, the vast majority of 
topical botanical products promise youth but lack true clinical 
evidence. This evidence is defined as blinded clinical trials of sta-
tistically significant numbers, using the finished, marketed prod-
uct. Studies with individual ingredients in a laboratory vehicle 
system are not valid due to the chemical complexity of topical 
formulations that impact ingredient chemistry and function [5].

regulatory

A surprising 78.7% of women polled did not know claims made 
for skin care products are not regulated, evaluated, or verified 
by any governmental agency. Only in the USA are herbal prod-
ucts  sold  as  dietary  supplements  which  are  governed  by  the 
Dietary  Supplement,  Health  and  Education  Act  in  1994.  Such 
products are intended to affect the structure and function of the 
human body, as well as provide calories and nutrients. Topically 
applied  herbs  for  treating  cosmetic  skin  conditions  are  com-
monly  referred  to  as  cosmeceuticals.  These  products  improve 
the  appearance  of  skin  like  a  cosmetic,  but  modulate  surface 
skin morphology like a drug. Yet there is no official regulatory 
category for cosmeceutical ingredients.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

283

284

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

Certain  ingredients  used  in  cosmeceuticals  may  be  claimed 
to be therapeutic for common skin diseases. These ingredients 
are regulated as over the counter (OTC) drug monographs for 
acne,  dermatitis/psoriasis,  skin  protectant,  topical  analgesia 
and sunscreens, by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
Non-prescription products that list these active ingredients that 
are used in the specified concentration range in topical formu-
lations may claim the finished product to be effective and safe 
therapy for the specific skin conditions listed. The United States 
has a regulatory classification for food supplement and cosmetic 
ingredients with proven safety, called Generally Recognized as 
Safe, or GRAS [5,6].

CFR Title 21 – Food Drugs & Cosmetic Act regulates skin care 
products and cosmetics, including cosmeceuticals. These prod-
ucts are not supposed to harm the public. Cosmeceuticals are 
actually helpful to the skin. According to this regulation, misla-
beling a cosmetic is illegal. Mislabeling is defined as labeling the 
cosmetic with false or misleading information, or the label does 
not include all the information required by this Act. There are 
also four other statutes that do not apply to topicals. The FDA 
has become more aggressive in regulating topicals, thus experts 
are calling for revision and updating CFR Title 21. Products that 
claim to affect gene expression and DNA are among those under 
scrutiny as drugs. Recently, warning letters addressing cosmet-
ics  that  make  drug  claims  have  been  issued.  Additionally,  the 
FDA is monitoring social media, which resulted in a citation for 
using Facebook to promote unapproved “new” drugs, defined as 
“making therapeutic claims.” Moreover, such regulatory moni-
toring is needed as more herbal products with actives which are 
known  to  have  toxic  components  are  being  marketed.  These 
apparently  are  without  any  basic  safety  data  presented  in  any 
communication medium. Cosmetics can only claim to tempo-
rarily improve appearance [7].

There is no consistent definition of “natural” in US skin care 
products,  so  it  is  marketing  jargon  without  functionality  [9]. 
Recently a recommended criterion is, “Five percent or more of 
the ingredients are found in nature.” Organic products are ones 
that are certified free of synthetic chemical use in the fields, and 
using production methods of the ingredients obtained in nature 
[1].  The  US  Department  of  Agriculture  now  has  certification 
criteria for this designation to include certified as 100% organic, 
but  can  claim  organic  if  95%  of  components  are.  Organic-
derived  can  be  claimed  if  70%  of  the  components  are  organic 
[10]. There has been no decision by the FDA about genetically 
modified foods labeled as “natural.”

disease  is  growing  rapidly,  many  “exotic”  species  with  certain 
“fad”  characteristics  are  being  touted  also  for  cosmeceuticals. 
Fortunately, most of these exotic ingredients are added at sub-
therapeutic  doses  just  for  the  marketing  story  of  the  prod-
uct. Little is known about efficacy and safety of many of these 
 ingredients.

The active ingredients of plants used for human skincare are 
generally small molecules not involved in regular metabolic pro-
cesses, known as secondary metabolites (SM). These ingredients 
are used for nutrient storage or organism protection. The goal of 
extraction processes is to improve consistency of SM concentra-
tion, increase SM potency, and increase product purity [1].

Herbal extracts are much more susceptible to quality varia-
tions  than  synthetic  products  due  to  environmental  and  pro-
cessing  factors  affecting  solubility,  stability,  pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacology  and  toxicity  of  the  active  ingredients.  These 
include:
 1.  Growing conditions of the plant.
 2.  Health of the plant.
 3.  Harvesting time.
 4.  Care of botanical products during transport.
 5.  Storage time and method prior to processing.
 6.  Selecting the proper anatomic site on the plant.
 7.  Processing  methods  include  air  or  oven  drying,  crushing, 
cold pressing, comminuting (fracturing) and grinding.
 8.  Extraction methods include solvents such as water, alcohol, 

glycol, glycerin, ester or oil [1,2].

 9.  Secondary  purification  including  super  critical  fluids  and 

column chromatography [10].
Additional details are provided in the previous edition of this 

book [11].

The processing of herbal extracts provides a variety of products, 

including:
 1.  Isolated pure molecules that may then be used as prescription 
medication  such  as  colchicine  and  reserpine.  Certain  sub-
stances may be used in cosmetic products such as glycyrrhetic 
acid for skin lightening and sericoside for wrinkles.
 2.  Standardized extracts in dry, oily or soft (butter) forms.
 3.  Phytosomes  such  as  Centinella  asiatica  triterpenes  for 

 wrinkles.

 4.  Actiphytes  from  cold  processing  in  hydroglycolic,  alcohol, 

glycerin or oil bases.

 5.  Organoleptics or flavorings.

Safety

Factors affecting concentration and quality 
of active ingredients

The  skin  care  practitioner  should  select  a  herb  for  a  specific 
desired beneficial effect based on scientific research and/or tra-
ditional medical knowledge founded on ethnobotany. As inter-
est in phytomedicines for improving health as well as treating 

Patients and clients entrust skincare professionals to create effec-
tive and safe regimens for their skin, yet there are no safety require-
ments for cosmeceuticals. Best corporate practices should ensure 
safety studies are performed on all herbal products. The incidence 
of dangerous adverse reactions to herbal medicines is infrequent, 
but  is  growing.  The  most  common  adverse  reaction  consists 
of  40%  of  US  women  who  claim  to  have  sensitive  skin  [1,6].  

German  chamomile  (Matricaria  recutita),  cayenne  (Capsicum 
annuum)  and  echinacea  (Echinacea  angustifolia)  have  been 
reported to produce anaphylactic reactions even to death. Tabo-
randi (Pilocarpus microphyllus) induced death via cardiac arrest, 
while poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron) induced death via coma. 
Fatalities have also been reported with Aloe, Aristocholia, Arnica, 
Black  Mustard,  Cascara,  Cayenne,  Chinese  Rhubarb,  Comfrey, 
Croton,  Kava  Kava,  Ma  Huang,  Mistletoe,  Oleander,  Senna, 
Scotch pine, Spruce and Yohimbe [2,8,10].

A product labeled as “natural” does not equal a safe product. 
Chinese practitioners are concerned about the well-known side 
effects  of  hepatotoxicity,  contact  dermatitis  and  teratogenicity 
which  occur  in  up  to  a  third  of  people  using  topical  Chinese 
herbal preparations. Moreover, a significant number of congeni-
tal anomalies occur when these herbs are used topically during 
pregnancy [12].

Another  risk  of  herbal  products  is  the  relatively  high  inci-
dence of cross-reactivity with other herbs. For example, in 106 
dermatitis afflicted people, 12 were allergic to tea tree oil and all 
12 had one or more patch test reactions to 10 other herbs, most 
commonly, lavender [13].

A preferred safety test for a cosmeceutical product would be 
the Repeat Insult Patch Test (RIPT) on 50 panelists to evaluate 
risk of contact irritant and allergic dermatitis with topical use. 
This is a one-month test that measures for irritant reactions in 
the  first  10  days  and  allergic  sensitization  in  the  last  10  days. 
It will not predict systemic reactions such as gynecomastia due 
to widespread topically applied lavender in atopic children and 
teens used for prolonged periods [10,14].

effectiveness

In the last decade a new development has been the use of blinded 
clinical studies to document efficacy of cosmeceutical products 
presented  at  peer-reviewed  meetings  or  in  scientific  journals. 
This  is  the  most  convincing  scientific  evidence  of  therapeutic 
efficacy.  A  total  of  16  companies  have  produced  50  blinded 
clinical trials of herbs to treat photoaging. One company who 
produced the first blinded trial in 2002 has accounted for 16 of 
these blinded trials. Twelve of the 50 trials have compared the 
test herbal or herbal/synthetic blend formulations to prescrip-
tion products. The most prolific company accounted for seven 
of these trials.

Cosmeceutical  efficacy  claims  for  an  herbal  product  being 
sold in your practice would ideally be supported by a double-
blind clinical trial [1,5].

The true measure of a prescription or nonprescription drug's 
efficacy has been determined by United States regulatory agen-
cies to be a p value of <0.05. P value is a measure of probability, 
also known as statistical significance. A p value of <0.05 means 
if you run a study 100 times, the comparable positive result will 
occur in at least 95% of the attempts. A highly statistically sig-
nificant  result  is  when  p  value  is  <0.001.  This  means  running 

32. Botanicals

285

the study 1000 times produces the comparable positive result in 
99.9% of the attempts [10].

A major challenge to the clinical efficacy of any herbal extract 
is  the  delivery  of  therapeutic  concentration(s)  of  the  desired 
active  ingredients  across  the  stratum  corneum  intact  in  their 
functional  state  to  affect  organelles,  cells,  receptors,  metabolic 
and  cell  signaling  pathways.  The  different  solubilities,  polari-
ties, size and architecture of the several to hundreds of multiple 
secondary metabolites (SM) in herbal extracts creates difficulty. 
Moreover, the degree of biodegradability, biocompatibility, tox-
icity, release profile and antigenicity also vary amongst the mul-
titude  SM  in  one  extract.  Contributing  to  the  challenge  is  the 
different SM bind to cells and receptors in different cutaneous 
strata.

To meet this challenge of negotiating the tortuous proteohy-
drolipid  stratum  corneum,  several  novel  methodologies  have 
been  developed  that  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  chapter,  but 
thoroughly analyzed in this listed reference [10].

Mechanism of action

Plants are equipped with protective defensive mechanisms, stor-
age, color and aroma via low molecular weight compounds called 
SM. These are not used in primary metabolic processes such as 
photosynthesis, respiration, assimilation of nutrients, transport, 
growth or differentiation. They usually provide protection against 
ultraviolet light, herbivores, parasites, pathogenic microbes, and 
animals. Certain fatty acids and certain carbohydrates function 
within both metabolic processes and as SM.

About 20% of the higher plants have been studied with spec-
trometry, nuclear magnetic resonance and/or x-ray diffraction 
which have identified about 40,000 SM [1].

SM  are  divided  into  more  than  15,500  terpenoids,  12,000 
alkaloids and 6000 phenolics, which have been chemically char-
acterized from herbal extracts, as have 10 other chemical classes 
representing the other 6500; more extensive discussion is given 
in the previous edition of this book [1,11].

Cosmeceutical products

To  help  separate  true  scientifically  based  safe  and  effective 
herbal-based  cosmeceuticals  from  “snake  oil”  products  using 
voodoo  science,  and  before  making  a  decision  on  retailing  or 
recommending any particular brand of skin care products, the 
practitioner should ask the following questions:
 1.  Is the herb being used in other living breathing organisms, 
i.e. used as a veterinary or dental medicine; or a part of tra-
ditional  Asian  or  homeopathic  medicines;  or  used  in  food 
technology for mammalian exposure?

 2.  Is the biologically active ingredient and therapeutic concen-
tration range known and used in this cosmeceutical product?

286

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

 3.  The development of the formulation should include chemi-
cal, physical and photo-stability to ensure efficacy and that 
toxic metabolites are not formed.

 4.  Does the herbal SM penetrate the stratum corneum perme-
ability barrier in its active state at a high enough concentra-
tion to manipulate its target cell, organelle, enzyme, receptor 
or compound? Soothing mucilage or occlusive SM function 
by placement upon the mucocutaneous surface.

 5.  When  was  the  finished  product  manufactured?  Freshness 
matters  with  herbal  products.  All  cosmeceutical  active 
ingredients including antioxidants, vitamins, and herbal SM 
undergo chemical reactions when combined in any formula-
tion. This auto-oxidation reaction is affected by formulation 
manufacturing method. For example, heating speeds up the 
auto-oxidation process and destroys the activity of virtually 
all antioxidants [1,2].

 6.  Does  the  product  really  work  in  the  skin,  as  determined  by 
blinded clinical trials with the finished product you are selling?
 7.  Is the product safe? Are there reports of topical toxicity? Was 
an RIPT test performed on the product you are selling?
 8.  Has  the  skin  care  practitioner  thoroughly  evaluated  the 
product?  Patients/clients  expect  the  practitioner  to  be  a 
clearing house for accurate information for all skin products, 
prescriptions  and  treatments.  The  patient/client  assumes 
the  practitioner  uses  the  same  criteria  to  establish  which 
prescription drugs and treatments are offered as is used to 
determine which cosmeceuticals are recommended and sold 
[15].  In  this  litigious  society,  injury  can  result  in  criminal 
as well as civil judgments with use of unapproved or illegal 
products. Ignorance provides no legal protection [6].

Specific herbs to treat or prevent photoaging

The three theories of skin aging include:
 1.  Reactive oxygen species.
 2.  Mitochondrial dysfunction via nucleic acid mutations which 
are much more common than nuclear nucleic acid mutations.

 3.  Telomere damage via telomerase upregulation [10].

Reactive oxygen species, or free radicals, are reversed by anti-
oxidants. Humans utilize 15 antioxidants, elements and mole-
cules. At no body site is there only high concentration of a single 
one; rather there exists a cycle phenomenon to pass off some of 
the oxidant energy among these multiple antioxidant molecules 
and elements [16].

To protect mitochondria and prevent their dysfunction, ade-
quate  amounts  of  photoprotective  herbal  anthocyanins  such 
as carotenoids, and polyphenols and catechins from green tea, 
grape seed, resveratrol and silymarin have documented benefit.
Camptotheca  acuminate  (Happy  tree)  has  been  shown  to 

downregulate telomerase [2].

About  200  herbs  have  anti-inflammatory  functionality  with 
140  of  these  having  antioxidant  activity.  The  other  60  include 
anti-inflammatory natural steroids, salicylates, and other non-

antioxidants.  Only  six  herbal  extracts  for  treating  photoaging 
have been a sole active ingredient in tested formulations, includ-
ing: coffeeberry, date palm kernel, oat, soy milk, total soy, and 
soy protease inhibitors. These and the other 33 herbs tested in 
blinded studies to treat photoaging are listed in Table 32.1.

table 32.1  Anti-aging	herbs	with	clinical	studies	in	humans

Aloe	(Aloe barbadensis)

Apple	(Malus domestica)

Avocado	(Persea americana)

Black	cohosh	(Cimicifuga racemosa)

Blackberry	(Rubis ursinus)

Blueberry	(Vaccinium myrtillus):	oral	only

Cat's	claw	(Uncaria	guianensis,	U.	tomentosa)

Coffeeberry	(Coffea arabica)*

Comfrey,	or	comphrey	(Symphytum officinale)

Date	palm	kernel	(Phoenix dactylifera)*

Dill	(Anethum graveolens)

Flax	(Linum usitatissimum)

German	chamomile	(Matricaria recutita)	+	oral

Goji	(Lycium barbarum)

Grapefruit	(Citrus paradisi):	oral	only

Grape	seed	(Vitis vinifera):	oral	only

Green	tea	(Camellia sinensis)*	+	oral

Lavender	(Lavandula augustifolia)

Licorice	(Glycyrrhiza glabra, G. inflate, G. uralensis):	oral	only	and	
Glabridin	topically

Mangosteen	(Garcinia mangostana)

Meadowfoam	(Limnanthes alba)

Mountain	rose	(Rosa canina)

Mushroom/wheat	complex

Oak	quercetin

Olive	(Olea europaea)

Plum	(Prunus domestica)

Pomegranate	(Punica granatum)	+	oral

Raspberry	(Rubus idaeus)

Safflower	(Carthamus tinctorius)

Sakura	leaf	(Prunus speciosa)

Southern	wood	(Artemesia ambrosia)

Soy	milk,	total	soy	(Glycine soja, G. max),	soy	protease	inhibitors*	+	oral

Spring	rest-harrow	(Ononis spinosa)

Sweet	orange	(Citrus sinensis):	oral	only

Tamarind	(Tamarindus indica)

Tomato	(Lycopersicon esculentum):	oral	only

White	sandalwood	(Santalum album)

White	tea	(Camellia sinensis)	+	oral

White	willow	(Salix alba)

*	=	single	active	in	product;	+	oral	=	oral	plus	topical	administration.

With  the  appreciation  of  multiple  clinical  components  of 
photoaging that require multiple functionalities, all the herbal 
products published in the last three years consist of at least six 
active  ingredients,  with  others  containing  up  to  33  different 
actives. The contribution of each active is difficult to ascertain 
in such “soups.”

It has now been documented that the underlying biochemi-
cal anomalies that induce cutaneous photoaging are driven by 
the  dual  pathophysiologies  of  disrupted  or  incompetent  stra-
tum corneum barrier coupled with chronic inflammation [10]. 
Herbs with these foundational functions are listed in Table 32.2. 
The  lighteners/brighteners  in  Table  32.3  consist  of  36  herbs, 
including three different licorice types, to lessen or reverse mot-
tled  pigmentation,  melasma  and/or  lentigines  that  have  been 
documented  to  effectively  treat  hyperpigmentation  in  blinded 
clinical trials. Another 39 are claimed to be effective lighteners/
brighteners, but have non-blinded, uncontrolled, open trials, or 
clinical observations. A total of 130 herbs are reported to inhibit 
one or more melanin synthetic molecules in vitro.

The  16  tighteners  in  Table  32.4  reverse  skin  laxity  and  help 
reverse  wrinkles.  Table  32.5  lists  eight  herbal  modulators  of 
nucleic acids. Table 32.6 lists 16 photoprotective herbs via topi-
cal  and/or  oral  routes.  Orally  administered  photoprotective 
products should be an important lifestyle adjunct as only 40% 
of the population routinely wears sunscreen [15]. Incorporating 

table 32.2  Targeting	aging	pathogenesis

Barrier repair herbs:

	 Avocado	(Persea americana)

Jojoba	(Simmondsia chinensis)

Mallow	(Althaea officinalis)

	 Oat	(Avena sativa)

	 Olive	(Olea europea)

	 Safflower	(Carthamus tinctorius)

	 Shea	(Vitellaria paradoxa)

+19	others

Anti-inflammatory herbs:

	 Apple	(Malus domestica)

	 Date	palm	fruit	(Phoenix dactylifera)

	 Flax	(Linum usitatissimum)

	 Licorice	(Glycyrrhiza glabra,	G. inflate,	G. uralensis)

	 Meadowfoam	(Limnanthes alba)

	 Mountain	rose	(Rosa canina)

	 Olive	(Olea europaea)

	 Soy	(Glycine soja,	G. max)

	 Teas	(Camellia sinesensis)

	 Turmeric	(Curcuma longa)

+190	others;

140	also	have	antioxidant	activity

32. Botanicals

287

table 32.3  Lighteners/brighteners

Aloesin	(Aloe barbadensis, A. carpensis, A. vera)

Bearberry	(Arctostaphylos uva-uris)

Black	mulberry	(Morus nigra)

Blueberry	(Vaccinium angustifolium)

Blue	skull	cap	(Scutellaria lateriflora)

Carrot	(Daucus carota)

Citrus	fruit	flavonoid	[Hesperidin]

Cranberry	(Vaccinium macrocarpon, V. oxycoccos, V. erythrocarpus)

Cucumber	(Echballium elaterium)

Curcumin	(Curcuma longa)

Date	palm	fruit	(Phoenix dactylifera)

Echinacea	(Echinacea angustifolia, E. pallida, E. purpurea)

Feverfew	(Tanacetum parthenium)

Flax	lily	(Dianella ensifolia)

Ginseng,	American	(Panax quinquefolius)

Ginseng,	Asian	(Panax ginseng)

Ginseng,	Siberian	(Eleutherococcus senticosus)

Gingko	(Gingko biloba)

Grape	seed	(Vitis vinifera)

Hibiscus	(Hibiscus sabdariffa)

Indian	gooseberry	(Emblica officinalis)

Licorice	(Glycyrrhiza glabra, G. inflata, G. uralensis)

[ammonium	glycyrrhizinate;	glabridin;	liquriritin]

Mangosteen	(Garcinia mangostana)

Oat	(Avena sativa)

Olive	(Olea europaea)

Pear	(Pyrus communis)

Sakura	leaf	(Prunus serrulata)

Saxifrage	(Pimpinella saxifraga)

Soy	(Glycine soja, G. max)

Turmeric	(Curcuma longa)

White	mulberry	(Morus alba)

White	willow	(Salix alba)

Wormwood	(Artemisia absinthium)

Yellow	dock	(Rumex crispus, R. obtusifolius)

active herbal extracts into mineral makeup also assists in pho-
toprotection [17].

The  herbs  most  commonly  used  for  cosmeceutical  extracts 

are listed below.

aloe (Aloe barbadensis, A. capensis, A. vera)
The three species of aloe may cross-react with garlic, onions and 
tulip allergies. Gel from the leaves is the best source for SM, which 
includes aloe resins, dithranol, chrysorobin, allantoin, saponins, 
sterols, tannins, salicylates, amino acids, flavonoids, mono- and 
polysaccharides,  arachidonic  acid,  lipase  and  cyclo-oxygenase. 

	
288

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

table 32.4  Tighteners

Birch	(Betula alba)

Cinnamon	(Cinnamomum verum)

Flax	(Linum usitatissimum)

Ginger	(Zingiber officinale)

Gingko	(Gingko biloba)

Green	tea	(Camillia sinensis)

Hops	(Humulus lupulus)

Horse	chestnut	(Aesculus hippocastanum)

Meadowfoam	(Limnanthes alba)

Mountain	rose	(Rosa canina)

Peppermint	(Mentha piperita)

Red	sandalwood	(Pterocarpus santalinus)

Rosemary	(Rosmarinus officianalis)

Sage	(Salvia lavandulae, s. folia)

Spearmint	(Mentha spicata)

Witch	hazel	(Hamamelis virginiana)

table 32.5  Botanicals	which	modulate	nucleic	acids

Camptotheca acuminata

Cat's	claw	(Uncaria guianensis, U. tomentosa)

Mushrooms:		 Agaricus blazei

Cordyceps sinesis

Coriolus (Tremetes versicolor)

Maitake	(Grifolia frondosa)

Reishi	(Ganoderma lucidum)

Shiitake	(Lentinula edodes)

table 32.6  Photoprotective	herbs

Black	tea	(Camellia sinensis)

Cocoa	(Theobroma cacao):	oral	only

Feverfew	(Tanacetum parthenium)

Golden	fern	(Polypodium leukotomas):	oral	only

Grapeseed	(Vitis vinifera)	+	oral

Green	tea	(Camillia sinensis)	+	oral

Kale	(Brassica oleracea)

Oat	(Avena sativa)

Olive	(Olea europea)

Pomegranate	(Punica granatum)	+	oral

Ringworm	bush	(Cassia lata)

Spinach	(Spinacia oleracea)

Strawberry	(Fragaria)

Tamarind	(Tamarindus indica)

Tomato	(Solanum lycopersicum)

White	sandalwood	(Santalum album)

Aloe is antibacterial (AB) to Helicobacter pylori, Bacillus subtilis, 
and  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus.  This  herb  has 
anti-fungal (AF), anti-viral (AV), anti-antihistaminic (AH), anti-
inflammatory (AI), vasoconstrictive, and anti-oxidant (AO) prop-
erties. It improves photoaging by increasing collagen synthesis and 
microcirculation. Aloe did not decrease UVB induced erythema 
in  a  human  in-vivo  study.  As  one  of  five  herbal  plus  synthetic 
antioxidants, aloe effectively reversed the signs of photodamage 
in a placebo controlled trial. Aloesin extract is a potent tyrosinase 
inhibitor and inhibits UV induced melanogenesis but less so than 
kojic acid. Adverse reactions are a rare contact dermatitis. Aloe 
should not be used during pregnancy or lactation [2,8,18].

Charentais cantaloupe (Melo reticulatus)
This melon has the highest content of superoxide dismutase, the 
most potent AO enzyme, and it activates synthesis of two other 
enzymatic anti-oxidants, catalase and glutathione oxidase. It is 
also  a  rich  source  of  vitamins  A,  C,  B1,  B3,  B5,  B6  and  folate 
[2,19].

One  double-blind  clinical  trial  combining  charentais  canta-
loupe extract combined with nine other herbs produced highly 
statistically  significant  decrease  in  wrinkles  after  one  week  of 
use  compared  to  a  growth  factor  product  and  an  L-ascorbic 
acid/tocopherol product [pending publication ].

Coffee (Coffea arabica)
Coffea  arabica  yields  three  commercial  products:  coffee  beans 
which  are  the  seeds,  the  fruit  which  is  coffeeberry  and  cof-
fee  charcoal  which  is  roasted  fruit  until  black.  The  major  SM 
include  purine  alkaloids  such  as  caffeine,  theobromine  and 
theophylline,  the  polyphenols  caffeic,  chlorogenic,  and  ferulic 
acids,  diterpenes,  phytoestrogens,  proanthocyanadins,  saccha-
rides, and magnesium. These provide AO, photo-protective and 
anti-tumor (AT) functions. Caffeine itself also seems to improve 
skin roughness and fine lines.

Coffeeberry  extract  is  obtained  from  subripe  coffee  fruit. 
These  beneficial  molecules  are  preserved  with  new  roasting 
techniques.  A  double-blind  study  of  coffeeberry  as  the  only 
active  on  20  females  compared  to  baseline  revealed  statisti-
cally significant 30% improvement in hyperpigmentation, 20% 
improvement in fine lines and wrinkles. In another 10-female 
trial  versus  placebo  there  was  a  statistically  significant  25% 
improvement in fine lines and wrinkles and a 15% reduction of 
hyperpigmentation [1,2,8,20].

Adverse  reactions  include  three  deaths  from  rectal  enemas; 

coma, stroke and anaphylactic IgE reactions are rare.

Cucumber (Cucumis sativa)
Cucumber slices applied directly on eyelid skin to relieve puffi-
ness  is  due  to  AO,  AI,  AT  and  anti-parasitic  (AP)  flavonoids, 
curcubitacins,  alkaloids,  and  tannins  plus  ascorbic  acid  and 
peptides.  Inhibition  of  matrix  metalloproteinases  also  occurs, 
likely  reducing  photoaging.  This  herb  inhibits  melanogenesis 
while  improving  wound  healing.  In  a  blinded  clinical  trial 

32. Botanicals

289

of  21  panelists,  cucumber  produced  statistically  significant 
decreases  in  sebum  production  but  no  significant  decrease  in 
melanogenesis.  It  should  not  be  consumed  during  pregnancy 
and lactation [2,21,22].

Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)
Parthenolide is a sesquiterpene lactone that is the most active 
component  but  also  the  most  toxic.  Among  the  other  40  SM, 
are flavonoids, tanetin and apigenin, polyynes, volatile oils such 
as  camphor,  chrysanthyl  acetate,  linalool  and  melatonin.  The 
commercially available powdered leaves lack parthenolide, yet 
are AI, AH, AO, AT, photoprotective, vasoconstrictor, inhibits 
serotonin and arachidonic acid release and gene transcription. 
Inhibition of TNF alpha was 35–1000 times higher than black, 
green, and white tea, echinacea, chamomile, aloe vera, and lico-
rice  extracts.  Adverse  reactions  include  oral  ulcerations  and 
angioedema.  A  double-blind  study  of  31  women  with  sensi-
tive skin using a parthenolide free Feverfew moisturizer twice 
daily for three weeks produced statistically significant decrease 
(p < 0.05) in erythema, tactile roughness, and overall irritation. 
It was also effective therapy for shaving-induced irritation [23].
Feverfew is a member of the Compositae family, so it cross-
reacts  with  marigold,  daisy,  ragweed,  bromelain,  milk  thistle, 
arnica, and chamomile. Feverfew should never be used during 
pregnancy  and  lactation,  or  with  children  under  two  years  of 
age [1,2,8].

German chamomile (Matricaria recutita)
The major SM of this herb are mucilages from the entire plant. 
Volatile oils such as bisabolol and flavonoids such as apigenin, 
quercetin, chalmazulene, rutin and coumarins are also extracted 
from  the  flower.  Chamomile  has  AH,  AO,  AI  (superior  to  
0.5% hydrocortisone) via inhibiting lipo-oxygenase and cyclo-
oxygenase, and has estrogenic effects. It is AT, and AB against 
staphylococcus, AV and anti-candida yeast (ACY). Chamomile 
is also reported to reduce rough, xerotic, inelastic skin and signs 
of  photodamage,  and  treats  mucositis  to  11  common  chemo-
therapeutic agents including methotrexate and hydroxyurea.

This  herb  is  a  member  of  the  Compositae  family,  and  thus 
cross-reacts  with  marigold,  daisy,  feverfew,  ragweed,  arnica, 
milk thistle, and bromelain. There has been at least one death by 
anaphylactic reaction, and it uncommonly causes allergic con-
tact dermatitis. Avoid in pregnancy and lactation [1,3,8].

Golden fern (Polypodium leucotomos)
This herb has documented therapeutic efficacy in clinical trials 
for vitiligo, psoriasis, sunburn and UVA induced phototoxicity 
when  administered  orally.  Topical  lotions  reduced  photodam-
age in vivo.

The primary SM include the polyphenols chlorogenic, feru-
lic and caffeic acids. This extract is AI, AH via inhibiting mast 
cells, and AO. This herb statistically significantly decreases ery-
thema, sunburn cells, pyrimidine dimers, epidermal prolifera-
tion, reducing graft rejection, while reducing loss of Langerhans 

cells, thus stimulating humoral immunity. In a trial treating 25 
panelists with polymorphous light eruption and solar urticaria 
with  480  mg  orally  each  day,  41%  of  them  improved  by  more 
than 50% compared to baseline. Photo-protection occurs with 
7.5  mg/kg/day  or  240  mg  three  times  daily.  Vitiligo  is  treated 
with 120 mg three times daily [2,8,24].

Grape (Vitis vinifera)
Grape SM include the flavonoids quercetin, tannins, monomeric 
catechins, oligomeric proanthocyanidins (OPC) polymers, res-
veratrol,  tocopherol  and  fruit  acids. These  SM  provide  AT  via 
cytotoxicity and inducing apoptosis, AH, AI, AO, and vasodi-
lating  effects.  It  inhibits  matrix  metalloproteinases  (MMP), 
which stabilizes collagen. Grape is 50-fold more potent than AO 
efficacy by vitamins C or E. An oral product reduced melasma 
by  6  months  in  an  open  trial.  When  combined  with  six  other 
actives  in  an  oral  anti-aging  product,  skin  firmness  improved 
by 6 months. Red wine has 10 times the amount of flavonoids 
as white wine. The most potent wine for AO and resveratrol is 
Granache, or garnacha, wine.

Grape  extract  also  treats  allergic  rhinitis,  improves  wound 
healing,  canker  sores,  and  chronic  venous  insufficiency. There 
is  one  report  of  non-fatal  anaphylactic  reaction  to  grape  skin 
[2,8,25,26].

Green tea
Green tea extract ointment (Veregen® by Bradley Pharmaceuti-
cals) received FDA approval as prescription therapy for genital 
and perianal warts. Green tea reduced gum inflammation and 
premalignant  leukoplakia.  Topically,  it  reduces  sunburn  and 
puffy eyelids.

Green  tea  is  unfermented  Camellia  sinensis.  This  tea  is  rich 
in  polyphenols  including  catechins  with  the  most  potent  AO 
being epigallo catechin gallate (EGCG), flavandiols, flavonoids 
and phenolic acids. Other green tea SM include sterols and anti-
inflammatory estrogenic lignans and inhibit 5-alpha reductase. 
These polyphenols protect DNA and mitochondria. Green tea 
SM are AB, AI and AV.

The  only  blinded  clinical  trial  proving  benefit  of  green  tea 
in  reversing  photoaging  used  oral  and  topical  formulations. 
Another blinded study in premalignant actinic keratosis failed 
to show benefit with topically applied green tea.

Unlike the fermented teas of black and oolong, green tea lacks 
theaflavins, which also exist in chocolate. Black tea also contains 
gallic acid and thearubigin. These are AT and AV molecules that 
protect DNA [2,8].

Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabora)
Up to 15% of licorice SM are AI triterpene saponins including 
glycyrrhetic acid, glycyrrhizia, and glabrolide. Isoflavonoids are 
AI with estrogenic properties including glabridin and glyccyr-
rhisoflavone. AO flavonoids such as liquiritigenin, licochalcone 
A and licoricidin. Sterols and coumarins are other SM. Licorice 
extracts are also AB, AH, anti-platelet, AT and ACY. In addition, 

290

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

licorice  extracts  stimulate  T  lymphocytes,  interferon  gamma 
and are cytotoxic by stimulating NK cells. The flavonoids also 
increase tumor sensitivity to anti-neoplastic drugs, so licorice is 
classified as a chemo-preventative agent by the FDA.

At low concentrations, glabridin has estrogen receptor depen-
dent  growth  promoting  effects  but  has  anti-proliferative  effect 
at  high  concentrations.  Licorice  decreases  testosterone  and 
androstenedione.  It  is  an  abortifacient  so  should  be  avoided  in 
pregnancy and lactation.

Licorice extract does inhibit three of the 17 steps in melanin 
synthesis. Two double-blinded controlled trials using formula-
tions containing this ingredient were found to be significantly 
superior  to  hydroquinone  in  treating  hyperpigmentation  with 
significantly  greater  tolerability.  A  shampoo  is  marketed  to 
reduce seborrhea [2,8,11].

Milk thistle (Silybum marinium)
Silybin accounts for 75% of milk thistle extract known as sily-
marin. It provides AI, inhibits UVB sunburn, AO, and AT activity. 
Other SM include fatty oils, flavonoids such as apigenin, quer-
cetin, sterols, glucosides, fumaric acid and polyynes. Silymarin 
is a potent inhibitor of TNF alpha and has estrogenic activity. 
Its  adverse  reactions  include  pruritis,  eczema,  urticarial  and 
angioedema. Avoid during pregnancy and lactation.

This  herb  is  a  member  of  the  Compositae  family,  and  thus 
cross-reacts  with  ragweed,  feverfew,  marigold,  daisy,  arnica, 
chamomile and bromelain allergy [1,2,8].

Mushrooms
The major medicinal mushrooms come from Asian traditional 
medicine.  These  include  Agoricus  blazei,  Cordyceps  sinensis, 
Coriolus (Trametei versicolor), Reishi in Japan, Lingzhi in China 
(Ganoderma lucidum), Maitake (Grifola frondosa), and Shiitake 
(Leninus  edodes).  Mushroom  extracts  contain  polysaccharides 
such as beta glucan, peptides including adenosine, triterpenes, 
polyphenols,  protease  inhibitors  and  sphingolipids.  MMP  and 
activating protein-1 are inhibited by most mushrooms suggest-
ing effectiveness for photoaging therapy. These SM have AI, AO, 
AT, AB, and anti-HIV effects. They also stimulate natural killer 
(NK) cells [1,2,8]. Six species modulate nucleic acids.

Oat (Avena sativa)
This herb has proven double-blinded clinical trials for relief of 
pruritic skin, xerosis, and seborrheic dermatitis. The SM include 
polysaccharides,  such  as  beta  glucan,  steroid  saponins,  flavo-
noids such as apigenin, and polyphenols such as avenathramide 
(comparable  to  1%  hydrocortisone),  caffeic  and  ferulic  acids, 
hydroxycinnamate, coumaric acids and tocotrienols. Oat is AI, 
AO, and UVA blocking.

In an open trial treating acne induced by epidermal growth 
factor receptor agonists, 60% achieved complete remission and 
30%  partial  response.  Oats  not  contaminated  with  barley  or 
wheat have been proven not to aggravate celiac gluten sensitive 
enteropathy. Oat can be safely used in people with celiac disease. 
Contact dermatitis to oat occurs infrequently [2,8,27].

Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Oleander disrupts the normal calcium gradient in the epidermis 
and stratum corneum, thus disrupting the skin barrier and slow-
ing its repair, producing clinically visible or subclinical cutane-
ous inflammation with edema, creating a perceived anti-aging 
result. This herb also has AP, AT and insecticidal properties.

Despite  being  marketed  in  topical  products  to  treat  skin 
aging, no double-blind studies proving efficacy have been pub-
lished  or  presented  at  scientific  meetings.  A  branded  multi-
networking product uses a patent-pending extraction technol-
ogy  that  produces  a  specific  extract  combining  aloe  vera  with 
Nerium  oleander  extract.  An  open  human  visualization  trial 
showed improved photoaging parameters by 30% after 4 weeks 
of use, but no mention of number of panelists, comparison to 
placebo or baseline, or statistical significance. Safety studies of 
these topical products also have not been presented.

This is one of 15 herbs known to induce fatal reactions when 
topically applied and has resulted in at least two deaths. Toxicity 
is dependent on the concentration of this ingredient, the extent 
and frequency of application, user's age, body site and whether 
there is underlying skin barrier compromise. The most adverse 
reaction  is  contact  dermatitis.  Topical  formulations  must  be 
absolutely avoided during pregnancy and lactation, as seizures 
occurred  in  a  neonate  after  mother's  use  in  third  trimester 
[2,8,28].

Maitake mushroom (Grifola frondosa)
An open clinical study of mushroom and wheat protein com-
plex treated 37 women. Statistically significant improvements in 
photoaging epidermal parameters and pinch recoil improved by 
8 weeks versus baseline occurred [1,2,8].

Papaya (Carica papaya)
The SM of this herb include papain and chymopapain, lipases, 
alkaloids such as carpain, glycosides, glucosinolates and sapon-
ins.  This  herb  improves  wound  healing,  increases  humoral 
immunity, and is AT, AP and AB.

Shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes)
This fungus is also a rich source of ergocalciferol (vitamin D) 
and  the  immune  stimulating  AI,  polysaccharide  betaglucan. 
When combined with other herbs, the product produced highly 
statistically  significant  decrease  in  wrinkles  compared  to  a 
growth  factor  serum  and  an  L-ascorbic  acid/tocopherol  blend 
in a double-blind trial [1,2,8, unpublished by author].

Papaya does cross-react with latex sensitivity as well as fig and 
kiwi, rarely producing severe allergic systemic and contact reac-
tions. This herb should be avoided in pregnancy [2].

Pineapple (Ananas comosus)
The  proteinase  enzyme  bromelain  used  for  wound,  burn  and 
ulcer debridement and to treat postoperative edema is extracted 
from pineapple. It has AI comparable to diclofenac, AO, AH and 

32. Botanicals

291

AT activities. Pineapple extract SM include malic and citric acid 
plus vitamins A and C [2].

Pomegranate (Punica granatum)
Pomegranate  juice  and  fruit  contain  more  polyphenols  and 
anthocyanadins than green tea, red wine, cranberry, blueberry 
or orange juice, with AO activity three times higher than green 
tea or red wine. Other SM include tannins such as ellagic acid, 
citric, linoleic, and tartaric acids, and phytoestrogens. This herb 
stimulates wound healing, melanogenesis, is anti-viral to HIV, 
AB to Staphylococcus aureus, AF, AP and photoprotective.

Pomegranate  stimulates  keratinocyte  proliferation,  inhibits 
MMP-1  and  increases  fibroblast  procollagen  synthesis,  thus 
benefit for photoaging therapy is expected but not proven with 
topical administration [2,8]. It was effective in reducing photo-
aging as part of a multinutrient oral product [10].

Pumpkin (Curcubita pepo)
These  SM  are  carotenoids  including  lutein  and  beta  carotene, 
unsaturated  fats  including  oleic,  palmitic,  stearic,  with  nearly 
half being linoleic acid. This oil is also rich in gamma and alpha 
tocopherols, sterols including cholesterol and curcubitin, which 
mimics dihydrotestosterone. This extract has AO and AP activ-
ity. No blinded clinical trials have been published for photoag-
ing therapy [2].

Pycnogenol (Pinus pinaster, P. maritima)
The  French  maritime  pine  tree  yields  SM  including  flavonoid 
monomers, dimers, oligomers and polymers of catechins, epi-
catechin and taxifolin, which are known as oligomeric proan-
thocyanidins (OPC). Pycnogenol also contains phenolics such 
as ferulic, caffeic and coumaric acids and polysaccharides. It has 
AH, AI, and AO photoprotective functions. This ingested herb 
effectively treats chronic venous insufficiency better than horse 
chestnut. It is photoprotective. This herb stimulates wound heal-
ing, inhibits MMPs, stimulates cellular and humoral immunity. 
Clinical  trials  document  it  is  effective  therapy  for  psoriasis, 
atopic dermatitis and lupus.

In  a  30-day  open  human  clinical  trial  for  melasma  therapy, 
there was highly statistically significant (p < 0.001) decrease in 
melasma  area  and  pigment  intensity  with  30  mg  three  times 
daily [2,8,29].

rosemary (Rosmarinus officianalis)
This  herb  is  also  a  rich  source  of  triterpenes,  especially  ursolic 
acid, as well as camphor, flavonoids, diterpenes such as carnosolic 
acid and caffeic acids, including rosmarinic. Rosemary is AB AF, 
AT, AV, while improving vascular perfusion to accelerate wound 
healing. Rosemary should not be used during pregnancy [2,8].

Sage (Salvia lavandulae, S. folia)
These herbs are rich sources of ursolic acid, a triterpene docu-
mented  to  two  clinical  trials  to  reduce  signs  of  photoaging.  It 
also contains AO, AI flavonoids, diterpenes including carnosolic 

acid, caffeic acids such as rosmarinic and chlorogenic acids and 
camphor. It has AB, AF, AV, AT, while increasing local circula-
tion. It should not be used during pregnancy. The toxin, thujone, 
must be removed during manufacturing [2,8].

Soy (Glycine max)
SM from the soy bean include all of the essential amino acids 
needed for protein synthesis as well as calcium, potassium, iron, 
vitamins K2, B3, and isoflavones with estrogenic effects includ-
ing  genistein,  equol  and  daidzein,  and  AO  estrogenic  lignans. 
Other  SM  include  phytosterols  such  as  beta  sitosterol,  phos-
pholipids such as phosphatidyl choline, and saponins including 
triterpenes. Soy isoflavones are AI, AO, and AT. Unfortunately, 
soy does inhibit synthesis of thyroid hormone.

The positive impact of soy in reversing photoaging has been 
documented in four double-blind controlled clinical trials using 
different  forms  of  soy  including  whole  soy,  soy  milk  and  soy 
isoflavones plus lignans. Success in treating acne has also been 
observed [2,8,30,31].

Swiss apple (Uttwiler spätlauber)
This apple was discovered to stay fresh-looking for up to 4 months 
due to longevity of its stem cells. Unfortunately, only 20 of these 
trees exist on a farm in Thurgau, Switzerland. Researchers have 
suggested that stem cells from these apples protect human skin 
cells  from  aging,  yet  this  conclusion  was  only  supported  by  a 
10-panelist open, uncontrolled study which demonstrated 25% 
reduction  of  wrinkles  after  four  weeks.  Efficacy  was  demon-
strated in a double-blind clinical study using this herb and five 
other actives. Safety with chronic use has not been documented 
[32,33,34].

tamarind (Tamarindus indica)
This  flavoring  agent  contains  SM  including  a  polysaccharide 
(pectin)  that  chemically  closely  resembles  eye  mucin.  It  also 
contains  methyl  salicylate,  thiazole,  malic  and  tartaric  acids, 
protein,  vitamins,  minerals,  pyrazines,  monosaccharides, 
monoterpenoids, and cinnamates. These extracts are AB, AF AP 
and ACY. Topically, tamarind reduces parameters of photoaged 
skin [2].

turmeric (Curcuma longa, C. domestica)
This herb is best known as the food spice, curry. Curcumin is the 
therapeutic  component  extracted that  is  AH,  AI (greater than 
ibuprofen), AO, AT and stimulates wound healing. SM include 
volatile oils such as tumerone, the source of the aroma; curcu-
minoids including curcumin, the yellow pigment; and polysac-
charides.  Curcumin  has  weak  estrogenic  effects,  prevents 
genetic  transcription,  suppresses  MMPs,  inhibits  angiogenesis 
while stimulating cellular immunity. Curcumin is AB, AP, AV 
(against HIV).

Topical  curcumin  is  a  safe  therapy  for  radiation  dermatitis 
wound  repair.  Turmeric  extracts  should  not  be  used  in  preg-
nancy [1,2,8].

292

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

The  next  six  herbs  have  been  combined  in  a  commercially 
available blend, documented in six double-blinded, prospective, 
controlled clinical trials to be statistically superior (p < 0.05) to 
prescription tretinoin 0.05% and 12% ammoniated lactic acid in 
reversing photoaging of the skin [35,36].

apple (Malus domestica)
SM of this fruit provide AB, AH, AI, AO, AT functionalities with 
flavonoids  including  quercetin  and  phloretin  but  also  malic, 
succinic, lactic and citric acids, phyto steroids, B and C vitamins, 
carotenoids, tannins, caffeoylquinic acid and aromatic hexanal, 
and ethyl butyrate. It also has skin lightening properties [2,8].

Date palm fruit (Phoenix dactylifera)
This  extract  contains  50%  saccharose  and  10%  oils  of  physto-
steroids, leucoanthocyanidins, and flavonoids such as quercetin. 
In one screening study, this extract had the highest AI activity 
of all healthy food stuffs [8,10]. A blinded clinical trial demon-
strated a statistically superiority to placebo in reducing perior-
bital  fine  lines  [37].  Combined  with  meadowfoam  and  white 
willow bark, periorbital fine wrinkles were reduced by 42% in 
another  double-blinded,  prospective,  controlled  clinical  trial 
compared to placebo [36].

Flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum)
Also known as linseed, flax is one of the richest sources of the 
omega 3 essential fatty acid, linolenic acid. It also contains lig-
nans at a dose of 800-fold higher than in soy. These SM provide 
AI,  AO,  AT  and  estrogenic  functions.  Combined  with  mead-
owfoam oil, flax produces the ideal omega-3: omega-6 ratio for 
optimizing cutaneous endogenous AI activity. Used orally with 
borage oil in a double-blind trial of 45 panelists, flax significantly 
decreased erythema, roughness and scaling, while hydration and 
skin barrier function were improved [2,8,10].

Meadowfoam (Limnanthes alba)
This oil is a richer source of monounsaturated fatty acids than 
olive oil as well as a rich source of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty 
acids. Meadowfoam is also the richest source of phyto DHA, an 
essential fatty acid and a key precursor to synthesis of acetylcho-
line which increases skin firmness. This herb is AI and AT [10].

Mountain rose (Rosa canina)
This herb has long been used as a dietary supplement for vitamin 
C, malic and citric acids and pectin. Rose SM include citronellol, 
geraniol, nerol, linalool and citral, as well as proanthocyanidins 
and tannins [2,8].

Safflower (Carmathus tinctorius)
Safflower  is  the  oil  with  the  highest  concentration  of  linoleic 
acid, one of the three physiologic stratum corneum barrier oils 
along  with  ceramide  and  cholesterol.  Linoleic  acid  provides 
epidermal AB, AF, AI, AP effects, plus helps maintain the acid 

mantle. Safflower oil also inhibits MMP-2 and -9, thus reducing 
photoaging. Safflower seed oil was also shown to inhibit mela-
nogenesis more potently than arbutin [2,8,38,39].

recent herbal clinical trials

 1.  Plum fruit (Prunus domestica), sakura leaf (Prunus speciosa), 
and  three  synthetics  to  treat  moderate  hyperpigmentation 
and photoaging in 114 panelists for 8 weeks. Statistically sig-
nificant improvement was seen. Dahl A, Oregajo C, Yatskayer 
M. 69th Annual Meeting, Amer Acad of Dermatol, February 
4–8, 2011, New Orleans, LA. Poster #3209.

 2.  Dianella ensifolia, white birch, tetrahydrocurcumin, glycyr-
rhretinic acid statistically significantly improved hyperpig-
mentation.  Mommone  T,  Muizzudin  N,  Declercq  L,  et  al. 
Modification  of  skin  discoloration  by  a  topical  treatment 
containing an extract of Dianella ensifolia, a potent antioxi-
dant. J Cosmet Dermatol 2010; 9: 89–95.

 3.  Review  of  herbal  hyperpigmentation  therapies.  Berson  D. 

Pract Dermatol 2012; 9: 33–3.

 4.  Polypodium  leucotomos  statistically  significantly  improved 
photosensitivity with 480 mg and 720 mg daily doses. Tanew 
A, Radakovic S, Gonzalez S, et al. Oral administration of a 
hydrophilic extract of polypodium leukotomos for preven-
tion of polymorphous light eruption. J Amer Acad Dermatol 
2012; 66 (1): 58–62.

 5.  Dill,  blackberry,  zinc,  copper.  N  =  33  significant  improve-
ment  in  some  photoaging  parameters.  Baumann,  LS, 
Figueras  KA,  Bell  M,  Flitter  CJ.  Skin  &  Allergy  News,  Nov 
2012; 28: 29.

 6.  Tetrahydrocurcumin  ascorbate,  glabridin  and  4  synthetics 
for hyperpigmentation equals 4% hydroquinone in efficacy 
and tolerability. Makino ET, Herndon JH, Sigler ML, et al. 
Clinical efficacy and safety of a multimodality skin bright-
ener composition compared with 4% hydroquinone. J Drugs 
Dermatol 2012; 11: 1478–82.

 7.  Tibetan  goji  berries,  Himalayan  raspberry,  Iceland  moss, 
and Carob (Ceratonia siliqua), with Dead Sea mineral water 
as a base of two products. N = 10 for 4 weeks, both products 
reduced wrinkle depth and increased hydration. Wineman 
E, Portugal-Cohen M, Sorok Y, et al. Photodamage protec-
tive effect of two facial products containing a unique com-
plex of Dead Sea minerals and Himalayan actives. J Cosmet 
Dermatol 2012; 11: 183–90.

 8.  Bulbinella  frutecens,  Centella  asiatica,  oleurapeia  in  dime-
thicone  enchance  hydration,  promote  collagen-1  forma-
tion and maturation of scar compared to 100% petrolatum. 
N = 120. At week 2, statistically significant reduction in scar 
thickness, height, vascularity and itching. Kircik L. Compar-
ative study of the efficacy and tolerability of a unique topical 
scar product vs. white petrolatum following shave biopsies.  
J Drugs Dermatol 2013; 12 (1): 86–90.

32. Botanicals

293

   9. Licorice  and  vitamin  C.  Park  US,  Campo  SO,  Costa  A. 
Thirty-five  panelists  treated  60  days  for  melasma  had  a 
MASI  score  reduction  by  a  statistically  significant  35.1%. 
71st Annual Meeting, Amer Acad of Dermatol, March 1–5, 
2013, Miami, FL. Poster #6811.

 19. Spring  restharrow  (Ononis  spinosa)  root  and  a  synthetic 
active  in  open  trial  of  48  panelists  for  2  weeks  reduced 
wrinkles and lifted skin. DeCunha A, Nkenge A, Bertin C, 
et al. 69th Annual Meeting, Amer Acad Dermatol, February 
4–8, 2012, New Orleans, LA, poster #808.

 10. Oatmeal  and  petrolatum.  Zernikow  R,  Nebus  J,  Suero  M, 
Appa Y. Two blinded trials: N = 11 for 3 days on abraded skin, 
n = 28 for 14 days for winter dryness. Statistically significant 
improved hydration at 24 hours and TEWL improved by 14 
days. 71st Annual Meeting, Amer Acad of Dermatol, March 
1–5, 2013, Miami, FL. Poster #6390.

 11. Dill, olive oil, a peptide and niacinamide used for 12 weeks. 
After  4  weeks,  significantly  improved  uneven  skin  tex-
ture  was  noted  with  improved  elasticity  also  by  12  weeks 
vs.  negative  control.  There  were  statistically  significant 
improved eyelid fine lines/wrinkles at 7 days. Osborne R, 
Reichart  D,  Li  J,  et  al.  71st  Annual  Meeting,  Amer  Acad 
Dermatol, March 1–5, 2013, Miami, FL. Poster #7051 and 
#7071.

 12. Twenty-one  herbs  with  29  synthetics  in  a  formulation 
reduced facial erythema by 32.7% after 4 weeks in 44 volun-
teers. Dupont E, Leveille C, Gomez J, et al. Clinical efficacy 
of a serum integrating multiple cosmetic ingredients in the 
management of erythema of the face in aging skin. J Cosmet 
Dermatol 2012; 11: 207–212.

 13. A  quick  review  of  69  herbals.  Botanical  Blockbusters. 

Tashetta-Millane M. Dayspa 2013 (Jan); 18(1): 60–67.

 14. Curcumin:  a  novel  treatment  for  skin  related  disorders. 
Nguyen TA, Friedman AJ. J Drugs Dermatol 2013 (Oct); 12: 
1131–7.

 15. Green tea, resveratrol, caffeine reduced facial erythema in all 
16 panelists by 6 weeks. Ferzli G, Patel M. Phrsai N, Brody N. 
Reduction of facial redness with resveratrol added to topi-
cal product containing green tea, polyphenols and caffeine. 
J Drugs Dermatol 2013 (July); 12: 770–4.

 16. Grape seed extract with 2 synthetics for photoaging signifi-
cantly increased collagen by 74% and dermal density as well 
as other photoaging parameters in 40 panelists for 60 days. 
Gomes-Neto A, Costa A, Arruda L, et al. 70th Annual Meet-
ing, Amer Acad Dermatol, March 16–20, 2012, San Diego, 
CA, poster #4703.

 17. Nebus J, Vassilatou K, Philippo U, Wallo W. Oak quercetin 
used for 60 days on eyelids of 32 panelists produced statis-
tically significant improvement of wrinkling and smooth-
ness  in  over  90%.  69th  Annual  Meeting,  Amer  Acad 
Dermatol,  February  4–8,  2012,  New  Orleans,  LA,  poster 
#1615.

 18. Anthonavage  M,  Saliou  C,  Tucker-Smaras  S,  Zedayko  T. 
Southern wood (Artemis ambrosia) in 20 panelists to treat 
photoaging  for  2  weeks  produced  statistically  significant 
decrease in fine lines and mottled hyperpigmentation. 69th 
Annual Meeting Amer Acad Dermatol, February 4–8, 2012, 
New Orleans, LA, poster #810.

Conclusion

The use of herbal products remains a very active area of research 
in cosmetic formulations. Their popularity is in part a result of 
the  perceived  safety  naturally  derived  ingredients.  Consumer 
perceptions  of  botanicals  as  positive  ingredients  also  make 
them a welcome addition to otherwise mundane formulations. 
This chapter has evaluated some of the key considerations when 
assessing and testing herbal based cosmetic products, including 
the scientific basis and clinical trials of the most commonly used 
herbal ingredients.

references

1  VanWyk  BE,  Wink  M.  In:  Medicinal  Plants  of  the  World.  Timber 

Press: Portland, OR, 2004: 16–26, 371–94.

2  Jellin JM, Gregory PJ, eds. In: Natural Medicines Comprehensive Data 
Base, 13th edn. Therapeutic Research Faculty: Stockton, California, 
2012: 38–42, 31, 42, 215, 255, 262, 263, 301, 443, 623–5, 768, 769, 
788–93, 1009–1013, 1107, 1162, 1200–1202, 1260–62, 1295–8, 1333–5, 
1356–9, 1374, 1375, 1424, 1439–50, 151215.

3  Zwiebel SJ, Lee M, Alleryne B, Guyuron B. The incidence of vita-
min, mineral, herbal and other supplements use in facial cosmetic 
patients. Plas Recon Surg 2013; 132 (1): 78-82.

4  Heller J, Gabbay JS, Ghadjar M, et al. The top 10 list of herbal and 
supplemental medicines used by cosmetic patients. Plas Recon Surg 
2006; 117 (2): 436–45.

5  Draelos ZD. The art and science of new advances in cosmeceuticals. 

Clin Plas Surg 2011; 38 (3): 397–407.

6  Winnington P. Skin care and medical dermatology. Pract Dermatol 

2007; Nov: 35–44.

7  Epstein HA. Cosmetic science. SKIN Med, 2013; 11: 297–9.
8  Greenwald J, Brendler T, Jaenicke C, eds. In: PDR for Herbal Medi-

cines, 4th edn. Thomson Healthcare, Inc: Montvale, NJ, 2007.

9  Draelos Z. Optimizing redness reduction, part 2. Cosmet Dermatol 

2008; 21: 433–6.

10  Thornfeldt C, Bourne K. In: The New Ideal in Skin Health: Separat-
ing Fact from Fiction. Allured Books: Carol Stream, IL, 2010; 31–55, 
134, 143, 144, 191, 352–67.

11  Thornfeldt C. In: DraelosZ (ed.) Cosmetic Dermatology, 1st edn. 
Wiley  Blackwell  Publishing  Ltd,  Chichester,  UK,  2010;  (34): 
1269–80.

12  Koo J. Arain S. Traditional Chinese medicine in dermatology. Clin 

Dermatol 1999; 17: 21–7.

13  Jancin B. Cross-sensitivity in tea tree oil allergy. Skin Allergy News 

2002; Mar:38.

14  Henley DV, Lipson N, Korach K, Bloch C. Prepubertal gynecomas-
tia linked to lavender and tea tree oils. NEJM 2007; 356: 479–85.

294

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

15  Lewis  W.  Cosmeceuticals  roundup.  Plastic  Surg  Products  2007; 

Sept: 38–42.

28  www.cancer.org/treatments, accessed 10 January 2014.
29  Ni  A,  Mu  Y,  Gulati  O.  Treatment  of  melasma  with  pycnogenol. 

16  Antioxidants in Human Skin. www.wikipedia.org (accessed 19 Jan 

Phytother Res 2007; 16: 567–71.

2014).

17  Saluja R, Yosowitz G, Goldman M. Evaluation of mineral cosmetics. 

Cosmet Dermatol 2007; 20: 382–7.

30  Wallo W, Nebus J, Leyden J. Efficacy of a soy moisturizer in pho-
toaging: a double-blind, vehicle controlled, 12-week study. J Drugs 
Dermatol 2007, 6: 917–22.

18  Jin Y, Lee S, Chung M. Aloesin and arbutin via a different action 

31  Baumann LS, Wu J. Cosmeceutical Critique Compendium: supple-

mechanism. Arch Pharm Res 1999; 22: 232–6.

ment to Skin and Allergy News 2008; 1–19.

19  Milesi MA, Lacan D, Brosse H, et al. Effect of an oral supplemen-
tation  with  a  proprietary  melon  juice  concentrate  (Extramel®)  on 
stress and fatigue in healthy people: a pilot, double-blind, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Nutr J 2009; 8: 40.

20  Cohen J. Coffeeberry. Skin Allergy News 2007; 1:32.
21  Akhtar  N,  Mehmood  A,  Ali  Khan  B,  et  al.  Exploring  cucum-
ber extract for skin rejuvenation. African J Biotech 2007; 10 (7): 
1206–16.

22  Baumann  LS.  Cucumber.  Cosmeceutical  Critique.  Skin  &  Allergy 

News 2012; Oct: 21.

23  Tierney N, Liebel F, Kurtz ES, Martin K. Daily use of a topical for-
mulation containing parthenolide-free extract of feverfew clinically 
reduces  the  appearance  of  erythema  due  to  ultraviolet  exposure. 
Poster presented at 63rd annual meeting of the American Academy 
of Dermatology, New Orleans, LA, 2007.

24  Middlekamp-Hup M, Puthak M, Parrado C, et al. Oral polypodium 
leukotomos extract decreases ultraviolet induced damage of human 
skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 2004; 51: 910–8.

25  Baumann LS. Melasma and its newest therapies. Cosmet Dermatol 

2007; 20: 349–53.

32  A  Swiss  apple  a  day  keeps  wrinkles  at  bay.  www.swissinfo.ch 

(accessed 11 Jan 2014).

33  www.Greenmedinfo.com/blog/science (accessed 13 May 2013).
34  Farris  PK,  Edison  BL,  Brouda  I,  et  al.  Swiss  apple  stem  cells  plus 
4  synthetics  and  one  peptide.  Improved  photoaging  to  statisti-
cally significant degree in 69 women for 16 weeks. A high potency 
multi-mechanism skin care regimen provides significant anti-aging 
effects: results from a double-blind, vehicle-controlled clinical trial. 
J Drugs Dermatol 2012; 11: 1447–54.

35  Thornfeldt  C,  Sigler  M.  A  cosmeceutical  with  novel  mechanisms 
of action effectively reduces signs of extrinsic aging. Poster #1128, 
presented  at:  64th  Annual  Meeting,  Amer  Acad  Dermatol,  San 
Francisco, CA, 2006.

36  Thornfeldt C, Sigler M. Comedolytic anti-inflammatory cosmeceu-
tical  reduces  signs  of  maturity.  Poster  #229,  presented  at  64th 
Annual Meeting, Amer Acad Dermatol, San Francisco, CA, 2006.
37  Bauza E, Dal Farra C, Berghi A, Oberto G, Peyronel D, Domloge 
N.  Date  palm  kernel  extract  exhibits  anti-aging  properties  and 
significantly  reduces  skin  wrinkles.  Int  J  Tissue  React  2002;  24: 
131–6.

26  Yamakoshi J, Sano A, Tokutake S, et al. Oral intake of proanthocya-
nidin-rich extract of grape seeds improves chloasma. Phytother Res 
2004; 18: 895–9.

38  Solanki  K,  Matnani  M,  Kale  M,  et  al.  Transcutaneous  absorption 
of topically massaged oil in neonates. Indian Pediatr 2005; 42 (10): 
998–1005.

27  Högberg  L,  Laurin  P,  Fälth-Magnussen  K,  et  al.  Oats  to  children 
with newly diagnosed coeliac disease: a randomized double-blind 
study. Gut 2004; 53: 649–54.

39  Roh JS, Han JY, Kim JH, Hwang JK. Inhibitory effects of active com-
pounds isolated from safflower (Carthamus tinctorius L.) seeds for 
melanogenesis. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27 (12): 1976–8.

ChApteR 33
Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

Bryan B. Fuller
DermaMedics LLC, Oklahoma City, OK, USA

BASIC CONCeptS

•	 An	antioxidant	is	a	molecule	that	prevents	the	oxidation	of	other	molecules	thereby	protecting	cells	from	damage	caused	by	free	

radicals.

•	 The	most	common	oxygen	radicals	in	the	body	are	the	superoxide	anion	(O•
2
•	 Free	radicals	cause	extensive	and	irreversible	damage	to	proteins,	DNA,	and	lipids,	with	serious	consequences	affecting	cell	survival,	

−)	and	the	hydroxyl	radical	(•OH).

malignant	transformation,	and	the	development	of	disease.

•	 Antioxidants	include	vitamin	C,	vitamin	E,	curcumin,	green	tea,	carotenoids,	and	ubiquinone.
•	 Anti-inflammatories	include	botanical	extracts,	corticosteroids,	non-steroidal	anti-inflammatories,	and	immunomodulators.
•	 Endogenous	antioxidants	and	anti-inflammatories	are	necessary	to	prevent	damage	that	contributes	to	both	extrinsic	and	intrinsic	aging.

Antioxidants

Introduction
The use of  oral and topical antioxidants  to  provide  protection 
from and treatments for various diseases, including cancer, and 
to  prevent  aging,  has  gained  considerable  popularity  over  the 
past 25 years. While it is clear that antioxidants such as vitamins 
C, E and A, and carotenoids, can protect cells from free radical 
damage,  it  is  not  clear  whether  or  not  taking  large  quantities 
of  antioxidants  can  prevent  the  occurrence  of  disease  or  slow 
the  aging  process.  Some  clinical  studies  have  suggested  such 
a  role  for  antioxidants,  while  other  studies  have  not  provided 
clear evidence that antioxidant supplements can reduce the risk 
of cancer, heart disease or aging [1]. Regardless of clinical study 
results,  the  fact  that  antioxidants  can  block  free  radical  dam-
age to cells has led to rapidly growing markets for antioxidant 
nutritional supplements, antioxidant beverages, and has fueled 
an  entire  industry  focused  on  finding  foods  with  ever  higher 
antioxidant  potential.  Most,  if  not  all,  topical  skin  care  prod-
ucts manufactured today contain antioxidants such as vitamin 
E, vitamin C, and carotenoids, to mention a few. The question 
of whether or not the antioxidants in topical skin care products 
may provide any skin benefits will be explored in this section.

Antioxidants, free radicals and reactive oxygen 
species (ROS)
An antioxidant is simply a molecule that can prevent the oxi-
dation of other molecules. Their importance in protecting cells 

from damage results from their ability to block the progression 
of oxidative damage caused by free radicals.

Free radicals are molecules or atoms with unpaired electrons. 
Having an unpaired electron leaves an incomplete electron shell 
and makes the atom or molecule more chemically reactive than 
those with complete electron shells. Because atoms seek to reach 
a state of maximum stability, they will try to fill the outer shell by 
“stealing” an electron from another molecule. When the target 
molecule  loses  an  electron  to  the  free  radical  it  then,  in  turn, 
becomes a free radical and must find a “donor” it can steal an 
electron  from.  Thus,  a  chain  reaction  begins  that  causes  con-
siderable  damage  to  cellular  proteins,  lipids,  membranes  and 
DNA.  Most  free  radicals  in  biological  systems  are  derivatives 
of oxygen. The most common oxygen radicals in the body are 
the  superoxide  anion  (O•
−)  and  the  hydroxyl  radical  (•OH−). 
2
While free radicals have extremely short half-lives, in the order 
of nanoseconds or microseconds, this is sufficient time to attack 
molecules  and  generate  new  free  radicals.  In  addition  to  the 
above oxygen radicals, there are other reactive oxygen species 
(ROS)  which  are  not  actually  radicals,  but  which  are  reactive 
and which can cause extensive damage to cells and tissues. Two 
of the more important of these are hydrogen peroxide and hypo-
chlorite ion [2].

Free  radicals  and  other  ROS  can  cause  irreversible  and 
destructive changes to proteins, DNA, and lipids and these can 
have serious consequences on cell survival, malignant transfor-
mation and the development of disease. One of the most damag-
ing free radical events is lipid peroxidation to membrane lipids 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

295

296

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

which play a key role in cell signaling. In this case a hydroxyl 
radical may remove a hydrogen atom from the side chain of a 
fatty acid, thereby converting the fatty acid into a radical. The 
fatty acid then reacts with oxygen to form a very reactive per-
oxyl  radical.  A  chain  reaction  begins  in  which  one  lipid  radi-
cal  becomes  two  lipid  radicals.  Ultimately,  the  lipid  radicals 
may  form  covalent  crosslinks  with  each  other  thereby  ending 
the chain reaction. Unfortunately the result is crosslinked and 
functionally damaged lipids. A good example of this is the free 
radical damage to low-density lipoprotein (LDL). This damage 
has been shown to lead to atherosclerosis.

ROS effects on signaling pathways
Free radicals and other reactive oxygen species (ROS) can not 
only  damage  proteins,  lipids  and  other  cellular  constituents, 
they can activate signaling pathways that lead to the increased 
expression  of  genes  controlling  inflammation  and  prolifera-
tion. Although ROS are produced constantly by normal cellular 
events such as respiration, or as a result of enzyme activity, e.g. 
NADH oxidases, they are continually being inactivated by cellu-
lar antioxidants such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, 
glutathione (GSH) peroxidase and GSH. However, if the “load” 
of  ROS  in  a  cell  becomes  very  high  due  to  exposure  to  such 
“insults” as UVR, ionizing radiation, chemotherapeutic drugs, 
or environmental  factors, the endogenous  antioxidant  mecha-
nisms  are  overwhelmed,  “oxidative  stress”  occurs,  and  signal-
ing pathways are activated. Many studies have shown that ROS 
can activate members of the mitogen activated protein kinases 
(MAPK)  family,  which  includes  the  growth  factor-regulated 
extracellular signal-related kinases (ERKs), the stress-activated 
MAPKs, c-jun NH2-terminal kinases (JNKs) and p38 MAPKs. 
Activation of these kinases leads to the enhanced expression of a 
number of genes including those involved in inflammation and 
proliferation [3]. How ROS activate the MAPK pathways is not 
completely  understood,  but  evidence  suggests  that  these  free 
radicals may function by:
 1.  promoting ligand-independent clustering and activation of 
membrane  receptors,  such  as  the  epidermal  growth  factor 
membrane  receptor,  which,  when  activated,  stimulates  the 
MAPK pathway;

 2.  inactivating MAPK phosphatases (MKP), which ordinarily 
function to dephosphorylate and inactivate MAPK thereby 
“dampening” the kinase mediated events;

 3.  altering the protein structure of receptor tyrosine kinases and 
MAPK and, by doing so, irreversibly activate them [4,5,6].
Regardless  of  the  mechanism  of  activation,  the  end  result 
of  stimulating  the  MAPK  pathway  is  that  gene  expression 
is  altered  leading  to:  (1)  increased  cellular  proliferation;  
(2)  increased  inflammatory  cytokine  and  chemokine  expres-
sion;  (3)  increased  COX-2  expression,  resulting  in  high   levels 
of  PGE-2;  (4)  cell  transformation/carcinogenesis;  and  (5) 
increased  production  of  MMPs  (matrix  metalloproteinases), 
including MMP-1, MMP-2, and MMP-9, all of which can cause 
damage to the skin’s matrix [7,8].

ROS and glycation: effects on skin aging
A large body of recent work has shown a strong link between 
AGEs (advanced glycation end products) and both skin aging 
and  skin  inflammation.  Aging  effects  on  skin  that  result  from 
glycation include alterations in skin thickness, texture, resiliency, 
loss of matrix components, and a decrease in elasticity. Glyca-
tion is a non-enzymatic linkage of sugar to proteins, lipids and 
nucleic  acids. Specifically  the carbonyl group  of  simple sugars 
such as glucose and fructose binds to the amino group of amino 
acids  (especially  lysine  and  arginine).  This  initial  and  revers-
ible reaction forms a Schiff base which is chemically unstable. 
This Schiff base then re-arranges to form a more stable ketoam-
ine.  Like  the  Schiff  base,  this  intermediate  is  also  reversible, 
but because it  is  reactive, the ketoamine can  form irreversible 
complexes with peptides and proteins, such as collagen, result-
ing  in  the  production  of  crosslinks  which  are  non-reversible 
and, unfortunately, are resistant to even enzymatic degradation. 
These  large  complexes  can  also  undergo  additional  reactions 
such as oxidation, polymerization, and dehydration resulting in 
new forms of AGEs. Since AGEs are resistant to turnover, they 
accumulate  with  age,  and  the  skin  structure  becomes  increas-
ingly damaged. Extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins are known 
to be a major target for glycation. Type I collagen is subject to 
glycation  as  is  elastin  and  fibronectin.  Collagen  is  not  only  a 
key structural component in the dermis, providing mechanical 
support for tissues, but it plays an active role in regulating such 
cell functions as migration, proliferation and gene expression. 
Glycation of collagen causes crosslinks between molecules and 
thus,  creates  stiffness  that  reduces  skin  elasticity.  In  addition, 
glycation alters the structure of collagen to the point that it is no 
longer able to bind correctly to target cells. This leads to lost cell 
communication. Table 33.1 shows a few of the “aging” effects of 
glycation on skin cells [9–11].

Evidence  suggests  that  free  radicals  produced  by  UVR  can 
accelerate the development of AGEs, and further, in the process 
of glycation and AGE formation, ROS are produced. These ROS, 
in  turn,  cause  more  damage  to  proteins  and  lipids  and  also 
activate  signaling  pathways  that  cause  inflammation.  Recent 

Table 33.1  Glycation	mediated	skin	aging	effects

Cell type

Action

Aging effect

Keratinocyte

Decreased	proliferation

Reduced	cell	renewal

Keratinoycte

Increased	MMPs

Matrix	destruction

Keratinocyte

NFκB	activation

Inflammation

Fibroblasts

Decreased	proliferation

Increased	senescence

Fibroblasts

MMP	increase	decreased	
collagen	synthesis

Loss	of	matrix	strength	and	
elasticity

Fibroblasts

Increased	apoptosis

Cell	death,	thinning	skin

Fibroblasts

Increased	ROS

inflammation

Vascular	
endothelium

Increase	adhesion	
molecules	in	endothelial	
cells

Increase	in	immune	cells	into	
skin:	increased	cytokines	and	
chemokines.	Inflammation

studies  have  identified  a  membrane  receptor  for  AGE,  appro-
priately  named  receptor  for  advance  glycation  end  products 
(RAGE). Upon binding to AGEs, the RAGE receptor is activated 
and  this  activation  leads  to  the  stimulation  of  several  signal-
ing  pathway  components  including  mitogen-activated  protein 
kinases (MAPKs), extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) 
1 and 2, phosphatidyl-inositol 3 kinase, p21Ras, stress-activated 
protein  kinase/c-Jun-N-terminal  kinase  and  the  janus  kinases 
[33,41].  Stimulating  these  pathways  results  in  activation  of 
various transcription factors, and in particular, the activation of 
nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB). This transcription factor, acti-
vates a variety of matrix damaging genes, such as MMP-1 and 
MMP-9,  as  well  as  inflammatory  genes,  including  TNF-alpha, 
IL-1, IL-8, and COX-2 [12,13].

Antioxidants protect cells from free radicals, ROS, 
and glycation
Antioxidants  protect  cells  from  free  radical/ROS  damage  by 
either donating an electron to a free radical thereby stabilizing it 
and halting the chain reaction or by accepting the one unpaired 
electron,  again  stabilizing  the  free  radical  and  preventing  it 
from interacting with and damaging proteins, DNA and lipids. 
By  donating  an  electron  to  the  free  radical  to  stop  the  chain 
reaction, the antioxidant itself becomes a free radical. However, 
because of its structure, the antioxidant is far less reactive than 
other radicals. If it is relatively large, the effect of the unpaired 
electron is “diluted” along its structure. The antioxidant “radical” 
may  also  be  neutralized  by  another  antioxidant  or  it  may  be 
enzymatically restored to its non-free radical form. Gluthione is 
one antioxidant that can donate a hydrogen atom to a hydroxyl 
radical thereby neutralizing it. The oxidized glutathione is con-
verted back to its reduced form by glutathione reductase and is 
then ready to reduce additional free radicals.

Recent studies have shown that antioxidants can prevent free 

radical damage to the skin in several ways:
 1.  Antioxidants inactivate ROS and PREVENT the ROS medi-
ated stimulation of signaling pathways that can lead to the 
activation of inflammatory and aging genes, such as TNF-
alpha, IL-1, COX-2 and MMPs.

 2.  Antioxidants can interfere directly with receptor activation 
of signaling pathways that stimulate inflammatory genes.
 3.  Antioxidants  prevent  free  radical  induced  changes  to  pro-
teins and to membrane lipids that destroy their normal cel-
lular functions.

 4.  Antioxidants  reduce  the  formation  of  AGEs,  and  AGEs 
produced ROS thus, reducing skin aging and inflammation 
[14–16].

An antioxidant’s “potency” may be quantified by use of ORAC 
assays.  ORAC  stands  for  oxygen  radical  absorbance  capacity 
and is a method of measuring antioxidant capacities of differ-
ent  foods,  vitamins  and  compounds  [17].  The  assay  measures 
the oxidative destruction of a fluorescent molecule (for exam-
ple,  fluorescein)  after  it  is  mixed  with  a  free  radical  producer 
that generates peroxyl and hydroxyl radicals. By comparing the 

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

297

Table 33.2  ORACValues	of	Antioxidants

Antioxidant

Olive	extract

Clove

Quercetin

Resveratrol

Cinnamon

Vitamin	C

Vitamin	E

Cocoa

Acai

Pomegranate

Blueberry	(raw)

Lycopene

ORAC mole TE/100g

2,700,000

1,078,700

1,090,000

620,000

267,536

189,000

135,000

80,7000

38,700

10,500

7,700

5,800

change in fluorescence in a reaction tube that contains only the 
fluorescent molecule and free radical with the change in fluo-
rescence measured in the assay tube containing the antioxidant 
along with the free radical, a measure of antioxidant potential 
(ORAC  score)  can  be  obtained.  Table  33.2  shows  the  ORAC 
scores of some representative antioxidants.

Of the many antioxidants that are now being formulated into 
topical products, two of the most common and most important 
are vitamin C and vitamin E. Vitamin C is the most prominent 
antioxidant in the aqueous compartment of cells. It can neutralize 
hydroxyl, alkoxyl and peroxyl radicals by hydrogen donation and 
is thus, an extremely important antioxidant for biological systems. 
Further, vitamin C can regenerate oxidized vitamin E and is, in 
turn, regenerated by glutathione. It is a useful antioxidant to incor-
porate into topical products, including suncare products because 
in the skin, vitamin C neutralizes free radicals generated by either 
UVA or UVB radiation. Unfortunately, vitamin C needs to be con-
tinually replaced since even a low dose of UV radiation from the 
sun can deplete 30–40% of the vitamin C present in the skin [18].
Vitamin  E  is  one  of  nature’s  most  important  lipid  antioxi-
dants since it associates with membranes and protects the lipid 
environment by scavenging lipid peroxyl radicals. Vitamin E is 
found in the stratum corneum where it can act as a “front line” 
defense  against  UV  radiation  induced  free  radicals.  As  men-
tioned above, the vitamin E radical can be regenerated by vitamin 
C, and also by glutathione and ubiquinol (coenzyme Q10).

There are many other antioxidants that have been formulated 
into  skincare  products  including  ferulic  acid,  retinol,  ideben-
one, and epigallocatechin gallate to mention a few. As discussed 
below, some of the skin benefits these antioxidants provide may 
be the result of actions on cells that go beyond their ability to 
simply scavenge free radicals.

Antioxidants as anti-inflammatories:  
effects on cell signaling pathways
Inflammatory skin disorders are common and range from occa-
sional rashes accompanied by skin itching and redness to more 

298

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

chronic conditions such as atopic dermatitis, rosacea, seborrheic 
dermatitis, and psoriasis. As mentioned, many naturally occur-
ring antioxidants have pronounced anti-inflammatory activities, 
and because of the negative side effects of many prescription anti-
inflammatories (discussed below), there is increasing interest by 
pharmaceutical  companies  in  identifying  botanically  derived 
compounds to treat inflammatory skin conditions. The goal is to 
find compounds which have excellent anti-inflammatory prop-
erties, but which do not suppress the immune system or cause 
other side effects, such as skin thinning.

Biology of the skin inflammatory process
Skin inflammation, which is characterized by redness, swelling, 
heat,  itching  and  pain,  can  exist  in  either  an  acute  or  chronic 
form with acute disease frequently progressing to a more chronic 
condition. Acute inflammation can result from exposure to UV 
radiation  (UVR),  ionizing  radiation,  allergens,  or  to  contact 
with  chemical  irritants  (soaps,  hair  dyes,  etc.).  Assuming  that 
the triggering stimulus is eliminated, this type of inflammation 
is typically resolved within 1 to 2 weeks with little accompany-
ing tissue destruction. A chronic inflammatory condition, how-
ever, can last a lifetime, and cause considerable damage to the 

skin. Some of the cellular and biochemical events which occur 
in the skin in response to a triggering stimuli (e.g. UVR, chemi-
cal or antigen) and which lead to an inflammatory response are 
shown in Figure 33.1. Within minutes of exposure of skin to an 
insult there is a rapid release of inflammatory mediators from 
keratinocytes and fibroblasts and from afferent neurons. Kerati-
nocytes produce a number of cytokines and chemokines includ-
ing PGE-2, TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6 and IL-8. Dermal fibroblasts 
also respond to the insult and to IL-1 produced by keratinocytes 
by increasing production and secretion of cytokines including 
IL-1, IL-6, IL-8 as well as PGE-2. PGE-2 increases vasodilation 
and vascular permeability, facilitates the degranulation of mast 
cells, and increases the sensitivity of afferent neuronal endings. 
Increased vasodilation and vascular permeability by PGE-2 and 
histamine  leads  to  increased  blood  flow  and  extravasation  of 
fluid from blood vessels, resulting in visible redness and swell-
ing. Increased production of TNF-alpha and IL-1, leads to the 
expression of intracellular adhesion molecules, such as VCAM 
and  ICAM,  on  endothelial  cells  of  the  blood  vessels  [19–21]. 
These  proteins,  as  well  as  P  and  E  selectin,  serve  as  anchor-
ing elements for blood-borne monocytes and neutrophils. The 
attachment of leukocytes to the adhesion molecules slows their 

Resident
Ag

Chemical
irritant

UV

Bacteria/fungal infection

Insult

TNFα

IL-1α

Nerve
cell

Mast cell

Epidermis
Keratinocytes

Dermis
Fibroblasts

MMPs

Sub P

Increased
excitability

Histamine

(TNFα,
IL-all,
MCP-1,
prostaglandins)

PGE2

IL-8

IL-6

Lymphocyte,
monocyte
activation

Monocytes/
macrophages/
T cells

Upregulation of
endothelial cell
adhesion molecules
(E-selectin, ICAM-1, VCAM-1)

Vasodilation,
increased
permeability

Diapedesis

Rolling

Firm adhesion

Skin venules

E-selection

ICAM-1

VCAM-1

Figure 33.1  Skin inflammation pathway.

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

299

movement  through  the  bloodstream  and  finally  causes  their 
adhesion to the endothelial wall. In the presence of chemokines, 
particularly, IL-8 produced and released by both keratinocytes 
and  fibroblasts,  the  adherent  leukocytes  undergo  chemotaxis 
and migrate from the blood vessel out into the skin where they 
act to scavenge the area of debris and also produce additional 
inflammatory  mediators.  The  initial  acute  response  occurs 
within minutes of the insult to the skin. The subsequent move-
ment  of  neutrophils  and  monocytes  into  the  “wounded”  area 
typically takes up to 48 hours to occur. If the triggering stimulus 
is eliminated, inflammatory mediator production by keratino-
cytes, fibroblasts and mast cells ceases, the influx of leukocytes 
to  the  “wounded”  area  decreases  and  inflammation  subsides 
[22–24].

In  contrast  to  acute  inflammation  which  typically  resolves 
in 1 to 2 weeks, chronic inflammation results from a sustained 
immune  cell  mediated  inflammatory  response  within  the  skin 
itself and is long-lasting. This response involves antigen present-
ing cells (APC) in the skin, called Langerhans cells in the epider-
mis and dendritic cells (DC) in the dermis, that, when activated, 
transport antigens through the lymphatics and to T lymphocytes 
where the antigen is “presented”. The T-lymphocytes are activated 
and travel back to the skin where they proliferate and express a 
wide  range  of  inflammatory  mediators  as  well  as  matrix-erod-
ing  enzymes  (MMP-1;  collagenase)  [25].  Cytokines  produced 
by  T-lymphocytes  can  stimulate  fibroblasts  and  keratinocytes 
to  produce  additional  cytokines  and  chemokines,  and  can  also 
induce the expression of a variety of tissue-destructive enzymes 
by  fibroblasts,  including  MMP-1  (collagen),  MMP-3  (stomely-
sin-1) and MMP-9 (gelatinase B). As long as the antigen or insult 
stimulus persists in the skin, the inflammatory response will con-
tinue resulting in significant and serious tissue destruction.

Inflammatory  processes  in  the  skin,  particularly  those  trig-
gered by long-term exposure to solar radiation trigger molecu-
lar  pathways  that  escalate  the  aging  process.  Actinic  aging,  or 
photoaging,  that  occurs  following  prolonged  exposure  of  the 
skin to ultraviolet (UV) light from the sun results in increased 
cytokine production with attendant activation of genes in both 
keratinocytes and fibroblasts that cause erosion of the normal 
skin structure. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which break 
down  the  skin  extracellular  matrix  causing  sagging  and  wrin-
kling, are stimulated in sun-exposed skin. Furthermore, dermal 
fibroblast synthesis and assembly of collagen, which is required 
to  maintain  and  restore  the  extracellular  matrix,  is  inhibited 
while elastin production is over- stimulated, leading to elastosis. 
It is now widely accepted that sun-exposed skin in most individ-
uals remains in a constant state of low level UV-induced inflam-
mation, and that this “smoldering” inflammation is responsible 
for the signs of skin aging that appear in middle age [26,27,28].
Many  antioxidants  have  anti-inflammatory,  as  well  as  anti-
aging activities. Vitamin C, for example, not only stimulates the 
collagen I and III genes in dermal fibroblasts, but can also inhibit 
UVR-induced  levels  of  inflammatory  cytokines,  chemokines 
and hormones including PGE-2. Further, this vitamin stimulates 

cell proliferation in dermal fibroblasts [29]. The major lipid sol-
uble anti-oxidant, vitamin E, has been shown to alter the expres-
sion of cell cycle genes in human T cells and to suppress PGE-2 
production  [30].  This  PGE-2  inhibition  may  explain,  in  part, 
vitamin E’s ability to partially protect skin from UVR induced 
erythema.

One of the best anti-inflammatory antioxidants produced by 
nature may be curcumin. In addition to its ability to neutralize 
free  radicals,  it  can  also  interfere  with  cell  signaling  pathways 
involved  in  inflammation.  Considerable  research  efforts  have 
focused on understanding how curcumin blocks inflammatory 
pathways [31–35]. From these studies the following picture has 
emerged:
 1.  Curcumin blocks the activation of the NF-κB transcription 
factor, which is responsible for the activation of a variety of 
inflammatory  genes  including  TNF-alpha,  IL-1,  Il-8,  and 
COX-2.

 2.  Curcumin  blocks  Nf-κB  activation  by  preventing  the  phos-
phorylation of the NF-κB inhibitor IKB. Since phosphoryla-
tion of this factor is required for NF-κB activation, preventing 
its phosphorylation blocks NF-κB activation.

 3.  Curcumin  also  inhibits  the  activation  of  the  inflammation 
related genes, ICAM and IL-12, which are controlled, at least 
in part, by Jak-STAT signaling pathways. This inhibition is 
due to curcumin’s ability to block the phosphorylation and 
activation of the STAT transcription factor [8].

 4.  Curcumin  can  block  the  ligand  activation  of  cell  surface 
receptors.  For  example,  curcumin  blocks  the  activation  of 
the EGF receptor, and since over-expression of this receptor 
is linked to several epithelial cell cancers, the potential use 
of curcumin as a cancer therapeutic has received consider-
able attention. Since curcumin has been shown to block the 
recruitment of “scaffolding proteins” to a receptor that has 
been “activated” by binding its ligand, it is likely that this is 
the mechanism by which curcumin blocks EGF activation of 
downstream signaling pathways.
Given all of these data, it seems likely that curcumin’s ability 
to prevent the activation of inflammatory genes results from its 
ability  to  interfere  with  the  initial  “scaffolding”  events  that  are 
required to stimulate the signaling cascade. In addition, curcum-
in’s ability to inactivate ROS prevents the ROS mediated activa-
tion of surface receptors. A cartoon depicting the probable sites 
of action of curcumin, and likely other phenolic antioxidants, in 
preventing the activation of inflammatory (and aging) genes is 
shown in Figure 33.2.

In  addition  to  curcumin,  a  large  number  of  other  phenolic 
and  polyphenolic  compounds  derived  from  plants  have  now 
been  shown  to  have  direct  anti-inflammatory  effects  on  cells 
as  well  as  antioxidant  activity.  These  include  quercetin,  luteo-
lin,  resveratrol,  ferulic  acid,  dihydroeugenol,  apigenin,  genis-
tein, and  epigallocatechin gallate [10–12]. While some of these 
 antioxidants  reduce  inflammatory  gene  expression  through 
interfering  with  NF-κB  driven  genes,  others  interfere  with 
MAPK  signaling  pathways  that  lead  to  the  activation  of  the 

300

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

IL-1R

SUN

EGFR

MyD88

X
IRAK

TRAF-6

ACTIVATION
X

ACTIVATION

X

UVB

ROS

Plasma membrane

NIK

IKK

IKb

NF-κB

Degradation

NF-κB

Vasodilation,Edema
CARCINOGENESIS

ANTIOXIDANT

SAPK/MAPK
ERK1/2/p38
pathways/JNK

TAK-1

IL-8, IL-1, IL-9
ICAM, VCAM
COX-2

Immune cell
chemotaxis
INFLAMMATION

COX-2
IL-12
MCP-1

MMP-1
TNF-α
IL-6

PGE-2
production

DECREASE in
Collagen 1, HAS-2
p53 gene
expression

Growth/
TUMOR
PROMOTION

Figure 33.2  Proposed mechanism for curcumin inhibition of inflammatory signaling pathways.

 transcription  factor,  AP-1.  By  interfering  with  the  ability  of 
AP-1 to activate target genes, these compounds, such as luteo-
lin, prevent the activation of such inflammatory genes as IL-6, 
COX-2,  IL-18  and  MCP-1  (monocyte  chemotactic  protein-1) 
[36–39]. With regard to skin anti-aging benefits, not only can 
luteolin  reduce  the  expression  of  inflammatory  cytokines  and 
chemokines,  but  it  inhibits  hyaluronidases  and  thus  preserves 
hyaluronic  acid  levels  in  the  skin  [40].  A  related  polyphenol, 
genistein,  blocks  intracellular  signaling  pathways  by  inhibit-
ing  tyrosine  kinases,  and  the  phosphorylation  of  the  epider-
mal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) [41]. A bar graph showing 
the effect of several antioxidants on inhibition of IL-1 induced 
PGE-2  levels  in  human  dermal  fibroblasts  is  shown  in  Figure 
33.3a, while the effect of luteolin and ascorbyl acetate in inhibit-
ing a variety of inflammatory cytokines in human keratinocytes 
induced with TPA, is shown in Figure 33.3b.

topical formulation of antioxidants
Although  it  is  clear  that  polyphenolic  antioxidants  as  well 
as  simpler  antioxidants  such  as  vitamins  C  and  E  can  reduce 
inflammation in the skin, for these compounds to be effective 
when  applied  topically,  they  must  penetrate  into  the  skin  at  a 

sufficient concentration to exert their protective effects on tar-
get  cells,  such  as  keratinocytes,  fibroblasts,  and  immune  cells 
migrating  in  from  the  vasculature.  Whether  or  not  a  particu-
lar  compound  will  be  able  to  cross  the  stratum  corneum  and 
penetrate  down  into  the  skin  to  reduce  inflammatory  events 
in the epidermis and dermis depends on two main factors: (1) 
size; and (2) solubility of the compound. With regard to size, it 
is well-known that molecules larger than 500 MW are too big 
to penetrate through the stratum corneum, at least to any sig-
nificant degree [42]. Although it is theoretically possible for a 
large molecule, e.g. growth factors, enzymes, other protein and 
peptides to enter the skin through the follicle route, or through 
sweat  glands,  unfortunately  these  structures  represent  less 
than 1% of the skin’s surface. Thus, this route of skin penetra-
tion would be of little value in addressing skin problems, such 
as inflammation. With regard to solubility characteristics, since 
the stratum corneum is composed largely of lipids, water solu-
ble compounds regardless of how small they are, will not easily 
penetrate through this barrier. For any compound to penetrate 
into and through the stratum corneum, it should have a parti-
tion coefficient (Log P value) of around 2.5. Partition coefficient 
simply  refers  to  the  ratio  between  a  compound’s  solubility  in 

100

80

60

)

%

(

2
-
E
G
P
d
e
c
u
d
n

i

1
-
L
I

40

f
o
n
o
i
t
i
b
h
n
0I

20

i

(a)

Ferulic acid
Eugenol

Curcumin

Quercetin

Trolox
Luteolin

Ascorbyl palmitate

CoQ10

Retinol
Retinoic acid

2
-
E
G
P
d
e
c
u
d
n

i

1
-
L
I

(b)

40

f
o
n
o
i
t
i
b
h
n
0I

20

i

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

301

Luteolin

Ascorbyl palmitate

100

80

60

)

%

(

PGE-2

IL-6

IL-8

TNF-α

PGE-2

IL-6

IL-8l

TNF-α

Figure 33.3  Anti-inflammatory properties of antioxidants. (a) Inhibition of the inflammatory mediator prostaglandin E 2 (PGE-2) in human keratinocytes 
by antioxidants. (b) Inhibition of four important skin inflammatory mediators by luteolin and vitamin C.

octanol  (oil  soluble)  and  its  solubility  in  water. The  logarithm 
of this ratio is called the LogP. So a compound with a LogP of 2 
is much more soluble in octanol than water and will be likely to 
penetrate through the stratum corneum. A compound that has 
a LogP considerably under (e.g. –3) or over (e.g. 8) the value of 
2 will likely not be a good candidate for topical use. A LogP of 8 
means the compound is so hydrophobic that if it enters the stra-
tum corneum, it will never move into the aqueous environment 
of the skin. Likewise, a compound with a negative LogP is too 
water soluble to penetrate the lipid environment of the stratum 
corneum.  Many  phenolic  and  polyphenolic  antioxidants  have 
exactly the properties needed for efficient topical delivery. Cur-
cumin, luteolin, quercetin and 4-propyl guaiacol are all less than 
400 molecular weight and all have a LogP of between 2 and 2.5. 
Unfortunately  curcumin,  luteolin  and  quercetin  are  yellow  in 
color and will appear yellow when applied topically. Thus, they 
have not been used to any extent in topical products. The plant 
derived antioxidant, 4-propyl guaiacol, however, is colorless and 
moves through the stratum corneum with high efficiency. It also 
has pronounced anti-inflammatory activity.

Anti-inflammatories

prescription medicines for inflammation 
and mechanism of action
Corticosteroids
Some of the most effective and commonly used prescription drugs 
for treating inflammation are the corticosteroids, particularly the 
glucocorticoid related steroids. They are effective for many forms 
of eczema, including atopic dermatitis and allergic contact der-
matitis, and are fairly effective in ameliorating the symptoms of 
psoriasis.  Corticosteroids  can  be  used  topically  or  orally.  Given 

the efficacy of corticosteroids in treating many different types of 
skin inflammation and autoimmune based inflammatory diseases 
such as rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, lupus erythematosus, and 
allergic rhinitis, considerable research has been directed toward 
understanding their mechanism of action.

Corticosteroids act on target cells by binding to the glucocorti-
coid receptor present primarily in the cytosol. This binding “acti-
vates” the receptor resulting in its translocation to the nucleus. 
The steroid hormone receptor complex then binds, as a homodi-
mer, to DNA regulatory elements along the promoter regions of 
specific genes. This binding usually results in the up-regulation 
of  gene  activity  but  can  also  cause  transcriptional  repression 
of  the  target  gene  [43].  The  effectiveness  of  corticosteroids  as 
inhibitors of inflammation stems from the ability of the steroid 
activated glucocorticoid receptor complex to interfere with the 
activation of genes regulated primarily by two transcription fac-
tors,  NF-κB  and  AP-1  [44,45].  These  two  transcription  factors 
are largely responsible for the transcriptional activation of a wide 
variety  of  pro-inflammatory  genes  including  cytokines  IL-1, 
IL-2,  IL-3,  IL-4,  IL-6,  IL-11,  IL-12  and  IL-13,  TNF-alpha,  and 
GM-CSF,  chemokine  genes  IL-8,  RANTES,  MCP-1,  adhesion 
molecules ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-selectin, the COX-2 gene, 
and the matrixmetalloproteinase genes, MMP-1 [46].

The  transcription  factors,  NF-κB  or  AP-1  are  activated  by 
kinases which, in turn, are activated as a result of a hormone or 
cytokine binding to, and activation of, a surface receptor. In the 
case of the NF-κB activation pathway, a kinase, IκK, when acti-
vated, phosphorylates an inhibitor protein, IκB. Unphosphory-
lated IkB binds to and represses the activity of NF-κB, but when 
phosphorylated,  it  dissociates  from  NF-κB  and  is  degraded. 
Once freed from the IkB, NF-κB can translocate to the nucleus 
where it binds to the promoter region of specific genes and acti-
vates them [47]. In regard to the AP-1 transcription factor, it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
302

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

G

G

Glucocorticoid
receptor

)a(

IL-1/TNF-α receptor

Plasma
membrane

IKK

IKB

P

IKB

NF-κB

NF-κB

Degradation

G

NF-κB

No binding
of NF-κB

No
transcription

Nucleus

IL-8

COX-2
IL-12
MCP-1

MMP-1
TNF-α
IL-6

Ca2+

Immunoreceptor

CRAC

Tacrolimus,
Pimecrolimus

CAMK

Calcineurin

Ca2+
P P P
P
NFAT
PPPP

Plasma
membrane

?

PLCγ

Ca2+

IP3

IP3R

ER

)b(

NFAT

Target genes

Figure 33.4  Glucocorticoid and immunomodulator inhibition of inflammatory pathways. (a) Mechanism of glucocorticoid inhibition of the NF-κB driven 
inflammation pathway. (b) Diagram of calcineurin and NFAT activation and inhibition by tacrolimus/pimecrolimus.

is phosphorylated and activated as a result of a kinase “signaling 
cascade”  that  begins  with  the  binding  of  a  hormone/cytokine, 
such as IL-1 or TNF-alpha to a surface receptor on target cells [45].
As  mentioned,  the  anti-inflammatory  activity  of  corticoste-
roids  comes  from  their  ability  to  repress  either  the  activation 
or activity of the NF-κB and AP-1 transcription factors thereby 
 suppressing  transcription  of  genes  coding  for  inflammatory 
mediators.  A  model  showing  one  mechanism  glucocorticoids 
use  to  block  the  transcriptional  activity  of  NF-κB  is  shown  in 
Figure 33.4a. When activated by hormone binding, the gluco-
corticoid receptor translocates to the nucleus where it can bind 
to  NF-κB  and  suppress  its  transcriptional  activity,  either  by 
preventing  its  binding  to  the  promoter  region  of  target  genes 
or by preventing NF-κB’s ability to activate the transcriptional 
machinery  when  bound  to  the  promoter.  Thus,  inflammatory 
genes  that  require  NF-κB  for  activation  remained  turned  off. 
[48,49].  Similarly,  the  activated  glucocorticoid  receptor  inter-
acts  with  the  AP-1  transcription  factor  and  prevents  it  from 
binding to and activating target inflammatory genes.

While the glucocorticoids are very effective in suppressing the 
activation  of  pro-inflammatory  genes  they  unfortunately  pro-
duce a variety of undesirable side effects. First, due to their potent 
inhibition of genes involved in an immune cell driven inflamma-
tory  response,  they  have  an  overall  immune  suppressive  effect. 
Prolonged use of glucocorticoids leads to a reduction in B and  
T  lymphocyte  populations,  and  a  reduced  ability  to  fight  skin 
infections. Further, steroids adversely affect the ability of dermal 
fibroblasts to synthesize collagen and at high doses they reduce 
the proliferation rate of these cells. Consequently, long-term use 
of topical steroids leads to skin thinning and a decrease in the der-
mal matrix. Other potential negative side effects caused by pro-
longed use of steroids include altered carbohydrate metabolism, 
suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, increased 
osteoporosis, and increased risk of developing cataracts.

NSAIDs
The most well-known of all the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs  (NSAIDs),  aspirin,  has  been  used  for  over  100  years  to 
control various forms of inflammation. NSAIDs are available in 
OTC and prescription forms. Common OTC forms are ibupro-
fen, naproxen, and aspirin. Those available with a prescription 
include  celecoxib  (Celbrex®),  diclofenac  (Votaren®),  etodolac 
(Lodine®),  indomethacin  (Indocid®),  ketoprofen  (Orudis®)  and 
Rofecoxib  (Vioxx®)  to  name  a  few.  One  topical  prescription 
NSAID that has received FDA approval in the U.S. is Solareze® 
(diclofenac)  which  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  actinic 
keratoses [50,51].

When  one  examines  the  published  data  on  the  efficacy  of 
topical  NSAIDs  in  treating  various  inflammatory  symptoms, 
the results show considerable disparity. A statistical analysis of 
clinical data from a wide number of trials with various topical 
NSAID  preparations  concluded  that  long-term  use  the  effec-
tiveness of the NSAID treated group was not significantly dif-
ferent from the placebo group [52]. Other studies, however, do 
suggest  that  topical  NSAID  treatment  for  joint  pain  provides 
relief  beyond  that  observed  with  the  placebo  group  [53–55]. 
Few  studies  have  evaluated  topical  formulations  that  contain 
newer NSAIDs, including the specific COX-2 inhibitors, but it 
seems likely that a topical preparation of a potent NSAID that 
delivers adequate levels of an effective COX inhibitor through 
the skin would likely be effective in treating a variety of inflam-
matory conditions in which PGE-2 is indicated as a causative 
factor.

The  target  for  NSAIDs  is  the  enzyme  cyclooxygenase 
(COX), which exists in two forms, COX-1 and COX-2. While 
most  older  versions  of  NSAIDs  including  aspirin  and  ibu-
profen are not selective inhibitors of any particular form of 
COX,  newer  drugs  have  been  designed  to  target  primarily 
COX-2 [56].

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

303

Because of their ability to lower PGE-2 levels, topical NSAIDs 
have  been  evaluated  for  their  ability  to  reduce  the  severity  of 
a sunburn, which is largely mediated by PGE-2. Topical appli-
cation of the COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, after UVB irradiation 
of  skin,  reduced  erythema,  edema,  PGE-2  levels,  the  number 
of  sunburn  cells,  and  dermal  infiltration  of  neutrophils  [57]. 
The  topical  NSAID,  diflofenac  (branded  Solareze®),  which  is 
approved for use in the U.S. to treat actinic keratoses, has been 
shown to reduce sunburn symptoms when applied within 4 hours 
of the initial onset of sunburn [51]. Interestingly, several studies 
implicate PGE-2 as a causative factor in skin cancer, and results 
from  mouse  experiments  show  that  topical  application  of  a 
PGE-2 inhibitor lowers the UVB induced number of papillomas 
detectable 12 weeks after UVB dosing [58,59].

Immunomodulators
A  newer  type  of  non-steroid  anti-inflammatory  drugs  is  rep-
resented  by  the  immunomodulators.  Two  anti-inflammatory 
drugs that have received FDA approval for topical use are the 
immunomodulators,  tacrolimus  and  the  related  drug,  pime-
crolimus. These drugs, along with cyclosporine, which exerts its 
effects through the same mechanism of action, had their origin 
as  immunosuppressive  agents  used  to  prevent  organ  rejection 
after transplant surgery [60]. Both pimecrolimus and tacrolimus 
have been approved for topical use in treating atopic dermati-
tis, but not for psoriasis. As is the case with the glucocorticoids, 
the immunomodulators inhibit the production of inflammatory 
mediators  but  unlike  the  corticosteroids,  both  tacrolimus  and 
pimecrolimus do not thin the skin [61–63].

Tacrolimus,  pimecrolimus  and  cyclosporine  all  repress 
inflammatory genes in target cells through a common mecha-
nism that involves the repression of activity of a ubiquitous cal-
cium-activated phosphatase, calcineurin, that is involved in the 
activation of specific inflammatory genes [64]. A cartoon show-
ing the calineurin pathway is shown in Figure 33.4b. When sur-
face membrane receptors are activated by binding to a hormone 
or  cytokine,  there  is  an  increase  in  intracellular  calcium.  The 
increased  calcium  causes  the  activation  of  calmodulin  which 
then binds to the calcium dependent enzyme, calcineurin and 
activates it. The activated calcineurin enzyme is a phosphatase, 
which can dephosphorylate the cytosolic subunit of a transcrip-
tion factor, NFATc (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytosol). 
The dephosphorylation of the cytosolic NFAT subunit allows it 
to translocate to the nucleus where it forms a complex with the 
nuclear subunit of NFAT (NFATn) whose synthesis was induced 
by  signaling  cascade  initiated  by  the  antigen  binding  to  the 
T-cell surface receptor. Once the NFAT dimer has formed in the 
nucleus, it can bind to the promoter region of several inflamma-
tory genes including those for IL-2, IL-3, IL-4 and TNF-α [64].

When  the  drugs,  tacrolimus,  pimecrolimus  or  cyclosporine 
enter  the  cell  they  bind  to  a  cytosol  protein,  either  FKBP  for 
tacrolimus  or  pimecrolimus  or  cyclophilin  for  cyclosporine. 
Once formed, this complex is able to bind to and inactivate cal-
cineurin. The now inactive calcineurin can no longer dephos-

phorylate  NFATc  which  results  in  the  transcription  factor 
remaining unactivated and in the cytosol. Thus, the NFATn pro-
tein in the nucleus has no binding partner and cannot bind to 
and activate inflammatory genes [63].

While tacrolimus and other calcineurin inhibitors are much 
more  specific  than  corticosteroids  in  terms  of  the  types  of 
cells they act on, they still inhibit a wide variety of inflamma-
tory genes and are therefore, immunosuppressive. In 2006, the 
FDA issued a “black box” warning that the use of either Elidel 
(pimecrolimus)  or  Protopic  (tacrolimus)  may  be  linked  to  an 
increased risk for cancer.
Another  class  of 

immunomodulators,  called  “biologic 
response modifiers (BRM)” or simply “biologics” because they 
are made from living organisms, have been developed over the 
past 5 years. These are essentially “designer” drugs because they 
target  a  specific  event  or  mediator  involved  in  inflammation. 
Most  of  these  are  “humanized”  monoclonal  antibodies  that 
bind  to  and  inactivate  various  inflammatory  cytokines.  Anti- 
inflammatory  drugs  in  this  category  include  the  TNF-alpha 
inhibitors,  Enbrel  (etanercept),  Remicade  (infliximab)  and 
Humira  (adalimumab)  [51],  a  fusion  protein  that  can  bind  to 
the  CD2  binding  site  on  T-lymphocytes  and  prevent  the  anti-
gen-mediated  activation  of  the  cell  (Amevive)  and  finally,  an 
antibody,  Raptiva,  that  prevents  leukocytes  cells  from  binding 
to adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, thereby preventing 
migration of these cells into the skin.

These  new  protein-based  “biologic”  immunomodulators, 
although effective and useful for treating various dermatologi-
cal conditions are, however, not without side effects. Because of 
their potent immunosuppressive effects, particularly on T-lym-
phocytes, the risk of infection among patients taking these med-
ications is elevated [65].

topical antioxidant anti-inflammatories
Determining topical efficacy
The  increasing  interest  in  using  “natural”  antioxidants  to 
address,  not  only  skin  aging,  but  also  inflammatory  diseases 
such  as  eczema,  atopic  dermatitis,  seborrheic  dermatitis  and 
even psoriasis and cancer, has led to the introduction of many 
products that contain botanical extracts or plant-derived com-
pounds, which are believed to have anti-inflammatory activity 
[66–68]. Some of the many antioxidant botanical extracts now 
in topical products include green tea extracts, curry extract, jew-
elweed, calendula, aloe, chamomile and willow bark, and many 
more.  Pure  phenolic  antioxidants  with  known  anti-inflamma-
tory activities that have been incorporated into topical formula-
tions  include  EGCG  (epigallocatechin  gallate)  [69],  vitamin  C 
[70] and resveratrol [71,72] to mention a few. Given the abun-
dance  of  botanicals  which  claim  anti-inflammatory  activity,  is 
there  any  scientific  evidence  to  suggest  that  any  of  these  can 
actually  block  the  production  of  inflammatory  mediators  or 
the process of inflammation when applied topically? Although 
there are many cell culture and animal studies that have exam-
ined the anti-inflammatory activities of these compounds, there 

304

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

have been very few clinical studies to assess their effectiveness 
when applied topically. One of the easiest human studies to run 
to determine if topically applied antioxidants can block inflam-
mation is a sunburn study. In the few studies that have been car-
ried out, non-sun exposed skin (e.g. buttocks) was treated with 
dose of UVB equal to 3–5 times the MED dose, and the effect of 
a topical antioxidant in blocking the resultant sunburn (inflam-
mation) determined. Studies with topical formulations contain-
ing either EGCG, caffeic acid, ferulic acid, or p-coumaric acid, 
have shown some protection from erythema. Unfortunately, all 
of  these  studies  were  conducted  on  skin  that  was  pre-treated 
for  several  days  with  the  antioxidant.  Because  phenolic  and 
polyphenolic  compounds  can  absorb  UV  radiation,  the  stud-
ies do not distinguish between the anti-inflammatory effect of 
the antioxidant and simply its sunscreen effect, i.e. the ability to 
block UV radiation from damaging the skin [73–75].

In a different study carried out with a lotion containing 2% 
dihydroeugenol,  human  subjects  were  irradiated  in  two  areas 
on  the  inner  forearm  with  an  FS  20  sunlamp  at  a  dose  equal 
to  three  times  the  MED.  However,  in  this  study,  lotions  were 

applied only after the irradiation was carried out. One area of 
irradiated  skin  was  treated  with  the  lotion  without  the  anti-
oxidant  4-propyl  guaiacol  while  the  other  irradiated  spot  was 
treated with the same lotion containing 2% 4-propyl guaiacol. 
Six  hours  later  the  site  was  photographed,  and  as  shown  in 
the photograph, the site treated with the phenolic antioxidant 
showed considerably less erythema (Figure 33.5).

Designing effective anti-inflammatory and anti-aging 
topicals targeting three key mediators: TNF-alpha, IL-1, 
and PGE-2
Since  the  inflammatory  process  in  skin  is  extremely  complex 
and involves the production and action of many cytokines and 
chemokines, as well as various paracrine and autocrine factors, 
how  does  one  decide  which  anti-inflammatory  compound  to 
use in a topical formulation to achieve the best efficacy in treat-
ing  skin  problems,  including  aging?  Although  there  are  many 
inflammatory mediators that play important roles in propagat-
ing an inflammatory response, there are at least three mediators 
which play major roles in skin diseases, and in skin aging:

Figure 33.5  Inhibition of UVR induced erythema by post-irradiation topical application of phenolic antioxidant, 4-propyl guaiacol. Photograph taken 6 
hours after UVB irradiation with 3 MED.

 1.  Tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF-alpha)  is  a  key  cytokine 
involved  in  psoriasis  and  in  other  autoimmune  based  dis-
eases, including Crohn’s disease. Several “biologic response 
modifiers”  such  as  Enbrel,  have  been  developed  to  spe-
cifically  target  this  cytokine.  They  work  by  binding  to  the 
cytokine,  thus  inhibiting  its  ability  to  bind  to  and  activate 
its receptor on target cells. TNF-alpha stimulates the expres-
sion  of  a  wide  number  of  inflammatory  genes  and  also 
increases  the  production  of  cellular  adhesion  molecules 
(CAM) in vascular endothelium. These adhesion molecules 
act to tether immune cells to the vasculature, allowing them 
to leave the blood vessels and enter into the skin. Blocking 
either  the  production  or  action  of  TNF-alpha  can  prevent 
the “chemotaxis” of immune cells into the skin and markedly 
improve immune cell based diseases.

 2.  A second important cytokine that is not only pro-inflamma-
tory but also plays a role in skin aging, is interleukin 1 (IL-1). 
This cytokine has been referred to as the “master cytokine” 
for inflammation because of its ability to activate a number 
of  inflammatory  genes  including  COX-2,  TNF-alpha,  IL-1 
(autocrine  effect),  MCP-1,  IL-6,  IL-8,  adhesion  molecules 
(ICAM,  e-selectin)  and  several  others  [76].  With  regard 
to its aging effects, IL-1 (both IL-a and IL-β forms) is pro-
duced by keratinocytes upon exposure of skin to UVR or to 
other “insults” such as chemical irritants. Once secreted, IL-1 
binds  to  target  cells  (fibroblasts  and  keratinocytes,  immune 
cells) and stimulates MAPK and NF-κB pathways leading to 
nuclear activation of NF-κB and AP-1 transcription factors. 
This  leads  to  activation  of  MMP  genes  including  MMP-1 
(type I collagenase), and MMP-9 (type IV collagenase, gelati-
nase, elastase), and may promote keratinocyte transformation 
leading to skin cancer [77–80].

 3.  The  third  important  skin  inflammatory  mediator,  is  PGE-
2. This prostaglandin is the produced by the action of pros-
taglandin E synthase (PGES-1) and cyclooxygenase (COX), 
both  of  which  are  inducible  in  skin  cells  by  IL-1.  The  key 
enzyme involved in large increases in PGE-2 production in 
the  skin  is,  however,  COX-2,  which  converts  arachidonic 
acid  to  the  intermediate  PGH2,  which  is  then  converted 
rapidly to PGE-2. Over 100 scientific publications have now 
linked high levels of PGE-2 to either initiating or stimulat-
ing  proliferation  in  many  cancers,  including  skin  cancer 
[58–60]. Studies in animal models have shown that block-
ing  PGE-2  production  can  reduce  the  formation  of  UVR 
induced  tumors  by  almost  90%.  Other  published  studies 
have  shown  that  PGE-2  is  also  involved  in  scar  formation 
and in poor wound healing [61,81]. Finally, PGE-2 also has 
aging effects by upregulating MMP genes, inhibiting colla-
gen I gene transcription, and by increasing TNF-alpha and 
IL-1 production. PGE-2 can also act in an autocrine loop to 
stimulate COX-2 gene activity (and thus its own synthesis) 
in fibroblasts [82–85]. Given its role in inflammation, sun-
burn,  matrix  destruction  and  in  promoting  cancer  forma-
tion, the use of topical antioxidants with the ability to block 

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

305

PGE-2  production in skin  might be expected to reduce or 
prevent the formation of actinic keratoses and skin cancers 
if used daily. Finally, recent research has shown that expo-
sure of skin to brief treatments with a CO2 laser can increase 
PGE-2 levels nine-fold, and that even 3 weeks after the laser 
treatment, PGE-2 levels are still 4–5 times higher than basal 
[86]. What long-term damage to the skin might result from 
high levels of PGE-2 that remain elevated for over 3 weeks 
remains to be seen.

Conclusion

Although there are a wide number of potent prescription topical 
anti-inflammatories available that are effective in treating skin 
inflammation, all have some side effects that negatively impact 
their usefulness. Topical steroids are effective for treating many 
dermatological  diseases  but  can  lower  collagen  production  in 
dermal  fibroblasts,  reduce  their  proliferation  and  cause  skin 
thinning.  Topical  immunomodulators  are  immunosuppressive 
and  can  lead  to  increased  risk  for  infection  and  even  cancer. 
There is a need for identifying newer, safer, anti-inflammatory 
technologies  that  can  effectively  treat  skin  disorders  without 
having  such  strong  immunosuppressive  effects.  Botanically-
derived  antioxidants  with  anti-inflammatory  activities  could 
help meet this need. Their safety profile is well-known because 
of  their  presence  in  common  foods,  their  widespread  use  for 
hundreds of years in traditional medicines, and their current use 
as  nutritional  supplements.  In  addition,  whereas  prescription 
drugs are typically very potent and are designed to be effective 
in the nanomolar or even picomolar range, natural antioxidants 
have  anti-inflammatory  potencies  in  the  micromolar  range. 
Thus,  it  seems  likely  that  when  applied  topically,  a  less  potent 
anti-inflammatory may be effective in treating the skin problem 
without causing undesirable side effects, which are more likely 
to occur with highly potent drugs. Traditional medicine relies 
heavily on botanically derived therapies, and given the fact that 
these treatments have been passed down for hundreds of years, 
perhaps their value should not be discounted.

References

1  Huang  WY.  (2010)  Natural  phenolic  compounds  from  medici-
nal herbs and dietary plants: potential use for cancer prevention. 
Nutr Cancer 62, 1–20.

2  Husain  N,  Kumar  A.  (2012)  Reactive  oxygen  species  and  natural 

antioxidants: A review. Adv Biores 3, 164–75.

3  Fruehauf JP, Meyskens FL. (2007) Reactive oxygen species: a breath 

of life or death? Clin Cancer Res 13, 789–94.

4  Finkel T. (2011) Signal transduction by reactive oxygen species. 

J Cell Biol 194, 7–15.

5  Son Y, Cheong Y-K, Kim N-H, et al. (2011) Mitogen-activate pro-
tein  kinases  and  reactive  oxygen  species:  How  can  ROS  activate 
MAPK pathways? J Signal Transduct 2011, 1–6.

306

ANtI-AgINg  Cosmeceuticals

6  Bai XC, Lu D, Liu AL, et al. (2005) Reactive oxygen species stimu-
lates receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand expression in osteob-
last. J Biol Chem 280, 17497–506.

7  Kai S, Subbaram S, Carrico PM, Melendez JA. (2010) Redox control 
of matrix metalloproteinase-1: A critical link between free radicals, 
matrix remodeling and degenerative disease. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 
174, 299–306.

30  Wu D, Hayek MG, Meydani S. (2001) Vitamin E and macrophage 

cyclooxygenase regulation in the aged. J Nutr 131, 382S–8S.

31  Shishodia  S.  (2013)  Molecular  mechanisms  of  curcumin  action: 

gene expression. Biofactors 39, 37–55.

32  Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S. (2004) Suppression of the nuclear factor-
[kappa]B activation pathway by spice-derived phytochemicals: rea-
soning for seasoning. Ann NY Acad Sci 1030, 434–41.

8  Korbecki  J,  Baranowska-Bosiacka  I,  Gutowaska  I,  Chlubek  D. 
(2013)  The  effect  of  reactive  oxygen  species  on  the  synthesis  of 
prostanoids from arachidonic acid. J Physiol Pharmacol 64, 409–21.
9  Gkogkolou P, Bohm M. (2012) Advanced glycation end products: 

33  Kim HY, Park EJ, Joe E-H, Jou I. (2003) Curcumin suppresses janus 
kinase-STAT  inflammatory  signaling  through  activation  of  Src 
Homology  2  domain-containing  tyrosine  phosphatase  2  in  brain 
microglia. J Immunol 171, 6072–9.

Key players in skin aging? Dermato-Endocrinol 4, 259–70.

10  Nedic O, Rattan SI, Grune T, Trougakos IP. (2013) Molecular effects 
of  advanced  glycation  end  products  on  cell  signaling  pathways, 
aging and pathophysiology. Free Radic Res 47, 28–38. 

11  Prasad,  YD,  Sonia  S,  Balvinder  S,  Charan  CR.  (2013)  Advanced 

glycation end products: A review. Sch Acad J Biosci 1, 39–45.

12  Xie J, Mendez JD, Mendez-Valenzuela V, Aguilar-Hernandez MM. 
(2013) Cellular signaling of the receptor for advanced glycation end 
products (RAGE). Cell Signal 25, 2185–97.

13  Sparvero LJ, Asafu-Adjei D, Kang R, et al. (2009) RAGE (receptor 
for advanced glycation endproducts), RAGE ligands, and their role 
in cancer and inflammation. J Transl Med 7, 17–38. 

14  Shinde A, Ganu J, Naik PJ. (2012) Effect of free radicals and antioxi-

dants on oxidative stress: A review. J Dent Allied Sci 1, 63–6.

15  Chen L, Hu JY, Wang SQ. (2012) The role of antioxidants in pho-
toprotection: a critical review. J Am Acad Dermatol 67, 1013–24.
16  Pham-Huy LA, He H, Pham-Huy C. (2008) Free radicals, antioxidants 

in disease and health. Int J Biomed 4, 89–96.

17  Cao  G,  Alessio  H,  Cutler  R.  (1993)  Oxygen-radical  absorbance 
capacity assay for antioxidants. Free Radic Biol Med 14, 303–11.
18  Placzek M, Gaub S, Kerkmann U, et al. (2005) Ultraviolet B-induced 
DNA  damage  in  human  epidermis  is  modified  by  antioxidants 
Ascorbic acid and d-alpha-tocopherol. J Invest Dermatol 124, 304–
307.

19  Serhan  CN,  Ward  PA,  Gilroy  DW.  (eds)  (2010)  Fundamentals  of 
Inflammation. New York: Cambridge University Press, 488 pp.
20  Wullaert A, Bonnet MC, Pasparakis M. (2011) NF-κB in the regu-
lation  of  epithelial  homeostasis  and  inflammation.  Cell  Res  21, 
146–58.

21  Huggenberger R, Detmar M. (2011) The cutaneous vascular system 
in chronic skin inflammation. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 15, 24–32.
22  Ley  K.  (2003)  The  role  of  selectins  in  inflammation  and  disease. 

Trends Mol Med 9, 263–8.

23  Esche C, de B Benedetto A, Beck LA. (2004) Keratinocytes in atopic 
dermatitis: inflammatory signals. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 4, 276–84.
24  . Nathan C. (2002) Points of control in inflammation. Nature 420, 

846–52.

25  Medzhitov R. (2008) Origin and physiological roles of inflamma-

tion. Nature 454, 428–33.

26  Quan T, Qin Z, Xia W, et al. (2009) Matrix-degrading metallopro-
teinases in photoaging. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 14, 20–24.
27  Debacq-Chainiaux F, Leduc C, Verbeke A, Toussaint O. (2012) UV, 

stress, and aging. Dermato-Endocrinol 4, 236–40.

28  Jenkins G. (2002) Molecular mechanisms of skin ageing. Mech Age-

ing Dev 123, 801–10.

34  Sikora  E,  Scapagnini  G,  Barbagallo  M.  (2010)  Curcumin,  inflam-
mation, ageing and age-related diseases. Immun Ageing 7, 1–4.
35  Jurrmann N, Brigelius-Flohe R, Bol G-F. (2005) Curcumin blocks 
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) signaling by inhibiting the recruitment of the 
IL-1  receptor-associated  kinase  IRAK  in  murine  thymoma  EL-4 
cells. J Nutr 135, 1859–64.

36  Boots AW, Haenen GR, Bast A. (2008) Health effects of quercetin: 
from antioxidant to nutraceutical. Eur J Pharmacol 585, 325–37.
37  Huang YT, Hwang JJ, Lee PP, et al. (1999) Effects of luteolin and quer-
cetin,  inhibitors  of  tyrosine  kinase,  on  cell  growth  and  metastasis-
associated properties in A431 cells overexpressing epidermal growth 
factor receptor. Br J Pharmacol 128, 999–1010. 

38  Chen D, Milacic V, Chen MS, et al. (2008) Tea polyphenols, their 
biological effects and potential molecular targets. Histol Histopathol 
23, 487–496.

39  Vicentini  FT,  He  T,  Shao  Y,  et  al.  (2011)  Quercetin  inhibits  UV 
irradiation-induced inflammatory cytokine production in primary 
human  keratinocytes  by  suppressing  NF-kB  pathway.  J  Dermatol 
Sci 61, 162–8.

40  Kuppusamy UR, Khoo HE, Das NP. (1990) Structure-activity stud-
ies of flavonoids as inhibitors of hyaluronidase. Biochem Pharmacol 
40, 397–401.

41  Zhang LL, Li L, Wu DP, et al. (2008) A novel anti-cancer effect of 
genistein: reversal of epithelial mesenchymal transition in prostate 
cancer cells. Acta Pharmacol Sin 29, 1060–8. 

42  Bos JD, Meinardi MM. (2000) The 500 Dalton rule for the skin pen-
etration of chemical compounds and drugs. Exp Dermatol 9, 165–9.
43  Uva L, Miguel D, Pinheiro C, et al. (2012) Mechanism of action of 
topical corticosteroids in psoriasis. Intl J Endocrinol 2012, Article 
ID 561018, 16 pp.

44  Dostert  A,  Heinzel  T.  (2004)  Negative  glucocorticoid  receptor 
response  elements  and  their  role  in  glucocorticoid  action.  Curr 
Pharm Des 10, 2807–16.

45  De  BK,  Vanden  BW,  Haegeman  G.  (2003)  The  interplay  between 
the glucocorticoid receptor and nuclear factor-kappaB or activator 
protein-1: molecular mechanisms for gene repression Endocr Rev 24, 
488–522.

46  Hermoso MA, Cidlowski JA. (2003) Putting the brake on inflam-
matory  responses:  the  role  of  glucocorticoids.  IUBMB  Life  55, 
497–504.

47  Tak PP, Firestein GS. (2001) NF-kappaB: a key role in inflammatory 

diseases. J Clin Invest 107, 7–11.

48  Almawi  WY,  Melemedjian  OK.  (2002)  Negative  regulation  of 
nuclear factor-kappaB activation and function by glucocorticoids. 
J Mol Endocrinol 28, 69–78.

29  Tajima S, Pinnel SR. (1996) Ascorbic acid preferentially enhances 
type  I  and  type  III  collagen  gene  transcription  in  human  skin 
fibroblasts. J Dermatol Sci 11, 250–310.

49  Necela  BM,  Cidlowski  JA.  (2004)  Mechanisms  of  glucocorticoid 
receptor action in noninflammatory and inflammatory cells. Proc 
Am Thorac Soc 1, 239–46.

33. Antioxidants and Anti-inflammatories

307

50  Jarvis B, Figgitt DP. (2003) Topical 3% diclofenac in 2.5% hyaluronic 
acid gel: a review of its use in patients with actinic keratosis. Am J 
Clin Dermatol 4, 203–13.

69  Middleton E Jr, Kandaswami C, Theoharides TC. (2000) The effects 
of plant flavonoids on mammalian cells: implications for inflamma-
tion, heart disease, and cancer. Pharmacol Rev 52, 673–751.

51  Nelson C, Rigel D, Smith S, et al. (2004) Phase IV, open-label assess-
ment  of  the  treatment  of  actinic  keratosis  with  3.0%  diclofenac 
sodium topical gel (Solaraze). J Drugs Dermatol 3, 401–7.

52  Lin  J,  Zhang  W,  Jones  A,  Doherty  M.  (2004)  Efficacy  of  topical 
non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  in  the  treatment  of  oste-
oarthritis: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 329, 
324–9.

53  Vaile JH, Davis P. (1998) Topical NSAIDs for musculoskeletal con-

ditions. A review of the literature. Drugs 56, 783–99.

54  Grace D, Rogers J, Skeith K, Anderson K. (1999) Topical diclofenac 
versus placebo: a double blind, randomized clinical trial in patients 
with osteoarthritis of the knee. J Rheumatol 26, 2659–63.

55  Roth  SH,  Shainhouse  JZ.  (2004)  Efficacy  and  safety  of  a  topical 
diclofenac solution (pennsaid) in the treatment of primary osteoar-
thritis of the knee: a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled 
clinical trial. Arch Intern Med 164, 2017–23.

56  Rainsford KD. (2007) Anti-inflammatory drugs in the 21st century. 

Subcellular Biochem 42, 3–27.

57  Wilgus TA, Ross MS, Parrett ML, Oberyszyn TM. (2000) Topical 
application of a selective cyclooxygenase inhibitor suppresses UVB 
mediated  cutaneous  inflammation.  Prostaglandins  Other  Lipid 
Mediat 62, 367–84.

58  Brecher AR. (2002) The role of cyclooxygenase-2 in the pathogen-

esis of skin cancer. J Drugs Dermatol 1, 44–7.

59  Muller-Decker  K.  (2011)  Cyclooxygenase-dependent  signaling  is 
causally  linked  to  non-melanoma  skin  carcinogenesis:  pharma-
cological,  genetic  and  clinical  evidence.  Cancer  Metast  Rev  30, 
343–61.

70  Berson DS. (2008) Natural antioxidants. J Drugs Dermatol 7, 7–12.
71  Oresajo  C,  Pillai  S,  Manco  M,  et  al.  (2012)  Antioxidants  and  the 
skin:  understanding  formulation  and  efficacy.  Dermatol  Ther  25, 
252–9.

72  Lee JH, Chung JH, Cho KH. (2005) The effects of epigallocatechin-
3-gallate  on  extracellular  matrix  metabolism.  J  Dermatol  Sci  40, 
195–204.

73  Murray JC, Burch JA, Streilein RD, et al. (2008) A topical antioxi-
dant  solution  containing  vitamins  C  and  E  stabilized  by  ferulic 
acid provides protection for human skin against damage caused by 
ultraviolet irradiation. J Am Acad Dermatol 59, 418–25.

74  Ferzil  G,  Patel  M,  Phrsai  N,  Brody  N.  (2013)  Reduction  of  facial 
redness with resveratrol added to topical product containing green 
tea polyphenols and caffeine. J Drugs Dermatol 12, 770–74.

75  Udenigwe CC, Ramprasath VR, Aluko RE, Jones PJ. (2008) Poten-
tial  of  resveratrol  in  anticancer  and  anti-inflammatory  therapy. 
Nutr Rev 66, 445–56.

76  Dinarello  CA,  Simon  A,  van  der  Meer  JWM.  (2012)  Treating 
Inflammation  by  blocking  interleukin-1  in  a  broad  spectrum  of 
diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discovery 11, 633–52.

77  Wang  X,  Zhigang  B,  Wenming  C,  Wan  Y.  (2005)  IL-1  receptor 
antagonist  attenuates  MAPkinase/AP-1  activation  and  MMP1 
expression in UVA-irradiated human fibroblasts induced by culture 
medium from UVB-irradiated human skin keratinocytes. Intl J Mol 
Med 16, 1117–24.

78  Cataisson C, Salcedo R, Hakim S, et al. (2012) IL-1R-MyD88 sig-
naling  in  keratinocyte  transformation  and  carcinogenesis.  J  Exp 
Med 209, 1689–1702.

60  Zhan  H,  Zheng  H.  (2007)  The  role  of  topical  cyclo-oxygenase-2 
inhibitors in skin cancer: treatment and prevention. Am J Clin Der-
matol 8,195–200.

79  Nasti TH, Timares L. (2012) Inflammasome activation of IL-1 family 
mediators  in  response  to  cutaneous  damage.  Photochem  Photobiol 
88, 1111–25.

61  Wilgus TA, Vodovotz Y, Vittadini E, et al. (2003) Reduction of scar 
formation in full-thickness wounds with topical celecoxib treatment. 
Wound Repair Regen 11, 25–34.

80  Murphy J-E, Robert C, Kupper TS. (1999) Interleukin-1 and cuta-
neous  inflammation:  A  crucial  link  between  innate  and  acquired 
immunity. J Invest Dermatol 114, 602–608.

62  Miyauchi-Hashimoto  H,  Kuwamoto  K,  Urade  Y,  et  al.  (2001) 
Carcinogen-induced  inflammation  and  immunosuppression  are 
enhanced in xeroderma pigmentosum group A model mice asso-
ciated with hyperproduction of prostaglandin E2. J Immunol 166, 
5782–91.

63  Nghiem  P,  Pearson  G,  Langley  RG.  (2002)  Tacrolimus  and  pime-
crolimus:  from  clever  prokaryotes  to  inhibiting  calcineurin  and 
treating atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 46, 228–41.

64  Bos JD. (2003) Non-steroidal topical immunomodulators provide 
skin-selective,  self-limiting  treatment  in  atopic  dermatitis.  Eur  J 
Dermatol 13, 455–61.

65  Gupta  AK,  Chow  M.  (2003)  Pimecrolimus:  a  review.  J  Eur  Acad 

Dermatol Venereol 17, 493–503.

66  Lazarous MC, Kerdel FA. (2002) Topical tacrolimus Protopic. Drugs 

Today (Barc) 38, 7–15.

67  Hogan PG, Chen L, Nardone J, Rao A. (2003) Transcriptional regu-
lation by calcium, calcineurin, and NFAT. Genes Dev 17, 2205–32.
68  Fantuzzi F, Del Giglio M, Gisondi P, Girolomoni G. (2008) Target-
ing tumor necrosis factor alpha in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. 
Expert Opin Ther 12, 1085–96.

81  Wilgus  TA,  Bergdall  VK,  Tober  KL,  et  al.  (2004)  The  impact  of 
cyclooxygenase-2 medicated inflammation on scarless fetal wound 
healing. Am J Pathol 165, 753–61.

82  Korbecki J, Bosiacka-Baranowska I, Gutowska I, Chlubek D. (2013) 
The effect of reactive oxygen species on the synthesis of prostanoids 
from arachidonic acid. J Physiol Pharmacol 64, 409–21.

83  Kim HH, Cho S, Lee S, et al. (2006) Photoprotective and anti-skin-
aging effects of eicosapentaenoic acid in human skin in vivo. J Lipid 
Res 47, 921–30.

84  Habib  MA,  Salem  SAM,  Hakim  SA,  Shalan  YAM.  (2014) 
Comparative  immunohistochemical  assessment  of  cutaneous 
cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme expression in chronological aging and 
photoaging. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photmed 30, 43–51.
85  Han JH, Roh MS, Park CH, et al. (2004) Selective COX-2 inhibi-
tor, NS-398, inhibits the replicative senescence of cultured dermal 
fibroblasts. Mech Ageing Dev 125, 359–66.

86  Sandulache VC, Chafin JB, Li-Korotky HS, et al. (2007) Elucidat-
ing  the  role  of  interleukin  1  beta  and  prostaglandin  E2  in  upper 
airway mucosal wound healing. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
133, 365–74.

chapter 34
peptides and proteins

Karl Lintner
KAL’IDEES S.A.S. Paris, France

Basic concepts

•	 Amino	acids,	linked	in	a	linear	chain,	are	the	building	blocks	of	peptides	and	proteins.
•	 Peptides	are	biologically	active	communication	tools	that	direct	skin	functioning.
•	 Engineered	peptides	are	a	new	category	of	active	skin	ingredients	suitable	for	almost	any	cosmetic	vehicle.
•	 Peptide	bioactivity	is	fully	documented	using	gene	chip	array	analysis,	ex vivo	protocols	and	vehicle	controlled	clinical	tests.

introduction

Peptides, proteins, and amino acids are often mislabeled and the 
terms applied as if they were interchangeable, yet they are differ-
ent in their characteristics, uses, biological activities, and cosmetic 
potential  [1].  An  important  distinction  must  be  made  between 
simple  protein  hydrolysates  (often  called  “peptides”[2])  and 
 synthetically  engineered,  specifically  chosen  peptide  sequences. 
After defining peptides and proteins, the first part of the chapter 
discusses the specificities of these molecules and their physiologic, 
biological  function,  particularly  in  the  skin;  what  can  they  do, 
what are the obstacles to their use in cosmetic products and how 
can these obstacles be overcome. In the four years since the first 
 edition of this book, a great number of such peptides have been 
studied,  developed  and  used  for  cosmetic  applications  and  both 
skin and hair care benefits. In the second part, a number of concrete 
examples of peptides and some proteins, in particular for the “anti-
aging” sector, are discussed before concluding with an outlook for 
the future of this ingredient category.

(COOH)  are  attached  to  the  central  carbon  atom  which 
also carries further quite variable structures, known as side 
chains, by which the different amino acids are distinguished 
(Figure 34.1).

Of the essentially unlimited theoretical number of amino 
acids  that  can  be  imagined  on  paper,  only  20  (e.g.  alanine, 
proline,  tyrosine,  histidine,  phenylalanine,  lysine,  gluta-
mine…) are incorporated into peptides and proteins via the 
genetic code. With few exceptions, these amino acids in iso-
lation  have  no  specific  intrinsic  biological  activity.  Within 
cells,  they  exist  in  a  pool  from  which  they  can  be  called 
upon to make peptides and proteins or, sometimes, biogenic 
amines, such as serotonin or dopamine. In the upper layers 
of  the  skin,  they  are  part  of  the  natural  moisturizing  factor 
(NMF) where they participate in the water holding capacity 
of  the  skin  contributing  to  both  osmolytic  and  hygroscopic 
properties. The result of linking two or more amino acids in 
a  linear  chain  via  an  amide  (“peptide-”)  bond  between  the 
carboxyl group of one and the amino group of the following 
amino acid is called a peptide, when the length of the chain is 

Definitions

It  is  important  to  understand  the  differences  between  amino 
acids, peptides, and proteins.

amino acids
Amino  acids  are  the  building  blocks  of  which  peptides  
and  proteins  are  made.  They  are  small  molecules,  with  a 
molecular  weight  of  100–200 Da,  characterized  by  the  fact 
that both an amino group (NH2) and a carboxylic acid group 

O

OH

NH2

Figure  34.1  Phenylalanine,  one  of  the  20  proteinogenic  amino  acids.  The 
“side chain” which is characteristic of each amino acid (here a phenyl group) 
is shown in the box.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

308

34. Peptides and Proteins

309

less than approximately 100 amino acids, or a protein when 
the chain is longer.

Biological functions of peptides and proteins 
in the skin

peptides
The  general  terminology  uses  prefixes  to  describe  the  type 
of a peptide. For example, when the peptide is made of two 
amino acids, such as tyrosine and arginine written as Tyr-Arg, 
it is called a dipeptide. Three amino acid combinations yield 
a tripeptide, four amino acid combinations yield a tetrapep-
tide,  etc.  “Oligo”  stands  for  a  “few”  so  that  oligopeptides 
can  have  2  to  ≈20  amino  acids  linked  in  a  chain.  The  term 
polypeptides  is  used  to  mean  many  amino  acids,  although 
these  latter  distinctions  are  not  strict  and  not   governed  by 
official rules.

The  most  important  characteristic  of  a  peptide,  besides 
its  length  determined  by  the  number  of  amino  acids  in  the 
chain,  is  its  sequence.  The  sequence  is  the  precise  order  in 
which the various amino acids are linked together. Both gly-
cyl-histidyl-lysine  and  glycyl-lysyl-histidine  are  tripeptides, 
composed  of  the  three  amino  acids  glycine,  histidine,  and 
lysine. However, the fact that these amino acids are linked in 
the Gly-His-Lys sequence in the former and in Gly-Lys-His 
sequence in the latter is crucial. The former peptide, usually 
abbreviated GHK, stimulates collagen synthesis in fibroblasts 
[3]; the latter GKH stimulates lipolysis in adipocytes [4]. The 
primary function of most peptides is to bring a biochemical 
message from place A in the body to place B allowing effec-
tive communication.

proteins
A peptide chain of more than approximately 100 amino acids is 
termed  a  protein.  However,  interleukins,  cytokines,  and  inter-
feron are also sometimes referred to as peptides, even though 
they  possess  a  much  higher  molecular  weight.  Sometimes  the 
distinction between the two categories relies more on the func-
tion of the molecule rather than the size.

Proteins  can  be  categorized  by  their  function,  roughly  into 

the following:
•	 Structural proteins: building tissue,  such  as collagen,  elastin, 

fibronectin and many others;

•	 Enzymes:  very  specific  proteins  that  catalyze  biochemical 
reactions,  such  as  superoxide  dismutase  (SOD),  chymot-
rypsin, tyrosinase;

•	 Transport proteins that bind to a specific substrate and carry 
it  along  in  the  body  (e.g.  hemoglobin  as  oxygen  carrier, 
 ferritin  for  iron  transport,  lipoprotein  for  lipids,  including 
 cholesterol);

•	 Difficult to categorize proteins with highly specific functions: 
receptors  such  as  protein  G,  genetic  regulators  such  as  per-
oxisome  proliferator-activated  receptor  (PPAR),  antibodies, 
coagulants, histones.

Proteins with individual molecular mass of hundreds of thou-
sands of Daltons often auto-assemble into large structures with 
very complex mechanisms of activity.

peptides
Peptides  perform  many  important  biologic  signal  (hormonal) 
functions.  The  word  hormone  –  from  Greek,  simply  meaning 
messenger  –  applies  to  various  classes  of  substances  (steroids, 
peptides, biogenic amines…). All messenger molecules, includ-
ing  certain  peptides,  act  in  similar  fashion:  some  disturbance, 
either internal or external, leads to the release of a small amount 
of peptide in a cell, blood, gland, or in some other organ. The 
peptide then travels in the body until it interacts with a target 
receptor either on the cellular surface or within the cell nucleus 
after  having  penetrated  the  cell  wall.  This  interaction  triggers 
further activity at the site, destined to respond and correct the 
initial disturbance.

This  mechanism  of  action  is  usually  characterized  by  three 

items:
 1.  Peptides  circulate  and  act  at  their  target  sites  at  extremely 
low  concentration  levels,  generally  in  the  nanomolar 
(10−9 mol/L) level.

 2.  Each  peptide  sequence  has,  at  its  defined  target,  a  highly 
selective binding affinity and carries a distinct message such 
that its activity is quite specific. The highly simplified con-
cept of “key” and “lock” (i.e. peptide and receptor) interac-
tion is used to explain this potency and specificity.

 3.  Peptides have short lifespans in the organism because pro-
teolytic enzymes break them down quickly in order to avoid 
overload at the target site.

Well-known  biological  activities  of  peptide  hormones  in  the 
human  body  are,  for  instance:  regulation  of  blood  sugar  con-
centration  (insulin);  blood  pressure  regulation  (angiotensin, 
bradykinin, calcitonin gene-related peptide [CGRP]); lactation 
and birthing (oxytocin); diuresis (vasopressin); pain repression 
(endorphins,  enkephalin);  tanning  (α-MSH);  radical  scaveng-
ing  (glutathione);  other  peptides  include  vasointestinal  pep-
tide (VIP), substance P, neurotensin, luteotropin and hundreds 
more. Peptides with various bioactivities have been identified in 
all organs of our body and the skin is no exception. An increas-
ing volume of research is devoted to the understanding of pep-
tide  functions  in  the  skin  and  consequently  to  find  cosmetic 
applications of this huge category of bioactive substances.

As this section’s term of “anti-aging” is not clearly defined, it 
shall be interpreted here in a rather broad way to represent any-
thing that helps the skin look younger. Hence we shall discuss, 
in  the  subsequent  paragraphs,  a  variety  of  cosmetic  skin  care 
activities for which peptides have been developed and used with 
success, such as antioxidant peptides, tissue repair peptides, skin 
whitening or tanning peptides, soothing and neuromodulating 
peptides,  hair  growth  controlling  peptides,  and  mention  only 
in  passing  lipid  metabolism  mediating  peptides,  moisturizing 
and barrier repair peptides and others. These examples are, of 
course, far from being exhaustive. A few words about potential 
pitfalls are, nevertheless, in order first.

310

anti-aging  Cosmeceuticals

obstacles to peptide use in cosmetic formulation
The  incorporation  of  peptides  into  various  galenic  forms  of 
skin care products can be challenging. Some of the hurdles con-
fronted with peptide formulation include: skin penetration, sta-
bility, toxicity, analysis, and cost.

Skin penetration
The  stratum  corneum  is  not  the  primary  target  for  peptides, 
as  they  need  viable,  living  skin  to  receive  their  message.  It  is 
necessary for a peptide to cross the cutaneous barrier in order 
to  reach  the  viable  epidermis  (keratinocytes),  the  basal  layer 
(melanocytes, nerve cell endings), the dermis (fibroblasts), and 
even  the  hypodermis  (adipocytes).  Even  small  peptide  mol-
ecules, such as the dipeptide carnosine, are too hydrophilic and 
electrically charged to penetrate easily any further than the first 
or second layer of the stratum corneum. Lintner and Peschard 
[5] have shown that the attachment of a lipophilic chain (fatty 
acid of sufficient length) to carnosine can increase the penetra-
tion rate by a factor of 100 or more. Similar effects were con-
firmed by Leroux et al. [4]. Goebel et al. [6] have further studied 
the  penetration  behavior  of  this  molecule  and  describe  vari-
ous  techniques  of  formulation  to  overcome  the  problem.  This 
technique of vectorizing the peptides has its limits because the 
longer the peptide chain, the less penetration the fatty acid will 
produce.  The  larger  the  peptide  (beyond  six  or  seven  amino 
acids), the less likely it is to reach the deeper layers of the skin. 
Thus, the long peptide sequences of CGRP, POMC, EGF, other 
chemokines  and  similar  structures,  do  not  function  well  as 
active ingredients in cosmetic formulas. Another limitation of 
this technique is the possible interference of biologic activity by 
acylation  of  the  peptide.  The  N  terminal  ionic  charge  may  be 
of importance for triggering effects at the target site or other-
wise interfering with the peptide’s properties. For example, the 
antioxidant activity of carnosine turns into pro-oxidant activity 
when  the  peptide  is  modified  to  become  palmitoyl-carnosine. 
Recent  research  has  discovered  alternative  ways  of  increasing 
transcutaneous  delivery,  using  amphiphilic  cell  penetration 
peptides  CPP  [7],  attaching  a  poly-arginine  chain  to  the  pep-
tide [8] or designing hyaluronic acid (HA) conjugates [9] to help 
molecules penetrate the stratum corneum. Liposome formula-
tions may also help carry the peptide through the barrier, but 
little if anything has been published in this respect.

Stability
Peptides have a reputation of limited chemical stability. While it 
is true that in aqueous environments, such as those frequently 
encountered  in  cosmetic  applications,  some  degree  of  hydrol-
ysis may occur,  experience has  shown that  the right choice of 
 excipients and stabilizers can help overcome this obstacle [10], 
the  more  so  as  the  apparent  instability  (disappearance  of  the 
peptide  from  the  cream)  is  often  an  artifact.  The  above  men-
tioned long chain acylated lipopeptides have a tendency to self-
associate and to form gels which simply pose a challenge to the 
analytical chemist [11].

Analysis
Detecting the presence of a peptide in a formulation 6–12 months 
after  product  manufacture  can  be  difficult  when  the  peptide  is 
present in micromolar or lower concentrations (p.p.m. level). Spe-
cial analytical techniques, such as derivatization, mass spectrom-
etry, and fluorescence spectrometry, have to be individually devel-
oped for each peptide. This is not always possible and/or very costly 
and sometimes proves an insurmountable hurdle. A recent paper 
by Chirita et al. [12] demonstrates nevertheless both the possibil-
ity of detecting 3 to 5 ppm of a pentapeptide in a complex cream 
matrix and the proven long-term stability of the substance.

Toxicity
Generally,  the  smaller  the  peptide,  the  less  likely  it  is  to  show 
untoward effects. Peptides, in contrast to proteins, are hardly big 
enough to elicit allergic reactions, but specific undesirable cel-
lular effects may occur with unknown sequences. It is advisable 
to use peptides with a biomimetic amino acid sequence, as the 
likelihood of toxicity is close to nil when the peptide is – almost 
–  identical  to  human  peptides  of  known  safety  status.  Never-
theless,  proper  safety  evaluation  of  newly  developed  peptides, 
especially  if  the  peptide  is  modified  by  acylation  or  esterifica-
tion, is necessary.

Cost
Peptides of defined sequence and high purity (>90%) are rela-
tively expensive to produce; although extraction from some pro-
tein hydrolysates is theoretically possible, most peptides used in 
cosmetic applications are synthetic (i.e. made in a step-by-step 
process  from  the  individual  amino  acid  building  blocks).  It  is 
noteworthy  that  the  amino  acids  themselves  are  frequently  of 
natural  plant  or  fermentation  origin.  However,  the  very  high 
potency of the peptides compensates for their cost and makes it 
possible to employ them at efficient level in all types of skincare 
formulas, because they are used at the p.p.m. level (0,000x%) in 
finished cosmetics.

Therefore, in spite of these formulation challenges, peptides 
have  become  popular,  widely  used  active  ingredients  for  anti-
aging skincare products, discussed next.

antioxidant peptides
Glutathione (γ-glutamyl-cysteyl-glycine)
This tripeptide GSH is one of the “oldest” members of the peptide 
family, with respect to its discovery, analysis, and  confirmatory 
synthesis. It contains an –SH bearing cystein amino acid which 
confers antioxidant activity to the molecule (Figure 34.2). The 

O

O

HO

NH2

N
H

S H

H
N

O

O

OH

Figure 34.2  Glutathione (γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine).

34. Peptides and Proteins

311

Repair

Healthy
tissue

Stress, wound

Proteolytic enzymes

Stimulation of
neosynthesis

A

B

D

F

H

G

I

A

C

E

Breakdown 
fragments

Cell migration

E

Chemotaxis

D

D

Figure 34.3  The matrikine concept: A tissue 
protein (e.g. collagen, elastin, fibronectin) is 
broken into fragments by enzymatic hydrol-
ysis, either during normal tissue renewal, or 
as a consequence of induced damages (free 
radicals,  burning,  mechanical  wound).  The 
breaking  up  of  the  protein  does  not  occur 
randomly,  nor  sequentially  from  one  or 
the other end; various pieces of amino acid 
strings  are  generated,  which  when  small 
enough, are readily available to act as “mes-
sengers” in the surrounding tissue, and will 
act as chemoattractants, transport aids, and 
stimulants  to  trigger  neosynthesis  of  the 
necessary  tissue  molecules  to  renew/repair 
the three-dimensional structure.

level of glutathione concentration in the body decreases notably 
with age, which may be a cause and a symptom of aging both 
at  the  same  time  [13].  Besides  affording  this  protective,  anti-
oxidant activity, for which there is in vitro but very little docu-
mented clinical evidence of skin benefits (for a medical study, 
see [14]), GSH may also have so-called “skin whitening” effects, 
as described by Villarama and Maibach [15].

Carnosine (β-alanyl-l-histidine)
Carnosine has been proven to scavenge reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) formed from peroxidation of cell membrane fatty acids 
during oxidative stress. Carnosine is also shown to be useful to 
counter the effects of glycation (the non-enzymatic binding of 
sugars to proteins) which leads to cytotoxic advanced glycation 
endproducts (AGEs). A new derivative of azelaic acid and his-
tidine  (azeloyl  tetrapeptide  23)  also  possesses  antioxidant  and 
strong anti-glycation activity [16].

Nagai et al. [17] showed that carnosine might also promote 
wound  healing,  at  least  indirectly,  as  exogenous  carnosine  is 
degraded  by  carnosinase  into  β-alanine  and  ultimately  hista-
mine.  Whereas  β-alanine  was  found  to  stimulate  the  biosyn-
thesis of nucleic acids and collagen, histamine is considered to 
enhance the process of wound healing by stimulating effusion 
at the initial stage of inflammation. This example illustrates the 
economical  side  of  nature  using  both  the  original  substance 
(carnosine)  and  both  its  metabolic  fragments  for  concurring 
purposes, a mechanism found particularly often with peptides.

Tissue repair peptides
One of the most popular claims of anti-aging concerns the repair 
or restoration of the extracellular matrix of the skin, mainly to 
reduce the appearance of wrinkles.

The term matrikines is used to describe naturally occurring 
fragments  of  matrix  macromolecules  endowed  with  stimula-
tory, tissue repair activity [18]. Schematically and very simpli-

fied, this matrikine concept of recycling breakdown fragments 
of macromolecules for triggering repair activity is illustrated in 
Figure 34.3. The concept is valid not only for proteins and pep-
tide fragments, but also for poly- and oligosaccharides, where 
the term glycokine applies. The best-known matrikine peptide 
used in skin care is the pentapeptide Pal-KTTKS, derived from 
the shortest pro-collagen I fragment capable of stimulating col-
lagen  synthesis  in  fibroblasts  (Katayama  et  al.  [19]).  A  DNA 
array study on this molecule indicated that mostly genes impli-
cated  in  the  wound  healing  process  were  upregulated  in  cells 
incubated  with  the  peptide.  Furthermore,  the  palmitoylated 
peptide stimulates not only the synthesis of collagen I, but also 
of collagen IV, fibronectin, and glycosaminoglycanes in mono-
layer culture of normal and aged human fibroblasts and in full 
thickness skin [20]. This peptide was tested in vehicle controlled 
clinical trials where it proved to thicken the skin, improve the 
epidermal–dermal  junction,  and  macroscopically  reduce  fine 
lines and wrinkles [20–22].

Hajem  et  al.  [23]  describe  the  naturally  occurring  Ac-Ser-
Asp-Lys-Pro tetrapeptide as an angiogenic factor that contrib-
utes  to  repair  of  cutaneous  injuries.  A  substantial  amount  of 
work has gone into studying the activities of this peptide at the 
level of in vitro mechanisms.

The tetrapeptide Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (RGDS), a sequence found 
within  the  fibronectin  structure  responsible  for  the  binding 
affinity of this protein to collagen and to cell membranes, is able 
to help cells migrate during the wound healing process. A cyclic 
RGD peptide, able to bind to integrin receptors was tested in a 
clinical study and found to possess anti-wrinkle properties [24].
The peptide Pal-Gly-Gln-Pro-Arg (Pal-GQPR) is a fragment 
of the natural circulating protein IgG and stimulates macromol-
ecule synthesis in cell culture but also contributes to the reduc-
tion of basal and UV-induced IL-6 release in keratinocytes and 
fibroblasts (Table 34.1.), which leads to improved skin firmness 
in vivo.

312

anti-aging  Cosmeceuticals

Table 34.1  Variation	in	IL-6	levels	in	presence	of	Pal-GQPR.

Pal-Gly-Gln-
Pro-Arg (ppm)

Decrease of basal IL-6 
(% of baseline level)

Decrease of UVB-induced 
IL-6 (% of baseline)

−15.6 ± 8.2

−20.0 ± 6.6

−24.6 ± 17.6

NT

NT

NT

10

15

30

45

65

85

NT,	not	tested.
*	n = 2.

−33.2 ± 12.8

−37.3 ± 13.0

−60.3 ± 8.5

−70.6 ± 9.8

−85.5*

−86.5*

The tripeptide Gly-His-Lys, found in different parts of broken-
down collagen and in some serum proteins, also stimulates col-
lagen synthesis in human skin fibroblasts, as found by Maquart 
et al. [3]. In its palmitoylated form (Pal-GHK) it can mimic the 
effects of retinoic acid [5]. The in vitro synergy between the tri- 
and tetrapeptide (Pal-GHK + Pal-GQPR) [25] led to an investi-
gation of the combination in a clinical, vehicle controlled, blind 
study on 23 panelists. Twice daily application of an oil-in-water 
(O/W) emulsion containing 4 p.p.m. of Pal-GHK and 2 p.p.m. 
of Pal-GQPR against vehicle showed significant wrinkle reduc-
tion, an increase in skin firmness, and visible smoothing after 
1–2  months.  More  recent  data  on  this  peptide  combination 
highlight  the  true  anti-aging  potential  of  peptides:  measuring 
the Subepidermal Low Echogenic Band (SLEB: Figure 34.4) by 
ultrasound echography, Mondon et al. [26] were able to show, 
based on the strong correlation between age and the thickness of 
the SLEB described by Querleux [27], a decrease in apparent age 
of the skin of ≈5 years in a panel of volunteers using the peptide 
containing creams for 2 months.

In another formulation, the peptide GHK was coupled to bio-
tin, instead of palmitic acid, in order to strengthen the affinity of 
the peptide to hair keratin. This biotinyl-GHK peptide was then 
tested  on  hair  growth  in  vitro  (Figure  34.5)  where  2 p.p.m.  of 
the peptide increased hair length by 58%, and 5 p.p.m. achieved 
120% increase. The production of the mitotic marker Ki67 and 

stimulation  of  collagen  IV  and  laminin  5  syntheses  were  also 
investigated.  Confirmation  of  the  improved  anchoring  of  the 
hair to the follicular infundibulum came from a clinical trial to 
study hair loss in alopecia patients where a significant improve-
ment of the anagen: telogen ratio was observed, in line with his-
tologic  observations  on  plucked  hairs  from  the  panelists  [28]. 
Loing  et  al.  [29]  describe  a  similar  result  with  an  undisclosed 
biomimetic  peptide  in  both  in  vitro  and  in  clinical  studies  on 
hair loss prevention.

Concepts derived from wound healing research are but one 
approach  to  peptide-based  anti-aging  treatments.  Reducing 
senescence via p53 expression and ataxia telangiectasia mutated 
(ATM) as investigated by Gruber et al. [30] is another promis-
ing  path.  Still  another  idea  centers  on  the  complex  process  of 
methionine  sulfoxide  reductases  (protein  repairing  enzymes). 
While  Frechet  et  al.  [31]  present  a  peptidomimetic  N-acetyl-
methionyl-decarboxymethionin  (AMDM)  modulation  with 
powerful  anti-oxidant  and  defense  properties,  Mondon  et  al. 
[32] developed a doubly oxidized Pal-Lys-Met (O2)-Lys peptide 
that proves to increase the synthesis of the six major macromol-
ecules  in  the  dermis  and  is  able,  in  vehicle  controlled  clinical 
studies  to  demonstrate  the  repair  of  wrinkles  both  in  the  eye 
zone and on the front, i.e. frown lines (Figure 34.6). The sulfoxi-
dized methionine in this peptide clearly plays a significant role 
that needs further investigation.

Many more small peptides and their derivatives can be found 

with claims of tissue repair and cosmetic anti-age effects.

neuropeptides
The skin and the brain are derived from the same initial embry-
onic  tissues  [34];  thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  many  peptides 
that are found to exist and possess activities in the brain are also 
found in the skin. Neurotensin, VIP, NPY, substance P, and CGRP, 
although endowed with potent biological activity, are not candi-
dates for cosmetic applications because of their size and irritation 
potential.  This  is  not  the  case  for  the  β-endorphin,  enkephalin 
and  the  kyotorphine  peptide  complex.  The  dipeptide  Tyr-Arg, 
which  is  known  as  kyotorphine,  has  been  shown  to  be  analge-
sic via enkephalin release in mouse brain [35] (Figure 34.7). The 

SLEB

5.5 mm

Figure 34.4  A Dermascan C (Cortex) echograph equipped with a 50 MHz frequency probe was used to obtain images approximately 6 mm wide and 3 mm 
thick with a resolution of 25 × 60 μm. A sequence of 100 successive images was recorded over 4 cm. Five representative images were extracted and analysed 
by image analysis. The SLEB is traced accurately over a width of 5.5 mm allowing its depth (in μm) and density (in Grey Scale Levels or GSL) to be calculated 
automatically.

(a)

Figure 34.5  Hair follicles in survival medium, 
incubated  14  days;  (a  &  b)  control;  (c  &  d) 
5 p.p.m. Biot-GHK.

(c)

Figure 34.6  Expression lines on the front before and after treating a panelist 
with the Pal-KM(O2)K peptide for two months.

34. Peptides and Proteins

313

(b)

(d)

modified peptide N-acetyl-tyr-arg-hexadecylester demonstrates 
improved  skin  bioavailability  and  stimulates  the  release  of 
β-endorphin in keratinocytes. It is also able to reduce skin sen-
sitivity to external thermal, chemical, and mechanical stress. A 
double-blind, vehicle controlled study using a lie detector estab-
lished that this peptide, at 300 p.p.m. in an O/W emulsion, was 
able  to  diminish  skin  electrodynamic  response  to  mechanical 
trauma induced by wiping the skin with sandpaper [36]. Sensi-
tivity of the skin to thermal trauma induced by a heat probe and 
chemical trauma induced by topical capsaicin is also decreased 
after  application  of  the  peptide  Furthermore,  the  peptide  also 
inhibits in vitro muscle contraction similarly to other modula-
tors of nerve-muscle interactions, such as curare [36].

Injections of derivatives of the Botulinium neurotoxin have been 
approved in a number of countries to diminish glabellar wrinkles. 
To develop a peptide with similar effects, Blanes-Mira et al. [38] 
synthesized  the  hexapeptide  N-Ac-Glu-Glu-Met-Gln-Arg-Arg-
NH2 (N-Ac-EEMQRR-NH2), a fragment of the SNAP-25 molecule 
[39]. It is reported to inhibit neurotransmitter release, apparently as 
a result of interference with the  formation and/or stability of the 
protein complex that is required to drive Ca2+-dependent exocyto-
sis, namely the vesicular fusion known as SNARE complex, simi-
lar  to  what  happens  with  Botulinium  neurotoxin  injections.  The 
authors also claim that an unspecified peptide solution,  formulated 
at the concentration of 10% in an O/W emulsion, reduced wrinkle 
depth up to 30% upon 30 days treatment on a panel of 10 human 
female volunteers [37].

Figure  34.7  demonstration  of  the  improvement  of  skin  firmness  after 
using the Ac-Tyr-Arg-hexadecylester dipeptide for one month. A weight is 
attached to the jowl and the skin extension is quantified. Left: before; right: 
after one month.

skin elasticity
Wrinkle treatment is one of the most obvious targets in anti-age 
research,  but  not  the  only  important  one.  Sagging  skin  (ptosis) 

314

anti-aging  Cosmeceuticals

reflecting  the  loss  of  elasticity,  caused  by  increased  elastolysis 
and decreased neosynthesis of the crucial elastin molecule in the 
dermis, has attracted much attention from the research commu-
nity and peptide scientists. Acetyl-tetrapeptide 2, was specifically 
designed  to  fight  flaccidity  as  it  increases  Fibulin  5  and  LOXL1 
activity, stimulates elastin synthesis and other processes involved 
in elastic fiber laydown [38], but the hexapeptide-10 and the Ac-
arg-trp-diphenylglycine peptides [39], the cyclopeptide-5 and the 
above  mentioned  Ac-Tyr-Arg-hexadecylester  dipeptide  all  show 
similar in vitro activity (protein synthesis, enzyme regulation, fiber 
organization and bundling, MMP inhibition…), and possess spe-
cific elasticity enhancing properties in vivo with sometimes spec-
tacular clinical results (Figure 34.8).

Melanogenesis
The well-named age-spots (lentigines) are another clear sign of 
the advancing years; visible in the face and on many other sun-
exposed areas of the body, they constitute an esthetic problem 
and a cosmetically treatable target. Given the fact that melano-
genesis is triggered by the a-MSH peptide (a fragment of proo-
piomelanocortin [40]), a huge number of peptide analogs and 
derivatives of a-MSH have been synthesized and tested for mod-
ulating melanin synthesis and skin pigmentation. The tetrapep-
tide Pro-Lys-Glu-Lys (PKEK) is described as being able to exert 
skin-whitening  effects  [41]. The  authors  have  carried  out  four 
clinical  vehicle  controlled  studies  based  on  the  observation 
that  in  vitro  the  peptide  reduces  the  expression  of  inflamma-
tory chemokines (IL6, IL8 and TNF-a, known to contribute to 
hyperpigmentation) and the synthesis of POMC by keratinoc-
ytes. Whereas PKEK is inspired by the KEK motive in cathelici-
din, an a-MSH derived hexapeptide analog activates the MCR-1 
receptor  and  reduces  UV  induced  DNA  damages  [Loing  42] 
and  an  acetyl  pentapeptide  proposed  as  a  “bronzing”  peptide  
actually increases melanin synthesis and tanning via stimulating 
the adenyl cyclase pathway [44].

These  and  many  other  examples  (anti-inflammatory  pep-
tides  [45,46],  peptides  modulating  lipid  metabolism  in  adipo-
cytes  [47–49],  barrier-repair  and  moisture  regulating  peptides 
[50,51]) show that the field of cosmetic applications for bioac-
tive peptides is still wide open.

proteins

Structural proteins are building blocks for the organs and tissues 
of the human body. Collagen, one of the most abundant protein 
families, as well as keratin, elastin, fibronectin, actins, together 
with  glycoproteins  and  proteoglucans,  arrange  themselves  in 
finely tuned, three-dimensional structures to form muscles and 
skin. The use of native collagen, elastin and keratins (extracted 
from  animal  tissue)  has  dramatically  declined  since  the  BSE 
scare in the 1990s, and is only now making a slow comeback. 
Not  much  bioactivity  is  attached  to  these  structural  proteins 
given that their size makes skin penetration rather unlikely. In 
the  dermal  layer,  however,  these  proteins  undergo  a  constant 
renewal process, even in the absence of external disturbances. 
These structural proteins present a contrast to enzymes, which 
fulfill  an  entirely  different  function.  Enzymes  speed  up  bio-
chemical reactions, which would otherwise occur too slowly for 
the body to function. Enzyme function is highly specific. This 
specificity results from the precise amino acid sequence, which 
not  only  aligns  the  correct  atoms  and  side  chains  in  the  right 
order, but also directs the precise folding pattern of the enzyme 
protein,  thus  guaranteeing  its  biological  function.  Enzymes 
are catalysts acting at low concentrations. The most important 
families of enzymes are proteolytic, lipolytic, antioxidant, DNA 
repair, and those involved in protein synthesis and gene regu-
lation.  A  variety  of  enzymes  have  been  employed  in  cosmetic 
products, of which we shall cite only a few examples.

proteolytic enzymes
Proteolytic  enzymes  are  used  as  an  alternative  to  α-hydroxy 
acids for superficial peeling of the skin surface, but care must 
be taken with the dosage. Figure 34.8 illustrates the proteolytic 
smoothing effect obtained with these enzymes.

t4 endonuclease V
T4  endonuclease  V,  isolated  from  Escherichia  coli  infected 
with T4 bacteriophage, has been shown to repair UV-induced 
cyclobutane  pyrimidine  dimers  in  DNA.  Applied  topically, 
liposomes  containing  T4  endonuclease  V  reduced  the  inci-
dence of basal cell carcinomas by 30% and of actinic keratoses 

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 34.8  Scanning electron microscope (SEM) pictures of skin treated with an occlusive patch for 2 hours; (a) control cream pH 7; (b) cream with AHA 
to pH 3.5; (c) cream with 2% proteolytic enzyme solution (10 proteolytic units/mL).

by  68%  without  adverse  effects  and  no  evidence  of  allergic 
or  irritant  contact  dermatitis.  Although  the  photoprotective 
effect  of  T4N5  has  been  investigated  only  in  xeroderma  pig-
mentosum patients, it may be also be effective for normal skin 
[52]. Cosmetic products based on this concept are in the cur-
rent marketplace.

superoxide dismutase and catalase
Superoxide dismutase, an antioxidant enzyme, is present at the 
surface  of  the  skin.  Adding  this  enzyme  to  cosmetic  formula-
tions  to  strengthen  the  natural  defense  system  is  tempting, 
although the transmutation of the superoxide anion to hydro-
gen  peroxide,  without  further  detoxification  of  the  peroxide, 
is  not  necessarily  sufficient  for  protecting  the  skin.  Catalase, 
an  enzyme  that  reduces  hydrogen  peroxide  to  harmless  water 
and oxygen, should work in conjunction with SOD; it is how-
ever prohibited for cosmetic use in Europe. Furthermore SOD 
and  catalase,  derived  from  bovine  blood,  from  yeast  or  other 
biotechnologically useful microorganism do not guarantee suf-
ficient stability to survive manufacturing procedures and shelf 
life in cosmetic consumer products.

A  novel  alternative  is  based  on  extremozymes  (enzymes  pro-
duced  by  extremophile  bacteria,  such  as  Thermus  thermophilus). 
Mas-Chamberlin  et  al.  [53]  have  shown  that  these  enzymes  are 
heat and UV stable, possessing both SOD and catalase-mimicking 
activity  which  protects  the  skin  against  UV-induced  free  radical 
damage.  A  6-month  clinical  vehicle  controlled  blind  trial  under 
tropical conditions (Figure 34.9; Tables 34.2 and 34.3) on the island 
of Mauritius [54] demonstrated the visible and measurable benefits 
of protecting the skin in preventive manner. New but as yet unpub-
lished data (Mondon P. personal communication) on this particu-
lar enzyme preparation show that the skin can also be protected 
against the possible damages resulting from Infrared radiation, a 
new target for preventive cosmetic concepts.

Other  enzymes  (lipase,  lactoperoxidase)  and  transport  pro-
teins  (lactoferrin,  hemocyanin)  are  more  of  theoretical  than 
practical use in cosmetic research and application.

(a)

(b)

Figure 34.9  Scanning electron microscope (SEM) pictures of stratum cor-
neum strippings: skin exposed to 6 months’ tropical climate, treated with 
moisturizer. (a) Control formula; (b) extremozyme-containing moisturizer. 
(Source: Soap Perfumery and Cosmetics. Reproduced with permission.)

34. Peptides and Proteins

315

Table 34.2  Changes	in	transepidermal	water	loss	(TEWL)	after	exposure	to	
tropical	climate	(25	panelists);	group	treated	with	extremozyme	formula.	

Time

Variation (g/m−2/
h−1) (mean ± SEM)

Week	4	vs.	T0

−1.0 ± 0.7

Week	12	vs.	T0

+0.8 ± 0.9

Week	24	vs.	T0

+0.2 ± 0.9

*	NS,	not	significant.

% 
Change 
(mean)

−6%

+5%

+1%

Significance

NS*	(p = 0.192)

NS	(p = 0.391)

NS	(p = 0.855)

Source:	Soap	Perfumery	and	Cosmetics.	Reproduced	with	permission.

Table 34.3  Changes	in	transepidermal	water	loss	(TEWL)	after	exposure	to	
tropical	climate	(25	panelists);	group	treated	with	placebo	formula;	clearly	the	
increase	in	TEWL	indicates	damaged	skin	barrier.	

Change (g.m−2.
h−1)
(mean ± SEM)

% change
(mean)

Time

4	weeks	vs.	T0

+0.9 ± 0.8

12	weeks	vs.	T0

+1.3 ± 0.7

24	weeks	vs.	T0

+1.4 ± 0.7

+7%

+10%

+11%

Significance

NS	(p = 0.258)

NS	(p = 0.081)

borderline	(p = 0.057)

Source:	Soap	Perfumery	and	Cosmetics.	Reproduced	with	permission.

conclusion

Peptides,  much  more  than  proteins,  have  become  an  impor-
tant tool for improving many aspects of the skin’s appearance, 
as  the  abundant  scientific  and  commercial  literature  demon-
strates. This chapter presents some justification for this  success. 
Although the list of peptides naturally occurring in the human 
body is long, allowing for further biomimetic peptide develop-
ment for skincare, the possibility to create derivatives, analogs, 
and other variations on a theme is enormous and even more 
exciting.  For  example,  the  number  of  possible  pentapeptides 
based on the 20 proteinogenic amino acids is 205 or 3,200,000. 
As our understanding of cellular mechanisms, gene regulation, 
receptor  activity,  and  metabolic  interactions  increases,  still 
many  new  peptides  will  appear  in  cosmetic  products  of  the 
future,  aiming  to  achieve  even  higher  specificity  and  greater 
effects in ever shorter time, all the while assuring safety in use.

references

  1  Lintner K. (2007) Peptides, amino acids and proteins in skin care? 

Cosmet Toiletries 122, 26–34.

  2  Anonymous (2012) Verisol®, the bioactive collagen peptides. HPC – 

Household and Personal Care Today, 1, 35.

  3  Maquart  FX,  Pickart  L,  Laurent  M,  et  al.  (1988)  Stimulation  of 
 collagen  synthesis  in  fibroblast  cultures  by  the  tripeptide-copper 
complex glycyl-L-histidyl-L-lysine-Cu2+. FEBS Lett 238, 343–5
  4  Leroux R, Peschard O, Mas-Chamberlin C, et al. (2000) Shaping up. 

Soap Perfum Cosmet 12, 22–4.

316

anti-aging  Cosmeceuticals

  5  Lintner K, Peschard O. (2000) Biologically active peptides: from a 
lab bench curiosity to a functional skin care product. Int J Cosmet 
Sci 22, 207–18.

  6  Goebel ASB, Schmaus G, Neubert RHH, Wohlrab J. (2012) Dermal 
peptide  delivery  using  enhancer  molecules  and  colloidal  carrier 
systems – Part I: carnosine. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 25(6), 281–7.
  7  Nasrollahi SA, Fouladdel S, Taghibiglou C, et al. (2012) A peptide 
carrier for the delivery of elastin into fibroblast cells. Int J Dermatol 
51(8), 923–9.

  8  Lim  JM,  Chang  MY,  Park  SG,  et  al.  (2003)  Penetration  enhance-
ment in mouse skin and lipolysis in adipocytes by TAT-GKH, a new 
cosmetic ingredient. J Cosmet Sci 54, 483–91.

  9  Yang JA, Kim ES, Kwon JH, et al. (2012) Transdermal delivery of 
hyaluronic acid – human growth hormone conjugate. Biomaterials 
33(25), 5947–54.

25  Lintner  K.  (2010)  Peptides:  Anti-Ageing  and  Much  More.  In: 
ML.SchlossmanML (ed.) Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics: 
Cosmetic Specialties and Ingredients. Carol Stream, IL: Allured Busi-
ness Media, pp. 113–25.

26  Mondon  P,  Feuilloley  M,  Peschard  O,  et  al.  (2012)  Evaluation  of 
dermal ECM and EDJ modifications Using Four Methods: Histol-
ogy, Maldi-MS, In Vivo Laser Confocal Microscopy and Echogra-
phy – effect of age and peptide applications. 27th IFSCC Congress 
2012. Book of Abstracts, Proceedings on Cd Rom, 359, 37–38.
27  Querleux B, Baldeweck T, Diridollou S, et al. (2009) Skin Res Tech-

nol 15, 306–313.

28  Mas-Chamberlin C, Mondon P, Lamy F, et al. (2005) Reduction of 
hair-loss: Matrikines and plant molecules to the rescue. In Proceed-
ings of the 7th Scientific Conference of the Asian Society of Cos-
metic Chemists, Bangkok, Thailand.

10  Ruiz  MA,  Clares  B,  Morales  ME,  et  al.  (2007)  Preparation  and 
 stability  of  cosmetic  formulations  with  an  anti-aging  peptide.  
J Cosmet Sci 58, 157–71.

29  Loing E, Lachance R, Ollier V, Hocquaux M. (2013) A new strat-
egy to modulate alopecia using a combination of two specific and 
unique ingredients. J Cosm Sci 64, 45–58.

11  Palladino P, Castelletto V, Dehsorkhi A, et al. (2012) Conformation 
and  self-association  of  peptide  amphiphiles  based  on  the  KTTKS 
collagen sequence. Langmuir. 28(33), 12209–15.

30  Gruber JV, Ludwig P, Holtz R. (2013) Modulation of cellular senes-
cence  in  fibroblasts  and  dermal  papillae  cells  in  vitro.  J  Cosm  Sci 
64(2), 79–87.

12  Chirita  RI,  Chaimbault  P,  Archambault  JC,  et  al.  (2009)  Devel-
opment  of  a  LC–MS/MS  method  to  monitor  palmitoyl  peptides  
content  in  anti-wrinkle  cosmetics.  Analytica  Chimica  Acta  641, 
95–100.

13  Rizvi SI, Maurya PK. (2007) Markers of oxidative stress in erythro-
cytes during aging in humans. Ann NY Acad Sci 1100, 373–82.
14  Enomoto  TM,  Johnson  T,  Peterson  N,  et  al.  (2005)  Combination 
glutathione and anthocyanins as an alternative for skin care during 
external-beam radiation. Am J Surg 189, 627–31.

15  Villarama CD, Maibach HI. (2005) Glutathione as a depigmenting 

agent: an overview. Int J Cosmet Sci 27, 147–53.

  Guglielmini G, Rigano L, Bachietto E. (2012) Rejuvenating amino 

peptide fights skin aging. Personal Care Europe, 5, 77–79.

17  Nagai K, Suda T, Kawasaki K, Mathuura S. (1986) Action of carno-
sine and beta-alanine on wound healing. Surgery 100, 815–21.
18  Maquart FX, Simeon A, Pasco S, Monboisse JC. (1999) Regulation 
of  cell activity by the  extracellular  matrix:  the  concept  of matrik-
ines. J Soc Biol 193, 423–8.

19  Katayama  K,  Armendariz-Borunda  J,  Raghow  R,  et  al.  (1993)  A 
pentapeptide from type I procollagen promotes extracellular matrix 
production. J Biol Chem 268, 9941–4.

20  Lintner K. (2002) Promoting production in the extracellular matrix 
without compromising barrier. Cutis, 70 n°6S (suppl.), 13–16.
21  Mas-Chamberlin C, Lintner K, Basset L, et al. (2002) Relevance of 
antiwrinkle treatment of a peptide: 4 months clinical double blind 
study  vs  excipient.  Ann  Dermatol  Venereol  129:  Proceedings  20th 
World Congress of Dermatology, Book II, PO 438, Paris.

22  Robinson  LR,  Fitzgerald  NC,  Doughty  DG,  et  al.  (2005)   Topical 
palmitoyl  pentapeptide  provides  improvement  in  photoaged 
human facial skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 27, 155–60.

23  Hajem N, Chapelle A, Bignon J, et al. (2013) The regulatory role of 
the tetrapeptide ACSDKP in skin and hair physiology and the pre-
vention of aging effects in these tissues – a potential cosmetic role. 
Int J Cosm Sci 35(3), 286–98.

24  Graf R, Reiffen KA, Anzali S, et al. (2012) In vivo anti-aging efficacy 

of a cyclic peptide composition. IFSCC Mag 15(1), 23–27.

31  Fréchet M, Lafitte P, Maccario F, et al. (2012) Regeneration by the 
MSR  enzymatic  system  potentiates  the  mitochondria-protective 
effect  of  a  methionine-containing  peptidomimetic.  27th  IFSCC 
Congress 2012. Book of Abstracts, 152, 360–62.

32  André N, Doridot E, Peschard O, et al. (2011) Dermis redensifica-
tion via collagen synthesis. Personal Care Europe 4(3), 33–34.
33  Misery L. (2002) Les nerfs à fleur de peau. Int J Cosmet Sci 24(2), 

111–6.

34  Shiomi  H,  Ueda  H,  Takagi  H.  (1981)  Isolation  and  identification 
of an analgesic opioid dipeptide kyotorphin (Tyr-Arg) from bovine 
brain. Neuropharmacology 20, 633–8.

35  Mas-Chamberlin C, Peschard O, Mondon P, Lintner K. (2004) Quanti-
fying skin relaxation and well-being. Cosmet Toiletries 119, 65–70.
36  Lintner  K,  Mas-Chamberlain  C,  Mondon  P,  et  al.  (2003)  A 
  lie-detector  investigation  to  measure  neuromodulating  activity  of 
a topically applied peptide: double blind clinical study of N-Acetyl-
Tyr-Arg-cetylhexylester vs. placebo. J Cosmet Sci 54, 98–99.

37  Blanes-Mira C, Clemente J, Jodas G, et al. (2002) A synthetic hexa-
peptide (Argireline) with antiwrinkle activity. Int J Cosmet Sci 24, 
303–10.

38  Chen YA, Scheller RH. (2001) SNARE mediated membrane fusion. 

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2, 98–106.

39  Rull M, Davi C, Cañadas E, et al. (2013) How to counteract the force 

of gravity. COSSMA, English Edition Online 14(11), 10–12.

40  Rull M, Davi C, Cañadas E, et al. (2012) Reversing signs of aging in 

mature skin. Personal Care Europe 5(4), 75–7.

41  Yamamoto K, Tanaka K, Iddamalgoda A. (2012) The potential role 
of alpha-MSH(1-8) as a novel melanogenesis-regulating factor. Fra-
grance J Japan, 11, 48–53.

42  Marini A, Farwick M, Grether-Beck S, et al. (2012) Modulation 
of skin pigmentation by the tetrapeptide PKEK: in vitro and in 
vivo  evidence  for  skin  whitening  effects.  Exp  Dermatol  21(2), 
140–6.

43  Loing E, Suere T. (2012) A new approach to protect and repair 
human  epidermal  cells  from  UV-induced  DNA  damages.  27th 
IFSCC Congress 2012. Book of Abstracts, 34, 156–7.

44  Cruz LjJ, Acosta G, Gutiérrez-Reyes C. (2011) Neuropeptides – a 
new strategy for skin care. Australasian J Cosm Sci 24, 5, 36–39.
45  Rull M, Davi C, Cañadas E, et al. (2013) Peptides working together 
– a relief for sensitive skin. COSSMA, English Edition Online, 14, 9 
(September), 14–16.

46  Rull  M,  Davi  C,  Cañadas  E,  et  al.  (2013)  Attenuating  facial  red-
ness  and  an  exacerbated  inflammatory  response  using  a  specific 
tetrapeptide. SÖFW Journal, English Edition, 139, 7 (July), 34–41.
47  Rull M, Davi C, Cañadas E, Van Den Nest W, Delgado R. (2012) 
Novel  proposal  to  ameliorate  silhouette  and  reduce  its  imperfec-
tions. Euro Cosmetics 20(11/12), 19–21.

48  Rull  M.  (2013)  Managing  volume  for.the  desired  silhouette. 

COSSMA, English Edition Online 14, 3, 10—11.

49  Nicolaÿ Jf, Fréchet M. (2012) Neuroendocrine control of lipolysis. 
Expression  Cosmétique  –  The  Global  Information  on  Cosmetics 
and Fragrances – 2011, Hors Série – November, 278–282.

34. Peptides and Proteins

317

50  Mantelin J. (2011) ISP, New synthetic peptide enhances skin’s natu-
ral UV defenses. Cosmetics Business – Online Newsletter by SPC 
– Soap, Perfumery and Cosmetics, 2011, 27 January 2011.

51  Mateu M, Davi C, Cañadas E. (2013) An integral 360° Hydration 
Approach. HPC – Household and Personal Care Today, 8, 2 (March–
April), Monographic Supplement Series, Supplement on Body Care 
Grooming, Protection and Hygiene.

52  Cafardi  JA,  Elmets  CA.  (2008)  T4  endonuclease  V:  review  and 

application to dermatology. Expert Opin Biol Ther 8, 829–38.

53  Mas-Chamberlin C, Lamy F, Mondon P, et al. (2002) Heat and UV 
stable cosmetic enzymes from deep sea bacteria. Cosmet Toiletries 
117, 22–30.

54  Mas-Chamberlin C, Mondon P, Lamy F, et al. (2006) Potential preven-

tive performance. Soap Perfum Cosmet 6, 34–6.

Chapter 35
Cellular Growth Factors

Rahul C. Mehta1 and Richard E. Fitzpatrick2
1 SkinMedica, Inc, An Allergan Company, Carlsbad, CA, USA
2 UCSD School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 Skin	aging	is	like	a	chronic	wound	that	does	not	completely	heal.
•	 Cellular	growth	factors	that	promote	wound	healing	may	accelerate	reversal	of	aging.
•	 High	levels	of	active	growth	factors	are	required	to	produce	biological	effects	after	topical	application.
•	 Multiple	clinical	studies	show	efficacy	of	products	containing	physiologically	balanced	cellular	growth	factors.

Introduction

This  chapter  discusses  cellular  growth  factors,  which  are  pro-
teins capable of stimulating cellular growth, proliferation, and 
cellular differentiation. Growth factors are important for regu-
lating a variety of cellular processes. They have been best studied 
in wound healing models, but have been adapted as cosmeceu-
ticals for their ability to improve the appearance of aging skin.

physiology

Skin aging and wound healing
Extensive research on skin aging in the last decade has resulted 
in  an  improved  understanding  of  the  pathophysiology  of 
intrinsic  (age-related)  and  extrinsic  aging  (UV-mediated  pho-
toaging).  Biochemical  processes  resulting  in  skin  damage  fol-
lowing exposure to UV radiation are now being identified and 
understood  [1].  A  correlation  between  biochemical  processes 
following photodamage and creation of wound is emerging. Of 
specific interest to cosmeceutical manufacturers are the effects 
of growth factors in the process of wound healing. Figure 35.1 
shows the stages of wound healing and role of growth factors in 
each  stage.  Growth  factors  are  regulatory  proteins  that  medi-
ate  signaling  pathways  between  and  within  cells.  After  a  skin 
damage,  a  variety  of  growth  factors  flood  the  wound  site  and 
interact synergistically to initiate and coordinate each phase of 
wound healing. They help recruit and activate fibroblast to rap-
idly produce extracellular matrix to close the wound followed 
by stimulation and multiplication of keratinocytes to form new 

epidermis.  The  overall  process  is  complex  and  not  completely 
understood [2].

Following skin damage, a variety of inflammatory pathways 
are  activated  including  nuclear  factor-κB  (NF-κB)  mediated 
activation of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukins 
[3]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS or free radicals) and proteo-
lytic enzymes are generated as a result of inflammation resulting 
in  degradation  of  extracellular  matrix.  ROS  increase  oxidative 
phosphorylation  of  cell  surface  receptors  causing  activation 
transcription  factors  activator  protein  1  (AP-1)  and  NF-κB, 
two  critical  components  of  mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP) 
kinase signaling pathway [4]. ROS therefore have a central role 
in  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  aging.  AP-1  stimulates  transcription 
of  matrix  metalloproteinase  (MMP)  growth  factor  genes  in 
fibroblast  and  keratinocytes,  and  inhibits  type  1  procollagen 
gene expression in fibroblasts [5]. Multiple studies have shown 
that activation of the MMP secretion as a result of intrinsic and 
extrinsic aging produces breakdown of dermal matrix [6].

Different  subtypes  of  MMP  have  different  substrate  pro-
teins  on  which  they  act  to  produce  a  break  in  their  primary 
sequence.  MMP-1  (collagenase)  produces  cleavage  at  a  single 
site in central triple helix of fibrillar type I and III collagen. The 
cleaved  subunits  are  further  degraded  by  MMP-3  (stromely-
sine  1)  and  MMP-9  (gelatinase).  Tissue  inhibitors  of  metallo-
proteinase (TIMP) decrease activity of MMPs. ROS inactivates 
TIMP thereby further increasing MMP activity. AP-1 mediated  
reduction  in  synthesis  of  procollagen  appears  to  result  from 
two  mechanisms:  interference  of  AP-1  with  type  1  and  3  
procollagen  gene  transcription  and  blocking  the  profibrotic 
effects of TGF-β by impairment of TGF-β type 2 receptor–Smad 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

318

35. Cellular Growth Factors

319

Laser procedure
Subclinical wound

Extrinsic aging
UV exposure

Intrinsic aging
Oxidative metabolism

Wound

Hemostasis

Platelets induced clotting
WBC recruitment

Inflammation

ROS mediated
ECM degradation

Granulation

ECM formation
Wound closure

Remodeling

ECM reorganization
Strengthening

TGF-β
TNF-α
IL-1, IL-6
IL-8, IL-10

TGF-β, PDGF
VEGF, HGF
NGF, IGFs
FGF2, IL-8

TGF-β
FGF2
TIMPs
MMPs

Figure  35.1  Healing  and  remodeling  of  skin  damaged  by 
the effect of intrinsic aging, extrinsic aging, wound or laser 
procedures. (Source: Mehta & Fitzpatrick, 2007 [2]. Repro-
duced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

pathway  [3].  Activation  of  NF-κB  stimulates  transcriptions  of 
proinflammatory cytokine genes including interleukin 1 (IL-1), 
TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 [4]. Inflammation resulting from these 
cytokines  increases  secretion  of  ROS  and  more  cytokines  fur-
ther enhancing the effect of UV exposure.

Inflammation causes protease-mediated degradation of elas-
tin and UV exposure causes formation of abnormal elastin by 
fibroblasts.  UV  light  is  also  an  inhibitior  of  leukocyte  elastase 
thereby increasing accumulation of elastotic materials [7]. The 
accumulation  of  elastotic  materials  is  accompanied  by  degen-
eration of surrounding collagenous network.

The overall effects of these interlinked biochemical activities is 
reduction of procollagen synthesis, increase of collagen degrada-
tion in the dermal extracellular matrix, and increase in irregu-
lar  elastin  deposition.  Successful  resolution  of  damage  to  skin 
and wound healing requires a balance between development of 
inflammation  and  its  rapid  resolution  which  includes  involve-
ment  of  growth  factors  and  cytokines  such  as  TGF-β,  TNF-α, 
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), IL-1, IL-6, and IL-10 [8]. 
Intrinsic aging does not show the inflammatory component seen 
with healing of acute photodamage and wounds; instead, mito-
chondrial oxidative metabolism produces some of the key medi-
ators of extracellular matrix degradation including ROS [9].

Transition  from  inflammatory  phase  of  wound  healing  to 
granulation phase is mediated by a variety of growth factors and 
cytokines  including  PDGF,  TGF-α,  TGF-β,  fibroblast  growth 
factors  (FGFs),  insulin-like  growth  factor  1  (IGF-1),  colony 
stimulating  factors  (CSF),  interleukins  and  TNF-α  [10].  The 
growth  factors  and  cytokines  are  derived  from  macrophages, 
epidermal  keratinocytes,  and  fibroblasts.  Multiple  metabolic 
pathways lead to formation of new collagen and repair of extra-
cellular matrix during the granulation phase.

The final stage of skin repair after granulation and re-epithe-
lialization or peeling of sunburned skin is the beginning of der-
mal tissue remodelling. During this stage, low strength, unorga-
nized, type 3 collagen and irregular elastin structures produced 
during  the  extracellular  matrix  production  phase  are  replaced 
by stronger type 1 collagen and structured elastin fibres to pro-
vide  strength  and  resiliency  to  the  dermis.  This  remodelling 
phase can last for several months and is the key to reversing the 
visible effects of skin aging [11].

Most studies have evaluated the role of single growth factors 
in controlled wound-healing environments. These studies dem-
onstrate the importance of growth factors in the repair of dam-
aged tissue, but research into the phases of wound healing has 
demonstrated that it is the interaction of multiple growth factors 

320

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

that is vital to tissue regeneration. Cosmeceutical manufacturers 
have taken notice of the positive results of clinical studies show-
ing  accelerated  wound  healing  and  have  included  growth  fac-
tors in products designed to mitigate damage from chronologic 
aging and sun exposure [11].

role of cellular growth factors in skincare
The use of growth factors and cytokines in skin rejuvenation and 
reversal of photoaging is fast becoming a cornerstone of antiag-
ing treatments. Table 35.1 lists some important growth factors 
and  cytokines  that  affect  the  proliferation  of  dermal  fibrob-
lasts and extracellular matrix production [12]. Growth factors, 
cytokines,  and  other  agents  that  help  rebuild  the  extracellular 
matrix are critical in the reversal of the signs of skin aging such 
as fine lines and wrinkles. Providing a physiologically balanced 
mixture of these growth factors and cytokines to cells respon-
sible  for  extracellular  matrix  production  and  remodeling  may 
benefit  in  rejuvenation  of  aging  skin.  Several  cosmeceutical 

products  containing  either  a  single  human  growth  factor  or 
combination  of  multiple  human  growth  factors  and  cytokines 
are  currently  marketed  for  skin  rejuvenation.  Several  clinical 
and skin biology studies now show that human growth factors 
when applied topically provide beneficial effects in reducing the 
signs of facial skin aging [2].

Unique attributes

Growth  factors  produce  antiaging  benefits  by  virtue  of  their 
biologic  role  to  maintain  healthy  skin  structure  and  function. 
Together with cytokines, growth factors provide constant com-
munication between cells of the immune system, keratinocytes, 
and  fibroblasts  throughout  the  process  of  wound  healing  and 
skin repair and regeneration. During the final remodeling phase 
of  wound  healing,  a  number  of  different  growth  factors  and 
cytokines  interact  with  each  other  and  with  the  surrounding 

Table 35.1  Partial	list	of	growth	factors	and	cytokines	identified	in	active	gel	and	their	function	in	skin	[12].

Growth factor/cytokine

Skin-related functions

Fibroblast	growth	factors:	bFGF	(FGF-2),	FGF-4,	FGF-6,	KGF	(FGF-7),	FGF-9

Angiogenic	and	fibroblast	mitogen

Hepatocyte	growth	factor	(HGF)

Platelet	derived	growth	factors:	PDGF	AA,	PDGF	BB,	PDGF	Rb

Strong	mitogenic	activities;	three-dimensional	tissue	regeneration	and	
wound	healing

Chemotactic	for	macrophages,	fibroblasts;	macrophage	activation;	
fibroblast	mitogen,	and	matrix	production

Insulin-like	growth	factors:	IGF1,	IGFBP1,	IGFBP2,	IGFBP3,	IGFBP6

Endothelial	cell	and	fibroblast	mitogen

Transforming	growth	factor:	TGF-β1,	TGF-β2,	TGF-β3

Keratinocyte	migration;	chemotactic	for	macrophages	and	fibroblasts

Tissue	inhibitor	of	metalloproteinases:	TIMP1	(MPI1),	TIMP2	(MPI2)

Prevent	enzymatic	degradation	of	collagen	and	hyaluronic	acid

Vascular	endothelial	growth	factor	(VEGF)

Influence	vascular	permeability	and	angiogenesis	to	improve	tissue	
nutrition

Placenta	growth	factor	(PLGF)

Promote	endothelial	cell	growth

Bone	morphogenetic	protein:	BMP7

Promote	development	of	nerve	cells	in	developing	tissue

Interleukins:	IL-1α,	IL-1β

Interleukin:	IL-2

Interleukin:	IL-6

Interleukin:	IL-10

Interleukin:	IL-4,	IL-13

Interleukin:	IL-3,	IL-4,	IL-5

Interleukins:	IL-7,	IL-8,	IL-15

Leptin

Early	activators	of	growth	factor	expression	in	macrophages,	keratinocytes,	
and	fibroblasts

Enhance	epithelial	wound	healing

Mediator	of	acute	phase	response	to	wound	and	has	synergistic	effect	
with	IL-1

Inhibits	pro-inflammatory	cytokines	to	reduce	inflammation	prevents	scar	
formation

Stimulate	production	of	IL-6

Leukocyte	maturation	and	degranulation	during	inflammatory	phase

Leukocyte	activation	and	proliferation	during	inflammatory	phase

Epidermal	keratinocyte	proliferation	during	wound	healing

Colony	stimulating	factors:	GCSF,	GM-CSF,	M-CSF

Stimulate	the	development	of	neutrophils	and	macrophages

CSF,	granulocyte	colony	stimulating	factor;	GM-CSF,	granulocyte	macrophage	colony	stimulating	factor;	M-CSF,	macrophage	colony	stimulating	factor.

35. Cellular Growth Factors

321

cells  in  concert  to  improve  the  quality  of  extracellular  matrix. 
Use  of  individual  growth  factors  is  unlikely  to  duplicate  these 
complex  interactions  essential  for  remodeling  of  skin.  There-
fore, a mixture of growth factors and cytokines proven to have 
a role in skin remodeling should provide superior benefits than 
individual growth factors. Ideal growth factor products should 
contain this unique mixture obtained from natural sources.

advantages and disadvantages

Clinically proven benefits in reversal of skin 
aging and post-procedure healing
In one of the first pilot clinical studies with a product contain-
ing  a  natural  combination  of  fibroblast-derived  growth  factor 
mixture,  14  patients  with  Fitzpatrick  class  II  or  greater  facial 
photodamage  applied  TNS  Recovery  Complex  (SkinMedica, 
Carlsbad, CA, USA) twice daily for 60 days. The results show a 
statistically significant reduction in fine lines and wrinkles and 
reduction  in  periorbital  photodamage  by  clinical  grading  and 
by optical profilometry. Figure 35.2 shows an example of a skin 
biopsy section with increased collagen after treatment with the 
study product. Measurements of grenz zone collagen and epi-
dermal thickness from the biopsy show a 37% increase in grenz 
zone collagen and a 30% increase in epidermal thickness [11].

Vehicle  controlled  studies  on  cosmeceutical  products  are 
very  difficult  to  conduct  as  topical  vehicles  can  have  ben-
efits  by  virtue  of  skin  hydration,  reduced  epidermal  water 
loss,  or  simply  providing  physical  barrier  against  the  envi-
ronment.  Because  of  these  effects,  most  vehicles  cannot  be 
classified  as  “inactive”  and  make  it  more  difficult  to  achieve  

statistical  significance  in  a  vehicle  controlled,  double-blind 
study design. In spite of these difficulties, if the product con-
tains any new active combinations, the study must include a 
reasonably matched vehicle to scientifically validate effects of 
the new active [13].

In  a  double-blind  vehicle  controlled  study,  60  subjects  were 
randomly assigned to receive either TNS Recovery Complex or 
vehicle and apply it twice daily for 6 months along with a mois-
turizing cleanser and sunscreen. Treatment with TNS Recovery 
Complex for 3 months produced greater reduction in fine lines 
and wrinkles than vehicle treatment as measured by optical pro-
filometry and assessment of photographs. The results were either 
statistically significant (p ≤ 0.05) or trending towards statistical 
significance (p ≤ 0.1). Figure 35.3 shows improvement in facial 
photodamage  observed  in  this  study.  The  study  demonstrates 
that even when compared with a treatment with a good moistur-
izer and sunscreen, the product being tested showed significant 
benefits of reversal of signs and symptoms of skin aging [12].

In  another  double-blind  study,  18  patients  with  Fitzpatrick 
class  II  or  greater  facial  photodamage  applied  Bio-Restorative 
Skin  Cream  (NeoCutis,  Inc,  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA)  twice 
daily  for  60  days.  The  results  showed  that  while  the  average 
facial  roughness  did  not  decrease,  a  significant  improvement 
was  seen  in  several  other  parameters  of  facial  wrinkles.  The 
measurements were conducted by a three-dimensional surface 
mapping technique [14].

A  split-face  study  of  42  subjects  using  human  cell  condi-
tioned  medium  CCM  (Histogen  Inc,  San  Diego,  CA,  USA) 
immediately  after  ablative  and  non-ablative  laser  resurfacing 
produced  accelerated  wound  healing  and  more  normal  skin 
recovery [15].

Figure 35.2  Histology of skin before 
(a) and after 3 months of TNS Recov-
ery Complex (b) showing increase in 
grenz-zone  collagen  and  epidermal 
thickness after treatment [11].

322

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

Figure 35.3  Photograph of periorbital and upper cheek area before (a) and after 6 months of TNS Recovery Complex (b) showing reduction in wrinkles 
and fine lines after treatment [12].

risks associated with growth factors
Growth factors are key molecules that affect cellular prolifera-
tion and differentiation which, if unregulated, can lead to car-
cinogenic  transformation  of  cells.  Presence  of  receptors  for 
some growth factors in melanoma cells and expression of cer-
tain growth factors by cancerous cells [16] has raised concerns 
about the potential for topically applied growth factors to stimu-
late the development of cancer. However, whether presence of 
receptors or increased expression contributes to tumor growth 
is uncertain. A recent finding suggests that chronic administra-
tion of high concentrations of PDGF directly into debrided dia-
betic pressure wounds may result in increased mortality from  
cancer.  It  is  unlikely  that  growth  factors  applied  topically  to 
intact  skin  would  affect  tumor  proliferation  as  the  protein 
molecules are too large to be absorbed in large quantities [12]. 
In  addition,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  levels  of  growth  factors  in 
skin after topical application is significantly higher than those  
following  inflammation-causing  event  such  as  chemical  peel, 
lasers, or skin infections.

Maintaining activity of growth factors through 
product shelf-life
Growth  factors  and  other  biologically  active  peptides  are 
inherently  unstable  in  non-physiologic  environment,  unless 
they are stored frozen at temperatures below −20°C. Presence 
of  surface  active  additives,  alcohols,  and  other  protein  dena-
turing excipients further decrease product stability and com-
promise  product  efficacy  during  the  claimed  shelf-life  of  the 
product. Analytical techniques have advanced to a point where 
presence of growth factors in simple solution or gel formula-

tions can be easily detected by immunoassay as demonstrated 
by  analysis  of  a  commercial  growth  factor  product  stored  at 
room  temperature  for  2  years  [12,17].  While  complex  mul-
tiphase formulations such as creams containing combination 
of  cellular  growth  factors  may  be  difficult  to  analyse,  a  new 
technique for determination of biological activity of anti-aging 
products  was  recently  validated  and  published.  The  study 
evaluates  expression  of  extra-cellular  matrix  related  genes  in 
full-thickness human skin using retinoic acid as positive con-
trol. Figure 35.4 shows gene expression changes with use of a 

12 Hours

Tretinoin 0.05% (Control)

Growth Factor Standard

COL1A1

COL13A1

ELN

MFAP2

LOXL1

24 Hours

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

e
n
e
G

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

r
e
v
o
s
d
o
f
(

l

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

e
n
e
G

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

r
e
v
o
s
d
o
f
(

l

4

3

2

1

0

16

12

8

4

0

COL1A1

COL13A1

ELN

MFAP2

LOXL1

Figure  35.4  Human  skin  model  for  determining  biological  activity  of 
growth factor containing products [18].

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial  growth  factor  product  [18].  Techniques  such  as 
this must be used to verify stability and activity of growth fac-
tors during the product shelf-life period to ensure that patients 
receive the claimed growth factors.

Ingredients

Natural growth factors
Human  growth  factors  may  be  obtained  from  two  major 
sources:  cultured  human  cells  or  genetically  engineered 
microorganisms. Human cells cultured in a three-dimensional 
network secrete a mixture of a large number of growth factors 
and other proteins capable of promoting wound healing [19]. 
The composition of the growth factor mixture varies with cell 
phenotype and environmental variables. Cells growing under 
conditions  resembling  a  wound  are  most  likely  to  produce 
growth  factors,  cytokines,  and  matrix  proteins  that  assist  in 
wound healing.

TNS  by  SkinMedica  is  collected  from  a  three-dimensional 
matrix of cultured human dermal fibroblasts induced to pro-
duce  collagen,  the  same  protein  they  produce  during  wound 
healing.  The  associated  combination  of  growth  factors  and 
cytokines  naturally  secreted  during  the  collagen  produc-
tion phase of the tissue culture therefore represents the most 
appropriate combination to induce wound healing (Table 35.1) 
[12].  CCM  Complex  by  Histogen  prepared  from  cultured 
human fibroblasts under embryonic-like conditions contain a 
mixture of growth factors appropriate for wound healing [15]. 
Naturally  secreted  growth  factors  can  also  be  obtained  from 
fibroblast and keratinocyte co-cultures. PSP by Neocutis uses a 
different method of collecting a mixture of growth factors and 
cytokines.  Growth  factors  from  cultured  fibroblasts  are  col-
lected by lyses followed by purification of all intracellular con-
tent present at the time of lysis. The purification process con-
centrates  the  growth  factors  and  removes  culture  media  but 
may also remove some important components of the growth 
factor mixture [20].

Growth factors secreting stem cells
Adipose-derived  stem  cells  and  umbilical  cord  mesenchymal 
stem  cells  have  been  studied  for  promotion  of  wound  healing 
and anti-aging effects by virtue of their ability to secrete growth 
factors. Preliminary studies show that intradermal injection of 
adipose-derived  stem  cell  suspension  can  produce  increased 
collagen  production,  increase  cellular  antioxidant  levels  and 
reduce  signs  of  skin  aging.  These  preclinical  results  warrant 
further  evaluation  in  clinical  studies  after  adequate  testing 
and standardization of methods to obtain autologous adipose-
derived stem cells [21,22].

Synthetic growth factors
Individual  growth  factors  and  cytokines  can  be  made  via 
recombinant  technology  using  bacterial  or  yeast  cultures 

35. Cellular Growth Factors

323

Table 35.2  Synthetic	growth	factors	registered	as	cosmetic	ingredients	[23].

INCI name

Growth factor

Human	oligopeptide-1

Epidermal	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-2

Insulin-like	growth	factor-1

Human	oligopeptide-3

Basic	fibroblast	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-5

Keratinocyte	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-7

Transforming	growth	factor-β3

Human	oligopeptide-8

Interleukin	10

Human	oligopeptide-10

Platelet	derived	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-11

Vascular	endothelial	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-12

Fibroblast	growth	factor	10

Human	oligopeptide-13

Acidic	fibroblast	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-14

Transforming	growth	factor-α

Human	oligopeptide-15

Interleukin	4

Human	oligopeptide-19

Nerve	growth	factor

Human	oligopeptide-20

Tissue	inhibitor	of	metalloproteinases

modified to include DNA sequence for growth factors. Many 
growth factors of cosmeceutical interest are produced by this 
technique including TGF-β, vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor  (VEGF),  epidermal  growth  factor  (EGF),  various  FGFs, 
PDGF, and more [23]. Table 35.2 lists various growth factors 
registered with International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary 
and  Handbook  as  cosmetic  ingredients.  While  clinical  stud-
ies have shown a marginally beneficial effect for some of the 
individual growth factors, more studies must be carried out to 
understand the role of combinations of growth factors in skin 
rejuvenation.  Combinations  of  growth  factors  that  comple-
ment each other's effects is likely to be more effective as multi-
ple growth factors are involved in most biochemical processes 
including wound healing [8].

related products

phytokinins
Kinetin,  a  plant-derived  growth  hormone  discovered  almost 
50  years  ago,  has  been  recently  used  in  several  cosmeceutical 
products  as  an  antiaging  ingredient  [24].  Kinetin  is  found  in 
the DNA of almost all organisms tested so far, including human 
cells.  In  plants,  kinetin  regulates  cellular  differentiation  by  an 
endocrine  pathway  with  unknown  mechanism;  however,  its 
function in human cells is not known. Kinetin and other cytoki-
nins are products of oxidative metabolism of the cell. Kinetin is 
formed in the nucleus by reaction of hydroxyl free radicals with 
DNA whereas reaction of hydroxyl radical with RNA results in 
formation  of  zeatin,  another  cytokinin  used  in  cosmeceutical 
products.

324

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

alternate delivery methods

Mesotherapy is the micro-injection of growth factors or other 
active molecules into the mesoderm with the premise that the 
active molecules are directly delivered to the target tissue using 
fine gauge short needles to a 2–5 mm depth of penetration. Mul-
tiple, close spaced injections are made to ensure adequate cover-
age of the treatment area. There are no clinical studies evaluat-
ing the efficacy of the procedures and safety remains a concern 
because of lack of availability of sterile growth factor solutions.

A variation of mesotherapy is the use of micro-needle devises 
or fractionated lasers to create micro-punctures into the stratum 
corneum before topical application of growth factors with the 
assumption that  reduced  barrier  will result  in greater efficacy. 
Again, very little clinical evidence exists to show effectiveness of 
these procedures.

Conclusions

Studying the role of growth factors in cutaneous wound healing 
has led to research demonstrating positive cosmetic and clinical 
outcomes  in  photodamaged  skin.  Although  the  topical  use  of 
growth factors is an emerging treatment approach, clinical stud-
ies  demonstrate  that  dermal  collagen  production  and  clinical 
improvement in photodamage appearance are significant. Fur-
ther, the increase in dermal collagen produced by topical growth 
factors can be measured quantitatively by biopsy. Although the 
functions of growth factors in the natural wound healing proc-
ess  are  complex  and  incompletely  understood,  it  appears  that 
wound  healing  is  dependent  on  the  synergistic  interaction  of 
many  growth  factors.  The  most  promising  research  suggests 
that  multiple  growth  factors  used  in  combination  stimulate 
the  growth  of  collagen,  elastin,  and  glycosaminoglycans  lead-
ing to reduction in fine lines and wrinkles. The use of a multi-
ple growth factor topical formulation provides a good first line 
treatment for mild to moderate photodamaged skin.

references

  1  Gilchrest BA. (1989) Skin aging and photoaging: an overview. J Am 

Acad Dermatol 21, 610–3.

  2  Mehta  RC,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  (2007)  Endogenous  growth  factors  as 

cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Ther 20, 350–9.

  3  Quan  T,  He  T,  Kang  S,  et  al.  (2004)  Solar  ultraviolet  irradiation 
reduces collagen in photoaged human skin by blocking transform-
ing growth factor-beta type II receptor/Smad signaling. Am J Pathol 
165, 741–51.

  4  Fisher  GJ,  Talwar  HS,  Lin  J,  et  al.  (1998)  Retinoic  acid  inhib-
its  induction  of  c-Jun  protein  by  ultraviolet  radiation  that  occurs 

subsequent to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase path-
ways in human skin in vivo. J Clin Invest 101, 1432–40.

  5  Schwartz  E,  Cruickshank  FA,  Christensen  CC,  et  al.  (1993)  Col-
lagen alterations in chronically sun-damaged human skin.  Photo-
chem Photobiol 58, 841–4.

  6  Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC, et al. (1997) Pathophysiology of pre-
mature skin aging induced by ultraviolet light. N Engl J Med 337, 
1419–28.

  7  Martin P. (1997) Wound healing: aiming for perfect skin regenera-

tion. Science 276, 75–81.

  8  Eming SA, Krieg T, Davidson JM. (2007) Inflammation in wound 
repair: molecular and cellular mechanisms. J Invest Dermatol 127, 
514–25.

  9  Sohal RS, Weindruch R. (1996) Oxidative stress, caloric restriction, 

and aging. Science 273, 59–63.

10  Moulin  V.  (1995)  Growth  factors  in  skin  wound  healing:  review 

article. Eur J Cell Biol 68, 1–7.

11  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Rostan  EF.  (2003)  Reversal  of  photodamage  with 
topical growth factors: a pilot study. J Cosmet Laser Ther 5, 25–34.
12  Mehta RC, Smith SR, Grove GL, et al. (2008) Reduction in facial 
photodamage by a topical growth factor product. J Drugs Dermatol 
7, 864–71.

13  Draelos ZD. (2007) Exploring the pitfalls in clinical cosmeceutical 

research. Cosmet Dermatol 20, 556–8.

14  Gold MH, Goldman MP, Biron J. (2007) Human growth factor and 
cytokine skin cream for facial skin rejuvenation as assessed by 3D 
in vivo optical skin imaging. J Drugs Dermatol 6, 1018–23.

15  Zimber  MP,  Mansbridge  JN,  Taylor  M,  et  al.  (2012)  Human  cell-
conditioned  media  produced  under  embryonic-like  conditions 
result  in  improved  healing  time  after  laser  resurfacing.  Aesthetic 
Plast Surg. 36, 431–7.

16  Liu B, Earl HM, Baban D, et al. (1995) Melanoma cell lines express 
VEGF  receptor  KDR  and  respond  to  exogenously  added  VEGF. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 217, 721–7.

17  Sundaram H, Mehta RC, Norine JA, et al. (2009) Topically applied 
physiologically  balanced  growth  factors:  A  new  paradigm  of  skin 
rejuvenation. J Drugs Dermatol. 8:s4–s13

18  Vega VL, Mehta RC, Bachelor MA, et al. (2013) Differential modu-
lation  of  ECM  components  and  GFR  by  retinoic  acid  and  physi-
ologically balanced GF formulation. J Invest Dermatol 133, S155.
19  Mansbridge  J,  Liu  K,  Patch  R,  et  al.  (1998)  Three-dimensional 
fibroblast culture implant for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers: 
metabolic activity and therapeutic range. Tissue Eng 4, 403–14.
20  Schütte H, Kula MR. (1990) Pilot- and process-scale techniques for 

cell disruption. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 12, 599–620.

21  Park BS, Jang KA, Sung JH, Park JS, Kwon YH, Kim KJ, et al. (2008) 
Adipose-derived stem cells and their secretory factors as a promis-
ing therapy for skin aging. Dermatol Surg 34, 1323–6.

22  Liu Q, Luo Z, He S, Peng X, et al. (2013) Conditioned serum-free 
medium from umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells has anti-pho-
toaging properties. Biotechnol Lett. 35, 1707–14.

23  Gottscha TE, Bailey JE, eds. (2008) International Cosmetic Ingredi-
ent Dictionary and Handbook. Washington DC: Toiletry and Fra-
grance Association, pp. 1170–4.10

24  Barciszewski J, Massino F, Clark BF. (2007) Kinetin: a multiactive 

molecule. Int J Biol Macromol 40, 182–92.

ChAPTEr 36
Topical Cosmeceutical retinoids

Olivier Sorg1, Gürkan Kaya2, and Jean H. Saurat1
1 Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
2 Department of Dermatology, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Retinoids	define	a	class	of	substances	comprising	vitamin	A	(retinol)	and	its	naturally	and	synthetic	derivatives.
•	 Retinoids	are	lipophilic	molecules	that	diffuse	through	plasma	membranes	or	cross	the	cutaneous	barrier	when	applied	topically.	Inside	the	
cells,	retinoids	bind	to	nuclear	receptors	(RAR-α,	-β,	-γ,	and	RXR-α,	-β,	-γ),	then	the	ligand–receptor	complexes	bind	to	a	RAR-response	
element	(RARE)	DNA	sequence,	resulting	in	the	modulation	of	the	expression	of	genes	involved	in	cellular	differentiation	and	proliferation.

•	 As	biologically	active	agents	given	to	humans,	retinoids	can	be	divided	into	therapeutics	and	cosmeceuticals.
•	 The	ranking	order	of	retinoid-like	activity	following	topical	application	is	as	follows:	retinoic	acid > retinaldehyde > retinol >>> retinyl	esters.

Biological concepts

Therapeutic and cosmeceutical retinoids
Retinoids  define  a  class  of  substances  comprising  vitamin  A 
(retinol)  and  its  naturally  and  synthetic  derivatives.  Although 
they were first discovered in the retina as central players of the 
biology of vision, they function as key regulators of differentia-
tion and proliferation in various tissues. Retinol is produced in 
the  small  intestine  either  by  hydrolysis  of  retinyl  esters,  or  by 
oxidation  of  various  carotenoids  [1,2].  Retinol  can  be  oxidized 
into  retinaldehyde,  and  then  into  retinoic  acid,  the  biologically 
active form of vitamin A. Retinol may be also esterified with fatty 
acids  to  form  retinyl  esters.  Retinoic  acid  is  oxidized  to  a  less 
active  metabolite,  4-oxoretinoic  acid,  or  converted  to  retinoyl 
glucuronide, whereas retinol is converted to retinyl glucuronide. 
Two  other  vitamin  A  metabolites,  4-oxoretinol  and  4-oxoreti-
nal,  are  believed  to  be  the  products  of  oxidation  of  retinol  and 
retinal,  respectively,  by  CYP26-related  hydroxylases,  although 
this has not been demonstrated [3,4] (Figure 36.1). The two pre-
dominant endogenous retinoids are retinol and its esters. Retinol 
and retinyl esters account for more than 99% of total cutaneous 
retinoids,  i.e.  ≈1  nmol/g  [5].  Retinoic  acid  is  catabolized  either 
by phase I or phase II enzymes, giving rise to retinoyl glucuro-
nide or 4-oxoretinoic acid [6,7]. Although the latter has long been 
considered an inactive catabolite of retinoic acid, other oxoretin-
oids,  i.e.  4-oxoretinol  and  4-oxoretinal,  have  been  shown  to  be 
the predominant retinoids in some models of morphogenesis [8-
10], and exert some of the retinoid-like activities in mouse in vivo 
[11].  As  lipophilic  molecules,  they  can  diffuse  through  plasma 

membranes or cross the cutaneous barrier when applied topically. 
Inside the cells, they bind to nuclear receptors (RAR-α, -β, -γ, and 
RXR-α,  -β,  -γ),  then  the  ligand–receptor  complexes  bind  to  a 
RAR-response element (RARE) DNA sequence, resulting in the 
modulation of the expression of genes involved in cellular differ-
entiation and proliferation [4,12–14] (Figure 36.1).

As biologically active agents given to humans, retinoids can 

be divided into therapeutics and cosmeceuticals.

Therapeutic retinoids are usually RAR or RXR ligands (except 
for  isotretinoin),  and  are  available  on  medical  prescription  to 
treat  diseases  such  as  acne,  psoriasis,  and  actinic  keratosis,  or 
oncological  diseases  such  as  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia, 
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, and squamous or basal cell carci-
noma  [15].  Endogenous  active  metabolites  of  retinol  (vitamin 
A) such as all-trans-retinoic acid (tretinoin), 9-cis-retinoic acid 
(alitretinoin)  and  13-cis-retinoic  acid  (isotretinoin),  as  well  as 
the  synthetic  monoaromatic  retinoids  acitretin  and  etretinate, 
and the arotinoids adapalene, tazarotene and bexarotene, belong 
to the therapeutic retinoids [16,17] (Figure 36.2A).

Endogenous  precursors  of  retinoic  acids,  i.e.  retinyl  esters, 
retinol and retinaldehyde, as well as 4-oxoretinoids (4-oxoretinol, 
4-oxoretinal and 4-oxoretinoic acids), do not bind to nuclear reti-
noid receptors; are found in many OTC products; and constitute 
the group of topical cosmeceutical retinoids [4] (Figure 36.2B).

Epidermal vitamin A
Vitamin A is present in the epidermis as free and esterified reti-
nol  at  an  average  concentration  of  1–2  nmol/g  [5,18].  Retinol 
and retinyl esters may be oxidized to retinaldehyde and then to 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

325

326

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals

Figure 36.1  Biochemical pathways from dietary provitamins A to biological responses. Abbreviations: ARAT, acyl-coenzyme A:retinol acyltransferase; BCO, 
β-carotene-15,15’-monooxygenase; CAR, β-carotene; CYP26, cytochrome P450 26; LRAT, lecithin:retinol acyltransferase; oxoRA, all-trans-4-oxoretinoic 
acid;  oxoRAL,  all-trans-4-oxoretinal;  oxoROL,  all-trans-4-oxoretinol;  RA,  all-trans-retinoic  acid;  RA-Glu,  all-trans-retinoyl-β-D-glucuronide;  RAL, 
all-trans-retinaldehyde; RALDH, retinal dehydrogenase; RE, retinyl esters; REH, retinyl ester hydrolase; RoDH, retinol dehydrogenase; ROL, all-trans-retinol; 
ROL-Glu, all-trans-retinyl- β-D-glucuronide; UGT, UDP-glucuronosyl transferase.

retinoic acid cis/trans isomers within keratinocytes [19–21]. An 
epidermal hypovitaminosis A may be the consequence of nutri-
tional deficiency [22,23], acute or long term UV exposure [24], 
oxidative stress [18,25] and aging [26]. A deficiency of vitamin 
A manifests in the skin as a follicular hyperkeratosis known as 
phrynoderma, characterized by rough, hyperkeratotic, follicular 
papules on the skin of elbows and knees [27]. Vitamin A defi-
ciency is also a risk factor for the development of skin cancers 
[28–32]. Retinoids increase the expression of the tumor-preven-
tive transcription factor p53 [31,33] and decrease that of AP-1 
and NF-κB [34,35], transcription factors linked to proliferation 
and  inflammation,  two  events  involved  in  tumor  formation 
[36,37]. This defines the biochemical foundation for the use of 
retinoids in cancer treatment and prevention [32,38–43].

The intracrine pro-ligand concept
Chronological  aging  and  photoaging  are  not  only  a  question 
of aesthetics that is often accompanied by psychological prob-
lems, they also constitute the background for the development 
of  precancerous  and  cancerous  skin  lesions,  as  well  as  severe 
functional  skin  fragility  now  called  dermatoporosis  [44,45]. 
Many  clinical  studies  indicate  that  certain  structural  changes 

induced  by  excessive  sun  exposure  can  be  reversed,  to  some 
extent, by the use of topical retinoids [46]. Although retinoic 
acid is widely used for topical therapy of several skin diseases 
and for improvement of skin aging, it induces irritation of the 
skin,  which  precludes  its  long-term  use  to  treat  extrinsic  or 
intrinsic aging.

Irritation might be explained, at least in part, by an overload 
of the retinoic acid-dependent pathways with supraphysiological 
amounts of exogenous retinoic acid in the skin. It is still not estab-
lished whether all the therapeutic activities of topical retinoids are 
mediated by nuclear receptors, and whether irritation is necessary 
for obtaining some of these activities, although most experts now 
consider that irritation is not mandatory for activity.

To  overcome  the  problems  encountered  by  topical  retinoic 
acid,  delivery  can  be  targeted  with  precursors  of  biologically 
active retinoids; these “pro-ligands” are then converted in a con-
trolled process into active ligands [47]. This intracrine concept, in 
which the active ligand is produced within the targets cells, has 
been explored to deliver retinoid activity to mouse and human 
skin topically with natural retinoids such as retinaldehyde that 
do not bind to nuclear receptors [5,48–52]. This might be a con-
venient definition of cosmeceutical topical retinoids.

36. Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids

327

Figure 36.2  Molecular structures. The molecular structures of therapeutic (A) and cosmeceutical (B) retinoids are indicated. Notes: (1) “R” in retinyl esters 
represents an acyl radical; (2) 4-oxoretinoids are indicated, because they have been shown to have a “soft” retinoid action [11]; however, to our knowledge, 
they haven’t yet been added in topical formulations; (3) OGG is not a retinoid, but, as mentioned in the text, is a potential cosmeceutical retinoid partner.

328

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals

To  validate  this  intracrine  concept,  the  precursor  should 
penetrate  easily  through  the  epidermis  by  topical  application 
and be metabolized into biologically active retinoids, while the 
latter  should  be  well  tolerated  and  result  in  biological  effects 
[53-55].  The  ranking  order  of  retinoid-like  activity  following 
topical application is as follows: retinoic acid > retinaldehyde > 
retinol  >>>  retinyl  esters;  in  other  words,  this  corresponds  to 
the metabolic pathways: retinyl esters are hydrolysed to retinol, 
which  is  oxidized  to  retinaldehyde,  which  is  in  turn  oxidized 
to retinoic acid. On the other hand, probably for the same rea-
son, the tolerance ranking order is the opposite: retinyl esters > 
retinol ≥ retinaldehyde >> retinoic acid.

Genomic effects
The  genomic  effects  of  topical  retinoids  are  the  consequence 
of  the  modulation  of  gene  expression  following  their  binding 
to nuclear RAR or RXR receptors. These effects most probably 
explain the results obtained in reversing and preventing various 
hallmarks  of  skin  aging  such  as  the  activation  of  matrix  met-
alloproteinase  [56,57],  oxidative  stress  and  the  degradation  of 
extracellular matrix [58]. In particular, retinoids are known to 
inhibit keratinocyte differentiation and to stimulate epidermal 
hyperplasia [11,59,60]. Heparin binding-epidermal growth fac-
tor  (HB-EGF)  activation  of  keratinocyte  ErbB  receptors  via  a 
RAR-dependent paracrine loop has been proposed to mediate 
retinoid-induced epidermal hyperplasia [61]. It has been shown 
that CD44v3, a heparan sulfate-bearing variant of CD44, which 
is  a  multifunctional  polymorphic  proteoglycan  and  principal 
cell surface receptor of hyaluronan (HA), recruits active matrix 
metalloproteinase  7,  the  precursor  of  HB-EGF  (pro-HB-EGF) 
and one of its receptors, ErbB4, to form a complex on the surface 
of murine epithelial cells [62]. We have previously shown that 
topical application of retinaldehyde increases the expression of 
CD44 in mouse skin. The increased expression of CD44 accom-
panying  epidermal  hyperplasia  induced  by  topical  retinalde-
hyde is associated to an increase in epidermal and dermal HA 
and with increased expression of the HA synthases 1, 2 and 3 
[63].  These  observations  indicate  that  the  HA  system  is  asso-
ciated to the HB-EGF paracrine loop, with the transcriptional 
up-regulation of CD44 and HA synthases. Thus, retinaldehyde-
induced in vitro and in vivo proliferative response of keratino-
cytes  is  CD44-dependent  and  requires  HB-EGF,  its  receptor 
ErbB1, and matrix metalloproteinases [64].

Non-genomic effects
There  is  some  evidence  that  retinoids  might  exert  a  biological 
activity  independently  of  their  binding  to  nuclear  receptors 
[11,65], thus confirming the concept of cosmeceutical retinoids. 
Such  indirect  effects  have  been  well  documented,  and  clinical 
manifestations  have  been  observed.  In  particular,  isotretinoin 
(13-cis-retinoic acid), is the only retinoid active at inducing seba-
ceous  gland  atrophy,  whereas  it  does  not  bind  itself  to  nuclear 
retinoid receptors; for this reason, it is the best therapeutic treat-
ment for severe acne [66,67].

Photobiology of topical retinoids
Owing  to  their  side  chain  containing  multiple  double  bonds, 
retinoids strongly absorb UV light, with molar extinction coef-
ficients  of  ≈52,000  (M−1.  cm−1)  at  wavelengths  ranging  from 
325 nm for retinol to 385 nm for retinaldehyde. This property 
is  crucial  in  the  retina,  where  photoisomerization  of  11-cis-
retinaldehyde into all-trans-retinaldehyde is the first step in the 
biochemical cascade leading to the generation of nervous influx 
from the optic nerve to the visual cortex [68-70]. This property 
also enables retinoids to act as UV filters when applied topically 
[71]:  topical  retinoids  have  been  shown  to  load  the  skin  with 
supraphysiological epidermal concentrations [5,18,19,72].

For instance, topical retinyl palmitate 2% was as efficient as a 
commercial sunscreen with a sun protection factor of 20 to prevent 
UVB-induced  erythema  and  DNA  photodamage  in  the  skin  of 
healthy  volunteers  [73].  In  mice,  retinoic  acid,  retinaldehyde, 
retinol  and  retinyl  palmitate  were  efficient  in  preventing  UVB-
induced  apoptosis  and  DNA  photodamage  [71].  The  similar 
potencies of these retinoids indicate a physical action mediated 
by their spectral properties rather than a biological action medi-
ated  by  the  binding  to  nuclear  receptors.  This  also  implies  that 
sun exposure induces significant vitamin A depletion in the epi-
dermis  [18],  which  significance  in  term  of  photoaging  has  not 
been fully analysed. In particular, hypovitaminosis A is known to 
induce a follicular hyperkeratosis known as phrynoderma [27], 
and is a risk factor for cancer development [31,32].

On the other hand, the biological effects of photodegradation 
of vitamin A and other retinoids are less understood and may be 
important for sun-exposed tissues, such as the skin. Exposure 
of  retinol  or  its  esters  to  UV  light  generates  free  radicals  and 
reactive  oxygen  species  that  can  damage  a  number  of  cellular 
targets, including proteins, lipids and DNA [74,75]. The balance 
between positive, filter-like properties, and possible damage to 
biomolecules is difficult to assess, and might depend on several 
factors [76-79]. For this reason, it is still recommended to avoid 
UV exposure when using topical retinoids.

Antibacterial activity of retinaldehyde
Aldehydes  represent  a  relatively  unstable  intermediate  state  of 
oxidation between alcohols and carboxylic acids [80-83]. Retinal-
dehyde may thus exert a direct biological activity by reacting non-
enzymatically with many biomolecules on skin surface, as well as 
on bacterial flora, independently of its conversion to retinoic acid 
and subsequent activation of nuclear receptors [84].

The putative anti-infective property of vitamin A had already 
been observed in the 1920s, although its mechanism of action 
was not understood [85]. Retinoic acid has been shown to protect 
dendritic cells in mice [86] and topical retinaldehyde, owing to 
its  better  tolerance  profile  than  retinoic  acid,  was  successfully 
applied to a long period of time to patients with inflammatory 
dermatoses  [55].  Retinaldehyde  has  been  successfully  used 
against  Gram-positive  bacteria  of  the  cutaneous  flora:  two 
weeks of treatment with topical retinaldehyde 0.05% displayed a 
significant decrease in counts of viable Propionibacterium acnes, 

36. Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids

329

Staphylococcus  aureus  and  Micrococcus  spp.  in  healthy  volun-
teers,  whereas  retinaldehyde  showed  to  be  more  potent  than 
retinol and retinoic acid when assessing the minimal inhibitory 
concentration on various bacterial strains [87,88].

Topical cosmeceutical retinoids as antioxidants
Oxidative  stress  is  considered  to  be  the  cornerstone  of  the 
biochemical  pathways  leading  to  both  intrinsic  (chronological) 
and extrinsic aging (photoaging) [14,89-93]. The skin, which is 
exposed  to  environmental  factors  and  pollutants,  possesses  an 
efficient  antioxidant  system  able  to  counteract  the  deleterious 
effects  of  occasional  oxidative  stress  of  moderate  magnitude 
[94,95]; however, in the case of chronic or severe oxidative stress, 
this endogenous antioxidant network reaches its limit and irre-
mediable  tissue  damage  is  unavoidable  [93,96-100].  According 
to the free radical theory of aging, oxidative stress increases with 
age, whereas during the same time the endogenous antioxidant 
systems become less efficient [101-104]. It thus seems logical to 
provide the skin with exogenous antioxidants in order to slow the 
natural process of skin aging. Although many clinical trials failed 
to demonstrated a benefit for the use of antioxidants, this concept 
is still actual when analysing these studies in detail and unveiling 
the reasons for such a misconception about cosmeceutical anti-
oxidants [105].

Retinoids have been shown to exert a free radical scavenging 
activity  in  vitro  [18,106-110].  This  property  is  most  probably 
due to the conjugated double bond structure of the side chain 
and  their  cyclohexenyl  or  aromatic  moiety,  rather  than  their 
ability to bind nuclear retinoid receptors, indicating that topical 
cosmeceutical retinoids should be as good candidates as ther-
apeutic  ones  to  prevent  or  improve  skin  aging.  Because  the 
endogenous antioxidants act together in a functional organized 
network,  when  supplying  any  organ  with  antioxidants,  this 
concept  should  be  followed;  this  means  that  if  cosmeceutical 
retinoids have a role to play in the prevention or improvement 
of  skin  aging,  they  should  be  considered  as  partners  of  other 
topical antioxidants, rather than as a whole antioxidant system.
In  mice,  the  peroxidation  of  epidermal  lipids  induced  by 
topical menadione (vitamin K3) was completely prevented by a 
pretreatment with either 0.25% topical α-tocopherol (vitamin E, 
a known efficient endogenous cutaneous antioxidant) or topical 
retinaldehyde  0.05%  [109].  In  human,  topical  retinol  0.075% 
provided  a  better  protection  of  the  stratum  corneum  against 
physical (UV) and chemical (sodium lauryl sulfate) threat than 
a cream containing α-tocopherol 1.1% [111].

Effects of topical cosmeceutical retinoids on pigmentation
It has been observed for a long time that retinoic acid had a light-
ening property on human skin, and for this reason it has been 
used, alone or in combination with hydroquinone, to treat hyper-
pigmented lesions [112,113]. The mechanism of this effect is not 
clear: depending on the cell culture model, retinoic acid inhibits 
tyrosinase  activity  –  the  rate-limiting  step  of  melanogenesis  – 
inhibits cell proliferation, decreases the melanin content or has 

no  effect  on  tyrosinase,  melanin  content  and  cell  growth;  in 
particular, in monolayer cultures, there is few or no effect with 
retinoic acid [114–117]. This suggests that the observed in vivo 
depigmenting  effect  of  retinoic  acid,  and  retinoids  in  general, 
may be due to the increased rate of epidermis “turnover” rather 
than to a direct effect on melanin content or melanocyte growth 
[117,118].

The best depigmenting product containing a retinoid is the for-
mula developed by Kligman and Willis, consisting of 0.1% treti-
noin (retinoic acid), 5.0% hydroquinone, and 0.1% dexametha-
sone, but none of its active ingredients can be used in cosmetic 
products.  Amongst  cosmeceutical  retinoids,  retinaldehyde,  the 
direct precursor of retinoic acid, is well tolerated in human skin 
and has been shown to have several biologic effects identical to 
that  of  retinoic  acid  [54,55].  In  the  mouse  tail  model  of  depig-
mentation, topical retinaldehyde 0.05% showed a higher depig-
menting effect than retinoic acid 0.05%, indicating that this effect 
of retinaldehyde was not solely due to its bioconversion to reti-
noic acid, but also to a retinoid receptor-independent mechanism 
[118-120]. A clinical trial in which retinol 10% and lactic acid 7% 
replaced tretinoin 0.1% and dexamethasone 0.1% in the formula 
of Kligman and Willis was successfully applied to patients with 
hyperpigmented lesions on the face. This new formula was shown 
to be comparable to that of Kligman and Willis, with the advan-
tage of preventing the steroid-induced skin atrophy [121].

Retinyl  esters,  in  particular  retinyl  palmitate,  are  widely 
used  in  cosmetics.  According  to  the  pro-ligand  concept  dis-
cussed  above,  in  order  to  exert  a  retinoid-like  activity,  retinyl 
esters have first to be hydrolysed to retinol, and then oxidized 
to retinoic acid, a process being less effective compared to reti-
nol  and  retinaldehyde,  since  it  requires  the  activation  of  the 
hydrolysing  enzymes  acyl:retinol  acyltransferase  (ARAT)  and 
lecithin:retinol  acyl  transferase  (LRAT)  [49,52,122,123].  If  a 
non-genomic effect is expected, the total retinoid content of the 
skin  would  be  determinant.  However,  very  few  studies  aimed 
at  assessing  the  penetration  of  retinyl  esters  through  human 
skin have been reported. In hairless mice, we found that topi-
cal retinol 0.05% and retinyl palmitate 0.05% loaded the epider-
mis with similar amounts of epidermal retinoids, i.e. a ten-fold 
increase compared to vehicle [71]. Thus, retinyl esters seem to 
deliver the skin with similar amounts of retinoids and have less 
genomic effects than retinol, suggesting that they should have 
similar depigmenting properties to retinol.

hyaluronan as a partner for cosmeceutical 
retinoids
Hyaluronan  (HA)  is  the  major  component  of  the  extracellular 
matrix  and  is  found  in  high  quantities  in  the  skin.  HA  is  a 
high  molecular  weight  non-sulfated  linear  glycosaminoglycan 
composed  of  repeating  units  of  D-glucuronic  acid  and 
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine linked together via alternating β-1,4 and 
β-1,3  glycosidic  bonds.  HA  chains  can  have  as  much  as  25,000 
disaccharide  repeats,  corresponding  to  a  molecular  mass  of 
≈8 MDa. In normal skin, HA is synthesized essentially by dermal 

330

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals

fibroblasts  and  epidermal  keratinocytes.  Due  to  its  negatively 
charged residues, HA can accommodate many water molecules, 
which help to maintain the normal hydration and viscoelasticity 
of the skin [124–126].

With  increasing  lifespan,  the  chronic  cutaneous  insufficiency 
syndrome  now  called  dermatoporosis  is  becoming  an  emerging 
clinical  problem  with  significant  morbidity,  which  sometimes 
results in prolonged hospital stays [44,45,127]. Dermatoporosis is 
principally due to chronological aging and long-term and unpro-
tected sun exposure, but it may also result from the chronic use 
of  topical  and  systemic  corticosteroids.  Experimental  evidence 
suggests that defective function of CD44, a transmembrane gly-
coprotein  that  acts  as  the  main  cell  surface  HA  receptor,  and 
the  corresponding  impaired  HA  metabolism,  are  implicated  in 
the  pathogenesis  of  dermatoporosis,  and  may  be  a  target  for 
intervention  [128].  Cleavage  of  the  high  molecular  weight  HA 
polymer during tissue remodelling gives rise to lower molecular 
weight fragments that elicit a variety of CD44-mediated cellular 
responses, including proliferation, migration, HA synthesis, and 
cytokine  synthesis  [125,126].  The  cellular  responses  elicited  by 
topical application of HA, and specifically HA synthesis by kerati-
nocytes, depend on the size of the HA oligosaccharides [129–131].
Topical retinoids are known to stimulate epidermal hyperplasia 
through the activation of a RAR-dependent HB-EGF paracrine 
loop [61,132]. HA production is also selectively stimulated by ret-
inoids in mouse and human skin [133,134]. In mouse skin, topical 
retinaldehyde  increases  HA  content,  the  expression  of  CD44 
and  HA  synthases  [63],  and  prevents  UV-induced  depletion  of 
HA and  CD44, an effect also  observed  with  topical  retinol and 
retinoic acid, although to a lesser extent [135]. In humans, topical 
retinaldehyde has been shown to restore the epidermal thickness 
and  CD44  expression  in  lichen  sclerosus  and  atrophic  lesions 
[136].  The  proliferative  response  of  keratinocytes  elicited  by 
either retinaldehyde or intermediate size HA fragments (HAFi) 
is dependent of CD44 and requires the presence of HB-EGF, its 
receptor erbB1, as well as matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) 
[64,137,138]. In particular, topical application of HAFi in com-
bination  with  retinaldehyde  caused  epidermal  hyperplasia  by 
specifically stimulating the CD44 platform molecules in the kera-
tinocytes and increased the HA content of epidermis and dermis 
[138,139]. Thus topical retinoids, in particular retinaldehyde, can 
restore epidermal functions by stimulating HA synthesis and bio-
logical functions.

Specific profiles of cosmeceutical retinoids

retinaldehyde
Retinaldehyde  is  much  less  irritant  than  retinoic  acid,  which 
explains  its  good  compliance,  and  has  been  shown  to  be  well 
tolerated and effective in treating photoaging on long periods of 
time: in particular, retinaldehyde produced significant improve-
ment  in  fine  and  deep  wrinkles  [140].  Retinaldehyde  does  not 
bind  to  nuclear  retinoid  receptors  and  selectively  delivers  low 

concentrations  of  retinoic  acid  at  the  cellular  level  [54,132]; 
this  prevents  an  excess  of  retinoic  acid  in  the  skin,  a  condition 
that  contributes  to  cutaneous  irritation  [5,47]  and  confers  to 
retinaldehyde  the  required  properties  for  the  intracrine  con-
cept  discussed  above  [18,47].  The  association  of  retinaldehyde 
and  δ-tocopheryl-gluco-pyranoside,  a  vitamin  E-like  precursor, 
improved the protection against the generation of free radicals – a 
condition leading to aging – as well as the skin elasticity [141]. 
Retinaldehyde,  which  possesses  an  aldehyde  functional  group, 
exerts direct receptor-independent biological actions not shared 
by other retinoids. This explains the usefulness of topical retinal-
dehyde 0.05% against P. acnes and Staphylococcus spp. [87,88]. As 
discussed above, retinaldehyde shares with other retinoids a high 
absorption power in the UVA range, and may decrease the flu-
ence received in this window significantly [71]. As compared to 
other retinoids, retinaldehyde loads the skin with natural retin-
oids very efficiently, probably due to its better penetration pro-
file  through  the  skin,  and  its  ability  to  be  reduced  to  retinol  or 
oxidized to retinoic acid very rapidly [142–146]. Retinaldehyde 
has been shown to reduce the pigmentation when applied to the 
skin for a couple of weeks or longer; this could be due in part to 
a melanosomal dilution resulting from an increase of epidermal 
turnover, an effect attributable to its conversion to retinoic acid. 
The  depigmenting  property  of  retinaldehyde  could  also  be  due 
to its antioxidant power, since the production of small quantities 
of hydrogen peroxide has been considered to be an essential step 
of the melanogenesis [147]. Indeed, topical retinaldehyde 0.05% 
decreases the melanin content by 80% and the density of active 
melanocytes by 75% in mouse tail skin, whereas an application of 
retinaldehyde 0.01% to guinea pig ear skin decreases epidermal 
melanin  by  50%  and  the  density  of  active  melanocytes  by  40% 
[118]. Owing to these properties, retinaldehyde should be con-
sidered  as  a  key  partner  in  topical  depigmenting  preparations. 
For  instance  retinaldehyde,  combined  to  the  tyrosinase  inhibi-
tor  4-(1-phenylethyl)-resorcinol  and  the  antioxidant  precursor 
δ-tocopherylglucopyranoside, was shown to have a good depig-
mentation and tolerance profile in murine melanocytes and in a 
three-dimensional human reconstructed epidermis [148].

retinol and retinyl esters
Retinol  and  retinyl  esters  (mostly  retinyl  palmitate)  have  been 
incorporated into many skin products. Theoretically, these topical 
endogenous retinoids, which are natural precursors of cutaneous 
retinaldehyde and retinoic acids [142,149,150], could also be use-
ful  in  treating  skin  conditions  for  which  retinoic  acid  is  active. 
However,  although  retinol  is  widely  used  in  cosmetic  formula-
tions to improve photoaging, topical retinol has not been demon-
strated to be effective to treat any skin condition, maybe because 
of its slow oxidation into retinaldehyde and retinoic acid [151]. It 
seems that the retinol concentrations required to induce a meas-
urable  biological  action  similar  to  that  of  retinoic  acid  (0.05%) 
induce a similar irritant dermatitis [121]. Thus, to avoid high con-
centrations of retinol or retinyl esters in topical formulation, the 
best way would be to combine them at moderate concentrations 

with  other  topical  agents  such  as  tocopherols,  ascorbate  and 
derivatives, flavonoids or other biological antioxidants [152-154]. 
Another useful property of retinol is its absorption spectrum: it 
absorbs UV light in shorter wavelengths (325 nm) than retinal-
dehyde (385 nm) and retinoic acid (345 nm). Therefore, topical 
retinol could be useful as a filter partner of many cosmetic and 
cosmeceutical products in the most biologically active solar UV 
range  (290–320  nm),  while  delivering  small  amounts  of  retin-
oic acid on a relatively long period of time [71,73]. This can be 
expanded to retinyl esters, which have the same UV spectrum as 
retinol, have the better tolerance profile among topical retinoids, 
while being the weaker retinoic acid precursors [49].

Associations
Association with hyaluronan fragments
The  molecular  mechanisms  underlying  retinoid-induced  epider-
mal hyperplasia are closely related to CD44-dependent pathways 
in  keratinocytes.  It  is  well  demonstrated  that  retinoids  synergize 
with the activities of hyaluronate fragments of defined size (HAFi) 
on cell renewal and de novo hyaluronate synthesis [63,138,139,155]. 
Accordingly,  the  topical  application  of  HAFi  was  found  to  have 
repairing action in dermatoporosis [137]. Therefore the combina-
tion of HAFi with a retinoid is highly promising as preventive treat-
ment in early phases of dermatoporosis.

High  molecular  weight  HA,  that  does  not  show  the  topi-
cal  activities  of  HAFi,  has  been  widely  used  in  cosmetic 
preparations  [156].  Application  of  high  molecular  weight 
HA-containing  cosmetic  products  to  the  skin  is  reported  to 
moisturize and restore elasticity [157]. HA-based cosmetic for-
mulations or sunscreens may also be capable of protecting the 
skin against ultraviolet irradiation due to the antioxidant prop-
erties  of  HA  [158].  In  almost  all  of  these  cosmetic  formula-
tions, the HA is associated with retinol. Scientific proof that the 
association of any topical retinoids with high molecular weight 
HA has some specific synergizing effect is currently lacking.

Association with glycylglycine oleamide
Glycylglycine  oleamide  (OGG,  Figure  36.2B) 
is  a  small 
amphiphilic molecule designed to protect the connective tissue of 
the skin from glycation and elastosis [159]. Its ability to potenti-
ate the esterification of retinol by retinaldehyde might make OGG 
a  new  retinoid  partner  in  cosmeceutical  formulations  aimed  at 
preventing  cutaneous  hypovitaminosis  A  [18].  In  particular,  a 
lotion  containing  0.1%  retinaldehyde,  0.1%  OGG  and  0.05% 
δ-tocopherylglucopyranoside  improved  the  antioxidant  capacity 
and decreased the lipoperoxidation in a clinical trial (manuscript 
in preparation).

Summary

The novelty in retinoid cosmeceutics clearly consists in the asso-
ciation of a retinoid with middle-size HA fragments, tyrosinase 
inhibitors or antioxidant precursors. Such an association seems to 

36. Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids

331

act synergistically to stimulate the targets of the retinoid partners, 
while optimizing the tolerance profile due to a decreased retinoid 
concentration in combined formulations. Current laboratory and 
clinical data indicate that retinaldehyde is the retinoid of choice 
for this association.

references

1  Castenmiller JJM, West CE. (1998) Bioavailability and bioconver-

sion of carotenoids. Annu Rev Nutr 18,19–36.

2  Vogel S, Gamble MV, Blaner WS. (1999) Biosynthesis, absorptiom, 
metabolism and transport of retinoids. In: Nau H, Blaner WS, eds. 
Retinoids  The  biochemical  and  molecular  basis  of  vitamin  A  and 
retinoid action. Berlin: Springer.

3  Roos  TC,  Jugert  FK,  Merk  HF,  Bickers  DR.  (1998)  Retinoid 

metabolism in the skin. Pharmacol Rev 50, 315–33.

4  Sorg  O,  Antille  C,  Kaya  G,  Saurat  JH.  (2006)  Retinoids  in 

cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Ther 19, 289–96.

5  Saurat JH, Sorg O, Didierjean J. (1999) New concepts for delivery 
of topical retinoid activity to human skin. In: NauH, BlanerWS, 
eds. Retinoids The Biochemical and Molecular Basis of Vitamin A 
and Retinoid Action. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 521–36.

6  Sass JO, Forster A, Bock KW, Nau H. (1994) Glucuronidation and 
isomerization of all-trans- and 13-cis-retinoic acid by liver micro-
somes  of  phenobarbital-  or  3-methylcholanthrene-treated  rats. 
Biochem Pharmacol 47, 485–92.

7  Taimi  M,  Helvig  C,  Wisniewski  J,  et  al.  (2004)  A  novel  human 
cytochrome P450, CYP26C1, involved in metabolism of 9-cis and 
all-trans isomers of retinoic acid. J Biol Chem 279, 77–85.

8  Achkar CC, Derguini F, Blumberg B, Langston A, Levin AA, Speck 
J, et al. (1996) 4-Oxoretinol, a new natural ligand and transactivator 
of the retinoic acid receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 4879–84.
9  Blumberg  B,  Bolado  J,  Jr.,  Derguini  F,  Craig  AG,  Moreno  TA, 
Chakravarti D, et al. (1996) Novel retinoic acid receptor ligands in 
Xenopus embryos. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 4873–8.

10  Ross  SA,  De  Luca  LM.  (1996)  A  new  metabolite  of  retinol: 
all-trans-4-oxo-retinol as a receptor activator and differentiation 
agent. Nutr Rev 54, 355–6.

11  Sorg  O,  Tran  C,  Carraux  P,  Grand  D,  Barraclough  C,  Arrighi 
JF,  et  al.  (2008)  Metabolism  and  biological  activities  of  topical 
4-oxoretinoids in mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol 128, 999–1008.
12  Fisher GJ, Voorhees JJ. (1996) Molecular mechanisms of retinoid 

actions in skin. FASEB J 10, 1002–13.

13  Napoli  JL.  (1996)  Retinoic  acid  biosynthesis  and  metabolism. 

FASEB J 10, 993–1001.

14  Sorg  O,  Antille  C,  Saurat  JH.  (2004)  Retinoids,  other  topi-
cal  vitamins,  and  antioxidants.  In:  RigelDS,  WeissRS,  LimHW, 
DoverJS, eds. Photoaging. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 89–115.
15  Dawson MI. (2004)Synthetic retinoids and their nuclear receptors. 

Curr Med Chem Anticancer Agents 4, 199–230.

16  Sorg  O,  Kuenzli  S,  Saurat  JH.  (2007)  Side  effects  and  pitfalls  in 
retinoid  therapy.  In:  VahlquistA,  DuvicM,  eds.  Retinoids  and 
Carotenoids  in  Dermatology.  New  York:  Informa  Healthcare, 
pp. 225–48.

17  Kuenzli  S,  Saurat  JH,  Retinoids.  (2003)  In:  Bolognia  JL,  Jorizzo 
JL, Rapini RP, eds. Dermatology. London: Mosby, Chapter 127, pp. 
1991–2006.

332

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals

18  Sorg  O,  Saurat  JH.  (2014)  Topical  retinoids  in  skin  aging:  A 
focused update with reference to sun induced epidermal vitamin 
A deficiency. Dermatology (in press).

39  Carr  DR,  Trevino  JJ,  Donnelly  HB.  (2011)  Retinoids  for  che-
moprophylaxis  of  nonmelanoma  skin  cancer.  Dermatol  Surg  37, 
129–45.

19  Duester G. (2000) Families of retinoid dehydrogenases regulating 
vitamin  A  function:  production  of  visual  pigment  and  retinoic 
acid. Eur J Biochem 267, 4315–24.

20  Jurukovski V, Simon M. (2000) Epidermal growth factor signaling 
pathway  influences  retinoid  metabolism  by  reduction  of  retinyl 
ester hydrolase activities in normal and malignant keratinocytes. J 
Cell Physiol 183, 265–72.

21  Kurlandsky SB, Xiao JH, Duell EA, et al. (1994) Biological activ-
ity  of  all-trans  retinol  requires  metabolic  conversion  to  all-trans 
retinoic acid and is mediated through activation of nuclear retin-
oid receptors in human keratinocytes. J Biol Chem 269, 32821–7.
22  Johnson KA, Bernard MA, Funderburg K. (2002) Vitamin nutri-

tion in older adults. Clin Geriatr Med 18, 773–99.

23  Miller SJ. Nutritional deficiency and the skin. (1989) J Am Acad 

Dermatol 21, 1–30.

24  Andersson E, Rosdahl I, Törmä H, Vahlquist A. (1999) Ultraviolet 
irradiation depletes cellular retinol and alters the metabolism of 
retinoic  acid  in  cultured  human  keratinocytes  and  melanocytes. 
Melanoma Res 9, 339–46.

25  Ihara  H,  Hashizume  N,  Hirase  N,  Suzue  R.  (1999)  Esterifica-
tion makes retinol more labile to photolysis. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 
(Tokyo) 45, 353–8.

26  Torras H. (1996) Retinoids in aging. Clin Dermatol 14, 207–15.
27  Maronn M, Allen DM, Esterly NB. (2005) Phrynoderma: a mani-
festation of vitamin A deficiency?… The rest of the story. Pediatr 
Dermatol 22, 60–3.

28  Levine N. (1998) Role of retinoids in skin cancer treatment and 

prevention. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, S62–S6.

40  Ralhan  R,  Kaur  J.  (2003)  Retinoids  as  chemopreventive  agents. 

J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 17, 66–91.

41  Saurat JH. (2001) Skin, sun, and vitamin A: from aging to cancer. 

J Dermatol 28, 595–8.

42  So PL, Lee K, Hebert J, et al. (2004)Topical tazarotene chemopre-
vention reduces Basal cell carcinoma number and size in Ptch1+/– 
mice exposed to ultraviolet or ionizing radiation. Cancer Res 64, 
4385–9.

43  Zusi FC, Lorenzi MV, Vivat-Hannah V. (2002) Selective retinoids 
and rexinoids in cancer therapy and chemoprevention. Drug Dis-
cov Today 7, 1165–74.

44  Kaya G, Saurat JH. (2007) Dermatoporosis: a chronic cutaneous 
insufficiency/fragility  syndrome.  Clinicopathological  features, 
mechanisms,  prevention  and  potential  treatments.  Dermatology 
215, 284–94.

45  Saurat  JH.  Dermatoporosis.  (2007)  The  functional  side  of  skin 

aging. Dermatology 215, 271–2.

46  Stratigos AJ, Katsambas AD. (2005) The role of topical retinoids in 

the treatment of photoaging. Drugs 65, 1061–172.

47  Saurat JH, Sorg O. (1999) Topical natural retinoids. The “Pro-lig-

and-non-ligand” concept. Dermatology 199, 1–2.

48  Duell EA, Derguini F, Kang S, et al. (1996) Extraction of human 
epidermis treated with retinol yields retro-retinoids in addition to 
free retinol and retinyl esters. J Invest Dermatol 107, 178–82.
49  Duell EA, Kang S, Voorhees JJ. (1997) Unoccluded retinol pene-
trates human skin in vivo more effectively than unoccluded retinyl 
palmitate or retinoic acid. J Invest Dermatol 109, 301–5.

50  Schaefer  H.  (1993)  Penetration  and  percutaneous  absorption  of 

29  Marks  R.  (1991)  Retinoids  in  Cutaneous  Malignancy.  Oxford: 

topical retinoids. Skin Pharmacol 6, 17–23.

Blackwell Scientific.

30  Moon TE, Levine N, Cartmel B, Bangert JL. (1997) Retinoids in 

prevention of skin cancer. Cancer Lett 19;114, 203–5.

31  Einspahr JG, Bowden GT, Alberts DS. (2003) Skin cancer chemo-
prevention: strategies to save our skin. Recent Results Cancer Res 
163, 151–64; discussion 264–6.

32  Fields AL, Soprano DR, Soprano KJ. (2007) Retinoids in biological 

control and cancer. J Cell Biochem 102, 886–98.

33  Mrass P, Rendl M, Mildner M, et al. (2004) Retinoic acid increases 
the  expression  of  p53  and  proapoptotic  caspases  and  sensitizes 
keratinocytes to apoptosis: a possible explanation for tumor pre-
ventive action of retinoids. Cancer Res 64, 6542–8.

34  Darwiche  N,  Bazzi  H,  El-Touni  L,  Abou-Lteif  G,  Doueiri  R, 
Hatoum  A,  et  al.  (2005)  Regulation  of  ultraviolet  B  radiation-
mediated  activation  of  AP1  signaling  by  retinoids  in  primary 
keratinocytes. Radiat Res 163, 296–306.

35  Fanjul  A,  Dawson  MI,  Hobbs  PD,  et  al.  (1994)  A  new  class  of 
retinoids with selective inhibition of AP-1  inhibits  proliferation. 
Nature 372, 107–11.

36  Bayon Y, Ortiz MA, Lopez-Hernandez FJ, et al. (2003) Inhibition 
of  IkappaB  kinase  by  a  new  class  of  retinoid-related  anticancer 
agents that induce apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 23, 1061–74.

37  Na  SY,  Kang  BY,  Chung  SW,  et  al.  (1999)  Retinoids  inhibit 
interleukin-12 production in macrophages through physical associa-
tions of retinoid X receptor and NFkappaB. J Biol Chem 274, 7674–80.
38  Camacho LH. (2003) Clinical applications of retinoids in cancer 

medicine. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 17, 98–114.

52 

51  Tran  C,  Kasraee  B,  Grand  D,  et  al.  (2005)  Pharmacology 
of  RALGA,  a  mixture  of  retinaldehyde  and  glycolic  acid. 
Dermatology 210, 6–13.
.  Tran  C,  Sorg  O,  Carraux  P,  et  al.  (2001)  Topical  delivery  of 
retinoids  counteracts  the  UVB-induced  epidermal  vitamin  A 
depletion in hairless mouse. Photochem Photobiol 73, 425–31.
53  Didierjean L, Sass JO, Carraux P, et al. (1999) Topical 9-cis-reti-
naldehyde  for  delivery  of  9-cis-retinoic  acid  in  mouse  skin.  Exp 
Dermatol 8,199–203.

54  Didierjean L, Tran C, Sorg O, Saurat JH. (1999) Biological activi-
ties of topical natural retinaldehyde. Dermatology 199,19–24.
55  Saurat JH, Didierjean L, Masgrau E, et al. (1994) Topical retinal-
dehyde on human skin : biological effects and tolerance. J Invest 
Dermato 103, 770–4.

56  Fisher GJ, Datta SC, Talwar HS, et al. (1996) Molecular basis of 
sun-induced  premature  skin  aging  and  retinoid  antagonism. 
Nature 379, 335–9.

57  Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SC,  et  al. (1997) Pathophysiology  of 
premature skin aging induced by ultraviolet light.  N  Engl  J  Med 
337,1419–28.

58  Griffiths CE, Russman AN, Majmudar G, et al. (1993) Restoration 
of collagen formation in photodamaged human skin by tretinoin 
(retinoic acid). N Engl J Med 329, 530–5.

59  Ponec M, Weerheim A, Havekes L, Boonstra J. (1987) Effects of 
retinoids on differentiation, lipid metabolism, epidermal growth 
factor,  and  Low-density  lipoprotein  binding  in  squamous  carci-
noma cells. Exp Cell Res 171, 426–35.

36. Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids

333

60  Saurat JH. How do retinoids work on human epidermis? A break-
through and its implications. (1988) Clin Exp Dermatol 13, 350–64.
61  Xiao  JH,  Feng  X,  Di  W,  et  al.  (1999)  Identification  of  heparin-
binding EGF-like growth factor as a target in intercellular regu-
lation of epidermal basal cell growth by suprabasal retinoic acid 
receptors. EMBO J 18,1539–48.

62  Yu WH, Woessner JF, Jr., McNeish JD, Stamenkovic I. (2002) CD44 
anchors  the  assembly  of  matrilysin/MMP-7  with  heparin-bind-
ing  epidermal  growth  factor  precursor  and  ErbB4  and  regulates 
female reproductive organ remodeling. Genes Dev 16, 307–23.
63  Kaya G, Grand D, Hotz R, et al. (2005) Upregulation of CD44 and 
hyaluronate synthase by topical retinoids in mouse skin. J Invest 
Dermatol 124, 284–7.

81  Witz G. (1989) Biological interactions of alpha,beta-unsaturated 

aldehydes. Free Radic Biol Med 7, 333–49.

82  Esterbauer  H,  Schaur  RJ,  Zollner  H.  (1991)  Chemistry  and 
biochemistry  of  4-hydroxynonenal,  malonaldehyde  and  related 
aldehydes. Free Radic Biol Med 11, 81–128.

83  Feron VJ, Til HP, de Vrijer F, et al. (1991) Aldehydes: occurrence, 
carcinogenic potential, mechanism of action and risk assessment. 
Mutat Res 259, 363–85.

84  Ambroziak  W,  Izaguirre  G,  Pietruszko  R.  (1999)  Metabolism  of 
retinaldehyde  and  other  aldehydes  in  soluble  extracts  of  human 
liver and kidney. J Biol Chem 274, 33366–73.

85  Green  HN,  Mellanby  E.  (1928)  Vitamin  A  as  an  anti-infective 

agent. Br Med J II, 691–6.

64  Kaya G, Tran C, Sorg O, et al. (2005) Retinaldehyde-induced epi-
dermal hyperplasia via heparin binding epidermal growth factor 
is CD44-dependent. J Invest Dermatol 124, A32.

86  Halliday GM, Ho KKL, Barnetson RSC. (1992) Regulation of the 
skin immune system by retinoids during carcinogenesis. J Invest 
Dermatol 99, 83S–6S.

65  Clifford  JL,  Menter  DG,  Wang  M,  et  al.  (1999)  Retinoid 
receptor-dependent  and  -independent  effects  of  N-(4-hydroxyphe-
nyl)retinamide in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 59, 14–8.
66  Layton A. (2009) The use of isotretinoin in acne. Dermatoendocrinol 

1, 162–9.

67  Wiegand  UW,  Chou  RC.  (1998)  Pharmacokinetics  of  oral 

isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, S8–S12.

68  Nakanishi K. (2000) Recent bioorganic studies on rhodopsin and 
visual transduction. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 48, 1399–409.
69  Blomhoff R, Blomhoff HK. (2006) Overview of retinoid metabolism 

and function. J Neurobiol 66, 606–630.

70  Schoenlein RW, Peteanu LA, Mathies RA, Shank CV. (1991) The 
first step in vision: femtosecond isomerization of rhodopsin. Sci-
ence 254, 412–5.

71  Sorg  O,  Tran  C,  Carraux  P,  et  al.  (2005)  Spectral  properties  of 
topical retinoids prevent DNA damage and apoptosis after acute 
UVB exposure in hairless mice. Photochem Photobio 81, 830–6.
72  Kang S, Duell EA, Fisher GJ, et al. (1995) Application of retinol 
to human skin in vivo induces epidermal hyperplasia and cellular 
retinoid binding proteins characteristics of retinoic acid but with-
out measurable retinoic acid levels or irritation. J Invest Dermatol 
105:549–56.

73  Antille C, Tran C, Sorg O, et al. (2003) Vitamin A exerts a pho-
toprotective action in skin by absorbing UVB radiations. J Invest 
Dermatol 121(5):1163–7.

74  Dillon  J,  Gaillard  ER,  Bilski  P,  et  al.  (1996)  The  photochemistry 
of  the  retinoids  as  studied  by  steady-state  and  pulsed  methods. 
Photochem Photobiol 63:680–5.

75  Fu PP, Xia Q, Yin JJ, et al. (2007) Photodecomposition of Vitamin 
A and Photobiological Implications for the Skin. Photochem Pho-
tobiol 83, 409–24.

76  Ferguson J, Johnson BE. (1989) Retinoid associated phototoxicity 

and photosensitivity. Pharmacol Ther 40, 123–35.

77  Fu  PP,  Cheng  SH,  Coop  L,  et  al.  (2003)  Photoreaction, 
Phototoxicity,  and  Photocarcinogenicity  of  Retinoids.  J  Environ 
Sci Health Part C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev 21, 165–97.
78  Kligman  LH.  (1987)  Retinoic  acid  and  photocarcinogenesis.  A 

87  Péchère M, Germanier L, Siegenthaler G, et al. (2002) The anti-
bacterial  activity  of  topical  retinoids:  the  case  of  retinaldehyde. 
Dermatology 205, 153–8.

88  Péchère M, Pechere JC, Siegenthaler G, et al. (1999) Antibacterial 
activity of retinaldehyde against Propionibacterium acnes. Derma-
tology 199, 29–31.

89  Wenk J, Brenneisen P, Meewes C, et al. (2001) UV-induced oxida-

tive stress and photoaging. Curr Probl Dermatol 29, 83–94.

90  Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. (1998) Aging versus photoaging: postulated 
mechanisms and effectors. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 3, 47–51.
91  Pinnell SR. (2003) Cutaneous photodamage, oxidative stress, and top-
ical antioxidant protection. J Am Acad Dermatol 48, 1–19; quiz 20–2.
92  Nishigori  C,  Hattori  Y,  Arima  Y,  Miyachi  Y.  (2003)  Photoaging 

and oxidative stress. Exp Dermatol 12, 18–21.

93  Sorg O, Kaya G. (2007) Oxidative stress in human pathology. Adv 

Gene Mol Cell Ther 1, 56–67.

94  Sies H, Stahl W. (2004) Nutritional protection against skin damage 

from sunlight. Annu Rev Nutr 24, 173–200.

95  Thiele JJ, Schroeter C, Hsieh SN, et al. (2001) The antioxidant net-
work of the stratum corneum. Curr Probl Dermatol 29, 26–42.
96  Halliwell  B.  (1994)  Free  radicals  and  antioxidants  :  a  personal 

view. Nutr Rev 52, 253–65.

97  Jacob RA, Burri BJ. (1996) Oxidative damage and defense. Am J 

Clin Nutr 63, 985S–90S.

98  Kohen R, Gati I. (2000) Skin low molecular weight antioxidants 
and  their  role  in  aging  and  in  oxidative  stress.  Toxicology  148, 
149–57.

99  Sorg O. Oxidative stress : a theoretical model or a biological reality? 

(2004) CR Biol. [review] 327, 649–62.

100  Halliwell  B,  Gutteridge  JMC.  (1999)  Free  Radicals  in  Biology 
and  Medicine,  3th  edn.  HalliwellB,  GutteridgeJMC,  eds.  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

101  Berr C. (2000) Cognitive impairment and oxidative stress in the 
elderly: results of epidemiological studies. Biofactors 13, 205–9.

102  Barja G. (2004) Free radicals and aging. Trends Neurosci 27, 595–600.
103  Harman D. (2001) Aging: overview. Ann NY Acad Sci 928, 1–21.
104  Crastes  de  Paulet  A.  (1990)  [Free  radicals  and  aging].  Ann  Biol 

controversy. Photodermatol 4, 88–101.

Clin 48, 323–30.

79  Fisher D, Lichti FU, Lucy JA. (1972) Environmental effects on the 

105  Bast A, Haenen GR. (2013) Ten misconceptions about antioxidants. 

autoxidation of retinol. Biochem J 130, 259–70.

Trends Pharmacol Sci 34, 430–6.

80  Becker  TW,  Krieger  G,  Witte  I.  (1996)  DNA  single  and  double 
strand  breaks  induced  by  aliphatic  and  aromatic  aldehydes  in 
combination with copper(II). Free Radic Res 24, 325–32.

106  Singh DK, Lippman SM. (1998) Cancer chemoprevention. Part 1: 
Retinoids and carotenoids and other classic antioxidants. Oncol-
ogy (Williston Park) 12, 1643–53, 57–58; discussion 59–60.

334

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals

107  Tsuchiya  M,  Scita  G,  Freisleben  HJ,  et  al.  (1992)  Antioxidant 
radical-scavenging activity of carotenoids and retinoids compared 
to alpha-tocopherol. Methods Enzymol 213, 460–72.

108  Tesoriere L, D’Arpa D, Re R, Livrea MA. (1997) Antioxidant reac-
tions of all-trans retinol in phospholipid bilayers: effect of oxygen 
partial  pressure,  radical  fluxes,  and  retinol  concentration.  Arch 
Biochem Biophys 343, 13–8.

109  Sorg O, Tran C, Saurat JH. (2001) Cutaneous vitamins A and E in 
the context of ultraviolet- or chemically-induced oxidative stress. 
Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 14, 363–72.

110  Sorg  O,  Kuenzli  S,  Kaya  G,  Saurat  JH.  (2005)  Proposed  mecha-
nisms  of  action  for  retinoid  derivatives  in  the  treatment  of  skin 
aging. J Cosm Dermatol 4, 237–44.

111  Goffin  V,  Henry  F,  Piérard-Franchimont  C,  Piérard  GE.  (1997) 
Topical retinol and the stratum corneum response to an environ-
mental threat. Skin Pharmacol 10, 85–9.

112  Kligman  AM,  Willis  I.  (1975)  A  new  formula  for  depigmenting 

human skin. Arch Dermatol 111, 40–8.

113  Griffiths CE, Finkel LJ, Ditre CM, et al. (1993) Topical tretinoin 
(retinoic  acid)  improves  melasma.  A  vehicle-controlled,  clinical 
trial. Br J Dermatol 129, 415–21.

114  Hoal E, Wilson EL, Dowdle EB. (1982) Variable effects of retinoids 
on  two  pigmenting  human  melanoma  cell  lines.  Cancer  Res  42, 
5191–5.

115  Edward M, Gold JA, MacKie RM. (1988) Different susceptibilities 
of melanoma cells to retinoic acid-induced changes in melanotic 
expression. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 155, 773–8.

116  Fligiel  SE,  Inman  DR,  Talwar  HS,  et  al.  (1992)  Modulation  of 
growth  in  normal  and  malignant  melanocytic  cells  by  all-trans 
retinoic acid. J Cutan Pathol 19, 27–33.

117  Yoshimura K, Tsukamoto K, Okazaki M, et al. (2001) Effects of all-
trans retinoic acid on melanogenesis in pigmented skin equivalents 
and monolayer culture of melanocytes. J Dermatol Sci 27, S68–S75.
118  Sorg O, Kasraee B, Salomon D, Saurat JH. (2013) The Potential Dep-
igmenting Activity of Retinaldehyde. Dermatology 227, 231–7.
119  Kasraee B, Tran C, Sorg O, Saurat JH. (2005) The depigmenting 
effect of RALGA in C57BL/6 mice. Dermatology 210, 30–4.
120  Ortonne  JP.  (2006)  Retinoid  therapy  of  pigmentary  disorders. 

Dermatol Ther 19, 280–8.

121  Yoshimura K, Momosawa A, Aiba E, et al. (2003) Clinical trial of 
bleaching treatment with 10% all-trans retinol gel. Dermatol Surg 
29, 155–60.

metabolism  in  the  skin  and  impairs  keratinocyte  proliferation. 
Genes Dev 11, 996–1007.

129  Forrester JV, Balazs EA. (1980) Inhibition of phagocytosis by high 

molecular weight hyaluronate. Immunology 40, 435–46.

130  West DC, Hampson IN, Arnold F, Kumar S. (1985) Angiogenesis 
induced by degradation products of hyaluronic acid. Science 228, 
1324–6.

131  Wiest L, Kerscher M. (2008) Native hyaluronic acid in dermatol-
ogy–results of an expert meeting. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 6, 176–80.
132  Didierjean L, Carraux P, Grand D, et al. (1996) Topical retinalde-
hyde increases skin content of retinoic acid and exerts biological 
activity in mouse skin. J Invest Dermatol 107, 714–9.

133  Margelin  D,  Medaisko  C,  Lombard  D,  et  al.  (1996)  Hyaluronic 
acid  and  dermatan  sulfate  are  selectively  stimulated  by  retinoic 
acid in irradiated and nonirradiated hairless mouse skin. J Invest 
Dermatol 106, 505–9.

134  Tammi  R,  Ripellino  JA,  Margolis  RU,  et  al.  (1989)  Hyaluronate 
accumulation  in  human  epidermis  treated  with  retinoic  acid  in 
skin organ culture. J Invest Dermatol 92, 326–32.

135  Calikoglu E, Sorg O, Tran C, et al. (2006) UVA and UVB decrease 
the  expression  of  CD44  and  hyaluronate  in  mouse  epidermis 
which  is  counteracted  by  topical  retinoids.  Photochem  Photobiol 
82, 1342–7.

136  Kaya G, Saurat JH. (2005) Restored epidermal CD44 expression in 
lichen sclerosus et atrophicus and clinical improvement with topi-
cal application of retinaldehyde. Br J Dermatol 152, 570–2.

137  Kaya  G,  Tran  C,  Sorg  O,  et  al.  (2006)  Hyaluronate  fragments 
reverse skin atrophy by a CD44-dependent mechanism. PLoS Med 
3, e493.

138  Barnes L, Tran C, Sorg O, et al. (2010) Synergistic effect of hyalur-
onate fragments in retinaldehyde-induced skin hyperplasia which 
is a CD44-dependent phenomenon. PLoS One 5, e14372.

139  Kaya G, Tran C, Sorg O, et al. (2006) Synergistic effect of retinal-
dehyde  and  hyaluronate  fragments  in  skin  hyperplasia.  J  Invest 
Dermatol 126, 33.

140  Creidi P, Vienne MP, Ochonisky S, et al. (1998) Profilometric eval-
uation  of  photodamage  after  topical  retinaldehyde  and  retinoic 
acid treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, 960–5.

141  Boisnic S, Branchet-Gumila MC, Nocera T. (2005) Comparative 
study of the anti-aging effect of retinaldehyde alone or associated 
with pretocopheryl in a surviving human skin model submitted to 
ultraviolet A and B irradiation. Int J Tissue React 27, 91–9.

122  Kurlandsky SB, Duell EA, Kang S, et al. (1996) Auto-regulation of 
retinoic acid biosynthesis through regulation of retinol esterifica-
tion in human keratinocytes. J Biol Chem 271, 15346–52.

142  Siegenthaler  G,  Saurat  JH,  Ponec  M.  (1990)  Retinol  and  retinal 
metabolism. Relationship to the state of differentiation of cultured 
human keratinocytes. Biochem J 268, 371–8.

123  Ross AC. (2003) Retinoid production and catabolism: role of diet 
in  regulating  retinol  esterification  and  retinoic  acid  oxidation.  J 
Nutr 133, 291S–6S.

143  Kishore GS, Boutwell RK. (1980) Enzymatic oxidation and reduc-
tion of retinal by mouse epidermis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
94, 1381–6.

124  Fraser  JR,  Laurent  TC.  (1989)  Turnover  and  metabolism  of 

144  Napoli JL, Race KR. (1988) Biogenesis of retinoic acid from b-car-

hyaluronan. Ciba Found Symp 143, 41–59.

otene. J Biol Chem 263, 17372–7.

125  Laurent TC. (1987) Biochemistry of hyaluronan. Acta Otolaryngol 

Suppl 442, 7–24.

126  Laurent TC, Fraser JR. (1992) Hyaluronan. FASEB J 6, 2397–404.
127  Kaya G, Jacobs F, Prins C, et al. (2008) Deep dissecting hematoma: 
an emerging severe complication of dermatoporosis. Arch Derma-
tol 144, 1303–8.

145  Raner  GM,  Vaz  AD,  Coon  MJ.  (1996)  Metabolism  of  all-trans, 
9-cis, and 13-cis isomers of retinal by purified isozymes of micro-
somal  cytochrome  P450  and  mechanism-based  inhibition  of 
retinoid oxidation by citral. Mol Pharmacol 49, 515–22.

146  Sorg  O,  Didierjean  L,  Saurat  JH.  (1999)  Metabolism  of  topical 

natural retinoids. Dermatology 199, 13–7.

128  Kaya G, Rodriguez I, Jorcano JL, et al. (1997) Selective suppression 
of CD44 in keratinocytes of mice bearing an antisense CD44 trans-
gene  driven  by  a  tissue-specific  promoter  disrupts  hyaluronate 

147  Kasraee B. (2002) Peroxidase-mediated mechanisms are involved 
in  the  melanocytotoxic  and  melanogenesis-inhibiting  effects  of 
chemical agents. Dermatology 205, 329–39.

36. Topical Cosmeceutical Retinoids

335

148  Sorg O, Kasraee B, Salomon D, Saurat JH. (2013) The combination 
of  a  retinoid,  a  phenolic  agent  and  an  antioxidant  improves  tol-
erance while retaining an optimal depigmenting action in recon-
structed epidermis. Dermatology 227, 150–6.

149  Bailly J, Crettaz M, Schifflers MH, Marty JP. (1998) In vitro metab-
olism by human skin and fibroblasts of retinol, retinal and retinoic 
acid. Exp Dermatol 7, 27–34.

150  Boehnlein  J,  Sakr  A,  Lichtin  JL,  Bronaugh  RL.  (1994)  Charac-
terization of esterase and alcohol dehydrogenase activity in skin. 
Metabolism of retinyl palmitate to retinol (vitamin A) during per-
cutaneous absorption. Pharm Res 11, 1155–9.

151  Connor  MJ.  (1988)  Oxidation  of  retinol  to  retinoic  acid  as  a 
requirement  for  biological  activity  in  mouse  epidermis.  Cancer 
Res 48, 7038–40.

152    Bruce  S.  (2008)  Cosmeceuticals  for  the  attenuation  of  extrinsic 

154  Picardo  M,  Carrera  M.  (2007)  New  and  experimental 
treatments  of  cloasma  and  other  hypermelanoses.  Dermatol 
Clin 25, 353–62.

155  Tammi  R,  Pasonen-Seppanen  S,  Kolehmainen  E,  Tammi  M. 
(2005) Hyaluronan synthase induction and hyaluronan accumu-
lation in mouse epidermis following skin injury. J Invest Dermatol 
124, 898–905.

156  Manuskiatti  W,  Maibach  HI.  (1996)  Hyaluronic  acid  and  skin, 

wound healing and aging. Int J Dermatol 35, 539–44.

157  Brown  MB,  Jones  SA.  (2005)  Hyaluronic  acid:  a  unique  topical 
vehicle for the localized delivery of drugs to the skin. J Eur Acad 
Dermatol Venereol 19, 308–18.

158  Trommer H, Wartewig S, Bottcher R, et al. (2003) The effects of 
hyaluronan  and  its  fragments  on  lipid  models  exposed  to  UV 
irradiation. Int J Pharm 254, 223–34.

and intrinsic dermal aging. J Drugs Dermatol 7, s17–s22.
153  Burgess C. (2008) Topical vitamins. J Drugs Dermatol 7, s2–s6.

159  Bel A, Fort-Lacoste L, Ginestar-Gonzales J, Navarro R, inventors. 
(1999) Glycylglycine oleamide in dermo-cosmetology. France.

ChAPTEr 37
Topical Vitamins

Donald L. Bissett, John E. Oblong, and Laura J. Goodman
Procter & Gamble Beauty Science, The Procter & Gamble Co., Sharon Woods Innovation Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Vitamins	are	commonly	used	as	topical	active	agents	in	skincare	products	designed	to	improve	aging	skin	appearance.
•	 With	appropriate	selection	of	vitamin	form	and	concentration,	many	vitamins	(e.g.,	A,	B3,	B5,	C,	E)	can	be	safely	applied	topically	for	

skin	improvement	effects.

•	 Appropriate	formulation	and	packaging	of	vitamins	is	required	to	prevent	loss	of	activity	through	processes	such	as	light	inactivation	or	

oxidation	and	to	achieve	aesthetically	acceptable	products.

Introduction

Vitamin A

Vitamins  are  organic  compounds  required  in  small  quantities 
for  normal  skin  function  and  are  typically  obtained  from  the 
diet. Many materials have been described as vitamins [1]. A few 
have been used in topical cosmetic products, and certainly there 
is  technical  rationale  for  such  use,  in  particular  based  on  the 
skin consequences in individuals consuming deficient diets. For 
example, vitamin B3 deficiency leads to the medical condition 
pellagra, which encompasses a broad range of symptoms from 
dermatitis to dementia to death.

Since vitamins are essential nutrients, several of them func-
tioning  in  a  wide  array  of  biochemical  processes,  they  have 
potential to provide beneficial effects across a wide spectrum of 
skin problems, even in people who are nutritionally sufficient. 
Also,  since  they  are  well  studied  due  to  their  importance  in 
nutrition,  their  mechanisms  and  toxicology  are  often  well 
understood.  Additionally,  with  topical  application  and  sub-
sequent  delivery  into  skin,  they  are  more  likely  to  have  local 
meaningful effects vs. oral intake with the consequent limited 
delivery  via  the  circulation  to  the  specific  skin  site  of  interest 
(e.g., facial skin).

Since  there  are  so  many  vitamins,  this  review  is  necessarily 
selective, focusing on a few, with particular emphasis on those 
materials  for  which  there  are  available  well-controlled  in  vivo 
human studies to illustrate skin care effects. Selected literature 
citations  are  provided  to  give  the  reader  some  references  that 
can serve as a starting point to probe deeper into the available 
technical data.

Forms
Several forms of vitamin A are used cosmetically, the most widely 
utilized  ones  being  retinol,  retinyl  esters  (e.g.,  retinyl  acetate, 
retinyl  propionate,  and  retinyl  palmitate),  and  retinaldehyde. 
Through  endogenous  enzymatic  reactions,  all  are  converted 
ultimately to trans-retinoic acid, the active form of vitamin A in 
skin. Specifically, retinyl esters are converted to retinol via este-
rase activity. Retinol is then converted to retinaldehyde by retinol 
dehydrogenase. Finally retinaldehyde is oxidized to retinoic acid 
by retinaldehyde oxidase (Figure 37.1).

Mechanisms
Since  trans-retinoic  acid  (RA)  is  the  active  form  of  vitamin 
A  in  skin,  the  abundant  published  literature  on  the  former  is 
applicable to this discussion. RA interacts with nuclear receptor 
proteins described as retinoic acid receptors (RAR) and retin-
oid X receptors (RXR), which can form heterodimer complexes. 
These complexes then interact with specific DNA sequences to 
affect transcription, to either increase or decrease expression of 
specific proteins/enzymes [2].

Using  genomic  methodology,  work  in  our  laboratories  has 
found  that  the  expression  of  over  1200  genes  is  significantly 
affected  by  topical  retinoid  treatment  of  photoaged  human 
skin (unpublished observations). Many of these changes can be 
ascribed, at least on some level, as being normalization of the 
altered skin conditions that occur with aging (induced by both 
chronological  and  environmental  influences  such  as  chronic 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

336

37. Topical Vitamins

337

Retinyl palmitate

CH 2

O

Palmitate

Esterase

CH2

OH

Alcohol dehydrogenase

C

H

O

Beta-carotene

Aldehyde dehydrogenase

C OOH

  Retinol 
(vitamin A)

Retinaldehyde

All-trans-retinoic acid

Figure 37.1  Conversion of retinyl ester into 
trans-retinoic acid in the skin.

C OOH

13-cis  Retinoic acid

9-cis  Retinoic acid

C OOH

sun exposure). Some specific changes induced by retinoid that 
are likely relevant to skin appearance effects are those that result 
in increased production of epidermal ground substance (glycos-
aminoglycans or GAGs which bind water, increasing epidermal 
hydration); increased dermal production of extracellular matrix 
components  such  as  collagen  (to  increase  dermal  thickness 
and restructure the matrix); and thicker and “restored” epider-
mis, e.g., increased epidermal proliferation and differentiation 
(increased epidermal thickness and epidermal turnover). These 
effects would be expected to contribute to improvements in the 
appearance of fine lines, wrinkles, and roughness [3].

In addition to stimulation of events in skin, retinoids also have 
an inhibitory effect on other tissue components. For example, 
retinoids are reported to inhibit production of collagenase. And 
while retinoids will stimulate production of ground substance 
(GAGs)  in  epidermis,  they  have  the  opposite  effect  in  dermal 

tissue, specifically inhibiting production of excess ground sub-
stance  in  the  upper  dermis  of  photoaged  skin.  While  a  low 
level  of  GAGs  are  required  in  the  dermis  for  normal  collagen 
structure and function, excess dermal GAGs are associated with 
altered  dermal  collagen  structure  and  wrinkled  skin  appear-
ance in the Shar Pei dog and in photoaged skin [4]. Removal of 
the excess dermal GAGs has been shown to be associated with 
improved matrix structure and reduced skin wrinkling.

Since  at  least  some  of  the  epidermal  effects  of  topical  reti-
noid (e.g., epidermal thickening and turnover) occur relatively 
rapidly  (days)  after  initiation  of  treatment,  some  skin  surface 
effects (e.g., diminution of roughness and fine line appearance) 
can  potentially  be  realized  quickly.  The  dermal  effects  likely 
occur  on  a  much  longer  time  frame  (weeks  to  months)  such 
that reduction in skin problems via this mechanism will require 
much longer time frames (weeks to months).

338

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals 

In addition to the fine line, wrinkle, and roughness effects of 
retinoids, they are also well known as agents to improve hyper-
pigmentation  (e.g.,  hyperpigmented  spots,  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation,  solar  lentigos,  melasma),  with  the  effect 
being achievement of lighter and more uniform skin color. The 
mechanisms by which retinoids affect the skin’s pigmentary sys-
tem  have  not  been  completely  identified.  Yet  it  is  known  that 
retinoids stimulate epidermal turnover, which simply could be 
interpreted as exfoliating pigmented stratum corneum cells from 
the skin surface. Retinoids also inhibit UV-induced pigmenta-
tion via reducing tyrosinase activity and melanin synthesis, by 
regulatory action on transcription processes in the epidermis (in 
melanocytes and keratinocytes) [5]. These effects would reduce 
hyperpigmentation, leading to lighter skin color (time frame of 
at least several weeks).

Topical effects
While  much  of  the  substantial  literature  on  the  improvement 
of skin fine lines, wrinkles, roughness, and hyperpigmentation 
by topical retinoids is focused on trans-retinoic acid, there are 
also data available on the vitamin A compounds that are used 
cosmetically. Since retinoids are irritating to skin, defining skin-
tolerated concentrations clinically is a key step in working effec-
tively with these materials. Retinol is better tolerated by the skin 

than trans-retinoic acid. In our testing we noted that retinyl pro-
pionate is milder to skin than the widely used retinol and retinyl 
acetate (Table 37.1) [6].

Since  retinoids  in  general  tend  to  be  fairly  potent,  topical 
doses of less than 1% are generally sufficient to obtain signifi-
cant effects. At low doses, in double-blind, split-face, placebo-
controlled facial testing (12-week duration), both retinol and 
retinyl propionate have been shown to be significantly effective 
in reducing facial hyperpigmentation and  fine  lines/wrinkles 
across  the  study  (Figure  37.2).  Determination  of  treatment 
effects was based on quantitative computer image analysis and 
blinded expert grading of high-resolution digital images [6].

There  are  also  clinical  studies  published  on  other  retinoids. 
Retinyl palmitate has very low irritation potential and has been 
reported to be effective if tested at a very high dose, such as 2%. 
There are also a few studies revealing the clinical efficacy of reti-
naldehyde, typically at a dose of 0.05%. However, retinaldehyde 
has irritation potential similar to retinol [7].

Formulation challenges
There are two primary challenges in working with retinoids. 
One  is  their  tendency  to  induce  skin  irritation  (as  noted 
above),  which  negatively  affects  skin  barrier  properties. 
While high doses will provide greater skin aging appearance 

Table 37.1  Cumulative	back	irritation	measures	for	retinol	and	its	esters	(double-blind,	vehicle-controlled,	randomized	study;	daily	patching	for	20	days,	under	
semi-occluded	patch,	n = 45;	0–3	irritation	grading).	Equimolar	doses	and	abbreviations	used	were:	0.09%	RP	(retinyl	propionate),	0.086%	RA	(retinyl	acetate),	
and	0.075%	ROH	(retinol).	RP	and	RA	were	significantly	less	irritating	than	ROH,	and	RP	was	directionally	less	irritating	than	RA.

Topical treatment  
(oil-in-water emulsions)

Emulsion	control

0.09%	Retinyl	propionate

0.086%	Retinyl	acetate

0.075%	Retinol

Expert Grader  
Cumulative  
Irritation Scores

Significance of  
Expert Grader  
Cumulative Scores*

Chromameter “a”  
Measure (day 21)

Significance of 
chromameter 
“a” measure*

	 	 		3.9

	 24

	 39

164

a

b

b

c

0.4

2.7

3.8

7.6

a

b

bc

d

*Treatments	with	the	same	letter	codes	are	not	significantly	different	from	each	other	(p < 0.05).

Figure 37.2  Topical retinyl propionate 
(RP)  reduces  the  appearance  of  fine 
lines/wrinkles. 0.2% retinyl propionate 
in  a  stable  skin  care  emulsion  system 
was  applied  twice  daily  for  12  weeks. 
Images  were  taken  at  baseline,  and 
weeks 4, 8, and 12.

37. Topical Vitamins

339

improvement,  the  associated  irritation  tends  to  define  an 
upper concentration limit where they can be used practically. 
While the skin may have some capacity to accommodate to 
retinoid treatment to respond with less irritation over time, 
it  is  not  completely  eliminated  even  with  long-term  use,  as 
demonstrated by evaluation of skin barrier function. Mitiga-
tion  of  the  irritation  may  be  managed  to  some  extent  with 
appropriate  formulation  to  meter  delivery  into  the  skin, 
use of retinyl esters which are less irritating than retinol (as 
noted  above),  or  inclusion  of  other  ingredients  (e.g.,  those 
with anti-irritancy or anti-inflammatory activity) to counter 
this issue.

The second key issue is instability, especially to oxygen and 
light.  Thus,  to  ensure  stability  of  retinoid  in  finished  prod-
uct,  formulation  and  packaging  must  be  done  in  an  envi-
ronment  that  minimizes  exposure  to  oxygen  and  light.  The 
final product packaging also ideally needs to be opaque and 
oxygen  impermeable,  including  use  of  a  small  package  ori-
fice to reduce oxygen exposure once the container is opened. 
In addition, a variety of other strategies might be employed, 
e.g.,  encapsulation  of  the  retinoid,  inclusion  of  stabilizing 
antioxidants, and unit dosing.

Vitamin B3

Forms
There  are  three  primary  forms  of  vitamin  B3  that  have  found 
utility  in  skin  care  products:  niacinamide  (aka  nicotinamide), 
nicotinic acid, and nicotinate esters (e.g., myristoyl nicotinate, 
benzyl nicotinate).

Mechanisms
Vitamin  B3  serves  as  a  precursor  to  a  family  of  endogenous 
enzyme co-factors (Figure 37.3), specifically nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide  (NAD+),  its  phosphorylated  derivative  (NADP+), 
and  their  reduced  forms  (NADH,  NADPH).  NADPH/NADP+ 
ratios  serve  as  an  indicator  of  redox  status  whereas  NAD+/
NADH  ratios  function  as  a  critical  cofactor  in  the  regulation  of 
metabolism, epigenetics, and circadian rhythms [8,9].

These co-factors are involved in many enzymatic reactions in 
the  skin,  and  thus  have  potential  to  influence  many  skin  pro-
cesses as well as overall aging [10]. The ability of niacinamide to 
incorporate into cellular NAD+ pools and be utilized by sirtuins 
and  poly-ADP  ribose  polymerases  may  be  a  key  mechanistic 
basis  for  the  diversity  of  clinical  effects  observed  for  a  simple 
material such as niacinamide [11,12].

Recently,  it  has  been  reported  that  niacinamide  can  protect 
both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation under conditions 
of  hydrogen  peroxide-induced  oxidative  stress,  which  mecha-
nistically involves incorporation into cellular NAD+ pools [13]. 
The emerging role of NAD+ in protecting cellular bioenergetics 
under oxidative stress conditions and as a limiting cofactor for 
these critical enzymatic processes may contribute to the specific 
actions of niacinamide have been described [14–16]. For exam-
ple, topical niacinamide has the following effects:
•	 Niacinamide  inhibits  sebum  production,  specifically  affecting 
the content of triglycerides and fatty acids. This may contribute 
to the observed reduction in skin pore size and thus improved 
skin texture (a component of texture being enlarged pores).
•	 Niacinamide  increases  epidermal  production  of  skin  barrier 
lipids (e.g., ceramides) and also skin barrier layer proteins and 
their  precursors  (keratin,  involucrin,  filaggrin),  leading  to  the 

Family of co-factors:

•NAD

•NADP

•NADH (antioxidant)

•NADPH (antioxidant)

O

N

Niacinamide
(vitamin B3)

C NH2

O

O

CH2

O

N+

O

P O−

H

H

HH

OH

OH

O

NH2

→ → →→

O

P O−

O

CH2

O

N

N

NH2

N

N

H

H

HH

OH

OH

Figure  37.3  Niacinamide  as  precursor  to 
energy  co-factors:  nicotinamide  adenine 
dinucleotide  (NAD),  nicotinamide  adenine 
dinucleotide  phosphate  (NADP),  and  their 
reduced forms NADH and NADPH.

340

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals 

observed  enhancement  of  barrier  function  as  determined  by 
reduced TEWL (transepidermal water loss). This improved bar-
rier also increases skin resistance to environmental insult from 
damaging agents such as surfactant and solvent, leading to less 
irritation, inflammation, and skin redness (e.g., facial red blotchi-
ness).  Since  inflammation  is  involved  in  development  of  skin 
aging  problems,  the  barrier  improvement  may  also  contribute 
to the anti-aging effects of topical niacinamide. Additionally, the 
anti-inflammatory and sebum reduction effects of niacinamide 
likely contribute to the anti-acne effect reported for this material.
•	 Niacinamide and its nucleotide derivatives (e.g., NAD) have 
anti-inflammatory  properties  (e.g.,  inhibition  of  inflamma-
tory cytokines).

•	 Niacinamide  increases  production  of  collagen,  which  may 
contribute to the observed reduction in the appearance of skin 
wrinkling.

•	 Niacinamide reduces the production of excess dermal GAGs 
(glycosaminoglycans).  As  noted  above  for  retinoids,  this 
reduction  is  associated  with  dermal  matrix  remodeling  and 
improved skin wrinkling.

•	 Niacinamide inhibits melanosome transfer from melanocytes 
to keratinocytes, leading to reduction in skin hyperpigmenta-
tion (e.g., hyperpigmented spots).

•	 Niacinamide inhibits skin yellowing. A contributing factor to 
yellowing is protein oxidation (glycation; Maillard reaction), 
which is a spontaneous oxidative reaction between protein and 
sugar, resulting in cross-linked proteins (Amedori products) 
that are yellow-brown in color. These products accumulate in 
matrix  components  such  as  collagen  that  have  long  biologi-
cal half-lives [17]. Niacinamide has anti-glycation effects and 
antioxidant properties, due at least in part to its conversion to 
the antioxidant NAD(P)H [13].

•	 Niacinamide improves dermal skin elasticity, as measured by 
cutometry. The mechanism by which elasticity improvements 
occur is not defined, but dermal remodeling (as evidenced by 
the observed increase in skin collagen and decrease in excess 
dermal GAGs noted above) and prevention of dermal matrix 
glycation (of collagen and elastin, as discussed above) may be 
contributory factors.

•	 Niacinamide  provides  an  ultraviolet  radiation  (UVR)  pro-
tective  effect  (inhibition  of  broad  spectrum  UVR-induced 
immunosuppression),  revealing  its  utility  for  incorporation 
into  sunscreen  products  to  protect  against  environmental 
insult [18]. Part of the mechanism of action for this effect has 
been speculated to involve modulation of cellular bioenerget-
ics, in particular protection of glycolysis.

Since nicotinic acid and its esters are also precursors to NAD(P)
H, they would be expected to provide these same effects to skin. 
Nicotinic acid and many (if not all) of its esters (following in-
skin hydrolysis to free nicotinic acid) also stimulate blood flow, 
leading to increased skin redness or a flush response. While in 
some  situations  this  might  be  a  desired  effect  (e.g.,  warming 
sensation for body skin), it is difficult to manage for the more 
sensitive facial skin and can lead to irritation and itch.

Topical effects
A well-studied member of the vitamin B3 family of compounds 
is niacinamide. There are many published reports on its mecha-
nisms  of  action,  its  delivery  into  human  skin,  and  the  diver-
sity  of  clinical  effects  provided  by  topical  niacinamide.  The 
clinical  observations  were  obtained  from  several  double-blind, 
single-variable,  placebo-controlled,  left-right  randomized  stud-
ies. An example of the clinical effects is significant improvement 
in  skin  barrier  [14],  as  measured  by  reduction  in  loss  of  water, 
i.e., lowered TEWL (Table 37.2). The niacinamide-treated skin is 
then more resistant to environmental damage, as determined by 
exposure of the skin to the surfactant SLS (sodium lauryl sulfate) 
and assessment of the resulting TEWL (Table 37.3).

As  another  example,  topical  niacinamide  has  been  shown  to 
reduce the appearance of skin fine lines/wrinkles [14,15]. The effect 
increases over time and is significant after 8-12 weeks of treatment. 
Additionally, topical niacinamide improves skin elastic properties 
as demonstrated for two parameters of skin elasticity, in particular 
R5 (measure of viscoelastic properties) and R7 (measure of elastic 
recovery). Topical niacinamide also improves other aspects of aging 
skin, such as reduction in sebaceous lipids (oil control) as shown in 
Table 37.4 and reduction in pore size, which likely contributes at 
least in part to the observed improved skin texture.

Table 37.2  Topical	niacinamide	strengthens	forearm	skin	barrier	as	assessed	
by	TEWL.

Topical 
treatment

Placebo

2%	Niacinamide

Significance

TEWL (gram water per m2.hour)

Day 1

Day 12

Day 19

Day 24

3.14

3.22

–

3.39

3.05

3.58

3.09

3.24

2.58

p < 0.05

p < 0.05

p < 0.05

Table 37.3  Topical	niacinamide	pre-treatment	reduces	the	barrier-damaging	
effects	of	the	surfactant	SLS	on	forearm	skin.

TEWL (gram water per m2.hour)

Topical 
treatment

Placebo

2%	Niacinamide

Day 24

3.24

2.58

1 hour post  
SLS patch

24 hours post 
SLS patch

17.2

14.1

15.4

12.1

Significance

p < 0.05

p < 0.05

p < 0.05

Table 37.4  Facial	sebum	excretion	reduction	after	topical	treatment	with	2%	
niacinamide.

Topical treatment

% Change in facial sebum 
excretion (after 8 weeks of 
topical treatment)

Placebo	formulation

–3.5

2%	Niacinamide	formulation

–23.0	(p < 0.05)

37. Topical Vitamins

341

Figure 37.4  Topical niacinamide 
reduces hyperpigmented spots.

Beyond the above effects, there is also improvement in skin 
color (evening of skin tone), such as improvement in red blotch-
iness  and  skin  yellowing,  and  in  particular  reduction  in  the 
appearance  of  hyperpigmented  spots  (Figure  37.4).  The  effect 
on spots has been reported in many published studies [19–21].

A key property that contributes to the ability of niacinamide 
to provide the wide diversity of clinical effects is its penetration 
into skin [19]. More than 10% of the topically applied dose pen-
etrates  into  and  through  human  skin,  making  the  compound 
readily  available  throughout  the  tissue.  Such  a  high  degree  of 
skin penetration results, at least in part, from its small size and 
lack of charge, permitting it to enter the skin much more readily 
than most other skin care active agents.

Fairly  high  doses  (2–5%)  of  vitamin  B3  have  been  used  to 
achieve the observed clinical effects. However, since there is very 
high tolerance of the skin to niacinamide even with chronic usage, 
high doses can be used acceptably. In fact, as noted above, since 
topical  niacinamide  improves  skin  barrier,  it  actually  increases 
the  skin’s  resistance  to  irritation,  damage,  and  environmental 
insult (e.g., from surfactant) and thus reduces red blotchiness.

Limited data on myristoyl-nicotinate have been presented to 
suggest that a similar broad array of effects may occur with this 
agent when used topically (1–5% doses) [22]. Clinical data for 
topical nicotinic acid and other esters are not available.

Niacinamide has also been tested clinically in combination with 
and in regimens involving other cosmetic agents (N-acetyl glucos-
amine,  peptide,  undecylenoyl-phenylalanine,  vitamin  A,  salicylic 
acid). The clinical results indicate at least additive effects (reduction 
in the appearance of fine lines, wrinkles, texture, hyperpigmenta-
tion) of the agents used in the topical testing [21,23–25]. In mixtures 
with other agents (e.g., in combination with N-acetyl glucosamine), 
the human skin penetration of niacinamide remains unchanged, as 
does the delivery of the other agent [19]. Thus, the observed addi-
tive clinical effect is not the result of altered permeation into skin, 
but rather is due to the combined effects of the active agents.

Formulation challenges
The  key  challenge  for  working  with  niacinamide  and  nicotinate 
esters on the face is avoiding hydrolysis to nicotinic acid. Nicotinic 
acid,  even  at  low  doses,  can  induce  an  intense  skin  reddening 
(flushing)  response.  While  a  little  skin  redness  (increased  skin 
“pinkness”)  may  be  a  desired  effect  for  the  face,  the  flushing 
response among individuals is highly variable in terms of dose to 
induce it, time to onset of the response, and duration of response. 
Additionally, the flushing can also have associated issues such as 
facial  burn,  sting,  and  itch,  particularly  under  cold  and/or  dry 
environmental conditions.  To avoid  hydrolysis  to nicotinic acid, 
formulating in the pH range of 5–7 is preferred. This flushing issue 
also requires that the purity of the raw material (e.g., niacinamide) 
be very high to minimize any contaminating free acid.

For the nicotinate esters, there are several commercial options. 
Many of them unfortunately are readily hydrolyzed to nicotinic 
acid on or in the skin such that flushing responses occur rap-
idly (within seconds-minutes) even at very low concentrations 
(<<1% in some cases). The longer chain esters (e.g., myristoyl-
nicotinate) apparently are more resistant to this hydrolysis and 
thus appear to be more suitable for chronic use topically.

Vitamin B5

Forms
Pantothenic acid is the active vitamin. A precursor is panthenol 
or pro-vitamin B5 which is also known as pantothenol or pan-
tothenyl alcohol. The widely used D optical isomer of panthenol 
is termed dexpanthenol. Panthenol is water soluble, stable, and 
low molecular weight (readily penetrates the stratum corneum).

Mechanisms
Panthenol  has  been  used  topically  to  treat  wounds,  bruises, 
scars, pressure and dermal ulcers, thermal burns, postoperative 

342

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals 

incisions/distention,  and  dermatoses  [26,27].  The  specific 
mechanisms for these effects are not known. However, dexpan-
thenol  is  a  precursor  to  pantothenic  acid  (vitamin  B5).  Pan-
tothenic acid is a component of co-enzyme A which functions 
in acyl group transfer during fatty acid biosynthesis and gluco-
neogenesis. By increasing skin lipid synthesis, improved barrier 
should  occur,  resulting  in  improved  wound  healing.  In  addi-
tion,  panthenol  promotes  fibroblast  proliferation  and  epider-
mal  re-epithelialization,  effects  that  promote  wound  healing. 
Furthermore, panthenol has found utility for skin penetration 
enhancement.

Topical effects
Topical panthenol is extremely well tolerated by the skin, lead-
ing to wide topical use of this material and many reported skin 
effects [26–28]. Among those are hydration and the associated 
improvement  in  roughness,  scaling,  and  epidermal  elasticity; 
improved  skin  barrier  function;  protection  against  skin  irrita-
tion and SLS-induced damage; skin soothing; and anti-inflam-
matory and anti-pruritic effects.

Hydration
Panthenol’s hydration effect likely derives from its hygroscopic 
properties. Panthenol is an effective moisturizer of stratum cor-
neum and is even more effective when combined with glycerol. 
In addition, it improves the dryness, roughness, scaling, pruri-
tus, and erythema associated with a wide variety of skin prob-
lems such as atopic dermatitis, ichthyosis, psoriasis, and contact 
dermatitis [26]. It also reduces the cutaneous side effects associ-
ated with retinoid therapy [29]. This hydration effect has further 
led to its use in hair care, promoting improved elasticity, soften-
ing, and easier combing.

Barrier and irritation
Panthenol  protects  against  irritation  via  improvement  in  skin 
barrier function [26,28,30]. Topical pre-treatment with panthe-
nol was observed to increase skin’s resistance to visible irritation 
upon  subsequent  exposure  to  the  surfactant  SLS  (Table  37.5). 
Since panthenol is the precursor to pantothenic acid which is a 
co-factor in barrier layer lipid biosynthesis, this could account 
for the noted barrier effect.

Some consumers are sensitive to specific components (e.g., cer-
tain preservatives, fragrances, sunscreen actives, etc.) in cosmetic 

Table 37.5  Prevention	of	sodium	lauryl	sulfate	(SLS)-induced	erythema	by	
topical	1%	panthenol.

Time point post  
SLS treatment

2	days

3	days

4	days

Erythema score (0–6 scale) for skin 
treated with:

SLS

4.0

3.4

2.7

Panthenol then SLS

2.4

1.7

1.4

Table 37.6  Reduction	in	negative	kinesthetic	effects	of	formulation	
containing	panthenol	vs.	formula	not	containing	1%	panthenol.

Visible or kinesthetic 
attribute

Reduction in attribute 
by panthenol (0–6 scale)

Redness

Burning

Tingling

Stinging

Itching

Warming

–1.4

–2.4

–5.7

–4.9

–4.9

–5.7

formulations, leading to induction of negative kinesthetic irritation 
effects  such  as  burn,  sting,  itch,  and  tingling.  Topical  panthenol 
incorporated  into  such  formulations  can  reduce  those  negative 
effects (Table 37.6). The mechanism for this may be related to the 
reported soothing or anti-inflammatory effect of panthenol [26].

Formulation challenges
Panthenol at high concentrations can yield sticky/greasy feeling 
formulations. Thus, doses greater than approximately 1% may 
require appropriate formulation adjustment.

Vitamin C

Forms
Of the many forms of this vitamin, some of the more commonly 
used are ascorbic acid, ascorbyl phosphate (as the magnesium 
and sodium salts), and other ascorbate derivatives (e.g., ascorbyl 
palmitate, ascorbyl glucoside).

Mechanisms
Vitamin C is well known as an antioxidant and has been utilized 
as a skin lightener (e.g., via tyrosinase inhibition and/or its antioxi-
dant effect). It also has been reported to have anti-inflammatory 
properties since it reduces the erythema associated with postopera-
tive laser resurfacing [31]. In addition, ascorbic acid also serves as 
an essential co-factor for the enzymes lysyl hydroxylase and pro-
lyl hydroxylase, both of which are required for post-translational 
processing  in  collagen  (Types  I  and  III)  biosynthesis.  Thus,  by 
stimulating these biosynthetic steps, ascorbic acid has the potential 
to increase the production of collagen which could lead to wrinkle 
reduction (as discussed above for vitamins A and B3).

While the ascorbic acid derivatives may possess some proper-
ties of the free acid (e.g., antioxidant), hydrolysis of the derivatives 
would  be  required  for  the  increased  collagen  production  effect 
since the acid is the active co-factor. Demonstration of the hydro-
lysis of all these derivatives in skin has not been well documented.

Topical effects
There  are  several  published  studies  discussing  the  anti-skin 
aging effect of ascorbic acid, such as reduced UVA-induced oxi-
dation and reduction in skin aging appearance parameters (skin 

37. Topical Vitamins

343

surface replicas, dermatologist grading, algorithm-based facial 
image  analysis,  and  histological  assessment  of  biopsy  speci-
mens of dermal matrix, such as collagen). For example, topical 
5%  ascorbic  acid  for  6  months  [32]  improved  photodamaged 
forearm  and  upper  chest  skin  based  on  dermatologist  scores, 
skin surface replicas, and biopsy specimen analysis (specifically 
improvements  in  elastin  and  collagen  fiber  appearance).  At  a 
high dose (23.8%), topical ascorbic acid for two weeks improved 
surface roughness, fine lines, and dyspigmentation [33].

Formulation challenges
The  key  challenge  with  vitamin  C  compounds  in  general  is 
stability (oxygen sensitivity), particularly with ascorbic acid. Not 
only does oxidation lead to loss of the active material, there is also 
rapid product yellowing (an esthetic negative for the consumer). 
Various  stabilization  strategies  can  be  attempted  to  address  the 
issue,  such  as  exclusion  of  oxygen  during  formulation,  oxygen 
impermeable  packaging,  encapsulation,  low  pH,  minimization 
of water, and inclusion of other antioxidants. In spite of all those 
approaches,  in  general  ascorbate  stability  remains  a  challenge, 
and  some  of  these  approaches  (e.g.,  very  low  pH)  can  lead  to 
unwanted aesthetic skin effects such as irritation.

For the ascorbyl phosphates (Mg and Na salts), the resulting high 
content  of  salt  in  product  can  dramatically  impact  the  thickener 
system, requiring increased use of thickener ingredients or other 
formulation approaches. These ascorbate derivatives are also con-
siderably more expensive than other ascorbate compounds.

Vitamin E

Forms
This vitamin is also commonly known as tocopherol. There are 
several isomers based, for example, on number and position of 
substituents on the phenyl ring. Thus, there are α, β, γ, δ, and 
ε isomers of tocopherol. There are also several esters. A widely 
used form of vitamin E is α-tocopherol acetate.

Mechanism
Vitamin E is an antioxidant. The various isomeric forms have var-
ying potencies as antioxidants. The active form is free tocopherol, 
so topical use of esters such as α-tocopherol acetate would require 
enzymatic  hydrolysis  to  the  free  vitamin  on  or  in  the  skin  for 
maximal activity. Since it is lipid soluble, its site of action is more 
likely to be in lipid-rich environments (e.g., cell membranes).

Topical effects
While vitamin E is often used as a preservative/stabilizer in for-
mulation, at relatively high topical doses it is quite effective in 
preventing oxidative damage to skin, such as preventing acute 
and chronic ultraviolet (UV) radiation damage. For example, in 
an  in  vivo  model  of  UV  radiation  damage,  topical  tocopherol 
reduced  by  approximately  50%  the  visible  skin  damage  (e.g., 
skin  wrinkling)  induced  by  chronic  UV  exposure  [34].  There 

are also some clinical data describing improved skin moisturiza-
tion and reduced skin roughness effects with topical vitamin E 
[35]. Since antioxidants are the topic of another chapter in this 
volume, the discussion here has been kept brief.

Formulation challenges
Tocopherol  has  some  oxidative  stability  concerns,  thus  esters 
such  as  α-tocopherol  acetate  are  most  often  used.  Both  toco-
pherol and its alkyl esters are oils, so high doses can be greasy/
sticky, requiring formulation to address the esthetic impact.

Other vitamins

Vitamin D
There  are  several  vitamin  D  compounds,  and  many  synthetic 
variations.  The  active  vitamin  is  1,25-dihydroxyvitamin  D3. 
Dehydrocholesterol (pro-vitamin D) is a cosmetically used mate-
rial which can be converted into active vitamin D upon exposure 
to UV. Due to the effects of vitamin D compounds on epidermal 
growth  and  differentiation,  there  has  been  discussion  of  their 
skin  barrier  and  photodamage  mitigation  activities,  as  seen  in 
in  vivo  model  testing  [36,37].  Vitamin  D  compounds,  like 
vitamin A materials, are often very potent, requiring caution in 
selecting specific compounds and topical doses.

Vitamin K
There are several forms of vitamin K, such as phylloquinone and 
menaquinone. Vitamin K compounds function in blood clotting, 
and there are data showing effects for mitigating bruising [38] and 
reducing purpura [39], which often occurs as a side effect to laser 
therapy for telangiectasia. There is also much speculation about the 
use of them in improving other skin problems such as under-eye 
dark circles. However, there appear to have not been any controlled 
studies presented to support that latter use. Oxidative stability is a 
concern with at least some of the vitamin K compounds.

Vitamin P (flavonoids)
This family of plant-derived and synthetically prepared chemicals 
encompasses a huge diversity of compounds. Some of the many 
types of flavonoids are flavons, isoflavones, flavanones, chalcones, 
coumarins, and chromones. Activities associated with flavonoids 
include  antioxidant,  anti-inflammatory,  and  phytoestrogen 
effects [40–42]. They are appearing in cosmetic products, often as 
components of natural extracts. Additionally, topical effects of a 
few specific compounds are emerging in the published literature 
[43,44]. This is a fertile area for identification of materials active 
in improving aging skin.

Discussion

While oral vitamins are well studied due to their importance in 
nutrition, the entire spectrum of possible effects from topical vita-
mins has not been thoroughly studied for the potential to improve 

344

ANTI-AGING  Cosmeceuticals 

skin. As the information presented in this chapter shows, at least 
some vitamins used topically can provide appearance-improving 
effects  to  aging  skin,  even  in  nutritionally  normal  individuals. 
With the wide array of vitamin materials, additional effects from 
their topical use are likely to emerge in the future.

A  vitamin  alone  is  not  likely  to  be  highly  potent,  although 
the  high  tolerance  by  skin  for  some  vitamins  provides  oppor-
tunity  to  use  high  topical  doses  to  achieve  greater  effects.  A 
key  to  achieving  that  is  development  of  esthetic  formulations, 
to  provide  elegant  product  forms  containing  those  high  levels 
that the consumer will use on a regular basis to achieve the skin 
benefits.  Also,  combinations  of  different  vitamins  or  vitamins 
plus  other  effective  agents  have  potential  to  achieve  consider-
ably more dramatic effects. For example, combining a vitamin 
B3  with  a  vitamin  A  or  with  a  peptide  leads  to  greater  effects 
than the individual materials. There is certainly opportunity to 
continue to explore this avenue of combinations.

As  an  individual  compound,  the  vitamin  B3  compound 
niacinamide is probably the most clinically studied agent in the 
cosmeceutical arena, based on the large number of peer-reviewed 
published  studies.  Interestingly,  an  independent  review  [3]  of 
materials used widely in cosmetic products concluded that there 
is  sufficient  data  on  niacinamide,  in  particular,  to  support  its 
accurate definition as a cosmeceutical ingredient: a material with 
substantial  published  robust  data  on  skin  permeability,  mecha-
nisms  of  action,  and  effectiveness  in  controlled  clinical  testing. 
In contrast, other widely used materials lack the depth of these 
technical elements to meet the criteria to be designated as a cos-
meceutical ingredient. For niacinamide, the volume of controlled 
clinical data continues to expand in the peer-reviewed published 
literature, adding to the strength of its technical foundation and 
broadening  the  array  of  skin  care  benefit  effects  attributable  to 
this multi-functional vitamin.

references

1  Newstrom H. (1993) Part 1: vitamins. In: NewstromH (ed.) Nutrients 

Catalog. McFarland & Company: Jefferson, NC, pp. 1–121.

2  Varani  J,  Fisher  GJ,  Kang  S,  et  al.  (1998)  Molecular  mechanisms 
of  intrinsic  skin  aging  and  retinoid-induced  repair  and  reversal. 
J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 3, 57–60.

3  Levin J, Del Rosso JQ, Momin SB. (2010) How much do we really 
know about our favorite cosmeceutical ingredients? J Clin Aesthet 
Dermatol 3, 22–41.

4  Kligman AM, Baker TJ, Gordon HL. (1975) Long-term histologic 
follow-up of phenol face peels. Plast Reconstruct Surg 75, 652–9.
5  Ortonne  JP.  (2006)  Retinoid  therapy  of  pigmentation  disorders. 

Dermatol Ther 19, 280–88.

6  Oblong JE, Saud A, Bissett DL, et al. (2005) Topical retinyl propionate 
achieves  skin  benefits  with  favorable  irritation  profile.  In:  Elsner  P 
&  MaibachHI  (eds)  Cosmeceuticals  and  Active  Cosmetics.  Taylor  & 
Francis: Boca Raton, FL, pp. 441–463.

7  Fluhr  JW,  Vienne  MP,  Lauze  C,  et  al.  (1999)  Tolerance  profile  of 
retinol,  retinaldehyde,  and  retinoic  acid  under  maximized  and 
long-term clinical conditions. Dermatol 199S, 57–60.

8  Canto C, Auwerx J. (2011) NAD+ as a signaling molecule modulating 

metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 76, 291–8.

9  Sassone-Corsi P. (2012) NAD+, a circadian metabolite with an epi-

genetic twist. Endocrinol 153, 1–5.

10  Xu  P,  Sauve  AA.  (2010)  Vitamin  B3,  the  nicotinamide  adenine 

dinucleotides and aging. Mech Ageing Dev 131, 287–98.

11  Jacobson EL, Giacomoni PU, Roberts MJ, et al. (2001) Optimizing 
the energy status of skin cells during solar radiation. J Photochem 
Photobiol B 63, 141–147.

12  Guarente  L.  (2011)  Sirtuins,  aging,  and  metabolism.  Cold  Spring 

Harb Symp Quant Biol 76, 81–90.

13  Rovito HA, Oblong, JE. (2013) Nicotinamide preferentially protects 
glycolysis  in  dermal  fibroblasts  under  oxidative  stress  conditions. 
Brit J Dermatol 168 (S2), 1–10.

14  Bissett  DL,  Oblong  JE,  Saud  A,  et  al.  (2003)  Topical  niacinamide 
provides  skin  aging  appearance  benefits  while  enhancing  barrier 
function. J Clin Dermatol 32S, 9–18.

15  Bissett DL, Miyamoto K, Sun P, et al. (2004) Topical niacinamide 
reduces yellowing, wrinkling, red blotchiness, and hyperpigmented 
spots in aging facial skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 26, 231–8.

16  Berson  DS,  Oblong  JE,  Osborne  RM,  et  al.  (2014)  Niacinamide: 
a  topical  vitamin  with  wide  ranging  skin  appearance  benefits.  In: 
Farris PK (ed.) Cosmeceuticals and Cosmetic Practice. John Wiley & 
Sons: Oxford, (in press).

17  Odetti  P,  Pronzato  MA,  Noberasco  G,  et  al.  (1994)  Relationships 
between glycation and oxidation related fluorescence in rat collagen 
during aging. Lab Invest 70, 61–7.

18  Sivapirabu G, Yiasemides E, Halliday GM, et al. (2009) Topical 
nicotinamide  modulates  cellular  energy  metabolism  and  pro-
vides  broad-spectrum  protection  against  ultraviolet  radiation-
induced  immunosuppression  in  humans.  Brit  J  Dermatol  161, 
1357–64.

19  Bissett  DL,  Robinson  LR,  Raleigh  PS,  et  al.  (2007)  Reduction  in 
the  appearance  of  facial  hyperpigmentation  by  topical  N-acetyl 
glucosamine. J Cosmet Dermatol 6, 20–26.

20  Kimball  AB,  Kaczvinsky  JR,  Li  J,  et  al.  (2010)  Reduction  in  the 
appearance  of  facial  hyperpigmentation  after  use  of  moisturizers 
with  a  combination  of  topical  niacinamide  and  N-acetyl  gly-
cosamine: results of a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled 
study. Brit J Dermatol 162, 435–41.

21  Bissett  DL,  Robinson  LR,  Raleigh  PS,  et  al.  (2009)  Reduction  in 
the appearance of facial hyperpigmentation by topical N-undecyl-
10-enoyl-L-phenylalanine  and  its  combination  with  niacinamide. 
J Cosmet Dermatol 8, 260–66.

22  Jacobson  MK,  Kim  H,  Coyle  WR,  et  al.  (2007)  Effect  of  myristyl 
nicotinate  on  retinoic  acid  therapy  for  facial  photodamage.  Exp 
Dermatol 16, 927–35.

23  Robinson  LR,  Fitzgerald  NC,  Doughty  DG,  et  al.  (2005)  Topi-
cal  palmitoyl  pentapeptide  provides  improvement  in  photoaged 
human facial skin. Int J Cosmet Sci 27, 155–60.

24  Fu JJ, Hillebrand GG, Raleigh P, et al. (2010) A randomized, con-
trolled  comparative  study  of  the  wrinkle  reduction  benefits  of  a 
cosmetic niacinamide/peptide/retinyl propionate product regimen 
vs. a prescription 0.02% tretinoin product regimen. Brit J Dermatol 
162, 647–54.

25  Kaczvinsky JR, Li JX, Mack CE, et al. (2014) Effectiveness of a sali-
cylic acid-niacinamide regimen for improvement in the appearance 
of facial skin texture and pores in post-adolescent women. J Drugs 
Dermatol submitted.

37. Topical Vitamins

345

26  Ebner F, Heller A, Rippke F, et al. (2002) Topical use of dexpanthe-

nol in skin disorders. Am J Clin Dermatol 3, 427–33.

27  Stozkowska W, Piekos R. (2004) Investigation of some topical for-
mulations containing dexpanthenol. Acta Polon Pharm 61, 433–7.
28  Camargo FB, Gaspar LR, Maia Campos PM. (2011) Skin moisturizing 
effects of panthenol-based formulations. J Cosmet Sci 62; 361–70.
29  Draelos ZD, Ertel KD, Berge CA. (2006) Facilitating facial retiniza-

tion through barrier improvement. Cutis 78, 275–81.

30  Biro K, Thaci D, Ochsendorf FR, et al. (2003) Efficacy of dexpan-
thenol in skin protection against irritation: a double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Contact Derm 49, 80–84.

31  Alster TS, West TB. (1998) Effect of topical vitamin C on postop-
erative  carbon  dioxide  laser  resurfacing  erythema.  Dermatol  Surg 
24, 331–4.

32  Humbert PG, Haftek M, Creidi P, et al. (2003) Topical ascorbic acid 
on photoaged skin: clinical, topographical and ultrastructural eval-
uation: double-blind study vs. placebo. Exptl Dermatol 12, 237–44.
33  Xu T-H, Chen JZS, Li Y-H, et al. (2012) Split-face study of topical 
23.8% L-ascorbic acid serum in treating photo-aged skin. J Drugs 
Dermatol 11, 51–56.

34  Bissett  DL,  Chatterjee  R,  Hannon  DP.  (1990)  Photoprotective 
effect  of  superoxide-scavenging  antioxidants  against  ultraviolet 
radiation-induced  chronic  skin  damage  in  the  hairless  mouse. 
Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 7, 56–62.

35  Yenilmez E, Yazan Y. (2010) Release of vitamin E from different top-
ical colloidal delivery systems and their in vitro-in vivo evaluation. 
Turk J Pharm Sci 7, 167–88.

36  Mitani H, Naru E, Yamashita M, et al. (2004) Ergocalciferol promotes 
in  vivo  differentiation  of  keratinocytes  and  reduces  photodamage 
caused  by  ultraviolet  irradiation  in  hairless  mice.  Photoderm  Pho-
toimmun Photomed 20, 215–23.

37  Reichrath  J,  Lehmann  B,  Carlberg  C,  et  al.  (2007)  Vitamins  as 

hormones. Hormone Med Res 39, 71–84.

38  Shah NS, Lazarus MC, Bugdodel R, et al. (2002) The effects of topical 
vitamin K on bruising after laser treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol 47, 
241–4.

39  Lee Cohen J, Bhatia AC. (2009) The role of vitamin K oxide gel in 
the  resolution  of  post-procedural  purpura.  J  Drugs  Dermatol  8, 
1020–24.

40  Vaya J, Tamir S. (2004) The relation between the chemical structure 
of flavonoids and their estrogen-like activities. Cur Med Chem 11, 
1333–43.

41  Kim HP, Park H, Son KH, et al. (2008) Biochemical pharmacology 
of  bioflavonoids:  implications  for  anti-inflammatory  action.  Arch 
Pharm Res 31, 265–73.

42  Amic D, Davidovic-Amic D, Beslo D, et al. (2007) SAR and QSAR 
of the antioxidant activity of flavonoids. Cur Med Chem 14, 827–45.
43  Tsai  Y-H,  Lee  K-F,  Huang  Y-B,  et  al.  (2010)  In  vitro  permeation 
and  in  vivo  whitening  effect  of  topical  hesperetin  microemulsion 
delivery system. Int J Pharm 388, 257–62.

44  Wolfle U, Esser PR, Simon-Haarhaus B, et al. (2011) UVB-induced 
DNA  damage,  generation  of  reactive  oxygen  species,  and  inflam-
mation are effectively attenuated by the flavonoid luteolin in vitro 
and in vivo. Free Rad Biol Med 50, 1081–93.

chapter 38
clinical Uses of hydroxyacids

Barbara A. Green,1 Eugene J. Van Scott,2 and Ruey J. Yu3
1NeoStrata Company, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA
2Private Practice, Abington, PA, USA
3Private Practice, Chalfont, PA, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Hydroxyacids	are	low	pH	substances	that	exfoliate	the	stratum	corneum	and	modulate	the	process	of	keratinization.
•	 The	hydroxyacids	include	alpha-hydroxyacids	(AHAs),	beta-hydroxyacids	(BHAs),	polyhydroxy	acids	(PHAs),	aldobionic	acids	(bionic	acids),	

and	aromatic	hydroxyacids	(AMAs).

•	 Effects	of	hydroxyacids	include	increased	thickness	of	epidermis	and	papillary	dermis;	improved	barrier	properties;	increased	amounts	
of	hyaluronic	acid	in	the	dermis	and	of	other	dermal	glycosaminoglycans	which	correspond	to	increased	skin	thickness	measured	
micrometrically;	improved	histologic	features	of	dermal	collagen;	increase	in	total	skin	thickness	which	in	turn	diminishes	clinical	wizened	
appearances;	and	diminished	dyspigmentation.

•	 PHAs	and	bionic	acids	can	be	distinguished	from	AHAs	in	that	they	are	gentle,	moisturizing	and	provide	skin	protective	benefits	

including	MMP	inhibition,	antioxidant/chelation	effects	and	reduced	non-enzymatic	glycation.

•	 Hydroxyacids	are	effective	skin	peeling	agents.

introduction

Research on aging today is motivated by the belief that innate 
degenerative processes of aging, and aging itself, can be modu-
lated, prevented, and perhaps reversed. Even though a com-
plete understanding of the mechanisms of aging may not be 
known, improvement in clinical appearance and function of 
the  skin  with  anti-aging  measures  is  a  signal  that  modula-
tion  of  aging  and/or  degenerative  processes  has  probably 
occurred.

After many years of research and clinical use, hydroxyacids 
(HAs) have been shown to have biologic importance and clinical 
value  for  both  younger  skin  and  older  skin  with  a  variety  of 
hyperkeratotic and aging-related conditions. This chapter covers 
HAs, including alpha-hydroxyacids (AHAs), beta-hydroxyacids 
(BHAs),  polyhydroxy  acids  (PHAs),  aldobionic  acids  (bionic 
acids), and aromatic hydroxyacids (AMAs). These compounds 
positively  impact  skin  morphology  and  function,  naturally 
playing physiologic roles in promoting normalcy and defending 
the  skin  against  endogenous  and  exogenous  adversities.  They 
provide measurable clinical and anti-aging benefits that can be 
considered  both  preventative  and  corrective  over  the  course  
of time.

chemical categorization and natural 
occurrence of hydroxyacids

Hydroxyacids  may  be  divided  into  five  groups  based  on  their 
chemical  structures:  AHAs,  BHAs,  PHAs,  bionic  acids,  and 
AMAs.

alpha-hydroxyacids
The  AHAs  are  the  most  widely  studied  and  commercialized 
ingredients  within  the  HA  family.  They  are  the  simplest  of  the 
HAs,  consisting  of  organic  carboxylic  acids  with  one  hydroxyl 
group attached to the alpha position of the carboxyl group. Both 
the  hydroxyl  and  carboxyl  groups  are  directly  attached  to  an 
aliphatic or alicyclic carbon atom. As a result, the hydroxyl group 
in the AHA is neutral and only the carboxyl group provides acid-
ity to the molecule, a property that distinguishes the AHAs from 
aromatic hydroxyacids such as salicylic acid as described below.

Many AHAs are present in foods and fruits, and therefore are 
called fruit acids (Table 38.1). Glycolic acid, the smallest AHA, 
occurs in sugar cane and citric acid is found in lemon juice at 
a concentration of 5–8%. Some AHAs contain a phenyl group 
as a side chain substituent; this changes the solubility profile of 
the  AHA  providing  increased  lipophilicity  over  conventional 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

346

Table 38.1  Examples	of	hydroxyacids.

Category

Alpha-hydroxyacid	(AHA)

Example

Glycolic

Lactic

Methyllactic

Citric

Malic

Tartaric

Beta-hydroxyacid	(BHA)

Beta-hydroxybutanoic

Polyhydroxy	acid	(PHA)

Aldobionic	acid	(bionic	acid)

Aromatic	hydroxyacid	(AMA)

Tropic

Gluconic

Gluconolactone

Lactobionic

Maltobionic

Salicylic

38. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids

347

Occurrence/source

Antioxidant

Sugar	cane

Sour	milk,	tomato

Mango

Lemon,	orange

Apple

Grape

Urine

Plant

Skin,	commercially	
	 derived	from	corn

Skin,	commercially	
	 derived	from	corn

Lactose	from	milk

Maltose	from	starch

Ester	form	in		
	 wintergreen	leaves

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

water-soluble  AHAs  and  can  be  used  to  target  oily  and  acne-
prone  skin.  Examples  include  mandelic  acid  (phenyl  glycolic 
acid) and benzilic acid (diphenyl glycolic acid).

Beta-hydroxyacids
The  BHAs  are  organic  carboxylic  acids  with  one  hydroxyl 
group attached to the beta position of the carboxyl group. Both 
the  hydroxyl  and  carboxyl  groups  are  attached  to  two  different 
carbon  atoms  of  an  aliphatic  or  alicyclic  chain  rendering  the 
hydroxyl group neutral in nature. Some BHAs are present in body 
tissues as metabolic intermediates and energy source. For exam-
ple, β-hydroxybutanoic acid is produced by the liver and utilized 
by skeletal and cardiac muscle as an energy source. In contrast to 
the water-soluble β-hydroxybutanoic acid, tropic acid is derived 
from a plant source, and is a lipid-soluble BHA. For the most part, 
BHAs have yet to be commercialized in skincare mainly because 
of a lack of commercial supply and high cost.

Some AHAs are also BHAs when the molecule contains two 
or more carboxyl groups. In this case, the hydroxyl group is in 
the alpha position to one carboxyl group, and at the same time 
is in the beta position to the other carboxyl group. For example, 
malic acid (apple acid) with one hydroxyl group and two car-
boxyl groups is both an AHA and a BHA. In the same manner, 
citric  acid  contains  one  hydroxyl  group  relative  to  three  car-
boxyl groups and is both an AHA to one carboxyl group and a 
BHA to the other two carboxyl groups. These ingredients have 
been commercialized in skincare formulations to adjust pH and 
to deliver antioxidant and anti-aging benefits.

groups are attached to the carbon atoms of an aliphatic or alicyclic 
chain. All the hydroxyl groups in the PHA are neutral, and only 
the  carboxyl  group  accounts  for  its  acidity.  Although  hydroxyl 
groups may be attached to several positions of the carbon chain, 
in order to be both an AHA and PHA it is essential that at least 
one hydroxyl group be attached to the alpha position.

Many  PHAs  are  endogenous  metabolites  or  intermediate 
products from carbohydrate metabolism in body tissues. Both 
galactonic  acid  and  galactonolactone  are  derived  from  galac-
tose, which is an important component of glycosaminoglycans. 
Gluconic  acid  and  gluconolactone  are  important  metabolites 
formed in the pentose phosphate pathway from glucose during 
the biosynthesis of ribose for ribonucleic acid. Gluconolactone 
is the most widely studied and commercialized skincare ingre-
dient among the PHAs.

aldobionic acids or bionic acids
The aldobionic acids, also called bionic acids, consist of one car-
bohydrate monomer chemically linked to a PHA via a stable ether 
linkage;  examples  are  lactobionic  acid  (galactose/gluconic  acid) 
and maltobionic acid (glucose/gluconic acid) (Figure 38.1). The 
bionic acid is commonly obtained from its disaccharide through 
chemical or enzymatic oxidation. For example, lactobionic acid 
is obtained from lactose and maltobionic acid from maltose. In 
general, the bionic acids have a larger molecular size and weight 
than most PHAs because of the additional sugar unit; however, at 
358 Da (lactobionic acid and maltobionic acid) these molecules 
remain small enough to penetrate skin.

polyhydroxy acids
The PHAs are organic carboxylic acids that possess two or more 
hydroxyl  groups  in  the  molecule.  The  hydroxyl  and  carboxyl 

aromatic hydroxyacids
AMAs such as salicylic acid and gallic acid are derived from ben-
zoic acid, which has been used in combination with salicylic acid 

348

anti-aGinG  Cosmeceuticals 

CH2OH

O

CH2OH

OH

COOH

Acid

OH

OH

OH

O

OH

OH

α-Hydroxy

Glucose

Gluconic acid

Figure 38.1  Maltobionic acid, a bionic acid.

as Whitfield’s ointment (e.g., 6% benzoic acid/3% salicylic acid) 
for  hyperkeratotic  conditions  and  fungal  infections.  Salicylic 
acid is 2-hydroxybenzoic acid and may be called an HA within 
a broad definition; however, its effects on skin differ from those 
of  the  AHAs,  BHAs,  PHAs,  and  bionic  acids.  Salicylic  acid  is  a 
conventional  keratolytic  agent  which  desquamates  corneocytes, 
layer by layer from the top downward [1]. In contrast, AHAs and 
BHAs appear to act at the innermost layers of the stratum cor-
neum, the stratum compactum, near the junction with stratum 
granulosum [2,3]. Moreover, AHAs, PHAs, and bionic acids have 
been shown to stimulate biosynthesis of dermal components and 
increase dermal skin thickness upon topical application, whereas 
salicylic acid has been shown to decrease dermal skin thickness 
[3–7]. Salicylic acid is an approved topical drug for the treatment 
of  acne  in  accordance  with  the  United  States  Food  and  Drug 
Administration  Over-the-Counter  (OTC)  acne  drug  products 
monograph. Its use in cosmetics may be less desirable relative to 
other HAs due to dermal thinning effects.

physicochemical and biological properties 
distinguishing has

As individual compounds, HAs differ broadly in physicochemical 
properties. Some HAs are very small molecules such as glycolic 
acid and lactic acid, and some are larger molecules such as lacto-
bionic acid. Most HAs are white crystalline at room temperature 
such as glycolic acid, malic acid, tartaric acid, citric acid, mandelic 
acid,  and  benzilic  acid,  but  a  few  are  liquid  such  as  lactic  acid. 
Most HAs are soluble in water, but some are also soluble in lipid 
solvents.  Some  HAs  are  soluble  only  in  lipid  solvents.  Certain 
physicochemical properties of HAs are discussed herein.

Water binding properties/gel matrix formation
In  contrast  to  AHAs  and  BHAs,  PHAs  and  bionic  acids  are 
strongly  hygroscopic  and  can  attract  and  bind  water  similarly 
to  other  polyol  compounds  such  as  glycerin. The  bionic  acids 

are  so  strongly  hygroscopic  that  they  form  a  gel  matrix  when 
their aqueous solution is evaporated at room temperature. The 
transparent gel thus obtained retains certain amounts of water, 
forming  a  clear  gel  matrix.  The  amount  of  water  retention 
depends on the individual bionic acid. For example, maltobionic 
acid can form a clear gel film containing 29% water complexed 
with maltobionic acid molecules. The formation of a gel matrix 
provides moisturization and may add protective  and soothing 
properties for inflamed skin. PHAs and bionic acids are gentle 
and non-irritating, and can be used to provide anti-aging ben-
efits to sensitive skin including patients with rosacea and atopic 
dermatitis, and following cosmetic procedures that weaken skin 
barrier function and increase skin sensitivity [8–11].

antioxidant properties
Most  PHAs,  bionic  acids,  and  some  AHAs  and  BHAs  with 
one  hydroxyl  group  and  two  or  more  vicinal  carboxyl  groups 
have  been  found  to  be  antioxidants.  The  antioxidant  property 
is  readily  determined  by  using  any  one  of  the  following  test 
methods:  prevention  or  retardation  from  air  oxidation  of:  (a) 
anthralin, (b) hydroquinone, or (c) banana peel. A freshly pre-
pared anthralin solution or cream is bright yellow, and an air-
oxidized  one  is  brownish  or  black.  A  hydroquinone  solution 
or cream is colorless or white color, and an air-oxidized one is 
brownish or black. A freshly peeled banana peel is light yellow 
in color, and an oxidized one ranges in color from tan, dark tan, 
brown to brownish black. Known antioxidants such as vitamin 
C and N-acetylcysteine may be used as the positive control in 
these screen tests. Based on these tests, all the PHAs and bionic 
acids  tested  are  antioxidants,  which  include  ribonolactone, 
gluconolactone, galactonolactone, lactobionic acid, and malto-
bionic acid [11]. Among AHAs and BHAs, malic acid, tartaric 
acid, citric acid, and isocitric acid have been shown to be anti-
oxidants.

Another  method  to  determine  antioxidant,  free  radical 
scavenging  properties  utilizes  an  in  vitro  model  of  cutaneous 
photoaging. Compounds are assessed to determine their ability 
to prevent UV-induced activation of the elastin promoter gene 
in  skin  via  free  radical  scavenging  activity.  An  increase  in  the 
expression  of  this  gene  causes  the  abnormal  production  of 
poorly  structured  elastin  in  skin,  resulting  in  the  condition 
known  as  solar  elastosis  –  a  hallmark  of  photoaging.  In  this 
model, free radical scavengers can reduce elastin promoter gene 
activation by approximately 50%; the balance of gene activation 
is reportedly caused by direct UV damage to cells and cellular 
DNA,  and  can  only  be  prevented  with  agents  that  protect  the 
skin against UV penetration such as sunscreens. Results of the 
study  indicate  that  the  PHA,  gluconolactone,  provides  up  to 
50% reduction of gene activation, the maximum effect afforded 
by antioxidant/free radical scavengers. Gluconolactone is not a 
significant  UV  absorbing  compound  (i.e.,  sunscreen)  and  the 
results  were  therefore  attributed  to  the  compound’s  ability  to 
chelate oxidation-promoting metals and possibly via direct free 
radical scavenging effects [12].

38. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids

349

It is interesting to note that lactobionic acid is an important 
antioxidant chelator used in organ transplantation preservation 
solutions to suppress tissue damage caused by hydroxyl radicals 
during organ storage and blood reperfusion. In this regard, lac-
tobionic acid reportedly inhibits hydroxyl radical production by 
forming  a  complex  with  Fe(II)  [13].  Furthermore,  both  lacto-
bionic acid and maltobionic acid have been shown to function 
as hydroxyl radical scavengers in the in vitro lipid peroxidation 
antioxidant  model  [14–16].  Inhibition  of  lipid  peroxidation  is 
vital  for  maintaining  cell  membranes  and  mitochondria,  pro-
tecting  cells  against  sun  damage  and  oxidative  stress,  and  is  a 
measure of a substance’s antioxidant capacity.

antiglycation effects of pha and bionic acids
Non-enzymatic protein glycation is one of many detrimental 
aging  processes  that  occurs  in  skin  over  time.  It  is  a  chemi-
cal  reaction  that  results  from  the  non-enzymatic  joining  of 
a  reducing  sugar  (e.g.,  glucose)  and  a  primary  amino  group 
found on dermal structural proteins (e.g., collagen and elastin). 
This  reaction  yields  glycation  intermediates  that  are  further 
oxidized to form irreversible advanced glycation end-products 
(AGEs). An increase in AGEs compromises the skin’s integrity 
and  functionality  due  to  unintended  and  permanent  protein 
cross-linking.  Ultimately,  this  manifests  morphologically  as 
dermal inelasticity and collagen degradation and, cosmetically, 
as visual wrinkling and loss of firmness [17–20]. In addition, 

AGEs  have  been  shown  to  impart  a  yellow  color  and  sallow 
appearance,  another  common  symptom  associated  with  skin 
aging [21].

Anti-glycation is considered an important anti-aging approach 
in  the  maintenance  of  healthy,  youthful  skin.  Compounds  that 
inhibit non-enzymatic glycation interfere in various steps in the 
Maillard reaction pathway (Figure 38.2). In order to prevent the 
formation of AGEs, some cosmetic compounds interfere in the last 
step of the Maillard pathway by functioning as antioxidants and/
or  chelators  of  oxidation-promoting  metals  [17,20,22,23].  The 
bionic acids, including lactobionic and maltobionic acids, and the 
polyhydroxy acid, gluconolactone, are oxidized sugar acids with  
antioxidant  and  metal  chelation  properties.  An  in  vitro,  anti-
glycation test was performed with these compounds (0.05%–0.5%) 
to evaluate their ability to modulate the process of non-enzymatic 
glycation between glucose and serum albumin (protein). Experi-
mental  findings  revealed  a  significant,  dose-dependent  inhibi-
tory effect of non-enzymatic glycation compared with the water 
control  (p  <  0.05),  with  similar  efficacy  to  the  positive  control, 
aminoguanidine (0.01%) [24] (Figure 38.3). Previous studies have 
demonstrated the ability of the PHA/bionic acid compounds to 
improve  the  appearance  of  sallowness  up  to  36%  when  applied 
topically twice daily over 12 weeks, p < 0.05. (Table 38.2) [5,25]. 
This  may  in  part  be  due  to  an  anti-glycation  effect  and  the 
resultant  formation  of  morphologically  correct  matrix  protein 
relative to dysfunctional glycated protein.

1

2

Reducing Sugar
Reducing Sugar
(aldehyde group 
(aldehyde group 
on glucose)
on glucose)

Protein 
Protein 
(primary amino 
(primary amino 
group on lysine
group on lysine
group in 
group in 
collagen, elastin)
collagen, elastin)

AGE inhibitors: 
AGE inhibitors: 
1.
1.

Sugar competitors (e.g., aspirin 
Sugar competitors (e.g., aspirin 
acetylates lysine residues to prevent 
acetylates lysine residues to prevent 
binding with sugars)
binding with sugars)

2.
2.

3.
3.

4.
4.

Protein competitors (e.g., compounds
Protein competitors (e.g., compounds
with free amino groups that react 
with free amino groups that react 
with reducing sugars: lysine, 
with reducing sugars: lysine, 
arginine, carnitine)
arginine, carnitine)

Compounds that interfere with 
Compounds that interfere with 
Amadori products (aminoguanidine)
Amadori products (aminoguanidine)

Compounds that interfere with 
Compounds that interfere with 
oxidation intermediates 
oxidation intermediates 
(Pyridoxamine); compouds that 
(Pyridoxamine); compouds that 
reduce oxidation of Amadori products 
reduce oxidation of Amadori products 
to AGEs (antioxidants, metal chelators)
to AGEs (antioxidants, metal chelators)

Nonenzymatic 
Nonenzymatic 

Schiff base reaction 
Schiff base reaction 

Glycosylated protein 
Glycosylated protein 
= glycation 
= glycation 
(e.g., fructoselysine)
(e.g., fructoselysine)

Rearrangement 
Rearrangement 

3

Amadori Products
Amadori Products

4

Glycoxidation with
Glycoxidation with
metal catalysis 
metal catalysis 

Maillard Reaction Oxidative End-Products = 
Maillard Reaction Oxidative End-Products = 
Advanced Glycation End-Products (AGEs)
Advanced Glycation End-Products (AGEs)

•
•

•
•

Irreversible reaction 
Irreversible reaction 

AGEs cause abnormal crosslinking of structural proteins 
AGEs cause abnormal crosslinking of structural proteins 
(e.g., collagen) causing slow deterioration of structural tissues
(e.g., collagen) causing slow deterioration of structural tissues

Figure 38.2   Reduction of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) by targeting specific steps in the Maillard reaction.

  
 
  
 
350

anti-aGinG  Cosmeceuticals 

)

%

(
n
o
i
t
a
c
y
G

l

f
o
n
o
i
t
i
b
h
n

i

I

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
r
e
t
a
w
o
t
d
e
z
i
l

a
m
r
o
n
(

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10

*

*

*

500 μg/mL
0.05%

1000 μg/mL
0.10%

5000 μg/mL
0.50%

110 μg/mL
0.01%

Positive control:
Aminoguanidine

Figure 38.3  Percent inhibition of non-enzymatic gly-
cation by maltobionic acid *p < 0.05.

Table 38.2  Clinical	grading	results	for	subjects	treated	with	maltobionic	acid	8%	cream:	baseline	versus	week	12.

Variable

Pore	size1

Roughness1

Laxity1

Fine	lines1

Coarse	wrinkles1

Mottled	
pigmentation1

Sallowness	1	

Clarity/radiance	1	

Pinch	recoil	2	

Erythema	3	

Dryness	3	

Stinging	3	

Grading site

Mean baseline 
score (n = 28)

Mean 12-week 
score (n = 28)

Mean 
change

Standard 
deviation

Statistical 
difference  
(p < 0.05)4

Change from 
baseline (%)5

Cheek

Cheek

Cheek

Eye

Eye

Face

Face

Face

Face

Face

Face

Face

4.77

4.29

5.43

4.57

5.22

4.54

3.79

3.79

1.66

0.18

0.38

0.00

4.01

1.51

4.51

3.29

4.12

3.32

2.60

7.13

1.42

0.20

0.00

0.11

−0.76

−2.78

−0.92

−1.29

−1.11

−1.22

−1.20

3.35

−0.24

0.02

−0.38

0.11

0.37

1.08

0.35

0.40

0.40

0.40

0.34

0.90

0.11

0.32

0.52

0.42

−20.2

−65.9

−18.2

−29.7

−22.0

−28.1

−33.4

92.4

−14.2

0.6

−12.5

3.6

ns

ns

1	Visually	graded	by	a	trained	assessor	using	an	anchored	0–10	point	scale	with	0.25	point	increments.	0	=	low	extreme,	10	=	high	extreme.
2	Measurement	collected	in	triplicate	by	a	trained	evaluator	using	a	stopwatch	in	hundreths	of	a	second;	a	decrease	in	pinch	recoil	time	indicates	an	increase	in	skin	firmness.
3	Visually	graded	by	a	trained	assessor	using	an	anchored	0–3	point	scale	(none,	mild,	moderate,	severe)	with	0.5-point	increments.
4	Arrow	indicates	statistically	significant	increase	or	decrease	from	baseline;	ns	=	not	significant.
5	Percent	change	from	baseline,	mean	calculated	on	an	individual	basis	and	then	averaged.

sun sensitivity
AHAs  and  PHAs  have  been  evaluated  to  determine  whether 
daily  application  alters  the  sensitivity  of  normal  human  skin 
to  UVB  radiation.  A  change  in  UV  sensitivity  resulting  from 
enhanced transmission of UVB can be monitored by the forma-
tion of sunburn cells (SBCs). Treatment with glycolic acid has 
been shown to increase the formation of SBCs in skin [26]; this 
effect can be prevented with use of low level sunscreens [26,27]. 

Importantly, pretreatment with gluconolactone (PHA) does not 
lead to an increase in sunburn cells following UVB irradiation, 
presumably due to its antioxidant effects [12].

sensory responses
One of the distinguishing benefits of the PHAs and bionic acids 
is their gentleness on skin. When compared with glycolic acid 
and  lactic  acid,  PHAs  and  bionic  acids  are  non-stinging  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
38. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids

351

non-burning. A 14-day cumulative irritation test of a 12% PHA/
bionic acid cream formulation at pH 3.8 conducted under full 
occlusion revealed no difference in irritation potential from the 
negative  control  (normal  saline),  thereby  validating  the  non-
irritating nature of these compounds even at high strength and 
bioavailable  pH  [11].  Accordingly,  product  use  studies  have 
demonstrated compatibility with sensitive skin, including clini-
cally sensitive skin such as rosacea and atopic dermatitis [8–10]. 
Furthermore,  PHAs  and  bionic  acids  are  gentle  enough  to  be 
applied to the skin immediately following cosmetic procedures 
such as microdermabrasion and non-ablative laser procedures, 
providing complementary anti-aging benefits while helping to 
reduce redness [11,28].

MMp inhibition effects of bionic acids
Matrix  metalloproteinase  enzymes  (MMPs)  provide  a  vital 
metabolic  function  by  digesting  the  skin’s  degraded  and  aged 
extracellular matrix components. Naturally occurring inhibitors 
of  MMPs  protect  the  skin  from  excessive  degradation  caused 
by these enzymes. With aging and exposure to ultraviolet light, 
there is an increase in MMP activity along with a decrease in nat-
ural MMP inhibitors that contributes to elevated MMP activity. 
This shifts the metabolic balance in favor of protein catabolism 
which ultimately contributes to the negative clinical manifesta-
tions of aging including wrinkles, skin laxity, and telangiectasia 
[29]. Research has shown that the bionic acid, lactobionate, is an 
inhibitor of MMP enzymes obtained from human liver effluents 
during organ transplantation procedures [30]. Similarly, topical 
lactobionic acid has been shown to inhibit MMPs via skin his-
topathology which may help protect skin against deterioration 
from photodamage [5]. In vitro evaluation of maltobionic acid 
and  lactobionic  acid  (0.0001%–0.1%  solutions)  demonstrated 
significant inhibition of the MMP collagenase, with nearly com-
plete inhibition at the highest concentration (0.1%) (Figure 38.4) 
[15,16]. In cosmetic anti-aging formulations, these compounds 
may be used to help preserve existing collagen in skin.

effects of has on skin – similarities  
and differences

Clinical  and  histologic  observations  on  the  biofunctionality 
of  HAs,  both  in  connection  with  therapeutic  performance  on 
numerous skin disorders and in the course of investigative studies 
on normal skin, confirm that AHAs, PHAs, and bionic acids have 
favorable effects on the stratum corneum, epidermis, and dermis. 
These effects appear to modulate form and function toward more 
normal  or  optimal  states  (Table  38.2).  Because  of  these  effects 
such  compounds  may  be  categorized  as  eudermatrophic  agents 
(i.e. agents that nourish the skin toward normalcy).

stratum corneum and epidermis
The initial response to AHA application on ichthyotic skin is a 
sheet-like, disjunctive desquamation of the thick, compact stra-
tum corneum. With continued daily use of AHA formulations, 
the  stratum  corneum  becomes  histologically  normal  in  thick-
ness and in appearance, and the hyperplastic acanthotic under-
lying  epidermis  returns  to  more  normal  thickness  [31].  The 
opposite occurs in the treatment of atrophic skin of the elderly 
wherein the stratum corneum and epidermis are both thin. After 
daily applications of AHAs for several weeks, histologic exami-
nation reveals both the stratum corneum and keratinocyte layer 
to  have  regained  more  normal  thickness  [5,32],  with  a  more 
even distribution of pigmentation [4]. Other studies have shown 
AHAs improves barrier function with continued use; this find-
ing  has  been  particularly  notable  with  the  PHAs  that  possess 
antioxidant properties [33].

Dermis
Significant  dermal  remodeling  occurs  with  daily  application  of 
AHAs to the skin. In studies on forearm skin where AHAs were 
applied  daily,  micrometrically  measurable  increases  in  dermal 
thickness  occurred,  which  were  correlated  histologically  with 
increased amounts of hyaluronic acid and other glycosaminoglycans 

y
y
t
t
i
i
v
v
i
i
t
t
c
c
A
A
e
e
s
s
a
a
n
n
i
i
e
e
t
t
o
o
r
r
p
p
o
o

l
l
l
l
a
a
t
t
e
e
M
M

900
900

800
800

700
700

600
600

500
500

400
400

300
300

200
200

100
100

0
0

100
1-

Figure 38.4  Inhibition of matrix metal-
loproteinase (MMP) activity by malto-
bionic acid in vitro.

1
1

5
5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70

Time (min)
Time (min)

Minimum
Minimum
Inhibition
Inhibition

 Coll (MMP)
 Coll (MMP)

  MBA- 0.01%
  MBA- 0.01%

  MBA- 0.1%
  MBA- 0.1%

Phen
Phen

mumixaM
mumixaM
noitibihnI
noitibihnI

 
 
 
 
 
 
352

anti-aGinG  Cosmeceuticals 

(a)

(b)

Figure 38.5  Histologic staining for acid mucopolysaccharides/glycosaminoglycans (GAGs): ×400. (a) Specimen shows staining of untreated control forearm 
skin. (b) Specimen shows staining following topical application of 8% maltobionic acid cream (pH 3.8) for 12 weeks. Increased density of blue colloidal iron 
stain demonstrates an increase in GAGs. (Source: Green & Briden, 2009 [11]. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.)

(Figure  38.5)  [4,5,7,34],  and  with  qualitative  improvements  in 
collagen fibers and improved fibrous quality of elastic fibers [4]. 
Additionally,  the  papillary  dermis  increased  in  thickness,  with 
increased prominence of dermal papillae thus increasing the der-
mal-epidermal junction surface area. Measurable increases in skin 
thickness without further topical applications persisted for months 
which  further  demonstrates  a  eudermatrophic  matrix  building 
effect [35]. Consistent with these clinical histologic findings are in 
vivo  and  in  vitro  observations  by  other  researchers  showing  the 
AHA glycolic acid to increase fibroblast proliferation and produc-
tion of collagen [36].

clinical uses of has

HA effects on skin morphology and functionality are manifold, 
spanning  all  of  the  skin’s  layers.  As  a  result,  numerous  clinical 
benefits have been observed with use of HAs as described herein.

Dry skin and hyperkeratinization
Previous  studies  demonstrated  that  the  stratum  corneum  of 
xerotic  skin  was  thicker  and  more  compact  than  that  of  non-
xerotic controls, and the epidermis often atrophic. Topical use 
of AHA formulations on xerotic skin restored the stratum cor-
neum and epidermis to a more normal state both clinically and 
histologically. This restoration was accompanied by substantial 
reduction of clinically evident xerosis, and upon discontinuance 
of the topical AHA treatment the skin remained relatively nor-
mal  for  up  to  about  2 weeks  when  the  thick  compact  stratum 
corneum again reformed [11,31,32,35].

Today  we  find  that  efficacy  of  HA  formulations  for  prob-
lem dry skin conditions is improved by incorporating into the 
formulation  combinations  of  AHAs,  PHAs,  and  bionic  acids 
selected  for  their  efficiency  in  restoring  and  maintaining  a 

more normal stratum corneum and epidermis. The PHAs and 
bionic acids, because of water-binding capabilities and inherent 
gentleness  to  the  skin,  offer  special  advantages  in  this  regard. 
Combination HA formulations are found to have unparalleled 
efficacy  for  treating  xerosis  [37],  and  for  treating  otherwise 
treatment-resistant conditions such as callused fissured plantar 
and  palmar  skin  (Figure  38.6).  This  combination  also  proved 
effective  in  descaling  psoriatic  plaques  when  applied  twice 
daily  for  two  weeks.  In  a  double-blind  clinical  study,  the  20% 
AHA/PHA/bionic  acid  formulation  provided  more  efficient 
descaling versus the prescription comparator (6% salicylic acid 
cream)  after  one  week  of  use.  Both  formulations  were  equally 
well tolerated. Since HAs may counter dermal thinning effects 

(a)

(b)

Figure 38.6  Hyperkeratotic feet treated once nightly with a cream containing 
an AHA/PHA/bionic acid blend (20% total) for 3 weeks. (a) Before treatment. 
(b) After treatment.

38. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids

353

of topical corticosteroids, these agents may be preferred for pso-
riatic descaling relative to salicylic acid, which has been shown 
to decrease dermal thickness [38].

Keratoses and dyspigmentation
Markers  of  advancing  years  are  a  variety  of  localized  hyperkera-
totic  lesions  that  include  seborrheic  keratoses,  actinic  keratoses, 
lentigines,  age  spots,  and  mottled  pigmentation.  HAs  exfoliate 
hyperkeratotic  pigmentation  spots  and  AHAs  have  been  shown 
to aid in the even disbursement of melanin [4]. PHAs and bionic 
acids  chelate  metals  such  as  copper,  an  essential  co-factor  in  the 
production of melanin, and have been shown to reduce melanin 
production in cultured murine B16 melanoma cells in a dose respon-
sive manner [15,16]. HAs can be useful alone or in combination 
with skin lightening agents to lighten dyspigmentation [2,34].

Wrinkles and photoaging
AHAs, PHAs, and bionic acids are now used widely as topical anti-
aging substances. They are used for superficial peeling to initiate 
accelerated epidermal turnover and to initiate dermal regenerative 
events  in  both  therapeutic  formulations  under  physicians’  guid-
ance and in a multitude of consumer cosmetic formulations rang-
ing from traditional creams and lotions to home peels. The reason 
for this wide use is because of what may be their eudermatrophic 
properties, demonstrated in studies described earlier herein where 
effective concentrations applied to human skin have been found 
to normalize photoaged skin (Table 38.2). Such changes include 
increased thickness of epidermis and papillary dermis; improved 
barrier  properties;  increased  amounts  of  hyaluronic  acid  in  the 
dermis  and  of  other  dermal  glycosaminoglycans,  which  corre-
spond  to  increased  skin  thickness  measured  micrometrically; 
improved histologic features of dermal collagen; increase in total 
skin thickness which in turn diminishes clinical wizened appear-
ances (Figure 38.7); and diminished dyspigmentation [3–5].

Uses as a peeling agent
Several substances have been used to date as peeling agents; these 
include  phenol,  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA),  salicylic  acid,  and 

AHAs. Phenol, weakly acidic in aqueous solution, is actually phe-
nylic acid and is quite distinct from AHAs, as is TCA. Both phe-
nol and TCA have a long history of use as peeling agents. Both are 
caustic, corrosive, powerful denaturants. Both cause rapid chemi-
cal destruction of skin. Neither of these agents is nutritive, and 
their benefits derive from post-injury replacement of destroyed 
epidermis  and  upper  dermis  through  mechanisms  of  wound 
repair. Salicylic acid (SA), 2-hydroxybenzoic acid, a phenolic acid, 
is in use today as an agent for superficial peeling mainly for acne.
Of the HAs, lactic acid and glycolic acid are the most common 
peeling agents. Many of the AHAs are nutritive and physiologic, 
giving them an advantage over phenol, TCA, and SA. In high con-
centrations of up to 70%, lactic or glycolic acid can be applied to 
the skin for short times (i.e., approximately 5 minutes) to achieve 
substantial desquamation and initiate accelerated epidermal and 
dermal renewal. One of the distinguishing safety features of AHA 
peels is the enhanced control afforded by the ability to neutralize 
and terminate the action of AHA peels when desired during the 
peeling procedure. A neutralizing solution of sodium bicarbonate 
reacts  with  AHAs  generating  carbon  dioxide  gas  bubbles.  The 
foaming thus generated provides a visual endpoint enhancing the 
safety and control of these peels. To date, AHAs have been used 
primarily as superficial peeling agents in the adjunctive treatment 
of  photoaging,  acne,  rosacea  and  dyspigmentation,  where  they 
offer the benefit of safety and effectiveness over the course of a 
series  of  peels  [6].  (Figures  38.8,  38.9)  Sensitive  skin  and  those 
prone  to  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  may  benefit 
from application of lower strength peel formulations (e.g., 20%, 
35%) in order to avoid provoking irritation. AHA peels can also 
be safely combined with other cosmetic procedures to optimize 
treatment  results  including  non-ablative  laser,  light  treatments, 
and with injectable fillers and botulinum toxin type A [28,39,40].

synergy with topical drugs
Enhancement  of  efficacy  can  be  observed  in  many  conditions 
by the combined presence of AHAs in formulations that contain 
active  drug  ingredients  for  particular  treatments.  Examples  of 
active ingredients whose efficacy is enhanced include retinoids, 

(a)

(b)

Figure 38.7  Periocular wrinkling is reduced on this 49-year-old female following twice daily application of 8% maltobionic acid cream (pH 3.8) for 12 weeks. 
(a) Before treatment. (b) After treatment.

354

anti-aGinG  Cosmeceuticals 

(a)

(b)

Figure  38.8  Improvement  in  acne  and 
superficial  acne  scarring  following 
application of five glycolic acid peels 
(35%,  50%,  50%,  50%,  70%)  with  use 
of adjunctive home care products con-
taining AHAs, PHAs, bionic acids and 
other benefit ingredients.

(a)

(b)

Figure  38.9  Improvement in periocular rhytides 
in a rosacea patient following application of four 
glycolic  acid  peels  (35%,  50%,  70%,  70%)  with 
use  of  adjunctive  home  care  products  contain-
ing AHAs, PHAs, bionic acids and other benefit 
ingredients.

antibacterials,  antifungals,  antipruritics,  and  corticosteroids. 
Mechanisms  by  which  HAs  complement  or  amplify  the  activ-
ity  of  another  substance  can  be  suspected  in  some  instances, 
for  example  with  retinoids  and  antibacterials  in  topical  treat-
ment of acne where activities of ingredients join to normalize 
intrafollicular keratinization and allow more efficient access of 
the medication into the pilosebaceous unit. The HAs also may 

enhance therapeutic effect of drugs by providing complemen-
tary cosmetic effects. For example, concurrent use of the PHA, 
gluconolactone,  with  azelaic  acid  has  been  shown  to  improve 
therapeutic outcomes for rosacea by reducing skin redness and 
diminishing  the  appearance  of  telangiectasia  presumably  by 
increasing overall skin thickness, while also improving the tol-
erability of the medication [41] (Figure 38.10).

(a)

(b)

Figure  38.10  Improvement  in  post-
inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
in 
an eczema patient following application 
of  two  glycolic  acid  peels  (35%,  50%) 
with  use  of  adjunctive  PHA-contain-
ing  home  care  products  (cleanser,  day 
cream SPF 15 and night cream) in con-
junction  with  a  2%  hydroquinone  + 
PHA/bionic acid cream applied to areas 
of hyperpigmentation and a topical cor-
ticosteroid applied to eczema lesions.

38. Clinical Uses of Hydroxyacids

355

conclusions

In the quest to reverse the clinical signs of aging and improve 
overall skin health, the HAs (AHA, BHA, PHA, and bionic acids) 
have  emerged  as  important  ingredient  technologies  owing  to 
their eudermatrophic effects. That is, HAs have the unique abil-
ity to nourish the skin towards normalcy, imparting meaningful 
cosmetic and therapeutic benefits in the process. Many of these 
compounds  provide  significant  protective  benefits  including 
antioxidant, MMP-inhibition, barrier repair and anti-glycation 
effects,  while  also  helping  to  reverse  existing  signs  of  aging 
including  wrinkles,  dyspigmentation  and  skin  laxity.  HAs  can 
be used alone or in combination with other topicals to target the 
symptoms of photoaging and the myriad conditions of hyperk-
eratosis. HAs continue to be a mainstay in dermatology because 
they offer significant epidermal and dermal benefits while being 
safe for skin and the body, even following full body application 
over long periods of time such as when treating ichthyosis. As 
time marches forward, it is our expectation that more scientific 
data will lead to greater uses of HAs alone and in combination 
with cosmetics, drugs, and devices in dermatology.

references

1  Briden  ME,  Green  BA.  (2006)  Topical  exfoliation:  clinical  effects 
and formulating considerations. In: Draelos ZD, Thaman LA, eds. 
Cosmetic  Formulation  of  Skin  Care  Products.  New  York:  Taylor  & 
Francis Group, pp. 237–50.

2  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. (1982) Substances that modify the stratum cor-
neum by modulating its formation. In: Frost P, Horwitz S, eds. Princi-
ples of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist. St. Louis: CV Mosby, pp. 70–4.
3  Yu  RJ,  Van  Scott  EJ.  (2005)  α-Hydroxyacids,  polyhydroxy  acids, 
aldobionic acids and their topical actions. In: Baran R, MaibachHI, 
eds. Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology, 3rd edn. New York: Taylor 
& Francis Group, pp. 77–93.

4  Ditre  CM,  Griffin  TD,  Murphy  GF,  et  al.  (1996)  Effects  of  alpha-
hydroxyacids  on  photoaged  skin:  a  pilot  clinical,  histologic  and 
ultrastructural study. J Am Acad Dermatol 34, 187–95.

5  Green  BA,  Edison  BL,  Sigler  ML.  (2008)  Anti-aging  effects  of 
topical lactobionic acid: results of a controlled usage study. Cosmet 
Dermatol 21, 76–82.

6  Van Scott EJ, Ditre CM, Yu RJ. (1996) Alpha hydroxyacids in the 

treatment of signs of photoaging. Clin Dermatol 14, 217–26.

7  Bernstein EF, Underhill CB, Lakkakorpi J, et al. (1997) Citric acid 
increases viable epidermal thickness and glycosaminoglycan con-
tent of sun-damaged skin. Dermatol Surg 23, 689–94.

8  Bernstein  EF,  Green  BA,  Edison  B,  Wildnauer  RH.  (2001)  Poly 
hydroxy  acids  (PHAs):  clinical  uses  for  the  next  generation  of 
hydroxy acids. Skin Aging 9 (Suppl), 4–11.

9  Rizer R, Turcott A, Edison B, et al. (2001) An evaluation of the toler-
ance profile of a complete line of gluconolactone-containing skincare 
formulations in atopic individuals. Skin Aging 9 (Suppl), 18–21.
10  Rizer R, Turcott A, Edison B, et al. (2001) An evaluation of the tol-
erance profile of gluconolactone-containing skincare formulations 
in individuals with rosacea. Skin Aging 9 (Suppl), 22–5.

11  Green BA, Briden ME. (2009) PHAs and bionic acids: next genera-
tion hydroxy acids. In: DraelosZ, DoverJ, AlamM, eds. Procedures 
in Cosmetic Dermatology: Cosmeceuticals, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: 
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 209-215.

12  Bernstein EF, Brown DB, Schwartz MD, et al. (2004) The polyhy-
droxy acid gluconolactone protects against ultraviolet radiation in 
an in vitro model of cutaneous photoaging. Dermatol Surg 30, 1–8.
13  Charloux  C,  Paul  M,  Loisance  D,  Astier  A.  (1995)  Inhibition  of 
hydroxyl radical production by lactobionate, adenine, and tempol. 
Free Radical Biol Med 19, 699–704.

14  Ogura R, Sugiyama M, Nishi J, Haramaki N. (1991) Mechanism of 
lipid radical formation following exposure of epidermal homoge-
nate to ultraviolet light. J Invest Dermatol 97(6), 1044–7.

15  Brouda I, Edison BL, Weinkauf RL, Green BA. (2010) Maltobionic 
acid, a powerful yet gentle skincare ingredient with multiple ben-
efits to protect and reverse the visible signs of aging. Am Acad of 
Dermatol Poster Exhibit: Chicago, August 2010.

16  Brouda  I,  Edison  BL,  Weinkauf  RL,  Green  BA.  Lactobionic  acid 
anti-aging mechanisms: antioxidant activity, MMP inhibition, and 
reduction of melanogenesis. Am Acad of Dermatol Poster Exhibit: 
Chicago, August 2010.

17  Dyer D, Dunn J, Thorpe S, et al. (1993) Accumulation of maillard 
reaction  products  in  skin  collagen  in  diabetes  and  aging.  J  Clin 
Invest 91, 2463–9.

18  Bucala  R,  Cerami  A.  (1992)  Advanced  glycosylation:  chemistry, 
biology and implications for diabetes and aging. Adv Pharmacol 23, 
1–4.

19  Nomoto K, Masayuki Y, Seizaburo A, et al. (2012) Skin accumula-
tion of advanced glycation end products and lifestyle behaviors in 
Japanese. J Anti-Aging Med 9, 165–73.

20  Schmid  D,  Muggli  R,  Zülli  F.  (2002)  Collagen  glycation  and  skin 

aging. Cosmetics and Toiletries Manufacture Worldwide, 1–6.

21  Ohshima H, Oyobikawa M, Tada A, et al. (2009) Melanin and facial 
skin fluorescence as markers of yellowish discoloration with aging. 
Skin Res and Tech 15, 496–502.

22  Fu M, Wells-Knecht K, Blackledge J, et al. (1994) Glycation, glycoxida-
tion, and cross-linking of collagen by glucose: kinetics, mechanisms, 
and inhibition of late stages of the maillard reaction. Diabetesjournals.
org. 43, 676–83.

23  Edelstein D, Brownlee M. (1992) Mechanistic studies of advanced 
glycosylation end product inhibition by aminoguanidine. Diabetes-
journals.org. 41, 26–9.

24  Green  BA,  Edison  BL,  Bojanowski  K,  Weinkauf  RL.  (2014)  Anti-
aging bionic and polyhydroxy acids reduce non-enzymatic protein 
glycation and skin sallowness. J Amer Acad Dermatol 17(5), AB22.
25  Edison  BL,  Green  BA,  Wildnauer  RH,  Sigler  ML.  (2004)  A  poly-
hydroxy acid skin care regimen provides anti-aging effects compa-
rable to an alpha-hydroxyacid regimen. Cutis 73 (suppl 2), 14–17.
26  (1998) 34th Report of the CIR expert panel: safety of alpha hydroxy 

acid ingredients. Int J Toxicol 17 (Suppl 1).

27  Johnson AW, Stoudemayer T, Kligman AM. (2000) Application of 
4% and 8% glycolic acid to human skin in commercial skin creams 
formulated to CIR guidelines does not thin the stratum corneum or 
increase sensitivity to UVR. J Cosmet Sci 51, 343–9.

28  Rendon MI, Effron C, Edison BL. (2007) The use of fillers and botu-
linum  toxin  type  A  in  combination  with  superficial  glycolic  acid 
(AHA) peels: optimizing injection therapy with the skin-smooth-
ing properties of peels. Cutis 79 (Suppl 1), 9–12.

356

anti-aGinG  Cosmeceuticals 

29  Thibodeau A. (2000) Metalloproteinase inhibitors. Cosmet Toil 115, 

75–6.

30  Upadhya GA, Strasberg SM. (2000) Glutathione, lactobionate, and 
histidine: cryptic inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases contained 
in University of Wisconsin and histidine/tryptophan/ketoglutarate 
liver preservation solutions. Hepatology 31, 1115–22.

31  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. (1974) Control of keratinization with α-hydroxy 

acids and related compounds. Arch Dermatol 110, 586–90.

32  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. (1984) Hyperkeratinization, corneocyte cohe-
sion, and alpha hydroxyacids. J Am Acad Dermatol 11, 867–79.
33  Berardesca E, Distante F, Vignoli GP, et al. (1997) Alpha hydroxy-
acids  modulate  stratum  corneum  barrier  function.  Br  J  Dermatol 
137, 934–8.

34  Grimes PE, Green BA, Wildnauer RH, Edison BL. (2004) The use of 
polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) in photoaged skin. Cutis 73 (Suppl 2), 3–13.
35  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. (1995) Actions of alpha hydroxy acids on skin 

compartments. J Geriat Dermatol 3 (Suppl A), 19–24.

37  Kempers  S,  Katz  HI,  Wildnauer  R,  Green,  B.  (1998)  An  evalua-
tion of the effects of an alpha hydroxy acid-blend skin cream in 
the  cosmetic  improvement  of  symptoms  of  moderate  to  severe 
xerosis,  epidermolytic  hyperkeratosis,  and  ichthyosis.  Cutis  61, 
347–50.

38  Akamine KL, Gustafson CJ, Yentzer BA, et al. (2013) A double-blind, 
randomized clinical trial of 20% alpha/poly hydroxy acid cream to 
reduce  scaling  of  lesions  associated  with  moderate,  chronic  plaque 
psoriasis. J Drugs Dermatol 12(8), 855–9.

39  Effron C, Briden ME, Green BA. (2007) Enhancing cosmetic out-
comes  by  combining  superficial  glycolic  acid  (AHA)  peels  with 
nonablative  lasers,  intense  pulsed  light,  and  trichloroacetic  acid 
peels. Cutis 79 (Suppl 1), 4–8.

40  Briden E, Jacobsen E, Johnson C. (2007) Combining superficial 
glycolic acid (AHA) peels with microdermabrasion to maximize 
treatment  results  and  patient  satisfaction.  Cutis  79  (Suppl  1), 
13–6.

36  Kim SJ, Park JH, Kim DH, et al. (1998) Increased in vivo collagen 
synthesis and in vitro cell proliferative effect of glycolic acid. Der-
matol Surg 24, 1054–8.

41  Draelos ZD, Green BA, Edison BL. (2006) An evaluation of a poly-
hydroxy  acid  skincare  regimen  in  combination  with  azelaic  acid 
15% gel in rosacea patients. J Cosmet Dermatol 5, 23–9.

chapter 39
the contribution of Dietary Nutrients  
and supplements to skin health

Helen Knaggs, Steve Wood, Doug Burke, Jan Lephart, and Jin Namkoong
Nu Skin and Pharmanex Global Research and Development, Provo, UT, USA

BasIc coNcepts

•	 Diet	and	oral	supplementation	can	influence	skin	appearance.
•	 Nutrients	effective	in	minimizing	UV	skin	damage	include	carotenoids,	vitamin	E	(tocopherols),	flavonoids,	vitamin	C	(ascorbate)		

and	n-3	fatty	acids.

•	 Selenium,	zinc,	and	copper	protect	against	UV-induced	damage.
•	 Diets	containing	high	amounts	of	refined	sugars	may	predispose	skin	to	premature	aging	through	the	formation	of	advanced	glycation	

end	products	(AGEs).

Introduction

The skin is one of the largest organs in the body and is exposed 
to  many  environmental  factors  affecting  its  appearance  and 
health.  Additionally,  there  are  changes  occurring  over  time  in 
skin,  determined  by  our  genes  and  hormones.  It  is  often  said 
that the appearance of the skin can predict overall health or is a 
window to health inside of the body and there is much interest 
in  maintaining  a  healthy  skin  appearance  and  function.  One 
approach  to  achieve  an  optimal  skin  appearance  is  through 
the use of topical products, such as cosmetics. However, there 
is now a growing body of research indicating that diet and/or 
oral  supplementation  can  also  influence  skin  appearance  as  is 
reviewed in this chapter.

Historically, dietary deficiency of many of the essential nutri-
ents (e.g. thiamine, zinc, and vitamins A and C) was first noted 
as a result of disruption of skin integrity or by a change in the 
skin’s appearance [1]. Many nutrients are important co-factors 
in biochemical processes occurring within skin cells and there-
fore  deficiencies  are  manifested  by  changes  in  the  skin.  For 
example, vitamin C was first discovered for its role in prevent-
ing scurvy and is an important co-factor for collagen synthesis 
[2].  Another  example  is  riboflavin,  which,  when  deficient, 
causes cracks in the corner of the mouth (angular cheilitis) as 
well as reddening and cracking of the lips, tongue, and mouth. 
Zinc deficiency may be noted in poor wound healing [3], and 
niacin and vitamin A deficiencies can cause dry skin or, in more 
extreme cases, dermatitis.

Conversely, published studies seem to show that supplemen-
tation of some of these key nutrients can result in an improve-
ment in skin condition and this has fueled the use of vitamins 
and other nutrients as benefit agents in cosmetic preparations. 
There is obvious interest in whether dietary supplementation of 
these key agents can also provide benefit to skin and how this 
compares with providing these actives via the topical route. For 
example, higher intakes of vitamin C have been associated with 
a lower likelihood of a wrinkled appearance and skin dryness, 
independent  of  age,  race,  education,  body  mass  index  (BMI), 
and  supplement  use  [4,5],  while  use  of  vitamin  C  in  topical 
products is fraught with challenges presented by the instability 
of the vitamin in skincare formulations. Vitamin C has a num-
ber of different biologic roles in skin, including participating in 
collagen synthesis, skin regeneration, and wound healing [6].

Many nutrients are required by the skin for different functions 
and this chapter aims to describe some of the key nutrients and dis-
cusses the data describing the use of these nutrients when provided 
orally for skin benefits (Table 39.1). Below is a description of several 
aspects  of  skin  health  and  studies  of  nutrients  or  dietary  supple-
ments that have been shown to improve skin health and appearance.

Nutrients and their role in protecting 
against UV-induced damage

One  of  the  leading  consumer  skin  concerns  is  skin  aging,  and 
products to delay or reverse the signs of aging are in high demand. A 
major contributing factor to skin aging is UV radiation, mostly from 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

357

358

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

Table 39.1  Nutrients	and	their	skin	health	benefits.

Nutrient groups

Specific nutrients

Antioxidants

Vitamin	C

Vitamin	E

β-carotene

Lycopene

Lutein/zeaxanthin

Astaxanthin

CoQ10

α-lipoic	acid

Combinations	of		
antioxidants

Vitamin	C	is	necessary	for	collagen	synthesis,	and	higher	intakes	are	associated	with	better	
skin	appearance	[4].	Supplemental	vitamin	C	and	E	for	3	months	significantly	reduced	the	
sunburn	reaction	to	UVB	irradiation	and	skin	DNA	damage	[25]

Vitamin	E	is	a	fat-soluble	antioxidant	that	accumulates	in	skin	cells.	It	protects	against	free	
radical	damage.	However,	if	cell	membranes	are	oxidized	they	become	more	rigid	leading	
to	skin	wrinkle	formation.	Studies	have	shown	that	supplemental	vitamin	E	reduced	levels	
of	malondialdehyde	(MDA,	a	marker	of	oxidative	stress)	in	the	skin	upon	exposure	to	
UV	rays	[19].	Skin	healing	is	also	affected	by	supplemental	vitamin	E.	In	57	patients	with	
pressure	ulcers,	administration	of	400 mg/day	oral	vitamin	E	promoted	faster	healing	than	
the	placebo	[23]

β-carotene	can	be	used	in	the	body	as	a	source	of	vitamin	A,	which	is	important	for	
skin	maintenance	and	repair.	Several	studies	have	also	demonstrated	that	supplemental	
carotenoids	improve	skin	health

Lycopene	is	depleted	from	the	skin	faster	than	β-carotene	upon	UV	exposure	[5].	Ten	
weeks	of	supplementation	of	tomato	paste,	high	in	lycopene,	provided	protection	against	
erythema	formation	following	UV	irradiation	[11,12]

Supplemental	lutein/zeaxanthin	has	produced	decreased	UV	damage	and	increased	skin	
hydration	and	elasticity	[17,18]

Subjects	given	astaxanthin	have	shown	significant	improvements	in	elasticity,	moisture	
content,	and	wrinkles	[34],	and	those	consuming	astaxanthin	and	vitamin	E	exhibited	
significant	reductions	in	fine	wrinkles	and	pimples,	and	increased	moisture	levels,	after	
4	weeks	of	supplementation	[35]

An	important	antioxidant	necessary	for	energy	metabolism.	Supplementation	of	60 mg	
CoQ10	for	3	months	significantly	reduced	wrinkle	grade	(depth	and	area	of	wrinkles)	and	
improved	skin	properties	[40]

A	potent	antioxidant	that	has	benefit	to	water-soluble	and	fat-soluble	portions	of	cells.	
In	a	preclinical	study,	α-lipoic	acid	has	been	shown	to	reduce	advanced	glycation	end	
products	(AGEs)	[41]

Subjects	given	β-carotene,	lycopene,	vitamin	E,	vitamin	C	and	experienced	significant	
protection	from	sun	damage	[50].	Consumption	of	lycopene,	lutein,	β-carotene,	
α-tocopherol	and	selenium	improved	skin	surface	[8]

Fish	oil/omega-3	
fatty	acids

Eicosapentaenoic	acid		
(EPA)	and		
docosahexaenoic		
acid	(DHA)

Dietary	consumption	of	fish	oil	is	known	to	modulate	the	lipid	inflammatory	mediator	
balance	and	therefore	is	valuable	in	the	treatment	of	inflammatory	skin	disorders.	
Consumption	of	EPA	and	DHA	totalling	3–4 g/day	for	up	to	3	months	reduced	erythema	
upon	UV	exposure	in	several	studies	[5]

Polyphenol	and	
flavonoids

Green	tea		
polyphenols

Grape	seed	extract		
and	resveratrol

Pycnogenol

Vitamin	D

Minerals

Zinc

Copper

Selenium

Polyphenols	protect	against	free	radical	damage.	Forty-one	women	aged	25–75	years	
given	300 mg	(green	tea	extract	containing	97%	pure	polyphenols)	twice	daily	for	2	
years	experienced	fewer	fine	wrinkles	and	telangiectasias	and	overall	less	solar	damage	
compared	with	baseline	and	the	control	group	[37]

When	subjects	received	100 mg	oligomeric	proanthocyanidins	along	with	vitamin	C	and	
SiO2	and	were	then	exposed	to	UV	rays,	they	experienced	less	erythema	and	increased	skin	
hydration	[51]

A	French	maritime	pine	bark	extract	with	a	potent	free	radical	scavenger,	which	contains	
65–75%	procyanidins,	increased	skin	hydration	and	improved	skin	elasticity	[45]

Vitamin	D	is	a	compound	that	is	formed/activated	in	the	skin	upon	sun	exposure	[52].	
Unfortunately,	there	have	not	yet	been	any	studies	on	skin	health	and	supplementation

Zinc	serves	as	a	co-factor	for	many	important	enzymes	in	the	body.	Some	of	the	best	
known	are	important	for	skin	healing	[3,	53]

Copper	is	an	important	co-factor	for	elastin,	the	support	structure	for	skin

Selenium	is	a	component	of	the	antioxidant	enzyme	glutathione	peroxidase.	Supplemental	
selenium	and	copper	have	shown	significant	protection	(versus	placebo)	against	UV-	
induced	cell	damage	[30]

Negative	
	nutritional	
components

Diet	high	in	fats		
and	carbohydrates

Diets	high	in	fats	and	carbohydrates	have	been	shown	to	increase	the	likelihood	of	a	
wrinkled	appearance	[4]

39. The Contribution of Dietary Nutrients and Supplements to Skin Health 

359

the sun. Both UVA and UVB rays generate harmful free radicals in 
the skin contributing to photodamage, leading to the production of 
fine lines and wrinkles, and, in extreme cases of sun exposure, sun-
burn and skin cancers. With sun exposure and no or inadequate sun 
protection, the skin depends solely on its internal or endogenous 
defenses  such  as  melanin  for  protection.  Dietary  micronutrients 
which act as antioxidants can help to protect against the free radical 
formation  induced  by  UV  irradiation.  Some  of  the  most  widely 
studied nutrients that have been effective in minimizing UV damage 
occurring within skin include carotenoids, vitamin E (tocopherols), 
flavonoids, vitamin C (ascorbate), and n-3 fatty acids [7,8].

Currently,  there  is  perhaps  the  most  evidence  to  support  the 
role of carotenoids in providing skin benefits, especially for UV 
damage. Topically, vitamin A has been shown to reduce the signs 
of photodamage and is most effective in the acid form available 
on  prescription  as  Retin  A®  (Ortho  Dermatologics,  USA)  (reti-
noic acid). β-carotene, lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin are major 
carotenoids in human blood and tissues, and are highly effective 
at  quenching  singlet  molecular  oxygen  formed  during  photo-
oxidative processes. In fact, carotenoids from a normal, unsupple-
mented diet accumulate in the skin [9] and confer a measurable 
photoprotective benefit (at least in lightly pigmented Caucasian 
skin) that is directly linked to tissue concentrations [10]. Dietary 
intake of tomato paste, which contains a number of carotenoids, 
including β-carotene, lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin, has been 
shown to provide photo-protective activity [11,12]. Dietary sup-
plementation  with  25  mg  total  carotenoids  a  day  for  12 weeks 
to  healthy  volunteers  significantly  diminished  erythema  upon 
UV irradiation given at week 8. This effect was enhanced when 
the same regimen was given with 335 mg/day (500 IU) RRR-α-
tocopherol [13]. A 12-week supplementation of β-carotene from 
Dunaliella  algae  was  also  effective  in  suppressing  UV-induced 
erythema given at a dose of 25 mg/day to healthy volunteers [13]. 
It is thought that other carotenoids such as lycopene act synergis-
tically with β-carotene to protect the skin from UV irradiation [5]. 
In humans, it was shown that lycopene is depleted from the skin 
faster than β-carotene upon UV exposure [14], suggesting a pri-
mary role of lycopene in mitigating oxidative damage in tissues, 
and an important role in the defense mechanism against adverse 
effects of UV irradiation on the skin. In fact, when a single UV 
light exposure of three times minimal erythemal dose (MED) was 
administered to human skin, lycopene concentrations decreased 
rapidly but skin β-carotene concentrations declined slowly.

Lutein  and  zeaxanthin  (LZ)  are  found  in  dark,  leafy,  green 
and  yellow  vegetables,  and  there  is  evidence  that  they  can 
provide  protection  against  UV-induced  damage.  The  pres-
ence of these carotenoids in the skin following dietary and oral 
supplementation  has  been  demonstrated  [15,16],  along  with  a 
benefit in reducing UV damage. Forty female subjects aged 25–50 
years were assigned to receive one of the following groups: pla-
cebo, oral only, topical only or both oral and topical, twice daily 
for 12 weeks. Dosage for oral supplementation was 5 mg lutein, 
0.3 mg zeaxanthin; and dosage for topical application was 50 ppm 

lutein  and  2  ppm  zeaxanthin.  All  active  treatments  reduced 
UV-light  induced  malondialdehyde  (MDA:  a  measure  of  lipid 
peroxidation)  production,  with  the  topical  and  oral  and  topical 
treatments producing similar results, and the combined treatment 
producing the greatest reduction. Other benefits were also noticed 
in this study-there were measurable increases in skin lipids pro-
duced by all treatments, with the oral regimen producing signifi-
cantly greater increases than the topical treatment. Additionally, 
hydration was increased similarly by oral and topical treatments, 
and  significantly  more  with  the  combination  treatment.  All 
differences were significant for all treatments at week 12 compared 
with placebo, and for all time points after week 2 [17,18].

The benefit of tocopherols in photoprotection has also been 
studied. Vitamin E is commonly associated with protecting cell 
membranes from oxidative damage and administration of oral 
400 IU/day vitamin E significantly reduced MDA production but 
no other measures of oxidative stress in the skin or sensitivity to 
UV damage [19]. The production of sebum containing dietary 
vitamin E by the sebaceous glands was shown to be the primary 
delivery route for sources of tocopherols to the skin surface [20].
Researchers  have  found  that  supplemental  flavonoids  for 
10–12 weeks in humans protects against UV-induced erythema 
[21], although this is related to dose, with high doses appearing 
necessary to provide benefits. In one study, a cocoa supplement 
with 329 mg total flavanols produced an increased microcircu-
lation in the skin, while the same cocoa drink containing 27 mg/
day total flavanols had no benefit. Another study compared two 
groups of women ingesting either a high (329 mg/day) or low 
(27 mg/day) flavanol cocoa powder dissolved in 100 mL water 
for 12 weeks. The production of erythema following a 1.25 MED 
UV ray dose was reduced significantly by 15% and 25% at 6 and 
12 weeks,  respectively,  in  the  high  dose  supplemented  group. 
No such benefit was observed for the group receiving the lower 
dose of flavanols. In addition, in the high dose group, but not 
the  low-flavanol  group,  increases  in  blood  flow  to  cutaneous 
and subcutaneous tissues were observed, as well as increases in 
skin  thickness,  skin  density,  and  skin  hydration,  along  with  a 
significant decrease in skin roughness and scaling [22].

Antioxidant combinations can provide added protection beyond 
single antioxidants alone in preventing UV damage. For example, 
in  healthy  volunteers  given  a  carotenoid  blend  (25  mg/day)  for 
12 weeks there was a significant decrease in skin reddening follow-
ing blue light exposure to the skin, whereas combining this with 
500 IU vitamin E had an even more dramatic decrease after only 
8 weeks of consumption [8]. Interestingly, in healthy individuals 
on a normal diet, little benefit was shown with individual antioxi-
dants like vitamin E in preventing UV-induced skin damage [23]. 
Data show that a combination of supplemental antioxidants that 
most closely mimics a diet rich in antioxidants can provide a pho-
toprotective effect against sun damage [24]. Administration of 1 g 
vitamin C and 500 mg vitamin E (as D-α-tocopherol) for 3 months 
to human volunteers significantly reduced the sunburn reaction 
to UVB irradiation as measured by a reduction in thymine dimer 

360

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

formation  by  43%  indicating  a  reduction  in  skin  DNA  damage, 
and an increased in MED by 41% [25].

Oral intake of lipids and lipid-soluble vitamins has long proved 
beneficial for skin. One study observed a photoprotective effect of 
a diet higher in olive oil on the skin [26]. Some evidence suggests 
that n-3 fatty acids (FA) may also be effective in protection against 
UV-induced skin cancers and photoaging, in part brought about 
by  the  reduction  of  UV-induced  release  of  cytokines  and  other 
inflammatory  mediators  in  a  variety  of  skin  cell  types  [27,28]. 
In  humans,  supplemental  omega-3 FA  have  been  shown  to  sig-
nificantly  increase  the  UVR-mediated  erythema  threshold  and 
reduce  the  level  of  proinflammatory,  immunosuppressive  pros-
taglandin  E2 levels  from  UVB  irradiation  [29].  Fish  oil  supple-
ments, which provide eicosapentaenoic and docosahexanoic acid, 
have also shown a photoprotective effect [5, 7].

Selenium, zinc, and copper have also been shown to provide 
benefit and protect against UV-induced damage. This could be 
because these nutrients are critical components for the activity 
of  several  enzymes  associated  with  skin  repair  following  UV 
irradiation (e.g. matrix metalloproteinase) [30]. A combination 
of  200  μg  selenium  and  4  mg  copper  alone,  or  with  14  mg 
vitamin E, 3.6 mg niacin, 0.4 mg pyridoxine, 0.12 mg thiamine, 
0.08  mg  riboflavin  plus  9000  IU  retinol  per  day  during  meals 
for 3 weeks gave significant protection (versus placebo) against 
UV-induced cell damage in the form of sunburn cells, but did 
not reduce UV-induced erythema. This study was performed on 
16 healthy  Caucasian  subjects  aged  20–37  years  and  the  com-
bined supplements gave the strongest effect [30].

Nutrients and their role in improving  
skin appearancwe

The  benefit  of  nutrients  in  protecting  the  skin  from  damage 
was  discussed  in  the  previous  section  [4–33].  Cumulative 
photodamage results in the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles 
on the face, as well as changes in pigmentation and skin dryness 
and roughness. There is also evidence to support the use of oral 
nutrients in improving the signs of photodamage, once formed, 
and in improving overall skin condition.

The  carotenoid  astaxanthin  is  found  in  plants  and  algae  and 
provides pink-orange color to shellfish and salmon. Supplemen-
tation of astaxanthin produced significant improvements in pre-
existing skin wrinkles, and also improved skin elasticity and tran-
sepidermal water loss (TEWL) [34]. Another study with 16 female 
subjects (mean age 40 years) with dry skin conditions were given 
either  2  mg  astaxanthin  (as  40  mg  AstaReal®,  Fuji,  Toyama, 
Japan) and 4 mg natural tocotrienols or a control supplement for 
4 weeks. Treated subjects exhibited significant reductions in fine 
wrinkles  and  pimples,  and  had  increased  skin  moisture  levels. 
These parameters contributed to the individual assessments that 
reported  reduced  swelling  under  the  eyes,  improved  elasticity, 
and  “better  skin  feel.”  Subjects  on  the  placebo  did  not  improve 
and generally worsened during this time [35].

Vitamin C is an important co-factor for the enzymes involved 
in collagen synthesis and it has also been shown to provide benefit 
in protecting against signs of photodamage. Using data from the 
National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey  (NHANES 
I),  associations  between  dietary  nutrient  intakes  and  signs  of 
skin  aging  in  4025 women  aged  40–74  years  were  compared. 
High  dietary  intakes  of  vitamin  C  were  associated  with  a  lower 
likelihood of senile skin dryness and a reduced wrinkled appear-
ance. In fact, an increase consumption of vitamin C, by 1 log unit, 
was associated with an 11% reduction in the odds of a wrinkled 
appearance  and  a  7%  reduction  in  the  odds  of  senile  dryness, 
independent of age, race, education, BMI, other supplement use, 
sun exposure, menopausal status, family income, energy intake, 
or physical activity [4]. This was an important study as it was the 
first  to  directly  relate  dietary  intakes,  rather  than  supplementa-
tion, of vitamin C with skin aging and showed that a diet high in 
foods supplying vitamin C can lead to a lower prevalence of an 
aged appearance. Other dietary factors were also studied: a lower 
intake of vitamin A, lower protein, and higher thiamine intakes 
were  also  linked  to  a  wrinkled  appearance.  Conversely,  higher 
intakes of fat and carbohydrates were associated with an increased 
chance  of  wrinkled  skin  appearance  and  skin  atrophy.  Thus,  it 
appears that one’s appearance may be an indicator of overall health 
status because balanced nutrition is essential, not only to prevent 
chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, 
and  diabetes  [31],  but  also  to  maintain  skin  health  and  ensure 
normal cellular function. It is a bold statement, but this evidence 
suggests that looking “old for one’s age” may also reflect and/or be 
associated with an increased risk of disease and mortality [32,33].
Similarly,  soy  isoflavones  have  been  shown  to  provide  a 
significant improvement in fine wrinkles and skin elasticity, com-
pared with a placebo group [36] after 12 weeks’ supplementation. 
This study showed that the benefits were evident in women in 
their late thirties and early forties. Another study examined the 
effect  of  green  tea  on  skin  condition.  Forty-one  women  aged 
25–75 years were given 300 mg of a proprietary green tea extract 
containing  97%  tea  polyphenols  or  a  placebo  twice  daily  for 
2 years. At 24 months, fine wrinkles were significantly reduced 
compared  to  baseline,  and  at  12 months,  telangiectasias  were 
significantly reduced in the green tea supplemented group, but 
not the placebo group. At 24 months compared with 12 months, 
overall  solar  damage  was  reduced  over  time  for  the  green  tea 
supplemented group but not in the placebo group [37].

Sun damage to skin does not need to have been severe for it 
to  respond  to  oral  supplements  within  a  relatively  short  period 
of  time.  Eight  weeks  is  common  for  topical  treatments  to  pro-
duce  a  noticeable  difference  in  skin  condition,  which  includes 
an  improvement  in  moderate  photodamage  with  8 weeks’  sup-
plementation with key nutrients. For example, one study inves-
tigated 30 dry-skinned women aged 48–59 years with moderate 
xerosis  and  photoaging.  The  group  was  randomized  to  receive 
either a topical nanocolloidal gel containing 0.5 mg α-lipoic acid 
and  15  mg  melatonin/emblica  along  with  a  nutritional  supple-
ment containing 3 mg lutein, 2.5 mg α-lipoic acid, 45 mg ascorbic 

39. The Contribution of Dietary Nutrients and Supplements to Skin Health 

361

acid, and 5 mg tocopherol. All treatments were given twice daily 
for 2 months. Dietary supplements, but not the placebo, signifi-
cantly reduced blood free radical activity compared with baseline. 
Skin hydration was significantly increased in all groups compared 
with baseline and placebo. An increase in superficial skin lipids 
was found for the treatments, with all being significantly differ-
ent from baseline. Significantly greater effects were seen with the 
combined versus individual treatments, and all treatments than 
the placebo. Lipid peroxidation at weeks 2, 4, and 8 on the skin 
was significantly greater with the control group [38].

A study of topical application of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) for 
3 months showed reduced depth and area of wrinkles around 
the eye area of 20 elderly volunteers, compared with the vehicle, 
which was applied around the opposite eye. There was a 27% 
reduction in mean peak to valley depth of the skin and a 26% 
reduction in Rq values measured on the PRIMOS, compared 
with  controls  [39].  Similar  findings  were  reported  following 
daily oral supplementation of 60 mg CoQ10 for 3 months [40].
Diets containing high amounts of refined sugars may predis-
pose skin to premature aging through the formation of advanced 
glycation  end  products  (AGEs).  Glycation  is  a  non-enzymatic 
reaction  between  amino  groups  on  proteins  (i.e.  lysine)  and 
reducing  sugars  (i.e.  fructose).  This  reaction  creates  cross-links 
in the skin and once these reactions occur they disrupt normal 
function  and  predispose  skin  to  oxidation  or  premature  aging 
in the extracellular matrix of the dermis. For example the cross-
linkages between dermal molecules cause the loss of elasticity or 
other properties of the dermis observed during aging. Some pre-
clinical studies have shown that supplemental nutrients such as 
α-lipoic acid may prevent the detrimental effects AGEs to the skin 
[41]. Interestingly, some researchers have shown that AGEs may 
actually be photosensitizers to cause more severe DNA damage 
to  the  skin  from  phototoxicity  which  ultimately  causes  acceler-
ated skin aging and increased risk of skin cancer. Future studies 
will help establish nutritional strategies to prevent the formation 
and detrimental effects of AGEs. Carnosine is a naturally occur-
ring antioxidant, which has been shown to inhibit AGE forma-
tion in vitro. In a recent clinical trial, significant improvements in 
the skin were observed by a combination of dietary supplements 
which included carnosine and vitamin E [42]. After 3 months of 
supplementation,  skin  surface  structure  improved  and  showed 
more smoothing.

In summary, there is a growing body of literature that dem-
onstrates that oral nutrients not only protect the skin from UV 
damage and reduce free radical damage, but also can improve 
skin condition after the effects of sun damage has formed.

and  0.3  mg  zeaxanthin  twice  daily  for  12 weeks  was  shown  to 
improve skin moisture and elasticity [17,18] and this may have 
resulted from an increase in skin lipids which was demonstrated 
during the study. Increases in skin lipids and improvements in 
skin smoothness and elasticity have been reported from previ-
ous studies of orally ingested antioxidants [38, 43].

Another nutritional supplement with improved skin elasticity 
and hydration is pycnogenol. Pycnogenol is an extract of French 
maritime pine bark, with a potent free radical scavenging activity. 
It is also known to regenerate the active forms of vitamin C and 
E [44]. Oral supplementation which included 75 mg pycnogenol 
for 12 weeks resulted in increased skin hydration at 6 weeks and 
improved skin elasticity in 6 and 12 weeks [45].

A combination of nutrients was also found to provide signifi-
cant skin changes. Thirty-nine healthy people with normal skin 
were divided into three groups and given 3 mg lycopene, 3 mg 
lutein, 4.8 mg β-carotene, 10 mg α-tocopherol, and 75 μg sele-
nium per day, a similar supplement with double the amount of 
lycopene without lutein, or a placebo. A significant increase of 
skin density and thickness, as determined by ultrasound, along 
with  improved  skin  surface  of  decreased  roughness  and  skin 
scaling (evaluated by Visioscan) was found for both antioxidant 
groups but not the placebo [8]. In a 14-week study with a blend 
of  soy  isoflavone,  lycopene,  vitamin  C,  vitamin  E  and  fish  oil 
also demonstrated the skin improvement, such as reduced skin 
roughness [46]. Further evaluation with skin biopsies indicated 
increase in collagen quantity and quality in some individuals.

Nutrients and their potential in improving 
dermatologic disorders and wound healing

Skin disorders that have an inflammatory component (e.g. pso-
riasis  and  eczema)  and  are  manifested  by  dry  and  flaky  skin 
have  responded  to  topical  omega-3  polyunsaturated  fatty  acid 
supplementation [47] and these nutrients may therefore offer a 
therapeutic benefit when given orally.

There is also evidence to show that oral supplementation can 
assist in healing. In 57 patients with pressure ulcers, administra-
tion of 400 mg/day vitamin E provided faster healing of the ulcer 
compared with placebo. When 10 females with lichen sclerosis 
took 300–1200 IU/day vitamin E, five improved markedly, two 
moderately,  and  three  slightly  [23].  Zinc  deficiency  has  been 
associated  with  delayed  wound  healing  and  roughness  of  the 
skin [3, 24, 48]. Mixtures of tocopherol and CoQ10 have proved 
to be beneficial for skin healing [49].

Nutrients shown to provide additional  
skin benefits

conclusions

As  well  as  protecting  from  UV  and  improving  photodamage, 
data exist to show that diet and nutritional supplementation can 
provide many other benefits for skin. Ingestion of 5 mg lutein 

An individual’s appearance has been regarded as an indicator 
of overall health, wellbeing, and age. In fact, it might perhaps 
be  an  indicator  of  life  expectancy  [32,33].  Nutrients  pro-
vided in the diet or through dietary supplements can provide 

362

aNtI-aGING  Cosmeceuticals

benefits  to  overall  skin  health  and  appearance,  and  in  some 
cases can reverse a wrinkled or aged appearance. There is also 
evidence  that  providing  several  nutrients  together  is  more 
beneficial  than  providing  single  nutrients  in  isolation.  The 
benefits of nutrients, such as carotenoids, flavonoids, CoQ10, 
α-lipoic acid, minerals, and omega-3 fatty acids are related to 
their  antioxidant  potential,  but  significant  other  benefits  are 
also provided, for example nutrients often serve as co-factors 
for key metabolic enzymes in skin (e.g. vitamin C and collagen 
production).

references

17  Palombo P, Fabrizi G, Ruocco V, et al. (2007) Beneficial long-term 
effects  of  combined  oral/topical  antioxidant  treatment  with  the 
carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin on human skin: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 20, 199–210.
18  Roberts RL, Green J, Lewis B. (2009) Lutein and zeaxanthin in eye 

and skin health. Clin Dermatol 27, 195–201.

19  Thiele JJ, Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage S. (2007) Vitamin E in human 
skin:  organ-specific  physiology  and  considerations  for  its  use  in 
dermatology. Mol Aspects Med 28, 646–67.

20  Thiele  JJ,  Weber  SU,  Packer  L.  (1999)  Sebaceous  gland  secretion 
is a major physiologic route of vitamin E delivery to skin. J Invest 
Dermatol 113, 1006–10.

21  Stahl  W,  Sies  H.  (2007)  Carotenoids  and  flavonoids  contribute 
to  nutritional  protection  against  skin  damage  from  sunlight.  Mol 
Biotechnol 37, 26–30.

1  Boelsma E, van de Vijver LP, Goldbohm RA, et al. (2003) Human 
skin condition and its associations with nutrient concentrations in 
serum and diet. Am J Clin Nutr; 77, 348–55.

22  Neukam  K,  Stahl  W,  Tronnier  H,  et  al.  (2007)  Consumption  of 
flavanol-rich  cocoa  acutely  increases  microcirculation  in  human 
skin. Eur J Nutr 46, 53–6.

2  Miller  SJ.  (1989)  Nutritional  deficiency  and  the  skin.  J  Am  Acad 

Dermatol 21: 1–30.

3  Corbo MD, Lam J. (2013) Zinc deficiency and its management in 
the pediatric population: a literature review and proposed etiologic 
classification. J Am Acad Dermatol 69, 616–624 e611.

4  Cosgrove MC, Franco OH, Granger SP, et al. (2007) Dietary nutri-
ent intakes and skin-aging appearance among middle-aged Ameri-
can women. Am J Clin Nutr 86, 1225–31.

5  Boelsma  E,  Hendriks  HF,  Roza  L.  (2001)  Nutritional  skin  care: 
health effects of micronutrients and fatty acids. Am J Clin Nutr 73, 
853–64.

6  Catani MV, Savini I, Rossi A, et al. (2005) Biological role of vitamin 

C in keratinocytes. Nutr Rev 63, 81–90.

7  Sies H, Stahl W. (2004) Nutritional protection against skin damage 

from sunlight. Annu Rev Nutr 24, 173–200.

8  Heinrich U, Tronnier H, Stahl W, et al. (2006) Antioxidant supple-
ments improve parameters related to skin structure in humans. Skin 
Pharmacol Physiol 19, 224–31.

9  Darvin ME, Patzelt A, Knorr F, et al. (2008) One-year study on the 
variation of carotenoid antioxidant substances in living human skin: 
influence of dietary supplementation and stress factors. J Biomed Opt 
13, 044028.

10  Stahl W, Heinrich U, Aust O, et al. (2006) Lycopene-rich products 
and dietary photoprotection. Photochem Photobiol Sci 5, 238–42.
11  Stahl W, Heinrich U, Wiseman S, et al. (2001) Dietary tomato paste 
protects against ultraviolet light-induced erythema in humans. J Nutr 
131, 1449–51.

12  Sies  H,  Stahl  W.  (2003)  Non-nutritive  bioactive  constituents  of 
plants:  lycopene,  lutein  and  zeaxanthin.  Int  J  Vitam  Nutr  Res  73, 
95–100.

13  Stahl W, Heinrich U, Jungmann  H,  et  al.  (2000) Carotenoids and 
carotenoids plus vitamin E protect against ultraviolet light-induced 
erythema in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 71, 795–8.

14  Ribaya-Mercado JD, Garmyn M, Gilchrest BA, et al. Skin lycopene 
is  destroyed  preferentially  over  beta-carotene  during  ultraviolet 
irradiation in humans. J Nutr (1995) 125, 1854–9.

15  Wingerath T, Sies H, Stahl W. (1998) Xanthophyll esters in human 

skin. Arch Biochem Biophys 355, 271–4.

23  Tebbe B. (2001) Relevance of oral supplementation with antioxidants 
for prevention and treatment of skin disorders. Skin Pharmacol Appl 
Skin Physiol 14, 296–302.

24  Richelle M, Sabatier M, Steiling H, et al. (2006) Skin bioavailability 
of dietary vitamin E, carotenoids, polyphenols, vitamin C, zinc and 
selenium. Br J Nutr 96, 227–38.

25  Placzek  M,  Gaube  S,  Kerkmann  U,  et  al.  (2005)  Ultraviolet 
B-induced  DNA  damage  in  human  epidermis  is  modified  by  the 
antioxidants ascorbic acid and D-alpha-tocopherol. J Invest Derma-
tol 124, 304–307.

26  Purba  MB,  Kouris-Blazos  A,  Wattanapenpaiboon  N,  et  al.  (2001) 
Skin  wrinkling:  can  food  make  a  difference?  J  Am  Coll  Nutr  20, 
71–80.

27  Jackson MJ, Jackson MJ, McArdle F, et al. (2002) Effects of micro-
nutrient supplements on u.v.-induced skin damage. Proc Nutr Soc 
61, 187–9.

28  Rhodes  LE,  Durham  BH,  Fraser  WD,  et  al.  (1995)  Dietary  fish  oil 
reduces  basal  and  ultraviolet  B-generated  PGE2 levels  in  skin  and 
increases the threshold to provocation of polymorphic light eruption. 
J Invest Dermatol 105, 532–5.

29  Black HS, Rhodes LE. (2006) The potential of omega-3 fatty acids 
in the prevention of non-melanoma skin cancer. Cancer Detect Prev 
30, 224–32.

30  la Ruche G, Cesarini JP. (1991) Protective effect of oral selenium plus 
copper associated with vitamin complex on sunburn cell formation 
in human skin. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 8, 232–35.
31  Willett WC. (2002) Balancing life-style and genomics research for 

disease prevention. Science 296, 695–8.

32  Purba MB, Kouris-Blazos A, Wattanapenpaiboon N, et al. (2001) Can 
skin wrinkling in a site that has received limited sun exposure be used 
as a marker of health status and biological age? Age Ageing 30, 227–34.
33  Christensen K, Iachina M, Rexbye H, et al. (2004) “Looking old for 

your age”: genetics and mortality. Epidemiology 15, 251–2.

34  Tominaga K, Hongo N, Karato M, et al. (2012) Cosmetic benefits of 

astaxanthin on humans subjects. Acta Biochim Pol 59, 43–7.

35  Yamashita E. (2002) Cosmetic benefit of dietary supplements con-
taining astaxanthin and tocotrienol on human skin. Food Style 21 
216, 112–17.

16  Lee  EH,  Faulhaber  D,  Hanson  KM,  et  al.  (2004)  Dietary  lutein 
reduces ultraviolet radiation-induced inflammation and immuno-
suppression. J Invest Dermatol 122, 510–17.

36  Izumi T, Saito M, Obata A, et al. (2007) Oral intake of soy isoflavone 
aglycone improves the aged skin of adult women. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 
(Tokyo) 53, 57–62.

39. The Contribution of Dietary Nutrients and Supplements to Skin Health 

363

37  Janjua R, Munoz C, Gorell E, et al. (2009) A two-year, double-blind, 
randomized placebo-controlled trial of oral green tea polyphenols 
on the long-term clinical and histologic appearance of photoaging 
skin. Dermatol Surg 35, 1057–65.

38  Morganti P, Bruno C, Guarneri F, et al. (2002) Role of topical and 
nutritional supplement to modify the oxidative stress. Int J Cosmet 
Sci 24, 331–9.

39  Hoppe U, Bergemann J, Diembeck W, et al. (1999) Coenzyme Q10, 

a cutaneous antioxidant and energizer. Biofactors 9, 371–8.

40  Ashida  Y,  Kuwazuru  S,  Nakashima  M,  et  al.  (2004)  Effect  of 
coenzyme  Q10 as  a  supplement  on  wrinkle  reduction.  Food  Style 
21 8, 1–4.

41  hirunavukkarasu V, Nandhini AT, Anuradha CV. (2004) Fructose 
diet-induced  skin  collagen  abnormalities  are  prevented  by  lipoic 
acid. Exp Diabesity Res 5, 237–44.

42  Babizhayev MA, Deyev AI, Savel’yeva EL, et al. (2012) Skin beautifi-
cation with oral non-hydrolized versions of carnosine and carcinine: 
Effective  therapeutic  management  and  cosmetic  skincare  solutions 
against  oxidative  glycation  and  free-radical  production  as  a  causal 
mechanism  of  diabetic  complications  and  skin  aging.  J  Dermatolog 
Treat 23, 345–84.

43  Segger D, Schonlau F. Supplementation with Evelle improves skin 
smoothness  and  elasticity  in  a  double-blind,  placebo-controlled 
study with 62 women. J Dermatolog Treat (2004) 15, 222–6.

44  Draelos  ZD.  (2010)  Nutrition  and  enhancing  youthful-appearing 

skin. Clin Dermatol 28, 400–408.

45  Marini A, Grether-Beck S, Jaenicke T, et al. (2012) Pycnogenol(R) 
effects  on  skin  elasticity  and  hydration  coincide  with  increased 

gene expressions of collagen type I and hyaluronic acid synthase in 
women. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 25, 86–92.

46  Jenkins G, Wainwright LJ, Holland R, et al. (2014) Wrinkle reduction 
in post-menopausal women consuming a novel oral supplement: a 
double-blind placebo-controlled randomized study. Int J Cosmet Sci 
36, 22–31.

47  Henneicke-von  Zepelin  HH,  Mrowietz  U,  Farber  L,  et  al.  (1993) 
Highly  purified  omega-3-polyunsaturated  fatty  acids  for  topical 
treatment of psoriasis. Results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled 
multicentre study. Br J Dermatol 129, 713–17.

48  Lansdown  AB,  Mirastschijski  U,  Stubbs  N,  et  al.  Zinc  in  wound 
healing:  theoretical,  experimental,  and  clinical  aspects.  Wound 
Repair Regen (2007) 15, 2–16.

49  de Luca C, Deeva I, Mikhal’Chik E, et al. (2007) Beneficial effects 
of  pro-/antioxidant-based  nutraceuticals  in  the  skin  rejuvenation 
techniques. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) 53, 94–101.

50  Cesarini JP, Michel L, Maurette JM, et al. (2003) Immediate effects of 
UV  radiation  on  the  skin:  modification  by  an  antioxidant  complex 
containing  carotenoids.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  Photomed  19, 
182–9.

51  Hughes-Formella B, Wunderlich O, Williams R. (2007) Anti-inflam-
matory and skin-hydrating properties of a dietary supplement and 
topical formulations containing oligomeric proanthocyanidins. Skin 
Pharmacol Physiol 20, 43–9.

52  Holick MF, Chen TC, Lu Z, et al. (2007) Vitamin D and skin physi-
ology: a D-lightful story. J Bone Miner Res 22 Suppl 2, V28–33.
53  Rostan EF, DeBuys HV, Madey DL, et al. (2002) Evidence supporting 
zinc as an important antioxidant for skin. Int J Dermatol 41, 606–611.

Sec tion 2 injectable Anti-aging techniques 

Chapter 40
Botulinum toxins

J. Daniel Jensen,1 Scott R. Freeman,2 and Joel L. cohen3,4
1Scripps Clinic, Bighorn Mohs Surgery and Dermatology Center, La Jolla, CA, USA
2Sunrise Dermatology, Mobile, AL, USA 
3AboutSkin Dermatology and DermSurgery, Englewood, CO, USA 
4 University of Colorado at Denver, Aurora, CO, USA

BasIC ConCepts

•	 Botulinum	toxins	are	high	molecular	weight	protein	complexes	that	are	secreted	by	clostridial	bacteria.	These	neuromodulator	agents	

exert	their	effects	by	binding	to	and	cleaving	specific	proteins	in	the	presynaptic	nerve	terminus,	thus	preventing	release	of	acetylcholine	
and	focally	preventing	nerve	conduction.

•	 Currently,	there	are	three	type	A	botulinum	toxins	approved	in	the	USA	for	cosmetic	use.	Botox®	is	FDA	approved	for	use	in	the	glabella	

and	crow’s	feet.	Dysport®	and	Xeomin®	are	approved	for	treatment	of	the	glabellar	frown	lines.

•	 In	many	other	anatomic	areas,	injectable	botulinum	toxins	have	a	favorable	safety	profile	and	are	effective	in	treating	the	upper,	mid,	
and	lower	face,	as	well	as	several	regions	of	focal	hyperhidrosis	(axillary,	palmar,	plantar,	facial).	They	have	all	been	used	worldwide	to	
treat	other	medical	conditions	including	strabismus,	blepharospasm,	and	cervical	dystonia.

•	 Injection-related	complications	for	esthetic	regions	can	frequently	be	avoided	with	good	technique	and	a	detailed	understanding	of	the	

regional	anatomy.

Introduction

Botulinum  toxins  are  produced  by  the  Gram-positive,  spore-
forming  anaerobe  Clostridium  botulinum,  and  cause  chemical 
denervation  by  suppressing  the  release  of  the  neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine from the axon terminals of peripheral nerves. There 
are seven distinct subtypes of botulinum toxin (A–G), with types 
A and B being the only clinically relevant subtypes at this time. 
Currently, there are three botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNTA) 
and one botulinum neurotoxin B (BoNTB) toxins available for 
human use in the USA. Botox® (onabotulinumtoxinA, Allergan, 
Inc., Irvine, CA, USA), Dysport® (abobotulinumtoxinA, Medi-
cis Pharmaceuticals Corp., Scottsdale, AZ, USA), and Xeomin® 
(incobotulinumtoxinA,  Merz,  Frankfurt,  Germany)  comprise 
the type A toxins currently available.

Botox  is  currently  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA) 
approved for several non-cosmetic therapeutic indications (includ-
ing blepharospasm, strabismus and axillary hyperhidrosis), as well 
as  for  cosmetic  use  for  temporary  improvement  of  moderate  to 
severe glabellar lines (approved 2002) and lateral canthal rhytides/

crow’s  feet  (2013).  Dysport®  is  FDA  approved  for  treatment  of 
cervical  dystonia  and  has  cosmetic  indication  for  temporary 
improvement of moderate to severe glabellar frown lines (2009). 
Xeomin®,  the  newest  to  market  type  A  toxin  in  the  US,  is  FDA 
indicated for treatment of cervical dystonia and blepharospasm, as 
well as for temporary improvement of moderate to severe glabel-
lar frown lines (2011). Myobloc® (Rimabotulinum toxin, Solstice 
Pharmaceuticals, South San Francisco, CA, USA), a type B botu-
linum toxin, is currently only approved for the therapeutic treat-
ment of cervical dystonia (2000).

While the various type A botulinum toxins are FDA approved 
for cosmetic use in the glabella (all) and crow’s feet (Botox only), 
they are used off-label in various other facial sites as well. Addition-
ally, while Botox is also FDA approved for axillary hyperhidrosis, 
Botox as well as Dysport and Xeomin are also used off-label for 
hyperhidrosis of the palms, soles, face, and scalp. Treatment doses 
are not interchangeable for any of the botulinum products (even 
among the strains of type A toxin) and all references to BoNTA 
dose, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, refer to and are spe-
cific for Botox.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

364

Clostridial  bacteria  secrete  high  molecular  weight  protein 
complexes  that  include  three  key  proteins:  a  150-kDa  toxin, 
a  non-toxin  hemagglutinin  protein,  and  a  non-toxin  non-
hemagglutinin  protein.  The  non-toxin  proteins  may  provide 
the  toxin  complex  protection  against  temperature  or  enzy-
matic  denaturation  [1],  or  at  least  that  has  been  a  historical 
perspective by some of the formulators. The 150-kDa toxin is 
cleaved by bacterial proteases to form a di-chain composed of 
a 100-kDa heavy chain and a 50-kDa light chain. Disulfide and 
non-covalent bonds link the heavy and light chains, and both 
chains are required for neurotoxicity [1].

In 1987, Canadian ophthalmologist Jean Carruthers recognized 
the  cosmetic  potential  of  BoNTA.  While  treating  patients  for 
benign essential blepharospasm, Dr. Carruthers noted that sev-
eral patients treated for blepharospasm had significant improve-
ment of dynamic rhytides in the periocular region. Following this 
observation, the husband and wife team of Drs. Alastair and Jean 
Carruthers began more systematic studies of BoNTA for cosmetic 
indications. In 1991, the Carruthers reported their initial findings 
of cosmetic treatment with BoNTA at North American dermatol-
ogy and ophthalmology meetings. After initiating clinical trials, 
their first publication on this topic was in 1992, demonstrating 
the safe and effective treatment of dynamic rhytides in the gla-
bella with BoNTA [2]. After over a decade of off-label cosmetic 
use in the USA, BoNTA (Botox) was approved specifically for the 
treatment of glabellar rhytides in 2002. Currently, off-label cos-
metic uses continue to expand with regions of treatment encom-
passing not only the forehead and periocular areas, but also the 
mid-face, lower face, neck and décolleté.

Botox and other BoNTA toxins are also widely used world-
wide for medical and therapeutic purposes, including the treat-
ment  of  hyperhidrosis,  headaches,  spasticity  disorders,  and 
depression. This chapter highlights both traditional and newer 
cosmetic applications of BoNTA.

Mechanism of action

The  process  of  chemical  denervation  requires  that  the  neuro-
toxin heavy chain bind the synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2 (SV2) 
on the presynaptic nerve terminal. This process leads to toxin–
receptor complex endocytosis with subsequent toxin light chain 
release through vesicle lysis [3]. All toxins cause chemical dener-
vation by suppressing the release of acetylcholine from the axon 
terminals of peripheral motor nerves. After vesicle lysis occurs 
within the axon terminus, toxin light chains ultimately prevent 
neurotransmission by cleaving specific protein isoforms neces-
sary for the docking, fusion, and release of acetylcholine from 
this nerve terminus. Toxins A, C, and E cleave synaptosomal-
associated  protein  25  (SNAP-25)  and  toxins  B,  D,  F,  and  G 
cleave vesicle associated membrane protein (VAMP, also known 
as synaptobrevin) [1]. Muscle paralysis typically occurs within 
approximately 3–7 days, and synaptic regeneration reverses the 
paralytic effect within 3–6 months [3].

40. Botulinum Toxins

365

neurotoxin physical characteristics

The neurotoxin-protein complex size of Botox is approximately 
900 kDa  and  the  most  common  vial  size  used  is  100  units, 
though it is available in 50 units as well. One vial contains 5 ng of 
toxin. One unit (U) is standardized to equal the median amount 
necessary to kill 50% of female Swiss-Webster mice after intra-
peritoneal  injection  (LD50)  [3,4,5].  Botox  is  a  vacuum-dried 
product,  and  in  addition  to  100 U  of  toxin,  each  vial  contains 
500 μg albumin and 900 μg sodium chloride [1,5]. Typical cos-
metic doses of Botox range from 10 to 60 units, depending on the 
number of areas treated in one session. The complex size of Dys-
port ranges from 500–900 kDa, and one vial contains 300 units 
of freeze-dried abobotulinum toxin. In addition, each 300 unit 
vial contains 125 μg of human serum albumin and 2.5 mg lac-
tose. Xeomin is a vacuum-dried 150 kDa toxin protein free from 
biologically inert complexing proteins. Xeomin is packaged in 50 
and 100 unit vials, and in addition to the active toxin, each 100 
unit vial also contains 1 mg human serum albumin and 4.7 mg 
sucrose [6]. Product characteristics of Botox compared with the 
other FDA-approved neurotoxins are provided in Table 40.1.

product stability

Package  inserts  indicate  that  Botox  and  Dysport  should  be 
stored at 2–8 °C and away from light. Xeomin is stable at room 
temperature (20 to 25°C), but may also be stored at refrigerator 
(2 to 8°C) or freezer (–20 to –10°C) temperatures for up to 36 
months. Once a vial of Botox or Xeomin has been reconstituted, 
product should be stored at 2–8°C and should be used within 24 
hours. Dysport, once reconstituted, should be stored at 2–8°C 

table 40.1  Botulinum	toxin	comparison.1

Botox3

Dysport4 

Xeomin5 Myobloc6 

Serotype

Molecular	weight	
(kDa)

FDA2	approved	
for	cosmetic	use?

Protein	weight	
per	vial	(ng)

Units	per	vial

pH	(after	
reconstitution)

A

900

Yes

5

100

7.4

A

A

500–900

150

B

700

Yes

5

300

7.4

Yes

No

25,	50,	or	
100

50,	100

5000

7.4

5.6

Target

SNAP-257	

SNAP-25

SNAP-25

VAMP8	

1Dosages	are	not	equivalent	between	products.
2Food	and	Drug	Administration.
3Allergan,	Inc.,	Irvine,	CA,	USA.
4Medicis,	Scottsdale,	AZ,	USA
5Merz,	Frankfurt,	Germany
6	Solstice	Pharmaceuticals,	South	San	Francisco,	CA,	USA.	Marketed	as	Neurobloc	outside	
of	the	USA.
7Synaptosomal-associated	protein	25	(SNAP-25).
8Vesicle-associated	membrane	protein	(synaptobrevin).

366

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

and  administered  within  4  hours.  However,  recent  studies 
suggest  that  botulinum  toxin  products  product  may  be  viable 
for much longer when properly handled. A double-blind, rand-
omized study of 30 patients showed no significant difference in 
the treatment of canthal lines between those treated with Botox 
reconstituted  with  sterile,  non-preserved  saline  immediately 
prior  to  injection  compared  with  toxin  reconstituted  1  week 
prior to injection [7]. Furthermore, another study demonstrated 
that  Botox  reconstitution  at  times  ranging  1–6  weeks  prior  to 
injection produced statistically similar results in patients treated 
for  glabellar  rhytides  compared  with  product  reconstitution 
1  day  prior  to  injection  [8]. While none of these three agents 
should be shaken, they are often lightly swirled upon reconstitu-
tion – and it is recommended that Xeomin actually be inverted 
to most effectively reconstitute the product.

safety and contraindications

Botulinum  toxinA  has  a  large  margin  of  safety,  with  an  esti-
mated human median lethal dose of 1.3–2.1 ng/kg when injected 
intramuscularly  or  intravenously.  This  correlates  to  a  LD50  of 
approximately 26–42 U/kg, making its cosmetic use a relatively 
safe  endeavor  at  recommended  cosmetic  doses  [9,10].  Care 
should be taken to use the necessary dosing ranges in a given 
region in order to optimize patient satisfaction and preserve a 
natural result. Injectors should possess excellent knowledge of 
facial  anatomy,  especially  considering  the  close  proximity  of 
adjacent musculature that may not be part of the intended area 
of treatment.

Contraindications to BoNTA are few and are listed in Table 
40.2 along with several medications that require caution when 
administering BoNTA [11].

table 40.2  Precautions	and	contraindications.

Precaution

Cyclosporine

Aminoglycoside	antibiotics

D-penicillamine

contraindication

Myasthenia	gravis

Lambert–Eaton	syndrome

Mechanism

Has	been	reported	to	cause	
neuromuscular	blockade,	possibly	
through	calcium	channel	blockade

Large	doses	can	prevent	release	of	
acetylcholine	from	neurons

May	cause	formation	of	antibodies	
targeting	acetylcholine	receptor

Autoantibodies	targeting	
acetylcholine	receptor

Paraneoplastic,	antibodies	
targeting	calcium	channels

Amyotrophic	lateral	sclerosis

Neurodegenerative	disease

Pregnancy	or	breastfeeding

Insufficient	safety	data

Allergy	to	any	constituent	of	BoNTA Potential	for	anaphylaxis

standard injection techniques

General considerations
Prior to treatment, patients should be informed that the typical 
duration of efficacy is likely to be 3–4 months, and potential side 
effects  should  be  discussed.  Duration  studies  comparing  the 
duration of efficacy for the various type A toxins have yielded 
mixed results and it is not clear which toxin, if any, has the most 
long-lasting effect. The mean onset of action for BoNTA should 
also be discussed with the patient, as some patients may have 
misperceptions and expect immediate results. While it has been 
published  that  Dysport  onset  often  starts  by  Day  1,  a  recent 
Botox  study  demonstrated  that  approximately  half  of  patients 
experience  initial  onset  by  post-injection  day  1  and  nearly  all 
patients will experience onset of action by day 4 [12].

Informed  consents  should  clearly  indicate  that  treatment  of 
areas other than those approved by the FDA constitute off-label 
use. Consent should be in the form of an oral discussion as well 
as a signed, written document. Pretreatment asymmetries and 
scars should always be discussed, documented, and we also rec-
ommend photography prior to treatment.

Patient satisfaction may be improved by the application of ice 
packs to the intended treatment areas prior to injection of toxin. 
This serves a two-fold purpose by providing mild anesthesia to 
the treatment area as well as causing vasoconstriction, thereby 
potentially decreasing the risk of bruising.

While  we  provide  suggested  doses  (herein  listed  in  Botox 
units) for various injection techniques, it must be remembered 
that  these  should  serve  as  guidelines  for  the  practitioner  and 
not as a “cookbook.” Treatment doses should be patient specific 
and be primarily based on prominence of individual muscles as 
well  as  patient  preference.  For  example,  the  corrugator  super-
cilii of the typical male patient are larger and more prominent 
than those of the average female. Additional consideration for 
the patient’s desired result should be made and addressed dur-
ing the pretreatment interview, as some patients prefer little to 
no movement in the treated muscles, while others may prefer a 
gentle softening of movement of treated area. The forehead, for 
example, is an area where it is very important to discuss this dif-
ference with patients.

Additionally, we caution against attempts to apply “conversion 
factors” to equate Botox, Dysport, and Xeomin. While they may 
provide a general guide for the beginner, we recommend that that 
the injector become familiar with the use and properties of each 
neuromodulator agent they choose to employ in their practice.

treatment of the upper face
Photodamage  and  overactive  musculature  can  cause  changes 
in  the  upper  face  that  convey  a  fatigued  or  angry  look  that  is 
often discordant with reality. Treatment of the upper face with 
BoNTA can lead to a more youthful, relaxed, and rested appear-
ance [13,14]. Data also support the use of BoNTA in multiple 
areas of the upper face in a single treatment session [15].

40. Botulinum Toxins

367

Forehead
The frontalis muscle is contiguous with the galea aponeurotica 
of  the  scalp  superiorly,  and  inserts  inferiorly  into  the  skin  of 
the  brow.  Its  configuration  varies  between  individuals  but  it 
is generally considered to be either a uniform band across the 
forehead or V-shaped with a relative absence of fibers medially 
(Figure 40.1). Fibers of the frontalis are oriented vertically, and 
thus when they contract the brows elevate and horizontal fore-
head lines become imprinted in the skin over time. The lateral 
fibers of the orbicularis oculi muscle pull down on the lateral 
brow, and thus directly oppose the upward forces of the frontalis. 
This  muscular  interaction  allows  for  the  creation  of  a  neuro-
toxin lateral brow lift (discussed below).

A recent Botox consensus article addressed treatment of hori-
zontal forehead lines caused by the frontalis [16]. The authors 
recommended  ranges  of  6–15 U  and  6  to  <15 U  BoNTA  for 
females  and  males,  respectively  (Table  40.3),  and  agreed  that 
doses  over  20 U  are  more  likely  to  lead  to  complications  or 
patient  dissatisfaction  (e.g.  eyebrow  ptosis  and  patient  com-
plaints  of  immobility  and  unnatural  appearance).  Forehead 
injections  of  BoNTA  are  generally  placed  over  4–9  injection 
sites.  In  order  to  avoid  eyebrow  ptosis,  the  injections  should 
generally not be placed any closer than 1–1.5 cm above the bony 
orbital rim (Figure 40.2). Patients with tall foreheads may ben-
efit from 2-3 rows of injections, and patients with wider fore-
heads  may  also  require  more  injection  sites.  Attention  to  the 
shape and positioning of the patients baseline brow is essential, 

Frontalis

Corrugator
supercilii

Procerus

Orbicularis
oculi

Figure  40.1  Relevant  musculature  of  the  upper  face.  (Source:  Sommer  B, 
Sattler G, eds. (2001) Botulinum Toxin in Aesthetic Medicine. Blackwell Science, 
Boston, MA. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)

and often injection sites in women are performed in an arch to 
try to preserve the arch of the brow below. Patients with derma-
tochalasis or low-set brows should be evaluated carefully prior 
to injection as they represent the population most at risk for sig-
nificant  eyebrow  ptosis  and/or  complaints  of  “heaviness”  after 
treatment. Accordingly, older patients who are more dependent 
upon their frontalis for brow elevation will typically not tolerate 
(or at least not like) the higher doses that younger patients will 

table 40.3  Treatment	recommendations	by	site	(Botox	units).

treatment site

Muscles

Upper face

Horizontal	forehead	lines

Frontalis

Glabellar	complex

Procerus,	depressor	supercilii,	orbicularis	oculi

Crow’s	feet

Orbicularis	oculi

Narrow	palpebral	aperture

Pretarsal	fibers	of	orbicularis	oculi

Lateral	brow	lift

Superolateral	fibers	of	orbicularis	oculi

Mid face

Bunny	lines

Gummy	smile

Lower face

Perioral	lines

Dimpled	chin

Nasalis

Levator	labii	superioris	alaeque	nasi

Orbicularis	oris

Mentalis

Downturned	smile

Depressor	anguli	oris

Platysmal	bands

Nefertiti	lift

Masseter	hypertrophy

Platysma

Platysma

Masseter

typical number of injection 
points

typical total Botox units *

Women

Men

4–9

5–7

2–5	per	side

1	per	side

1–2	per	side

1	per	side

1	per	side

4–6	per	lip

1–2

1–2

2–12	per	band

7	per	side

5–6	per	side

6–15

10–30

10–30

2

8–12

3–5

1–2

4–12

4–8

6–8

20–35

28–42

50–60

6	to	>15

20–40

20–30

2

8–12

3–5

1–2

4–12

4–8

6–8

20–35

28–42

50–60

*Suggested	doses	are	based	on	Botox	units	in	this	table.	All	sites	other	than	glabellar	complex	(Botox,	Dysport,	Xeomin)	and	crow’s	feet	(Botox)	are	currently	“off	label”	in	the	USA.

368

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

(a)

(b)

Figure 40.2  Horizontal forehead lines before (a) and after (b) Botox injection.

tolerate, and thus are most frequently treated with lower doses. 
Patients  with  significant  etched-in  lines  immediately  superior 
to their lateral brows  are  also patients  who  may  frequently be 
advised  not  to  have  BoNTA  treatment  as  they  depend  on  the 
baseline  action  of  the  lower  frontalis  fibers  to  hoist  the  brow 
upward  and  away  from  their  eyelid.  These  patients  may  ben-
efit from other treatments including tightening devices, lifting 
devices,  filler  agents  to  occupy  volume,  or  surgical  correction 
with brow lift techniques.

Additionally, it is recommended that the frontalis be treated 
usually in conjunction with the glabella (discussed below). The 
frontalis  is  the  only  elevator  of  the  brow,  and  when  rendered 
less functional by treatment by BoTNA in the context of active 
glabellar muscles (which are depressors), this will result in an 
overall  lowering  of  the  brow.  This  will  have  the  tendency  to 
cause an unacceptable cosmetic (forehead heaviness and brow 
downward  repositioning,  or  flat  brow  instead  or  arched),  and 
sometimes functional (brow ptosis), result.

Glabella
The  glabellar  complex  (Figure  40.1)  represents  the  site  most 
commonly  treated  with  BoNTA.  The  glabella  is  the  only  cos-
metic site for which all three type A botulinum toxins currently 
on  the  US  market  have  FDA  approval.  It  is  one  of  the  easiest 
sites  to  treat,  and  thus  is  a  good  place  for  novice  injectors  to 
begin. Both the corrugator supercilii and the depressor super-
cilii originate on the nose and insert into the mid-brow. These 
muscles draw the brow medially and downward, creating ver-
tical  lines  in  the  glabella.  Treatment  of  these  brow  depressors 
with BoNTA leads to relaxation of these muscles, which usually 
results in a medial lift of the brow to some extent. The procerus 
muscle originates on the nasal bridge and inserts into skin of the 
mid-glabella. Contraction of the procerus also pulls the medial 
brow down, but with the pure vertical orientation of this muscle 
a horizontal line becomes etched in the skin with contraction 
over time.

Glabellar doses of Botox typically range from 10–30 total U 
in women and 20–40 U in men, with the FDA approval pivotal 
study showing efficacy of 20 units in most patients. Injections 
are  most  commonly  placed  in  five  specific  sites:  one  injection 
in the procerus, one in each of the medial corrugators, and one 
in each of the lateral corrugators (Figure 40.3). Sometimes, in 
patients  who  display  significant  medial  recruitment  above  the 
mid-brow, 1–2 additional injection sites can be helpful to avoid 
this central pulling. Other patients who have smaller corruga-
tor supercilii may be adequately treated with a total of 3 injec-
tion sites. Again, this highlights the need for individualization 
of treatment plans from patient to patient to determine not only 
dose but also injection points. Some injectors choose to literally 
“thread”  small  droplets  of  neurmodulators  along  a  muscle  to 
limit injection points and target more of the muscle. Anatomi-
cally, patients can have different orientations of the corrugator 
muscles  from  vertically-oriented  to  horizontally-oriented  to 
more of a diagonal-in between-pattern [17], and thus injection 
targets may be different. In most circumstances, these agents are 
not  placed  any  closer  than  about  1 cm  above  the  bony  orbital 
rim in the mid-pupillary line in order to try to avoid lid ptosis. 
Lid  ptosis  can  occur  from  migration  of  the  toxin  through  the 
orbital septum to knock out the function of the levator palpebrae 
superioris muscle (which functions to elevate the lid upwards).

Periorbital
The  orbicularis  oculi  muscle  is  a  circular,  sphincter-like  mus-
cle that surrounds the eye and functions in eyelid closure. The 
circularity of this muscle creates an anatomical structure com-
posed  of  fibers  running  in  multiple  directions.  The  muscular 
diversity of the orbicularis oculi creates functional diversity in 
animation of the periorbital area. For example, the lateral and 
superolateral fibers of the orbicularis oculi immediately below 
the brow function as brow depressors. Treatment of the lateral 
canthal  rhytides  (commonly  described  as  crow’s  feet)  is  often 
satisfying for the novice injector and the patient. Because of the 

40. Botulinum Toxins

369

(a)

(b)

Figure 40.3  Glabellar frown lines before (a) and after (b) Botox injection.

presence of many small vessels in the lateral periocular area, it 
is often recommended to place BoNTA injections superficially 
(even intradermally) in this region, usually creating a wheal at 
the injection site. For treatment of lateral canthal rhytides, the 
injector typically chooses 2–5 injection points per side, depend-
ing on the prominence of the musculature of the area. The real-
ity is that orbicularis oculi muscle prominence varies between 
patients, making individual assessment of anatomy and patterns 
of  dynamic  muscular  lines  helpful  prior  to  treatment  of  each 
patient  [18].  Typically,  5–15  units  of  Botox  are  injected  into 
each side (Figure 40.4). Care should be taken to inject no closer 
than 0.5–1 cm to the lateral orbital rim in order to avoid migra-
tion  of  toxin  causing  unintended  paralysis  of  ocular  muscles. 
In many circumstances, the needle can be inserted medially, so 
that the tip of the needle is pointing lateral – thereby focusing on 
softening the lateral canthal musculature while trying to avoid 

medial migration which could rarely affect the eye lubrication 
or extra-ocular musculature.

In  a  small minority of patients, pretarsal bands of the orbi-
cularis  oculi  muscle  can  be  hypertrophic  at  the  lower  lid.  A 
hyperfunctional,  pretarsal  orbicularis  oculi  muscle  can  cause 
unsightly bands (also known as “jelly rolls”) around the lower 
eyelid and narrowing of the palpebral aperture which are espe-
cially evident when smiling. If treating this infraorbital type of 
hyperfunctional musculature, it is recommended to first evalu-
ate lower lid laxity with a “snap-test” to ensure lid competency 
after the muscle is weakened. Typically, 1–2 units of Botox are 
used in this pretarsal area for patients who complain of signifi-
cant muscle prominence of this area, or those who desire chang-
ing the shape of their eye from an almond-type shape to that of a 
more rounded eye with a widened palpebral aperture. Injections 
are placed carefully from a lateral approach subdermally, about 

(a)

(b)

Figure 40.4  “Crow’s feet” before (a) and after (b) Botox injection.

370

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

3 mm below the ciliary margin in the mid-pupillary line [16]. A 
lateral approach in this area helps to ensure a superficial injec-
tion, and to allow the non-injecting hand to pull down the lower 
lid and protect the patient from movement. The patient should 
be lying back against a solid headrest, and the needle is usually 
oriented purely horizontally and placed very shallow.

Lateral brow lift
In patients with downturned or ptotic lateral brows, either from 
dermatochalasis,  overactive  lateral  orbicularis  oculi  activity 
pulling  down  on  the  tail  of  the  brow,  or  inadvertent  paralysis 
of the most inferior fibers of the frontalis after aggressive fore-
head  BoNTA  treatment,  partial  correction  can  sometimes  be 
achieved  with  a  BoNTA  chemical  brow  lift.  This  lateral  brow 
lift  can  be  obtained  by  injection  into  the  superolateral  fib-
ers  of  the  orbicularis  oculi  muscle.  This  technique  relaxes  the 
specific  aspect  of  the  orbicularis  oculi  that  is  pulling  the  lat-
eral  brow  downward,  and  carefully  tries  to  avoid  some  of  the 
adjacent  inferolateral  frontalis  fibers  just  superior  to  the  brow 
– as these frontalis fibers can be helpful to try to pull the lateral 
brow upward. To accomplish this effect, the injector places 3–6 
units of Botox just below the lateral infrabrow [19]. Identifica-
tion  of  this  injection  site  requires  that  the  patient  first  elevate 
their  brows  to  find  the  lateral  margin  of  the  frontalis  muscle 
(known as the temporal fusion plane). Second, the patient must 
close their eyes forcefully in order to localize the area where the 
orbicularis oculi exerts maximal medial and downward pull on 
the lateral brow. The proper injection point is just inferior to the 
point of maximal pull downward on the brow, but making sure 
this site is at least 1–1.5 cm inferior to the most lateral fibers of 
the frontalis muscle (Figure 40.5). Avoiding these trailing lateral 
frontalis fibers allows for the preservation of the lift the lateral 
frontalis normally provides at baseline. Patients with more sig-
nificant  brow  redundancy  can  sometimes  be  improved  with  a 

Figure 40.5  The lateral bow lift can be obtained by injection into the supe-
rolateral  fibers  of  the  orbicularis  oculi  muscle.  This  technique  relaxes  the 
specific aspect of the orbicularis oculi that is pulling the lateral brow down-
ward. (Source: Sommer B, Sattler G, eds. (2001) Botulinum Toxin in Aesthetic 
Medicine. Blackwell Science, Boston, MA. Reproduced with permission of 
John Wiley & Sons.)

combination of BoNTA in conjunction with small volumes of 
fillers (e.g. 0.1–0.2 mL of a hyaluronic acid product) placed just 
below the lateral brow (often facilitated by using a blunt-tipped 
cannula) or an energy based lifting device such as focused ultra-
sound  or  radiofrequency,  but  clearly  those  with  more  severe 
dermatochalasis can really only be effectively treated with surgi-
cal intervention.

treatment of the mid-face
Bunny lines
Contraction of the nasalis muscle creates diagonal lines along 
the proximal nasal sidewall. This area is becoming a more com-
mon area for BoNTA treatment. Patients seeking treatment of 
these lines often have experienced the benefits of BoNTA sof-
tening the forehead, glabella, and crow’s feet and are looking 
to  extend  a  more  relaxed  look  to  the  mid-face.  Identification 
of the muscle is straightforward and accomplished by having 
the  patient  “scrunch”  their  nose.  Three  to  five  units  of  Botox 
can be placed superficially into the muscle at the medial aspect 
of the proximal nasal sidewall on each side of the nose. Place-
ment of BoNTA too far laterally can lead to unwanted paralysis 
of the adjacent levator labii superioris alaeque nasi (LLSAN), 
resulting in elongation or drooping of the upper lip. The final 
cosmetic result can often be enhanced with concomitant treat-
ment  of  the  procerus  in  some  patients  with  more  significant 
bunny lines that seem to be most bulky on the midline proximal 
nasal dorsum.

Softening of the nasolabial fold and “gummy smile”
An  overactive  LLSAN  can  be  a  component  of  an  accentu-
ated or prominent superior nasolabial fold. Treatment of the 
LLSAN  can  be  an  option  for  young  patients  looking  to  sof-
ten  the  superior  aspect  of  the  nasolabial  fold  without  using 
fillers  or  at  a  lower  cost  than  fillers.  A  total  of  1–2  units  of 
Botox can often achieve a softening of the top of the nasolabial 
fold, and a 1992 anatomic study by Pessa illustrated that the 
LLSAN is actually the more important muscle contributing to 
the prominence of the nasolabial fold. Higher doses (typically 
3–5 units) of BoNTA are usually used at the same location for 
patients with significant gummy smiles. Injection of 3–5 units 
per  side  of  BoNTA  into  the  belly  of  LLSAN  at  the  pyriform 
aperture  can  elongate  the  upper  cutaneous  lip  and  partially 
correct  the  excessive  gingival  display  [20].  Doses  of  5–7.5 
units of Botox in patients with very severe gummy smiles have 
been reported [20].

In  cases  of  a  prominent  nasolabial  fold  or  a  gummy  smile, 
injection  of  the  LLSAN  is  primarily  a  treatment  for  younger 
patients  who  can  compensate  for  the  resulting  pronounced 
elongation of the cutaneous lip with other musculature. In addi-
tion to the LLSAN, the muscles responsible for the elevation of 
the upper lip, particularly in younger individuals, are the leva-
tor labii superioris, levator anguli oris, zygomaticus major and 
minor, and the depressor septi nasi. Older patients seem to be 
more reliant on primarily the levator labii muscles alone.

40. Botulinum Toxins

371

treatment of the lower face
Treatment of the perioral area, and lower face in general, can have an 
increased risk of adverse side effects given that muscles around the 
mouth play an important functional role for speaking, eating, and 
drinking. Therefore it is best that the clinician gain experience with 
injection of BoNTA on other, more forgiving areas of the face (i.e., 
glabella, crow’s feet) before attempting injections on the lower face.

Perioral lines
The lips are the cosmetic focal point of the lower face and care-
ful,  conservative  corrections  can  often  dramatically  improve 
aspects of an aging face. Vertical “etched in” lines of the perio-
ral skin are common and are caused by years of contraction of 
the orbicularis oris muscle, a sphincter-like muscle that encir-
cles the mouth. Etched-in lines are preceded by years of vertical 
muscle columns in women, leading eventually to imprinting of 
the perioral skin. The skin in this area is highly innervated and 
vascular, and therefore injections into this region are generally 
associated  with  more  discomfort  and  can  be  associated  with 
bruising or swelling. Topical anesthetics and/or the application 
of ice-packets can be very beneficial.

Tenants of injecting BoNTA into the lip musculature include: 
use of low doses with frequent follow-up for retreatment, preser-
vation of symmetry utilizing photography and carefully placed 
injections,  treatment  of  both  upper  and  lower  lips  at  the  same 
time, and avoidance of midline injections to preserve the desirable 
Cupid’s bow. Injection technique varies depending on individual 
anatomy, but typical treatments include four superficial injection 
sites in the upper lip (two points on each side of the upper lip) 
just above the vermillion border. In patients with more signifi-
cant vertical muscle columns (taller, bulkier, deeper) sometimes 
an additional site on each side of the upper lip (often 1 cm above 
the vermillion border placed between the lower injection sites) 
can  be  helpful.  For  the  lower  lip,  usually  2–4  superficial  injec-
tion sites are performed as well (two sites on each side of midline 
approximately 1.5 cm apart). It is important to inject superficially 
and use lower dosages, especially for a patient’s first treatment. 
Follow-up  2  weeks  later  will  typically  allow  the  injector  to  see 
if  additional  units  may  be  helpful.  Some  have  advocated  doses 
for perioral injection to be in a range of 4–5 units of Botox [16], 
while  another  recent  study  demonstrated  equivalent  reduction 
in hyperdynamic perioral lines with a total of 7.5 units versus 12 
units using four injection sites [21].

Dimpled chin
The mentalis muscle originates in the incisive fossa and inserts 
into the skin of the chin. Contraction of this muscle can create 
a  dimpled  appearance  of  the  chin  that  has  been  termed  “peb-
bled  chin,”  “golfball  chin,”  “peau  d’  orange  chin,”  and  “apple 
dumpling chin.” A total of 4–8 U of Botox , placed as a single 
midline injection (or sometimes in two points 0.5 cm lateral to 
midline at the bony part of the chin), can be very effective. Prod-
uct placed too far laterally risks paralysis of the depressor labii 
inferioris and can cause speech problems.

DAO

Figure  40.6  Treatment  of  a  downturned  smile  is  accomplished  by  injec-
tion  into  the  posterior  fibers  of  the  depressor  anguli  oris  (DAO)  muscles. 
(Source:  Sommer  B,  Sattler  G,  eds.  (2001)  Botulinum  Toxin  in  Aesthetic 
Medicine. Blackwell Science, Boston, MA. Reproduced with permission of 
John Wiley & Sons.)

Downturned smile
Descent of the lateral commissures of the mouth can result from 
gravity and volume loss and sometimes from hypertrophy of the 
depressor  anguli  oris  (DAO)  muscle.  Injection  of  Botox  (3–4 
units per side) into the posterior aspect of the DAO in a single 
injection  site  can  sometimes  partially  correct  this  appearance 
of a downturned smile (Figure 40.6). Complications associated 
with medial diffusion or injection of BoNTA into the depressor 
labii  inferioris  are  discussed  below.  DAO  prominence  is  often 
associated with volume loss of the lower face, and in our expe-
rience combination treatment with fillers and BoNTA is more 
consistently effective than BoNTA alone.

Platysmal bands
The platysma is a thin, superficial muscle that can create vertical 
bands in the neck which are displeasing to many patients. Patient 
selection is key to successful treatment of this condition, and the 
most  appropriate  candidates  are  those  with  prominent  vertical 
bands at rest. A typical treatment session includes injection of 2–3 
bands with 20–35 U of BoNTA total (2–12 injection points per 
band). Dysphagia is a rare complication that has been reported 
with  cosmetic  use  of  BoNTA  in  higher  doses  for  treatment  of 
platysmal bands [22]. Conservative treatment, with low dosages 
and superficial injections, is recommended in order to avoid this 
very rare and disturbing complication that can persist for weeks. 
Marking  injection  points  and  pinching  the  band  between  the 
thumb and forefinger can aid in the precise superficial placement 
of BoNTA in small aliquots at approximately 1.5 cm intervals.

In  addition  to  the  treatment  of  platysmal  bands,  placement 
of toxin along the inferior margin of the mandible and in the 
superior aspect of the posterior platysmal band may redefine the 
mandibular border. This procedure has been termed the “Nefer-
titi  lift”  and  was  described  by  Levy  in  a  study  of  130  patients 
[23].  Patients  were  treated  with  2–3  units  of  Botox  per  injec-
tion site, with five sites being along the margin of the mandible 
and two sites being in the superior aspect of the posterior pla-
tysmal band. It was hypothesized that the resultant sharpening 
of the mandibular border was secondary to partial reversal of 
the chronic downward pull on the cheeks by the platysma. At 

372

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

present, placement of fillers along the mandibular margin has 
helped to achieve a more consistent recontouring of the jawline.

Masseter hypertrophy
Prominent masseter bulk over the posterior mandible can create 
a squared-off shape to the face which is not desirable to some 
people. A study of 45 patients with masseter hypertrophy were 
treated  with  BoNTA  and  followed  for  10  months  [24].  Total 
doses of 25 to 30 units of Botox were injected into each mas-
seter in 5–6 injection points. The maximum reduction in mas-
seter thickness as measured by ultrasound was seen at 1 month, 
and  CT  scan  found  continued  reduction  of  masseter  muscle 
thickness up to 3 months after treatment. Eighty-two percent of 
patients were satisfied with the treatment. Local adverse effects 
included  masticatory  difficulties  (44%  of  patients)  and  speech 
disturbance (16% of patients). All side effects were transient.

A  study  specifically  measuring  bite  force  in  patients  treated 
with 25 units of Botox per masseter (50 units total) reported sig-
nificant bite-force reduction at 2, 4, and 8 weeks post-injection 
(p < 0.05) [25]. Difference in bite-force reduction was not statis-
tically significant at the 12-week measurement, and while bite-
force measurements trended upward, they still did not achieve 
preinjection  values  at  the  end  of  12  weeks.  So  while  injection 
can beneficially alter the shape of the masseter, it may alter mas-
tication. Further study is needed to better define the duration 
and significance of the observed bite-force reduction.

Combination of botulinum toxin with fillers

While BoNTA treatment works well for dynamic rhytides, resting 
lines and volume loss are not corrected by neurotoxin placement 
alone. Combination treatment consisting of hyaluronic acid and 
BoNTA often yield impressive results and may double the dura-
tion  of  response  compared  with  filler  treatment  alone  in  some 
areas  [26].  Combination  therapy  can  be  useful  in  the  glabella, 
periorbital  area,  perioral,  mentalis,  jawline  and  sometimes  the 
nasolabial creases. Placement of filler prior to BoNTA treatment 
may decrease untoward migration of same-day toxin caused by 
massage of the filler molding and the common practice of con-
firming placement of the filler product after injection.

Complications and management

Bruising, swelling, and mild asymmetry are commonly encoun-
tered issues. Less common is migration of toxin to adjacent but 
unintended musculature, which can result in significant asym-
metry. Eyebrow ptosis can occur from toxin placement too close 
to the brow in the frontalis muscle, poor patient selection and 
use of higher dosages in the forehead. In fact, a 2008 consensus 
publication  recommended  using  about  half  the  frontalis  dose 
of BoNTA previously suggested in an earlier statement by the 
same group [16].

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, glabellar study, head-
ache occurred in 20% of patients in the placebo group vs. 11.4% 
in the BoNTA treated group, leading authors to conclude that 
headache was likely related to trauma from the injection needle 
itself  [27].  A  non-blinded  case  series  of  320  patients  treated 
for  cosmetic  reasons  with  BoNTA  reported  the  occurrence  of 
severe, debilitating headaches in 1% of patients treated [28]. In 
this study, these headaches occurred within 2 days of injection 
with BoNTA and persisted at a high level for 2 weeks to 1 month 
after injection.

It is best to wipe off the patient’s make-up prior to injection 
(particularly in the lateral canthal area) in order to best identify 
little veins in the area and avoid them. This also reduces the risk 
of introducing foreign make-up material into the skin. Ice prior 
to injection to facilitate vasoconstriction is also very helpful in 
helping to reduce the mild pain of the injections themselves. If 
patients  are  on  prophylactic  medications  or  supplements  that 
may have an anticoagulant effect, it may be helpful if they discon-
tinue these agents a few days prior to injection. An example of 
such an agent would be the use of aspirin as a preventive measure 
in  patients  lacking  a  history  of  atherosclerotic  disease,  stroke, 
clot,  or  atrial  fibrillation.  However,  patients  on  anticoagulant 
therapies  for  specific  purposes  (i.e.,  prior  deep  vein  thrombo-
sis,  valvular  disease,  etc)  should  generally  avoid  modifying  the 
dose or discontinuing their medication for these small cosmetic 
injectable procedures.

Immunogenicity to BoNTA has been reported in the litera-
ture  but  is  very  rare  in  patients  treated  with  the  newer  (post-
1997)  formulation  of  Botox.  The  newer  formulation  of  Botox 
has  only  20%  of  the  protein  content  that  the  older  batch  had 
(pre-1997), and presumably has made the product significantly 
less immunogenic. One case report, however, describes neutral-
izing antibody formation to the post-1997 formulation of Botox 
in a patient treated cosmetically for masseter hypertrophy [29]. 
Presence of neutralizing antibody was supported by two posi-
tive mouse protection assays and by ELISA testing [29]. Risks 
associated  with  immunogenicity  are  very  large  doses  of  toxin 
(more frequent in therapeutic uses of BoNTA) and short inter-
vals (less than 3 months) between high-dose injections [30].

Generalized reactions have been reported related to toxicity 
and  include  headache,  nausea,  malaise,  fatigue,  flu-like  symp-
toms, and rashes distant to injection sites. These reactions have 
arisen  from  improper  dosages  and  the  use  of  “experimental 
strains of botulinum toxin” [31]. In studies measuring complica-
tions in patients treated with legitimate BoNTA, adverse events 
occurred in similar frequencies in both treatment and placebo 
groups.  Most  post-injection  issues  are  transient  in  nature  and 
resolve  spontaneously,  requiring  no  intervention  other  than 
reassurance.

Upper face
Injection into the frontalis muscle can lead to brow ptosis, and 
patients can develop a quizzical look (raising of the lateral brow 
because of residual non-treated frontalis fibers pulling upward) 

if only medial fibers of the frontalis are treated. This “Mr. Spock” 
look can usually be easily treated with placement of 1–2 units in 
each side of the lateral functional frontalis. In addition, patients 
can  rarely  experience  painful  electric  shock-like  sensations  if 
the supraorbital or supratrochlear sensory nerves are inadvert-
ently hit with the injection needle.

Eyelid ptosis is also uncommon (less than 1% of patients in 
the  hands  of  experienced  injectors)  and  presumably  occurs 
when  injecting  the  lateral  corrugator  area,  with  migration  of 
toxin through the orbital septum leading to the paralysis of the 
levator  palpebrae  superioris.  This  is  a  transient  event  (gener-
ally resolving by 2–3 weeks) and can be treated to some extent, 
but often not fully, by using ophthalmic drops such as Naph-
con (Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA; can be purchased over-the-
counter)  which  exert  mild  adrenergic  effects,  or  prescription 
Iopidine (Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA) drops [22]. The mecha-
nism of both treatments is adrenergic stimulation and contrac-
tion of the adjacent Mueller’s muscle which can partially raise 
the  eyelid.  Iopidine  may  mask  underlying  glaucoma  so  this 
treatment  should  be  reserved  for  short  periods  of  treatment 
such as 3–5 weeks [32].

Lower face
Treatment of the orbicularis oris muscle for correction of verti-
cal  lip  lines  can  very  rarely  lead  to  drooling  or  difficulty  with 
phonation. Thus, when treating vertical muscle columns caused 
by  a  hyperfunctional  orbicularis  oris  muscle,  care  should  be 
taken to use lower dosages and avoid overtreatment. In addition, 
medial placement of these injections can help avoid unintended 
musculature being affected, especially near the oral commissure. 
However, care should be taken to not place injections to closely 
to  the  philtrum  and  cupid’s  bow  area,  as  this  may  produce  an 
undesirable flattening effect and loss of lip definition.

Correction  of  downturned  smile  is  best  accomplished  with 
careful BoNTA placement in the posterior aspect of the depres-
sor  anguli  oris  muscle.  This  posterior  placement  helps  avoid 
unintended medial migration and effect on the depressor labii 
inferioris,  a  complication  that  can  cause  slurred  speech  and 
drooling  and  lasts  weeks  to  months  [33].  Similar  to  injection 
of the lateral canthus, consider introducing the needle medially 
and pointing it laterally to try to avoid medial spread from the 
DAO. Injection of BoNTA into the neck for softening of platys-
mal bands has in one report led to prolonged dysphagia second-
ary to paralysis of the deeper strap muscles requiring placement 
of nasogastric tube [22]. This event can be best avoided by fol-
lowing the recently revised recommendations presented in this 
chapter.

Even  the  most  experienced  of  injectors  may  observe  asym-
metric treatment effect, despite consistent technique, especially 
when  treating  many  patients.  This  unbalanced  appearance  is 
usually easily corrected with additional enhancement injections. 
Finally, temporary strabismus or diplopia are extremely rare and 
infrequently reported, and likely occur by either large diffusion 
or direct injection of toxin into the extraocular muscles.

40. Botulinum Toxins

373

on the horizon

A  topical  formulation  of  BoNTA  (RT001,  Revance  Therapeu-
tics,  Inc.,  Newark,  CA,  USA)  is  currently  in  Phase  3  clinical 
trials  and  is  being  investigated  for  various  cosmetic  and  non-
cosmetic applications. Cosmetic use for topical formulations of 
BoTNA will likely be limited to areas where skin is thin, under-
lying  musculature  lies  superficially,  and  extremely  accurate 
placement of toxin is not necessary. Currently, RT001 is being 
tested  for  treatment  of  lateral  canthal  lines  [34],  but  may  also 
have use for hyperhidrosis.

Notably,  a  novel  alternative  to  neurotoxins  for  temporary 
reduction  of  dynamic  rhytides  on  the  forehead  has  recently 
gained approval in Europe. The device, called iovera° (Myosci-
ence,  Redwood  City,  CA,  USA),  uses  focused  cold  therapy  to 
temporarily  inhibit  motor  nerve  conduction  in  the  temporal 
branch of the facial nerve. This results in inhibition of voluntary 
contraction of the frontalis and glabella muscle groups [35].

references

1  Huang W, Foster JA, Rogachefsky AS. (2000) Pharmacology of bot-

ulinum toxin. J Am Acad Dermatol 43, 249–59.

2  Carruthers  JDA,  Carruthers  JA.  (1992)  Treatment  of  glabellar 
frown lines with C. botulinum exotoxin. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 18, 
17–21.

3  Sadick NS, Matarasso SL. (2004) Comparison of botulinum toxins 
A and B in the treatment of facial rhytides. Dermatol Clin 22, 221–6.
4  Ting PT, Freiman A. (2004) The story of Clostridium botulinum: 

from food poisoning to Botox®. Clin Med 4, 258–61.

5  Matarasso SL. (2003) Comparison of botulinum toxin types A and 
B: a bilateral and double-blind randomized evaluation in the treat-
ment of canthal rhytides. Dermatol Surg 29, 7–13.

6  Dressler D, Benecke R. (2007) Pharmacology of therapeutic botu-

linum toxin preparations. Disabil Rehabil 29, 1761–8.

7  Lizarralde M, Gutierrez SH, Venegas A. (2007) Clinical efficacy of 
botulinum toxin type a reconstituted and refrigerated 1 week before 
its application in external canthus dynamic lines. Dermatol Surg 33, 
1328–33.

8  Hexsel  DM,  Trindade  de  Almeida  A,  Rutowitsch  M,  et  al.  (2003) 
Multicenter,  double-blind  study  of  the  efficacy  of  injections  with 
botulinum  toxin  type  A  reconstituted  up  to  6  consecutive  weeks 
before application. Dermatol Surg 29, 523–9.

9  Scott AB, Suzuki D. (1988) Systemic toxicity of botulinum toxin by 

intramuscular injection in the monkey. Mov Disord 3, 333–5.

10  Arnon  SS,  Schechter  R,  Inglesby  TV,  Henderson  DA,  Bartlett  JG, 
Ascher  MS,  Eitzen  E,  Fine  AD,  Hauer  J,  Layton  M,  Lillibridge  S, 
Osterholm  MT,  O’Toole  T,  Parker  G,  Perl  TM,  Russell  PK,  Swer-
dlow DL, Tonat K; Working Group on Civilian Biodefense. (2001) 
Botulinum toxin as a biological weapon: medical and public health 
management. JAMA 285, 1059–70.

11  Cote TR, Mohan AK, Polder JA, et al. (2005) Botulinum toxin type A 
injections: adverse events reported to the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration in therapeutic and cosmetic cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 53, 
407–15.

374

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

12  Beer KR, Boyd C, Patel RK, et al. (2011) Rapid onset of response 
and  patient-reported  outcomes  after  onabotulinumtoxinA  treat-
ment  of  moderate-to-severe  glabellar  lines.  J  Drugs  Dermatol  10, 
39–44.

13  Cox SE, Finn JC, Stetler L, et al. (2003) Development of the Facial 
Lines  Treatment  Satisfaction  Questionnaire  and  initial  results  for 
botulinum toxin type A-treated patients. Dermatol Surg 29, 444–9; 
discussion 449.

14  Finn JC, Cox SE, Earl ML. (2003) Social implications of hyperfunc-

tional facial lines. Dermatol Surg 29, 450–5. Review.

15  Flynn  TC.  (2006)  Update  on  botulinum  toxin.  Semin  Cutan  Med 

Surg 25, 115–21.

16  Carruthers  J,  Fagien  S,  Matarasso  SL,  and  the  Botox  Consensus 
Group.  (2008)  Advances  in  facial  rejuvenation:  botulinum  toxin 
type a, hyaluronic acid dermal fillers, and combination therapies: 
consensus  recommendations.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg  121  (Suppl), 
5–30S.

25  Ahn KY, Kim ST. (2007) The change of maximum bite force after 
botulinum toxin type a injection for treating masseteric hypertro-
phy. Plast Reconstr Surg 120, 1662–6.

26  Carruthers J, Carruthers A. (2003) A prospective, randomized, par-
allel group study analyzing the effect of BTX-A (Botox) and nonani-
mal  sourced  hyaluronic  acid  (NASHA,  Restylane)  in  combination 
compared with NASHA (Restylane) alone in severe glabellar rhytides 
in adult female subjects: treatment of severe glabellar rhytides with a 
hyaluronic acid derivative compared with the derivative and BTX-A. 
Dermatol Surg 29, 802–9.

27  Carruthers JD, Lowe NJ, Menter MA, Gibson J, Eadie N, Botox Gla-
bellar Lines II Study Group. (2003) Double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study of the safety and efficacy of botulinum toxin type A for patients 
with glabellar lines. Plast Reconstr Surg 112, 1089–98.

28  Alam M, Arndt KA, Dover JS. (2002) Severe, intractable headache 
after injection with botulinum a exotoxin: report of 5 cases. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 46, 62–5.

17  de  Almeida  AR,  da  Costa  Marques  ER,  Banegas  R,  Kadunc  BV. 
(2012) Glabellar contraction patterns: a tool to optimize botulinum 
toxin treatment. Dermatol Surg 38, 1506–15.

29  Lee S. (2007) Antibody-induced failure of botulinum toxin type A 
therapy in a patient with masseteric hypertrophy. Dermatol Surg 33 
(1 Spec No.), S105–10.

18  Kane MA. (2003) Classification of crow’s feet patterns among Cau-
casian women: the key to individualizing treatment. Plast Reconstr 
Surg 112(Suppl), 33–9S.

19  Cohen  JL,  Dayan  SH.  (2006)  Botulinum  toxin  type  A  in  the 
treatment of dermatochalasis: an open-label, randomized, dose-
comparison study. J Drugs Dermatol 5, 596–601.

20  Kane MA. (2003) The effect of botulinum toxin injections on the 
nasolabial fold. Plast Reconstr Surg 112 (Suppl), 66–72S; discussion 
73–4S.

21  Cohen JL, Dayan SH, Cox SE, et al.. (2012) OnabotulinumtoxinA 
dose-ranging study for hyperdynamic perioral lines. Dermatol Surg 
38, 1497–505.

22  Carruthers J, Carruthers A. (1999) Practical cosmetic Botox tech-

niques. J Cutan Med Surg 3 (Suppl 4), S49–52.

23  Levy  PM.  (2007) The  “Nefertiti  lift”:  a  new  technique  for  specific 

re-contouring of the jawline. J Cosmet Laser Ther 9, 249–52.

24  Park MY, Ahn KY, Jung DS. (2003) Botulinum toxin type A treat-
ment for contouring of the lower face. Dermatol Surg 29, 477–83.

30  Naumann M, Carruthers A, Carruthers J, et al. (2010) Meta-anal-
ysis of neutralizing antibody conversion with onabotulinumtoxinA 
(BOTOX®) across multiple indications. Mov Disord 25, 2211–8.
31  Bootleg Botox sentences. New York Times January 27, 2006. Avail-
able at: http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/27/national/27brfs.html? 
pagewanted=print&_r=0. Accessed August 5th, 2015.

32  Klein  AW.  (2003)  Complications,  adverse  reactions,  and  insights 

with the use of botulinum toxin. Dermatol Surg 29, 549–56.

33  Cohen  JL.  (2007)  Botulinum  neurotoxin  clinical  update.  Cosmet 

Dermatol 20, S3.

34  Glogau R, Blitzer A, Brandt F, et al. (2012) Results of a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety  of  a  botulinum  toxin  type  A  topical  gel  for  the  treatment 
of  moderate-to-severe  lateral  canthal  lines.  J  Drugs  Dermatol  11, 
38–45.

35  Hsu  M,  Stevenson  FF.  (2014)  Reduction  in  muscular  motility  by 
selective focused cold therapy: a preclinical study. J Neural Transm 
121, 15–20.

ChAPTEr 41
hyaluronic Acid Fillers

Mark S. Nestor, Emily L. Kollmann, and Nicole Swenson
Center for Clinical and Cosmetic Research, Aventura, FL, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Hyaluronic	acid	fillers	are	used	for	86%	of	the	volume	enhancing	procedures	performed	in	the	USA.
•	 Hyaluronic	acid	filler	are	popular	because	they	are	non-permanent	but	long-lasting,	have	few	allergic	aspects,	minimal	side	effects,	are	

relatively	painless	to	inject,	and	can	be	reversible.

•	 Hyaluronic	acid	is	a	polysaccharide,	specifically	a	glycosaminoglycan,	that	is	formed	from	repeating	D-glucuronic	acid	and	D-N-

acetylglucosamine	disaccharide	units.	The	disaccharide	units	are	linked	together	in	a	linear	chain	forming	a	large	polymer	with	a	total	
molecular	weight	of	greater	than	10 MDa.

•	 The	different	hyaluronic	acid	fillers	possess	various	hyaluronic	acid	concentrations,	sizes	of	particles,	gel	consistencies,	type	of	cross-

linking,	degree	of	cross-linking,	and	the	degree	of	gel	hardness.

•	 Hyaluronic	acids	are	injected	in	the	deep	dermis	for	optimal	volume	replacement.

Introduction

The  appearance  of  the  aging  face  is  a  compilation  of  intrinsic 
aging;  our  genetics  causing  the  preprogrammed  loss  of  fat, 
muscle, and bone as well skin elasticity changes, and extrinsic 
aging; primarily photodamage that affects collagen, elastin, and 
accelerates the intrinsic aging process [1]. One of the hallmarks 
of the aging face is the loss of tissue volume and as well as the 
accentuation of lines and folds [2]. While many procedures can 
be used to improve the appearance of the aging face, the use of 
soft tissue, dermal fillers has become one of the most popular 
ways of filling lines and wrinkles as well as replacing volume in 
the aging face [3].

According  to  recent  statistics  of  the  American  Society  of 
Aesthetic  Plastic  Surgeons,  the  use  of  dermal  fillers  is  only 
second to Botox as one of the most popular non-surgical cos-
metic procedures performed in 2013. Of all the dermal fillers 
used in the United States, hyaluronic acid fillers accounted for 
over 88% of fillers used. Also, an increased use of hyaluronic 
acid fillers of 31.5% over the previous year was reported [4]. 
While  hyaluronic  acid  fillers  may  not  be  “the  perfect”  filler 
in all aspects, they come very close to what most patients and 
physicians look for in the ideal filler, namely non-permanent 
but  long-lasting,  having  few  if  any  allergic  aspects,  mini-
mal side effects, relatively painless to inject, and finally safe 
because  of  the  reversible  nature  of  hyaluronic  acid  fillers. 

This  chapter  will  outline  the  science  and  use  of  hyaluronic 
acid fillers including:
 1.  The  chemical  composition  and  physical  properties  of 

hyaluronic acid fillers.

 2.  The indications for the variety of FDA approved fillers.
 3.  Injection techniques, both beginner and advanced.
 4.  Complications of filler injections and their solutions.
 5.  Future uses and indications for hyaluronic acid fillers.

Chemical composition and properties  
of hyaluronic acid fillers

At this time, there are eight marketed FDA approved hyaluronic 
acid fillers used in the United States. These are listed in Table 41.1. 
All hyaluronic acid fillers are formed from either bacterial based 
or animal-based hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid is a polysac-
charide,  specifically  a  glycosaminoglycan  that  is  formed  from 
repeating D-glucuronic acid and D-N-acetylglucosamine disac-
charide units. The disaccharide units are linked together in a lin-
ear chain forming a large polymer with a total molecular weight 
of greater than 10 MDA. While both animal based and bacterial-
based hyaluronic acid fillers are on the market, the vast major-
ity  of  utilized  fillers  are  based  on  bacterial  production.  Native 
hyaluronic acid would break down very quickly if injected into 
the  skin  and  needs  to  be  altered  and  stabilized  primarily  by 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

375

376

ANTI-AGING  Injectable Antiaging Techniques 

Table 41.1  Food	and	Drug	Administration	(FDA)	approved	hyaluronic	acid	
(HA)	fillers.

	• Allergan

–	Juvéderm™	Ultra/Juvéderm™	Ultra	Plus

–	Juvéderm	Voluma™	XC

	• Galderma

–	Restylane®

–	Perlane®

–	Restylane	Silk®

–	Restylane	Lyft®

	• Mentor

–	Prevelle™	Silk	(phased	out)

	• Merz

–	Belotero	Balance®

1No	esthetic	indication.

cross-linking to have a long resident life in the skin. Since the 
basis of all bacterial-based dermal fillers is the same, the differ-
ence of the fillers and their properties depend upon the type and 
degree of cross-linking as well as the manufacturing process that 
forms the ultimate filler [5].

The important chemical and physical properties of the different 
filler substances include as noted, the type and degree of cross-
linking,  the  total  hyaluronic  acid  concentration,  the  size  of  the 
particle and/or the consistency of the gel, and the degree of gel 
hardness or G prime.

The  most  commonly  used  hyaluronic  acid  products  in  the 
United  States  use  BDDE  (1,4-butanediol  diglycidyl  ether)  as 
cross-linking agents. This includes Juvederm, Perlane, Restylane 
and  now  Juvederm  Voluma  and  Belotero  which  are  the  most 
commonly  used  hyaluronic  acid  products  in  the  US.  Belotero 
has  a  unique  cohesive  polydensified  matrix  which  has  a  high 
concentration of non-cross-linked molecules and the degree to 
which the filler is cross-linked is not uniform, creating areas of 
greater and lesser density, thus polydensified [6].

The degree of cross-linking indicates the percentage of hyal-
uronic  acid  disaccharide  monomer  units  that  are  bound  to  a 
cross-linking  molecule.  For  hyaluronic  acid  fillers,  some  feel 
that when all factors are equal, a higher degree of a cross-linking 
agent may translate into a longer persistence of the filler. There 
are  questions,  however,  about  the  effect  that  the  cross-linking 
has  on  biocompatibility,  namely  setting  the  filler  as  a  foreign 
substance. Therefore, there may be an optimal degree of cross-
linking  that  may  give  the  longest  term  residence  in  the  skin 
without causing biocompatibility issues.

Total  HA  concentration  refers  to  the  amount  of  hyaluronic 
acid per ml in a product. It generally measures both cross-linked 
hyaluronic acid and free hyaluronic acid in a product. Free hyal-
uronic acid or uncross-linked hyaluronic acid is generally added 
in varying amounts to some products to improve lubrication or 
product flow. The most widely used hyaluronic acid products are 

of  similar  concentration  but  may  vary  as  to  the  degree  of  free 
or uncross-linked hyaluronic acid, gel hardness, and hyaluronic 
acid gel consistency. The two most popular hyaluronic acid prod-
uct lines, namely the Restylane product line and the Juvederm 
product line, are produced by different mechanical means. The 
Restylane product line is sieved, thus it is pressed through screens 
to split the molecules into different size particles; the smallest in 
Restylane  Silk  and  the  largest  in  Restylane  Lyft.  The  Juvederm 
line is manufactured in a way that homogenizes the particles in a 
blender-type apparatus. Juvederm Voluma is created with a com-
bination of low and high molecular weight hyaluronic acid, cre-
ating a more mobile fiber network which facilitates cross-linking 
to 1,4 butanediol. 

Belotero  Balance  is  non-sieved,  meaning  no  particle  sizing 
occurs and the product consists of homogeneous masses of both 
cross-linked  and  non-cross-linked  hyaluronic  acid  molecules 
with variable shapes and sizes [7]. Belotero Balance begins with 
longer  strands  that  are  not  cross-linked  creating  softer  areas 
with less cross-linking and firmer areas with more cross-linking. 
The different formulations and production strategies yield dif-
ferent gel hardness or G prime to the variety of different prod-
ucts. Clinically, G prime can be thought of both as the amount 
of force that is necessary to inject a product through a specific-
sized needle, as well as the lifting capacity of the filler. In general, 
fillers that are thicker are more difficult to inject through smaller 
needles, but based on their properties can act to bring in more 
water and thus cause more tissue lifting in a given area. This is 
critical to the product’s in vivo behavior and clinical indication 
and the reason that products are not easily interchangeable.

Indications

Most HA fillers are FDA approved to fill “moderate to severe lines 
and  folds”  such  as  the  nasolabial  fold.  Juvederm  Voluma  and 
Restylane Lyft are approved for mid face volumization (Resty-
lane Lyft is also known as Perlane so that it is also approved for 
moderate to severe lines and folds such as the nasolabial fold).  
Restylane is also approved for lip augmentation and Restylane 
Silk is approved for lip augmentation as well as perioral lines. 

Historically, fillers such as collagen were used to fill fine lines 
and  wrinkles  including  those  in  the  perioral  and  periorbital 
regions.  Collagen  fillers  were  injected  in  the  mid-dermis  and 
usually had a clinical life in the skin of approximately three to six 
months. Hyaluronic acid fillers are generally injected deeper in 
the skin, most often below the dermis in the superficial subcuta-
neous layer and traditionally have primarily been indicated for 
deeper lines and folds [8,9]. Prior to the availability of Belotero 
Balance,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  Restylane  Silk,  hyaluronic  acid 
fillers  could  not  be  injected  superficially  because  of  the  risk 
of  the  Tyndall  effect;  whereby  the  filler  appears  as  a  blue  hue 
directly under the skin [10]. This occurs because the hyaluronic 
acid  implanted  into  the  superficial  dermis  scatters  the  light 
striking  it  so  that  blue  light,  which  has  a  shorter  wavelength, 

41. Hyaluronic Acid Fillers

377

is reflected back to an observer’s eye. Belotero Balance, which 
has been available in Europe for several years, is now available 
in the United States and has been used to inject superficial lines 
in the perioral, periorbital, and cheek areas. Tyndall effect has 
not been noted with Belotero Balance, even when the product 
is  injected  very  superficially  in  the  dermis  [11].  The  majority 
of hyaluronic acid fillers used to date were initially used in the 
nasolabial fold, mesiolabial fold as well as other similar lines and 
folds in the face. More recently, the use of hyaluronic acid fillers 
has also eclipsed into volume replacement. Thicker hyaluronic 
acid fillers such as Juvederm Voluma and Restylane Lyft are now 
are FDA approved for the indication of volume deficit replace-
ment  in  the  midface,  with  reports  of  durability  of  Juvederm 
Voluma of  up to 2 years after initial volume replacement [12].

Hyaluronic acid fillers may be used to augment areas such as 
the lips by both replacing lost volume with aging and enhanc-
ing lip volume and Restylane Silk has also been shown to sig-
nificantly  improve  perioral  lines.  Additionally,  fillers  are  used 
to replace volume in areas such as the hands and resculpt and 
act as reshaping agents in areas such as the nose and the chin 
[13,14].  Hyaluronic  acid  fillers  have  significant  advantage  for 
these indications because of their longevity and overall low inci-
dence of inflammation and significant swelling.

Injection techniques

Fillers in general are injected using three basic techniques:
 1.  Droplet injection.
 2.  Linear threading either antegrade or retrograde.
 3.  Fanning.
 4.  Volumizing.
As noted, the majority of hyaluronic acid are injected either in the 
deep dermis or superficial subcutaneous layer and studies have 
shown that the vast majority of injections are in the sub cutaneous 
layer [9]. Most injectors use a combination of injection techniques 
depending upon the specific area that is being injected. Studies 
have shown that slower injection techniques tend to decrease side 
effects and swelling as well as decrease patient discomfort [15].

Patients are usually prepared by cleansing the area either with 
alcohol or another anti-infective topical cleansing substance. A 
topical  anesthethic  is  often  used  either  in  the  form  of  topical 
lidocaine, or compounded topicals that may include lidocaine 
and Betacaine. Many injectors also use cooling methods to both 
decrease pain of injection, as well as decrease swelling and bruis-
ing. Finally, although many HA fillers incorporate lidocaine in 
the filler product, many injector mix lidocaine with epinephrine 
into the filler prior to injection to decrease pain and bruising.  
As the injector gets more comfortable, advanced injection tech-
niques, specifically with regard to volume, may utilize the use 
of large volumes of hyaluronic acid filler to replace and sculpt 
volume in areas of loss and these injections may take place in 
the deeper subcutaneous tissue or under the muscle layer. When 
volumizing,  injections  should  create  a  network  of  scaffolding 

with small bolus, limiting complications such as biofilms. Injec-
tion sites that may be under the muscle include the tear troughs 
and malar regions [12].

Complications

Possible complications of hyaluronic acid fillers include uneven-
ness of the filler substance, inflammation, swelling, and bruis-
ing, injection of the hyaluronic acid filler too superficially in the 
dermis, and rarely vascular events and abscesses, both bacterial 
and  sterile  [16].  Swelling  and  bruising  can  be  thought  of  by 
some as complications, but are usually normally associated with 
any  filler  injection.  Depending  upon  the  injection  technique, 
swelling  and  bruising  may  be  common  but  can  often  be  mit-
igated  by  the  use  of  ice  as  well  as  the  use  of  a  slow  injection 
technique.  Patients  should  be  warned  that  they  certainly  can 
experience  some  swelling  and  bruising  for  at  least  the  first 
48 hours after injection. The most common type of complication 
is the unevenness of hyaluronic acid fillers. The clinician needs 
to  evaluate  a  patient  and  understand  very  clearly  the  needs 
of  that  patient  and  proper  injection  technique  to  minimize 
unevenness.  Patients  are  not  symmetrical  and  they  often  may 
need differing amounts of hyaluronic acid on one aspect of the 
face versus the other. It is also very important that the filler is 
massaged and the clinician can feel whether the various areas 
of  the  face  are  even  upon  completion  of  the  injection  of  the 
filler. If a patient comes back in or is referred for unevenness, 
there are two methods of correcting this complication. The first 
is to simply inject more filler to correct the imbalance, and the 
second is the use of hyaluronidase to dissolve the uneven filler. 
Most  unevenness  can  be  adjusted  by  injecting  small  amounts 
of filler in the contralateral side to even, however, when bumps 
and areas are too apparent or uneven, hyaluronidase, usually in 
25 to 200 units can be injected and within 48 hours the area of 
unevenness or of bulging can be dissolved [17].

When a filler is injected too superficially and a tindle effect 
occurs, oftentimes it can be extruded by making a small puncture 
with  a  #25 gauge  needle  and  massaging  the  filler  through  the 
opening. If this fails, hyaluronidase can be used to dissolve the 
filler. Finally, in those rare cases of sterile abscess or long-term 
inflammation,  topical  anti-inflammatories  can  be  used  some-
what successfully and when they fail, the use of clarithromycin 
may  also  be  effective.  Rarely  vascular  events  occur  including 
necrosis, embolization and retinal occlusion. If vascular events 
occur physicians should have a minimum of the following: hyal-
uronidase to hydrolyze the hyaluronic acid and increase tissue 
permeability, warm compresses and Sildenafil to increase vaso-
dilation, aspirin, Heparin, and Nitropaste [18].

The  development  of  biofilms  after  injection  of  fillers  is  a 
newly  recognized  complication.  It  is  very  rare  with  HA  fillers 
but may be more of a risk with longer acting volumizing fillers 
such as Juviderm Voluma. Biofilms are defined as an aggregate 
of microorganisms comprising cells adhering to each other to a 

378

ANTI-AGING  Injectable Antiaging Techniques 

surface and embedded within a self-secreted extracellular poly-
meric substance [19,20]. A biofilm occurs in the filler substance 
after bacteria from the skin surface is introduced to the product 
during  the  injection  and  this  may  occur  without  a  significant 
host response [21–23]. Biofilms present weeks to months after 
injection as erythematous, persistent, mildly tender nodules and 
more commonly occur after the injection of long lasting fillers 
versus hyaluronic acid fillers. Several bacterial strains have been 
cultured in animal models and because of the properties of the 
biofilm in the filler, substrate often has antibiotic resistant prop-
erties making successful treatment a challenge [24]. Treatment 
options for biofilms include the use of hyaluronidase, or pass-
ing  a  small  gauge  needle  back  and  forth  through  the  nodule 
allowing  dispersion. The  use  of  antibiotics  such  as  macrolides 
and  fluoroquinolones  have  also  been  suggested  for  the  treat-
ment of biofilms [25,26].

Treatment optimization: persistence 
of dermal fillers and in vivo collagen 
stimulation

Hyaluronic acid fillers injected as a single treatment in the nasola-
bial fold, with or without one touch-up 1–2 weeks later usually 
just for the initial treatment, persists in a subset of patients for 
up  to  12 months  or  longer  [27].  It  has  generally  been  hypoth-
esized that the prolonged efficacy of stabilized hyaluronic acid 
fillers versus injectable substances such as collagen is attributed 
to the sustained persistence of the product in the skin due to the 
effect that cross-linking has on limiting breakdown from in vivo 
hyaluronidase.  However,  new  data  may  indicate  that,  in  addi-
tion to residual product left at each reinjection that provides a 
base, hyaluronic acid fillers can stimulate collagen synthesis and 
inhibit collagen breakdown, which can contribute to their per-
sistence and correlates with physician observations that patients 
require less overall filler over time to retain optimal correction. A 
landmark study by Narins et al. [28] which is the basis for a new 
FDA approval for Restylane for up to 18 months, may provide 
a key piece of evidence to show that full correction followed a 
single optimizing treatment can not only optimize longevity and 
in turn patient satisfaction, but also may enhance the patient’s 
in vivo collagen stimulation. This paper is an 18-month interim 
analysis of a 30-month study to evaluate efficacy and persistence 
of  non-animalized,  stabilized  hyaluronic  acid  100000 gel  par-
ticles/mL  filler  based  on  different  re-treatment  schedules.  The 
results  in  this  study  seem  to  indicate  initial  full  correction  of 
the nasolabial folds, followed by an optimizing treatment at an 
interval  somewhere  between  4 and  9 months,  causes  improved 
long-term persistence of the filler and may indicate that full cor-
rection followed by retreatment at optimum treatment intervals 
may enhance the patient’s own in vivo collagen stimulation. This 
hypothesis is supported by in vivo studies by Wang et al. [29] who 
demonstrated that NAHSA 100000 gel particles/mL hyaluronic 
acid  filler  can  induce  synthesis  of  type-I  collagen  probably  by 

stretching fibroblasts. The effect of optimizing treatments inter-
vals  to  enhance  in  vivo  collagen  stimulation  is  consistent  with 
Wang’s data and is further supported by data with other types of 
treatments that cause collagen stimulation in vivo, namely laser, 
light  and  radiofrequency  devices. The  data  by  Narins  et  al.,  as 
well as Wang et al., leads to a new paradigm in the use of der-
mal hyaluronic acid fillers. Up until now, the standard for aes-
thetic correction using hyaluronic acid dermal fillers has been 
to inject fillers to replace lost volume and to replace the fillers as 
they slowly degredated. These data may indeed indicate a new 
treatment approach. Optimizing initial treatment by achieving 
full correction and thereby stretching fibroblasts and maximally 
stimulating collagen synthesis, followed by a second optimizing 
treatment, perhaps at an interval of 4 to  9 months may lead to 
long-term  benefit  and  a  continued  enhancement  effect  by  the 
hyaluronic acid filler. It is possible that with each touch-up injec-
tion set the product builds up on a base already there, the metab-
olism of filler degradation decreases, and collagen production is 
continually stimulated.

Summary

The use of dermal fillers and hyaluronic acid fillers specifically 
has  become  a  mainstay  in  the  treatment  of  the  aging  face. 
Hyaluronic  acid  fillers  can  be  used  safely  and  effectively  in 
treating  a  variety  of  aspects  of  the  aging  face  including  folds 
and wrinkles as well as replacing lost volume. Hyaluronic acid 
fillers  can  also  be  used  to  sculpt  areas  such  as  the  chin,  the 
nose, tear troughs, and the eyebrows to enhance features in a 
non-invasive  and  completely  reversible  procedure.  Recently 
approved for use in the United States are Restylane Silk, Resty-
lane Lyft, Belotero Balance, and Juvederm Voluma, which add 
new indications and possibilities for facial rejuvenation. Finally, 
new treatment paradigms such as initial treatment followed by 
an  optimization  treatment  within  6 months  may  cause  long-
term  improvements  and  optimize  in  vivo  collagen  synthesis. 
Hyaluronic acid fillers will continue to be the mainstay of treat-
ment for static folds, lines, and wrinkles and volume replace-
ment in the near future.

references

1  Chung J, Soyun C, Sewon K. (2004) Why does the skin age? Instrin-
sic aging, photoaging, and their pathophisiology. In: Rigel DS, Weis 
RA, Lim HW, Dover JS, eds. Photoaging. New York: Marcel Dekker, 
Inc, pp. 1–13.

2  Rohrich RJ, Pessa JE. (2008) The fat compartments of the face: anat-
omy and clinical implications for cosmetic surgery. Plast Reconstr 
Surg 121, 1061.

3  Brandt  FS,  Cazzaniga  A.  (2008)  Hyaluronic  acid  gel  fillers  in  the 

management of facial aging. Clin Interv Aging 3, 153–9.

4  (2013) Statistics: American Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery.
5  Tezel  A,  Fredrickson  GH.  (2008)  The  science  of  hyaluronic  acid 

dermal fillers. J Cosmet Laser Ther 10, 35–42.

41. Hyaluronic Acid Fillers

379

6  Lorenc ZP, Fagien S, Flynn TC, Waldorf HA. (2013) Clinical appli-
cation  and  assessment  of  Belotero:  a  roundtable  discussion.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg 132, 69 S–76 S.

18  Lorenc AP, Fagien S, Flynn TC, Waldorf HA. (2013) Clinical appli-
cation  and  assessment  of  Belotero:  a  roundtable  discussion.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg 132, 69 S.

7  Stocks  D,  Sundaram  H,  Michaels  J,  Durrani  MJ,  Wortzman  MS, 
Nelson DB. (2011) Rheological evaluation of the physical proper-
ties of hyaluronic acid dermal fillers. J Drugs Dermatol 10, 974–80.
8  Narins RS, Brandt F, Leyden J, et al. (2003) A randomized, double-
blind,  multicenter  comparison  of  the  efficacy  and  tolerability  of 
Restylane®  versus  Zyplast®  for  the  correction  of  nasolabial  folds. 
Dermatol Surg 29, 588–95.

9  Arlette JP, Trotter MJ. (2008) Anatomic location of hyaluronic acid 
filler material injected into nasolabial fold: a histologic study. Der-
matol Surg 34, S56–S63.

10  Narins  RS,  Jewell  M,  Rubin  M,  et  al.  (2006)  Clinical  conference: 
management of rare events following dermal fillers – focal necrosis 
and angry red bumps. Dermatol Surg 32, 426–34.

11  Kühne U, Imhof M, Kirchmeir M, Howell DJ. (2012) Five-year ret-
rospective review of safety, injected volumes, and longevity of the 
hyaluronic acid Belotero Basic for facial treatments in 317 patients. 
J Drugs Dermatol 11, 1032–5.

12  Callan P, Goodman GJ, Carlisle I, Liew S, Muzikants P, Scamp T, 
Halstead MB, Rogers JD. (2013) Efficacy and safety of a hyaluronic 
acid filler in subjects treated for correction of midface volume defi-
ciency: a 24 month study. Clin Cosmet Invest Dermatol 6, 81–9.
13  Gold MH. (2007) Use of hyaluronic acid fillers for the treatment of 

the aging face. Clin Interv Aging 2, 369–76.

14  Beer KR. (2006) Nasal reconstruction using 20 mg/ml cross-linked 

hyaluronic acid. J Drugs Dermatol 5, 456–65.

15  Glogau RG, Kane MA. (2008) Effect of injection techniques on the 
rate of local adverse events in patients implanted with nonanimal 
hyaluronic acid gel dermal fillers. Dermatol Surg 34, S105–S109.
16  Cohen JL. (2008) Understanding, avoiding, and managing dermal 

filler complications. Dermatol Surg 34, S92–S99.

17  Cavallini  M,  Gazzola  R,  Metalla  M,  Vaienti  L.  (2013)  The  role  of 
hyaluronidase  in  the  treatment  of  complications  from  hyaluronic 
acid dermal fillers. Aesthet Surg J 33, 1167–74.

19  Lear G, Lewis GD, eds. (2012) Microbial Biofilms: Current Research 
and  Applications.  Norwich,  United  Kingdom:  Caister  Academic 
Press.

20  Parsek MR, Singh PK. (2003) Bacterial biofilms: An emerging link 

to disease pathogenesis. Annu Rev Microbiol 57, 677–701.

21  Christensen  LH.  (2009)  Host  tissue  interaction,  fate,  and  risks 
of  degradable  and  nondegradable  gel  fillers.  Dermatol  Surg  35, 
1612–9.

22  Narins RS, Coleman WP III, Glogau RG. (2009) Recommendations 
and  treatment  options  for  nodules  and  other  filler  complications. 
Dermatol Surg 35, 1667–71.

23  Rohrich  RJ,  Monheit  G,  Nguyen  AT,  Brown  SA,  Fagien  S.  (2010) 
Soft-tissue filler complications: The important role of biofilms. Plast 
Reconstr Surg 125, 1250–624.

24  Alhede M, Er O, Eickhardt S, et al. (2014) Bacterial biofilm forma-
tion and treatment in soft tissue fillers. Pathog Dis 70, 339–46.
25  Kanoh  S,  Rubin  BK.  (2010)  Mechanisms  of  action  and  clinical 
application of macrolides as immunomodulatory medications. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 23, 590–615.

26  Lewis  K.  Riddle  of  biofilm  resistance.  (2001)  Antimicrob  Agents 

Chemother 45: 999–1007.

27  Lupo MP, Smith S, Thomas J, et al. (2008) Effectiveness of Juvederm 
ultraplus  dermal  filler  in  the  treatment  of  severe  nasolabial  folds. 
Plast Recontr Surg 121, 289–97.

28  Narins RS, Dayan SH, Brandt FS, Baldwin EK. (2008) Persistence 
and  improvement  of  nasolabial  fold  correction  with  nonanimal-
stabilized  hyaluronic  acid  100000 gel  particles/mL  filler  on  two 
retreatment schedules: results up to 18 months on two retreatment 
schedules. Dermatol Surg 34, S2–S8.

29  Wang F, Garza LA, Kang S, et al. (2007) In vivo stimulation of de 
novo  collagen  production  caused  by  cross-linked  hyaluronic  acid 
dermal  filler  injections  in  photodamaged  human  skin.  Arch  Der-
matol 134, 155–63.	

ChaPter 42
Calcium hydroxylapatite for Soft tissue augmentation

Stephen Mandy
Department of Dermatology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, and Private Practice, Miami Beach, FL, USA

BaSIC ConCePtS

•	 Calcium	hydroxylapatite	is	a	fibroplastic	filler	in	which	volume	correction	is	achieved	in	part	through	the	biologic	response	of	the	host.
•	 Calcium	hydroxylapatite	is	approved	for	correction	of	moderate	to	severe	wrinkles	and	folds,	treatment	of	HIV-associated	lipoatrophy,	

and	vocal	fold	insufficiency.

•	 The	injectable	filler	is	composed	of	microspheres	of	calcium	hydroxylapatite	suspended	in	an	aqueous	carrier	gel.
•	 Ideal	areas	for	correction	with	calcium	hydroxylapatite	are	the	malar	eminences,	center	of	the	cheek,	nasolabial	and	nasojugal	(tear	

trough)	folds,	prejowl	sulcus/marionette,	and	chin	and	jawline	regions.	It	is	also	very	suitable	for	rejuvenation	of	the	hands.

•	 Filler	duration	is	documented	for	as	long	as	12	months,	although	some	loss	of	correction	may	occur.

Introduction

Facial  volume  loss  leads  to  dramatic  changes  in  appearance 
resulting  from  aging,  disease,  or  hereditary  conditions.  The 
deflation  from  lipoatrophy  causes  skin  redundancy,  which 
is  compounded  by  loss  of  elasticity  and  collagen  degenera-
tion from solar radiation and oxidative damage. Skeletal bone 
resorption further leads to deflation, enlargement of the ocular 
orbit, and shrinkage of the jaw. These visual signs of aging can-
not be corrected by surgical tightening without volumization as 
this procedure alone leads to a skeletal, windswept appearance.
Replacement of volume through soft tissue augmentation can 
often offer facial rejuvenation with or without surgery. A variety 
of suitable materials for soft tissue augmentation exists. Natural 
fillers, such as collagen, hyaluronic acid, and calcium hydroxyl-
apatite (CaHA), are synthesized to mimic, or are derived from 
biologic materials. Synthetic fillers may be permanent, such as 
acrylates  and  silicone,  or  biodegradable,  such  as  poly-L-lactic 
acid [1].

Physiology and pharmacology

CaHA is a new type of fibroplastic filler in which volume cor-
rection is achieved in part through the biologic response of the 
host. Radiesse® (Merz Aesthetics, Inc, USA) is an injectable filler 
composed of microspheres of 30% CaHA suspended in an aque-
ous gel consisting of water, glycerin, and sodium carboxymeth-
ylcellulose.  Once  injected,  the  gel  carrier  is  soon  absorbed. 

The remaining microspheres are 25–45 μm in diameter, which 
facilitates  injection  but  resists  immediate  phagocytosis.  These 
bioceramic spheres have no antigenicity, foreign body or giant 
cell response, and cause a minimal inflammatory reaction. They 
do not stimulate ossification. Although visible on X-ray images 
and  magnetic  resonance  imaging  scans,  they  are  radiolucent, 
appearing somewhat like frosted glass, and pose no impediment 
to radiologic analysis [2]. The CaHA microspheres form a scaf-
fold for the fibroplastic proliferation, which provides the natural 
tissue feel of the implant. The local fibroplastic response results 
in  the  fibrous  encapsulation  of  the  particles  and  their  gradual 
dissolution into calcium and phosphate ions (Figures 42.1, 42.2, 
and 42.3) [3]. Calcium hydroxylapatite requires no allergy test-
ing which allows for immediate injection.

Indications and techniques

CaHA is a thick, white, clay-like, cohesive material intended for 
subdermal  injection.  The  density  of  the  material  would  make 
intradermal injection difficult because of poor tissue intrusion 
into  the  dermal  stroma.  It  is  not  intended  or  suitable  for  fine 
lines, superficial injection, or injection into highly mobile areas 
such  as  the  lip  or  above  the  orbital  rim,  where  accumulation 
of material from movement might result in nodule formation. 
Because of its density the filler is most easily injected through 
a  27-g  standard  needle  or  a  28-g  wide  bore  (Exel®)  needle.  It 
is  most  commonly  injected  in  a  linear  retrograde  fashion  fol-
lowing penetration of the dermis at a 45° angle and then fully 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

380

42. Calcium Hydroxylapatite for Soft Tissue Augmentation

381

Figure 42.1  Calcium hydroxylapatite microspheres, 25–45 μm in diameter. 
(Source: BioForm Medical, San Mateo CA. Reproduced with permission.)

Figure 42.2  Gradual dissolution of microspheres. (Source: BioForm Medi-
cal, San Mateo CA. Reproduced with permission.)

(a)

(b)

Figure 42.3  (a) Light microscopic section at 1 month post-injection showing microspherules at the dermal subcuticular junction and a slight increase in 
histiocytes (arrows). (Illustration courtesy of Drs. David J. Goldberg and Ellen Marmur.) (b) Electron microscopic section at 6 months showing both an 
intact microspherule and one undergoing a histiocytic derived catabolic process into smaller particles of calcium (black particles). The phosphate ions are 
not seen because they are dissolved in the processing of tissue for electron microscopy analysis. (Source: David J. Goldberg and Ellen Marmur. Reproduced 
with permission.)

inserting  the  needle  in  the  subcutaneous  plane  parallel  to  the 
surface. The material is then extruded upon withdrawal of the 
needle  in  a  threadlike  manner.  Multiple  parallel  or  layered 
repeat injections may be utilized to achieve correction of a soft 
tissue contour. Injection through a blunt 27 gauge cannula may 
afford single port injection of the entire mid face and help avoid 
vascular injury and bruising [4].

Fanning  and  cross-hatching  are  utilized  to  achieve  greater 
volume by smooth even injections of 0.1–0.2 mL per pass, fol-
lowed by massage to avoid lumps and irregularities. One of the 
advantages of CaHA is its immediate “moldability” by massag-
ing  the  injected  area  firmly  against  underlying  structures  or 

bimanually between the injector’s fingers. Supraperiosteal place-
ment is used to correct bony deformity.

Several  comparative  studies  have  demonstrated  that  lesser 
volumes  of  CaHA  are  required  for  full  correction  than  with 
collagen or hyaluronic acid [5]. Ideal areas for correction are 
the malar eminences, center of the cheek, nasolabial and naso-
jugal (tear trough) folds, prejowl sulcus/marionette, and chin 
and jawline regions. Reinflation of the midface, including the 
malar, cheek, nasolabial, tear trough areas, yields a facelift-like 
effect and a far more dramatic rejuvenation than simple “line 
filling”  (Figures  42.4  and  42.5)  [5,7].  CaHA  is  a  structural, 
volumetric filler analogous to the concrete foundation of facial 

382

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

(a)

(b)

(a)

Figure 42.4  Preinjection (a) and post-
injection (b) of 2.6 mL CaHA.

Figure 42.5  Preinjection (a) and 
immediately post-injection (b) of 2.6 mL  
CaHA.

(b)

restructuring. It is compatible with other more superficial fill-
ers that can be overlaid for fine line smoothing, and with use in 
conjunction with radiofrequency and laser devices.

Preinjection topical anesthesia, 20–30 minutes pretreatment, 
is  very  important  to  insure  patient  comfort.  A  popular,  FDA-
approved means of achieving anesthesia is to mix CaHA with 
lidocaine  via  sterile  syringe  transfer  [5].  CaHA  is  transferred 
via a female–female connector into a syringe containing 0.02–
1.0 mL lidocaine and then the two are mixed by repeatedly pass-
ing  the  emulsion  back  and  forth  (Figure  42.6)  [8].  Avoidance 
of  aspirin,  non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs), 
and  other  medications  or  supplements  that  promote  bruis-
ing  are  advisable.  Pre-  and  post-treatment  viral  prophylaxis 
is  recommended  in  patients  with  a  history  of  herpes  simplex. 
Merz  recently  (January  2015)  released  a  new  form  of  calcium 
hydroxylapatite which has lidocaine incorporated in the syringe 
(Radiesse L).

The first indication for calcium hydroxylapatite was for vocal 
fold correction. In 2006, it was approved for correction of mod-
erate  to  severe  facial  wrinkles  and  folds,  and  restoration  or 

Figure 42.6  Radiesse mixed with lidocaine, using a female–female 
connector.

42. Calcium Hydroxylapatite for Soft Tissue Augmentation

383

correction  of  signs  of  lipoatrophy  in  patients  with  HIV  [2,6]. 
In comparative studies of nasolabial fold treatment with CaHa 
versus  collagen  or  hyaluronic  acid,  implants  with  CaHA  gave 
significantly greater and more persistent correction with lower 
volumes at all time points [5,9].

Duration is documented for as long as 12 months, although 
some loss of correction may occur prior to that. Off label, non-
FDA approved applications include correction of nasal defects, 
chin augmentation, and filling of the hands. Injection of a full 
syringe (1.3 mL) into each dorsal hand is accomplished through 
several bolus deposits in the subcutaneous space and between 
veins and tendons, followed by massage evenly over the entire 
hand to provide a full, more youthful appearance (Figure 42.7) 
[9,10].

All injections are performed percutaneously. Although some 
authors suggest intraoral approach to the tear trough area, this 
approach needlessly creates the opportunity to introduce bacte-
ria into the implant with potentially serious consequences [11]. 
Glabellar injections are probably ill-advised because of the risk 
of  vascular  occlusion  by  embolization  or  compression,  which 
has  been  reported  with  nearly  all  previous  fillers.  Calcium 
hydroxylapatite has been demonstrated to be safe and effective 
in skin of color [12].

Complications

Edema, erythema, pain, and ecchymosis are the most common 
complications,  comparable  to  collagen  and  hyaluronic  acid 
injections. Too superficial an injection can yield a visible white 
papule or plaque, which is slow to resolve. Too much material 
in one placement, or failure to massage, can result in palpable 
or visible nodules. Many of the complications, in the experience 
of this author, seem to be reduced when lidocaine is mixed with 
the CaHA prior to injection in the method described earlier.

(a)

(b)

Figure 42.7  Preinjection (a) and post-injection (b) of CaHA into the hand.

384

antI-aGInG  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

Conclusions

Substantial  facial  volume  restoration  with  facelift-like  effect 
can be achieved with the injection of CaHA. Large volume cor-
rection  can  be  accomplished  in  a  practical  fashion  because  of 
the greater volumizing effect of CaHA in contrast to other fill-
ing  agents.  Success  is  technique-dependent;  complications  are 
infrequent  and  comparable  to  other  agents.  Durability  of  this 
fibroplastic filler may be up to 1 year.

references

1  Mandy  SH.  (2008)  Fillers  that  work  by  fibroplasia:  poly-L-lactic 
acid.  In:  CarruthersA,  CaruthersJ,  eds.  Soft  Tissue  Augmentation, 
2nd edn. Saunders Elsevier, pp. 101–4.

2  Carruthers A, Liebeskind M, Carruthers J, Forster B. (2008) Radi-
ological and computed tomographic studies of calcium hydroxy-
lapatite  for  treatment  of  HIV-associated  facial  lipoatrophy  and 
correction of nasolabial folds. Derm Surg 34, 578–84.

4  Niamtu  J.  (2009)  Filler  Injection  with  micro-cannula  instead  of 

needles. Derm Surg 35, 2005–2008.

5  Moers-Carpi MM, Tufet JO. (2007) Calcium hydroxylapatite versus 
nonanimal  stabilized  hyaluronic  acid  for  correction  of  nasolabial 
folds. Dermatol Surg 34, 210–5.

6  Graivier  M,  Bass  L,  Busso  M,  Jasin  ME,  Narins  RS,  Tzikas  TL. 
(2007)  Calcium  hydroxylapatite  for  correction  of  mid  and  lower 
face. Plast Reconstr Surg 120(6), 55–66S.

7  Rohrich RJ, Pessa JE, Ristow B. (2008) The youthful cheek and the 
deep medial fat compartment. Plast Reconst Surg 121(6), 2107–12.
8  Marmur  E,  Green  L,  Busso  M.  (2009)  A  controlled  randomized 
study of pain levels in subjects treated with calcium hydroxylapa-
tite premixed withlidocaine for correction of nasolabial folds. Derm 
Surg 36, 1–7.

9  Busso M, Applebaum D. (2007) Hand augmentation with Radiesse® 

(calcium hydroxylapatite). Dermatol Ther 20, 385–7.

10  Smith  S,  Busso  M,  McClaren  M,  Bass  LS.  (2007)  A  randomized, 
bilateral,  prospective  comparison  of  calcium  hydroxylapatite 
microspheres  versus  human-based  collagen  for  the  correction  of 
nasolabial folds. Dermatol Surg 33, S112–21.

11  Wolcott R, Ehrlich G. (2008) Biofilms and chronic infection. JAMA 

299, 2682–4.

3  Marmur ES, Phelps R, Goldberg D. (2004) Clinical histologic and 
electron microscopic findings after injection of calcium hydroxyla-
patite filler. J Cosmet Laser Ther 6, 223–6.

12  Marmur  E,  Taylor  S,  Grimes  P,  Boyd  C,  et  al.  (2009)  Six  month 
safety results of calcium hydroxylapatite for treatment of nasolabial 
folds in Fitzpatrick skin types IV to VI. Derm Surg 35, 1641–5.

Chapter 43
autologous Skin Fillers

Amer H. Nassar,1 Andrew S. Dorizas,1 and Neil S. Sadick1,2
1Sadick Dermatology, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Dermatology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 Autologous	fillers	are	a	novel	group	of	dermal	fillers	using	the	patients’	own	cells	or	tissue.
•	 Autologous	fillers	can	be	divided	into:	platelet-rich	plasma,	autologous	fibroblast	cell	therapy	and	adipose-derived	stem	cells.
•	 Platelet-rich	plasma	has	been	studied	most	extensively	from	the	group,	while	adipose-derived	stem	cells	the	least.
•	 Autologous	fillers	can	be	used	for	volume	correction,	facial	contouring	and	filling	of	dermal	defects.

Introduction

Dermal fillers have been utilizes for decades, and recently their 
demand  for  cosmetic  purposes  has  increased  significantly. 
Although the desired outcome remains the same, the materials 
used to achieve facial contouring and correct volume loss have 
changed  dramatically.  The  recent  introduction  of  autologous 
dermal fillers in the  field of cosmetic  dermatology has shifted 
the focus into yet a new direction, one that possibly enhances 
many of the desired effects, while abolishing the adverse ones. 
Although  autologous  fillers  are  new  and  have  a  promising 
future, they are yet to be studied on a large scale.

platelet-rich plasma

Introduction
Platelets were first described by Max Schulze in the mid 1800s, 
and their role in coagulation and blood clotting was discovered 
a  short  while  later  when  Giulio  Bizzozero  noted  the  relation-
ship  between  their  adhesion,  aggregation  and  the  subsequent 
fibrin deposition [1]. The wide role platelets play in a multitude 
of  other  processes  have  since  been  described,  one  of  which  is 
the  healing  process.  Platelets  release  a  number  of  growth  fac-
tors  (Table  43.1)  including  transforming  growth  factor  beta 
(TGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), both closely 
involved in wound healing and the repair and regeneration of 
tissues. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is a concentrated source of 
autologous  platelets,  prepared  from  whole  blood,  containing 
roughly five times the amount of platelets as the baseline blood 
platelet count. These features make PRP a great source of growth 
factors,  and  its  capabilities  in  assisting  in  wound  healing  and 

tissue regeneration has attracted considerable interest from the 
medical community [2].

Recently, the dermatological possibilities of PRP for skin reju-
venation were recognized, and its ability to serve as an autolo-
gous  dermal  filler  was  comprehended.  The  cocktail  of  growth 
factors released from the α-granules of platelets, serve to regulate 
cell  migration  and  proliferation  as  well  as  the  promotion  of 
extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation. This eventually led to 
angiogenesis stimulation which promoted activation of regional 
fibroblasts,  thus  inducing  the  synthesis  of  collagen,  leading  to 
skin rejuvenation [2].

Although  robust  evidence  exists  for  the  use  of  PRP  in  the 
fields  of  odontology,  orthopedics,  and  traumatology,  it  was 
only  recently  that  positive  effects  have  been  apparent  in  cos-
metic dermatology. Sclafani has shown that as little as a single 
treatment with autologous platelet rich fibrin matrix (a similar 
product to PRP), has positive outcomes on deep nasolabial folds 
(NLF). In the past several years, PRP has received wide attention 
and considerable homage as an autologous filler not only for the 
treatment of deep NLF’s, but also facial rhytids, dermal depres-
sions and scars [3].

Moreover, PRP therapy as a possible treatment for hair loss 
has also been researched extensively, and it appears that fibro-
blast growth factor released from activated platelets plays a role 
as a potent stimuli for hair growth. Results appear promising for 
both androgenetic alopecia as well as alopecia areata [4].

preparation of platelet-rich plasma
The  preparation  of  PRP  is  a  relatively  simple  and  quick  task, 
usually occurring without any complications with a wide vari-
ety  of  preassembled  PRP  preparation  kits  are  available  in  the 
market  (Figure  43.1).  Initially,  approximately  9  cc  of  blood  is 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

385

386

aNtI-aGING  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

Table 43.1  Growth	Factors	released	from	platelets	during	PRP	treatment.

Growth factor name

Effect

Platelet	derived	growth	
factor	–	AA,	AB,	BB	(PDGF)

•	 Deposition	of	ECM

•	 Stimulates	the	production	of	collagen,	
hyaluronic	acid,	proteoglycans,	and	
fibronectin

•	 Production	and	secretion	of	
collagenase	by	fibroblasts

•	 Contraction	of	collagen	matrices

•	 Chemotaxis	of	fibroblasts	and	smooth	

muscle	cells	[8]

Transforming	growth	
factor	–	β	1,2	(TGF)

•	 Chemotaxis	of	macrophages	and	

fibroblasts

Vascular	endothelial	
growth	factor	(VEGF)

•	 Stimulation	of	ECM	production

•	 Inhibition	of	proteolytic	enzymes

•	 Formation	of	new	granulation	tissue	[9]

•	 Stimulation	of	angiogenesis

•	 Chemotaxis	of	macrophages	and	

neutrophils

Insulin-like	growth	factor	1

•	 Stimulation	of	collagen	production

•	 Stimulation	of	cell	proliferation	[10]

Basic-fibroblast	growth	
factor	(bFGF)

•	 Stimulation	of	proliferation	of	
mesenchymal	stromal	cells

•	 Stimulation	of	angiogenesis	[11]

Epidermal	growth		
factor	(EGF)

•	 Stimulation	of	proliferation	of	

endothelial	cells

Platelet	factor-4

•	 Chemotaxis	of	neutrophils	and	

fibroblasts

collected  into  a  tube  containing  an  anticoagulant,  most  com-
monly citrate dextrose-A. After collection of the whole blood, 
either a single centrifugation or a 2-step centrifugation process 
follows. Although both processes are capable of producing PRP, 
the  2-step  centrifugation  process  allows  for  a  higher  concen-
tration for platelets and is therefore preferable. The initial step 
will separate the plasma containing the buffy coat from the red 
blood cells beneath. The second round of centrifugation accu-
mulates the platelets at the bottom, which are used to create the 
PRP [2,5].

Before  injection,  the  PRP  must  be  activated  using  either 
thrombin  or  calcium  chloride.  This  will  allow  exocytosis  and 
the release of growth factors from α-granules, and facilitate the 
processes which will eventually lead to tissue regeneration [6].

techniques for prp injection
It  is  important  to  mention  that  injection  techniques  vary 
between  physicians.  A  local  anesthetic  either  in  the  form  of  a 
topical anaesthetic cream or simple topical ice should be used 
to minimize discomfort and pain. Alternatively, for correction 
of deep NLFs, infraorbital nerve blockade could be utilized for 

Figure 43.1  Platelet-rich plasma kit from Regen Lab containing three vac-
uum tubes, using a thixotropic gel for cell separation and sodium citrate as 
an anticoagulant.

further pain control. All injections should be done using a 27 or 
30-gauge  needle.  For  NLF  injections,  a  linear  threading  tech-
nique  has  proven  most  successful  with  correction  performed 
from the alar crease to the level of the oral commissure, in the 
subdermal or intradermal plane. Intradermal injections should 
be used for fine rhytids, whereas a subscision followed by a sub-
dermal injection using the “abundant ponfi” technique are best 
for treating acne scars [6,7]. Other methods of injection include 
the “micro ponfi” technique in the forehead and neck and the 
“linear retrograde technique in the cheek area [7].

Sclafani  has  contemplated  that  initial  overcorrection  of  the 
dermal defects is desirable when using PRP, as much of the filler 
is  plasma  volume,  which  is  quickly  absorbed  within  the  first 
3–12 hours after the procedure [8].

adverse reactions
As  with  any  medical  intervention,  adverse  reactions  should 
always  be  acknowledged,  and  the  risk  minimized,  when  per-
forming  a  procedure.  Prior  to  the  use  of  autologous  fillers, 

43. Autologous Skin Fillers

387

injectable dermal fillers posed a risk of immunogenetic hyper-
sensitivity reactions, as well as granuloma formation or chronic 
infections when using permanent fillers [6,8]. Since PRP is pre-
pared from the patient’s own blood, the aforementioned adverse 
reactions have been eliminated. The most observed side effects 
observed after PRP injections were mild and transient in nature.
Mild bruising was experienced by most patients, which lasted 
between one and three days. In a minority of patients, bruising 
lasted considerably longer, up to 14 days, usually with injections 
in the periorbital area.

There have been no reports of other adverse reactions from 
the use of PRP as an autologous dermal filler. Redaelli et al. have 
reported that in a group of 23 patients, none experienced any 
serious  side  effects  including  infections  and  haematomas  [7]. 
This similar lack of adverse reactions was mentioned in another 
study of 15 patients by Sclafani [6].

autologous fibroblast cell therapy

Introduction
Collagen is the primary protein found in the dermis and serves 
multiple functions, which provide strength and elasticity for the 
skin,  as  well  as  a  structural  scaffold  for  cells.  With  aging,  the 
proportions of collagen in the human skin begin to vary. Certain 
factors, such as the levels of matrix metalloproteinases and UV 
radiation, play a central role in the degradation of dermal col-
lagen, leading to the development of rhytids, folds and accentua-
tion of dermal defects. Thus, the replacement of dermal collagen 
became a major player for the rejuvenation and revitalization of 
aged skin. Historically, collagen has been widely used as a der-
mal filler. However, reports of as many as six percent of healthy 
patients  experience  localized  hypersensitivity  reactions,  while 
others  report  the  occurrence  of  granulomatous  foreign  body 
reactions, erythematous nodules at the injection site as well as 
other side effects. These adverse reactions coupled with the tem-
porary  corrective  measure  of  collagen  as  a  dermal  filler,  have 
limited its use and left much room for improvement [13].

Fibroblasts,  being  the  major  source  of  collagen  production, 
have  drawn  much  interest  for  their  capabilities  in  cosmetic 
dermatology.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  autologous  fibroblasts 
sparked  even  greater  interest,  as  it  would  eliminate  problems 
procured  from  the  use  of  allogenic  substances.  Fibrocell  Sci-
ence, Inc. formerly known as Isolagen Inc., was one of the first 
biotech  companies  focused  on  developing  autologous  fibro-
blasts for esthetic applications. Their production of Azfibrocel-
T (brand name LavivTM), an autologous form of fibroblast cell 
therapy, has been the subject of numerous clinical trials for its 
potential  use  as  a  dermal  filler  [13–16]. This  method  involves 
the  acquirement  of  small  skin  biopsies  from  the  patient  to 
develop  an  autologous  fibroblastic  cell  line.  Once  the  cell  line 
is created and fibroblasts are multiplied, they are reinjected in 
the desired areas, acting as a dermal filler. After reintroduction, 
fibroblasts  will  undergo  a  process  of  collagen  production  and 

protein repair that helps sustain the long-term corrective effect 
of the treatment. The results are an increase in thickness as well 
as density of dermal collagen.

preparation
The nature of autologous cell treatment require collection of 
patient tissue in order to develop a patient-specific cell line. In 
the case of autologous fibroblasts, a simple skin biopsy is the 
preferred method of tissue sampling. Three separate 3–4 mm 
punch biopsies are obtained, preferably from the postauricular 
crease. The tissue samples are then sent to a laboratory over-
night, where they are isolated, cultured and expanded by tis-
sue culture techniques over a 6-week period. Once a sufficient 
amount of fibroblasts has been reached, they are returned for 
initiation of treatment. The procedure should be undertaken 
within 24 hours of receiving the autologous fibroblasts. This 
allows for optimal results and ensures the autologous fibrob-
lasts remain viable. Culturing will produce anywhere between 
500–600 million cells, approximately 20 million cells for every 
1 mL of injectable product. It is important to note that cryo-
preservation  is  an  available  method  to  store  the  autologous 
cell  lines  for  future  use,  preserving  viability  for  up  to  three 
years [16].

techniques for autologous fibroblast injection
Once  the  product  arrives,  treatment  can  begin  immediately 
with no need for further preparation. The expanded fibroblast 
suspension can be injected in various areas, depending on the 
patient’s  demands.  Autologous  fibroblasts  have  shown  great 
results  as  a  dermal  filler  for  NLFs  as  well  as  depressed  acne 
scars. However, it maybe be used for other wrinkles, fine lines 
and dermal defects as well [14,16].

One should not underestimate the importance of pain control 
before the start of such a procedure. It is much easier to delineate 
the areas of wrinkling or defects in a relaxed and calm patient. 
Local anesthesia can be achieved either by cold ice application, 
local nerve block, or topical injections of lidocaine.

Thereafter,  visual  delineation  of  the  facial  contour  deformi-
ties  should  pursue,  followed  by  the  injection  of  the  filler  into 
the  upper  and  middle  dermal  layers.  The  injection  technique 
requires  multiple  passes  and  careful  depth  penetration  so  as 
to  create  transient  blanching  of  the  skin  surface.  This  ensures 
that the injection was given in the right plane and in sufficient 
amounts. Usually, 0.1 mL per linear centimeter is to be given. A 
retrograde threading technique has been most commonly used, 
giving positive results especially with nasolabial and melolabial 
folds [14]. Injections into the papillary dermal plane have also 
been  noted  to  be  reliable  when  depressed  or  distensible  acne 
scars  are  being  treated  [15].  It  is  of  note  that  volumetric  cor-
rection of the dermal deformities should not be considered an 
efficacy  endpoint.  Autologous  fibroblastic  cell  therapy  is  not 
designed  for  immediate  volumetric  correction,  instead  it  is 
intended to provide cells capable of collagen production, pro-
viding results within weeks to months.

388

aNtI-aGING  Injectable Anti‐aging Techniques

Patients should receive a total of three treatments, separated 
by two to three week intervals for optimal results. One should 
inform  patients  of  the  delayed  results  and  long-term  correc-
tion of such a treatment, as to not provide them with unrealistic 
expectations of immediate results.

adverse reactions
There have been very few documented adverse reactions from 
autologous fibroblast cell therapy. Self-limiting erythema, swell-
ing and bruising might occur and are usually mild and transient 
in nature. Furthermore, they are most likely attributable to the 
procedure itself rather than the injectable used.

As with any autologous treatment, the risk of adverse reactions 
from hypersensitivity is low. However, injection of small amounts 
of autologous cells into the patients forearm, days to weeks prior 
to the procedure, with absence of evidence of an allergic skin reac-
tion further minimizes the risk. Boss et al. reported an absence 
of allergic adverse effects during a two and a half year study [17].
It must be mentioned that the limited amount of studies and 
small patient group sizes are insufficient for excluding the pos-
sibility of short term or long-term adverse events.

adipose-derived stem cells

Introduction
Autologous  fat  transplantation  has  been  used  for  decades 
throughout  the  fields  of  medicine,  and  in  recent  years  has 
become  more  popular  for  facial  recontouring.  When  used  for 
aesthetic  purposes  as  a  dermal  filler,  transplanted  autologous 
fat  has  the  tendency  to  fibrose  [18],  and  even  with  the  newer 
“lipostructure  technique”,  the  survivability  of  transplanted  fat 
remains relatively low [19]. The lack of neovascularization is an 
issue that plays a major role in the survivability of transplanted 
autologous  adipocytes.  However,  it  soon  became  evident  that 
stem cells located within adipose tissue could have a beneficial 
effect  on  transplanted  fat.  Adipose-derived  stem  cells  (ASC), 
are mesenchymal multipotent stem cells which have the capa-
bility  of  differentiating  into  multiple  cell  lines.  Recent  studies 
have  shown  that  when  combined  with  autologous  fat  transfer, 
improve the outcome of a procedure, with up to 60% increase 
in fat survival [20]. The proposed mechanism is believed to be 
related to growth factors secreted by ASC which promote neo-
vascularization and minimize the inflammatory response [21]. 
Moreover, it has been suggested that ASC alone are not capable 
of producing soft-tissue fill [22]. Therefore, the most promising 
use of ASC as a filler would be its incorporation and supplemen-
tation into a matrix formed from autologous fat [23].

Due  to  the  relatively  novel  nature  of  ASC,  there  has  been  a 
lack of clinical trials based in the US. Some studies abroad have 
shown  that  ASC  produce  an  anti-wrinkle  effect  as  well  as  an 
increase in dermal thickness [24].

preparation
ASCs can be acquired in large quantities with a simple surgical 
procedure. Initially for fat extraction, conventional techniques 
may rupture a high amount of extracted adipocytes due to high 
pressures.  It  is  therefore  advised  to  place  cells  under  minimal 
trauma using a 3-mm cannula connected to a 10-cc syringe and 
using manual suction. Once the fat grafts have been obtained, 
isolation of ASC may commence.

techniques for adipose-derived stem cell 
injection
Intradermal injections of 20% to 30% of ASCs incorporated into 
a matrix of autologous fat, may be used as the injectable filler. It 
is  important  to  note  that  a  large  surface  area  contact  between 
the graft and the vascularized tissue should be achieved in an 
attempt to minimize the amount of graft undergoing ischemic 
necrosis. This may be facilitated by incorporating the “fanning 
technique” which allows multiple tunnels of fat particles to be 
injected in the desired location.

adverse reactions
It is also important to evaluate the safety of ASC treatment before 
its use increases in everyday clinical treatment. Certain reports 
have demonstrated a neoplastic and tumorigenic effect of ASC, 
especially when subculturing the cells [25]. Furthermore, there 
may  be  an  association  between  ASC  and  an  increased  recur-
rence rate of certain hematologic malignancies [26].

Nevertheless, it is clear that much effort and research is yet to 
be done in order to achieve a full understanding in this subject. 
Although  our  current  knowledge  of  ASC  as  a  dermal  filler  is 
limited, it remains both promising and exciting.

Conclusion

The practice of using dermal fillers in cosmetic dermatology 
has been around for decades, with newer and more novel fillers 
entering the market occasionally. The success of platelet-rich 
plasma and autologous fibroblast cell therapy in recent years 
has  proven  that  autologous  products  have  a  place  in  facial 
contouring  and  that  the  science  of  dermal  fillers  has  much 
room  for  expansion  and  innovation.  Moreover,  the  promis-
ing nature of ASCs incorporated into an adipocyte matrix is 
evidence that many more therapies are to be expected in the 
near future.

Autologous fillers are time and time again proving that they 
too  can  play  a  vital  role  in  this  increasingly  complex  field  of 
medicine, bringing their own benefits along. It is uncertain as 
of yet, as to what extent they will be game-changing innovative 
therapies and if they will revolutionize dermal fillers and facial 
contouring procedures.

43. Autologous Skin Fillers

389

references

1  Brewer DB. (2006) Max Schultze (1865), G. Bizzozero (1882) and 

the discovery of the platelet. Br. J. Haematol 133, 251–8.

2  Kim DH, Je YJ, Kim CD, et al. (2011) Can platelet-rich plasma be 
used  for  skin  rejuvenation?  Evaluation  of  effects  of  platelet-rich 
plasma on human dermal fibroblast. Ann Dermatol 23, 424–31.
3  Sclafani AP, Romo T III, Parker A, et al. (2000) Autologous collagen 
dispersion (Autologen) as a dermal filler: clinical observations and 
histologic findings. Arch Facial Plast Surg 2, 48–52.

4  Trink A, Sorbellini E, Bezzola P, et al. (2013) A randomized, double-
blind,  placebo-  and  active-controlled,  half-head  study  to  evaluate 
the effects of platelet-rich plasma on alopecia areata. Br J Dermatol 
169, 690–4. 

5  Arora NS, Ramanayake T, Ren YF, Romanos GE. (2009) Platelet-

rich plasma: a literature review. Implant Dent 18, 303–10.

6  Sclafani AP. (2010) Platelet-rich fibrin matrix for improvement of 

deep nasolabial folds. J Cosmet Dermatol 9, 66–71.

7  Redaelli A, Romano D, Marcianó A. (2010) Face and neck revi-
talization with platelet-rich plasma (PRP): clinical outcome in a 
series  of  23  consecutively  treated  patients.  J  Drugs  Dermatol  9, 
466–72.

8  Sclafani AP. (2011) Safety, efficacy, and utility of platelet-rich fibrin 
matrix in facial plastic surgery. Arch Facial Plast Surg 13, 247–51.
9  Heldin CH, Westermark B. (1999) Mechanism of action and in vivo 
role of platelet-derived growth factor. Physiol Rev 79, 1283–316.
10  Sporn  MB,  Roberts  AB.  (1989)  Transforming  growth  factor-beta. 
Multiple  actions  and  potential  clinical  applications.  JAMA  262, 
938–41.

11  Lyras  DN,  Kazakos  K,  Agrogiannis  G,  et  al.  (2010)  Experimental 
study of tendon healing early phase: is IGF-1 expression influenced 
by platelet rich plasma gel? Orthop Traumatol Surg Res 96, 381–7.
12  Chieregato K, Castegnaro S, Madeo D, et al. (2011) Epidermal growth 
factor,  basic  fibroblast  growth  factor  and  platelet-derived  growth 
factor-bb  can  substitute  for  fetal  bovine  serum  and  compete  with 
human platelet-rich plasma in the ex vivo expansion of mesenchymal 
stromal cells derived from adipose tissue. Cytotherapy 13, 933–43.
13  Watson D, Keller GS, Lacombe V, et al. (1999) Autologous fibrob-
lasts for treatment of facial rhytids and dermal depressions. A pilot 
study. Arch Facial Plast Surg 1, 165–70.

14  Weiss RA, Weiss MA, Beasley KL, Munavalli G. (2007) Autologous 
cultured fibroblast injection for facial contour deformities: a pro-
spective, placebo-controlled, Phase III clinical trial. Dermatol Surg 
33, 263–8.

15  Munavalli GS, Smith S, Maslowski JM, Weiss RA. (2013) Success-
ful treatment of depressed, distensible acne scars using autologous 
fibroblasts: a multi-site, prospective, double blind, placebo-controlled 
clinical trial. Dermatol Surg 39, 1226–36.

16  Smith SR, Munavalli G, Weiss R, et al. (2012) A multicenter, double-
blind,  placebo-controlled  trial  of  autologous  fibroblast  therapy  for 
the treatment of nasolabial fold wrinkles. Dermatol Surg 38, 1234–43.
17  Boss  WK,  Marko  O.  (1998)  Isolagen.  In:  KleinAW,  ed.  Tissue 
Augmentation in Clinical Practice. Marcel Dekker Inc 335–47.
18  Watson  DKG,  Keller  GS,  Lacombe  V,  et  al.  (1999)  Autologous 
fibroblasts for treatment of facial rhytids and dermal depressions. A 
pilot study. Arch Facial Plast Surg 1, 165–70.

19  Coleman  SR.  (1997)  Facial  recontouring  with  lipostructure.  Clin 

Plast Surg 24, 347–67.

20  Yoshimura  K,  Suga  H,  Eto  H.  (2009)  Adipose-derived  stem/
progenitor cells: roles in adipose tissue remodeling and poten-
tial use for soft tissue augmentation. Regen Med 4, 265–73.
21  Beeson W, Woods E, Agha R. (2011) Tissue engineering, regenera-
tive medicine, and rejuvenation in 2010: the role of adipose-derived 
stem cells. Facial Plast Surg 27, 378–87.

22  Moseley  TA,  Zhu  M,  Hedrick  MH.  Adipose-derived  stem  and 
progenitor  cells  as  fillers  in  plastic  and  reconstructive  surgery. 
Plast Reconstr Surg 2006) 118, 121S–128S.

23  Woo  YI,  Park  BJ,  Kim  HL,  et  al.  (2010)  The  biological  activities 
of (1,3)-(1,6)-beta-d-glucan and porous electrospun PLGA mem-
branes  containing  beta-glucan  in  human  dermal  fibroblasts  and 
adipose tissue-derived stem cells. Biomed Mater 5, 044109.

24  Kim  WS,  Park  BS,  Sung  JH.  (2009)  Protective  role  of  adipose-
derived  stem  cells  and  their  soluble  factors  in  photoaging.  Arch 
Dermatol Res 301, 329–36.

25  Rubio  D,  Garcia-Castro  J,  Martin  MC,  et  al.  (2005)  Spontaneous 
human adult stem cell transformation. Cancer Res 65, 3035–9.
26  Ning HYF, Yang F, Jiang M, et al. (2008) The correlation between 
cotransplantation of mesenchymal stem cells and higher recurrence 
rate in hematologic malignancy patients: outcome of a pilot clinical 
study. Leukemia 22, 593–9.

Chapter 44
polylactic acid Fillers

Kenneth R. Beer1 and Jacob Beer2
1General, Surgical and Esthetic Dermatology, West Palm Beach, FL, USA
2Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA

BasIC ConCepts

•	 Polylactic	acid	filler	(PLLA)	is	a	volume	stimulator	rather	than	a	direct	volume	replacement.
•	 PLLA	is	best	suited	for	areas	that	are	concave.
•	 PLLA	results	are	dependent	on	techniques	such	as	dilution	and	injection.
•	 Complications	from	PLLA	are	different	from	those	from	other	fillers	and	include	subcutaneous	papule	formation.
•	 PLLA	results	(both	good	and	bad)	may	last	for	years.

Introduction

Poly-L-lactic  acid  is  the  active  ingredient  found  in  Sculptra® 
(also known as New-Fill; Valeant, Laval, Canada). Each bottle 
of material also contains sodium carboxy methylcellulose (USP) 
and  non-pyrogenic  mannitol  [1]. The  sodium  carboxymethyl-
cellulose  and  mannitol  act  to  stabilize  the  PLLA  and  have  no 
biologic effect on the volume stimulation. The material comes 
as a freeze-dried powder that must be reconstituted with ster-
ile water [2]. At the present time, Sculptra is the only product 
of its kind and as such is unique. In the United States, Europe 
and  Canada,  a  variety  of  materials  are  available  for  long  term 
or permanent volume correction. These include Radiesse, Per-
lane, silicone and Juvederm Voluma in many of these markets. 
Sculptra differs from these materials in several key respects, the 
most significant of which is the fact that Sculptra is not a direct 
volume replacement. Rather, it stimulates the production of col-
lagen and elastin to replace volume. Its replacement is gradual 
and dependent on the patient’s ability to make connective tissue.
Although  the  amount  of  PLLA  in  a  bottle  of  Sculptra  is  fixed 
at 367.5 mg, the methods of reconstitution and thus the volumes 
used for injections are variable. The ability to add different amounts 
of water, lidocaine and epinephrine is one opportunity for physi-
cians  to  vary  the  use  of  this  material  and  may  contribute  to  dif-
fering  reports  of  success  and  complications.  Unlike  other  filling 
agents, the product injected is not standardized and the package 
insert does not reflect the way that the product is presently used. 
Initial reports of product use in Europe utilized dilutions of 3 mL 
pf  sterile  water  per  bottle  [3].  The  duration  of  reconstitution  for 
these early studies was 4 hours. The package insert for the product 
recommends  a  reconstitution  time  of  4 hours;  however,  many 

PLLA injectors advocate longer periods, with some recommend-
ing that water imbibe for at least 24 hours, with longer periods of 
up to 3 weeks also touted. At the present time, there is no uniform 
consensus or any clinical trial data to suggest what is the optimal 
dilution  or  reconstitution  time.  Since  the  product  has  been  used 
for  several  years,  growing  numbers  of  physicians  are  increasing 
the volume used to dilute and also increasing the amount of time 
for the PLLA to soak prior to injection. At the present time, many 
injectors are using 7–9 mL of water for at least 48 hours of imbibing 
time. Many expert injectors prefer to have the product imbibe for 
at least week and will add water and then refrigerate the product. 
When injecting areas other than the face, including the chest, knees 
and arms, dilutions above 10 mL per bottle are being utilized.

In addition to the 7–9 mL water, various anesthetic agents and 
epinephrine are added to the mixture. The anesthetic added to 
the product varies depending on injector preferences and expe-
riences. Among the alternatives used, 1% lidocaine with 1:100 k 
epinephrine added is perhaps the most frequently used. Lido-
caine without epinephrine (1%) and 2% lidocaine is also used.

Volumes of  anesthetic  added  to  the  reconstituted material also 
vary  based  on  the  location  of  each  injection  and  the  experience 
of  the  injector.  At  the  present  time,  many  skilled  injectors  utilize 
7–9 mL water for at least 24 hours and immediately before injection 
add 1–2 mL of 1% lidocaine with epinephrine. When injecting areas 
such as the back of the hands, this dilution may require additional 
water and the total reconstitution volume for these areas is 10 mL for 
many injectors. For the 10-mL dilution, the authors suggest the use 
of 9 mL water and 1 mL 1% lidocaine with 1:100000 epinephrine.

Once reconstituted, the bottle should be signed and dated and 
the material should be stored in a refrigerator. Before injection, 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

390

44. Polylactic Acid Fillers

391

it should be left out so that it can warm to room temperature. 
Whether  or  not  gently  heating  it  to  body  temperature  before 
injecting improves outcomes is another area of controversy. At 
the present time, it seems reasonable to inject material that is at 
room or body temperature, but not to heat the product beyond 
these temperatures. There is a paucity of data to suggest what the 
optimal injection temperature for this product is.

advantages and disadvantages

PLLA  has  many  unique  properties  and  strengths  and  weak-
nesses. Among the strengths of the product are its long-lasting 
nature, ability to correct large volume losses, and ease of injec-
tion. Weaknesses of the product include the formation of sub-
cutaneous papules, multiple injection visits, expense, and, most 
importantly, there is no way to predict the degree of improve-
ment that will result from any given injection. This latter point 
means that unlike the hyaluronic acids (HA) or calcium hydrox-
ylapatite, there is no way for a physician to correct a given area 
with a 1:1 defect to product replacement ratio. Instead, the injec-
tor must wait to see the extent to which new collagen will form. 
Interims of approximately four weeks should separate injections.
One of the advantages of this product is its ability to produce 
collagen, providing a correction that lasts for more than 1 year 
[4]. The only products that are able to provide this type of long-
term correction are those that are permanent (such as Artefill 
or  silicone)  or  the  highly  cross-linked  hyaluronic  acids  such 
as Voluma. Another advantage of Sculptra is the fact that it is 
easily enhanced when the volume begins to subside. Typically, 
patients may return for an annual enhancement with 1–2 bottles 
of material. Despite the initial high cost of injection, the degree 
and duration of the PLLA correction makes it cost effective. Vol-
ume replacement for moderate lipoatrophy costs $3000–4000. 
When compared with the cost of other fillers for the same time 
interval,  PLLA  correction  is  reasonably  priced.  Newer,  more 
cross-linked  hyaluronic  acid  fillers  such  as  Juvederm  Voluma 
may provide corrections that are of comparable duration.

PLLA is technically easy to inject. In fact, the difficulty asso-
ciated with this product lies more with poor patient selection, 
inappropriate and inadequate volume reconstitution and injec-
tions  into  areas  that  should  not  be  injected  with  this  product 
(e.g. the lips). The very nature of the product as it is injected (it 
is a suspension rather than a solution or gel) means that even 
with the best technique, particles of PLLA will migrate follow-
ing injection. In addition, density differences both in the syringe 
and  in  the  patient  as  the  PLLA  particles  settle  provide  non-
homogeneous product dispersion even with the best technique.
One additional advantage of the product is its utility in vari-
ous parts of the face. It has been successfully used in the prejowl 
sulcus,  temples,  malar  area,  nasolabial  creases,  pre-auricular 
region, tear trough and mandibular border. Patient satisfaction 
with PLLA is high, with 99.1% of patients in one study reporting 
satisfaction with the procedure [4].

standard injection techniques

Beginners  should  not  have  technical  problems  injecting  this 
product as long as they select the right patients and locations to 
treat. The most common problem encountered by novice injec-
tors is clogging of material in the needle, resulting in sporadic 
injections of product under high pressure and placement of the 
product at the wrong plane.

Rapid injection is the best technique for injecting PLLA. This 
avoids  needle  clogs  producing  high  pressure  injections  and 
areas of high and low concentration product placement. Injec-
tion  needles  should  be  either  25 or  26 gauge  and  0.5–1 inch  in 
length. Smaller bore and longer needles may result in difficulty 
extruding the product into the tissue. However, the advantage 
of longer needles are that they can get to a wide area with fewer 
injection sites and less theoretical trauma. Cannulas may also be 
used for the insertion of Sculptra but should be 25 G to avoid 
clogging.  One  advantage  of  cannulas  is  that  they  enable  the 
injector to deposit Sculptra across a wide area of the face with 
far fewer punctures than a traditional needle.

Injections  of  PLLA  require  deep  product  placement.  Thus, 
the needle should be at the level of the deep dermis or dermal–
subcutaneous junction. Superficial placement will increase the 
probability  of  visible  papule  formation.  Various  methods  of 
injecting  including  serial  puncture,  linear  threading,  and  fan-
ning  have  been  described  and  espoused.  Standard  injection 
techniques  should  try  to  include  aspects  of  each  because  the 
goal  of  the  injection  is  to  obtain  a  homogeneous  distribution 
of product at the plane where it will do the most good. Which 
technique predominates for a given individual depends on the 
area  being  injected  and  the  amount  of  product  being  placed. 
Following any technique, it is essential to massage the product 
vigorously to distribute it. When massaging, deep pressure ade-
quate  to  move  product  from  discrete  pearls  into  a  contiguous 
plane is required.

One  disadvantage  of  the  product  is  the  need  for  multiple 
injections. This need substantially increases the risk of bleeding 
and trauma from injections. It is not clear whether or not the use 
of epinephrine in the dilution decreases this risk, but it is likely 
that  this  is  the  case.  As  with  other  injections,  bruising  result-
ing from PLLA injections may be treated with pulse dye laser 
to  help  resolution.  There  is  anecdotal  evidence  that  injections 
that utilize more than one bottle in a session will provide faster 
volume replacement. Most injectors do not favor decreasing the 
interval  between  injections  for  fear  of  creating  subcutaneous 
papules.

The most frequently injected areas are the cheeks, jawline, and 
temples. For the cheeks, it is helpful to inject half a bottle (4.5 mL) 
per session into each cheek. Experienced injectors may increase 
the amount injected per session to two bottles to accelerate the 
process. Each injection should be accomplished such that approx-
imately 0.05 mL is inserted and the space between injections is 
about 0.5 cm. Serial puncture and fanning may be combined to 
produce a spoke-like network of injections (Figure 44.1). Typical 

392

antI-agIng  Injectable Anti-aging Techniques

1

3

2

4

5

6

7

9

8

(a)

Figure 44.1  Serial puncture and fan-
ning  techniques.  (a)  Fan  technique. 
(b) Cross-hatching technique.

(b)

injection schedules for the cheeks include three injections spaced 
at  least  1 month  apart.  In  many  patients,  one  bottle  of  product 
will be used for each injection. However, many physicians have 
recently increased the number of bottles injected per session to 
two. Patients with severe lipoatrophy may require more injections 
and more material per injection. It is acceptable to advise these 
patients that between 4–6 sessions will be required until full vol-
ume restoration is accomplished. However, it is not advisable to 
decrease the time interval between sessions.

Correction of jawline volume loss may be required following 
loss of subcutaneous tissue and bone resorption. Loss of bony 
support is one hallmark of facial aging. As the support structure 
for the skin is lost, the skin and soft tissue sag. PLLA injections 
may be performed to stimulate collagen in this area with out-
standing results. Standard injection techniques for this area are 
serial puncture and fanning. Needle insertion for this location 
should be at the level of the deep tissue (subcutaneous or just 
above the periosteum). As with other locations, deep massage is 
necessary to move the product into a homogeneous plane.

Needle  orientation  for  the  jawline  is  typically  at  45°  to  the 
skin. Moderate volume loss may be treated with 3–4 bottles of 
the 9 mL dilution of PLLA and can be completed in three visits 
for many patients. Severe volume loss may be treated with four 
or bottles spanning 4–8 sessions.

Temporal  wasting  is  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  facial  aging. 
Although  other  products  may  be  used  to  treat  this,  PLLA  is 
exceptionally well suited for this application. Injections in this 
location have several potential pitfalls that need to be avoided. 
The plethora of blood vessels in this area provides one potential 
pitfall for injection of any product and the particulate nature of 
PLLA is no exception. When injecting the temples with PLLA, 
it  is  important  to  aspirate  prior  to  inserting  product.  Needle 
placement  should  be  deep  and  at  the  level  just  superficial  to 
the periosteum. Placement at this level will also help avoid for-
mation  of  visible  subcutaneous  papules.  Recent  articles  high-
light the efficacy of PLLA for temporal volume restoration and 

describe  optimal  techniques  for  treatment  [5].  These  authors 
also advocate the use of lasers to rejuvenate the skin of the area 
for a comprehensive approach to this region. Average injection 
volume per side is 4.5 mL using the 9 mL volume dilution. The 
technique for injecting PLLA in this area is predominantly the 
fanning  method,  but  serial  puncture  is  also  used.  Restoration 
of  temporal  volume  may  require  3–4 sessions,  requiring  3–4 
bottles for most patients.

Treatment  of  lipoatrophy  remains  one  of  the  best  uses  for 
PLLA.  Injections  of  PLLA  in  patients  with  lipoatrophy  are 
associated  not  only  with  improvements  in  the  appearance  of 
their  face,  but  also  improvements  in  the  quality  of  their  lives 
[6]. In a review of 230 HIV patients treated with up to five ses-
sions  of  injections,  64%  had  improvements  in  their  quality  of 
life  measured  at  2 months  and  58.8%  had  improvements  at 
12–18 months.  As  more  patients  live  with  lipodystrophy  from 
HIV therapy, it is important to offer treatments that help relieve 
the visual stigmata associated with this disease.

PLLA may be safely used in skin of color to treat signs of aging as 
well as for the treatment of lipoatrophy. However, it has been sug-
gested that this population may require increased intervals between 
treatments to minimize the potential for adverse events [7].

advanced techniques

Perhaps  the  most  important  consideration  when  performing 
advanced  techniques  is  to  change  the  dilution  and  volume  to 
accommodate the different areas being treated. Advanced tech-
niques for injecting PLLA may be utilized to treat areas such as 
the  tear  troughs  and  the  dorsum  of  the  hands.  When  treating 
these  areas,  it  is  worthwhile  to  dilute  each  bottle  with  at  least 
10 mL of total volume rather than with 9 mL.

Tear troughs are one of the areas that should not be injected 
with  Sculptra  except  by  advanced  injectors.  Each  injection 
should  place  a  small  amount  of  material  (about  0.05  mL). 

44. Polylactic Acid Fillers

393

 Injections should be about 3–5 mm apart. Following placement, 
each  should  be  massaged  to  avoid  discrete  nodule  formation. 
Despite perfect technique, injections of PLLA may result in the 
delayed formation of nodules and patients should be aware of 
this possibility prior to treatment [9].

Dorsal  hand  lipoatrophy  and  photoaging  are  hallmarks  of 
aging  that  are  frequently  left  untreated  because  of  the  lack  of 
effective modalities. The use of PLLA for this location is a tech-
nique utilized by advanced injectors with very good results. As 
with injections of the tear trough, the dorsal hands are covered 
with skin that is typically thin and translucent. Thus, dilution of 
each bottle of Sculptra with 9 mL liquid is appropriate.

Longer needles or cannulae may be used to treat the dorsal 
hands.  The  needle  may  be  inserted  proximally  and  advanced 
parallel  to  the  tendons  and  material  inserted  as  the  needle  is 
withdrawn.  Photoaged  hands  typically  have  prominent  veins 
and care must be taken to avoid injections into these structures. 
Each hand will require about half a bottle per treatment session 
and approximately 9–10 injection sites to cover the entire hand.

after  multiple  injections  it  is  possible  to  remove  it  surgically 
using a small incision. The rate of formation of these papules is 
approximately 4.7% [4].

More  serious  complications  are  possible  with  injections  of 
PLLA (or any material) and these include necrosis of the skin. 
This  could  result  from  intravascular  injection  of  PLLA  and 
it  is  wise  to  aspirate  prior  to  injections  near  major  vascular 
structures.  Inadvertent  excursions  of  the  needle  into  the 
globe  may  also  occur  with  PLLA  injections  (or  those  of  any 
product) when the periorbital area or tear troughs are injected. 
The  injector  should  take  care  to  use  the  non-dominant  hand 
to palpate the infraorbital ridge and to orient the needle away 
from the eye so that if the patient makes a sudden movement, 
the needle will not jab them. As is the case with most injected 
agents, orbital necrosis and loss of vision secondary to embo-
lization  has  been  reported  following  injections  with  Sculptra 
[11].  The  patient  reported  in  this  case  had  undergone  injec-
tions of Sculptra in the periorbital region immediately followed 
by  symptoms.  Angiography  revealed  findings  consistent  with 
embolic phenomena.

Complications

pLLa compared with other fillers

The most common complications related to injections of PLLA 
are injection site related [2]. These include bruising, erythema, 
and site-related discomfort. More serious complications include 
nodule formation known as subcutaneous papules. These nod-
ules are typically foreign body type granulomas mixed in with 
collagen matrix [10]. The subcutaneous nodules may be treated 
with  injections  of  intralesional  cortisone  and  it  is  reasonable 
to  begin  treatments  with  2.5–5  mg/mL  triamcinolone  aceto-
nide. Injections may be performed on a monthly basis until the 
 nodule resolves. In the event that the nodule does not resolve 

With the advent of calcium hydroxylapatite, and new forms of 
hyaluronic acid, one question asked by some physicians is when 
PLLA should be used and what patients should be treated with 
it. PLLA is not a direct volume replacement material and instead 
causes the body to replace collagen. Thus, it is not a substitute 
product for the various fillers. Many patients that need discrete 
line filling will have volume loss associated that can be treated 
with  PLLA.  Patients  that  only  require  volume  replacement  of 
the malar, temporal, or jaw areas may also obtain optimal results 

(a)

(b)

Figure 44.2  (a) Before and after Sculptra injections: this is the result of three sessions, each with one bottle of Sculptra. This is typical of a three bottle correc-
tion with excellent volume restoration of the cheek area. The correction was durable for more than 18 months. (b) This is the result of three bottles initially 
with an excellent response that lasted for several years.

394

antI-agIng  Injectable Anti-aging Techniques

with PLLA, highly cross-linked HA or calcium hydroxylapatite. 
The advent of highly cross-linked HA fillers such as Juvederm 
Voluma  provides  the  ability  to  afford  immediate  as  well  as 
delayed volume restoration.

Deciding  where  PLLA  fits  into  one’s  practice  is  as  much  a 
patient selection issue as a technical one. Patients who have the 
temperament  and  budget  to  accept  a  gradual  volume  replace-
ment should be treated with this product. Patients demanding a 
single visit correction should not. In addition, because there is 
no way to anticipate fully how any given individual will manu-
facture collagen, patients who will not tolerate a treatment pro-
gram should be avoided.

Conclusions

PLLA  is  a  unique  molecule  capable  of  restoring  significant 
amounts  of  subcutaneous  volume  for  long  periods  of  time.  It 
causes the body to make collagen and other extracellular matrix 
proteins. Unlike other products used in cosmetic dermatology, 
PLLA cannot produce exactly predictable results and it requires 
multiple  treatment  sessions  to  achieve  its  planned  correction. 
Used judiciously, it can correct deficits that would otherwise be 
difficult to correct. PLLA has some unique complications that 
should be understood before it is used and patient selection is 
perhaps more important with this product than any other. How-
ever, its unique properties offer cosmetic dermatologists unique 
opportunities and this product should be embraced by injectors 
who understand its strengths and weaknesses.

references

  1   Beer K. (2007) Optimizing patient outcomes with collagenic stimu-

lators. J Drugs Dermatol Suppl 6.

  2  Sculptra Package Insert. Bridgewater, NJ: Sanofi-Aventis.
  3  Vleggar D, Bauer U. (2004) Facial enhancement and the European 

experience with Sculptra. J Drugs Dermatol 3, 542–7.

  4  Schierle CF, Casas LA. (2011) Nonsurgical rejuvenation of the aging 
face with injectable poly-L-lactic acid for restoration of soft tissue 
volume. Aesthet Surg J 31(1), 95–109.

  5  Rose AE, Day D. (2013) Esthetic rejuvenation of the temple. Clin 

Plast Surg 40(1), 77–89.

  6  Duracinsky  M,  Leclercq  P,  Armstrong  AR,  Dolivo  M,  Mouly  F, 
Chassany  O.  (2013)  A  longitudinal  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  a 
polylactic  acid  injection  therapy  on  health  related  quality  of  life 
amongst HIV patients treated with anti-retroviral agents under real 
conditions of use. BMC Infect Dis. 20(13), 92.

  7  Hamilton  TK,  Burgess  CM.  (2010)  Considerations  for  the  use  of 
injectable poly-L-lactic acid in people of color. J Drugs Dermatol. 
9(5), 451–6.

  8  Burgess C, Quiroga R. (2005) Assessment of the safety and efficacy 
of  poly-L-lactic  acid  for  the  treatment  of  HIV  associated  facial 
lipoatrophy. J Am Acad Dermatol 52, 233–9.

  9  Beer K. (2009) Delayed formation of nodules from PLLA injected 

in the periorbital area. Dermatol Surg 35 Suppl 1, 399–402.

10  Lombardi  T,  Samson  J,  Plantier  F,  Husson  C,  Küffer  R.  (2004)  
Orofacial  granulomas  after  injection  of  cosmetic  fillers:  his-
topathologic  and  clinical  study  of  11 cases.  J  Oral  Pathol  Med 
33, 115–20.

11  Roberts SA, Arthurs BP. (2012) Severe visual loss and orbital inf-
arction following periorbital aesthetic poly-(L)-lactic acid (PLLA) 
injection. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 28(3). 

Sec tion 3  Resurfacing techniques

CHAPter 45
Superficial Chemical Peels

M. Amanda Jacobs1 and Randall Roenigk2
1 Geisinger Health Systems, Danville, PA, USA 
2 Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

BASIC CONCePtS
•	 Chemical	exfoliating	agent	causes	destruction	of	the	epidermis	(to	varying	degrees)	with	subsequent	repair	and	rejuvenation.
•	 Factors	that	influence	the	depth	of	a	peel.
•	 Specific	peeling	agents,	chemical	action,	and	results.
•	 Standard	and	advanced	techniques	for	superficial	chemical	peels.
•	 Complications.

Definition

Superficial chemical peels involve the application of a chemical 
peeling agent to the skin, resulting in destruction of the epider-
mis. The peel may have effects anywhere from the stratum cor-
neum to the basal cell layer. There are many factors that affect 
the depth of the peel including the peeling agent and the tech-
nique of application. Chemical peels create a controlled wound 
which the body then heals. Permanent histologic changes can be 
seen after a series of superficial peels.

Physiology

Indications
Superficial  chemical  peels  are  generally  safe  and  can  be  used 
on all Fitzpatrick skin types. The peeling agent only affects the 
epidermis  and  so  this  procedure  is  only  indicated  for  superfi-
cial processes such as mild photoaging, superficial dyschromias 
(melasma,  lentigines,  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
[PIH]),  acne,  and  actinic  keratoses  [1].  Typically,  a  series  of 
peels is required for the best clinical response.

Depth of peel
Multiple  factors  influence  the  depth  of  a  given  peel,  includ-
ing  chemical  agent  selection  and  technique  of  application 
(Table 45.1). Each of these factors should be considered when 
selecting a superficial peel for a patient.

table 45.1  	Variables	that	affect	the	depth	of	a	superficial	peel.

Peeling	agent	and	concentration

Technique	of	application	(number	of	coats	and	pressure	of	application)

Duration	of	contact	with	the	skin	(prior	to	neutralization)

Anatomic	location

Pretreatment	regimen

Histologic changes
Superficial chemical peels injure and rejuvenate the epidermis; 
however,  histologic  changes  can  also  be  seen  in  the  dermis, 
including collagen formation in the papillary dermis. Repeated 
application of alfa-hydroxy acids to the skin surface resulted in 
a 25% increase in epidermal thickness as well as increased acid 
mucopolysaccharides  and  increased  density  of  collagen  in  the 
papillary dermis [2].

Formulation

In a superficial peel, chemical agents are applied to the skin to 
create a wound by destroying the epidermis. There are multiple 
different chemicals that fall into this category (Table 45.2).

Alfa-hydroxy acids (glycolic, lactic, malic, oxalic, 
tartaric, and citric acid)
These acids have been used on the skin for centuries. Ancient 
Egyptian  women  would  bathe  in  sour  milk  (containing  lactic 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

395

396

ANtI-AgINg  Resurfacing Techniques

table 45.2  	Characteristics	of	various	chemical	peeling	agents.

Peeling agent

Activity

neutralization Frosting

Unique properties

Side effects

Alfa-hydroxy	acid

Pyruvic	acid

Jessner’s	solution

TCA	(10–25%)

Salicylic	acid

Tretinoin

Diminishes	corneocyte	
adhesion/desquamation

Keratolytic,	sebostatic,	
antimicrobial

Stratum	corneum	separation,	
dermal	edema

Coagulation	of	epidermal	
proteins

Keratolytic,	comedolytic,	
desquamation	of	upper	SC		
Enhances	other	peeling	
agents

Not	destructive	Increases	cell	
turnover

Resorcinol

Weakens	hydrogen	bonds	of	
keratin

Solid	carbon	dioxide

Freezes	and	destroys	
epidermis

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

*White	precipitate	can	occur	as	vehicle	evaporates,	does	not	represent	true	frost.

−

−

−*

+

−*

−

−

Deeper	peel	may	be	achieved	with	
prolonged	skin	contact

Intense	burning	with	
application

Newer	formulation	used	for	
superficial	peels

Intense	burning	with	
application	2–3	coats	applied

True	frost	forms,	intensity	
correlates	with	depth	of	
injury

Burning	with	initial	
application,	then	acid	
becomes	an	anesthetic

Painless	Discolors	skin	
(yellow)	Must	remain	on	skin	
for	6	hours	Decomposed	by	
UV	light

Daily	application	for	3	days	
Time	consuming

Block	of	dry	ice	dipped	in	
acetone/ethanol	solution	
Used	to	treat	acne

Burning	with	application	Erythema	
for	several	days

Transient	salicylism	may	occur

Produces	strong	erythema	Fine	
white	flakes	with	peeling

Irritant	or	contact	allergy	possible	
Continued	use	associated	with	
thyroid	dysfunction

Cold	sensitivity

acid) to smooth the skin [3,4]. They are naturally occurring in 
sugarcane, sour milk,  and various  fruits. When  applied  to  the 
skin,  they  decrease  corneocyte  adhesion  above  the  granular 
layer,  reduce  the  number  of  desmosomes,  and  result  in  desq-
uamation  [2,4].  The  application  is  typically  painless,  although 
some mild stinging may occur. These acids require neutraliza-
tion with sodium bicarbonate or dilution with water. Prolonged 
contact  with  the  skin  may  result  in  uneven  penetration  and 
deeper peel depths being achieved [1].

epidermal edema [1]. Application is best with a sable hair brush. 
Wrung-out gauze pads may also be used. Typically, two to three 
coats are applied. The skin will first become erythematous and 
then a white, powdery appearance will emerge. This is caused 
by precipitation of the chemical compounds onto the skin with 
vehicle  evaporation.  This  is  not  equivalent  to  a  “frost”  which 
indicates depth of peeling in a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peel. 
Complications are rare with this type of peel because of the lim-
ited penetration of the peeling solution.

Pyruvic acid (alfa-keto acid)
This product has keratolytic, antimicrobial, and sebostatic prop-
erties. It is a small molecule with a low pKa which allows deep 
penetration in the skin. Typical formulations fall into the cat-
egory  of  medium  depth  peels.  This  potent  acid  carries  a  high 
risk for scarring. Application is associated with an intense burn-
ing sensation and neutralization is required with a 10% sodium 
bicarbonate solution [1,3].

Berardesca et al. [3] describe the efficacy of a 50% pyruvic acid 
preparation  with  dimethyl  sulfone.  This  buffered  solution  has  a 
lower pH value. The overall result is a superficial peel with mild 
burning on application and mild erythema following the peel.

Jessner’s solution (resorcinol 14%, lactic acid 
14%, and salicylic acid 14% in alcohol)
The penetration of this solution is limited to the epidermis. The 
peel  results  in  separation  of  the  stratum  corneum  and  upper 

trichloroacetic acid
TCA is a much stronger acid than alfa-hydroxy acid (AHA), and 
higher concentrations produce medium and deep peels. Super-
ficial peels can be achieved using concentrations of 10–25%.

TCA is an inorganic compound that occurs naturally in the 
crystalline  form.  It  is  dissolved  in  distilled  water  to  form  an 
aqueous solution of the desired concentration. It is stable for a 
long time (23 weeks) and is not heat or light sensitive. Use and 
storage  may  affect  the  concentration  of  the  solution  and  care 
should be taken to handle appropriately [1]. Cotton tip applica-
tors and debris can contaminate the solution.

The mechanism of action for TCA is coagulation of epidermal 
proteins and necrosis of the cells. The skin gradually turns whit-
ish gray, creating a “frost” as the epidermal proteins coagulate 
and precipitate (Figure 45.1) [5]. This is a self-neutralizing acid. 
Histologically,  the  epidermis  and  upper  papillary  dermis  are 
destroyed along with new collagen deposition [1,4,6].

45. Superficial Chemical Peels

397

Figure 45.1   White frost seen with a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peel indicat-
ing  epidermal  protein  coagulation.  The  intensity  of  the  frost  corresponds 
with the peel depth.

TCA must be applied in a controlled setting. Analgesia and/
or  sedation  are  typically  required.  Cotton-tipped  applicators 
are dipped in a container with TCA solution and rolled on the 
edge to prevent dripping of solution. The acid is then painted on 
the  skin,  typically  along  cosmetic  units  until  the  desired  level 
of  frosting  is  achieved  [6].  Multiple  coats  may  be  needed  and 
depth  of  the  peel  correlates  to  the  intensity  of  the  frost.  Cool 
compresses can be used to ease burning sensation, but do not 
neutralize  the  solution.  Patients  should  expect  several  days  of 
erythema followed by desquamation over 7 days.

This peel is operator  dependent and potential  for error and 
complications are high. The greatest risk exists for peeling more 
deeply than originally intended.

Salicylic acid (ortho-hydroxybenzoic acid)
This  is  a  beta-hydroxyl  acid.  It  is  a  lipophilic  acid  that  allows 
desquamation of the upper layers of the stratum corneum with-
out  inflammation  [1,6].  This  peeling  agent  can  be  safely  used 
on all skin types, even those prone to PIH. This agent also has 
keratolytic  and  comedolytic  qualities  making  it  ideal  for  acne 
patients. It also enhances the penetration of other acids and is 
often used in combination peels (such as Jessner’s solution).

A  mild–moderate  burning  sensation  occurs  on  applica-
tion. Typically, this is easily managed with a cool fan. The acid 
causes superficial anesthesia and so this quickly dissipates after 
a minute or more. The acid should be left on the skin for about 
3–5 minutes.  This  is  a  self-neutralizing  acid,  but  is  typically 
washed  off  the  skin  after  5 minutes  with  plain  water.  A  white 
precipitate  will  be  seen  on  the  skin  after  about  1 minute  from 
evaporation of the vehicle (Figure 45.2). This is not a true frost 
and does not indicate depth of penetration. Desquamation will 
begin 2–3 days after the peel and continue for 7 days [1,4,6].

Salicylism is possible with this peel, although unlikely. Care 
should be taken to avoid peeling large areas at the same time. 
Patients may experience tinnitus, dizziness, and headache. The 

Figure 45.2   White discoloration of the skin seen during a salicylic acid peel 
caused by evaporation of the vehicle and precipitation of salicylate on the 
skin.

symptoms are transient and self-resolving [7]. Increased water 
intake may improve symptoms more quickly.

tretinoin peel
Tretinoin applied in high concentration (1–5%) in propylene glycol 
is used for peeling. The solution is canary yellow and discolors skin 
on application. Tretinoin decomposes on UV exposure and should 
be applied late in the day. The application is painless and the peel-
ing agent must be left on the skin at least 6 hours. This is a safe peel 
and the desquamation consists only of fine white flakes. It typically 
produces strong erythema and the risk for prolonged erythema is 
increased with this type of peel [6].

Tretinoin cream is typically used as part of a pre-peeling regi-
men to help improve penetration of peeling agent and improve 
healing  time.  Most  practices  advocate  at  least  2 weeks  of  pre-
treatment prior to the peel [7].

resorcinol (m-hydroxybenzene)
Resorcinol is structurally and chemically related to phenol and 
acts as a potent reducing agent. It disrupts the weak hydrogen 
bonds of keratin and is therefore a keratolytic. It remains stable 
in water, ethanol, and ether.

Typically, the peeling agent is applied as a paste in concentra-
tions  of  10–50%.  It  is  applied  daily  for  three  consecutive  days 
and  the  skin  contact  time  is  slowly  increased  daily  [1,7].  The 
paste  is  then  wiped  off  the  skin.  Water  and  creams  must  be 
avoided for up to 1 week.

Rescorcinol is not typically used as a peeling agent. The pro-
cess is time-consuming and the results can be achieved by other 

398

ANtI-AgINg  Resurfacing Techniques

methods.  It  also  can  cause  a  non-specific  irritant  reaction  or 
contact  allergy.  Additionally,  there  are  reports  of  thyroid  dys-
function with continued use (over months to years) [7]. More 
recent  reviews  indicate  no  danger  when  used  in  the  standard 
fashion (as described above) [8].

Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice)
This  modality  has  been  used  to  treat  acne  for  over  60  years. 
Brody describes a technique using a block of dry ice wrapped in 
a hand towel and dipped in a 3:1 solution of acetone and alco-
hol. Acetone dissolves sebum and lowers the temperature of the 
carbon dioxide. Individual lesions or segments of the face can 
be treated then using slow even strokes. The depth of injury is 
modified  with  pressure  of  application.  Brody  reports  5–8 sec-
onds  of  moderate  pressure  as  sufficient  to  freeze  comedones. 
This is less destructive than liquid nitrogen which is more than 
twice as cold (−186 °C) compared to dry ice (−78 °C) [7].

Advantages and disadvantages

Superficial chemical peels are generally very safe procedures with 
a minimal risk profile. They can safely be performed on all Fitz-
patrick skin types [4]. Patient discomfort is typically minimal and 
local anesthesia is not typically needed. Patients usually tolerate the 
erythema and desquamation following the peel quite well.

Appropriate  management  of  patient  expectations  is  critical 
with  superficial  peels.  Patients  must  be  aware  that  a  series  of 
peels  is  required  for  maximum  benefit.  In  addition,  patients 
should  be  selected  appropriately,  based  on  the  degree  of  skin 
disease to ensure a successful peel candidate.

Standard technique

Initial consult
The  initial  consult  is  essential.  This  allows  the  treating  physi-
cian to determine if the patient is an appropriate candidate for a 
chemical peel. They should have a dermatologic condition that 
is amenable to this therapy. A history of recent isotretinoin use, 
hypertrophic  scarring,  facial  radiation,  or  significant  psycho-
logic disorder may make the patient a less desirable candidate. 
Also,  a  history  of  oral  contraceptive  use  or  hormonal  agents 
should  be  noted  as  this  may  increase  the  chance  of  PIH  [4]. 
Photographs should be obtained at this visit. Perhaps the most 
important aspect of this consult is managing the patient’s expec-
tations and preparing him or her for the procedure. The peel is 
superficial in nature and the need for serial treatments should 
be emphasized. Also, adherence to priming and post-treatment 
recommendations is essential to treatment success.

Priming
Pretreatment is important for peeling. It allows for melanocyte 
suppression,  uniform  penetration  of  the  peeling  agent,  and 

decreased  healing  time.  Ideally,  priming  occurs  for  2–3 weeks 
prior to the peel procedure. The regimen can be customized to 
the  patient  but  often  includes  glycolic  acid  products  (around 
10%),  tretinoin,  hydroquinone,  and  sunscreen  on  a  regular 
basis. The regimen (except sunscreen) should be discontinued 
3 days prior to the procedure [4,5]. Hydroquinone 2% cream has 
been shown to be a superior priming agent to tretinoin cream 
when treating patients with melasma with superficial chemical 
peels [9]. This is likely due to hydroquinone inhibiting melanin 
production by blocking tyrosinase while tretinoin may stimu-
late new melanin production secondary to inflammation.

Peel procedure
The depth of the chemical peel is determined by multiple vari-
ables; however, the key factors are amount and concentration of 
peeling agent used, pressure used with application, and duration 
of contact with the skin.

Basic peel protocol is similar for all types of superficial peels 
(Table 45.3). The procedure begins with cleansing and defatting 
the skin. Defatting is achieved by applying acetone or isopropyl 
alcohol to remove excess oil and sebum and allow for even pen-
etration  of  the  peeling  agent.  Occlusive  ointment  can  be  used 
to protect the lips and eyes; hair should be tied back away from 
face. Ideally, the office should be equipped with an eyewash sta-
tion or have access to water for flushing [10].

All  of  the  materials  needed  should  be  gathered  prior  to 
beginning.  This  includes  a  neutralization  solution  if  needed. 
Patients may be more comfortable with a fan blowing cool air 
during the peel. Applications with either cotton-tip applicators 
or gauze are typically used (Figures 45.3 and 45.4).

There  are  inherent  errors  that  can  occur  with  peeling  and 
care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  these  situations.  One  error  is 
incorrect formulation, either secondary to error in compound-

table 45.3  	Standard	procedure	for	a	superficial	peel.

Initial consult

Includes	pre-peel	photographs

Priming

2–3	weeks	prior	to	peel

Pre-treatment	with	glycolic	acid,	tretinoin,	hydroquinone,	sunscreen

Peel

Degreasing	with	acetone	or	alcohol

Application	of	peeling	agent

Desired	exposure	to	skin

Rinse	skin	or	neutralize	with	appropriate	material

Application	of	sunscreen	and	possibly	anti-inflammatory	agent

Post-peel

Cool	compresses

Sunscreen/sun	avoidance

Creams/lotions	as	recommended

(a)

(b)

Figure 45.3  (a) Typical tray set-up for a salicylic acid peel. (b) Excess peel solution is removed from sponge prior to application.

(a)

(b)

Figure  45.4   Standard  peel  procedure 
for  a  salicylic  acid  peel.  (a)  Face  is 
degreased with acetone; (b) peel solu-
tion is applied; (c) erythema and white 
precipitate  form  on  skin;  (d)  patient 
rinses face with water.

(c)

(d)

399

400

ANtI-AgINg  Resurfacing Techniques

ing  or  incorrect  storage  leading  to  evaporation  of  alcohol/
water vehicle. The latter results in a stronger peeling solution 
than  intended.  Careful  labeling  and  storage  of  peeling  agents 
is essential. If greater than one strength is being used at a time, 
it is recommended that only one solution be on the tray at any 
given time and this should be clearly marked with concentra-
tion [8].

Post-care
Post-peel  care  includes  gentle  cleansing.  Light  moisturizing 
lotions  can  be  used  24 hours  after  the  peel  procedure  (Figure 
45.5). Sun protection (avoidance or sunscreen) is essential for 
1 month  following  the  peel.  It  is  critical  in  the  first  week  after 
the peel.

Advanced techniques/specific uses

Depth controlled tCA peel
Consistent results with TCA peels can be difficult to achieve and 
potential  complications  can  occur  more  frequently  depending 
on physician skill level and patient selection. A recent product, 
the TCA Blue Peel, offers a depth controlled TCA peel with more 
standardization in acid absorption [11]. The fixed concentration 
(15% or 20%) of TCA is mixed with the Blue Peel base (glycerin, 
saponins, and a non-ionic blue color). This base increases the 
surface  tension  of  the  solution  and  results  in  slower  penetra-
tion of TCA into the skin. The blue color allows the physician to 
easily identify the areas that have been treated. Frosting occurs 
more slowly which allows the physician to control the depth of 

peel more consistently. Several coats may be applied depending 
on the desired depth of peeling.

Fluor-hydroxy pulse peel
This  peel  combines  5-flurorouracil  with  glycolic  acid  (70%) 
peels to treat actinically damaged skin. The two agents appear 
to  have  synergistic  effects.  One  randomized  study  showed 
this  combination  cleared  91%  of  actinic  keratoses,  compared 
with  19%  when  treated  with  glycolic  acid  alone. The  peel  was 
repeated once weekly for 8 weeks [12].

Chemical reconstruction of skin scars
Chemical reconstruction of skin scars (CROSS) is a technique 
to address acne scars while minimizing the risks of deeper peels 
(such  as  scarring  and  pigmentary  changes). The  CROSS  tech-
nique  involves  focal  application  of  high  concentration  TCA 
(65–100%)  to  atrophic  acne  scars.  Each  scar  is  pressed  firmly 
with a sharpened wooden applicator. Variable improvement can 
be seen with this technique but typically it requires a series of 
treatments [13].

treatment of acne vulgaris
Chemical  peels  are  often  used  as  adjuvant  therapy  in  both 
inflammatory  and  non-inflammatory  acne.  Recent  studies 
reviewed the evidence supporting this practice [14]. The most 
beneficial  effect  of  superficial  chemical  peels  was  on  come-
donal acne. One study showed a 75% reduction in lesion count 
using salicylic acid peels 30% alone [15]. A significant benefit in 
comedonal acne was seen with both glycolic acid and salicylic 
acid peels [14].

)a(

)b(

)c(

Figure 45.5  (a) Pre-peel; (b) immediately post-peel; (c) 24 hours after a salicylic acid peel.

table 45.4  Potential	complications	associated	with	superficial	peels.

references

45. Superficial Chemical Peels

401

Pigmentary	changes

Infection

Reactivation	of	herpes

Prolonged	erythema/pruritus

Contact	dermatitis

Lines	of	demarcation

Transient	textural	changes	(enlarged	pores)

Milia

Cold	sensitivity	(CO2)

Results for treating inflammatory acne are less clear cut. Peels, 
particularly glycolic acid peels, can result in flares at the begin-
ning  of  treatment  in  15–20%  of  patients  [16].  Overall  lesion 
counts did improve in these patients with continued treatments.

treatment of post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation/melasma
Superficial  peels  can  benefit  patients  with  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation. Both gylcolic acid peels and salicylic acid peels 
have shown benefit. Salicylic acid peels are non-inflammatory and 
therefore safer in patients with darker skin tones [14,17,18].

Epidermal  melasma  responds  better  to  topical  therapies 
such as chemical peels. Use of a Wood’s lamp to determine the 
depth of pigment prior to treatment may help determine which 
patients will achieve the best results. Epidermal melasma shows 
enhancement of color contrast under Wood’s light as compared 
to  visible  light.  Dermal  melasma  does  not  show  such  change 
[19].  Various  peels  have  shown  benefit  in  treating  melasma 
including salicylic acid, glycolic acid and TCA (10–20%) [20].

Complications

Complications arising from superficial chemical peels are rela-
tively  rare  (Table  45.4)  [9].  Post-inflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation  can  occur,  particularly  in  darker  skin  types.  Technical 
errors  (dripping  of  acid  in  the  eyes)  or  incorrect  formulation 
must also be avoided.

Conclusions

Superficial  chemical  peels  wound  the  epidermis  with  destruc-
tion or desquamation. This leads to increased epidermal thick-
ness and new collagen formation in the papillary dermis with 
repeated application. They are indicated for superficial processes 
such  as  superficial  dyschromias,  mild  photoaging,  acne,  and 
actinic keratoses. They can safely be performed on all skin types 
and complications are rare. A series of peels is often required for 
the best clinical outcome.

  1  Zakopoulou N, Kontochristopoulos G. (2006) Superficial chemical 

peels. J Cosmet Dermatol 5, 246–53.

  2  Ditre  CM,  Griffin  TD,  Murphy  GF,  et  al.  (1996)  Effects  of  alpha-
hydroxy  acids  on  photoaged  skin:  a  pilot  clinical,  histologic,  and 
ultrastructural study. J Am Acad Dermatol 34, 187–95.

  3  Berardesca E, Cameli N, Primavera G, Carrera M. (2006) Clinical 
and instrumental evaluation of skin improvement after treatment 
with a new 50% pyruvic acid peel. Dermatol Surg 32, 526–31.
  4  Roberts WE. (2004) Chemical peeling in ethnic/dark skin. Derma-

tol Ther 17, 196–205.

  5  Roenigk  RK.  (1998)  Facial  chemical  peel.  In:  Baran  R,  Maibach 
HI, eds. Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology, 2 nd edn. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Science, pp. 585–94.

  6  Landau M. (2008) Chemical peels. Clin Dermatol 26, 200–8.
  7  Brody HJ. (1992) Superficial peeling. In: Chemical Peeling. St. Louis, 

MO: Mosby Year Book, pp. 53–73.

  8  Brody HJ. (2001) Complications of chemical resurfacing. Dermatol 

Clin 19 (3).

  9  Nanda  S,  Grover  C,  Reddy  BS.  (2004)  Efficacy  of  hydroquinone 
(2%) versus tretinoin (0.025%) as adjunct topical agents for chemi-
cal peeling in patients with melasma. Dermatol Surg 30, 385–9.
10  Drake LA, Dinehart SM, Goltz RW, et al. (1995) Guidelines of care 
for chemical peeling. Guidelines/Outcomes Committee: American 
Academy of Dermatology. J Am Acad Dermatol 33, 497–503.

11  Obagi ZE, Obagi S, Alaiti S, Stevens MB. (1999) TCA-based blue 
peel: a standard procedure with depth control. Dermatol Surg 25, 
773–80.

12  Marrero GM, Katz BE. (1998) The new fluor-hydroxy pulse peel: a 
combination of 5-fluorouracil and glycolic acid. Dermatol Surg 24, 
973–8.

13  Lee  JB,  Chung  WG,  Kwahck  H,  Lee  KH.  (2002)  Focal  treatment 
of acne scars with trichloroacetic acid: chemical reconstruction of 
skin scars method. Dermatol Surg 28, 1017–21.

14  Dreno B, Fischer TC, Perosino E, Poli F, Viera MS, Rendon MI, et 
al. (2011) Expert opinion: Efficacy of superficial chemical peels in 
active  acne  management  –  what  can  we  learn  from  the  literature 
today? Evidence based recommendations. JEADV 25, 695–704.
15  Hashimoto Y, Suga Y, Mizuno Y et al. (2008) Salicylic acid peels in 
polyethylene glycol vehicle for treatment of comedogenic acne in 
Japanese patients. Dermatol Surg 34, 276–9.

16  Wang CM, Huang CL, Hu CT, Chan HL. (1997) The effect of glycolic 
acid on the treatment of acne in Asian skin. Dermatol Surg 23, 23–9.
17  Grover  C,  Reddu  BS.  (2003)  The  therapeutic  value  of  glycolic 
acid peels in dermatology. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 69, 
148–50.

18  Grimes PE. (1999) The safety and efficacy of salicylic acid chemical 
peels in darker racial-ethnic groups. Dermatol Surg 25, 18–22.
19  Asawanonda P, Taylor CR. (1999) Review: Wood’s light in derma-

tology. Internat J Dermatol 38, 801–807.

20  Cotellessa C, Peris K, Onorati MT, et al. (1999) The use of chemical 
peelings  in  the  treatment  of  different  cutaneous  hyperpigmenta-
tions. Dermatol Surg 25, 450–54.

chapter 46
Medium Depth chemical peels

Gary D. Monheit and Virginia A. Koubek
Total Skin & Beauty Dermatology Center, PC, and Departments of Dermatology and Ophthalmology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Indicated	both	for	therapeutic	field	treatments	of	precancerous	skin	lesions	and	for	various	cosmetic	indications.
•	 Induce	controlled	chemical	damage	through	the	epidermis	and	variable	portions	of	the	dermis	in	order	to	promote	the	regrowth	of	new	

skin	with	improved	surface	characteristics.

•	 Pretreatments	including	even	cleansing,	degreasing,	and	subsequent	application	of	Jessner’s	solution	will	open	the	epidermal	barrier	for	

more	even	and	deep	penetration	of	trichloracetic	acid.

•	 Affords	the	patient	a	single	procedure	with	healing	time	within	1	week	to	10	days.
•	 Considered	safe	and	effective	when	used	by	experienced	dermatologists.

introduction

A number of acidic and basic chemical agents have been used 
to produce the varying effects of light, medium, or deep chemi-
cal  peels,  mediated  by  differences  in  their  ability  to  penetrate 
and damage epidermal and dermal skin components. The level 
of  penetration,  destruction,  and  inflammation  determines  the 
level of peeling. The stimulation of epidermal growth through 
the removal of the stratum corneum without necrosis character-
izes light superficial peels. Through exfoliation, it thickens the 
epidermis with qualitative regenerative changes. Destruction of 
the epidermis defines a full superficial chemical peel inducing 
the  regeneration  of  the  epidermis.  Further  destruction  of  the 
epidermis and induction of inflammation within the papillary 
and upper portions of the reticular dermis constitutes a medium 
depth  peel.  Further  inflammatory  response  in  the  medium 
reticular dermis induces new collagen production and ground 
substances constituting a deep chemical peel [1].

Formulations

trichloracetic acid
Trichloracetic  acid  (TCA)  has  become  the  gold  standard  of 
chemical peeling agents, based on its long history of usage, its 
versatility  in  peeling,  and  its  chemical  stability.  Its  first  docu-
mented use for skin rejuvenation dates back as far as 1882, when 
German dermatologist Paul Gerson Unna described the prop-
erties  of  salicylic  acid,  resorcinol,  phenol,  and  TCA  [1].  TCA 

has since been used in many concentrations because it has no 
systemic toxicity and can be used to create superficial, medium, 
or  even  deep  wounds  in  the  skin.  TCA  is  naturally  found  in 
crystalline form and is mixed weight-by-volume with distilled 
water. It is not light sensitive, does not need refrigeration, and is 
stable on the shelf for over 6 months. The standard concentra-
tions of TCA should be mixed weight-by-volume to assess the 
concentration  accurately.  TCA  crystals  weight  30 g  are  mixed 
with 100 mL distilled water to give an accurate 30% weight-by-
volume  concentration.  Any  other  dilutional  system  –  volume 
dilutions and weight-by-weight – are inaccurate in that they do 
not reflect the accepted weight-by-volume measurements cited 
in the literature.

Because TCA, at concentrations of 50% or above, has a high 
potential  to  be  scarring,  the  use  of  higher  concentrations  has 
fallen out of favor [2]. Therefore, combined applications using 
an initial modifying treatment followed by a 35% TCA formula 
were developed to better control the level of damage and mini-
mize the risk of side effects [3].

Brody [4] first developed the use of solid CO2 applied with 
acetone to the skin as a freezing technique prior to the applica-
tion of 35% TCA. The preliminary freezing appears to break the 
epidermal barrier for a more even and complete penetration of 
the 35% TCA. Monheit [5] then introduced the use of Jessner’s 
solution prior to the application of 35% TCA (Table 46.1). The 
Jessner’s  solution  was  found  to  be  very  effective  in  destroying 
the epidermal barrier by breaking up individual epidermal cells. 
This allows a deeper penetration of the 35% TCA and a more 
even  application  of  the  peel  solution.  Similarly,  Coleman  and 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

402

Table 46.1  Jessner’s	solution	(Combes’	formula).

Resorcinol

Salicylic	acid

85%	Lactic	acid

95%	Ethanol	(q.s.ad.)

q.s.ad,	a	sufficient	quantity	up	to.

14 g

14	g

14	g

100	mL

Table 46.2  Agents	used	for	medium	depth	chemical	peeling.

Agent

40–50%	TCA

Combination	35%	TCA + solid	CO2	
(Brody)

Combination	35%	TCA + Jessner’s	
solution	(Monheit)

Comment

Not	recommended

The	most	potent	combination

The	most	popular	combination

Combination	35%	TCA + 70%	glycolic	
acid	(Coleman)

An	effective	combination

88%	phenol

Rarely	used

Futrell [6] have demonstrated the use of 70% glycolic acid prior 
to the application of 35% TCA. Its effect has been very similar to 
that of Jessner’s solution.

All three combinations have proven to be as effective as the 
use  of  50%  TCA;  however,  with  a  greater  safety  margin.  The 
application of  acid and  resultant  frosting  are  better controlled 
with the combination so that the “hot spots” with higher con-
centrations of TCA can be controlled, creating an even peel with 
less incidence of dyschromias and scarring (Table 46.2).

advantages and disadvantages

The  advantages  of  chemical  peeling  compared  with  other 
modalities  used  to  treat  photoaging  or  precancerous  lesions 
include the low cost, the ease of a single application, and reli-
able efficacy. Additionally, chemical peeling may be performed 
in any office setting with routine dermatologic supplies such as 
2 × 2 or 4 × 4 inch gauze pads and cotton-tipped applicators, 
and  does  not  require  special  equipment  (Figure  46.1).  When 
performed properly on the correctly chosen patient, a medium 
depth  peel  will  reliably  improve  the  appearance  of  photoaged 
skin and produce sustained clearing of most precancerous skin 
lesions for a period of several months to several years.

indications

While  superficial  peels  may  improve  conditions  such  as  acne 
and  skin  texture,  and  deep  peels  may  help  improve  moderate 
rhytides  and  acne  scarring,  current  indications  for  medium 
depth  chemical  peeling  include  Glogau  type  II  photoag-

46. Medium Depth Chemical Peels

403

Figure 46.1  Standard setup for Jessner’s and trichloracetic acid (TCA) com-
bination peel. The standard setup includes a facial cleanser such as Septisol, 
acetone, Jessner’s solution, 35% TCA, cotton-tipped applicators, 2 × 2 inch 
and 4 × 4 inch gauze pads, and cool-water soaks for patient comfort.

ing  (Table  46.3),  epidermal  lesions  such  as  actinic  keratoses, 
 pigmentary dyschromias, mild acne scarring, as well as blend-
ing the effect of deeper resurfacing procedures (Table 46.4) [7].
The  Jessner’s–35%  TCA  peel  is  particularly  useful  for  the 
improvement of mild to moderate photoaging. It freshens sal-
low, atrophic skin and softens fine rhytides, with minimal risk of 
textural or pigmentary complications. Deep furrows, however, 
are not eliminated with this peel and there is no significant skin 
retraction  as  is  seen  with  ablative  fractional  laser  resurfacing. 
When used in conjunction with a retinoid, bleaching agent and 
sunscreens, a single Jessner’s–35% TCA peel lessens pigmentary 

Table 46.3  Glogau’s	classification	of	photoaging.

Group

Severity

Age Group 
(Years)

Features

I

II

Mild

Usually	28–35

Mild	pigmentary	change

No	keratoses

Minimal	wrinkles

Moderate

Usually	36–50

Early	senile	lentigines

III

Advanced Usually	51–65

Keratoses	palpable	but	not	
visible

Parallel	smile	lines	beginning

Obvious	dyschromia,	
telangiectasias

Visible	keratoses

Wrinkles	even	when	not	
moving	facial	muscles

IV

Severe

Usually	66–75

Yellow-gray	color	of	skin

Prior	skin	malignancies

Wrinkled	throughout	with	no	
normal	skin

404

anti-aging  Resurfacing Techniques

Table 46.4  Major	indications	for	medium	depth	chemical	peels.

Table 46.5  Contraindications to medium-depth chemical peeling.

Destruction	of	premalignant	epidermal	lesions	–	actinic	keratoses

Absolute contraindications

Resurfacing	moderate	to	advanced	photoaged	skin	(Glogau	Levels	II,	III)

Poor	physician–patient	relationship

Improving	pigmentary	dyschromias

Improving	mild	acne	scars

Blending	laser,	dermabrasion,	or	deep	chemical	peeling	in	photoaged	skin	
(transition	from	treated	to	non-treated	area)

dyschromias and lentigines as well as or even more effectively 
than  repetitive  superficial  peels.  Epidermal  growths  such  as 
actinic keratosis also respond well to this peel. In fact, the Jess-
ner’s—35% TCA peel has been found to be as effective as topical 
5-fluorouracil  chemotherapy  in  removing  both  grossly  visible 
and clinically undetectable actinic keratosis, but has the advan-
tages of lower morbidity and greater improvement in associated 
photoaging [8].

Another indication for the Jessner’s–35% TCA peel is to blend 
the effects of other resurfacing procedures with the surround-
ing skin. It is important to note that when used in combination 
with  other  resurfacing  procedures  such  as  laser  ablation  and 
dermabrasion,  the  peel  should  be  performed  first,  in  order  to 
avoid accidental application of the peeling agent onto previously 
abraded areas of skin which may lead to scarring [9].

contraindications

Several contraindications exist when choosing a medium depth 
chemical peel (Table 46.5). Because patient compliance during 
the recovery period is essential to avoiding permanent negative 
sequelae, a medium depth peel should not occur in the setting of 
a poor physician–patient relationship. Likewise, a frank discus-
sion of what the peel can and cannot accomplish is necessary, 
and unrealistic expectations on the part of the patient must be 
recognized.  Furthermore,  poor  general  health  and  nutritional 
status  will  compromise  wound  healing  and  should  dissuade  a 
procedural approach. Moreover, isotretinoin therapy within the 
previous  6  months  has  been  associated  with  increased  risk  of 
scarring, and a medium depth chemical peel should be delayed 
until  the  patient  is  beyond  6  months  of  finishing  a  course  of 
isotretinoin.  Additionally,  active  infections  or  open  wounds 
such as herpes simplex vesicles, excoriations, or open acne cysts 
should postpone the treatment until such conditions resolve. All 
patients with a history of herpes simplex virus I of the facial area 
should be premedicated with an antiviral agent such as acyclovir 
or valacyclovir and remain on prophylactic therapy for 10 days.
While  not  absolute  contraindications,  patients  with  overly 
sensitive,  hyperreactive,  or  koebnerizing  skin  disorders  such 
as  atopic  dermatitis,  seborrheic  dermatitis,  psoriasis,  or  con-
tact  dermatitis  may  find  their  underlying  disease  exacerbated 
by a chemical peel. In particular, patients with rosacea typically 
develop  an  exaggerated  inflammatory  response  to  the  peeling 
agents, which serves as a trigger factor for symptoms. Caution 

Unrealistic	expectations

Poor	general	health	and	nutritional	status

Isotretinoin	therapy	within	the	last	6	months

Complete	absence	of	intact	pilosebaceous	units	on	the	face

Active	infection	or	open	wounds	(e.g.	herpes,	excoriations,	or	open	acne	
cysts)

Pregnant	or	nursing	patients

Relative contraindications

Medium	depth	or	deep	resurfacing	procedure	within	the	last	3–12	months

Recent	facial	surgery	involving	extensive	undermining,	such	as	a	
rhytidectomy

History	of	abnormal	scar	formation	or	delayed	wound	healing

History	of	therapeutic	radiation	exposure

History	of	certain	skin	diseases	(e.g.	rosacea,	seborrheic	dermatitis,	atopic	
dermatitis,	psoriasis,	or	vitiligo)	or	active	retinoid	dermatitis

History	of	autoimmune	connective	tissue	diseases	(e.g.	cutaneous	lupus,	
scleroderma)

Fitzpatrick	skin	types	IV,	V	and	VI

should also be exercised for patients with autoimmune connec-
tive  tissue  diseases  (e.g.  cutaneous  lupus,  scleroderma)  as  the 
trauma  of  the  chemical  peeling  may  activate  the  disease  [9]. 
A  history  of  keloid  formation  should  be  screened  for  prior  to 
chemical  peeling.  Likewise,  patients  with  a  recent  history  of 
extensive  or  major  facial  surgery,  or  those  who  have  recently 
had a  medium  depth peel in  the preceding months  should be 
evaluated closely with regard to risks and benefits. The collagen 
remodeling phase of wound healing due to prior treatments is 
still underway in such patients, and an altered wound healing 
response may occur. Another important relative contraindica-
tion is a history of radiation therapy to the proposed treatment 
area. An absence of pilosebaceous units should serve as a har-
binger that the area does not have the reserve capacity of follicu-
lar epidermal cells with which to repopulate. While Fitzpatrick 
skin types I and II are at low risk for post-resurfacing hyperpig-
mentation or hypopigmentation, types III–VI are at greater risk 
for these complications [10].

standard technique

Jessner’s tca peel procedure after Monheit
  1  The skin should be cleaned thoroughly with Septisol® (Vestal 

Laboratories, St. Louis, MO, USA) to remove oils.

  2  Acetone or acetone alcohol is used to further debride oil and 

scale from the surface of the skin.

  3  Jessner’s solution is applied.
  4  35% TCA is applied until a light frost appears.

46. Medium Depth Chemical Peels

405

 5.  Cool saline compresses are applied to dilute the solution.
 6.  The peel will heal with 0.25% acetic acid soaks and a mild 

its full effect. Thus, the antiviral agent must be continued after a 
medium depth peel for at least 10 to 14 days.

emollient cream.

informed consent

A thorough pretreatment discussion is imperative. It allows the 
opportunity to discuss the risks and benefits, as well as to edu-
cate the patient on the expected time frame and course of recov-
ery. It also allows the surgeon to assess the patient’s goals and 
expectations so that the procedure is performed only on appro-
priate candidates. Those who are not willing to tolerate an acute 
event followed by 7–10 days of desquamation and 2–3 weeks of 
erythema are best served by other treatments. The patient must 
fully understand the potential benefits, limitations, and risks of 
the procedure, and an informed consent form must be signed. 
Pretreatment  photographs  are  also  highly  recommended  to 
allow for post-treatment comparison.

setup

All necessary reagents for a Jessner’s + 35% TCA medium depth 
peel  may  be  obtained  in  bulk  for  multi-application  use  from 
leading dermatologic suppliers. When ordering TCA, one must 
ensure that the strength of the acid is as intended by the physi-
cian. While both weight-to-weight and volume-to-volume meth-
ods of calculating acid concentration may be used, the authors 
prefer the more common method of weight-to-volume calcula-
tions.  When  changing  vendors  or  ordering  new  products,  the 
distributor’s method of calculation should be confirmed so as to 
avoid application of a more highly concentrated or less highly 
concentrated formulation than intended product. The standard 
setup includes a facial cleanser such as Septisol, acetone, Jess-
ner’s solution, TCA, cotton-tipped applicators, 2 × 2 inch and 
4 × 4 inch gauze pads, and cool-water soaks for patient comfort 
(Figure 46.1).

patient preparation

All  patients  with  a  history  of  oral  or  facial  herpes  simplex  virus 
(HSV) infection should be pretreated with antiherpetic agents to 
prevent  herpetic  activation  during  the  post-peel  period.  Because 
a  negative  history  of  HSV  infection  does  not  always  correspond 
with  actual  prior  exposure,  and  because  antiviral  medications 
are  extremely  safe,  it  is  prudent  to  place  all  patients  undergoing 
medium depth peels on a post-procedural course of medication. 
Recommended  prophylaxis  consists  of  acyclovir  400  mg  three 
times daily, valacyclovir 500 mg twice daily or famciclovir 250 mg 
twice daily, beginning on the day of the procedure. All antiherpetic 
agents act by inhibiting viral replication in the intact epidermal cell, 
such  that  the  skin  must  be  re-epithelialized  before  the  agent  has 

Almost every patient desiring facial rejuvenation for cutane-
ous photoaging would benefit from botulinum toxin injections 
to  alleviate  dynamic  wrinkles.  When  administered  preopera-
tively  in  patients  undergoing  medium-depth  chemical  peels, 
botulinum  toxin  injections  enhance  the  results  of  the  peel  by 
immobilizing  the  muscles  implicated  in  the  development  of 
dynamic rhytides during the critical time of postoperative col-
lagen remodelling. Another important preoperative adjunctive 
therapy is topical tretinoin applied on a nightly basis prior to the 
procedure. Retinoids increase epidermal proliferation and pre-
sumably lead to more rapid re-epithelialization after the chemi-
cal  peel.  Additionally,  the  use  of  topical  retinoids  enhances 
penetration  of  the  chemical  peel  by  decreasing  the  thickness 
of the stratum corneum. However, the chemical peel should be 
delayed in cases of active retinoid dermatitis, as this condition 
may lead to a prolongation in postoperative erythema [9].

analgesia and sedation

Medium depth peels may be performed without anesthesia, with 
preceding topical anesthesia, with local nerve blocks, with mild 
preoperative sedation, or anxiolytic medications, or a combina-
tion of any of the above. For full-face peels in anxious patients, 
it  is  useful  to  give  preoperative  sedation  (5–10 mg  diazepam 
orally) along with mild analgesia in the form of 50 mg mepe-
ridine (Demerol, Winthrop, New York, USA) and a mild seda-
tive such as 25 mg hydroxyzine hydrochloride intramuscularly 
(Vistaril, Lorec, New York, USA). The discomfort from this peel 
is not long-lasting, so short-acting anxiolytics and analgesics are 
all that are usually recommended [10].

application technique

Vigorous cleansing and degreasing of the skin prior to applica-
tion  of  the  active  peeling  agent  represents  a  crucial  and  often 
overlooked  step  in  the  protocol.  The  removal  of  skin  surface 
lipids  deriving  from  sebum  and  epidermal  lipids,  scale  and 
thickened stratum corneum is particularly important for even 
penetration of the solution. The face is first washed with an anti-
bacterial cleanser in glycerin (Septisol) applied with 4 × 4 inch 
gauze pads, then rinsed with water. Acetone is then applied with 
4 × 4 inch gauze pads to remove residual oils and debris. The 
skin is thus débrided of stratum corneum and excessive scale. 
The necessity for thorough degreasing in order to achieve reli-
able and even penetration cannot be overemphasized. Prior to 
application  of  the  active  peeling  agent,  one  should  assess  the 
thoroughness of degreasing. If oil or scale is felt, the degreasing 
step should be repeated. Particular attention should be focused 
on  the  hairline  and  nose.  Thorough  and  uniform  degreasing 
conditions the skin to ensure an even peel over the entire face.

406

anti-aging  Resurfacing Techniques

Next, Jessner’s solution is evenly applied, either with cotton-
tip applicators or 2 × 2 inch gauze pads. Jessner’s solution alone 
constitutes a very light peel, and thus will open the epidermal 
barrier for a more even and more deeply penetrating TCA appli-
cation. Only one coat of Jessner’s solution is usually necessary to 
achieve  a  light,  even  frosting  with  a  background  of  erythema. 
The  expected  frosting  is  much  lighter  than  that  produced  by 
the TCA. The face is treated in sequential segments progressing 
inferiorly from the hairline. Even strokes are used to apply the 
solution to the forehead first then each cheek, the nose, and the 
chin. The perioral area should follow, and the eyelids are treated 
last, creating the same erythema with blotchy frosting.

As with the application of Jessner’s solution, cosmetic units of 
the face are then peeled sequentially with TCA from forehead to 
temple to cheeks, and finally to the cutaneous lips and eyelids. 
The 35% weight-to-volume TCA is applied evenly with 1–4 cot-
ton-tipped applicators rolled over different areas with lighter or 
heavier doses of the acid. Four well-soaked cotton-tipped appli-
cators  are  used  with  broad  strokes  over  the  forehead  and  the 
medial cheeks. Two mildly soaked cotton-tipped applicators can 
be used across the lips and chin, and one damp cotton-tipped 
applicator on the eyelids. The amount of acid delivered is thus 
dependent  upon  both  the  saturation  of  an  individual  cotton-
tipped applicator and the number of cotton-tipped applicators 
used. In this manner the application is titrated according to the 
cutaneous thickness of the treated area.

The white frost from the TCA application, which represents 
the keratocoagulated endpoint, should appear on the treated area 
within 30 seconds to 2 minutes after application (Figure 46.2). 
An even application should eliminate the need for a second or 
a third pass, but if frosting is incomplete or uneven, the solu-
tion should be reapplied. TCA takes longer to frost than a deep 

Figure  46.2  Frosting  observed  immediately  after  combined  Jessner’s  and 
TCA  peel.  Typical  opaque  white  frosting  with  mild  erythema  observed  2 
minutes after TCA application.

 phenol  peel,  but  less  time  than  the  superficial  peeling  agents. 
After a single application to an area, the surgeon should wait at 
least 3–4 minutes to ensure that frosting has reached its peak. 
The  thoroughness  of  application  can  then  be  analyzed,  and 
a  touch  up,  or  less  commonly  another  pass,  can  be  applied  as 
needed.  Areas  of  poor  frosting  should  be  retreated  carefully 
with a thin application of TCA.

The  physician  should  seek  to  achieve  a  level  II–III  frosting. 
Level II frosting is defined as white-coated frosting with a back-
ground of erythema [11]. A level III frosting, which is associated 
with penetration to the reticular dermis, is solid white enamel 
frosting  with  no  background  of  erythema.  A  deeper  level  III 
frosting should be restricted only to areas of heavy actinic dam-
age  and  thicker  skin.  Although  heavily  damaged  actinic  skin 
may require a level III frosting, most medium depth chemical 
peels  should  strive  to  obtain  no  more  than  a  level  II  frosting. 
This  is  especially  true  over  eyelids  and  areas  of  sensitive  skin. 
Those areas with a greater tendency to scar formation, such as 
the zygomatic arch, the bony prominences of the jawline, and 
chin,  should  only  receive  up  to  a  level  II  frosting.  Over  coat-
ing TCA with multiple passes or highly saturated cotton-tipped 
applicators will increase its penetration, so that a second or third 
application will create further damage. One must be extremely 
careful to retreat only areas where the amount of solution taken 
up  was  not  adequate  or  the  skin  is  much  thicker.  One  should 
never overcoat a fully frosted area.

Certain facial features require special attention. Careful feath-
ering of the solution into the hairline and around the rim of the 
jaw and brow conceals the line of demarcation between peeled 
and non-peeled areas. The perioral area has fine, radial rhytides 
that  require  a  complete  and  even  application  of  solution  over 
the lip skin to the vermilion border. This is best accomplished 
with the help of an assistant who stretches and fixates the upper 
and lower lips as the peel solution is applied. Alternatively, the 
TCA may be applied along the rhytid to the vermilion border 
with the wooden end of a cotton-tipped applicator. It should be 
noted that deeper furrows such as expression lines will not be 
eradicated by a medium depth peel and thus should be treated 
like the remaining skin.

Thickened  keratoses  should  stand  in  contrast  to  the  frosted 
background  because  they  do  not  pick  up  peel  solution  evenly 
and  thus  do  not  frost  evenly.  Additional  applications  rubbed 
vigorously into these lesions may be needed for penetration.

Eyelid skin must be treated delicately and carefully. A damp, 
rather than saturated, applicator should be used. This is accom-
plished  by  draining  the  excess  TCA  on  the  cotton  tip  against 
the rim of the bottle or onto a dry gauze pad before using it for 
application. The patient should be positioned with the head ele-
vated at 30 ° and the eyelids closed. The applicator is then rolled 
gently on the lids and periorbital skin within 2–3 mm of the lid 
margin. Never leave excess peel solution on the lids, because the 
solution  can  roll  into  the  eyes.  Dry  tears  with  a  separate,  dry 
cotton-tipped applicator during peeling because they may wick 
peel solution to the puncta and eyes by capillary attraction.

The patient will experience an immediate burning sensation 
as the TCA is applied, but this subsides as frosting is completed. 
A circulating fan may be placed beside the patient for comfort. 
Cool  saline  or  water  compresses  also  offer  symptomatic  relief 
for a peeled area. The compresses are  placed  over  the  face  for 
5–6 minutes after the peel until the patient is comfortable. The 
burning  subsides  fully  by  the  time  the  patient  is  ready  to  be 
discharged. At that time, most of the frosting has faded and a 
brawny desquamation is evident.

post-procedure

Postoperatively,  edema,  erythema,  and  desquamation  are 
expected. With periorbital peels and even forehead peels, eyelid 
edema can be severe enough to close the lids. For the first 2–4 
days, the patient is instructed to soak four times a day with a 
0.25% acetic acid compresses made of 1 tablespoon white vin-
egar in 1 pint warm water. A bland emollient is applied to the 
desquamating  areas  after  soaks.  After  4  days,  the  patient  can 
shower  and  clean  gently  with  a  mild  facial  cleanser.  The  ery-
thema  intensifies  as  desquamation  becomes  complete  within 
4–5 days. Thus, healing is completed within 7–10 days. At this 
time the bright red color has faded to pink and has the appear-
ance of a sunburn (Figure 46.3). This erythema may be covered 
by cosmetics and will fade fully within 2–3 weeks.

complications

Despite proper patient and procedure selection, perfect surgical 
technique, and appropriate management before and after the pro-
cedure, true complications can occur with medium depth chem-
ical peels (Table 46.6). Many of the complications seen in peeling 
can be recognized early on during healing stages. The cosmetic 
surgeon should be well acquainted with the normal appearance 
of  a  healing  wound  in  its  time  frame  for  medium  depth  peel-
ing. Prolongation of the granulation tissue phase beyond 1 week 
may indicate delayed wound healing. This could be the result of 
viral, bacterial, or fungal infection, contact irritants interfering 
with wound healing, or other systemic factors. A red flag should 
alert the physician that careful investigation and prompt treat-
ment should be instituted to forestall potential irreparable dam-
age that may result in scarring. Thus, it is critically important to 
understand the stages of wound healing in reference to medium 
depth peeling. The physician then can avoid, recognize, and treat 
any and all complications early (Figure 46.4).

During  chemical  peeling,  intraoperative  exposure  of  vital 
structures to the resurfacing agent may occur and have serious 
adverse  consequences. The  moistened  applicator  should  never 
be  passed  over  the  central  face,  in  order  to  avoid  inadvertent 
exposure  of  the  eyes  to  the  solution.  There  should  always  be 
appropriate fluids readily available to rinse the area in case such 
an exposure does occur. Saline is used to dilute TCA.

46. Medium Depth Chemical Peels

407

Table 46.6  Potential	complications	of	medium-depth	chemical	peeling.

Inadvertent	exposure	of	vulnerable	structure	to	peeling	agent

Dyspigmentation

Infection	(bacterial,	viral	or	fungal)

Persistent	erythema

Scarring

Textural	abnormalities

Milia

Eruptive	keratoacanthomas

The  most  common  complication  of  chemical  peeling  is 
abnormal  pigmentation.  The  risk  for  hyperpigmention  is 
higher in patients whose Fitzpatrick skin type is IV or higher, 
so an extra measure of caution is necessary. Exogenous estro-
gens,  photosensitizing  medications,  and  direct  sun  expo-
sure  during  the  first  6  weeks  after  peels  increase  the  risk  of 
hyperpigmentation. It is best prevented and/or treated with a 
topical retinoid, a 4–8% hydroquinone preparation and strict 
photoprotection.

Infection  is  an  uncommon  complication  that  develops  dur-
ing  the  postoperative  period  and  may  be  caused  by  bacterial, 
viral or fungal organisms. Factors contributing to post-peel bac-
terial infections include improper wound hygiene and the use 
of thick, occlusive ointments that may promote staphylococcal 
and streptococcal folliculitis. Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas spp. 
or candida infections may also occur. Medium depth chemical 
peeling  may  activate  a  HSV  during  the  postoperative  period 
with the potential for dissemination and scarring. An outbreak 
can even occur in patients on the recommended 10–14 day pro-
phylactic antiviral regimen. The sudden onset of facial pain or 
severe scarring may herald the onset of diffuse facial HSV. Fre-
quent postoperative visits are helpful to assure rapid recognition 
and aggressive treatment of any infection so that scarring does 
not result.

Persistent  erythema  beyond  2  months  after  a  medium-
depth procedure may be precipitated by the use of topical or 
systemic retinoid therapy, contact with various allergens and 
irritants, an underlying skin condition or genetic susceptibil-
ity  or  the  presence  of  active  infection.  Persistent  erythema 
may indicate the impending development of scar formation. 
Management  includes  massage,  topical,  intralesional  or  sys-
temic  corticosteroids,  silicone  gel  sheeting,  and  pulsed  dye 
laser therapy.

Scarring is perhaps the most feared complication of chemi-
cal resurfacing procedures. The risk of scarring increases pro-
portionately with the depth of the peel. Factors that increase 
the risk of post-peel scarring include the use of TCA at con-
centrations  greater  than  50%  or  a  history  of  any  of  the  fol-
lowing:  isotretinoin  within  a  6-month  period,  facial  surgery 
or  resurfacing  within  a  6-month  period,  or  any  previous 
 radiation exposure. Of note, the risk of scarring is greater on 

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

(b)

(d)

(f)

(h)

Figure 46.3  Sequential exfoliation, granulation, and re-epithelialization after Jessner’s and TCA combination medium depth peel. (a) Postoperative day 1: 
inflammation with edema, erythema; (b) day 2: early epidermal separation with hyperpigmentation; (c, d) day 3 morning; and (e, f) day 3 afternoon: dermal 
inflammation with granulation tissue and early re-epithelialization; (g, h) days 5 and 6, respectively: full desquamation with regeneration of new epidermis 
and beginning dermal remodeling.

408

46. Medium Depth Chemical Peels

409

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 46.4  Jessner’s TCA peel performed for photoaging skin and actinic keratoses. (a) Preoperative; (b) 5 weeks postoperative; (c) 10 weeks postoperative.

non-facial skin. Presumably, this is due to a relative decrease in 
adnexal structure when compared to the face, which impairs 
wound  healing.  Thus,  when  peeling  non-facial  skin,  such  as 
for actinic keratoses of the arms and hands, it is prudent to use 
lower  concentrations  of  acids  and  serial  treatments.  In  addi-
tion to scarring, medium depth chemical peeling of the dorsal 
arms and hands has been reported to trigger eruptive kerato-
acanthomas [12].

Adverse  systemic  effects  related  to  medium  depth  chemical 
peels are exceedingly rare. The use of Jessner’s solution poses a 
theoretical risk of systemic salicylate or resorcinol toxicity, but 
this  is  probably  not  clinically  significant  when  application  is 
limited to the face and neck. Additionally, a growing number of 
studies linking long-term systemic TCA exposure in laboratory 
mice  to  the  development  of  liver  cancer  have  raised  concern 
over  the  potential  carcinogenicity  of  TCA  in  humans.  How-
ever, this link has not been demonstrated in any human studies. 

 Further, it is unlikely that the amount of TCA exposure a person 
receives during a medium depth chemical peel, only 3-4 min-
utes before the acid is washed off, would pose a significant risk 
of carcinogenesis [13].

Long-term care

Long-term care of peeled skin includes sunscreen protection for 
up  to  6  months  along  with  reinstitution  of  medical  treatment 
such as low strength hydroxy acid lotions and topical tretinoin 
formulations.  Repeeling  areas  should  not  be  performed  for  6 
months from the previous peel. If any erythema or edema per-
sists, the peel should not be performed as the reinjury may create 
complications.  Medium  depth  peels  should  not  be   performed 
on undermined skin such as facelift or flap surgery performed 
up to 6 months prior to the peel [14].

410

anti-aging  Resurfacing Techniques

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 46.5  Jessner’s 35% TCA peel for actinic keratoses. (a & b) Preoperative diffuse actinic keratoses and seborrheic keratoses; (c & d) 9 months postop-
erative.

conclusions

The  evolution  of  medium  depth  chemical  peeling  has 
changed  the  face  of  cosmetic  surgery.  It  has  introduced 
new  techniques  into  the  armamentarium  of  the  cos-
metic  surgeon  to  treat  problems  that  previously  have  been 
approached  with  tools  inadequate  to  obtain  the  results  for 
moderate  photoaging  skin  or  with  overly  aggressive  treat-
ment using deep chemical peeling agents. The combination 

peels have  provided some of the more popular tools needed 
to  approach  a  burgeoning  population  with  photoaging  and 
photocarcinogenesis.

The  presented  medium  depth  peel  will  produce  excellent 
results for a variety of skin conditions, including actinic ker-
atoses (Figure 46.5). Medium depth combination peels thus 
provide  an  effective,  safe,  and  simple  single  procedure  that 
can be used as both a therapeutic and cosmetic procedure to 
counteract cutaneous photodamage.

46. Medium Depth Chemical Peels

411

references

  1    Brody  HJ,  Monheit  GD,  Resnik  SS,  Alt  TH.  (2000)  A  history  of 

chemical peeling. Dermatol Surg 26, 405–9.

  2    Brody  HJ.  (1989)  Variations  and  comparisons  in  medium  depth 

chemical peeling. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 15, 960–3.

  3  Monheit GD. (2004) Chemical peels. Skin Ther Lett 9, 6–11.
  4  Brody HJ. (1997) Chemical Peeling and Resurfacing. Mosby, p. 110.
  5  Monheit  GD.  (1989)  The  Jessner’s  +  TCA  peel:  a  medium  depth 

chemical peel. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 15, 945.

  6  Coleman WP, Futrell JM. (1994) The glycolic acid + trichloroacetic 

acid peel. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 20, 76–80.

  7  Glogau  RG.  (1994)  Chemical  peeling  and  aging  skin.  J  Geriatr 

 Dermatol 2, 30–5.

  8  Lawrence N, Cox SE, Cockerell CJ, et al. (1995) A comparison of 
efficacy and safety of Jessner’s solution and 35% trichloracetic acid 

vs.  5%  fluorouracil  in  the  treatment  of  widespread  facial  actinic 
keratoses. Arch Dermatol 131, 176–81.

  9  Monheit, GD, Chastain, MA. Chemical and mechanical skin resur-
facing. In Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL & Schaffer JV (eds.) Dermatology, 
3rd edn. Elsevier: 2012: 2494–506.

10  Monheit GD. (1995) The Jessner’s trichloracetic acid peel. Dermatol 

Clin 13, 277–83.

11  Rubin M. (1995) Manual of Chemical Peels. Philadelphia, PA: Lip-

pincott, pp. 120–1.

12  Mohr B, Fernandez MP, Krejci-Manwaring J. (2013) Eruptive kera-
toacanthomas after Jessner’s and trichloroacetic acid peel for actinic 
keratosis. Dermatol Surg 39, 331–3.

13  Zheng, L. (2011) Toxicological Review of Trichloroacetic Acid. U.S. 

Environmental Protection Agency.

14  Monheit  GD.  (1994)  Advances  in  chemical  peeling.  Facial  Plast 

Surg Clin North Am 2, 7–8.

Chapter 47
CO2 Laser resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

Mitchel P. Goldman1,2 and Ana Marie Liolios1
1Cosmetic Laser Dermatology, San Diego, CA, USA
2Private Practice, Fairway, Kansas, MO, USA

BasIC COnCepts

•	 Fractionated	laser	resurfacing	with	ablative	lasers	gives	better	results	than	with	non-invasive	lasers.
•	 Confluent	ablative	laser	resurfacing	gives	better	results	than	fractionated	laser	resurfacing.
•	 More	“down-time”	correlates	with	better	results.
•	 Cold	air	cooling	and	advanced	topical	and	local	anesthesia	provides	optimal	pain	control.
•	 Fractionated	ablative	resurfacing	has	minimal	adverse	effects.

Introduction

Carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  lasers  are  currently  available  in  two 
forms: confluent and fractionated. The differences between the 
results, adverse effects, and down-time are compared and con-
trasted in this chapter.

CO2 laser resurfacing

The modern era of CO2 laser resurfacing began in 1994 with the 
development  of  the  UltraPulse  CO2  laser  by  Coherent  Medical 
(now  Lumenis,  Inc.,  Santa  Clara,  CA,  USA). This  laser  delivers 
peak  fluence  above  the  ablation  threshold  of  cutaneous  tissue 
(5 J/cm2) with tissue dwell times shorter than the 1 ms thermal 
relaxation time of the epidermis. These new generation CO2 lasers 
limited tissue dwell time by either shortening the pulse duration 
(i.e. UltraPulse)  or using  scanning  technology  to  rapidly sweep 
a continuous wave CO2 laser beam over the tissue such that the 
laser beam does not remain in contact with any particular spot on 
the tissue for longer than 1 ms (i.e. SilkTouch, Sharplan Laser Cor-
poration, now Lumenis Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA). These high 
peak-power, short-pulsed, and rapidly scanned CO2 laser systems 
allow laser surgeons to precisely and effectively ablate 20–30 μm 
of skin per pass while leaving in its wake a considerably smaller 
residual zone of thermal damage (up to 150 μm) than left behind 
by the previous generation of continuous wave CO2 lasers (up to 
600 μm). Clinically, this technologic advancement translates into 
superior clinical results and a much more favorable safety profile 
than seen previously with the continuous wave CO2 lasers.

The thermal effect of the CO2 laser acts on dermal collagen 
stimulating  neocollagenesis  and  tightening  of  facial  skin.  Suc-
cessful  ablation  maximizes  thermal  stimulation  of  the  dermis 
while  limiting  non-specific  thermal  damage.  Another  method 
used  to  decrease  thermal  damage  is  to  follow  a  session  of 
CO2  laser  ablation  with  the  erbium:yttrium  aluminum  garnet 
(Er:YAG)  laser.  With  this  technique,  the  residual  non-specific 
thermal  damage  left  from  the  CO2  laser  is  vaporized  by  sub-
sequent  passes  with  an  Er:YAG  laser  which  leaves  little  if  any 
non-specific thermal damage.

Given  the  impressive  clinical  results  achieved  with  the  high 
peak  power,  short  pulsed,  and  rapidly  scanned  CO2  lasers, 
they  quickly  replaced  chemical  peels  and  dermabrasion  as  the 
treatment  of  choice  for  cutaneous  resurfacing.  However,  the 
impressive results achieved with these new generation CO2 lasers 
were not without drawbacks. Re-epithelialization can take 5–14 
days  and  postoperative  erythema  and/or  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation can last 1–6 months depending on the depth 
of laser ablation, amount of residual non-specific thermal dam-
age, and patient’s skin type. Finally, there is a risk of fungal, viral, 
and bacterial infections on the denuded skin as well as delayed 
permanent  hypopigmentation  from  destruction  of  melanocytes 
and resultant scarring. Minimizing these potential adverse effects 
requires excellent postoperative care and is time-consuming for 
both the patient and physician.

These  side  effects,  as  well  as  the  significant  “down-time” 
typically  associated  with  CO2  laser  resurfacing  and  extensive 
postoperative care, are unacceptable to many patients and sig-
nificantly dampened the initial enthusiasm associated with their 
use.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

412

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

413

Because the CO2 laser typically operates near its tissue abla-
tion threshold (5 J/cm2) in most resurfacing applications, a large 
fraction  of  its  energy  is  invested  in  heating  rather  than  ablat-
ing tissue. Consequently, the CO2 laser produces relatively large 
residual thermal damage zones and causes significant desicca-
tion of the target tissue after only a few passes. With each sub-
sequent  pass,  the  amount  of  vaporized  tissue  decreases  while 
thermal damage increases and a “plateau” of ablation is typically 
reached after the fourth pass. Non-specific thermal damage has 
a  negative  impact,  not  only  on  the  CO2  laser’s  ablative  capac-
ity, but also on its side effect profile. Our research suggests that 
the  relatively  large  thermally  induced  residual  zone  of  necro-
sis  (up  to  150  μm)  left  behind  by  the  CO2  laser  is  one  of  the 
main factors contributing to its adverse sequelae including pro-
longed erythema, postoperative pain, delayed healing, infection, 
hypopigmentation, and scarring.

To minimize the issues resulting from a large residual thermal 
zone  the  Er:YAG  laser  was  introduced  for  resurfacing.  While 
it was successful in reducing thermal damage it was unable to 
penetrate beyond papillary dermis as a result of its high absorp-
tion by water. A multimode Er:YAG system, the Tunable Resur-
facing Laser (TRL), was developed (Sciton, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, 
USA) which allows the user to blend a variety of ablation and 
thermal coagulation depths by extending the pulse duration of 
the Er:YAG laser which is typically less than 0.5 ms. Extending 
the pulse duration to 4–10 ms allowed for less flash vaporization 
and more prolonged thermal heating to occur. The TRL can be 
tuned for pure ablation or CO2-like thermal injury, or any point 
in between.

Modifications  of  technical  protocols  have  continued  to 
improve  clinical  outcomes.  Combination  therapy  with  CO2 
immediately followed by Er:YAG lasers allow cosmetic surgeons 
to capitalize on the unique benefits of each laser system and to 
minimize  their  disadvantages.  Er:YAG  laser  treatment  can  be 

used to bypass the ablation “plateau” characteristic of CO2 resur-
facing  to  ablate  deeper  into  the  dermis.  Improved  postopera-
tive healing can also be attained when the short-pulsed Er:YAG 
laser is used to remove the residual zone of thermal necrosis left 
behind after CO2 resurfacing (Figures 47.1 and 47.2).

Additionally,  the  ablative  lasers  have  turned  out  to  be 
extremely  versatile  therapeutic  tools.  Cosmetic  surgeons  now 
regularly combine ablative laser resurfacing with other problem-
specific non-ablative technologies to address multiple cosmetic 
concerns for the patient in a single treatment session. The effi-
cacy of Q-switched lasers in the treatment of pigmented lesions 
is enhanced when these lasers are used after ablative resurfacing. 
Treatment  of  vascular  lesions  with  the  pulsed  dye  laser,  other 
vascular  lasers,  or  the  intense  pulsed  light  has  been  shown  to 
be extremely successful when performed prior to skin resurfac-
ing with an ablative laser. Despite early reports advising against 
it, full-face laser resurfacing is now safely being combined with 
rhytidectomy, autologous fat transfer and/or the use of dermal 
filler or biostimulatory agents like Sculptra™ to achieve a more 
comprehensive approach to facial rejuvenation. To enhance col-
lagen deposition we utilize a variety of neuromodulator agents 
like Botox™, Dysport™, or Xeomin™ usually a day or longer prior 
to laser resurfacing to decrease facial muscular movement.

Pre-treatment  and  post-treatment  protocols  have  also 
improved.  Although  some  controversy  remains  surrounding 
the topic of antibiotic prophylaxis, a number of studies in the 
last  decade  have  provided  relevant  information  on  common 
pathogens, effective antibiotic prophylaxis regimens, and clini-
cal situations at increased risk for infection after cutaneous laser 
resurfacing. Improved laser wound care regimens have reduced 
recovery  time  and  decreased  morbidity  after  laser  skin  resur-
facing. The benefits of occlusive dressings in accelerating laser 
wound healing have been well established in a number of studies. 
Timely  institution  of  topical  medications  in  the  postoperative 

(a)

(b)

Figure 47.1  (a) Two passes of CO2 laser at 7 J/cm2 leaves approximately 70 μm of residual thermal necrosis. (b) Two passes of Er:YAG laser at 10 J/cm2 results 
in removal of approximately 50 μm of this necrotic tissue. (Source: Carcamo & Goldman, 2006; Skin resurfacing with ablative lasers. In: Goldman MP, ed. 
Cutaneous and Cosmetic Laser Surgery. London: Mosby-Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.)

414

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 47.2  Combination UltraPulse CO2 (UPCO2) and Er:YAG laser (patient’s right side) showing improvement equal to left side treated with UPCO2 
alone. (a) Before treatment; (b) immediately after treatment; (c) 7 days after laser resurfacing; (d) 3 weeks after laser resurfacing; (e) 2 months after resur-
facing. (Source: Carcamo & Goldman, 2006; Skin resurfacing with ablative lasers. In: Goldman MP, ed. Cutaneous and Cosmetic Laser Surgery. London: 
Mosby-Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.)

period is now allowing surgeons to effectively address a number 
of expected postoperative symptoms and complications includ-
ing  postoperative  erythema  and  edema,  pruritus,  and  post-
inflammatory hyperpigmentation. We are presently evaluating 
a variety of growth factors and biologic wound dressings to fur-
ther enhance wound healing.

Fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing

Because of the prolonged and meticulous postoperative care in 
addition to potential adverse effects, as well as the advancement 
in  minimally  invasive  procedures  with  rapid  healing  times, 
confluent  CO2  and/or  Er:YAG  ablative  resurfacing  is  rarely 

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

415

necessary for the full face and if performed is only utilized in the 
perioral and/or periorbital regions. Physicians and patients find 
it easier to have minimally invasive procedures performed at the 
expense of efficacy. The current consensus among patients is to 
embrace  a  treatment  modality  that  delivers  maximum  results 
with minimal down-time. Unfortunately, the promises by most 
laser companies who have developed and are promoting these 
minimally  invasive,  non-ablative  lasers  have  not  lived  up  to 
their  stated  efficacy  in  improving  photodamage.  The  develop-
ment  of  fractionated  lasers  that  treat  a  percentage  of  the  skin 
while  leaving  the  intervening  areas  untreated,  allows  for  the 
more dramatic results of a variety of laser wavelengths including 
the 10600 nm CO2 laser to be associated with quicker healing 
times and fewer postoperative sequelae.

Initially,  fractional  lasers  were  introduced  in  a  non-ablative 
format. This technology was developed to overcome the homo-
geneous thermal damage typically created after treatment with 
standard CO2 and/or Er:YAG lasers and instead creates micro-
scopic  thermal  wounds  which  spares  the  tissue  surrounding 
each wound. Initial studies showed a 2.1% linear shrinkage of 
periorbital rhytides was noted at 3 months with this non-ablative 
fractionated  laser  which  is  much  less  than  that  achieved  with 
standard  ablative  CO2  and/or  Er:YAG  laser  resurfacing.  With 
the disappointment of the fractionated non-ablative lasers, it did 
not  take  long  for  fractional  photothermolysis  to  be  applied  to 
ablative lasers, allowing for a more aggressive treatment option. 
Our recommendation is that non-ablative fractionated lasers be 
reserved for patients who cannot accept any “down-time” and 

are willing to wait at least 6 months and have 4–6 treatments to 
see definite improvement in wrinkles and/or scarring.

Interestingly,  physicians  have  had  the  ability  to  perform 
fractionated  CO2  laser  resurfacing  since  the  development  of 
the scanning UltraPulse hand-piece in 1995. This scanner was 
developed  to  deliver  precisely  overlapped  laser  pulses  that 
occurred  in  a  Gaussian  distribution  uniformly  to  ablate  and/
or vaporize the epidermis. Recognition that one could use this 
scanner  with  a  negative  10%  overlap  along  with  the  develop-
ment of smaller laser spot sizes (0.1 and 1.2 mm) produced the 
first fractionated CO2 laser.

There are an ever-increasing variety of both fractionated CO2, 
Er:YAG,  and  Er:YSGG  lasers  to  assist  in  facial  rejuvenation. 
Table 47.1 summarizes most of the available lasers by company, 
wavelength, spot size, density, frequency, power, and maximal 
depth (if known). Due to the ever increasing number of devices 
available, below is a discussion of some of the most commonly 
used devices at the time of this writing (early 2014). Because we 
have not been able to evaluate each system and little if anything 
is currently available in the peer-reviewed medical literature, we 

are thankful to our colleagues for sharing their experience.

active and Deep FX-Lumenis
The  Active  and  Deep  FX  fractionated  CO2  laser  delivers  the 
equivalent of 240 W to the tissue compared to the other 30 and 
40 W systems. The nature of the 240 W square wave pulse of the 
UltraPulse makes it about eight times the power of competitive 
CO2  laser  systems. This  is  said  to  result  in  a  cleaner  ablation. 

Table 47.1   Summary	of	available	lasers	by	company,	wavelength,	spot	size,	density,	frequency,	power,	and	maximal	depth.

Wavelength (nm)

Spot size (μm)

Max Depth (μm)

Density

Frequency (Hz)

Power (W)

10,600

10,600

10,600

10,600

10,600

10,600

10,600

10,600

2940

2940

Company

Lumenis

Lumenis

Solta

Alma

Lasering

DEKA

Lutronic

Candela

Product

Deep	FX

Active	FX

Fraxel	Re:pair

Pixel	CO2

MiXto	SX

Mosaic	eCO2

CO2RE

SmartXide	DOT

10,600

Cynosure

SmartSkin

Palomar

Lux	2940

Sciton

Sciton

Alma

Cutera

MTZ, microthermal zone.

Profractional

Profractional	XC

2940

Pixel

2940

Fractionated	Pearl

2790

120

1300

120

250

180/300

350

4000

300

1600

300

500

350

5–45%

55–100%

300

600

10–70%

2100	MTZ/s

15–20%

20–100%

5–100%

5–100

120/30/1000

2400

5–130%

200

180

350

300

250

430

150

300

600

1500

1500

<300

200–1000

1.5–60%

2.3 cm2/s

5.5	or	11%

49	or	81

2

60

60

40

70

30

30

30

60

30

416

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

Intact “bridge”

Ablated
column

Heat in the
dermis

Figure 47.3  Histology of Active FX laser 
impulse at 100 mJ.

The Active FX hand-piece has a spot size of 1.3 mm and ablates 
up to 300 μm of tissue (Figure 47.3). The Deep FX hand-piece 
has a 120 μm diameter spot size which can ablate tissue from 
superficial to up to 2 mm depending on the power density cho-
sen as well as whether the individual pulses occur as a single, 
double,  or  triple  pulse  (Figure  47.4).  The  Deep  FX  is  used  to 
treat individual  scars and/or  wrinkles. This  is  followed  by  the 

Active FX which is used to treat the entire face, rejuvenating the 
epidermis.  The  Total  FX  mode  combines  the  Active/Deep  FX 
modes  simultaneously.  In  2012,  Lumenis  introduced  SCAAR 
FX which is a higher energy, shorter pulse duration treatment 
option which penetrates up to 4 mm in depth. This mode uses 
coagulation and ablation to treat complex and deep skin lesions 
and scars.

Bridge of in tact tissue

Zone of ablation

Lateral coagulation

Figure 47.4  Histology of Deep FX laser impulse at 17.5 mJ. Zones of ablation are created, leaving bridges of intact tissue to aid in regeneration. Lateral and 
vertical coagulation stimulate a tissue regeneration response between the ablated columns.

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

417

(a)

(b)

Figure 47.5  Forty-year-old female treated with Active FX fractionated CO2 laser with a 1.3 mm diameter spot size, density 2, 100 mJ: (a) before; (b) two 
months after treatment.

We have evaluated the histologic and clinical effects of vary-
ing pulse energies and densities on ex vivo tissue as well as in 
vivo with the fractionated CO2 laser (UltraPulse Encore Active 
FX™,  Lumenis,  Santa  Clara,  CA,  USA).  A  distinct,  stippled 
grey,  fractional  epidermolysis  pattern  is  apparent  during  the 
procedure  followed  by  erythema.  Erythema  lasts  for  about  3 
days for patients treated with –10% overlap and increases by 
approximately 1 day for each increased density setting. Edema 
persists for a little more than 1 day (Figure 47.5). The level of 
satisfaction at 1 month is relatively high, averaging 6 on a 1–10 
scale.

We find that it may take two to three separate treatments with 
the fractionated CO2 laser to achieve the same results as non-
fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing (Figures 47.6 and 47.7). The 
advantage  of  the  fractionated  approach  is  that  the  procedure 
can be performed entirely under topical anesthesia and supple-
mented with cold air cooling and field/nerve blocks as opposed 
to standard CO2 laser resurfacing which requires general anes-
thesia  or  the  use  of  a  large  number  of  nerve  blocks  and/or 

tumescent anesthesia. In addition, postoperative healing is far 
easier  with  the  fractionated  approach.  Patients  do  not  require 
a Silon  TSR dressing (Bio Med Sciences,  Inc.,  Bethlehem, PA, 
USA) and do not have to be as diligent with vinegar water soaks. 
There is minimal serous exudate or crusting. Finally, patients are 
able to wear make-up 4–7 days post-procedure and are usually 
completely healed and look good without make-up within 5–7 
days (Figure 47.8).

Ciocon et al. conducted a split-faced study to evaluate the 
efficacy of the Deep FX compared to the Fraxel Re:Pair (Solta 
Medical, Hayward, CA) for the treatment of photodamaged 
facial  skin  in  eight  patients.  Topical  benzocaine,  lidocaine 
and  tetracaine  ointment  was  used  for  1  hour  prior  to  treat-
ment [1]. The Deep FX was used at 20–25 mJ with a density 
of 2 (10%), two passes without pulse stacking were done for 
an overall density of 20%. For the Fraxel Re:Pair the energy 
was 25–40 mJ with a treatment level of 7–9 with four passes 
and an overall density of 25–35%. Results showed that both 
modalities  were  equally  efficacious  in  improving  wrinkles, 

418

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

)a(

)b(

)c(

)d(

)e(

Figure 47.6  Forty-year-old female (same as in Figure 47.5) treated with Deep FX at 17.5 mJ density 1, one pass 3 months after Active FX treatment as above. 
(a) Immediately before; (b) immediately after treatment; (c) 1 day after treatment; (d) 2 days after treatment; (e) 2 months after treatment.

pigmentation,  laxity  and  overall  appearance  at  3  months 
after  treatment.  Intraoperative  pain  was  rated  significantly 
higher with the Deep FX compared to the Fraxel Re:Pair in 
this study.

A  more  recent  study  was  performed  comparing  four 
 ablative  fractional  lasers  for  photodamage  in  a  random-

ized, controlled quadrant study. The study compared Fraxel 
Re:Pair, Active and Deep FX, Quadralase (Candela, Wayland, 
MA),  and  Pearl  Fractionated  (Cutera,  Brisbane,  CA).  Each 
subjects face was divided into four quadrants and each quad-
rant was randomly assigned a treatment with one of the four 
lasers. Settings were chosen based on clinical experiences of 

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

419

Figure 47.7  Fifty-one-year-old women treated with Deep FX at 15 mJ, density 1, one pass in the periorbital and perioral area followed by Active FX to the 
entire face at 100 mJ, density 2, one pass. Before and 2 months after treatment.

the investigator to optimize outcomes. Results show that all 
four  devices  showed  statistical  improvement  in  photoaging 
(rhytides,  lentigines,  skin  texture  and  pore  size),  but  none 
was significantly better than the others. Patient satisfaction 
and  pain  was  not  significantly  different  between  the  four 
lasers,  but  the  Active  and  Deep  FX  patients  healed  quicker 
with  less  postoperative  erythema  and  operative  pain.  Two 
subjects agreed to submit biopsies for histologic comparison 
and no significant difference was found in the depth/width 
of  evaporative  zones  and  total  thermal  injury  between  the 
four lasers.

Fraxel re:pair – solta Medical
Fraxel  Re:Pair  (Solta  Medical,  Hayward,  CA)  is  a  fraction-
ated  ablative  10600  nm  CO2 laser  that  delivers  5–70  mJ  of 
energy, a 350 μm spot size and a 15 × 15 mm treatment tip. 
This laser provides 5–70% coverage based on the treatment 

level  chosen.  Depth  of  penetration  at  70  mJ  is  reported  at 
1.6 mm.

In 2009, Rhaman et al. provided a study using Fraxel Re:Pair 
technology  to  treat  inner  forearms  initially  and  then  photo-
damage  of  the  face  and  neck  in  30  subjects.  Rhaman  found 
that treatment with the Re:Pair was well tolerated with no seri-
ous adverse events. He reported 83% of patients had 50–100% 
overall  improvement  in  photodamage  as  judged  by  blinded 
investigators 3 months following treatment (Figure 47.9) [2].

In  2010,  Karsai  et  al.  reported  a  randomized  controlled 
double blind split face trial comparing fractional ablative CO2 
(Fraxel  Re:Pair)  and  Er:YAG  (MCL30  Dermablate,  Asclep-
tion  Laser  Technologies,  Jena,  Germany)  laser  for  treatment 
of periorbital rhytides [3]. Rhytides were evaluated with pro-
filometric measurement of depth and using the wrinkle score. 
Patient  satisfaction  and  assessment  of  side  effects  were  also 
done. Both lasers showed reduction in depth of rhytides and 

420

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

Figure  47.8  52-year-old  female  treated  with  Active  and  Deep  FX  (A)  before  treatment  (B)  immediately  after  treatment  (C)  1  day  after  treatment 
(D) 2 days after treatment (E)3 days after treatment (F) 1 week after treatment.

improvement in Fitzpatrick wrinkle scores, with no significant 
difference  between  the  two  lasers.  Early  in  recovery  patients 
reported  more  discomfort  with  the  Er:YAG  treatment,  but 
later  in  the  healing  process  more  discomfort  was  reported 
with the CO2 treatments. Overall patients did not have a pref-
erence  for  one  laser  over  the  other  and  the  majority  stated 
they would undergo the procedure again. One treatment with 
either fractional ablative laser that was studied showed small, 
but  noticeable  improvement  in  periocular  rhytides,  leading 
one to assume that multiple treatments will likely be necessary 
for more dramatic improvement.

MiXto sX – Lasering Usa
This is a low-powered fractionated CO2 laser with energy out-
put  between  0.5–30  W. This  device  is  usually  used  at  a  power 
between  8  and  15  W.  Variable  spot  sizes  (180  μm  or  300  μm) 
are  available  with  a  focusing  handpiece.  Depth  of  ablation 
is  reported  at  200  μm  with  an  additional  300  μm  of  thermal 
 damage  (Tierney-Derm  Therapy,  2011)  [4,5.]  This  low-energy 

(A)

(B)

Figure  47.9  63-year-old  female  (A)  before  treatment  (B)  4  months  after 
Fraxel  Re:Pair  full  face  and  neck,  UPCO2/Erbium  periorbital/periocular, 
VBeam and topical Sculptra applied with Alma. (Source: Dr. Richard Fitz-
patrick. Reproduced with permission.)

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

421

system has the advantage of causing only 1 day of erythema and 
fine,  pinpoint  crusting  up  to  a  week.  No  topical  anesthesia  or 
cold air cooling is recommended. Pain is reported as minimal 
and “easily tolerated” with one pass (Figure 47.10).

This  laser  can  also  be  used  in  a  continuous  mode  at  30  W 
for  cutting.  In  fractional  mode,  the  scanner  is  delivered  alter-
natively  into  four  quadrants  to  produce  thermal  relaxation 
between impact spots.

A  split-face  study  comparing  the  Mixto  SX  with  a  micro-
fractional Er:YAG laser (MCL30 Dermablate, Ascleption Laser 
Technologies,  Jena,  Germany),  with  both  systems  using  an 
energy  density  of  15  J/cm2  without  any  anesthesia,  showed  a 
slightly  higher  improvement  (15%)  with  the  CO2  as  opposed 
to  the  Er:YAG  systems  without  any  difference  in  satisfaction 
scores. Microcrusting lasted 1 day less with the Er:YAG system.

Mosaic eCO2™ – Lutronic
The  Mosaic  eCO2  is  a  multifunctional  microfractional  CO2 
laser with pulse energy that ranges from 2–240 mJ, a density of 
25–400 spots/cm2, and utilizes a fractional scanner handpiece. 
The eCO2 allows the user to select between several scan shapes 
and sizes, a sequential beam pattern or a non-linear randomized 

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 47.10  Patient treated with the SLIM E30 Mixto SX fractionated CO2 laser. (a) Before treatment; (b) 1 day after treatment; (c) 3 days; (d) 7 days; (e) 2 weeks; 
(f) 8 weeks. (Source: Dr. Jeffery Hsu. Reproduced with permission.)

422

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

Figure  47.11  The  Controlled  Chaos  Technol-
ogy  minimizes  thermal  damage  by  spacing 
each  beam  further  apart  to  reduce  the  collat-
eral thermal effect of the laser beams.

b.

a.

200 

m

40

Figure  47.12  The  120  μm  beam  size  has  a  deep  penetration  depth  (up  to 
2.4 mm).

microbeam  delivery  pattern  (known  as  Lutronic’s  Controlled 
Chaos Technology™ – a spray paint-like approach). The Control-
led  Chaos  Technology  minimizes  thermal  damage  by  spacing 
each beam further apart to reduce the collateral thermal effect 
of  the  laser  beams  and  creates  a  more  natural  post-treatment 
look  by  non-sequentially  placing  the  beams.  There  are  dual 
operation  modes,  the  Static  Mode  (a  pulsed  operating  mode) 
and  the  Dynamic  Mode  (a  continuous  operating  mode)  used 
to “feather” the treatment to reduce the “checkerboard” appear-
ance  that  is  common  with  currently  available  fractional  CO2 
devices (Figure 47.11). A Multiple Repetition Mode (also on the 
Lumenis Deep FX) enables even deeper penetration (successive 
shots  of  two  to  five)  to  create  subdermal  damage  without  the 
superficial damage for greater skin tightening ability. The eCO2 
laser  has  a  variable  microbeam  delivery  speed,  skin  sensing 
treatment tips (safety feature that prevents laser firing without 
skin contact), and user-friendly treatment interfaces that enable 
real-time tracking of microbeam delivery (automatic total den-
sity counter) in dynamic mode.

There  are  three  interchangeable  treatment  tips  (120,  300, 
and  1000  μm),  which  include  a  pinpoint  beam  tip  for  tradi-
tional  ablative  skin  resurfacing.  The  120  μm  beam  size  has  a 
deep  penetration  depth  (up  to  2.4  mm)  (Figure  47.12).  There 
are  no  consumable  tips  for  the  eCO2  laser.  Patients  are  usually 
healed within 3–5 days post-treatment at 140 mJ of pulse energy  
(Figure 47.13).

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

423

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 47.13  (a) Before treatment; (b) 1 day after treatment; (c) 2 days; (d) 3 days; (e) 4 days; (f) 5 days; (g) 1 week; (h) 4 weeks.

pixel CO2 – alma Lasers
The  Pixel  CO2  fractionated  laser  (Alma  Lasers  Ltd.,  Caesarea, 
Israel)  is  a  70  W  fractional  CO2  laser  that  utilizes  a  patented 
Pixel® microoptics lens. There are three available tip options – 
7 × 7, 9 × 9 and 1 × 7. With the 7 × 7 tip, 49 250 μm pixels (spots) 
are  created.  The  micro-injury  sites  comprise  approximately 
15–20%  of  the  treatment  area.  Thermal  effect  goes  approxi-
mately 300 μm deep at maximal energy. A burning sensation on 
the skin is said to last 1–3 hours. Re-epithelialization requires 
8–10 days and patients may remain erythematous for 6 weeks 
to 3 months.

The Pixel® CO2 OMNIFIT hand-piece is a separate device that 
can fit on to nearly any existing CO2 laser designed for skin abla-
tion or resurfacing. It converts any pulsed or continuous wave 
CO2 laser into a fractionated skin resurfacing laser.

smartXide DOt – DeKa, Italy
The  SmartXide  DOT  is  a  fractional  CO2 laser.  While  power 
up to 30 W accounts for depth of ablation of approximately 
300–350 μm, dwell time (0.2–2.0 ms in microablative mode; 
0.2–20.0  ms  in  standard  mode)  controls  the  width  of  the 
thermal  pulse  that  is  delivered  directly  after  the  microabla-
tion occurs.

A third setting space between laser impacts can be adjusted 
from 0.0 to 2.0 mm in order to change the laser from fraction-
ated  to  fully  ablative.  The  scan  mode  defines  how  each  of  the 
spots are laid out on the scanned surface. The “normal” option 
will sequentially place each spots. The “interlaced and autofill” 
options are especially programmed to minimize tissue overheat-
ing. In the interlaced mode, odd lines are scanned first followed 
by the even ones. In the autofill mode, the spots are randomly 
placed on the scanned area.

In  2009,  Tierney  et  al.  reported  the  use  of  this  fractionated 
technology  for  treatment  of  photoaging  on  the  neck.  One  to 
three treatments were done on 10 patients at 6–8 week intervals. 
Blinded  evaluations  were  completed  2  months  after  last  treat-
ment. Improvement in skin laxity, texture, rhytides and overall 
cosmetic appearance were seen [6].

Tierney  went  on  to  publish  further  studies  of  the  use  of  the 
SmartXide DOT (30 W, 500 μm pitch, and 1000–1500 μs) in 45 
patients for the treatment of photoaging of the face. Blind evalua-
tions were done 6 months after treatment and significant improve-
ments were seen in skin texture, laxity, dyschromia and overall cos-
metic result. Mild post-treatment side effects of pin-point bleed-
ing,  edema,  moderate/severe  erythema,  mild  crusting,  and  skin 
bronzing were reported, but all resolved by post-procedure day 7.

424

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

Tierney has continued to study this device, and in 2012, char-
acterized  the  histologic  findings  and  effects  on  photoaging  of 
the face with the SmartXide DOT [7]. The effects on photoag-
ing were similar to those mentioned in the above study. Authors 
also  comment  on  a  trend  of  patients  that  were  treated  with 
pulse durations equal or greater than 1500 μs showing greater 
improvement in skin textures, laxity and rhytides. Also impor-
tant to note was that this study reported no long term adverse 
events.  Histologic  evaluation  showed  increased  depth  of  abla-
tion with increased pulse duration.

CO2re – syneron–Candela
CO2RE laser is a CO2 device that provides six different modes, 
four  fractional  ablative,  one  traditional  resurfacing,  and  one 
excision mode. The four fractional ablative modes are referred 
to as light, mid, deep and fusion. The depth of ablation corre-
sponds to the mode name, with the fusion mode being a com-
bination treatment at multiple depths. The ability to treat super-
ficial for rejuvenation and deeper for remodelling at the same 
time is a beneficial feature of this laser.

smartskin – Cynosure
The SmartSkin is a fractional CO2 laser offering 30 W of power, 
a 15 × 15 mm treatment area with a 350 μm spot size. In micro-
ablative  mode  the  pulse  duration  is  0.2–2  ms  and  in  standard 
mode 0.2–20 ms. Gold et al. report a study using this laser for 
treatment  of  acne  scars  and  photoaging  in  12  patients  each 
receiving two treatments at 3–5 week interval. Both physicians 
and patients note improvement in all aspects of photodamage 
(hyperpigmentation,  skin  laxity,  fine  lines  and  wrinkles,  and 
enlarged pores) at both 1 and 3 months post-procedure [8]. The 
authors also comment that acne scarring was improved, but not 
graded as a part of this study.

proFractional and proFractional-XC – sciton
Sciton’s  ProFractional  2940  nm  wavelength  allows  the  user  to 
optimize treatment depth, area coverage, and the ratio of abla-
tion  and  thermal  zone.  The  ProFractional  module  can  selec-
tively treat – in a single pass – from 1.5 to 60% of the skin area 
and from 25 to 1500 μm in depth. ProFractional-XC provides 
the  same  treatment  depths  and  two  fixed  densities  –  5.5  and 
11%  –  and  offers  two  additional  features:  superfast  treatment 
speed  and  user-controlled  thermal  coagulation  for  increased 
collagen production. Thermal coagulation is achieved by using 
a  long,  low-power  pulse  that  heats  but  does  not  vaporize  tis-
sue, immediately following a short, high-energy pulse for tissue 
ablation. ProFractional-XC allows the user to select and control 
the degree of the thermal damage independent of the ablation 
depth. With this tunable flexibility the user can adjust settings 
for different skin types and patient expectations and can emulate 
the thermal profile of CO2 or other lasers (Figures 47.14–47.16).

pixel 2940 – alma
This fractionated Er:YAG delivers the laser via a hand-piece that 
splits  the  beam  into  various  microbeams  150  μm  in  diameter 
using the same technology as the Pixel CO2 laser. The 7 × 7 matrix 
with 49 microbeams with 150 μm in diameter yields energy den-
sity of up to 51 mJ/pulse per pixel in an area of 11 × 11 mm2. The 
9 × 9 matrix produces 81 microbeams 150 μm in diameter, with 
31 mJ/pulse per pixel which covers 11 × 11 mm2. The laser oper-
ates  at  energy  of  up  to  2500  mJ/pulse  and  multiple  passes  are 
required to produce epidermal ablation and dermal effects. The 
degree of thermal effects is determined by the number of stacks 
(stationary technique) or passes (non-stationary technique). No 
Zimmer or other cooling means is required during the proce-
dure. An unpublished study found that erythema lasts 2–10 days 
(mean 3.6 days). An evaluation of 28 patients treated 1–4 times 
demonstrated excellent (21) and good (7) results.

Ablation threshold
Ablation
Coagulation

No coag

Coag level 1

Coag level 2

Coag level 3

y
g
r
e
n
E

y
g
r
e
n
E

y
g
r
e
n
E

y
g
r
e
n
E

Pulse width

Pulse width

Pulse width

Pulse width

Figure 47.14  Diagrammatic representation of non-specific thermal damage by controlling the pulse width of the Sciton Er:YAG laser. (Source: Sciton, Inc., 
Palo Alto, CA. Reproduced with permission.)

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

425

(a)

(b)

Figure 47.15  Patient treated with the Sciton Profractional at 150 μm, 1.9%. (a) Before; (b) 4 weeks after treatment. (Source: Dr. Michael Gold. Reproduced 
with permission.)

(a)

(b)

Figure 47.16  Patient treated with the Sciton Profractional-XC at 100 μm, 11%, two passes. (a) Before treatment; (b) 4 weeks after three treatments. (Source: 
Dr. Kent Remington. Reproduced with permission.)

Lux 2940 – Cynosure
The  Lux2940  microlens  array  handpiece  utilizes  the  Palomar 
StarLux  500  platform  and  is  a  fractionated  Er:YAG  laser  that 
splits  the  laser  beam  into  microbeams  300  μm  in  diameter. 
This  technology  utilizes  a  Groove  Optic  insert  which  gener-
ates  a  five  line  pattern,  6  mm  long,  and  each  1.35  mm  apart. 

Energy  parameters  are  2–5.5  mJ/0.1  mm  and  pulse  duration 
ranges from 0.25–5 ms. Biopsy demonstrates ablated columns 
extending  600  μm  below  the  epidermis  with  an  approximate 
20 μm coagulation area. Re-epithelialization occurs by 12 hours 
with  a  mild  inflammatory  response  persisting  for  1  month  
(Figure 47.17).

426

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 47.17  Patient treated with the Palomar fractionated 2940 nm Er:YAG 
laser 6 mm diameter spot, 300 μm depth, 120 μm crater diameter, 40–60% 
coverage. (a) Before treatment; (b) immediately after treatment; (c) 3 months 
after treatment. (Source: Dr. E. Vic Ross. Reproduced with permission.)

Xeo pearl Fractionated – Cutera
This  is  a  fractionated  Er:YSGG  laser  with  2790  nm  wavelength. 
Energy  ranges  from  60–320  mJ/microspot.  The  spot  size  is 
300 microns and pulse duration is 600 microseconds. At the higher 
energies, depth of ablation is reported to be greater than 1 mm.

technique and procedures for fractionated 
laser treatment (active/Deep FX)

preoperative
Our  experience  with  full-face  ablative  laser  resurfacing  has 
proven that preoperative treatment with topical retinoids, gly-
colic  or  depigmenting  agents  such  as  hydroquinones  are  not 

required to enhance treatment efficacy. At best, by pretreating 
the skin, both patient and physician can determine what prod-
ucts are easily tolerated and/or irritating to the skin. This may 
be  beneficial  if  and  when  the  physician  prescribes  the  medi-
cal  creams  post-laser  to  treat  hyperpigmentation  or  an  acnei-
form eruption. It does make sense to ensure that patients have 
adequate nutrition and vitamin stores to enhance healing and 
promote new collagen formation. We regularly recommend oral 
antioxidants and a multivitamin. No controlled clinical studies 
have  yet  to  be  performed  to  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  this 
recommendation.

We  have  found  that  treating  areas  of  hyperactive  muscle 
movement, such as the lateral canthus, with a botulinum toxin 

neuromodulator  1  week  before  laser  treatment  will  allow  for 
uniform lamellar collagen deposition to occur. We do not rec-
ommend performing these injections at the same time as laser 
treatment because the resulting inflammation and edema from 
the laser may inactivate and/or promote migration of the neuro-
modulator from the intended site of injection.

Before  treatment,  patients  wash  their  faces  with  a  neutral 
cleanser. A topical anesthetic cream (lidocaine 23% and tetra-
caine 7% in petrolatum) is applied to the face for 30 minutes and 
wiped off just before treatment. We use the UltraPulse Encore™ 
Fractional  CO2  Laser  System  (Active/Deep  FX,  Lumenis  Inc., 
Santa Clara, CA, USA), which emits a wavelength of 10600 nm, 
with spot sizes of 1.3 and 0.12 mm in diameter. We always treat 
the face with a 5 °C cold air cooler (Zimmer) set at maximum 
flow. We initially use the Deep FX hand-piece with its 120 μm 
spot size at 15–25 mJ to treat areas of skin laxity and/or wrinkles 
and  scars  at  a  density  of  10–15%  with  one  to  two  passes. The 
entire face is then treated with one pass of the Active FX hand-
piece with its 1.3 mm spot size at a fluence of 125 mJ, frequency 
of 125 Hz, pattern of 3 (square), size 7 mm, and density of 1–3. 
We always use the Cool Scan setting, which produces a random-
ized  spot  pattern  allowing  for  extra  cooling  to  occur  between 
laser impacts and a repeat delay of 0.3 Hz. The mean duration 
for the entire procedure is 10–15 minutes.

postoperative
Patients  apply  cold,  wet  compresses  immediately  post-treat-
ment.  They  use  Restorative  Ointment  (SkinMedica®  Allergan, 
Irvine, CA) for 3 days until epithelial healing is complete and 
then  a  bland  moisturizer  such  as  Cetaphil  cream  (Galderma, 
Fort Worth, TX, USA) or aquaphor ointment until erythema has 
resolved. Approximately day 3–4 we start a mid-potency topical 
corticosteroid  that  is  used  by  patients  at  night  until  approxi-
mately  day  7.  The  use  of  the  topical  corticosteroid  is  thought 
to help reduce inflammation and possible risk of hyperpigmen-
tation.  Patients  wear  a  broad  spectrum,  zinc  oxide  containing 
sunscreen during the day under a mineral based make-up. At 
3–4 weeks, when epidermal regeneration is complete with for-
mation of an intact epidermal barrier, patients then use a topical 
antioxidant growth factor serum (TNS Essential Serum, Skin-
Medica® Allergan, Irvine, CA) to further stimulate fibroblastic 
formation  of  new  collagen  and  elastic  fibers.  Sun  protection 
with UVA and UVB blockers is continued.

Patients are seen 1 day, 1 week, and 1 month after the proce-
dure and then every 3 months. A botulinum toxin neuromodu-
lator  is  recommended  to  relax  hyperactive  muscles  and  allow 
continued collagen deposition every 3–4 months. If patients do 
not achieve the degree of improvement they would like, repeat 
treatments are scheduled every 6 months. Histologic studies of 
non-fractionated  CO2  and  Er:YAG  laser  resurfacing  patients 
demonstrated continued collagen production and improvement 
lasting up to 2 years after treatment. It is not known how long 
fibroblastic stimulation occurs after fractionated laser resurfac-
ing, but 6 months seems to be a reasonable estimate.

47. CO2 Laser Resurfacing: Confluent and Fractionated

427

Ortiz et al. reported a long-term follow-up study of patients 
treated with fractionated CO2 (Fraxel Re:Pair) for acne scarring 
and  photodamage  and  found  that  at  1  and  2  years  post-treat-
ment,  subjects  maintained  74%  of  their  overall  improvement 
compared to their 3-month follow-up visits. This helps to show 
that fractional ablative resurfacing does offer long-term results 
for patients, but additional treatments in the future may be war-
ranted to further improve their long term results [9].

Identification and management  
of complications

We recently performed a retrospective evaluation of 490 treat-
ments  on  374  patients  with  the  Active/Deep  FX  in  our  office. 
We found 5.3% incidence acneiform eruption, 2.2% incidence 
of herpes simplex outbreak, 1.8% incidence bacterial infection, 
1.2%  incidence  of  yeast  infections,  1.2%  incidence  of  hyper-
pigmentation, 0.8% incidence of erythema lasting longer than 
1 month and 0.8% incidence of contact dermatitis. There were 
no  reports  of  scarring  or  hypopigmentation  in  our  patient 
population. The average follow-up in our population was 2.18 
months. It is known that with traditional CO2 that late findings 
(hypopigmentation) beginning nine months or more after the 
procedure can occur, while we don’t expect this to occur with 
fractional CO2, as it has never been reported in the literature, it 
is possible that due to the range of follow-up times longer term 
side effects were missed.

Conclusions

Fractional ablative technology has truly transformed the non-
surgical  resurfacing  arena.  Fractional  ablative  technology  has 
proven time and again to offer good patient results with a favo-
rable safety profile and minimal downtime compared to older 
technology.

references

  1  Ciocon  DH,  Engelman  DE,  Hussain  M,  et  al.  (2011)  A  split-face 
comparison of two ablative fractional carbon dioxide lasers for the 
treatment of photodamaged facial skin. Dermatol Surg 37, 784–90.
  2  Rhaman Z, MacFalls H, Jiang K, et al. (2009) Fractional deep der-
mal ablation induces tissue tightening. Lasers Surg Med 41, 7–86.
  3  Karsai S, Czarnecka A, Junger M, et al. (2010) Ablative fractional 
lasers  (CO2  and  Er:YAG):  a  randomized  controlled  double-blind 
split-face trial of the treatment of peri-orbital rhytides. Lasers Surg 
Med 42, 160–67.

  4  Tierney  EP,  Hanke  CW.  (2011)  Fractionated  carbon  dioxide  laser 
treatment  of  photoaging:  prospective  study  in  45  patients  and 
review of literature. Dermatol Surg 37, 1279–90.

  5  Tierney  EP,  Eisen  RF,  Hanke  CW.  (2011)  Fractionated  CO2  laser 

skin rejunvenation. Dermatol Therapy 24, 41–53.

428

antI-aGInG  Resurfacing Techniques

    Preissig J, Hamilton K, Markus R. (2012) Current laser resurfacing 
technologies: a review that delves beneath the surface. Semin Plast 
Surg 26, 109–116.

Goldman MP, Fitzpatrick RE, Ross EV, et al. (2013) Lasers and Energy 
Devices for the Skin, 2 nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor 
and Francis Group, pp. 110–77.

  6  Tierney  EP,  Hanke  CW.  (2009)  Ablative  fractionated  CO2,  laser 
resurfacing for the neck: prospective study and review of the litera-
ture. J Drugs Dermatol 8, 723–31.

Helou  J,  Maatouk  I,  Moutran  R,  et  al.  (2013)  Efficacy  and  safety  of 
10600-nm carbon dioxide fractional laser on facial skin with previ-
ous volume injections. J Cutan Aesthet Surg 6(1), 30–32.

  7  Tierney  EP,  Hanke  CW,  Petersen  J.  (2012)  Ablative  fractionated 
CO2 laser treatment of photoaging: a clinical and histologic study. 
Dermatol Surg 38, 1777–89.

Kohl E, Meierhofer J, Koller M, et al. (2013) Fractional carbon dioxide laser 
resurfacing of rhytides and photoaging: a prospective study using pro-
filometric analysis. Br J Dermatol Dec 26 (epub ahead of print).

  8  Gold  MH,  Heath  AD,  Biron  JA.  (2009)  Clinical  evaluation  of  the 
Smart Skin fractional laser for the treatment of photodamage and 
acne scars. J Drugs Dermatol 8(11 suppl), s4–8.

LaTowsky BC, Abbasi H, Dover JS, et al. (2012) A randomized, control-
led trial of four ablative fractionated lasers for photoaging: a quad-
rant study. Dermatol Surg 38, 1477–89.

  9  Ortiz AE, Tremaine AM, Zachary CB. (2010) Long-term efficacy of 

a fractional resurfacing device. Lasers Surg Med 42, 168–70.

Further reading

Alexiades-Armenakas MR, Dover JS, Arndt KA. (2012) Fractional laser 

skin resurfacing. J Drugs Dermatol 11(11), 1274–87.

Bjorn  M,  Stausbol-Gron  B,  Braae  Olesen  A,  et  al.  (2013)  Treatment 
of  acne  scars  with  actional  CO2 laser  at  1-month  versus  3-month 
intervals:  An  intra-individual  randomized  controlled  trial.  Lasers 
Surg Med Sept 9.

Cohen  JL,  Ross  EV.  (2013)  Combined  fractional  ablative  and  nonab-
lative  laser  resurfacing  treatment:  a  split-face  comparative  study. 
J Drugs Dermatol 12(2), 175–8.

Marqa MF, Mordon S. (2014) Laser fractional photothermolysis of the 
skin: Numerical simulation of microthermal zones. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther Jan 10 (epub ahead of print).

Oh IY, Kim BJ, Kim MN et al. (2013) Efficacy of light-emitting diode pho-
tomodulation in reducing erythema after fractional carbon dioxide 
laser resurfacing: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg 39(8), 1171–6.

Sattler EC, Poloczek K, Kastle R, et al. (2013) Confocal laser scanning 
microscopy and optical coherence tomography for the evaluation 
of the kinetics and quantification of wound healing after fractional 
laser therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 69(4), e165–73.

Serowka KL, Saedi N, Dover JS, et al. (2013) Fractionated ablative carbon 
dioxide laser for the treatment of rhinophyma. Lasers Surg Med. Oct 5.
Shamsaldeen O, Peterson JD, Goldman MP. (2011) The adverse events 
of deep fractional CO2: a retrospective study of 490 treatments in 
374 patients. Lasers Surg Med 43, 453–6.

Chapter 48
Nonablative Lasers

Adam S. Nabatian1 and David J. Goldberg2
1Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
2Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, and Skin Laser & Surgery Specialists of New York and New Jersey, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 Nonablative	laser	systems	are	used	for	rejuvenation	of	photodamaged	skin.
•	 The	lasers	cause	a	dermal	wounding	response	that	results	in	collagen	remodeling	and	production,	while	protecting	the	epidermis	from	

harm.

•	 There	are	numerous	laser,	light	sources,	and	radiofrequency	devices	used	for	nonablative	resurfacing	with	variable	results	on	rhytides,	

scarring,	dyschromia,	and	vascular	change.

•	 Side	effects	are	mild	and	rare	with	nonablative	devices.
•	 Exciting	new	advances	in	nonfacial	rejuvenation	are	also	being	made	with	the	nonablative	systems	discussed.

Introduction

In recent years there has been a progressive movement towards 
nonsurgical  interventions  for  facial  rejuvenation.  Ablative 
resurfacing  with  CO2  and  erbium-doped  yttrium  aluminum 
garnet  (Er:YAG)  lasers  were  first  used  to  treat  photodamaged 
skin in the 1980s and remain the gold standard today [1–5]. Yet 
despite their effectiveness at treating photoaging, there has been 
a  recent  push  for  nonablative  treatment  modalities  with  less 
downtime and fewer side effects.

Nonablative lasers have been used to successfully treat rhyt-
ides,  dyspigmentation,  vascular  changes,  skin  texture,  laxity, 
and scarring [1,5,6]. The main goal of these systems is to selec-
tively induce dermal damage, resulting in collagen remodeling 
and  production  while  sparing  the  epidermis  [1,3,6–8].  Many 
different  systems  have  been  used  with  this  endpoint  in  mind 
(Table 48.1), and they will be discussed in detail below.

pathophysiology

Nonablative rejuvenation systems are composed of lasers, light 
sources, and radiofrequency devices. Laser systems use energy 
in the infrared or near infrared spectrum to target specific der-
mal  chromophores,  such  as  water,  melanin,  and  hemoglobin. 
In contrast, radiofrequency devices produce heat in the dermis 
and subcutaneous tissue as a result of resistance to current flow 

through the tissue. Although the mechanisms of action are dif-
ferent,  the  end  result  is  the  same.  Both  the  light  sources  and 
radiofrequency  devices  effectively  heat  the  dermis  eliciting  a 
wound healing response without disturbing the integrity of the 
epidermis [1,5,9–11].

One of the main effects of photodamage and aging is a reduc-
tion  in  dermal  collagen,  and  this  is  the  target  of  nonablative 
rejuvenation. It has been proven that thermal induced injury to 
the dermis causes local release of inflammatory cytokines lead-
ing to the proliferation of fibroblasts which results in collagen 
synthesis [7,12–15]. In vivo mouse studies have been performed 
to  evaluate  collagen  composition  after  treatment  with  various 
lasers,  and  they  have  all  demonstrated  a  significant  change  in 
collagen and extracellular matrix [7,13].

A  study  by  Liu  et  al.  compared  the  dermal  collagen  com-
position  after  treatment  with  various  laser  systems  [7].  This 
study  confirmed  that  collagen  I  production  is  predominantly 
increased  after  nonablative  treatment  with  the  pulse  dye  laser 
(PDL),  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser,  and  the  long  pulsed  1064  nm 
Nd:YAG laser. On the other hand, collagen type III was more 
significantly  increased  in  those  treated  with  the  Q-switched 
1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser.  These  results  not  only  support  the 
theory  regarding  neocollagenesis,  but  it  also  provides  specific 
data on collagen composition and differences in laser systems. 
This study suggests that because of the predominant increase in 
collagen type III after treatment with the Q-switched Nd:YAG 
laser, it may be more effective in increasing the elasticity of the 
skin and giving a more youthful appearance.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

429

430

aNtI-aGING  Resurfacing Techniques

Table 48.1  Lasers	for	Facial	Rejuvenation

Laser type

Pulsed	KTP

Pulsed	dye
585 nm

595 nm

Intense	pulse	light	(IPL)

System name

Gemini	(Laserscope)
Aura	(Laserscope)
Versapulse	(Coherent/Lumenis)
Diolite	(Iridex)

Cbeam	(Candela)
SPTL-1B	(Candela)
Photogenica	V	(Cynosure)

Cynosure	V-star	(Cynosure	–	585/595)
V-beam	(Candela)

Quantum	SR	(Lumenis)
Palomar	Starlux	(Palomar)
Vasculight	(Lumenis)
Estelux/Medilux	(Palomar)
Aurora	DS/Aurora	SR	(Syneron)

1320 nm	Nd:YAG

Cool	Touch	I,	II,	and	III	(Cooltouch)

1064 nm	QS-	Nd:YAG

Medlite	IV	Continuum	(Biomedical)
VersaPulse	VPC	(Lumenis)

1450 nm	diode

Smoothbeam	(Candela)

Er:glass	1540 nm

Aramis-Quantel	(Quantel	Medical)

Infrared	light	(1100–1800  nm)

Titan	(Cutera	Inc.)

Radiofrequency devices
monopolar
unipolar	and	bipolar

Thermacool	TC(Thermage)
Accent	(Alma	Laser)

Nonablative modalities

Many  nonablative  systems  have  been  evaluated  for  efficacy  in 
facial rejuvenation. Results have been variable and often times 
require  multiple  treatments  in  order  to  appreciate  clinical 
improvement.  The  most  effective  treatment  regimens  are  still 
being determined for facial rejuvenation, and the correspond-
ing studies for each laser will be discussed below. The most com-
mon  lasers  and  parameter  settings  used  today  are  outlined  in 

Table 48.2.

potassium titanyl phosphate (Ktp) 532 nm 
laser

photorejuvenation [15]. After 3–6 treatments, all three groups 
showed  statistically  significant  improvement  in  rhytides,  skin 
toning and texture, reduction in redness, and improvement in 
dyschromia.  Overall,  the  KTP  laser  treated  patients  showed 
more  improvement  than  the  LP  Nd:YAG  laser,  but  the  com-
bined treatment group was superior to either group alone. The 
combined  group  had  a  70–80%  improvement  in  redness  and 
pigmentation,  40–60%  improvement  in  skin  texture,  tone  and 
tightening,  and  a  30–40%  improvement  in  rhytides.  In  addi-
tion to these findings, it was also noted that collagen remodel-
ing continues for up to 6–12 months post-treatment, with slow 
regression  in  benefit  thereafter.  Although  further  studies  are 
necessary, these results suggest that combined modalities may 
be superior at targeting various factors involved in photodam-
age and more effectively stimulate collagen production.

A  recent  study  by  Ho  and  colleagues  compared  the  effec-
tiveness and safety of using the 532 nm LP KTP laser, 595 nm 
long pulse dye laser (LPDL), 755 nm LP Alexandrite laser, and 
532 nm QS Nd:YAG laser for the treatment of freckles or len-
tigines in Fitzpatrick skin type III and IV Asian patients [16]. 
Forty  patients  were  enrolled  in  the  study  and  each  patient 
attended between one and four treatments at 4–6 weeks inter-
vals  depending  on  the  clinical  response.  The  laser  parameters 
included a fluence of 12–14 J/cm2 and spot size of 2 mm for the 
LP KTP laser, a fluence of 11–13 J/cm2 and spot size of 7 mm 
for the LPDL, a fluence of 20–35 J/cm2 and spot size of 10 mm 
for the LP Alexandrite laser, and a fluence of 0.6 J/cm2 and spot 
size of 2 mm for the QS Nd:YAG laser. Statistically significant 
improvement of global and focal facial pigmentation was found 
after  treatment  with  LP  KTP,  LPDL,  and  QS  Nd:YAG  lasers. 
No significant improvement was found after treatment with LP 
Alexandrite  laser.  Post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  was 
absent after LP KTP and LPDL treatment, but was seen in 20% 
of patients after LP Alexandrite treatment and 10% of patients 
after QS Nd:YAG treatment. The 532 nm LP KTP and 595 nm 
LPDL lasers appear to be more effective with less complications 
compared to the 532 nm QS Nd:YAG and 755 nm LP Alexan-
drite lasers for the treatment of freckles and lentigines in Fitz-
patrick type III and IV skin. The authors also concluded that a 
long pulse laser and small spot size appear to reduce the risks of 
lentigines treatment in darker skin types.

pulse dye laser (pDL) 585 nm or 595 nm

The  532  nm  KTP  laser  is  one  of  the  many  modalities  used  in 
facial  rejuvenation.  It  is  absorbed  more  intensely  by  melanin 
and hemoglobin, and so it is thought that fewer treatments are 
needed  when  targeting  these  components  of  photodamaged 
skin [2]. This laser has been shown to effectively target vascular 
and pigmentary change, skin texture, tightening, acne scars, and 
rhytides [5,15].

The PDL is a yellow light that targets oxyhemoglobin and mela-
nin. It has been used to treat vascular changes and induce new 
collagen formation. It has been hypothesized that wavelengths 
targeting hemoglobin disrupt vascular endothelial cells result-
ing in cytokine release and subsequent collagen remodeling and 
production [5,17,18].

Lee  performed  a  150-person  study  to  compare  the  efficacy 
of  the  KTP  laser  alone,  the  long  pulsed  Nd:YAG  alone,  or 
the  two  modalities  combined  on  collagen  enhancement  and 

A  group  of  10  female  patients,  Fitzpatrick  types  I–IV,  were 
treated in the periorbital area with the 595 nm flash lamp PDL 
[18]. One side of the face was treated with the following laser 

Table 48.2  Nonablative	lasers

48. Nonablative Lasers

431

Wavelength ( nm)

Fluences (J/cm2)

Pulse duration

Spot sizes ( mm)

Target

Laser type

KTP	(pulsed)

Pulsed	dye	laser	
(PDL)

532

585

595

IPL

550–1200

Nd:YAG

Nd:YAG	(QS)

Diode

Er:glass

1320

1064

1450

1540

Infrared	light

1100–1800

7–15

3–6.5

6–12

25–28

17–22

2.5–7

8–14

Up	to	126

30–40

20–50 ms

2,	4,	10

Hemoglobin,	melanin

350,	450 ms

5,	7,	10

6–10 ms

7,	10

Hemoglobin,	melanin

2.4,	4.0 ms

Hemoglobin,	melanin,	water	
(weak)

200	or	350 ms

6,	10

Water

5 ns

160–260 ms

3.3

170–200	pulses

6

4,	6

4,	5

Hemoglobin,	melanin,	water

Water

Water

–

–

–

Radiofrequency
RF,	monopolar

RF	bipolar	current

61.5–63.5	(adjusted	
for	pain)

300–400	pulses

0.25 cm,	1.0 cm,	1.5 cm,	
3 cm

RF,	unipolar

RF	electromagnetic	
radiation

50–250

RF,	bipolar

RF	bipolar	current

40–100

settings: 1.5 msec pulse, fluences of 5–6 J/cm2, and a spot size 
of  7    mm.  The  contralateral  side  was  treated  with  a  40  msec 
pulse duration, fluences of 8–11 J/cm2, and a 7 mm spot size. 
Cryogen cooling was administered for 30 msec with a delay of 
30 msec before treatment. Subjects were treated 1–2 times, and 
at their 6-month follow-up, 70% treated had mild to moderate 
improvement overall. Sixty percent had equal improvement on 
both sides despite the different settings. Histologic and electron 
microscopic evaluation showed a significant increase in papil-
lary dermal collagen, mainly type I.

Another study performed by Bernstein evaluated the effects 
of  treatment  of  sun  damaged  skin  with  a  595  nm  long  pulse 
duration  PDL  [17].  Ten  subjects  were  treated  with  10  ms 
pulse duration, fluences of 8–10 J/cm2, and a 10 mm spot size. 
Improvements were evaluated 8 weeks after treatment with pho-
tograph comparison. Blinded physician evaluation of pre- and 
post-photographs rated improvement in wrinkles in 50%, facial 
veins improved in 82%, overall redness improved 80%, pigmen-
tary change 61.4%, and a 25% improvement in pore size.

A small clinical trial was performed on 10 patients compar-
ing the efficacy of a long-pulse PDL (LPDL) versus an intense 
pulsed  light  (IPL)  on  photodamaged  facial  skin.  [19].  When 
compared to the IPL, the LPDL showed greater improvement 
in  lentigines  (81%  versus  62%),  no  significant  difference  in 
wrinkle  reduction  between  the  two  groups,  and  fewer  treat-
ments were needed with the LPDL when compared to the IPL 
(3 versus 6).

In addition to using the PDL laser as a single agent in pho-
torejuvenation, recent trends have shown effective combination 
with aminolevulinic acid (ALA) in treatment of photodamaged 
skin. It is believed that PDL at 595 nm activates protoporphyrin 
IX, a photosensitizer, which accumulates in photodamaged cells, 

causing destruction of the cells, release of cytokines, and collagen 
repair [1]. This is a new and exciting area of research that offers 
another effective treatment modality for photorejuvenation.

Intense pulsed light (IpL)

The IPL system emits light, with wavelengths of 550–1200 nm, 
which effectively targets melanin, hemoglobin, and water, to a 
lesser degree. The IPL device has been used in photorejuvena-
tion to target vascular changes, pigmentary alteration, and mild 
rhytides [1,2,5,19,20]. Filters may be used with the IPL to target 
specific chromophores. Rapid improvement in overall appear-
ance  after  IPL  treatment  is  secondary  to  rapid  and  effective 
improvement  of  vascular  and  pigmentary  change,  rather  than 
improvement in wrinkles [5]. As per Weiss et al., shorter pulse 
duration  and  lower  cut  off  filters  when  using  the  IPL  system, 
results in significant improvement in pigmentary alteration [2].
Although  not  thought  to  be  the  most  effective  treatment 
modality for rhytides, some studies using the IPL have shown 
improvement [1,3,4,19,20]. Goldberg et al. evaluated the treat-
ment of facial rhytides with an IPL system using a 645 nm cutoff 
filter  [3,20].  Thirty  patients,  skin  type  I–III,  were  treated  1–4 
times over a 10-week period. Treatments were delivered using 
fluences of 40–50 J/cm2, through bracketed cooling device with 
triple 7 ms pulses, and interpulse delay of 50 ms. At 6 months 
follow-up,  approximately  53%  showed  some  improvement, 
30%  showed  substantial  improvement,  and  17%  showed  no 
improvement.

Hedelund et al. also performed a study looking at the efficacy 
of IPL treatment for perioral rhytides in comparison to CO2 abla-
tive resurfacing [4]. Twenty-seven females, skin type II, with peri-

432

aNtI-aGING  Resurfacing Techniques

oral rhytides were randomly treated with 3-monthly IPL sessions 
or one CO2 laser ablation. The results showed a higher degree 
of  patient  satisfaction  and  significant  improvement  in  rhytides 
with CO2 laser resurfacing when compared to IPL rejuvenation. 
In addition to the more dramatic improvement seen with CO2 
resurfacing, side effects were also found to be significantly higher 
in  this  group.  Patients  treated  with  the  CO2  laser  experienced 
milia, dyspigmentation, and persistent erythema, while the IPL 
group wasn’t noted to have any side effects. Both groups showed 
longterm improvement in skin elasticity, although no significant 
improvement in wrinkles was seen in the IPL treatment group. 
Many physicians today advocate 3–6 treatments for significant 
improvement, which implies that the treatment course may not 
have been sufficient to produce notable results.

As with PDL lasers, recent trends have shown effective com-
bination of IPL with aminolevulinic acid (ALA) in treatment of 
photodamaged skin [21–24]. Patients treated with this combi-
national  therapy  demonstrated  greater  improvement  in  global 
photodamage,  mottled  pigmentation,  and  fine  lines  compared 
to  those  patients  treated  with  IPL  alone  [21].  Combinational 
treatment is well tolerated with little difference in the incidence 
of adverse effects with or without 5-ALA pretreatment.

1320 nm Neodymium yttrium aluminium 
garnet (Nd:YaG)

One  of  the  first  laser  systems  to  be  developed  for  nonablative 
rejuvenation was the Nd:YAG 1320 nm laser [25]. At this wave-
length,  energy  is  able  to  penetrate  into  the  papillary  and  mid 
reticular dermis, and it is absorbed by water associated with der-
mal collagen. There is a high water absorption and strong scat-
tering in the dermis which allows for extensive dermal wound-
ing [25]. This accelerates the productive capacity of fibroblasts 
as seen in its promotion of the two major secretory factors they 
produce:  basic  fibroblast  growth  factor  (bFGF)  and  inhibiting 
transforming  growth  factor  β1  (TGF-β1)  [26,27].  This  is  fol-
lowed byt the stimulation of collagen types I, III, and VII, and 
tropoelastin  production  [27,28].  The  surface  cooling  systems 
are present to protect the epidermis from involvement.

The 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser has been used to target acne scar-
ring, photoaging, and rhytides with variable results [1-3,25,29]. 
As  a  result  of  its  poor  absorption  by  melanin,  it  can  be  used 
in all skin types without fear of pigmentary change [29]. When 
treating  mild  rhytides  or  acne  scars,  Weiss  et  al.  recommends 
using a fluence of 17–19 J/cm2, a total of 25 ms of cooling (pre 
and post cooling at 10 ms and midcooling at 5 ms), with a fixed 
pulse  duration  of  50  ms,  and  2–3  passes  [2].  When  treating 
acne  scars  with  this  regimen,  30–50%  improvement  has  been 
observed in about four of five patients, while 20% show no sig-
nificant response.

According to a study done by Rogachefsky et al., the 1320 nm 
Nd:YAG  laser  is  an  effective  modality  to  treat  atrophic  and 
mixed pattern facial acne scars [29]. After treating 12 patients 
with  three  monthly  sessions,  optimal  improvement  was  noted 

in atrophic acne scars; however, mixed acne scars also showed 
softening of sclerotic and shallow pitted scars. Sadick et al. also 
confirms significant improvement in acne scars after treatment 
with the 1320 nm Nd:YAG, but he proposes that six sessions is 
more effective than three laser sessions [25].

Q-switched (QS) Nd:YaG 1064 nm laser

The QS Nd:YAG 1064 nm laser has not only proven to be suc-
cessful for treatment of tattoos, vascular, and pigmented lesions, 
but  it  has  recently  been  used  to  treat  rhytids,  photodamage, 
and acne scars [3,8,11,30]. This laser system is poorly absorbed 
by  water,  making  deeper  collagen  damage  more  likely  when 
compared to systems with other wavelengths [30]. It has been 
hypothesized  that  when  compared  to  other  nonablative  sys-
tems, the 1064 nm QS Nd:YAG laser is able to cause the most 
severe  dermal  damage  and  thus  produce  the  greatest  amount 
of collagen remodeling. This was confirmed in a mouse study 
done which showed greatest improvement in skin elasticity after 
treatment with the QS Nd:YAG 1064 nm laser [13].

Another small study involving eight patients was performed to 
evaluate  the  effects  of  the  QS  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  on  facial 
wrinkles [30]. Treatments were performed monthly, for a total of 
three months, with a fluence of 7 J/cm2, a 3 mm spot size, and two 
passes, with petechiae as the desired endpoint. In the end, six of 
the eight subjects demonstrated clinical improvement in rhytides.
The  QS  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  has  also  been  used  to  treat 
atrophic acne scars with notable success. In eleven patients who 
completed five treatment sessions with the QS 1064 nm Nd:YAG 
laser, significant improvement in facial acne scars was demon-
strated  [8].  After  completing  all  five  treatments,  improvement 
was seen as early as 1 month, the greatest percentage improve-
ment was noted at 3 months, and improvement had reached a 
plateau at 6 months. Another similar study used three dimen-
sional topography to quantify the efficacy of five QS 1064 nm 
Nd:YAG treatments on facial wrinkles and acne scars [11]. At 3 
months post-treatment, a 61% improvement in surface topog-
raphy  was  recorded,  and  it  was  maintained  at  the  six-month 
follow-up. These results and others, have suggested that colla-
gen remodeling and repair continues to occur for an extended 
period of time following the last treatment [1,3,8,11].

erbium:glass 1540 nm

The  erbium:glass  (Er:glass)  1540  nm  laser  has  been  used  to 
treat  perioral  and  periorbital  rhytides  with  mild  to  moderate 
end results [1,3,12,31]. Fournier et al. studied the effects of the 
Er:glass laser on 42 patients treated at 6-week intervals for a total 
of five sessions [31]. Profilometry, ultrasound, and photography 
were used to rate clinical improvement after the final treatment. 
All patients reported improvement in quality and appearance of 
their skin at 6 months. Notable findings showed an increase in 
dermal thickness by 17%, a reduction of anisotropy by 44.8%, 
and an overall improvement in clinical appearance.

48. Nonablative Lasers

433

An  additional  35-month  study  was  conducted  to  assess  the 
long-term benefits of treatment with the Er:glass 1540 nm laser 
on facial rhytides [12]. Eleven patients with periorbital and peri-
oral rhytides were treated with a series of five treatments at six-
week intervals. Approximately half of the patients also received 
two  additional  maintenance  treatments  at  14  and  20  months. 
Treatments  were  performed  with  settings  of  8  J/cm2,  three 
stacked  pulses  at  2  Hz  repetition  rates  for  periorbital  and  five 
stacked pulses for perioral sites, and a 4 mm spot size. It was dem-
onstrated that for all 11 patients treated, the improvement in col-
lagen anisotropy measurements showed a reduction in rhytides 
of 51.7% at 14 months, and 29.8% at 35 months. Overall patient 
satisfaction was 70% at approximately 2.5 years. Based on both of 
the aforementioned studies, the Er:glass 1540 nm laser appears to 
effectively stimulate collagen remodeling with long-term results.

1450 nm diode laser

The  1450  nm  diode  laser  targets  water  containing  tissue  to 
stimulate  collagen  remodeling  and  production.  It  has  been 
used to treat periorbital and perioral rhytides, and facial acne 
scars [1–3,32,33].

A previous study was performed with the 1450 nm diode laser 
to assess the efficacy of treatment on facial rhytides and the asso-
ciated side effects [33]. Twenty patients underwent 2–4 monthly 
treatment sessions focusing on perioral and periorbital wrinkles. 
Each session consisted of treatment of one side of the face with 
laser  and  cryogen  and  the  other  side  with  cryogen  alone.  The 
laser  settings  were:  frequency  of  0.5–1.0  Hz,  pulse  width  of 
160–260  ms,  pre-,  post-  and  intermediate  cryogen  cooling  of 
40–80 ms total, and a 4 mm spot size. At 6 months after the final 
treatment, 13 of the 20 laser/cryogen treated sites showed some 
improvement, while none of the cryogen only sites showed any 
improvement.  It  also  showed  that  periorbital  wrinkles  showed 
greater improvement when compared to the perioral sites.

In addition to wrinkles, the 1450 nm diode has been used to 
treat atrophic acne scars with minimal side effects [32,34]. Tanzi 
et  al.  performed  a  comparison  study  treating  20  patients  with 
mild to moderate atrophic acne scars with the 1320 nm Nd:YAG 
on half of the face and the 1450 nm diode laser on the contralat-
eral side. Three monthly treatments were performed, and only 
modest  improvement  in  facial  scarring  was  seen  among  both 
groups  at  6  months.  Yet,  greater  overall  clinical  improvement 
and patient satisfaction was seen in the 1450 nm diode laser sites. 
Increase  in  dermal  collagen  and  improvement  in  skin  texture 
was found in both groups. Minimal side effects were reported.

Infrared light devices (1100–1800 nm)

A  new  nonablative  broad  spectrum  infrared  device,  emitting 
wavelengths from 1100–1800 nm, has been recently introduced 
for the treatment of photoaged skin. Improvement in skin lax-
ity and rhytides is believed to result from volumetric heating of 

water in the dermis which leads to tissue contraction [1,35,36]. 
A  large  component  of  facial  aging  is  the  development  of  skin 
laxity. With this in mind, a study was conducted to evaluate the 
efficacy of a filtered infrared light device in the treatment of skin 
laxity with ptosis of the lower face and neck [36].

Thirteen  females,  a  mean  age  of  64  years  old,  were  treated 
from the nasolabial folds to the preauricular area, and from the 
malar  prominence  to  the  clavicle.  The  parameters  used  were: 
fluences of 30–36 J/cm2, 230–440 pulses per session, pulse dura-
tion up to 11 seconds, a spot size of 1.5 × 1.0 cm, and cooling of 
the  epidermis  to  40C.  Treatments  were  administered  monthly 
for a total of two treatments. Improvement was seen clinically in 
11 of 12 patients who completed the study. Significant improve-
ment  in  submental  and  submandibular  definition  was  noted. 
The most dramatic improvement was seen in those with loss of 
definition due to excess skin hanging separately from deeper soft 
tissue. Continued improvement was noted beyond the 1-month 
follow-up visit. Mild erythema was the only side effect seen, and 
it resolved within 30 minutes after treatment.

A  recent  small  study  was  performed  on  nine  women,  skin 
types III–IV, with variable photodamage [35]. Half of the sub-
jects received a one time treatment to the face, while the other 
group  had  2-monthly  treatments.  The  laser  parameters  were: 
fluences  of  30–40  J  cm2  and  170–200  pulses.  Overall,  both 
subjects’ and investigators’ assessments of pre and post proce-
dural appearances found significant improvement in elasticity, 
pore  size,  dyschromia,  wrinkles,  and  overall  texture.  Also,  the 
improvement in elasticity, rhytides, and skin texture were more 
evident in the group treated twice. This study showed promising 
results but was limited to an 8-week time span and small study 
population.  More  studies  will  need  to  be  performed  to  deter-
mine the role of new infrared light devices in the field of facial 
rejuvenation.

radiofrequency devices (rF)

RF  devices  have  become  another  widely  accepted  method  of 
nonablative rejuvenation. The FDA has approved the RF devices 
for  the  treatment  of  periorbital  rhytides  [10].  The  mechanism 
of  action  differs  from  nonablative  lasers  which  use  selective 
photothermolysis to induce collagen remodeling. As a result of 
the resistance to current flow through the tissue, uniform volu-
metric heat is produced at controlled levels of the reticular der-
mis and subcutaneous fat [1,9,10]. Tissue tightening is believed 
to  result  from  the  breaking  of  hydrogen  bonds  in  the  colla-
gen  triple  helix.  The  disruption  of  the  molecular  structure  of  
collagen  causes  contraction  that  begins  immediately  and  
continues for approximately 6 months [9]. In addition, heated 
fibroblasts are associated with new collagen synthesis and there-
fore tissue remodeling [37]. Contact cooling is used to protect 
the epidermis from damage.

In  an  early  study  performed,  17  patients,  skin  types  II–IV, 
were treated in 20 areas with the Thermacool T (Thermage Inc) 
RF device to assess the efficacy and safety of treatment of facial 

434

aNtI-aGING  Resurfacing Techniques

laxity [10]. Areas of primary focus were the jowls and the brow. 
Treatments were performed at settings of 14.5–16.0 (125–144 J/
cm2). Tightening was found to occur gradually over 4 months, 
and subtle improvements were at times difficult for subjects to 
appreciate without seeing pre and post photography. After view-
ing  photos,  approximately  90%  admitted  to  seeing  improve-
ment.  Mild  erythema  was  noted  in  all  subjects  but  resolved 
within hours. There were no burns seen with this treatment, and 
this was thought to be due to close monitoring and adjustment 
of energy level based on patient pain level.

There continues to be much debate over the most successful 
treatment protocol for RF devices. Recent studies have looked 
at the efficacy of using lower energies with multiple passes and 
more  pulses  [1,9].  Sixty-six  patients  with  moderate  laxity  of 
the lower face and neck were treated with the Thermacool RF 
device (Thermage Corp) [9]. Treatments were performed with 
a 1.5 cm tip, average treatment level was 62 (83 J/cm2) and was 
titrated  for  level  of  pain,  and  approximately  556  pulses  were 
administered  per  treatment.  A  maximum  of  five  passes  was 
performed. Patients were assessed at 4 and 6 months post treat-
ment,  and  were  found  to  have  95%  and  92%  improvement  in 
facial skin laxity. In addition to standardized assessments, sub-
ject satisfaction when comparing pre- and post-treatment pho-
tographs was 70% at six months. Among these patients who had 
a  measurable  response,  there  was  a  significant  improvement 
seen among those with both cutaneous and subcutaneous lax-
ity versus those with subcutaneous laxity only. The investigators 
hypothesized that radiofrequency devices cause contraction of 
dermal fibrils and fibrous septae of subcutaneous fat. Treatment 
of areas with laxity involving both the dermis and subcutane-
ous tissue, such as the cheeks and jowls, may have a more sig-
nificant response to tightening. Although additional trials need 
to  be  performed,  this  study  shows  good  results  and  minimal 
side effects when performing multiple passes with low/moder-
ate temperatures.

A  more  recent  study  by  el-Domyati  and  colleagues  evalu-
ated the clinical effects and objectively quantified the histologic 
changes of the nonablative RF device in the treatment of pho-
toaging  [38].  Six  individuals  with  mild  to  moderate  wrinkles 
underwent 3 months of treatment (six sessions at 2-week inter-
vals) using a monopolar RF device (Biorad, Shenzhen GSD Tech 
CO, Guangdong, China). Skin biopsy specimens were obtained 
at baseline, at 3 and 6 months after the start of treatment. Two 
initial passes of 150 J each were performed over the entire face 
and three to six additional passes of 200 J were performed to tar-
geted treatment regions. Patients had noticeable clinical results, 
with  high  satisfaction  and  corresponding  facial  skin  improve-
ment.  Compared  with  the  baseline,  there  was  a  statistically 
significant increase in the mean of collagen types I and III, and 
newly synthesized collagen, while the mean of total elastin was 
significantly  decreased,  at  the  end  of  treatment  and  3  months 
post-treatment. This study shows good results and histologically 
confirms  significantly  increased  levels  of  collagen  in  patients 
treated with RF with multiple passes.

Improvements  in  RF  systems  have  been  seen  not  only  with 
multiple pass treatments but also with new tip size availability 
[1,9]. There are now multiple sizes ranging from the commonly 
used 1.0 cm2 or 1.5 cm2, the 0.25 cm2 tips for smaller treatment 
areas like eyelids, and the larger 3cm tips for treatment of larger 
surface areas.

Newer  combined  approaches  with  RF  systems  and  nonab-
lative  lasers  are  currently  being  studied  to  determine  if  more 
effective facial rejuvenation can be obtained with both optical 
and electrical energy combined. Improvement of rhytides and 
photodamaged skin has been seen when using bipolar radiofre-
quency with infrared lasers, IPLs, or diode lasers [1,39,40]. Kim 
et al. performed sequential combination treatment using bipo-
lar RF-based IPL, IR light, and diode laser safely in one session 3 
weeks apart for four sessions [41]. The study demonstrated that 
a combination of three different energy sources, with bipolar RF, 
in one session is effective without further downtime for solving 
multiple problems including tone, texture, and laxity in photo-
aged Asian skin. Further studies need to be conducted to deter-
mine the most effective treatment regimen. In addition to com-
bined  electrical  and  optical  modalities,  newer  RF  devices  are 
also emerging, such as the Accent Device (Alma Laser) which 
offers both unipolar and bipolar modes. This device is theoreti-
cally supposed to improve both laxity and fine lines by provid-
ing  greater  flexibility  in  penetration  depths  [1].  The  unipolar 
mode  targets  the  reticular  dermis  and  subcutaneous  junction, 
while  the  bipolar  mode  targets  the  papillary  and  mid  dermis. 
There are trials underway at this time to determine effectiveness 
of treatment of facial laxity and cellulite.

advanced approaches

In addition to facial rejuvenation, several of these devices have 
also  been  evaluated  for  use  in  photoaging  and  tightening  of 
other anatomical sites [35,42–45] (Table 48.3). Early studies and 
preliminary results have suggested that nonablative resurfacing 
may play a significant part in nonfacial rejuvenation and tight-
ening.  Yet,  further  results  are  necessary  to  determine  how  big 

their role will be in this rapidly growing field.

For  example,  a  small  case  series  was  performed  using  the 
1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  to  treat  photoaging  hands  [42].  After 
6-monthly treatments, four of the seven patients showed mild to 
moderate  improvement  in  smoothness,  reduced  wrinkles,  and 
more  even  pigmentation.  Subjective  improvement  was  reported 
by six of the seven patients at 6 months. Although this study was 
small,  the  results  showed  statistically  significant,  although  mild, 
improvement  in  photoaged  hands.  Radiofrequency  and  infrared 
light devices have also been used in an attempt to treat skin laxity 
in nonfacial areas with variable findings [36,37,40,43,44]. Although 
nonablative  tightening  results  may  not  be  as  effective  as  surgical 
interventions,  significant  improvement  has  been  found.  A  small 
trial using an infrared light device showed improvement in neck 
contour  and  excess  skin  in  11  of  the  12  patients  who  completed 

Table 48.3  Advanced	nonablative	resurfacing

48. Nonablative Lasers

435

Laser/RF device

1320 nm	Nd:YAG

Photodamaged	dorsal	hands

13–18 J/cm2

Treatment locations

Fluence

Pulse duration/pulse number

Spot size

Infrared	light	device	(1100–1800 nm)

Neck	skin	laxity

30–36 J/cm2	(adjusted	for	pain	
level)

50 msec	macropulse	(stacked	
350 ms	micropulses)

10  mm

11	seconds	total	pulses	230–440

1.5 cm

3 cm

2 cm

150–170	Watts

30	seconds

Monopolar	radiofrequency	(Thermacool) Upper	arm	skin	laxity

Monopolar	radiofrequency	(Pellevé)

Hand	wrinkles

Unipolar	RF	device	(Accent	XL)

Upper	thigh,	buttocks,	
abdominal	cellulite

Table 48.4  Side	effects	of	nonablative	laser	resurfacing

Transient erythema and edema (most common)

•	 Pain/discomfort

•	 Purpura	(KTP	and	PDL)

•	 Temporary	hyperpigmentation

•	 Petechiae/pinpoint	bleeding	(1064 nm	QS-Nd:YAG)

•	 Burning	and	vesiculation	(rare,)

•	 Crusting

•	 Edematous	papules-	1–7	days	(1450 nm	diode)

the study [36]. Early results from the use of a monopolar radiofre-
quency device on upper arm contouring have shown improvement 
in  circumferential  size  of  36  of  70  patients  treated  at  a  4-month 
follow-up [39]. Further longterm results are still expected to follow. 
Other  trials  have  demonstrated  that  radiofrequency  devices  are 
effective in improving the appearance of cellulite with cirumferen-
tial reduction of the buttocks, thighs, and abdomen [37,46].

Complications

One of the major benefits of all nonablative rejuvenation modal-
ities  is  the  low  risk  of  potential  complications  involved  with 
treatments. The most common side effect found among all non-
ablative  lasers,  light  devices,  and  RF  devices  is  mild  transient 
erythema  and  edema  which  commonly  resolves  within  hours 
to  days  [1–3,6,8–10,12,16,17,25,31–33].  Although  complica-
tions are rare, temporary side effects have been recorded and are 

listed in Table 48.4.

Conclusions

Nonablative  rejuvenation  is  a  relatively  new  and  exciting  field  in 
aesthetic dermatology. Many different devices are currently being 
used to treat changes associated with photoaging, such as rhytides, 
skin laxity, vascular changes, and pigmentary alterations. Although 
ablative  resurfacing  and  surgical  intervention  remain  the  gold 

standard, nonablative systems offer an alternative option with less 
downtime and risk of complications. These devices selectively tar-
get  the  dermis,  inciting  a  wound  healing  response  locally,  while 
sparing  the  epidermis  from  harm.  Dermal  collagen  remodeling, 
production, and repair are upregulated as a result of this selective 
targeting. Multiple lasers, light sources, and radiofrequency devices 
have been used to induce significant neocollagenesis with measur-
able success. Yet despite the significant histological changes noted, 
the  clinical  enhancement  is  often  subtle  with  mild  to  moderate 
improvement over time. As a result, it is important to give patients 
realistic expectations when performing nonablative rejuvenation. 
The most effective devices and treatment parameters for photore-
juvenation have yet to be determined, but continued enthusiasm in 
this field gives hope for continued research and success.

references

  1  Alexiades-Armenakas MR, Dover JS, Arndt KA. (2008) The spec-
trum of laser skin resurfacing: Nonablative, fractional, and ablative 
laser resurfacing. JAAD 58, 719–37.

  2  Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  Beasley  KL,  Munavalli  G.  (2005)  Our 
approach to nonablative treatment of photoaging. Lasers Surg Med 
37, 2–8.

  3  Goldberg DJ. (2003) Lasers for facial rejuvenation. Am J Dermatol 

4, 225–34.

  4  Hedelund L, Bjerring P, Egekvist H, Haedersdal M. (2006) Ablative 
versus nonablative treatment of perioral rhytides. A randomized 
controlled  trial  with  long-term  blinded  clinical  evaluations  and 
non-invasive measurements. Lasers Surg Med 38, 129–36.

  5  Sadick NS. (2003) Update on nonablative light therapy for rejuve-

nation: A review. Lasers Surg Med 32, 120–28.

  6  Bosniak S, Cantisano-Zilkha M, Purewal BK, Zdinak LA. (2006) Com-
bination Therapies in Oculofacial rejuvenation. Orbit 25, 319–26.
  7  Liu H, Dang Y, Wang Z, Chai X, Ren Q. (2008) Laser induced col-
lagen  remodeling:  A  comparative  study  in  vivo  on  mouse  model. 
Lasers Surg Med 40, 13–19.

  8  Friedman  PM,  Jih  MH,  Skover  GR,  Payonk  GS,  Kimyai-Asadi  A, 
Geronemus RG. (2004) Treatment of atrophic facial acne scars with 
the 1064 nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser. Arch Dermatol 140, 1337–41.
  9  Bogle MA, Ubelhoer N, Weiss RA, Mayoral F, Kaminer FS. (2007) 
Evaluation of the multiple pass, low fluence algorithm for radiofre-
quency tightening of the lower face. Laser Surg Med 39, 210–17.

436

aNtI-aGING  Resurfacing Techniques

10  Narins DJ, Narins RS. (2003) Non-surgical radiofrequency facelift. 

J Drug Dermatol 2, 495–500.

11  Friedman PM, Skover GR, Payonk G, Kauvar AN, Geronemus RG. 
(2002) 3D in-vivo optical skin imaging for topographical quantita-
tive assessment of nonablative laser technology. Dermatol Surg 28, 
199–204.

12  Fournier N, Lagarde JM, Turlier V, Courrech L, Mordon S. (2004) A 
35-month profilometric and clinical evaluation of nonablative remod-
eling using a 1540 nm Er:glass laser. J Cosmet Laser Ther 6, 126–30.
13  Dang Y, Ren Q, Li W, et al. (2006) Comparison of biophysical prop-
erties of skin measured by using non-invasive techniques in the KM 
mice following 595 nm pulsed dye, 1064 nm Q-switched Nd:YAG 
and  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  nonablative  rejuvenation.  Skin  Res 
Technol 12, 119–25.

14  Keller R, Belda Junior W, Valente NY, Rodrigues CJ. (2007) Nonab-
lative 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser for treating atrophic facial acne scars: 
Histologic and clinical analysis. Dermatol Surg 33, 1470–76.

15  Lee MW. (2003) Combination 532 nm and 1064 nm lasers for nonin-
vasive skin rejuvenation and toning. Arch Dermatol 139, 1265–76.
16  Ho SG, Chan NP, Yeung CK, et al. (2012) A retrospective analysis 
of the management  of freckles  and  lentigines  using  four different 
pigment lasers on Asian skin. J Cosmet Laser Ther 14, 74–80.

29  Rogachefsky  AS,  Hussain  M,  Goldberg  DJ.  (2003)  Atrophic  and 
a mixed pattern of acne scars improved with a 1320 nm Nd:YAG 
laser. Dermatol Surg 29, 904–8.

30  Goldberg DJ, Silapunt S. (2000) Q-switched Nd:YAG laser: rhytid 
improvement  by  nonablative  dermal  remodeling.  J  Cutan  Laser 
Ther 2, 157–60.

31  Fournier N, Dahan S, Barneon G, et al. (2002) Nonablative remod-
eling:  a  14  month  clinical  ultrasound  imaging  and  profilometric 
evaluation of a 1540 nm Er:glass laser. Dermatol Surg 28, 926–31.
32  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. (2004) Comparison of a 1450 nm diode laser and 
a 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser in the treatment of atrophic facial scars: a 
prospective clinical and histologic study. Dermatol Surg 30, 152–7.
33  Goldberg DJ, Rogachefsky AS, Silapunt S. (2002) Nonablative laser 
treatment of facial rhytides: a comparison of 1450 nm Diode laser 
treatment  with  dynamic  cooling  as  opposed  to  treatment  with 
dynamic cooling alone. Lasers Surg Med 30, 79–81.

34  Wada T, Kawada A, Hirao A, et al. (2012) Efficacy and safety of a 
low-energy double-pass 1450-nm diode laser for the treatment of 
acne scare. Photomed Laser Surg 30, 107–11.

35  Ahn JY, Han TY, Lee CK, et al. (2008) Effect of a new infrared light 
device  (1100–1800  nm)  on  facial  lifting.  Photodermatol  Photoim-
munol Photomed. 24, 49–51.

17  Bernstein  EF.  (2007)  The  new-generation,  high-energy,  595  nm, 
long  pulse-duration  pulsed-dye  laser  improves  the  appearance  of 
photodamaged skin. Lasers Surg Med 39, 157–63.

36  Goldberg DJ, Hussain M, Fazeli A, et al. (2007) Treatment of skin 
laxity of the lower face and neck in older individuals with a broad-
spectrum infrared light device. J Cosmet Laser Ther 9, 35–40.

18  Goldberg DJ, Sarradet D, Hussain M, et al. (2004) Clinical, histo-
logic, and ultrastructural changes after nonablative treatment with 
a 595-nm flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye laser: Comparison of var-
ying settings. Dermatol Surg 30, 979–82.

19  Kono  T,  Groff  WF,  Sakurai  H,  et  al.  (2007)  Comparison  study  of 
intense pulsed light versus a long-pulse pulsed dye laser in the treat-
ment of facial skin rejuvenation. Ann Plast Surg 59, 479–83.

20  Goldberg  DJ,  Cutler  KB.  (2000)  Nonablative  treatment  of  rhytids 

with intense pulsed light. Lasers Surg Med 26, 196–9.

21  Alster TS, Tanzi EL, Welsh EC. (2005) Photorejuvenation of facial 
skin  with  topical  20%  5-aminolevulinic  acid  and  intense  pulsed 
light treatment: a split face comparison study. J Drugs Dermatol 4, 
35–38.

22  Marmar ES, Phelps R, Goldberg DJ. (2005) Ultrastructural changes 
seen after ALA-IPL photorejuvenation: a pilot study. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther 7, 21–24.

23  Dover JS, Bhatia AC, Stewart B, Arndt KA. (2005) Topical 5-ami-
nolevulinic  acid  combined  with  intense  pulsed  light  in  the  treat-
ment of photoaging. Arch Dermatol 141, 1247–52.

24  Gold MH, Bradshaw VL, Boring MM, et al. (2006) Split-face com-
parison of photodynamic therapy with 5-aminolevulinic acid and 
intense pulsed light versus intense pulsed light alone for photodam-
age. Dermatol Surg 32, 795–801.

25  Sadick NS, Schecter AK. (2004) A preliminary study of utilization 
of  the  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  for  the  treatment  of  acne  scarring. 
Dermatol Surg 30, 995–1000.

26  Zhenxiao Z, Aie X, Yuzhi J, et al. (2011) Exploring the role of a non-
ablative laser (1320 nm cooltouch laser) in skin photorejuvenation. 
Skin Res Technol 17, 505–9.

37.  Belenky I, Margulis A, Elman M, et al. (2012) Exploring channeling 
optimized radiofrequency energy: a review of radiofrequency his-
tory and applications in esthetic fields. Adv Ther 29, 249–66.

38  El-Domyati M, el-Ammawi TS, Medhat W, et al. (2011) Radiofre-
quency facial rejuvenation: evidence-based effect. J Am Acad Der-
matol 64, 524–35.

39  Sadick  NS,  Alexiades-Armenakas  M,  Bitter  P,  et  al.  (2005) 
Enhanced full-face skin rejuvenation using synchronous intense 
pulsed  optical  and  conducted  bipolar  radiofreqwuency  energy 
(ELOS):  introducing  selective  radiophotothermolysis.  J  Drugs 
Dermatol 4, 181–86.

40  Alexiades-Armenakas  M.  (2006)  Rhytides,  laxity,  and  photoag-
ing  treated  with  a  combination  of  radiofrequency,  diode  laser, 
and pulsed light and assessed with a comprehensive grading scale. 
J Drugs Dermatol 5, 731–8.

41  Kim JE, Chang S, Won CH, et al. (2012) Combination treatment using 
bipolar radiofrequency-based intense pulsed light, infrared light and 
diode  laser  enhanced  clinical  effectiveness  and  histological  dermal 
remodeling in Asian photoaged skin. Dermatol Surg 38, 68–76.

42  Sadick N, Schecter AK. (2004) Tilization of the 1320 nm Nd:YAG 
laser for the reduction of photoaging of the hands. Dermatol Surg 
30, 1140–44.

43  Goldberg DJ, Hussain M, Fazeli A, et al. (2007) Monopolar radiof-
requency tightening of upper arm skin laxity: a multicenter study. 
Laser Surg Med (suppl 19), 19.

44  Vega JM, Bucay VW, Mayoral FA. (2013) Prospective, multicenter 
study  to  determine  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  a  unique  radiofre-
quency device for moderate to severe hand wrinkles. J Drugs Der-
matol 12, 24–6.

27  Preissig J, Hamilton K, Markus R. (2012) Current laser resurfacing 
technologies: a review that delves beneath the surface. Semin Plast 
Surg 26, 109–16.

45  Kassim At, Goldberg DJ. (2013) Assessment of the safety and effi-
cacy  of  a  bipolar  multi-frequency  device  in  the  treatment  of  skin 
laxity. J Cosmet Laser Ther 15, 114–7.

28  El-Domyati M, El-Ammawi TS, Medhat W, et al. (2011) Effects of 
the Nd:YAG 1320 nm laser on skin rejuvenation: clinical and histo-
logical correlations. J Cosmet Laser Ther 13, 98–106.

46  Del Pino E, Rosado RH, Azuela A, et al. (2006) Effect of controlled vol-
umetric tissue heating with radiofrequency on cellulite and the subcu-
taneous tissue of the buttocks and thighs. J Drugs Dermatol 5, 714–22.

ChAPTEr 49
Dermabrasion

Christopher B. Harmon and Daniel P. Skinner
Surgical Dermatology Group, Birmingham, AL, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Dermabrasion	involves	mechanically	removing	the	epidermis	and	papillary	dermis,	creating	a	newly	contoured	open	wound	to	heal	by	

second	intention.

•	 The	most	common	indications	for	dermabrasion	are	for	the	improvement	of	cystic	acne	scarring,	post-surgical	scar	revision,	and	

enhanced	contouring	of	partial	thickness	Mohs	defects.

•	 Patients	must	have	realistic	expectations	of	the	anticipated	improvement,	possible	side	effects,	and	potential	complications	of	

dermabrasion	prior	to	treatment.

•	 Proper	technique	is	paramount	in	order	to	avoid	intraoperative	complications.
•	 Vigilance	during	the	postoperative	period	is	important	in	order	to	recognize	complications	at	an	early	stage	and	prevent	long-term	

sequelae.

Definition and history

Mechanism of action

Dermabrasion  is  a  skin  resurfacing  technique  that  surgically 
abrades  or  planes  the  epidermis  through  the  use  of  a  rapidly 
rotating wire brush or diamond fraise [1]. The wire brush or dia-
mond fraise is used as the abrading tip to create an open wound 
that will heal by second intention. An irregular or scarred cuta-
neous surface may be surgically abraded in order to achieve a 
more regular plane, or a more gradual transition between dif-
ferent planes, thereby improving skin contour and appearance.

In its simplest form, dermabrasion was practiced by ancient 
Egyptians  in  circa  1500  BC,  who  employed  the  abrasive  char-
acteristics  of  pumice  and  alabaster  to  treat  skin  blemishes 
[2].  Kurtin  presented  the  first  series  of  patients  who  under-
went  dermabrasion  to  Mount  Sinai  Hospital  in  1953.  Kurtin 
described the use of high-speed rotary abraders, intraoperative 
freezing, and a variety of abrasive end pieces [3]. Later publica-
tions further refined Kurtin’s technique, including the use of the 
diamond fraise and the wire brush [4–7]. Since the introduction 
of modern dermabrasion by Kurtin growing interest in the tech-
nique  has  culminated  in  its  application  to  a  variety  of  lesions 
including  most  commonly,  facial  scars  secondary  to  acne, 
trauma  and  surgery.  The  growing  number  of  applications  of 
dermabrasion has been accompanied by evolution of the tech-
nique from the use of common sandpaper in the mid-twentieth 
century to electrically powered devices with wire brush tips or 
diamond fraises of varying sizes, shapes and textures that can 
achieve speeds of over 33,000 revolutions per minute [8].

Fundamentally, the skin can be subdivided into three layers – 
epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. The dermis is fur-
ther  subdivided  into  the  more  superficial  papillary  dermis, 
containing  both  a  finely  woven  meshwork  of  collagen  inter-
digitating  with  the  epidermal  rete  as  well  as  the  superficial 
vascular  plexus,  and  the  deeper  reticular  dermis,  composed 
of thick bundles of predominantly Type I collagen [9]. Resur-
facing,  by  definition,  involves  iatrogenic  removal  of  one  or 
multiple layers of the skin to create a cutaneous wound. Der-
mabrasion mechanically removes the epidermis and papillary 
dermis, creating a partial thickness wound to heal by second 
intention. The well-characterized, yet complex, wound healing 
response  is  triggered,  involving  transforming  growth  factor 
beta  1  (TGF-β1)-driven  myofibroblastic  deposition  of  new 
Type  I  and  Type  III  collagen  and  subsequent  remodeling  in 
the dermis [10]. Additionally, TGF-1β and epidermal growth 
factor (EGF) as well as other growth factors and matrix met-
alloproteinases  (MMPs)  stimulate  re-epithelialization  from 
both  underlying  skin  appendages  and  adjacent  epithelialized 
skin  [10].  Defined  ultrastructural  and  molecular  alterations 
accompany the clinically visible changes apparent in the der-
mabraded area. These include increased collagen bundle den-
sity and size with a tendency toward unidirectional orientation 
of collagen fibers parallel to the epidermal surface, as well as 
altered levels of α6- and β4-integrin expression in the stratum 
spinosum [11].

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

437

438

ANTI-AGING  Resurfacing Techniques

When properly performed, the irregularly contoured or actini-
cally damaged epidermal and papillary dermal layers are removed, 
and second intention wound healing occurs. The clinical result is 
a  smoother,  more  evenly  contoured  surface,  with  fewer  irregu-
larities in the form of acne scars, rhytides, keratoses, or step-off 
transitions.

Indications

The  most  common  indications  for  dermabrasion  are  desired 
improvement  of  acne  scars,  traumatic  and  surgical  scars,  rhi-
nophyma,  deep  rhytides,  and  partial-thickness  Mohs  defects  
(Figure  49.1)  [12].  However,  it  has  also  been  described  for 
improvement of actinic keratoses, seborrheic keratoses, angiofi-
bromas, syringomas, solar elastosis, epidermal nevi, tattoo removal 
and more recently, vitiligo [13–15].

With regard to acne scarring, even in the era of laser devices, 
fractionated delivery approaches, and non-invasive “tissue-tight-
ening”  procedures,  dermabrasion  remains  an  important  tool  in 
the  combination  approach  to  the  improvement  of  cystic  acne 
scarring.  While  the  shallow  and  wide,  undulating,  or  “rolling” 
type acne scars are better treated with subcision, dermal grafts, 
fillers, or fractionated laser devices, the slightly deeper and nar-
rower “box-car” type acne scars that demonstrate step-off vertical 
borders respond best to mechanical dermabrasion. Additionally, 
the deepest and narrowest “ice-pick” type acne scars respond best 

to dermabrasion subsequent to punch excisions, punch grafts, or 
TCA cross destruction. Dermabrasion allows a skilled practitio-
ner to selectively plane off “hilltops” surrounding atrophic scars 
which  are  so  prominent  in  moderate  to  severe  acne  scarring. 
Chemical peels and laser treatments in contrast, produce an injury 
of  equivalent  depth  in  both  areas.  Fractional  CO2  resurfacing 
does have the advantage of creating skin contraction through the 
deep  penetration  causing  microthermal  zones,  which  in  some 
cases  can  produce  improvement  in  acne  scarring  equivalent  to 
dermabrasion [16–17].

For traumatic and surgical scars, the thickness, contour, and 
overall  appearance  is  routinely  improved  with  postoperative 
dermabrasion (Figure 49.2). Also known as “scarabrasion”, this 
procedure is best performed 6–8 weeks after the initial surgery 
or wounding event [18]. When performed during this 6–8 week 
window,  the  late  proliferative  and  early  remodeling  phases  of 
wound healing are interrupted and partially “reset”, resulting in 
an improved final cosmetic result.

While several modalities, including wire loop electrosurgery 
and  CO2  laser  resurfacing,  have  been  described  for  the  treat-
ment  of  rhinophyma,  dermabrasion  remains  unmatched  in  the 
operator’s  ability  to  re-establish  the  complex  contour  of  the 
many  cosmetic  subunits  of  the  nose.  Furthermore,  although 
fractionated laser resurfacing has largely replaced dermabrasion 
for full face treatment of facial rhytides, dermabrasion can be as 
efficacious or more efficacious at removal of both fine and mod-
erate facial rhytides. However, with patient preferences moving 

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 49.1  Dermabrasion after partial thickness Mohs layer on the nose (a) Male patient with a partial thickness defect after 1 stage of Mohs micrographic 
surgery for the removal of basal cell carcinoma (b) Immediately after spot dermabrasion to blend the surgical defect with the surrounding skin (c) 2 weeks 
after Mohs and dermabrasion.

49. Dermabrasion

439

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 49.2  Dermabrasion of scar on the nose after Mohs surgery and reconstruction (a) Female patient with a scar on the right nasal sidewall and lateral 
tip 6 weeks after Mohs surgery and flap reconstruction. (b) Immediately after dermabrasion to multiple cosmetic subunits of the nose. Feathering the border 
of the dermabraded area (arrows) helps to minimize the color differences between the treated and untreated areas. (c) 2 weeks after dermabrasion with 
significant improvement in the appearance and texture of the scar.

in the direction of less invasive procedures with shorter down-
time, full face dermabrasion for rhytides is unlikely to return to 
widespread use in the foreseeable future.

Finally, dermabrasion proves to be an incredibly useful tech-
nique in the armamentarium of the Mohs surgeon. Thin carci-
nomas in cosmetically sensitive or high-risk areas can often be 
completely  removed  with  a  shallow  Mohs  layer  to  the  level  of 
the  superficial  reticular  dermis.  After  clearance,  these  partial-
thickness defects, particularly on the nose and scalp, may lend 
themselves to healing by second intention rather than primary 
closure,  yet  with  slightly  increased  risk  of  an  evident  contour 
discrepancy  or  sharp  pigmentary  transition.  Dermabrasion  of 
the edges surrounding the partial-thickness Mohs defect greatly 
improves  the  final  contour  by  replacing  the  steeply  beveled 
wound  edge  with  a  more  gradual  slope.  Additionally,  derm-
abrading the remainder of an involved cosmetic subunit of the 
nose  results  in  a  less  obvious  scar  by  placing  the  pigmentary 
demarcation lines at the less perceptible subunit boundaries.

result  in  even  less  erythema  and  quicker  re-epithelialization 
than dermabrasion, their efficacies for the improvement of scars, 
rhytides, and precancerous lesions do not currently match that 
seen  with  mechanical  dermabrasion.  However,  a  recent  study 
comparing  fractionated  CO2  laser  and  mechanical  dermabra-
sion  for  post-Mohs  scars  did  show  the  same  efficacy  for  both 
treatment  modalities,  with  less  bleeding  erythema  and  edema 
in the group treated with CO2 laser [19]. Dermabrasion has also 
been shown to be more efficacious than 5-fluorouracil for the 
treatment of actinic keratosis [20].

The major disadvantage of dermabrasion as compared to the 
above  modalities  is  that  it  is  much  more  operator  dependent. 
Unlike laser and light devices, the depth of penetration is not 
pre-programmed.  Successful  treatment  relies  not  only  on  the 
physician’s knowledge of the modality and application settings, 
but also on his or her skilled execution. In the novice’s hands, 
dermabrasion  exhibits  a  narrower  window  or  buffer  between 
effective treatment depth and inappropriate scarring depth. How-
ever, this is quickly overcome with experience.

Advantages and disadvantages

As  compared  to  fully  ablative  resurfacing  with  the  CO2  and 
Er:YAG  lasers,  dermabrasion  demonstrates  similar  or  greater 
efficacy  for  the  treatment  of  scars,  rhytides,  and  precancerous 
lesions,  with  less  postoperative  erythema  and  more  rapid 
re-epithelialization. While newer, fractionated delivery protocols 

Patient selection and preoperative 
consultation

The  most  important  components  of  the  preoperative  consul-
tation  are  determining  the  patient’s  specific  motivation  for 
resurfacing  and  establishing  realistic  expectations  regarding 

440

ANTI-AGING  Resurfacing Techniques

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 49.3  Dermabrasion of acne scars (a) African-American male with severe acne scarring prior to dermabrasion. (b) Immediate postoperative appear-
ance of the treated area. (c) Appearance 4 weeks after dermabrasion.

the  treatment  outcome.  The  ultimate  goal  of  any  resurfacing 
treatment should be an improvement of the given defect rather 
than a complete eradication. Dermabrasion consistently achieves 
30–50% improvement in the appearance of deep acne scars and 
rhytides  (Figure  49.3),  but  the  patient  who  seeks  and  expects 
the elimination of all scars and rhytides will rarely be satisfied. 
Reviewing before and after photographs with the patient during 
consultation,  particularly  when  considering  full  cosmetic  unit 
or full-face dermabrasion, may foster realistic expectations for 
improvement.

The preoperative consult should also include a complete his-
tory addressing bleeding disorders, prior herpes simplex infec-
tion, impetigo, keloidal or hypertrophic scarring, koebnerizing 
conditions, prior isotretinoin therapy, and immunosuppression. 
The  risk/benefit  ratio  of  an  iatrogenically  induced  wound  is 
unfavorable in patients who are immunosuppressed, who have 
a  history  koebnerizing  conditions  such  as  lichen  planus  and 
psoriasis, or who demonstrate a propensity towards keloidal or 
hypertrophic scar formation. Due to an increased risk of scar-
ring in patients on isotretinoin, dermabrasion should be delayed 
until  six  months  after  finishing  an  oral  retinoid  course  [21]. 
Caution should also be exercised when planning to dermabrade 
patients  who  have  recently  undergone  extensive  procedures 
involving  the  area  to  be  dermabraded,  such  as  a  facelift,  as  a 
robust blood supply is necessary for appropriate wound healing. 
Many surgeons prefer to wait six months after a facelift before 
subsequent dermabrasion.

Antiviral prophylaxis should be instituted in those with a his-
tory  of  herpes  simplex  outbreak  in  the  area  to  be  spot  derm-
abraded  or  in  those  who  are  undergoing  full  face  or  multiple 
cosmetic  unit  dermabrasion.  The  antiviral  agents  acyclovir  or 
valacyclovir may be used, and patients should remain on pro-
phylactic therapy for ten days after the procedure (valacyclovir 
500  mg  BID  ×  ten  days).  Similarly,  antibacterial  prophylaxis 
with an anti-staphylococcal agent should be instituted in those 
with a history of impetigo.

Particular  attention  should  also  be  paid  to  the  Fitzpatrick 
Skin Type of the patient. Fitzpatrick Skin Types IV, V, and VI 
are much more prone to both postoperative hyperpigmentation 
and permanent, clinically significant hypopigmentation, the lat-
ter of which may not appear for several months following the 
procedure.

Preoperative  photographs  are  highly  recommended,  and 
should include a frontal view, 45 and 90-degree views from both 
sides, and a close up view of the areas to be treated. Addition-
ally, all preoperative and postoperative expectations should be 
discussed. The patient should particularly be made aware of the 
nature  of  the  postoperative  recovery  routine,  which  includes 
extensive  facial  dressings  with  multiple  changes  over  several 
days, and clinically apparent erythema for several weeks.

Instrumentation

With mechanical dermabrasion, a diamond fraise or wire brush 
abrading tip is driven by a handheld engine at speeds of 15,000 
to 30,000 rotations per minute (RPMs). Some of the most com-
monly used hand engines and handpieces include the Bell, Osada, 
and Acrotorque.

Diamond  fraises  come  in  a  range  of  shapes  and  sizes,  such 
as  pears,  cones,  bullets,  and  wheels,  and  also  vary  in  coarse-
ness from fine to extra-coarse. Alternatively, the wire brush is a 
3.0–5.0 mm wide × 17.0 mm diameter wheel with steel bristles 
radiating from the center in a clockwise fashion when viewed 
from  the  shaft.  The  wire  brush  is  the  most  aggressive  type  of 
end  piece  and  can  be  more  technically  difficult  to  master,  yet 
it is considered more efficacious by those experienced with its 
use.  The  microlacerations  created  with  the  wire  brush  are  the 
most efficient means of removing the nodules of rhinophyma, 
the  thick  plaques  of  hypertrophic  scars,  and  deep  acne  scars. 
Wire  brushes  are  no  longer  being  manufactured  and  must  be 
purchased as a used piece of equipment from a third party.

Standard technique

Treating  surgical  scars,  rhinophyma,  and  partial-thickness  Mohs 
defects provides an excellent point of entry into the practice of der-
mabrasion prior to practicing advanced techniques such as full face 
dermabrasion. If the treatment area is limited in size, local anesthesia 
(1% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:100,000) or tumescent technique 
is adequate. When treating the entire nose, a ring block may achieve 
an appropriate degree of anesthesia as well. Prior to abrasion, the 
area to be treated is cleansed with a 4% chlorhexidine solution.

The  body  of  the  hand  engine  is  grasped  in  the  palm  of  the 
dominant  hand  with  four  fingers,  allowing  the  thumb  to  proj-
ect along the neck for stabilization. Finger position is similar to 
a  “thumbs-up”  sign  or  to  that  seen  when  gripping  a  golf  club, 
yet the hand and instrument are pronated, with the palm facing 
downward (Figure 49.4a). The area of skin to be dermabraded 
can  be  tumesced  with  local  anesthesia  to  provide  a  firm  and 
anesthetic are of skin to abrade. 

An alternate method of anesthesia for full face dermabrasion 
utilizes  a  spray  refrigerant  to  provide  topical  anesthesia  and  a 
firm  substrate  to  dermabrade.  Topical  refrigerant  spray,  Frigi-
derm containing Freon 114 is applied to the treatment area in an 
amount necessary to achieve a 5–10 second thaw time, during 
which time abrasion is performed on the frozen area. Although 
not  required  in  every  case,  refrigerant  spray  accomplishes  two 
important  functions:  decreasing  pain  by  cryoanesthesia  and  a 
providing a firm substrate upon which to achieve re-contouring. 
Concerns  regarding  potential  harm  to  the  environment  from 
cryogenic sprays have limited the availability of topical refrigerant 
sprays in several countries, including the US. Liquid nitrogen or 
other agents that cryopreserve tissue create a colder temperature 
that can lead to scarring and/or hypopigmentation and their use 
is not recommended [1].

Immediately after freezing, three-point retraction is obtained 
by the two hands of the surgical assistant and the non-domi-
nant hand of the surgeon. The frozen skin is thus stabilized by 
retraction, and the lesion is re-contoured with the wire brush 
rotating in a counter-clockwise direction (with the angle of the 
radiating bristles) as determined from the point of view of the 
body of the hand engine (Figure 49.4b).

For abrasive resurfacing the wire brush is passed over the treat-
ment area in an arciform motion with the long axis perpendicular 
to the rotating handpiece, parallel to the body of the hand engine 
(Figure 49.4c). Counter-clockwise rotation of the wire brush offers a 
less aggressive technique of wire brush surgery that is especially well 
suited for spot dermabrasion of Mohs defects or surgical scars with-
out cryoanesthesia. With counter-clockwise rotation, the radiating 
bristles are less prone to gouge unfrozen skin. This counter-clock-
wise  direction  of  rotation  is  also  useful  when  dermabrading  free 
margins of the face such as the lips and nasal alae, in order to prevent 
the inadvertent “grabbing” of tissue by the rotating wire brush when 
dermabrading from the right side with the dominant right hand.

Regular  pinpoints  of  bleeding  signal  abrasion  to  the  level  of 
the papillary dermis. As depth increases to the reticular dermis, 

49. Dermabrasion

441

the  bleeding  foci  become  larger,  and  frayed  collagen  bundles 
become apparent. Surgical scars will frequently disintegrate upon 
abrasion, which is a desirable endpoint. Contouring should often 
include  “feathering”  or  graduating  zones  of  treatment  around 
the  central  scar  to  provide  a  smooth  transition  between  differ-
ent  planes  and  improved  pigment  transition  (Figure  49.2c). 
Alternatively, the treatment zone may be stopped at the border of 
a cosmetic unit or carried to an inconspicuous endpoint such as 
1.0 cm beyond the mandible.

(a)

(b)

1

(c)

Counter-clockwise
notation

Clockwise
rotation

5

4

3

2

skin surface

Figure 49.4  Technical considerations (a) Proper grasp of the hand engine. 
(b) Clockwise rotation (against the angle of the rotating bristles) of the wire 
brush  results  in  removal  of  a  thicker  plane  of  tissue  with  each  pass  than 
counter-clockwise rotation (with the angle of the bristles) (c) The treatment 
stroke. After the wire brush comes in contact with the skin (1), it is pulled 
across  the  treatment  area  in  in  a  unidirectional  fashion  perpendicular  to 
the  direction  of  the  rotating  wire  brush  (2).  Following  completion  of  the 
treatment stroke, the wire brush is lifted from the skin surface (3), and in an 
arciform fashion (4–5) is moved to a new area.

442

ANTI-AGING  Resurfacing Techniques

Advanced technique

While local or tumescent anesthesia may be adequate for scar 
or  spot  dermabrasion,  full  face  abrasion  of  acne  scarring  or 
rhytides is best accomplished with a combination of oral (p.o.) 
or intramuscular (i.m.) light sedation, nerve blocks, and cryoan-
esthesia. A standard regimen consists of 50–75 mg i.m. mepe-
ridine, 25 mg i.m. hydroxyzine, and 5–10 mg p.o. or sublingual 
diazepam  30–60  minutes  prior  to  the  start  of  the  procedure. 
After  a  chlorhexidine  prep,  nerve  blocks  to  the  supratroch-
lear,  supraorbital,  infraorbital,  and  mental  nerves  may  also  be 
performed.

In contrast to the counterclockwise rotation typically utilized 
for  less  aggressive  dermabrasion,  more  experienced  practitio-
ners  may  opt  to  use  a  clockwise  rotation  of  the  abrasive  wire 
brush,  especially  in  areas  of  deeper  scarring  like  mid-cheeks 
or  with  thick  papules  of  rhinophyma.  Rotation  in  a  clockwise 
direction occurs against the angle of the radiating wire bristles 
and causes the tip to pull away from the thumb rather than driv-
ing  toward  it.  Deeper  planing  and  re-contouring  are  possible 
with clockwise rotation, but this direction is much less forgiving. 
Additionally,  clockwise  rotation  utilized  by  a  dominant  right 
hand increases the risk that free margins of the face, such as lips 
and nasal alae, will be “grabbed” by the rotating bristles rather 
than brushed away, resulting in unintentional, deeper abrasion 
in these areas.

When  performing  full  face  dermabrasion,  beginning  at  the 
periphery  of  the  cheek  or  mandible  and  working  toward  the 
center of the face allows the practitioner to avoid gravity depen-
dent  bleeding  as  the  procedure  progresses.  A  surgical  towel, 
surgical  cap,  or  petrolatum  may  also  be  used  to  help  prevent 
entanglement of hair at the periphery of the treatment area. Sur-
gical  towels  are  also  preferable  to  cotton  gauze  as  sponges  on 
the surgical field, as gauze becomes more easily entangled in the 
wire brush and hand engine.

Postoperative wound care

Gauze  or  a  non-adherent  dressing  soaked  with  1%  lidocaine 
with  1:100,000  epinephrine  may  be  immediately  applied  to 
the  post-abraded  area  for  a  period  of  5–10  minutes  to  assist 
with  hemostasis.  A  closed-technique,  layered  bandage  is  then 
applied,  composed  of  a  semi-permeable  hydrogel  dressing 
(Vigilon, Second Skin) in contact with the wound, a non-adher-
ent dressing (Telfa) above, and paper tape or surgical netting to 
secure the bandage in place. Semi-permeable hydrogel dressings 
provide two important advantages over other types of dressings: 
decreased  patient  discomfort  in  the  postoperative  period  and 
decreased  time  to  re-epithelialization  by  up  to  40%  [22].  The 
dressing  should  be  changed  daily  for  3–5  days.  If  full  face  der-
mabrasion has been performed, it is usually most convenient to 
have the patient return to the office for dressing changes during 
this period. For smaller areas, the patient may change the bandage 

at home. After 3–5 days, the patient begins an open wound care 
technique at home. Acetic acid soaks (0.25%: 1 tablespoon white 
vinegar into 1 pint of warm water) are followed by topical petrola-
tum ointment until re-epithelialization is complete, usually 7–10 
days after the procedure. Strict adherence to this regimen reduces 
the risk of both secondary infection and scarring.

If  full  face  dermabrasion  is  performed,  a  short  course  of 
oral  or  intramuscular  steroids  may  also  be  given  immediately 
after  the  procedure  to  help  reduce  facial  swelling.  Swelling  is 
an anticipated consequence of full face dermabrasion and may 
be expected to resolve over several weeks to a few months. All 
previously  prescribed  antivirals  and  antibacterials  should  be 
instituted  or  continued,  and  patients  should  be  given  a  prog-
nosis  and  expected  recovery  timeframe.  Once  re-epitheliali-
zation  has  occurred,  sunscreens  and  sun  avoidance  should  be 
strictly adhered to for several weeks in order to minimize post-
procedure  pigment  alteration.  Makeup  may  be  used  to  cover 
erythema after re-epithelialization as well.

The  most  common  complications  encountered  after  derm-
abrasion  are  milia  and  acne  flares.  These  minor  side  effects 
should be anticipated, and may be treated by comedone expres-
sion, topical tretinoin, and oral antibiotics.

Infection, pigment alteration, and scarring are the more porten-
tous complications that may be encountered after dermabrasion. 
Vigilance  in  the  immediate  postoperative  period  is  necessary 
to  identify  these  complications  at  an  early  stage  and  institute 
treatment.  Herpes  simplex  infection  may  still  occur  while  the 
patient  is  on  a  prophylactic  antiviral  dose,  and  clinically  mani-
fests as painful (out of proportion to healing phase), erythema-
tous lesions 7–10 days post-procedure. Larger doses of antiviral 
medications are then necessary for treatment (valcyclovir 1 gram, 
three  times  per  day  for  7–10  more  days).  Bacterial  and  fungal 
infections may likewise produce persistently painful, erythema-
tous lesions. Lesions should be cultured and empiric therapy with 
an anti-staphylococcal or anti-candidal agent, or both, should be 
implemented as warranted by clinical suspicion.

Transient, postoperative hyperpigmentation is a common compli-
cation, usually beginning 4–6 weeks after dermabrasion. Hydroqui-
none (4–8%), or formulations containing hydroquinone, tretinoin, 
and a mild steroid, should be implemented at the earliest signs of 
hyperpigmentation and continued for 4–8 weeks. A more difficult 
complication to treat is hypopigmentation. While not quite as com-
mon as with fully ablative CO2 laser resurfacing, nearly one-third 
of patients will develop permanent hypopigmentation after full face 
wire  brush  dermabrasion.  Furthermore,  such  hypopigmentation 
often  does  not  develop  until  several  months  post-procedure. 
Female  patients  may  camouflage  such  hypopigmentation  with 
makeup,  but  male  patients  have  fewer  options  for  improvement. 
The 308-nm excimer laser has been shown to improve hypopig-
mented scars and vitiligo, and may be an option for improvement 
after  dermabrasion  as  well  [23].  True  hypopigmentation  should 
be  differentiated  from  the  pseudo-hypopigmentation  seen  when 
resurfaced skin without actinic damage simply appears lighter than 
the surrounding actinically damaged skin.

Finally, persistent erythema in the absence of infection is the 
harbinger of scar formation. Scars should be treated early and 
proactively  in  order  to  minimize  sequelae.  Flat,  erythematous 
scars  may  be  managed  by  topical  steroids,  or  steroid-impreg-
nated tape worn nightly. However, indurated scars also require 
intralesional  corticosteroid  injections  and/or  pulsed  dye  laser 
treatments on a regular basis. These may be repeated every few 
weeks until stabilization and improvement occur.

Summary

With  the  armamentarium  of  resurfacing  modalities  increasing, 
mechanical  dermabrasion  remains  an  important  dermasurgi-
cal  procedure,  particularly  for  the  improvement  of  cystic  acne, 
post-surgical  scars,  and  partial-thickness  Mohs  defects.  Select-
ing appropriate patients and establishing realistic treatment goals 
are  prerequisites.  Small  areas  may  be  easily  and  safely  treated 
with proper technique, and these demonstrate a rapid recovery. 
Although experience and skill are necessary in order to avoid seri-
ous complications with full face dermabrasion, its efficacy for the 
treatment of acne scarring and deep rhytides currently remains 
unmatched for the patient who is willing to endure the resultant 
recovery period. Close follow-up during the postoperative period 
is  important  in  order  to  recognize  and  treat  the  most  serious 
potential  complications  of  infection  and  scarring  at  the  earliest 
stages. While new technologies continue to emerge, mechanical 
resurfacing will likely remain an essential and unmatched modal-
ity for scar improvement into the foreseeable future.

Table 49.1  Complications	of	dermabrasion	with	suggested	treatment.

Complication

Comment

Treatment

49. Dermabrasion

443

Table 49.2  Pearls	and	pitfalls

Pearls

Pitfalls

•	 Preoperative	application	of	

petroleum	jelly,	aquaphor	or	
K-Y	jelly	along	the	hair	line	
minimizes	entanglement	of	
the	hair	with	the	spinning	tip	
of	the	hand	engine.

•	 Thicker	scars	are	more	

efficiently	treated	with	the	
wire	brush	rotating	in	a	
clockwise	direction	(against	
the	angle	of	the	radiating	
bristles),	and	counter-
clockwise	rotation	(with	the	
angle	of	the	bristles)	offers	a	
less	aggressive	approach.

•	 Avoid	using	gauze	for	blotting	and	
retracting	during	these	procedures	
since	these	can	easily	become	
entangled	in	the	rapidly	rotating	end	
piece.	Cotton	towels	are	preferable.

•	 Dermabrasion	produces	aerosolized	
particles	and	could	potentially	result	
in	exposure	of	the	surgeon	and	staff	
to	pathogens.	Therefore	preoperative	
planning	should	include	evaluation	
for	HIV	and	hepatitis.

•	 In	patients	who	have	

•	 Pseudohypopigmentation	is	seen	

undergone	a	prior	procedure	
involving	the	area	to	be	
dermabraded,	e.g.	surgical	
excision,	grafting	or	other	
procedures	requiring	
extensive	undermining,	at	
least	6–8	weeks	should	
elapse	before	dermabrasion	
is	considered.

when	normally	repigmented	abraded	
skin	has	a	slightly	lighter	tone	and	
appearance	than	adjacent	sun-
damaged,	non-abraded	skin.	This	
condition	responds	to	superficial-	or	
medium-depth	chemical	peels,	
nonablative	lasers	and	intense	
pulsed	light	to	blend	the	treated	and	
untreated	areas.

•	 Noticeable	pigmentary	

•	 Patients	with	unrealistic	expectations	

differences	between	treated	
and	untreated	skin	can	be	
minimized	by	feathering	the	
borders	of	the	treatment	
area.

will	be	disappointed	with	any	
outcome,	regardless	of	the	degree	
of	improvement.	Prior	to	surgery,	
extensive	discussion	with	patients	
should	be	had	regarding	expected	
improvement.

Milia	and	acne	flare

Most	common

Expression,	topical	
retinoids,	oral	
antibiotics

references

HSV	“breakthrough”	
infection

Intensely	painful	
erythematous	lesions	
at	7–10	days

Increase	antiviral	dose	
(valcyclovir	1 g,	3×	day	
for	7–10	more	days)

Bacterial	infection

Persistently	painful	
erythematous	lesions

Fungal	infection

Persistently	painful	
erythematous	lesions

Hyperpigmentation

Usually	transient

Hypopigmentation

Delayed	onset,	usually	
permanent

Scarring

Persistent	erythema	
in	the	absence	of	
infection

Culture	and	begin	
empiric	therapy	with	
anti-staphylococcal	
antibiotic

Culture	and	begin	
empiric	therapy	with	
anti-candidal	agent

4–8%	hydroquinone	for	
4–8	weeks

Camouflaging	makeup,	
possibly	308-nm	
excimer	laser

Treat	early	and	
repeatedly
Topical	steroids
Intralesional	steroids
Pulsed	dye	laser

1  Monheit GD. (2012) Chemical and mechanical skin resurfacing. In: 
BologniaJL, et al., eds. Dermatology, 3rd edn. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 
2493–508.

2  Lawrence N, Mandy S, Yarborough J, et al. (2000) History of derma-

brasion. Dermatol Surg 26, 95–101.

3  Kurtin A. (1953) Corrective surgical planing of skin; new technique 
for treatment of acne scars and other skin defects. AMA Arch Derm 
Syphilol 68, 389–97.

4  Burks JW, Thomas CC. (1956) Wire Brush Surgery. Springfield, IL: 

Charles C. Thomas.

5  Orentreich D, Orentreich N. (1987) Acne scar revision update. Der-

matol Clin 5, 359–68.

6  Alt  TH.  (1987)  Technical  aids  for  dermabrasion.  J  Dermatol  Surg 

Oncol 13, 638–48.

7  Yarborough JM Jr. (1987) Dermabrasion by wire brush. J Dermatol 

Surg Oncol 13, 610–5.

8  Padilla RS, Yarborough JM. (1998) Dermabrasion. In: Dermatologic 
Surgery. Ratz JL, ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, pp. 473–84.
9  Murphy  GF.  (1997)  Histology  of  the  skin.  In:  Elder  D,  et  al.,  eds. 
Lever’s Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 
pp. 42–3.

444

ANTI-AGING  Resurfacing Techniques

10  Kirsner RS. (2012) Wound healing. In: Bolognia JL, et al., eds. Der-

17  Ong  MW,  Bashir  SJ.  (2012)  Fractional  laser  resurfacing  for  acne 

matology, 3rd edn. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 2313–325.

scars: a review. Br J Dermatol 166, 1160–9.

11  Harmon CB, Zelickson BD, Roenigk RK, et al. (1995) Dermabrasive 
scar revision. Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural evaluation. 
Dermatol Surg 21, 503–508.

12  Campbell RM, Harmon CB. (2008) Dermabrasion in our practice. 

J Drugs Dermatol 7, 124–8.

18  Yarborough JM Jr. (1988) Ablation of facial scars by programmed 

dermabrasion. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 14, 292–4.

19  Jared Christophel J, Elm C, Endrizzi BT, et al. (2012) A randomized 
controlled  trial  of  fractional  laser  therapy  and  dermabrasion  for 
scar resurfacing. Dermatol Surg 38, 595–602.

13  Roenigk HH Jr. (1977) Dermabrasion for miscellaneous cutaneous 
lesions (exclusive of scarring from acne). J Dermatol Surg Oncol 3, 
322–8.

20  Coleman WP 3rd, Yarborough JM, Mandy SH. (1996) Dermabrasion 
for prophylaxis and treatment of actinic keratoses. Dermatol Surg 
22, 17–21.

14  Quezada  N,  Machado  Filho  CA,  et  al.  (2011)  Melanocytes  and 
keratinocytes  transfer  using  sandpaper  technique  combined  with 
dermabrasion for stable vitiligo. Dermatol Surg 37, 192–8.

21  Rubenstein  R,  Roenigk  HH  Jr,  Stegman  SJ,  Hanke  CW.  (1986) 
Atypical keloids after dermabrasion of patients taking isotretinoin. 
J Am Acad Dermatol 5(2 Pt 1), 280–85.

15  Awad SS. (2012) Dermabrasion may repigment vitiligo through stim-
ulation of melanocyte precursors and elimination of hyperkeratosis. 
J Cosmet Dermatol 11, 318–22.

16  Manstein D, Herron GS, Sink RK, et al. (2004) Fractional photo-
thermolysis: a new concept for cutaneous remodeling using micro-
scopic patterns of thermal injury. Lasers Surg Med 34, 426–38.

22  Pinski JB. (1987) Dressings for dermabrasion: new aspects. J Der-

matol Surg Oncol 13, 673.

23  Alexiades-Armenakas MR, Bernstein LJ, Friedman PM, Geronemus 
RG. (2004) The safety and efficacy of the 308-nm excimer laser for 
pigment  correction  of  hypopigmented  scars  and  striae  alba.  Arch 
Dermatol 140, 955–60.

Sec tion 4  Skin Modulation techniques

chapter 50
Laser-assisted hair removal

Keyvan nouri,1 Voraphol Vejjabhinanta,2 nidhi Avashia,3 and Jinda Rojanamatin2
1 University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
2 Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand
3 Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Current	options	for	hair	removal	include	shaving,	epilation,	depilatories,	electrolysis,	and,	more	efficiently,	lasers.
•	 Lasers	are	fast,	safe,	and	effective	when	used	appropriately.
•	 Selective	photothermolysis	is	the	key	concept	in	laser	hair	removal.
•	 By	varying	specific	parameters	such	as	wavelength,	pulse	duration,	and	fluence,	certain	specific	chromophores	may	be	targeted	while	

protecting	other	tissues.

•	 Melanin	is	the	main	endogenous	chromophore	in	hair	follicles.
•	 In	permanent	hair	reduction,	heat	from	the	laser	must	spread	from	the	hair	shaft	to	the	bulb	and	the	bulge	of	the	hair.
•	 Adverse	effects	reported	after	laser-assisted	hair	removal	including	erythema,	perifollicular	edema,	crusting,	vesiculation,	

hypopigmentation,	and	hyperpigmentation.

introduction

The use of lasers for hair removal, or photoepilation, is becom-
ing increasingly popular. According to the American Society for 
Aesthetic Plastic Surgery (ASAPS), nearly 11.7 million cosmetic 
surgical  and  non-surgical  procedures  were  performed  in  the 
USA in 2007. ASAPS, which has been collecting multispecialty 
procedural statistics since 1997, notes the number of cosmetic 
procedures has increased 457% [1]. Laser hair removal is one of 
the top, non-surgical, cosmetic procedures with 1 412 657 per-
formed in 2007.

Hair removal is of great interest because excess hair, especially 
in  those  with  hypertrichosis  or  hirsutism,  can  be  socially  and 
psychologically  troubling  [2].  The  psychosocial  importance  of 
hair is great, as noted by patient distress over both hair loss and 
excess hair [3]. Current options for hair removal include shav-
ing,  epilation,  depilatories,  electrolysis,  and,  more  efficiently, 
lasers [4]. All of these hair removal methods possess side effects, 
yet  lasers  are  fast,  safe,  and  effective  when  used  appropriately. 
The concept of laser hair removal was defined in 1998 by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Following this, manu-
facturers  were  given  permission  to  use  the  term  “permanent 
hair  reduction”  in  their  materials.  The  FDA  definition  of  per-
manent hair reduction included “long-term, stable reduction in 

the number of hairs regrowing after a treatment regimen.” Thus, 
permanent  hair  removal  does  not  imply  the  total  elimination 
of  hairs  [5],  but  rather  a  significant  reduction  in  growth  rate. 
Complete hair loss is defined as a lack of regrowing hairs, which 
can be temporary or permanent. However, permanent hair loss 
is  defined  as  lack  of  regrowing  hair  indefinitely.  Hair  removal 
with lasers produces complete but temporary hair loss for 1–3 
months [6].

Biology of hair follicles

Hair is a skin appendage, present on the entire body except for 
the  palms  and  soles.  There  are  approximately  5  million  hair 
follicles on the adult body with a density of 40–800/cm2. They 
are  made  of  keratin  fibers  supported  by  specialized  dermal 
structures.  Hair  is  formed  from  the  matrix  epithelial  cells  at 
the base of the hair follicle. The hair matrix is contained in the 
hair bulb, which is the deep bulbous portion of the hair follicle 
that surrounds the dermal papilla. The bulge of the hair is the 
reservoir for hair stem cells. In permanent hair reduction, heat 
from the laser must spread from the hair shaft to the bulb and 
the bulge of the hair. Heating only the hair matrix is not suffi-
cient for permanent hair reduction.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

445

446

anti-aGinG  Skin Modulation Techniques

table 50.1  Hair	cycles	for	various	body	sites.

Body site

Scalp

Upper	lip

Axillae

Arms

Legs

Bikini	area

Anagen 
(%)

telogen 
(%)

Anagen duration 
(months)

telogen duration 
(months)

Follicular depth 
(mm)

85

65

30

20

20

30

15

35

70

80

80

70

24–72

		3–4

		3–4

		2–4

		5–7

		1–3

3–4

1–2

2–3

2–4

3–6

2–3

3–5

1–2

3–4

2–3

3–4

3–4

There is no formation of new hair follicles throughout life, so, 
as the body expands, the density decreases. Hair changes through-
out our lifetime. A single follicle can form several different types of 
hairs ranging from lanugo in preterm newborns to vellus hairs in 
children to terminal hairs in adults. Lanugo is fine, non-pigmented 
hairs present at birth. Vellus hairs are fine, short, non-pigmented 
hairs known as “peach fuzz.” Terminal hairs are the thick, usually 
pigmented, hairs of the scalp and secondary sexual areas. Terminal 
hairs are the targets of photoepilation.

Hair does not grow continuously, but instead grows in three 
phases:  anagen,  catagen,  and  telogen.  The  anagen  phase  is 
known  as  the  growth  phase.  Catagen  is  the  transition  phase. 
Telogen is the resting phase. The cycle for scalp hairs is not only 
asynchronous but lasts 3–5 years. The duration of the hair cycle 
varies depending on body location (Table 50.1). Photoepilation 
is most effective during certain phases of the hair growth cycle.
The regulation of hair growth is influenced by genetic factors 
and  hormones,  particularly  androgens.  The  function  of  hair, 
while primarily psychosocial, serves to protect from mechani-
cal, thermal, and UV damage [3]. Thus, hair removal is impor-
tant for appearance and not functional reasons. The basic con-
cepts of laser-assisted hair removal are discussed next.

Basic concepts of laser-assisted hair removal

Selective  photothermolysis  is  the  key  concept  in  laser  hair 
removal, known as photoepilation. Photoepilation causes ther-
mal destruction of the hair follicle and its associated stem cells 
at the hair bulge. By varying specific parameters such as wave-
length,  pulse  duration,  and  fluence,  certain  specific  cutaneous 
chromophores  may  be  targeted  while  protecting  other  tissues 
[7].  Whether  the  hair  is  in  telogen  at  the  time  of  removal  is 
important,  because  only  anagen  hairs  are  sensitive  to  photo-
thermolysis. Because melanin is the main chromophore in hair 
follicles, the corresponding wavelength spectrum would range 
from  UV  to  near-infrared  light.  Longer  wavelengths  are  pre-
ferred, because the chromophore lies deep in the skin and the 
penetration of light increases with wavelength.

The  specific  target  in  laser  hair  removal  is  melanin  and 
the light emitted must be within the absorption spectrum of 

melanin,  which  is  250–1200 nm  [8].  Melanin  is  an  endog-
enous chromophore found in the hair bulb, bulge, and shaft. 
Thus,  in  the  range  of  600–1100 nm,  deep  dermal  melanin 
absorption  may  be  used  for  selective  photothermolysis  of 
hair follicles [9].

A drawback to the use of lasers for hair removal, especially in 
those with darker skin, is that melanin resides in the epidermis. 
This  is  problematic  because  epidermal  melanin  can  interfere 
with photoepilation by distracting the laser energy, but can also 
lead to certain side effects, such as epidermal damage and pig-
mentation. Thus, proper preoperative management is essential 
to achieving superior results.

preoperative management

Discrepancy  can  exist  between  patient  expectations  for  laser-
assisted hair removal and the actual effects of such a treatment. 
Open communication must exist between the care provider and 
the  patient.  Preoperative  management  for  laser  hair  removal 
consists of three main steps: history and physical examination, 
counseling, and preparatory instructions (Table 50.2). First, an 
accurate  patient  history  must  be  taken  focusing  on  patient’s 
expectations, current medications, scarring risk, and local infec-
tion  including  history  of  herpes  virus  infection  in  the  area  of 
treatment. Along with a complete history, a thorough physical 
examination is vital. The physical examination should assess the 
aspects of the patient’s skin color, health condition, hair color, 
hair diameter, and hair density.

Following the workup of the patient, a counseling session is 
necessary. The patient must be advised that 4–6 weeks prior to 
laser treatment no plucking or other hair removal methods can 
be used in the treatment areas. Shaving and depilatory creams 
may  be  used  as  these  methods  do  not  remove  the  hair  root, 
which is targeted by the laser. In addition, sun exposure and tan-
ning should be limited. Bleaching of the skin with retinoic acid 
or hydroquinone can lighten the skin prior to laser treatment. 
Topical anesthetic creams or cryogenic sprays may be applied to 
the treatment area to reduce discomfort during the procedure. 
Cold compresses are also effective in reducing discomfort, ery-
thema, and edema at the treatment area.

table 50.2  Preoperative	and	postoperative	procedures	for	hair	removal.

50. Laser-assisted Hair Removal

447

Preoperative care  
(4 weeks prior to 
treatment)

Preoperative care  
(day before treatment)

Sunscreen	application

Shave	area	to	be	treated

Day of treatment

Postoperative care

Clean	and	remove	make-up	
from	area	to	be	treated

Ice	packs

Bleaching	cream	
(hydroquinone)	to	those	
with	darker	skin

No	plucking,	waxing,	or	
electrolysis

When	indicated,	start	
prophylactic	antiviral

When	indicated,	start	
prophylactic	oral	
antibiotic

Apply	topical	anesthetic	
cream	to	treatment	area	
1–2	h	prior	to	treatment

Avoid	sun	exposure	
and	trauma

Mild	topical	steroid	
creams	(if	necessary)

Prophylactic	
antiobiotics/
antivirals	completed

History

Conditions	that	may	cause	
hypertrichosis:	hormonal,	
familial,	drug,	tumor

History	of	HSV	perioral		
and	genitalis

History	of	keloids/
hypertrophic	scarring

Previous	treatment	
modalities

Shaving	or	depilatory	
creams	may	be	used

Current	medications

HSV,	herpes	simplex	virus	infection.

The skin surface must be thoroughly cleansed of all makeup, 
anesthetic  creams,  and  other  applicants  immediately  prior  to 
laser  treatment.  This  may  be  done  with  a  gentle  cleanser,  fol-
lowed by a cloth, and should be allowed to dry completely.

Laser systems are dangerous hazards to the eye. Because there 
are high concentrations of melanin in the iris and in the retina, 
these areas are highly susceptible to damage by laser light. Every 
person  in  the  room  during  laser  treatment  should  wear  pro-
tective eyewear that is certified for the wavelength of the laser 
in  use.  Because  the  patient  usually  lies  supine,  he  or  she  may 
require full occlusive eye protection to prevent laser light from 
entering  underneath  a  sunglasses  or  goggle  type  of  protective 
eyewear [6].

Description of techniques

temperature. This laser is ideal for those with light skin and dark 
hair, and penetrates the skin by only 1–2 mm. This laser is not 
recommended in darker skin types.

In a study demonstrating the efficacy of the ruby laser, 48 areas 
of unwanted facial and body hair from 25 patients with blonde, 
brown,  or  black  hair  were  treated  with  the  long  pulsed  ruby 
laser  at  fluences  of  10–40 J/cm2.  Hair  regrowth  was  measured 
at  4  weeks  after  the  first  treatment,  4  weeks  after  the  second 
treatment, 4 weeks after the third treatment, and 16 weeks after 
the  third  treatment  by  counting  the  number  of  terminal  hairs 
compared with baseline pretreatment values. The mean percent 
of  regrowth  after  the  first  treatment  was  65.5%,  41%  after  the 
second  treatment,  and  34%  after  the  third  treatment.  Overall, 
regardless  of  skin  type  or  targeted  body  region,  patients  who 
underwent  three  treatment  sessions  demonstrated  an  average 
35% regrowth in terminal hair count [10].

Long pulsed 694 nm ruby laser
The  long  pulsed  ruby  laser  was  the  first  widely  used  laser  for 
hair removal (Table 50.3). This laser has the shortest wavelength 
at  694 nm  of  all  the  available  lasers  for  hair  reduction.  It  is 
absorbed the best by melanin but has the shortest penetration 
depth.  Thus,  this  would  mean  that  the  ruby  laser  is  the  most 
effective at hair removal, but has the greatest potential for epi-
dermal injury. A cooling hand-piece is used concomitantly dur-
ing treatment to reduce the risk of injury by lowering the skin’s 

Long pulsed 755 nm alexandrite laser
The long pulsed alexandrite laser has a wavelength of 755 nm. 
This  longer  wavelength  allows  deeper  penetration  into  the 
dermis with less absorption by epidermal melanin. This causes 
less  adverse  side  effects  such  as  pigmentation  in  darker  skin 
patients. This laser is still typically used for patients with lighter 
skin types, but can also be used in those with darker skin. The 
adverse effects of this laser, when used on patients with darker 
skin  types,  can  include  blistering,  crusting,  and  alterations  of 

table 50.3  Step-by-step	technique	for	hair	removal.

Skin preparation

Visibility

treatment fluence

technique

cooling

Remove	anesthetic	
cream,	makeup

Treatment	grid	or	Seymour	
light	in	order	to	prevent	
skipped	areas	and	double	
treatment

Ideal	treatment	parameters	
individualized	for	each	
patient,	increase	fluence	
carefully	while	monitoring	for	
adverse	effects

Slightly	overlapping	laser	
pulses	are	delivered	with	a	
predetermined	spot	size	and	
highest	tolerable	fluence	to	
obtain	best	results

Cooling	gel	applied	
prior	to	pulses	if	
device	is	not	equipped	
with	cooling	feature

448

anti-aGinG  Skin Modulation Techniques

pigment, even when skin cooling devices are used. In patients 
classified as having the darkest skin, residual hypopigmentation 
or hyperpigmentation is the rule with the alexandrite laser.

Long pulsed 800 nm diode laser
The  800 nm  diode  laser  is  comparable  to  the  755 nm  alex-
andrite  laser,  and  has  become  more  popular  along  with  the 
neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser for treating 
patients with darker skin types. The diode laser is more effective for 
laser-assisted hair removal in patients with dark skin because of the 
higher absorption by melanin than is seen with the Nd:YAG laser. 
Still, temporary adverse effects have been reported with the use of 
the diode laser in the form of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation 
when used on individuals with dark skin.

A  retrospective  study  of  313  consecutive  laser-assisted  hair 
removal  treatments  was  conducted  on  a  total  of  23  patients 
(22 women, 1 man) with 58 anatomic areas by means of an alex-
andrite  laser.  The  long  pulsed  alexandrite  system  was  used  at 
a  755 nm  wavelength  to  deliver  fluences  ranging  17–25 J/cm2 
through  a  10 mm  spot  size.  The  results  showed  that  patients 
who  undergo  more  treatment  sessions  achieve  a  higher  rate 
of  hair  reduction;  although  this  may  be  concomitant  with  an 
increase in the incidence of adverse effects. The benefit of more 
laser treatments should be balanced with the risk of occurrence 
of side effects in each patient [11].

1064 nm nd:YaG laser
The 1064 nm Nd:YAG has the longest wavelength and deepest 
penetration amongst the aforementioned laser systems available. 
It  is  not  very  well  absorbed  by  melanin,  but  is  sufficient  in 
achieving selective photothermolysis and has superior penetra-
tion. This laser is able to penetrate the skin to 5–7 mm, a depth 
at  which  most  of  the  target  structures  lay.  Furthermore,  the 
combination of a low melanin absorption and deep penetration 
leads  to  less  collateral  damage  to  the  melanin-containing 

epidermis.  These  features  make  this  particular  laser  the  safest 
method to treat all skin types, especially darker skinned patients 
(Figure 50.1). Unfortunately, while this laser may be the safest, 
it is not the most effective. In a study by Bouzari et al. [12], hair 
reduction by the long pulsed Nd: YAG, alexandrite, and diode 
lasers were compared. They found that after 3 months, the Nd: 
YAG was the least effective of the three.

intense pulsed light
The intense pulsed light (IPL) system is not a laser, but has recently 
entered the hair removal realm as a competent contender. It has 
been  used  for  virtually  all  of  the  same  indications  as  laser  sys-
tems.  IPL  systems  utilize  a  xenon  bulb  as  a  light  source,  which 
produces polychromatic light with wavelengths of 515–1200 nm. 
This is in contrast to laser light sources, which produce mono-
chromatic light of a specific wavelength. Light emitted by the bulb 
passes through a filter that excludes shorter wavelengths which 
may severely damage skin. The ability to “tune” the wavelength 
of light emitted by these systems gives IPL systems the advantage 
of versatility. Using different filters, a pulsed  light system could 
mimic any number of laser systems, allowing the operator to treat 
many different conditions amenable to light therapy, including, of 
course, the removal of unwanted hair (Figure 50.2).

radiofrequency combinations

Radiofrequency  devices  have  been  combined  with  both  IPL  and 
diode lasers to provide optimal hair removal treatments to a wider 
range  of  skin  types.  The  combinations  are  considered  safe  for 
patients with darker skin types because the radiofrequency energy 
is  not  absorbed  by  melanin  in  the  epidermis.  This  technology, 
termed electro-optical synergy (ELOS) has a dual mechanism of 
heating the hair follicle with electrical energy (radiofrequency) and 
heating the hair shaft with optical energy.

(a)

(b)

Figure 50.1  (a) Pretreatment of the right axillary area with coarse hair. (b) Only fine hair exists after 3 months after five treatments with a 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser.

50. Laser-assisted Hair Removal

449

(a)

(b)

Figure 50.2  (a) Pretreatment of the upper lip area. (b) Seven weeks after two treatments with intense pulsed light (IPL) system.

other removal methods for  
non-pigmented hair

Meladine, a topical melanin pigment, has been studied in Europe 
with  interesting  results.  The  liposome  solution  dye,  which  is 
sprayed on, is selectively absorbed by the hair follicle and not 
the  skin.  This  in  turn  gives  the  follicles  a  temporary  boost  of 
melanin  to  optimize  laser  hair  removal  treatments.  Clinical 
studies in Europe have shown vast permanent hair reduction in 
patients who used meladine prior to treatment. However, other 
studies have found meladine to only offer a delay of hair growth 
as opposed to permanent hair reduction [6].

Another option for non-pigmented hair removal is photody-
namic therapy. A photosensitizer such as 5-aminolevulinic acid 
(5-ALA)  is  used  because  non-pigmented  hair  lacks  a  natural 
chromophore.  In  a  study  conducted  to  compare  the  6-month 
hair removal efficacy of a combined pulsed light bipolar radio-
frequency device with and without pretreatment using topical 
5-ALA,  researchers  found  that  an  average  terminal  white  hair 
removal of 35% was observed at 6 months after treatment with 
the combined pulsed light bipolar radiofrequency device. When 
pretreatment with topical 5-ALA was provided the average hair 
removal of terminal white hairs was found to be 48%. This find-
ing can be explained by the fact that light exposure activates the 
5-ALA,  which  leads  to  the  formation  of  reactive  oxygen  ele-
ments and slows for hair follicle destruction [13].

postoperative management

Postoperative management consists of reducing pain and mini-
mizing  edema.  This  can  be  done  using  ice  packs.  Mild  topical 
steroid creams can also be used to decrease redness. Antibiotics 
should be given if epidermal injuries occur during the procedure.

complications

Although  there  is  no  obvious  advantage  of  one  laser  system 
over  another  in  terms  of  treatment  outcome  (except  the  Nd: 
YAG laser, which is found to be less efficacious, but more suited 

to patients with darker colored skin), laser parameters may be 
important when choosing the ideal laser for a patient. Adverse 
effects  reported  after  laser-assisted  hair  removal  including 
erythema  and  perifollicular  edema,  which  are  common,  and 
crusting and vesiculation of treatment site, hypopigmentation, 
and  hyperpigmentation  (depending  on  skin  color  and  other 
factors) (Figure 50.3).

Most  complications  are  generally  temporary.  The  occur-
rence  of  hypopigmentation  after  laser  irradiation  is  thought 
to  be  related  to  the  suppression  of  melanogenesis  in  the  epi-
dermis  (which  is  reversible),  rather  than  the  destruction  of 
melanocytes.  Methods  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  adverse 
effects  include  lightening  of  the  skin  and  sun  avoidance  prior 
to  laser  treatment,  cooling  of  the  skin  during  treatment,  and 
sun  avoidance  and  protection  after  treatment.  Proper  patient 
selection and tailoring of the fluence used to the patient’s skin 
type  remain  the  most  important  factors  in  efficacious  and 
well-tolerated laser treatment. While it is generally believed that 

Figure 50.3  Blister formation 3 days after treatment with IPL system.

450

anti-aGinG  Skin Modulation Techniques

hair follicles are more responsive to treatment while they are in 
the growing (anagen) phase, conflicting results have also been 
reported. There is also no consensus on the most favorable treat-
ment sites [14]. In addition, patients should be cautious and not 
use numbing agents on large areas of their body for prolonged 
periods of time as this can lead to methemoglobinemia.

Future directions

Laser  hair  removal  is  not  FDA  approved  to  be  marketed  as  a 
permanent  hair  removal  treatment.  Further,  manufacturers 
may  not  claim  that  laser  hair  removal  is  either  painless  or 
permanent  unless  the  FDA  determines  that  there  are  suffi-
cient  data  to  demonstrate  such  results.  Several  manufacturers 
received FDA permission to claim, “permanent reduction,” not 
“permanent removal” for their lasers. This means that although 
laser treatments with these devices will permanently reduce the 
total number of body hairs, they will not result in a permanent 
removal of all hair.

There  are  many  new  laser  hair  removal  systems  that  the 
FDA has approved for at home use and over-the-counter sales. 
These devices are diode laser, IPL, IPL+RF based technologies. 
Available data from uncontrolled clinical trials indicates short-
term hair removal efficacy [15,16].

conclusions

Up  to  22%  of  women  in  North  America  have  excessive  or 
unwanted  facial  hair.  Men  also  feel  compelled  to  rid  them-
selves of unwanted body hair, as dictated by popular culture 
and appearance anxieties. Excessive facial hair can negatively 
impact on one’s quality of life. Prior options to hair removal 
have been painful, tedious, resulted in frustrated clients, and 
caused short-term effects. With the advent of laser technol-
ogy, laser and light systems have becomes some of the most 
popular procedures. While this is still not a permanent solu-
tion to hair removal, is a safe, fast, and effective method for 
hair reduction.

references

1  American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery (ASAPS). (2007) 
ASAPS  2007  Cosmetic  Surgery  National  Data  Bank  Statistics. 
www.surgery.org/download/2007stats.prf Accessed 2008 Aug 20.
2  Nouri  K,  Trent  JT.  (2003)  Lasers.  In:  NouriK,  Leal-KhouriS,  eds. 
Techniques in Dermatologic Surgery. St. Louis: Mosby, pp. 245–58.
3  Rassner  G.  (2004)  Atlas  of  Dermatology.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Lea  & 

Febiger, pp. 224–6.

4  Olsen EA. (1999) Methods of hair removal. J Am Acad Dermatol 

40, 143–55.

5  Food and Drug Administration. (1998) FDA docket K980517. July 21.
6  Dierickx C, Crossman M. (2005) Laser hair removal. In: Golderg DJ, 
ed. Lasers and Lights, Vol.  2. China: Elsevier-Saunders, pp. 61–76.
7  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. (1983) Selective photothermolysis: precise 
microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of  pulsed  radiation.  Science 
220, 524–7.

8  Battle EF, Hobbs LM. (2003) Lasers in dermatology: four decades of 

progress. J Am Acad Dermatol 49, 1–31.

9  Mandt N, Troilius A, Drosner M. (2005) Epilation today: physiology 
of the hair follicle and clinical photoepilation. J Investig Dermatol 
Symp Proc 10, 271–4.

10  Williams R, Havoonjian H, Isagholian K, et al. (1998) Clinical study 
of hair removal using the long-pulsed ruby laser. Dermatol Surg 24, 
837–42.

11  Bouzari N, Nouri K, Tabatabai H, Abbasi Z, Firooz A, Dowlati I. (2005) 
The role of number of treatments in laser-assisted hair removal using a 
755-nm alexandrite laser. J Drugs Dermatol 4, 573–8.

12  Bouzari N, Tabatabai H, Abbasi Z, et al. (2004) Laser hair-removal: 
comparison  of  long-pulsed  Nd:YAG,  long-pulsed  aleandrite,  and 
long-pulsed diode lasers. Dermatol Surg 30, 498–502.

13  Goldberg DJ, Marmur ES, Hussain M. (2005) Treatment of terminal 
and  vellus  non-pigmented  hairs  with  an  optical/bipolar  radiofre-
quency energy source: with and without pretreatment using topical 
aminolevulinic acid. J Cosmet Laser Ther 7, 25–8.

14  Liew  SH.  (2002)  Laser  hair  removal:  guidelines  for  management. 

Am J Clin Dermatol 3, 107–15.

15  Wheeland RG. (2012) Permanent hair reduction with a home-use 
diode laser: Safety and effectiveness 1 year after eight treatments. 
Lasers Surg Med 44, 550–7.

16  Thaysen-Petersen D, Bjerring P, Dierickx C, et al. (2012) A systematic 
review of light-based home-use devices for hair removal and consid-
erations on human safety. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 26, 545–53.

chapteR 51
Radiofrequency Devices

Vic Narurkar
Bay Area Laser Institute, San Francisco, CA, and University of California Davis Medical School, Sacramento, CA, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Radiofrequency	devices	have	been	introduced	for	non-surgical	skin	tightening	of	facial	and	non-facial	skin.
•	 The	mechanism	of	action	of	these	devices	involves	an	initial	immediate	collagen	contraction	and	a	secondary	wound	healing	response	

producing	collagen	deposition	and	remodeling	with	skin	tightening	over	time.
•	 Radiofrequency	devices	can	be	divided	into	monopolar	and	bipolar	categories.
•	 Monopolar	radiofrequency	utilizes	an	electrical	current	passed	from	the	radiofrequency	energy	source	through	a	monopolar	electrode	in	

the	hand-piece	and	the	current	continues	through	the	patient	to	the	grounding	pad,	which	completes	the	circuit.

•	 Bipolar	radiofrequency	in	conjunction	with	light	and	vacuum	offer	more	superficial	treatments,	and,	most	recently,	a	combined	unipolar	

and	bipolar	radiofrequency	device	has	been	introduced	with	control	of	depths	of	radiofrequency	energies.

introduction

Table 51.1  Examples	of	radiofrequency	devices.

Radiofrequency devices have been introduced for non-surgical 
skin tightening of facial and non-facial skin. The mechanism of 
action  of  these  devices  involves  an  initial  immediate  collagen 
contraction and a secondary wound healing response produc-
ing  collagen  deposition  and  remodeling  with  skin  tightening 
over time. There has been a great deal of controversy surround-
ing the use of these devices when they were first introduced for 
non-surgical skin tightening. With the advent of newer  proto-
cols utilizing lower energies and multiple passes, the safety and 
efficacy of radiofrequency devices is increasing. New directions 
include introduction of radiofrequency energy through cannu-
las and the expanded use of these technologies in combination 
with injectables.

Radiofrequency devices

Mechanism

Examples of commercial devices

Monopolar	RF

Thermage	CPT(Solta),	Exilis	(BTL),	Vanquish	
(BTL),	Pellefirm	(Ellman),	TruSculpt	(Cutera)

Mono/bipolar	RF

Accent	(Alma)

Bipolar	RF

Tripollar	RF

E-prime	(Syneron),	E-matrix	(Syneron)

Apollo	(Pollogen)

Multipolar	RF

Venus	Freeze,	Swan	and	Legacy	(Venus)

Bipolar	RF/vacuum

Velashape	(Syneron),	Reaction	(Viora)

Temperature	control	RF

ThermiRF	(Thermiaesthetics)

requency  and  light  (electro-optical  synergy  systems),  bipolar 
radiofrequency and vacuum, and a combination of unipolar and 
bipolar  radiofrequency  to  deliver  different  depths  of  radiofre-
quency current to the skin.

Radiofrequency  devices  can  be  divided  into  monopolar  and 
bipolar  categories  (Table  51.1).  Monopolar  radiofrequency 
utilizes  an  electrical  current  passed  from  the  radiofrequency 
energy source through a monopolar electrode in the hand-piece 
and  the  current  continues  through  the  patient  to  the  ground-
ing pad, which completes the circuit. The Thermage device is an 
example of monopolar radiofrequency. Bipolar radiofrequency 
devices employ a closed system and are usually combined with 
other sources. Examples include systems using bipolar radiof-

Monopolar radiofrequency

Monopolar  capacitive  radiofrequency  was  the  first  commer-
cially  available  device  to  be  introduced  for  non-surgical  skin 
tightening  and  is  the  most  widely  studied.  The  generation  of 
heat  occurs  because  of  natural  tissue  resistance  to  the  move-
ment  of  electrons  within  a  radiofrequency  field  which  creates 
heat  relative  to  the  amount  of  current  and  time. The  different 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

451

452

anti-aGinG  Skin Modulation Techniques

components  of  skin  (dermis,  fat,  subcutaneous  tissue,  muscle, 
and fibrous tissue) have varying resistance to the movement of 
radiofrequency energy. For example, the fibrous septa are heated 
more than the surrounding subcutaneous tissue.

 1.  Use  of  patient  feedback  about  heat  sensation  as  a  valid 
and preferred method for selecting the optimal amount of 
energy;

 2.  Use of multiple passes at moderate energy settings to yield 

Controlled  radiofrequency  pulses  selectively  heat  zones  of 
the dermis and deeper tissue with the use of cryogen delivery 
to protect and cool the epidermis. A pressure-sensitive tip pre-
vents the non-uniform application of energy to the skin and the 
cryogen delivery minimizes epidermal compromise and assists 
in comfort of the procedure.

The  initial  approach  to  utilize  monopolar  radiofrequency 
for skin tightening employed very high fluencies with one to 
two treatments. The discharge time was slow and the protocol 
was to utilize the highest tolerable fluence with a single pass 
over the entire treated area. With this protocol, the results were 
modest at best with significant pain. Moreover, the discharge 
time  of  the  tip  was  slow  at  5–6 seconds.  In  addition  to  sig-
nificant discomfort and high variability in efficacy, infrequent 
reports of subcutaneous tissue depressions were reported (Fig-
ure 51.1). As a result, the treatment received much skepticism 
and criticism.

The  Thermacool  device  utilizes  monopolar  radiofrequency 
energy  with  a  maximal  output  of  225  J/cm2 with  a  peak  tem-
perature  2–3  mm  beneath  the  surface.  Upon  activation  of  the 
device, a cooling system which uses a cryogen spray is activated 
and internally precools the electrode. The cryogen continues to 
be  delivered  during  (parallel  cooling)  and  after  (post-cooling) 
the  energy  delivery.  The  initial  treatment  cycle  consisted  of 
6 seconds but the newer protocol is about 2 seconds.

A  new  protocol  was  developed  to  overcome  these  limita-
tions  based  on  observations  and  studies  demonstrating  that 
low fluence delivery with multiple passes of monopolar radio-
frequency can produce a more reproducible clinical endpoint. 
Histologic  correlations  to  these  findings  demonstrated  greater 
collagen denaturation at multiple passes using lower energies. In 
addition, lower energies produced less discomfort and greater 
patient satisfaction. A consensus panel published these findings 
with the following criteria:

Figure 51.1   Subcutaneous atrophy from unipolar radiofrequency using old 
protocol with high fluencies.

consistent efficacy; and

 3.  Treatment  to  a  clinical  endpoint  of  visible  tightening  and 
contouring  for  maximizing  predictability  and  long-term 
results.
With  the  original  treatment  protocol  (single  pass  and  high 
fluence) 26% of patients showed immediate tightening and 54% 
showed delayed tightening. With the new protocol, 87% showed 
immediate tightening and 92% noted tightening after 6 months, 
with 94% of patients of the patients showing satisfaction.

The  largest  studied  areas  for  monopolar  radiofrequency  are 
the midface, lower face, and neck. The technique with the new 
protocol  utilizes  a  tip  that  can  deliver  up  to  900  pulses  using 
multiple low fluence passes (typically 450 per each side of the 
face and neck). Treatments are administered without any topi-
cal  anesthesia  or  intravenous  sedation,  as  patient  feedback  is 
critical for outcomes. Up to 10 passes are performed using this 
algorithm.

The  greatest  challenge  in  all  skin  tightening  modalities  is 
patient  selection  and  setting  expectations.  Because  three-
dimensional  changes  are  often  difficult  to  capture  in  two-
dimensional  photography,  it  is  imperative  to  have  a  detailed 
and thorough consultation to set realistic expectations. In our 
practice,  we  perform  a  detailed  consultation  to  discuss  the 
realistic  goals  of  monopolar  radiofrequency  and  emphasize 
the  variability  in  results.  Standardized  photography  is  abso-
lutely critical with standardized lighting and angles to capture 
subtle  changes.  Our  criteria  for  patient  selection  include  the 
following:
 1.  Patients who are absolutely averse to any surgical procedures 

for laxity such as rhytidectomy.

 2.  Patients who have had rhytidectomy and are showing signs 

of laxity.

 3.  Patients  who  are  not  surgical  candidates  because  of  risks 

associated with surgery.

 4.  Post-surgical patients who still show some laxity.
 5.  Off face loose skin, for which there are no other options.

We  also  offer  this  procedure  to  candidates  who  seek  subtle 

body contouring, with emphasis on the word subtle.

complications
Complications  with  monopolar  radiofrequency  are  rare.  With 
the old protocol, subcutaneous depressions were seen. Common 
transient side effects include mild erythema and edema. Slight 
tenderness post-treatments have been reported. Lack of proper 
contact with the skin can produce burns. With the new protocol, 
there have been no reports of permanent complications. All skin 
types can be treated, as radiofrequency is truly color blind and 
does not compete with melanin chromophores. There have been 
no reports of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

51. Radiofrequency Devices

453

Future directions
New directions for monopolar radiofrequency are the introduc-
tion of several new tips to address specific areas. These include 
tips for eyelid rejuvenation and large area body contouring. Eye-
lid rejuvenation has been one of the most exciting and innova-
tive developments in monopolar radiofrequency tips. A shallow 
0.25  cm2 tip  is  utilized  which  delivers  heat  more  superficially 
than the medium depth tips utilized for facial and body areas. 
Plastic corneoscleral shields are placed prior to treatment. Ideal 
candidates  for  eyelid  treatment  include  patients  with  mild  to 
moderate dermatochalasis and good skin tone and patients who 
have previously had blepharoplasty and show signs of skin lax-
ity. With low fluence and multiple pass protocol, upper eyelid 
tightening and reduction of hooding has been seen in over 80% 
of patients. The newest addition to the tip armamentarium is the 
large diameter deep tip for large body areas. One of the limita-
tions of treating large body areas has been the amount of time 
required for treatments. Recently, a 16 cm2 deep tip was intro-
duced  which  has  shortened  the  treatment  time  by  50%.  This 
allows for more efficient treatments of large body areas such as 
abdomen, buttocks, and flanks.

summary
Monopolar  radiofrequency,  in  summary,  is  the  most  widely 
studied  modality  for  non-surgical  skin  tightening.  The  initial 
protocol  has  been  modified  with  a  low  energy  multiple  pass 
algorithm  to  reduce  discomfort  and  achieve  more  predictable 
outcomes. While midface and lower neck were the initial areas 
for treatments, the advent of varying depth tips has expanded 
the  use  for  the  treatment  of  eyelids  and  off  face  areas  such  as 
the  abdomen,  buttocks,  and  flanks.  The  biggest  challenge  in 
treatment outcomes is predictability of results, which are vari-
able. Therefore, a thorough consultation setting realistic patient 
expectations and “underpromising” results are key for optimal 
outcomes. It  is  imperative  to emphasize  that  these  procedures 
are not a substitute for surgery and will not address severe laxity.

To further enhance outcomes of monopolar radiofrequency 
treatments, combination therapy approaches are being investi-
gated. Most recently, we have initiated combining non-ablative 
fractional  resurfacing,  monopolar  radiofrequency,  and  dermal 
fillers. Combination therapy is becoming the mainstay of treat-
ments for a variety of non-surgical procedures. The combined 
non-ablative  fractional  resurfacing  and  monopolar  radiofre-
quency procedure has been coined “Thermafrax,” with the frac-
tional  resurfacing  addressing  dyschromia,  superficial  rhytids, 
and the monopolar radiofrequency addressing laxity. The treat-
ments  can  be  performed  on  the  same  day  or  as  staged  proce-
dures.  The  radiofrequency  treatments  are  performed  first,  as 
patient  feedback  is  necessary  and  anesthesia  cannot  be  used. 
This is followed by non-ablative fractional resurfacing. Dermal 
fillers are performed last for any volume depletion. Facial and 
non-facial  skin  can  be  effectively  treated  with  this  approach. 
Hand  rejuvenation  with  combination  of  monopolar  radiofre-
quency,  non-ablative  fractional  resurfacing,  and  dermal  fillers 
is becoming increasingly popular, with each modality comple-
menting the other – radiofrequency addressing laxity, fractional 
resurfacing addressing dyschromia and photodamage, and fill-
ers addressing volume loss (Figure 51.2).

Bipolar radiofrequency and light

The second commercially introduced modality for non-invasive 
skin tightening employed the combination of bipolar radiofre-
quency and light energy devices (900 nm diode laser in a single 
pulse or broadband light in the 700–2000 nm wavelength in a 
single  pulse).  The  theory  behind  the  use  of  two  technologies 
is  the  safer  delivery  of  radiofrequency  energy,  with  the  opti-
cal  component  enabling  the  bipolar  radiofrequency  energy  to 
concentrate where the optical energy has selectively heated the 
target. Optical energy levels of 30–50 J/cm2 with radiofrequency 
levels of 80–100 J/cm2 are utilized in this mode. Three to four 

(a)

(b)

Figure 51.2  (a) Pre-Thermage and Fraxel laser. (b) Post-Thermage and Fraxel laser.

454

anti-aGinG  Skin Modulation Techniques

passes are usually performed and, unlike monopolar radiofre-
quency,  3–5 treatment  sessions  are  necessary,  as  opposed  to  a 
single treatment.

The  main  indication  for  bipolar  radiofrequency  and  light 
combination devices is diminution of superficial rhytids. There 
may be some subtle tissue tightening. There is much controversy 
regarding  the  synergistic  effects  of  light  and  radiofrequency 
energies.  The  use  of  lower  optical  energies  makes  this  a  safe 
device  in  all  skin  types.  However,  because  the  radiofrequency 
energy does not penetrate very deep into the skin, tissue arcing 
can occur with improper technique, resulting in scar formation.
The majority of published clinical studies using these devices 
have focused on the treatment of mild to moderate rhytids with 
modest  improvement.  The  amount  of  energy  penetration  with 
these devices does not produce deep volumetric heating and sub-
sequent tightening compared with monopolar radiofrequency.

Bipolar radiofrequency and vacuum

Bipolar radiofrequency with vacuum was introduced to reduce 
discomfort associated with radiofrequency devices. The bipolar 
radiofrequency energy with an accompanying vacuum appara-
tus allows the tissue into the vacuum and targets the radiofre-
quency energy to the deep dermis. Less energy is necessary for 
treatment  efficacy,  as  the  vacuum  brings  the  electrodes  closer 
to the dermis, with the additional benefit of reducing pain. The 
main indications for this technology are subtle improvement of 
fine rhytids and tissue tightening.

Unipolar and bipolar radiofrequency device

Different depths of radiofrequency energy can be delivered to 
the  skin  –  bipolar  for  more  superficial  heating  and  unipolar 
for  deeper  heating.  It  is  a  closed  system  and  does  not  require 
grounding,  as  monopolar  radiofrequency.  Published  data  are 
limited  and  there  is  some  evidence  in  the  reduction  of  the 
appearance of cellulite and subtle tissue tightening.

subdermal radiofrequency

Subdermal  radiofrequency  is  a  minimally  invasive  procedure 
which evolved from the use of radiofrequency for nerve abla-
tion to treat glabellar furrows. A small probe is inserted under-
neath the skin through a needle hole. Radiofrequency is emitted 
through an electrode at the tip of the probe. In addition, there 
is a temperature gauge on the probe which monitors the exact 
temperature that will reach the target and a thermal camera for 
measurement  of  the  surface  skin  temperature  to  avoid  burns. 
At this time, the device is being used off label for skin tighten-
ing and there is nothing published in the literature of long term 
safety and efficacy.

conclusions

Non-surgical tissue tightening has evolved considerably since its 
first introduction. Monopolar radiofrequency using a new treat-
ment  algorithm  remains  the  gold  standard  of  radiofrequency, 
with the largest series of published papers, longest clinical expe-
rience,  and  modifications  for  optimal  outcomes.  Bipolar  radi-
ofrequency in conjunction with light and vacuum offers more 
superficial treatments, and, most recently, a combined unipolar 
and  bipolar  radiofrequency  device  has  been  introduced  with 
control of depths of radiofrequency energies.

The  greatest  challenge  in  all  modalities  of  radiofrequency 
treatments is predictability of outcomes. Patient selection with a 
thorough consultation reviewing realistic expectations is key for 
successful outcomes. The development of newer algorithms with 
standardized  protocols  is  allowing  for  more  reproducible  out-
comes in using these devices for non-surgical skin tightening.

Future  directions  of  radiofrequency  include  the  use  of  mini-
mally invasive probes that can deliver radiofrequency energy sub-
dermally  with  precise  temperature  monitoring  which  may  give 
more consistent and predictable outcomes for skin tightening.

Further reading

Alster TS, Tanzi E. (2004) Improvement of neck and cheek laxity with 
a nonablative radiofrequency device: a lifting experience. Dermatol 
Surg 30, 503–7.

Biesman  B,  Baker  SS,  Carruthers  J,  et  al.  (2006)  Monopolar  radiofre-
quency treatment of human eyelids: a prospective multicenter effi-
cacy trial. Lasers Surg Med 38, 890–8.

Chipps LK, Bentow J, Prather HB, et al. (2013) Novel nonablative radi-
ofrequency rejuvenation device applied to the neck and jowls: clini-
cal evaluation and 3 dimensional image analysis. J Drugs Dermatol 
12(11), 1215–8.

Doshi  SN,  Alster  TS.  (2005)  Combination  radiofrequency  and  diode 
laser for treatment of facial rhytids and skin laxity. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther 7, 11–5.

Dover JS, Zelickson BD. (2007) 14 physician multispecialty consensus 
panel. Results of a survey of 5700 patient monopolar radiofrequency 
facial skin tightening treatments: assessment of a low energy mul-
tiple pass technique leading to a clinical endpoint algorithm. Der-
matol Surg 33, 900–7.

Emilia del Pino M, Rosado RH, Azuela A, et al. (2006) Effect of control-
led volumetric tissue heating with radiofrequency on cellulite and 
the subcutaneous tissue of the buttocks and thighs. J Drugs Derma-
tol 5, 714–22.

Fitzpatrick  R,  Geronemus  R,  Goldberg  D,  et  al.  (2003)  Multicenter 
study of noninvasive radiofrequency for periorbital tissue tighten-
ing. Lasers Surg Med 33, 232–2.

Fritz M, Counters JT, Zelickson BD. (2004) Radiofrequency treatment 
for middle and lower face laxity. Arch Facial Plast Surg 6, 370–3.
Gold MH. (2007) Tissue tightening: a hot topic utilizing deep dermal 

heating. Drugs Dermatol 6, 1238–42.

Gold MH, Goldman MD, Rao J, et al. (2007) Treatment of wrinkles and 
elastosis using vacuum assisted bipolar radiofrequency heating of 
the dermis. Dermatol Surg 33, 303–9.

51. Radiofrequency Devices

455

Jacobson  LG,  Alexiades-Armenakis  M,  Bernstein  L,  Geronemus  RG. 
(2003) Treatment of nasolabial folds and jowls with a noninvasive 
radiofrequency device. Arch Dermatol 139, 1371–2.

Sadick  NS.  (2005)  Combination  radiofrequency  and  light  energies: 
electro-optical synergy technology in esthetic medicine. Dermatol 
Surg 31, 1211–7.

Kassim AT, Goldberg DJ. (2013) Assessment of the safety and efficacy 
of a bipolar multifrequency radiofrequency device in the treatment 
of skin laxity. J Cosmet Laser Ther 15(2), 114–17.

Lack EB, Rachel JD, D'Andrea L, Corres J. (2005) Relationship of energy 
settings and impedance in different anatomic areas using a radiof-
requency device. Dermatol Surg 31, 1668–70.

Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  Munavalli  G,  Beasley  KL.  (2006)  Monopolar 
radiofrequency facial tightening: a retrospective analysis of efficacy 
and safety in over 600 treatments. J Drugs Dermatol 5, 707–12.
Yu CS, Yeung CK, Skek SY, Tse RK, Kono T, Chan HH. (2007) Com-
bined infrared light and bipolar radiofrequency for skin tightening 
in Asians. Lasers Surg Med 39, 471–5.

chapter 52
LeD photomodulation for reversal of photoaging and 
reduction of Inflammation

David McDaniel,1 Robert Weiss,2 Roy Geronemus,3 Corinne Granger,4 and Leila Kanoun-Copy5
1McDaniel Institute of Anti Aging Research, Virginia Beach, VA, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk VA and Old Dominion University Norfolk VA, USA
2Maryland Laser Skin & Vein Institute, Hunt Valley, MD, and Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
3Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, NY, and New York University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
4L'Oreal Research, Asnieres, France
5L'Oréal Research, Chevilly Larue, France

BasIc concepts

•	 Photomodulation	uses	non-thermal,	photobiochemical	mechanism	based	treatments	to	regulate	the	activity	of	cells	rather	than	

photothermal	wound	healing	mechanisms.

•	 Photomodulation	stimulates	cells	to	perform	certain	functions	using	light	packets	that	are	low	energy	and	modulate	cell	metabolism.
•	 LED	arrays	for	photomodulation	are	useful	for	collagen	stimulation,	textural	smoothing,	and	reduction	of	inflammation.
•	 Photomodulation	research	has	recently	expanded	to	include	new	therapeutic	areas	such	as	scarring,	pigment	disorders,	hair	growth,	

nerve	regeneration	and	other	innovative	applications.

Introduction

Photorejuvenation encompasses many procedures using light 
or laser-based technology to reverse the effects of photoaging. 
Photoaging, of which dermal collagen degeneration comprises 
a  large  component,  is  compounded  by  environmental  dam-
age  including  smoking,  pollutants,  and  other  insults  caus-
ing  free  radical  formation.  Non-ablative  photorejuvenation 
refers  to  the  controlled  use  of  thermal  energy  to  accomplish 
skin rejuvenation without disturbance of the overlying epider-
mis and with minimal to no down-time. Currently employed 
non-ablative modalities include primarily intense pulsed light 
(IPL),  visible  wavelengths  including  585nm  pulsed  dye  laser 
(PDL),  and  532 nm  [CH1]  green  light  (KTP  laser)  [1].  Vari-
ous infrared wavelengths with water as the target are used for 
remodeling  dermal  collagen.  Because  absorption  by  melanin 
is negligible, these devices can be used for all skin types and 
these  include  1064,  1320,  1450,  and  1540 nm  [2,3].  The  pri-
mary mechanism of action is thermal injury either by heating 
the  dermis  to  stimulate  fibroblast  proliferation  or  by  heating 
blood vessels for photocoagulation [4,5,6]. The newest way to 
deliver these wavelengths is by fractionating the dose through 
microlenses  that  allow  microthermal  zones  surrounded  by 
normal skin [7].

A non-thermal mechanism, which represents a fundamental 
change in thinking, is the theory of photomodulation. This con-
cept involves the stimulation of cells to perform certain func-
tions  using  light  packets  that  are  low  energy  and  stimulate  or 
inhibit various cellular processes. This novel approach to pho-
toaging  uses  non-thermal  light  treatments  to  regulate  activity 
of  cells  rather  than  to  invoke  thermal  wound  healing  mecha-
nisms [8,9]. This incurs far less risk for patients than other light 
modalities. The first written report on using photomodulation 
to improve facial wrinkles was in 2002 [10].

Photomodulation  was  first  discovered  from  use  of  LED  and 
low energy light therapy (LILT) in stimulating growth of plant 
cells [11]. The belief that cell activity can be upregulated or down-
regulated by low energy light had been discussed in the past, but 
consistent or impressive results had been lacking [12,13]. Some 
promise had been shown with wound healing for oral mucositis 
[13]. Wavelengths previously examined included a 670 nm LED 
array [13], a 660 nm array [14], and higher infrared wavelengths 
[15].  Fluence  and  duration  of  exposure  were  variable  in  these 
studies with high energy required for modest results [13].

To  investigate  LED  light  for  rejuvenation  purposes,  a  fibro-
blast  culture  model  was  utilized  in  conjunction  with  clinical 
testing.  Particular  packets  of  energy  with  specific  wavelengths 
combined with using a very specific propriety pulse sequencing  

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

456

52. LED Photomodulation for Reversal of Photoaging and Reduction of Inflammation

457

“code”  were  found  to  upregulate  collagen  I  synthesis  in  fibro-
blast  culture  using  reverse  transcription  polymerase  chain 
reaction  (RT-PCR)  to  measure  collagen  I  [10].  The  upregula-
tion of fibroblast collagen synthesis correlated with the clinical 
observation  of  increased  dermal  collagen  on  treated  human 
skin  biopsies  [16].  Curiously,  both  in  the  fibroblast  and  clini-
cal model, collagen synthesis was accompanied by reduction of 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). In particular, MMP-1 (colla-
genase) was greatly reduced with exposure to 595–870 nm (in a 
75%:25% ratio) low energy light. Use of very low energy, narrow 
band light with specific pulse code sequences and durations was 
termed LED photomodulation by McDaniel et al. [10]. A device 
that utilizes pulsed code sequences of LED light to induce pho-
tomodulation was termed Gentlewaves®.

clinical applications

LED photomodulation can be used both alone and in combina-
tion with a variety of common, non-ablative, rejuvenation proce-
dures in an office setting. Several anti-inflammatory and wound 
healing applications are also possible. Treatments were delivered 
using the yellow/infrared light LED photomodulation unit with 
a  full  face  panel.  Energy  density  was  set  at  0.15 J/cm2  and  100 
pulses were delivered with a pulse duration of 250 ms and an off 
interval of 100 ms. Treatment time was approximately 35 seconds.

photorejuvenation
This  technique  was  evaluated  on  6000+  patients  over  the  last 
6 years. Of these treatments, 10% were LED photomodulation 
alone and 90% were concomitant with a thermal-based photore-

juvenation procedure. Using specific pulsing sequence param-
eters, which are the basis for the LED photomodulation “code,” 
the  original  multicenter  clinical  trial  was  conducted  with  90 
patients receiving a series of eight LED treatments over 4 weeks 
[17,18,19,20]. This study showed positive results, with over 90% 
of patients improving by at least one Fitzpatrick photoaging cat-
egory  and  65%  of  the  patients  demonstrating  global  improve-
ment in facial texture, fine lines, erythema, and pigmentation. 
Results peaked at 4–6 months following completion of a series 
of eight treatments [20]. Another retrospective study, using the 
same  590–870 nm  LED  array  (Gentlewaves®),  demonstrated 
similar  results  (Figure  52.1).  These  results  were  confirmed  by 
digital microscopy [21].

Most  recently,  the  595/870 nm  LED  array  was  used  in  an 
independent  clinical  laboratory  confirming  the  findings  (data 
on  file,  L'Oréal  Research,  France).  An  additional  clinical  trial 
involving  65  subjects  used  silicone  replica  impressions  of  lat-
eral  canthal  wrinkles  (crow's  feet).  These  replicas,  illuminated 
by reproducible lighting both parallel and perpendicular to each 
wrinkle, were analyzed with image-analysis software (Quantiri-
des,  Monaderm,  Monaco).  The  analysis  showed  a  significant 
reduction in the number of wrinkles 2–4 months after treatment 
accompanied by a significant reduction in the length of wrinkles 
at  5  months  post-treatment.  Subject  self-assessment  showed 
significant improvement in skin wrinkles, texture, softness, and 
radiance"Most  recently,  the  595(870 nm  LED  array  was  used 
in  an  independent  clinical  laboratory  confirming  the  findings 
(data on file, L'Oréal Research, France). An additional clinical 
trial involving 65 subjects used silicone replica impressions of 
lateral canthal wrinkles (crow's feet). These replicas, illuminated 
by reproducible lighting both parallel and perpendicular to each 

(a)

(b)

Figure 52.1  Smoothing of the skin seen after eight treatments over 4 weeks of Gentlewaves® photomodulation (Gentlewaves, Inc., Charlotte, NC, USA) (a) 
Before treatments. (b) Eight weeks after baseline. Reduction in wrinkles, pigmentation and improvement of texture are noted.

458

antI-agIng  Skin Modulation Techniques

31 subjects with facial rhytids who received nine light therapy 
treatments  using  combined  wavelengths  of  633  and  830 nm. 
Fluences  were  relatively  high  utilizing  126 J/cm2  for  633 nm 
and  66 J/cm2  for  830 nm.  Improvements  to  the  skin  surface 
were reported at weeks 9 and 12 by profilometry performed on 
periorbital replicas. Results showed that 52% of subjects showed 
a 25–50% improvement in photoaging scores [23].

In the USA, the first Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
cleared  LED  device  to  be  used  in  the  reduction  of  periocular 
wrinkles was in 2005 (Gentlewaves®; Figure 52.2). Other devices 
(Omnilux™,  Photo  Therapeutics  Ltd.,  Altrincham,  Cheshire, 
UK) then followed.

anti-inflammatory effects

Photomodulation  can  also  be  used  for  the  reduction  of  ery-
thema from a variety of causes. Erythema may be induced from 
wide ranging skin injuries including but not limited to thermal 
laser  treatments,  UV  burns,  radiation  therapy,  blunt  trauma, 
and skin disease. Treatment of atopic eczema in patients with-
drawn from all topical medications led to resolution with 3–4 
treatments over 1–2 weeks (Figure 52.3).

Use  of  LED  photomodulation  in  combination  with  other 
laser  modalities  may  results  in  faster  erythema  resolution. 
The enhanced erythema resolution may be a result of the anti-
inflammatory  effects  of  LED  photomodulation.  The  complete 
mechanisms have not yet been elucidated but downregulation 
of inflammatory mediators from lymphocytes or macrophages 
is  possible.  Studies  on  human  skin  fibroblasts  treated  with 
LED photomodulation have shown a reduction in interleukins 
IL-1B1 and IL-6 [24].

A  recent  study  looked  at  whether  LED  photomodulation 
therapy  could  accelerate  resolution  of  post-intense  pulsed 
light (IPL) erythema [25]. Fifteen subjects were randomized to 
receive LED treatment to one side of the face immediately fol-
lowing a single IPL treatment for photodamage. Results showed 

Figure 52.2  Gentlewaves LED photomodulation device. Array of LEDs.

wrinkle, were analyzed with image-analysis software (Quantiri-
des,  Monaderm,  Monaco).  The  analysis  showed  a  significant 
reduction in the number of wrinkles 2–4 months after treatment 
accompanied by a significant reduction in the length of wrinkles 
at  5  months  post-treatment.  Subject  self-assessment  showed 
significant improvement in skin wrinkles, texture, softness, and 
radiance."> [CM2]

Others  have  confirmed  that  additional  wavelengths  of  LED 
light, using red and infrared wavelengths, may be effective for 
skin  texture  improvement.  Although  these  treatments  were 
longer in duration, 36 patients receiving nine treatments over a 
5-week period showed improvement in skin softness [22]. Each 
treatment was administered in continuous mode, without puls-
ing, with a treatment time of 20 minutes using 633 and 830 nm 
as  an  LED  array  (Omnilux™,  Phototherapeutics,  Altrincham, 
Cheshire, UK). Another recent report using this system studied 

(a)

(b)

Figure 52.3  (a) Before shows flare of eczema following withdrawal of all therapy. (b) Atopic eczema after three treatments with Gentlewave LED photo-
modulation. The after image (b) shows effects of reduction of inflammation by LED photomodulation within 10 days.

52. LED Photomodulation for Reversal of Photoaging and Reduction of Inflammation

459

mean erythema scores on the first visit were statistically signifi-
cantly  lower  on  the  LED-treated  side.  This  led  the  authors  to 
conclude that LED photomodulation treatment may accelerate 
resolution of erythema following IPL treatment [25].

A  study  on  radiation  dermatitis  examined  whether  LED 
photomodulation  could  alter  and  improve  the  outcome  of 
intensity-modulated radiation treatments (IMRT) on overlying 
breast  skin.  Nineteen  patients  with  breast  cancer  were  treated 
with  LED  photomodulation  immediately  after  every  radiation 
session.  Treatments  were  administered  to  post-lumpectomy 
patients  receiving  a  full  course  of  IMRT  [26].  Skin  reactions 
were monitored weekly using National Cancer Institute (NCI) 
criteria  for  grading.  Age-matched  controls  (n  =  28)  received 
IMRT without LED photomodulation. The results of this study 
showed  that  LED  treatment  had  a  significantly  positive  effect. 
Of the LED treated patients, 94.7% (18) had grade 0 or 1 reac-
tion  and  5.3%  (1)  had  a  grade  2  reaction.  Among  controls,  
4 (14.3%) had a grade 1 reaction and 24 (85.7%) had a grade 2 or 
3 reaction. Of the non-LED treated group, 67.9% had to inter-
rupt treatment because of side effects of skin breakdown with 
moist reactions but only 5% of the LED treated group had inter-
rupted treatment. The authors concluded that not only did LED 
photomodulation  treatments  delivered  immediately  after  each 
IMRT reduce the incidence of adverse NCI criteria skin reac-
tions, but also allowed the full course of treatment and resulted 
in a final smoother skin texture with improved skin elasticity  
post-radiation  treatment.  Another  study,  focused  on  sensitive 
skin,  demonstrated  a  significant  decrease  in  the  Erythema 
Index after an average of 9.9 treatments and a cumulative dose 
of 71.3 J/cm2. Furthermore, the study utilized cultured human 
keratinocytes treated with a nontoxic dose of sodium lauryl sul-
phate to cause irritation prior to exposure to low level light. The 
resulting assay demonstrated a reduction in the release of VEGF 
from cells treated with low level light further indicating the anti-
inflammatory capacity of photomodulation as well as indicating 
possible mechanism(s) of action [27].

Wound healing research of one type or another has quickly 
become  one  of  the  primary  research  foci  for  photomodula-
tion's future. Literature searches will quickly turn up a variety 
of  articles  involving  light  and  the  potential  benefits  to  wound 
healing  of  all  types  of  injuries.  One  such  study  examined  the 
effects of wavelengths of light on the wound healing of partial 
thickness  dermal  abrasion  models  in  mice.  635,  730,  810  and 
980  nm  wavelengths  were  tested  at  equal  fluence  for  evalua-
tion  via  collagen  accumulation,  re-epithelialization,  wound 
area size, and cytokeratin 14 and proliferating cell nuclear anti-
gen  staining.  The  results  indicated  biological  response  based 
on wavelength used as only 635 and 810 nm light showed any 
wound healing stimulation, with 810nm being most efficacious 
[28]. The wound healing research has begun to include lesions 
caused  by  herpes  simplex  labialis  (HSL)  as  well  as  traditional 
wounding  models.  In  a  randomized,  placebo  controlled  study 
examining the effect of 1072 nm IR light on time to re-epith-
ilialization, where 87 patients suffering from HSL lesions were 

given 3 minutes of 1072 nm light therapy or sham treatment, the 
average time to complete re-epithilialization was decreased by 
30% in photomodulated subjects [29].

Additional  data  indicates  anti-inflammatory  effect  for  LED 
photomodulation  following  UV-induced  erythema.  Using  a 
solar simulator, findings indicate a photoprotective effect when 
delivered after UV radiation [24]. This concept is a rescue from 
UV damage even after inadvertant UV radiation has occurred. 
We have observed a reduction in UV erythema when LED pho-
tomodulation was supplied within hours after UV exposure. The 
use of 590–870 nm LED photomodulation produced significant 
downregulation  of  dermal  matrix  degrading  enzymes,  which 
were stimulated by the UV exposure [24]. Additionally, a pilot 
study with precise CO2 laser epidermal destruction has shown 
promise with using this device for accelerated wound healing.

Parallel to wound healing, use of photomodulation has been 
extended to a protective or preventative effect following several 
types  of  toxic  injury.  Experiments  using  LED  light  to  protect 
the retina against the toxic actions of methanol-derived formic 
acid in a rodent model of methanol toxicity have been success-
ful. In a recent study, LED treatment protected the retina from 
the histopathologic changes induced by methanol on mitochon-
drial  oxidative  metabolism  in  vitro  and  retinal  protection  in 
vivo [30]. Photomodulation may enhance recovery from retinal 
injury  and  other  ocular  diseases  in  which  mitochondrial  dys-
function is postulated to have a role.

Human  retinal  pigment  epithelial  (RPE)  cells  were  treated 
with  LED  photomodulation  produced  by  acute  injury  from 
blue light wavelengths [31]. The results showed reduction of cell 
death  at  24  hours  from  94%  to  10–20%.  Another  in  vitro  test 
on human RPE cells showed a sevenfold reduction in vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression at 24 hours post-
LED  exposure  using  LED  photomodulation  at  590–870 nm 
delivered at 0.1 J/cm2 [32]. The RPE research has also included 
in  vivo  studies  using  a  diabetic  rodent  model.  The  diabetes 
induced  retinal  abnormalities  were  assessed  functionally  and 
histologically  in  the  animals  and  biochemically  in  a  parallel 
RPE cell culture. The study demonstrated that daily treatments 
of 670 nm light at 6 J/cm2 can significantly reduce the death of 
retinal ganglion cells, improved the photopic b wave response 
by 50%, and prevented diabetes induced overexpression of leu-
kostasis and ICAM-1. In the cell culture model, the increased 
superoxide  production,  inflammatory  biomarker  expression 
and cell death were all inhibited by photobiomodulation [33]. 
The ability for 670 nm light to assist in prevention of retinopa-
thy was confirmed in a second study, using not a diabetic, but 
a hyperoxia induced rat model. 9 J/cm2 of 670 nm light therapy 
reduced neovascularization, vaso-obliteration and branching of 
retinal vessels caused by hyperoxia induced retinopathy [34].

photodynamic therapy
LED  red  light  (630 nm)  has  been  used  in  combination  with  a 
sensitizer  (levulinic  acid)  for  photodynamic  therapy  (PDT) 
[30].  When  exposed  to  light  with  the  proper  wavelength,  the 

460

antI-agIng  Skin Modulation Techniques

sensitizer produces an activated oxygen species, singlet oxygen, 
that oxidizes the plasma membrane of targeted cells. As a result 
of a lower metabolic rate, there is less sensitizer in the adjacent 
normal  tissue,  thus  less  of  a  reaction.  One  of  the  absorption 
peaks of the metabolic product of levulinic acid, protoporphy-
rin, absorbs strongly at 630 nm red. A red LED panel emitting 
at  630 nm  (Omnilux  PDT™,  Phototherapeutics,  Altrincham, 
Cheshire,  UK)  has  been  used  for  this  purpose  in  Europe  and 
Asia  [31].  A  full  panel  590 nm  LED  array  has  also  been  used 
for facilitating PDT. This therapy is delivered by application of 
levulinic  acid  (Levulan™,  DUSA,  Wilmington,  MA,  USA)  for 
45  minutes  and  exposure  to  continuous  (non-pulsed)  590–
870 nm LED for 15 minutes for a cumulative dose of over 70 J/
cm2.  The  results  show  reduction  in  actinic  damage  including 
improvement of skin texture and reduction of actinic keratoses 
[35]. While not directly PDT, as previously mentioned, photo-
modulation is being studied in combination with drugs for the 
treatment  of  many  skin  disorders  like  dermatophagoides  fari-
nae  (Df)  induced  atopic  dermatitis.  850nm  LED  treatment  in 
conjunction with Tacrolimus (FK-506) in a Df induced mouse 
model  demonstrated  reduction  in  the  severity  of  the  lesions, 
increased serum levels of IgE and Nitric Oxide, reduced inflam-
matory infiltrate and recovery of skin barrier function [36].

One  of  the  means  for  photomodulated  upregulation  of  cell 
activity for collagen synthesis by LED is the activation of energy 
switching  mechanisms  in  mitochondria,  the  energy  source 
for  cellular  activity.  Cytochrome  molecules  are  believed  to  be 
responsible  for  the  light  absorption  in  mitochondria.  Cyto-
chromes  are  synthesized  from  protoporphyrin  IX  and  absorb 
wavelengths  of  light  from  562  to  600 nm.  It  is  believed  that 
LED light absorption causes conformational changes in antenna 
molecules within the  mitochondrial membrane.  Proton trans-
location initiates a pump, which ultimately leads to energy for 
conversion  of  adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP)  to  adenosine  tri-
phosphate  (ATP).  This  essentially  recharges  the  “cell  battery” 
and provides more energy for cellular activity.

Others  have  confirmed  that  mitochondrial  ATP  availability 
can  influence  cellular  growth  and  reproduction,  with  lack  of 
mitochondrial ATP associated with oxidative stress [37]. Cellu-
lar aging may be associated with decreased mitochondrial DNA 
activity [38]. It has been concluded that LED light represents a 
novel, non-invasive, therapeutic intervention for the treatment 
of numerous diseases linked to mitochondrial dysfunction [39].
Previous  work  has  also  demonstrated  rapid  ATP  produc-
tion  within  mitochondria  of  cultured  fibroblasts  exposed  to 
590–870 nm  yellow/infrared  LED  light  only  with  the  proper 
pulsing  sequence  [9,40].  New  ATP  production  occurs  rapidly 
after  LED  photomodulation,  triggering  subsequent  metabolic 
activity of fibroblasts [19]. There also appear to be receptor-like 
mechanisms,  which  result  in  modulation  of  the  expression  of 
gene activity producing upregulation or downregulation of gene 
activity as well as wide-ranging cell signaling pathway actions. It 
has also been shown that near IR light alters the mitochondrial 
biogenesis signalling in cell culture [41]. The choice of photo-

modulation parameters has a vital role in determining the over-
all pattern of gene upregulation and/or downregulation. In our 
experience, use of LED yellow/infrared light without the proper 
pulsing sequence leads to minimal or no consequences on mito-
chrondrial ATP production.

conclusions

LED arrays for photomodulation are useful for collagen stimu-
lation,  textural  smoothing,  and  reduction  of  inflammation. 
Pilot  wound  healing  studies  show  slightly  accelerated  wound 
resolution.  Cellular  rescue  from  UV  damage  and  other  toxic 
insults has been shown in small studies. Thermal, non-ablative 
photorejuvenation  and  non-thermal  LED  photomodulation 
have  a  synergistic  effect.  LED  photomodulation  is  delivered 
immediately  subsequent  to  the  thermal-based  treatment  for 
its anti-inflammatory effects, which may reduce the thermally 
induced  erythema  and  edema  of  non-ablative  treatments. 
Delivery of LED light immediately before and after UV or thermal 
injury  appears  to  increase  anti-inflammatory  and  protective 
effects.

As  photomodulation  gains  in  popularity,  applications  arise 
from expanding research. For example, treatment of hyperpig-
mentation with 830 and 850 nm LEDs demonstrate the ability 
to inhibit melanin synthesis in vitro as evidenced by decreased 
expression of the tyrosinase family of genes (i.e. TRP1 and TRP2) 
[42]. New data is being published on the beneficial effects of pho-
tomodulation on a monthly basis for applications like enhanced 
blood  vessel  growth,  hair  growth/alopecia  improvement,  and 
dopaminergic  cell  survival  in  the  brain  [43,44,45].  Currently 
LED photomodulation has been studied and shown to be effec-
tive  extensively  in  skin  [46],  but  continuing  new  research  will 
only expand as the technology improves and allows photomodu-
lation to reach areas that current therapies cannot.

references [ch3]

1  Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  Beasley  KL,  Munavalli  G.  (2005)  Our 
approach to non-ablative treatment of photoaging. Lasers Surg Med 
37, 2–8.

2  Munavalli  GS,  Weiss  RA,  Halder  RM.  (2005)  Photoaging  and 
nonablative  photorejuvenation  in  ethnic  skin.  Dermatol  Surg  31, 
1250–60.

3  Weiss RA, McDaniel DH, Geronemus RG. (2003) Review of nonab-
lative photorejuvenation: reversal of the aging effects of the sun and 
environmental damage using laser and light sources. Semin Cutan 
Med Surg 22, 93–106.

4  Weiss RA, Gold M, Bene N, Biron JA, Munavalli G, Weiss M, et al. 
(2006) Prospective clinical evaluation of 1440-nm laser delivered by 
microarray for treatment of photoaging and scars. J Drugs Dermatol 
5, 740–4.

5  Weiss RA, Goldman MP, Weiss MA. (2000) Treatment of poikilo-
derma of Civatte with an intense pulsed light source. Dermatol Surg 
26, 823–7.

52. LED Photomodulation for Reversal of Photoaging and Reduction of Inflammation

461

6  Fatemi A, Weiss MA, Weiss RA. (2002) Short-term histologic effects 
of nonablative resurfacing: results with a dynamically cooled milli-
second-domain 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg 28, 172–6.
7  Bogle  MA.  (2008)  Fractionated  mid-infrared  resurfacing.  Semin 

Cutan Med Surg 27, 252–8.

8  Weiss RA, McDaniel DH, Geronemus RG. (2003) Review of nonab-
lative photorejuvenation: reversal of the aging effects of the sun and 
environmental damage using laser and light sources. Semin Cutan 
Med Surg 22, 93–106.

9  McDaniel DH, Weiss RA, Geronemus R, Ginn L, Newman J. (2002) 
Light-tissue  interactions  I:  photothermolysis  vs  photomodulation 
laboratory findings. Lasers Surg Med 14, 25.

10  McDaniel  DH,  Weiss  RA,  Geronemus  R,  et  al.  (2002)  Light-
tissue interactions II: photothermolysis vs photomodulation clinical 
applications. Lasers Surg Med 14, 25.

11  Whelan HT, Smits RL Jr, Buchman EV, et al. (2001) Effect of NASA 
light-emitting diode irradiation on wound healing. J Clin Laser Med 
Surg 19, 305–14.

12  Whelan  HT,  Buchmann  EV,  Dhokalia  A,  et  al.  (2003)  Effect  of 
NASA  light-emitting  diode  irradiation  on  molecular  changes  for 
wound healing in diabetic mice. J Clin Laser Med Surg 21, 67–74.
13  Whelan HT, Connelly JF, Hodgson BD, et al. (2002) NASA light-
emitting  diodes  for  the  prevention  of  oral  mucositis  in  pediatric 
bone marrow transplant patients. J Clin Laser Med Surg 20, 319–24.
14  Walker MD, Rumpf S, Baxter GD, et al. (2000) Effect of low-inten-
sity  laser  irradiation  (660  nm)  on  a  radiation-impaired  wound-
healing model in murine skin. Lasers Surg Med 26, 41–7.

15  Lowe  AS,  Walker  MD,  O'Byrne  M,  et  al.  (1998)  Effect  of  low 
intensity  monochromatic  light  therapy  (890  nm)  on  a  radiation-
impaired, wound-healing model in murine skin. Lasers Surg Med 
23, 291–8.

16  Weiss  RA,  McDaniel  DH,  Geronemus  RG,  et  al.  (2005)  Clinical 
experience with light-emitting diode (LED) photomodulation. Der-
matol Surg 31, 1199–205.

17  Weiss RA, McDaniel DH, Geronemus RG, Weiss MA. (2005) Clini-
cal  trial  of  a  novel  non-thermal  LED  array  for  reversal  of  photo-
aging: clinical, histologic, and surface profilometric results. Lasers 
Surg Med 36, 85–91.

18  McDaniel DH, Newman J, Geronemus R, et al. (2003) Non-ablative 
non-thermal LED photomodulation: a multicenter clinical photo-
aging trial. Lasers Surg Med 15, 22.

19  Geronemus  R,  Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  et  al.  (2003)  Non-ablative 
LED photomodulation: light activated fibroblast stimulation clini-
cal trial. Lasers Surg Med 25, 22.

20  Weiss RA, McDaniel DH, Geronemus R, et al. (2004) Non-ablative, 
non-thermal  light  emitting  diode  (LED)  phototherapy  of  photo-
aged skin. Lasers Surg Med 16, 31.

21  Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  Geronemus  RG,  McDaniel  DH.  (2004)  A 
novel  non-thermal  non-ablative  full  panel  led  photomodulation 
device for reversal of photoaging: digital microscopic and clinical 
results in various skin types. J Drugs Dermatol 3, 605–10.

22  Goldberg DJ, Amin S, Russell BA, et al. (2006) Combined 633-nm 
and 830-nm led treatment of photoaging skin. J Drugs Dermatol 5, 
748–53.

23  Russell BA, Kellett N, Reilly LR. (2005) A study to determine the 
efficacy of combination LED light therapy (633 nm and 830 nm) in 
facial skin rejuvenation. J Cosmet Laser Ther 7, 196–200.

24  Weiss RA, McDaniel DH, Geronemus RG, Weiss MA. (2005) Clini-
cal  trial  of  a  novel  non-thermal  LED  array  for  reversal  of  photo-

aging: clinical, histologic, and surface profilometric results. Lasers 
Surg Med 36, 85–91.

25  Khoury JG, Goldman MP. (2008) Use of light-emitting diode pho-
tomodulation  to  reduce  erythema  and  discomfort  after  intense 
pulsed light treatment of photodamage. J Cosmet Dermatol 7, 30–4.
26  DeLand  MM,  Weiss  RA,  McDaniel  DH,  Geronemus  RG.  (2007) 
Treatment  of  radiation-induced  dermatitis  with  light-emitting 
diode (LED) photomodulation. Lasers Surg Med 39, 164–8.

27  Choi M, Kim JE, Cho KH, Lee JH. (2013) In vivo and in vitro analy-
sis of low level light therapy: a useful therapeutic approach for sen-
sitive skin. Lasers Med Sci. 28, 1573–9.

28  Gupta A, Dai T, Hamblin MR. (2013) Effect of red and near-infra-
red wavelengths on low level laser (light) therapy-induced healing 
of partial-thickness dermal abrasion in mice. Epub ahead of print.
29  Dougal G, Lee SY. (2013) Evaluation of the efficacy of low-level light 
therapy  using  1072nm  infrared  light  for  the  treatment  of  herpes 
simplex labialis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 38, 713–8.

30  Eells JT, Henry MM, Summerfelt P, et al. (2003) Therapeutic pho-
tobiomodulation  for  methanol-induced  retinal  toxicity.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci USA 100, 3439–44.

31  Eells JT, Henry MM, Summerfelt P, et al. (2003) Therapeutic pho-
tobiomodulation  for  methanol-induced  retinal  toxicity.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 100, 3439–44.

32  McDaniel  DH,  Weiss  RA,  Geronemus  R,  Weiss  MA.  (2006)  LED 
photomodulation ‘reverses’ acute retinal injury. Annual meeting of 
the American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery, Boston, MA, 
April 6, 2006.

33  Tang J, Du Y, Lee CA, et al. (2013) Low-intensity far-red light inhib-
its early lesions that contribute to diabetic retinopathy: in vivo and 
in vitro. Invest Opthalmol Vis Sci. 54, 3681–90.

34  Naroli R, Valter K, Barbosa M, et al. (2013) 670nm photobiomodu-
lation  as  a  novel  protection  against  retinopathy  of  prematurity: 
evidence  from  oxygen  induced  retinopathy  models.  PLoS  One  8, 
e72135.

35  Kim CH, Cheong KA, Lee AY. (2013) 850nm light-emitting-diode 
phototherapy  plus  low-dose  tacrolimus  (FK-506)  as  combination 
therapy  in  the  treatment  of  dermatophagoides  farina-induced 
atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions in NC/Nga mice. 72, 142–8.
36  Tarstedt M, Rosdahl I, Berne B, et al. (2005) A randomized multi-
center study to compare two treatment regimens of topical methyl 
aminolevulinate (Metvix)-PDT in actinic keratosis of the face and 
scalp. Acta Derm Venereol 85, 424–8.

37  Chen HM, Yu CH, Tu PC, et al. (2005) Successful treatment of oral ver-
rucous hyperplasia and oral leukoplakia with topical 5-aminolevulinic 
acid-mediated photodynamic therapy. Lasers Surg Med 37, 114–22.
38  Weiss  RA,  McDaniel  DH,  Geronemus  RG,  et  al.  (2005)  Clinical 
experience with light-emitting diode (LED) photomodulation. Der-
matol Surg 31, 1199–205.

39  Zhang  X,  Wu  XQ,  Lu  S,  et  al.  (2006)  Deficit  of  mitochondria-
derived  ATP  during  oxidative  stress  impairs  mouse  MII  oocyte 
spindles. Cell Res 16, 841–50.

40  Sorensen  M,  Sanz  A,  Gomez  J,  et  al.  (2006)  Effects  of  fasting  on 
oxidative stress in rat liver mitochondria. Free Radic Res 40, 339–47.
41  Desmet KD, Paz DA, Corry JJ, et al. (2006) Clinical and experimen-
tal applications of NIR-LED photobiomodulation. Photomed Laser 
Surg 24, 121–8.

42  Weiss RA, Weiss MA, McDaniel DH, et al. (2003) Comparison of 
non-ablative  fibroblast  photoactivation  with  and  without  applica-
tion of topical cosmeceutical agents. Lasers Surg Med 15, 23.

462

antI-agIng  Skin Modulation Techniques

43  Nguyen LM, Malamo AG, Larkin-Kaiser KA, et al. (2013) Effect of 
near-infrared light exposure on mitochondrial signalling in C2C12 
muscle cells. Mitochondrion Epub ahead of print.

46  Lanzafame RJ, Blanche RR, Bodian AB, et al. (2013) The growth of 
human scalp hair mediated by visible red laser and LED sources in 
males. Lasers Surg Med 45,487–95.

44  Kim JM, Kim NH, Tian YS, Lee AY. (2012) Light-emitting diodes 
at  830 and  850 nm inhibit  melanin  synthesis  in  vitro. Acta Derm 
Venereol 92, 675–80.

45  Zaidi M, Krolikowki JG, Jones DW, et al. (2013) Transient repetitive 
exposure to low level light therapy enhances collateral blood vessel 
growth  in  the  ischemic  hindlimb  of  the  tight  skin  mouse.  Photo-
chem Photobiol 89, 709–13.

47  Moro C, Massari NE, Torres N,  et  al.  Photobiomodulation inside 
the  brain:  a  novel  method  of  applying  near-infrared  light  intrac-
ranially  and  its  impact  on  dopaminergic  cell  survival  in  MPTP-
treated mice. J Neurosurg Epub ahead of print.

48  Avci P, Gupta A, Sadasivam M, et al. (2013) Low-level laser (light) 
therapy  (LLLT)  in  skin:  stimulating,  healing,  restoring.  Semin 
Cutan Med Surg 32, 41–52.

Sec tion 5  Skin contouring techniques

chapter 53
Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser assisted

Anne Goldsberry,1 emily tierney,2 and c. William Hanke1
1Laser and Skin Surgery Center of Indiana, Carmel, IN, USA
2Department of Dermatology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

BasIc concepts

•	 The	safety	profile	for	liposuction	is	significantly	improved	when	tumescent	local	anesthesia	is	employed.
•	 Tumescent	local	anesthesia	utilizing	lidocaine	with	epinephrine	allows	for	the	removal	of	large	volumes	of	fat	with	minimal	associated	

blood	loss	and	postoperative	morbidity.

•	 Liposuction	is	a	procedure	for	patients	who	are	either	at	or	approaching	their	goal	weight,	to	achieve	a	more	esthetic	figure,	contour,	

and	shape	in	conjunction	with	a	diet	and	exercise	regimen.

•	 Preoperative	consultation,	setting	realistic	patient	expectations	for	improvement,	establishing	patients'	overall	health	status	and	past	

medical	history	and	discussion	of	risks	and	benefits	of	the	procedure	are	critical	to	the	success	of	the	procedure.

•	 Laser-assisted	tumescent	liposuction	has	been	purported	to	result	in	mechanical	cavitation	of	fat,	resulting	in	greater	ease	of	suction	and	

greater	skin	retraction;	however,	additional	studies	are	needed	to	confirm	these	results.

Introduction: history of liposuction with 
tumescent local anesthesia

The early history of liposuction begins with Fischer's description 
of  hollow  cannula  liposuction  in  1976  [1].  Shortly  thereafter, 
Ilouz,  a  Frenchman  trained  in  obstetrics  and  gynecology,  and 
Fournier, a general surgeon, began practicing liposuction using 
the “wet technique,” involving injection of hypotonic saline and 
hyaluronic acid into the fat prior to suction [2]. Fournier pio-
neered the “criss-cross” technique and syringe liposuction and 
became a teacher of the technique [3].

In the early 1980s, Saul Asken, Sam Stegman, Ted Tromovitch 
and several other American dermatologists began utilizing local 
anesthesia  for  liposuction  [4].  Asken  published  two  complete 
textbooks describing his techniques.[5,6] Jeffrey Klein, another 
American dermatologist, first described his “Tumescent Tech-
nique” for liposuction in 1987 [7].

In  1988,  Hanke  and  Bernstein  published  a  report  on 
the  safety  of  the  TLA  technique  for  liposuction,  reporting 
the  results  of  9,478  patients  treated  by  dermatologists  [8]. 
Shortly after attending Fournier's liposuction course in Paris, 
William Hanke, the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Derma-
tologic Surgery and Oncology, commissioned an issue of the 
journal dedicated to liposuction. Further innovations to the 

field  evolved  with  the  publication  by  Hanke  and  colleagues 
documenting  the  safety  of  TLA  in  15,336  patients  in  1995 
[9].  Additionally,  while  initial  reports  by  Klein  established 
the safety of tumescent liposuction using a lidocaine dose of 
35 mg/kg in 1990 [10]., Ostad et al. [11]. reported the safety 
of lidocaine dosage up to 55 mg/kg. In 2000, Klein published 
a book entitled Tumescent Technique [12], highlighting many 
of  his  important  contributions  to  the  field  including:  the 
Klein  microcannula,  Klein  infiltration  pumps,  multihole 
Klein Capistrano cannulas, and specific techniques for treat-
ing all body areas.

A  textbook  on  liposuction  published  initially  in  German  in 
1999, first mentioned the term “tumescent local anesthesia.”[13]. 
The book was republished in English in 2001 [14]. Klein's full 
text  on  Tumescent  Technique,  published  in  2000,  is  currently 
out of print [15]. Other books on liposuction have been written 
by dermatologists in recent years [16,17,18].

Since Klein's introduction of the technique of TLA for lipo-
suction in 1987, it has revolutionized the technique among der-
matologic surgeons and surgeons of all specialties performing 
the procedure. Liposuction with TLA facilitates the removal of 
large volumes of fat with minimal blood loss or postoperative 
morbidity, excellent aesthetic results, and a remarkably superior 
safety profile to general anesthesia.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

463

464

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

table 53.1  Appropriate	liposuction	candidate	selection.

Does	the	patient	have	realistic	expectations	of	the	procedure?

Is	the	patient	at	or	near	goal	body	weight?

Is	the	patient	in	good	health	in	the	absence	of	anticoagulant	therapy?

Does	the	patient	have	localized	fat	deposits	on	the	body	that	are	diet	
and	exercise	resistant	for	which	they	are	seeking	treatment?

Does	the	patient	have	good	or	adequate	skin	tone?

physiology: what skin contour problem does 
the procedure address and how does this 
procedure alter the contour problem?

Liposuction  is  a  procedure  that  can  assist  patients  who  want 
to achieve a more idealized and balanced body contour (Table 
53.1) [19–22]. It is designed for individuals at their ideal body 
weight who seek correction of single or multiple anatomic sites 
with  focal  excess  adiposity  and  laxity  [19–22].  The  ideal  lipo-
suction patient is a patient of ideal body weight with focal dis-
proportionate adiposity, resulting in contour deformity [19–22]. 
Importantly, liposuction is not a weight loss procedure, and it 
should be emphasized that patients seeking the goal of weight 
loss are not good candidates for the procedure (Table 53.1) [19–22]. 
In  initial  patient  consultations,  it  is  important  to  set  realistic 
patient expectations for the results of the procedure. The results 
of  liposuction  in  all  anatomic  sites  are  limited  by  the  existing 
bony structure, the texture and quality of the skin, the tone and 
build  of  muscle,  and  the  pre-existing  adiposity  in  areas  not 
amenable to liposuction.

Liposuction  can  help  to  achieve  a  more  idealized  and  bal-
anced  body  contour,  and  patients  will  largely  vary  in  seeking 
correction of a single area or multiple anatomic sites to achieve 
their own personal optimal correction.

advantages and disadvantages

Liposuction with TLA allows the removal of large volumes of fat 
with  minimal  blood  loss  or  postoperative  morbidity,  excellent 
cosmesis, and a remarkable safety profile. TLA technique with 
the use of a dilute epinephrine and anesthetic achieves the aims 
of  hemostasis  and  anesthesia  at  the  surgical  site  [23–27].  The 
advantages of the technique include improved safety, precision, 
and patient convenience [23–27]. These advances have contrib-
uted  to  the  enhanced  safety  profile  and  widespread  growth  in 
the popularity of the liposuction technique [23–27]. TLA can be 
utilized for any anatomic site treated with liposuction, from the 
neck to the ankles.

Advantages of the TLA technique include a significant reduc-
tion  in  blood  loss  attributed  to  the  vasoconstrictive  effects  of 
epinephrine. This can be quantified by comparing the aspirate 
from TLA (containing 1–3% whole blood) with that from the 
procedure  performed  under  general  anesthesia  (40%  whole 

blood)  [25].  Improved  hemostasis  results  in  both  decreased 
blood loss as well as decreased bruising and discomfort for the 
patient  in  the  postoperative  phase  [25].  In  addition,  the  anes-
thetic and vasoconstrictive effects of the TLA create a reservoir 
effect, resulting in prolonged anesthesia of several hours' dura-
tion in the treated area [22–25]. Consequently, patients have a 
decreased reliance upon postoperative narcotics.

The  TLA  solution  also  results  in  a  hydrodissection  effect, 
whereby the pressure of the solution facilitates easier and more 
uniform penetration and removal of adipose tissue by the can-
nula (Figures >–53.1 and 53.2) [8–12,22–25]. Tumescent fluid 
enlarges, magnifies, and lifts targeted fat, allowing for more pre-
cise removal of fat [8–12,22–25].

With  proper  technique  for  infusion  of  the  tumescent  fluid, 
TLA  can  be  performed  without  ancillary  sedation  and  intra-
venous  or  general  anesthesia  [24,25].  With  TLA,  patient  con-
venience  is  significantly  enhanced  during  the  perioperative 
recovery  period  where  there  is  more  rapid  recovery  [24–34]. 
In contrast, the recovery is much more prolonged after general 
anesthesia, both as a result of the after-effects of the anesthetic 
and from the increased bruising and discomfort associated with 
the procedure [24–34].

Complications  with  the  TLA  technique  include  discomfort, 
swelling, bruising, temporary loss of sensation, post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation,  and  minimal  scarring  at  the  incision  sites. 
However,  these  complications  are  significantly  less  than  those 
associated with the procedure performed under general anesthe-
sia [24–34]. Potential risks of liposuction under general anesthesia 
include deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, abdominal 
or other organ perforation, infection, and bleeding [31,33].

Figure 53.1  A 2-L liposuction canister filled with liposuction aspirate.

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

465

table 53.2  Five	groups	of	patients:	abdominal	liposuction.

Liposuction:	lower	abdomen

Liposuction:	upper	and	lower	abdomen

Liposuction:	hourglass	abdomen;	upper	and	lower	abdomen,	hips,	
waist,	and	back

Liposuction	and	skin	excision:	mini-abdominoplasty	with	or	without	
umbilical	translocation

Complete	abdominoplasty

The  overall  body  shape  of  the  patient  should  be  examined 
during the preoperative physician examination [35]. The patient 
should be marked while standing to identify the larger areas of 
fatty deposition in the abdomen [35]. Incision sites are made in 
the following locations: two to three in the suprapubic region, 
one  at  the  umbilicus,  and  two  on  the  lateral  portions  of  the 
umbilical  fat  depositions  [35].  The  patient  should  be  lying  on 
his  or  her  back  for  the  procedure;  however,  towards  the  end 
of the procedure, it is helpful if the patient lies in both lateral 
decubitus positions to identify pockets of fat as they fall away 
from the rectus muscle [35]. The goal of abdominal liposuction 
should be to reduce the deeper fatty layers while preserving a 
superficial, even layer of fat attached to the skin [35]. Over suc-
tion can lead to dimpling of the skin, uneven fat deposits, and 
dermal necrosis [35].

Patients  in  group  1  (Table  53.2),  lower  abdomen  only,  are 
typically  thin  patients  with  a  localized  fatty  deposition  in  the 
lower abdomen alone (Figure 53.3) [35]. These patients tend to 
respond very well to liposuction with high patient satisfaction.

Patients in group 2 (Table 53.2), requiring liposuction of both 
the upper and lower abdomen, must be carefully evaluated (Fig-
ure 53.4) [35]. This group may also be relatively thin; however, 
if suction of the lower abdomen alone is performed, they may 

Figure 53.2  Blanching of skin visible after infusion of tumescent anesthesia 
with tumescent local anesthesia (TLA) technique.

Indications for tumescent liposuction, by 
anatomic site

abdomen
Patient selection has a significant role in liposuction surgery 
of the abdomen. Patients should be within 10–25 lb. (5–12 kg) 
of their ideal body weight and should have good to excellent 
skin tone which will assist with skin contraction after the pro-
cedure [35].

Figure 53.3  Lower abdomen, anterior view: 
(a) pretreatment; (b) post-treatment.

(a)

(b)

466

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

(a)

(b)

Figure 53.4  Lower abdomen and hips lipo-
suction,  lateral  view:  (a)  pretreatment;  (b) 
post-treatment.

have  a  protuberant  overhanging  upper  abdomen  [35].  There-
fore, it is important to perform liposuction on both segments of 
the abdomen to ensure a proportionate appearance.

Patients requiring liposuction of the upper and lower abdomen 
in addition to the hips, waist, and back (group 3; Table 53.2; Fig-
ure 53.5) tend to be older postmenopausal women or those on 
hormone replacement therapy with a history of weight gain [35].
Men requesting liposuction of the abdomen may require more 
widespread liposuction to ensure a proportionate appearance as 

fat deposits in men in the abdomen are usually accompanied by 
excess fat on the chest, flanks, and back [35]. Many men are not 
good candidates for abdominal liposuction as much of the fat 
deposits are behind the rectus abdominis and thus are not acces-
sible to suction during the liposuction procedure [35].

The fourth group of patients (Table 53.2) demonstrate atro-
phic, stretched skin from pregnancy, advancing age, and rapid 
fluctuations changes in weight [35]. More extensive liposuction 
is  needed  in  these  patients  and  liposuction  alone  is  often  not 

(a)

(b)

Figure  53.5  Lower  abdomen,  hips,  and 
lateral  thigh  liposuction,  lateral  view:  (a) 
pretreatment; (b) post-treatment.

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

467

satisfactory. Waiting 3–4 months after the procedure will allow 
the physician to assess if liposuction alone is sufficient or if the 
patient  will  require  an  abdominoplasty  procedure  to  address 
skin redundancy [35].

hips, outer thighs, and buttocks
Evaluation  of  patients  for  liposuction  in  these  anatomic  sites 
requires a three-dimensional and universal approach to all ana-
tomic sites; otherwise a disproportionate appearance can result 
with more noticeable enlargement in the unsuctioned areas after 
suction of localized fat deposits. For the hips, outer thighs, and 
buttocks,  it  is  important  to  observe  and  review  carefully  with 
the patient all changes in underlying musculature, cellulite, and 
inelastic skin, none of which can be improved with liposuction. 
For the hips, the patient should be placed in the lateral decu-
bitus position. For the thighs, the patient should also be in the 
lateral decubitus position with a pillow placed between the legs, 
which mimics the standing position and allows the femur to be 
directed anteriomedially [30].

The end result of suctioning should be that a region is flat, not 
concave [35]. Suctioning should also be equal on both sides and 
careful steps should be taken to monitor that relatively equiva-
lent amounts of fat are removed from either side [35].

Liposuction of the buttocks must be performed carefully, with 
special consideration to the inferolateral gluteal crease, where a 
banana roll, comprised of a defined infragluteal fat pocket, may 
worsen or lead to an atrophic buttock in the event of over suc-
tion [35]. Physical examination must focus on bony and mus-
cular prominences and asymmetry. Realistic expectations must 
be established with the patient as liposuction will not assist with 
underlying bony asymmetry, the presence of large or asymmet-
rical muscle masses, or skin laxity. Conservative buttock suction 
is recommended with removal of no more than 30–50% of fat 
from  the  middle  and  deep  fat  layers  [35].  Superficial  suction-
ing of the buttocks should be avoided as it is likely to result in 
undesirable dimpling.

arms
Liposuction of the arms is performed in women with laxity of 
the proximal arm musculature and who have a pendulous fatty 
protuberance  of  the  posterior,  lateral,  or  anterior  upper  arm 
(Figure 53.6). The fat distribution in the arms is best visualized 

when  the  arms  are  extended  at  90 °  from  the  body.  Avoiding 
over  suctioning  is  critical  for  the  arms  and  gentle  liposuction 
should only be performed in the medial and posterior (exten-
sor arms). As skin redundancy often contributes significantly to 
laxity of the arms, patients need to be advised that the goal is 
to  decrease  the  convexity  of  the  arms  as  opposed  to  complete 
removal of all redundancy of skin and soft tissue.

Excessive tumescent solution should be avoided in the upper 
arm region as there is a small risk for creation of “compartment 
syndrome” whereby a functional tourniquet develops distal to 
the infused region, brought about by fluid-induced compression 
of neural, vascular, and lymphatic structures in the area.

One  position  for  the  procedure  is  to  lay  the  patient's  arms 
entirely flat with palms facing down over the hips with the body 
in  a  lateral  decubitus  position,  which  will  serve  to  maximally 
expose the posterior portion of the arm. The other position that 
is helpful is for the patient to be in a supine or lateral decubitus 
position with a hand brought behind the head, forearm flexed, 
and elbow pointing out, which also exposes the posterior por-
tion  of  the  arm.  Liposuction  to  the  axilla  should  be  avoided 
given the risks of damage to the branches of the brachial plexus 
in this area.

neck and jowls
The goal of liposuction of the neck and jowls is to give improved 
definition  of  the  cervicomental  angle  and  jawline  [36–39]. 
Aging  in  this  region  can  be  caused  by  a  multitude  of  factors, 
including  ptosis  of  fatty  tissue  and  decreased  elastic  tissue. 
These changes in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck allow the 
anterior margins of the platysma to slide forward and result in 
protrusion  of  the  submental  and  submandibular  fat  [36–39]. 
Patients with excess laxity in this area may benefit from a spec-
trum  of  procedures,  including  facelifts,  chin  implants,  platys-
mal  plication,  and  CO2  laser  resurfacing.  Careful  selection  of 
patients who will benefit from liposuction in this area is critical 
(Figure 53.7) [36–39].

Fullness in the neck and jowls can be attributed to a variety of 
factors, including redundant skin, muscle, or a low or anteriorly 
positioned hyoid bone (creating an obtuse cervicomental angle) 
[36–39]. Patients with low set or anteriorly placed hyoid bones 
are unlikely to benefit from liposuction alone. The ideal candi-
date should have a hyoid positioned at the level of the C3–C4 

(a)

(b)

Figure 53.6  Arm, anterior view: (a) pretreatment; (b) post-treatment.

468

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

(a)

(b)

Figure 53.7  Neck, lateral view: (a) pretreatment; (b) post-treatment.

vertebrae, excellent skin elasticity, and a palpable submental fat 
pad [36–39].

In order to mark the neck liposuction patient, the anatomic 
boundaries  must  be  distinguished,  including  the  mandibular 
border, jowls, submental fat pad, anterior borders of the ster-
nocleidomastoid, platsyma band, and thyroid cartilage (Figure 
53.8)  [36–39].  The  patient  should  be  seated  with  the  head 
gently extended posteriorly and the chin raised with the small 
supportive pillow for neck support [36–39].

For liposuction of the neck and jowls, entry points should 
be  along  the  submental  crease,  just  below  or  lateral  to  the 
jowls  [36–39].  If  extensive  lateral  neck  fat  is  present,  addi-
tional  insertion  sites  can  be  made  in  a  neck  fold  behind  the 
earlobes  [36–39].  The  suctioning  plane  should  begin  just 
above  the  platysma  muscle,  with  subsequent  suction  with 
small  (1.5–2 mm)  cannulae  [36–39].  The  cannula  should  be 
delicately  applied  in  this  area  to  suction  above  the  platsyma 
in  order  to  avoid  placing  the  cannula  through  the  platsyma 
[36–39]. In addition, the marginal mandibular branch of the 
facial  nerve  is  located  in  this  area  (below  the  angle  of  the 

mandible at the anterior border of the masseter muscle), and 
care must be taken to avoid trauma to the nerve [36–39]. The 
nerve becomes increasingly superficial and more likely to be 
injured  along  or  posterior  (up  to  two  fingerbreadths)  to  the 
posterior  border  of  the  sternocleidomastoid  muscle  [36–39]. 
The cannula can be used to elevate the subcutaneous fat away 
from the underlying structures in these areas to avoid injury 
to underlying structures [26–30]. Also, it is important to avoid 
over suctioning cheeks and along the jowl–cheek margin, as 
an  undesirable  hollowed  appearance  results  from  over  suc-
tioning in this area [36–39].

Female breast
Traditional  breast  reduction  in  women,  reduction  mammo-
plasty,  requires  general  anesthesia  with  significant  associated 
risks, including, seroma, hematoma, scarring, skin loss, and fat 
necrosis  [40,41].  The  procedure  involves  making  a  T-shaped 
incision  extending  from  the  areola  to  the  inframammary 
folds, which in the majority of cases leaves an unattractive scar 
[40,41].

(a)

(b)

Figure 53.8  Neck liposuction markings: (a) anterior view; (b) lateral view.

Liposuction as a means to decrease breast size is a relatively 
new procedure and has only been described in the literature in 
a handful of cases [40,41]. For women with moderate to severe 
breast enlargement, liposuction may not be sufficient given that 
it may not address issues of excess skin and soft tissue [40,41]. A 
preoperative breast weight should be taken to establish the opti-
mal amount of fat reduction and to provide baseline to calculate 
the postoperative percent fat reduction [40,41]. Breast volume is 
often determined using a water displacement methodology. The 
breast is immersed into a five liter beaker filled with water, and 
the displaced water volume is measured in order to estimate the 
breast volume [42].

The patient should be positioned supine with the ipsilateral 
arm behind the head or with the arm posteriorly displaced in 
order to bring the breast flat against the chest wall [40,41]. Two 
incisions for suctioning should be made, one in the lateral and 
one  in  the  medial  inframammary  crease  [42].  Initially,  it  was 
thought that suctioning should focus in the mid to deep plane 
of the lateral and inferior quadrants of the breast [40,41]. How-
ever, Habbema advocates for a fan like pattern throughout the 
layers of the tissue for optimal contraction [42]. Subareolar and 
upper lateral quadrants, those areas with the highest concentra-
tion of glandular tissue, are spared from aggressive suction.[42]. 
It is less desirable for suction in the superior quadrant to pre-
serve the natural contour of the breast, as the upper quadrants 
typically  flatten  with  age  [40,41].  The  surgeon  determines  the 
amount of fat removed, calculated as a percentage of total fat, 
based upon preoperative measurement [40,41].

It was initially recommended that less than one-third of the 
measured total breast volume be removed in one session [40,41]; 
however  more  recent  reports  of  up  to  87%  reduction  suggest 
it  might  be  useful  for  larger  scale  reduction  [42].  Habbema 
reported a series of 151 women who underwent liposuction of 
the breasts [42]. Preoperative breast volume ranged from 175–
4000 mL with an average of 1005 mL [42]. The breast volume 
removed ranged from 24–87% with an average of 53%. Preop-
erative breast ptosis ranged from 0.8–13 cm with an average of 
6.5 cm. The average ptosis reduction was 50.2%. Furthermore, 
77.5% and 21.8% of patients reported being very or mostly satis-
fied, respectively [42]. From the study, Habbema recommended 
the following selection criteria for breast reduction using lipo-
suction  with  TLA:  patients  who  decline  traditional  reduction 
mammoplasty, patients interested in a reduction of 50% or less, 
women 45 years-old or older, un-operated large breasts, asym-
metry in breast volume, and patients who are poor candidates 
for general anesthesia [42].

Breast reduction in female breasts by liposuction alone rep-
resents  a  promising  new  application  of  this  technology  and 
presents  significant  advantages  relative  to  traditional  reduc-
tion mammoplasties, including less risk associated with general 
anesthesia, as well as benefits of decreased infection and scar-
ring risks. Analysis of breast liposuction aspirate in 61 patients 
revealed that less than 15% had any evidence of glandular tissue. 
None of the aspirate specimens revealed any large glands [43]. 

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

469

This suggests that, unlike reduction mammoplasty, liposuction 
of the breast does not pose a risk to future lactation [43].

Male chest
A  careful  history  and  physician  examination  should  be  per-
formed in men before attempting liposuction in the male chest, 
with  specific  attention  to  the  palpation  of  the  gynecomas-
tia  and  regional  lymph  nodes  [40,41,44].  Several  authors  also 
recommend  palpation  of  the  testes  to  evaluate  for  testicular 
tumors [40,41]. While rare, breast tumors do occur in men and 
thus all  masses with suspicion for malignancy (asymmetry, firm, 
or  fixed)  should  undergo  mammogram,  ultrasound,  and/or 
biopsy  [40,41].  Etiologies  for  male  breast  enlargement  include 
fatty  deposition,  glandular  deposition,  medications  (estrogen, 
spironolactone, digitalis, diazepam, phenytoin and clomiphene), 
alcoholism,  hypogonadism,  and  hormone-secreting  tumors  of 
the pituitary, adrenal gland, and testis [40,41].

As the male breast is one of the most vascular sites for TLA, care 
must be taken to ensure the vasoconstrictive effect of epinephrine 
has taken effect prior to the procedure and that the pectoralis mus-
cle is not traumatized during the anesthesia infusion or liposuc-
tion [40,41]. The male breast is also one of the most fibrous sites in 
which liposuction is performed, with significant variability in the 
content of glandular and fatty tissue present [40,41].

Incision  sites  for  the  liposuction  cannula  are  placed  along 
the periphery of the breast and in the inframammary crease to 
allow for complete infiltration and criss-cross suction of adipose 
tissue  [40,41].  Suction  is  started  with  microcannula,  allowing 
for  easier  tissue  penetration,  such  as  the  16-gauge  Capistrano 
cannula for initial tunneling with transition to a larger 14-gauge 
cannula [40,41]. The subareolar breast tissue can be gently suc-
tioned with the use of a 16-gauge short (5 or 7 cm) Capistrano 
cannula [40,41].

anesthesia technique

Tumescent solution should be prepared on the day of the pro-
cedure utilizing 0.9% sodium chloride solution (normal saline) 
[8–12,19].  The  anesthetic  is  lidocaine,  available  in  1%  or  2% 
solution.  Epinephrine  and  sodium  bicarbonate  are  added  to 
aid  in  vasoconstriction  and  buffering,  respectively  [8–12,19]. 
The  doses  utilized  for  TLA  range  from  conservative  doses  of 
30–35 mg/kg  to  as  high  as  55 mg/kg  [8–12,19].  Doses  at  the 
lower  end  of  the  range  can  be  utilized  when  patients  are  tak-
ing  medications  that  inhibit  cytochrome  P450,  specifically 
the  CYP3A4  isoenzyme,  responsible  for  the  clearance  of  lido-
caine  [8–12,19].  In  particularly  smaller  individuals,  lidocaine 
concentrations  should  be  limited  to  0.05–0.075%  as  the  total 
dose is limited by weight [8–12,19]. Recent studies show that a 
lidocaine concentration as low as 0.04% can provide adequate 
anesthesia [45]. Higher concentrations are generally advised in 
more  sensitive  areas,  such  as  the  chest,  waist,  and  periumbili-
cal area [8–12,19,45]. Epinephrine is added to the solution at a 

470

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

concentration  of  1:1,000,000  (1 mg  1:1000  epinephrine  in  1 L 
solution of saline) [8–12,19]. Finally, bicarbonate is added in the 
amount of 10 mEq in 1 L [8–12,19]. Before mixing, the saline 
should be warmed to enhance the comfort of the patient during 
the infiltration process [8–12,19].

TLA should be administered once the patient has been com-
fortably positioned for the procedure. Insertion sites should be 
anesthetized  with  1%  lidocaine  with  epinephrine  (usually  at  a 
dilution of 1:100,000) [8–12,19]. The incisions are created using a 
No. 11 blade through the dermis to allow entry of the blunt-tipped 
infiltration cannula into the subcutaneous tissue [8–12,19]. The 
infiltration  cannula  should  be  inserted  and  the  infiltration  rate 
should be appropriately adjusted for the anatomic site [8–12,19]. 
The infiltration rates should be less than 100 mL per minute to 
minimize patient discomfort [8–12,19]. Gentle advancement of 
the cannula should occur prior to infiltration of the tumescent 
solution  [8–12,19].  Anesthesia  should  be  performed  using  a 
fanned approach from the entry site with care taken not to put 
excessive strain on the entry site [8–12,19]. If the patient experi-
ences excessive pain, slowing the rate of infiltration can improve 
patient  comfort  [8–12,19].  The  infiltration  endpoint  is  reached 
when the edges of the field become firm and indurated and the 
area  of  infiltration  is  blanched  (secondary  to  vasoconstriction 
effect of epinephrine) [8–12,19].

standard and advanced operating technique

After  infiltration  of  the  TLA  is  complete  and  after  allowing 
15–20 minutes for full epinephrine effect to occur, fat suction 
can  begin  [8–12,19].  Suction  can  be  performed  through  the 
same sites  of insertion of the  TLA [8–12,19].  More  aggressive 
thinner  cannulas  should  be  used  first  to  break  up  the  fibrous 
septae and to create tunnels for subsequent removal of fat with 
larger  (3 mm),  less  aggressive  cannulae  [8–12,19].  Suction 
movement should proceed in a linear and vertical fashion, with 
little  horizontal  movement,  in  the  creation  of  subcutaneous 
tunnels [8–12,19]. The cannula should be directed  so that  the 
aperture is facing downwards or opposite the dermis [8–12,19]. 
Both  deep  and  superficial  tunneling  should  be  performed  so 
that the physician's free or “smart hand” monitors the motion 
and position of the cannula tip [8–12,19].

Initially during the suctioning, the area is tense from the infil-
tration  of  TLA;  however,  as  the  suctioning  proceeds,  the  area 
becomes  more  flaccid  and  techniques  are  needed  to  maintain 
the  cannula  in  a  uniform  plane  to  ensure  uniform  suctioning 
[8–12,19].  One  helpful  technique  is  to  have  the  assistant  gen-
tly  grasp  the  flaccid  skin  adjacent  to  the  suction  area  and  roll 
in such a way to flatten the suctioned area [8–12,19]. Another 
helpful  technique  is  to  have  an  assistant  flatten  the  region  by 
placing counter traction of the skin while the surgeon continues 
suction guided by their “smart hand” [8–12,19].

increasingly bloody and devoid of suctionable fat and palpa-
tion  of  the  area  revealing  minimal  persistence  of  fat  pockets 
and  even  distribution  of  the  remaining  fat  [8–12,19].  When 
this occurs, suctioning should stop in this area, and the can-
nula  should  be  repositioned.  Localized  pockets  of  fat  should 
be sought out and removed by placing the cannula (with the 
suction  apparatus  off)  into  tunnels  and  gently  pulling  back 
and  up  against  the  dermis.  Pockets  of  fat  may  become  more 
pronounced  with  this  maneuver  and  further  suctioning  of 
these  well-defined  areas  helps  create  a  more  even  result. The 
total volume of fat removed in a single procedure should not 
exceed 4500 mL. This equates to 6000–8000 mL of total aspi-
rate,  assuming  50–60%  of  the  aspirate  of  fat.  If  the  patient 
possesses areas of fat where the estimated loss is greater than 
4500 mL, treatments should be planned over multiple sessions 
[8–12,19].

equipment

The  fundamental  equipment  needed  to  perform  liposuction 
includes an aspiration pump, liposuction cannulae, the infiltra-
tion  pump,  a  sterile  field,  syringes  with  1%  lidocaine  with  or 
without epinephrine (to anesthetize the cannula insertion sites), 
a No. 11 blade, gauze, and clamps to secure tubing and drapes 
in place [46].

Various infiltration pumps for administration of the tumes-
cent  solution  are  available,  the  most  optimal  of  which  allow 
adjustment  of  the  rate  of  administration  of  the  TLA  solution 
[46]. The infiltration pump is connected directly to the tumes-
cent solution via intravenous tubing which is threaded through 
the power pump and connected directly to the tumescent solu-
tion through an infiltration cannula or needle [46].

The aspiration pump is an electrically powered device which 
is  designed  to  create  negative  pressure  and  collect  fatty  tissue 
throughout the procedure [46]. There are a variety of machines 
available, the ideal of which are those with a closed collection 
system, overflow trap, and disposable air filter with efficient and 
uninterrupted suction [46].

The  liposuction  cannulae  are  comprised  of  stainless  steel, 
aluminum,  deldrin,  or  brass  [46].  The  shape,  diameter,  hole 
placement, and size determine the ease of fat removal as well 
as  the  relative  injury  to  the  tissue  [46].  Easier  fat  removal  is 
achieved with cannulae with several holes and a large-diameter 
tapered end (usually 3 mm), where the holes are located distally 
on the tip (e.g. Capistrano, Pinto, Cobra, Becker, and Elimina-
tor cannulae; Wells Johnson Company, Tucson, AZ, USA) [46]. 
Cannulae  with  smaller  diameters  (less  than  3 mm),  blunted 
ends, fewer holes, or holes placed more proximally relative to 
the tip are less aggressive and gentler to the tissue (e.g. Klein, 
Fournier, Standard cannulae; Wells Johnson Company, Tucson, 
AZ, USA) [46].

The  endpoint  of  fat  suction  is  determined  by  a  number  of 
factors, such as the observation that the aspirate has become 

In  fibrous  tissue,  it  is  best  to  begin  with  a  cannula  with  an 
aggressive  tip  and  a  small  diameter  [46].  As  the  fibrous  tissue 

is diminished, a less aggressive cannula with a larger diameter 
tip can be utilized [46]. In areas where the fat is soft, such as the 
inner thigh, smaller cannulae can be utilized to avoid over suc-
tion. Per the guidelines of the American Academy of Dermatol-
ogy regarding liposuction, the cannula diameter should be no 
greater than 4.5 mm in diameter.[46]. As most liposuction can-
nula utilized are between 2 and 3 mm in size, they comply with 
this recommendation [46].

Ultrasound  assisted  liposuction  was  introduced  in  the  late 
1990s and is associated with increased complications and is not 
recommended. Studies have shown an increased risk of blister-
ing, seromas, dermal necrosis and burns [47–49].

complications

Long-term experience has shown that the complications associ-
ated with liposuction under the TLA technique are minor and 
significantly less than those associated with complications with 
liposuction performed under intravenous or general anesthesia 
[28–34]. The most common complications of liposuction using 
TLA  include  bruising,  swelling,  soreness,  inflammation  of  the 
incision sites, and postoperative fatigue [28–34].

preoperative phase
Obtaining informed consent from each patient prior to the pro-
cedure  and  reviewing  the  risks  of  the  procedure,  especially  of 
skin contour abnormalities in areas of poor skin elasticity, will 
allow the patient to be more accepting of the final results [26]. 
It should be emphasized that there are limitations to the proce-
dure. Safety dictates the amount of fat that can be removed [26]. 
Additionally, as a body contouring procedure, liposuction will 
not improve pre-existing scars, pigmentary variation, cellulite, 
indentations, and skin textural changes [26]. Finally, it should 
be emphasized to the patient that adoption and/or continuing 
a regular exercise routine will assist with skin contraction and 
maintenance of results [26].

Preoperative assessment should also include a physical exam 
for  possible  abdominal  wall  hernias  [26].  Blood  tests  should 
be performed to ensure the patient does not have an underly-
ing bleeding tendency or liver transaminitis, which could also 
potentially be a sign of impaired clotting factor synthesis [26]. 
At a minimum, a full blood count with platelets, liver function 
tests, and a prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time (PT/
PTT)  should  be  checked  [26].  Detailed  questions  regarding 
bleeding  complications  with  prior  deliveries  or  surgeries  may 
elicit a history of bleeding which gives an indication for further 
work-up  [26].  This  additional  workup  may  include:  bleeding 
time, von Willebrand's factor, factor V Leiden level, or hemo-
philia screen [26].

A  review  of  medication  intake,  both  prescription  and  over-
the-counter,  is  essential  to  the  safety  and  success  of  the  TLA 
procedure [26]. Intake of aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

471

inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs)  is  contraindicated  before  sur-
gery,  because  of  inhibition  of  platelet  activity  and  subsequent 
increased  perioperative  bleeding  [26].  Aspirin  should  be  dis-
continued 7–10 days prior to surgery [26]. Ibuprofen and other 
NSAIDs should be discontinued 4–7 days prior to surgery [26]. 
The discontinuation of vitamins and herbal supplements, such 
as vitamin E, chondroitin, glucosamine, Ginkgo biloba, ginseng 
and fish oil is encouraged because of the anticoagulant effects of 
these agents [26].

Intraoperative phase
The  key  to  achieving  a  smooth  end  result  with  liposuction 
involves performing the suction from multiple angles and direc-
tions in a criss-cross motion.

During the procedure, sterile technique must be emphasized, 
with the use of antiseptic washes to the area the night before and 
immediately prior to the surgery. Superficial infections, usually 
around  incision  sites,  are  typically  culture  positive  for  staphy-
lococcus  and  streptococcus.  However,  deeper  infections  which 
occur  in  a  delayed  fashion  several  months  after  the  procedure 
occur  with  atypical  mycobacterial  species  (Mycobacterium 
abscessus, M. chelonae, M. fortuitum) and have been associated 
with improper cleaning and sterilization of surgical instruments.
During liposuction, the surgeon should always use the non-
dominant  hand  or  “smart  hand”  to  assess  the  position  of  the 
liposuction  cannula  at  all  times.  Elevating  the  skin  with  the 
“smart  hand”  and  then  passing  the  cannula  along  the  adipose 
tissue horizontally will preserve the integrity of the abdominal 
wall. Superficial placement of the cannula in this area is recom-
mended  to  maximize  the  amount  of  fat  removed,  induce  skin 
contraction, and allow a safe layered approach to fat removal.

One  of  the  significant  advantages  of  liposuction  using  the 
TLA technique is that it minimizes blood loss. However, often 
surgeons  will  fail  to  wait  long  enough  after  infiltration  of  the 
TLA  solution  until  the  vasoconstrictive  effects  of  epinephrine 
(15–20  minutes  after  infiltration  of  TLA  solution)  have  taken 
effect. During the procedure, the surgeons should keep a close 
eye on the aspirate, directing the cannula away from areas where 
there are greater volumes of blood relative to fat in the aspirate. 
Selecting the appropriate cannula size (4 mm should be the larg-
est utilized) and blunt tip style will have a significant role in the 
decreased tendency for bleeding and hematoma formation. To 
decrease the risk of bleeding and hematoma formation, larger 
procedures such as high volume abdominal liposuction, should 
be considered in two stages.

During TLA, the maximum dosage of lidocaine used should 
be  55 mg/kg  [10].  The  lowest  dose  of  lidocaine  that  provides 
complete local anesthesia should be utilized. The normal saline 
utilized  should  contain  lidocaine  in  concentrations  of  0.05–
0.1% [10]. The peak plasma concentration of lidocaine occurs 
12–18 hours postoperatively, given the slow systemic absorption 
of lidocaine from the adipose tissue [10]. Patients, family, and 
staff taking care of the patient should be aware of the symptoms 
and signs of lidocaine toxicity.

472

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

postoperative phase
Postoperative  compression  garments  will  both  enhance  skin 
contraction and assist with more rapid removal of local tumes-
cent solution. The compression garment is also critical in order 
to minimize or eliminate bleeding, hematoma and seroma for-
mation, and to speed wound healing. Patient comfort after the 
procedure is also greatly improved by wearing compression gar-
ments. In general, it is recommended that the garment be worn 
around the clock for the first week and be worn half-time for the 
subsequent 2–3 weeks.

Any  signs  of  infection  should  be  evaluated  and  cultured  as 
soon  as  possible.  With  atypical  mycobacterial  infections,  it  is 
important  to  obtain  the  culture  medium  requirements  of  the 
laboratory and to notify the laboratory that special processing 
of the specimen is needed. A rare case of necrotizing fasciitis has 
been reported with liposuction and thus any patient presenting 
with severe pain out of proportion to examination, surface blis-
tering,  and  tenderness  should  be  promptly  evaluated  for  pos-
sible débridement and started immediately on broad-spectrum 
antibiotics and supportive care.

Lidocaine,  epinephrine,  and  bicarbonate  utilized  in  the 
tumescent solution have all been proven to have antimicrobial 
effects on a diverse range of pathogens (bacteria, fungi, viruses) 
and thus the large dilute volume of anesthetic solution with the 
tumescent  technique  may  further  have  a  role  in  the  low  rates 
of infection  associated with  this  procedure.  In  addition,  using 
fine cannulas (4 mm or less) will minimize deep bruising and 
seroma formation and infection risk.

Leaving  the  cannula  sites  open  to  drain  leads  to  decreased 
hematoma  and  seroma  formation.  If  significant  hematomas 
form, they will usually spontaneously resolve or can be evacu-
ated  once  they  have  liquefied.  Large  hematomas  can  be  very 
uncomfortable for the patient and can prevent him or her from 
returning quickly to usual routines. Seromas need to be drained, 
sometimes  repeatedly  with  recurrence,  with  subsequent  com-
pression applied to the area (Figure 53.9).

Figure  53.9  Adverse complication of liposuction: skin dimpling and scar-
ring in medial thighs after overly aggressive liposuction procedure.

conclusions and future directions

Liposuction  with  local  TLA  is  a  procedure  that  was  designed 
and developed by dermatologic surgeons. It is a procedure with 
a documented safety record, longevity of results, and high levels 
of patient satisfaction. Liposuction using TLA in the office set-
ting  has  a  superior  safety  profile  which  has  been  documented 
in a number of studies in the dermatologic surgery literature by 
Bernstein, Hanke, Habbema, and Housman (Table 53.3).

Several of largest studies to date, the first by Hanke et al. in 
1995 [9], reported data on 44,014 body areas treated with lipo-
suction. There were no serious complications  such as death, 
emboli, hypovolemic shock, perforation of thorax or perito-
neum, thrombophlebitis, seizures, or toxic reactions to drugs. 
Subsequently, in 2002, Housman et al. [34] reported data on 
66,570 liposuction procedures. No deaths were reported and 
the  serious  adverse  event  ratio  was  low  at  0.68  per  1000.  In 
2004, Hanke surveyed 39 tumescent liposuction centers and 
688 patients treated with the tumescent technique to examine 
liposuction practice and safety [50]. The overall complication 
rate was 0.7%, with a minor complication rate of 0.57% and 
a  major  complication rate  of 0.14%  (1/688 patients). Patient 
satisfaction  was  very  high  among  the  surveyed  population, 
where  91%  of  patients  surveyed  were  positive  about  their 
decision to have liposuction. Habbema in 2010 [45] reported 
3430  procedures  in  which  he  gradually  decreased  the  con-
centration  of  lidocaine  in  the  TLA  in  order  to  identify  the 
minimum concentration required for anesthesia. He reported 
that  400  mg/L  in  most  body  areas,  and  500  mg/L  for  more 
sensitive areas, provided adequate anesthesia [45]. Use of this 
dilute concentration further lowers the risk of lidocaine toxicity 
with TLA.

In contrast, in the plastic surgery literature (Table 53.3) the 
case  fatality  and  complication  rates  were  significantly  higher 
for liposuction. In the largest study to date among plastic sur-
geons by Grazer and de Jong in 2000 [51]. evaluating data on 
496,245 procedures, the fatality rate was 19.1/100,000; where 
the most common causes of death included thromboembolism 
(23.1%),  abdomen/viscous  perforation  (14.6%),  anesthesia/
sedation/medication  (10%),  fat  embolism  (8.5%),  cardiore-
spiratory failure (5.4%), massive infection (5.4%), and hemor-
rhage (4.6%).

Laser-assisted liposuction
Current  studies  are  undergoing  evaluating  the  ability  to  liq-
uefy or rupture fat cells using various lasers [52–58]. The laser 
devices most widely utilized to assist with liposuction include a 
helium-neon  laser  (635 nm),  a  diode  laser  (600–800 nm),  and, 
most recently, a 1064 nm neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet 
(Nd:YAG) laser [52–58]. The studies with a 635 nm diode laser 
utilized to release fat from adipocytes demonstrated changes in 
the adipose structure utilizing electron microscopy and magnetic 
resonance  imaging  (MRI)  [52–59].  Six  minutes  of  exposure  to 
the 635 nm diode laser at 1.2 J/cm2 resulted in a transitory pore 

table 53.3  Liposuction	safety	studies.

Study/author

Hughes	[68].

Year

2001

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

473

number of
procedures

Specialty

number of
fatalities

Fatality rate

94,159

Plastic	surgery

Not	stated

Jackson,	Dolsky	[67].

1997

200,000

Cosmetic	surgery	(derm,	
ENT,	etc.)

ASPRS	Task	Force	on	
Liposuction	[66].

Dillerud	[65].

Temourian,	Rogers	[64].

Newman,	Dolsky	[63].

Grazer,	De	Jong	[51].

Hanke	et	al.	[50].

Habbema	[45].

Housman	et	al.	[34].

Hanke	et	al.	[9].

Bernstein,	Hanke	[8].

1998

24,295

Plastic	surgery

1991

1991

1984

2000

2004

2010

2002

1995

1988

3,511

112,756

5,458

Plastic	surgery

Plastic	surgery

Cosmetic	surgery(derm,	
ENT,	etc.)

496,245

Plastic	surgery

688

3,430

66,570

15,336

9,478

Dermatologic	surgery

Dermatologic	surgery

Dermatologic	surgery

Dermatologic	surgery

Dermatologic	surgery

1

5

0

15

0

95

0

0

0

0

0

1/47,	415	(lipo	only)
1/7,314	(lipo	and	other	
procedures)
1/3,281	(lipo	and	
abdominoplasty

2.4/100,000

20.6/100,000

0

12.7/100,000

1/38,426

19.1/100,000

0

0

0

0

0

in  the  cell  membrane  with  resultant  release  of  the  fat  into  the 
interstitial space [52–59].

Recent  studies  have  evaluated  both  the  clinical  and  histo-
pathologic  effects  of  the  1064 nm  Nd:YAG  laser  and  980 nm 
diode laser in laser-assisted lipolysis [52–59]. A recent study by 
Mordon  et  al.  [52]  demonstrated  both  enhanced  lipolysis  and 
skin contraction with the laser-assisted devices. Using an opti-
mal thermal modeling approach, the authors demonstrated that 
increased heat generated by the laser in the deep reticular dermis 
may result in collagen and elastin synthesis and resultant skin 
tightening  which  they  observed  clinically  after  laser  lipolysis. 
Goldman demonstrated skin contraction and enhanced lipolysis 
with the use of the 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser for submental lipo-
suction [53]. Clinical results of tissue tightening were correlated 
with  histologic  analysis  confirming  laser-induced  rupture  of 
the adipocyte membrane. Kim et al. [54] reported the results of  
29 patients treated with laser lipolysis with the 1064 nm Nd:YAG 
device  and  demonstrated  clinical  improvement  (at  3  months, 
average of 37%) as well as decreased adiposity as measured by 
MRI  (average  of  17%  reduction  in  volume).  Greater  improve-
ment was noted in smaller volume areas, such as the submen-
tum, in both clinical outcome and dermal tightening. However, 
several other recent comparative trials evaluating laser-assisted 
liposuction with the 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser have shown equivo-
cal results with laser-assisted liposuction relative to liposuction 
alone [57–59].

Laser-assisted  liposuction  has  been  purported  to  result  in 
both  mechanical  cavitation  of  fat  resulting  in  greater  ease  of 

suction  and  greater  skin  retraction  after  the  procedure  result-
ing in enhanced tightening. However, further studies are highly 
needed  to  evaluate  scientifically  the  benefits  of  pretreatment 
with lasers for ease of adipose removal and enhanced cosmesis 
[52–58].

Liposuction with tLa for lipedema
Lipedema,  or  adipositas  dolorosa,  is  a  painful,  hereditary  dis-
order  affecting  women  that  involves  accumulation  of  excess 
fatty tissue on the lower extremities [60–62]. The enlargement 
of the lower extremities is disproportionate to the trunk, upper 
extremities,  neck  and  face  [60–62].  Patients  experience  pain, 
sensitivity to touch and pressure, and bruise easily after minor 
trauma [60–62]. Medical histories on lipedema patients reveal 
that diet and exercise may not improve the affected area [60–62]. 
Physical  exam  reveals  normal  appearing  feet  with  enlarged 
calves above the malleoli. This sharp demarcation at the ankle 
is known as the cuff sign of lipedema [60–62]. Approximately 
30% of patients have upper extremity involvement, which simi-
larly shows an abrupt transition at the wrists, sparing the hands 
[60–62]. Morbidity results from both the cosmetic and physical 
limitations of the disease.

Liposuction with TLA is a safe and highly effective treatment 
for  lipedema.  In  2010,  Rapprich  and  Dingler  [61]  reported  a 
series of 25 women with lipedema treated with liposuction. On 
average, the volume of the legs was reduced by approximately 
7%. Patients also reported a statistically and clinically significant 
reduction in pain and psychological strain. In 2011, Schmeller 

474

antI-aGInG  Skin Contouring Techniques

et al. [62] reported survey results of 112 women with lipedema 
treated with liposuction. All patients noted improved shape and 
body proportions. Patients similarly noted symptom improve-
ment  including  decreased  spontaneous  pain,  sensitivity  to 
pressure, edema, and bruising. Patients experienced improved 
movement, cosmesis, and quality of life.

All of the illustrations in the chapter are provided courtesy of 

C. William Hanke, MD.

references

1  Fischer  G.  (1990)  Liposculpture:  the  “correct”  history  of  liposuc-

tion. Part I. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 16, 1087–9.

21  Brownell KD, Rodin J. (1994) Medical, metabolic, and psychologi-

cal effects of weight cycling. Arch Intern Med 154, 1325–30.

22  Ozgur  F,  Tuncali  D,  Guler  Gursu  K.  (1998)  Life  satisfaction,  self-
esteem, and body image: a psychosocial evaluation of aesthetic and 
reconstructive surgery candidates. Aesthetic Plast Surg 22, 412–9.
23  Mann  MW,  Palm  MD,  Sengelmann  RD.  (2008)  New  advances  in 

liposuction technology. Semin Cutan Med Surg 27, 72–82.

24  Hanke CW. (1989) Liposuction under local anesthesia. J Dermatol 

Surg Oncol 15, 12.

25  Lillis  PJ.  (1988)  Liposuction  surgery  under  local  anesthesia:  lim-
ited blood loss and minimal lidocaine absorption. J Dermatol Surg 
Oncol 14, 1145–8.

26  Butterwick Kaminer MS. (2003) Liposuction consultation and pre-
operative considerations. In: NarisRS, ed. Safe Liposuction and Fat 
Transfer. New York: Marcel Dekker.

2  Illouz YG. (1983) Body contouring by lipolysis: a 5-year experience 

27  Jacob CI KM. (2003) Tumescent anesthesia. In: Narins RS, ed. Safe 

with over 3000 cases. Plast Reconstr Surg 72, 591–7.

Liposuction and Fat Transfer. New York: Marcel Dekker;.

3  Fournier P. (1987) Body Sculpting Through Syringe Liposuction and 
Autologous Fat Re–injection. Corona del Mar: Samuel Rolf Interna-
tion.

28  Hanke  CW,  Coleman  WP,  3rd.  (1999)  Morbidity  and  mortal-
ity  related  to  liposuction.  Questions  and  answers.  Dermatol  Clin 
17,899–902, viii.

4  Hanke  CW,  Moy  RL,  Roenigk  RK,  Roenigk  HH,  Jr.,  Spencer  JM, 
Tierney EP, et al. (2013) Current status of surgery in dermatology. J 
Am Acad Dermatol 69, 972–1001.

5  Asken S. (1988) Liposuction Surgery and Autologous Fat Transplan-

29  Coleman IW, Hanke CW, Lillis P, Bernstein G, Narins R. (1999) 
Does the location of the surgery or the specialty of the physician 
affect malpractice claims in liposuction? Dermatol Surg 25, 343–7.
30  Landry GL, Gomez JE. (1991) Management of soft tissue injuries. 

tation. Norwalk, CT: Appleton and Lange.

Adolescent Medicine (Philadelphia, Pa) 2, 125–40.

6  Asken  S.  (1986)  Manual  of  Liposuction  Surgery  and  Autologous 
Fat Transplantation under Local Anesthesia. Irvine, CA: Terry and 
Associates.

31  Klein  J.  (2000)  Miscellaneous  complications.  In:  Klein  JA,  ed. 
Tumescent  Technique,  Tumescent  Anesthesia  and  Microcannular 
Liposuction. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.

7  Klein JA. (1987) The tumescent technique for liposuction surgery. 

32  Narins RS, Coleman WP, 3rd. (1997) Minimizing pain for liposuc-

Am J Cosmet Surg 4:263–7.

tion anesthesia. Dermatol Surg 23, 1137–40.

8  Bernstein G, Hanke CW. (1988) Safety of liposuction: a review of 
9478 cases performed by dermatologists. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 14, 
1112–4.

33  Klein J. Thrombosis and embolism. (2000) In: Klein JA, ed. Tumes-
cent Technique, Tumescent Anesthesia and Microcannular Liposuc-
tion. St. Louis: Mosby.

9  Hanke CW, Bernstein G, Bullock S. (1995) Safety of tumescent lipo-
suction in 15,336 patients. National survey results. Dermatol Surg 
21, 459–62.

10  Klein JA. (1990) Tumescent technique for regional anesthesia per-
mits lidocaine doses of 35 mg/kg for liposuction. J Dermatol Surg 
Oncol 16, 248–63.

11  Ostad A, Kageyama N, Moy RL. (1996) Tumescent anesthesia with 
a lidocaine dose of 55 mg/kg is safe for liposuction. Dermatol Surg 
22, 921–7.

34  Housman TS, Lawrence N, Mellen BG, et al. (2002) The safety of 
liposuction: results of a national survey. Dermatol Surg 28, 971–8.

35  Narins RS. (2003) Abdomen, hourglass abdomen, flanks and modi-
fied  abdominoplasty.  In:  Naris  RS,  ed.  Safe  Liposuction  and  Fat 
Transfer. New York: Marcel Dekker.

36  Jacob  C,  Kaminer  MS.  (2003)  Surgical  approaches  to  the  aging 
neck. In: Narins RS, ed. Safe Liposuction and Fat Transfer. New York: 
Marcel Dekker.

37  Goddio AS. (1992) Suction lipectomy: the gold triangle at the neck. 

12  Klein J. (2000) Tumescent Technique: TLA and Microcannular Lipo-

Aesthetic Plast Surg. 16, 27–32.

suction. St Louis, MO: Mosby.

13  Sommer B, Sattler G, Hanke C, eds. (1999) Tumescenz Lokalanasthesie. 

Berlin (Germany): Springer.

14  Hanke C, Sommer B, Sattler G, eds. (2001) Tumescent local anesthe-

sia. Berlin (Germany): Springer.

15  Klein  JA.  (2000)  Tumescent  Technique:  Tumescent  Anesthesia  and 

Microcannular Liposcution. St Louis, MO: Mosby.

16  Hanke  CW,  Sattler  G.  (2005)  Liposuction  Procedures  in  Cosmetic 

Dermatology Series. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.

17  Hanke  CW,  Sattler  S,  Sommer  B.  (2007)  Textbook  of  Liposuction. 

Abingdon, United Kingdom: Informa Healthcare.

18  Narins  RS.  (2003)  Safe  Liposuction  and  Fat  Transfer.  New  York: 

Marcel Dekker.

19  Hanke CW. (1999) State-of-the-art liposculpture in the new millen-

nium. J Cutan Med Surg 3 Suppl 4, S36–42.

20  Pasman  WJ,  Saris  WH,  Westerterp-Plantenga  MS.  (1999)  Predic-

tors of weight maintenance. Obesity Research 7, 43–50.

38  Kamer FM, Minoli JJ. (1993) Postoperative platysmal band deform-
ity. A pitfall of submental liposuction. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 119, 193–6.

39  Key D. (2008) Efficacy of skin tightening and contour correction of 
the lower face and jowl using 1320 nm laser lipolysis: a comparison 
evaluation of lipolysis without aspiration, lipolysis with aspiration 
and aspiration without lipolysis. American Society of Laser Medicine 
and Surgery Conference; Kissimmee, FL.

40  Samdal F, Kleppe G, Amland PF, Abyholm F. (1994) Surgical treat-
ment  of  gynaecomastia.  Five  years'  experience  with  liposuction. 
Scan J Plast Recontstru Hand Surg 28, 123–30.

41  Matarasso A, Courtiss EH. (1991) Suction mammaplasty: the use 
of suction lipectomy to reduce large breasts. Plast Reconstr Surg 87, 
709–17.

42  Habbema L. (2009) Breast reduction using liposuction with tumes-
cent  local  anesthesia  and  powered  cannulas.  Dermatol  Surg  35, 
41–50; discussion – 2.

53. Liposuction: Manual, Mechanical, and Laser Assisted

475

43  Habbema L, Alons JJ. (2010) Liposuction of the female breast: a his-

tologic study of the aspirate. Dermatol Surg 36, 1406–11.

44  Gray LN. (1998) Liposuction breast reduction. Aesthetic Plast Surg 

22, 159–62.

45  Habbema L. (2010) Efficacy of tumescent local anesthesia with vari-
able lidocaine concentration in 3430 consecutive cases of liposuc-
tion. J Am Acad Dermatol 62, 988–94.

46  Bernstein G. (1999) Instrumentation for liposuction. Dermatol Clin 

17, 735–49, v.

47  Fodor PB, Watson J. (1998) Personal experience with ultrasound–
assisted  lipoplasty:  a  pilot  study  comparing  ultrasound–assisted 
lipoplasty with traditional lipoplasty. Plast Reconstr Surg 101, 1103–
16; discussion 17–9.

57  Dressel TZB. (2008) Laser liposuction a work in progress. Abstract 
presented at American Society of Laser Medicine and Surgery Con-
ference; Kissimmee, FL.

58  Weiss  R  WM,  Beasley  K.  (2008)  Laser  lipolysis:  skin  contraction 
effect of 1320 nm. Abstract presented at American Society of Laser 
Medicine and Surgery Conference; Kissimmee, FL.

59  DiBernardo B GM, Saluja R, Woodhall K, Reyes J. (2008) Mulicenter 
study evaluation of sequential emission of lasers for the treatment 
of  fat  with  laser  assisted  lipolysis.  Abstract  presented  at  American 
Society of Laser Medicine and Surgery Conference; Kissimmee, FL.
60  Langendoen  SI,  Habbema  L,  Nijsten  TE,  Neumann  HA.  (2009) 
Lipoedema: from clinical presentation to therapy. A review of the 
literature. Br J Dermatol 161, 980–6.

48  Maxwell GP, Gingrass MK. (1998) Ultrasound–assisted lipoplasty: 
a clinical study of 250 consecutive patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 101, 
189–202; discussion 3–4.

61  Rapprich S, Dingler A, Podda M. (2011) Liposuction is an effective 
treatment for lipedema – results of a study with 25 patients. J Dtsch 
Dermatol Ges 9, 33–40.

49  Klein  JA.  (2000)  Critique  of  ultrasonic  liposuction.  In:  Klein  JA, 
ed. Tumescent Technique, Tumescent Anesthesia and Microcannular 
Liposuction. St. Louis: Mosby.

62  Schmeller W, Hueppe M, Meier–Vollrath I. (2012) Tumescent lipo-
suction in lipoedema yields good long–term results. Br J Dermatol 
166, 161–8.

50  Hanke W, Cox SE, Kuznets N, Coleman WP, 3rd. (2004) Tumescent 
liposuction  report  performance  measurement  initiative:  national 
survey results. Dermatol Surg 30, 967–77; discussion 78.

63  Dolsky RL, Newman J, Fetzek JR, Anderson RW. (1987) Liposuc-
tion.  History,  techniques,  and  complications.  Dermatol  Clin  5, 
313–33.

51  Grazer FM, de Jong RH. (2000) Fatal outcomes from liposuction: 
census survey of cosmetic surgeons. Plast Reconstr Surg 105, 436–
46; discussion 47–8.

64  Teimourian B, Rogers WB, 3rd. (1989) A national survey of com-
plications associated with suction lipectomy: a comparative study. 
Plast Reconstr Surg 84, 628–31.

52  Mordon  SR,  Wassmer  B,  Reynaud  JP,  Zemmouri  J.  (2008)  Math-
ematical modeling of laser lipolysis. Biomed Eng Online 7:10.

53  Goldman  A.  (2006)  Submental  Nd:Yag  laser-assisted  liposuction. 

Lasers Surg Med 38, 181–4.

54  Kim KH, Geronemus RG. (2006) Laser lipolysis using a novel 1,064 

nm Nd:YAG Laser. Dermatol Surg 32, 241–48; discussion 7.

55  Ichikawa K, Miyasaka M, Tanaka R, et al. (2005) Histologic evalua-
tion of the pulsed Nd:YAG laser for laser lipolysis. Lasers Surg Med 
36, 43–6.

56  Morton S WB, Reynaud P, Zemmouri J. (2008) Mathematical mod-
eling  of  laser  lipolysis.  Abstract  presented  at  American  Society  of 
Laser Medicine and Surgery Conference; Kissimmee, FL.

65  Dillerud E, Haheim LL. (1993) Long–term results of blunt suction 
lipectomy assessed by a patient questionnaire survey. Plast Reconstr 
Surg 92, 35–42.

66  ASPRS Task Force on Liposuction [August 2, 2009]. Available from: 
www.plasticsurgery.org/Medical_Professionals/Publications/PSN_
News_Bulletins/ASPS_urges_members_to_exercise_caution_in_
lipoplasty_procedures_Task_Force_report_calls_for_scrutiny_of_
training_large_volume_removals.html.

67  Dolsky RL. (1997) State of the art in liposuction. Dermatol Surg 23, 

1192–3.

68  Hughes CE, 3rd. (1999) Patient selection, planning, and marking in 

ultrasound-assisted lipoplasty. Clin Plast Surg 26, 279–82; ix.

chapter 54
Liposuction of the neck

Kimberly J. Butterwick
Cosmetic Laser Dermatology, San Diego, CA, USA

Basic concepts

•	 Neck	liposuction	is	used	to	remove	excess	fat	from	the	neck	area	and	minimize	skin	sagging.
•	 Small	cannulas	and	multiple	entry	sites	are	necessary	to	achieve	even	fat	removal	without	ridging	or	deformity.
•	 Tumescent	anesthesia	is	key	to	reducing	pain	and	bruising	while	facilitating	fat	removal.
•	 Proper	selection	of	patients	with	fat	in	front	of	the	platysma	muscle	can	ensure	a	successful	outcome.
•	 Overremoval	of	fat	on	the	lower	neck	should	be	avoided.

introduction

One  of  the  first  signs  of  aging  that  prompts  patients  to  seek 
cosmetic treatment is the sagging neck. Tumescent liposuction 
of  this  area  often  dramatically  rejuvenates  the  neckline  and  is 
one of the most common body areas treated with this modal-
ity. Although this area may seem complicated to the novice sur-
geon, liposuction of the neck is relatively quick, safe, and readily 
learned. It is also well tolerated by patients with rapid healing in 
3–4 days. With careful selection of patients and good technique, 
this is a very rewarding area for patients and surgeon alike.

anatomy

The  primary  goal  of  liposuction  of  the  neck  is  restoration  of 
the  cervicomental  angle  (CMA).  This  is  the  angle  formed  by 
the  horizontal  plane  of  the  submental  region  and  the  vertical 
plane  of  the  neck  (Figure  54.1)  [1].  The  ideal  angle  is  gener-
ally considered to be 90–100° or more, up to 135° [1-3]. Other 
anatomic  features  of  a  youthful  neck  include  definition  of  the 
inferior  mandibular  border,  subthyroid  depression,  a  thyroid 
notch  visible  as  a  gentle  indentation,  and  a  visible  anterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle [1]. The face should 
be distinct from the neck such that a shadow should be cast on 
to the upper neck by the mandible. With aging and/or genetics, 
there may be accumulation of submental fat leading to blunting 
of the CMA or a “double chin.” Other anatomic factors may also 
contribute to an obtuse CMA such as a low-lying hyoid bone, 
microgenia,  or  retrognathia.  Ideally,  the  hyoid  bone  should 
be positioned at the C3–C4 level [4]. Lateral to the submental 
region,  there  may  be  loss  of  definition  of  the  submandibular 

region leading to an unattractive continuum between the face 
and the neck. Further contributing to fullness in this area may 
be ptotic submandibular glands located along the inferior mid-
portion  of  the  mandibular  ramus.  Other  stigmata  of  aging  in 
the  lower  third  of  the  face  may  need  to  be  addressed  such  as 
the presence of jowls and the development of a depression just 
medial to the jowl called the prejowl sulcus [5].

The platysma muscle is the thin layer of muscle just deep to 
the  submental  fat  pad  arising  from  the  cervicopectoral  fascia 
inferiorly  and  attaching  to  the  depressor  anguli  oris,  risorius, 
and mentalis muscles superiorly with a varying degree of decus-
sation  at  the  midline  [6].  Approximately  75%  of  the  time,  the 
fibers interlace 1–2 cm below the chin but separate in the supra-
hyoid region. Less often, the fibers decussate all the way down 
to the thyroid cartilage or not at all [7]. With aging, the medial 
fibers of the platysma muscle may hypertrophy into thick vis-
ible bands. Deep to the platysma, there may be a collection of 
fat  that  is  midline  and  submental.  While  the  preplatysmal  fat 
pad is accessible to tumescent liposuction, the retroplatysmal fat 
pad is not and requires direct excision for removal. Having the 
patient clench his or her teeth tightens the platysma and aides in 
distinguishing pre- or retroplatysmal fat [3]. The amount of sub-
mental  retroplatysmal  fat  has  been  estimated  to  vary  between 
30% and 57% of the total amount [8].

Also deep to the platysma is the marginal mandibular branch 
of the facial nerve, which is vulnerable to trauma during lipo-
suction of this area. This motor nerve runs along the mandible, 
parallel  to  the  ramus  and  is  typically  most  superficial  at  the 
anterior  border  of  the  masseter  muscle  (Figure  54.2).  How-
ever, the position of this nerve is variable, and it can be found 
3–4 cm inferior to the ramus. Caution must be exercised when 
suctioning  this  region  because  repeated  pressure  and  rubbing 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

476

54. Liposuction of the Neck

477

Frankfurt
plane 

CMA 105°

Figure 54.1  The youthful neck with a cervicomental angle of 100 °. The facial and Frankfurt plane are 
shown with glabella, subnasale, and chin in alignment.

Facial plane

Parotid gland

Sternocleidomastoid
muscle

Facial artery and vein

Marginal mandibular
branch of the facial nerve
Submandibular gland

Figure  54.2  Marginal  mandibular  branch  of  the 
facial nerve and other relevant anatomy.

Platysma muscle

from the cannula may result in temporary neuropraxis. While 
this typically lasts only 4–6 weeks, the distorted appearance is 
very distressing to the patient. To minimize injury to this nerve, 
patients should be asked to clench their teeth and the anterior 
edge of the masseter should be marked where the nerve is likely 
to be found, at or just below the level of the ramus. Other tech-
niques to minimize potential injury to this nerve are described 
below. Another structure less vulnerable to injury is the external 
jugular vein which passes over the sternocleidomastoid muscle. 
The vessel could be injured from inadvertent deep penetration 
by the cannula from a lateral position.

the floor, in which a horizontal line can be drawn through the high-
est point of the ear canal meatus and the lowest point of the orbital 
rim [10]. In this position, the chin is at the proper level for assess-
ing the CMA and for uniformity of preoperative and postoperative 
photographs. It is said that in this position, the glabella, nasal root, 
lip projection, and mentum should ideally align in a vertical facial 
plane. Utilizing this proportion enables the surgeon to assess the 
relative strength of the chin and the adequacy of volume in the face. 
The face should be divisible by thirds from the midline frontal scalp 
to  glabella,  the  glabella  to  the  infranasal  area,  and  the  infranasal 
area to the mentum. Often, the lower third of the face is reduced in 
volume because of bone loss, aging, genetics, or other factors.

aesthetic considerations

patient selection

To the novice surgeon, liposuction of the neck entails simply remov-
ing fat in the submental area. However,  there  are some  aesthetic 
principles and proportions that should be considered for optimal 
aesthetic results (Figure 54.1) [9,10]. When evaluating the cervico-
mental angle, one should evaluate the entire profile of the head and 
neck. The ideal profile should be viewed with the head held in the 
Frankfurt horizontal plane. This is the horizontal plane, parallel to 

Potential  candidates  for  submental  liposuction  fall  into  three 
groups:  correction  of  genetic  traits,  rejuvenation  for  mild  to 
moderate  aging, and  restoration  of  more advanced aging. The 
latter  two  groups  may  also  have  some  pre-existing  hereditary 
factors.  All  groups  should  be  assessed  systematically  and  all 
determinates to the aging neck evaluated (Table 54.1).

478

anti-aGinG  Skin Contouring Techniques

Table 54.1  Preoperative	assessment.

	 1	 Cervicomental	angle

	 2	 Degree	of	submental	fat

	 3	 Platysma	banding

	 4	 Degree	of	subplatysma	fat

	 5	 Hyoid	position

	 6	 Presence	of	jowls

	 7	 Position	of	submandibular	glands

	 8	 Adequacy	of	chin	profile

	 9	 Skin	thickness

10	 Skin	laxity

The first group of patients tends to be relatively young, typically 
less  than  30  years,  and  usually  of  normal  weight,  although  this 
deposit makes them look heavier or older than they are. Although 
the skin quality is excellent, the profile is obscured by submental 
fat. There are often contributing factors to the obtuse CMA, such 
as microgenia or a low-lying hyoid bone. These limitations should 
be addressed at the time of the consultation. Patients in this age 
group may also have quite full cheeks, but with age cheek hollows 
often  become  more  marked.  Removal  of  fat  in  the  cheeks  may 
cause the patient to look older and gaunt years later.

The next group of patients is typically 35–50 years old with 
some skin laxity brought about by photoaging, facial volume loss, 
and  a  genetic  tendency  towards  submental  fat  accumulation. 
They are often mildly overweight, but even at ideal weight, the 
problem persists.

The last group is over 55 years old and has submental fat but in 
addition significant skin redundancy, bone and volume loss, pla-
tysma banding, and photoaging. Many in this group would fare 
better  with  reconstructive  surgery,  but  at  times  the  risk:benefit 
ratio – that is, the improvement offered by liposuction alone – will 
satisfy those wishing to avoid the risks of a more invasive surgical 
procedure. These patients should be carefully assessed, as liposuc-
tion alone could significantly worsen the appearance of the skin, 
platysma bands, or expose ptotic submandibular glands.

In all three groups, males may show relatively less improve-
ment than females. Their thickened, bearded skin retracts less 
readily  than  that  of  females.  Even  thinner  females  with  little 
submental fat often show good benefit because of marked skin 
retraction after liposuction.

consultation and physical examination

The consultation is a key step in communicating expected risks 
and benefits. In our practice, patients initially voice their con-
cerns to a practice consultant. The consultant reviews treatment 
options  and  helps  patients  develop  and  prioritize  their  beauty 
wish  list.  Patients  often  pull  back  the  neck  tightly  and,  in  the 
same breath, state they would never want a facelift. If liposuction 

Figure  54.3  Grasping  and  tucking  the  submental  fat  to  demonstrate 
expected results of submental liposuction without upward posterior retrac-
tion seen in rhytidectomy.

alone is  being  considered,  it is  helpful  to grasp the  submental 
fat  and  tuck  it  up  under  the  chin.  This  maneuver  essentially 
“removes”  the  fat  from  view  without  pulling  up  on  the  jowls 
(Figure 54.3). If the patient has lax, photoaged skin, the surgeon 
should bunch it up a little and show the patient that it could look 
more wrinkled after the procedure. The surgeon should pull the 
skin back and demonstrate the probable result of a rhytidectomy 
to help the patient visualize the different results of different pro-
cedures. Any contributing factors to the blunted neck angle are 
reviewed with the patient at this point and additional corrective 
measures  and  alternative  treatments  are  discussed.  Platysma 
bands can be identified by having the patient grimace. An over-
view of the risks is also part of the consultation.

At  this  point,  the  surgeon  typically  leaves  the  room,  and  the 
consultant  answers  additional  questions,  reviews  the  fee  quote, 
and offers to schedule the procedure. Should the patient decide 
to proceed, he or she returns for a second visit for a preoperative 
examination. At this visit, the patient has a physical examination, 
reads and signs consents forms, and is given written preoperative 
and  postoperative  instructions.  Preoperative  laboratory  studies 
and photographs are completed. Typical preoperative laboratory 
studies include: full blood count, chemistry panel, prothrombin 
time/partial  thromboplastin  time  (PT/PTT),  international  nor-
malized  ratio,  and  viral  titers  to  screen  for  hepatitis  and  HIV 
infection. A prescription for preoperative antibiotics is given to 
start the night before surgery for a total of 10 days.

procedure

Markings
The preoperative markings are summarized in Table 54.2. With 
the  patient  in  an  upright  position,  the  edge  of  the  mandible  is 
outlined and a circle is drawn around the perimeter of the main 
accumulation of fat in the submental area (Figure 54.4). An “X” 
is then marked on the most visible mound within that circle. An 
additional circle may be drawn just inferior to the submental area 
if indicated, or concentric circles may be drawn around the main 
deposit of fat. The jowls are outlined as they extend both superior 
and inferior to the mandibular border. Again, the fullest aspects 
of the jowl are marked with an “X.” Laterally, fullness superior to 
the mandible is outlined. Inferior to the mandible, small “X’s” or a 
line should be drawn where maximum definition is desired. This 
is the area where a linear shadow should be cast.

The  patient  is  then  instructed  to  clamp  down  on  the  back 
teeth. The edge of the masseter is then palpated and an “X” is 
placed  at  the  probable  location  of  the  marginal  mandibular 
nerve, preferably in a different color. The platysma is assessed 
during this maneuver and the bands may be outlined in another 
color.  Other  landmarks  that  may  be  highlighted  include  the 
anterior  border  of  the  sternocleidomastoid  muscle,  the  hyoid 
bone, and the inferior border of the neck.

Table 54.2  Preoperative	marking.

Mark	border	of	mandible

Encircle	submental	fat	and	place	“X”	on	apex

If	present,	outline	jowl	and	excess	fat	in	lower	lateral	cheek

Make	a	line	or	“X’s”	where	submandibular	concavity	desired

Mark	likely	position	of	marginal	mandibular	nerve

Dot	in	platysma	bands	if	indicated

Draw	parallel	vertical	lines	to	base	of	neck

54. Liposuction of the Neck

479

Parallel vertical lines are drawn from the immediate submental 
area down the remainder of the neck to the base of the neck. 
Fat  is  rarely  removed  from  the  lower  two-thirds  of  the  neck 
because the skin here is often so thin that it will look more aged 
and  wrinkled  if  underlying  fat  is  removed.  The  long  vertical 
lines remind the surgeon not to remove fat but rather to tunnel 
through, without suction. Tunneling is thought to create tissue 
injury that will then stimulate some neocollagenesis and perhaps 
thicken  or  tighten  the  skin  to  some  degree.  On  rare  occasion 
if  the  patient  has  horizontal  rhytids  of  the  lower  two-thirds  of 
the neck and excessive fat, very conservative liposuction of the 
lower neck will significantly improve fat bulges and horizontal 
furrows.

anesthesia and infiltration
Patients undergoing liposuction of the neck do not require general 
anesthesia and many of them could undergo the procedure without 
any sedation at all. However, most patients prefer to have some anx-
iolysis and are typically given 1 mg lorazepam p.o. prior to the pro-
cedure. Alternatively, if a surgicenter is utilized, an intravenous line 
may be started and the patient given 1.0 mg midazolam IV along 
with 25 μg fentanyl IV as a one-time dose. Intravenous medications 
are  often  preferred  because  the  patient  will  feel  instantly  relaxed 
and  will  be  nearly  fully  awake  when  the  procedure  is  over.  One 
must  be  careful  with  intravenous  medications  to  avoid  excessive 
sedation and apnea; however, the low doses utilized above result in 
mild sedation with appropriate responsiveness.

The  patient  is  then  positioned  in  a  supine  position  with  a 
neck  roll  partially  under  the  shoulders  so  that  the  head  rolls 
back comfortably in an extended position. After prepping with 
benzalkonium  chloride  antiseptic  (Med  Chem,  Torrance,  CA, 
USA), the patient is draped with sterile towels, including a ster-
ile turban (Figure 54.5). A lap sponge is placed over the patient’s 
eyes for comfort and protection.

Figure 54.4  Preoperative markings.

Figure 54.5  Operative position with chin extended. Three of the five entry 
sites are denoted with circles and typical fanning pattern shown.

480

anti-aGinG  Skin Contouring Techniques

Tumescent anesthesia of the neck is the next step. Superficial blebs 
of tumescent lidocaine are first made in five sites, corresponding to 
the entry sites for the cannula. Dilute lidocaine consisting of Klein’s 
standard formula with lidocaine 0.1% is infiltrated into the subcu-
taneous space with the aid of an infusion pump [11]. A 25-gauge 
spinal  needle  is  used  initially  in  a  fan-like  motion,  introduced 
through five blebs, until the entire surgical field has been partially 
infused. The tumescent fluid is warmed, the infusion rate is low, 
and the needle gauge is small, assuring that there is minimal dis-
comfort  for  the  patient.  Approximately  50–100 mL  is  utilized  at 
this point. The spinal needle is then changed to 20-gauge, at a faster 
infusion rate, so that very quickly, within 5–15 minutes, the entire 
surgical field is tumesced. The patient may feel a bit anxious at this 
point because the neck will feel taut. Reassure patients that they can 
still breathe and swallow and that the tightness will loosen within a 
few minutes of starting the liposuction. It should be noted that it is 
not necessary to infiltrate the lower half of the neck. While the pro-
cedure is underway, the solution will drift inferiorly to the sternal 
notch, so that at the end of the procedure, when tunneling the lower 
neck may be desired, the lower neck will have adequate anesthesia. 
Typical volumes of infiltrated solution are 400–500 mL.

Liposuction: standard operative techniques
The  standard  liposuction  procedure  utilizes  five  entry  sites 
and  a  thorough  suction  with  small  cannulae  (Table  54.3).  The 
submental area is approached through three small stab incisions 
with  an  11  blade.  Although  it  may  be  tempting  to  perform  the 
entire procedure through one site, the most thorough and smooth 
result requires criss-crossing through multiple sites. In addition, 
one avoids a depression which is commonly seen under a single 
incision site. Only small cannulae are utilized, such as the Klein 14 
and 16 gauge Finesse, to avoid ridges or troughs in thin-skinned 
patients. In patients with thicker skin, a slightly more aggressive 
cannula is sometimes needed such as a 12-gauge Klein Finesse or 
the multi-holed Klein Capistrano, gauge 14. These smaller can-
nulas also preserve connective tissue strands throughout the fat 
and are thought to maximize retraction of the skin.

A thorough fanning technique is utilized through all three 
incisions with the cannula attached to the suction device. An 
assistant may anchor the skin at the entry site and elsewhere 
to  minimize  skin  buckling,  thereby  facilitating  long  smooth 
strokes of the cannula. This is the area to be aggressive, from 

Table 54.3  Standard	technique.

Debulk	in	midline	submental	region	from	three	entry	sites

Turn	head	laterally,	suction	lateral	cheek/submandibular	region

Avoid	rasping	mandible

Conservative	suction	of	the	jowl

Repeat	steps	2	and	3	on	contralateral	side

Return	head	to	central	position.	Tunnel	inferiorly

Palpate	all	areas	for	smoothness

Apply	microfoam	tape	and	dressings

the submental crease to the superior edge of the thyroid car-
tilage, approximately 8–9 cm caudal to the submental crease. 
The  end  point  in  this  area  is  a  thin  pinch  of  the  skin.  When 
lifting up a cannula under the skin, the overlying skin should 
be palpated and free of lumps. A thin layer of fat, approximately 
3–5 mm in thickness should be left to prevent surface irregu-
larities [12]. The cannula may be visible beneath the skin.

The patient’s head is then turned to the side and a fourth inci-
sion site is made. If indicated by the preoperative examination, 
very conservative liposuction of the lower cheek is performed. 
Usually, less than 10 strokes of the cannula are needed in order 
to taper the face. One must be careful not to overresect this area 
and to feather (tunnel without suction) into the cheek immedi-
ately superior to the treated area in order to avoid a shelf or step-
off. It is also important that fat is left behind. A strong, smooth, 
mandibular border is a youthful feature so it is rarely necessary 
to remove fat immediately overlying the mandible. The cannula 
is  then  directed  approximately  3–4 cm  below  the  ramus.  This 
is  a  key  area  for  removing  fat  to  optimize  definition  between 
the head and the neck. Thorough removal is performed along 
this  region.  The  surgeon  must  be  mindful  not  to  rasp  against 
the ramus while performing liposuction with the head turned 
because of the proximity of the marginal mandibular nerve. In 
this position, the nerve may be located 3–4 cm below the man-
dible and become more superficial. Although it is deep to the 
platysma, this muscle is very thin and could be punctured by a 
small cannula [13]. If liposuction is needed near the ramus, one 
should pinch up the skin off the ramus and avoid deep fat.

Special  attention  is  then  directed  toward  the  jowl.  If  the 
jowl is large, a separate stab incision is made with an 18-gauge 
No-Kor  needle,  at  the  most  caudal  extension  of  the  jowl 
(Figure 54.6). A 16-gauge Klein Finesse cannula is then utilized 
to very conservatively remove less than 30% of the fat. Excessive 

Figure 54.6  Liposuction of the jowl with a 16-gauge Klein Finesse cannula. 
The skin is pinched up by the non-dominant hand to avoid rasping the can-
nula against the mandible.

54. Liposuction of the Neck

481

effect in the development of delayed and unattractive adherence 
of the skin to underlying fascia. If platysma bands were visible at 
the preoperative examination, it may be helpful to take a spatula-
tipped cannula and tunnel underneath them to reduce cutaneous 
attachments. Others prefer a closed neck V-shaped neck dissector 
to release tethering fibrous bands [14].

At the end of the procedure, three pieces of microfoam tape (3M, 
St. Paul, MN, USA) are applied as shown in Figure 54.7. This helps 
to minimize pooling of tumescent fluid and free floating adipocytes 
in the submental area and minimizes postoperative bruising. It is 
removed 23–48 hours after the procedure.

postoperative course
In addition to microfoam tape, patients wear a chin strap 24 hours 
a day for 3–4 days. The strap is then worn 2–4 hours per day for 
another 3 weeks. Immediately after the procedure, patients experi-
ence minimal to no discomfort. Mild discomfort may last 2–4 days. 
Patients may return to work after the initial few days at home. Pur-
pura is typically minimal. If it develops, it tends to drift below the col-
lar line and can be covered with clothing or scarves. During the first 
2 weeks postoperatively, the submental area swells and patients will 
note increasing induration. There may be small focal areas of indura-
tion appearing as lumps or areas of stiff skin that crease unnaturally 
with movement. Patients should be advised ahead of time because 
induration  always  develops  as  an  expected,  temporary  condition 
that resolves over a period of 4–8 weeks. Lymphatic massage may be 
helpful as the induration most likely represents a localized interstitial 
edema. Rarely, a larger nodule develops that is unsightly. Low doses 
of 2.5 mg/mL Kenalog (Bristol-Myers Squibb Princeton, NJ, USA) 
may be injected to reduce the edema more quickly.

After the healing process, expected benefits of liposuction of the 
neck and jowls include reduction of adipocities, and skin retraction 
leading to elevation of the submental area, flattening of the jowls, 
and  a  reduced  cervicomental  angle  (Figure  54.8  and  54.9).  The 

Figure 54.7  Microfoam tape with two shorter pieces applied with traction 
to the midline and a third piece across entire area. This helps to decrease 
central pooling.

removal  in  this  area  is  not  necessary  as  the  skin  will  redrape 
nicely and overresection will result in deepening of the adjacent 
marionette fold. These same steps are then repeated on the con-
tralateral side.

After liposuction of both sides, the head is then returned to a cen-
tral position. A 14-gauge Klein Finesse cannula is passed through 
the three central incisions sites to check for remaining fat deposits.
Sometimes there are stubborn deposits inferior to the lowermost 
extension of the jowls and this area is specifically checked. Tunnel-
ing or feathering without suction is then performed with the can-
nula passing through the entire surgical field, down to the sternal 
notch  without  suction.  Some  surgeons  recommend  “windshield 
wiping” at this point in order to gain maximal skin retraction. In 
the author’s opinion this is not necessary and may have a negative 

(a)

(b)

Figure 54.8  Before (a) and 3 years after (b) removal of 50 mL of supranatant fat.

482

anti-aGinG  Skin Contouring Techniques

(a)

(b)

Figure 54.9  Before (a) and 1 month after (b) removal of 100 mL of supranatant fat. CoolLipo laser applied at 15 W, 40 Hz for 625 pulses with simultaneous 
suction. After suction, skin tightening was performed at 5 W, 50 Hz for 93 pulses.

capacity of the skin of the neck to retract and redrape in this area is 
outstanding and remarkable even compared to liposuction in other 
areas [15]. The very small incision sites (3 mm or less) heal readily 
and essentially ensure a scarless procedure. Avoiding both surgical 
scars and general anesthesia are key aspects of this procedure that 
factor into the patient’s choice over more invasive options.

complications

Submental  liposuction  has  a  very  low  rate  of  complications 
with  proper  careful  technique.  Immediate  potential  com-
plications  include  bleeding  or  hematoma.  With  tumescent 
liposuction and blunt-tipped cannulas the risk of significant 
bleeding is very low. Postoperative compression further min-
imizes this risk.

Temporary injury to the marginal mandibular nerve is prob-
ably the most common complication. It is important to be aware 
of  the  likely  position  of  this  nerve,  anterior  to  the  masseter 
muscle and at the level of the ramus or 3–4 cm inferior to the 
border. The nerve is most vulnerable when the head is turned to 
the side. It is also prone to injury if one attempts to treat the jowl 
from a medial, submental incision site. Avoidance of brushing 

against the mandible in any position and avoidance of penetrat-
ing the thin platysma muscle is essential. In addition, approach-
ing  the  jowl  from  the  previously  described  inferior  position 
should nearly eliminate this potential risk. If paresis develops, 
it presents not as ipsilateral weakness, but rather hyperkinesis of 
the contralateral side.

This side effect is temporary, rarely lasting beyond a few weeks, 
but it may last for 2–3 months. If troublesome to the patient, a 
few units of botulinum toxin may be placed in the contralateral, 
hyperkinetic, depressor labii inferioris. Permanent injury to the 
marginal mandibular nerve has not been reported after tumes-
cent liposuction because there is no sharp instrumentation. Sen-
sory  nerves  may  also  be  temporarily  affected.  Reassurance  that 
the numb feeling will resolve within 4–6 weeks generally consoles 
the patient. Postoperative edema has been mentioned previously.
One  more  troubling  aspect  of  this  is  the  development  of  a 
submental fold. This is most likely caused by the compression 
garment loosening in this area. Patients with larger necks, low 
hyoid  bones,  and  who  frequently  flex  their  neck  for  work  or 
hobbies (i.e. needlepoint) seem to be at risk for this complica-
tion, which presents as a ridge, just posterior to the submental 
crease. Careful taping with microfoam tape and admonition to 
elevate the chin regularly will mitigate this risk.

54. Liposuction of the Neck

483

(a)

(b)

Figure 54.10  Small platysma bands unmasked after submental liposuction (b).

Overresection  is  an  avoidable  complication.  Overresec-
tion in the submental area leads to a “cobra” neck in which 
there  is  an  actual  depression  under  the  chin  with  flaring 
of  the  sides  because  of  the  relative  overabundance  of  adja-
cent  fat  [16].  The  jowls  are  another  danger  zone  in  which 
the surgeon may be overly aggressive and cause a depressed, 
aged appearance. If patients are thin-skinned and/or elderly, 
overresection  will  lead  to  increased  wrinkling  of  the  skin. 
Conservative  liposuction,  leaving  a  thin  blanket  of  fat,  is 
best in these patients.

Although it may not be a result of overresection, perform-
ing liposuction of the neck may unmask platysma bands and 
ptotic submandibular glands (Figure 54.10). A thorough pre-
operative examination should help to detect these patients. In 
one study of 301 patients, submental obesity and the anatomic 
pattern non-decussating platysma fibers were found to be sig-
nificant  correlates  in  the  development  of  the  postoperative 
platysmal banding [17]. The bands may be treated with botu-
linum toxin A (Allergan, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) after surgery 
or adjuvant procedures such as platysmaplasty at the time of 
surgery.

Excessive  defatting  in  a  patient  with  a  round  face,  without 
tapering  the  lower  face,  can  result  in  a  “lollipop”  appearance. 
Tapering  of  the  lower  face  will  prevent  this  appearance;  how-
ever,  care  must  be  given  to  feather  superiorly  to  avoid  a  shelf 
or step off. Infection is very rare with tumescent liposuction of 
any area. Patients are advised of this low risk, which is further 
reduced by preoperative antibiotics, and sterile procedures dur-
ing surgery.

advanced and ancillary operating 
techniques

Submental liposuction is an excellent stand-alone procedure but 
it also lends itself to the addition of other procedures. At times, 
these procedures are essential for an acceptable outcome. Exam-
ples  include  platysmaplasty  for  thick,  pronounced  platysma 
bands that are present at rest or with mild animation [14,18]. A 
mini or full rhytidectomy may be added for excessively lax skin 
and jowls [11]. The use of various lasers and devices to melt fat 
and/or tighten skin has been touted by some, but at this point, 
clinical  data  are  lacking.  At  other  times,  procedures  may  be 
added to enhance an otherwise good outcome. With photoaged 
skin, for example, one may perform a resurfacing procedure to 
the face and neck immediately following the liposuction proce-
dure. A typical procedure would add a fractionated laser versus 
a more invasive laser to avoid the oozing and discomfort from 
more aggressive laser procedures while wearing the chin strap. If 
the chin is recessed and/or the chin height short, chin implants 
may  be  inserted  through  a  submental  incision  [19].  Alterna-
tively,  autologous  fat  transfer  may  be  easily  added  to  the  pro-
cedure (Figure 54.11) [20]. Fat may be utilized from the neck, 
but it is usually difficult to obtain enough fat through a hand-
held syringe, particularly if the fat is to be centrifuged as well. 
Another donor site may be necessary. Other areas of the face in 
which volume restoration will enhance the neckline include the 
prejowl sulcus, marionette fold, or mandibular border. Full-face 
volume restoration if indicated will elevate the cheeks and jowls 
and often lift the submental area.

484

anti-aGinG  Skin Contouring Techniques

(a)

(b)

Figure 54.11  Before (a) and 6 months after (b) sub-
mental  liposuction  (25 mL)  combined  with  fat  aug-
mentation to cheeks and chin (21 mL).

conclusions

Liposuction of the neck is a procedure that is straightforward, 
takes  1  hour  or  less,  and  is  rapidly  healing  with  few  compli-
cations. It is often a stand-alone procedure or it can be com-
bined with other procedures that may be indicated in the aging 
patient  or  those  with  pre-existing  anatomic  factors.  Proper 
patient selection and good technique that avoids overresection 
are key elements for achieving optimal results. Because aging 
of  the  neckline  and  drooping  jowls  are  often  the  first  major 
complaint of the aging patient, it is incumbent of the dermato-
logic surgeon to achieve mastery of this technique as it is likely 
to become one of his or her favorite procedures to perform.

references

1  Prendiville  S,  Kohoska  MS,  Hollenbeak  CS,  et  al.  (2002)  A  com-
parative study of surgical techniques on the cervicomental angle in 
human cadavers. Arch Facial Plast Surg 4, 236–42.

7  Hoefflin  SM.  (1998)  Anatomy  of  the  platysma  and  lip  depres-
sor muscles: a simplified mnemonic approach. Dermatol Surg 24, 
1225–31.

8  Lambros V. (1992) Fat contouring in the face and neck. Clin Plast 

Surg 19, 401–14.

9  Powell N, Humphreys B. (1984) Proportions of the Aesthetic Face. 

New York: Thieme-Stratton.

10  Farkas LG, Sohm P, Kolar JC, Katic MJ, Munro IR. (1985) Inclination 
of the facial profile: art versus reality. Plast Reconstr Surg 75, 509–19.
11  Klein JA. (1990) Tumescent technique for regional anesthesia per-
mits lidocaine doses of 35 mg/kg for liposuction. J Dermatol Surg 
Oncol 16, 248–63.

12  Watson D. (2005) Submentoplasty. Facial Plast Surg Clin N Am 13, 

459–67.

13  Langdon  RC.  (2000)  Liposuction  of  neck  and  jowls:  five-incision 
method combining machine-assisted and syringe aspiration. Der-
matol Surg 26, 388–91.

14  Jacob CI, Kaminer MS. (2002) The corset platysma repair: a tech-

nique revisited. Dermatol Surg 28, 257–62.

15  Goddio AS. (1992) Suction lipectomy: the gold triangle at the neck. 

Aesth Plast Surg 16, 27–32.

16  Fattahi  TT.  (2004)  Management  of  isolated  neck  deformity.  Atlas 

2  Ellenbogen R, Karlin J. (1980) Visual criteria for success in restoring 

Oral Maxillofacial Surg Clin N Am 12, 261–70.

the youthful neck. Plast Reconstr Surg 66, 826.

17  Kamer FM, Minoli JJ. (1993) Postoperative platysmal band deformity. 

3  Jacob CI, Berkes BJ, Kaminer MS. (2000) Liposuction and surgical 
recontouring  of  the  neck:  a  retrospective  analysis.  Dermatol  Surg 
26, 635–2.

4  Moreno A, Bell WH, Zhi-Hao Y. (1994) Esthetic contour analy-
sis  of  the  submental  cervical  region.  J  Oral  Maxillofac  Surg  52, 
704–13.

5  Mittelman  H.  (1994)  The  anatomy  of  the  aging  mandible  and  its 
importance to facelift surgery. Facial Plast Surg Clin N Am 2, 301–10.
6  de  Castro  CC.  (1980) The  anatomy  of  the  platysma  muscle.  Plast 

Reconstr Surg 66, 680–3.

Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 119, 193–6.

18  Knipper  P,  Mitz  V,  Maladry  D,  Saad  G.  (1997)  Is  it  necessary  to 
suture the platysma muscles on the midline to improve the cervical 
profile? An anatomic study using 20 cadavers. Ann Plast Surg 39, 
566–71.

19  Newman  J,  Dolsky  RL,  Mai  ST.  (1984)  Submental  liposuction 
extraction  with  hard  chin  augmentation.  Arch  Otolaryngol  110, 
445–54.

20  Butterwick KJ. (2003) Enhancement of the results of neck liposuc-

tion with the FAMI technique. J Drug Dermatol 2, 487–93.

Chapter 55
hand recontouring with Calcium hydroxylapatite

Kenneth L. Edelson
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and Private Practice, New York, NY, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 The	aging	hand	is	a	common	area	of	concern	for	patients.
•	 Adequate	treatment	solutions	were	hampered	by	injection	pain	and	the	absence	of	treatment	longevity.
•	 The	soft	tissue	filler	calcium	hydroxylapatite	is	effective	for	rejuvenating	aging	hands.
•	 Calcium	hydroxylapatite	combined	with	lidocaine	reduces	pain	of	injection,	improves	product	rheology	of	the	procedure,	and	deposits	

the	product	in	the	correct	metacarpal	spaces.

•	 The	volume	of	injected	calcium	hydroxylapatite	varies	with	physician	preference.

Introduction

This chapter begins with a description of the aging hand, then iden-
tifies various cosmetic hand treatment products used by physicians 
for the past 20 years. Calcium hydroxylapatite is then introduced 
as an alternative to past dermal fillers. A discussion of how to add 
anesthesia to the calcium hydroxylapatite follows. The author then 
leads the reader through a step-by-step instruction of injection of 
the product into the aging hand. The chapter closes with a sum-
mary and a discussion of the various volumes of product and pos-
sible durability effects that have been used by various physicians.

physiology of the hand

The great Irish playwright Oscar Wilde once said that “a woman 
who tells you her age will tell you anything.” Well, in his day she 
did not have to; one could just examine her hands. Today, with 
the technology of hand recontouring, her secret is safe.

The hands have always been problem areas for physicians to 
rejuvenate  and  a  myriad  of  applications  and  techniques  have 
been used, both surgical and non-surgical with limited success. 
Until  recently,  no  gratifying  procedure  has  been  successful  in 
producing the effect of Botox on wrinkles or intense pulsed light 
(IPL) and lasers on vessels.

Signs of the aging hand include: a textural, crepe-like appear-
ance, dryness, dyscromia, increased skin laxity, and volume loss 
giving the sunken appearance highlighting bones, tendons, and 
veins. A combination of both  fractional  non-ablative,  or abla-
tive laser resurfacing to address the epidermal defects, and the 

ideal subdermal filling agent to correct the loss of skin elastic-
ity, volume, and wrinkling, is needed to address the aging hand. 
Both men and women can benefit from volume restoration and 
can attain a plumper, more youthful hand appearance with the 
proper technique and product.

A panoply of dermal fillers exists in the aesthetic marketplace. 
These have been well described in the 2008 American Society 
for  Dermatologic  Surgery  (ASDS)  guidelines  publication  [1]. 
Zyderm®  collagen  (Collagen  Corp.,  Palo  Alto,  CA,  USA),  the 
original filler  since 1982 and  the gold  standard  for more than 
two  decades,  and  Zyplast®  (Collagen  Corp.,  Palo  Alto,  CA, 
USA),  followed  by  Cosmoderm®  and  Cosmoplast®  (Allergan, 
Irvine, CA, USA) did not produce optimal results because of its 
consistency and flow characteristics, as well as lack of longevity. 
The filler was injected into the atrophic area, but did not cover 
objectionable  structures.  Collagen  and  hyaluronic  acid  fillers 
also did not flow well, yielding lumps and bumps.

Harvested fat has also been used by some physicians. However, 
the large-bore needles required for injection often leave unsightly 
puncture  marks.  More  importantly,  the  results  were  modest  at 
best,  and  short-lived,  requiring  a  second  surgical  procedure  to 
harvest the fat.

advantages of calcium hydroxylapatite  
for treatment of the aging hand

In  2007,  Florida  dermatologists  Mariano  Busso  (Coconut 
Grove) and David Applebaum (Boca Raton) reported off-label 
clinical  experiences  using  calcium  hydroxylapatite  (CaHA; 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

485

486

aNtI-aGING  Skin Contouring Techniques 

Table 55.1  Representative	treatment	products	for	the	aging	hand.

Product category

Duration of effect*†

Advantages

Disadvantages

Autologous	fat

Widely	variable,	from	4	months		

to	more	than	12	months

Biocompatibility,	potential		
	 neovascularization

Calcium	hydroxylapatite	
(Radiesse®)

Approximately	12–15	months

Biocompatibility,	collagen		
	proliferation,	immediate	
correction,	no	overcorrection	
needed,	minimal	pain

Harvesting	required,	not	amenable	to		

	patients	with	lipodystrophy,	does	not	
conceal	structures

Time	required	for	mixing	with		

lidocaine

Collagen	[bovine]		

	(Zyderm®,	Zyplast®)

	 CosmoDerm®,	
CosmoPlast®	(human)

Approximately	2–3	months

Long	history	of	use	in	US		
	 aesthetics
No	testing	required

Skin	testing	for	hypersensitivity		
reactions,	does	not	conceal		

structures

Hyaluronic	acids

Approximately	6–9	months

	(Juvederm™,	Restylane®,	
Perlane®)

Poly-L-lactic	acid	
(Sculptra®)

Wide	variety	of	products		
	 available

Visibility	of	papules,	color	not	easily		

	blended	into	skin	of	dorsum,	tindall	
effect,	does	not	conceal	structures

Approximately	18–24	months

Sustained	collagenesis	after	a		
few	weeks	post-injection

Multiple	treatments	often	necessary,		
	 does	not	conceal	structures

*Facial	areas	(scant	literature	on	longevity	in	hand).
†ASDS	Guidelines.

Radiesse,  BioForm  Medical,  San  Mateo,  CA,  USA)  for  hand 
recontouring [2]. Their idea involved addition of lidocaine to 
the  existing  Radiesse  compound.  (Radiesse  was  approved  in 
later 2006 for treatment of severe lines and wrinkles of the face 
such as nasolabial folds as well as treatment for HIV-associated 
facial lipoatrophy.) As a result, pain of treatment was reduced 
to nearly none, with immediately pleasing results to patients in 
one treatment session.

Radiesse consists of CaHA microspheres, 25 μm to 45 μm 
in  diameter,  in  a  carboxymethyl  cellulose  carrier  gel.  The 
CaHA is identical to the component found in human bone. 
The  carrier  gel  disperses  within  weeks,  leaving  behind  the 
calcium  microspheres.  It  does  not  induce  osteogenesis  
when  placed  in  tissue  but  laboratory  studies  show  neocol-
lagenesis extending out to 72 weeks [3]. Hand recontouring 
required  a  substance  that  could  not  only  fill  atrophic  areas 
of the dorsal hand, but could also conceal the vein and ten-
don  color.  Radiesse  is  white,  opaque,  possesses  the  proper 
viscosity,  and  flows  smoothly  with  a  low  extrusion  force 
(Table 55.1).

technique of injection of Caha into  
the hand

Contrary  to  the  technique  developed  for  collagen  injection  in 
1982,  CaHA  hand  recontouring  requires  a  different  injection 
technique:bolus injection, followed by vigorous massage, allow-
ing the  CaHA to  fill where  needed. It  is  a  new  technique,  not 
predicated on line filling, but rather on steady vigorous massage 
to deliver the material to required atrophic areas (Table 55.2).

Table 55.2  Steps	of	in-office	procedure	for	treatment	of	the	aging	hand.

1.	 	Combine	Radiesse	with	lidocaine,	using	a	Luer-Lok	connector	for	the	
Radiesse	syringe	and	a	3-mL	syringe	containing	0.5	mL	of	2%	plain	
lidocaine.

2.	 	Identify	the	areas	of	treatment,	usually	between	the	second	

and	fifth	metacarpals,	from	the	dorsal	crease	of	the	wrist	to	the	
metacarpophalangeal	joints.

3.	 	Isolate	the	area	of	treatment	with	skin	tenting	between	thumb	and	

forefinger	of	non-injecting	hand,	or	forceps.

4.	 	Using	a	27-gauge,	0.5-inch	needle,	inject	the	boluses	of	CaHA-

lidocaine	mixture	into	the	areolar	plane	between	the	subcutaneous	
layer	and	superficial	fascia	of	the	hand	as	needed.

5.	 	Have	the	patient	make	a	fist	of	the	injected	hand,	then	firmly	massage	

mixture	to	disperse.

6.	 	Schedule	follow-up	with	patient	in	2–4	weeks;	repeat	treatment	for	any	

areas	missed	during	initial	visit.

Source:	Busso	&	Applebaum,	2007	[Dermatol Ther	20,	385–87].	Adapted	with	permission	
of	John	Wiley	&	Sons.

preparing the radiesse-lidocaine mixture
Prior to injecting CaHA into the hands, it is homogenized with 
0.5 mL  of  2%  plain  lidocaine.  The  1.5 mL  CaHA  Luer-Lok 
syringe is attached via the connector included in the package, to 
the 3-mL Luer-Lok syringe, (also included in the package) con-
taining 0.5 mL lidocaine (Figure 55.1) The use of a 3-mL Luer-
Lok  syringe  is  ideal  for  the  homogenization  process,  because 
a  high  extrusion  pressure  is  generated  to  mix  the  two  liquids. 
The connector should be filled with lidocaine prior to making 
the connection, otherwise the CaHA will not flow. Instead, the 
plunger  will  move  down  without  product  emerging  from  the 
needle  tip,  the  result  of  air  in  the  mixture.  The  CaHA  is  first 
injected  into  the  syringe  containing  the  lidocaine  and  mixed 
slowly  back  and  forth  for  10  passes  until  the  filler–lidocaine 
mixture is smooth and without bubbles (Figure 55.2) [4]. The 

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
55. Hand Recontouring with Calcium Hydroxylapatite

487

line of bolus injection(s) is midway between the dorsal crease of 
the wrist and the metacarpophalangeal joints, bound laterally by 
the fifth metacarpal and medially by the second metacarpal. This 
boundary can be modified depending on the injector’s judgment 
regarding the location of the defects to be filled.

how to inject
The patient should be comfortably seated on an examination table 
with the hands extended in front of them, preferably resting on a 
Mayo stand covered with a soft pillow, adjusted to the height of the 
patient’s  knees,  allowing  gravity  to  have  the  desired  effect  on  the 
defects to be corrected. The skin must be tented in order to separate 
it from the underlying veins and tendons (Figure 55.2). Entry is into 
the areolar plane, which is located between the superficial fascia and 
the subcutaneous fat. The thumb and forefinger of the non-injecting 
hand are used to lift the skin and create the entry point in the center 
of the tent (Figure 55.3). With a 27-gauge by 0.5 inch needle (or the 
new 28-gauge with 27-gauge inner lumen) attached to the prefilled 
CaHA syringe, inject 2–4 boluses of product across the previously 
described area of the dorsum of the hand, refilling the syringe when 
necessary.  The  average  bolus  amount  is  about  0.2–0.5 mL  CaHA 
emulsion (Figure55.4, Figure 55.5, and Figure 55.6).

Figure 55.1  Radiesse with lidocaine using the Baxa connector.

Figure 55.2  Radiesse–lidocaine mixture with 1.5 mL Radiesse and 0.5 mL 
2% plain lidocaine.

addition of the anesthetic changes the viscosity and filler extru-
sion force, delivering a more malleable mixture which is less vis-
cous and therefore requires a smaller extrusion force.

After this textbook was sent to the printer (which unfortunately 
is often the  case  in  publishing), Merz received  FDA  approval  in 
March 2015 for a new Radiesse (+) with Integral 0.3% Lidocaine 
mixed into the syringe. This will obviate the need for the mixing 
process, but for those of you who have the original Radiesse, follow 
the  chapter  instructions.  The  new  Radiesse  +  also  comes  in  the 
original volumes of 0.8cc and 1.5cc’s.

Where to inject
Careful injection site selection can considerably limit the amount 
of bruising. Before injecting, carefully examine the hand to ensure 
selection  of  an  area  devoid  of  veins  or  tendons.  The  imaginary 

Figure 55.3  Tenting of the skin technique.

Figure 55.4  Injecting and forming bolus of Radiesse mixture (0.5 mL bolus) 
in the areolar plane.

488

aNtI-aGING  Skin Contouring Techniques 

Figure 55.5  Injected bolus prior to closed-fist massage.

Figure 55.7  Partial massage of bolus into the dorsum.

post-injection hand massage
At this point, massaging – the quintessential element of relocating 
the CaHA – is begun (Figure 55.7). Have the patient make a tight fist. 
To relieve friction and enhance the process, apply a liberal amount 
of Aquaphor (Beiersdorf Inc., Wilton, CT, USA) or white petrola-
tum to the dorsum. Begin pushing the boluses, one at a time, dis-
tally, laterally and medially, so that the bolus is flattened and spread 
as far as possible. Care should be taken not to encroach upon the 
metacarpophalangeal joints or the medial and lateral dorso-palmar 
junctions; product is not intended for these areas. After completing 
treatment of the first hand, have the patient sit on that hand while 
you treat the other hand. It will help in the smoothing out process 
as well as add to hemostasis if needed. In the event of a hematoma, 
have the patient hold pressure firmly for 5–10 minutes, and proceed 
to begin treating the contralateral hand. When the other hand is 
completed, go back and complete the “bruised” hand. Each hand 
usually  requires  between  one  and  two  1.5-mL  syringes.  CaHA  is 
also available in 0.3 mL and 0.8 mL syringes, should a full 1.5-mL 
syringe not be needed for the second syringe.

Figure 55.6  Injected bolus prior to closed-fist massage.

post-treatment care
After treatment is completed apply ice packs to the hands. The 
patient leaves the office with the disposable pack, using it for as 
long as it stays cool. Use of the ice pack will help reduce some 
of the possible swelling. The patient should be told to carry on 
with normal activities beginning the following day. Schedule the 
patient  for  follow-up  in  2  weeks,  and  if  at  this  time  there  are 
skip areas noticed, fill them in using the 0.3-mL CaHA syringe 
mixed with 0.12 mL of 2% lidocaine.

adverse events

Because  it  is  a  compound  identical  to  that  found  in  bone, 
CaHA has high biocompatibility and low adverse event risks. 
Adverse  events  in  published  studies  have  been  few  and  of 
short  duration  [5-8].  They  include  ecchymosis,  erythema, 
and occasional edema, when used in facial applications other 
than  the  lips.  In  general,  the  diluted  product  described  for 
off-label  use  in  the  hands  is  even  more  forgiving.  Clinical 
experiences  with  treatment  of  the  aging  hand  suggest  that 
adverse  events  in  this  area  are  infrequent  and  not  severe. 
Anecdotal reports, however, have noted hand edema persist 
for 5–7 days post injection.

results

Figures 55.8, Figure 55.9, Figure 55.10, and Figure 55.11 repre-
sent  a  45-year-old  female  patient  who  received  1.5 mL  CaHA 
mixture  per  hand  during  the  initial  visit,  and  did  not  have  a 
touch-up  performed.  Figure55.12,  Figure  55.13,  Figure  55.14, 
Figure  55.15,  and  Figure  55.16  represent  a  58-year-old  female 
patient  who  also  received  1.5 mL  of  CaHA  mixture  in  each 
hand,  and  returned  for  a  touch-up  of  the  left  hand  only  with 
0.3 mL CaHA at week 8.

55. Hand Recontouring with Calcium Hydroxylapatite

489

Figure 55.8  45-year-old female patient prior to treatment.

Figure 55.11  Same patient 12 weeks post-treatment.

Figure  55.9  Same patient 2 weeks post-treatment with 1.5 mL mixture in 
each hand.

Figure 55.12  58-year-old female patient pretreatment (pianist).

Figure 55.10  Same patient 8 weeks post-treatment.

Figure  55.13  Same  patient  2  weeks  post-treatment  with  1.5 mL  Radiesse 
mixture for each hand.

490

aNtI-aGING  Skin Contouring Techniques 

Figure  55.14  Same patient 8 weeks post-treatment with a  touch-up  using 
0.3 mL Radiesse mixture for only left hand performed at 4 weeks after initial 
treatment.

Figure 55.15  Same patient at 20 weeks after initial treatment.

Figure 55.16  Same patient at 28 weeks after initial treatment.

Discussion

As with every new technique in surgery, refinements and modifica-
tions are the rule as time goes on. New approaches to the same tech-
nique give rise to slight revisions and adjustments leading to a better 
outcome. The original technique described by Busso was a single, 
voluminous  bolus  of  an  entire  syringe  of  Radiesse  and  lidocaine, 
which was then spread out over the hand. Some physicians prefer the 
large-volume bolus approach; others believe it is less advantageous 
than the multiple, smaller-volume bolus approach.

The volume of lidocaine remains an open question. The original 
volumes  of  lidocaine  with  the  single  bolus  injection  were  much 
smaller  (0.10 mL  per  1.5 mL  CaHA)  than  the  volumes  found  in 
many  clinical  settings  today  (0.23–2.0 mL  per  syringe).  In  many 
personal communications, the author has determined that a larger 
volume  of  lidocaine  is  preferred  for  optimum  results. These  vol-
umes  have  ranged  0.12–2.0 mL  lidocaine  per  1.5-mL  syringe  of 
CaHA.  A  mixture  of  0.5 mL  of  2%  lidocaine  per  1.5-mL  CaHA 
syringe and 0.12 mL for the 0.3-mL CaHA syringe appear optimal. 
There are several reasons why these two volumes are the volumes 
of choice. In the first place, considerably less hand swelling occurs 
when 0.5 mL lidocaine is used than using 2.0 mL. In addition, this 
volume  enhances  product  flow  and  makes  massage  of  injected 
mixture  relatively  easy.  However,  the  most  important  reason  is 
longevity  and  the  convenience  issue  for  the  patient.  Much  less 
product is used with higher dilutions, and therefore the correction 
may  not  endure  as  long  as  with  smaller  dilutions.  Busso’s  recent 
paper states “physicians have reported that they see no significant 
decrease in durability for media diluted with lidocaine” [4]. At this 
point, controlled clinical trials are needed to determine that dilu-
tion with lidocaine does not negatively affect longevity of CaHA 
correction, not only in the hands, but for all applications.

This issue of higher dilutions and possible decreased durability 
can easily be addressed, but it means more procedures at the 2-week 
follow-up  than  necessary.  Follow-up  sessions  should  address  the 
missed  areas  that  are  inevitable,  not  retreating  areas  where  the 
“excess” lidocaine has been absorbed. Another refinement that is 
helpful is the use of a smooth forceps to create the subsequent tents 
that might be needed. Once the emollient has been applied to the 
skin, a gloved hand on greasy skin will not be able to create the tent.

Conclusions

Past experiences with products for treating the aging hand have 
met with limited success. These products – harvested fat, colla-
gen, and hyaluronic acids – have disadvantages for placement in 
the hands for contouring enhancements. Foremost among these 
is the short duration, usually less than 3 months, and the inabil-
ity of all of the other fillers to conceal the objectionable struc-
tures of the aging hand. CaHA appears well-suited for consider-
ation as a product for recontouring of the hand, with a duration 
of effect of 6 months or longer. Unlike other areas, where there 
is not a lot of muscle  activity, the hand’s muscles and tendons are 

55. Hand Recontouring with Calcium Hydroxylapatite

491

constantly moving, creating the friction that accelerates product 
breakdown.  This  is  in  contrast  to  more  static  treatment  areas 
where there is greater longevity of correction. Perhaps the single 
most important and unique characteristic of CaHA that makes 
it ideal for hand recontouring is its opacity, the trait that enables 
the concealment of the undesirable structures of the aging hand. 
CaHA is also clinically unchanged by the addition of lidocaine, 
enabling painless treatment.

It was been five years since the first edition of “Cosmetic Der-
matology”, was published, and I am pleased to report that the 
adverse  events  and  longevity  of  correction  have  remained  as 
stated in the original chapter in 2009.

references

1  Alam  M,  Gladstone  H,  Kramer  EM,  et  al.  Guidelines  Task  Force. 
(2008) American Society for Dermatologic Surgery (ASDS) Guide-
lines of Care: Injectable Fillers. Dermatol Surg 34, 115–48.

2  Busso M, Applebaum D. (2007) Hand augmentation with Radiesse® 

(calcium hydroxylapatite). Dermatol Ther 20, 315–7.

3  Berlin  AL,  Hussain  M,  Goldberg  DJ.  (2008)  Calcium  hydroxyla-
patite for facial filler rejuvenation: a histologic and immunohisto-
chemical analysis. Dermatol Surg 34, 64–S67.

4  Busso M, Voigts R. (2008) An investigation of changes in physical 
properties  of  injectable  calcium  hydroxylapatite  in  a  carrier  gel 
when  mixed  with  lidocaine  and  with  lidocaine/epinephrine.  Der-
matol Surg 34, 16–24.

5  Tzikas TL. (2008) A 52-month summary of results using calcium 
hydroxylapatite for facial soft tissue augmentation. Dermatol Surg 
34, 9–15.

6  Carruthers A, Liebeskind M, Carruthers J, Forster BB. (2008) Radio-
graphic and computed tomographic studies of calcium hydroxylapa-
tite for treatment of HIV-associated facial lipoatrophy and correction 
of nasolabial folds. Dermatol Surg 34, 78–84.

7  Moers-Carpi M, Vogt S, Martinez Santos B, et al. (2007) A multi-
center, randomized trial comparing calcium hydroxyalaptite to two 
hyaluronic  acids  for  treatment  of  nasolabial  folds.  Dermatol  Surg 
33, 144–51.

8  Sadick NS, Katz BE, Roy D. (2007) A multicenter, 47-month study 
of safety and efficacy of calcium hydroxylapatite for soft tissue aug-
mentation of nasolabial folds and other areas of the face. Dermatol 
Surg 33, 122–7.

SECTION 6  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics 

Chapter 56
anti-aging regimens

Karen E. Burke
The Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 The	appearance	of	aging	skin	can	indeed	be	reversed	without	invasive	treatments	by	daily	skin	care	using	scientifically	proven	techniques	

and	products.

•	 Proper	cleansing	and	exfoliation	smooth	the	skin’s	surface	to	decrease	pore	size	and	wrinkles	within	days.
•	 Sun	protection	by	application	of	ample	amounts	of	high-SPF,	UVA-protective,	highly	water-resistant	sunscreen	is	essential	to	protect	

from	photoaging	and	to	enhance	natural	repair.

•	 Topical	retinoids	as	well	as	topical	antioxidants	such	as	vitamins	C	and	E,	selenium,	genestein,	and	coenzyme	Q10	not	only	protect	from	

but	also	reverse	photoaging	if	the	correct	molecular	forms	and	concentrations	are	applied.

Introduction

In her book, Survival of the Prettiest, Etcoff [1] synthesizes litera-
ture and research from anthropology, biology, psychology, and 
archeology to show that indeed appreciation of one’s own and 
others’ beauty is hard-wired in human brains. Etcoff concludes, 
“Flawless skin is the most universally desired feature of beauty.” 
This chapter presents a basic skin regimen to protect from pho-
todamage and reverse the appearance of aging. The four necessary 
steps are cleansing, exfoliation, protection, and treatment. Help-
ful techniques and scientific research proving efficacy of specific 
ingredients are presented.

Cleansing

Proper cleansing is an essential component of skincare. The face 
accumulates endogenous and exogenous soils. Sebaceous gland 
size and density are greatest on the face, upper back, and chest. 
The natural oils, sweat, and sebum secretions create a hydrolipid 
film on the skin surface that, in addition to applied cosmetics, 
traps  and  accumulates  environmental  pollutants  such  as  dust, 
airborne irritants, and compounds from cigarette smoke. Care 
must be taken to accomplish thorough cleansing without irrita-
tion or drying.

Therefore, a gentle, effective cleanser is of utmost importance. 
Surfactants  are  the  ingredients  that  bind  to  dirt  and  oil  for 
removal. These surfactants are classified by their charge on the 
surface-active moiety as anionic (negatively charged, for good 
foaming  and  lathering),  cationic  (positively  charged),  ampho-
teric (both positive and negative, considered to “condition” skin 
while helping to foam), and non-ionic (which are used in baby 
products to suppress foam) [2]. Components of surfactants can 
bind  to  the  stratum  corneum  proteins,  decreasing  the  skin’s 
ability  to  bind  and  hold  water.  With  continued,  frequent  use, 
surfactants can damage the skin barrier. New synthetic surfac-
tants improve cleansing with less irritation.

Other  components  of  cleansers  include  polypeptides  and 
synthetic polymers to make the product smooth and to soften 
skin,  polymers  to  moisturize,  preservatives,  opacifying  agents, 
and  fragrance.  With  frequent  washing,  these  ingredients  can 
cause  sensitivities  or  contact  allergy  in  certain  individuals. 
Because cleansers are rinsed off, their contact time with the skin 
is reduced causing less contact allergy. Newer cleansers are less 
alkaline than older formulations, so they are less drying.

In recent years, antibacterial agents (e.g. triclosan and triclo-
carban)  have  been  added  to  hand  cleansers.  Surprisingly,  these 
agents are rarely skin irritants. However, some physicians voice 
concern, fearing development of bacterial resistance to these anti-
biotics with frequent use. Originally, triclosan was thought to kill 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

492

56. Anti-aging Regimens

493

be  careful  not  to  get  the  grains  into  the  eyes.  Exfoliants  to  be 
avoided are those with apricot or almond kernels, walnut shells, 
and pumice – all of which have irregularly shaped particles with 
sharp edges which can be too rough for delicate skin and danger-
ous if they get into the eyes. The immediate improvement in small 
wrinkles by gentle exfoliation can be appreciated in Figure 56.2.

Masks are among the oldest face mechanical exfoliants. Masks 
can “wash off ” or “peel off.” Some “wash off ” masks are made of 
clay, which harden and are removed with water rinsing. “Peel-
off ”  masks  contain  synthetic  polymers  that  are  quite  safe  and 
effective. Some masks may irritate the skin; it is advisable to test 
on the inner wrist before treating the face.

protection

The  single  most  effective  therapy  for  aging  skin  is  sun  pro-
tection  [4].  Avoid  sun  exposure  between  10am  and  4pm,  and 
beware of “hidden sun”: UVA is not filtered by glass and neither 
UVA or UVB are filtered by clouds. People get their worst burns 
on cloudy days, especially when skiing or when on the beach or 
in the water when reflected rays double exposure. If one’s indoor 
workspace is in direct sun, that person can become sun-burned 
through  the  window  and  suffer  severe  photoaging,  as  seen  in 
Figure 56.3. Sunscreen should be applied often and generously 
every 90 minutes. Frequently missed areas with sunscreen appli-
cation are just in front of the ears, around the eyes, above the lip, 
fingertips, and the scalp under thinning hair.

Sunscreens are classified as organic filters (which absorb pho-
tons of UV light) or inorganic filters (which reflect or scatter UV 
radiation) [5]. As shown in Figure 56.4, some organic sunscreen 
agents  block  only  UVB  (p-aminobenzoic  acid  [PABA]  and 
its  esters  padamate  A  and  O,  the  cinnamates,  and  salicylates); 
others  absorb  primarily  UVB  and  some  low  wavelength  UVA 
(octocrylene,  benzophenones,  anthranalides).  Ecamsule,  sold 
under the trade name Mexoryl™ XL or SL (Anthelios, La Roche-
Posay,  L’Oréal),  blocks  UVB  as  well  as  most  UVA.  The  UVA 
absorbing sunscreen avobenzone (Parsol 1789) can degrade with 
exposure  to  UV  [6],  but  stabilizing  compounds  (benzylidene 
camphor  and  diphenyl  cyanoecrylate  derivatives,  both  UVB 
filters)  can  be  effectively  added  (Helioplex™,  Neutrogena)  [7]. 
The  inorganic  filters  with  microfine  titanium  dioxide  and  zinc 
oxide are total UVB blocks, titanium dioxide blocking low wave-
length  UVA  and  zinc  oxide  almost  all  UVA.  Thus,  zinc  oxide 
provides  better  protection  than  titanium  dioxide  [8].  The  new 
technology  with  microfine  particles  makes  them  non-opaque 
and  cosmetically  appealing.  The  concentration  and  the  size  of 
the microparticles determine SPF efficacy [5]1.

The  ability  of  a  sunscreen  to  prevent  UVB-mediated  ery-
thema is measured by the internationally accepted standard 
sun protection factor (SPF), the ratio of equivalent exposure by 

1A	complete	list	of	sunscreens	with	the	Skin	Cancer	Foundation’s	Seal	of	
Recommendation	is	available	at	www.skincancer.org

Figure 56.1  To treat wrinkles while washing, gently rub upward horizontally 
across the upper lip and “up and out” on the rest of the face – perpendicular 
to the direction of wrinkles.

bacteria by a “broad-based” mechanism, similar to alcohol and 
peroxide. However, recent research demonstrated that triclosan 
acts  at  a  specific  gene  site  in  Escherichia  coli  to  inhibit  replica-
tion, so resistant strains could evolve [3]. Thorough washing with 
gentle cleansers removes dirt and has been shown to be as effec-
tive as using these antibacterial compounds.

Cleansing  the  face  should  be  accomplished  with  lukewarm 
water and the fingertips. The face and neck should be washed 
with upward, outward motions. On the face, one should always 
rub perpendicular to the direction of those wrinkles that could 
develop later. On the forehead, cheeks, chin and neck, rub up 
and  out;  above  the  upper  lip  and  under  the  eyes,  the  strokes 
should  be  first  horizontal,  then  upward  at  the  edges,  as  illus-
trated  in  Figure  56.1.  Sunscreen,  moisturizer,  or  other  treat-
ments should be applied immediately after gently towel-drying 
to seal in the water remaining on the skin’s surface.

exfoliation

Exfoliation  is  the  rejuvenation  treatment  providing  the  most 
immediate  improvement  in  appearance.  Exfoliation  removes 
the outer layers of stratum corneum, and thus treats the hyper-
keratosis of dry skin. Exfoliative rubbing perpendicular to the 
direction of wrinkles (with upward, outward strokes) minimizes 
small wrinkles because the surface is smoothed (Figure 56.1).

Exfoliation  can  be  chemical  or  mechanical.  Chemical  exfoli-
ants  such  as  hydroxyacids  and  retinoic  acid  remove  dead  sur-
face cells by keratolysis. Mechanical exfoliants include cleansing 
grains,  waxy  creams  that  adhere  to  the  surface  cells,  as  well  as 
slightly  abrasive  terry  washcloths,  non-woven  polyester  polish-
ing pads, brushes, loofas, or mechanical brushes – all of which 
physically “sand” the skin surface by rubbing. Grainy exfoliants 
with aluminum oxide crystals can be effective, but the user must 

494

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure  56.2  Tiny  wrinkles  and  crepey  skin  can 
be  treated  immediately  at  home  by  exfoliation. 
Improvement is seen in this 60-year-old woman’s 
face  after  she  simply  washed  with  a  non-woven 
polyester polishing pad and used a waxy exfoliant 
that  mechanically  “sticks”  and  removes  surface 
cells. (a) and (c), pre-exfoliation; (b) and (d), post-
exfoliation.

UVB  in  sunscreen-protected  compared  with  unprotected  skin. 
(An SPF of 30 means that the amount of UB exposure in 10 min-
utes without sunscreen is equivalent to 10 minutes × 30 = 5 hours 
of exposure with sunscreen.) The SPF should be at least 30. Sun-
screen labels may specify degree of UVB protection by stating the 
SPF as 30+ or 50+; higher SPFs may no longer be stated on the 
label. UVA protection is measured by degree of either immediate 
pigment darkening (dependent upon radiation-induced darkening 
of  preformed  melanin)  or  persistent  (delayed)  pigment  darkening 
(as  in  a  more  complex  response  which  induces  production  and 
transfer  of  melanin  as  well  as  proliferation  of  melanocytes). The 
latter assay is preferred in Europe and Japan. A sunscreen may be 
labelled  “Broad  Spectrum”  only  if  the  UVA  critical  wavelength 
(CW,  the  wavelength  at  which  90%  of  the  UV  above  320  nm  is 
absorbed)  is  >370  nm.  Only  sunscreens  of  (1)  SPF  >15  and  (2) 

broad spectrum can claim to protect against skin cancer and pho-
toaging. If the SPF is <15, then the label must state specifically that 
this sunscreen protects only against sunburn, but not against skin 
cancer or photoaging.

After SPF, the second important criterion for a sunscreen is 
that  it  be  “highly  water  resistant,”  meaning  it  is  effective  for 
about  80  minutes.  (Labels  read  water  resistant  (40  minutes) 
or  water  resistant  (80  minutes).)  The  terms  “waterproof ”  and 
“sweat  proof ”  may  no  longer  be  written  on  sunscreen  labels, 
since these are considered to be “false promises.” Many individ-
uals prefer a different sunscreen for the face than for the body. 
These criteria are summarized in Table 56.1. This is particularly 
important for individuals with acne, since many ingredients that 
make a sunscreen formulation cosmetically smooth in texture 
or fragrant can be comedogenic).

56. Anti-aging Regimens

495

Figure  56.3  This  secretary  sat  at  the 
same  desk  for  more  than  30  years.  Her 
left  face  which  was  exposed  to  UVA 
through the window shows severe pho-
todamage,  especially  when  compared 
with the less-exposed right side. Photo-
graph  courtesy  of  Michelle  Verschoore, 
L’Oréal Advanced Research Laboratories, 
Clichy  and  Aulnay-Sous-Bois,  France, 
and Pierre Moulin, Lyon, France.

Table 56.1  Criteria	of	a	good	sunscreen.

1.	 High	SPF	(SPF	30+	or	preferably	50+)
2.	 Broad	spectrum:	Protection	against	UVA	and	UVB
3.	 Highly	water	resistant	(80)
4.	 Non-comedogenic
5.	 Personally	pleasing;	lotion,	gel	or	spray

SPF,	sun	protection	factor.

Further protection with topical antioxidants and sun protec-
tive clothing, hats, and sunglasses are indicated. Sun protective 
clothing is rated using UV protective factor (UPF), measured by 
the amount of UV radiation transmitted through the fabric. A 
fabric with a UPF of 40–50 transmits only 2.6% of biologically 
effective  radiation,  in  contrast  with  normal  summer  clothing 
that  typically  has  a  UPF  of  only  4–10,  providing  a  maximum 
SPF  of  30%  but  often  only  an  SPF  of  about  2  if  wet  [9].  New 
products  (such  as  SunGuard  (2,2′-(1,2-ethenediyl)bis[5-[[4-
(methylamino)-6[[4-(methylamino)catonyl]-phenyl]amino]-
1,3,5-triazin-2-yl]amino]-,  disodium  salt))  have  recently 
become  available  to  be  added  when  washing  clothes  to  give  a 
UPF of 30 that lasts 20 washes.

treatment

There  are  several  medical  treatments  for  anti-aging  purposes. 
These include retinoic acid, hydroxy acids, and topical antioxi-
dants. Many products are advertised, but their efficacy may not 
have been demonstrated by rigorous placebo-controlled, double-
blind clinical trials.

s
t
n
e
i
d
e
r
g
n

i

n
e
e
r
c
s
n
u
S

Padimate-O

Octyl methoxycinnamate

Octyl salicylate

Octocrylene

Benzophenone

Titanium dioxide

Avobenzone

Mexoryl

Zinc oxide

290

320

340

400

UVB

UVAII

UVAI

Ultraviolet spectral coverage

Figure 56.4  Ultraviolet spectral coverage of sunscreen ingredients.

hydroxyacids
Hydroxyacids  (HAs)  have  been  used  for  centuries.  Cleopatra 
routinely  applied  HAs  and  Marie  Antoinette  washed  with  red 
wine, benefitting from tartaric acid.

Hydroxyacids  were  reintroduced  to  dermatology  in  1974 
when  Van  Scott  and  Yu  [10]  reported  improvement  of  severe 
hyperkeratosis  and  icthyosis.  Hydroxyacids  are  classified  by 
the position of the hydroxyl group attached to the acid moiety: 
α-hydroxyacids  (AHAs)  (glycolic  acid,  lactic  acid,  and  citric 
acid),  β-hydroxyacids  (BHAs)  (tropic  acid,  salicylic  acid  [SA] 
– called a BHA but actually an α-hydroxybenzoic acid), and the 
“new generation” polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) (gluconolactone 

 
496

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

or lactobionic acid – a naturally occurring component of skin). 
AHAs act rapidly (within 2 weeks) to smooth the surface skin by 
reducing epidermal corneocyte adhesion, first at the innermost 
level  of  the  stratum  corneum  (just  above  the  stratum  granu-
losum)  [11].  Epidermal  damage  of  photoaging  is  corrected  in 
14–16 weeks, resulting in a thinned stratum corneum, epider-
mal acanthosis, and decreased melanogenesis [12]. An increase 
in  epidermal  intercellular  hyaluronic  acid  improves  surface 
moisturization by water retention.

An elegant study demonstrated that epidermal keratolysis is 
followed  by  dermal  penetration  which  increases  synthesis  of 
glycosaminoglycans  and  increases  fibroblast  proliferation  and 
production of collagen and elastin [13]. A 25% increase in skin 
thickness  was  measured  after  6  months’  treatment  with  25% 
AHAs with no inflammation.

SA is unique among the hydroxyacids in that it is lipophilic 
and  is  particularly  attracted  to  sebaceous  orifices,  thereby 
exhibiting its keratolytic properties not only to smooth surface 
wrinkles, but also to decrease pore size and prevent acne. As an 
excellent  keratolytic  agent,  SA  solubilizes  intercellular  cement 
by disrupting corneocyte adhesion layer by layer, from the sur-
face downward. SA may also be directly bacteriostatic.

The  PHAs  have  several  advantages.  They  have  larger  mol-
ecules,  so  they  penetrate  the  skin  gradually  and  are  therefore 
less  irritating  than  AHAs  or  SA.  PHAs  are  recommended  for 
patients with sensitive skin, rosacea, or atopic dermatitis [12]. 
They can even be used in conjunction with retinoic acid with-
out  irritation.  PHAs  also  give  improved  moisturization  of  the 
stratum corneum when compared with AHAs. PHAs have anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant activity, further enhancing repair 
of cutaneous photoaging [14].

Three key factors determine HA efficacy:
 1.  Type of hydroxyacid (described above).
 2.  Concentration: the higher the concentration, the more effec-
tive  but  the  more  possible  irritation.  Concentrations  of 
8–12% glycolic and lactic acids are available by prescription, 
as are concentrations of SA greater than 3%. Higher concen-
trations are used for medical chemical peels.

 3.  pH (acidity): the amount of biologically free acid determines 
the  clinical  strength  [13].  To  be  effective,  the  hydroxyacid 
must be acidic.
There is a delicate balance in attaining efficacy without irritation. 
For each type of hydroxyacid or mixture thereof, the concentration 
and pH determines the strength and the clinical benefits [13].

retinoids
Retinoids  are  the  “gold  standard”  for  reversing  photoaging  of 
the skin. Retinoic acid (tretinoin) has been used for more than 
35 years for the treatment of acne. In the late 1980s, the remark-
able  clinical  improvement  of  wrinkles  and  solar  lentigos  after 
treatment  with  topical  tretinoin  was  documented  [15,16,17]. 
UV  exposure  leads  to  decreased  expression  of  retinoic  acid 
receptors (RAR) and retinoic X receptors (RXR) (in particular, 

RAR-α and RXR-γ, the two major nuclear receptors in keratino-
cytes) with subsequent activation of transcription factors (AP-1 
and NF-IF) which increase proliferation and inflammation and 
activate the matrix metaloproteinases (MMPs) that break down 
extracellular  matrix  proteins  [18].  By  binding  to  these  recep-
tors,  topical  retinoids  restore  expression,  thereby  reversing 
UV-induced  damage  at  all  levels  of  the  epidermis  and  dermis 
[19,20].

Retinoids increase epidermal proliferation causing epidermal 
thickening with compaction of the stratum corneum and deposi-
tion of glycosaminoglycans intercellularly; with epidermal pro-
liferation,  inhibition  of  excess  melanogenesis  and  shedding  of 
melanin-laden  keratinocytes  resolves  mottled  hyperpigmenta-
tion; and retinoids directly induce collagen synthesis and reduce 
collagen  breakdown  by  inhibiting  the  UV-induced  MMPs 
[21,22], thereby correcting wrinkles.

Topical  tretinoin  also  reverses  intrinsic  aging,  perhaps  even 
more significantly in non-sun-exposed than in photoaged skin. 
A marked increase in epidermal thickness (with a more undu-
lating  dermoepidermal  junction),  in  anchoring  fibrils,  and  in 
dermal  angiogenesis  with  new  elastic  fibers  and  glycosamino-
glycans was observed [23].

Previously, topical tretinoin was postulated to make the skin 
more sensitive to UV exposure. Indeed, resolution of unattractive 
hyperkeratosis may allow more UV to penetrate deeper, but the 
inhibition of the UV-induced MMPs that break down collagen 
results in less UV damage with tretinoin treatment. Occasionally, 
irritation (retinoid dermatitis) can occur, especially when begin-
ning treatment. This can usually be avoided by starting with lower 
concentrations (0.025% cream instead of 0.05% cream or 0.01% 
gel), other formulations (microsphere gels, new generic formula-
tions, or different retinoids as described below), and less frequent 
application. Patients with sensitive skin should begin with a mild 
formulation, applying initially each 3 days and increasing to daily 
over several weeks or months. Most of the improvement occurs 
within the first year; improvement is maintained with continued 
use, as proven by up to 4-year histologic studies [22].

Other “second generation” retinoids have been proven effective 
in treating photodamage [22]. Retinaldehyde cream (0.05%) and 
retinol cream (up to 1.6%) are comparable to tretinoin in efficacy, 
but are more irritating. Tazarotene (0.5% and 0.1%) may give faster 
improvement but is also more irritating. Adapalene (0.1% cream 
and gel) is less irritating but probably less effective than tretinoin.

antioxidants
The skin naturally uses nutritional antioxidants to protect itself 
from photodamage and topical application has been investigated. 
The challenge is to make topical antioxidant formulations that are 
stable and that give percutaneous absorption to deliver high con-
centrations of the active forms to the dermis as well as the epider-
mis. The advantage is that only once-per-day application of topical 
antioxidants  provides  a  reservoir  of  protection  that  cannot  be 
perspired or washed away, markedly enhancing sun protection.

Vitamin C
If the retinoids are the “gold standard,” topical vitamin C is the 
“silver standard” for reversing photoaging of the skin. Vitamin 
C (L-ascorbic acid) is the body’s major aqueous-phase antioxi-
dant. Dietary vitamin C is absolutely required for life.

Environmental free-radical stress depletes vitamin C levels in 
the  skin.  UV  exposure  of  1.6  minimal  erythema  dose  (MED) 
decreases vitamin C to 70% normal, and 10 MED to 54% [20]. 
Although  vitamin  C  is  itself  not  a  sunscreen,  topical  vitamin 
C protects against solar damage. As an antioxidant, vitamin C 
deactivates the UV-induced free radicals, decreasing erythema 
and sunburn. This protection has been confirmed by histologi-
cally: treatment with topical 10% vitamin C decreases the num-
ber of abnormal “sunburn cells” by 40–60% and reduces the UV 
damage to DNA by 62% [24].

The main function of vitamin C is as the essential co-factor for 
collagen synthesis. When 10% vitamin C was added to in vitro 
elderly fibroblasts, collagen proliferation and synthesis increased 
by factors of 6 and 2, respectively [25]. With this enhancement 
of  collagen  synthesis,  topical  vitamin  C  (15%)  is  impressively 
effective in reducing wrinkles of photoaging. Although optimal 
efficacy is noted after 6 months, appreciable improvement of peri-
orbital wrinkles can be seen after 3–4 months. This formulation 
also treats rosacea [26] by building firm collagen that constricts 
microvasculature and by its anti-inflammatory efficacy. Both of 
these  activities  enhance  wound  healing:  When  vitamin  C  was 
applied both before and after surgery, healing time was substan-
tially shortened [27]. Vitamin C also inhibits tyrosinase, thereby 
lightening  solar  lentigos.  In  this  author’s  experience,  topical 
vitamin C (15%) is the most effective depigmenting agent cur-
rently available. Lightening of solar lentigos can be appreciated 
after only 1–2 months, while all other agents require at least 3–4 
months before lightening is noted. Another important action of 
vitamin C on the skin is that topical vitamin C increases the syn-
thesis of several specific lipids of the skin surface [28]. Not only 
does this mean that vitamin C helps the natural moisturization 
of the skin, but it also enhances the protective barrier function 
of the skin [29].

Formulation  is  key  to  optimizing  percutaneous  absorption 
of vitamin C. Because L-ascorbic acid is such an excellent anti-
oxidant, it is inherently unstable when exposed to oxygen. Cre-
ating  an  effective  topical  delivery  system  is  crucial  and  quite 
difficult. Many products contain stable derivatives, which are 
either (or both) not absorbed or not metabolized by the skin 
(such  as  ascorbyl-6-palmitate  or  magnesium  ascorbyl  phos-
phate)  and  therefore  have  no  appreciable  cutaneous  activity 
[30]. Other formulations do not result in measurable absorp-
tion of vitamin C because they are not at the correct pH. Topi-
cal absorption of 10% vitamin C cream was proven by radioa-
ctive labeling studies in pigs. After treatment, 8.2% was found 
in the dermis, and 0.7% was in the blood [30]. The most effec-
tive concentration for topical delivery is 20%, giving maximal 
skin levels after 3 days.

56. Anti-aging Regimens

497

Vitamin e (d-α-tocopherol)
Natural vitamin E is the most important lipid-soluble, membrane-
bound antioxidant in the body. Natural dietary vitamin E can 
exist in four methylated forms (α, β, χ, δ); synthetic vitamin E 
is a mixture of eight (d,l) stereoisomers. The d-α-tocopherol  
isomer has the greatest biologic efficacy. In order to attain activ-
ity  through  cutaneous  application,  the  natural  non-esterified 
form must be applied in concentrations greater than 2% (5% is 
optimal) [31]. Most commercial products containing “vitamin 
E” contain a mixture of 32 synthetic isomers, esterified, and in 
quite low concentrations. Allergic contact dermatitis has been 
reported  from  such  formulations,  although  no  adverse  reac-
tion has ever been reported with the natural d-α-tocopherol.

In a mouse model, topical d-α-tocopherol has been shown 
to be impressively effective in protecting against all acute and 
chronic UV-induced damage, and far more effective than the 
esterified topical d-α-tocopherol succinate [31]. Sunburn and 
tanning are markedly decreased, and the time of onset of skin 
cancer  is  delayed  and  the  incidence  is  markedly  decreased. 
In  humans  the  minimal  erythema  dose  (MED)  of  UVB  is 
increased  after  treatment  with  topical  d-α-tocopherol.  Vita-
min  E  has  also  been  demonstrated  to  reverse  photoaging 
dramatically.  Figure  56.5  shows  the  impressive  decrease  in 
periorbital rhytides after 4 months of daily application of d-α-
tocopherol (5%). Histology confirmed this improvement in a 
mouse  model.  The  UV-induced  epidermal  hypertrophy  and 
hyperkeratosis, the increased incidence of damaged “sunburn 
cells” in the basal layer, and the disruption of dermal collagen 
and  elastin  were  all  corrected  after  8  weeks  of  topical  treat-
ment (KE Burke, L Riciotti, EG Gross, unpublished observa-
tions).

Topical d-α-tocopherol is also anti-inflammatory and accel-
erates healing. Frequent application is very effective in healing 
acute  burns,  and  when  applied  after  laser  surgery,  healing  is 
accelerated. Many studies have demonstrated decreased hyper-
trophic  scarring  when  vitamin  E  is  applied  throughout  the 
healing process.

Vitamin C with vitamin e
In  cells,  vitamins  C  and  E  interact  synergistically  to  provide 
antioxidant  protection.  In  membranes,  vitamin  E  is  oxidized 
as it quenches peroxyl free radicals and intracellular vitamin C 
regenerates the vitamin E activity [32]. Oral vitamin C with E in 
high doses protects against UV-induced erythema in humans, 
whereas  either  vitamin  alone  is  ineffective  [33].  Compared  to 
twofold protection for either vitamin alone, topical L-ascorbic 
acid  (15%)  with  α-tocopherol  (1%)  gives  fourfold  protection 
against UV-induced erythema, decreasing the number of dam-
aged  “sunburn  cells”  seen  histologically  and  decreasing  thia-
mine dimer formation in porcine skin [34]. Fortunately, mixing 
these hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidants in a topical formu-
lation stabilizes each.

498

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

(a)

(b)

Figure 56.5  Correction of periorbital wrinkles after 4 months of once-daily treatment with 0.05% d-α-tocopherol cream. (a) Before. (b) After.

Vitamin C with vitamin e and ferulic acid
Ferulic acid is a potent antioxidant present in the cell walls of 
grains,  fruits,  and  vegetables.  Ferulic  acid  alone  absorbs  some 
UV and therefore is itself a weak sunscreen. When mixed with 
vitamins C and E, it further stabilizes the formulation and acts 
synergistically to double the photoprotection from fourfold to 
eightfold  [35].  This  triple  antioxidant  combination  has  been 
made into the SkinCeuticals product C E Ferulic (15% vitamin 
C, 1% vitamin E, and 0.5% ferulic acid).

Other antioxidants
Coenzyme Q10
Coenzyme  Q10  (ubiquinone  or  CoQ10)  is  a  component  of 
the  mitochondrial  electron  transport  chain  in  all  plant  and 
animal  cells,  including  human  cells,  especially  in  organs  with 
high  rates  of  metabolism  such  as  the  heart,  liver,  and  kidney. 
In  the  skin,  CoQ10  acts  as  an  antioxidant,  although  the  level 
is naturally relatively low, with 10 times more in the epidermis 
than the dermis [36]. CoQ10 has been shown to reverse natural 
intrinsic aging as an energy generator as well as an antioxidant 
and a regulator of gene induction. CoQ10 treatment increases 
rates of cell division as well as synthesis of natural hyaluronic 
acid  and  collagen  type  IV  and  elastin  [37].  CoQ10  treatment 
also  protects  from  UV-induced  degradation  of  collagen.  [38]. 
Decreased wrinkle depth was documented by optical profilom-
etry using 0.3% ubiquinol cream for 6 months [39]. CoQ10 also 
suppresses  UVA  destruction  of  collagen  [38].  CoQ10  further 
reverses the unattractive hyperpigmentation seen with photo-
aging by inhibiting tyrosinase activity, thereby decreasing syn-
thesis of melanin [38].

Ongoing medical research continues to demonstrate the effi-
cacy of CoQ10 in healing aging skin – both intrinsic and extrinsic. 
This will certainly become a more frequently used topical cos-
meceutical.

α-Lipoic acid
α-Lipoic acid (αLA), made in cells of all plants and animals, has 
many impressive antioxidant properties and has been shown to 
retard aging in heart and brain cells in laboratory studies. How-
ever, the evidence for reversal of photoaging in the skin is scant: 
33 women applied 5% αLA to half of their faces for 12 weeks and 
noted some decrease in wrinkles, skin roughness, and fading of 
dark spots [40].

Recent research does not confirm efficacy of αLA in protecting 
against sun damage. αLA provides little or no protection against 
UV  irradiation  [41].  Furthermore,  αLA  is  not  stable  because 
of  its  low  melting  point  and  it  decomposes  when  exposed  to 
UVA [42]. Thus it is extremely difficult to make a product with 
enough stability to assure an effective shelf life.

Selenium
Selenium  is  a  trace  mineral  essential  to  human  life  because 
it  is  the  required  co-factor  for  the  intracellular  antioxidant 
enzymes glutathione peroxidase and thiodoxin reductase. Topi-
cal L-selenomethionine (0.02–0.05%) has been shown to protect 
the skin from both acute and chronic UV damage [43]. In mice, 
topical L-selenomethionine completely stops sunburn, decreases 
tanning, and delays the onset and decreases the incidence of skin 
cancer  [43].Application  increases  MED  in  humans  [44],  even 
when MED is measured 24 hours after application, proving that 

56. Anti-aging Regimens

499

Table 56.2  Photoprotection	and	reversal	of	photoaging.

Treatment agent

Source

Photoprotection

Treatment of  
wrinkles

Treatment of  
solar lentigos

α-Hydroxy	acids

β-Hydroxy	acids

Retinoic	acid

Vitamin	C

Vitamin	E	(d-α)

Ferulic	acid

Sugar	cane,	milk,	fruits*

Willow	or	sweet	birch	bark,		
wintergreen	leaves*

Vitamin	A*

Citrus	fruits,	red	peppers

Sunflower	oil

Cell	wall	of	fruits,	grains,	vegetables

–

–

Dermis	only

+++

+++

++++

Coenzyme	Q10	(ubiquinone)

Fish,	shellfish,	spinach,	nuts

Dermis	only

α-Lipoic	acid

All	plant	and	animal	cells		
(including	humans)*

L-selenomethionine

Grains,	saltwater	fish

Genistein

Soy

–

++++

+++

+,	Minimal	effect	noted	in	good	studies;	++++,	maximal	effect	(a	“gold	standard”)	?,	not	studied.

*	Produced	synthetically	for	cosmetic	products.

++

++

++++

++++

++++

?

++

+

++++

?

++

++

++++

++++

+++

?

?

+

++

?

this antioxidant is absorbed, providing a reservoir of protection 
from  UV.  Furthermore,  when  applied  to  sun-damaged  skin, 
topical L-selenomethionine was shown clinically and histologi-
cally to reverse photoaging as effectively if not even more effec-
tively than retinoic acid – with a decrease in hyperkeratosis and 
regeneration of collagen and repair of elastic tissue [45]. Topical 
L-selenomethionine also accelerates wound healing.

assiduous protection when in the sun) and treatment. Some 
treatments  improve  the  appearance  immediately  and  oth-
ers  act  physiologically  to  inhibit  further  photodamage  and 
to reverse previous damage at a molecular level. New thera-
pies  for  photoaging  are  promoted,  but  many  have  not  been 
subjected to large, placebo-controlled, double-blind, clinical 
trials.

Genistein
Genistein is a potent antioxidant isolated from soy, which has 
been proven to protect against UV-induced erythema and skin 
cancer [46]. As a phytoestrogen with an affinity for both α- and 
β-nuclear  estrogen  receptors,  genistein  confers  the  additional 
benefit of stimulating hyaluronic acid, collagen, and elastin syn-
thesis and thus may prove to be an excellent treatment for wrin-
kles and for hydration of the skin.

In  Table  56.2,  this  author  has  summarized  her  personal 
impressions  of  the  clinical  efficacy  of  well-researched  topicals 
for photoprotection and reversal of photoaging. Others include 
niacinamide (smoothing texture, improving red blotchiness, and 
dark spots, decreasing yellowing, and improving fine lines, wrin-
kles, and elasticity – but is only about one-third to one-fifth as 
effective as retinoic acid), and kinetin (a synthetic plant growth 
hormone  that  retards  senescence  in  plants,  shown  to  reverse 
aging of skin cells in the laboratory, but in the author’s experi-
ence only minimally helpful clinically in correcting wrinkles).

Conclusions

The appearance of aging skin can be treated non-invasively. 
Strategies include primary prevention (with changes in life-
style  by  not  smoking,  avoiding  excessive  sun  exposure,  and 

references

1  Etcoff N. (1999) Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty. New 

York: Anchor Books, Random House.

2  Rieger  MM.  (2000)  Skin  cleansing  products.  In:  Rieger  MM,  ed. 
Harry’s Cosmeticology. New York: Chemical Publishing Company, 
Inc., pp. 485–500.

3  Levy  CW,  Roujeinikova  A,  Sedelnikova  S,  Baker  PJ,  Stuitje  AR, 
Slabas  AR,  et  al.  (1999)  Molecular  basis  of  triclosan  activity. 
Nature 308, 383–4.

4  Glaser DA. (2003) Anti-aging products and cosmeceuticals. Facial 

Plast Surg Clin North Am 11, 219–27.

5  Forestier S. (2008) Rationale for sunscreen development. J Am Acad 

Dermatol 58, S133–8.

6  Roscher  NM,  Lindeman  MKO,  Kong  SB,  et  al.  (1994)  Photo-
decomposition of several compounds commonly used as sunscreen 
agents. J Photochem Photobiol A 80, 417–21.

7  Deflandre A, Forestier S, Lang G, et al., inventors; L’Oreal, assignee. 
(1997)  Photostable  cosmetic  composition  containing  a  UV-A 
screen and a UV-B screen and a process for stabilizing the UV-A 
screen with the UV-B screen. US patent US 5605680. February 25.
8  Pinnell SR, Fairhurst D, Gillies R, et al. (2000) Microfine zinc oxide 
is  a  superior  sunscreen  ingredient  to  microfine  titanium  dioxide. 
Dermatol Surg 26, 309–14.

9  Diffey BL. (2001) Sun protection with clothing. Br J Dermatol 144, 

449–51.

500

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

10  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. (1974) Control of keratinization with the alpha 
hydroxy acids and related compounds. Arch Dermatol 110, 586–90.
11  Van Scott EJ, Ditre CM, Yu RJ. (1996) Alpha-hydroxyacids in the 

treatment of signs of photoaging. Clin Dermatol 14, 217–26.

12  Grimes PE, Green BA, Wildnauer RH, Edison BL. (2004) The use of 

polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) in photoaged skin. Cutis 73, 3–13.

13  Ditre  CM,  Griffin  TD,  Murphy  GF,  et  al.  (1996)  Effects  of  AHAs 
on photoaged skin: a pilot clinical, histological and ultra-structural 
study. J Am Acad Dermatol 34, 187–95.

14  Green BA, Briden E. (2009) PHAs and bionic acids: next generation 
hydroxy  acids.  In:  Draelos  ZD,  ed.  Cosmeceuticals.,  2nd  edn.  The 
Netherlands: Elsevier Inc., 209–15.

30  Pinnell SR, Yang HS, Omar M, et al. (2001) Topical L-ascorbic acid: 

percutaneous absorption studies. Dermatol Surg 27, 137–42.

31  Burke  KE,  Clive  J,  Combs  GF  Jr,  et  al.  (2001) The  effects  of  topi-
cal  and  oral  vitamin  E  on  pigmentation  and  skin  cancer  induced 
by ultraviolet irradiation in Skh:2 hairless mice. J Nutr Cancer 38, 
87–97.

32  Chan AC. (1993) Partners in defense, vitamin E and vitamin C. Can 

J Physiol Pharmacol 71, 725–31.

33  Fuchs  J,  Kern  H.  (1998)  Modulation  of  UV-light-induced  skin 
inflammation  by  d-α-tocopherol  and  L-ascorbic  acid:  a  clini-
cal study using solar simulated radiation. Free Radic Biol Med 25, 
1006–12.

15  Weiss  JS,  Ellis  CN,  Headington  JT,  et  al.  (1988)  Topical  tretinoin 
improves  photodamaged  skin:  a  double-blind,  vehicle-controlled 
study. JAMA 259, 527–32.

34  Lin JY, Selim MA, Shea CR, et al. (2003) UV photoprotection by 
combination  topical  antioxidants  vitamin  C  and  E.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol 48, 866–74.

16  Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, Leyden JJ. (1986) Topical tretin-

oin for photoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 15, 836–56.

17  Burke KE, Graham GF. (1988) Tretinoin for photoaging skin: North 

Carolina vs. New York. JAMA 260, 3130.

18  Fisher GJ, Wang ZQ, Datta SE. (1997) Pathophysiology of prema-
ture skin aging induced by ultraviolet radiation. N Engl J Med 337, 
1419–28.

19  Stratigos AJ, Katsambas AD. (2005) The role of topical retinoids in 

the treatment of photoaging. Drugs 65, 1061–72.

20  Shindo Y, Wit E, Han D, Packer L. (1994) Dose–response effects of 
acute ultraviolet irradiation on antioxidants and molecular markers 
of oxidation in murine epidermis and dermis. J Invest Dermatol 23, 
470–5.

21  Wang Z, Boudjelal M, Kang S, et al. (1999) Ultraviolet irradiation of 
human skin causes functional vitamin A deficiency, preventable by 
all-trans retinoic acid pre-treatment. Nat Med 5, 418–22.

22  Bhawan  J,  Olsen  E,  Lufrano  L,  et  al.  (1996)  Histologic  evaluation 
of the long-term effects of tretinoin on photoaged skin. J Dermatol 
Sci 11, 177–82.

23  Kligman AM, Dogadkina D, Lauker RM. (1993) Effects of topical 
tretinoin on non-sun-exposed protected  skin  of the  elderly. J  Am 
Acad Dermatol 39, 25–33.

24  Darr D, Combs S, Dunston S, et al. (1992) Topical vitamin C pro-
tects porcine skin from ultraviolet radiation-induced damage. Br J 
Dermatol 127, 247–53.

25  Phillips CL, Combs SB, Pinnell SR. (1994) Effects of ascorbic acid 
on proliferation and collagen synthesis in relation to donor age of 
human dermal fibroblasts. J Invest Derm 103, 228–32.

26  Bergfeld W, Pinnell S. (1996) Topical vitamin C. Dialogues Dermatol 

Am Acad Derm 38, 1.

27  Alster TS, West TB. Effect of vitamin C on postoperative CO2 laser 

resurfacing erythema. Dermatol Surg 24, 331–4.

28  Uchida Y, Behne M, Quiac D, et al. (2001) Vitamin stimulates sphin-
golipid production and markers of barrier formation in submerged 
human keratinocyte cultures. J Invest Dermatol 117, 1307–13.
29  Catiel-Higournenc  Farrais  C,  Guey  C,  Schmidt  R,  et  al.  Private 
communications: L’Oréal Advanced Research Laboratories, Clichy 
and Aulnay-sous-Bois, France.

35  Lin  FH,  Lin  JY,  Gupta  RD,  et  al.  (2005)  Ferulic  acid  stabilizes  a 
solution  of  vitamins  C  and  E  and  doubles  its  photoprotection  of 
skin. J Invest Dermatol 125, 826–32.

36  Hoppe U, Bergemann J, Diembeck W, et al. (1999) Coenzyme Q10, 

a cutaneous antioxidant and energizer. BioFactors 9, 371–8.

37  Blatt T, Littarru GP. (2011) Biochemical rationale and experimental 
data on the anti-aging properties of CoQ10 at skin level. Biofactors 
37, 381-5.

38  Zhang  M,  Dang  L,  Guo  F,  et  al.  (2012)  Coenzyme  Q10  enhances 
dermal elastin expression, inhibits IL-1α production and melanin 
synthesis  in  vitro.  International  Journal  of  Cosmetic  Science  34, 
273–9.

39  Eucerin  Q10  Anti-Wrinkle  Sensitive  Skin  Crème.  (2003)  From 
Wrinkle Reduction Study 2003. In: Eucerin Q10 Product Compen-
dium. Wilton, CT: Beiersdorf Inc., p. 11.

40  Beitner H. (2003) Randomized, placebo-controlled, double blind 
study  on  the  clinical  efficacy  of  a  cream  containing  5%  alpha-
lipoic acid related to photoaging of facial skin. Br J Dermatol 149, 
841–9.

41  Pinnell SR, Lin J-Y, Lin F-H, et al. (2004) Alpha lipoic acid is inef-
fective  as  a  topical  photoprotectant  of  skin.  Poster  presentation, 
62nd Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Dermatology, 
Washington, DC.

42  Matsugo  S,  Bito  T,  Konishi  T.  (2011)  Photochemical  stability  of 

lipoic acid and its impact on skin ageing. Free Rad Res 45, 918–24.
43  Burke KE, Combs GF, Gross EG, et al. (1992) The effects of topi-
cal and oral L-selenomethionine on pigmentation and skin cancer 
induced by ultraviolet irradiation. Nutr Cancer 17, 123–37.

44  Burke KE, Burford RG, Combs GR Jr, et al. (1992) The effect of topi-
cal  L-selenomethionine  on  minimal  erythema  dose  of  ultraviolet 
irradiation  in  humans.  Photodermatol  Photoimmun  Photomed  9, 
52–7.

45  Burke  KE.  (1994)  Method  for  the  prevention  and  reversal  of  the 
extrinsic aging of the skin by transdermal application of selenamino 
acids and compositions therefore. US Patent #5,330,757, July 19.
46  Wei  H,  Saladi  R,  Lu  Y,  Wang  Y,  et  al.  (2003)  Isoflavone  genistein: 
photoprotection and clinical implications in dermatology. J Nutrition 
133, 3811S–9S.

Chapter 57
Over-the-counter acne treatments

Emmy M. Graber1 and Diane Thiboutot2
1Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
2Private Practice, Boston, MA, USA 

BaSIC CONCeptS

•	 Over-the-counter	cosmeceutical	products	are	frequently	used	in	the	treatment	of	acne.
•	 Topical	benzoyl	peroxide	is	one	of	the	most	effective	over-the-counter	acne	treatments.
•	 Other	active	agents	in	acne	products	include	hydroxy	acids,	salicylic	acid,	sulfur,	and	retinol.
•	 Leave-on	products	have	a	more	profound	effect	on	acne	than	cleansers.
•	 Cleansing	cloths	and	scrubs	may	be	used	for	their	sebum	removal	and	keratolytic	activity.

Introduction

Although  acne  is  one  of  the  most  common  conditions  that  a 
general dermatologist treats [1], most people with acne will first 
try to self-treat before seeking the assistance of a healthcare pro-
fessional. A survey carried out in 2000 demonstrated that 75% 
of acne sufferers waited about 1 year prior to seeking the help 
of  a  healthcare  professional  [2].  Another  study  estimated  that 
one-third  of  those  battling  acne  will  ever  consult  a  physician 
regarding their condition [3]. Without the assistance of a physi-
cian,  patients  will  often  turn  to  the  drugstore  shelves  to  treat 
their acne.

A  plethora  of  over-the-counter  (OTC)  modalities  exists 
for  treating  acne.  These  modalities  include  topical  cleansers, 
creams,  lotions,  gels,  and  masks  as  well  as  mechanical  treat-
ments,  essential  oils,  and  oral  vitamins.  The  non-prescription 
acne market is one of the fastest growing segments of the der-
matologic industry. This OTC market worldwide is estimated to 
be 2–4 times the size of the prescription market [4]. Estimates 
from 2001 revealed that consumers spend approximately $100 
million per year on OTC anti-acne products [5].

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is the regulatory 
agency  that  presides  over  the  marketing  of  non-prescription 
acne  products.  In  the  Final  Acne  Monograph,  the  FDA  states 
that any product labeled as an “acne drug product” is defined as: 
“A drug product used to reduce the number of acne blemishes, 
acne  pimples,  blackheads  and  whiteheads.”  The  FDA  defines 
OTC products that fit this description to include: salicylic acid, 
sulfur, sulfur combined with resorcinol, and benzoyl peroxide [6]. 
Although  products  cannot  be  sold  bearing  an  anti-acne  label 

unless they contain one of the above approved ingredients, many 
other products are marketed towards the acne-prone consumer 
claiming to “heal,” “purify,” or “cleanse,” the skin and pores.

In this chapter we address OTC products that are marketed 
for the treatment of acne, not just those products that the FDA 
defines as an “acne drug product.” There are a multitude of OTC 
products  with  labeling  that  implies  an  acne  efficacy.  Some  of 
these washes and leave-on products contain benzoyl peroxide, 
salicylic acid, alfa-hydroxy acids, polyhydroxy acids, retinol, or 
sulfur. Mechanical treatments exist as well and come in the form 
of cleansing brushes, adhesive pads, heating devices, and scrubs. 
Some patients may turn to homeopathic  remedies such as tea 
tree oil or chamomile. Oral vitamins, such as vitamin A, zinc, or 
nicotinamide are also tried as an OTC acne fix.

Soaps and syndets

Studies show that over half of those with acne believe that their 
condition  is  caused  by  poor  hygiene  and  dirt  on  the  skin  [7]. 
This belief often leads patients to alter both how they wash their 
face and their face washing frequency. While washing the face 
twice  daily  is  more  optimal  then  washing  once  or  four  times 
daily,  the  quantity  of  cleansings  probably  does  not  matter  as 
much as the substance that is used to wash the face [8]. A mul-
titude of cleansers exist and can be categorized as either soaps 
or syndets. Traditional soaps are made of fats and an alkali and 
have a basic pH of 9–10. This pH, which is higher than the skin’s 
pH, disrupts the intercellular lipids that hold the stratum cor-
neum together. The disintegration of the intercellular “cement” 

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

501

502

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

causes skin irritation. Syndets are made of synthetic detergents 
and have a pH of 5.5–7, similar to the skin’s natural pH. Because 
syndets  only  contain  less  than  10%  soap,  they  are  much  less 
damaging  to  the  stratum  corneum  [9].  The  benefit  of  syndet 
cleansers  specifically  for  acne  patients  has  been  demonstrated 
in studies.

One study, looking at 25 patients undergoing acne treatment, 
were randomized to cleanse with either a soap or a syndet. After 
4 weeks, those using the syndet cleanser reported having signifi-
cantly  less  acne  and  less  oil.  Both  patients  and  dermatologists 
reported less irritation in those using the syndet cleanser [10]. 
Although  not  all-inclusive,  some  brands  of  syndet  cleansers 
include Cetaphil, Aveeno, Purpose, Basis, Oil of Olay, and Dove. 
There are additional cleansers that are marketed specifically for 
acne use that contain an active anti-acne ingredient (e.g. benzoyl 
peroxide or salicylic acid).

Benzoyl peroxide

Benzoyl  peroxide  is  commonly  found  in  OTC  anti-acne 
washes, creams, and lotions. In fact, 23% of people aged 13–27 
have used an OTC benzoyl peroxide product [11]. Benzoyl per-
oxide  was  first  utilized  in  1917  to  bleach  flour.  In  the  1960s, 
benzoyl peroxide began to have medical applications for treat-
ing leg and decubitus ulcers. Several years later, in 1979, it was 
first used for treating acne. Benzoyl peroxide has antibacterial, 
anti-inflammatory,  and  comedolytic  properties,  which  makes 
it  effective  in  acne  treatment.  It  has  antimicrobial  properties 
against  Propionibacterium  acnes  and  Staphylococcal  aureus. 
One study demonstrated an almost 2-log10 decrease in P. acnes 
concentration  just  after  2  days  of  5%  benzoyl  peroxide  use 
[12]. Another study confirmed this fast-acting effect showing 
that P. acnes counts reduced by a mean of 2-log10 after apply-
ing 10% benzoyl peroxide cream for 3 days. After 7 days, there 
was no further decline in P. acnes levels [13]. Benzoyl peroxide 
has  greater  antimicrobial  properties  against P.  acnes  than  any 
of  the  topical  antibiotics  alone.  However,  unlike  the  antibiot-
ics, benzoyl peroxide will not induce bacterial resistance. Using 

a topical antibiotic with the addition of benzoyl peroxide will 
increase  the  bactericidal  effect  of  the  antibiotic  (Figure  57.1) 
[14].  Furthermore,  it  will  also  prevent  the  development  of 
P. acnes resistance when used in combination with a topical or 
oral antibiotic [15].

Benzoyl peroxide also acts as an anti-inflammatory agent by 
reducing oxygen free radicals and also by lessening P. acnes den-
sity. The reduction of P. acnes has a profound anti-inflammatory 
effect because the bacteria induce monocytes to produce tumor 
necrosis  factor  α  (TNF-α),  interleukin-1β,  and  interleukin-8 
[16,17]. The strong anti-inflammatory and antibacterial effects 
of benzoyl peroxide can be parlayed into good clinical results, 
as shown in a large UK study. This study looked at five antimi-
crobial acne treatments over an 18-week period. Subjects used 
either oral oxytetracycline, oral minocycline, benzoyl peroxide, 
separate  administration  of  topical  erythromycin  and  benzoyl 
peroxide, or a combination product with containing both topical 
erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide. The 5% benzoyl peroxide 
used twice daily had similar efficacy to 100 mg minocycline once 
daily. This study also carried out a cost-effectiveness analysis and 
found that the least expensive treatment (benzoyl peroxide) was 
12 times more cost-effective than minocycline [18].

Besides being an anti-inflammatory, benzoyl peroxide is also 
comedolytic. One study utilizing the rabbit ear comedogenicity 
assay showed a 10% reduction of comedones [19]. Another study 
compared 5% benzoyl peroxide twice daily with 0.05% tretinoin 
once daily for 8 weeks. Both treatments were “extremely effective” 
for all acneiform lesions but significantly reduced both open and 
closed comedones after only 2 weeks [20].

Benzoyl peroxide is available OTC in 2.5–10% strengths and 
as either washes or leave-on products (e.g. cream, lotion, gel). 
Leave-on products reduce P. acnes counts more than the washes, 
although  both  significantly  reduce  P.  acnes  on  the  skin  [14]. 
There is some indication that gel formulations may be more stable 
and release benzoyl peroxide more consistently than creams and 
lotions [21]. Equal reductions of acneiform lesions are seen with 
benzoyl  peroxide  strengths  of  2.5,  5,  and  10%.  Increasing  the 
strength of benzoyl peroxide seems only to intensify the irrita-
tion [22]. Skin irritation to benzoyl peroxide is one of its greatest 

2

m

c
g
o
L

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Clin-BP

Ery-BP

Benzoyl
peroxide

Clinda-
mycin

Erythro-
mycin

Azelaic
acid

Figure 57.1  Reduction in Propionibacterium acnes with topi-
cal therapy. Clin-BP, clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide; Ery-
BP, erythromycin and benzoyl peroxide. (Source: Leden, 2001 
[Semin Cutan Med Surg 20, 13943]. Reproduced with permis-
sion of Elsevier.)

 
57. Over-the-counter Acne Treatments

503

barriers to use. Redness, stinging, and dryness may be manifes-
tations of irritation. Many patients describe this as an “allergy” 
to benzoyl peroxide. However, true allergic contact dermatitis to 
benzoyl  peroxide  is  estimated  at  only  1–2.5%  of  patients  with 
acne [23,24]. Patients should be warned about irritation that may 
result and should also be told of the propensity for benzoyl per-
oxide to bleach fabrics and hair.

In addition to being available OTC, benzoyl peroxide is also 
available  as  a  prescription.  These  prescription  products  may 
contain  different  formulations  that  may  enhance  penetration 
and  decrease  irritation,  although  no  head-to-head  trials  exist 
comparing prescription with OTC benzoyl peroxide.

Since mouse studies have shown that benzoyl peroxide can pro-
duce DNA strand breaks, there has been some question to its car-
cinogenic  potential.  However,  two  case–control  studies  showed 
no  correlation  between  benzoyl  peroxide  use  and  skin  cancer. 
Additionally, 23 carcinogenicity studies in rodents produced neg-
ative results [11]. Epidemiologic evaluations have shown no asso-
ciation between benzoyl peroxide and malignant melanoma [25].

alpha-hydroxy acids

The hydroxy acids are another common OTC anti-acne ingredi-
ent found in washes and leave-on products. There are two main 
classes  of  hydroxy  acids  that  are  used  for  treating  acne:  alpha-
hydroxy  acids  and  beta-hydroxy  acids  (Table  57.1). The  alpha-
hydroxy  acids  are  water-soluble,  penetrate  the  epidermis  and 
even into the dermis at higher concentrations. They act by desq-
uamating  the  stratum  corneum  (i.e.  exfoliation).  Specifically, 
alpha-hydroxy  acids  disrupt  corneocyte  adhesion  in  the  upper 
stratum corneum, possible by chelating calcium [26]. This results 
clinically in a smoother appearance to the skin, and may also give 
the illusion of reducing pore size [27]. Alpha-hydroxy acids also 
promote epidermolysis, disperse basal layer melanin, and when 
strong enough to penetrate the dermis they may increase colla-
gen synthesis [28]. These effects may make alpha-hydroxy acids 
helpful for acne prevention and treatment of postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.  The  most  common  OTC  alpha-hydroxy 
acids are glycolic acid (derived from sugar cane) and lactic acid 
(from sour milk) and are found in less than 10% concentration.

Salicylic acid

The  only  beta-hydroxy  acid  used  in  dermatology  is  salicylic 
acid. Unlike the alpha-hydroxy acids, it is lipid-soluble allowing 
it to penetrate not only the epidermis but also the pilosebaceous 
unit. This added penetration makes it comedolytic, thus giving 
it superiority over the alfa-hydroxy acids in treating acne [29]. 
Salicylic acid also exerts anti-inflammatory effects by inhibiting 
arachidonic acid.

Multiple  studies  exist  demonstrating  the  superiority  of  sali-
cylic acid to placebo or to benzoyl peroxide. One study exam-
ined 49 patients who applied either 0.5% salicylic acid or placebo 
twice  daily  for  12  weeks.  Those  who  applied  the  salicylic  acid 
had significantly reduced inflammatory papules and open com-
edones, but closed comedones were not diminished [30]. One of 
the two studies submitted to the FDA during the OTC approval 
phase was a 12-week, double-blind investigation of 180 subjects. 
It compared the efficacy of 2% salicylic acid solution with a vehi-
cle  solution  and  5%  benzoyl  peroxide.  Of  the  subjects  treated 
with the salicylic acid, 40% showed a good or excellent response 
versus 5% in the vehicle group and only 2% in the benzoyl perox-
ide group. Salicylic acid was better than either vehicle or benzoyl 
peroxide  in  improving  total  lesions,  inflammatory  lesions,  and 
open comedones, but not closed comedones.

The second study submitted to the FDA involved 187 subjects 
and compared 0.5% and 2% salicylic acid solution with the vehi-
cle solution. Both 0.5% and 2% salicylic acid were superior to 
the vehicle in reducing inflammatory lesions, open and closed 
comedones, and total lesions [31].

There  are  also  several  studies  that  demonstrate  the  efficacy 
of salicylic acid formulations other than solution. A cross-over 
study evaluating a 2% salicylic acid cleanser and a 10% benzoyl 
peroxide lotion in 30 patients found the salicylic acid cleanser to 
be superior at improving comedones [32]. Another study dem-
onstrated  the  efficacy  of  a  2%  salicylic  acid  scrub  in  reducing 
open  comedones  [33].  Based  on  these  studies,  many  consider 
salicylic  acid  more  effective  than  benzoyl  peroxide  in  treating 
comedonal  acne,  but  less  effective  than  benzoyl  peroxide  in 
treating inflammatory acne [31]. Unlike benzoyl peroxide, sali-
cylic acid does not have the ability to prevent resistance when 
used in combination with oral or topical antibiotics.

Table 57.1  Hydroxy	acids

Hydroxy acid

Solubility

Source

Penetration

Action

Over-the-counter strength

Alph-hydroxy acids Water	soluble

Dermis	(at	high	
concentrations)

Exfoliative

Less	than	10%

Glycolic	acid

Lactic	acid

Sugar	cane

Sour	milk

Beta-hydroxy acid

Lipid	soluble

Salicylic	acid

Willow	bark,	wintergreen,	
sweet	birch

Epidermis	and	
pilosebaceous	unit

Exfoliative,	comedolytic,	
anti-inflammatory

0.05–5%

504

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

polyhydroxy acids

retinols

A  third  class  of  hydroxy  acids,  polyhydroxy  acids,  is  becoming 
more  popular  in  OTC  dermatologic  formulations.  Polyhydroxy 
acids  have  been  shown  to  be  less  irritating  than  alpha-hydroxy 
acids,  but  their  larger  particle  size  may  limit  penetration  [34]. 
Lactobionic acid and gluconolactone are polyhydroxy acids most 
often found in topicals marketed for anti-aging purposes but may 
someday also be found in OTC acne treatments.

Although  very  little  of  either  the  topical  benzoyl  peroxide 
or  hydroxy  acids  is  absorbed  systemically,  both  of  these  OTC 
products are pregnancy category C. Like benzoyl peroxide, the 
hydroxy acids can cause skin irritation marked by dryness, ery-
thema,  and  flaking.  Use  of  the  hydroxy  acids  can  also  lead  to 
greater  sun  sensitivity.  Although  generally  safe,  toxic  levels  of 
salicylic  acid  (known  as  salicylism)  can  occur  if  salicylic  acid 
is used on a large body surface area in patients with icthyosis 
or  excoriations.  Use  of  salicylic  acid  is  contraindicated  in  any 
patient with an aspirin allergy [35].

Retinols are a group of vitamin A derivatives that are available 
topically OTC in various forms such as retinol, retinyl propion-
ate,  and  retinyl  palmitate.  Both  retinol  and  retinyl  propionate 
are  absorbed  by  keratinocytes  where  they  are  reversibly  oxi-
dized into retinaldehyde, whereas retinyl palmitate is inactive. 
Retinaldehyde  is  irreversibly  converted  into  all-trans  retinoic 
acid (i.e. tretinoin). Tretinoin is transported into the keratino-
cyte nucleus where it acts by binding to the hormone response 
elements. There are no large multicenter trials that evaluate the 
efficacy of the retinols. In general, the retinols are 20 times less 
potent  than  topical  tretinoin  but  exhibit  greater  penetration 
than tretinoin [43]. 0.25% Topical retinol induces cellular and 
molecular changes similar to that observed with 0.025% tretin-
oin without causing the irritation typical of tretinoin. However, 
it should be noted that most OTC formulations of retinol come 
in only 0.04–0.07% [44].

Sulfur

Sulfur  is  a  yellow,  non-metallic  element  that  has  been  used 
for  centuries  to  treat  various  dermatologic  conditions.  A 
physician  in  Ancient  Rome,  Aulus  Cornelius  Celsus  (ca 
25 bc – ca 50 bc), wrote  De  Medicina,  a  medical  text which 
includes the use of sulfur in mineral baths to treat acne [36]. 
Sulfur continues to be used today for a variety of conditions 
because of its antifungal and bacteriostatic properties [37]. It 
is believed by some to also have a keratolytic effect. Although 
the  precise  mechanism  of  action  is  not  known,  sulfur  is 
thought  to  interact  with  cysteine  in  the  stratum  corneum 
causing a reduction in sulfur to hydrogen sulfide. Hydrogen 
sulfide  in  turn  degrades  keratin,  producing  the  keratolytic 
effect  of  sulfur  [38].  Although  one  study  has  shown  sulfur 
to  be  comedogenic  [39],  further  studies  have  not  validated 
this claim [40]. Sulfur is available OTC in concentrations of 
3–8% and is often found in combination with resorcinol or 
resorcinol monoacetate. The malodor and messiness of sul-
fur limits its use.

triclosan and triclocarban

Triclosan and triclocarban are two antimicrobials that are found 
in cleansers marketed for acne treatment and are often labeled 
as  “antibacterial”  cleansers.  Including  having  effects  against  P. 
acnes, both of these antimicrobials are effective against Gram-
positive bacteria and triclocarban also is effective against Gram-
negative bacteria. Studies are scant, but there is some evidence 
that these antimicrobials improve acne [41,42].

Cleansing cloths

Cleansing cloths are disposable, dry towelettes that are impreg-
nated with a cleanser and possibly an anti-acne ingredient. Just 
prior to use, most of them need to be moistened with water. They 
are manufactured by combining polyester, rayon, cotton, and cel-
lulose fibers through a thermal process. Many cloths are impreg-
nated with triclosan or a hydroxy acid. Their effect on the skin 
is determined in part by their ingredients but also by the type of 
weave.  The  cloths  may  be  either  open  or  closed  weave.  Cloths 
with an open weave have 2–3 mm between fibers. This relatively 
large  spacing  between  the  fibers  decreases  the  cloth’s  contact 
area with the skin and in turn lessens irritancy. The closed weave 
cloths have less space between each individual fiber and are more 
irritating to the skin [45]. There are no known published trials 
evaluating the efficacy of cleansing cloths against acne.

Mechanical treatments

In  addition  to  the  above-described  anti-acne  ingredients,  there 
are several OTC treatments designed to mechanically rid the skin 
of acne. Some of these treatments, such as scrubs and cleansing 
brushes, physically abrade the skin in an attempt to control acne. 
There are many abrasive scrubs available OTC that patients will 
often  try  to  combat  acne.  Scrubs  are  topical  agents  that  incor-
porate  particles  that  mechanically  abrade  the  skin  and  thin  the 
stratum  corneum.  In  general,  three  classes  of  scrubs  exist.  The 
most abrasive scrubs are made of aluminum oxide particles and 
ground fruit pits. These particles are the harshest on the skin, in 
part  because  of  their  irregular  shape.  The  second,  and  milder, 
class of scrubs is made of polyethylene beads that are smooth 
and round particles. The mildest class of scrubs is composed of 

57. Over-the-counter Acne Treatments

505

sodium tetraborate decahydrate granules, which soften and dissolve 
soon  after  application  [45].  To  our  knowledge,  there  is  only  one 
published study looking at the effect of scrubs on acne. This study 
showed that scrubs did not improve comedones, but in fact wors-
ened them. The abrasives also caused peeling and erythema. How-
ever, resorption of inflammatory lesions was somewhat augmented 
by the abrasives [46]. Some scrubs also include benzoyl peroxide or 
a hydroxy acid in order to target the consumer with acne.

In addition to scrubs, another cleansing method designed to 
thin the stratum corneum is the cleansing brush. Some cleansing 
brushes (e.g. Sonic™ Skin Care Brush [Pacific Bioscience Labs, 
Bellevue,  MA,  USA])  are  handheld,  battery  operator  devices 
with an oscillating brush head while others are simply handheld, 
coarse pads (Clean and Clear™ Blackhead Eraser [Johnson and 
Johnson,  New  Brunswick,  NJ,  USA]).  There  are  no  published 
trials evaluating the efficacy of either of these devices for remov-
ing acne. However, there is a small internally performed study 
by the makers of the Sonic™ Skin Care Brush demonstrating the 
brush  to  remove  2.34  times  more  foundation  than  traditional 
cleansing methods.

There are also adhesive pads (Biore™ [Kao Brands Co., Cin-
cinnati, OH, USA]) on the market that are purported “to get rid 
of pore clogging buildup and blackheads” [47]. These disposable 
pads are applied to wet skin and left in place for 10 minutes, over 
which time the pad will stiffen. The active agent of these pads is 
polyquaternium 37, a cationic hydrocolloid substance that binds 
to the anionic component of comedonal plugs [48]. Although no 
studies exist evaluating the pads’ efficacy in treating acne, there 
is a report of its success in treating trichostasis spinulosa [48].

Besides  mechanical  agents  such  as  brushes  and  pads,  there 
are also handheld devices that patients can purchase for home-
use.  One  such  heating  device  (Zeno™  [Zeno  Corp.,  Houston, 
TX, USA]) is designed to speed the resolution of existing acne 
lesions.  The  user  is  directed  to  apply  the  device  to  individual 
acne  lesions  for  2.5  minutes,  for  2–3  times  a  day.  The  device 
heats to 121°Fahrenheit, killing P. acnes. The exact mechanism 
by  which  the  delivered  heat  kills  this  bacterium  is  unknown. 
Data from the manufacturer demonstrates that lesions treated 
with the Zeno device clear on average 1.3 days faster than those 
treated with a placebo [49].

There are several light emitting diode (LED) devices that are 
available over-the-counter that patients can purchase for use at 
home. LED is nonablative and athermal mode of treatment [50] 
that releases narrow bands of polychromatic, low-intensity light. 
The polychromatic light may include light in the blue, red, and/
or near-infrared spectrum. Blue light may improve inflamma-
tory acne by activating corproporphyrin III and protoporphy-
rin  IX  which  can  destroy  P.  acnes  [51].  Blue  light  reduces  the 
proliferative  activity  of  keratinocytes  and  fibroblasts  without 
increased  cell  death  [52].  Red  light  may  stimulate  mitochon-
drial activity and modulate cytokine release from macrophages 
resulting in a reduced inflammatory response in inflammatory 
acne [51]. In non-inflammatory acne, LED may reduce sebum 

production and mean size of sebaceous glands [51]. Near-infrared 
light (830 nm) is absorbed in the cellular membrane and may 
enhance  chemotaxis  of  neutrophils,  macrophages,  and  fibro-
blasts to the treated area; increase cellular recruitment, metabo-
lism,  and  mitosis;  and,  accelerate  degranulation  of  mast  cells 
[50]. TGF-beta I is overproduced and poorly regulated in scars, 
leading to fibroblastic proliferation; low-level light therapy with 
near-infrared light may also modulate TGF-beta I [53].

Several at home handheld LED devices are commercially avail-
able but studies evaluating their efficacy are limited and many of 
the existing studies lack scientific rigor. A randomized-controlled 
trial of a combination blue- and red- light LED device (OCimple 
Light  Therapy  System  MP200)  used  in  mild-to-moderate  acne 
has shown to decrease both inflammatory and non-inflammatory 
acne  lesions  [51].  This  study  evaluated  lesions  on  the  forehead 
and  cheeks  of  35  subjects  before  and  after  serial  application  of 
420-nm  blue  light  and  660-nm  red  light  for  2.5  minutes,  twice 
daily for four weeks with resulting decrease in number of inflam-
matory lesion counts by 26.3% during the course of treatment, 
and further decrease by 76.8% at eight weeks after completion of 
treatment [51]. Non-inflammatory lesions decreased by 22.3% at 
2 weeks of treatment and by 53.7% at 12 weeks after treatment 
[51]. Hematoxylin and eosin stains of 2mm punch biopsies taken 
at baseline and 12 weeks revealed a significant decrease in inflam-
matory lesions [51].

A prospective study evaluated a 405–460 nm blue-violet LED 
device (Silk’n Blue Device) two times weekly for four weeks for 
the  treatment  of  mild  to  moderate  inflammatory  acne  in  17 
patients, with significant reduction in acne lesions by 35% at one 
month and by an additional 39% at three months after treatment 
[56]. However, this trial was neither blinded nor controlled. This 
study  was  not  controlled  for  other  topical  or  oral  acne  treat-
ments simultaneously used by the study participants [56].

A prospective, single-center, open-label study was conducted 
to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  two  fluences  (A:  29  J/cm2/day  vs. 
B: 2J/cm2/day)  of 412 nm blue light  (TRIA Beauty Blue Light 
Device) for the treatment of mild to moderate acne [57,58]. 32 
subjects treated a 3 × 5cm area on one cheek with fluence A and 
contralateral cheek with fluence B [20]. Blue light at fluence A 
was  associated  with  significant  reductions  from  baseline  to  as 
early as Week 1 of treatment, while blue light at fluence B was 
showed  this  association  by  Week  3  [57,58].  Significant  reduc-
tions in subject report of both the number and severity of flares 
and improvement in the skin’s appearance [57,58]. 53% of sub-
jects  considered  the  treatment  gentler  than  traditional  acne 
treatments [57,58].

A prospective,  randomized, self-control study evaluated the 
efficacy of an a home-use blue light device (Tanda Zap device) 
vs. a sham device applied on 30 subjects in office for 2 minutes 
twice daily for 2 days; revealing significant difference in the size 
and  erythema  of  lesions  [59].  While  patients  and  physicians 
both agreed with the improvement, neither were blinded to the 
treatment [59].

506

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

essential oils

Patients  who  are  seeking  a  homeopathic  approach  to  treating 
acne may seek out essential oils and oral vitamins. Two topical 
essential oils that can be used are tea tree oil and chamomile. Tea 
tree oil is derived from the Australian tree Melaleuca alternifo-
lia. The oil contains several antimicrobial substances including 
terpinen-4-ol, alpha-terpineol, and alfa-pinene [62]. A compar-
ative study of 5% tea tree oil versus 5% benzoyl peroxide showed 
that both substances significantly reduce acne. The tea tree oil 
had a slower onset but was less irritating than the benzoyl per-
oxide [61]. It should be noted that the majority of tea tree oil 
available OTC is no more than 1% concentration. Chamomile is 
derived from the German chamomile plant Matricaria recutita. 
The active ingredient is alfa bisabolol. One study demonstrated 
that alpha bisabolol has an anti-inflammatory effect in the skin 
equal to that of 0.25% hydrocortisone [62]. Because of this anti-
inflammatory effect, some will try this homeopathic approach 
to treat their acne.

Oral vitamins

Oral  vitamins  that  have  been  tried  for  the  treatment  of  acne 
include zinc, nicotinamide, and vitamin A. Zinc sulfonate was 
first  used  as  an  acne  treatment  in  1970.  Later,  in  the  1980s,  a 
different  formulation  of  zinc  was  developed  –  zinc  gluconate. 
In patients with acne, zinc inhibits chemotaxis, is bacteriostatic 
against P. acnes, and reduces TNF-α production. In vitro, zinc 
inhibits type I 5-alpha reductase, a key enzyme in the hormonal 
impact on acne [63]. A randomized, double-blind study of 332 
patients compared 30 mg/day zinc gluconate with 100 mg/day 
minocycline. At 90 days, patients treated with either medication 
had  significant  reductions  of  papules  and  pustules.  However, 
minocycline-treated  subjects  had  a  17%  greater  reduction  in 
inflammatory lesions than those treated with zinc [64].

It should be noted that the recommended daily allowance of 
zinc is 15 mg, half the dose than is often used to treat acne. The 
most common side effect of zinc supplementation is gastroin-
testinal upset. Although generally safe at common doses (even 
safe in pregnancy), side effects can ensue when higher doses are 
used. In an anecdotal report, a desperate teenage boy with acne 
self-medicated with 300 mg/day zinc for 2 years. As a result, 
he  developed  severe  anemia,  leucopenia,  and  neutropenia, 
which improved upon cessation of the zinc [65].

Another  oral  vitamin  often  utilized  for  acne  treatment  is 
nicotinamide  (also  known  as  niacinamide),  a  water-soluble  B 
vitamin.  Nicotinamide  can  improve  acne  by  both  inhibiting 
white  blood  cell  chemotaxis  and  by  inhibiting  the  release  of 
lysosomal enzymes by white blood cells which damage the fol-
licular  wall  [66].  Although  the  recommended  daily  allowance 
of  nicotinamide  is  20 mg,  studies  showing  its  beneficial  effect 
for acne have used 750–1000 mg/day [67]. Supplementation is 
safe up to 3000 mg/day, at which point it may induce reversible 

elevations of liver function tests. Oral nicotinamide is also avail-
able as a prescription in combination with zinc, copper, and folic 
acid in a product known as Nicomide (DUSA Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., Wilmington, MA, USA) and has shown success in treating 
acne [68]. Topical nicotinamide has not shown benefit in treat-
ing acne [69].

Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin that can be used in high 
doses to treat acne. Interestingly, those with acne tend to have 
lower plasma levels of vitamin A than controls [70,71]. Vitamin 
A binds to some of the same nuclear receptors as isotretinoin 
(13-cis retinoic acid). The recommended daily allowance of vita-
min A is 50 000–100 000 IU. It is effective for acne at 300 000 IU/
day  in  females  and  400 000–500 000 IU/day  in  males  [72].  At 
these high doses most patients experience similar side effects to 
those who are on isotretinoin (e.g. xerosis and cheilitis). High 
doses of vitamin A also have the potential to induce liver and 
kidney damage and to cause pseudotumor cerebri.

Conclusions

Because  many  patients  will  turn  to  OTC  remedies  to  treat 
their acne, it is important that the physician understand what 
is  available  to  patients.  The  ability  of  the  physician  to  speak 
knowledgeably  on  OTC  remedies  instils  patient  confidence 
in the physician. Many of these OTC treatments may be used 
beneficially; however, it is helpful for the physician to advise 
the patient on both their advantages and shortcomings. Some 
OTC  treatments  may  enhance  the  use  of  prescription  medi-
cations  while  others  may  only  cause  further  irritation.  Ulti-
mately, the physician should be educated on merging OTC and 
prescription  acne  medications  to  best  help  the  patient  with 
acne.

references

1  Feldman SR, Fleischer AB Jr. (2000) Role of the dermatologist in the 

delivery of dermatologic care. Dermatol Clin 18, 223–7.

2  Woodard I. (2002) Adolescent acne: a stepwise approach to man-

agement. Top Adv Nurs Pract J 2.

3  Malus M, LaChance PA, Lamy L, et al. (1987) Priorities in adoles-
cent health care: the teenager’s viewpoint. J Fam Pract 25, 159–62.
4  Bowe WP, Shalita A. (2008) Effective over-the-counter acne treat-

ments. Semin Cutan Med Surg 27, 170–6.

5  Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2001) Management 

of Acne. March 2001, Contract No. 01-E018.
6  21 CFR Part 333.350(b)(2), 21 CFR (1991).
7  Clearihan L. (2001) Acne: myths and management issues. Aust Fam 

Physician 30, 1039–44.

8  Choi  JM,  Lew  VK,  Kimball  AB.  (2006)  A  single-blinded,  rand-
omized, controlled clinical trial evaluating the effect of face washing 
on acne vulgaris. Pediatr Dermatol 23, 421–7.

9  Abbas S, Goldberg JW, Massaro M. (2004) Personal cleanser tech-
nology  and  clinical  performance.  Dermatol  Ther  17  (Suppl  1), 
35–42.

57. Over-the-counter Acne Treatments

507

10  Subramanyan K. (2004) Role of mild cleansing in the management 

of patient skin. Dermatol Ther 17, 26–34.

11  Kraus AL, Munro IC, Orr JC, et al. (1995) Benzoyl peroxide: an 
integrated  human  safety  assessment  for  carcinogenicity.  Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol 21, 87–107.

12  Bojar RA, Cunliffe WJ, Holland KT. (1995) Short-term treatment 
of acne vulgaris with benzoyl peroxide: effects on the surface and 
follicular cutaneous microflora. Br J Dermatol 132, 204–8.

13  Pagnoni A, Kligman AM, Kollias N, et al. (1999) Digital fluores-
cence  photography  can  assess  the  suppressive  effect  of  benzoyl 
peroxide  on  Propionibacterium  acnes.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol  41, 
710–6.

14  Leyden  JJ.  (2001)  Current  issues  in  antimicrobial  therapy  for  the 
treatment of acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 15 (Suppl 3), 51–5.
15  Berson  DS,  Shalita  AR.  (1995) The  treatment  of  acne:  the  role  of 

32  Shalita  AR.  (1989)  Comparison  of  a  salicylic  acid  cleanser  and  a 
benzoyl peroxide wash in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Clin Ther 
11, 264–7.

33  Pagnoni A, Chen T, Duong H, et al. (2004) Clinical evaluation of a 
salicylic acid containing scrub, toner, mask and regimen in reduc-
ing blackheads. 61st meeting, American Academy of Dermatology, 
February 2004, Poster 61.

34  Grimes PE, Green BA, Wildnauer RH, Edison BL. (2004) The use 
of polyhydroxy acids (PHAs) in photoaged skin. Cutis 73 (Suppl), 
3–13.

35  Brubacher  JR,  Hoffman  RS.  (1996)  Salicylism  from  topical  sali-
cylates: review of the literature. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 34, 431–6.
36  Thayer B. (2006) Celsus: De Medicina. Available from: http://penelope.

uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Celsus/home.html.

37  Gupta AK, Nicol K, Gupta AK, Nicol K. (2004) The use of sulfur in 

combination therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol 32, 31–41.

dermatology. J Drugs Dermatol 3, 427–31.

16  Kim  J,  Ochoa  M,  Krutzik  S,  et  al.  (2002)  Activation  of  toll-like 
receptor  2  in  acne  triggers  inflammatory  cytokine  responses.  
J Immunol 169, 1535–41.

17  Vowels B, Yang S, Leyden J. (1995) Induction of proinflammatory 
cytokines by a soluble factor of Propionibacterium acnes: implica-
tions for chronic inflammatory acne. Infect Immun 63, 3158–65.
18  Ozolins M, Eady EA, Avery AJ, et al. (2004) Comparison of five anti-
microbial regimens for treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory 
facial acne vulgaris in the community: randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 364, 2188–95.

19  Tucker SB, Flannigan SA, Dunbar M Jr, Drotman RB. (1986) Develop-
ment of an objective comedogenicity assay. Arch Dermatol 122, 660–5.
20  Belknap BS. (1979) Treatment of acne with 5% benzoyl per oxide gel 

or 0.05% retinoic acid cream. Cutis 23, 856–9.

21  Gollnick  H,  Cunliffe  W,  Berson  D,  et  al.  (2003)  Management  of 
acne:  a  report  from  a  Global  Alliance  to  Improve  Outcomes  in 
Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol 49 (Suppl), S1–37.

22  Mills OH Jr, Kligman AM, Pochi P, Comite H. (1986) Comparing 
2.5%, 5%, and 10% benzoyl peroxide on inflammatory acne vulgaris. 
Int J Dermatol 25, 664–7.

38  Lin AN, Reimer RJ, Carter DM. (1988) Sulfur revisited [see comment]. 

J Am Acad Dermatol 18, 553–8.

39  Mills OH Jr, Kligman AM. (1972) Is sulphur helpful or harmful in 

acne vulgaris? Br J Dermatol 86, 620–7.

40  Fulton JE Jr, Pay SR, Fulton JE 3rd. (1984) Comedogenicity of cur-
rent therapeutic products, cosmetics, and ingredients in the rabbit 
ear. J Am Acad Dermatol 10, 96–105.

41  Franz E, Weidner-Strahl S. (1978) The effectiveness of topical antibac-

terials in acne: a double-blind clinical study. J Intern Med Res 6, 72–7.
42  Lee  TW,  Kim  JC,  Hwang  SJ.  (2003)  Hydrogel  patches  containing 
triclosan for acne treatment. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 56, 407–12.
43  Duell  EA,  Kang  S,  Voorhees  JJ.  (1997)  Unoccluded  retinol  pene-
trates human skin in vivo more effectively than unoccluded retinyl 
palmitate or retinoic acid. J Invest Dermatol 109, 301–5.

44  Kang  S,  Leyden  JJ,  Lowe  NJ,  et  al.  (2001)  Tazarotene  cream  for  the 
treatment of facial photodamage: a multicenter, investigator-masked, 
randomized, vehicle-controlled, parallel comparison of 0.01%, 0.025%, 
0.05%,  and  0.1%  tazarotene  creams  with  0.05%  tretinoin  emollient 
cream applied once daily for 24 weeks [see comment]. Arch Dermatol 
137, 1597–604.

23  Balato N, Lembo G, Cuccurullo FM, et al. (1996) Acne and allergic 

45  Draelos Z. (2005) Reexamining methods of facial cleansing. Cosmet 

contact dermatitis. Contact Derm 34, 68–9.

Dermatol 18, 173–5.

24  Morelli R, Lanzarini M, Vincenzi C. (1989) Contact dermatitis due 

46  Mills OH Jr, Kligman AM. (1979) Evaluation of abrasives in acne 

to benzoyl peroxide. Contact Derm 20, 238–9.

therapy. Cutis 23, 704–5.

25  Cartwright  RA,  Hughes  BR,  Cunliffe  WJ.  (1988)  Malignant 
melanoma,  benzoyl  peroxide  and  acne:  a  pilot  epidemiological 
case–control investigation. Br J Dermatol 118, 239–42.

26  Berardesca E, Distante F, Vignoli GP, et al. (1997) Alpha hydroxyacids 
modulate stratum corneum barrier function. Br J Dermatol 137, 934–8.
27  Bergfeld W, Tung R, Vidimos A, et al. (1997) Improving the cos-
metic appearance of photoaged skin with glycolic acid. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 36, 1011–3.

28  Tung  RC,  Bergfeld  WF,  Vidimos  AT,  Remzi  BK.  (2000)  Alpha-
hydroxy  acid-based  cosmetic  procedures:  guidelines  for  patient 
management. Am J Clin Dermatol 1, 81–8.

29  Kligman  AM.  (1997)  A  comparative  evaluation  of  a  novel  low-
strength salicylic acid cream and glycolic acid products on human 
skin. Cosmet Dermatol 11 (Suppl).

30  Shalita AR. (1981) Treatment of mild and moderate acne vulgaris 
with salicylic acid in an alcohol-detergent vehicle. Cutis 28, 556–8.
31  Chen  T,  Appa  Y.  (2006)  Over-the-counter  acne  medications.  In: 
Draelos ZD, Thaman LA, eds. Cosmetic Formulations of Skin Care 
Products. New York: Taylor & Francis, pp. 251–71.

47  Available from: www.biore.com.
48  Elston  DM.  (2000)  Treatment  of  trichostasis  spinulosa  with  a 

hydroactive adhesive pad. Cutis 66, 77–8.

49  Bruce S, Conrad C, Peterson RD, et al. Significant efficacy and safety 
of  low  level  intermittent  heat  in  patients  with  mild  to  moderate 
acne. www.myzenoeurope.com/doc/zenowhite.pdf.

50  Sadick  NS.  (2008)  A  study  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  a  novel 
handheld light-emitting diode device in the treatment of photoaged 
skin. J Cosmet Dermatol 7(4), 263–7.

51  Kwon HH, Lee JB, Yoon JY, et al. (2013) The clinical and histologi-
cal effect of home-use, combination blue-red LED phototherapy for 
mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris in Korean patients: a double-blind, 
randomized controlled trial. Br J Dermatol 168, 1088–94.

52  Weinstabl A, Hoff-Lesch S, Merk HF, von Felbert V. (2011) Pro-
spective  randomized  study  on  the  efficacy  of  blue  light  in  the 
treatment of psoriasis vulgaris. Dermatology 223, 251–9.

53  Barolet D, Boucher A. (2010) Prophylactic low-level light therapy 
for the treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids: a case series. 
Lasers Surg Med 42, 597–601.

508

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

54  Green J, Kaufman J. (2011) Home-use acne devices offer expanded 

options for patients. Dermatology Times.

55  Horfelt C, Stenquist B, Larko O, et al. (2007) Photodynamic therapy 
for acne vulgaris: a pilot study of the dose-response and mechanism 
of action. Acta Dermato-venereol 87, 325–9.

56  Gold MH, Biron JA, Sensing W. (2013) Clinical and usability study 
to  determine  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  the  Silk’n  Blue  Device  for 
the treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory acne vulgaris. 
J Cosmet Laser Ther 16, 108–13.

64  Dreno  B,  Moyse  D,  Alirezai  M,  Amblard  P,  Auffret  N,  Beylot  C,  
et  al.  (2001)  Multicenter  randomized  comparative  double-blind 
controlled clinical trial of the safety and efficacy of zinc gluconate 
versus minocycline hydrochloride in the treatment of inflammatory 
acne vulgaris. Dermatology 203, 135–40.

65  Porea TJ, Belmont JW, Mahoney DH Jr. (2000) Zinc-induced anemia 

and neutropenia in an adolescent. J Pediatr 136, 688–90.

66  Fivenson DP. (2006) The mechanisms of action of nicotinamide and 

zinc in inflammatory skin disease. Cutis 77 (Suppl), 5–10.

57  Wheeland RG, Koreck A. (2012) Safety and Effectiveness of a New 
Blue Light Device for the Self-treatment of Mild-to-moderate Acne. 
J Clin Aesthet Dermatol 5, 25–31.

67  Niren  NM.  (2006)  Pharmacologic  doses  of  nicotinamide  in  the 
treatment  of  inflammatory  skin  conditions:  a  review.  Cutis  77 
(Suppl), 11–6.

58  Wheeland RG, Dhawan S. (2011) Evaluation of self-treatment of 
mild-to-moderate facial acne with a blue light treatment system. 
J Drugs Dermatol 10, 596–602.

68  Niren NM, Torok HM. (2006) The Nicomide Improvement in Clin-
ical Outcomes Study (NICOS): results of an 8-week trial. Cutis 77 
(Suppl), 17–28.

59  Gold MH, Sensing W, Biron JA. (2011) Clinical efficacy of home-
use  blue-light  therapy  for  mild-to  moderate  acne.  J  Cosmet  Laser 
Ther 13, 308–314.

60  Raman A. (1995) Antimicrobial effects of tea-tree oil and its major 
components  on  Staphylococcus  aureus,  Staph.  epidermidis  and 
Propionibacterium acnes. Lett Appl Microbiol 21, 242–5.

61  Bassett IB. (1990) A comparative study of tea-tree oil versus benzoyl 

peroxide in the treatment of acne. Med J Aust 153, 455–8.

62  Brown  DJ,  Dattner  AM.  (1998)  Phytotherapeutic  approaches  to 
common dermatological conditions. Arch Dermatol 134, 1401–4.
63  Dreno  B,  Trossaert  M,  Boiteau  HL,  Litoux  P.  (1992)  Zinc  salts 
effects on granulocyte zinc concentration and chemotaxis in acne 
patients. Acta Derm Venereol 72, 250–2.

69  Shalita  AR,  Smith  JG,  Parish  LC,  Sofman  MS,  Chalker  DK. 
(1995) Topical nicotinamide compared with clindamycin gel in 
the treatment of inflammatory acne vulgaris. Int J Dermatol 34, 
434–7.

70  Vahlquist A, Michaelsson G, Juhlin L. (1978) Acne treatment with 
oral zinc and vitamin A: effects on the serum levels of zinc and reti-
nol binding protein (RBP). Acta Derm Venereol 58, 437–42.

71  El-Akawi  Z,  Abdel-Latif  N,  Abdul-Razzak  K.  (2006)  Does  the 
plasma level of vitamins A and E affect acne condition? Clin Exp 
Dermatol 31, 430–4.

72  Kligman AM, Mills OH Jr, Leyden JJ, Gross PR, Allen HB, Rudolph 
RI. (1981) Oral vitamin A in acne vulgaris. Preliminary report. Int 
J Dermatol 20, 278–85.

ChaPter 58
rosacea regimens

Joseph Bikowski
Bikowski Skin Care Center, Sewickley, PA, USA 

BaSIC CONCePtS

•	 Rosacea	is	a	chronic	vascular	disorder	characterized	by	flushing,	redness,	telangiectases,	and	inflammatory	skin	lesions.
•	 Skincare	products	and	cosmetics	can	provide	moisturization,	support	epidermal	barrier	function,	and	also	camouflage	underlying	

erythema.

•	 Cleansers,	moisturizers,	and	sunscreens	can	impact	the	appearance	of	rosacea;	Sunscreens	prevent	against	additional	photodamage.
•	 Skincare	products	can	be	used	in	conjunction	with	prescription	medications	for	optimal	symptom	reduction.	Light-based	devices	can	

treat	telangiectases.

Introduction

Rosacea is a chronic vascular disorder affecting the facial skin and 
eyes  that  typically  is  characterized  by  a  chronic  cycle  of  remis-
sion  and  flare.  Regardless  of  disease  severity  (Figure  58.1a–c), 
this disease has cosmetic consequences for the patient, including 
flushing, redness, telangiectasia, papules, and/or pustules. Current 
estimates suggest that 16 million or more people in the USA have 
rosacea [1,2]. Because there is no cure for the disease, management 
consists  of  the  avoidance  of  disease  triggers  and  the  use  of  both 
prescription  and  over-the-counter  (OTC)  products  that  work  in 
concert to achieve remission, prevent flares, reduce erythema, and 
camouflage disease manifestations, such as flushing and redness.

Physiology of rosacea

Rosacea  is  found  most  frequently  in  fair-skinned  individuals 
with Fitzpatrick type I skin who tend to burn rather than tan. 
UV radiation damages blood vessels and supporting tissue. In 
fact, cumulative sun exposure is now considered a causative fac-
tor in the disease [3]. Rosacea is most often diagnosed in patients 
between the ages of 30 and 60 years [3], but it also can begin in 
adolescence – when it is often mistaken for acne vulgaris – or in 
individuals older than 60 years.

The  etiology  and  pathogenesis  of  rosacea  have  not  been 
established,  nor  are  there  any  known  histologic  or  serologic 
markers of the disease. However, rosacea is diagnosed by the 

presence  of  one  or  more  primary  disease  features,  including 
flushing (transient erythema), non-transient erythema, telan-
giectasia, papules, and pustules. Secondary diagnostic features 
include  burning/stinging,  plaque  formation,  dryness,  edema, 
ocular manifestations, peripheral location, and/or phymatous 
changes [5].

Although these disease features often occur in various com-
binations, four rosacea subtypes have been classified and agreed 
upon  to  assist  in  the  diagnosis  and  selection  of  appropriate 
treatment [5] (Figure 58.2a–d). Subtype 1 is erythematotelangi-
ectatic rosacea (Figure 58.2a), which is characterized by flush-
ing episodes lasting more than 10 minutes and persistent ery-
thema of the central face. Telangiectases are often present. These 
patients may also complain of central facial edema, stinging and 
burning,  roughness  or  scaling.  A  history  of  flushing  alone  is 
common.

Subtype  2  is  papulopustular  rosacea  (Figure  58.2b),  which 
is characterized by persistent erythema, with transient papules 
and/or pustules on the central face. Subtype 2 resembles acne, 
but  without  comedones;  however,  acne  and  papulopustular 
rosacea  can  occur  simultaneously.  Papules  and  pustules  also 
can occur around the mouth, nose, or eyes, and some patients 
report burning and stinging.

Subtype 3 is phymatous rosacea (Figure 58.2c), which includes 
thickening  skin  and  nodularities.  Rhinophyma,  nose  involve-
ment, is the most common presentation; however, ears, chin, and 
forehead may be involved. Patients may also have telangiectasias 
and/or patulous follicles in the phymatous area.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

509

510

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 58.1  Mild (a), moderate (b), and 
severe (c) rosacea.

Subtype 4 is ocular rosacea (Figure 58.2d), which should be 
considered if the patient has one or more of the following ocular 
signs: watery or bloodshot eyes, foreign body sensation, burn-
ing or stinging, dryness, itching, light sensitivity, blurred vision, 
telangiectasia of the conjunctiva and lid margin, or lid and peri-
ocular erythema. Blepharitis and conjunctivitis are also found 
commonly in rosacea patients with ocular manifestations. Ocu-
lar rosacea can precede cutaneous signs by years, but it is found 
most frequently along with cutaneous disease.

rosacea flare

Across the various subtypes and presentations, rosacea typically 
is characterized by a chronic cycle of remission and flare. Sun 
avoidance is crucial for every patient to minimize further cuta-
neous damage, prevent skin cancer, and avoid recurrent flares. 
There  are,  however,  numerous  other  possible  disease  triggers. 
Table 58.1 is only a partial list of flare factors, but it is sufficient 
to illustrate how challenging flare avoidance is for patients and 
why it is nearly impossible for them to avoid triggers completely.
Because  rosacea  pathophysiology  has  not  yet  been  fully 
described,  treatment  targets  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  the 

disease  without  a  full  understanding  of  disease  mechanisms. 
Disease manifestations and treatment-related cosmetic sequelae 
necessitate the use of both OTC and prescription products for 
long-term  treatment  and  to  treat  or  camouflage  skin  redness, 
flushing, and blemishes.

rosacea skincare: available OtC products

Rosacea  patients  often  self-describe  their  skin  as  “sensitive”. 
This  is  a  non-specific,  non-medical  term  that  can  vary  in 
meaning  from  patient  to  patient.  Therefore,  patients  should 
be  encouraged  to  be  specific  about  their  skin  symptoms.  In 
general,  patients  with  rosacea  should  be  counseled  to  avoid 
astringents, soaps, fresheners, toners, facial scrubs, masks, and 
most  OTC  skincare  “programs”.  However,  even  though  the 
list  of  verboten  agents  is  long,  there  are  numerous  safe  and 
effective  cleansers,  moisturizers,  sunscreens,  and  cosmetics 
available  for  rosacea  patients.  Disease  management  is  aimed 
at achieving synergy between prescription and OTC products 
to ensure maximum efficacy of active drugs, extend remission, 
and conceal redness and blemishes. People with rosacea tend 
to have skin that is extremely sensitive to chemical irritants, so 

58. Rosacea Regimens

511

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 58.2  Rosacea clinical subtypes: (a) subtype 1; (b) subtype 2; (c) subtype 3; (d) subtype 4.

it is important that patients try to avoid all sources of irrita-
tion. Furthermore, the skin care regimen of a rosacea patient 
needs to be simple; the more the skin is specifically manipu-
lated the more opportunity there is for unnecessary irritation. 
Additionally,  simplified  regimens  are  expected  to  encourage 
adherence.

Cleansing and moisturizing

A  proper  cleansing  and  moisturizing  routine  is  an  important 
part  of  rosacea  management.  Patients  should  be  counseled 
that daily cleansing is important to rid the skin of surface dirt, 
makeup, dead skin, and excess oil, but they should avoid scrub-
bing the skin and wash with only cool water. The ideal cleanser 
for rosacea skin is a product that leaves minimal residue, is non-
comedogenic and lipid free, and contains non-ionic surfactants 
with  a  neutral  or  slightly  acidic  pH  [5].  Table  58.2  lists  some 
recommended cleansers for rosacea patients.

Moisturizing  is  important  in  order  to  maintain  the  soft-
ness  and  elasticity  of  the  skin,  and  therapeutic  moisturizers 
devoid of irritants are important adjunctive therapy in rosacea 
management  [6].  A  large  proportion  of  rosacea  patients  have 
clinically dry skin, and some topical rosacea medications (e.g. 
topical metronidazole) can cause further drying and irritation. 
Furthermore,  there  is  increasing  evidence  that  epidermal  bar-
rier dysfunction, which is associated with transepidermal water 
loss and contributes to skin dryness and inflammation, is linked 
with rosacea. Epidermal barrier dysfunction is associated with 
elevation  of  inflammatory  serine  proteases  in  various  derma-
toses,  including  atopic  dermatitis  and  rosacea  [7].  In  rosacea 
specifically,  epidermal  barrier  dysfunction  has  been  identi-
fied, involving predominantly the central facial region in both 
inflammatory  (papulopustular)  and  erythematotelangiectatic 
subtypes [8].

Use of moisturizers formulated with a combination of emol-
lients  and  humectants  is  recommended  to  help  keep  the  stra-
tum  corneum  intact  to  either  repair  or  prevent  skin  barrier 

512

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Table 58.1  Potential	rosacea	flare	factors.

Factors

Sun	exposure

Emotional	stress

Hot	weather

Wind

Heavy	exercise

Alcohol	consumption

Hot	baths

Cold	weather

Spicy	foods

Humidity

Indoor	heat

Certain	skin-care	products

Heated	beverages

Certain	cosmetics

Medications

Medical	conditions

Certain	fruits

Marinated	meats

Certain	vegetables

Dairy	products

Other	factors

Percent affected

81%

79%

75%

57%

56%

52%

51%

46%

45%

44%

41%

41%

36%

27%

15%

15%

13%

10%

9%

8%

24%

Table 58.3  Recommended	over-the-counter	moisturizers	for	rosacea	
skincare.

Moisturizers

Benefits

Cetaphil®	Moisturizing	cream

CeraVe®	Facial	moisturizing	lotion	
AM/PM

Eucerin®	Redness	relief	soothing	
moisture	lotion	SPF	15	or	daily	
protecting	lotion	SPF	16

Non-greasy,	cosmetically	
appealing,	fragrance-free	and	
non-comedogenic.	Contains	sweet	
almond	oil,	which	is	a	source	of	
essential	fatty	acids

Ceramide-rich;	contains	
niacinamide,	which	may	reduce	
redness

Contains	licochalcone	A;	protects	
from	UVA/UVB;	fragrance-free,	
oil-free,	non-irritating,	non-
comedogenic;	daily	protecting	
lotion	contains	green	color	
neutralizers

Neutrogena®	Oil-free	moisture,	
various	formulations

Oil-free,	non-comedogenic,	
hypoallergenic,	fragrance-free

Olay®	Complete	all-day	
moisturizer	with	sunscreen

Rosaliac®	Anti-redness	
moisturizer

Color	and	fragrance-free;	contains	
vitamin	E;	SPF	15,	protects	against	
UVA	and	UVB

Contains	vita	min	C	to	reduce	
redness	and	green	tint	to	conceal	
redness;	Relatively	expensive

All	trademarks	are	property	of	their	respective	owner.

As	reported	by	Members	of	the	National	Rosacea	Society	in	its	survey	of	members.	National	
Rosacea	Society	website,	National	Rosacea	Society.	www.rosacea.org/patients/materials/trig-
gersgraph.php.	Accessed	29	June	2015.
Source:	Rosacea	Triggers	Survey	(www.rosacea.org/patients/materials/triggersgraph.php).	
Reproduced	with	permission	of	National	Rosacea	Society.

Table 58.2  Recommended	over-the-counter	cleansers	for	rosacea	skincare.

Cleansers

Benefits

Avene®	Extremely	gentle	
cleanser	lotion

No	rinse,	fragrance-free,	paraben-free,	
non-comedogenic,	non-irritating

Cetaphil®	Gentle	skin	
cleanser

CeraVe®	Hydrating	cleanser

Eucerin®	Gentle	hydrating	
cleanser

Lipid-free,	neutral	pH,	soap-free,	non-
comedogenic,	fragrance-free,	leaves	no	
residue,	non-irritating

Lipid-free,	multi-vesicular	emulsion,	soap-
free,	non-comedogenic,	hydrating,	leaves	
no	residue

Lipid-free,	soap-free,	non-comedogenic,	
fragrance-free,	leaves	no	residue,	non-
irritating

L’Oréal®	Plénitude	gentle	
foaming	cleanser

Lipid-free,	soap-free,	non-comedogenic,	
leaves	no	residue,	non-irritating

Purpose®	Gentle	cleansing	
wash

Lipid-free,	soap-free,	non-comedogenic,	
soap-free,	non-irritating

Eucerin®	Redness	relief	
soothing	cleanser

Soap-free	gel,	non-irritating,	non-drying,	
fragrance-free,	non-comedogenic,	
contains	licochalcone	A

All	trademarks	are	property	of	their	respective	owner.

dysfunction.  Furthermore,  moisturizing  dry  skin  lessens  the 
itchiness and irritation that rosacea patients often experience as 
a part of their condition. Some OTC moisturizers are now avail-
able that incorporate high ratios of lipids and/or ceramides to 
support epidermal barrier function. Given the finding of epider-
mal barrier dysfunction in rosacea, the use of prescription bar-
rier repair agents may be considered for some rosacea patients 
who do not respond to OTC moisturizers. Table 58.3 lists some 
OTC moisturizers that can be used as part of a rosacea skin care 
regimen.

Cosmetics

Until  recently,  there  has  been  no  medical  treatment  for  the  ery-
thema of rosacea. Therapeutic options, including novel agents, are 
discussed below. Nonetheless, cosmetics are and will continue to 
be used to camouflage disease signs and symptoms, which is an 
important  part  of  disease  management.  Rosacea  patients  should 
be counseled to avoid products containing menthol, camphor, or 
sodium lauryl sulfate, as these can be irritating. It is also recom-
mended that rosacea patients avoid the use of waterproof cosmet-
ics and heavy foundations because they are mechanically harder to 
apply, and their removal often requires the use of irritating solvents.
Mineral-based  make-ups  have  become  increasingly  popular 
in recent years, and some products appear to be well-suited for 
use by rosacea patients because they contain all or mostly inert 

58. Rosacea Regimens

513

Table 58.4  Recommended	over-the-counter	cosmetics	for	rosacea	skincare.

Sunscreens

Cosmetics

Benefits

DermaBlend®	Cover	
crème	foundation;	smooth	
indulgence	foundation/
concealer

ColoreScience®

Eucerin®	redness	relief	
concealer

Allergy	tested,	non-comedogenic,	
fragrance-free,	mineral-based

Contains	pure,	micronized	minerals;	
offers	UVA/UVB	protection;	waterproof

Smooth	formula	blends	easily	into	
the	skin.	Fragrance-free,	oil-free,	non-
irritating,	non-comedogenic,	contains	
licochalcone	A	and	has	green	color	
neutralizers

Cellex-C®	Eye	contour	cream	
with	a	5%	L-ascorbic	acid

Contains	L-ascorbic	acid	and	zinc;	
lightweight;	expensive

All	trademarks	are	property	of	their	respective	owner.

ingredients,  including  preservatives  and  fragrances.  However, 
some  mineral  makeup  formulations  were  found  in  a  recent 
analysis to contain irritants and allergens [9].

Pigmentation irregularities can be  camouflaged by  applying 
foundations of complementary colors [7]. For example, red skin 
can  be  camouflaged  by  applying  a  green  foundation,  which  is 
the complementary color to red; the combination of green and 
red  creates  a  brown  tone,  and  this  can  be  covered  further,  if 
desired, by a light foundation that spreads easily. Furthermore, a 
yellow skin tone will turn brown when complemented with pur-
ple foundation. Figure 58.3 (a & b) shows how effective green-
tinted  makeup  can  be  in  camouflaging  redness.  Fortunately, 
there are an increasing number of tinted cosmetics and skincare 
products available to help camouflage rosacea redness, some of 
which are listed in Table 58.4.

The daily, uninterrupted use of sunscreen is a cornerstone of the 
long-term  management  of  rosacea.  Sun  exposure  is  the  lead-
ing  cause  of  rosacea  flares,  and  patients  should  be  advised  to 
use a sunscreen daily, irrespective of cloud coverage, with a sun 
protection factor (SPF) of at least 30. However, patients should 
be  advised  that  an  appropriate  sunscreen  contains  both  UVB 
blockers  (e.g.  octyl  methoxycinnamate,  homosalate),  as  well 
as  UVA  blockers  (e.g.  avobenzone,  ecamsule,  titanium  diox-
ide, oxybenzone, sulisobenzone, and zinc oxide) [7]. New FDA 
sunscreen  labeling  requirements  have  been  met  with  mixed 
reactions by clinicians [10]. In light of label revisions, patients 
should  be  advised  to  select  a  formulation  that  confers  broad-
spectrum protection and to adhere to label instructions for fre-
quency of reapplication.

It is also important that the sunscreen be non-irritating, and 
patients  with  rosacea  may  have  better  tolerance  of  products 
containing  dimethicone  or  cyclomethicone  [8].  Alternatively, 
patients may use formulations containing physical sunscreens – 
zinc oxide or titanium dioxide – only. Mineral make-ups often 
provide  broad-spectrum  protection  against  ultraviolet  (UV) 
radiation and can be used as physical sunblocks [11]. Further-
more,  green-tinted  sunscreens  have  the  additional  benefit  of 
camouflaging erythema. Examples of some recommended sun-
screens for rosacea can be found in Table 58.5.

Cleansing, moisturizing, camouflaging, and using sunscreen 
are the primary elements of a rosacea skincare regimen. OTC 
products that have a green tint or that are cosmetically elegant 
can be applied during the day, and prescription products used to 
treat erythema and redness that are less cosmetically elegant can 
be applied at night. Patients with long-term rosacea often have 
sensitive skin and can be the most difficult to treat.

Figure 58.3  The effect of green-tinted makeup 
on reddened skin. (a) Patient with rosacea. (b) 
Camouflage  of  patient’s  rosacea  using  green-
tinted makeup.

(a)

(b)

514

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Table 58.5  Recommended	over-the-counter	sunscreens	for	rosacea	skincare.

Sunscreens

Benefits

Aveeno	daily	moisturizing	
lotion	with	sunscreen

Contains	colloidal	oatmeal;	fragrance	
free,	non-greasy,	and	non-comedogenic

Avene®	High	protection	
mineral	cream

100%	mineral,	broad-spectrum;	
developed	for	sensitive	skin

Elat	MD®	UV	clear

L’Oréal®/La	Roche-Posay®	
Anthelios®

Neutrogena	Helioplex™

Active	photo	barrier	
complex™

Titanium	dioxide/zinc	oxide	
formulations

Vanicream®	Sunscreen,	
sensitive	skin

Broad	spectrum;	zinc	oxide-based;	
Contains	niacinamide;	Fragrance-free,	
oil-free,	paraben-free,	sensitivity-free	and	
non-comedogenic

Contains	ecamsule;	expensive

Contains	avobenzone;	protects	from	
UVA/UVB

Contains	avobenzone;	protects	from	UVA

Effective	options	for	UVA	protection.	
Older	formulations	made	patients	
look	pale,	but	newer	manufacturing	
techniques	have	made	these	effective	
products	cosmetically	elegant

Broad	spectrum;	Free	of	any	additives	
including	dyes	and	masking	fragrances,	
No	parabens,	formaldehyde,	preservatives

All	trademarks	are	property	of	their	respective	owner.

available prescription agents

Oral  and  topical  prescription  agents  are  fundamental  in  the 
management of rosacea. Mild to moderate rosacea can be treated 
with topical monotherapy or topical combination therapy with 
or without an oral antibiotic. Moderate to severe rosacea necessi-
tates the use of oral antibiotic therapy until remission is achieved, 
usually for 3–4 months. Remission can often be maintained by 
continuing the topical therapy alone or in combination with a 
low-dose oral antibiotic [2]. Because rosacea pathogenesis is so 
poorly understood, management is focused on treating disease 
endpoints rather than the underlying disease. In general, inflam-
mation is treated with an anti-inflammatory agent, papules and 
pustules are treated with antibiotics (with no target organism), 
flushing is treated with vasoconstrictors, and telangiectasias are 
treated with light-based therapies.

Oral antibiotic therapy

Papular-pustular  rosacea  responds  well  to  oral  antibiotics, 
although their efficacy likely is brought about by their anti-inflam-
matory effects more than their antimicrobial effects [3]. Standard 
antibiotic agents include tetracyclines (tetracycline, doxycycline, 
and minocycline), erythromycin, and co-trimoxazole, although 
the  latter  is  usually  reserved  for  use  in  Gram-negative  rosacea 

or for patients who have not responded to other therapies [12]. 
These agents have been used for decades and are associated with 
a relatively good safety profile [12].

Tetracyclines  are  the  most  commonly  prescribed  oral  anti-
biotics  for  rosacea,  but  there  is  apprehension  about  antibiotic 
resistance with the long-term use of these and other antibiotic 
agents. In response to this concern, an anti-inflammatory dose 
formulation of doxycycline (40 mg delayed-release formulation) 
has been formulated for the treatment of rosacea. Long-term use 
of  this  delayed-release  formulation  did  not  alter  bacterial  sus-
ceptibility to antibiotics during a 9-month period [13]. Further-
more, a 16-week comparison study showed that both the 40-mg 
delayed-release  and  the  100-mg  formulations  in  combination 
with 1% metronidazole topical gel are equally effective for the 
treatment of moderate to severe rosacea with a similar onset of 
action, and the delayed-release group had a superior side effect 
profile including fewer gastrointestinal effects [14].

topical therapy

Topical  therapy  for  rosacea  reduces  inflammatory  lesions 
(papules and pustules), decreases erythema, improves pruritus, 
burning, and stinging, and reduces the incidence and intensity 
of  flares  [2].  Standard  topical  therapies  include  sulfacetamide 
10%/sulfur 5%, metronidazole, and azelaic acid (AzA). Topical 
erythromycin and clindamycin are second-line agents, but data 
regarding their efficacy in rosacea treatment are limited [2].

Sulfacetamide-sulfur  has  anti-inflammatory  properties,  and 
the gel is available in a green-tinted formulation, which has the 
advantage of simultaneously treating inflammation and toning 
down  redness.  Sulfacetamide-sulfur  also  has  been  combined 
with  avobenzone  (UVA  filter)  and  octinoxate  (UVB  filter)  in 
an  SPF  18  formulation,  which  has  shown  superior  efficacy  to 
topical  metronidazole  in  investigator  global  severity  scores, 
percent reductions in inflammatory lesions, and improvement 
in erythema [15]. Overall, these leave-on products have dem-
onstrated favorable safety and tolerability profiles [2]. Further-
more,  sulfacetamide-sulfur  cleansers  also  have  demonstrated 
efficacy as adjunctive therapy in combination with other topical 
and/or systemic agents [2].

Other treatment modalities

Flushing is a challenging aspect of rosacea management and a 
source of frustration for most patients. Low-dose beta-blockers, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and clonidine have been 
used off-label to treat the flushing of rosacea [16].

New  to  the  market  is  a  topical  prescription  gel  containing 
the  alpha-agonist  brimonidine  tartrate  0.5%.  Reduction  in 
background  erythema  is  evident  as  early  as  30  minutes  after 
application  of  the  gel.  Data  from  two  identically  designed 
randomized,  double-blind,  vehicle  controlled  Phase  III  trials 

58. Rosacea Regimens

515

showed that topical brimonidine gel applied once-daily was sig-
nificantly more effective than vehicle gel throughout 12 hours. 
Evaluations included the Clinician’s Erythema Assessment and 
Patient’s Self-Assessment. Adverse events were mostly dermato-
logical, mild, and transient, with a slightly higher incidence of 
adverse events in the active treatment group [17].

Light-based therapies
Many patients are frustrated with the poor efficacy of oral and 
topical therapies in resolving telangiectasia and persistent ery-
thema.  However,  light-based  and  laser  therapies  have  demon-
strated efficacy in the improvement of vascular disease features. 
Potassium  tytanil  phosphate  (KTP),  pulsed  dye  lasers  (PDL), 
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet  (Nd:YAG),  and  intense 
pulsed  light  (IPL)  have  all  been  used  for  telangiectases,  with 
PDL  offering  superior  clearance  rates  compared  with  other 
sources [18].

Despite  the  efficacy  of  the  pulsed  dye  laser  in  reducing  tel-
angiectasia,  flushing,  and  erythema  by  eliminating  hemoglo-
bin  within  increased  dilated  vessels  in  rosacea  skin,  efficacy 
is  inconsistent,  and  treatment  can  be  limited  by  the  frequent 
occurrence of purpura, which can be long-lasting and difficult 
to conceal [19].

More  recently,  intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  therapy  has  been 
used  with  success  to  treat  vascular  symptoms  of  rosacea.  IPL 
utilizes  selective  photothermolysis  with  a  broad  spectrum  of 
light  to  destroy  targeted  vessels  by  coagulation  while  sparing 
surrounding tissue [2]. IPL is advantageous because it can pen-
etrate  the  skin  more  effectively  than  lasers.  Furthermore,  vari-
able light durations can target vessels of different sizes at multiple 
depths, IPL’s increased spot size allows a larger treatment area, 
and sequential pulsing provides for epidermal cooling between 
pulses [18,19].

Natural actives
Cosmetic products with natural actives can be useful to soothe 
irritation  associated  with  rosacea.  Vitamin  C  is  an  antioxidant 
with  numerous  positive  effects  on  the  skin  including  collagen 
repair,  normalization  of  photodamage,  and  anti-inflammatory 
properties. The use of a 5.0% vitamin C preparation demonstrated 
efficacy  in  objective  and  subjective  improvement  in  erythema, 
which might be because of its anti-inflammatory effects [3]. There 
are  currently  three  or  four  anti-redness  products  available,  and 
the anti-redness moisturizer listed in Table 58.3 also has a green 
tint, which heals and conceals redness simultaneously.

Licochalcone A is a major phenolic constituent of the licorice 
species  Glycyrrhiza  inflata  which  exhibits  anti-inflammatory 
and  antimicrobial  effects,  and  improves  redness  and  irritation 
[20]. The Eucerin® Redness Relief line has an SPF lotion and spot 
concealer  containing  licochalcone  A  with  a  green-tinted  base, 
which provides both an anti-inflammatory component and red-
ness camouflage. A study assessing the efficacy of this product 
line  in  reducing  irritation  in  patients  with  mild  to  moderate 
facial  redness  showed  that  a  regimen  of  cleanser,  SPF  lotion, 

spot  concealer,  and  night  cream  containing  licochalcone  A 
improved redness and was compatible with daily metronidazole 
treatment [21].

Chrysanthellum  indicum  is  a  plant-based  extract  contain-
ing  phenylpropanoic  acids,  flavonoids,  and  saponosids  with 
documented  effects  on  vascular  wall  permeability  and  on  the 
increase of the mechanical resistance of capillaries [22]. A cream 
containing  C.  indicum  was  recently  evaluated  in  246  patients 
with  moderate  rosacea.  Results  showed  that  12-week,  twice 
daily  treatment  with  the  C.  indicum  extract-based  cream  was 
significantly more effective than placebo in reducing erythema. 
Furthermore, this cream has vitamin P properties, which may 
be responsible for reducing or preventing microcirculation dis-
orders involved in the erythema of rosacea [22].

Alfa-hydroxy  acid-based  cosmetic  peels  and  at-home  regi-
mens also have shown promise for rosacea treatment. A regimen 
of a daytime cream containing SPF 15 and gluconolactone 8%, 
and  an  evening  cream  with  gluconolactone  8%  demonstrated 
significant  improvement  in  texture,  fine  lines,  photodamage, 
dryness, and erythema, and 80% of patients rated the cosmetic 
acceptability of these products as good to excellent [23]. A poly-
hydroxy acid skin care regimen (cleanser and moisturizer) also 
demonstrated good tolerability and efficacy in combination with 
AzA  15%  in  patients  with  sensitive  skin  conditions  [24].  This 
regimen significantly added to the reduction of facial erythema, 
did not interfere with the efficacy of AzA 15%, and smoothed 
the skin, which could further enhance patient satisfaction with 
the products. Glycolic acid peels and topical glycolic acid prod-
ucts added to an antibacterial regimen also have demonstrated 
dramatic improvement in skin texture and follicular pores, and 
in the resolution of comedones, papules, and pustules [23]. An 
additional benefit of these products and procedures is that they 
provide  a  treatment  option  for  pregnant  women  because  gly-
colic acid products, as well as AzA 15%, are not contraindicated 
in pregnancy.

Conclusions

Management of rosacea requires avoidance of disease triggers, 
an appropriate skincare regimen – including moisturizers, and 
use  of  oral  and  topical  prescription  agents  to  address  specific 
symptoms. While rosacea cannot be cured, treatment is aimed at 
achieving remission, maximizing time to flare, concealing red-
ness, and now through the use of topical agents or light-based 
devices,  treating  redness  and  telangiectases.  A  non-irritating 
skincare  regimen  is  essential  for  long-term  disease  manage-
ment. A variety of OTC cleansers, moisturizers, sunscreens, and 
cosmetics are available to keep skin healthy, and an increasing 
number of OTC products are tinted and/or contain natural anti-
redness  actives,  such  as  vitamin  C  and  licochalcone  A,  which 
can be used in combination with prescription agents to maxi-
mize  response.  Prescription  barrier  repair  agents  may  also  be 
considered.

516

aNtI-aGING  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Although the pathogenesis of rosacea still has not been elu-
cidated,  there  is  hope  that  future  rosacea  therapies  will  target 
the disease at the genetic level, which is now common for other 
inflammatory skin disorders such as atopic dermatitis. There is 
ongoing research on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
antagonists. It would appear that retinoids can modulate VEGF 
expression in the skin, and topical retinoic acid has demonstrated 
beneficial effects on vascular components of rosacea, specifically 
erythema and telangiectasia. Natural actives and botanicals will 
continue  to  be  evaluated  for  their  positive  effects  on  the  skin, 
and work remains to be done in optimizing light-based therapy 
in terms of clarifying treatment parameters, optimal treatment 
frequency, and the utility of adjuvant light-based therapies.

references

1  Del Rosso JQ. (2004) Medical treatment of rosacea with emphasis 

on topical therapies. Expert Opin Pharmacother 5, 5–13.

2  Rosacea.org
3  Cohen AF, Tiemstra JD. (2002) Diagnosis and treatment of rosacea.  
J Am Board Fam Pract 15, 214–7. Wilkin J, Dahl M, Detmar M, et al. 
(2002)  Standard  classification  of  rosacea:  report  of  the  National 
Rosacea Society Expert Committee on the Classification and Stag-
ing of Rosacea. J Am Acad Dermatol 46, 584–7.

12  Del  Rosso  JQ.  (2000)  Systemic  therapy  for  rosacea:  focus  on  oral 

antibiotic therapy and safety. Cutis 66 (Suppl), 7–13.

13  Walker C, Webster G. (2007) The effect of anti-inflammatory dose 
doxycycline 40 mg once-daily for 9 months on bacterial flora: Subset 
analysis from a multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial. Poster 
presented at 26th Anniversary Fall Clinical Dermatology Confer-
ence; October 18–27, 2007, Las Vegas, Nevada.

14  Del Rosso JQ. (2008) Comparison of anti-inflammatory dose doxycy-
cline (40 mg delayed-release) vs doxycycline 100 mg in the treatment 
of rosacea. Poster presented at 8th Annual Caribbean Dermatology 
Symposium, January 15–19, 2008; St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands.
15  Shalita AR, Dosik JS, Neumaier GJ, et al. (2003) A comparative effi-
cacy study of Rosac® cream with sunscreens (sodium sulfacetamide 
10%  and  sulfur  5%)  and  MetroCream®  (metronidazole  0.75%)  in 
the twice daily treatment of rosacea. Skin Aging Oct (Suppl), 17–22.
16  Baldwin HE. (2007) Systemic therapy for rosacea. Skin Ther Lett 12, 

1–5; 9.

17  Fowler J Jr, Jackson M, Moore A, et al. (2013) Efficacy and safety of 
once-daily topical brimonidine tartrate gel 0.5% for the treatment 
of  moderate  to  severe  facial  erythema  of  rosacea:  results  of  two 
randomized,  double-blind,  and  vehicle-controlled  pivotal  studies. 
J Drugs Dermatol 12, 650–56.

18  Bencini PL, Tourlaki A, De Giorgi V, Galimberti M. (2012) Laser 
use for cutaneous vascular alterations of cosmetic interest. Derma-
tol Ther 25, 340–51.

19  Bikowski  JB,  Goldman  MP.  (2004)  Rosacea:  where  are  we  now? 

4  Bikowski J. (2001) The use of cleansers as therapeutic concomitants 

J Drugs Dermatol 3, 251–58.

in various dermatologic disorders. Cutis 68 (Suppl), 12–9.

5  Bikowski  J.  (2001) The  use  of  therapeutic  moisturizers  in  various 

dermatologic disorders. Cutis 68 (Suppl), 3–11.

6  Draelos ZD. (2007) Cosmetics. Emedicine online journal. Available 
at:  http://emedicine.com/derm/topic502.htm.  Accessed  29  June 
2015.

7  Nichols K, Desai N, Lebwohl MG. (1998) Effective sunscreen ingre-
dients and cutaneous irritation in patients with rosacea. Cutis 61, 
344–6.

8  Dirschka T, Tronnier H, Fölster-Holst R. (2004) Epithelial barrier 
function and atopic diathesis in rosacea and perioral dermatitis. Br 
J Dermatol 150, 1136–41.

20  Kolbe L, Immeyer J, Batzer J, Wensorra U, tom Dieke K, Mundt C, 
et al. (2006) Anti-inflammatory efficacy of licochalcone A: correla-
tion of clinical potency and in vitro effects. Arch Dermatol Res 298, 
23–30.

21  Weber TM, Ceilley RI, Buerger A, Kolbe L, Trookman NS, Rizer 
RL,  et  al.  (2006)  Skin  tolerance,  efficacy,  and  quality  of  life  of 
patients with red facial skin using a skin care regimen containing 
licochalcone A. J Cosmet Dermatol 5, 227–32.

22  Rigopoulos D, Kalogeromitros D, Gregoriou S, Pacouret JM, Koch 
C, Fisher N, et al. (2005) Randomized placebo-controlled trial of a 
flavonoid-rich plant extract-based cream in the treatment of rosacea. 
J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 19, 564–8.

9  Bi MY, Katta R. (2010) Mineral make-up and its potential utility in 
patients with contact dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 62(3), 519–22.
10  Pigeon,  T.  (2012)  Update  on  sunscreen  labeling  and  regulation. 

23  Tung  RC,  Bergfeld  WF,  Vidimos  AT,  Remzi  BK.  (2000)  Alpha-
hydroxy  acid-based  cosmetic  procedures:  guidelines  for  patient 
management. Am J Clin Dermatol 1, 81–8.

Practical Dermatol 9, 27–30.

11  Sundaram H. (2010) Medical grade mineral cosmetics: their ben-

efits and role in patient care. Practical Dermatol 7, 50–52.

24  Draelos ZD, Green BA, Edison BL. (2006) An evaluation of a poly-
hydroxy  acid  skin  care  regimen  in  combination  with  azelaic  acid 
15% gel in rosacea patients. J Cosmet Dermatol 5, 23–9.

ChAPTEr 59
Eczema regimens

Zoe D. Draelos
Department of Dermatology, Duke University School of Medicine Durham, NC, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Dry	skin	affected	by	eczema	is	characterized	by	loss	of	intercellular	lipids	which	results	in	barrier	deficits.
•	 Moisturizers	are	an	important	part	of	eczema	treatment	as	they	provide	an	environment	optimal	for	barrier	repair.
•	 Moisturizers	function	by	impeding	transepidermal	water	loss	with	oily	occlusive	substances,	such	as	petrolatum,	mineral	oil,	vegetable	
oils,	and	dimethicone,	and	by	attracting	water	to	the	dehydrated	stratum	corneum	and	epidermis	with	humectants,	such	as	glycerin,	
sodium	PCA,	propylene	glycol,	lactic	acid,	and	urea.

•	 Moisturizing	ingredients	can	be	delivered	to	the	skin	surface	by	emulsions,	liposomes,	and	niosomes.
•	 Careful	moisturizer	selection	is	key	to	the	treatment	and	prevention	of	eczematous	skin	disease.

Introduction

Eczematous skin disease is one of the most commonly treated 
dermatologic  conditions.  While  topical  prescription  corticos-
teroids and calcineurin inhibitors are the mainstay of therapy, 
cosmeceutical  moisturizers  are  key  to  the  treatment  and  pre-
vention  of  disease.  Moisturizers  enhance  the  skin  barrier, 
decreasing stinging and burning from a sensory standpoint and 
improving the look and feel of the skin. Moisturizers can also 
smooth desquamating corneocytes and fill corneocytes gaps to 
create the impression of tactile smoothness. This effect is tem-
porary, of course, until the moisturizer is removed from the skin 
surface  by  wiping  or  cleansing.  From  a  functional  standpoint, 
moisturizers can create an optimal environment for healing and 
minimize the appearance of lines of dehydration by decreasing 
transepidermal water loss. Transepidermal water loss increases 
when  the  “brick  and  mortar”  organization  of  the  protein-rich 
corneocytes  held  together  by  intercellular  lipids  is  damaged. 
A well-formulated cosmeceutical moisturizer can decrease the 
water loss until healing occurs.

some cases, the barrier may be defective because of insufficient 
sebum production, inadequate intercellular lipids, or abnormal 
keratinocyte organization. The end result is the induction of the 
inflammatory  cascade  accompanied  by  erythema,  desquama-
tion, itching, stinging, burning, and possibly pain. The immedi-
ate  goal  of  treatment  is  to  stop  the  inflammation  through  the 
use of topical, oral, or injectable corticosteroids, depending on 
the  severity  of  the  eczema  and  the  percent  body  surface  area 
involved. In dermatology, topical corticosteroids are most fre-
quently employed with low potency corticosteroids (desonide) 
used  on  the  face  and  intertrigenous  areas,  medium  potency 
corticosteroids  (triamcinolone)  on  the  upper  chest  and  arms, 
high  potency  corticosteroids  (fluocinonide)  on  the  legs  and 
back,  and  ultra  high  potency  corticosteroids  (clobetasol)  used 
on the hands and feet. Newer topical options for the treatment 
of eczema-induced sensitive skin include the calcineurin inhibi-
tors, pimecrolimus, and tracrolimus.

However, the resolution of the inflammation is not sufficient 
for the treatment of eczema. Proper skin care must also be insti-
tuted  to  minimize  the  return  of  the  conditions  that  led  to  the 
onset of eczema.

Etiology

Eczema  is  characterized  by  barrier  disruption,  which  is  the 
most common  cause  of  sensitive  skin. The  barrier  can be  dis-
rupted  chemically  through  the  use  of  cleansers  and  cosmetics 
that remove intercellular lipids or physically through the use of 
abrasive substances that induce stratum corneum exfoliation. In 

Moisturizers are incorporated into eczema treatment regimens 
to reduce transepidermal water loss. There are three cosmeceu-
tical ingredient categories that can reduce transepidermal water 
loss: occlusives, humectants, and hydrophilic matrices [1]. The 

Moisturizer mechanism of action

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

517

518

ANTI-AgINg  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Table 59.1  Occlusive	moisturizing	ingredients	to	inhibit	transepidermal	water	
loss.

1.  	Hydrocarbon	oils	and	waxes:	petrolatum,	mineral	oil,	paraffin,	

squalene
2.  Silicone	oils
3.  Vegetable	and	animal	fats
4.  Fatty	acids:	lanolin	acid,	stearic	acid
5.  Fatty	alcohol:	lanolin	alcohol,	cetyl	alcohol
6.  Polyhydric	alcohols:	propylene	glycol
7.  Wax	esters:	lanolin,	beeswax,	stearyl	stearate
8.  Vegetable	waxes:	carnauba,	candelilla
9.  Phospholipids:	lecithin

10.  Sterols:	cholesterol

most common method for reducing transepidermal water loss 
is the application of an occlusive ingredient to the skin surface. 
These are oily substances that create a barrier to water evapo-
ration. The more commonly used occlusive ingredients in cur-
rent  formulations  and  their  chemical  category  are  listed  in 
Table 59.1 [2].

The most popular and effective occlusive ingredient is time-
tested  petrolatum,  which  blocks  99%  of  water  loss  from  the 
skin surface [3]. This remaining 1% transepidermal water loss 
is  necessary  to  provide  the  cellular  message  for  barrier  repair 
initiation. If the transepidermal water loss is completely halted, 
the removal of the occlusion results in failure to repair the bar-
rier  and  water  loss  quickly  resumes  at  its  preapplication  level. 
Thus,  the  occlusion  does  not  initiate  barrier  repair  [4].  Petro-
latum  does  not  function  as  an  impermeable  barrier,  rather  it 
permeates  throughout  the  interstices  of  the  stratum  corneum 
allowing barrier function to be re-established [5]. Moisturizers 
for eczematous disease must contain several occlusive moistur-
izing ingredients.

In  addition  to  occlusive  ingredients,  a  therapeutic  moistur-
izer for eczema must contain humectants. Humectants are sub-
stances  that  attract  water  to  the  viable  epidermis  and  stratum 
corneum  from  the  dermis. They  function  as  a  sponge  to  hold 
and release water as necessary. Examples of humectants include 
glycerin, honey, sodium lactate, urea, propylene glycol, sorbitol, 
pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, gelatin, hyaluronic acid, vitamins, 
and some proteins [2,6].

Humectants  only  draw  water  from  the  environment  when 
the  ambient  humidity  exceeds  70%.  In  environmentally  con-
trolled spaces, this does not occur, thus humectants pull water 
from  the  deeper  epidermal  and  dermal  tissues  to  rehydrate 
the  stratum  corneum.  A  therapeutic  moisturizer  for  eczema 
must trap the water in the skin with an occlusive film placed 
on top of the stratum corneum [7]. Humectants also allow the 
skin to feel smoother by filling holes in the stratum corneum 
through swelling [8,9]. Therefore, a moisturizer recommended 
for eczema must combine both occlusive and humectant ingre-
dients  for  optimal  efficacy  and  patient  aesthetics.  Occlusive 
and  humectant  moisturizers  are  the  formulations  most  ben-
eficial in the treatment of eczema and include the majority of 

those found in the dermatologic sample closet (Eucerin Cream 
and  Lotion,  Beiersdorf;  Norwegian  Formula  Moisturizers, 
Neutrogena;  Aveeno  Cream  and  Lotion,  Johnson  &  Johnson; 
Olay  Daily  Facial  Moisturizer,  Procter  &  Gamble,  Plentitude, 
L’Oréal; Cetaphil Cream and Lotion, Galderma; CeraVe Cream 
and Lotion, Coria).

A  third  type  of  moisturizing  formulation  is  known  as  the 
hydrophilic  matrix.  Hydrophilic  matrices  are  large  molecular 
weight substances that create a film over the skin surface thereby 
retarding water evaporation. The first hydrophilic matrix devel-
oped  was  an  oatmeal  bath  (Aveeno  Oatmeal  Bath,  Johnson  & 
Johnson).  The  colloidal  oatmeal  created  a  film  that  prevented 
water  from  leaving  the  skin  to  enter  the  bath  water.  Newer 
hydrophilic  matrices  include  peptides  and  proteins,  but  they 
do  not  provide  meaningful  skin  moisturization  in  the  eczema 
patient.

Moisturizer goals in eczema

The goal of all moisturizing emulsions is to accomplish skin 
remoisturization, which occurs in four steps: initiation of bar-
rier repair, alteration of surface cutaneous moisture partition 
coefficient,  onset  of  dermal–epidermal  moisture  diffusion, 
and  synthesis  of  intercellular  lipids  [10].  These  steps  must 
occur  sequentially  in  order  for  proper  skin  barrier  repair. 
Once the barrier has repaired, there must be some substance 
that holds and regulates the skin water content. This substance 
has been termed the natural moisturizing factor (NMF). The 
constituents of the NMF consist of a mixture of amino acids, 
derivatives of amino acids, and salts (Figure 59.1). [11]. The 
NMF  is  actually  derived  from  profillagrin  in  the  living  epi-
dermis that is broken down into filaggrin. Filaggrin is respon-
sible for the mechanical stability of the outer epidermis, but 
degrades with the help of proteases to become NMR, which 
is essential for skin water content maintenance. Persons with 
severe  atopic  dermatitis  demonstrate  genetic  filaggrin  defi-
ciency. Ten percent of the dry weight of the stratum corneum 
cells  is  composed  of  NMF  in  well-hydrated  skin  [12].  Cos-
meceutical moisturizing emulsions try to duplicate the effect 
of the NMF.

Another  important  structure  in  the  maintenance  of  skin 
water content are the aquaporins, which are a family of 13 pro-
teins found in the cell membranes that regulate water and glyc-
erol passage in and out of cells (Figure 59.2). Aquaporins 1, 2, 
4, 5, and 8 are water channels while aquaporins 3, 7, 9, and 10 
are aquaglyceroporins. Aquaporins 6, 11, and 12 are “unortho-
dox”  aquaporins.  Of  these,  the  most  important  in  the  skin  is 
aquaporin 3. Glycerin is transported in aquaporin 3 channels to 
phospholipase D resulting in phosphatidylglycerol, a lipid that 
signals enzymes of cell differentiation. This discovery has led to 
a renewed interest in glycerin as a modulator of skin function in 
eczema patients.

Human skin contains a combination of
hygroscopic substances: 

Urea

Lactate

Amino acids

Pyrrolidone carboxylic acid (PCA)

Inorganic salts

59. Eczema Regimens

519

Urea
7%

Amino
acids
41%

PCA
12%

Lactate
12%

Inorganic
salts
18%

Figure 59.1  The constituents of the natural mois-
turizing  factor  responsible  for  maintaining  the 
water content of the skin.

among  patients  because  the  water  evaporates  leaving  behind  a 
thin film of oily ingredients. If the emulsion can be poured from 
a bottle, it is considered a lotion. These moisturizing products are 
popular for eczema treatment, but may make the eczema worse 
as the repeated wetting and drying of the skin results in further 
maceration. Cream oil-in-water emulsions are preferred because 
the environment created for barrier repair is far superior.

Water-in-oil  emulsions,  where  the  water-soluble  substances 
are  dissolved  in  the  oil-soluble  substances,  are  less  popular 
because of their greasy aesthetics. Most ointments are water-in-
oil emulsions, but they leave the skin feeling warm and sticky. 
Ointments  deliver  higher  levels  of  moisturization  because  the 
water  phase  is  small,  leaving  behind  a  proportionately  larger 
concentration  of  ingredients  capable  of  retarding  transepi-
dermal  water  loss.  Even  though  their  efficacy  is  greater,  most 
eczema patients prefer more aesthetic formulations.

Moisturizing serums
A specialized form of emulsion is a serum. Serums are usually 
low viscosity, oil-in-water emulsions that deliver of thin film of 
active ingredients to the skin surface. For example, a high con-
centration glycerin serum can be placed under a high concen-
tration petrolatum oil-in-water emulsion to provide robust skin 
moisturization. Sometimes a serum will contain cosmeceutical 
barrier  enhancing  ingredients,  such  as  ceramides,  cholesterol, 
and free fatty acids.

Moisturizing liposomes and niosomes
Moisturizing  ingredients  can  be  incorporated  into  structures 
with unique physical properties on the skin, such as liposomes 
and niosomes (Table 59.2). Liposomes are spherical vesicles with 
a diameter 25–5000 nm formed from membranes consisting of 
bilayer  amphiphilic  molecules,  which  possess  both  polar  and 
non-polar ends. The polar heads are directed toward the inside 
of the vesicle and toward its outer surface while the non-polar, 
or lipophilic tails, are directed toward the middle of the bilayer.
Liposomes are based on the natural structure of the cell mem-
brane, which has been highly conserved through evolutionary 
change. The name is derived from the Greek word “lipid” mean-
ing  fat,  and  “soma”  meaning  body.  Liposomes  are  primarily 
formed  from  phospholipids,  such  as  phosphatidylcholine,  but 

Figure 59.2  A pictorial representation of the aquaporin channels necessary 
to maintain cellular osmotic balance.

Moisturizer delivery systems

Another  method  for  optimizing  the  ability  of  moisturizers  to 
create an environment for healing in eczema patients is through 
novel  delivery  of  the  ingredients. This  has  led  to  the  develop-
ment of delivery systems that can time release substances onto 
the skin surface and improve product aesthetics. For example, 
petrolatum is the most effective ingredient for skin healing, yet 
it leaves an easily removed, sticky, greasy film on the skin sur-
face. A delivery system could allow small amounts of petrola-
tum to be released onto the skin surface avoiding the aesthetic 
drawbacks.  Examples  of  delivery  systems  relevant  to  eczema 
treatment  include  emulsions,  serums,  liposomes,  niosomes, 
multivesicular emulsions, and nanoemulsions.

Moisturizing emulsions
Most  moisturizers  developed  for  the  treatment  of  eczema  are 
emulsions [13]. An emulsion is formed from oil and water mixed 
and held in solution by an emulsifier. Most emulsifiers are sur-
factants, or soaps, which dissolve the two non-miscible ingredi-
ents. The most common emulsions are oil-in-water, where the oil 
is dissolved in the water [14]. This emulsion is the most popular 

520

ANTI-AgINg  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Table 59.2  Special	moisturizer	delivery	systems.

Delivery system

Structure

Advantages vs. disadvantages

Liposomes

Spherical	vesicles	consisting	of	bilayer	amphiphilic	
molecules	with	polar	and	non-polar	ends

Can	deliver	hydrophilic	and	hydrophobic	substances	to	
the	skin	surface	without	an	emulsifier

Multivesicular	emulsion	(MVE)

Liposome	within	a	liposome	within	a	liposome	to	form	
concentric	liposomes

Deliver	multiple	moisturizing	ingredients	(glycerin,	
dimethicone,	sphingolipids,	ceramides)	simultaneously

Niosome

Liposome	composed	of	non-ionic	surfactants,	such	as	
ethoxylated	fatty	alcohols	and	synthetic	polyglycerol	ethers

Non-ionic	surfactants	do	not	moisturize	the	skin	surface

Nanoemulsions

Emulsions	with	20–300 nm	droplets

Allow	enhanced	skin	penetration	due	to	small	droplet	
size

may also be composed of surfactants, such as dioleoylphospha-
tidylethanolamine.  Their  functionality  may  be  influenced  by 
chemical composition, vesicle size, shape, surface charge, lamel-
larity, and homogeneity.

The liposome is an extremely versatile structure. It can con-
tain  aqueous  substances  in  its  core,  or  nothing  at  all.  Hydro-
phobic substances can dissolve in the phospholipid bilayer shell, 
which  allows  liposomes  to  deliver  both  oil-soluble  and  water-
soluble  substances  without  need  for  an  emulsifier.  Thus,  the 
internal moisturizer payload plus the phospholipid membrane 
can both function as moisturizers.

It  is  unlikely  that  liposomes  diffuse  across  the  stratum  cor-
neum barrier intact. The corneocytes are embedded in intercel-
lular lipids, composed of ceramides, glycosylceramides, choles-
terol,  and  fatty  acids,  which  are  structurally  different  from  the 
phospholipids  of  the  liposome.  It  is  postulated  that  liposomes 
penetrate  through  the  appendageal  structures.  They  may  also 
fuse with other bilayers, such as cell membranes, to release their 
ingredients. This is the mechanism by which liposomes can func-
tion as moisturizers, supplementing deficient intercellular lipids.
Niosomes  are  a  specialized  form  of  liposome  composed  of 
non-ionic surfactants. These are detergents, such as ethoxylated 
fatty  alcohols  and  synthetic  polyglycerol  ethers  (polyoxyethyl-

ene alkylester, polyoxyethylene alkylether). These liposomes do 
not deliver the moisturizing phospholipids to the skin surface.

Multivesicular emulsions
Another  variant  of  the  liposome  is  a  multivesicular  emulsion 
(MVE)  (Figure  59.3).  The  MVE  is  created  through  a  physical 
mixing technique, which makes them more stable, but also less 
expensive to produce. An MVE can be thought of as a liposome 
within a liposome within a liposome. Thus, with the release of 
each liposome, additional moisturizing ingredients can be depos-
ited on the skin surface. MVEs can deliver glycerin, dimethicone, 
sphingolipids, and ceramides to the skin surface simultaneously.

Moisturizing nanoemulsions
Nanoemulsions  are  similar  to  regular  emulsions  with  an  oil- 
loving hydrophobic phase and a water-loving hydrophilic, except 
droplets in these emulsions are on the nano scale of 20–300 nm 
[15]. If the nano droplets are larger than 100 nm, the emulsion 
appears white, while nanoemulsions with droplets of 70 nm are 
transparent.  Nanoemulsions  offer  the  ability  to  deliver  highly 
hydrophobic or lipophilic substances into the skin, which could 
not  otherwise  penetrate.  The  stratum  corneum  is  an  excellent 
barrier to lipophilic ingredients.

Ceramides

Hyaluronic acid

Phytoshingosine

Glycerin

Dimethicone

Oil

Water

Figure 59.3  A multivesicular emulsion can 
dissolve many ingredients in the concentric 
liposomes.

59. Eczema Regimens

521

For  example,  new  nanoemulsions  of  ubiquinone  have  been 
developed.  Ubiquinone,  also  known  as  coenzyme  Q10,  is  an 
important antioxidant manufactured by the body and found in 
all skin cells. It is found in both hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
cellular compartments, but topical delivery has been challeng-
ing. Nanoemulsions have successfully delivered higher concen-
trations of ubiquinone into the skin with the goal of enhancing 
the skin’s natural antioxidant capabilities, while leaving beyond 
a moisturizing film from the other ingredients in the emulsion.

barrier repair is white petrolatum, but dimethicone and cyclo-
methicone are commonly added to decrease the greasiness of a 
simple  petrolatum  and  water  formulation.  Basic  night  creams 
containing  these  ingredients,  in  addition  to  glycerin,  are  the 
mainstay of therapeutic eczema moisturizers. It is important to 
remember  that  fewer  ingredients  are  preferred,  because  more 
ingredient  exposure  creates  added  opportunities  for  sensitiza-
tion or an adverse event.

Developing a moisturizer regimen

This chapter has discussed the goals of moisturization, the vari-
ous types of moisturizers, and some of the unique moisturizer 
delivery systems. The biggest challenge for the clinician is add-
ing  moisturizers  or  combining  moisturizers  as  part  of  a  treat-
ment regimen.

Patients with eczema require basic hygiene. The face and body 
must be cleansed. There is no doubt that the synthetic detergent 
cleansers, also known as syndets, provide the best skin cleansing 
while minimizing barrier damage. Bars based on sodium cocyl 
isethionate  appear  to  perform  the  best  (Dove,  Unilever;  Olay, 
Procter & Gamble). There are some patients, however, who only 
require  the  use  of  a  facial  syndet  cleanser  occasionally,  because 
sebum  production  and  physical  activity  are  minimal.  For  these 
patients, a lipid-free cleanser is preferable because it can be used 
without  water  and  wiped  away  (Cetaphil,  Galderma;  CerVe, 
Coria). These products may contain water, glycerin, cetyl alcohol, 
stearyl alcohol, sodium laurel sulfate, and occasionally propylene 
glycol. They leave behind a thin moisturizing film and can be used 
effectively in persons with excessively dry, sensitive, or dermatitic 
skin. They do not have strong antibacterial properties, however, 
and may not remove odor from the armpit or groin. Lipid-free 
cleansers are best used where minimal cleansing is desired.

After completing cleansing, the eczema patient requires mois-
turization.  The  moisturizer  should  create  an  optimal  environ-
ment for barrier repair, while not inducing any type of skin reac-
tion. For example, the product should not contain any mild irri-
tants that may present as an acneiform eruption in the eczema 
patient  because  of  the  presence  of  follicular  irritant  contact 
dermatitis. The best moisturizers are simple oil-in-water emul-
sions. The morning moisturizer should provide SPF 30 photo-
protection. A variety of sunscreen-containing moisturizers are 
on the market for this purpose (Olay Complete Defense SPF 30, 
Procter & Gamble; Neutrogena Daily Defense SPF 30, Johnson 
&  Johnson).  If  additional  hydration  is  required,  a  moisturizer 
can be applied to the face followed by a second sunscreen-con-
taining moisturizer on top. It is possible to layer moisturizers for 
additive  benefit. The  sunscreen-containing  moisturizer  should 
be applied last, as it does not need to touch the skin to provide 
optimal photoprotection.

The  evening  moisturizer  provides  the  best  opportunity  for 
barrier repair, because the body is at rest. The best ingredient for 

Conclusions

Eczema treatment requires the use of prescription medications 
in conjunction with skincare products. Both must be judiciously 
selected  to  insure  optimal  results.  Thorough  resolution  of 
eczema requires alleviation of the disease, the treatment phase, 
and  prevention  of  recurrence,  the  maintenance  phase.  This 
chapter has discussed those concepts that are key to designing a 
maintenance phase regimen for eczema patients.

references

  1  Baker  CG.  (1987)  Moisturization:  new  methods  to  support  time 

proven ingredients. Cosmet Toilet 102, 99–102.

  2  De  Groot  AC,  Weyland  JW,  Nater  JP.  (1994)  Unwanted  Effects  of 
Cosmetics  and  Drugs  Used  in  Dermatology,  3rd  edn.  Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, pp. 498–500.

  3  Friberg SE, Ma Z. (1993) Stratum corneum lipids, petrolatum and 

white oils. Cosmet Toilet 107, 55–9.

  4  Grubauer  G,  Feingold  KR,  Elias  PM.  (1987)  Relationship  of  epi-
dermal  lipogenesis  to  cutaneous  barrier  function.  J  Lipid  Res  28, 
746–52.

  5  Ghadially R, Halkier-Sorensen L, Elias PM. (1992) Effects of pet-
rolatum  on  stratum  corneum  structure  and  function.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol 26, 387–96.

  6  Spencer TS. (1988) Dry skin and skin moisturizers. Clin Dermatol 

6, 24–8.

  7  Rieger MM, Deem DE. (1974) Skin moisturizers II. The effects of 
cosmetic  ingredients  on  human  stratum  corneum.  J  Soc  Cosmet 
Chem 25, 253–59.

  8  Robbins CR, Fernee KM. (1983) Some observations on the swell-
ing of human epidermal membrane. J Sos Cosmet Chem 37, 21–34.
  9  Idson B. (1992) Dry skin: moisturizing and emolliency. Cosmet Toi-

let 107, 69–78.

10  Jackson  EM.  (1992)  Moisturizers:  What’s  in  them?  How  do  they 

work? Am J Contact Derm 3, 162–8.

11  Wehr RF, Krochmal L. (1987) Considerations in selecting a mois-

turizer. Cutis 39, 512–5.

12  Rawlings AV, Scott IR, Harding CR, Bowser PA. (1994) Stratum cor-
neum moisturization at the molecular level. Prog Dermatol 28, 1–12.
13  Chanchal D, Swarnlata S. ((2008) Novel approaches in herbal cos-

metics. J Cosmet Dermatol 7, 89–95.

14  Carlotti ME, Gallarate M, Rossatto V. (2003) O/W microemulsions 

as a vehicle for sunscreen. J Cosmet Sci 54, 451–59.

15  Kaur  IP,  Agrawal  R.  (2007)  Nanotechnology:  a  new  paradigm  in 

cosmeceuticals. Recent Pat Drug Deliv Formul 1, 171–82.

ChAPTEr 60
Psoriasis regimens*

Laura F. Sandoval, Karen E. Huang, and Steven R. Feldman
Center for Dermatology Research, Wake Forest University School of Medicine; Winston-Salem, NC, USA

BASIC CONCEPTS

•	 Psoriasis	is	a	common	condition	that	can	be	treated	with	a	variety	of	over-the-counter	skincare	products.
•	 Over-the-counter	skincare	products	helpful	for	the	treatment	of	psoriasis	include	moisturizers,	keratolytics,	tar,	hydrocortisone,	salicylic	

acid,	and	tanning	booth	radiation	exposure.

•	 Compliance	is	key	in	psoriasis	therapy,	which	may	be	encouraged	by	over-the-counter	skincare	products.
•	 Over-the-counter	skincare	products	can	be	combined	with	prescription	medications	for	optimal	treatment.

Introduction

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease that affects an 
estimated 7.5 million people in the United States and 125 million 
worldwide, with about 30% of these patients also suffering from 
psoriatic  arthritis.  Men  and  women  are  affected  equally.  The 
disease may occur at any age, most frequently starts in the late 
teens and early 20s, and is most prevalent in the third through 
fifth  decades  of  life.  Caucasians  are  twice  as  likely  as  African-
Americans to  have been  diagnosed  with  psoriasis, though  this 
may not translate directly to prevalence in these populations [1]. 
The etiology of psoriasis is not yet fully characterized. There is 
tremendous  variation  in  individuals’  disease  presentation  and 
response  to  treatment,  adding  to  the  complexity  of  psoriasis 
treatment.

The  majority  of  patients  with  psoriasis  have  limited,  or  so 
called “mild”, disease, covering less than 3% of total body sur-
face  area  [2].  However,  the  disease  burden  does  not  correlate 
closely with the extent of disease, and even patients with limited 
areas of psoriasis can suffer from significant psychosocial stress 
and depression [3,4]. Only about one in six people with psoria-
sis sees a doctor for their disease in any given year. The remain-
ing psoriasis patients do not seek treatment by a dermatologist. 
They may be untreated, or they may self-treat with a variety of 
over-the-counter (OTC) medications.

Psoriasis has a significant impact on quality of life. A recent 
survey by the National Psoriasis Foundation found psoriasis has 
both  an  emotional  impact  and  physical  impact  [5].  The  poor 
quality of life seen in psoriasis patients is due in part to the cuta-
neous manifestations of the disease and the treatment regimens. 
Patients claim physical appearance to be a large negative factor 
in  quality  of  life,  and  in  addition  to  feeling  embarrassed  and 
self-conscious, the majority of patients experience anger, frus-
tration, and helplessness [5]. The concern over physical appear-
ance  increases  as  the  extent  of  disease  spreads.  The  treatment 
regimens can also negatively impact quality of life, as they often 
require multiple daily applications, come in messy greasy vehi-
cles, and can be very expensive.

This chapter focuses on the role of OTC medications in pso-
riasis and describes strengths and weaknesses of different OTC 
products. We will briefly discuss the role of OTC medications as 
part of a combination treatment regimen. Patient compliance is 
a major factor affecting the effectiveness of psoriasis treatments, 
and we discuss the future development of OTC medications.

Physiology

Psoriasis is a multifactorial, T-cell mediated autoimmune disease, 
involving genetics, immune system alterations, and environmental 

* Funding/Conflicts of interest: The Center for Dermatology Research is supported by an unrestricted educational grant from Galderma Laboratories, L.P. 
Dr. Feldman is a consultant and speaker for Galderma, Stiefel/GlaxoSmithKline, Abbott Labs, Warner Chilcott, Janssen, Amgen, Photomedex, Genentech, 
BiogenIdec, and Bristol Myers Squibb. Dr. Feldman has received grants from Galderma, Astellas, Abbott Labs, Warner Chilcott, Janssen, Amgen, Photomedex, 
Genentech, BiogenIdec, Coria/Valeant, Pharmaderm, Ortho Pharmaceuticals, Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Roche Dermatology, 3M, Bristol Myers Squibb, Stiefel/
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Medicis, Leo, HanAll Pharmaceuticals, Celgene, Basilea, and Anacor and has received stock options from Photomedex. Dr. Feldman is 
the founder and holds stock in Causa Research.

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

522

60. Psoriasis Regimens

523

factors. Normal keratinocytes remain in the epidermis for 300 
hours, but psoriasis keratinocytes only remain in the epidermis 
for  36  hours.  This  shortening  of  the  keratinocyte  life  cycle  is 
associated with an increased proliferation of keratinocytes and 
subsequent plaque formation [6]. The pathophysiology behind 
the  shortened  keratinocyte  life  cycle  is  at  least  in  part  due  to 
a  complex  immune  reaction.  Both  the  innate  and  adaptive 
immune  systems  play  a  role.  This  cascade  is  largely  driven  by 
dysregulation of helper T cells and their release of cytokines and 
TNF-α into the dermis. The presence of cytokines in the dermis 
triggers infiltration and activation of both polymorphonuclear 
and mononuclear leukocytes [7]. Many different proinflamma-
tory cytokines, chemokines, and chemical mediators are present 
in  the  dermis  and  epidermis  of  psoriatic  skin,  including  IL-4, 
IL-6,  IL-12,  IL-22,  IL-23,  IL-17,  IFN-γ  and  TGF-β  to  name  a 
few  [6,8].  The  roles  of  each  of  these  cytokines  have  yet  to  be 
fully understood, however as their roles become better identi-
fied, they are increasingly being targeted in potential therapies.
Genetics  impacts  psoriasis,  as  up  to  70%  of  identical  twins 
both develop this disease [9]. Psoriasis has been associated with 
certain HLA genotypes, and psoriasis risk allele PSORS1 that 
codes  for  HLA-Cw6  genotype  has  been  identified  as  a  major 
risk allele [10]. However, no single allele can be called the “pso-
riasis gene” because there are multiple alleles that contribute to 
the  inheritance  and  risk  of  developing  psoriasis.  There  are  at 
least nineteen other genetic loci that have also been identified 
as psoriasis risk alleles [11]. Complex inherited diseases such as 
psoriasis require large studies of many affected families in order 
to begin to identify all the possible genetic loci, a task that has 
been  difficult  to  achieve,  but  considerable  progress  has  been 
made in the last few years resulting in a significant increase in 
candidate genes.

A  temporal  relationship  has  been  established  between  psy-
chosocial stress and psoriasis flares [12]. At baseline, psoriasis 
patients have high stress levels and poor quality of life [13]. Up 
to  80%  of  psoriasis  patients  report  that  a  stressful  event  trig-
gered a psoriasis flare during the course of their disease. Most of 
these stress-related flares occur within two weeks of the stressful 
event [14]. Obesity is a risk factor both for developing psoriasis 
and for increased severity of psoriasis [15]. Streptococcal type 
A  infections  have  also  been  reported  to  cause  psoriasis  out-
breaks. The link between streptococcal infections and psoriasis 
has  been  extensively  researched,  but  no  single  hypothesis  has 
emerged.  Some  theories  posit  there  exists  molecular  mimicry 
between streptococcal antigens and keratinocytes,  while  other 
theories blame bacterial superantigens [6].

These genetic, biologic, and environmental factors combine to 
create the “perfect storm” of psoriasis. The shortened keratino-
cyte life cycle results in thick scales that accumulate on the sur-
face of the skin. The inflammatory infiltrates cause dysfunction 
of skin’s natural barrier. Inflammatory cytokines cause vascular 
capillary  dilatation  which  results  in  skin  erythema  and  helps 
perpetuate the inflammatory process [16]. The end result is dry, 
cracked, inflamed plaques that can be both painful and pruritic.

role of OTC medications

Psoriasis education
The first step in any psoriasis treatment regimen is education. 
Empowering patients with knowledge about their disease allows 
them to make informed decisions about their care and creates 
realistic  expectations  for  treatment  outcomes.  The  National 
Psoriasis Foundation is a great resource for patients, providing 
educational resources, as well as resources to help patients feel 
less isolated. Foundation members feel more satisfied with their 
treatment and have less disease burden. The Foundation’s web-
site has an OTC treatment guide that provides information on 
many  OTC  products  commonly  used  for  psoriasis  (www.pso-
riasis.org/about-psoriasis/treatments/topicals/over-the-coun-
ter). The site also provides information to help patients screen 
out non-prescription remedies that are touted for their efficacy 
but which are at best unproven.

role of self-treating
Patients who self-treat their psoriasis tend to have mild disease 
and  can  achieve  a  measure  of  control  with  over-the-counter 
medications alone. For these patients OTC medications provide 
symptom relief (reduced pruritus) or improve the skin’s cosmetic 
appearance [17]. Based on their experiences, some dermatologists 
may feel OTC medications have little efficacy; such an impression 
may be based on seeing only the patients who have failed to ade-
quately control their disease with OTC medications. People who 
do achieve adequate control with OTCs alone would be less likely 
to feel the need to visit a dermatologist. For those patients who 
do visit a dermatologist for prescription treatment, OTC medi-
cations  may  still  play  an  important  role  in  reducing  symptoms 
and improving appearance. Additionally, OTC medications like 
moisturizers and keratolytics can serve to increase the efficacy of 
prescription topical corticosteroids and phototherapy.

OTC products recommended by physicians
The  National  Ambulatory  Care  Survey  (NAMCS)  provides  a 
representative  snapshot  of  psoriasis  treatment  in  the  United 
States [18]. Through this survey, the estimated frequency of pre-
scription  and  OTC  medications  prescribed  by  dermatologists 
and non-dermatologists are tabulated each year. OTC treatment 
options for psoriasis are estimated to cost $500 million and to 
account for 40% of all psoriasis-related expenditures [19]. The 
NAMCS  provides  data  on  the  OTC  psoriasis  treatments  most 
commonly recommended by physicians. We looked at NAMCS 
data  from  1996–2010  and  identified  the  most  common  OTC 
prescriptions for psoriasis in each of three five-year periods.

Since 1996, keratolytics have been the leading OTC medica-
tion  for  psoriasis,  while  hydrocortisone,  moisturizers,  and  tar 
are  comparable  in  their  prescribing  patterns.  (Figure  60.1). 
When the keratolytics were broken down into individual types, 
salicylic  acid,  lactic  acid,  and  urea  were  the  three  most  com-
monly  prescribed  keratolytics,  with  salicylic  acid  most  fre-
quently  prescribed  (Figure  60.2).  The  prescribing  of  salicylic 

524

ANTI-AgINg  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
r
p

l
a
u
n
n
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

n
i
(
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
r
p

l
a
u
n
n
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
n
i
(

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Hydrocortisone

Keratolytics

Moisturizers

Tar

Hydrocortisone

Salicylic acid

Urea

Lactic Acid

Moisturizers

Tar

Figure 60.1  OTC psoriasis medications 
prescribed by physicians from 1996–2010. 
NAMCS data was used to find the pre-
scription frequency of OTC medications 
prescribed by both dermatologists and 
non-dermatologists. Yearly data was then 
grouped in three five-year time periods. 
OTC medications were grouped in hydro-
cortisone, keratolytics, moisturizers, and tar 
preparations.

Figure  60.2  OTC  psoriasis  medications 
prescribed  by  physicians  from  1996–2010. 
NAMCS  data  was  used  to  find  the  pre-
scription  frequency  of  OTC  medications 
prescribed  by  both  dermatologists  and 
non-dermatologists.  Yearly  data  was  then 
grouped  in  three  five-year  time  periods. 
OTC medications analyzed included hydro-
cortisone,  salicylic  acid,  lactic  acid,  urea, 
moisturizers, and tar preparations.

1996-2000

2001-2005

Time period

2006-2010

1996-2000

2001-2005
Time period

2006-2010

acid has increased over time, while the prescribing of hydrocor-
tisone has steadily declined.

Compliance in psoriasis treatment
Psoriasis patients are among the worst in terms of compliance 
with treatment regimens [20]. Psoriasis patients have levels of 
depression  and  anxiety  that  are  higher  than  other  dermato-
logic  disease  patients  [3].  Depression  and  disease  burden  can 
negatively affect the patients’ ability to adhere to treatment [21]. 
Adherence  to  topical  medications  is  worse  than  adherence  to 
oral  medications,  with  the  number  of  daily  applications,  the 
chronicity  of  treatment  and  the  complexity  of  the  treatment 
regimen affecting overall compliance [22].

Topicals have traditionally been messy, greasy, and generally 
unappealing  from  a  cosmetic  perspective.  When  choosing  a 
topical preparation for a patient, that particular patient’s prefer-
ences are critical to consider. While ointments may be said to 
be more efficacious for psoriasis, they will not be efficacious for 
patients who find them too messy to use.

OTC  medications  allow  patients  access  to  a  wide  variety  of 
treatment  options  at  relatively  low  cost.  Patients  can  try  out 
different  vehicles  and  different  combinations  of  products  to 
achieve the best improvement. OTC products give patients the 
independence to experiment with products until they find one 
they  prefer,  rather  than  having  to  go  through  a  dermatologist 
every time they want to switch products or try something new.

Moisturizers and keratolytics

Dry skin is often a sign of poor barrier function, as is the case 
in psoriasis. Symptoms of psoriasis include scaling, itching, and 
increased sensitivity. Moisturizers can improve the skin’s hydra-
tion in two ways. First, the hydrophobic emollients like petrola-
tum provide occlusive benefits, meaning they create a physical 
layer of protection on the surface of the skin that acts to slow 
epidermal water loss. Second, hydrophilic emollients like glyc-
erine provide humectant benefits, meaning they attract moisture 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60. Psoriasis Regimens

525

from  the  air  and  help  skin  preserve  its  water  content.  Some 
moisturizers  only  contain  either  hydrophobic  or  hydrophilic 
elements,  but  most  contain  both  compounds.  The  net  effect 
of  this  increase  in  moisture  on  psoriatic  skin  is  a  decrease  in 
appearance of scale. Factors such as number of applications and 
thickness of the applied layer impact success. Moisturizers can 
often make scale completely invisible by changing the refractive 
index  of  scale  so  less  light  is  reflected.  Several  skin  care  lines 
such as Cetaphil® and Accent® have moisturizers and cleansers 
that they recommend for psoriasis. While these may be popular 
choices amongst dermatologist in general for sensitive skin and 
skin diseases, these moisturizers are not specifically formulated 
for psoriasis treatment and we are unaware of evidence show-
ing  that  they  are  any  better  or  worse  than  other  moisturizers. 
Interesting, the National Psoriasis foundation suggests that even 
cooking oils and shortening can be as effective and an economic 
alternative to often pricey commercial moisturizers [1].

Keratolytics differ from moisturizers in that they actually dis-
solve the scales on the skin’s surface. Keratolytics help decrease 
the thickness of the hyperkeratotic plaque from the top surface 
inward by softening the scaly layers allowing for easy removal 
[23].  Salicylic  acid  comes  in  a  wide  variety  of  vehicles  from 
shampoo to gels to creams. OTC concentrations approved for 
psoriasis use range from 1–3%. OTC concentrations exist up to 
6%, but concentrations above 3% have not been FDA approved 
for psoriasis [24]. OTC lactic acid products come in 5–12% con-
centrations.  Other  OTC  keratolytics  include  phenol  (which  is 
often used in scalp preparations) and urea products. OTC urea 
preparations  range  from  10–25%  concentrations  and  typically 
are sold as lotions or creams [24]. Keratolytics such as these can 
be found OTC in single preparations or in OTC combinations 
with a moisturizer. Combination products allow the scale to be 
camouflaged  by  moisturizer  as  the  keratolytics  gradually  thin 
the psoriatic plaques. Keratolytics can cause irritant contact der-
matitis secondary to their acidic nature. Therefore it is impor-
tant for patients to find a keratolytic product with a potency that 
is effective but minimizes irritation.

Tar

Tar  is  one  of  the  oldest  treatments  for  psoriasis,  but  its  exact 
mechanism  of  action  remains  unknown.  Tar  is  believed  to 
reduce epidermal hyperproliferation and exert anti-inflamma-
tory effects on psoriasis skin. It also has anti-pruritic effects that 
can provide a great deal of symptom relief [25]. Tar is developed 
from coal or wood and can be sold as crude or refined tar prod-
ucts. Most tar products for psoriasis treatment are coal tar prod-
ucts, and are available OTC in concentrations of 0.5–5%. OTC 
formulations are varied and include shampoos, soaps, lotions, 
creams, and ointments [24]. Tar shampoos and ointments can 
be very helpful in the treatment of scalp psoriasis [26].

There are several downsides to tar products that prevent them 
from being used more commonly to treat psoriasis. Traditional 

tar  preparations  have  been  messy,  malodorous  and  stain  skin 
and  clothing.  This  is  especially  true  of  crude  tar  products. 
Newer products that use refined tar have tried to minimize these 
unwanted  side  effects,  increasing  the  aesthetic  appeal  of  tar 
topicals while maintaining the desired efficacy [26,27]. Despite 
improvements in the vehicle and odor, patient compliance with 
tar  products  may  be  poor.  Tar  can  also  cause  unwanted  skin 
reactions like contact irritation and folliculitis, further decreas-
ing patient compliance. Another component of tar therapy that 
affects both patient use and physician prescribing is the fear of 
its  carcinogenic  properties.  While  there  is  no  clear  evidence 
showing  an  increased  risk  of  cancer  in  humans,  and  while  a 
large cohort study found that coal tar did not increase risk for 
non-skin  malignancies  or  skin  cancers,  several  animal  studies 
have demonstrated an increased risk of cancer with topical tar 
application [28,29].

All OTC tar products are covered by an FDA monograph that 
permits marketing and sales of tar products of certain concen-
trations  for  an  indication  of  psoriasis  [30].  Other  ingredients 
that are generally regarded as safe may also be in the product. 
Thus, companies can create and market many different products 
and  claim  they  are  effective  for  psoriasis  as  long  as  the  prod-
uct  contains  the  appropriate  concentration  of  tar.  Companies 
can create all manners of fruit and vegetable extracts and claim 
their product is FDA approved for the treatment of psoriasis by 
incorporating tar into the product.

hydrocortisone

Topical hydrocortisone cream is available OTC in 0.5% and 1% 
concentrations  and  is  a  low-potency  corticosteroid  with  anti-
inflammatory  and  anti-itch  properties.  In  a  survey  conducted 
by the National Psoriasis Foundation, psoriasis patients named 
“scaling”,  “itching”,  and  “skin  redness”  as  their  most  common 
symptoms [31]. Topical corticosteroids help relieve these symp-
toms.  Despite  their  low  potency,  OTC  hydrocortisone  treat-
ments can play an important role in psoriasis management. A 
benefit  of  low-potency  OTC  hydrocortisone  is  that  psoriasis 
patients can use this corticosteroid to self-treat more sensitive 
areas of their skin, such as the face, axilla, and genital area.

Other OTC products

While many of the OTC psoriasis products are likely to contain 
one of the above commonly used drugs as the active ingredient, 
there are many other agents that are used in psoriasis treatment. 
The  National  Psoriasis  Foundation  is  a  great  resource  for  rec-
ommendations,  and  list  agents  such  as  aloe  vera,  jojoba,  zinc 
pyrithione, and capsaicin, however, adding that the effectiveness 
of  these  may  not  be  known  and  warning  of  potential  adverse 
effects  such  as  irritation  [1].  Zinc  pyrithione,  specifically, 
has  conflicting  data  on  its  effectiveness  for  psoriasis  [32,33]. 

526

ANTI-AgINg  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

Castederm, a product containing phenol, is recommended for 
inverse psoriasis. To help remove scale, the Foundation suggests 
adding oil, oatmeal, Epson salts, or Dead Sea salts to the bath. 
In  addition,  products  containing  camphor,  diphenhydramine 
hydrochloride  (HCl),  benzocaine  and  menthol  are  recom-
mended for itch.

Ultraviolet light (UV) therapy

Phototherapy  has  been  a  mainstay  treatment  for  psoriasis  for 
millennia.  Up  until  the  1990s,  broad  spectrum  UVB  was  the 
treatment of choice. More recently, narrowband (300–313 nm) 
UVB boxes were introduced, as well as devices designed to pro-
vide localized therapy to individual lesions [34]. The addition of 
PUVA therapy for severe psoriasis in the 1990’s further expanded 
the  use  of  phototherapy  for  psoriasis  [35].  Many  psoriasis 
patients realize the benefit of UV exposure before any prescrip-
tion phototherapy is used through the seasonal variation in their 
psoriasis  and  the  beneficial  effect  of  outdoor  (and  sometimes 
indoor)  tanning  on  their  disease.  Benefits  of  non-prescription 
phototherapy  over  prescription  phototherapy  include  greater 
convenience and lower cost, albeit at the expense of less control 
over  dosimetry.  Prescription  phototherapy  requires  patients  to 
travel  to  the  dermatologist’s  office  anywhere  from  three  to  five 
times a week to receive UV treatments. This can be costly and 
inconvenient to patients, which compromises the overall benefit 
and accessibility of the treatment. Home light units are also an 
option that can be cost-effective, convenient, and result in good 
patient adherence.

Sun exposure is the least costly way to obtain phototherapy 
for  psoriasis,  though  it  may  be  inconvenient  or  inaccessible 
(depending  on  geography).  Dosimetry  is  difficult  to  control. 
Commercial  tanning  beds  provide  another  phototherapy 
option.  Although  these  devices  radiate  mostly  UVA  light,  the 
most widely used commercial tanning bulbs have about 5% of 
the output that is in the UVB range and this may contribute to 
tanning  bed  efficacy.  Some  dermatologists  discourage  use  of 
tanning beds for treating psoriasis because of the potential and 
poorly defined risk of skin cancer and premature aging. How-
ever, tanning beds can be an option for psoriasis patients who 
cannot afford or who do not have access to home or dermatolo-
gist-administered UVB therapies. Some dermatologists may not 
think tanning beds are effective based on their experiences see-
ing patients who have tried tanning and saw no benefit. Derma-
tologists should keep in mind that the people who tried tanning 
and did find it to be effective for clearing their psoriasis may not 
come to the dermatologist.

If tanning bed use is recommended by a dermatologist for a 
particular patient, patient education and guidance for use should 
be provided and realistic expectations about length of time until 
improvement should be set. Most patients will require multiple 
tanning sessions over several weeks before seeing improvement 
in their skin. To help control the dosimetry, patients should use 

the same tanning bed for each exposure (not switching between 
tanning establishments or between beds within a single estab-
lishment). Tanning bed operators are familiar with their equip-
ment and will likely recommend a safe starting dose, but start-
ing with half that dose may provide a greater degree of safety, 
particularly if the tanning bed is used in conjunction with oral 
retinoid treatment (tanning beds should not be used in conjunc-
tion  with  psoralen  as  life-threatening  burns  may  result).  Sun-
screen  or  protective  clothing  can  be  recommended  to  protect 
unaffected skin, and eye protection should be worn. These mea-
sures help patients avoid burning their skin and minimize the 
risk of developing skin cancer or cataracts [1].

Psoriasis patients may inquire if OTC tanning is safe to use 
with other psoriasis medications. Topical corticosteroids are safe 
to use with phototherapy and may even enhance the UV light’s 
effect by thinning the psoriatic plaques, though there is concern 
that  corticosteroids  reduce  the  remission  periods  associated 
with  phototherapy.  Topical  vitamin  D  analogues  are  effective 
in combination with UV therapy, however the light may inacti-
vate vitamin D analogues, so it is recommended for patients to 
apply the topical after or a minimum of 2 hours prior to photo-
therapy sessions [36]. Coal tar can also be used in combination 
with phototherapy, but should be removed from the body prior 
to treatment since it can act as a physical blocker reducing the 
light  exposure  [37].  The  Goeckerman  treatment,  which  com-
bines topical crude coal tar and UVB phototherapy, is a classic, 
yet often forgotten, psoriasis therapy. This combination’s success 
was first described by Dr. Goeckerman in 1925, and continues 
to be one of the most effective psoriasis treatments in use today. 
The  Goeckerman  treatment  can  induce  remission  even  when 
the most technologically advanced regimens like biologics fail 
[38,39].  Goeckerman  treatment  is  typically  administered  by  a 
dermatologist in the inpatient or specialized outpatient psoria-
sis treatment center. Patients can attempt to mimic the effects of 
Goeckerman by using outdoor or indoor UV therapy followed 
by  prolonged  OTC  tar  ointment  used  under  plastic  wrap  or 
sauna suit occlusion.

In  terms  of  systemic  therapies,  oral  retinoids  are  not  only 
safe to use with phototherapy, they are frequently prescribed 
in combination with phototherapy because they can improve 
the phototherapy’s efficacy [40]. While methotrexate is safe to 
use with phototherapy, cyclosporine should not be used with 
UVB  therapy  because  of  concerns  for  increased  risk  of  skin 
cancer [41].

Combination regimens

Most psoriasis treatment regimens do not rely on only one drug 
to effectively treat psoriasis. Specific combinations of therapies 
often  produce  the  best  results  with  the  least  amount  of  side 
effects.  The  caution  with  combination  treatment  regimens 
is  that  overly  complex  regimens  can  confuse  and  discourage 
patients and negatively affect treatment adherence. The goal of a 

60. Psoriasis Regimens

527

dermatologist should be to develop a streamlined regimen that 
focuses on the individual patient’s treatment goals and lifestyle.
OTC medications play a large role in combination psoriasis 
therapies.  Keratolytics  are  used  to  enhance  the  ability  of  topi-
cal corticosteroids to penetrate the epidermis and target dermal 
inflammation. Topical corticosteroids can penetrate skin two to 
three times better with keratolytics than without. This results in 
better relief of symptoms like scaling and pruritus [23]. Kera-
tolytics  have  similar  effects  with  tar  products  and  UV  photo-
therapy.  Moisturizers  can  also  enhance  the  efficacy  of  topical 
corticosteroids [42]. When prescribing such combination regi-
mens, however, it is essential to consider that complicating the 
regimen may reduce treatment adherence, resulting in the loss 
of any potential gains expected from increased penetration.

Summary

OTC medications play a large role in the treatment regimen of 
self-treating  patients  and  those  managed  by  a  dermatologist. 
For  the  vast  majority  of  people  with  psoriasis  who  choose  to 
self-treat their disease, OTC medications provide relief of symp-
toms like pruritus, erythema, and dry skin as well as effectively 
controlling plaque formation. For the minority of patients who 
require a dermatologist, OTC medications still provide a degree 
of symptom relief, and are commonly used in combination with 
prescription medications. The NAMCS data show that derma-
tologists  prescribe  OTC  hydrocortisone,  keratolytics,  tar,  and 
moisturizers to supplement prescription psoriasis therapies. The 
large percentage of psoriasis patients who rely on OTC medica-
tions  continues  to  drive  the  production  of  new  and  improved 
OTC  products.  New  moisturizers  are  constantly  being  devel-
oped to increase skin’s hydration, and new keratolytics seek to 
improve the appearance of hyperkeratotic plaques while mini-
mizing skin irritation. Improved vehicles like foams and sprays 
for OTC corticosteroids are being developed to increase efficacy 
and make them more attractive to patients. New tar extracts and 
derivatives are designed to be less messy and smelly than their 
older counterparts; by increasing patient adherence, such treat-
ments may offer improved efficacy outcomes.

Future trends in OTC psoriasis medications can be considered  
in two different populations. In those people who entirely self-
treat  and  do  not  see  a  dermatologist,  there  will  probably  be  a 
continued  increase  in  the  use  of  products  like  moisturizers, 
keratolytics,  and  tar  as  the  products  continue  to  improve.  In 
patients  who  see  a  dermatologist,  there  may  be  a  decrease  in 
some  OTC  use  of  medications  like  keratolytics  as  more  and 
more topical prescriptions are switching to combination topical 
products  that  contain  a  prescription  drug  along  with  an  OTC 
drug. An example of this would be a high-potency topical cor-
ticosteroid ointment that also contains salicylic acid. Prescrip-
tion topicals are now available in new vehicles like foams and 
sprays  that  reduce  the  messy  application  process.  This  move-
ment towards multiple therapies in one product and improved 

prescription vehicles may result in a decrease in the prescription 
of  OTC  topical  medications.  Biologic  agents  have  revolution-
ized treatment in a small population of psoriasis patients, induc-
ing  rapid  and  complete  remission  and  thereby  reducing  their 
need for complicated combination regimens.

references

  1  National  Psoriasis  Foundation.  www.psoriasis.org.  Accessed  29 

June 2015.

  2  Stern RS, Nijsten T, Feldman SR, et al. (2004) Psoriasis is common, 
carries a substantial burden even when not extensive, and is associ-
ated with widespread treatment dissatisfaction. J Investig Dermatol 
Symp Proc 9, 136–9.

  3  Evers AWM, Lu Y, Duller P, et al. (2005) Common burden of chronic 
skin diseases? Contributors to psychological distress in adults with 
psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 152, 1275–81.

  4  Gupta MA, Gupta AK. (1998) Depression and suicidal ideation in 
dermatology patients with acne, alopecia areata, atopic dermatitis 
and psoriasis. Br J Dermatol 139, 846–50.

  5  Armstrong  AW,  Schupp  C,  Wu  J,  et  al.  (2012)  Quality  of  life  and 
work  productivity  impairment  among  psoriasis  patients:  findings 
from  the  National  Psoriasis  Foundation  survey  data  2003–2011. 
PLoS One 7, e52935.

  6  Nickoloff  BJ,  Qin  JZ,  Nestle  FO.  (2007)  Immunopathogenesis  of 

psoriasis. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 33, 45–56.

  7  Linden  KG,  Weinstein  GD.  (1999)  Psoriasis:  current  perspectives 

with an emphasis on treatment. Am J Med 107, 595–605.

  8  Mudigonda  P,  Mudigonda  T,  Feneran  AN,  et  al.  (2012)  Inter-
leukin-23  and  interleukin-17:  importance  in  pathogenesis  and 
therapy of psoriasis. Dermatol Online J. 18, 1.

  9  Valdimarsson H. (2007) The genetic basis of psoriasis. Clin Derma-

tol 25, 563–7.

10  Nair RP, Stuart PE, Nister I, et al. (2006) Sequence and haplotype 
analysis supports HLA-C as the psoriasis susceptibility 1 gene. Am 
J Hum Genet 78, 827–51.

11  Rahman  M,  Alam  K,  Ahmad  MZ,  et  al.  (2012)  Classical  to  cur-
rent  approach  for  treatment  of  psoriasis:  a  review.  Endocr  Metab 
Immune Disord Drug Targets 12, 287–302.

12  Hunter HJ, Griffiths CE, Kleyn CE. (2013) Does psychosocial stress 
play a role in the exacerbation of psoriasis? Br J Dermatol 169, 965–74.
13  Misery L, Thomas L, Jullien D, et al. (2008) Comparative study of 
stress and quality of life in outpatients consulting for different der-
matoses in 5 academic departments of dermatology. Eur J Dermatol 
18, 412–5.

14  Kimyai-Asadi A, Usman A. (2001) The role of psychological stress 

in skin disease. J Cutan Med Surg 5, 140–45.

15  Azfar RS, Gelfand JM. (2008) Psoriasis and metabolic disease: epi-
demiology and pathophysiology. Curr Opin Rheumatol 20, 416–22.
16  Joshi R. (2004) Immunopathogenesis of psoriasis. Indian J Derma-

tol Venereol Leprol 70, 10–12.

17  Proksch E. (2008) The role of emollients in the management of dis-
eases with chronic dry skin. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 21, 75–80.
18  National Center for Health Statistics (2010) National Ambulatory 
Medical  Care  Survey  (NAMCS)  and  National  Hospital  Ambula-
tory  Medical  Care  Survey  (NHAMCS).  www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/
major/ahcd/ahcd1.htm. Assessed 29 June 2015.

528

ANTI-AgINg  Implementation of Cosmetic Dermatology into Therapeutics

19  Bickers DR, Lim HW, Margolis D, et al. (2004) Burden of Skin Dis-
eases.  Located  online  at  www.sidnet.org/pdfs/Burden%20of%20
Skin%20Diseases%202004.pdf.

63554–69.  Found  online  at  www.fda.gov/cder/otcmonographs/
Dandruff&Seborrheic_Dermatitis&Psoriasis/dandruff_sebor-
rheic_dermatitis_psoriasis_FR_19911204.pdf.

20  Storm A, Andersen SE, Benfeldt E, et al. (2008) One in 3 prescrip-
tions are never redeemed: primary nonadherence in an outpatient 
clinic. J Am Acad Dermatol 59, 27–33.

31  Krueger G, Koo J, Lebwohl M, et al. (2001) The impact of psoriasis 
on quality of life: results of a 1998 National Psoriasis Foundation 
patient-membership survey. Arch Dermatol 137, 280–84.

21  Sundbom  LT,  Bingefors  K.  (2013)  The  influence  of  symptoms  of 
anxiety and depression on medication nonadherence and its causes: 
a  population  based  survey  of  prescription  drug  users  in  Sweden. 
Patient Prefer Adherence 7, 805–11.

32  Housman TS, Keil KA, Mellen BG, et al. (2003) The use of 0.25% 
zinc  pyrithione  spray  does  not  enhance  the  efficacy  of  clobetasol 
propionate  0.05%  foam  in  the  treatment  of  psoriasis.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol 49, 79–82.

22  Carroll CL, Feldman SR, Camacho FT, et al. (2004) Adherence to top-
ical therapy decreases during the course of an 8-week psoriasis clinical 
trial:  Commonly  used  methods  of  measuring  adherence  to  topical 
therapy overestimate actual use. J Am Acad Dermatol 51, 212–6.
23  Koo  J,  Cuffie  CA,  Tanner  DJ,  et  al.  (1998)  Mometasone  furoate 
0.1%-salicylic acid 5% ointment versus mometasone furoate 0.1% 
ointment in the treatment of moderate-to-severe psoriasis: a multi-
center study. Clin Ther 20, 283–91.

24  National  Psoriasis  Foundation  Treatment  Guide.  http://psoriasis.

org/treatment/guide/otc/. Accessed 29 June 2015.

33  Sadeghian G, Ziaei H, Nilforoushzadeh MA. (2011) Treatment of 
localized  psoriasis  with  a  topical  formulation  of  zinc  pyrithione. 
Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Panonica Adriat 20, 187–90.

34  Stein KR, Pearce DJ, Feldman SR. (2008) Targeted UV therapy in 

the treatment of psoriasis. J Dermatolog Treat 19, 141–5.

35  Kostović K, Pasić A. (2004) Phototherapy of psoriasis: review and 

update. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat 12, 42–50.

36  Lapolla  W,  Yentzer  BA,  Bagel  J,  et  al.  (2011)  A  review  of  photo-
therapy protocols for psoriasis treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol 64, 
936–49.

25  Roelofzen JH, Aben KK, van der Valk PG, et al. (2007) Coal tar in 

37  Paghdal KV, Schwartz RA. (2009) Topical tar: back to the future. J 

dermatology. J Dermatolog Treat 18, 329–34.

Am Acad Dermatol 61, 294–302.

26  Dodd WA. (1993) TARS. Their role in the treatment of psoriasis. 

Dermatol Clin 11, 131–5.

27  Mefford  L.  (2008)  NeoStrata(R)  Announces  the  Launch  of 
PSORENT(TM)  Psoriasis  Topical  Treatment.  www.reuters.com/
article/pressRelease/idUS169492+04-Feb-2008+PRN20080204. 
Accessed 29 June 2015.

28  van Schooten FJ, Godschalk R. (1996) Coal tar therapy. Is it carci-

nogenic? Drug Saf 15, 374–7.

29  Roelofzen JH, Aben KK, Oldenhof UT, et al. (2010) No increased 
risk of cancer after coal tar treatment in patients with psoriasis or 
eczema. J Invest Dermatol 130, 953–61.

30  Kessler  DA.  (1991)  Food  and  Drug  Administration:  Dandruff, 
seborrheic  dermatitis,  and  psoriasis  drug  products  for  over-
the-counter  human  use;  Final  Monograph.  Federal  Register  56, 

38  Fitzmaurice S, Bhutani T, Koo J. (2013) Goeckerman regimen for 
management  of  psoriasis  refractory  to  biologic  therapy:  the  Uni-
versity of California San Francisco experience. J Am Acad Dermatol 
69, 648–49.

39  Serrao R, Davis MD. (2009) Goeckerman treatment for remission 
of psoriasis refractory to biologic therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 60, 
348–9.

40  Carlin CS, Callis KP, Krueger GG. (2003) Efficacy of acitretin and 
commercial tanning bed therapy for psoriasis. Arch Dermatol 139, 
436–42.

41  Zanolli, MM (2004) Phototherapy arsenal in the treatment of pso-

riasis. Dermatol Clin 22, 397–406.

42  Ghali FE. (2005) Improved clinical outcomes with moisturization 

in dermatologic disease. Cutis 76(6 Suppl), 13–8.

Index

Page numbers in italic refer to figures.
Page numbers in bold refer to tables.

A
abdomen, liposuction, 465–467
abscesses, from filler injection, 377
absorption promoters, 68
accelerants, 68
Accent Device (radiofrequency device), 434
acetic acid, after peels, 407
acetone, 223, 405
N-acetyl-Glu-Glu-Met-Gln-Arg-Arg-NH2 

Active FX-Lumenis laser, 415–419, 420, 427
Active photo barrier complex™, 514
acyclovir, 405
acyl isethionate bars, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90–92
adapalene, 496
Aδ nociceptors, 37
adhesion molecules, 298–299, 305
adhesion promoters, artificial nail 
enhancements, 228

adhesive pads, acne, 505
adipose-derived stem cells, 323, 388
advanced glycation end products, 296–297, 

(hexapeptide), 313

349, 361

acetyl-Ser-Asp-Lys-Pro (tetrapeptide), 311
acetyl-tetrapeptide 2, 314
N-acetyl-Tyr-Arg-hexadecylester, 313
acidic permanent waves, 258
acidity, stratum corneum, 9
acne

autologous fibroblast cell therapy, 387
camouflage, 191
cross-polarized light photography, 45
dermabrasion, 438, 440, 442
diode laser, 433
dry ice, 398
glycolic acid peels, 354
hydroxyacids, 354, 503
isotretinoin, 328
mildness of cleansing, 93, 94
Nd:YAG lasers, 432
Q-switched, 432

oats for, 290
over-the-counter treatments, 501–508
peels, 400–401
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 25
sunscreens, 494
UV fluorescence photography, 46

acrylates

contact dermatitis, 214
nail lacquers, 219

acrylics, 77

allergy, 58
artificial nail enhancements, 226–228

actinic keratosis, medium depth peels, 404, 410
activator protein-1 (AP-1), 15, 318–319

corticosteroids on, 301–302
retinoic acid on, 18
UV radiation on, 16

adverse effects, 52–64, see also contact 

dermatitis

adipose-derived stem cells, 388
antiperspirants, 164
artificial nail enhancements, 231–232
autologous fibroblast cell therapy,  

388

botulinum toxins, 372
collagen, 387
cosmeceuticals, 284–285
laser therapy, 412
panthenol relieving, 342
permanent waves, 259–260
platelet-rich plasma, 386–387
aerosol hairsprays, 273–274, 276
African-American skin, see also ashy skin; 

ethnic skin
photoaging, 17, 29

African hair, 29–31

styling aids, 276–278

age-spots, 314

vitamin C on, 497

aging, see also photoaging

ethnic skin, 27–28
face, 27–28, 375, 380
hair, 253
hands, 485, 486
inflammation, 299
lips, 194–195
microvasculature, 15, 195
neck, 28

nonablative lasers on, 434–435

nutrients for, 360
vs photoaging, 13–14
reactive oxygen species, 296–297

Cosmetic Dermatology: Products and Procedures, Second Edition. Edited by Zoe Diana Draelos.
© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

alcohol

as penetration enhancer, 68
for percutaneous delivery, 67
as solvent, 105
in sunless tanning agents, 151
TFM rating, 114
toners, 106

alcohol-based hand sanitizers, 113–114, 

117–118

guidelines, 112
organisms not affected, 118
safety, 119
soaps vs, 119

aldobionic acids see bionic acids
alexandrite laser, 447–448
alkaline perms, 258
alkalizers

hair dyes, 240
perming lotions, 256

alkyl sulfates, 97
allergens

balsam of Peru as, 55
hair dyes, 246

allergic contact dermatitis, 53

fragrances, 55
preservatives, 55–56
tattooing, 59

allergic reactions, 11, 57–60

autologous fibroblast cell therapy, 388
botanicals, 285
papaya, 290
formalin, 222
hair dyes, 244, 245, 246–248
hair styling aids, 278
nail cosmetics, 213–214
UV gel nail polish, 223

Allergy Alert Test, hair dyes, 245, 247, 248
all-trans-retinoic acid (tRA), 18
aloe, 287–288
alpha bisobolol, 506
α-hydroxyacids, 346–347, 351, 495–496, 499

acne, 503
as peeling agents, 353, 395–396

rosacea, 515

α-lipoic acid, 358, 498, 499
α-tocopherol acetate, 343, see also d-α-

tocopherol
aluminum salts, 163, 164

529

530

 Index

Alzheimer disease, aluminum and, 164
Amedori products, 340
American Society of Testing and Materials, 

protocol E 1174, 115

amino acetates, 68
amino acids, 308–309

dihydroacetone on, 149
glycation, 296
hair, 253, 254

ethnicity, 30

in sunless tanning agents, 149

aminoglycosides, 366
aminolevulinic acid
hair removal, 449
IPL with, 432
PDL laser with, 431
ammonium persulfate, 58
ammonium thioglycolate, 58, 259–260, 264, see 

also thiol procedure

amphoteric surfactants, 104, 125, 237, 492
a-MSH (peptide), analogs, 314
anagen, hair growth, 167, 252, 446

eyelashes, 200

anaphylaxis, herbs causing, 285
angiogenesis

retinoids on, 18
UV radiation causing, 15

anhydrous formulations
antiperspirants, 163
mascara, 201, 205

anionic surfactants, 104, 237, 492
anthralin, antioxidant testing, 348
antibacterials

benzoyl peroxide as, 502
in hand cleansers, 492–493, see also 
antimicrobial handwashes

hydroxyacids with, 354
for liposuction, 478
odor neutralization, 163
rosacea, 514

antibacterial soaps, 85
antibiotic-resistant infections, 110
anticholinergics, 165
anticoagulants

botulinum toxin treatment and, 372
liposuction and, 471

antifungals

nail lacquers, 220
shampoos, 127, 128

antigen-presenting cells, 53, 299
anti-inflammatories, 295, 301–305

antioxidants as, 297–298, 299, 300
benzoyl peroxide as, 502
efficacy, 303–304
herbs, 287, 299–300, 303–304
topical formulations, 304–305
anti-inflammatory effects, LED 

photomodulation, 458–460

antimicrobial barrier, 6
antimicrobial handwashes, 113–114

efficacy, 114–118

antioxidants, 19, 295–301, 358, 359, 496–499

chemistry, 297

depletion, 8
freshness, 286
hydroxyacids as, 348–349
lipsticks, 197
natural ointments, 78
non-invasive assessment, 48
peptides, 310–312
Pinnell formulation, 48
protective factor, 48, 49
retinoids as, 329, 330
topical formulations, 300–301, 303–305
vitamin E as, 297, 358
antiperspirants, 160–165
antiplatelet drugs

botulinum toxin treatment and, 372
liposuction and, 471

apocrine glands, 160, 161, 162
apples, 292
application devices, allergy, 58
aquaporins, 6–7, 135, 144–146, 518
aqueous roll-ons, antiperspirants, 163
Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (tetrapeptide), 311
arginine, dihydroacetone on, 149
arm

liposuction, 467
nonablative rejuvenation systems, 435

aromatic hydroxyacids, 347–348
arrector pili, 167
artificial nail enhancements, 226–233

removal, 230

ascorbates see vitamin C
ashy skin

body washes on, 100–101
mildness of cleansing, 91–92

Asia, hair straightening, 265
aspirin

botulinum toxin treatment and, 372
liposuction and, 471

astaxanthin, 358, 360
ASTM protocol E 1174, 115
asymmetic effects

botulinum toxin treatment, 372–373
filler injection, 377

atopic dermatitis, see also eczema

body washes, 101
facial moisturizers for, 136–137
formaldehyde releasers, 56
LED light with tacrolimus, 460
LED photomodulation on, 458
microbiota, 111–112
mildness of cleansing, 92–93
urea deficiency, 142
ATP, LED light on, 460
Australia, approved sunscreens, 154
autologous fat transplantation, 388, 483, 486
autologous fillers, 385–389
automated applicators, mascara, 206
auto-oxidation, botanicals, 286
Aveeno moisturizer, 514
Avene® Extremely Gentle, 512
Avene® High Protection, 514
avobenzone, 155, 493
axilla, liposuction and, 467

axons, somatosensory, 33, 34–36
azelaic acid

gluconolactone with, 354
rosacea, 515

azeloyl tetrapeptide 23, 311
Azfibrocel-T, 387
azone, 68

B
bacteria, 6, see also microbiota

biofilms, 377–378
fillers made from, 375–376
retinaldehyde on, 328–329, 330

baked eyeshadows, 204
balsam of Peru, as allergen, 55
banana peel, antioxidant testing, 348
bandages, after dermabrasion, 442
barbershops, 166
bar cleansers, 83–95

effects on skin, 85–90
manufacture, 84

barrier functions of epidermis, 5–8

eczema, 517
niacinamide on, 339–340
panthenol on, 342
rosacea, 511
tests, 136

basal layer, UV filtration, 25
basecoats, nails, 217, 218
basic soaps, 84
basophilic degeneration, 14
beads

body washes, 97–98
scrubs, 106

beard, 168

pseudofolliculitis barbae, 172
stubble recreation, 188

beeswax, 196
Belotero (hyaluronic acid product), 376
Belotero Balance, 376, 377
benefit agents, body washes, 97–98
benzoic acid, 347–348
benzophenones, 155
benzoyl peroxide, 502–503
salicylic acid vs, 503
tea tree oil vs, 506

bergamot oil, 57
β-carotene, 18, 358
β-hydroxyacids, 347, 499, 503
bicarbonate, tumescent local anesthesia, 4 

70
Bimatoprost, 203
binders, compact powders, 180
bio-availability

actives in shampoo, 127–128
zinc pyrithione, 129

biofilms, filler injection, 377–378
bioinstrumentation, 42, 43
biologics, 303, 305, 527
bionic acids, 347, 348
for dry skin, 352
on glycation, 349–350
on matrix metalloproteinases, 351

biopsy, for autologous fibroblast cell therapy, 

387

Bio-Restorative Skin Cream, 321
biotin, 213
biotinyl-GHK, 312
bipolar radiofrequency devices, 451, 453–454
bite force, botulinum toxin on, 372
black henna tattoos, pPD in, 247
blade shaving, 166–173
bleaching agents
allergy, 57
for hair, 58, 240, 241, 242
ultrasound with, 70

blepharopigmentation, 203
blinded trials, see also randomized trials

botanicals, 285

blindness, from polylactic acid therapy, 393
blistering, after hair removal, 449
blood, platelet-rich plasma preparation, 

385–386

blood flow, nicotinic acid on, 340, 341
blood loss, liposuction, 464, 471
blood vessels, see also microvasculature

filler injection, 377

blue light, acne, 505
Blue Peel, 400
BMDM (butyl methoxy dibenzoyl methane), 

155, 493
body washes, 96–102
BoNTA, 364, 365, see also botulinum toxins

with fillers, 372
topical formulation, 373

botanicals, 283–294
allergy, 57, 285
anti-inflammatories, 299–300, 303–304
clinical studies, 292–293
efficacy, 285
evaluation, 285–286
factors on quality, 284
rosacea, 515

Botox®, 364, 365, see also botulinum toxins

low-protein formulation, 372

botulinum toxins, 364–374
after laser treatment, 427
allergy, 59
complications, 372–373
contraindications, 366
fillers with, 372
hyperhidrosis, 165
laser therapy with, 413
before laser treatment, 426–427
marginal mandibular branch of facial nerve, 

482

before medium depth peels, 405
platysma bands, 483

bovine collagen, 60
aging hand, 486
intradermal challenge, 60

brain, somatosensory system, 39–40
Brazil, hair straightening, 265
breast, liposuction, 468–469
breast cancer

antiperspirants and, 164

male, 469
radiation dermatitis, LED photomodulation 

on, 459
brilliances, lips, 197
brimonidine tartrate, 514–515
bristles, mascara brushes, 202
brittle nails, 209, 210, 211, 213, 222
broadspectrum sunscreens, 18, 158, 494
bromates, perming lotions, 258
bromelain, 290–291
brow ptosis, 27
bruising

filler injection, 377
platelet-rich plasma, 387
polylactic acid therapy, 391

brushes

for cleansing, 505
dermabrasion, 440, 441, 442
mascara, 201–202, 203

buffering, see also pH
antiperspirants, 163

buffer salts, perming lotions, 257
bunny lines, botulinum toxin treatment, 370
burning sensation, trichloroacetic acid, 407
buttocks, liposuction, 467
butyl methoxy dibenzoyl methane, 155, 493

C
Cade test, 116
caffeine, 19, 288
calcineurin, 303
calcium

on corneocytes, 8, 9
nail plate, 209

Index

531

dermabrasion vs, 439
on PGE-2 levels, 305
postoperative care, 427

LED photomodulation, 459

techniques, 426–427
carnosine, 310, 311, 361
carnuba wax, 196
β-carotene, 18, 358
carotenoids, 359
carriers, perming lotions, 257
Carruthers, A. and J., studies of BoNTA,  

365

Castederm, 526
castor oil, 196
catagen, hair growth, 167, 252, 446
catalase, 315
cathelin-related antimicrobial peptide, 6
cathepsins, 17, 26
cationic emulsifiers, 76, 104, 492
cationic polymers, shampoos, 126
CCM Complex (Histogen), 321, 323
CD44, 330
CD44v3, 328
C E Ferulic (SkinCeuticals), 498
celecoxib, 303
cell conditioned media (CCM), 321, 323
cell cultures

fibroblasts, 387
growth factors from, 323

Cellex-C® Eye contour cream, 513
cellular growth factors, 318–324
Centers for Disease Control, on hand hygiene, 

112

central projections, sensory nervous system, 

calcium hydroxylapatite, 60, 380–384,  

38–40

485–491

California, regulations on solvents, 223–224
camouflage, 186–192
rosacea, 512–513

Camptotheca acuminata (happy tree), 286
Canada, antiperspirants, regulations, 162
cancer, see also breast cancer

adipose-derived stem cells, 388
benzoyl peroxide and, 503
growth factors and, 322
hair dyes, 248
PGE-2, 305
tar, 525
trichloroacetic acid and, 409
vitamin A deficiency, 326

candelilla wax, 196
Canfield VISIA camera systems, 44
cannulas

liposuction, 470–471, 480
for polylactic acid, 391

capacitance, 9–10
capillaries see microvasculature
carbohydrates, excess, 358
carbomers, 77
Carbon Black, 205
carbon dioxide, solid, 396, 398, 402
carbon dioxide lasers, 412–428

complications, 427

central venous catheters, colonizations, 

antimicrobial handwashes and, 117

centrifugation, platelet-rich plasma 

preparation, 386

ceramides, 5, 8, 26
CeraVe® Facial moisturizer, 512
CeraVe® Hydrating cleanser, 512
cerebral cortex, somatosensory system, 40
ceruse, 178
cervicomental angle, 476, 477, 478
Cetaphil® Gentle skin cleanser, 512
Cetaphil® Moisturizing cream, 512
chamomile, 289, 506
charentais cantaloupe, 288
charge (electrical), effect of pH, 87
cheek, liposuction, 480
cheilitis, 195
cheiloscopy, 194
chelating agents, see also neutralization

hair dyes, 246

chemical bio-availability, zinc pyrithione,  

129

chemical penetration enhancers, 68
chemical reconstruction of skin scars (CROSS), 

400
chemical reduction

hair straightening, 264–265
permanent waves, 251, 254, 256

532

 Index

chemistry

antioxidants, 297
antiperspirants, 163
hair, 253–254
UV radiation, 155

chest (male), liposuction, 469
children

hair dye allergy, 247
MRSA, hand hygiene, 118

chin, dimpled, 371
Chinese herbals, toxicity, 285
chin rests, photography, 44
chlorides, aluminum, 163
cholesterol, 8
chroma (color coordinate), 188
Chromasphere™, 183, 184
chromophores, 155

laser hair removal, 446
Chrysanthellum indicum, 515
CIELAB, L*a*b* standard, 151
cineole, 68
cinnamaldehyde, 55
CI numbers (Color Index numbers), 219–220
circadian rhythm, 8
citric acid, 347, 395–396
c-Jun protein, 18
classifications

hair curliness, 262, 263
photoaging, 403
rosacea, 509–510
sunscreens, 154

cleansing agents, 492–493, see also bar 
cleansers; hand sanitizers

acne, 501–502
adverse skin reactions, 55, 57
body washes, 96–102
eczema, 521
face, 103–109
rosacea, 511, 512
cleansing brushes, 505
cleansing cloths, 105, 106–107, 108

acne, 504

cleansing devices, 107
climate, dry skin, 89, 90
climbazole, 127
clinical studies, see also blinded trials; 

randomized trials

antioxidants, 304
hand microbiota removal, 116–117
herbs, 292–293

clinics, camouflage, 191
clockwise rotation, wire brushes, 441, 442
clogging, polylactic acid, 391
clostridial proteins, 365, see also botulinum 

toxins

clothing, UV protection factor ratings, 18, 495
C-mechano-heat nociceptors, 37
CO2RE laser, 424
coacervates, 126–127, 129, 130
coal tar, 127, 525, 526
cobra neck, 483
coenzyme Q10, 358, 361, 498, 499

nanoemulsions, 521

co-factors for enzymes

vitamin B3 derivatives, 339–340
vitamin C, 342

coffee, 288
coffeeberry extract, 288
cold air cooling, laser therapy, 427
cold sense, 36, 37
cold therapy, forehead, 373
collagen, 15, 27

aging hand, 486
fillers, 60, 376, 387
glycation, 296
hyaluronic acid fillers on, 378
low energy light on synthesis, 457
nonablative rejuvenation systems on, 429
photoaging, 14, 15, 16
radiofrequency devices on, 433, 434
vitamin C for synthesis, 497
wound healing, 437

collagen (bovine) see bovine collagen
color additives, sunless tanning agents as,  

150

coloration of skin, sunless tanning agents,  

150
ColoreScience®, 513
Color Index numbers (CI numbers), 219–220
color measurement, 151, 187–188
color rinses, 240
colors (pigments)
body washes, 98
camouflage, 187, 513
eyelashes, 203
facial foundation, 181, 182

testing, 183–184

hair see hair dyes
L*a*b* standard, CIE, 151
lipsticks, 196–197
nail cosmetics, 217, 219–220
UV-curable, 222–223

conductance, 26, 136
confocal laser scanning microscope, 50
confocal Raman microspectrometry, 72
congenital anomalies, from botanicals, 285
consent

botulinum toxin treatment, 366
liposuction, 471
medium depth peels, 405

consort dermatitis, 58
consultations

dermabrasion, 439–440
hair styling, 278
laser hair removal, 446
liposuction, 471, 478
radiofrequency therapy, 452

consumer research

body washes, 98–99
facial moisturizers, 136
contact dermatitis, 26, 52–64
diagnosis and treatment, 60
nail cosmetics, 213–214

contact lens solutions, allergy, 56
contact urticaria, 53
continuous process manufacture, bar cleansers, 

84

contouring, 186, 188
controlled application tests

body washes, 99
soaps vs syndets, 90, 91

Controlled Chaos Technology™, 422
cooling

laser therapy, 427
radiofrequency therapy, 452

Cool Scan setting, laser therapy, 427
copper, 358, 360
coQ10 see coenzyme Q10
corneocytes, 3–4, 8, 25, 132–133

build-up, 86
lips, 194, 195

color standard chips, digital photography, 43
combination regimens, psoriasis, 526–527
combs, hair straightening, 263, 266
comedolytics

benzoyl peroxide as, 502
salicylic acid as, 503

Commission Internationale d’Eclairage, L*a*b* 

corneodesmosomes, 5
Corneometer®, 9–10
corneometry (conductance), 26, 136
cornified cell envelope, 4–5, 6
corrective makeup see camouflage
corrugator supercilii, 368
cortex, hair shaft, 167, 235, 251, 262

standard, 151

community setting, hand hygiene, 118
compact foundations, 178, 179–182
compartment syndrome, 467
complexing agents, perming lotions, 257
complexion makeup see makeup
compliance

handwashing guidelines, 113
psoriasis treatment, 524

compression garments, liposuction, 472
conditioners

after hair straightening, 268
eyelashes, 206
perming, 256, 257, 258
rinse-off, 130
shampoos, 126, 237–238
for colored hair, 246

relaxers on, 268

cortical cells, hair, 251, 252
corticosteroids, 301–302
after laser therapy, 427
allergy, 57–58
body washes sparing, 101
eczema, 517
hydrocortisone, 525
psoriasis, 526, 527

cosmetical optimization, 129, 130
Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CTFA), 52
cosmetic intolerance syndrome see sensitive 

skin

costs

peptides, 310
psoriasis, 523
Sculptra®, 391

Index

533

counseling, laser hair removal, 446
counter-clockwise rotation, wire brushes, 441
couplers, hair dyes, 242, 243
covalent bonds, hair, 262
creams, 75–77

hair styling aids, 275
sunless tanning agents, 149–150
critical micelle concentration, 104
critical wavelength values, UVA protection 

measurements, 158

D
daily use moisturizers, sunless tanning agents, 

151

d-α-tocopherol, 497, 498, 499, see also vitamin 

E

dandruff, 124, 125, 130
dappen dishes, 226–227
date palm fruit, 292
death

from botanicals, 285, 288

DHHB (diethylamino hydroxybenzoyl hexyl 

benzoate), 155

diabetes mellitus

feet, moisturizers, 143, 145
LED photomodulation on retinopathy, 459

diamond fraises, 440
dibutyl phthalate, 219
diclofenac, 302, 303
dietary nutrients, 357–363
diethylamino hydroxybenzoyl hexyl benzoate, 

criticisms, antimicrobial handwash standards, 

oleander, 290

115

CROSS (chemical reconstruction of skin 

scars), 400

cross-linking

collagen, 15, 16
hyaluronic acid, 376
proteins, 6

glycation, 361
hair, 253
with lipids, 5

cross-polarized light photography, 45
cross-reactions

botanicals, 285
hair dye allergy, 248

crow’s feet, botulinum toxin treatment, 

368–369

cryogen sprays, see also refrigerant sprays

radiofrequency therapy, 452

‘crystal’ products, 163
C-tactile afferents, 38
cucumber, 288–289
cuff sign, lipedema, 473
cuneate fasciculus, 38
Cupidon arch, 194
curcumin, 291, 299, 300
curlers, 255
curliness of hair, 29–30, 251, 262, 263, see also 

permanent waves

cuticle

hair, 30–31, 167, 234–235, 251, 252

relaxers on, 267–268

nails, 215

cutting edges, razor blades, 169–171
cyanoacrylates, nail wraps, 229–230
cyclooxygenases, 302, 305
cyclosporine, 303

botulinum toxins and, 366
phototherapy and, 526

cysteamine, 58, 256
cysteine, in melanogenesis, 24
cysteine proteases, 7
L-cystine, hair, 253, 254
cytochrome P450 inhibitors, lidocaine doses 

and, 469

cytochromes, LED light on, 460
cytokeratins, lips, 194
cytokines, 9, 24

corticosteroids on, 301
cosmeceuticals, 320–321
inflammation, 298, 299, 305
psoriasis, 523
wound healing, 319

rates, liposuction, 472, 473
decalcification see neutralization
decussations, sensory projections, 38
Deep FX-Lumenis laser, 415–419, 420, 427
defatting, 398

medium depth peels, 405

degradable polymer gels, allergy, 59
degreasing see defatting
dehydrators, nails, 228
dehydroalanine, 266
dehydrocholesterol, 343
delayed hypersensitivity, hair dyes, 246
ΔE (Euclidean distance), 151
δ-tocopherylglucopyranoside, 330, 331
demi-permanent hair dyes, 240–241
denaturation, hair proteins, 263–264
dendritic cells, 299
denervation, botulinum toxins, 365
deodorants, 160–165

soaps, 85
depigmentation

Kligman and Willis formula, 329
serine protease inhibitors, 24
depressor anguli oris, 371, 373
depressor labii inferioris, paralysis, 373
depressor supercilii, 368
depth controlled peels, trichloroacetic acid, 400
DermaBlend® Cover, 513
dermabrasion, 437–444
dermatoporosis, 326, 330
dermis

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 351–352
lips, 194
melanin color, 25
nonablative rejuvenation systems on, 429
peels, 395
photoaging, 13, 14, 28–29
microvasculature, 15

retinoids on, 337
skin of color, 27
thickness, 34

dermoepidermal junction, 27, 28
desmosomes, 5, 90
desquamation, 5, 6, 7, 8

by alpha-hydroxyacids, 351, 353
glycerol on, 135
hydration on, 133
tests, 9

detergents, see also syndets
bar cleansers, 83, 86
shampoos, 237

developers, hair dyes, 243

155

diffusion, 66
digital photography, 42, 43–46
dihydroacetone, 148–149, 188
di-isostearylmalate, 196
dimethicone, shampoos, 237
dimethyl urea, 221
dimpled chin, 371
diode laser, 433

hair removal, 448
liposuction, 472–473

discoloration of nails, 208, 215
disinfection, schools, 118
disodium phenyl dibenzimidazole 
tetrasulfonate, 156

distal phalanx, 209
disulfide bonds, hair proteins, 253, 254, 255
DNA, UV radiation on, 14–15, 16, 53
docosahexaenoic acid, 358
dopaquinone, 24
dorsal horn, 38
double chin, 28, 476
double edge razors, 169
double-sided mascara products, 201
Dove bar, 85, 90
downturned smile, 371, 373
doxycycline, rosacea, 514
DPDT (disodium phenyl dibenzimidazole 

tetrasulfonate), 156

dressings

after dermabrasion, 442
after liposuction, 481
driving, occupational, 15
drometrizole trisiloxane, 155–156
drooling, from botulinum toxin treatment, 373
drug history, liposuction, 471
dry cleansing cloths, 105, 107
dry-hair shampoos, 237
dry ice see carbon dioxide
dry skin, 88–90

body washes, performance, 98–100
face, 132–133
facial cleansers, 109
genetics, 93–94
hand moisturizers on, 143, 144
lips, 195
pigmentation and, 26
rosacea, 511
soaps, 85
syndet bars, 87
water paradox, 86, 88, 89–90

D-squames, 136
DTS (drometrizole trisiloxane), 155–156

534

 Index

dyes see colors; hair dyes
dyschromia, 208
dysphagia, from botulinum toxin treatment, 

371, 373
Dysport®, 364, 365–366

E
East Asians, photoaging, 17
ecamsule, 493
eccrine glands, 160, 161, 162
ectropion, 200
eczema, 517–521, see also atopic dermatitis; 
inflammatory skin diseases; specific 
diseases

facial moisturizers for, 137
hand moisturizers on, 143, 144
occupational, 58

eczema area severity index, mildness of 

cleansing, 93
edema, after liposuction, 481
education, nail care practitioners, 232
eicosapentaenoic acid, 358
elastic fibers, photoaging, 28
elasticity, 27

niacinamide on, 340
nutrients for, 361
peptides for, 313–314

elastic recovery, 27
elastin promoter gene, antioxidant testing, 348
elastosis, 13, 14, 28, 319

antioxidant testing, 348
cathepsins, 17

Elat MD® UV Clear, 514
electric brushes, 505
electric razors, 167
electron microscopy, 10
African hair, 30–31
effect of moisturizers, 142

electro-optical synergy, hair removal, 448
electrostatic salt links, hair shaft keratin, 235, 

262

embolization, from polylactic acid therapy, 393
emollients, 10, 76

antimicrobial handwashes, 113
cleansers, 105, 106
hair styling aids, 270, 272, 273, 274
moisturizers, 134, 135
for percutaneous delivery, 67
sunless tanning agents, 150

emotive ingredients, bar cleansers, 84
emulsifiers, 76, 140

facial foundation, 179
moisturizers, 134
sunless tanning agents, 150
emulsions, 75–76, 77, 78, 104

facial foundation, 179
hair styling aids, 275, 276
moisturizers, 140, 519, 520, 521
for percutaneous delivery, 66
phase separation, body washes, 97
EN 1499 and EN 1500 (protocols), 115
endocuticle, African hair, 31
endpapers, perming, 256

enhanced glycerol derivative (EGD), 145
enkephalin, 312
entropion, 200
enzymes, 314–315

co-factors

vitamin B3 derivatives, 339–340
vitamin C, 342

lip skin surface, 194, 195
proteolytic, 7, 314

epidermal growth factor receptor, curcumin 

on, 299

epidermis, 3–12, see also barrier functions of 

epidermis; transepidermal delivery; 
transepidermal water loss

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 351
labial, 194
melanin color, 25
photoaging, 13, 14, 28
skin of color, 25–26

epinephrine, tumescent local anesthesia, 469
erbium:glass lasers, 432–433
erbium:YAG lasers, 412, 413, 414, 419–420, 

424, 425

erythema

after peels, 407
antioxidant assessment, 48
body washes on, 100
camouflage, 191
LED photomodulation on, 458–459
rosacea, 514–515

erythematotelangiectatic rosacea, 509, 511
erythrulose, 149
essences, facial foundation, 179
essential oils
acne, 506
for percutaneous delivery, 68
estradiol, percutaneous delivery, 73
Etcoff, N., Survival of the Prettiest, 492
ethnic skin, 23–32, see also ashy skin

facial foundation, 182
photoaging, 17–18, 25, 28–29
polylactic acid therapy, 392

ethyl acetate, 223–224
ethyl acrylate, 227
N,N’-ethylenediamine disuccinic acid, 246
Eucerin® Redness (products), 512, 513, 515
Euclidean distance, color evaluation, 151
EU Cosmetics Directive, 259
eudermatrophic agents, hydroxyacids as, 351, 

353
eugenol, 68
eumelanin, 7, 23, 241
Europe

antimicrobial handwashes, assessment 

protocols, 115

UVA protection measurements, 158

European baseline series, fragrances, 55, 56
eutectic blends, 67
evaporimeters, 9, 136
excimer laser, for hypopigmentation, 442
excipients, skin penetration, 66–67
exfoliation, 493, 494
cleansers for, 108

exocuticle, African hair, 31
extensibility of skin, 27
extensions

eyelashes, 203
nails, 211, 215

external jugular vein, 477
extracellular matrix, glycation, 296
extracellular signal-related kinases, 18
extremozymes, 315
eye(s), see also retina
cosmetics, 199–206
ocular rosacea, 510, 511
protection from lasers, 446

eyebrows, 203

lateral brow lift, 370
ptosis, 27, 372
unilateral raised, 372–373

eyelashes, 200

conditioners, 206
cosmetics, 199, 201–203
extensions, 203

eyelids

aging, 27
cucumber, 288
dermatitis, 56, 58
jelly rolls, 369
ptosis, 368, 373
radiofrequency therapy, 453
tattooing, 203
trichloroacetic acid, 406

eyeliners, 199, 204
eyeshadow, 199, 204

F
face, see also specific resurfacing techniques

aging, 27–28, 375, 380
botulinum toxin treatment, 366–373
cleansers, 103–109

selection guide, 107–109

fillers, 375
foundations, 177–185, see also makeup

rosacea, 512–513
moisturizers, 132–138
sensory perception, 33, 39
washing, 493

facial nerve, liposuction and, 468, 476–477, 

480, 482

Fair Packaging and Labeling Act, 52
false eyelashes, 202–203
famciclovir, 405
farnesol, 68
fats, dietary excess, 358
fat transplantation, 388, 483, 486
fatty acids, 68

free, 8
Malassezia yeasts on, 124
omega-3, 358, 360, 361
peroxidation, 296
soaps, 84, 97
volatile, 160

neutralization, 163

Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 52
feedback, radiofrequency therapy, 452

Index

535

feel modifiers, body washes, 98
feet

moisturizers, 143–144, 145
skin, 139

ferulic acid, 498, 499
feverfew, 289
fibers

cleansing cloths, 106–107
in mascaras, 201

fibroblast growth factors, 320, 321
fibroblasts, 16–17

aged, 17
autologous cell therapy, 387–388
hyaluronic acid fillers on, 378
low energy light on, 456–457
Nd:YAG laser on, 432
skin of color, 27
vitamin C on, 497

Fibrocell Science, Inc., 387
fibroplastic response, calcium hydroxylapatite, 

380

fibrous tissue, liposuction, 470–471
Fick’s law, 66
fig leaves, 57
filaggrin, 5, 6, 9, 53, 93–94, 140, 518
filing, nails, 212, 228, 232
Filipino hair, thiol procedure, 265
fillers, see also under hyaluronic acid
adverse skin reactions, 53, 59
autologous, 385–389
botulinum toxin with, 372
calcium hydroxylapatite, 60, 380–384, 

485–491

collagen, 60, 376, 387
hands, 485, 486
polylactic acid, 390–394, 486
powders, 180, 181
radiofrequency and nonablative therapy, 453

film-forming polymers, 272
filters, UV radiation, 154–155, see also 

sunscreens

fingerpad method, antimicrobial handwash 

assessment, 115
finishing powders, 180
firmness of skin, tests, 183
fish oils, 358, 360
Fitzpatrick skin types
dermabrasion, 440
peels, 404
photoaging, 17, 25

fixing lotions, permanent waves, 254
flaking

scalp, 124, 125
skin, 90

flares

psoriasis, 523
rosacea, 510, 512

flat irons, 264
flavonoids, 358, 359
licorice, 289–290
vitamin P, 343

flaxseed, 292
f-layer, hair epicuticle, 235, 245, 251

flexibility, nails, 210
flora see bacteria; microbiota
fluorescence photography, 46
fluorescent UV nail lamps, 228
fluor-hydroxy pulse peel, 400
flushing

nicotinic acid, 341
rosacea, 514–515
folliculitis barbae, 172
food allergies, 55
Food and Drug Administration
on acne drug products, 501
on antifungals, 220
approved fillers, 376
Food Code, on hand hygiene, 112
on handwashes, 113, 115
permanent hair reduction (term), 445, 450
regulations, 52

antimicrobial handwashes, 114
cosmeceuticals, 284
medical devices, 70

stability testing of ointments, 79
on sunless tanning agents, 150
sunscreens, 154, 156–157, 158
tar products, 525

free radicals, 16, 295–296

retinoids on, 329
on vitamin C, 497
friction, cleaning, 105
Frigiderm, 441
frontalis, 370

botulinum toxin treatment, 367–368, 

372–373

frosting

levels, 406
trichloroacetic acid, 396, 397, 406

fruit seeds

body washes, 98
scrubs, 106

functional MRI, 40

G
GAGs see glycosaminoglycans
G.A. Morgan Hair Refining Cream, 265
gastrointestinal infections, hand hygiene, 118
gelees, sunless tanning agents, 150
gel hardness, hyaluronic acid product, 376
gel matrices, bionic acids, 348
gel polish, nail coatings, 230–231
gels

Food Drugs & Cosmetic Act, 284
food handling, hand sanitizers and, 113
food supplements see oral supplements
forceps, for calcium hydroxylapatite treatment, 

hair styling aids, 275, 276
sunless tanning agents, 150

general anesthesia, liposuction, 464
genetics

490

forehead, botulinum toxin treatment, 367–368, 

372–373

foreign body reactions, fillers, 53–54, 59–60
forensic medicine, lip topology, 194
formaldehyde, 222
formaldehyde releasers, 56
formalin, 222

as nail hardener, 221

formulations

antiperspirants, 163, 164
hair dyes, 242–243
hair styling aids, 272–273
peeling agents, 395–398, 402–403
perm lotions, 255–258
retinoids, 338–339
for skin penetration, 66–67
sunscreens, 156
topical antioxidants, 300–301, 303–305
vitamin B3, 341
vitamin C, 343, 497

foundations (face), 177–185, 512–513
fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing, 414–426
fragrances

allergy, 55
body washes, 98
labeling, 52, 55, 56
moisturizers, 135
Frankfurt plane, 477
Franz cells, 71–72
Fraxel Re:Pair laser, 417–420
freckles, lasers compared, 430
free fatty acids, 8
free nerve endings, 37

dry skin, 93–94
melanogenesis, 24
photoaging, 17
psoriasis, 523
genistein, 300, 499
Gentlewaves®, 457, 458
German chamomile, 289, 506
Gillette safety razor, 166
glabella

botulinum toxin treatment, 368
calcium hydroxylapatite and, 383

glabridin, 290
glabrous skin, 34, 35

sensory perception, 34, 36

Glogau’s classification, photoaging, 403
glosses, lips, 197
glow moisturizers, sunless tanning agents, 151
glucocorticoid receptors, 301, 302
gluconolactone, 347, 348, 495–496

with azelaic acid, 354
rosacea, 515
on sun sensitivity, 350
glutathione, 297, 310–311
glycation, 149, 296–297, 361
hydroxyacids on, 349–350
niacinamide on, 340

glycerides, 68
glycerol, 6–7, 134–135, 137, 518
enhanced derivatives, 145

glyceryl monothioglycolate, 58, 256, 258
glycolic acid
acne, 503
on dermis, 352
fluor-hydroxy pulse peel, 400

536

 Index

glycolic acid (continued)

before medium depth peel, 403
as peeling agent, 353, 354, 395–396
on sunburn cells, 350

glycols, 68, 77
glycosaminoglycans

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 351–352
hyaluronic acid as, 375
niacinamide on, 340
retinoids on, 337

glycylglycine oleamide (OGG), 327, 331
Gly-His-Lys (tripeptide), 312
glyoxal, 221–222
Goeckerman treatment, 526
golden fern, 289
G prime, hyaluronic acid product, 376
gracile fasciculus, 38
grading, skin response, 42
grafts, camouflage, 188
granulomatous reactions, 54, 59, 60
grape extract, 289
grape seed extract, 358
graying of hair, 241, 244–245

setting lotions, 274

green tea, 19, 289, 358, 360
green tints, rosacea camouflage, 513
grenz zone, 28
grooming, 40

nails, 210–215

ground substance see glycosaminoglycans
growers, eyelashes, 206
growth factors

after laser therapy, 427
assays, 322–323
cellular, 318–324
from platelets, 385, 386

GSH (glutathione), 297, 310–311
guanidine relaxers, 266, 268
guidelines, hand hygiene, 112
guide photographs, 46
gummy smile, 370

H
H1N1 influenza, efficacy of handwashes, 

116–117

hair, 29, 167–169, 234–238, 251–252, 270–272, 
see also African hair; permanent waves

biotinyl-GHK on growth, 312
chemistry, 253–254
damage

from permanent waving, 259, 260
protection by styling aids, 278

dyes on, 244, 245–246
ethnic differences, 29–31
eyelashes, 200
growth cycle, 167–168, 446
hydration, 168, 171
mimicking for camouflage, 188
pH, 253, 256
platelet-rich plasma therapy, 385
relaxers on, 267–268
removal, 166, 191, 445–450
blade shaving, 166–173

scalp, 124, 168
shampoo benefits, 130–131
shaving action, 169
straightening, 262–269

technique, 266–267, 268–269

styling, 270–279
water and, 252–253, 256, 271–272

hair dyes, 239–250
allergy, 58, 246
oxidation to form, 242

hair follicles, 29, 167, 234, 445–446

eyelashes, 200
nerve supply, 168
transplantation, 203
zinc pyrithione bio-availability, 129

hair matrix, 445
hair shaft, 234–235, see also cortex

cross-section shape, 29, 30, 252, 277
medulla, 167, 235, 251
hairsprays, 273–274, 276

silicones, 276

hairy skin, 35
halogenation, corticosteroids, 57–58
hand, 139

aging, 485, 486
calcium hydroxylapatite, 383, 485–491
hygiene, 112–113
moisturizers, 142–143, 144
occupational eczema, 58
polylactic acid therapy, 393

hand sanitizers, 110–123

antibacterials in, 492–493, see also 
antimicrobial handwashes

efficacy, 114–118
safety, 118–119

handwashing technique, 112–113

on microbiota, 111, 113

happy tree (Camptotheca acuminata), 286
haptens, 53
hardeners, nails, 217, 218, 220–222, 223

allergy, 58

headache, from BoNTA treatment, 372
healthcare-associated infections, 110,  

117–118

heat

on hair, 253, 278, see also thermal processing
pain sense, 37
photoaging, 29
from radiofrequency devices, 433, 451–452
with thiol procedure, 264–265, 268–269

heating devices, acne, 505
heel skin, 143, 145
hematomas

calcium hydroxylapatite to hands, 488
liposuction, 472

hemoglobin, laser wavelengths targeting, 430
Henle’s layer, hair follicles, 234
henna, 59
heparin binding-epidermal growth factor, 328
herbal ingredients see botanicals
herpes simplex

after peels, 407
dermabrasion and, 440, 442, 443

LED photomodulation on lesions, 459
before peels, 404, 405

high performance liquid chromatography, 
sunless tanning agents, 149

hips, liposuction, 467
histamine, 37
histopathology, photoaging, 28–29
historical aspects

bar cleansers, 83
complexion makeup, 177–178
dermabrasion, 437
eye cosmetics, 199–200
facial cleansing, 103
hair removal, 166
lip cosmetics, 195
liposuction, 463
nail cosmetics, 217
soaps, 96

HIV-associated lipoatrophy, polylactic acid 

therapy, 392
home hand hygiene, 118
homunculus, somatosensory, 39
hormones, 8–9, 309
hospital infections, handwashes and, 117–118
hot combs, 263
households, hand hygiene, 118
hue, 187
human albumin, allergy, 59
human oligopeptides, 323
humectants, 6–7, 10, 77

in alcohol-based hand rubs, 114
in moisturizers, 134–135, 140, 141, 142, 518
psoriasis, 524–525

humidity, 8, 9, see also water
Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome, 17
Huxley’s layer, hair follicles, 234
hyaluronan, 328, 329–330, 331
hyaluronic acid

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 351–352
fillers, 59, 375–379
aging hand, 486
botulinum toxin with, 372

hyaluronidase, 59
hydration, 6–7, 9, 10

on desquamation, 133
of hair, 168, 171
measurement, 9–10, 26
nutrients for, 361
panthenol, 342
for percutaneous delivery, 67

hydrocarbons, hair straightening, 264
hydrocortisone, 525
hydrodissection, 464
hydrogel dressings, 442
hydrogen bonds, hair, 262, 271–272
hydrogen peroxide
hair bleaches, 58
hair dyes, 240, 242, 243, 244, 245
perming lotions, 257
regulations, 258
hydrolyzed proteins

nail cosmetics, 223
shampoos, 237

hydrophilic matrices, 518
hydroquinone

antioxidant testing, 348
priming for peeling, 398
hydroquinone derivatives, 57
hydroxide straighteners, 265–268
hydroxyacids, 346–356, 495–496, 499

acne, 354, 503
peels, 353, 354, 395–396

rosacea, 515

synergy with drugs, 353–354

hydroxyethyl-p-phenylenediamine, 247–248
hyoid bone, 467–468, 476
hyperalgesia, 37
hyperhidrosis, 164–165
hyperkeratosis, hydroxyacids for, 352–353
hyperpigmentation, 25, see also 

infiltration pumps, liposuction, 470
infiltration rates, tumescent local anesthesia, 

470

inflammation, 8, 298–300, see also cytokines

antioxidants on, 297–298
dyspigmentation, 25
eczema, 517
from filler injection, 54, 377
hyperalgesia, 37
LED photomodulation on, 458–460
photoaging, 14, 299
from protease-activated receptor 2, 24
scalp, 124
wound healing, 318–319

inflammatory skin diseases, see also specific 

diseases

facial moisturizers for, 136–137

postinflammatory hyperpigmentation

influenza (H1N1), efficacy of handwashes,  

after dermabrasion, 442, 443
camouflage, 189
LED light on, 460
licorice for, 290
niacinamide on, 340, 341
from peels, 407
retinoids on, 329, 338
UV reflectance photography, 45–46

hyponychium, 208
hypopigmentation, 25

after dermabrasion, 442, 443
after hair removal, 449

hypotrichosis, 200

I
ice packs

for botulinum toxin treatment, 366
calcium hydroxylapatite to hands, 488

ID reaction, tattooing, 59
IκK, corticosteroids on, 301
image analysis, 42, 48, 49
imaging techniques, 10, 50
imbalance see asymmetic effects
imbibing times, Sculptra®, 390
imines, hair dyes, 242
immune function, 6
psoriasis, 523

immunogenicity, botulinum toxins, 372
immunohistochemistry, 10
immunomodulators, 303
immunosuppression

corticosteroids, 302
by UV radiation, 19

indomethacin, nanocapsules, 69, 70
induration, after liposuction, 481
infections, 110, 117–118, see also viral 

infections

after dermabrasion, 442, 443

staff, 443

after liposuction, 471, 472
nail care, 217, 219, 232
from peels, 407
psoriasis, 523
retinaldehyde on, 328–329
surrogate models, 118

116–117

infrared light devices, 433
injectables see fillers
injection

adipose-derived stem cells, 388
autologous fibroblast cell therapy, 387
botulinum toxins, 366–372
fillers, 377, 391–393

calcium hydroxylapatite, 380–381, 487

micro-injection, 324
platelet-rich plasma, 386
injuries, see also wound healing

camouflage, 188–190

inorganic UV filters, 155, 493
intense pulsed light system, 431–432

erythema, LED photomodulation on, 

458–459

hair removal, 448, 449
rosacea, 515

intensity (color coordinate), 188
intensity-modulated radiation treatments, 

dermatitis, LED photomodulation on, 
459

intensive care units, hand cleansing, 117
interference pigments, lipsticks, 197
interleukin 1, 305
intermediate size HA fragments (HAFi), 330, 

331
interneurons, 38
intracrine concept, 326–328
intraoral approach, calcium hydroxylapatite, 383
intrinsic point of neutrality, hair, 253
in vitro assays, antimicrobial handwashes, 114
in vitro models

lipid peroxidation, 349
photoaging, antioxidant testing, 348

in vivo and in vitro assessment, percutaneous 

delivery, 71–72, 73

in vivo models

resident microbiota, 116
transient microbiota, 114–116

involucrin, lips, 194
ionization, skin penetration and, 66
iontophoresis, 71

hyperhidrosis, 165

Index

537

Iopidine, for eyelid ptosis, 373
iovera (cold therapy device), 373
IPL see intense pulsed light system
iron oxides, facial foundation, 181
irons, 264
irritant contact dermatitis, 52–53
irritants, 54–55

barrier function testing, 136

irritation, 26, 54–55

antiperspirants, 164
benzoyl peroxide, 502–503
from cosmetics, 11
dandruff, shampoos on, 130
hair dyes, 244
hair styling aids, 275
hand moisturizers on, 143
handwashing, 118–119
lack of, hydroxyacids, 350–351
nail cosmetics, 214
nociception, 37
perming lotions, 260
retinoids, 54, 326, 496
shaving, 168–169

isethionate syndet bars, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90–92
ISO 24444, sunscreens, 156
isoionic point, hair, 253
isopropanol, 114
isopropyl myristate, 55
isotretinoin, 328

dermabrasion and, 440
medium depth peels after, 404

itch sense, 37–38

J
Japan

approved sunscreens, 154
regulations, perming lotions, 258
thiol procedure, 265
UVA protection measurements, 158

jaw line, 28

liposuction, 467, 468, 480–481
polylactic acid therapy, 392

jelly rolls, eyelids, 369
Jessner’s solution, 396, 402, 403–405, 408, 409, 410

before medium depth peels, 406

jowling, 28

liposuction, 467, 468, 476, 480–481
Juvederm, hyaluronic acid products, 376

K
K38 patterns, hair curl, 30
keratin granulations, nails, 214
keratinocytes, 3–4

melanosome transfer to, 23, 24
psoriasis, 523
UV radiation on, 24

keratins

hair, 235–237
hair follicles, 234
hair shafts, 235, 262
keratohyalin granules, 5
keratolytics, psoriasis, 523–524, 525, 527
ketoamines, 296

538

 Index

ketoconazole, 127
ketones, 219, 223
kinetin, 323, 499
Kligman and Willis formula, depigmentation, 

329

KTP laser, 430
kwashiorkor, nail plate, 209
kyotorphine, 312, 313

L
labeling of products, 52

colors, 219–220
fragrances, 55, 56
mislabeling, 284
nail lacquers, 217
sunless tanning agents, 150, 151
sunscreens, 157, 494

laboratory tests, liposuction, 471, 472, 478
L*a*b* standard, Commission Internationale 

d’Eclairage, 151
lacquers, nails, 217–221

photoinitiators, 221, 222, 223
removers, 223–224

lactates, 142
lactic acid

acne, 503
as peeling agent, 353, 395–396

lactobionic acid, 349, 351
lake form, colors, 219
lamellar granules, 5
lamina propria, lips, 194
Langerhans cells, 299

lips, 194
lanolin, 135
allergy, 57
lanthionine, 266
large body areas, radiofrequency therapy, 453
lasers, 413–414, see also carbon dioxide lasers

hair removal, 445–450

camouflaging erythema, 191

for hypopigmentation, 442
liposuction, 472–473
nonablative, 429–436
rosacea, 515
safety, 446

lateral brow lift, 370
latex allergy, 58
lathering cleansers, 105–106, 107
Latisse, 203
laxity of skin, see also ptosis
infrared light devices, 433
radiofrequency devices, 451–455

LD50, botulinum toxins

humans, 366
mice, 365

leave-on products
bergamot oil, 57
hand sanitizers as, 114
moisturizers, 97, 99, 100

lecithin, 76
legal medicine, lip topology, 194
legislation, 52, see also regulations

fragrances, 55, 56

lentigines, see also age-spots
lasers compared, 430

leukocytes, inflammation, 298–299
leukotriene-C4, 25
levator labii superioris alaeque nasi, 370
levulinic acid, photodynamic therapy, 459–460
licochalcone A, 515
licorice, 289–290
lidocaine

mixing with calcium hydroxylapatite, 383, 

486–487, 490

Sculptra®, 390
tumescent local anesthesia, 469, 471

light-emitting diodes

acne treatment devices, 505
photomodulation, 456–462
UV radiation, 223, 228

light energy devices, see also intense pulsed 

light system

skin tightening, 453–454

lighteners/brighteners (herbs), 287
lightening products see bleaching agents
lighting

photography, 44
raking light optical profilometry, 47

linolenic acid, 292
linseed, 292
lipedema, liposuction for, 473–474
lipid-free cleansers, 521
lipids, 8

cleansing agents on, 85, 89
in cosmetics, 10

solid lipid nanoparticles, 69

as emollients, 135
emulsifiers on, 76, 104
ethnic skin, 26
inter-corneocyte, 3, 5
lutein/zeaxanthin on, 361
Malassezia yeasts on, 124
nail plate, 209–210
oral, 360
permeability barrier, 5
peroxidation, 16, 295–296
carotenoids on, 359
in vitro model, 349

pH on, 86
vitamin C on synthesis, 497
vitamin E on, 297

lipoatrophy, 380

polylactic acid therapy, 392, 393

lipolysis, lasers, 473
liporeceptors, 8–9
liposomes, 69, 519–520
liposuction, 463–475

neck, 467–468, 476–484
technique, 470, 471, 479–482
volume removed, 470

lip prints, 194
lips, 193–195

lipsticks, 193, 195–197

actives, 197

liquid cleansers, 93

lathering cleansers, 105–106, 107

liquid crystal emulsifiers, 76
liquid eyeliners, 204
liquid nitrogen, 398, 441
liquid systems, artificial nail enhancements, 

226–228, 232

liver X receptor, 9
local anesthesia, see also topical anesthesia; 
tumescent local anesthesia

adverse reactions, 59
dermabrasion, 441, 442
Sculptra®, 390

log P (partition coefficient), 301
lollipop appearance, 483
Londinium ointment can, 178
long pulsed lasers
dye lasers, 431
hair removal, 447–448
Nd:YAG lasers, collagen synthesis, 429

long wear eye cosmetics, 205
loose powders, facial foundation, 180
L’Oréal Curl Classification, 262, 263
L’Oréal/La Roche-Posay® Anthelios®, 514
L’Oréal Plénitude cleanser, 512
lotions, 75–76, 519

hair styling aids, 277–278
perming lotions, 254
setting lotions, 274

low energy light therapy, 456–457, 505
lower face, aging, 28
low threshold mechanoreceptors, 34
lubricating strips, razors, 170, 171
lunula, 207
lutein, 358, 359, 361
luteolin, 300
Lux 2940 laser, 425, 426
lycopene, 358, 359
lye relaxers, 265–268
lymph drainage, lips, 194
lysine, dihydroacetone on, 149

M
macular lesions, camouflage, 188
madarosis, 200
Maillard reaction, 349
maitake mushroom, 290
makeup, 177–185, see also camouflage; lipsticks

after laser therapy, 427
body wash testing, 98
cleansers to remove, 108
removal for BoNTA treatment, 372
rosacea, 512–513
wet cleansing cloths as removers, 107

malar soft tissue, aging, 28
Malassezia yeasts, 124
antifungals vs, 127

botulinum toxin treatment, 371
glosses and brilliances, 197
LED photomodulation on HSV lesions,  

459

male chest, liposuction, 469
male consumer needs, body washes, 99
malic acid, 347, 395–396
malpighian layer, UV filtration, 25

maltobionic acid
gel matrix, 348
on glycation, 350
on matrix metalloproteinases, 351
on wrinkles, 353

mammoplasty (reduction), 468
mandible, see also jaw line

Nefertiti lift, 371
manicures, 210–215
UV gels, 230–231

manufacture, bar cleansers, 84
marginal mandibular branch, facial nerve, 468, 

476–477, 480, 482
market share, bar cleansers, 83
markings, neck liposuction, 479
mascara, 199–200, 201–202, 205

applicators, 201–202, 203, 205–206

masking of odors, 163
masks, 493
massage

calcium hydroxylapatite, 486, 488
polylactic acid therapy, 391

masseter, hypertrophy, 372
mast cells, ethnicity, 26
matrikines, 311
matrix delivery systems, antiperspirants, 163, 

164

matrix metalloproteinases, 318

bionic acids on, 351
chronic inflammation, 299
low energy light on, 457
retinoids on, 496
UV-induced, 16, 136
matrix proteins, hair, 254
matt finish, tests, 184
meadowfoam, 292
mechanical factors, irritation, 54–55
mechanical tension, on fibroblasts, 16–17
medial lemniscus, 38
medication history, liposuction, 471
medulla, hair shaft, 167, 235, 251
Meissner corpuscles, 34
meladine, 449
melanin, 7, 17–18, 23
bleaching, 242
dermis vs epidermis, 25
hair, 241
hydroxyacids on, 353
laser hair removal, 446
LED light on synthesis, 460
lips, 194, 195
retinaldehyde on, 330
synthesis, 24

peptides affecting, 314
melanocortin-1 receptor, 24
melanocytes, 23–25, 241

behavior modulation, 248–249
retinaldehyde on, 330
melanosomes, 23, 24, 29
melasma

camouflage, 190
peels, 401
pycnogenol for, 291

melt cast manufacture, bar cleansers, 84
melting points, eutectic blends, 67
men see male consumer needs
mentalis, 371
menthol, 68
mercury, 57
Merkel disks, 34
mesocortical cells, hair, 29–30
mesotherapy, 324
metal ions, tap water, 245–246
metal oxides, see also titanium dioxide; zinc oxide

nanoparticles, 155

methacrylates, 60, 226, 227, 232
methacrylic acid, 228
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, hand hygiene, 

117, 118

methionine sulfoxide reductases, 312
methotrexate, phototherapy and, 526
2-methoxymethyl-p-phenylenediamine, 248
methyl acetate, 224
methylchloroisothiazolinone, 56
methylene glycol, 222
methyl ethyl ketone, 223–224
methylisothiazolinone, 56
methyl methacrylate, 232
metronidazole, rosacea, 514
Mexoryl SX™ (UV filter), 155
Mexoryl XL™, 155–156
micelles, 104
microbeams, Pixel 2940 laser, 424
microbiota

hands, 110–112
resistance to antimicrobials, 119
skin damage, 119
in vivo models, 114–116

microdialysis, 72
micro fibrils, hair, 254
microfine particles, see also nanoparticles

sunscreens, 493
microfins, razors, 171
microflora see bacteria; microbiota
micro-injection, 324
microneedles, 70–71
microneurography, 36, 40
microspheres, calcium hydroxylapatite, 380, 

381

microvasculature, see also blood flow

aging, 15, 195
lips, 194, 195
nail bed, 208–209
superficial vascular plexus, 28

midface, aging, 28
mildness

bar cleansers, 85, 86, 90–93, 94
facial cleansers, 108–109

milia, 442, 443
milks, 105, 106
milk thistle, 290
mineral makeups, rosacea, 512–513
minimal erythema dose, UV radiation, 48
minocycline

benzoyl peroxide vs, 502
zinc gluconate vs, 506

Index

539

mislabeling, 284
mitochondria, LED light on, 459, 460
mitochondrial DNA

herbs protecting, 286
UV radiation on, 16

mitogen activated protein kinases, 296, 297
MiXto SX laser, 420–421
Mohs surgery, dermabrasion after, 438, 439
moisturization, 6–7
moisturizers, 10

after shaving, 172
allergy, 57
body washes, 96–97, 98–100
definition, 133
delivery systems, 519–521
dry cleansing cloths, 107
eczema, 517–521
facial, 132–138
hands and feet, 139–147
panthenol as, 342
psoriasis, 524–525, 527
regimens, 521
rosacea, 511–512
in sunless tanning agents, 151
tests, 183

molded applicators, mascara, 202, 203, 

205–206

molecular biology, photoaging, 15–17
molecular weight, for skin penetration, 66
monographs

antiperspirants, 162
sunscreens, 154, 156–157

monopolar radiofrequency devices, 451–453
Morgan, Garrett A., 265
Mosaic eCO2™ laser, 421–422, 423
mountain rose, 292
mousses, hair styling aids, 275, 276
MSH cell surface receptor gene, 24
mucosa, labial, 193
multi-blade razors, 167, 169–170
multivesicular emulsions, 520
murine β-defensins, 6
mushrooms, 290
myelination, sensory axons, 34
Myobloc®, 364
myristoyl-nicotinate, 341

N
NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), 339
nail bed, 208–209
nail folds, 207–208
nail matrix, 207
nail plate, 207, 209–210

thickness, 210

nails, 207–225

artificial enhancements, 226–233

removal, 230

colored cosmetics, 217, 219–220

UV-curable, 222–223

damage, 232
growth, 209
hardeners, 217, 218, 220–222, 223

allergy, 58

540

 Index

nails (continued)

polishes, 212–214, 217, see also UV gels

allergy, 58
nanocapsules, 69, 70
nanoemulsions, 520–521
nanoparticles, see also microfine particles

lipids, 69
metal oxides, 155

Naphcon, for eyelid ptosis, 373
nasalis, 370
nasolabial fold, 370, 378, 383
National Ambulatory Care Survey, psoriasis,  

523, 524

National Psoriasis Foundation, 523
natural (term), 284
natural moisturizing factors (NMF), 6–7, 10, 

140–142, 308, 518, 519

from filaggrin, 5
soaps on, 85–86
water on, 89–90
natural ointments, 78
near-infrared light, acne, 505
neck

aging, 28

nonablative lasers on, 434–435

liposuction, 467–468, 476–484
washing, 493

necrosis

from laser therapy, 413
from polylactic acid therapy, 393

necrotizing fasciitis, 472
Nefertiti lift, 371
neodymium:YAG lasers, 432–433

collagen synthesis, 429
hair removal, 448
liposuction, 473

Neo-Heliopan AP®, 156
neonatal intensive care units, antimicrobial 

handwashes, 117

nerve supply

hair follicles, 168
lips, 194
skin, 33–41

neurons

central projections, 38–39
somatosensory, 33, 34–36

neuropeptides, 312–313
neutralization

after hair straightening, 267, 269
alpha-hydroxyacids, 353
camouflage, 188
odors, 163
perming, 256, 257–258
neutral permanent waves, 258
Neutrogena®, soap bars, 84–85
Neutrogena Helioplex™, 514
Neutrogena® Oil-free, 512
New Drug Applications, sunscreens, 154
niacinamide, 339–341, 344, 499, 506
Nicomide, 506
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, 339
nicotinate esters, formulations, 341
nicotinic acid, on blood flow, 340, 341

niosomes, 69, 520
nitric oxide, 16
nitro-dyes, 240
nitrogen compounds, in sunless tanning 

agents, 149

no-base relaxers, 265
nociception, 37
nodules, Sculptra®, 59, 393
no-light gels, 230
no-lye relaxers, 266, 268
nonablative rejuvenation systems, 429–436
radiofrequency devices with, 434, 453
non-invasive techniques, skin assessment, 

42–51

non-ionic surfactants, 104, 125, 492
non-polar solvents, 105
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 

302–303, 471

non-thermal photomodulation, 456
non-transfer facial foundation, 179
norovirus, hand sanitizers and, 113, 118
no-rub mists, sunless tanning agents, 151
Norwalk virus, 118
nosocomial infections, handwashes and, 

117–118
NSAIDs, 302–303, 471
nuclear factor kappa-B, 297, 299
corticosteroids on, 301, 302

nuclear factor of activated T cells, 303
nuclear hormone receptors, 8–9
nucleic acids

herbs modifying, 288, see also mitochondrial 

DNA

nurses, camouflage, 192
nutrients, dietary, 357–363

omega-3 fatty acids, 358, 360, 361
OMNIFIT handpiece, Pixel CO2 laser, 423
Omnilux™, 458
onychocytes, 207
onycholysis, 208, 209, 215
onychomycosis, 213
onychorrhexis, 208
onychoschizia, 208, 210, 211
opacifiers, perming lotions, 257
ophthalmic products, allergy, 56
optical coherence tomography, 50
optical energy devices see light energy devices
optical profilometry, 46–47, 48
ORAC assays, 297
oral supplements, 357–363

vitamins, acne, 506

orbicularis oculi, 367, 368, 369, 370
orbicularis oris, 193

complications of botulinum toxin treatment, 

373
organic (term), 284
organic UV filters, 155, 493
orthocortical cells, hair, 29–30
overresection, neck liposuction, 483
over-the-counter treatments

acne, 501–508
antiperspirants as, 162
psoriasis, 523–526, 527
rosacea, 510–511, 512, 513

oxalic acid, 395–396
oxazolidinones, 68
oxidation, see also auto-oxidation; peroxidation 

of lipids
dye formation, 242
hair straightening, 264
prevention see antioxidants

O
oatmeal, 290, 518
occlusion, for percutaneous delivery, 67
occlusives, in moisturizers, 134, 135, 140, 141, 

oxidative stress, 296, 329
niacinamide on, 339
from UV radiation, 7–8, 14, 16
on vitamin C, 497

518
occupations

formaldehyde allergy, 56
hand eczema, 58
sun exposure, 15, 493, 495

OCimple Light Therapy System MP200, 505
octopirox, 127
ocular rosacea, 510, 511
odors, prevention, 163
off-axis lighting, 44, 47
off-label uses

botulinum toxins, 364, 365
calcium hydroxylapatite, 383

OGG (glycylglycine oleamide), 327, 331
oil-in-water emulsions, 75, 76, 77, 179, 519
oils, lipsticks, 196
oily cleansers, 105
oily skin, facial cleansers, 108
ointments, 76–79, 519, 524
Olay® Complete, 512
Olay® Daily Facials, 107
oleander, 290
oligopeptides, definition, 309

oxidizing agents, hair bleaches, 58, 240
oxoretinoids, 325, 327
oxygen inhibition layers, UV-curable artificial 

nails, 229, 232

oxytalan fibers, 28
ozokerite, 196

P
Pacinian corpuscles, 34
pain sense, 37
painting of nails, 212–213, 217, 218
Pal-GHK, 312
Pal-GQPR, 311, 312
Pal-KTTKS (matrikine), 311
Palomar StarLux 500, 425, 426
p-aminobenzoic acid, 493
panthenol, 341–342
papaya, 290
papillary dermis, 27

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 352

papules, Sculptra®, 59, 393
papulonodular lesions, camouflage, 188
papulopustular rosacea, 509, 511

parabens, 56
paracortical cells, hair, 29
paraffin wax, 196
parallel-polarized light photography, 45
para-phenylenediamine, 246, 247
para-toluenediamine, 246
paronychia, 208, 215
parthenolide, 289
particulates, see also nanoparticles

body washes, 97–98
exfoliants, 493
scrubs, 106, 504–505
zinc pyrithione as, 128

partition coefficients, skin penetration and, 66, 

300–301
patches, transdermal, 70
patch testing, 60

corticosteroids, 58
fragrances, 55
local anesthetics, 59
patting, camouflage, 188
Pears soap, 84
pedicures, 210–215
peels

hydroxyacids, 353, 354, 395–396

rosacea, 515
irritants used, 54
medium depth, 402–411

complications, 407–409
contraindications, 404

superficial, 395–401
pencils, eyeliners, 204
penetration enhancement vectors, 69
penetration enhancers, 67–69
penetration of skin, 7, 66–71
devices enhancing, 70–71
niacinamide, 341
partition coefficients and, 66, 300–301
peptides, 310
penicillamine, 366
peptides, 308–314
analysis, 310
definition, 309

percutaneous delivery, 65–74
perfume, lipsticks, 197
perioral area, botulinum toxin treatment, 

371–372

periorbital treatment, botulinum toxins, 

368–370

permanent dyes, hair, 58, 239, 240–241, 

242–243

permanent hair reduction (term), 445, 450
permanent waves, 58, 251–261

technique, 256, 258
permeability barrier, 5
drug routes across, 7
perming, eyelashes, 203
perming lotions, 254
peroxidation of lipids, 16, 295–296

carotenoids on, 359
in vitro model, 349

peroxisome proliferator activator receptor, 9
persistent pigment darkening methods, 158

petrolatum, 77, 78, 135, 518

body washes depositing, 98, 100–101
cleansing cloths, 107

pH, see also buffering

antimicrobial handwashes, 114
bar cleansers, 86–88, 89
hair, 253, 256
neutralizing shampoos, 267
skin penetration and, 66
soaps, 84, 85, 86–88
stratum corneum, 9
sulfites, 265
sunless tanning agents, 149
surfactants, 104

phase separation, body washes, 97
phenol, 353
phenylmercuric acetate, 56
phenyl side chain, alpha-hydroxyacids, 

346–347
pheomelanin, 7, 23, 241
phosphatidylglycerol, 518
photoaging, 13–22, 493, 495

ethnic skin, 17–18, 25, 28–29
face, 27
Glogau’s classification, 403
hands, polylactic acid therapy, 393
herbs for, 286–287
hydroxyacids on, 353
inflammation, 14, 299
medium depth peels, 403
nonablative rejuvenation systems, 434
prevention, 18–19, 493
retinoids, 496
in vitro model, antioxidant testing, 348

photobiology, retinoids, 328
photodamage

mildness of cleansing, 92
nutrients for, 360, 497, 499

photodynamic therapy
hair removal, 449
LED light, 459–460
photoepilation, 445–450
photography, digital, 42, 43–46
photoinitiators, nail lacquers, 221, 222, 223
photomodulation, by light-emitting diodes, 

456–462

photoprotection, see also sunscreens

golden fern, 289
herbs for, 287
photoreactivity, 155
photo-stabilizers, 155
phototherapy, psoriasis, 526
phototoxic dermatitis, 53
phrynoderma, 326, 328
phymatous rosacea, 509, 511
physical cleaning, 105, 108
physical penetration enhancers, 69
phytokinins, 323
phytophotodermatitis, 53, 57
pigmentation, 23–32
hair, 241–242
hydroxyacids on, 353
lips, defects, 195

Index

541

niacinamide on, 340, 341
from peels, 407
retinoids on, 329, 338

pigments see colors
pilosebaceous units, 167
pimecrolimus, 303
pineapple, 290–291
Pinnell formulation, antioxidant, 48
Pixel 2940 (Er:YAG laser), 424
Pixel CO2 laser, 423
PKEK (Pro-Lys-Glu-Lys), 314
plants, see also botanicals

phytophotodermatitis from, 53

plasticizers

nail lacquers, 219, 221, 223
nails, 210

platelet morphology, zinc pyrithione, 128
platelet-rich plasma, 385–387
platysma, 476, 480

aging, 28
bands, 371–372, 373, 483

pleasure sense, 38
plugging effect, antiperspirants, 162
polarized light photography, 45
polar solvents, 105
poliosis, 200
polishes, nails, 212–214, 217, see also UV gels

allergy, 58
polybutene, 196
polydensification, Belotero, 376
polydimethylsiloxanes, 60
polyglyceryl-2 triisostearate, 196
polyhydroxy acids (PHAs), 347, 348, 495–496

acne, 504
for dry skin, 352
on glycation, 349–350
rosacea, 515

polylactic acid fillers, 390–394, 486
polymerization, artificial nail enhancements, 

227

polymers, 492
allergy, 59
hair styling aids, 270, 272, 273

overuse, 278
mascara, 201, 205
shampoos, 126

polymethylmethacrylate, 60
polymodal nociceptors, 37
polyphenols, 358
polyquaternium 37, 505
pomades, 275
pomegranate, 291
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 25

laser therapy, 412
peels, 401

postinflammatory hypopigmentation, 25
potassium alum, 163
potassium titanyl phosphate laser, 430
powders

facial foundation, 180–181
setting camouflage, 188

powder systems, artificial nail enhancements, 

226–228, 232

542

 Index

p-phenylenediamine, 58
pregnancy see congenital anomalies
prejowl sulcus, 476
preservatives

allergy, 55–56
facial foundation, 182
lipsticks, 197
moisturizers, 134, 136
sunless tanning agents, 150

presurgical hand antisepsis, standards, 115
pre-test, hair dyes, 245, 247, 248
prevalence, hair dye allergy, 246–247
primary afferents, 33
primary intermediates, hair dyes, 242
primary sunscreens, 153
priming, for peeling, 398
probability, efficacy, 285
procerus, 368
procollagen, 15, 16
ProFractional lasers (Sciton), 424, 425
progerin, 17
pro-ligands, 326–328
Pro-Lys-Glu-Lys (tetrapeptide), 314
propellants, hairsprays, 273–274
Propionibacterium acnes, 111
benzoyl peroxide on, 502
UV fluorescence photography, 46

proprioception, 33
propylene glycol, for percutaneous delivery, 67
4-propyl guaiacol, 301
prostaglandin analogs, eyelash growth, 203
prostaglandin E-2, 298, 299, 305

NSAIDs on, 303

prostheses see artificial nail enhancements
protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2), 24–25
protease inhibitors, 7, 8
proteases, 136
protective factor (PF)
antioxidants, 48, 49
sunlight, 25

protein binding, cleansing agents, 85
proteins, 314–315, see also hydrolyzed proteins

antimicrobial, 6
cornified cell envelope, 4–5, 6
cross-links with lipids, 5
definition, 309
desmosomes, 5
glycation, 361
hair, 253–254

denaturation, 263–264
disulfide bonds, 253, 254, 255

proteolytic enzymes, 7, 314
provisional matrix, foreign body reactions, 54
pseudofolliculitis barbae, 172
pseudohypopigmentation, after dermabrasion, 

443

Pseudomonas, nail discoloration, 208, 215
psoralen, tanning beds and, 526
psoriasis, 522–528

hydroxyacids for, 352–353
nails, 213
urea deficiency, 142

PSP (Neocutis), 323

psychological effects, hair dyes, 244
psychophysical channels, sensory perception, 

hair straightening, 264–265
permanent waves, 251, 254, 256

34

psychosocial stress, psoriasis, 523
ptosis

breast, 469
eyebrows, 27, 372
eyelids, 368, 373
infrared light devices, 433
peptides for, 313–314
submandibular glands, 483

pulse dye lasers, 430–431
collagen synthesis, 429
rosacea, 515

pump hairsprays, 273, 276
pumpkin, 291
Purpose® Gentle, 512
purpura, after liposuction, 481
p values, efficacy, 285
pycnogenol, 291, 358, 361
pyrrolidones, 68
pyruvic acid, 396

Q
Q-switched lasers, 413
Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers, 432

collagen synthesis, 429

quality of life

camouflage, 192
psoriasis, 522

Quantitative Risk Assessment, hair dyes, 246

R
RAB27A (gene), 24
radiance, skin, 50
radiation dermatitis, LED photomodulation 

on, 459

Radiesse, 383, 486
radiofrequency devices
hair removal, 448
rejuvenation systems, 429, 433–434,  

451–455

raking light optical profilometry, 46–47, 48
raking light photography, 44, 45
Raman microspectrometry, confocal, 72
randomized trials, see also blinded trials

hand hygiene, 117

RAR ligands, 325, 328, 496
razors, 166–167, 169–172
reactive oxygen species, 16, 295–297, 318
rebalancing, artificial nail enhancements, 228
receptive fields, low threshold 
mechanoreceptors, 34

receptor for advanced glycation end products 

(RAGE), 297
re-coloring, hair, 246
recombinant growth factors, 323
reconstitution

botulinum toxins, 366
Sculptra®, 390
red light, acne, 505
reducing sugars, as sunless tanning agents, 149
reduction (chemical)

reduction mammoplasty, 468
red wine, 289
reflectance confocal microscopy, 26
refrigerant sprays, see also cryogen sprays

dermabrasion, 441

regulations, see also Food and Drug 

Administration
antiperspirants, 162
botanicals, 283–284
eye cosmetics, 204–205
hairsprays, 273–274
lipstick colors, 196
medical devices, 70
nail lacquer removers, 223–224
permanent waves, 258, 259
sunless tanning agents, 150, 151
sunscreens, 153–155, 156–158
relaxers, hair straightening, 265–268
removers

camouflage, 188
nail lacquers, 223–224
wet cleansing cloths as, 107
Repeat Insult Patch Test, 285
resident microbiota, 111
in vivo models, 116

resins, nail cosmetics, 213–214, 219, 221, 222, 

223, 223
resorcinol, 396, 397–398
respiratory infections, hand hygiene, 118
Restylane (hyaluronic acid product), 376
resurfacing, see also nonablative rejuvenation 

systems; peels

with carbon dioxide lasers, 412–428
dermabrasion, 437–444

resveratrol, 19, 358
reticular dermis, 27
Retin A®, 359
retina, protection by LED photomodulation, 

459

retinaldehyde, 328–329, 330, 338, 496
retinoic acid, 499, see also all-trans-retinoic 

acid

retinoids, 18, 325–335, 336–339, 359, 496

dermabrasion and, 440
irritation, 54, 326, 496
before medium depth peels, 405
phototherapy and, 526
rosacea, 516

retinol, 330–331, 496, 504
retinyl esters, 329, 330–331, 338, 504
retraction, for dermabrasion, 441
rheology modifiers, hair styling aids, 272
rhinophyma

dermabrasion for, 438
phymatous rosacea, 509, 511

rhinovirus, efficacy of handwashes, 116
rhytides

application of trichloroacetic acid, 406
bipolar RF and light, 454
botulinum toxin treatment, 365, 368–369
dermabrasion for, 438

fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing, 415, 

419–420

glycolic acid peels, 354
nonablative lasers, 429–436

riboflavin, 357
ridging, nail plate, 207
ringing gels, 275
rinse-off conditioners, 130
ritual preference, facial cleansers, 108
roll-ons, antiperspirants, 163
rosacea, 509–516

glycolic acid peels, 354
medium depth peels and, 404
mildness of cleansing, 93, 94
vitamin C on, 497, 515
Rosaliac® Anti-redness, 512
rosemary, 291
ruby laser, hair removal, 447
Ruffini endings, 34
RXR ligands, 325, 328, 496

S
Safe Cosmetics and Personal Care Products 

Act, 52

safety

botulinum toxins, 366
cosmeceuticals, 284–285
dermabrasion, 443
eye cosmetics, 204–205
facial foundation, 182
hair dyes, 246–248
hairsprays, 274
hand cleansers, 118–119
lasers, 446
nail cosmetics, 215
peels, 398, 400
peptides, 310
permanent waves, 258, 259–260
tanning beds, 526
UV lamps, 233
safety razors, 166
safflower, 292
sage, 291
sagging see ptosis
salicylic acid (SA), 347–348, 496

acne, 503
as peeling agent, 353, 396
psoriasis, 523–524, 525
for scalp, 127
technique, 397

sallowness, hydroxyacids on, 349
salt links, hair shaft keratin, 235, 262
saturation (color coordinate), 188
SCAAR FX laser treatment, 416
scalp, 124, 125

hair, 124, 168
perming lotions on, 260
scanning CO2 lasers, 412, 415
scarring, see also acne

after dermabrasion, 443, 443
after peels, 407–409
camouflage, 188
dermabrasion for, 438

scents see fragrances
Schiff bases, 296
schools, hand hygiene, 118
Sciton ProFractional lasers, 424, 425
screening, fragrances, 55
scrubbing, 53
scrubs, 105, 106, 504–505
scrubs (surgical), standards, 115
sculpting, nails, 227
Sculptra®, 59, 390–394
sebaceous glands, 167
sebaceous oil

facial cleansers to remove, 108
scalp, 124

seborrheic dermatitis, 124, 125
sebum, 167

niacinamide on, 339, 340

secondary metabolites (SM), 284, 285
secondary sunscreens, 153–154
sedation

dermabrasion, 442
liposuction, 479
medium depth peels, 405

seeds see fruit seeds
selective photothermolysis, 446
selenium, 358, 360, 498–499
selenium sulfide, 127
L-selenomethionine, 498–499
self-tanners see sunless tanning products
semi-permanent hair dyes, 58, 240
semi-permanent mascaras, 205
semi-permeable hydrogel dressings, 442
sensitive skin, 11, 55

hydroxyacids on, 351
LED photomodulation on, 459
retinoids, 496
rosacea, 510–511
shaving, 172
sensitization, 53
sensory perception, 33–41

irritation, 55
lips, 194
skin of color, 27

serine protease inhibitors, 24
serine proteases, 7, 24
seromas, liposuction, 472
serums

hair styling aids, 276
moisturizers, 519
setting lotions, 274
setting powders, camouflage, 188
shade guides, hair dyes, 245
shampoos, 124–131, 237–238

allergy, 57
for colored hair, 246
neutralizing, 267

sharpness, razor blades, 169–170, 171
shaving, 166–173
shellac, 212–213
shiitake mushroom, 290
SIAScope, 49
signaling pathways

antioxidants on, 297–298

Index

543

calcineurin, 303
corticosteroids on, 301–302
reactive oxygen species on, 296, 297

silicone oils, facial foundation, 179
silicones, see also bovine collagen

artificial, 135
granulomatous reactions, 60
hair straightening, 264
hair styling aids, 276
shampoos, 237, 238
sunless tanning agents, 150

Silk’n Blue Device, 505
silymarin, 290
skin benefit agents, body washes, 97–98
SkinChip®, 10
skin diseases, see also specific diseases

dermabrasion and, 440
medium depth peels and, 404

skin-friendly emulsifiers, 76
skin type, see also Fitzpatrick skin types

facial cleansers, 105, 107–108

Smad complex, 15, 16
SmartSkin laser, 424
SmartXide DOT (laser), 423–424
smile

downturned, 371, 373
gummy, 370
soaps, 83, 84, 96
acne, 501–502
alcohol-based hand sanitizers vs, 119
bar cleansers, 84–85, 88
body washes, 97
irritation, 55
pH, 84, 85, 86–88
superfatted, 84, 86
syndets vs, 90–94

sodium acyl isethionate see syndets
sodium hydroxide, straighteners, 265–268
sodium lauryl sulfate, 55, 136
soft tissue augmentation see fillers
soil models

antimicrobial handwash standards, 115
body wash testing, 98

Solareze®, 302, 303
solar radiation see UV radiation
solid lipid nanoparticles, 69
solubility, for percutaneous delivery, 67
solubilizing agents, perming lotions, 257
solvents, 55, 105

brittle nails, 213
nail lacquers, 219, 221, 223

removers, 223–224

for percutaneous delivery, 68
toners, 106

somatosensory system, 33–41
Sonic™ Skin Care Brush, 505
sorbic acid, 55
South-East Asians, photoaging, 17
soy, 291
spatial distribution, actives from shampoo, 

128–129

spectrophotometry, sunless tanning agents, 151
spectroradiometers, 183

544

 Index

speech, botulinum toxin complications, 373
spinal cord, 38–39
spinal nucleus of V, 39
spinothalamic tract, 38–39
split-face tests, bar cleansers, 92
spoolies (brushes), 203
spray booths, sunless tanning, 151
spray gels, hair styling aids, 275
sprays see hairsprays
stability

botulinum toxins, 365–366
growth factors, 322
ointments, 78–79
peptides, 310
retinoids, 339
vitamin C, 343

staining, nail colors, 220
Staphylococcus aureus, 111–112

methicillin-resistant, hand hygiene, 117, 118

Staphylococcus epidermidis, 111
statistical significance, efficacy, 285
stearic acid

acyl isethionate bars, 86
Dove bar, 85
stem cells, 323

adipose-derived, 323, 388
hair follicles, 234

Stephens & Associates, Inc., photographic 

studios, 44

Stephens Wrinkle Imaging using Raking Light 

(SWIRL), 47–48
sterility, liposuction, 479
storage

growth factors, 322
retinoids, 339
sunless tanning agents, 149
straightening of hair, 262–269

technique, 266–267, 268–269

strand tests

hair dyes, 245
thiol procedure, 268

stratum corneum, 3–8, 65, 132–133

alpha-hydroxyacids on, 351
cleansing agents on, 85–86
pH, 9
shaving on, 171
skin of color, 25
surfactants on, 87, 89
swelling, 86, 87
urea on, 142
UV filtration, 25

stratum lucidum, photoaging, 28
streptococcal infections, psoriasis, 523
stress, 8

psoriasis, 523

stubble recreation, beards, 188
styes, 200
subcutaneous papules, Sculptra®, 59, 393
subdermal radiofrequency probes, 454
subepidermal low echogenic band, 312
submandibular glands, ptosis, 483
submental fat, 478
submental fold, after liposuction, 482

submicron delivery systems, 69
substrate cleansers see cleansing cloths
sugars

after dermabrasion, 442
filler injection, 377
stratum corneum, 86, 87

in diet, 361
hair straightening, 264
as sunless tanning agents, 149

sulfacetamide-sulfur, 514
sulfite perms, 258
sulfites, hair straightening, 265
sulfoxidized methionine, 312
sulfur, 127

acne, 504
nail plate, 209

sulfur bridges, hair proteins, 253, 254, 255
sunburn

Solareze® for, 303
studies, 304

sunburn cells, glycolic acid on, 350
SunGuard, 495
sunless tanning products, 148–152

acetyl pentapeptide, 314
sunlight see UV radiation
sun protection factor, 18, 493–494

measurement, 156–157
skin of color, 25
UVA protection factor vs, 156
sunscreens, 18, 153–159, 493–495

after laser therapy, 427
criteria, 155, 157
evaluation, 156–158
in facial moisturizers, 136, 521
in nail lacquers, 220, 221
retinoids as, 328
rosacea, 513, 514
in sunless tanning agents, 149, 151
tests, 156–158
UV fluorescence photography, 46

supercontraction, hair straightening, 266
superfatted soaps, 84, 86
superficial musculoaponeurotic system, 28
superficial peels, 395–401
superficial vascular plexus, photoaging, 28
superoxide dismutase, 315
supersaturation, 67
supplements see oral supplements
surfactants, 492, see also detergents

on antiseptics, 114
bar cleansers, 83–84
body washes, 97, 98
cleansing cloths, 107
cleansing effect, 104
lathering cleansers, 105–106
for percutaneous delivery, 67, 68
perming lotions, 257
shampoos, 125–126
shave gels, 171
on skin barrier, 10
on stratum corneum, 87, 89

surgery (cosmetic), lips, 195
surrogate models, infections, 118
Survival of the Prettiest (Etcoff), 492
sweating, 160–162, 164–165
swelling

swine flu, efficacy of handwashes, 116–117
SWIRL (Stephens Wrinkle Imaging using 

Raking Light), 47–48

Swiss apple, 291
sympathetic nerves, 38
synapses, central projections, 38
syndets, 84
acne, 502
bar cleansers, 85, 86, 87, 88
body washes, 97
eczema, 521
soaps vs, 90–94

synthetic growth factors, 323

T
T4 endonuclease V, 314–315
tacrolimus, 303

LED light with, 460

talc, 181
tamarind, 291
tanning beds, psoriasis, 526
tanning products (sunless), 148–152

acetyl pentapeptide, 314

tape stripping, 9

percutaneous delivery assessment, 72

tap water, metal ions, 245–246
tar

psoriasis, 525, 526
scalp care, 127
tartaric acid, 395–396
tattooing

adverse skin reactions, 58–59
black henna tattoos, pPD in, 247
eyelids, 203
mimicking hair, 188

tazarotene cream, 18–19, 496
TCA Blue Peel, 400
TDSA (UV filter), 155
tea, 289
tear troughs, polylactic acid therapy, 392–393
tea tree oil, acne, 506
telangiectasia, camouflage, 191
telogen, hair growth, 167–168, 252, 446

eyelashes, 200

telomerase, happy tree on, 286
temperature sense, 36, 37
temporal fusion plane, 370
temporal wasting, polylactic acid therapy, 392
temporary hair dyes, 240
Tentative Final Monograph (FDA 1994), on 

handwashes, 113–114, 115

tenting technique, calcium hydroxylapatite to 

hands, 487, 490
teratogenesis, botanicals, 285
terminal hair, 29, 167, 446
terpenes, 68
terpenoids, 68
terphthalilydine dicamphor sulfonic acid, 

approval, 154
tetracyclines, rosacea, 514

tetrapeptides, tissue repair, 311
texturing agents
lipsticks, 196
relaxers, 266

thalamocortical afferents, 39–40
therapeutic shampoos, 124, 125, 126–127
therapists, camouflage, 192
Thermacool RF device, 433–434, 452
Thermafrax, 453
thermal coagulation, ProFractional-XC laser, 

424

thermal damage, lasers, 412, 413
thermal processing, hair straightening, 263–265
thermal waves, 258
thickeners, 77

for ascorbyl phosphates, 343
hair styling aids, 275
perming lotions, 257
sunless tanning agents, 150

thighs, liposuction, 467
thioglycolate see ammonium thioglycolate
thioglycolic acid, 256
regulations, 258
thiolactic acid, 256
thiol procedure, 264–265, 268–269
thixotropic agents, nail lacquers, 220, 221
threading, eyebrows, 203
3D imaging systems, 50
Tierney, E.P., on SmartXide DOT (laser), 

423–424

tighteners (herbs), 287, 288
tightening see laxity of skin
Time and Extent Applications (FDA), 

sunscreens, 154

tinting

eyelashes, 203
rosacea camouflage, 513

tip and overlay technique, artificial nail 

enhancements, 227

tissue dwell times, carbon dioxide lasers, 412
tissue remodeling, 319
tissue repair peptides, 311–313
titanium dioxide, 155, 493
facial foundation, 181
rosacea, 514

T lymphocytes, 53, 299
TNS Essential Serum, after laser therapy, 427
TNS Recovery Complex, 321, 322, 323
tocopherol, see also vitamin E
α-tocopherol acetate, 343
d-α-tocopherol, 497, 498, 499

δ-tocopherylglucopyranoside, 330, 331
toluene, 219
tomato paste, 359
toners, 105, 106
topcoats, nails, 217, 218, 220
topical anesthesia

autologous fibroblast cell therapy, 387
calcium hydroxylapatite injection, 383
laser therapy, 427

tosylamide-formaldehyde resin, 213–214, 219, 

222, 223

touch, 34–36

toxic substances, protection from, 7
Trac II (multi-blade razor), 167
training, nail care practitioners, 232
transdermal patches, 70
transepidermal delivery, 65, see also 
percutaneous delivery

transepidermal water loss, 9

blockade, 518
body washes on, 100
rosacea, 511
by site, 132, 133
skin of color, 26
soaps vs syndets, 90
tests, 136

transforming growth factor α, 25
transforming growth factor β, 15, 16
transglutaminases, 5, 6
transient microbiota, 111

in vivo models, 114–116

transparency, facial foundation, 179
transparent soaps, 84–85
transplantation, autologous fat, 388, 483, 486
transplants, eyelashes, 203
trans-urocanic acid, 7
tretinoin, 18–19, 396, 397, 496

acne, 504
benzoyl peroxide vs, 502
before medium depth peels, 405
triamcinolone, for PLLA nodules, 393
trichiasis, 200
trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 353, 396–397, 
402–405, 406, 408, 409, 410

burning sensation, 407
depth controlled peels, 400

triclocarbon, 504
triclosan

acne, 504
on E. coli, 492–493
on MRSA, 117
odor neutralization, 163
tests for resistance, 119
triethanolamine soap, 85
trigeminal nerve, 39
trimethylpropane triisostearate, 196
trimming, nails, 212
tripeptides, 309
tryptase reactivity, mast cells, ethnicity, 26
tumescent local anesthesia, 464, 469–470

historical aspects, 463
lidocaine dosage, 471
neck, 480

tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 305

feverfew on release, 289
Tunable Resurfacing Laser, 413
turmeric, 291–292
two-phase toners, 106
two-way cakes, powders, 180
Tyndall effect, 376–377
type IV reactions, hair dyes, 246
Tyr-Arg (dipeptide), 312, 313
tyrosinase

LED light on, 460
in melanogenesis, 24

tyrosinase-related proteins, 24

Index

545

U
ubiquinone see coenzyme Q10
Ultrapulse CO2 laser, 412, 414, 415, 427
ultrasound

liposuction and, 471
for penetration enhancement, 70
ultraviolet radiation see UV radiation
unevenness see asymmetic effects
units, botulinum toxin quantities, 365
urea, 68, 140, 141–143, 145–146, 525
urticaria, 53
UV fluorescence photography, 46
UV gels

artificial nail enhancements, 227, 228–229
manicures, 230–231
nail polish, 222–223, 227

UV lamps

nail care, 223, 224, 232, 233
safety, 233

UV protection factor ratings, 18, 156–157, 495
UV radiation, 14–15, 153, see also photoaging; 

photodamage

absorption by retinoids, 328, 330, 331
on African-American skin, 17
on colored hair, 246
for curing nail polish, 223, 224
elastosis, 319
erythema, LED photomodulation on, 459
on face, 132
filters, see also sunscreens
approved, 154–155

hydroxyacids on sensitivity, 350
lips, 194
minimal erythema dose, 48
on molecules, 155
in nail care, 213, 218, 223, 224, 232, 233
phytophotodermatitis, 53
pigmentation, 24–25
protection from, 18

extremozymes, 315
niacinamide on, 340
nutrients, 357–360
vitamin E, 343
protective factor, 25
for psoriasis, 526
rosacea, 509, 513
skin barrier, 7–8
UVA protection criteria, 158
on vitamin C, 297

UV reflectance photography, 45–46

V
vacuum, bipolar RF and, 454
valacyclovir, 405, 440, 442, 443
value (color coordinate), 187
Vanicream® Sunscreen, 514
vascular complications, filler injection, 377
vascular endothelial growth factor

retinoids on, 18
UV radiation and, 15

vascular malformations, camouflage, 190
vasculature see microvasculature
vectors, penetration enhancement, 69

546

 Index

vehicle controlled studies, 321
vehicle effect, skin penetration, 66–67
vellus hair, 29, 167, 446
vermilion border, 193, 194
vesicles (penetration enhancement vectors), 69
vibrations, sensory testing, 34
viral infections, 110, 113, 116, 118, see also 

herpes simplex; HIV-associated 
lipoatrophy

viscosity, ingredients altering, 98
VISIA camera systems (Canfield), 44
visible light photography, 44
vitamin(s)

oral, acne, 506
topical, 336–345

vitamin A, 325–326, 328, 336–339, 359

acne, 506

vitamin B3, 339–341, 344
vitamin B5, 341–342
vitamin C, 342–343, 357, 358
as anti-inflammatory, 299
as antioxidant, 297
on photodamage, 19, 360, 497, 499
rosacea, 497, 515
vitamin E with, 359–360, 497, 498

vitamin D, 343, 358

phototherapy and, 526
vitamin E, 343, 358, 497, 499
as antioxidant, 297, 358
UV protection, 299
with vitamin C, 359–360, 497, 498
wound healing, 358, 361

vitamin K, 343
vitamin P, 343
vitiligo, camouflage, 188, 189
VivaScope, confocal laser scanning 

microscope, 50

VivoSight, optical coherence tomography, 50
volatile fatty acids, 160
neutralization, 163

volatile oils, facial foundation, 179

W
warm sense, 36

washing, see also handwashing technique

face and neck, 493
water, see also tap water

binding by hydroxyacids, 348
body washes, 97
on colored hair, 246
dry skin paradox, 86, 88, 89–90
hair and, 252–253, 256, 271–272
nail plate content, 209
resistance, sunscreens, 494
for Sculptra®, 390

water-based nail cosmetics, 219
water displacement, breast volume, 469
water evaporation barrier see permeability 

barrier; transepidermal water loss
water-in-oil emulsions, 75–76, 77, 78, 179, 519
waterpacts, 180
waterproof mascaras, 201, 205
waxes

hair styling aids, 270, 272, 273, 274, 275–276
lipsticks, 195, 196
mascara, 201

waxy pastes, lipsticks, 196
weight reduction, liposuction vs, 464
wet cleansing cloths, 105, 107
wetness control, antiperspirants, 162–163
wet work, irritation, 55
whitening (historical), 177–178
white skin roll, lips, 194
white spots, nail cosmetic removal, 230–231
Whitfield’s ointment, 348
windshield wiping technique, liposuction, 481
wine, 289
wire brushes, dermabrasion, 440, 441, 442
women, shaving, 167, 172
wood pencils, eyeliners, 204
Wood’s lamp examination

melanin, 25
melasma, 401

World Health Organization, on hand hygiene, 

112

wound care, after dermabrasion, 442–443
wound healing, 318–320

after dermabrasion, 437

after laser therapy, 413–414
after medium depth peels, 407
LED photomodulation on, 459
nutrients for, 361
tissue repair peptides, 311–313
vitamin C on, 497
vitamin E, 358, 361
wraps, nails, 227, 229–230
wrinkles

hydroxyacids on, 353
LED photomodulation, 457–458
maltobionic acid on, 353
nonablative lasers, 431–435
nutrients for, 360, 361
photoaging, 29
raking light optical profilometry, 46–47
soaps vs syndets, 92
3D imaging systems, 50
tissue repair peptides, 311–313
vitamin C on, 497

X
xenon lightbulbs, 448
Xeomin®, 364, 365
Xeo Pearl Fractionated laser, 426

Y
yellowing, niacinamide on, 340

Z
zeaxanthin, 358, 359, 361
Zeno™ heating device, 505
zinc, 358, 360
acne, 506
deficiency, 357
toxicity, 506

zinc oxide, 155, 493
rosacea, 514

zinc pyrithione, 127–129, 130, 525
zirconium salts, 163
zoning, cleansing cloths, 107
zwitterionic (amphoteric) surfactants, 104, 125, 

237, 492

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.

