Cosmetics and Dermatological 
Problems and Solutions

Cosmetics and Dermatological 
Problems and Solutions

A Problem Based Approach

Third Edition

Zoe Diana Draelos, MD
Consulting Professor, Department of Dermatology, 
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, U.S.A.

First and second editions published in 1990 and 1995 respectively by Churchill Livingstone.
This edition published in 2011 by Informa Healthcare, Telephone House, 69-77 Paul Street, London EC2A 4LQ, UK.

Simultaneously published in the USA by Informa Healthcare, 52 Vanderbilt Avenue, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10017, USA.

Informa Healthcare is a trading division of Informa UK Ltd. Registered Office: 37–41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK.
Registered in England and Wales number 1072954.

©2011 Informa Healthcare, except as otherwise indicated

No claim to original U.S. Government works

Reprinted material is quoted with permission. Although every effort has been made to ensure that all owners of copyright material 
have been acknowledged in this publication, we would be glad to acknowledge in subsequent reprints or editions any omissions 
brought to our attention.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, unless with the prior written permission of the pub-
lisher or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of any licence 
 permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP, UK, or the 
Copyright  Clearance  Center,  Inc.,  222  Rosewood  Drive,  Danvers,  MA  01923,  USA  (http://www.copyright.com/  or  telephone 
978-750-8400).

Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.

This book contains information from reputable sources and although reasonable efforts have been made to publish accurate infor-
mation, the publisher makes no warranties (either express or implied) as to the accuracy or fitness for a particular purpose of the 
information or advice contained herein. The publisher wishes to make it clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book 
by individual authors or contributors are their personal views and opinions and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of 
the publisher. Any information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use solely by medical professionals strictly as a 
supplement  to  the  medical  professional’s  own  judgement,  knowledge  of  the  patient’s  medical  history,  relevant  manufacturer’s 
instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or 
advice on dosages, procedures, or diagnoses should be independently verified. This book does not indicate whether a particular 
treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional 
to make his or her own professional judgements, so as appropriately to advise and treat patients. Save for death or personal injury 
caused by the publisher’s negligence and to the fullest extent otherwise permitted by law, neither the publisher nor any person 
engaged or employed by the publisher shall be responsible or liable for any loss, injury or damage caused to any person or property 
arising in any way from the use of this book.

A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN-13: 9781841847405

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Draelos, Zoe Diana. 
  Cosmetics and dermatological problems and solutions : a problem based approach / Zoe Diana Draelos. -- 3rd ed.

  p.  ;  cm.

  Rev. ed. of: Cosmetics in dermatology / Zoe Diana Draelos. 2nd ed. 1995.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-84184-740-5 (hb : alk. paper)  1.  Cosmetics--Composition. 2.  Dermatology.  I. Draelos, Zoe Diana. Cosmetics 

in dermatology. II. Title.

[DNLM: 1.  Cosmetics. 2.  Dermatologic Agents. 3.  Hair--drug effects. 4.  Nails--drug effects. 5.  Skin--drug effects. 

6.  Skin Care--methods.  QV 60]
  RL72.D73 2011
  616.5--dc23

2011021178

 
 
 
 
Orders may be sent to: Informa Healthcare, Sheepen Place, Colchester, Essex CO3 3LP, UK
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7017 5540
Email: CSDhealthcarebooks@informa.com
Website: http://informahealthcarebooks.com/

For corporate sales please contact: CorporateBooksIHC@informa.com
For foreign rights please contact: RightsIHC@informa.com
For reprint permissions please contact: PermissionsIHC@informa.com

Typeset by Exeter Premedia Services Private Ltd., Chennai, India
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom

I dedicate this book to everyone who has touched my life in the past 25 years of dermatology 
practice, especially my husband, Michael, who has been supportive of my writing efforts and 
infinitely inspirational to challenge me to think beyond with new ideas. I also dedicate this book 
to my boys, Mark and Matthew, who have opened my eyes to the electronic world and helped 
me immensely in the preparation of this text.

This third edition represents a life of learning as I have grown in the understanding of complex 
formulations in the cosmetic realm that impact the practice of dermatology.

Contents

  Russell P. Hall 

Foreword 
Acknowledgment 
Introduction 

I  Facial cosmetic dermatology 

Introduction 

  1.  Acne and cosmetics 

  2.  Rosacea and cosmetics 

  3.  Facial moisturizers and eczema 

  4.  Sensitive skin and contact dermatitis 

  5.  Aging skin and cosmeceuticals 

  6.  Facial scarring and camouflaging 

  7.  Ethnic skin and pigmentation 

  8.  Male skin care 

  9.  Facial photoprotection 

10.  Lip cosmetic considerations 

11.  Eyes 

12.  Postsurgical cosmetics 

13.  Facial adornment 

14.  Troubleshooting problematic ingredients 

Summary 

II  Cosmetics in dermatology of the body

Introduction 

15.  Personal hygiene, cleansers, and xerosis 

16.  Body xerosis and moisturization 

17.  Hand dermatitis and moisturization 

18.  Hyperhidrosis and antiperspirants 

19.  Fragrances, dermatitis, and vasomotor rhinitis 

20.  Body photoprotection 

21.  Sunless tanning creams 

22.  Cellulite 

23.  Stretch marks 

III  Hair

Introduction 

24.  Shampoos for hair health 

25.  Hair conditioners 

viii
ix
x

1

3

12

18

27

34

47

52

57

60

68

76

91

95

103

112

113

115

121

130

132

137

141

148

150

154

156

158

164

26.  Hair styling aids 

27.  Hair styling with prostheses 

28.  Hair permanent waving 

29.  Hair straightening 

30.  Hair dyeing 

31.  Folliculitis and shaving 

32.  Hair removal 

33.  Hair and photoprotection 

34.  Alopecia and cosmetic considerations 

35.  Seborrheic dermatitis 

36.  Psoriasis and hair 

37.  Aging hair issues 

38.  Damaged hair issues 

IV  Nail

Introduction 

39.  A problem-oriented approach to fingernail issues 

40.  Understanding and treating brittle nails 

41.  Cosmetics in nail disease 

42.  Children and nail cosmetic issues 

43.  Toenails and cosmetic issues 

Summary 

Index 

169

176

183

190

198

209

213

221

225

233

236

239

242

248

249

262

265

268

269

272

275

vii

 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword

It is a great pleasure to write the foreward to the third edition 
of  Dr.  Zoe  Draelos’s  textbook,  Cosmetics  and  Dermatological 
Problems and Solutions. Zoe has a long interest in this area and 
has made major contributions to the field through the applica-
tion of scientific principles to the evaluation of the efficacy of 
cosmetic  products.  Her  training  as  an  engineer,  clinical 
researcher  and  clinical  dermatologist  are  a  unique  combina-
tion in this field and the result is a new level of understanding 
of the wide variety of agents that are used as cosmetics. 

This  book  is  a  testament  to  Dr.  Draelos’s  commitment  to 
educating dermatologists about the wide variety of products 
available to our patients and on the scientific basis for cosmet-
ics.  This  is  a  benefit  to  all  dermatologists  as  we  attempt  to 
answer  the  many  questions  our  patients  have  regarding  the 
vast array of products and confusing advertising that confront 
us all daily. 

The third edition continues on the foundation of the first 
two editions. It is comprehensive, including the vast array of 
products  that  our  patients  may  utilize.  It  is  however  more 
than  a  list,  in  that  Zoe  has  included  the  proposed  mecha-
nisms of action of each product. Finally, this book is an inde-
pendent effort including all products without regard to any 
specific  member  of  the  cosmetic  industry.  Cosmetics  and 
Dermatological Problems and Solutions is an important contri-
bution to our specialty and will be useful to the experienced 
dermatologist and residents alike. 

Russell P. Hall
Department of Dermatology
Duke University School of Medicine
Durham, North Carolina, USA

viii

 
Acknowledgment

Many people have contributed to my search for knowledge 
and  preparation  of  this  book.  I  am  grateful  to  those  who 
trained me to practice dermatology at the University of Ari-
zona,  namely  Peter  Lynch,  MD,  Norman  Levine,  MD,  and 
Ron  Hansen,  MD.  Peter  Lynch,  MD,  was  visionary  in 
encouraging my knowledge development in the area of cos-
metic  dermatology  during  my  residency  and  provided  me 
with  the  opportunity  to  publish  the  first  edition  of  this 
book  in  1990.  The  second  edition  was  published  in  1995 
and  this  is  the  third  edition  which  is  being  published 
in 2011.

I am also grateful to my son, Matthew Draelos, who helped 
with the preparation of the references for this book and edit-
ing  of  the  text  and  photographs.  In  short,  this  third  edition 
acknowledges the cumulative efforts of many who have posi-
tively influenced my love of dermatology.

This book contains images of many products to illustrate the 
topics  discussed.  These  are  not  product  endorsements,  but 
representations of widely available formulations in the present 
marketplace. An effort has been made to photograph products 
from many different manufacturers, unless there is only one 
company that dominates a certain market segment.

ix

Introduction

As  the  understanding  of  skin,  hair,  and  nail  physiology  has 
evolved,  so  too  has  the  design  of  products  to  enhance  the 
appearance of these external structures. This book is designed 
to aid the dermatologist in understanding and utilizing these 
products in daily practice. The book is organized first by struc-
ture  in  terms  of  the  skin,  hair,  and  nails.  This  layout  was 
selected  because  dermatologists  are  the  medical  experts  in 
charge  of  disease  and  appearance  issues  related  to  the  skin, 
hair,  and  nails.  After  reading  this  book,  the  dermatologist 
should have a fundamental understanding of the formulation, 
application, side effects, and issues of special interest as related 
to nonprescription products to maintain and enhance appear-
ance.  All  the  products  discussed  are  in  the  over-the-counter 
realm,  not  traditionally  covered  by  dermatology  textbooks. 
Yet, the maintenance of healthy skin, hair, and nails is accom-
plished solely by the use of over-the-counter products, which 
makes the reading of this book important. The dermatologists 
must learn to make recommendations and identify problems 
related to over-the-counter products.

Within the broad topics of skin, hair, and nails, there are 
several subdivisions. Skin is broken down into body areas of 
face and body. Great distinctions exist because the facial skin 
is adorned with colored cosmetics, whereas the body is only 
cleansed  and  moisturized;  however,  the  control  of  armpit 
perspiration  is  also  important.  Differences  between  female 
and male skin needs, considering all variations of skin color, 
are explored and the products used for hygiene are also eval-
uated. The book goes a step further by discussing the use of 
cosmetics  and  skin  care  products  in  common,  cosmetically 
relevant skin disease, such as acne, eczema, rosacea, and sen-
sitive skin. Further, skin can be distinguished by age and the 
amount  of  oil  production.  All  these  variables  influence 
cleanser and moisturizer selection while providing opportu-
nities  for  manufacturers  to  customize  formulations.  These 
formulations  are  presented  to  better  understand  the  subtle 
differences between the myriad of customized products that 
are available for purchase.

Within the face, there are unique hygiene and product appli-
cation  areas.  The  eyes  are  elaborately  adorned  with  color 
 cosmetics, but represent a sensitive skin area with a junction 
between cornified skin and mucosa. A similar junction exists 
around the mouth, but the vermillion is also adorned with lip 
cosmetics and subject to the trauma of speaking and chewing. 
The ears are discussed with attention to the health of the ear 
canal and earlobe. Finally, the face must be considered in terms 
of photoprotection needs to prevent both painful sunburn and 
photoaging.  Sunscreens  can  be  used  as  separate  products  or 
applied through moisturizers, facial foundations, or powders. 
Cosmetics  can  provide  functionality  beyond  adornment 
through photoprotection.

Aesthetic issues of facial scarring, asymmetries, and the care 
of post-surgical facial skin are tackled, since there are needs for 
an  understanding  of  camouflaging  techniques.  The  use  of 
artistic  color  to  improve  appearance  through  recontouring 
and  the  minimization  of  scarring  with  opaque  cosmetics  is 
part of the knowledge base of the dermatologist. Proper use of 
cosmetics  can  enhance  patient  satisfaction  with  healing 
 following an invasive procedure or the final skin appearance 
after an incisional surgery.

Even though the hair and nails are nonliving structures, they 
are of tremendous cosmetic value. Hair grooming issues, such 
as shampooing and conditioning, for all types of hair architec-
tures are important to hair appearance and also for the main-
tenance  of  scalp  health  following  treatment  of  seborrheic 
dermatitis, psoriasis, postmenopausal dry scalp, and the alope-
cias. Improper hair styling procedures and products may cause 
hair breakage and loss, requiring special discussion, along with 
hair dyeing, permanent waving, and straightening. The chem-
istry  behind  hair  cosmetic  manipulations  is  complex  and 
damaging to the unique keratin structure of the hair shaft. The 
desire for appearance alterations must be balanced with hair 
health, which sometimes requires compromise on the part of 
the  patient.  While  abundant  hair  growth  is  desirable  on  the 
scalp,  it  is  undesirable  on  the  female  face,  armpits,  and  legs. 
This  book  also  covers  issues  of  hirsutism  and  hair  removal 
options.

Nails  are  also  addressed  both  from  a  functional  and  cos-
metic standpoint. Brittle nails, nails in children, and toenails 
are discussed along with the use of nail cosmetics from pol-
ishes to prostheses. Nail health can be affected by improper 
grooming  procedures  and  cosmetic  elongation  manipula-
tions, but nail disease also be improved with the use of nail 
cosmetics.

In short, this book covers all aspects of cosmetic dermatol-
ogy  presented  in  a  fashion  that  allows  the  dermatologist  to 
use this material in everyday practice. This problem-oriented 
approach is not found in any other textbook on the subject 
and is a new addition to the third edition. When the first edi-
tion of this book was published some 20 years ago in 1990, a 
more encyclopedic approach was taken because it was the first 
book of its kind in dermatology to address the area of cosmet-
ics. It was a paperback book with a few tables and line draw-
ings.  The  second  edition  of  the  book  was  launched  in  1995 
into hardback with more tables, but only a black on white lay-
out. The third edition of this book in 2011 is hardback and in 
full color with numerous textboxes, images, and tables and a 
digital  layout.  The  advancements  in  publishing  technology 
have supplemented the advancements in cosmetics, which are 
showcased in this third edition. The 20-year evolution of this 
book  represents  my  growth  as  a  person,  as  a  dermatologist, 

x

 INTRODUCTION

and as a teacher. It is the culmination of my passion for learn-
ing and sharing. I hope you can sense my enthusiasm for the 
subject and the joys I experienced while developing the mate-
rial. Writing, after all, is a unique undertaking. It is done in 
silence with focused thought and vigilant hands tapping on 
the keyboard using borrowed moments in the far reaches of 
the globe in all time zones. This book is the culmination of 

xi

ideas  that  zip  across  the  subconscious  brain  unexpectedly 
only to find their way into a framework of organization and 
logic.  It  is  my  hope  that  you  will  find  illumination  and 
 enjoyment while we share together an increased understand-
ing of the place that cosmetics has in dermatology!

Zoe Diana Draelos

             I  

 Facial cosmetic dermatology: Introduction       

 Facial skin receives the major attention in the realm of  cosmetic 
dermatology as it is our outer expressive conduit to the world. 
It ages more rapidly than the rest of the skin due to its almost 
constant exposure to the sun. Decoration of the facial skin is a 
time-honored tradition among many of the world’s peoples. 
Most  modern  cosmetics  are  used  to  highlight  facial  features 
and camouflage facial defects. The earliest cosmetic designed 
to cover facial blemishes was the beauty patch. These patches 
became  popular  in  the  1600s  as  they  were  used  to  cover  the 
permanent scars left behind on the faces of people who sur-
vived smallpox epidemics in Europe. These patches were black 
silk or velvet pieces shaped like stars, moons, and hearts that 
were carefully placed on the face. Patch boxes—shallow metal 
boxes with a mirror in the cover—were carried everywhere to 
keep  replacements  handy  should  a  patch  fall  off  in  public. 
Modern facial cosmetics were developed from the decorative 
patches ( 1 ). 

 The concept of covering the face with a pigmented cream 
originated  in  the  theater  with  a  product  known  as “French 
White,”  which  consisted  of  face  powder  incorporated  into  a 
liquid vehicle ( 2 ). This was considered a novel improvement 
over simply powdering the skin due to its superior adherence. 
Later, “grease paints” were developed as thick oily pigmented 
pastes, but they were not appropriate for wear outside the the-
ater.  The  first  major  breakthrough  in  facial  foundations  for 
the  average  woman  came  when  Max  Factor  developed  cake 
make-up, which he patented in 1936 ( 3 ). This product cam-
ouflaged the underlying skin, providing a velvety texture with 
subtle color. 

 However, the face is not only adorned with cosmetics, but it 
is also cleansed and moisturized. Cosmetics are used not only 
for hygiene purposes but also to maintain and enhance skin 
beauty.  Harley  Procter  developed  the  first  widely  marketed 
American facial cleansing soap in 1878 when he decided that 
his father’s soap and candle factory should produce a delicately 
scented,  creamy  white  soap  to  compete  with  imported 
 European products. He accomplished this feat with the help of 
his cousin James Gamble, a chemist, who made a richly lather-
ing product called “White Soap.” By accident, they discovered 
that  whipping  air  into  the  soap  solution  before  molding 
resulted in a floating soap that could not be lost in the stream 
or  bathtub  ( 4 ).  This  resulted  in  a  product  known  as “Ivory” 
soap, which is still manufactured today. 

 The  excellent  sebum  removal  afforded  by  the  first  soaps 
 created the need for moisturizers to compensate for the flaking 
and  dryness  experienced.  It  is  surprising  that  the  very  first 
American moisturizer is still in use and known as “Vaseline,” as 
named  by  Robert  A.  Chesebrough  who  manufactured  and 
 patented  the  concoction  in  1872.  Chesebrough  originally 
 recommended  petrolatum  as  a  chemical  to  treat  leather; 
 however, its value was soon recognized as a remedy for chapped 
hands and as a hair pomade. Later, petrolatum was adapted by 
the  pharmaceutical  industry  as  a  vehicle  instead  of  lard. 

It  offered  the  benefit  of  preservative-free  stability  since  lard 
 frequently turned rancid. 

 Facial skin care has a rich history, but the modern formula-
tions  are  clearly  superior  and  better  able  to  meet  skin  needs. 
This  section  of  the  text  examines  facial  skin  care  from  a 
 disease-oriented  approach.  It  examines  the  needs  of  the  oily 
skin of acne, the dry skin of eczema, and the sensitive skin of 
rosacea. Cleansing, moisturizing, and the use of facial founda-
tions are examined for these basic prototype groups. The dis-
cussion then turns to the large category of aging facial skin to 
additionally  encompass  the  realm  of  cosmeceuticals.  Finally, 
the  section  focuses  on  the  special  needs  areas  of  the  face, 
 specifically the eyes and lips. It is hoped that at the end of this 
section, the dermatologist will be able to understand how these 
over the counter products fit into the medical armamentarium. 

  skin physiology 
 A brief discussion of skin physiology is presented in order to 
understand  the  challenge  in  creating  a  healthy  normal  facial 
skin for patients of all skin colors, complexion types, and ages. 
This is particularly challenging when the constituents of “nor-
mal” skin have not been defined; rather there is a range of nor-
mal skins among all peoples of the world. Skin is the largest 
organ of the body possessing a regularly irregular surface com-
posed of skin scales with intervening hairs, sweat ducts, and oil 
glands that reflect light to the eye, which is perceived as beauty. 
Unfortunately, with the passage of time the beauty of the skin 
fades, even though it may be considered “normal.” Sun, smok-
ing, stress, disease, scarring, and aging alter the structure of the 
skin  and  degrade  its  pristine  appearance  that  is  present  at 
birth.  

  skin structure 
 The skin is composed of two layers, the epidermis and the der-
mis, each with distinct functions ( Fig. I.1 ). The outer epider-
mis forms a barrier to the world, keeping out water, sunlight, 
insects, bacteria, toxins, and allergens. It acts as a beautiful bar-
rier between the body and the environment and is responsible 
for all the variations in skin appearance. Below the epidermis 
lies  the  dermis,  accounting  for  more  than  90%  of  skin  mass 
and  providing  physical  strength  to  the  skin.  The  dermis  is 
composed  of  the  papillary  dermis  and  the  reticular  dermis 
with the papillary dermis lying in direct contact with the epi-
dermis. It is composed of collagen and elastin fibers contain-
ing  blood  vessels  and  lymphatic  channels.  In  addition,  there 
are connective tissue cells and glycosaminoglycans responsible 
for holding water in the dermis and maintaining skin hydra-
tion.  Under  the  papillary  dermis  lies  the  reticular  dermis, 
 possessing  fewer  cells,  relatively  few  blood  vessels,  dense 
 collagen  bundles,  and  coarse  elastin  fibers.  The  papillary 
 dermis provides physical strength to the skin and is the  location 
of  the  eccrine  and  apocrine  sweat  glands,  sebaceous  glands, 
and hair follicles.  

1

2

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Opening of eccrine sweat duct

Hair shaft

Eccrine sweat duct

Eccrine sweat gland

Apocrine duct

Hair follicle

Apocrine sweat gland

 Figure I.1     The skin is composed of the epidermis and the dermis, with a thin nonliving layer known as the stratum corneum. All cosmetic products impact the 
stratum corneum, which is the basis for the visual beauty of the skin.    

  stratum corneum 
 Perhaps the most important layer of the skin, from a cosmetic 
standpoint, is the stratum corneum, also known as the horny 
layer.  This  outermost  layer  of  the  epidermis  is  impacted  by 
cleansing,  moisturization,  and  other  skin  care  treatments  to 
the greatest degree. It is the layer assessed by the eye to arrive 
at  the  impression  of  a  lovely  skin,  but  is  only  15  to  150 µm 
thick.  The  rest  of  the  chapter  will  address  this  layer  from  a 
 cosmetic viewpoint. 

 The stratum corneum is composed of helical polypeptides 
known  as  keratin  protein  arranged  into  corneocytes.  The 
 corneocytes  have  been  termed  the  bricks  in  the  “brick  and 
mortar”  construction  of  the  skin  barrier.  The  mortar  is 
 composed  of  the  intercellular  lipids  that  form  a  waterproof 
covering  of  the  body  to  which  cleansers,  moisturizers,  and 
 cosmetics are applied. There are two types of lipids found in 
the skin: polar and nonpolar. The polar lipids possess an elec-
trical  charge  and  consist  of  phospholipids,  glycolipids,  and 
cholesterol.  The  uncharged  nonpolar  lipids  are  triglycerides, 
squalene,  and  waxes.  The  percentage  breakdown  of  the 
 intercellular lipids is given in  Table I.1 . 

 Moisturizers attempt to mimic the effect of the intercellular 
lipids,  but  they  can  only  create  a  barrier  that  reduces  the 
amount  of  water  lost  to  the  environment.  Cleansers  must 
allow  these  intercellular  lipids  to  remain  intact  without 

Table I.1  Intercellular Lipid Composition

Lipid

Quantity (%)

Triglycerides
Fatty acids
Waxes
Cholesterol, sphingolipids, ceramides

12–25
12–20
6
14–25

 producing  irritation  or  premature  desquamation  of  the 
 corneocytes.  Finally,  colored  cosmetics  and  cosmeceuticals 
must enhance the appearance of the stratum corneum on the 
face  to  create  the  optical  sensation  of  beauty.  With  this 
 introduction, our attention now turns to the incorporation of 
these concepts into a patient treatment regimen.  

     references 
  1.            Panati     C    .   Beauty patch and compact  .   In  :   Extraordinary Origins of Everyday 

Things  .   New York  :   Perennial Library, Harper & Row  ,    1987  :    225  –  6  .   

  2.            Schlossman      ML   ,     Feldman     AJ    .    Fluid  foundations  and  blush  make-up  .    In: 
deNavarre  MG,  ed.  The  Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  , 
  2nd edn  .   Wheaton, IL  :   Allured Publishing Corporation  ,   1988  :   741  –  65  .    
  3.            Wells      FV   ,     Lubowe      II    .    Cosmetics  and  the  Skin  .    New  York  :    Reinhold 

 Publishing Corporation  ,    1964  :    141  –  9  .    

  4.            Panati     C. Soap    .   In  :   Extraordinary Origins of Everyday Things  .   New York  : 

  Perennial Library, Harper & Row Publishers  ,   1987  :   217  –  19  .         

             1  

 Acne and cosmetics      

  Acne is the most common inflammatory condition treated by 
the  dermatologist,  using  both  prescription  and  over  the 
 counter (OTC) formulations. This chapter focuses on the OTC 
drugs  and  cosmetics  that  are  used  in  conjunction  with 
 prescription  medication  and  in  the  maintenance  phase  of 
therapy.  Consumers  spend  about  $100  million  per  year  on 
OTC anti-acne products, which include cleansers, creams, and 
moisturizers ( 1 ). 

  otc drug acne therapies 
 Acne products listing an active ingredient are regulated by the 
US Food and Drug Administration as OTC drugs. Only certain 
ingredients can be used in acne products, which are listed in 
the final Acne Monograph. Some of the ingredients approved 
for this use in the monograph are salicylic acid, sulfur, sulfur 
combined  with  resorcinol,  and  benzoyl  peroxide  ( 2 ).  These 
ingredients can only be used singly and not in combination. 
Their utility in the treatment of acne in combination with skin 
care products is discussed in this chapter. 

  Benzoyl Peroxide 
 The most effective and most commonly used active ingredient 
in OTC drug acne preparations is benzoyl peroxide. Eventu-
ally,  even  all  prescription  benzoyl  peroxide  products  will  be 
available as OTC  drugs. About 23% of  people aged 13 to 27 
years have used an OTC benzoyl peroxide product ( 3 ). It is a 
member  of  the  organic  peroxide  family  consisting  of  two 
 benzoyl groups joined by a peroxide group. Benzoyl peroxide 
is prepared by treating benzoyl chloride with sodium peroxide 
to yield benzoyl peroxide and sodium chloride. It is a radical 
initiator and is highly flammable, explosive, a possible tumor 
promoter, and a mutagen.  

   Benzoyl peroxide is the most effective acne treatment 
ingredient in the OTC market. 

 Benzoyl  peroxide  has  many  properties  pertinent  to  acne, 
including  antibacterial,  anti-inflammatory,  and  comedolytic 
effects ( 4 ). When benzoyl peroxide touches the skin, it breaks 
down into benzoic acid and oxygen, neither of which is prob-
lematic. It has antimicrobial properties against  Propionibacte-
rium  acnes   as  demonstrated  by  a  2log 10   decrease  in   P.  acnes  
concentration after two days of topical application of 5% ben-
zoyl peroxide ( 5 ). This same antimicrobial effect was observed 
after  applying  10%  benzoyl  peroxide  cream  for  three  days, 
which resulted in a mean 2log 10  decrease in the concentration 
of microbial organisms; however, after seven days, no further 
decline in  P. acnes  concentration was observed ( 6 ). 

 Benzoyl peroxide is an important antimicrobial agent that 
has  a  better  potency  against   P.  acnes   than  other  topical 
 antibiotics  such  as  erythromycin  or  clindamycin.  However, 

unlike topical antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide does not result in 
resistant organisms ( 7 ). Benzoyl peroxide also acts as an anti-
inflammatory agent by reducing oxygen radicals. In addition, 
its ability to reduce the  P. acnes  population also reduces inflam-
mation due to fewer bacterial induced monocytes producing 
tumor necrosis factor α, interleukin 1β, and interleukin 8 ( 8 ). 
This anti-inflammatory effect is perceived by the consumer as 
reduced redness and pain. 

 Finally,  benzoyl  peroxide  is  also  a  comedolytic,  which  is 
capable  of  producing  a  10%  reduction  in  comedones  ( 9 ). 
Comedolytics  allow  the  plug  in  the  pore  to  loosen  from  the 
surrounding follicle restoring the normal flow of sebum to the 
skin surface. It was originally thought that higher concentra-
tion  benzoyl  peroxide  preparations  would  provide  superior 
comedolytic benefits; however, it now appears that even 2.5% 
benzoyl peroxide is effective. This is the strength most com-
monly  found  in  products  available  in  the  consumer  market. 
Higher  concentration  benzoyl  peroxides  may  only  increase 
skin irritation, resulting in peeling and redness ( 10 ). In addi-
tion,  benzoyl  peroxide  causes  allergic  contact  dermatitis  in 
1–2.5%  of  consumers,  resulting  in  redness,  swelling,  oozing, 
and pain ( 11 ).  

   2.5% Benzoyl peroxide in small particulate size may be as 
effective as 5–10% benzoyl peroxide in acne treatment 
creams. 

 One  of  the  major  unresolved  concerns  regarding  benzoyl 
peroxide is its safety. Benzoyl peroxide is a highly reactive mol-
ecule capable of causing explosions in concentrations of 20% 
or  higher.  The  manufacture  of  benzoyl  peroxide  products 
requires a special facility, and stability problems are common 
in new formulations. Benzoyl peroxide is capable of producing 
DNA  strand  breaks,  but  rodent  carcinogenicity  studies  have 
been  negative  ( 12 ).  No  correlation  has  been  shown  between 
benzoyl peroxide use and skin cancer in humans. 

 Current  trends  in  benzoyl  peroxide  formulation  have 
focused on the use of less irritating hydrogel formulations and 
smaller particle size benzoyl peroxide ( 13 ). Raw benzoyl per-
oxide is a particulate that must be solubulized into solution. It 
is only the benzoyl peroxide particles that touch the skin sur-
face that are active in the killing of  P. acnes . Although larger 
particles will yield higher concentrations in the formulation, 
most of the benzoyl peroxide particles will not touch the skin. 
A smaller particle size allows better skin coverage with less irri-
tation, since the concentration is reduced. It is possible to cre-
ate a 2.5% benzoyl peroxide formulation with an efficacy equal 
to that of a 10% benzoyl peroxide formulation based on skin 
contact with the active ingredient. A careful, creative formula-
tion  can  minimize  tolerability  issues  associated  with  OTC 
 benzoyl peroxide formulations ( Fig. 1.1 ).   

3

4

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Opening of sweat duct

Infected sebum

Comedonal plug

Muscle

Subcutaneous fat

 Figure 1.1     Benzoyl peroxide particles that contact the skin in and around the 
ostia  provide  a  comedolytic  and  antibacterial  effect  by  causing  the  skin  to 
shed  the  comedonal  “Plug,”  which  seals  the  infected  sebum  and  causes 
inflammation.    

  Salicylic Acid 
 Salicylic acid is another major comedolytic used as an active 
ingredient  in  OTC  acne  treatments  in  concentrations  up  to 
2%  ( 14 ).  Salicylic  acid  is  a  colorless,  crystalline,  oil-soluble 
phenolic  compound  originally  derived  from  the  willow  tree 
 Salix . It is a β-hydroxy acid where the OH group is adjacent to 
the  carboxyl group. The compound is synthesized by treating 
sodium  phenolate,  the  sodium  salt  of  phenol,  with  carbon 
dioxide at 100 atm pressure and 390 K temperature followed 
by acidification with sulfuric acid.  

   Salicylic acid is able to exfoliate in the oily milieu of the 
pore. 

 Salicylic  acid,  also  known  as  2-hydroxybenzoic  acid,  has  a 
rich  history  in  medicine.  It  is  used  as  an  anti-inflammatory 
inhibiting  arachidonic  acid,  since  it  is  chemically  related  to 
aspirin,  a  flavoring  agent  with  the  characteristic  wintergreen 
taste, a liniment for sore muscles and an acne treatment. Sali-
cylic acid can penetrate into the follicle and dislodge the com-
edonal plug from the follicular lining. It neither kills  P. acnes  
nor does it prevent the development of antibiotic resistance. 
Thus, salicylic acid may be less  effective than benzoyl peroxide 
in  acne  treatment,  but  it  is  also  less  irritating  and  less  aller-
genic. Some proprietary salicylic acid preparations have shown 
parity to 5% benzoyl peroxide ( 15 ). Salicylic acid is sometimes 
used  in  hypoallergenic  acne  treatments  and  acne  treatments 
for mature individuals. 

 Salicylic acid can be applied to the skin in a variety of differ-
ent  formulations  ( 16 ).  It  can  be  applied  as  a  solution  in  an 
alcohol-detergent  vehicle  or  in  the  form  of  an  impregnated 
pad ( 17 , 18 ). It can be formulated as a 2% salicylic acid scrub, 
with clinical data demonstrating a reduction in open comedo-
nes  ( 19 ). Also,  10%  and  20%  salicylic  acid  peels  are  used  to 
promote comedolysis. 

 Some  individuals  experience  allergic  reactions  when  sali-
cylic acid is ingested; however, it is generally accepted as a safe 
ingredient. An overdose of salicylic acid can lead to salicylate 
intoxication, presenting as a state of metabolic acidosis with a 
compensatory  respiratory  alkalosis.  This  has  not  been 
reported  with  topical  applications  and  salicylic  acid  acne 
preparations  are  considered  safe  and  effective,  even  during 
pregnancy.  

  Sulfur 
 The  oldest  treatment  for  acne  predating  benzoyl  peroxide 
and salicylic acid is sulfur. Sulfur is a known bacteriostatic 
and antifungal agent ( 20 ). It is a yellow, nonmetallic element 
that  has  been  used  for  centuries  to  treat  various  dermato-
logic conditions. The mechanism of action for sulfur is not 
totally understood, but it is thought to interact with cysteine 
in  the  stratum  corneum  causing  a  reduction  in  sulfur  to 
hydrogen sulfide. Hydrogen sulfide in turn degrades keratin, 
producing  the  keratolytic  effect  of  sulfur  ( 21 ).  Sulfur  has 
been labeled as a comedogen, but this is controversial ( 22 ). 
Sulfur is available in concentrations of 3–8% in OTC acne 
formulations. It has a characteristic foul odor and unusual 
yellow color. It stains clothing and is typically formulated as 
a thick paste.    

   Sulfur is thought to interact with cysteine in the stratum 
corneum causing a reduction in sulfur to hydrogen sulfide, 
which has a comedolytic effect beneficial in curing acne. 

  cosmetic acne therapies 
 In addition to the monographed acne treatment ingredients of 
benzoyl  peroxide,  salicylic  acid,  and  sulfur,  other  substances 
have been used in the cosmetic treatment of acne, which are 
not  monographed.  These  ingredients  are  found  in  cosmetic 
acne  therapies  and  include  hydroxy  acids,  retinol,  triclosan, 
and tea tree oil. 

  Hydroxy Acids 
 Hydroxy acids, such as glycolic acid, are used in the cosmetic 
treatment of acne as desquamating agents. Glycolic acid is the 
smallest alpha hydroxy acid appearing as a colorless, odorless, 
hygroscopic  crystalline  solid.  While  glycolic  acid  can  be 
obtained from the fermentation of sugar cane, it is more com-
monly synthesized by reacting chloroacetic acid with sodium 
hydroxide followed by re-acidification. 

 The efficacy of glycolic acid in treating acne is related to the 
free acid concentration ( 23 ). The free acid is able to dissolve 
the ionic bonds between the corneocytes forming the stratum 
corneum.  This  desquamation  can  remove  the  comedonal 
plugs;  however,  the  water-soluble  glycolic  acid  cannot  enter 
the oily milieu of the pore. For this reason, salicylic acid is a 
much better comedolytic.  

ACNE AND COSMETICS

5

   Glycolic acid is an exfoliant used in acne washes. 

 Glycolic  acid  can  be  delivered  to  the  skin  in  the  form  of  a 
cleanser,  moisturizer,  or  peel.  The  rinse-off  cleanser  is  less 
 effective in acne therapy than the leave-on moisturizer. Higher 
concentrations such as 20–70% glycolic acid can be delivered to 
the skin in the form of a peel that is left on for 3–5 minutes and 
rinsed off later. The peels can also be used to improve the dark 
scarring  associated  with  acne,  known  as  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation ( 24 ).  

  Triclosan 
 Topical  antimicrobials  may  also  be  used  in  the  treatment  of 
acne.  One  common  antimicrobial  used  in  deodorant  soaps 
and waterless hand sanitizers is triclosan. Triclosan is not on 
the US Acne Monograph, but is used for the treatment of acne 
in  other  countries,  such  as  England.  Triclosan  decreases  the 
 P. acnes  count on the skin surface, which accounts for the der-
matologist recommendation that acne patients use deodorant 
soap as part of an acne treatment regimen. Other OTC deliv-
ery methods for triclosan, including hydrogel patch delivery, 
have been published ( 25 ).  

   Triclosan is an antibacterial used in many deodorant soaps 
popular with acne patients. 

 No  bacterial  resistance  to  triclosan  has  been  identified  to 
date,  but  the  use  of  triclosan  is  increasing  dramatically  with 
the popularity  of triclosan-containing antibacterial waterless 
hand  sanitizers  for  consumer  and  hospital  use.  It  is  thought 
that triclosan interferes with lipid synthesis in the bacterial cell 
wall accounting for its wide ranging antibacterial effect.  

  OTC Retinoids 
 Vitamin  A  derivatives,  known  as  retinoids,  are  used  in  the 
treatment of acne. Three prescription acne treatment retinoids 
exist: adapalene, tretinoin, and tazarotene. A  variety  of OTC 
retinoids  exist  that  may  be  helpful  in  acne  treatment.  These 
retinoids  include  retinol  and  retinaldehyde.  Retinol  can  be 
absorbed by keratinocytes and reversibly oxidized into retinal-
dehyde. Retinaldehyde is irreversibly converted into all-trans 
retinoic acid, also known as tretinoin. Tretinoin is transported 
into the keratinocyte nucleus modulating follicular keratiniza-
tion.  Large,  multicenter,  double  blind,  placebo-controlled 
studies on the use OTC retinoids in acne treatment are yet to 
be conducted. However, retinol has been shown to be 20 times 
less potent than topical tretinoin but exhibits greater penetra-
tion than tretinoin ( 26 ).   

   Retinol and retinaldehyde are used in some cosmetic acne 
treatment creams, but they do not have a similar effect on 
microcomedones like tretinoin. 

  Tea Tree Oil 
 Tea  tree  oil  is  the  most  common  herbal  essential  oil  used  for 
acne treatment. Tea tree oil, obtained from the Australian tree 
 Melaleuca alternifolia , contains several anti microbial substances 
such as terpinen-4-ol, alpha-terpineol, and  alpha-pinene ( 27 ). 

The  oil  has  a  pale  golden  color  with  a  fresh  camphoraceous 
odor.  It  is  used  for  medicinal  purposes  as  an  antiseptic, 
 antifungal, and antibacterial ( 28 ). 

 The antibacterial activity of 10% tea tree oil has been shown 
against   Staphylococcus  aureus ,  including  methicillin-resistant 
 Staphylococcus aureus , without resistance ( 29 ). Lower concen-
trations, however, have demonstrated bacterial resistance. Tea 
tree  oil  has  been  found  to  be  as  effective  in  the  treatment  of 
acne as 5% benzoyl peroxide based on a reduction in comedo-
nes and inflammatory acne lesions; however, the onset of action 
is slower for tea tree oil ( 30 ). The tea oil group did experience 
fewer  side  effects  than  the  benzoyl  peroxide  group.  Another 
randomized,  60-subject  placebo-controlled  study  in  subjects 
with mild to moderate acne found 5% topical tea tree oil pro-
duced a statistically significant reduction in total lesion count 
and acne severity index as compared to placebo ( 31 ). Tea tree 
oil  may  also  reduce  the  amount  of  inflammation  present 
around acne lesions thereby reducing the redness ( 32 ).  

   Tea tree oil is used as an antibacterial in some natural 
botanical cosmetic acne treatment products. 

 Tea  tree  oil  is  toxic  when  swallowed.  It  also  has  produced 
toxicity when applied topically in high concentrations to cats 
and other animals ( 33 ). Its use in low concentration topically 
for the treatment of acne has not produced toxicity problems. 
However,  tea  tree  oil  is  a  known  cause  of  allergic  contact 
 dermatitis. An Italian study of 725 subjects patch tested with 
undiluted,  1%,  and  0.1%  tea  tree  oil  found  that  6%  of  the 
 subjects experienced a positive reaction to undiluted tea tree oil, 
one subject experienced an allergic reaction to 1% tea tree oil, 
and none of them had any reaction to the 0.1% dilution ( 34 ). 
Thus,  the  incidence  of  allergic  reactions  to  tea  tree  oil  is 
 concentration dependent.  

  Miscellaneous Acne Ingredients 
 An ingredient of some interest in acne treatment is zinc. It has 
been applied topically, since zinc salts are bacteriostatic to  P. acnes , 
and orally ingested as a homeopathic acne therapy ( 35 ). A study 
by Dreno et al., demonstrated that zinc salts in the culture media 
of  P. acnes  prevented the development of organisms resistant to 
erythromycin.  Since  many   P.  acnes   organisms  are  resistant  to 
 topical erythromycin, which has been largely replaced by topical 
clindamycin, this may be an important mechanism for preventing 
bacterial  resistance  ( 36 ).  Zinc  taken  orally  with  nicotinamide 
orally  for  acne  reduces  inflammation.  It  is  theorized  that  they 
reduce 
leukocyte  chemotaxis, 
 lysosomal enzyme release, and mast cell degranulation ( 37 ). 

inflammation  by 

inhibiting 

 The value of topical nicotinamide in acne has been reported 
along  with  its  use  orally  ( 38 , 39 ).  A  commercially  available 
OTC  vitamin  preparation,  based  on  nicotinamide,  has  been 
shown  to  produce  acne  improvement  in  eight  weeks  ( 40 ). 
 Topically,  nicotinamide  4%  was  shown  to  be  comparable  to 
clindamycin gel 1% in the treatment of moderate acne ( 41 ).   

  skin care in acne patients 
 Beyond the acne treatments discussed earlier, skin care prod-
ucts  and  cosmetics  can  aid  in  acne  therapy  or  contribute  to 
disease worsening. These ancillary skin care products include 

6

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

cleansers,  astringents,  exfoliants,  facial  scrubs,  epidermabra-
sion, textured cloths, mechanized skin care devices, and face 
masks. 

  Cleansers 
 A variety of cleansers are useful in removing sebum and nor-
malizing the acne biofilm. Soaps are some of the major cleans-
ers used in acne treatment. These include true soaps that are 
composed  of  long  chain  fatty  acid  alkali  salts,  with  a  pH  of 
9–10. Many of the milder acne soaps are composed of synthetic 
detergents, known as syndets. These cleansers contain less than 
10%  soap  with  a  more  neutral  pH  adjusted  to  5.5–7.0  ( 42 ). 
Some of the most popular soaps for acne patients are combars 
composed of alkaline soaps to which surface active agents with 
a pH of 9–10 have been added. These combars also contain tri-
closan, a potent antibacterial helpful in acne, discussed  earlier. 
 Beyond traditional soaps that are used in acne treatment, spe-
cialized  formulations  known  as  facial  scrubs  are  commonly 
used. Facial scrubs are mechanical exfoliants, as opposed to the 
glycolic acid chemical exfoliants previously discussed, employ-
ing  small  granules  in  a  cleansing  base  to  enhance  corneocyte 
desquamation.  The  scrubbing  granules  may  be  polyethylene 
beads, aluminum oxide, ground fruit pits, or sodium tetraborate 

decahydrate  granules  aiding  in  the  removal  desquamating 
 stratum  corneum  from  the  face  ( Fig.  1.2 )  ( 43 ).  Sibley  et  al. 
 considered  abrasive  scrubbing  creams  effective  in  controlling 
excess sebum and removing desquamating tissue ( 44 ). However, 
they  can  cause  epithelial  damage  if  used  too  vigorously.  This 
view is held by Mills and Kligman, who noted that the products 
produced peeling and erythema with no reduction in comedo-
nes. Aluminum  oxide  and  ground  fruit  pits  provide  the  most 
abrasive scrub due to their rough edged particles, followed by 
polyethylene  beads,  which  are  smoother  and  produce  less 
 stratum  corneum  removal.  Sodium  tetraborate  decahydrate 
granules become softer and dissolve during rubbing, providing 
the least abrasive scrub.   

   Acne scrub creams may contain polyethylene beads, 
aluminum oxide, ground fruit pits, or sodium tetraborate 
decahydrate granules. 

 A  currently  popular  trend  in  facial  exfoliant  scrubs  is  the 
production  of  warmth.  These  products  are  labeled  as  “self-
heating”  scrubs.  Heat  is  produced  as  part  of  an  exothermic 
reaction  resulting  in  the  heat  byproduct.  The  heat  does  not 
increase the exfoliant efficacy, but is added for consumer com-
fort and marketing purposes. Sometimes these heated exfoli-
ant  scrubs  are  preceded  by  a  self-administered  hydroxy  acid 
peel, thus combining both chemical and physical exfoliation in 
one kit.  

  Astringents and Exfoliants 
 Astringents and exfoliants are used in cosmetic acne treatment 
regimens  marketed  by  many  companies. Astringents  are  liq-
uids applied to the face following cleansing and are used widely 
in cosmetic acne treatments. They comprise a broad category 
of  formulations  known  by  many  terms:  toners,  clarifying 
lotions, controlling lotions, protections lotions, skin freshen-
ers,  toning  lotions,  T-zone  tonics,  etc.  Originally,  astringents 
were  developed  to  remove  alkaline  soap  scum  from  the  face 
following  cleansing  with  lye-based  soaps  and  high-mineral-
content  well  water.  The  development  of  synthetic  detergents 
and  public  softened  water  systems  greatly  decreased  the 
amount  of  post-washing  residue.  A  new  use  for  astringents 
was found when cleansing cream became a preferred method 
of  removing  facial  cosmetics  and  environmental  dirt.  The 
astringent then became an effective product for removing the 
oily residue left behind following cleansing cream use. 

 Astringent formulations are presently available for all skin 
types (oily, normal, dry, sensitive, photoaged, etc.); with a vari-
ety of uses, their primary benefit is in oily skin afflicted with 
acne ( 45 ). Oily skin astringents contain a high concentration 
of  alcohols,  water,  and  fragrance  functioning  to  remove  any 
sebum left behind after cleansing, to produce a clean feel, and 
possibly apply some treatment product to the face. For exam-
ple, 2% salicylic acid or witch hazel may be added for a kerato-
lytic and drying effect on the facial skin of acne patients. Clays, 
starches, or synthetic polymers may be added to absorb sebum 
and minimize the appearance of facial oil.  

 Figure 1.2     Scrubs are used in OTC acne cleansers for increased exfoliation in 
and around the pore.    

   Cosmetic acne treatment astringents may contain 2% 
salicylic acid as the active ingredient. 

ACNE AND COSMETICS

 Exfoliants are similar to astringents, but these are solutions, 
lotions, or creams applied to the face after cleansing and after 
the application of an exfoliant designed to hasten stratum cor-
neum exfoliation and assist in comedolysis in the acne patient. 
Their exfoliant effect is based on the use of alpha, poly, or beta 
hydroxy acids, thus inducing chemical exfoliation. The goal is 
to  loosen  the  retained  comedonal  plug  chemically  from  the 
lining  of  the  pore.  Many  cosmetic  acne  treatment  exfoliants 
use this theory to support claims and purport efficacy. Glycolic 
acid exfoliants based on alpha hydroxy acids may be useful in 
patients with acne and photoaged skin to improve appearance; 
however,  the  salicylic  beta  hydroxy  acid  exfoliants  are  more 
effective. This is due to their inherent oil solubility that allows 
them to exfoliate in the oily milieu of the pore. Polyhydroxy 
acid  exfoliants  based  on  gluconolactone  are  also  marketed 
with the main claim of reduced irritation. Their large  molecular 
weight impedes skin penetration and reduces irritation.  

  Epidermabrasion and Textured Cloths 
 Epidermabrasion  and  textured  clothes  are  used  to  induce 
mechanical exfoliation of comedonal plugs as opposed to the 
exfoliants that induce chemical exfoliation. Durr and Orent-
reich termed mechanical exfoliation as epidermabrasion, who 
examined the use of a nonwoven polyester fiber web sponge 
for the removal of keratin excrescences and trapped hairs in 
pilosebaceous  ducts  ( 46 – 47 ).  Other  epidermabrasion  imple-
ments include rubber puffs, sea sponges, and loofahs, and the 
most  recent  addition  of  textured  fiber  face  cloths.  The  fiber 
face  cloths  have  come  to  be  a  major  segment  of  the  current 
epidermabrasion marketplace and are discussed in detail. 

 Fiber  cloths  are  extremely  versatile  dermatologic  devices. 
They can be premoistened and impregnated with surfactants to 
cleanse the face; can be perfumed containing volatile solvents 
to freshen the face; they can be packaged dry with lipids and 
detergents  to  clean  the  face,  and  they  can  be  covered  with  a 
plastic film pouch that has microscopic holes to time release an 
active acne ingredient onto the skin surface. Also, they can be 
textured  with  patterns  to  physically  exfoliate  the  skin.  Even 
though the use of facial fiber cloth as a cosmetic acne treatment 
is new, the cloth has been around for 30 years ( Fig. 1.3 ).   

7

   Fiber cloths are useful in cleansing the face of acne 
patients to clean in and around the pores. 

 Modern fiber cloth technology focused on creating a soft 
wipe with excellent strength to prevent tearing. The fibers 
used are a combination of polyester, rayon, cotton, and cel-
lulose  fibers  held  together  via  heat  through  a  technique 
known as thermobonding. Additional strength is imparted 
to the wipe by hydroentangling the fibers. This is achieved 
by  entwining  the  individual  rayon,  polyester,  and  wood 
pulp fibers with high pressure jets of water. Thermobond-
ing and hydroentangling have eliminated the use of adhe-
sive binders thereby creating a soft, strong cloth suitable for 
facial use. 

 Face cloths are available both dry and moist. The dry pack-
aged cloths are impregnated with a cleanser that foams mod-
estly when the cloth is water moistened. The type of cleanser in 
the cloth can effect an aggressive sebum removal for oily skin 
and contain salicylic acid. Humectants and emollients can also 
be added to the cloth to decrease barrier damage or to smooth 
the xerotic skin scale common in acne patients who are on pre-
scription therapy. 

 In addition to the composition of the ingredients preapplied 
to the dry cloth, the weave of the cloth will also determine its 
acne effect. Two types of fiber weaves are used in facial acne 
cloths: open weave and closed weave. Open weave cloths are so 
named because of the 2–3 mm windows in the cloth between 
the  adjacent  fiber  bundles.  These  cloths  are  used  in  persons 
with dry and/or sensitive skin and acne to increase the softness 
of the cloth and decrease the surface area contact between the 
cloth  and  the  skin  yielding  a  milder  exfoliant  effect.  Closed 
weave cloths, on the hand, are designed with a much tighter 
weave and are double sided. One side of the closed weave cloth 
is textured and impregnated with a synthetic detergent cleanser 
designed  to  optimize  the  removal  of  sebum,  cosmetics,  and 
environmental  dirt  while  providing  an  exfoliant  effect.  The 
opposite side of the cloth is smooth and designed for rinsing 
the  face  and  possibly  applying  skin  conditioning  or  acne 
agents. 

(A)

(B)

 Figure 1.3     ( A ) A scanning electron microscopy image of a fiber cloth prior to cleansing showing the entangled fibers compressed to form a continuous fabric. 
( B ) A used cleansing cloth showing the skin scale and debris attached to the fibers prior to rinsing.    

8

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 The texture of the cloth provides gentle mechanical exfolia-
tion that may be valuable in the patient who cannot tolerate 
chemical exfoliation with hydroxy acids. The mechanical exfo-
liation can be achieved on the skin surface and around the fol-
licular ostia due to the ability of the textured cloth to traverse 
the irregular topography of the skin more effectively than the 
hands  or  a  wash  cloth.  The  degree  of  exfoliation  achieved  is 
dependent  on  the  cloth  weave,  the  pressure  with  which  the 
cloth is stroked over the skin surface, and the length of time 
the cloth is applied. The cloth can aid in the removal of com-
edonal plugs.  

  Mechanized Skin Care Devices 
 Mechanization  of  the  epidermabrasion  process  is  known  as 
microdermabrasion. This is a procedure performed by estheti-
cians  and  paramedical  personnel,  where  small  particulates, 
such as aluminum, silica, baking soda, etc., are sprayed against 
the skin surface and simultaneously removed with a vacuum. 
Microdermabrasion  simply  is  another  technique  to  induce 
stratum corneum exfoliation.  

   Mechanized cleansing devices can rotate, vibrate, 
or sonicate to aid in removal of skin scale and sebum. 

 A variety of devices are available to exfoliate the facial skin. 
These include rotary brushes that drag synthetic bristles across 
the  skin  surface  to  physically  remove  the  stratum  corneum. 
These devices are sold with a special cleanser to remove sebum 
and clean the bristles simultaneously. A variant of this technol-
ogy used scrubbing pads of varied roughness to produce exfo-
liation. The scrubbing pads were held on the device head with 
adhesive  and  could  be  replaced  when  worn.  These  devices 
vibrated instead of rotating to remove skin scale. 

 A third type of facial cleansing device produces a sonicating 
motion,  similar  to  that  of  sonicating  electric  toothbrushes. 
The  hand-held  device  runs  on  a  rechargeable  battery  that  is 
attached  to  a  miniaturized  motor  creating  an  oscillatory 
motion of the brush head. This oscillatory sonic motion allows 
the brush bristles to traverse the dermatoglyphics, facial pores, 
and facial scars more adeptly than other mechanized cleansing 
methods.  These  devices  may  be  useful  in  acne  patients  with 
facial scarring.  

  comedogenicity and skin care formulations 
 The issue of comedogenicity in relation to cosmetics arose in 
1972  when  Kligman  and  Mills  described  a  low-grade  acne 
characterized by closed comedones on the cheeks of women 
aged 20–25 years ( 48 ). They labeled this phenomenon “acne 
cosmetica.” Many of these women had not experienced ado-
lescent  acne.  The  authors  proposed  that  substances  present 
in cosmetic products induced the formation of closed com-
edones and, in some cases, a papulopustular eruption. This 
led  to  the  concept  that  skin  care  products  and  cosmetics 
could cause acne. 

 Further research on cosmetic-induced acne led to the devel-
opment of the rabbit ear comedogenicity model, which is still 
sometimes used by cosmetic companies to test products. The 
cosmetic  is  applied  to  the  ears  of  New  Zealand  white  albino 
rabbits. One ear serves as a control while the other ear receives 
one-half mL of the test substance five days per week for two 
consecutive weeks. Visual observations of enlarged pores and 
hyperkeratosis are made daily. At the completion of the study, 
the skin is biopsied to look for hyperkeratosis of the sebaceous 
follicles ( 49 ). 

 While this model was the standard test for comedogenicity 
for many years, it is currently out of favor as animal testing has 
been abandoned by many cosmetic companies and there are 
inherent problems with the model ( 50 ). First, some studies do 
not perform a biopsy and rely on the visual inspection of the 
rabbit ear, which is less sensitive than the microscopic exami-
nation.  Microcomedones,  now  known  to  be  important  acne 
precursor lesions, can only be identified through microscopic 
examination.  Second,  some  studies  have  confused  follicular 
dilation with comedone formation. Follicular dilation is a side 
effect of cutaneous irritation and is not necessarily the same as 
comedone formation. Third, the use of immature or aged rab-
bits  may  not  yield  accurate  data  since  sebum  production  is 
reduced in rabbits not in their prime. Fourth, the rabbit ear 
may not accurately simulate the human face: many substances 
that produce comedones in the rabbit ear model produce pus-
tules  and  inflammatory  papules,  not  comedones,  on  the 
human face.  

   The follicular biopsy has become the standard technique 
for assessing comedogenicity in skin care formulations. 

  Face Masks 
 Face masks are also used in the cosmetic treatment of acne. 
Typically, a face mask is applied on a weekly basis to provide 
a  more  aggressive  type  of  acne  treatment,  but  the  medical 
benefits  may  be  minimal.  The  masks  that  are  used  in  acne 
treatment are earth based. Earth-based masks, also known as 
paste  masks  or  mud  packs,  are  formulated  from  absorbent 
clays such as bentonite, kaolin, or china clay. The clays pro-
duce an astringent effect on the skin making this mask most 
appropriate  for  oily-complected  patients.  The  astringent 
effect of the mask can be enhanced through the addition of 
other  substances  such  as  magnesium,  zinc  oxide,  salicylic 
acid, etc. The masks can be applied as a cloth that is laid over 
the entire face or as a paste that is scooped from a jar. The 
mask  is  left  on  the  face  for  15–30 minutes  and  then  rinsed 
away with water.   

 Due to the aforementioned limitations with the rabbit ear 
model,  many  cosmetic  companies  are  now  using  the  upper 
back  of  male  and  female  volunteers  for  comedogenicity 
assessment ( 51 ). The volunteers are first checked for the abil-
ity to produce comedones by taking a follicular biopsy. This 
is done by placing a drop of cyanoacrylate glue on a micro-
scope slide and letting it dry on the back of the subject. The 
microscope slide is then pulled from the skin removing com-
edonal plugs that appear as waxy mountains when the slide is 
viewed  with  a  dissecting  5×  microscope.  Occlusive  patch 
tests  are  used  to  apply  the  material  to  the  upper  back  for 
30 days with repeated daily changing. Follicular biopsies are 
repeated at the end of the test period and the slides are exam-
ined for an increase in the presence of comedonal plugs ( 52 ). 
A  negative  no-treatment  patch  is  applied  and  a  positive 
 treatment patch containing coal tar is also used. This test for 

ACNE AND COSMETICS

Table 1.1  A Standard List of Possible Comedogenic 
Substances

9

Butyl stearate
Cocoa butter
Corn oil
D&C red dyes
Decyl oleate
Isopropyl isostearate
Isopropyl myristate
Isostearyl neopentanoate
Isopropyl palmitate
Isocetyl stearate
Lanolin, acetylated
Laureth-4
Linseed oil
Mineral oil
Myristyl ether propionate
Myristyl lactate
Myristyl myristate
Methyl oleate
Oleic acid
Oleyl alcohol
Olive oil
Octyl palmitate
Octyl stearate
Peanut oil
Petrolatum
Propylene glycol stearate
Safflower oil
Sesame oil
Sodium lauryl sulfate
Stearic acid

comedogenicity  is  also  performed  in  addition  to  pre-  and 
post-marketing surveillance. 

 The  established  lists  of  comedogenic  substances,  such  as 
those  shown  in   Table  1.1 ,  are  used  by  watch  dog  websites 
and some companies to show marketing advantages. These 
lists were generated many years ago by studying the material 
in concentration of 100% in the rabbit ear assay, which may 
not  be  relevant  to  actual  cosmetic  formulations.  Giving 
patients this list of comedogenic substances to avoid is not 
very useful, since it is practically impossible to find formula-
tions  that  possess  none  of  these  ingredients.  The  list  con-
tains  some  of  the  most  effective  emollients  (octyl  stearate, 
isocetyl stearate), detergents (sodium lauryl sulfate), occlu-
sive moisturizers (mineral oil, petrolatum, sesame oil, cocoa 
butter), and emulsifiers found in the cosmetic industry ( 53 ). 
A  product  line  that  avoided  all  of  these  substances  would 
not perform well on the skin and would possess a low cos-
metic  acceptability.  Comedogenicity  can  only  be  evaluated 
in  light  of  the  patient’s  susceptibility  to  the  formation  of 
comedonal plugs. Some individuals have never developed a 
comedone in their life and use cocoa butter daily as a facial 
moisturizer. For some reason, it is not yet understood why 
certain  patients  develop  fewer  comedones  than  others 
( 54 , 55 ).    

   Lists of comedogenic substances are not particularly 
helpful in selecting skin care product formulations for 
acne patients. 

 Figure 1.4     It is impossible to determine whether a cosmetic is comedogenic or 
acnegenic based on the appearance or from the ingredient disclosure. Clinical 
testing is required.    

  acnegenicity and skin care formulations 
 Acnegenicity  is  a  completely  separate  issue  from  comedoge-
nicity. Substances that are comedogenic cause comedones, or 
blackheads, whereas substances that are acnegenic cause pap-
ules  and  pustules.  Comedogenicity  is  due  to  follicular  plug-
ging  whereas  acnegenicity  is  due  to  follicular  irritation  ( 56 ). 
Thus,  substances  that  are  comedogenic  are  not  necessarily 
acnegenic and vice versa ( Fig. 1.4 ).  

 At first glance, acnegenicity also may seem rather simple. A 
list of substances that irritates the follicular ostia could be gen-
erated and then used to pick skin care products and cosmetics 
for patient use. Unfortunately, lists of acnegenic substances are 
useless since the interaction of ingredients, as well as their con-
centration, is important. But of more importance, is the indi-
vidual patient susceptibility to acne formation. Cosmetics that 
are acnegenic in one patient are not necessarily acnegenic in 
another patient. 

 It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  a  general  dermatologist’s 
practice, the phenomenon of acnegenicity due to cosmetics is 
a more common occurrence than that of comedogenicity due 
to cosmetics. This makes acnegenicity a more important issue 
than  comedogenicity.  However,  the  incidence  of  comedone 
and acne formation due to cosmetics is rare, considering the 
number of persons who use such products on a daily basis.  

  summary 
 This chapter has discussed the various ingredients and ancil-
lary skin care products for acne treatment in the current mar-
ketplace.  Astringents  represent  a  broad  category  and  may 
impart  both  cleansing  and  moisturizing  effects  to  the  skin, 
depending on the formulation and skin type. Exfoliants, which 
became  popular  when  glycolic  acid  was  introduced  to  the 
 cosmetic acne treatment marketplace, can contain both chem-
ical  and  physical  exfoliating  ingredients  to  enhance  the 
 desquamation  of  the  stratum  corneum.  Physical  exfoliating 
agents  are  commonly  packaged  as  particulate  facial  scrubs, 
woven  sponges,  or  textured  cloths.  Textured  cloths  are  the 
most  recent  introduction  and  can  function  like  disposable 
washcloths or may leave behind ingredients on the skin sur-
face. Mechanized skin care devices attempt to deliver at home 
microdermabrasion  with  rotary,  vibrating,  or  sonicating 
motors. Finally, face masks deliver skin care benefits. These are 

10

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

popular  acne   ingredients  and  devices  that  should  be  under-
stood by a dermatologist.   

   references 
    1.     Management  of  acne  .    Agency  for  healthcare  research  and  quality  .    2001   

  March 2001 Contract No.: 01-E018  .   

    2.     21 CFR Part 333.350(b)(2), 21 CFR     (1991)  .   
    3.       Kraus     AL   ,    Munro     IC   ,    Orr     JC    ,   et al  .   Benzoyl peroxide: an integrated human 
safety assessment for carcinogenicity  .   Regul Toxicol Pharmacol     1995  ;   21  : 
  87  –  107  .   

    4.       Tanghetti     E    .   The evolution of benzoyl peroxide therapy  .   Cutis     2008  ;   82  :   5  –  11  .   
    5.       Bojar     RA   ,    Cunliffe     WJ   ,    Holland     KT    .   Short-term treatment of acne vulgaris 
with  benzoyl  peroxide:  effects  on  the  surface  and  follicular  cutaneous 
microflora  .   Br J Dermatol     1995  ;   132  :   204  –  8  .   

    6.       Pagnoni     A   ,    Kligman     AM   ,    Kollias     N   ,    Goldberg     S   ,    Stoudemayer     T    .   Digital 
fluorescence  photography  can  assess  the  suppressive  effect  of  benzoyl 
 peroxide  on  Propionibacterium  acnes  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      1999  ;    41 
 (5 Pt 1)  :   710  –  16  .   

    7.       Leyden      JJ    .    Current  issues  in  antimicrobial  therapy  for  the  treatment  of 

acne  .   J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol     2001  ;   15  (Suppl 3)  :   51  –  5  .   

    8.       Kim     J   ,    Ochoa     M   ,    Krutzik     S    ,   et al  .   Activation of toll-like receptor 2 in acne 
triggers inflammatory cytokine responses  .   J Immunol     2002  ;   169  :   1535  –  41  .   
    9.       Bojar     RA   ,    Cunliffe     WJ   ,    Holland     KT    .   Short-term treatment of acne vulgaris 
with  benzoyl  peroxide:  effects  on  the  surface  and  follicular  cutaneous 
microflora  .   Br J Dermatol     1995  ;   132  :   204  –  8  .   

   10.       Mills     OH     Jr   ,    Kligman     AM   ,    Pochi     P   ,    Comite     H    .   Comparing 2.5%, 5%, and 
10%  benzoyl  peroxide  on  inflammatory  acne  vulgaris  .    Int  J  Dermatol   
  1986  ;   25  :   664  –  7  .   

   11.       Morelli      R   ,     Lanzarini      M   ,    Vincenzi      C    .    Contact  dermatitis  due  to  benzoyl 

peroxide  .   Contact Dermatitis     1989  ;   20  :   238  –  9  .   

   12.       Kraus     AL   ,    Munro     IC   ,    Orr     JC    ,   et al  .   Benzoyl peroxide: an integrated human 
safety assessment for carcinogenicity  .   Regul Toxicol Pharmacol     1995  ;   21  : 
  87  –  107  .   

   13.       Tanghetti     E   ,    Popp     KF    .   A current review of topical benzoyl peroxide: new 
perspectives on formulation and utilization  .   Dermatol Clin     2009  ;   27  :   17  –  24  .   
   14.       Eady     EA   ,    Burke     BM   ,    Pulling     K   ,    Cunliffe     WJ    .   The benefit of 2% salicylic 

acid lotion in acne  .   J Dermatol Ther1996  ;   7  :   93  –  6  .   

   15.       Bissonnette     R   ,    Bolduc     C   ,    Seite     S    ,   et al  .   Randomized study comparing the 
efficacy and tolerance of a lipophilic hydroxy acid derivative of salicylic 
acid and 5% benzoyl peroxide in the treatment of facial acne vulgaris  .   J 
Cosmet Dermatol     2009  ;   8  :   19  –  23  .   

   16.       Chen      T   ,    Appa     Y    .    Over-the-Counter Acne  Medications  .      In  :      Draelos      ZD   , 
   Thaman      LA    ,    eds  .    Cosmetic  Formulations  of  Skin  Care  Products  .    New 
York  :   Taylor & Francis  ,   2006  :   251  –  71  .   

   17.       Shalita     AR    .   Treatment of mild and moderate acne vulgaris with salicylic 

   27.       Raman     A    .   Antimicrobial effects of tea-tree oil and its major components 
on  Staphylococcus  aureus,  Staph.  epidermidis  and  Propionibacterium 
acnes  .   Lett Appl Microbiol     1995  ;   21  :   242  –  5  .   

   28.       Hammer     KA   ,    Carson     CF   ,    Riley     TV    .   Susceptibility of transient and com-
mensal skin flora to the essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia  .   Am J Infect 
Control     1996  ;   24  :   186  –  9  .   

   29.       Shemesh     A   ,    Mayo     WL    .   Australian tea tree oil: a natural antiseptic and fun-

gicidal agent  .   Aust J Pharm     1991  ;   72  :   802  –  3  .   

   30.       Bassett     IB   ,    Pannowitz     DL   ,    Barnetson     RS    .   A comparative study of tea-tree 
oil  versus  benzoyl  peroxide  in  the  treatment  of  acne  .    Med  J Aust      1990  ; 
  153  :   455  –  8  .   

   31.       Enshaieh     S   ,    Jooya     A   ,    Siadat     AH   ,    Iraji     F    .   Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol   

  2007  ;   73  :   22  –  5  .   

   32.       Koh     KJ   ,    Pearce     AL   ,     Marshman     G   ,    Finlay-Jones     JJ   ,    Hart     PH    .   Tea tree  oil 
reduces histamine-induced skin inflammation  .   Br J Dermatol     2002  ;   147  : 
  1212  –  17  .   

   33.       Bischoff      K   ,     Guale      F    .   Australian  tea  tree  oil  poisoning  in  three  purebred 

cats  .   J Vet Diag Invest     1998  ;   10  :   208  .   

   34.       Lisi     P   ,    Melingi     L   ,    Pigatto     P    ,   et al  .   Prevalenza della sensibilizzazione all’olio 
exxenziale di Melaleuca  .   Ann Ital Dermatol Allergol     2000  ;   54  :   141  –  4  .   
   35.       Elston      D    .    Topical  antibiotics  in  dermatology:  emerging  patterns  of 

 resistance  .   Dermatol Clin     2009;     27  :   25  –  31  .   

   36.       Dreno     B   ,    Trossaert     M   ,    Boiteau     HL   ,    Litoux     P    .   Zinc salts effects on granulo-
cyte  zinc  concentration  and  chemotaxis  in  acne  patients  .    Acta  Derm 
Venereol     1992  ;   72  :   250  –  2  .   

   37.       Fivenson      DP    .    The  mechanisms  of  action  of  nicotinamide  and  zinc  in 

inflammatory skin disease  .   Cutis     2006  ;   77  (1 Suppl)  :   5  –  10  .   

   38.       Ottte      N   ,     Borelli      C   ,     Korting      HC    .    Nicotinamide  biologic  actions  of  an 

emerging cosmetic ingredient  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     2005  ;   27  :   255  –  61  .   

   39.       Niren      NM    .    Pharmacologic  doses  of  nicotinamide  in  the  treatment  of 

inflammatory skin conditions: a review  .   Cutis     2006  ;   77  (1 Suppl)  :   11  –  16  .   
   40.       Niren      NM   ,     Torok      HM    .    The  Nicomide  Improvement  in  Clinical  Out-
comes  Study  (NICOS):  results  of  an  8-week  trial  .    Cutis      2006  ;    77 
 (1 Suppl)  :   17  –  28  .   

   41.       Shalita     AR   ,    Smith     JG   ,    Parish     LC   ,    Sofman     MS   ,    Chalker     DK    .   Topical nico-
tinamide compared with clindamycin gel in the treatment of inflamma-
tory acne vulgaris  .   Int J Dermatol     1999  ;   34  :   434  –  7  .   

   42.       Wortzman     MS   ,    Scott     RA   ,    Wong     PS    ,   et al  .   Soap and detergent bar rinsabil-

ity  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1986  ;   37  :   89  –  97  .   

   43.       Mills      OH   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Evaluation  of  abrasives  in  acne  therapy  .    Cutis   

  1979  ;   23  :   704  –  75  .   

   44.       Sibley     MJ   ,    Browne     RK   ,    Kitzmiller     KW    .   Abradant cleansing aids for acne 

vulgaris  .   Cutis     1974  ;   14  :   269  –  74  .   

   45.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Astringents  and  skin  toners  .    In  :    Harry’s 
 Cosmeticology  ,   7th edn  .   New York  :   Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   74  –  81  .   
   46.       Durr      NP   ,     Orentreich      N    .    Epidermabrasion  for  acne  .    Cutis      1976  ;    17  : 

acid in an alcohol-detergent vehicle  .   Cutis     1981  ;   28  :   556  –  8  .   

  604  –  8  .   

   18.       Zander      E   ,     Weisman      S    .    Treatment  of  acne  with  salicylic  acid  pads  .    Clin 

   47.       Mackenzie     A    .   Use of But-Puf and mild cleansing bar in acne  .   Cutis     1977  ; 

Ther     1992  ;   14  :   247  –  53  .   

  20  :   170  –  1  .   

   19.       Pagnoni      A   ,     Chen      T   ,     Duong      H   ,     Wu      IT   ,     Appa     Y    .    Clinical  evaluation  of  a 
salicylic  acid  containing  scrub,  toner,  mask  and  regimen  in  reducing 
blackheads  .    61st  meeting,  American  Academy  of  Dermatology  .    2004    
 February 2004  ;   Poster 61  .   

   20.       Gupta     AK   ,    Nicol     K   ,    Gupta     AK   ,    Nicol     K    .   The use of sulfur in dermatology  . 

   48.       Kligman     AM   ,    Mills     OH    .   Acne cosmetica  .   Arch Dermatol     1972  ;   106  :   843  .   
   49.       Kaufman     PJ   ,    Rappaport     MJ    .   Skin care products  .   In  :      Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cos-
metic Safety a Primer for Cosmetic Scientists  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, 
Inc  ,   1987  :   179  –  204  .   

   50.       Frank     SB    .   Is the rabbit ear model, in its present state, prophetic of acnege-

  J Drugs Dermatol     2004  ;   3  :   427  –  31  .   

nicity?     J Am Acad Dermatol     1982  ;   6  :   373  .   

   21.       Lin      AN   ,     Reimer      RJ   ,     Carter      DM    .    Sulfur  revisited  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   

   51.       Mills     OH   ,    Kligman     AM    .   A human model for assessing comedeogenic sub-

  1988  ;   18  :   553  –  8  .   

   22.       Mills     OH     Jr   ,    Kligman     AM    .   Is sulphur helpful or harmful in acne vulgaris?   

  Br J Dermatol     1972  ;   86  :   620  –  7  .   

   23.       Berardesca     E   ,    Distante     F   ,    Vignoli     GP   ,    Oresajo     C   ,    Green     B    .   Alpha hydroxy-
acids modulate stratum corneum barrier function  .   Br J Dermatol     1997  ; 
  137  :   934  –  8  .   

   24.       Garg     VK   ,    Sinha     S   ,    Sarkar     R    .   Glycolic acid peels versus salicylic acid peels 
in active acne vulgaris and post-acne scarring and hyperpigmentation: a 
comparative study  .   Dermatol Surg     2009  ;   35  :   59  –  65  .   

   25.       Lee      TW   ,     Kim      JC   ,     Hwang      SJ    .    Hydrogel  patches  containing  triclosan  for 

acne treatment  .   Eur J Pharm Biopharm     2003  ;   56  :   407  –  12  .   

   26.       Duell      EA    .    Unoccluded  retinol  penetrates  human  skin  in  vivo  more 
 effectively  than  unoccluded  retinyl  palmitate  or  retinoic  acid  .    J  Invest 
Dermatol     1997  ;    109  .   

stances  .   Arch Dermatol     1982  ;   118  :   903  –  5  .   

   52.       Kaufman     PJ   ,    Rappaport     MJ    .   Skin care products  .   In  :      Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cos-
metic Safety a Primer for Cosmetic Scientists  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, 
Inc  ,   1987  :   179  –  204  .   

   53.       Fulton      JE   ,     Pay      SR   ,     Fulton      JE    .    Comedogenicity  of  current  therapeutic 
products, cosmetics, and ingredients in the rabbit ear  .   J Am Acad Derma-
tol     1984  ;   10  :   96  –  105  .   

   54.       Fulton     JE   ,    Bradley     S   ,    Aqundez     A   ,    Black     T    .   Non-comedogenic cosmetics  . 

  Cutis     1976  ;   17  :   344  .   

   55.     Report of the 1988 American Academy of Dermatology Invitational Sym-
posium on Comedogenicity  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1989  ;   20  :   272  –  7  .   
   56.       Mills      OH   ,     Berger      RS    .    Defining  the  susceptibility  of  acne-prone  and 
sensitive skin populations to extrinsic factors  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 
  93  –  8  .    

ACNE AND COSMETICS

  suggested reading 
      Barker     MO    .   Masks and astringents/toners (Chapter 13)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     H    , 
  eds  .    Textbook  of  Cosmetic  Dermatology  ,    2nd  edn  .    Martin  Dunitz  Ltd  , 
  1998  :   155  –  65  .   

     Cunliffe     WJ   ,    Holland     DB   ,    Clack     SM   ,    Stables     GI    .   Comedogenesis: some new 
aetiological,  clinical  and  therapeutic  strategies  .    Br  J  Dermatol    2000  ;    142  : 
  1084  –  91  .   

     Cunliffe     WJ   ,    Holland     DB   ,    Jeremy     A    .   Comedone formation: etiology, clinical 

presentation, and treatment  .   Clin Dermatol     2004  ;   22  :   367  –  74  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    A  Re-evaluation  of  the  Comedogenicity  Concept  .    J  Am  Acad 

 Dermatol     2006  ;   54  :   507  –  12  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics in acne and rosacea  .   Semin Cutan Med Surg     2001  ;   20  : 

  209  –  14  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Treating the patient with multiple cosmetic product allergies  .   A 
problem-oriented  approach  to  sensitive  skin.  Postgrad  Med      2000  ;    107  : 
  70  –  2  ,   75  –  7  .   

11

     Draelos      ZD   ,     DiNardo      JC    .    A  re-evaluation  of  the  comedogenicity  concept  . 

  J Am Acad Dermatol     2006  ;   54  :   507  –  12  .   

     Katsambas     AD   ,     Stefanaki      C   ,     Cunliffe     WJ    .    Guidelines  for  treating  acne  .    Clin 

Dermatol     2004  ;   22  :   439  –  44  .   

     Kiken     DA   ,    Cohen     DE    .   Contact dermatitis to botanical extracts  .   Am J Contact 

Dermat     2002  ;   13  :   148  –  52  .   

     Klock     J   ,    Ikeno     H   ,    Ohmori     K    ,   et al  .   Sodium ascorbyl phosphate shows in vitro 
and in vivo efficacy in the prevention and treatment of acne vulgaris  .   Int J 
Cosmet Sci     2005  ;   27  :   171  –  6  .   

     Leyden     JJ    .   Antibiotic resistance in the topical treatment of acne vulgaris  .   Cutis   

  2004  ;   73     (6 Suppl)  :   6  –  10  .   

     Mirshahpanah      P   ,     Maibach      HI    .    Models  in  acnegenesis  .    Cutan  Ocul  Toxicol   

  2007  ;   26  :   195  –  202  .   

     Nguyen     SH   ,    Dang     TP   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Comedogenicity in rabbit: some cosmetic 

ingredients/vehicles  .   Cutan Ocul Toxicol     2007  ;   26  :   287  –  92  .   

     Zatulove     A   ,    Konnerth     NA    .   Comedogenicity testing of cosmetics  .   Cutis     1987  ; 

  39  :   521  .        

             2  

 Rosacea and cosmetics      

  The use of cosmetics in a rosacea patient is very important to 
minimize  inflammation  as  well  as  to  camouflage  facial  red-
ness. Rosacea patients form a subset of sensitive skin, making 
the selection of skin care products and cosmetics problematic. 
Ingredients  that  typically  cause  no  difficulty  in  an  average 
patient  can  cause  severe  stinging  and  burning  in  a  rosacea 
patient. Sometimes the adverse reaction can be invisible; more 
typically, it is characterized by the rapid onset of facial flush-
ing.  For  this  reason,  developing  a  methodology  for  product 
recommendations  in  a  rosacea  patient  becomes  important. 
This  chapter  will  discuss  a  rationale  for  the  selection  of 
 cleansers,  moisturizers,  cosmeceuticals,  and  facial  cosmetics 
for rosacea patients. 

 Many skin care and cosmetic products are labeled as appro-
priate for sensitive skin, including the rosacea patient, but this 
term does not have any scientific definition. Most manufactur-
ers who make this claim will test sensitive skin care products 
on a population consisting of at least 30% rosacea sufferers. Of 
the entire population, approximately 40% consider themselves 
to  possess  the  characteristics  of  sensitive  skin  ( 1 ).  Sensitive 
skin  can  be  defined  in  both  subjective  and  objective  terms. 
Subjective  perceptions  of  sensitive  skin  are  derived  from 
patient  observations  regarding  stinging,  burning,  pruritus, 
and tightness following various environmental stimuli. These 
symptoms  may  be  noticed  immediately  following  product 
application or delayed by minutes, hours, or days ( 2 ). Further-
more, the symptoms may only result following a cumulative 
product  application  or  in  combination  with  concomitant 
products.  Objective  perceptions  of  sensitive  skin  include  the 
onset of facial flushing and/or inflammatory papules follow-
ing application. An adverse reaction to a cosmetic or skin care 
product may elicit subjective and/or objective signs in a  rosacea 
patient. 

  testing of facial products in rosacea 
patients 
 Skin care and cosmetic products designed for rosacea patients 
must be specially tested as appropriate for sensitive skin. One 
method  of  testing  is  simply  to  employ  an  in-use  model  by 
enrolling  40–60  subjects  with  mild  to  moderate  rosacea  and 
asking them to use the newly developed product for four weeks 
while recording their perceptions in a diary. A dermatologist 
investigator can also assess the state of the subject’s rosacea at 
two-week intervals for improvement or worsening related to 
the  study  product.  This  is  the  most  basic  type  of  test  that 
should be performed.  

   The facial sting test is useful for the testing of skin care 
and cosmetic products to find out whether they are 
appropriate for rosacea sufferers. 

12

 A more sophisticated testing method should be performed to 
evaluate subsets of rosacea patients who may have a more sensi-
tive  skin  and  a  higher  incidence  of  cosmetic  problems.  This 
method of evaluating product appropriateness for rosacea is to 
use a modification of the lactic acid facial stinging test ( 3 ). This 
test provokes a flare of rosacea by exposing the skin to an irri-
tating chemical, accompanied by heat. The test is  performed by 
placing the rosacea patient in a warm facial sauna for 15 min-
utes or until profuse sweating and redness appears, followed by 
an application of a 5% aqueous solution of lactic acid at room 
temperature  to  one  randomized  nasolabial  fold  using  brisk 
rubbing strokes of a cotton-tipped applicator. The product in 
question is applied to the other nasolabial fold and the subject 
is asked to rate the stinging of both application areas. The sub-
ject is blinded as to the identity of the applied products, so as 
not to bias the stinging response. The patient rates the stinging 
at  2.5  and  5  minutes  after  application  on  an  ordinal  4-point 
scale (0 = no stinging, 1= slight stinging, 2 = moderate stinging, 
3 = severe stinging) ( 4 , 5 ). Even though this test is quite artifi-
cial,  it  appears  to  correlate  well  with  skin  care  and  cosmetic 
products that might cause difficulty in rosacea patients, but this 
remains controversial ( 6 ). This type of challenge testing can be 
adapted for use in the dermatology office. 

 The most important part of the product testing for rosacea 
patients is the need to expose the facial skin to the cosmetic 
during  a  rosacea  flare  when  active  inflammation  is  present. 
Vasodilation  and  inflammatory  mediator  release  must  be 
 present to get an accurate assessment. Products that sting on 
the  face  of  a  rosacea  patient  may  provoke  a  flare,  which  is 
undesirable, and they should not be marketed as appropriate 
for sensitive skin. In general, rosacea patients can use skin care 
and cosmetic products from reputable manufacturers that are 
labeled as appropriate for sensitive skin.  

  facial cleansers 
 Proper skin care can enhance rosacea treatment or, in some 
cases, totally negate a positive effect. No skin care act is more 
important than cleansing. Since  Demodex  and  Propionibacte-
rium  acnes   may  be  contributory  in  some  forms  of  rosacea, 
skin cleansing is the first step to restoring and maintaining a 
healthy biofilm. Thorough cleansing is also necessary to con-
trol the growth of  Pityrosporum  species in patients with the 
overlap  syndrome  of  rosacea  and  seborrheic  dermatitis.  In 
short, the goals of cleansing in a rosacea patient are to remove 
excess  sebum,  environmental  debris,  desquamating  corneo-
cytes,  unwanted  organisms,  and  old  skin  care  and  cosmetic 
products while leaving the skin barrier untouched. This can 
be  a  challenge  since  cleansers  cannot  distinguish  between 
sebum  and  intercellular  lipids,  meaning  that  products  that 
clean too well may be problematic ( Fig. 2.1 ). This discussion 
focuses on the use of the cleansers in rosacea patients with a 

ROSACEA AND COSMETICS

13

Soap may remove too much sebum in this population, making 
syndet cleansers the preferred choice. Syndets, also known as 
synthetic  detergents,  contain  less  than  10%  soap  with  an 
adjusted pH of 5.5–7. The neutral pH, closer to the natural pH 
of the skin, produces less irritation. In general, all beauty bars, 
mild cleansing bars, and sensitive skin bars are of the syndet 
variety  (Oil  of  Olay,  Procter  &  Gamble;  Dove,  Unilever; 
 Cetaphil Bar, Galderma). The most commonly used detergent 
is  sodium  cocoyl  isethionate.  These  cleansers  also  possess 
excellent rinsability, meaning that a soap scum film is not left 
behind on the skin when used with water of varying hardness. 
This  is  an  important  property  in  the  sensitive-skin  rosacea 
patients where the soap film might produce irritation. 

 For  rosacea  patients  who  are  concerned  about  body  odor 
and desire a “squeaky-clean” skin feel, another type of cleanser, 
known  as  a  combar,  is  available.  Combars  are  produced  by 
combining  an  alkaline  soap  with  a  syndet  to  produce  less 
aggressive  sebum  removal  than  a  soap,  but  more  aggressive 
sebum removal than a syndet. Most of the combars also add an 
antibacterial,  such  as  triclosan,  to  provide  odor  control 
 properties. These cleansers are commonly labeled as deodor-
ant  soaps  (Dial,  Dial  Corporation;  Irish  Spring,  Colgate 
 Palmolive)  ( 9 ).  For  rosacea  patients  with  abundant  sebum 
production  and  difficult–to-control  pustules,  this  type  of 
cleanser  may  be  beneficial.  Triclosan  is  not  approved  as  an 
acne  ingredient  in  the  U.S.A.,  but  is  used  in  Europe  for  this 
purpose.  For  patients  with  normal  sebum  production,  the 
deodorant cleanser can be used once daily or once every other 
day  to   provide  antibacterial  effects  without  overly  aggressive 
sebum production.  

  Dry and/or Sensitive Skin 
 Many rosacea patients possess a sensitive skin that must be 
gently  cleaned  due  to  limited  sebum  production.  These 
patients are usually mature postmenopausal women. Lipid-
free cleansers represent a cleansing alternative for this popu-
lation. Lipid-free cleansers are liquids that clean without fats, 
a  point  which  distinguishes  them  from  soaps  (Cetaphil 
Cleanser,  Galderma;  CeraVe,  Coria;  Aquanil,  Person  & 
Covey).  The  cleanser  is  applied  to  dry  or  moistened  skin, 
rubbed to produce a slight lather, and rinsed or wiped away. 
These  products  may  contain  water,  glycerin,  cetyl  alcohol, 
stearyl  alcohol,  sodium  laurel  sulfate,  and  occasionally 
 propylene glycol. They leave behind a thin moisturizing film, 
but  do  not  possess  strong  antibacterial  properties.  For  this 
reason, lipid-free cleansers are excellent for the dry face, but 
are  not  recommended  for  cleansing  the  groin  or  armpits. 
They also are not good at removing excessive environmental 
dirt or sebum.  

  Cosmetic Removal 
 Lipid-free cleansers may also be used to remove cosmetics in 
the  rosacea  patient  (Cetaphil,  Galderma;  CeraVe  Cleanser, 
Valeant). They can be applied dry and rubbed over the eyelids, 
cheeks, and lips to remove both water-removable and water-
resistant  cosmetics  and  rinsed  off  with  lukewarm  water.  If 
 necessary, another cleanser can be used for additional clean-
ing.  Many  of  the  commercially  marketed  cosmetic  removers 
 contain  solvents  that  are  volatile  and  damaging  to  the 
 intercellular lipids, thus provoking rosacea.  

 Figure  2.1     The  typical  inflamed  appearance  of  a  rosacea  patient  with  an 
 excessive-cleansing-induced irritation from surfactant barrier damage.    

variety  of  skin  needs  to  include  oily,  normal,  and  dry  skin. 
Cosmetic  removal,  cleansing  devices,  and  problematic 
 products are also discussed.   

   Facial cleansing assumes great importance in rosacea to 
maintain a healthy biofilm without damaging the skin 
 barrier. 

  Oily Skin 
 Many  rosacea  patients  with  a  highly  sebaceous  skin  produce 
abundant  sebum.  Even  though  the  skin  is  oily,  overcleansing 
will result in shiny, flaky skin. This is due to the barrier disrup-
tion created by the removal of the intercellular lipids that causes 
premature  corneocyte  desquamation  followed  by  the  subse-
quent  reacummulation  of  sebum.  The  face  becomes  overdry 
immediately  after  cleansing,  but  turns  oily  again  two  to  four 
hours  after  cleansing.  This  is  a  challenging  situation,  since 
cleansing does not reduce sebum production; it only removes 
the  sebum  present  at  the  time  of  cleansing.  This  observation 
accounts for the ill-founded belief of some rosacea patients that 
skin cleansing produces redness and increased sebum. 

 The  most  basic  cleanser  for  oily  skin  is  soap,  created  as  a 
reaction between a fat and an alkali resulting in a fatty acid salt 
with detergent properties ( 7 ). Soap is composed of long-chain 
fatty acid alkali salts with a pH between 9 and 10 ( 8 ). The high 
pH thoroughly removes sebum, but can also damage the inter-
cellular lipids. For persons with extremely oily skin, this type 
of  cleanser  may  be  appropriate  (Ivory,  Procter  &  Gamble). 
Aggressive  scrubbing  with  a  washcloth  or  other  implements 
should  be  avoided  when  trying  to  remove  copious  sebum, 
since the manipulation of the skin may provoke a rosacea flare. 
A better solution is to wash the face twice, each time removing 
more  sebum.  Gentle  massaging  of  the  cleanser  into  the  skin 
with the hands followed by lukewarm water rinsing is the best. 
It is important to avoid exposing the face to water temperature 
extremes, which could provoke flushing.  

  Normal Skin 
 There is no definition of normal skin; however, for this discus-
sion  the  term  will  refer  to  patients  without  oily  or  dry  skin. 

14

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Lipid-free or low-foaming cleansers are excellent for makeup 
removal in rosacea patients. 

 Another  product  for  cosmetic  removal  is  the  cleansing 
cream. A cleansing cream is composed of water, mineral oil, 
petrolatum,  and  waxes  (Albolene)  ( 10 ).  The  most  common 
variant of the cleansing cream, known as cold cream, is cre-
ated by adding borax to mineral oil and beeswax (Pond’s Cold 
Cream)  ( 11 ).  These  products  are  popular  among  mature 
women  as  they  do  cosmetic  removal  and  mild  cleansing  in 
one step.  

  Cleansing Devices 
 Cleansing devices combine a cleanser with an implement for 
washing the skin. The most common cleansing device is a dis-
posable cleansing cloth impregnated with a cleanser. The cloth 
can be of polyester, rayon, cotton, and cellulose fibers, which 
are  heated  to  produce  a  thermobond.  Additional  strength  is 
imparted to the cloth by hydroentangling the fibers with high 
pressure jets of water, which eliminates the need for adhesive 
binders.  This  creates  a  soft  durable  cloth.  The  cloth  can  be 
packaged  dry  or  wet  typically  with  a  syndet  cleanser.  Dry 
cloths are wetted before use.  

   Open weave cleansing cloths can be used to gently but 
thoroughly cleanse the face of rosacea patients. 

 The amount of sebum removal achieved by the cloth can be 
varied based on the amount of cleanser as well as the type of 
the weave of the cloth. There are two types of fiber weaves used 
in  facial  cloths:  open  weave  and  closed  weave.  Open  weave 
cloths possess 2–3 mm windows between adjacent fiber bun-
dles. These cloths are used on dry and/or sensitive skin as it 
increases the softness of the cloth and decreases the cleansing 
surface  area.  Closed  weave  cloths,  on  the  hand,  are  designed 
with  a  much  tighter  weave  and  provide  a  more  thorough 
cleansing,  but  also  induce  exfoliation.  The  exfoliation  is 
intended  to  remove  desquamating  corneocytes.  While  this 
may be beneficial in some rosacea patients, it may be problem-
atic in others. The degree of exfoliation achieved is dependent 
on the cloth weave, the pressure with which the cloth is stroked 
over  the  skin  surface,  and  the  length  of  time  the  cloth  is 
applied. Individuals with sensitive skin may wish to consider 
using an open weave cloth gently over the face once weekly for 
mild exfoliation. 

 Moisturizing cleansing cloths are also available and may be 
the  preferable  choice  in  rosacea  patients.  The  cloth  contains 
two sides, which may be differently designed to deliver differ-
ent benefits. The moisturizing cloths contain a cleanser on the 
textured side and a moisturizer on the smooth side. The cloth 
is dipped in water to wet it; the textured side of it is used first 
to clean and gently exfoliate the skin; then the cloth is rinsed. 
The cloth is then turned over and the face is rinsed and mois-
turized simultaneously. This cloth technology can also be used 
for cosmetic removal in some patients. 

 A  variant  of  the  cleansing  cloth  is  the  cleansing  pouch. 
 Fusing two cleansing cloths around skin cleansing and condi-
tioning  ingredients  creates  the  cleansing  pouch.  A  plastic 

membrane is placed between two fiber cloths containing holes 
of various diameters to control the release of ingredients onto 
the skin surface. Many times the cleansing pouches contain a 
variety  of  botanicals,  which  may  be  problematic  in  rosacea 
patients.  

  Problematic Cleansers and Cleansing Implements 
 Other cleansers and cleansing implements may also be prob-
lematic in rosacea patients. Products that induce aggressive 
exfoliation,  such  as  abrasive  scrubs,  may  provoke  flushing. 
Abrasive  scrubs  incorporate  polyethylene  beads,  aluminum 
oxide, ground fruit pits, or sodium tetraborate decahydrate 
granules  to  induce  various  degrees  of  exfoliation  ( 12 ).  The 
most aggressive exfoliation is produced by irregularly shaped 
aluminum  oxide  particles  and  ground  fruit  pits,  which 
should be avoided by rosacea patients. Milder exfoliation is 
produced  by  polyethylene  beads,  which  possess  a  smooth 
rounded  surface. The least aggressive exfoliation is produced 
by  sodium  tetraborate  decahydrate  granules,  which  soften 
and dissolve during use.  

   Aggressive facial cleansers and scrubbing implements 
should be avoided in a rosacea patient. 

 Another form of aggressive exfoliation is produced by sponges 
composed of nonwoven polyester fibers (Buf Puf) ( 13 ). These 
sponges  are  too  aggressive  for  most  of  the  rosacea  patients. 
Rosacea patients have sensitive skin that must be handled gently 
like  a  fine  silk  scarf.  Pulling,  tugging,  rubbing  vigorously,  and 
strong cleansers will ruin a silk scarf immediately and are not 
recommended for the rosacea patient with sensitive skin. Some 
rosacea sufferers scrub their face mercilessly hoping to cleanse 
away the inflammatory lesions and redness, when in actuality 
they are only worsening the barrier damage. However, barrier 
damage  repair  can  be  facilitated  with  moisturizers,  the  next 
topic for discussion.   

  facial moisturizers 
 Moisturizers  are  important  to  provide  an  environment 
 suitable for barrier repair in the rosacea patient. Facial mois-
turizers are the most important cosmetic in the prevention of 
a facial rosacea flare ( Fig. 2.2 ). These moisturizers attempt to 
mimic  the  effect  of  sebum  and  the  intercellular  lipids  com-
posed of sphingolipids, free sterols, and free fatty acids. They 
intend to provide an environment allowing the stratum cor-
neum  barrier  to  heal  by  replacing  the  corneocytes  and  the 
intercellular lipids. Yet, the moisturizing substances must not 
occlude  the  sweat  ducts,  or  miliaria  will  result  in;  must  not 
produce irritation at the follicular ostia, or else an acneiform 
eruption  will  break  out;  and  must  not  initiate  comedone 
 formation.  Furthermore,  the  facial  moisturizer  must  not 
 produce noxious sensory stimuli, which may also provoke a 
rosacea flare.  

 Moisturizers are used to heal the barrier-damaged skin by 
minimizing transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and creating 
an environment optimal for rosacea control. Three categories 
of substances that can be combined to enhance the water con-
tent of the skin are occlusives, humectants, and hydrocolloids. 
Occlusives are oily substances that retard TEWL by placing an 
oil slick over the skin surface, while humectants are substances 

ROSACEA AND COSMETICS

15

water from the dermis speeding up hydration. It is through the 
careful combination of these ingredients that facial moistur-
izers can be constructed to prevent a rosacea flare.  

  facial cosmeceuticals 
 Cosmeceuticals are over-the-counter moisturizers with a vari-
ety of active ingredients designed to enhance the appearance 
of  the  skin.  Most  of  the  cosmeceuticals  designed  for  rosacea 
patients contain anti-inflammatory agents that are intended to 
reduce  redness.  The  anti-inflammatory  agents  are  botanical 
extracts  that  may  complement  prescription  therapy  in  the 
maintenance  phase  of  rosacea  treatment.  Commonly  used 
botanical  anti-inflammatory  agents  in  the  current  market-
place include ginkgo biloba, green tea, aloe vera, allantoin, and 
licochalcone.  Their  rationale  for  use  in  redness-reducing 
 cosmeceuticals is discussed.  

   Cosmeceuticals for rosacea patients generally contain 
 anti-inflammatory agents to reduce facial redness. 

  Ginkgo Biloba 
 Ginkgo  biloba  leaves  contain  unique  polyphenols  such  as 
terpenoids  (ginkgolides,  bilobalides),  flavonoids,  and  flavo-
noid  glycosides  with  anti-inflammatory  effects.  These  anti-
inflammatory  effects  have  been  linked  to  antiradical  and 
antilipoperoxidant effects in experimental fibroblast models. 
Ginkgo leaves are also purported to alter skin microcircula-
tion by reducing blood flow at the capillary level and induc-
ing a vasomotor change in the arterioles of the subpapillary 
skin  plexus.  Taken  together,  these  changes  may  lead  to 
decreased skin redness.  

  Green Tea 
 Green  tea,  also  known  as   Camellia  sinensis ,  is  another  anti-
inflammatory botanical agent containing polyphenols, such as 
epicatechin,  epicatechin-3-gallate,  epigallocatechin,  and 
 epigallocatechin-3-gallate.  The  term “green  tea”  refers  to  the 
manufacture of the botanical extract from fresh leaves of the 
tea  plant  by  steaming  and  drying  at  elevated  temperatures 
avoiding  oxidation  and  polymerization  of  the  polyphenolic 
components. A study by Katiyar et al. demonstrated the anti-
inflammatory effects of topical green tea application on C3H 
mice ( 14 ). A second study by the same authors found that top-
ically  applied  green  tea  extract  containing  epigallocatechin-
3-gallate reduced the UVB-induced inflammation as measured 
by  double  skin-fold  swelling  ( 15 ).  Green  tea  extracts  are  the 
most commonly used botanical anti-inflammatory cosmeceu-
tical at the time of this writing.  

  Aloe Vera 
 The second most commonly used anti-inflammatory botani-
cal herb is aloe vera. The mucilage is released from the plant 
leaves as a colorless gel and contains 99.5% water and a com-
plex  mixture  of  mucopolysaccharides,  amino  acids,  hydroxy 
quinone glycosides, and minerals. Compounds isolated from 
aloe vera juice include aloin, aloe emodin, aletinic acid, cho-
line, and choline salicylate. The reported cutaneous effects of 
aloe  vera  relevant  to  rosacea  include  reduced  inflammation, 
decreased  skin  bacterial  colonization,  and  enhanced  wound 

 Figure 2.2     An example of a variety of anti-inflammatory facial moisturizers, 
typically  labeled  as  redness-reducing  moisturizers,  that  are  available  for 
 rosacea patients.    

that  attract  water  to  the  skin,  not  from  the  environment, 
unless  the  ambient  humidity  is  70%,  but  rather  from  the 
inner layers of the skin. Humectants draw water from the via-
ble dermis into the viable epidermis and then from the nonvi-
able epidermis into the stratum corneum. Lastly, hydrocolloids 
are  physically  large  substances,  which  cover  the  skin  thus 
retarding TEWL.  

   Moisturizers to prevent facial rosacea flares combine with 
occlusive agents and humectant agents to prevent water loss 
and to attract water and facilitate barrier repair,  respectively. 

 The  best  moisturizers  to  prevent  facial  rosacea  flares 
 combine occlusive and humectant ingredients. For example, a 
well-formulated  moisturizer  might  contain  petrolatum, 
 mineral oil, and dimethicone as occlusive agents. Petrolatum is 
the synthetic substance mostly like intercellular lipids, but too 
high a concentration will yield a sticky greasy ointment. The 
aesthetics of petrolatum can be improved by adding dimethi-
cone, which is also able to prevent water loss, but reduces the 
petrolatum concentration and yields a thinner more  acceptable 
formulation. Mineral oil is not quite as greasy as petrolatum, 
but still an excellent barrier repair agent; it further improves 
the  ability  of  the  moisturizer  to  spread,  yielding  enhanced 
 aesthetics. The addition of glycerin to the formulation attracts 

16

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

healing. The anti-inflammatory effects of aloe vera may result 
from its ability to inhibit cyclooxygenase as part of the arachi-
donic acid pathway through the choline salicylate component 
of the juice. However, the final concentration of aloe vera in 
any  moisturizer  must  be  at  least  10%  to  achieve  a  cosme-
ceutical effect relevant for rosacea patients.  

  Allantoin 
 Allantoin  is  oldest  anti-inflammatory  ingredient  added  to 
many moisturizers labeled as appropriate for sensitive skin. It 
is found naturally in the comfrey root, but usually synthesized 
by the alkaline oxidation of uric acid in a cold environment. It 
is a white crystalline powder readily soluble in hot water, mak-
ing  it  easy  to  formulate  in  cream  and  lotion  moisturizers 
designed  for  sensitive  skin.  It  is  called  a  skin  protectant  and 
may be helpful in redness reduction.  

  Licochalcone A 
 Licochacone A is isolated by heating from the root of the Glyc-
yrrhiza  inflata  licorice  plant.  It  possesses  anti-inflammatory 
properties  as  evidenced  by  its  in  vitro  ability  to  inhibit  the 
keratinocyte release of PGE 2  in response to UVB-induced ery-
thema and the lipopolysaccharide-induced release of PGE 2  by 
adult  dermal  fibroblasts  ( 16 ).  Licochalcone  A  is  the  active 
agent in one of the largest product lines currently sold interna-
tionally for redness reduction (Eucerin, Beiersdorf).   

  facial camouflage cosmetics 
 Many times a complete redness reduction with pharmaceuti-
cals and skin care products is impossible due to the presence of 
telangiectasias,  which  cannot  be  addressed  with  either  treat-
ment modality. This leaves colored cosmetics as a viable alter-
native for all female rosacea patients, and possibly some males. 
The  cosmetics  can  camouflage  the  underlying  redness  by 
either  blending  colors  or  concealing  the  underlying  skin  to 
achieve a more desirable appearance.  

   Green moisturizers are useful in rosacea patients,  in 
 minimizing facial redness under a facial foundation. 

 The art of blending colors to minimize facial redness utilizes 
a  color  complementary  to  red,  which  is  green.  Moisturizers 
with a slight green tint are applied after the prescription medi-
cation and well blended. Since the mixture of red and green 
produce brown, the sheer green tint will tone down bright red 
cheeks. Sometimes, over the green tint a tan facial foundation 
is applied that matches the desired skin color. The green tint 
allows a sheer facial foundation to better camouflage the red 
tones. If the red remains apparent, a more translucent or even 
opaque facial foundation can be used.  

  troubleshooting facial cosmetics and skin 
care in rosacea patients 
 Occasionally,  a  rosacea  patient  will  present  who  cannot  use 
any  topical  medications  and  skin  care  or  cosmetic  products 
without an adverse effect. The dermatologist may at first think 
that the patient is histrionic, since these patients present with 
a  basket  full  of  problematic  products  and  will  have  usually 
seen  multiple  dermatologists.  In  this  case,  it  may  be  worth-
while to embark on a logical elimination scheme to determine 

which products can and cannot be tolerated. This discussion 
introduces  an  algorithm  for  dealing  with  these  difficult 
patients, based more on the art of medicine than the science 
that first discontinues all unnecessary products and then rein-
troduces them systematically. The algorithm is outlined below:

1.     Discontinue all topical cosmetics, over-the-counter 
treatment products, cleansers, moisturizers, and fra-
grances.  Use  only  a  lipid-free  cleanser  and  a  bland 
moisturizing cream for two weeks.  

2.    Discontinue all topical prescription medications for 
two weeks. Especially, avoid medications containing 
retinoids,  benzoyl  peroxide,  glycolic  acid,  and  pro-
pylene glycol. Oral medications for rosacea may be 
continued.  

3.    Eliminate  all  sources  of  skin  friction  by  selecting 

loose, soft clothing.  

4.    Discontinue any physical activities that involve skin 
friction,  such  as  weight  lifting,  running,  horseback 
riding, etc.  

5.    Evaluate  the  patient  at  two  weeks  to  determine 
whether any improvement has occurred or whether 
any concommitant dermatoses are present. If an un-
derlying  dermatosis,  such  as  seborrheic  dermatitis, 
psoriasis, eczema, atopic dermatitis, or perioral der-
matitis appear, treat as appropriate until two weeks 
after all visible signs of the newly diagnosed skin dis-
ease have disappeared.  

6.    Patch test the patient to elicit any allergens with the 
standard dermatologic patch test substances. Deter-
mine which of these allergens are clinically relevant 
and make avoidance recommendations.  

7.    Evaluate the patient’s mental status especially, not-
ing  signs  of  depression,  menopause,  or  psychiatric 
disease.  

8.    Allow the female patient to add one facial cosmetic 
in the following order: lipstick, face powder, blush.  
9.    Test all remaining cosmetics used by the patient by 
applying nightly to a 2-cm area lateral to the eye for 
at  least  ﬁ ve  consecutive  nights.  Cosmetics  should 
be tested in the following order: mascara, eye liner, 
eyebrow pencil, eye shadow, facial foundation, blush, 
facial powder, and any other colored facial cosmetics.  
  10.    Lastly, test all topical rosacea medications by apply-
ing nightly to a 2-cm area lateral to the eye for ﬁ ve 
consecutive nights.  

  11.    Analyze all data and present the patient with a list of 
medications, skin care products, and cosmetics that 
are appropriate for use.    

 This  is  indeed  a  time-consuming  undertaking,  but  it  is  a 
thorough approach to determining the topical products that 
are appropriate for the challenging patient.  

  summary 
 Rosacea patients are a challenge to the dermatologist who aims 
to give practical advice on the selection of skin care and cos-
metic  products.  This  chapter  has  discussed  the  variety  of 
cleansers,  moisturizers,  and  cosmeceuticals  in  the  current 
marketplace that may or may not be appropriate for rosacea 
patients.  Key  to  success  lies  in  customizing  a  skin  treatment 

ROSACEA AND COSMETICS

17

regimen for each patient. Identifying the skin needs and pre-
scribing  products  that  match  those  needs  will  not  only  treat 
rosacea  but  satisfy  the  patient.  An  approach  for  identifying 
products  suitable  for  the  problematic  patient  has  also  been 
presented. The ideas discussed in this chapter should provide 
ideas for supplementing traditional rosacea therapy with skin 
care and cosmetic products.     

 references 
  1.       Jackson      EM    .    The  science  of  cosmetics  .    Am  J  Contact  Dermat      1993  ;    4  : 

  108  –  10  .   

  7.       Willcox      MJ   ,     Crichton      WP    .    The  soap  market  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1989  ;    104  : 

  61  –  3  .   

  8.       Wortzman     MS    .   Evaluation of mild skin cleansers  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

    35  –  44  .   

  9.       Wortzman      MS   ,     Scott      RA   ,     Wong      PS    ,    et  al  .    Soap  and  detergent  bar 

 rinsability  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1986  ;   37  :   89  –  97  .   

 10.       deNavarre     MG    .   Cleansing creams  .   In  :     deNaarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The Chemistry 
and Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Vol. 3  ,   2nd edn  .   Wheaton, Illinois  :   Allured 
 Publishing Corporation  ,   1975  :   251  –  64  .   

 11.       Jass      HE    .    Cold  creams  .    In  :      deNaarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and 
 Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  .    Vol.  3  ,    2nd  edn  .    Wheaton,  Illinois  :    Allured 
Publishing  Corporation  ,   1975 : 237  –  49  .   

 12.       Mills      OH   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Evaluation  of  abrasives  in  acne  therapy  .    Cutis   

  2.       Draelos      ZD    .    Sensitive  skin:  perceptions,  evaluation,  and  treatment  . 

  1979  ;   23  :   704  –  5  .   

   Contact Derm     1997  ;   8  :   67  .   

  3.      Facial Sting Task Group   ,   ASTM Committee E-18.03.01  .   
  4.       Grove     G   ,    Soschin     D   ,    Kligman     AM    .   Guidelines for performing facial sting-
ing tests  .   In  :   Proc 12th Congress Internat Fed Soc of Cosmet Chem  .   Paris  : 
   September 13–17  ,   1982  .   

  5.       Laden     K    .   Studies on irritancy and stinging potential  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem   

  1973  ;   24  :   385  –  93  .   

  6.       Basketter     DA   ,    Griffiths     HA    .   A study of the relationship between suscepti-
bility to skin stinging and skin irritation  .   Contact Derma     1993  ;   29  :   185  –  8  .   

 13.       Durr     NP   ,    Orentreich     N    .   Epidermabrasion for acne  .   Cutis     1976  ;   17  :   604  –  8  .   
 14.       Katiyar     SK   ,    Elmets     CA    .   Green tea and skin  .   Arch Dermatol     2000  ;   136  :   989  .   
 15.       Katiyar     SK   ,    Elmets     CA   ,    Agarwal     R    ,   et al  .   Protection against ultraviolet-B 
 radiation-induced  local  and  systemic  suppression  of  contact  hypersen-
sitivity and edema responses in C3H/HeN mice by green tea  polyphenols  . 
   Photochem Photobiol     1995  ;   62  :   861  .   

 16.       Kolbe      L   ,     Immeyer      J   ,     Batzer      J    ,    et  al  .    Anti-inflammatory  efficacy  of 
 Licochalcone A: correlation of clinical potency and in vitro effects  .   Arch 
Derm Res     2006  ;   298  :   23  –  30  .       

             3  

 Facial moisturizers and eczema       

 Facial moisturizers are some of the most important over-the-
counter skin care products. Dramatic changes are induced in 
the  skin  through  the  addition  or  removal  of  water.  A  well-
hydrated facial skin is soft, smooth, and beautiful while a poorly 
hydrated facial skin is rough, harsh, and unattractive ( Fig. 3.1 ). 
The  main  effect  produced  by  most  cosmeceuticalsthat  are 
designed  to  minimize  the  appearance  of  wrinkles  is  excellent 
skin  hydration.  Conditions  ranging  from  facial  wrinkles  of 
dehydration to facial eczema are treated by moisturization.  

 Various terms are used by the cosmetics industry to describe 
the  effects  of  creams  and  lotions:  lubricants,  moisturizers, 
repair  or  replenishing  products,  emollients,  etc.  These  terms 
do  not  have  a  scientific  meaning  since  the  mechanisms  for 
rehydrating dry skin or rejuvenating damaged skin remain to 
be elucidated. In basic terms, lubricants refer to those products 
that increase skin slip in dry skin that is rough and flaky; mois-
turizers impart moisture to the skin by increasing the skin flex-
ibility;  and  repair  or  replenishing  products  are  intended  to 
reverse the appearance of aging skin. All three classes of prod-
ucts are based on emollients. An understanding of the func-
tion of facial moisturizers and their formulation is essential to 
the dermatologist who must maintain the health of facial skin 
once the dermatitis has resolved ( 1 ). 

  physiology of xerosis 
 Xerosis is a result of decreased water content of the stratum cor-
neum  which  leads  to  abnormal  desquamation  of  corneocytes 
( Fig. 3.2 ). For the skin to appear and feel normal, the water con-
tent of this layer must be above 10% ( 2 ). Water is lost through 
evaporation to the environment under low humidity conditions 
and must be replenished by water from the lower epidermal and 
dermal layers ( 3 ). The stratum corneum must have the ability to 
maintain this moisture or the skin will feel rough, scaly, and dry. 
However, this is indeed a simplistic view as there are minimal 
differences between the amount of water present in the stratum 
corneum of dry and normal skin ( 4 ). Xerotic skin is due to more 
than simply low water content ( 5 ). Electron micrographic stud-
ies of dry skin demonstrate a stratum corneum that is thicker, 
fissured, and disorganized ( Fig. 3.3 ).    

   Water is lost through evaporation to the environment 
under low humidity conditions and must be replenished 
by water from the lower epidermal and dermal layers. 

 There are three intercellular lipids implicated in epidermal bar-
rier function: sphingolipids, free sterols, and free fatty acids ( 6 ). 
In  addition,  it  is  thought  that  the  lamellar  bodies  (Odland 
bodies, membrane-coating granules, and cementsomes), con-
taining  sphingolipids,  free  sterols,  and  phospholipids,  play  a 
key role in barrier function and are essential to trap water and 
prevent excessive water loss ( 7 , 8 ). The lipids are necessary for 
barrier  function  since  solvent  extraction  of  these  chemicals 
leads to xerosis, directly proportional to the amount of lipid 

18

removed ( 9 ). The major lipid by weight found in the stratum 
corneum is ceramide, which becomes sphingolipid if glycosyl-
ated via the primary alcohol of sphingosine ( 10 ). Ceramides 
have most of the long-chain fatty acids and linoleic acid in the 
skin. Perturbations within the barrier result in rapid lamellar 
body  secretion  and  a  cascade  of  cytokine  changes  associated 
with adhesion molecule expression and growth factor produc-
tion ( 11 ). If skin with barrier perturbations is occluded with a 
vapor-impermeable wrap, the expected burst in lipid synthesis 
is blocked. However, occlusion with a vapor-permeable wrap 
does not prevent barrier recovery ( 12 ). Therefore, transepider-
mal  water  loss  (TEWL)  is  necessary  to  initiate  synthesis  of 
 lipids to allow barrier repair ( 13 , 14 ).  

   The three intercellular lipids implicated in epidermal 
barrier function are sphingolipids, free sterols, and free 
fatty acids. 

 Remoisturization of the skin must then occur in four steps: 
initiation  of  barrier  repair,  alteration  of  surface  cutaneous 
moisture  partition  coefficient,  onset  of  dermal-epidermal 
moisture diffusion, and synthesis of intercellular lipids ( 15 ). It 
is generally thought in the cosmetics industry that a stratum 
corneum  containing  20–35%  water  will  exhibit  the  softness 
and pliability of normal stratum corneum ( 16 ). 

 Other  disease  states,  such  as  facial  atopic  dermatitis,  also 
demonstrate abnormal barrier function due to ceramide dis-
tribution  ( 17 , 18 ).  Interestingly  enough,  xerosis  tends  to 
increase with age due to a lower, inherent water content of the 
stratum  corneum  ( 19 ).  But  this  does  not  totally  account  for 
the  scaliness  and  roughness  of  the  aged  skin,  probably  an 
abnormal desquamatory process is also present ( 20 ). 

 There  are  other  lipids  present  in  the  stratum  corneum, 
besides those previously discussed, that are worth mentioning: 
cholesterol  sulfate,  free  sterols,  free  fatty  acids,  triglycerides, 
sterol  wax/esters,  squalene,  and  n-alkanes  ( 21 ).  Cholesterol 
sulfate only comprises 2–3% of the total epidermal lipids, but 
is important in corneocyte desquamation ( 22 ). It appears that 
corneocyte desquamation is mediated through the desulfation 
of cholesterol sulfate ( 23 ). Fatty acids are also important since 
it has been demonstrated that barrier function can be restored 
by topical or systemic administration of linoleic acid-rich oils 
in essential fatty-acid-deficient rats ( 24 ).   

   The primary two methods for remoisturization of the skin 
are occlusives and humectants. 

  mechanisms of moisturization 
 There  are  four  mechanisms  by  which  the  stratum  corneum 
can  be  rehydrated:  occlusives,  humectants,  hydrophilic 
 matrices, and sunscreens ( 25 ). 

FACIAL MOISTURIZERS AND ECZEMA

19

Absence of organized lipid bilayers

Corneocytes

Amorphous matrix

 Figure 3.1     A SEM appearance of xerotic skin with barrier damage demonstrated by the presence of a disorganized lipid bilayer.    

Stratum corneum

Stratum lucidum

Stratum granulosum

Stratum spinosum

Stratum basale

 Figure 3.2     The process of corneocyte maturation requires a progressive dehydration of the cells as they move from the basal layer to the stratum corneum.    

20

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Absence of organized lipid bilayer

Widened
intercellular
spaces,
characteristic of
soap use

 Figure 3.3     A SEM image of surfactant-induced dry skin with barrier damage.    

  Occlusives 
 There  are  20  different  generic  classes  of  chemicals  that  can 
function as occlusives to retard TEWL . Each chemical imparts 
a different feel and thickness to the moisturizer. Listed below 
are some of the more widely used substances ( 26 ): 

1.     Hydrocarbon  oils  and  waxes:  petrolatum,  mineral 

oil, parafﬁ n, and squalene  

2.    Silicone oils  
3.    Vegetable and animal fats  
4.    Fatty acids: lanolin acid and stearic acid  
5.    Fatty alcohol: lanolin alcohol and cetyl alcohol  
6.    Polyhydric alcohols: propylene glycol  
7.    Wax esters: lanolin, beeswax, and stearyl stearate  
8.    Vegetable waxes: carnauba and candelilla  
9.    Phospholipids: lecithin  

  10.    Sterols: cholesterol   

 The most occlusive of the above chemicals is petrolatum ( 27 ). 
It  appears,  however,  that  a  total  occlusion  of  the  stratum 
 corneum  is  undesirable.  While  the  TEWL  can  be  completely 
halted, once the occlusive is removed, water loss resumes at its 
preapplication  level.  Thus,  the  occlusive  moisturizer  has  not 
allowed the stratum corneum to repair its barrier function ( 28 ). 
But, petrolatum does not appear to function as an impermeable 
barrier;  rather  it  permeates  throughout  the  interstices  of 
the  stratum  corneum  allowing  the  barrier  function  to  be 
 reestablished ( 29 ).  

   Petrolatum remains the most effective occlusive  moisturizing 
agent. 

 While petrolatum is a very effective facial moisturizer, it is 
not commonly used, except in formulations for very dry skin. 
It is very greasy and does not allow makeup to perform well. It 
also does not allow sweat to evaporate from the skin surface 
creating the feeling of warmth. Finally, it stains clothing. Pet-
rolatum is used in small amounts in facial moisturizers, but is 

usually mixed with dimethicone and cetyl alcohol to make a 
more cosmetically acceptable formulation. This need for cos-
metic elegance has led to all the countless facial moisturizers 
on the market today.  

  Humectants 
 Another concept in rehydrating the facial stratum corneum is 
the use of humectants. Humectants have been used in cosmet-
ics for many years to increase the shelf life by preventing prod-
uct evaporation and subsequent thickening due to variations 
in temperature and humidity. For example, humectants are a 
necessary  part  of  all  oil-in-water  creams  to  maintain  their 
required  water  content.  Substances  that  function  as  humec-
tants are glycerin, honey, sodium lactate, urea, propylene gly-
col,  sorbitol,  pyrrolidone  carboxylic  acid,  gelatin,  hyaluronic 
acid, vitamins, and some proteins ( 26 , 30 ). 

 Cosmetic chemists have theorized that humectants could 
be used to draw water from the environment, under condi-
tions  where  the  ambient  humidity  exceeds  70%,  and  more 
commonly from the deeper epidermal and dermal tissues to 
rehydrate the stratum corneum. Water that is applied to the 
skin  in  the  absence  of  a  humectant  is  rapidly  lost  to  the 
atmosphere ( 31 ). Humectants may also allow the skin to feel 
smoother  by  filling  holes  in  the  stratum  corneum  through 
swelling  ( 32 ).  However,  under  low  humidity  conditions, 
humectants  such  as  glycerin  will  actually  draw  moisture 
from  the  skin  and  increase  TEWL  ( 33 ).  Therefore,  a  good 
moisturizer should combine both occlusive and humectant 
properties. 

 Glycerin  is  mixed  with  occlusive  petrolatum  and  dimethi-
cone in many facial moisturizers to aid in drawing water to the 
skin surface that is held in place by the artificial barrier. Too 
much glycerin can make the facial moisturizer sticky by hold-
ing  sweat  to  the  skin  surface.  Other  humectants,  such  as 
 vitamins  and  proteins,  are  added  to  complement  the  effect 
of  glycerin.  While  the  patient  may  believe  that  the  proteins 
or  peptides  are  affecting  skin  collagen,  they  are  in  actuality 

FACIAL MOISTURIZERS AND ECZEMA

 preventing facial skin water loss by humectancy. This is the art 
of facial moisturizer formulation.  

  Hydrophilic Matrices 
 Hydrophilic  matrices  are  large  molecular  weight  substances 
that  physically  retard  water  loss  from  the  face.  Some  of  the 
more  recent  advances  in  facial  moisturization  have  been  in 
this  category.  Topical  hyaluronic  acid  is  a  high-molecular-
weight substance that is one of the newer hydrophilic matri-
ces found in facial moisturizers. It sits on the skin surface not 
only blocking water loss physically but also functioning as a 
humectant  to  hold  water.  Many  proteins  also  function  as 
humectants  and  hydrophilic  matrices  simultaneously.  One 
manufacturer produces a facial moisturizer based on colloidal 
oatmeal,  familiar  to  dermatologists  from  the  oatmeal  bath, 
which also physically prevents water loss. Hydrophilic matri-
ces are the least commonly used moisturizing mechanism in 
facial moisturizers.  

   Hydrophilic moisturizers are large molecular weight 
substances that impede water loss. 

  Sunscreens 
 The most potent antiaging ingredient in any facial moisturizer 
is sunscreen. As a matter of fact, most of the claims that deal 
with aging are supported by the sunscreen primarily and the 
moisturizer secondarily. It is widely felt that protection against 
UVB and UVA radiation is beneficial in the prevention of skin 
aging,  but  this  theory  has  never  been  tested,  only  observed. 
Sunscreens are listed as moisturizers because they prevent cel-
lular  damage  and  thus  prevent  dehydration.  Sunscreens  are 
considered  moisturizing  ingredients,  but  do  not  alter  facial 
skin  water  loss  in  the  profound  manner  of  occlusive  and 
humectant ingredients.   

  mechanisms of emollience 
 Emollience  is  another  important  characteristic  of  moistur-
izers independent of their ability to increase skin hydration. 
Emollients function by filling the spaces between the desqua-
mating corneocytes with oil droplets ( 34 ), but their effect is 
only  temporary.  They  make  the  skin  feel  smooth  and  soft, 
which  is  the  primary  facial  moisturizer  attribute  addressed 
by  most  patients  ( Fig.  3.4 ).  Some  moisturizing  ingredients 
are  emollients,  but  not  all  emollients  are  moisturizing 
 ingredients.   

   Emollients function by filling the spaces between the 
desquamating corneocytes making the skin feel smooth 
and soft. 

 Emollients can be divided into several categories: protec-
tive  emollients,  fattening  emollients,  dry  emollients,  and 
astringent  emollients  ( 35 ).  Protective  emollients  are  sub-
stances such as diisopropyl dilinoleate and isopropyl isostea-
rate  that  remain  on  the  skin  longer  than  average  time  and 
allow the skin to feel smooth immediately upon application. 
Fattening  emollients,  such  as  castor  oil,  propylene  glycol, 
jojoba oil, isostearyl isostearate, and octyl stearate, also leave 

21

 Figure 3.4     Most patients evaluate the efficacy of a moisturizer for its emollient 
properties, not for its barrier repair properties.    

 Figure 3.5     The ability of a moisturizer to create an environment for facial bar-
rier repair cannot be assessed by visually inspecting the viscosity properties of 
the product.    

a long lasting film on the skin, but may feel greasy. Dry emol-
lients such as isopropyl palmitate, decyl oleate, and isostearyl 
alcohol do not offer much skin protection but produce a dry 
feel. Lastly, astringent emollients, such as dimethicones and 
cyclomethicones,  isopropyl  myristate  and  octyl  octanoate, 
have minimal greasy residue and can reduce the oily feel of 
other emollients.    

   Dimethicone can function as an emollient and as an 
occlusive moisturizer. 

  facial moisturizer formulation 
 Most moisturizers consist of water, lipids, emulsifiers, preser-
vatives, fragrance, color, and specialty additives. Interestingly 
enough, water accounts for 60–80% of any moisturizer; how-
ever, externally applied water does not remoisturize the face. 
In  fact,  the  rate  of  water  passage  through  the  skin  increases 
with increased hydration ( 36 ). The water functions as a dilu-
ent and evaporates leaving the active agents behind. Emulsifi-
ers are generally soaps in concentrations of 0.5% or less and 
function to keep the water and lipids in one continuous phase. 
Parabens are the most commonly used preservatives in mois-
turizers,  usually  combined  with  one  of  the  formaldehyde 
donor  preservatives  ( 15 ).  The  variety  of  specialty  additives 
incorporated into moisturizers is endless, limited only by the 
imagination of the cosmetic chemist ( Fig. 3.5 ).   

22

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Facial moisturizers consist of water, lipids, emulsifiers, 
preservatives, fragrance, color, and specialty additives. 

 A  marketable  moisturizer  facial  formulation  must  fulfill 
three  criteria:  it  must  increase  the  water  content  of  the  skin 
(moisturization), it must make the skin feel smooth and soft 
(emollience), and it must protect injured or exposed skin from 
harmful or annoying stimuli (skin protection). 

 Facial  moisturizers  and  related  products  are  the  fastest 
growing cosmetic market ( Fig. 3.6 ). There are two basic for-
mulations: oil-in-water emulsions in which water is the domi-
nant  phase  and  water-in-oil  emulsions  in  which  oil  is  the 
dominant  phase.  Oil-in-water  formulations  are  used  for  the 
thinner daytime facial moisturizers and water-in-oil formula-
tions are used for night creams or facial replenishing creams. 
Oil-in-water emulsions can be identified by their cool feel and 
nonglossy  appearance  while  water-in-oil  emulsions  can  be 
identified by their warm feel and glossy appearance ( 37 ). Day-
time moisturizers are generally composed of mineral oil, pro-
pylene glycol, and water in sufficient quantity to form a lotion 
( Fig. 3.7 ). Night creams are composed of mineral oil, lanolin 
alcohol,  petrolatum,  and  water  to  form  a  cream  ( Fig.  3.8 ). 
 Specialized eye creams are night creams with some of the more 
irritating  ingredients  removed  to  prevent  eye  stinging.  The 
 differences  between  products  thus  lie  in  the  addition  of 
 fragrances,  exotic  oils,  vitamins,  protein  or  amino  acid 
 products, and other minor moisturizing aids.    

 The plethora of facial moisturizers has made categoriza-
tion of the various products difficult; however, a brief look 
at the claims and composition of some key products is valu-
able.  The  cosmetic  companies  market  facial  moisturizers 
based  on  skin  types.  Naturally,  products  designed  for  oily 
complexions are oil-free or contain small amounts of light 
oils. Products for normal skin contain moderate amounts of 
light  oils,  and  products  for  dry  skin  contain  increased 
amounts  of  heavier  oils.  The  lighter  oil  used  is  generally 
mineral oil and the heavier oil is petrolatum. Thus, moistur-
izing products can be developed for all skin types based on 
varying water-to-oil ratios.  

   Oily complexion moisturizers are oil-free and composed 
of water and silicone derivatives, such as cyclomethicone 
or dimethicone. 

 Oily complexion products that are oil-free are composed of 
water  and  silicone  derivatives,  such  as  cyclomethicone  or 
dimethicone. This combination has been shown to be noncom-
edogenic in the rabbit ear assay. These products are nongreasy 
since the bulk of the product evaporates from the face. Many 
oily complexion moisturizers also claim to provide oil control, 
which  is  accomplished  through  the  use  of  oil-absorbing 
 substances such as talc, clay, starch, or synthetic polymers. 

 Products  designed  for  normal  or  combination  skin  contain 
predominantly  water,  mineral  oil,  and  propylene  glycol  with 
very  small  amounts  of  petrolatum.  These  products  leave  a 
greater oily residue on the face than oil-free formulations. Mois-
turizers in this line are also called antiwrinkle lotions, protective 
creams, or sport creams if they contain sunscreening agents.  

 Figure 3.6     Facial moisturizers improve appearance by hydrating fine lines of 
dehydration, especially around the eyes.    

 Figure 3.7     A demonstration of the viscosity of a day cream formulation.    

 Figure 3.8     A demonstration of the viscosity of a night cream formulation.    

   Normal skin facial moisturizers are composed predominantly 
of water, mineral oil, and propylene glycol with very small 
amounts of petrolatum. 

 Dry  skin  moisturizers  contain  water,  mineral  oil,  propylene 
glycol, and larger amounts of petrolatum or lanolin in addition 
to  low  concentrations  of  numerous  additives  claiming  to 
rebuild,  renew,  or  replenish.  The  patients  should  realize  that 
there  is  no  perfect  skin  moisturizer.  Creams  and  lotions  that 

FACIAL MOISTURIZERS AND ECZEMA

23

(A)

(B)

 Figure 3.9     ( A)  The appearance of dry skin prior to application of a moisturizer. ( B)  The same dry skin in ( A)  immediately following moisturizer application which 
has smoothed the skin scale temporarily and improved the appearance.    

claim to restore or rebuild tissue in the dermis do not  penetrate 
deeply to have any effect. The extremely high cost of some mois-
turizers is not justified by the value of the ingredients. Patients 
are  buying  a  certain  feel,  fragrance,  or  image.  If  the  patient 
achieves  more  self-confidence  or  an  increased  sense  of  well 
being after using a certain facial cream, the money has been well 
spent. The role of the physician should be to identify which cos-
metic claims are unfounded so that the patient has a medical 
perspective on the product he or she chooses to  purchase.  

   Dry skin facial moisturizers contain water, mineral oil, 
propylene glycol, and larger amounts of petrolatum. 

 It  is  important  that  the  patient  select  the  appropriate  facial 
moisturizer for his or her skin type. Most cosmetic companies 
clearly label which moisturizers are for oily, normal, and dry skin. 
Even  though  patients  with  oily  skin  may  be  hesitant  to  use  a 
moisturizer, a product that contains oil-absorbing talc or kaolin 
can decrease the facial shine. Patients with the oily skin often use 
a soap containing benzoyl peroxide to remove unwanted oil and 
aid in acne treatment. These soaps can leave the face scaly with 
the subsequent washing immediately interfering with the foun-
dation application. An oil-free moisturizer can help flatten the 
scale enabling smooth foundation application rather than pref-
erentially  adhering  to  skin  scale.  Patients  selecting  an  oil-free 
foundation must use an oil-free moisturizer to ensure maximum 
foundation wear and minimal color drift. 

 Patients with dry skin will benefit from the selection of an 
appropriate  moisturizer.  Fine  wrinkling  due  to  cutaneous 
dehydration and roughness due to skin scale can be improved 
( Fig. 3.9 ).   

  facial moisturizer efficacy evaluation 
 The  efficacy  of  facial  moisturizers  can  be  difficult  to  assess; 
however,  several  excellent  noninvasive  methods  have  been 
developed:  regression  analysis,  profilometry,  squametry, 
in vivo image  analysis, corneometry, and  evaporimetry ( 38 ). 

These  methods  are  used  to  evaluate  the  benefits  of  a  given 
moisturizer formulation without injury to the skin. 

 Regression  analysis  is  a  method  of  evaluating  moisturizer 
efficacy  under  clinical  conditions.  Here  patients  are  selected 
and  treated  by  an  objective  observer  with  moisturizers  at  a 
predetermined test site for two weeks. The test site is evaluated 
on days 7 and 14. If an improvement is noted, the moisturizer 
application is discontinued and the test site is evaluated daily 
for  two  weeks,  or  until  the  baseline  skin  dryness  has  reap-
peared  ( 39 ).  This  method  is  particularly  valuable  since  the 
 efficacy  of  all  facial  moisturizers  is  excellent  immediately 
 following  application,  but  the  true  effectiveness  can  only  be 
assessed with the passage of time ( 40 ).  

   Regression analysis evaluates the longevity of the effect of 
a moisturizer on the skin. 

 Profilometry involves the analysis of silicone rubber (Silflo ) 
replicas of the skin surface. These silicone replicas are then cast 
into plastic positives, which are then measured with a comput-
erized stylus instrument that provides a contour tracing of the 
surface.  Thus,  a  two-  or  three-dimensional  topogram  is 
 created.  Unfortunately,  this  method  can  be  inaccurate  since 
the silicone application to the skin surface tends to flatten and 
disturb  the  desquamating  skin  scale  ( 41 ).  The  use  of  actual 
silicone  replicas  is  now  sometimes  replaced  with  the  video 
imaging of the skin surface, but the replicas remain the more 
accurate standard.  

   Video imaging and silicone replicas examine the skin 
surface topography. 

 Squametry involves the analysis of skin squames harvested 
by  pressing  a  sticky  tape  against  the  skin.  The  outermost, 
loosely adherent skin scale is then removed. The tape provides 
a  specimen  that  retains  the  topographical  relationships  of 
the skin surface and the pattern of desquamation. Image pro-
cessing is then used to evaluate the scaliness of the skin ( 42 ). 

24

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

This  technique  is  very  useful  when  evaluating  the  effect  of 
facial  moisturizers  on  patients  with  desquamatory  defects. 
Squametry can also be used to harvest corneocytes in a pain-
less  manner  for  extraction  of  ceramides  and  lipids  to  deter-
mine  the  effect  of  facial  moisturizers  on  intercellular  lipid 
composition. Further, the squames can be dissolved with a sol-
vent to examine the penetration of externally applied moistur-
izers  into  the  skin.  Multiple  squames  removed  successively 
provide a penetration map for the moisturizer.  

   Squametry can be used to track the penetration of a 
moisturizing ingredient into the stratum corneum. 

 In vivo image analysis uses a video microscope to magnify 
the skin surface and examine the condition of the facial cor-
neocytes  in  real  time  ( 43 ).  Care  is  necessary  to  standardize 
lighting and camera angles to insure accurate data for analysis. 
In vivo imaging can also measure pigmentation and erythema 
to  examine  the  effect  of  skin  lightening  preparations  or  the 
erythema of rosacea. 

 Finally, two techniques are available to measure the amount 
of water present in the skin or that coming out of the skin. The 
amount of water in the skin can be assessed by evaluating the 
conductance of the skin with a technique known as corneom-
etry.  Corneometry  puts  a  low  voltage  current  into  the  skin 
with an electrode consisting of pins. One set of pins delivers 
the current while the second set of pins senses the current. The 
more water there is in the skin, the more hydration that is pres-
ent.  Thus,  increased  corneometry  readings  indicate  an 
increased skin hydration ( 44 , 45 ). Evaporimetry measures the 
amount of water coming out of the skin known as TEWL ( 46 ). 
This is accomplished by using two humidity meters spaced at 
known  distance  from  the  skin  and  evaluating  the  passage  of 
water vapor per time past the probe. More occlusive substances 
would be expected to lower water loss while humectants, such 
as glycerin, actually increase water loss ( 47 , 48 ). Lower evapo-
rimetry  measurements  mean  that  the  skin  barrier  is  better, 
while higher evaporimetry measurements mean that the skin 
barrier is damaged.) A quality moisturizer would be expected 
to lower TEWL and decrease the evaporimetry reading.  

   Corneometry evaluates the amount of water in the skin 
while evaporimetry evaluates the amount of water leaving 
the skin. 

 Even  though  these  sophisticated  noninvasive  methods  of 
cutaneous evaluation sound appealing, there is no substitute 
for the opinion of a trained unbiased observer when evaluat-
ing  moisturizer  effectiveness.  Mechanistic  evaluation  can  be 
easily biased to produce data that serves the best interest of the 
manufacturer. Computers cannot yet accurately synthesize all 
the  tactile  and  visual  information  that  can  be  obtained  with 
human evaluation. The noninvasive techniques simply present 
another tool for assessing facial moisturizer function ( 49 ).  

  facial moisturizer: adverse reactions 
 Many patients with dry skin will claim that they are “allergic” 
to most moisturizers as a result of skin stinging experienced 
following application. This may represent an irritant contact 

dermatitis rather than a true allergic contact dermatitis ( 50 ). 
These  patients  should  avoid  moisturizers  containing  propyl-
ene  glycol,  which  may  cause  burning  upon  application  to 
damaged skin. Other substances found in facial moisturizers 
that  cause  stinging  include  benzoic  acid,  cinnamic  acid 
 compounds, lactic acid, urea, emulsifiers, formaldehyde, and 
sorbic acid. 

 Moisturizing ointments, creams, lotions, and gels should be 
patch tested “as is.” If an irritant reaction is experienced with 
closed patch testing, the product should be retested with open 
patch testing and provocative use testing ( 51 ).  

  summary 
 Facial moisturizers are one of the most important categories 
of skin care products. They can reduce wrinkles and minimize 
dry  skin.  Their  composition  is  simple,  but  their  effects  are 
 profound.  Using  occlusive  and  humectant  ingredients,  they 
can  improve  the  look  and  feel  of  the  skin  within  minutes. 
Moisturizers  also  form  the  basis  for  all  prescription  topical 
formulations  and  can  supplement  or  hinder  the  functioning 
of drugs.    

  references  
    1.       Goldner      R    .    Moisturizers:  a  dermatologist’s  perspective  .    J  Toxicol  Cut 

 Ocular Toxicol     1992  ;   11  :   193  –  7  .   

    2.       Boisits     EK    .   The evaluation of moisturizing products  .   Cosmet Toilet     1986  ; 

  101  :   31  –  9  .   

    3.       Wu      MS   ,    Yee      DJ   ,     Sullivan      ME    .    Effect  of  a  skin  moisturizer  on  the  water 
distribution  in  human  stratum  corneum  .    J  Invest  Dermatol      1983  ;    81  : 
  446  –  8  .   

    4.       Wildnauer     RH   ,    Bothwell     JW   ,    Douglass     AB    .   Stratum corneum biomechan-

ical properties  .   J Invest Dermatol     1971  ;   56  :   72  –  8  .   

    5.       Pierard     GE    .   What does “dry skin” mean?     Int J Dermatol     1987  ;   26  :   167  –  8  .   
    6.       Elias     PM    .   Lipids and the epidermal permeability barrier  .   Arch Dermatol 

Res     1981  ;   270  :   95  –  117  .   

    7.       Holleran     WM   ,    Man     MQ   ,    Wen     NG    ,   et al.  Sphingolipids are required for 
mammalian epidermal barrier function  .   J Clin Invest     1991  ;   88  :   1338  –  45  .   
    8.       Downing      DT    .    Lipids:  their  role  in  epidermal  structure  and  function  . 

   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   63  –  9  .   

    9.       Grubauer      G   ,     Elias      PM   ,     Feingold      KR    .    Transepidermal  water  loss:  the 
 signal for recovery of barrier structure and function  .   J Lipid Res     1989  ;   30  : 
  323  –  33  .   

   10.       Petersen      RD    .    Ceramides  key  components  for  skin  protection  .    Cosmet 

 Toilet     1992  ;   107  :   45  –  9  .   

   11.       Nickoloff      BJ   ,     Naidu      Y    .    Perturbation  of  epidermal  barrier  function 
 correlates with initiation of cytokine cascade in human skin  .   J Am Acad 
Dermatol     1994  ;   30  :   535  –  46  .   

   12.       Elias     PM    .   Epidermal lipids, barrier function, and desquamation  .   J Invest 

Dermatol     1983  ;   80  :   44s  –  9s  .   

   13.       Jass     HE   ,    Elias     PM    .   The living stratum corneum: implications for cosmetic 

formulation  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   47  –  53  .   

   14.       Holleran      W   ,     Feingold      K   ,     Man      MQ    ,     et  al.   Regulation  of  epidermal 
 sphingolipid synthesis by permeability barrier function  .   J Lipid Res     1991  ; 
  32  :   1151  –  8  .   

   15.       Jackson      EM    .    Moisturizers:  What’s  in  them?  How  do  they  work?      Am  J 

 Contact Dermatitis     1992  ;   3  :   162  –  8  .   

   16.       Reiger      MM    .    Skin,  water  and  moisturization  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1989  ;    104  : 

  41  –  51  .   

   17.       Motta     S   ,    Monti     M   ,    Sesana     S    ,   et al.  Abnormality of water barrier function 

in psoriasis  .   Arch Dermatol     1994  ;   130  :   452  –  6  .   

   18.       Imokawa     G   ,    Abe     A   ,    Jin     K    ,   et al.  Decreased level of ceramides in stratum 
corneum  of  atopic  dermatitis:  an  etiologic  factor  in  atopic  dry  skin?      J 
Invest Dermatol     1991  ;   96  :   523  –  6  .   

   19.       Potts      RO   ,     Buras      EM   ,     Chrisman      DA    .    Changes  with  age  in  the  moisture 

content of human skin  .   J Invest Dermatol     1984  ;   82  :   97  –  100   

   20.       Wepierre     J   ,    Marty     JP    .   Percutaneous absorption and lipids in elderly skin  . 

  J Appl Cosmetol     1988  ;   6  :   79  –  92  .   

FACIAL MOISTURIZERS AND ECZEMA

   21.       Brod     J    .   Characterization and physiological role of epidermal lipids  .   Int J 

Dermatol     1991  ;   30  :   84  –  90  .   

   22.       Lampe     MA   ,    Williams     ML   ,    Elias     PM    .   Human epidermal lipids: character-
ization  and  modulation  during  differentiation  .    J  Lipid  Res      1983  ;    24  : 
  131  –  40  .   

   23.       Long      SA   ,     Wertz      PW   ,     Strauss      JS    ,     et  al.   Human  stratum  corneum  polar 

lipids and desquamation  .   Arch Dermatol Res     1985  ;   277  :   284  –  7  .   

   24.       Elias     PM   ,    Brown     BE   ,    Ziboh     VA    .   The permeability barrier in essential fatty 
acid  deficiency:  Evidence  for  a  direct  role  for  linoleic  acid  in  barrier 
 function  .   J Invest Dermatol     1980  ;   75  :   230  –  3  .   

   25.       Baker      CG    .    Moisturization:  new  methods  to  support  time  proven 

 ingredients  .   Cosmet Toilet     1987  ;   102  :   99  –  102  .   

   26.       De  Groot      AC   ,     Weyland      JW   ,     Nater      JP    .    Unwanted  Effects  of  Cosmetics 
and Drugs Used in Dermatology  ,   3rd edn  .   Amsterdam: Elsevier  ,   1994  : 
  498  –  500  .   

   27.       Friberg      SE   ,     Ma      Z    .    Stratum  corneum  lipids,  petrolatum  and  white  oils  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   107  :   55  –  9  .   

   28.       Grubauer      G   ,     Feingold      KR   ,     Elias      PM    .    Relationship  of  epidermal  lipo-
genesis to cutaneous barrier function  .   J Lipid Res     1987  ;   28  :   746  –  52  .   
   29.       Ghadially      R   ,     Halkier-Sorensen      L   ,     Elias      PM    .    Effects  of  petrolatum  on 
 stratum corneum structure and function  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1992  ;   26  : 
  387  –  96  .   

   30.       Spencer     TS    .   Dry skin and skin moisturizers  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   24  –  8  .   
   31.       Rieger      MM   ,     Deem      DE    .    Skin  moisturizers  II  The  effects  of  cosmetic 
 ingredients on human stratum corneum  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1974  ;   25  : 
  253  –  62  .   

   32.       Robbins     CR   ,    Fernee     KM    .   Some observations on the swelling of human 

epidermal membrane  .   JSCC     1983  ;   37  :   21  –  34   .

   33.       Idson     B    .   Dry skin: moisturizing and emolliency  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107   

  69  –  78  .   

   34.       Wehr      RF   ,     Krochmal      L    .    Considerations  in  selecting  a  moisturizer  .    Cutis   

  1987  ;   39  :   512  –  15  .   

   35.       Brand     HM   ,    Brand-Garnys     EE    .   Practical application of quantitative emol-

liency  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107  :   93  –  9  .   

   36.       Warner      RR   ,     Myers      MC   ,     Taylor      DA    .    Electron  probe  analysis  of  human 
skin: Determination of the water concentration profile  .   J Invest Dermatol   
  1988  ;   90  :   218  –  24  .   

   37.       Idson     B    .   Moisturizers, emollients, and bath oils  .   In  :     Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    , 
  eds  .   Principles of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby 
Company  ,   1982  :   37  –  44  .   

   38.       Grove     GL    .   Noninvasive methods for assessing moisturizers  .   In  :     Waggoner   
  WC    ,    ed  .    Clinical  Safety  and  Efficacy  Testing  of  Cosmetics  .    New  York  : 
   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1990  :   121  –  48  .   

   39.       Kligman      AM    .    Regression  method  for  assessing  the  efficacy  of  mois-

turizers  .   Cosmet Toilet     1978  ;   93  :   27  –  35   .

   40.       Lazar     AP   ,    Lazar     P    .   Dry skin, water, and lubrication  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  45  –  51   .

   41.       Grove     GL   ,    Grove     MJ    .   Objective methods for assessing skin surface topo-
graphy  noninvasively  .    In  :      Leveque      JL    ,    ed  .    Cutaneous  Investigation  in 
Health and Disease  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1988  :   1  –  32  .   

   42.       Grove     GL    .   Dermatological applications of the Magiscan image analysing 
computer  .    In  :      Marks      R   ,     Payne      PA    ,    eds  .    Bioengineering  and  the  Skin  . 
   Lancaster, England  :   MTP Press  ,   1981  :   173  –  82  .   

   43.       Prall     JK   ,    Theiler     RF   ,    Bowser     PA   ,    Walsh     M    .   The effect of cosmetic products 
in alleviating a range of skin dryness conditions as determined by clinical 
and instrumental techniques  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     1986  ;   8  :   159  –  74  .   

   44.       Tagami      H    .    Electrical  measurement  of  the  water  content  of  the  skin 

 surface  .   Cosmet Toilet     1982  ;   97  :   39  –  47  .   

   45.       Grove     GL    .   The effect of moisturizers on skin surface hydration as measured 

in vivo by electrical conductivity  .   Curr Ther Res     1991  ;   50  :   712  –  19  .   

   46.       Idson      B    .    In  vivo  measurement  of  transdermal  water  loss  .    J  Soc  Cosmet 

Chem     1976  ;   29  :   573  –  80  .   

   47.       Rietschel      RL    .    A  method  to  evaluate  skin  moisturizers  in  vivo  .    J  Invest 

 Dermatol     1978  ;   70  :   152  –  5  .   

   48.       Rietschel     RL    .   A skin moisturization assay  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1979  ;   30  : 

  360  –  73  .   

   49.       Grove     GL    .   Design of studies to measure skin care product performance  . 

  Bioeng Skin     1987  ;   3  :   359  –  73  .   

   50.       Lazar     PM    .   The toxicology of moisturizers  .   J Toxicol Cut Ocular Toxicol   

  1992  ;   11  :   185  –  91  .   

   51.       Maibach     HI   ,    Engasser     PG    .   Dermatitis due to cosmetics  .   In  :     Fisher     AA    ,   ed  . 
  Contact Dermatitis  .   3rd edn  .   Phildelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  :   371  .    

25

  suggested reading 
      Altemus     M   ,    Rao     B   ,    Dhabhar     F   ,    Ding     W   ,    Granstein     R    .   Stress-induced Changes 
in Skin Barrier Function in Healthy Women  .   J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   117  : 
  309  –  17  .   

     Ananthapadmanabhan      KP   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Rattinger      GB    .    Moisturizing 
cleansers  (Chapter  20)  .    In  :      Leyden      JJ   ,     Rawlings      AV    ,    eds  .    Skin  Moisturi-
zation  .   Vol. 25  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   405   –  32  .   

     Arct     J   ,    Gronwald     M   ,    Kasiura     K    .   Possibilities for the Prediction of an Active Sub-
stance Penetration through Epidermis  .   IFSCC Magazine     2001  ;   4  :   179  –  83  .   
     Atrux-Tallau      N   ,     Romagny      C   ,     Padois      K    ,    et  al  .    Effects  of  Glycerol  on  Human 
Skin  Damaged  by  Acute  Sodium  Lauryl  Sulphate  Treatment  .    Arch 
 Dermatol Res     2009  ;   [Epub ahead of print]  .   

     Barton     S    .   Formulation of Skin Moisturizers (Chapter 25)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings   
  AV    ,   eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   547  –  75  .   
     Bikowski      J    .    The  use  of  therapeutic  moisturizers  in  various  dermatologic 

 disorders  .   Cutis     2001  ;   68     (5 Suppl)  :   3  –  11  .   

     Bissonnette     R   ,    Maari     C   ,    Provost     N    ,   et al  .   A Double-Blind Study of Tolerance 
and  Efficacy  of  a  New  Urea-Containing  Moisturizer  in  Patients  with 
Atopic Dermatitis  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2010  ;   9  :   16  –  21  .   

     Buraczewska      I   ,     Berne      B   ,     Lindberg      M   ,     Torma      H   ,     Loden      M    .    Changes  in  skin 
barrier  function  following  long-term  treatment  with  moisturizers,  a 
 randomized controlled trial  .   Br J Dermatol     2007  ;   156  :   492  –  8  .   

     Chamlin     SL   ,    Kao     J   ,    Frieden     IJ    ,   et al  .   Ceramide-dominant Barrier Repair Lipids 
Alleviate  Childhood  Atopic  Dermatitis:  Change  in  Barrier  Function 
 Provide  a  Sensitive  Indicator  of  Disease  Activity  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   
  2002  ;   47  :   198  –  208  .   

     Coderch     L   ,    Lopez     O   ,    de la Maza     A   ,    Parra     JL    .   Ceramides and Skin Function  .   Am 

J Clin Dermatol     2003  ;   4  :   107  –  29  .   

     Crowther      JM   ,     Sieg      A   ,     Clenkiron      P    ,    et  al  .    Measuring  the  effects  of  topical 
 moisturizers on changes in stratum corneaim thickness, water gradients 
and hydration in vivo  .   Br J Dermatol     2008  ;   159  :   567  –  77  .   

     Denda     M   ,    Kumazawa     N    .   Negative electric potential induces alteration of ion 
gradient  and  lamellar  body  secretion  in  the  epidermis,  and  accelerates 
skin barrier recovery after barrier disruption  .   J Invest Dermatol     2002  ;   118  : 
  65  –  72  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    Concepts  in  skin  care  maintenance  .    Cutis      2005  ;    76      (6  Suppl)  : 

  19  –  25  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   The ability of onion extract gel to improve the cosmetic appear-

ance of postsurgical scars  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2008  ;   7  :   101  –  4  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Therapeutic moisturizers  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   597  –  607  .   
     Draelos      ZD   ,     Ertel      K   ,     Berge      C    .    Niacinamide-containing  facial  moisturizer 
improves skin barrier and benefits subjects with rosacea  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76  : 
  135  –  41  .   

     Endo      K   ,     Suzuki      N   ,     Yoshida      O    ,    et  al  .    Two  factors  governing  transepidermal 
water loss: barrier and driving force components  .   IFSCC Magazine     2003  ; 
  6  :   9  –  13  .   

     Fluhr     JW   ,    Bornkessel     A   ,    Berardesca     E    .   Glycerol—Just a Moisturizer? (Chapter 
20)  .    In  :      Loden      M   ,     Maibach      HI    ,    eds  .    Biological  and  Biophysical  Effects. 
Dry Skin and Moisturizers  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC  ,   2006  : 
  227   –  43  .   

     Fluhr      J   ,     Holleran      WM   ,     Berardesca      E    .    Clinical  effects  of  emollients  on  skin 
(Chapter 12)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    ,   eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  . 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   223   –  43  .   

     Ghali      FE    .    Improved  clinical  outcomes  with  moisturization  in  dermatologic 

disease  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76     (6 Suppl)  :   13  –  18  .   

     Giusti     F   ,    Martella     A   ,    Bertoni     L   ,    Seidernari     S    .   Skin Barrier, Hydration, and pH 
of the Skin of Infants Under 2 years of Age  .   Pediatr Dermatol     2001  ;   18  : 
  93  –  6  .   

     Hannuksela      A   ,     Kinnunen      T    .    Moisturizers  prevent  irritant  dermatitis  .    Acta 

Derm Venereol     1992  ;   72  :   42  –  4  .   

     Hannuksela      M    .    Moisturizers  in  the  prevention  of  contact  dermatitis  .    Curr 

Probl Dermatol     1996  ;   25  :   214  –  20  .   

     Harding     CR    .   The stratum corneum: structure and function in health and dis-

ease  .   Derm Ther     2004  ;   17  :   6  –  15  .   

     Harding      CR   ,     Rawlings      AV    .    Effects  of  natural  moisturizing  factor  and  lactic 
acid isomers on skin function (Chapter 18)  .   In  :     Loden     M   ,    Maibach     HI    , 
  eds  .   Dry Skin and Moisturizers  .   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC  , 
  2006  :   187  –  209  .   

     Hawkins      SS   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Liu      D   ,     Bryk      M    .    Cleansing.  Moisturizing,  and 
sun-protection  regimens  for  normal  skin,  self-perceived  sensitive  skin, 
and dermatologist- assessed sensitive skin  .   Derm Ther     2004  ;   17  :   63  –  8  .   

26

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

     Held      E   ,     Lund      H   ,     Agner      T    .    Effect  of  different  moisturizers  of  SLS-irritated 

     Loden     M    .   Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry 

human skin  .   Contact Dermatitis     2001  ;   44  :   229  –  34  .   

     Held     E   ,    Sveinsdottir     S   ,    Agner     T    .   Effect of long-term use of moisturizer on skin 
hydration,  barrier  function  and  susceptibility  to  irritants  .    Acta  Derm 
Venereol     1999  ;   79  :   49  –  51  .   

skin barrier disorders  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2003  ;   4  :   771  –  88  .   
     Loden     M    .   Skin Barrier Function: Effects of Moisturzers  .   C & T  .   
     Loden     M    .   The clinical benefit of moisturizers  .   J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol   

  2005  ;   19  :   672  –  88  ;   quiz     686  –  7  .   

     Held     E   ,    Agner     T    .   Effect of moisturizers on skin susceptibility to irritants  .   Acta 

     Loden      M    .    Urea-containing  moisturizers  influence  barrier  properties  of 

Derm Venereol     2010  ;   81  :   104  –  7  .   

 normal skin  .   Arch Dermatol Res     1996  ;   288  :   103  –  7  .   

     Herman     S    .   Lipid Assets  .   GCI  .   2001     Dec  :   12  –  14  .   
     Herman     S    .   The new polymer frontier  .   GCI  .   January     2002  .   
     Jemec     GB   ,    Wulf     HC    .   Correlation between the greasiness and the plasticizing 

     Loden     M   ,    Andersson     AC   ,    Lindberg     M    .   Improvement in skin barrier function 
in  patients  with  atopic  dermatitis  after  treatment  with  a  moisturizing 
cream (Canoderm)  .   Br J Dermatol     1999  ;   140  :   264  –  7  .   

effect of moisturizers  .   Acta Derm Venereol     1999  ;   79  :   115  –  17  .   

     Lynde      CW    ,    Moisturizers: What  They  are  and  How  They Work  .    Skin  Terapy 

     Johnson     AW    .   Overview: fundamental skin care—protecting the barrier  .   Derm 

Lett     2001  ;   6  :   3  –  5  .   

Ther     2004  ;   17  :   1  –  5  .   

     Madison     KC    .   Barrier Function of the Skin: “La Raison d’Etre” of the Epider-

     Kao     JS   ,    Garg     A   ,    mao-Qiang     M    ,   et al  .   Testosterone perturbs epidermal perme-

mis  .   J Invest Dermatol     2003  ;   121  :   231  –  41  .   

ability barrier homeostasis  .   J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   116  :   443  –  50  .   

     Kraft     JN   ,    Lynde     CW    .   Moisturizers: what they are and a practical approach to 

product selection  .   Skin Ther Lett     2005  ;   10  :   1  –  8  .   

     Lachapelle     JM    .   Efficacy of protective creams and/or gels  .   Curr Probl Dermatol   

  1996  ;   25  :   182  –  92  .   

     Lebwohl      M   ,     Herrmann      LG    .    Impaired  skin  barrier  function  in  dermato-
logic disease and repair with moisturization  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76     (6 Suppl)  : 
  7  –  12  .   

     Le  Fur      I   ,     Reinberg      A   ,     Lopez      S    ,    et  al  .    Analysis  of  Circadian  and  Ultradian 
Rhythms  of  Skin  Surface  Properties  of  Face  and  Forearm  of  Healthy 
Women  .   J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   117  :   718  –  24  .   

     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    .   Humectants (Chapter 13)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    , 
  eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   245   –  66  .   
     Lipozencic      J   ,     Pastar      Z   ,     Marinovic-Kulisic      S    .    Moisturizers  .    Acta  Derma-

     Maes     DH   ,    Marenus     KD    .   Main finished products: moisturizing and cleansing 
creams (Chapter 10)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Textbook of Cosmetic 
Dermatology  .   2nd edn  .   Martin Dunitz Ltd  ,   1998  :   113   –  24  .   

     Mandawgade      SD   ,     Patravale      VB    .    Formulation  and  evaluation  of  exotic  fat 
based cosmeceuticals for skin repair  .   Indian J Pharm Sci     2008  ;   70  :   539  –  42  .   
     Norlen      L    .    Skin  barrier  formation:  the  membrane  folding  model  .    J  Invest 

 Dermatol     2001  ;   117  :   823  –  36  .   

     Prasch      TH   ,     Schlotmann      K   ,     Schmidt-fonk      K   ,     Forster      Th    .    The  influence  of 
 cosmetic products on the stratum corneum by infrared and spectroscopy  . 
  IFSCC Magazine     2001  ;   4  :   201  –  3  .   

     Rawlings      AV   ,     Canestrari      DA   ,     Dobkowski      B    .    Moisturizer  technology  versus 

clinical performance  .   Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17     (Suppl 1)  :   49  –  56  .   

     Rawlings     AV   ,    Harding     CR    .   Moisturization and skin barrier function  .   Dermatol 

Ther     2004  ;   17  :   43  –  8  .   

tovenerol Croat     2006  ;   14  :   104  –  8  .   

     Rieger     M    .   Moisturizers and humectants  .   In  :     Rieger     MM    ,   ed  .   Harry’s Cosmeti-

     Loden      M    .    Barrier  recovery  and  influence  of  irritant  stimuli  in  skin  treated 

cology  .   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  .   

with a moisturizing cream  .   Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   36  :   256  –  60  .   
     Loden     M    .   Do moisturizers work?     J Cosmet Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   141   –  9  .   
     Loden     M    .   Hydrating Substances (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   ,    Maibach   
  HI    ,    eds  .    Handbook  of  Cosmetic  Science  and  Technology  .    2nd  edn  . 
  Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   265  –  80  .   

     Simion     FA   ,    Abrutyn     ES   ,    Draelos     ZD    .   Ability of moisturizers to reduce dry skin 
and irritation and to prevent their return  .   J Cosmet Sci     2005  ;   56  :   427  –  44  .   
     Simion      FA   ,     Starch      MS   ,     Witt      PS   ,     Woodford      JK   ,     Edgett      KJ    .    Hand  and  body 
lotions (Chapter 24)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Textbook of Cosmetic 
Dermatology  .   2nd edn  .   Martin Dunitz Ltd  ,   1998  :   285   –  308  .        

             4  

 Sensitive skin and contact dermatitis      

  Treating  sensitive  skin  can  indeed  present  a  challenge  to  the 
dermatologist, since formulations that are typically not prob-
lematic  for  the  general  population  cause  intense  stinging, 
burning, and redness in individuals with sensitive skin. Patients 
with  sensitive  skin  can  present  with  either  skin  that  appears 
normal to the eye or overt skin disease. Those with overt skin 
disease are sometimes easier to evaluate, since visual inspec-
tion  can  provide  an  idea  of  how  to  approach  the  problem. 
Invisible  sensitive  skin  is  a  tremendous  challenge  as  there  is 
nothing  to  evaluate,  except  for  the  patient’s  history.  This  is 
most  disconcerting  to  the  dermatologist  who  only  relies  on 
history  when  all  else  has  failed  and  the  diagnosis  is  still  not 
forthcoming. This is the perplexing part of treating sensitive 
skin  and  this  chapter  will  discuss  methods  of  treating  both 
invisible and visible sensitive facial skin ( 1 ). It will then segue 
into contact dermatitis and its relationship with cosmetics and 
skin care products.  

   Visible sensitive skin is characterized by eczema, atopic 
dermatitis, and rosacea. 

  visible sensitive facial skin 
 Visible sensitive facial skin is the easiest condition to diagnose, 
since the outward manifestations of erythema, desquamation, 
lichenification,  and  inflammation  identify  the  presence  of  a 
severe  barrier  defect  ( Fig.  4.1 ).  Any  patient  with  a  barrier 
defect  will  possess  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  sensitive  skin 
until complete healing occurs. The three most common causes 
of  barrier  defect-induced  facial  sensitive  skin  are  eczema, 
atopic  dermatitis,  and  rosacea.  These  three  diseases  nicely 
illustrate the three components of sensitive skin, which include 
barrier disruption, immune hyper-reactivity, and heightened 
neurosensory response.   

   The three components of visible sensitive skin are barrier 
disruption, immune hyper-reactivity, and heightened 
neurosensory response. 

  Eczema 
 Eczema  is  characterized  by  barrier  disruption,  which  is  the 
most common cause of facial sensitive skin. The barrier can be 
disrupted chemically through the use of cleansers and cosmet-
ics that remove intercellular lipids, or physically through the 
use of abrasive substances that induce stratum corneum exfo-
liation. In some cases, the barrier may be defective either due 
to insufficient sebum production, inadequate intercellular lip-
ids, abnormal keratinocyte organization, etc. The end result is 
the  induction  of  the  inflammatory  cascade  accompanied  by 
erythema, desquamation, itching, stinging, burning, and pos-
sibly  pain.  The  immediate  goal  of  treatment  is  to  stop  the 
inflammation  through  the  use  of  topical,  oral,  or  injectable 
corticosteroids,  depending  on  the  severity  of  the  eczema. 

Newer  topical  options  for  the  treatment  of  eczema-induced 
sensitive  facial  skin 
inhibitors, 
pimecrolimus, and tacrolimus. 

include  the  calcineurin 

 However,  the  resolution  of  the  inflammation  is  not  suffi-
cient for the treatment of eczema. Proper skin care must also 
be instituted to minimize the return of the conditions that led 
to the onset of eczema. This includes the selection of skin care 
maintenance  products,  such  as  cleansers  and  moisturizers. 
Thus, the care of sensitive skin involves not only the treatment 
of the acute skin disease but also the prevention of recurrence 
through proper skin care maintenance.  

  Atopic Dermatitis 
 Sensitive facial skin due to eczema is predicated only on physical 
barrier disruption, while the sensitive facial skin associated with 
atopic dermatitis is predicated both on a barrier defect and an 
immune  hyper-reactivity,  as  manifested  by  the  association  of 
asthma and hay fever. Patients with atopic dermatitis not only 
have sensitive skin on the exterior of the body but also sensitive 
mucosa lining the eyes, nose, and lungs. Thus, the treatment of 
sensitive facial skin in the atopic population involves topical and 
systemic considerations. There is also a prominent link between 
the  worsening  of  hay  fever  and  the  onset  of  skin  symptoms, 
requiring broader treatment considerations. 

 All  of  the  treatments  previously  described  for  eczema  also 
apply to atopic dermatitis, but additional therapy is required 
to minimize the immune hyper-reactivity. While this may take 
the form of oral or injectable corticosteroids, antihistamines 
(hydroxyzine, cetirizine hydrochloride, diphenhydramine, and 
fexofenadine  hydrochloride,  etc.)  are  typically  added  to 
decrease  cutaneous  and  ocular  itching.  Antihistamines  also 
improve  the  symptoms  of  hay  fever  and  may  prevent  a  flare 
should the patient be exposed to pollens or other inhaled aller-
gens.  The  avoidance  of  sensitive  skin  in  the  atopic  patient  is 
largely  predicated  on  avoidance  of  inciting  substances.  This 
means creating an allergy-free environment by removing old 
carpet, nonwashable drapes, items likely to collect dust, feather 
pillows  and  bedding,  stuffed  animal  toys,  heavy  pollinating 
trees and plants, live pets, etc. The prevention of the release of 
histamine is the key to controlling the sensitive facial skin of 
atopic dermatitis.  

  Rosacea 
 Rosacea  is  an  example  of  the  third  component  of  sensitive 
facial skin, which is a heightened neurosensory response. This 
means  that  patients  with  rosacea  experience  stinging  and 
burning  more  frequently  than  the  general  population  do  to 
minor  irritants.  Whether  this  sensitive  facial  skin  is  due  to 
nerve  alterations  from  chronic  photodamage,  vasomotor 
instability,  altered  systemic  effects  to  ingested  histamine,  or 
central facial lymphedema is unclear. 

 The treatments for rosacea-induced sensitive facial skin are 
much different than those for eczema or atopic dermatitis ( 2 ). 

27

28

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 4.1  Considerations for the Minimization of Contact 
Dermatitis from Skin Care Products and Cosmetics

1.   Eliminate common allergens and irritants, or reduce their 

concentration.

2.   Select products from a reputable manufacturer that uses 
high-quality, pure ingredients free of contaminants.

3.   Products should be well preserved to prevent the formation of 

auto-oxidation byproducts.

4.   Paraben preservatives have proven to be the least problematic.
5.   Avoid solvents, volatile vehicles, vasodilatory substances, and 

sensory stimulators in all products.

6.   Minimize the use of surfactants and select minimally irritating 

emulsifier systems.

the  patient.  Products  must  be  carefully  selected  based  on  the 
use of ingredients that are least likely to damage the skin bar-
rier, elicit a noxious sensory response, or alter the skin structure 
( Table 4.1 ). Products with botanical anti-inflammatories may 
be helpful, but most patients want specific suggestions on how 
to  select  skin  care  products  and  cosmetics.  This  section  dis-
cusses the approach I use in my practice for product selection 
for the sensitive skin patient who has not responded to any of 
the previously outlined treatment modalities.   

   Products for sensitive skin must be carefully selected based 
on the use of ingredients that are least likely to damage the 
skin barrier, elicit a noxious sensory response, or alter the 
skin structure. 

 Even patients with sensitive skin require basic hygiene. The 
face  and  body  must  be  cleansed.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
synthetic detergent cleansers, also known as syndets, provide 
the best skin cleansing while minimizing barrier damage. Bars 
based on sodium cocoyl isethionate appear to perform the best 
( Fig. 4.2 ). There are some patients, however, who only require 
the use of a facial syndet cleanser occasionally since the sebum 
production  and  physical  activity  are  minimal.  For  these 
patients,  a  lipid-free  cleanser  is  preferable  because  it  can  be 
used without water and wiped away. These products may con-
tain water, glycerin, cetyl alcohol, stearyl alcohol, sodium lau-
rel  sulfate,  and  occasionally  propylene  glycol.  They  leave 
behind a thin moisturizing film and can be used effectively in 
persons with excessively dry, sensitive, or dermatitic skin. They 
do not have strong antibacterial properties, however, and may 
not remove odor from the armpit or groin. Lipid-free  cleansers 
are best used where minimal cleansing is desired.  

 After  completing  cleansing,  the  sensitive  skin  patient 
requires  moisturization.  The  moisturizer  should  create  an 
optimal  environment  for  barrier  repair,  while  not  inducing 
any  type  of  skin  reaction.  For  example,  the  product  should 
not  contain  any  mild  irritants  that  may  present  as  an  acne-
iform eruption in a sensitive skin patient due to the presence 
of follicular irritant contact dermatitis. The best moisturizers 
are  simple  oil-in-water  emulsions.  The  most  common  oil 
used  is  white  petrolatum,  but  dimethicone  and  cyclomethi-
cone are also acceptable oils in the sensitive skin population 
for decreasing the greasiness of a simple petrolatum and water 
formulation. As mentioned previously, the fewer ingredients 
the better.  

 Figure 4.1     Visible sensitive skin is easy for the dermatologist to diagnose.    

Anti-inflammatories in the form of oral and topical antibiot-
ics form the therapeutic armamentarium. Antibiotics of the 
tetracycline  family  are  used  most  commonly  orally,  while 
 azelaic acid, metronidazole, sulfur, and sodium sulfacetamide 
are the most popular topical agents. However, the effect of the 
anti-inflammatory  antibiotic  can  be  enhanced  through  the 
use of complementary skin care products that enhance  barrier 
function.    

   Invisible sensitive skin is characterized by itching, stinging, 
burning, and possibly pain. 

  invisible sensitive skin 
 Eczema, atopic dermatitis, and rosacea are in some ways the 
easiest forms of sensitive skin to treat. The skin disease is easily 
seen and the treatment success can be monitored visibly. If the 
skin  looks  more  normal,  generally  the  symptoms  of  itching, 
stinging,  burning,  and  pain  will  also  be  improved.  Unfortu-
nately, there are some patients who present with sensitive facial 
skin and no clinical findings. These patients typically present 
with a bag full of skin care products they claim cannot be used 
because they cause facial acne, rashes, and/or discomfort. This 
situation  presents  a  challenge  for  the  physician,  since  it  is 
unclear how to proceed. 

 Several treatment ideas are worth considering. The patient 
may have subclinical barrier disruption. For this reason, treat-
ment with an appropriate-strength, topical corticosteroid for 
two weeks may be advisable. If symptoms improve, then the 
answer is clear. The patient may have subclinical eczematous 
disease. If the symptoms do not improve, it is then worthwhile 
to examine the next most common cause of invisible sensitive 
skin, which is contact dermatitis.  

  sensitive facial skin product guidelines 
 In many cases, it is impossible to determine the exact cause of 
the  sensitive  skin.  No  obvious  skin  disease  is  present,  yet  the 
patient  experiences  intense  stinging  and  burning  sensation 
whenever  skin  care  products  or  cosmetics  are  applied  to  the 
skin. Frequently, patch testing reveals no obvious source of irri-
tant or allergic contact dermatitis. This then leaves the physician 
to use empiric methods to make product recommendations to 

SENSITIVE SKIN AND CONTACT DERMATITIS

29

 Figure 4.2     Synthetic detergents or syndet cleansers produce gentle cleansing 
for patients with sensitive skin. From left to right, they are available as bars, 
opaque liquids, or foaming clear washes.    

 Figure  4.3     Facial  foundations  can  be  tested  for  sensitive  skin  suitability  by 
applying a small amount to the lateral eye for five consecutive nights.    

   Sensitive skin products should contain as few ingredients 
as possible. 

 Sensitive  skin  women  also  require  recommendations  on 
proper cosmetic selection. This can be a challenge for the phy-
sician, since cosmetic formulations change rapidly as dictated 
by the needs of fashion. The best method for evaluating prob-
lematic facial cosmetics is the provocative use test, performed 
by applying a 2-cm area of product lateral to the eye for 5 con-
secutive nights ( Fig. 4.3 ). This allows the isolation of the cos-
metic products one at a time on the most sensitive part of the 
face, which has the highest yield of uncovering the problem. 
Powder cosmetics overall appear to have the fewest ingredients 
and present the least problems ( Fig. 4.4 ).    

 Figure 4.4     Powder cosmetics are preferred in sensitive skin.    

  contact dermatitis 
 The use of cosmetics and skin care products can occasionally 
result in contact dermatitis. This is certainly a minor issue, but 
no  discussion  of  cosmetic  dermatology  could  be  complete 
without addressing this important aspect of patient care. With 
the tremendous variety of products available for purchase, it is 
easy for the consumer to simply discard or return any product 
that has produced an untoward reaction. Occasionally, how-
ever, a patient finds that he or she experiences numerous reac-
tions  or  severe  reactions  requiring  the  expertise  of  a 
dermatologist skilled in the diagnosis and treatment of contact 
dermatitis. Contact dermatitis can be classified as irritant con-
tact  dermatitis,  allergic  contact  dermatitis,  contact  urticaria, 
phototoxic contact dermatitis, and photoallergic contact der-
matitis. Each of these subjects is discussed in the framework of 
skin care products and cosmetics. 

  Irritant Contact Dermatitis 
 Irritant  contact  dermatitis,  the  most  commonly  encoun-
tered adverse reaction to cosmetics and skin care products, 
is  manifested  as  erythematous,  burning,  pruritic  skin  that 
may develop microvesiculation and later desquamation. The 
dermatitis  is  characterized  by  stratum  corneum  damage 
without  immunologic  phenomena.  The  irritancy  may  be 
due to the presence of chemical factors with excessively high 
or  low  pH,  or  by  volatile  vehicles  that  dissolve  protective 
sebum ( 3 ). Physical factors including the rubbing necessary 
to  apply  cosmetics  or  abrasive  particles  within  cosmetics 
may cause irritancy. Most importantly, a damaged stratum 
corneum may not be able to provide a protective barrier, so 
that  any  cosmetic  applied  to  the  damaged  skin  will  cause 
irritation. This is the case in patients with atopic dermatitis, 
xerotic  eczema,  or  neurodermatitis.  These  patients 
 frequently  will  describe  numerous  products  that  produce 
“allergic” symptoms. In actuality, there is no immunologic 
basis  for  the  dermatitis,  but  an  irritancy  heightened  by  a 
damaged stratum corneum. Any cosmetic applied to derma-
titic skin may produce irritation; therefore, patients should 
not  wear  cosmetics  or  use  personal  care  items  until  the 
 dermatitis has resolved.   

   Any cosmetic applied to dermatitic skin may produce 
irritation. 

30

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

  Allergic Contact Dermatitis 
 It is difficult to differentiate allergic contact dermatitis from irri-
tant contact dermatitis clinically, but the distinction is essential 
for good patient care. Both conditions may present as erythema-
tous  plaques;  however,  acute  allergic  contact  dermatitis  may 
exhibit more vesiculation. In some cases, late-stage allergic and 
irritant contact dermatitis cannot be differentiated clinically or 
histologically.  Allergic  contact  dermatitis  is  an  immunologic 
phenomenon  requiring  antigen-presenting  and  antigen- 
processing  cells  irrespective  of  the  condition  of  the  protective 
stratum corneum. Therefore, an intact stratum corneum cannot 
prevent the development of allergic contact dermatitis in sensi-
tized individuals. The only course is avoidance of the allergen ( 4 ). 
The most common cosmetic-induced causes of allergic contact 
dermatitis  as  determined  by  the  North  American   Contact 
 Dermatitis Group are listed by product category ( Table 4.2 ) and 
ingredient ( Table 4.3 ) ( 5 ). Other studies have also been  published 
by the European dermatologic community ( 6 , 7 ).     

   An intact stratum corneum cannot prevent the 
 development of allergic contact dermatitis in sensitized 
individuals. 

  Contact Urticaria 
 Contact  urticaria  may  be  an  immunologic  or  nonimmuno-
logic reaction to cosmetics and skin care products. It is charac-
terized by the development of a wheal-and-flare response to a 
topically applied chemical. The spectrum of clinical presenta-
tion ranges form itching and burning to generalized urticaria 
to anaphylaxis. Nonimmunologic contact urticaria is induced 
when histamine is released by a direct contactant and thus pas-
sive transfer is not possible. It is more commonly encountered 
than  immunologic  contact  urticaria  where  immunologic 
mechanisms are involved in histamine release, thus the phe-
nomenon  can  only  be  elicited  in  sensitized  individuals  and 
passive transfer is possible. However, there are some chemicals 
that produce contact urticaria due to uncertain mechanisms. 
 Table 4.4  lists the nonimmunologic and immunologic causes 

Table 4.2  Causes of Allergic Contact Dermatitis as per 
North American Contact Dermatitis Group

Skin care products
Hair care products
Facial cosmetics
Nail cosmetics
Fragrance products

Source: Data from Ref. 5.

28%
24%
11%
8%
7%

Table 4.3  Ingredients Causing Allergic Contact Dermatitis 
in Order of Decreasing Incidence

Fragrances
Preservatives
p-Phenylenediamine (hair dye component)
Lanolin
Glyceryl thioglycolate (permanent wave solution component)
Propylene glycol
Toluenesulfonamide/formaldehyde resin (nail polish component)
Sunscreens

Source: Data from Ref. 5.

of contact urticaria to substances encountered in cosmetics ( 8 ). 
Testing  for  contact  urticaria  should  be  carried  out  under 
 carefully  controlled  conditions  with  nearby  resuscitation 
 facilities since anaphylaxis due to topically applied chemicals 
has occurred in sensitized individuals.    

   Contact urticaria is characterized by the development of a 
wheal-and-flare response to a topically applied chemical. 

  Phototoxic and Photoallergic Dermatitis 
 Phototoxic  and  photoallergic  dermatitis  are  limited  to  areas 
exposed to light. Phototoxic reactions are based on nonimmu-
nologic mechanisms and usually appear as sunburns that may 
be  followed  by  hyperpigmentation  and  desquamation.  The 
molecules  that  produce  phototoxicity  are  generally  of  low 
molecular weight and possess highly resonant structures that 
readily  absorb  mainly  UVA  radiation  ( 9 ).  Photoallergic  der-
matitis, on the other hand, is less common and immunologi-
cally mediated; generally requires repeat exposure and can be 
passively transferred. It is characterized by erythema, edema, 
and vesiculation. Photoallergens are generally low-molecular-
weight,  lipid-soluble  substances  that  possess  highly  resonant 
structures absorbing energy over a wide range of wavelengths, 
but again predominantly UVA. The light energy photochemi-
cally converts the photosensitizer into its active form ( 10 ). Less 
ultraviolet radiation energy is required to elicit a photoallergic 
reaction  compared  with  a  phototoxic  reaction  ( 11 ). 
 Differentiating  between  the  two  may  be  difficult,  however, 
especially if a severe phototoxic reaction results in  vesiculation. 
Substances  found  in  cosmetics  that  may  cause  photoallergic 

Table 4.4  Substances Used in Cosmetics that Cause Contact 
Urticaria

Nonimmunologic
Acetic acid
Alcohols
Balsam of Peru
Benzoic acid
Cinnamic acid
Cinnamic aldehyde
Formaldehyde
Sodium benzoate
Sorbic acid

Immunologic

Acrylic monomer
Alcohols
Ammonia
Benzoic acid
Benzophenone
Diethyltoluamide
Formaldehyde
Henna
Menthol
Parabens
Polyethylene glycol
Polysorbate 60
Salicylic acid
Sodium sulfide

Uncertain

Ammonium persulfate
Para-phenylenediamine

SENSITIVE SKIN AND CONTACT DERMATITIS

reactions  include  fragrances  such  as  methylcoumarin  and 
musk  ambrette  and  antibacterial  agents  and  the  para- 
aminobenzoic acid esters such as sunscreening agents ( 12 ).    

   Photoallergens are low-molecular-weight, lipid-soluble 
substances that possess highly resonant structures which 
absorb energy over a wide range of wavelengths. 

  patch testing 
 Patch testing is performed to determine the source of allergic 
contact dermatitis ( 13 ). Generally, the appropriate substances 
for patch testing are selected from the dermatologic patch test 
tray  ( Table  4.5 )  and  applied  to  filter  paper  discs  affixed  to  a 
strip of polyethylene-coated aluminum foil (Al-test) or placed 
in  8-mm  aluminum  chambers  affixed  to  a  nonwoven  textile 
tape ( 14 ). The prepackaged TRUE test can also be used. The 
healthy  skin  of  the  upper  back  is  selected  and  marked  for 
placement  of  the  tape  strips,  which  are  worn  for  48 hours. 
During this time, the patient should not get the patches wet or 
engage in activities that induce heavy sweating. The tests are 
initially evaluated at 20 minutes after removal and again at two 
to seven days ( 15 ).  Table 4.6  shows the method of evaluation 
used by the North American Contact Dermatitis Group.   

Table 4.5  Substances on a Standard Patch Test Tray

  1.  Benzocaine 5% petrolatum
  2.  Imidazolidinyl urea 2% aqueous
  3.  Thiram mix 1% petrolatum
  4.  Lanolin alcohol 30% petrolatum
  5.  Neomycin sulfate 20% petrolatum
  6.  p-Phenylenediamine 1% petrolatum
  7.  Mercaptobenzothiazole 1% petrolatum
  8.  P-tert-butylphenol formaldehyde resin 1% in petrolatum
  9.  Formaldehyde 1% aqueous
10.  Carba mix 3% petrolatum
11.  Rosin (colophony) 20% petrolatum
12.  Black rubber mix 0.6% petrolatum
13.  Ethylenediamine dihydrochloride 1% petrolatum
14.  Quaternium-15 2% petrolatum
15.  Mercapto mix 1% petrolatum
16.  Epoxy resin 1% petrolatum
17.  Balsam of Peru 25% petrolatum
18.  Potassium dichromate 0.25% petrolatum
19.  Nickel sulfate 2.5% petrolatum
20.  Cinnamic aldehyde 1% petrolatum

Table 4.6  Evaluation of Patch Test Reactions

+?  =   Doubtful reaction; possibly caused by a weak irritant 

effect: the reaction shows only a weak erythema without 
infiltration
 Weak reaction; erythema with infiltration and possibly 
papules

+  

= 

++  =  Strong reaction; erythema, infiltration, papules, vesicles
+++  =   Extreme reaction; erythema, infiltration, papules, 

confluent vesicles or bullae

=  Negative reaction

–  
IR  =  Irritant reaction
NT  =  Not patch tested

31

 There are two other methods of patch testing that are useful 
in  patients  with  suspected  cosmetics  or  skin  care  product 
 sensitivities: open patch tests and provocative use tests. Open 
patch  testing  is  useful  when  the  test  chemical  is  suspected 
of being a cutaneous irritant. The chemical is applied to the 
skin  on  the  outer  aspect  of  the  arms  above  the  elbow  unoc-
cluded twice daily for two or more days without washing the 
test site. The site is evaluated in the same manner as illustrated 
in Table 4.6. False-negative results may occur with this method, 
however.  Provocative  use  testing  is  valuable  in  confirming 
 positive reactions to cosmetic products containing ingredients 
that  were  previously  found  to  be  sources  of  allergic  contact 
dermatitis with standard patch testing. The product is applied 
twice  daily  to  the  skin  3 cm  in  diameter  above  or  below  the 
antecubital fossae for one week. A modification of this test for 
eye cosmetics is application to the skin lateral to the eye twice 
daily for one week. Reactions are also evaluated as illustrated 
in Table 4.6.   

   Two additional methods of patch testing useful in patients 
with suspected cosmetics or skin care product sensitivities 
are the open patch test and provocative use test. 

  additional sensitivity testing 
 Testing  beyond  patch  testing  may  be  required  to  ensure  the 
complete safety of cosmetic and skin care products. Ingredi-
ents used in cosmetics are evaluated by the Cosmetic Ingredi-
ent Review committee who makes recommendations for use 
and concentration of the chemical in question. 

  Draize Test 
 The Draize test is an evaluation of dermal irritation using an 
animal model ( 16 ) Semiocclusive patch tests of the evaluation 
substance  are  placed  at  100%  concentration  on  both  intact 
and  abraded  albino  rabbit  skin.  Readings  are  performed  at 
24  and  72 hours  after  leaving  the  skin  uncovered  for  30  to 
60 minutes  to  allow  local  effects  to  subside.  The  sites  are 
 evaluated for erythema and edema to determine the degree of 
irritancy ( 17 ). This test is required by law for cosmetics and 
skin  care  products  under  the  Federal  Hazardous  Substances 
Act  ( 18 )  to  predict  the  toxicity  of  chemicals  to  humans  in  a 
manner that overestimates the risk ( 19 , 20 ).  

  Repeat Insult Patch Test  
 Repeat  insult  patch  testing  evaluates  skin  sensitization  by 
repeating chemical exposure at the same site on the body. Ten 
patches are applied to the same site at 48-hour intervals for a 
three- to four-week period. The skin is allowed to rest for two 
weeks and then a repeat challenge of the same chemical to the 
skin is applied for 48 hours and read. This method is  commonly 
used by reputable cosmetic companies in evaluating ingredi-
ents and final products for minor sources of sensitization prior 
to manufacturing them on a large scale.  

  Cumulative Irritancy Test 
 The cumulative irritancy test is designed to assess the irritancy 
of an ingredient, such as those found in a cosmetic or skin care 
item, or a final product. The test involves daily application of the 
same substance to the test site under occlusion for 21 days ( 21 ). 

32

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

The  repeat  application  is  designed  to  maximize  the  irritant 
 reactions.  

Table 4.7  Substances that Induce Stinging

  Eye Irritancy Test 
 The  eye  irritancy  test  is  important  for  cosmetic  products 
since  cosmetics  may  accidentally  enter  into  eyes.  This  test 
assesses  the  irritant  effects  of  substances  on  the  conjuncti-
vum,  cornea,  and  iris  of  Albino  rabbits.  This  is  similar  to 
patch  testing;  however,  0.10 mL  of  the  test  substance  is 
instilled into the eye. In one group of rabbits, the treated eyes 
are  left  unwashed;  in  the  second  group  the  treated  eyes  are 
washed with 20 mL of lukewarm water after 2 seconds and in 
the third group the eyes are washed with 20 mL of lukewarm 
water after 4 seconds. Evaluation of the eyes are performed at 
24 hours,  48 hours,  72 hours,  4 days,  and  7 days  after  treat-
ment, or for as long as the injury persists ( 22 ). Human sub-
jects are also used to assess the irritant capacity of products 
introduced into or around the eye. Cosmetics and skin care 
products should be tested in this manner to ensure human 
safety.  

  Photopatch Testing 
 Photopatch testing is performed when photosensitivity evalu-
ation is required. Two patch test pads are placed with the sus-
pected chemical: one on a site to be irradiated and the other 
on  a  protected  site.  The  pads  are  placed  on  the  skin  for 
48 hours ( 23 ). One site is subjected to ultraviolet radiation of 
the wavelength desired and read in 24 to 48 hours. This pro-
cess may be repeated if desired. A phototoxic reaction consists 
of erythema and usually arises within six hours. A photoal-
lergic  reaction  is  characterized  by  erythema,  papules,  and 
vesicles.  If  only  the  irradiated  site  is  positive,  a  diagnosis  of 
photoallergy can be made. If both the irradiated and the pro-
tected sites are positive, a diagnosis of allergic contact derma-
titis can be made. If the irradiated site is more positive than 
the protected site, then a diagnosis of allergic contact derma-
titis  and  photoallergy  can  be  made.  Substances  that  cause 
photoallergic dermatitis found in cosmetics are tested as fol-
lows: methylcoumarin 5% in petrolatum, musk ambrette 5% 
in  petrolatum,  and  para-aminobenzoic  acid  esters  10%  in 
petrolatum.  

  Cutaneous Stinging 
 There  is  a  group  of  patients  who  note  stinging  or  burning 
within several minutes after applying a cosmetic that intensi-
fies  over  5  to  10 minutes  and  then  resolves  after  15 minutes. 
These  patients  are  known  as “stingers”  and  will  not  tolerate 
certain cosmetic products even though patch testing for aller-
gic contact dermatitis is negative and no evidence of irritant 
contact dermatitis is present. Patients who are stingers can be 
identified  by  inducing  sweating  (110°F  and  80%  relative 
humidity or exposure to a desktop facial sauna machine) and 
applying a 5–10% aqueous solution of lactic acid to the naso-
labial fold. Those who develop stinging for at least 5 to 10 min-
utes are identified as “stingers.” These individuals can then be 
used as test panel subjects to evaluate the stinging capacity of 
cosmetic ingredients or finished products by applying the test 
substance on one nasolabial fold and a bland control on the 
other nasolabial fold. Substances that can induce stinging are 
listed in  Table 4.7  ( 24 ).    

Slight stingers
Benzene
Phenol
Salicylic acid
Resorcinol
Phosphoric acid

Moderate stingers

Sodium carbonate
Trisodium phosphate
Propylene glycol
Propylene carbonate
Propylene glycol diacetate
Dimethylacetamide
Dimethylformamide
Dimethyl sulfoxide
Diethyltoluamide
Dimethyl phthalate
2-ethyl-1,3-hexanediol
Benzoyl peroxide

Severe stingers

Crude coal tar
Phosphoric acid
Hydrochloric acid
Sodium hydroxide
2-ethoxyethyl p-methoxy-cinnamate

Source: Table adapted from Ref. 24.

  summary 
 The  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  a  sensitive  skin  is  a  medical 
 challenge. Any treatment must address the barrier disruption, 
immune  hyper-reactivity,  and  heightened  sensory  responsive-
ness that characterize the sensitive skin. If the sensitive skin is 
due to a visible dermatosis, the treatment can be streamlined, 
but if it is an invisible sensitive skin, a long treatment algorithm 
must  be  followed  to  further  elucidate  valuable  diagnostic 
 information. Patch testing may be necessary if irritant or allergic 
contact  dermatitis  is  suspected.  Finally,  basic  skin  care  and 
 cosmetic  recommendations  can  be  made  to  the  sensitive  skin 
patient to minimize the chances of encountering a problem.   

   references 
    1.       Draelos      ZD    .    Sensitive  skin:  perceptions,  evaluation,  and  treatment  . 

   Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   8  :   67  .   

    2.       Draelos      ZD    .    Noxious  sensory  perceptions  in  patients  with  mild  to 

 moderate rosacea treated with azelaic acid 15% gel  .   Cutis     2004  ;   74  :   257  .   

    3.       Jackson     EM    .   Irritation and sensitization  .   In  :     Waggoner     WC    ,   ed  .   Clinical 
Safety and Efficacy Testing of Cosmetics  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  , 
  1990  :   23  –  42  .   

    4.       Baer      RL    .    The  mechanism  of  allergic  contact  hypersensitivity  .    In  :      Fisher   
  AA    ,   ed  .   Contact Dermatitis  ,   3rd edn  .   Philadelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  : 
  1  –  8  .   

    5.       Adams     RM   ,    Maibach     HI    .   A five-year study of cosmetic reactions  .   J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .   

    6.       De Groot     AC   ,    Beverdam     EGA   ,    Ayong     CT   ,    Coenraads     PJ   ,    Nater     PJ    .   The role 
of contact allergy in the spectrum of adverse effects caused by cosmetics 
and toiletries  .   Contact Dermatitis     1988 ;  19  :   195  –  201  .   

    7.       De Groot     AC    .   Contact allergy to cosmetics: causative ingredients  .   Contact 

Dermatitis     1987  ;   17  :   26  –  34  .   

    8.       Fisher      AA    .    Contact  Dermatitis  ,    3rd  edn  .    Philadelphia  :    Lea  &  Febiger  , 

  1986  :   686  –  709  .   

    9.       Billhimer      WL    .    Phototoxicity  and  photoallergy  .    In  :      Waggoner      WC    ,    ed  . 
  Clinical  Safety  and  Efficacy  Testing  of  Cosmetics  .    New  York  :    Marcel 
Dekker, Inc  ,   1990  :   43  –  74  .   

SENSITIVE SKIN AND CONTACT DERMATITIS

33

   10.       Stephens      RJ   ,     Bergstresser      PR    .    Fundamental  concepts  in  photoimm-
unology and photoallergy  .   In  :     Jackson     EM    ,   ed  .   Photobiology of the Skin 
and Eye . New York, Marcel Dekker,  1986  :   41  –  66  .   

     de  Groot      AC   ,     Frosch      PJ    .    Adverse  reactions  to  fragrances  .    A  clinical  review. 

Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   36  :   57  –  86  .   

     de Groot     AC   ,    Liem     DH   ,    Weyland     JW   ,    Kathon     CG    .   Cosmetic allergy and patch 

   11.       Epstein     JH    .   Phototoxicity and photoallergy in man  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   

test sensitization  .   Contact Dermatitis     1985  ;   12  :   76  –  80  .   

  1983  ;   8  :   141  –  7  .   

     Diepgen     TL   ,    Weisshaar     E    .   Contact dermatitis: epidemiology and frequent  sensitizers 

   12.       DeLeo      VA   ,     Harber      LC    .    Contact  photodermatitis  .    In  :      Fisher      AA    ,    ed  . 

to cosmetics  .   J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol     2007  ;   21     (Suppl 2)  :   9  –  13  .   

   Contact Dermatitis  ,   3rd edn  .   Philadelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  :   454  –  69  .   

     Distante      F   ,     Rigano      L   ,     D’Agostina      R   ,     Bonfigli      A    .    Intra-and  Inter-Individual 

   13.       Nethercott      JR    .    Sensitivity  and  specificity  of  patch  tests  .    Am  J  Contact 

 Differences in Sensitive Skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     2002  ;   117  :   39  –  43   .   

 Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  :   136  –  42  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetic Selection in the Sensitive-Skin Patient  .   Dermatol Ther   

   14.       Goldner     R    .   Clinical tests  .   In  :     Jackson     EM   ,    Goldner     R    ,   eds  .   Irritant Contact 

  2001  ;   14  :   175  –  7  .   

Dermatitis  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1990  :   201  –  18  .   

   15.       Fowler     JF    .   Reading patch tests: some pitfalls of patch testing  .   Am J Contact 

Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  :   170  –  2  .   

   16.       Draize     JH   ,    Woodard     G   ,    Calvary     HO    .   Methods for the study of irritation 
and  toxicity  of  substances  applied  topically  to  the  skin  and  mucous 
 membranes  .   J Pharmacol Exp Ther     1944  ;   82  :   377  –  419  .   

   17.       Bronaugh     RL   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Primary irritant, allergic contact, phototoxic, 
and  photoallergic  reactions  to  cosmetics  and  tests  to  identify  problem 
products  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  .    Principles  of  cosmetics  for  the 
 dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby Company  ,   1982  :   223  –  43  .   

   18.    Method  of  testing  primary  irritant  substances,  United  States  Code  of 
 Federal  Regulations,  16  CFR,  1500.41,   1979 ,  Consumer  Product  Safety 
Commission, Washington, DC  .

   19.       Philips     L   ,    Steingerg     M   ,    Maibach     HI   ,    Akers     WA    .   A comparison of rabbit 
and  human  skin  response  to  certain  irritants  .    Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol   
  1972  ;   21  :   369  .   

   20.       Gabrial      KL    .    In  vivo  preclinical  tests  .    In  :      Jackson      EM   ,     Goldner      R    ,    eds  . 
   Irritant Contact Dermatitis  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1990  :   191  –  9  .   
   21.       Kligman      AM   ,     Wooding      WM    .    A  method  for  the  measurement  and 
 evaluation of irritants in human skin  .   J Invest Dermatol     1967  ;   49  :   78  –
  94   .

   22.       Wortzman     MS    .   Eye products  .   In  :     Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic Safety A primer 
for Cosmetic Scientists  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1987  :   205  –  20  .   
   23.       DeLeo     VA    .   Photocontact dermatitis in photosensitivity  .   In  :     DeLeo     VA    ,   ed  . 

  New York  :   Igaku-Shoin  ,   1992  :   84  –  99  .   

   24.       Frosch     PJ   ,    Kligman     AM    .   A method for appraising the stinging capacity of 
topically applied substances  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1977  ;   28  :   197  –  209  .    

  suggested reading 
      Adams      RM   ,     Maibach      HI    .    A  five-year  study  of  cosmetic  reactions  .    J  Am 

 Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .   

     Basketter     DA   ,    Briatico-Vangosa     G   ,    Kaestner     W   ,    Lally     C   ,    Bontinck WJ  .   Nickel    , 
  cobalt and chromium in consumer products: a role in allergic contact der-
matitis?     Contact Dermatitis     1993  ;   28  :   15  –  25  .   

     Campbell     L   ,    Zirwas     MJ    .   Triclosan  .   Dermatitis     2006  ;   4  :   204  –  7  .   
     Davari     P   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Contact Urticaria to Cosmetic and Industrial Dyes  .   Clin 

Exp Dermatol     2010  ;   [Epub ahead of print]  .   

     de  Groot      AC    .    Contact  allergy  to  cosmetics:  causative  ingredients  .    Contact 

 Dermatitis     1987  ;   17  :   26  –  34  .   

     de  Groot     AC   ,     Bruynzeel      DP   ,     Bos      JD    ,    et  al  .    The  allergens  in  cosmetics  .   Arch 

Cermatol     1988  ;   124  :   1525  –  9  .   

     Elias     PM   ,    Feingold     KR    .   Does the tail wag the dog? Role of the barrier in the 
pathogenesis of inflammatory dermatoses and therapeutic implications  . 
  Arch Dermatol     2001  ;   137  :   1079  –  81  .   

     Hachem     JP   ,    De Paepe  .   K   ,    Vanpee     E    ,   et al  .   The effect of two moisturizers on skin 
barrier  damage  in  allergic  contact  dermatitis  .    Eur  J  Dermatol      2002  ;    12  : 
  136  –  8  .   

     Johansen     JD    .   Fragrance contact allergy: a clinical review  .   Am J Clin Dermatol   

  2003  ;   4  :   789  –  98  .   

     Larsen      W   ,     Nakayama      H   ,     Lindberg      M    ,    et  al  .    Fragrance  contact  dermatitis: 
a worldwide multicenter investigation(Part 1)  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis   
  1996  ;   7  :   77  –  83  .   

     Mehta     SS   ,    Reddy     BS    .   Cosmetic dermatitis-current perspectives  .   Int J Dermatol   

  2003  ;   42  :   533  –  42  .   

     Nardelli     A   ,    Carbonez     A   ,    Ottoy     W   ,    Drieghe     J   ,    Goossens     A    .   Frequency of and 
trends  in  fragrance  allergy  over  a  15-year  period  .    Contact  Dermatitis   
  2008  ;   58  :   134  –  41  .   

     Nigram     PK    .   Adverse Reactions to Cosmetics and Methods of Testing  .   Indian 

J Dermatol Venereol Leprol     2009  ;   75  :   10  –  18  .   

     Orton     DI   ,    Wilkinson     JD    .   Cosmetic allergy: incidence, diagnosis, and manage-

ment  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2004  ;   5  :   327  –  37  .   

     Ortiz      KJ   ,     Yiannias      JA    .    Contact  dermatitis  to  cosmetics,  fragrances,  and 

 botanicals  .   Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17  :   264  –  71  .   

     Pascoe      D   ,     Moreau      L   ,     Sasseville      D    .    Emergent  and  Unusual  Allergens  in 

 Cosmetics  .   Dermatitis     2010  ;   21  :   127  –  37  .   

     Ramirez  Santos      A   ,     Fernandez-Redondo      V   ,     Perez  Perez      L   ,     Concheiro  Cao      J   , 
   Toribio     J    .   Contact allergy from vitamins in cosmetic products  .   Dermatitis   
  2008  ;   19  :   154  –  6  .   

     Rastogi      SC   ,     Johansen      JD    .    Significant  exposures  to  isoeugenol  derivatives  in 

perfumes  .   Contact Dermatitis     2008  ;   58  :   278  –  81  .   

     Rastogi     SC   ,    Johansen     JD   ,    Bossi     R    .   Selected important fragrance sensitizers in 

perfumes-current exposures  .   Contact Dermatitis     2007  ;   56  :   201  –  4  .   

     Scheinman     PL    .   Is it really fragrance-free?     Am J Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   8  : 

  239  –  42  .   

     Tomar     J   ,    Jain     VK   ,    Aggarwal     K   ,    Dayal     S   ,    Gupta     S    .   Contact allergies to cosmetics: 
testing with 52 cosmetic ingredients and personal products  .   J Dermatol   
  2005  ;   32  :   951  –  5  .   

     Warshaw     EM   ,    Belsito     DV   ,    DeLeo     VA    ,   et al  .   North American Contact  Dermatitis 
Group  patch-test  results,  2003–2004  study  period  .    Dermatitis      2008  ;    19  : 
  129  –  36  .   

     Yokota     T   ,    Matsumoto     M   ,    Sakamaki     T    ,   et al  .   Classification of Sensitive Skin and 
Development of a Treatment System Appropriate for Each Group  .   IFSCC 
Magazine     2003  ;   6  :   303  –  7  .        

             5  

 Aging skin and cosmeceuticals      

  The cosmeceutical category is an undefined, unclassified, and 
unregulated area of dermatology that is yet in its infancy ( 1 ). 
Traditional  cosmeceuticals  involve  the  topical  application  of 
biologically  active  ingredients,  which  affect  the  skin  barrier 
and  overall  skin  health.  The  ability  of  these  ingredients  to 
enhance skin functioning depends on how they are formulated 
into creams, lotions, etc., to maintain the integrity of the active 
agent, deliver it in a biologically active form to the skin, reach 
the  target  site  in  sufficient  quantity  to  exert  an  effect,  and 
properly release from the carrier vehicle. In the United States, 
cosmeceuticals are sold as cosmetics making marketing, pack-
aging, and aesthetic appeal important considerations. Ideally, 
the  cosmeceutical  should  be  clinically  tested  for  efficacy  to 
ensure a proven skin benefit, but also to substantiate market-
ing claims. The recognition that there are governmental limi-
tations on efficacy claims restricts cosmeceutical development, 
since products can only be assessed in terms of their ability to 
improve skin appearance, but not function. Improving func-
tion would remove the cosmeceutical from cosmetic category 
and place it in the drug category. Herein rests the challenge of 
defining the cosmeceutical category, the topic of this chapter. 
 When the cosmeceutical category was first introduced to the 
dermatologist,  cosmeceuticals  were  prescription  items  that 
addressed appearance issues ( 2 ). The first cosmeceutical that 
met these criteria was topical tretinoin. Tretinoin has been a 
significant force in dermatology, but is not as popular as some 
of the cosmetic formulations containing less biologically effec-
tive retinol. Why? Unfortunately, tretinoin produces no short-
term benefits. As a matter of fact, tretinoin produces short-term 
setbacks  in  skin  appearance  due  to  the  peeling  and  redness 
that  occur  during  the  first  two  weeks  of  use,  requiring  the 
encouragement of a dermatologist for compliance. The long-
term  benefits  of  tretinoin  take  at  least  six  months  to  realize. 
While the functional benefits of tretinoin are great, there are 
no aesthetic benefits. This has led to the proliferation of over-
the-counter (OTC) retinol, retinyl propionate, and retinalde-
hyde  moisturizers  that  cannot  deliver  the  ultimate  collagen 
regeneration  benefits  of  prescription  tretinoin,  but  do  not 
cause  irritation  and  peeling.  Thus,  a  modern  cosmeceutical 
must combine the aesthetics of a cosmetic with the efficacy of 
a drug. 

 The next cosmeceutical introduced to the dermatologist was 
topical  minoxidil.  This  product  demonstrated  a  functional 
benefit in terms of hair growth, but at least six months of use 
was necessary to perceive any increase in hair fullness. In order 
to achieve topical minoxidil penetration, a high concentration 
of propylene glycol was required, which produced scalp itch-
ing and dryness. The established safety profile of this prescrip-
tion drug allowed reclassification into the OTC drug market, 
but the lack of immediate aesthetic benefits prevented this for-
mulation  from  reaching  its  full  potential  for  use  among 
patients with male or female pattern alopecia. Thus, a modern 

34

cosmeceutical  must  produce  an  immediate  benefit  like  a 
 cosmetic, but also a long-term benefit like a drug. 

 The  world  of  the  prescription  cosmeceutical  has  virtually 
come  to  a  standstill  following  the  approval  of  tretinoin  and 
minoxidil. Yet, the concept of cosmeceuticals is alive and well. 
Patients are well educated via the mass media, periodicals, and 
the Internet demanding sophistication in products they pur-
chase. These demands have led to the new concept of cosme-
ceuticals,  which  can  be  most  accurately  described  as 
multifunctional cosmetics, products that are purchased with-
out a prescription that do more than scent or color the skin. 
These  modern  cosmeceuticals  are  expected  to  have  superior 
feel and smell while providing a visibly perceivable improve-
ment  in  skin  appearance.  Our  review  of  cosmeceuticals  and 
skin care products begins with a discussion of aging skin. 

  aging skin 
 Aging  of  the  skin  can  be  classified  into  two  components: 
intrinsic  and  extrinsic  aging.  As  the  names  imply,  intrinsic 
aging is due to genetically controlled senescence and extrinsic 
aging is due to environmental factors superimposed on intrin-
sic aging. Environmental factors known to accelerate extrinsic 
aging  are  sun  exposure  and  cigarette  smoking.  Cutaneous 
aging due to sun exposure is known as photoaging ( 3 ).  

 Youthful  skin  is  characterized  by  its  unblemished,  evenly 
pigmented, smooth, and pink appearance. This is in contrast 
to  intrinsically  aged  skin,  which  is  thin,  inelastic,  and  finely 
wrinkled with deepening of facial expression lines ( 4 ). These 
changes are evident histologically as a thinned epidermis and 
dermis with the flattening of the rete pegs at the dermoepider-
mal junction ( 5 ). Extrinsically aged, sun-exposed skin appears 
clinically  as  blemished,  thickened,  yellowed,  lax,  rough,  and 
leathery ( 6 ). These changes may begin as early as the second 
decade ( 7 ) and can be used to divide photoaged skin into four 
groups known as the Glogau Classification ( Table 5.1 ). It may 
also  contain  precancerous  and  cancerous  growths,  as  well  as 
telangiectasias  and  lentigines  ( 8 ).  Some  of  the  propensity 
toward cancerous growths may be due to a decrease in Langer-
hans cells and their function ( 9 ). Photoaged skin is character-
ized histologically by epidermal dysplasia with varying degrees 
of cytologic atypia, loss of keratinocyte polarity, an inflamma-
tory infiltrate, decreased collagen, increased ground substance, 
and  elastosis.  Elastosis  is  the  degradation  of  elastic  material, 
which, in early photoaging, is increased in amount and seen 
twisted,  degraded  elastic 
microscopically  as 
fibers ( 10 ). These fibers degenerate into an amorphous mass as 
photoaging progresses ( 11 ). Thus, intrinsic aging of the skin 
results in atrophy while extrinsic photoaging results in hyper-
trophy. This distinction is not always clinically apparent, but in 
ideal cases intrinsically aged skin has fine wrinkling while pho-
toaged skin demonstrates coarse wrinkling and furrowing ( 12 ) 
( Fig. 5.1 ). Many substances have been put forth to treat aging 

thickened, 

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

skin,  perhaps  the  first  being  hormone  creams,  which  is 
 discussed next.    

  aging and hormones 
 Since the beginning of time, man has searched for topicals and 
ingestibles that promise to deliver the magic of youth. Prior to 
the 1930s, many products were sold door to door promising to 
be a youth elixir, but some contained toxic ingredients such as 
arsenic and mercury. One of the most popular antiaging prep-
arations  at  the  time  the  Cosmetics  and  Toiletries  Act  was 
penned  in  the  1930s  was  the  facial  moisturizers  containing 
estrogen  ( Fig.  5.2 ).  The  introduction  of  legislation  defining 
cosmetics  as  products  that  do  not  alter  the  structure  or 

Table 5.1  Glogau Classification of Photoaging Groups

Group 1 Mild

No keratosis
Little wrinkling
No scarring
Little or no makeup
Usually age 28–35 yrs

Group 2 Moderate

Early actinic keratoses
Slight yellow skin discoloration
Early wrinkling (parallel smile lines)
Mild scarring
Little makeup
Usually age 35–50 yrs

Group 3 Advanced

Actinic keratoses
Obvious yellow skin discoloration with telangiectasia
Wrinkling present at rest
Moderate acne scarring
Always wears makeup
Usually age 50–65 yrs

Group 4 Severe

Actinic keratoses and skin cancers have occurred
Wrinkling of actinic gravitational and dynamic origin
Severe acne scarring
Wears makeup, but does not cover well
Usually age 60–75 yrs

35

 function of the skin reclassified hormone creams as drugs and 
they were removed from the consumer market. However, the 
past 70 years have brought an increased understanding of skin 
physiology and the recognition that even water can alter the 
structure and function of the skin. This has created a renewed 
interest in cosmeceuticals, especially in the realm of hormone 
therapy.  

 There  is  no  doubt  that  hormone  therapy  is  effective  for 
improving the appearance of aging skin, as supported by the 
article published in this issue by Wolff, Narayan, and Taylor. 
Not  only  do  estrogens  improve  skin  rigidity  and  decrease 
wrinkling, but they also increase skin thickness as measured by 
ultrasound ( 13 ), increase skin sebum production as measured 
by  a   Sebumeter  ( 14 ),  increase  skin  elasticity  as  measured  by 
skin  deformability  using  a  suction  device  ( 15 ),  increase  skin 
hydration as measured by corneometry ( 16 ), and increase skin 
collagen content as measured by skin biopsy ( 17 ). Many meth-
ods that assess the skin function point to oral and/or transder-
mal estrogen as a valuable replacement hormone. 

 A  variety  of  studies  have  also  examined  estrogen  delivery 
topically.  Estrogen  is  readily  soluble  in  a  creamy  vehicle  and 
easily penetrates the stratum corneum due to its small molec-
ular size. It is the ideal cosmeceutical for topical application. 
Topical estrogen has been shown to increase the production of 
type III collagen and the overall collagen fiber count after six 
months of application ( 18 ). It also increased the acid muco-
polysaccharide  and  hyaluronic  acid  levels  in  the  skin,  which 
are  important  for  maintaining  skin  hydration  and  barrier 
function ( 19 ). The combination of increased dermal volume, 
due to more collagen fibers, and increased dermal hydration, 
due  to  more  hyaluronic  acid,  may  explain  the  decreased 
 wrinkling apparent in women using estrogens. It is important 
to note that there is currently no other substance available to 
the  cosmetic  formulator  that  delivers  such  documentable 
reproducible results in women.  

   Phytoestrogens, such as genistein, daidzein, and glycitein, 
are found in fermented soy and can be consumed in the 
form of roasted soy nuts or tofu. 

Line

Wrinkle

Fold

Decreased collagen

Decreased elastin
Decreased hyaluronic acid

Decreased fat

 Figure 5.1     Many defects contribute to the appearance of aged skin.    

36

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

O

OH

O

OH

O

O

O

17-hydroxyprogesterone

Androstenedione

Testosterone

Androgens and estrogens
are smaller than the
corticoids and progestagens

HO

A

HO

O

OH

HO

A

HO

 Figure 5.2     Estrogen creams were the first cosmeceutical facial moisturizer for aging skin.    

Estrone

Estradiol

 The legal restriction on OTC estrogen has led to an interest 
in phytoestrogens, especially those derived from soy. Phytoes-
trogens, such as genistein, daidzein, and glycitein, are found in 
fermented soy and can be consumed in the form of roasted soy 
nuts or tofu. Soy protein supplements have been investigated 
for their benefit in a variety of postmenopausal symptoms, but 
the  data  is  somewhat  inconsistent.  One  controlled  study  by 
Kotsopoulos et al., found that a soy protein supplement had 
no statistically significant effect over placebo on dry skin ( 20 ). 
Yet, genistein is one of the most popular botanical additives to 
skin  care  products  promising  to  decrease  the  appearance  of 
fine lines on the face. It can be difficult, however, to determine 
whether the decreased wrinkling advertised by the manufac-
turer is due to the vehicle moisturizer decreasing the lines of 
dehydration and altering light reflection from the skin surface 
or  true  changes  in  skin  collagen  production  and  decreased 
wrinkling  due  to  increased  dermal  thickness.  In  the  current 
regulatory climate, no cosmetic manufacturer wants to deter-
mine  the  answer  to  this  question.  Moisturizing  the  skin  and 
changing the optical characteristics is the realm of cosmetics, 
but enhancing collagen production is the realm of a drug. Any 
soy product that documented an increased collagen produc-
tion would certainly be removed from the market by the Food 
and  Drug  Administration  (FDA).  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
research is lacking in the topical application of phytoestrogens. 
 The  question  then  remains  as  to  why  topical  estrogen 
creams and estrogen replacement therapy are so controversial 
when  the  skin  benefits  have  been  well  documented.  There 
have been some concerns that estrogens predispose women to 
malignant  melanoma  in  the  literature,  although  the  reports 
are contradictory. A study by Smith et al., demonstrated no 
link  between  melanoma  and  oral  contraceptives  or  replace-
ment estrogens ( 21 ). Topical estrogens are even more contro-
versial, since they are theoretically linked to breast cancer and 

cancer of other female organs. No company wants to market 
a  topical  product  with  such   tremendous  opportunity  for 
 lawsuits,  since  cause  and  effect  are  hard  to  demonstrate  or 
negate.  Topical  estrogens  are  also  associated  with  facial 
 telangiectasias, which is  undesirable. 

 One area of estrogen benefit for skin appearance is rarely 
discussed in the literature. This is the decrease in facial bone 
mass. Many articles allude to the benefit of oral estrogens in 
bone  mineral  density,  but  few  have  studied  the  mineraliza-
tion of the facial bones ( 22 ). Much of the wrinkling experi-
enced with advancing age is not due to skin effects, but due 
to loss of the underlying subcutaneous tissue and bony archi-
tecture.  Loss  of  facial  bone  structure  also  contributes  to 
wrinkling,  which  may  be  improved  through  oral  estrogen 
supplementation.  

  development of cosmeceuticals 
 Since the removal of the first cosmeceutical, topical estrogen, 
from the market, many other cosmeceutical formulations have 
been introduced. There is nothing special about cosmeceuti-
cals, which are classified by industry as functional cosmetics. 
This means that the ingredients that are included in formula-
tions must come from a list of raw materials that are generally 
recognized as safe, or the cosmeceutical would be classified as 
a drug. The easiest source of new cosmeceutical ingredients is 
the  plant  kingdom.  Plants  are  rich  in  endogenous  antioxi-
dants,  because  they  must  survive  in  an  environment  rich  in 
UV radiation insults. Plant extracts are also felt to be safe and 
meet the FDA criteria for substances that can be put in OTC 
formulations.  It  is  generally  felt  that  substances  that  are  safe 
for oral consumption can be assumed safe when applied topi-
cally. This has led to a renewed interest in herbal preparations, 
which form the basis for functionality in many cosmeceuticals 
( Fig. 5.3 ).   

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

37

Table 5.2  Botanical Sources of Cosmeceutical Functional 
Ingredients

1.   Plant source leaves, roots, fruits, berries, stems, twigs, barks, 

flowers

2.   Growing conditions: soil composition, amount of available 

water, climate variations, plant stress

3.   Harvesting conditions: time from harvest to transport, care of 
plant materials during shipping, storage conditions prior to 
manufacture

4.   Preparation methods: crushing, grinding, boiling, distilling, 

pressing, drying

5.  Final extract status: liquid, powder, paste, syrup, crystal
6.   Concentration sufficient amount of active agent to produce the 

biologic effect

Table 5.3  Steps in Cosmeceutical Development

  1.  New botanical material received in the laboratory.
  2.  Various fractions of the botanical extracted.
  3.   Fractions analyzed for relationship to known chemical 

compounds.

  4.   Purified fraction exposed to gene array chip.
  5.   Analysis completed for upregulation or downregulation of 
key events in cellular oxidation, inflammation, or irritation.
  6.   New isolate studied in an in vitro model of cell culture for 

confirmation of gene array results.

  7.   Positive in vitro findings lead to isolate analysis in mouse 
model focusing on markers of possible cutaneous benefit.

  8.   Positive mouse findings lead to formulation in a vehicle 

suitable for human use.

  9.   Human model testing conducted to determine whether the 

active agent has any cutaneous value.
10.  Formulation fine-tuned and patented.
11.  New ingredient licensed to cosmetic manufacturer.
12.  New technology enters the marketplace.

government  and  as  such  are  unregulated.  However,  the 
 cosmetic  industry  does  an  excellent  job  of  self-policing  the 
safety of products introduced into the marketplace. No repu-
table cosmetic manufacturer wants to introduce problematic 
formulations that would tarnish the hard earned reputation of 
the company. Most of the quality cosmeceuticals are formu-
lated from ingredients that already have a proven safety record 
in the marketplace. This may be due to their extraction from 
foods, such as topical lycopene from tomatoes or topical avo-
cadin  from  avocados.  Alternatively,  extensive  animal  testing 
may be undertaken by the raw material supplier to determine 
that the new ingredient is appropriate for human use. In the 
case  of  botanicals,  most  are  assumed  safe  based  on  their 
 ubiquitous nature.   

   Cosmeceuticals are unregulated and presently considered 
cosmetics in the U.S.A. 

  cosmeceutical overview 
 A tremendous variety of ingredients can be incorporated into 
cosmeceuticals,  far  beyond  the  reach  of  this  text.  For  an  in-
depth discussion, the reader is referred to a book I edited on 
Cosmeceuticals  published  by  Elsevier  in  second  edition  in 

 Figure 5.3     Botanicals form the basis for many cosmeceutical formulations.    

   Cosmeceuticals are moisturizers that contain active agents 
commonly derived from plant materials, such as flowers, 
seeds, roots, leaves, twigs, and berries. 

 The  search  for  novel  herbals  has  led  to  the  gathering  of 
 flowers, seeds, roots, leaves, twigs, and berries from plants all 
over the world. This can be a complex process, since the con-
stituents  of  a  plant  extract  are  influenced  by  the  season  in 
which  the  plant  material  is  picked,  the  growing  conditions, 
and  the  processing  of  the  botanical  ingredient.  The  popular 
sources  for  botanical  cosmeceutical  ingredients  are  summa-
rized  in   Table  5.2 .  Once  a  possible  functional  cosmeceutical 
active agent has been identified and synthesized, it is typically 
applied to a fibroblast gene chip to determine whether it affects 
any key cellular event. After the demonstration of a presumed 
physiologic effect, the active agent is tested in vitro to deter-
mine  its  effect  on  cultured  fibroblasts.  If  positive  data  are 
obtained, the active agent is studied in a mouse model for con-
firmation.  It  is  then  placed  in  a  vehicle  suitable  for  human 
application,  and  clinical  studies  are  undertaken.  Successful 
human clinical studies pave the way for successful introduc-
tion  into  the  marketplace  via  ingredient  licensing  arrange-
ments.  These  steps  for  cosmeceutical  development  are 
summarized in  Table 5.3 .   

 An important consideration in cosmeceutical development 
is safety. Cosmeceuticals are considered cosmetics by the US 

38

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

2009. In this chapter, I would like to highlight a few cosmeceu-
tical ingredients that are of particular interest. They belong to 
three families of substances including carotenoids, flavonoids, 
and  polyphenols.  These  are  the  major  categories  of  antioxi-
dants,  which  have  excellent  evidence  to  support  their  oral 
ingestion, but less impressive evidence to support their topical 
application.  

   The three major families of antioxidants found in 
 cosmeceuticals are carotenoids, flavonoids, and polyphenols. 

  Carotenoids 
 Carotenoids are derivatives of vitamin A and have found wide-
spread  use  in  cosmeceuticals  due  to  the  established  topical 
antiaging  benefits  associated  with  the  prescription  retinoid 
tretinoin. The carotenoids are a large family of orange-, red-, 
and  yellow-appearing  substances  that  perform  vital  antioxi-
dant roles when ingested and are less well established as topical 
antioxidants. 

  Astaxanthin 
 Astaxanthin is a pink carotenoid found in high concentration 
in salmon, accounting for the characteristic pink color of the 
fish.  This  is  the  rationale  for  antiaging  diets  recommending 
the ingestion of a serving of salmon five times weekly ( 23 ). For 
topical application purposes, astaxanthin is obtained from the 
marine  microalgae   Haematococcus  pluvialis .  The  efficacy  of 
astaxanthin is attributed to its cell membrane that is composed 
of two external lipid layers, which has been touted to possess 
stronger  antioxidant  abilities  than  vitamin  E  ( 24 ).  It  is  both 
water  and  oil  soluble  only  being  produced  by  algae  when 
exposed to intense UV radiation. 

 Few  topical  studies  exist  to  confirm  the  topical  effect  of 
 astaxanthin ( 25 ), but it has been studied extensively as an oral 
 supplement  ( 26 ).  It  is  used  as  a  homeopathic  treatment  for 
macular degeneration because, unlike canthaxanthin, another 
carotenoid,  it  does  not  crystallize  in  the  eye.  It  crosses  the 
blood–brain barrier and has been studied in brain dysfunction, 
to  include  spinal  cord  injuries  and  Parkinson’s  disease  ( 27 ). 
Even  though  other  carotenoids,  such  as  beta-carotene,  have 
been proven ineffective in reducing the oxidative stress associ-
ated  with  cardiovascular  disease,  astaxanthin  is  currently 
undergoing further investigation ( 28 ). 

 Astaxanthin  in  concentrations  of  0.03–0.07%  produces  a 
pink  color  cream.  This  limits  the  concentration  that  can  be 
used,  but  no  topical  adverse  reactions  have  been  associated 
with this carotenoid. The topical antioxidant benefits of astax-
anthin have not been established.  

  Lutein 
 Another carotenoid found in topical cosmeceuticals is lutein. It 
is naturally found in green leafy vegetables, such as spinach and 
kale. Lutein is an antioxidant in the plant kingdom, also being 
used for blue light absorption. In the animal kingdom, lutein is 
found in egg yolks, animal fats, and the corpus luteum. It is a 
lipophilic  molecule,  not  soluble  in  water,  characterized  by  a 
long polyene side chain composed of conjugated double bonds. 
These double bonds are degraded by light and heat, a universal 
characteristic of carotenoids to a greater or lesser degree ( 29 ). 

 Lutein  is  used  as  a  natural  colorant  due  to  its  orange-red 
color resulting from the absorption of blue light. Its largest use 
is  as  a  food  supplement  for  chickens,  which  results  in  more 
vivid  yellow  yolks.  In  humans,  lutein  is  concentrated  in  the 
macula  and  has  been  linked  to  the  prevention  of  macular 
degeneration ( 30 ). It has been available as a nutritional sup-
plement  since  1996  and  can  be  administered  as  a  sublingual 
spray for elderly patients with macular degeneration. 

 The question remains as to whether lutein applied topically 
is of value. Again no data are available to support this, but an 
excess lutein intake can result in carotenodermia and an excess 
topical application results in bronzing of the skin.  

  Lycopene 
 Another  potent  carotenoid  is  lycopene,  found  in  most  fruits 
and  vegetables  with  a  red  color  including,  tomatoes,  water-
melon, pink grapefruit, papaya, gac, red bell pepper, and pink 
guava.  The  highest  lycopene  containing  food  is  ketchup,  but 
lycopene is not an essential human nutrient. The Mayo Clinic 
website rates the evidence for the use of lycopene as an anti-
oxidant as a C, since is it not clear if lycopene has these effects 
on the human body. 

 Lycopene is a highly unsaturated hydrocarbon containing 11 
conjugated  and  2  unconjugated  double  bonds,  which  makes 
it  a  longer  molecule  than  any  other  carotenoid.  This  makes 
its  absorption  into  the  skin  doubtful.  It  undergoes  cis- 
isomerization when exposed to sunlight making it an unlikely 
topical ingredient.   

  Flavonoids 
 Flavonoids are aromatic compounds, frequently with a yellow 
color, which occur in higher plants. Five thousand flavonoids 
have been identified with a similar chemical structure possess-
ing 15 carbon atoms and a variety of biologic activities ( 31 ) 
( Fig. 5.4 ). Flavonoids can be divided into flavones, flavonols, 
isoflavones,  and  flavanones,  each  with  a  slightly  different 
chemical  structure  ( Fig.  5.5 ).  Common  flavonoids  include 
curcumin, silymarin, and pycnogenol.   

  Curcumin 
 Curcumin  is  a  popular  natural  yellow  food  coloring  used  in 
everything from prepackaged snack foods to meats. It is some-
times used in skin care products as a natural yellow coloring in 
products  that  claim  to  be  free  of  artificial  ingredients.  Cur-
cumin comes from the rhizome of the turmeric plant and is 
consumed  orally  as  an  Asian  spice,  frequently  found  in  rice 
dishes to color the otherwise white rice yellow. However, this 
yellow color is undesirable in cosmetic preparations, since yel-
lowing of products is typically associated with oxidative spoil-
age. Tetrahydrocurcumin, a hydrogenated form of curcumin, 
is off-white in color and can be added to skin care product. It 
not only functions as a skin antioxidant but also prevents the 
lipids in the moisturizer from becoming rancid. The antioxi-
dant  effect  of  tetrahydrocurcumin  is  said  to  be  greater  than 
that  of  vitamin  E  by  cosmetic  chemists.  It  is  said  to  provide 
antioxidant  skin  benefits  by  quenching  oxygen  radicals  and 
inhibiting nuclear factor-KB ( 32 , 33 ). The effects of curcumin 
as  a  topical  antioxidant  in  the  skin  have  not  been  studied 
so well.  

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

39

OH
3′

B

6′

4′

OH

5′

HO

7

6

8

A

5

OH

2′

3

OH

O

2

C

4

O

3′

B

6′

4′

5′

HO

7

6

OH

8

A

5

OH

2′

OH

2

3

O

C

4

O

Basic structural features of flavonoids with high multifunctional activities,
i.e., free radical scavenging, metal ion chelating and enzyme inhibiting

OH

OH

Hydrogen-bond stabilized
flavonoid phenoxyl radical

H

O

O

HO

O

HO

O

RO

ROH

OH

OH

O

OH

O

H

O

O

Stable quinone structure

O

OH

O

HO

O

HO

O

RO

ROH

OH

OH

OH

O

OH

O

Mechanism of antioxidant action of 3′,4′-diOH polyphenols (flavonoids)

 Figure 5.4     The chemical structure of flavonoids illustrating their ability to function as antioxidants.    

  Silymarin 
 Silymarin is an extract of the milk thistle plant ( Silybum mari-
anum ), which belongs to the aster family of plants including 
daisies, thistles, and artichokes. The plant is named milk thistle 
because the oldest recorded use of the extract was to enhance 
human  lactation,  and  the  plant  produces  a  white  milky  sap. 
The extract consists of three flavonoids derived from the fruit, 
seeds,  and  leaves  of  the  plant.  These  flavonoids  are  silybin, 
silydianin, and silychristin. Homeopathically, silymarin is used 
to treat liver disease, but it is a strong antioxidant preventing 
lipid peroxidation by scavenging free radical species. Its anti-
oxidant  effects  have  been  demonstrated  topically  in  hairline 
mice  by  the  92%  reduction  of  skin  tumors  following  UVB 

exposure ( 34 , 35 ). The mechanism for this decrease in tumor 
production is unknown, but topical silymarin has been shown 
to  decrease  the  formation  of  pyrimidine  dimers  in  a  mouse 
model ( 36 ). It has also been found to improve the healing of 
burns in albino rats ( 37 ). 

 Silymarin is found in a number of high-end moisturizer for 
benign  photoaging  to  prevent  cutaneous  oxidative  damage 
and  to  reduce  facial  redness.  A  double-blind  placebo- 
controlled study in 46 subjects with stage I to III rosacea found 
improvement in skin redness, papules, itching, hydration, and 
skin color ( 38 ). This was felt to be due to its direct activity on 
modulating  cytokines  and  angiokines.  Other  well-controlled 
human trials are lacking.  

40

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

R7

R6

R7

R6

R8

′
R2

O

R5

O

Flavone

′
R2

O

R8

R5

Catechin

′
R3

′
R3

R3

R3

R7

R6

R8

′

R2

O

R5

O

Flavanone

HO

O

′
R4

′
R5

′
R4

′
R5

′

R3

R1

R3

OH

′
R4

′
R5

OH

R2

OH

Anthocyanin

 Figure 5.5     The chemical structures of common flavonoids.    

  Pycnogenol 
 Pycnogenol  is  an  extract  of  French  marine  pine  bark  ( Pinus 
pinaster ), which grows only on the southwest coast of France 
in Les Landes de Gascogne. The extract is a water-soluble liq-
uid containing several phenolic constituents, including taxifo-
lin,  catechin,  and  procyanidins.  It  also  contains  several 
phenolic  acids,  including  p-hydroxybenzoic,  protocatechuic, 
gallic, vanillic, p-couric, caffeic, and ferulic ( 39 ). It is a trade-
marked ingredient that is sold for oral consumption as a pre-
ventative  for  cardiovascular  disease  ( 40 ),  a  treatment  for 
diabetic microangiopathy ( 41 ), and a pain reliever for muscle 
cramps  ( 42 ).  It  is  a  potent-free  radical  scavenger  that  can 
reduce  the  vitamin  C  radical,  returning  the  vitamin  C  to  its 
active form ( 43 ). The active vitamin C in turn regenerates vita-
min E to its active form maintaining the natural oxygen scav-
enging mechanisms of the skin intact. 

 Pycnogenol  is  the  ideal  antiaging  additive  since  it  demon-
strates  no  chronic  toxicity,  mutagenicity,  teratogenicity,  or 
allergenicity  ( 44 ).  It  is  consumed  orally  to  enhance  the  pro-
duction of nitric oxide, which inhibits platelet aggregation in 
coronary artery disease, thus it is also deemed safe for topical 
use. Its use for skin indications is less well documented, how-
ever. In B16 melanoma cells, it was shown to inhibit tyrosinase 
activity  and  melanin  biosynthesis   (45).  Many  discussions  of 
antioxidant flavonoids include a mention of pycnogenol, but 
only few quality data are presented ( 46 ).   

  Polyphenols 
 Polyphenols are a subset of flavonoids used in many cosme-
ceuticals. Two main sources of polyphenols are tea and fruits. 
Pomegranate is used as an example of a commonly used poly-
phenol cosmeceutical. 

  Pomegranate 
 Similar  to  lycopene,  another  oral  supplement  appearing  in 
health drinks and vitamin is pomegranate extract. Pomegran-
ate, botanically known as  Punica granatum , is a deciduous tree 
bearing a red fruit native to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, and 
northern India ( 47 ). It was brought to California by the Span-
ish settlers in 1769 and is commercially cultivated for its juice. 
The pomegranate became famous in Greek mythology when 
Persephone was kidnapped by Hades and taken to the Under-
world to be his wife. Persephone had consumed four pome-
granate seeds while in the Underworld and thus had to spend 
four months every year in Hades, during which time nothing 
would grow. This gave rise to the season of winter. 

 Pomegranate  juice,  commonly  consumed  in  the  Middle 
East, provides about 16% of the adult requirement of vitamin 
C per 100 mg serving. It also contains pantothenic acid, also 
known  as  vitamin  B5,  potassium,  and  antioxidant  polyphe-
nols.  These  substances  have  been  demonstrated  to  protect 
against  UVA-  and  UVB-induced  cell  damage  in  SKU-1064 
human skin fibroblasts ( 48 ). Pomegranate juice has also been 

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

41

Vitamin A metabolites

Vitamin A

Vitamin A esters

Retinol
R = CH2OH

Retinoic acid

R = COOH

Retinaldehyde

R = CHO

Tazarotene

Retinyl acetate
R = CH2OOCCH3

Retinyl propionate
R = CH2OOCC2H5

Retinyl palmitate
R = CH2OOCC15H31

 Figure 5.6     The family of over-the-counter and prescription retinoids.    

purported to reduce oxidative stress and affect LDL and plate-
let  aggregation  in  humans  and  apolipoprotein  E-deficient 
mice ( 49 , 50 ). It has also been studied for improving the levels 
of hyperlipidemia in diabetic patients ( 51 ).    

   Unfortunately, there is little evidence to support the use 
of most cosmeceutical active ingredients. The vehicle 
moisturizer remains the active agent in most cases. 

  Retinoids 
 Retinoids represent one of the most important categories of 
cosmeceuticals  both  in  the  prescription  and  the  OTC  realm 
( Fig. 5.6 ). Prescription retinoids, such as tretinoin, can reverse 
photo-induced  skin  changes  (52–54).  Tretinoin  has  been 
shown to transform an atrophic epidermis into a hyperplas-
tic,  thicker  epidermis  resulting  in  the  improvement  of  skin 
wrinkling  ( 55 ).  Tretinoin  also  induces  papillary  dermal  col-
lagen synthesis, new blood vessel formation, increased glycos-
aminoglycan deposition, and exfoliation of retained stratum 
corneum ( 56 , 57 ). These histologic changes translate clinically 
into skin with less yellow and more pink hues accompanied 
by  increased  tactile  smoothness  ( 58 ).  Changes  may  be  per-
ceived in four months in some patients who use topical treti-
noin  daily,  but  more  improvement  is  seen  with  a  longer 
therapy.  Naturally,  more  improvement  is  visible  in  patients 
with severe photoaging, but results are also seen in non-sun-
exposed elderly skin ( 59 ). It is interesting to note improved 
psychosocial status in patients who undergo topical tretinoin 
therapy ( 60 ).   

be substituted for a deodorant soap to prevent further xerosis 
and irritation. The use of all drying agents, such as astringents 
and toners, exfoliants, abrasive scrubbers, and cleansing masks, 
should be discontinued. Oil-free or water-based facial founda-
tions will tend to adhere preferentially to facial scale, necessi-
tating  the  use  of  an  appropriate  moisturizer  to  smooth  the 
desquamating stratum corneum prior to application of foun-
dation. Where possible, foundations with a higher oil content 
designed for dry skin can be selected. These alterations in skin 
care may facilitate the use of tretinoin. 

 In  addition  to  prescription  retinoids,  OTC  retinoids  are 
found  in  some  cosmeceuticals  in  the  form  of  retinol,  retinyl 
palmitate, retinyl propionate, and retinaldehyde. It is theoreti-
cally possible to interconvert the retinoids from one form to 
another. For example, retinyl palmitate and retinyl propionate, 
chemically  known  as  retinyl  esters,  can  become  biologically 
active  following  a  cutaneous  enzymatic  cleavage  of  the  ester 
bond and subsequent conversion to retinol. Retinol is the nat-
urally  occurring  vitamin  A  form  found  in  red,  yellow,  and 
orange fruits and vegetables. Although the pigment is respon-
sible for the vision, it is highly unstable ( Fig. 5.7 ). Retinol can 
be  oxidized  to  retinaldehyde  and  then  oxidized  to  retinoic 
acid, also known as prescription tretinoin. It is this cutaneous 
conversion of retinol to retinoic acid that is responsible for the 
biologic activity of some of the new stabilized OTC vitamin A 
preparations  designed  to  improve  the  appearance  of  benign 
photodamaged skin ( 62 ). Unfortunately, only small amounts 
of retinyl palmitate and retinol can be converted by the skin, 
accounting  for  the  increased  efficacy  seen  with  prescription 
preparations containing retinoic acid.   

   Retinoids represent one of the most important categories 
of cosmeceuticals both in the prescription and the OTC 
realm. 

   OTC retinoids include retinol, retinyl palmitate, retinyl 
propionate, and retinaldehyde. 

 Tretinoin must be applied daily to the face to achieve rever-
sal of photoaging. Patients who initiate treatment may experi-
ence varying degrees of erythema and dermatitis for the first 
two to six weeks of therapy. It is thought that the skin eventu-
ally “hardens” to the irritating effect of the tretinoin, with the 
disappearance  of  burning,  pruritus,  and  desquamation  ( 61 ). 
This hardening effect is lost when application is discontinued. 
 Topical tretinoin is the most commonly used cutaneous pre-
scription cosmeceutical. However, successful use may require 
alterations  in  skin  care  products  and  cosmetics.  During  the 
phase of retinoid dermatitis, a mild cleansing bar may need to 

 The main problem with prescription retinoids is their irri-
tancy. Unfortunately, as the biological efficacy of the retinoid 
increases, so does the irritancy. This is also the case with the 
OTC  retinoids.  Retinol  is  a  greater  irritant  than  the  retinyl 
esters  and  is  also  more  unstable.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
 cosmeceutical  formulations  not  manufactured  under  strict 
 oxygen-free conditions prefer to add retinyl palmitate to mois-
turizing creams. However, the retinyl palmitate may act as an 
antioxidant for the lipids present in the moisturizer. 

 The  topical  benefit  of  retinol  has  been  documented  by 
 well-controlled  studies  ( 63 ).  It  is  commonly  felt  among 

42

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 5.4  Glycolic Acid: Different Concentrations with 
Different pH Levels

Concentration (%)

5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70

pH

1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.0
0.6

   The alpha hydroxy acids include glycolic, lactic, citric, 
malic, mandelic, and tartaric acids. 

 Glycolic acid is the most popular of the alpha hydroxy acids 
for  antiaging  purposes  available  in  OTC  and  physician- 
dispensed products. Its pH varies with concentration, as dem-
onstrated in  Table 5.4 . This acidic pH is sometimes buffered 
for facial application with phosphoric acid and monosodium 
phosphate or neutralized with sodium hydroxide ( 66 ). A desir-
able pH for facial application lies between 2.8 and 4.8. Glycolic 
acid is finding its way into formulations for facial moisturizers, 
cleansers, and toners. Additionally, it is used alone, or in com-
bination  with  other  chemicals,  at  various  concentrations  for 
facial peels (67–69). The epidermal effects of glycolic acid are 
manifested by decreased keratinocyte cohesion, which may be 
due  to  alterations  in  ionic  bonding  ( 70 ),  while  the  dermal 
effects  lead  to  increased  mucopolysaccharide  and  collagen 
synthesis ( 71 ). Visibly this translates into less cutaneous wrin-
kling  and  dyspigmentation  ( 72 ).  Furthermore,  glycolic  acid 
may  act  as  an  antioxidant,  as  demonstrated  by  its  ability  to 
alleviate  the  erythema  observed  after  ultraviolet  radiation 
exposure to the skin ( 73 ).  

 Alpha hydroxy acids and tretinoin can be combined as ther-
apy for photoaged skin since the combination is well tolerated 
and  the  effects  may  be  additive  ( 74 ).  They  act  very  different 
chemically  since  the  hydrophilic  alpha  hydroxy  acids  diffuse 
freely  throughout  the  watery  intercellular  phase  while  the 
hydrophobic retinoids require proteins in the plasma and skin 
to act as carriers ( 75 ). Current trends use an 8% glycolic acid 
moisturizer in the morning, accompanied by a bedtime use of 
the highest strength of tretinoin tolerated. This treatment can 
be supplemented with biweekly to monthly glycolic acid face 
peels in concentrations of 20%, 35%, 50%, and 70%. Better-
controlled  clinical  studies  with  histologic  evaluation  are 
required  before  the  optimum  therapy  for  photoaged  skin 
emerges ( Fig. 5.8 ).    

  skin care in mature patients 
 This chapter closes with an examination of skin care products 
in  mature  patients.  These  products  include  color  cosmetics, 
face  masks,  and  exfoliants.  Color  cosmetics  are  necessary  to 
camouflage  photoaging  while  face  masks  can  be  used  to 
improve skin texture. Exfoliants can smooth the skin surface 
by minimizing the effect of the desquamatory failure found in 
mature skin.  

 Figure  5.7     Retinol  is  the  most  popular  OTC  retinoid  used  in  cosmeceutical 
formulations.    

 dermatologists that retinol is of benefit ( 64 ), but it is difficult 
in  moisturizer  studies  that  do  not  include  vehicle  control  to 
separate the retinol benefit from the moisturizer benefit. Nev-
ertheless, of all the carotenoids available for formulation, reti-
nol  has  the  greatest  evidence  to  support  topical  application 
efficacy.  

  Hydroxy Acids 
 No discussion of cosmeceuticals would be complete without 
the  mention  of  the  hydroxy  acids.  The  hydroxy  acids  were 
some of the first substances to initiate interest in cosmeceuti-
cals. Interestingly, hydroxy acids represent the oldest facial cos-
meceuticals.  It  is  said  that  Cleopatra  used  the  debris  at  the 
bottom  of  the  wine  barrels  to  massage  her  face.  Chemically, 
this was the tartaric acid, thus Cleopatra was the first woman 
recorded to routinely apply facial alpha hydroxy acids. Alpha 
hydroxy  acids  represent  a  group  of  chemicals  consisting  of 
organic  carboxylic  acids  in  which  a  hydroxy  group  is  at  the 
alpha position. Members of this group include glycolic, lactic, 
citric,  malic,  mandelic,  and  tartaric  acid.  Glycolic  acid  is 
derived from sugar cane, lactic acid is derived from fermented 
milk, citric acid is found in citrus fruits, malic acid is found in 
unripe apples, mandelic acid is an extract of bitter almonds, 
and tartaric acid is found in fermented grapes ( 65 ). The acids 
are now produced synthetically for cosmetic use.  

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

43

Line

Wrinkle

Superficial peel

Fold

Medium peel

Deep peel

 Figure 5.8     Alpha hydroxy acid peels produce superficial skin peeling to temporarily improve skin texture and induce exfoliation.    

   Color cosmetics, face masks, and exfoliants can be used to 
improve the appearance of mature skin. 

  Color Cosmetics 
 Cutaneous sun exposure accelerates and exaggerates the clini-
cal changes associated with advanced age ( 76 ). Thus, individu-
als  turn  to  cosmetics,  which  can  aid  in  the  camouflage  of 
telangiectasias  and  lentigines,  but  cannot  conceal  the  deep 
wrinkling  found  in  photoaging.  Facial  foundations  become 
difficult  to  apply  evenly  and  tend  to  migrate  into  cutaneous 
furrows.  The  yellow  skin  hue  imparted  by  elastosis  can  be 
improved  by  the  use  of  a  purple  undercover  cosmetic,  but 
again uniform application is difficult. The patient may attempt 
to solve these problems by using a high-coverage cream foun-
dation.  Unfortunately,  thicker  facial  foundations,  which  can 
cover skin color abnormalities, only accentuate the deep wrin-
kling and furrows. One possible cosmetic solution is to use a 
white eyeliner pencil to line the depths of each furrow and a 
subsequent application of a moderate-coverage facial founda-
tion appropriate for the patient’s skin type. The white pigment 
placed at the depth of each furrow will make the recessed skin 
less shadowed, depending on the concept of facial contouring. 
Lining  each  furrow  is  time-consuming  but  can  improve, 
although not eliminate, the photoaged skin appearance.  

  Face Masks 
 Face  masks  consist  of  substances  applied  to  the  face  for  an 
extended  period  for  therapeutic  and/or  esthetic  purposes. 
Masks are available for domestic and professional uses. They 
may be packaged in a jar or bottle for immediate application to 
the face or as dry ingredients in a pouch for mixing with water. 
Typically, a mask is applied on a weekly basis to provide a time 
for relaxation, an esthetically pleasing sensation, and skin ben-
efits. There are four basic mask formulations: wax based, vinyl 
or rubber based, hydrocolloid, and earth based. 

of beeswax or, more commonly, paraffin wax to which petro-
leum jelly and cetyl or stearyl alcohols have been added to pro-
vide  a  soft,  pliable  material  for  facial  application  with  a  soft 
brush. The wax is heated in a pot placed in a water bath to con-
trol the temperature and prevent burning. Sometimes the wax is 
dipped from the pot and painted over the face and other times it 
may  be  brushed  over  thin  cotton  gauze  draped  over  the  face. 
Gauze  is  commonly  used  to  enable  the  facial  technician  to 
remove the wax in one piece ( 77 ). Gauze also prevents the wax 
from sticking to the vellus hairs on the face, which may be pain-
fully epilated as the wax is peeled off the face. 
face  masks 

impede  cutaneous 
 transepidermal water loss. This effect is limited only to the time 
the mask is in direct contact with the face, unless a suitable occlu-
sive moisturizer is applied immediately following mask removal. 
For this reason, they are popular in persons with dry skin.  

temporarily 

 Wax-based 

  Vinyl- and Rubber-Based Masks 
 Vinyl  and  rubber-based  masks  are  popular  masks  for  home 
use, since they are easily squeezed from a pouch onto the face 
and  removed  in  one  piece.  Rubber-based  masks  are  usually 
based  on  latex  while  vinyl-based  masks  are  based  on  film-
forming substances, such as polyvinyl alcohol or vinyl acetate. 
Because  of  the  concern  over  latex  allergy,  there  are  no  true 
rubber-based masks for home use. 

 Vinyl  masks  are  squeezed  premixed  from  a  tube  or  pouch 
and applied with fingertips or a wooden applicator to the face. 
Upon  evaporation  of  the  vehicle,  a  thin  flexible  vinyl  film 
remains behind on the face. The mask is generally left in con-
tact with the skin for 10 to 30 minutes and then peeled off in 
one sheet by loosening the edges from the face.  

 Vinyl  and  rubber  masks  are  appropriate  for  all  skin  types. 
The  evaporation  of  the  vehicle  from  the  wet  mask  creates  a 
cooling sensation and the shrinking of the mask with drying 
may  give  the  impression  that  the  skin  is  actually  tightening. 
These  masks  can  temporarily  impede  transepidermal  water 
loss while they are in contact with the skin.  

  Wax Masks 
 Wax masks are popular among women who visit professional 
spas for their warm, esthetically pleasing feel. They are  composed 

  Hydrocolloid Masks 
 Hydrocolloid masks are used both in professional salons and 
at home. Hydrocolloids are substances, such as oatmeal, that 

44

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

are of large molecular weight and thus interfere with transepi-
dermal water loss. These masks are formulated from gums and 
humectants and enjoy tremendous popularity since many spe-
cialty  ingredients  are  easily  incorporated  into  their  formula-
tion.  They  are  marketed  in  the  form  of  dry  ingredients  in  a 
sealed  pouch  that  must  be  mixed  with  warm  water  prior  to 
application. The resulting paste is then smeared over the face 
with the hands or a wooden blade and allowed to dry ( 78 ). 

 Hydrocolloid masks leave the skin feeling smooth, and cre-
ate the sensation of skin tightening as the water evaporates and 
the mask dries. Temporary moisturization can occur while the 
mask  is  on  the  skin.  Specialty  additives  such  as  honey,  egg 
whites, chamomile flowers, aloe vera, almond oil, zinc oxide, 
sulfur, avocado, witch hazel, etc. may be used to customize the 
mask. Many spas have their own special concoction. By  varying 
the  ingredients,  masks  can  be  created  for  all  skin  types.  In 
addition,  herbal  medicine  can  be  practiced  by  combining 
 various healing plants into a poultice for facial application.  

  Earth-Based Masks 
 Earth-based masks, also known as paste masks or mud packs, 
are formulated of absorbent clays such as bentonite, kaolin, or 
china clay. The clays produce an astringent effect on the skin 
making  this  mask  most  appropriate  for  oily-complected 
patients.  The  astringent  effect  of  the  mask  can  be  enhanced 
through the addition of other substances such as magnesium, 
zinc oxide, salicylic acid, etc.   

  Exfoliants 
 Exfoliants containing hydroxy acids produce both epidermal 
and  dermal  changes.  The  epidermal  changes  are  immediate 
and occur at the junction of the stratum corneum and stratum 
granulosum.  They  constitute  a  reduction  in  the  thickness  of 
the hyperkeratotic stratum corneum due to decreased corneo-
cyte adhesion ( 79 ). The dermal effects, which are delayed, con-
sist  of  increased  glycosaminoglycan  synthesis  ( 80 ).  These 
effects are most pronounced with the alpha hydroxy acids (gly-
colic acid, lactic acid, and malic acid), which rapidly penetrate 
the  epidermis  to  enter  the  dermis.  Individuals  with  sensitive 
skin may not be able to tolerate the low pH of 3 required to 
cause this epidermal renewal ( 81 ). This has led to development 
of  polyhydroxy  acids  (gluconolactone,  lactobionic  acid,  and 
ferulic acid), which are larger-molecular-weight hydroxy acids 
that do not penetrate as rapidly to the dermis. This produces 
less  irritation;  therefore,  polyhydroxy  acid  is  suitable  for 
 persons with sensitive skin, eczema, and atopic dermatitis. 

 Another mechanism for reducing the irritation of chemical 
exfoliants is through neutralization or buffering. Irritation can 
also be minimized by raising the exfoliant pH through sodium 
hydroxide neutralization; however, this also reduces the exfo-
liation  produced.  The  use  of  buffering  agents,  such  as  phos-
phoric acid or monosodium phosphate, is preferable since the 
buffer maintains the product at a desired pH ( 82 ). Ideally, the 
pH of an exfoliant solution should not be lower than 3. Exfo-
liation  is  induced  more  with  a  lower  pH,  since  the  hydroxy 
acid concentration is increased, but a greater irritation in the 
form of stinging and burning is also expected. 

 Beta hydroxy acids, such as salicylic acid, may also be used, 
but do not produce dermal penetration. Salicylic acid is tech-
nically  not  a  beta  hydroxy  acid;  it  is  rather  a  phenolic 

 compound, but the marketing nomenclature has popularized 
this terminology. Salicylic acid is an oil-soluble acid, as com-
pared  with  the  alpha  hydroxy  acids  that  are  mainly  water 
 soluble,  and  remains  on  the  skin  surface.  Since  exfoliation 
occurs on the skin surface, this is a desirable characteristic that 
minimizes irritation. 

 Exfoliants provide the quickest way to improve the appear-
ance of aging skin. They can improve skin smoothness, skin 
color, and skin light reflection. This can result in the aggressive 
use  of  these  products,  but  the  benefits  decline  if  used 
 continuously.   

  summary 
 Cosmeceuticals  form  an  important  part  of  the  OTC  skin 
 treatment  market  in  aging  skin.  It  is  felt  that  cosmeceutical 
development has been stymied largely due to the failure of the 
FDA to develop a new classification system. It is thought that a 
new  “quasi-drug”  category,  similar  to  the  Japanese  designa-
tion,  would  allow  the  introduction  of  more  robust  active 
ingredients  into  cosmeceuticals.  These  more  robust  ingredi-
ents would provide enhanced consumer-perceived skin bene-
fits, supporting stronger claims. 

 In  summary,  I  believe  that  cosmeceuticals  will  become  an 
ever-increasing part of the fund of knowledge of dermatology. 
We are now only at the beginning of the cosmeceutical story. 
Cosmeceuticals  were  derived  from  the  cosmetic  industry’s 
desire to go beyond simply adorning the skin. They wanted to 
improve  the  appearance  of  the  skin  by  tackling  important 
functional issues to meet the demands of consumers. Now, the 
cosmeceutical category needs to learn from the drug category. 
The principles of the scientific method must be applied to the 
clinical study of cosmeceuticals. No longer can in vitro data be 
used to extrapolate visible clinical results, nor can 15-subject 
studies be used to determine the value of a specific ingredient. 
Trends without statistical significance are of no use anymore, 
to confirm the skin effect of a given formulation. Dermatology 
will move the cosmeceutical category forward and the cosme-
ceutical category will move dermatology forward.    

  references 
    1.       Vermeer     BJ   ,    Gilchrest     BA    .   Cosmeceuticals. A proposal for rational defini-

tion, evaluation and regulation  .   Arch Dermatol     1996  ;   132  :   337  .   

    2.       Kligman      AM    .    Cosmeceuticals  as  a  third  category  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1998  ; 

  113  :   33  .   

    3.       Gilchrest     BA    .   Cellular and molecular changes in aging skin  .   J Geriatr Der-

matol     1994  ;   2  :   3  –  6  .   

    4.       Hurley     HJ    .   Skin in senescence: a summation  .   J Geriatr Dermatol     1993  ;   1  : 

  55  –  61  .   

    5.       West     MD    .   The cellular and molecular biology of skin aging  .   Arch Derma-

tol     1994  ;   130  :   87  –  95  .   

    6.       Griffiths     CEM   ,    Wag     TS   ,    Hamilton     TA   ,    Voorhees     JJ   ,    Ellis     CN    .   A photonu-
meric scale for the assessment of cutaneous photodamage  .   Arch Dermatol   
  1992  ;   128  :   347  –  51  .   

    7.       Kligman     AM    .    Early  destructive  effects  of  sunligt  on  human  skin  .    J Am 

Med Assoc     1969  ;   210  :   2377  –  80  .   

    8.       Majmudar     G   ,    Nelson     BR   ,    Mazany     KD   ,    Billard     M   ,    Johnson     TM    .   Cutaneous 

aging and collagen  .   J Geriatr Dermatol     1994  ;   2  :   36  –  44  .   

    9.       Suader     DN    .   The immunology of aging skin  .   J Geriatr Dermatol     1994  ;   2  : 

  15  –  18  .   

   10.       Kligman     LH   ,    Kligman     AM    .   Ultraviolet radiation-induced skin aging  .   In  : 
    Lowe     NJ   ,    Shaath     NA    ,   eds  .   Sunscreens Development, Evaluation and Regu-
latory Aspects  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc .,  1990  :   55  –  60  .   

   11.       Braverman     IM   ,    Fonferko     E    .   Studies in cutaneous aging  .   I. The elastic fiber 

network. J Invest Dermatol     1982  ;   78  :   434  –  44  .   

AGING SKIN AND COSMECEUTICALS

   12.       Uitto     JJ    .   Intrinsic aging changes in the dermis  .   J Geriatr Dermatol     1994  ;   2  : 

  7  –  14  .   

   13.       Chotnopparatpattara     P   ,    Panyakhamlerd     K   ,    Taechakraichana     N    ,   et al  .   An 
effect of hormone replacement therapy on skin thickness in early post-
menopausal women  .   J Med Assoc Thai     2001  ;   84  :   1275  –  80  .   

   14.       Callens     A   ,    Vaillant     L   ,    Lecomte     P    ,   et al  .   Does hormonal skin aging exist? A 
study of the influence of different hormone therapy regimens on the skin 
of postmenopausal women using non-invasive measurement techniques  . 
  Dermatology     1996  ;   193  :   289  –  94  .   

   15.       Sumino      H   ,     Ichikawa      S   ,     Abe      M    ,    et  al  .    Effects  of  aging,  menopause,  and 
hormone replacement therapy on forearm skin elasticity in women  .   J Am 
Geriatr Soc     2004  ;   52  :   945  –  9  .   

   16.       Pierard-Franchimont     C   ,    Letawe     C   ,    Goffin     V   ,    Pierard     GE    .   Skin water hold-
ing  capacity  and  transdermal  therapy  for  menopause:  a  pilot  study  . 
  Maturitas     1995  ;   22  :   151  –  4  .   

   17.       Sauerbronn      AV   ,     Fonseca      AM   ,     Bagnoli      VR   ,     Saldiva      PH   ,     Pinotti      JA    .    The 
effects  of  systemic  hormonal  replacement  therapy  on  the  skin  of  post-
menopausal women  .   Int J Gynaecol Obstet     2000  ;   68  :   35  –  41  .   

   18.       Schmidt     JB   ,    Binder     M   ,    Demschik     G   ,    Bieglmayer     C   ,    Reiner     A    .   Treatment of 
aging skin with topical estrogens  .   Int J Dermatol     1996  ;   35  :   669  –  74  .   
   19.       Shah     MG   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Estrogen and skin. An overview  .   Am J Clin Der-

matol     2001  ;   2  :   143  –  50  .   

   20.       Kotsopoulos     D   ,    Dalais     FS   ,    Liang     YL   ,    McGrath     BP   ,    Teede     HJ    .   The effects of 
soy protein containing phytoestrogens on menopausal symptoms in post-
menopausal women  .   Climacteric     2000  ;   3  :   161  –  7  .   

   21.       Smith     MA   ,    Fine     JA   ,    Barnhill     RL   ,    Berwick     M    .   Hormonal and reproductive 
influences and risk of melanoma in women  .   Int J Epidemiol     1998  ;   27  :   751  –  7  .   
   22.       Sumino     H   ,    Ichikawa     S   ,    Abe     M    ,   et al  .   Effects of aging and postmenopausal 
hypoestrogenism on skin elasticity and bone mineral density in Japanese 
women  .   Endocr J     2004  ;   51  :   159  –  64  .   

   23.       Hussein     G   ,    Sankawa     U   ,    Goto     H   ,    Matsumoto     K   ,    Watanabe     H    .   Astaxanthin, 
a  carotenoid  with  potential  in  human  health  and  nutrition  .    J  Nat  Prod   
  2006  ;   69  :   443  –  9  .   

   24.       Karppi     J   ,    Rissanen     TH   ,    Nyyssonen     K    ,   et al  .   Effects of astaxanthin supple-
mentation of lipid peroxidation  .   Int J Vitam Nutr Res     2007  ;   77  :   3  –  11  .   
   25.       Seki     T    .   Effects of astaxanthin on human skin  .   Fragrance J     2001  ;   12  :   98  –  103  .   
   26.     Higuera-Ciapara I, Felix-Valenzuela L, Goycoolea FM. Astaxanthin : a review 
of its chemistry and applications  .   Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr     2006  ;   46  :   185  –  96  .   
   27.       Tso     MO   ,    Lam     TT    .   Method of retarding and ameliorating central nervous 
system and eye damage. US Patent #5527533  .   Board of trustees of the Uni-
versity of Illinois, USA  ,   1996  .   

   28.       Pashkow     FJ   ,    Watumull     DG   ,    Campbell     Cl    .   Astaxanthin: a novel potential 
treatment for oxidative stress and inflammation in cardiovascular disease  . 
  Am J Cardiol     2008  ;   101  :   58D  –  68D  .   

45

   40.       Devaraj     S   ,    Vega-Lopez     S   ,    Kaul     N    ,   et al  .   Supplementation with a pine bark 
extract  rich  in  polyphenols  increases  plasma  antioxidant  capacity  and 
alters the plasma lipoprotein profile  .   Lipids     2002  ;   37  :   931  –  4  .   

   41.       Cesarone      MR   ,     Belcaro      G   ,     Rohdewald      P    ,    et  al  .    Improvement  of  diabetic 
microangiopathy with pycnogenol: a prospective, controlled study  .   Angi-
ology     2006  ;   57  :   431  –  6  .   

   42.       Vinciguerra     G   ,    Belcaro     G   ,    Cesarone     MR    ,   et al  .   Cramps and muscular pain: 
prevention with pycnogenol in normal subjects, venous patients, athletes, 
claudicants and in diabetic microaniopathy  .   Angiology     2006  ;   57  :   331  –  9  .   

   43.       Cossins     E   ,    Lee     R   ,    Packer     L    .   ESR studies of vitamin C regeneration, order 
of reactivity of natural source phytochemical preparations  .   Biochem Mol 
Biol Int     1998  ;   45  :   583  –  98  .   

   44.       Schonlau     F    .   The cosmetic pycnogenol  .   J Appl Cosmetol     2002  ;   20  :   241  –  6  .   
   45.       Kim     YJ   ,    Kang     KS   ,    Yokozawa     T    .   The anti-melanogenic effect of pycnogenol 
by its anti-oxidative actions  .   Food Chem Toxicol     2008  ;   46  :   2466  –  71  .   
   46.       Rona      C   ,     Vailati      F   ,     Berardesca      D    .    The  cosmetic  treatment  of  wrinkles  . 

  J Cosmet Dermatol     2004  ;   3  :   26  –  34  .   

   47.       Jurenka     JS    .   Therapeutic applications of pomegranate (Punica granatum 

L.): a review  .   Altern Med Rev     2008  ;   13  :   128  –  44  .   

   48.       Pacheco-Palencia     LA   ,    Noratto     G   ,    Hingorani     L   ,    Talcott     ST   ,    Mertens-Talcott   
  SU    .   Protective effects of standardized pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) 
polyphenolic  extract  in  ultraviolet-irradiated  human  skin  fibroblasts  . 
  J Agric Food Chem     2008  ;   56  :   8434  –  41  .   

   49.     Aviram M, Rosenblat M, Gaitini D, et al. Pomegranate juice  consumption 
for  3 years  by  patients  with  carotid  artery  stenosis  reduces  common 
carotid intima-media thickness, blood pressure and LDL oxidation  .   Clin 
Nutr     2004  ;   23  :   423  –  33  .   

   50.       Aviram     M   ,    Dornfeld     L   ,    Rosenblat     M    ,   et al  .   Pomegranate juice consump-
tion  reduces  oxidative  stress,  atherogenic  modifications  to  LDL,  and 
platelet  aggregation:  studies  in  humans  and  in  atherosclerotic  apolipo-
protein e-deficient mice  .   Am J Clin Nutr     2000  ;   71  :   1062  –  76  .   

   51.     Esmaillzadeh A, Tahbaz F, Gaieni I, et al. Concentrated pomegranate juice 
improves profiles in diabetic patients with hyperlipidemia  .   J Med Food   
  2004  ;   7  :   305  –  8  .   

   52.       Kligman     AM   ,    Grove     GL   ,    Hirose     R   ,    Leyden     JJ    .   Topical tretinoin for photo-

aged skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1986  ;   15  :   836  –  59  .   

   53.       Weiss     JS   ,    Ellis     CN   ,    Headington     JT    ,   et al  .   Topical tretinoin improves photo-

aged skin  .   JAMA     1988  ;   259  :   527  .   

   54.       Weiss      JS   ,     Ellis      CN   ,     Headington      JT   ,    Voorhees      JJ    .    Topical  tretinoin  in  the 

treatment of aging skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1988  ;   19  :   169  –  75  .   

   55.       Hermittte     R    .   Aged skin, retinoids, and alpha hydroxy acids  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1992  ;   107  :   63  –  7  .   

   56.       Goldfarb     MT   ,    Ellis     CN   ,    Weiss     JS   ,    Voorhees     JJ    .   Topical tretinoin therapy: its 

use in photoaged skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1989  ;   21  :   645  –  50  .   

   29.       Alves-Rodrigues     A   ,    Shao     A    .   The science behind lutein  .   Toxical Lett     2004  ; 

   57.       Bhawan     J   ,    Gonzalez-Serva     A   ,    Nehal     K    ,   et al  .   Effects of tretinoin on photo-

  150  :   57  –  83  .   

   30.       Barclay      L    .    Lutein  Improves  Visual  Function  in  Age-Related  Macular 
Degeneration  .    Medscape  Medical  News  .  [  Available  from  :    http://www.
medscape.com  ]   

   31.       Arct      J   ,     Pytokowska      K    .    Flavonoids  as  components  of  biologically  active 

cosmeceuticals  .   Clin Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   347  –  57  .   

   32.       Hatcher     H   ,    Planalp     R   ,    Cho     J   ,    Torti     FM   ,    Torti     SV    .   Curcumin: from ancient 
medicine to current clinical trials  .   Cell Mol Life Sci  .   2008  ;   65  :   1631  –  52  .   
   33.       Jagetia      GC   ,     Aggarwal      BB    .   “Spicing  up”  of  the  immune  system  by  cur-

cumin  .   J Clin Immunol     2007  ;   27  :   19  –  35  .   

   34.       Katiyar     SK   ,    Korman     NJ   ,    Mukhtar     H   ,    Agarwal     R    .   Protective effects of sily-
marin against photocarcinogenesis in a mouse skin model  .   J Natl Cancer 
Inst     1997  ;   89  :   556  –  66  .   

   35.       Katiyar      SK    .    Silymarin  and  skin  cancer  prevention:  anti-inflammatory, 
antioxidant and immunomodulatory effects (Review)  .   Int J Oncol     2005  ; 
  26  :   169  –  76  .   

   36.       Chatterjee      L   ,     Agarwal      R   ,     Mukhtar      H    .    Ultraviolet  B  radiation-induced 
DNA lesions in mouse epidermis: an assessment sing a novel 32P-postla-
beling technique  .   Biochem Biophys Res Commun     1996  ;   229  :   590  –  5  .   
   37.       Toklu      HZ   ,     Tunali-Akbay      T   ,     Erkanli      G    ,    et  al  .    Silymarin,  the  antioxidant 
component of Silybum marianum, protects against burn-induced oxida-
tive skin injury  .   Burn     2007  ;   33  :   908  –  16  .   

   38.       Berardesca     E   ,    Cameli     N   ,    Cavallotti     C    ,   et al  .   Combined effects of silymarin 
and  methyisulfonylmethane  in  the  managementof  rosacea:  clinical  and 
instrumental evaluation  .   J Cosmet Dermatol.     2008  ;   7  :   8  –  14  .   

   39.     [Available from  :   http://www.drugs.com/npp/pyconogenol.html  ],   accessed 

December 7  ,   2008  .   

damaged skin  .   Arch Dermatol     1991  ;   127  :   666  –  72  .   

   58.       Olsen     EA   ,    Katz     HI   ,    Levine     N    ,   et al  .   Tretinoin emollient cream: a new ther-
apy for photodamaged skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1992  ;   26  :   215  –  24  .   
   59.       Kligman     AM   ,     Dogadkina      D   ,     Lavker      RM    .    Effects  of  topical  tretinoin  on 
non-sun-exposed protected skin of the elderly  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1993  ; 
  29  :   25  –  33   

   60.       Gupta     MA   ,    Goldfarb     MT   ,    Schork     NJ    ,   et al  .   Treatment of mildly to moder-
ately photoaged skin with topical tretinoin has a favorable psychosocial 
effect: a prospective study  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1991  ;   24  :   780  –  1  .   

   61.       Weinstein     GD   ,    Nigra     TP   ,    Pochi     PE   ,    Savin     RC    .   Topical tretinoin for treat-

ment of photodamaged skin  .   Arch Dermatol     1991  ;   127  :   659  –  65  .   

   62.       Duell     EA   ,    Derguini     F   ,    Kang     S   ,    Elder     JT   ,    Voorhees     JJ    .   Extraction of human 
epidermis  treated  with  retinol  yields  retro-retinoids  in  addition  to  free 
retinol and retinyl esters  .   J Invest Dermatol     1996  ;   107  :   178  –  82  .   

   63.       Kafi     R   ,    Swak     HS   ,    Schumacher     WE    ,   et al  .   Improvement of naturally aged 

skin with vitamin A (retinol)  .   Arch Dermatol     2007  ;   143  :   606  –  12  .   
   64.       Hruza     GJ    .   Retinol benefits naturally aged skin  .   J Watch Dermatol     2007   .   
   65.       Rosan      AM    .    The  chemistry  of  alpha-hydroxy  acids  .    Cosmet  Dermatol 

Suppl     1994  :  4  –  11  .   

   66.       Yu      RJ   ,     Van      Scott  EJ    .    Alpha-hydroxy  acids:  science  and  therapeutic  use  . 

  Cosmet Dermatol Suppl     1994  :   12  –  20  .   

   67.       Moy     LS   ,    Murad     H   ,    Moy     RL    .   Glycolic acid peels for the treatment of wrin-

kles and photoaging  .   J Dermatol Surg Oncol     1993  ;   19  :   243  –  6  .   

   68.       Moy     LS   ,    Murad     H   ,    Moy     RL    .   Glycolic acid therapy: evaluation of efficacy 
and techniques in treatment of photodamage lesions  .   Am J Cosmet Surg   
  1993  ;   10  :   9  –  13  .   

   69.       Elson     ML    .   The art of chemical peeling  .   Cosmet Dermatol Suppl     1994  :   24  –  8  .   

46

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   70.       Van Scott     JE   ,    Yu     RJ    .   Hyperkeratinization, corneocyte cohesion and alpha 

     Giacomoni     PU    .   Advancement in skin aging: the future cosmeceuticals  .   Clin 

hydroxy acids  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1984  ;   11  :   867  –  79  .   

Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   364  –  6  .   

   71.       Van  Scott      JE   ,     Yu      RJ    .    Alpha  hydroxyacids:  therapeutic  potentials  .    Can  J 

     Gilchrest      B    .    Skin  aging  2003:  recent  advances  and  current  concepts  .    Cutis   

Dermatol     1989  ;   1  :   108  –  12  .   

  2003  ;   72  :   5  –  10  .   

   72.       Van Scott     EJ   ,    Yu     RJ    .   Alpha hydroxy acids: procedures for use in clinical 

     Glaser      DA    .    Anti-aging  products  and  cosmeceuticals  .    Facial  Plast  Surg  Clin 

practice  .   Cutis     1989  ;   43  :   222  –  8  .   

North Am     2004  ;   12  :   363  –  72  ,   vii  .   

   73.       Perricone     NV    .   An alpha hydroxy acid acts as an antioxidant  .   J Geriatr Der-

matol     1993  ;   1  :   101  –  4  .   

   74.       Kligman     AM    .   Compatibility of a glycolic acid cream with topical tretinoin 
for the treatment of the photo damaged face of older women  .   J Geriatr 
Dermatol     1993  ;   1  :   179  –  81  .   

     Green     BA   ,    Edison     BL   ,    Lee     Y    .   Treatment of Photoaged Hands  .   C & T  .   
     Grimes      P   ,     Green      BA   ,     Wildnauer      RH   ,     Edison      BL    .    The  use  of  polyhydroxy 

acids(PHAs) in photoaged skin  .   Cutis     2004  ;   73  :   3  –  13  .   

     Katsambas     AD   ,    Katoulis     AC    .   Topical retinoids in the treatment of aging of the 

skin  .   Adv Exp Med Biol     1999  ;   455  :   477  –  82  .   

   75.       Hermittte     R    .   Aged skin, retinoids, and alpha hydroxy acids  .   Cosmet Toilet   

     Kawi     N    .   Phytoestrogens: applications of soy isoflavones in skin care  .   Cosmet 

  1992  ;   107  :   63  –  7  .   

Toilet Magazine     2003  ;   118  :   73  –  80  .   

   76.       Gilchrest     BA    .   Overview of skin aging  .   J Cutan Aging Cosmet Dermatol   

     Kennedy      C   ,     Bastiaens      M   ,     Bajdik      C    ,    et  al  .    Effect  of  smoking  and  sun  on  the 

  1988  ;   1  :   1  –  3  .   

aging skin  .   J Invest Dermatol     2003  ;   120  :   548  –  54  .   

   77.       Gerson      J    .    Milady’s  Standard  Textbook  for  Professional  Estheticians  . 

     Kligman      A    .    The  treatment  of  photoaged  human  skin  by  topical  tretinoin  . 

   Buffalo, NY  :   Milady  ,   1992  :   240  –  2  .   

  Drugs     1989  ;   38  :   1  –  8  .   

   78.       Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics in Dermatology  ,   2nd edn  .   Edinburgh  :   Churchill 

     Kligman      AM    .    Topical  treatments  for  photoaged  skin  .    Separating  the  reality 

Livingstone (WB Saunders)  ,   1995  :   213  .   

from the hype. Postgrad Med     1997  ;   102  :   115  –  8  ,   123  –  6  .   

   79.       Dietre     CM   ,    Griffin     TD   ,    Murphy     CF    ,   et al  .   Effects of alpha-hydroxy acids 

     Kligman     A   ,    Grove     G   ,    Hirose     R   ,    Leyden     J    .   Topical tretinoin for photoaged skin  . 

on photoaged skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1996  ;   34  :   187  –  95  .   

  J Am Acad Dermatol     1986  ;   15     (4 pt 2)  :   836  –  59  .   

   80.       Van Scott     JE   ,    Yu     RJ    .   Hyperkeratinization, corneocyte cohesion and alpha 

     Kockaert     M   ,    Neumann     M    .   Systemic and topical drugs for aging skin  .   J Drugs 

hydroxy acids  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1984  ;   11  :   867  –  79  .   

Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   435  –  41  .   

   81.       Smith     WP    .   Hydroxy acids and skin aging  .   Cosmet Toilet     1994  ;   109  :   41  –  8  .   
   82.       Yu      RJ   ,     Van  Scott      EJ    .    Alpha  hydroxy  acids:  science  and  therapeutic  use  . 

  Cosmet Dermat Suppl     1994  :   12  –  20  .    

  suggested reading 
      Babamiri      K   ,     Nassab      R    .    Cosmeceuticals:  the  evidence  behind  the  retinoids  . 

   Aesthet Surg J     2010  ;   30  :   74  –  7  .   

     Kullavanijaya      P   ,     Lim      H    .    Photoprotection  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      2005  ;    52  : 

  937  –  58  .   

     Larrabee WF     Jr   ,    Caro     I    .   The aging face. Why changes occur, how to correct 

them  .   Postgrad Med     1984  ;   76  :   37  –  9  ,   42  –  6  .   

     Mukherjee     S   ,    Date     A   ,    Patravale     V    ,   et al  .   Retinoids in the treatment of skin aging: 
an overview of clinical efficacy and safety  .   Clin Interv Aging     2006  ;   1  :   327  –  48  .   
     Petkovich      PM    .    Retinoic  acid  metabolism  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      2001  ;    45  : 

  S136  –  42  .   

     Beer     K   ,    Kellner     E   ,    Beer     J    .   Cosmeceuticals for rejuvenation  .   Facial Plast Surg   

     Pinnell     S    .   Cutaneous photodamage, oxidative stress, and topical antioxidant 

  2009  ;   25  :   285  –  9  .   

     Briden      ME    .    Alpha-hydroxyacid  chemical  peeling  agents:  case  studies  and 

rationale for safe and effective use  .   Cutis     2004  ;   73  :   18  –  24  .   

     Bruce     S    .   Cosmeceuticals for the attenuation of extrinsic and intrinsic dermal 

aging  .   J Drugs Dermatol     2008  ;   7     (2 Suppl)  :   s17  –  22  .   

     Choi      CM   ,     Berson      DS    .    Cosmeceuticals  .    Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg      2006  ;    25  : 

  163  –  8  .   

protection  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2003  ;   48  :   1  –  20  .   

     Rivers      JK    .    The  role  of  cosmeceuticals  in  antiaging  therapy  .    Skin  Ther  Lett   

  2008  ;   13  :   5  –  9  .   

     Robinson     LR   ,    Fitzgerald     NC   ,    Doughty     DG    ,   et al  .   Topical palmitoyl pentapep-
tide provides improvement in photoaged human facial skin  .   Int J Cosmet 
Sci     2005  ;   27  :   155  –  60  .   

     Sadick      NS    .    Cosmeceuticals.  Their  role  in  dermatology  practice  .    J  Drugs 

     Contet-Audonneau     J-L   ,    Danoux     L   ,    Gauche     D   ,    Pauly     G    .   Stress, apoptosis and 

 Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   529  –  37  .   

ageing in human skin  .   IFSCC Magazine     2001  ;   4  :   115  –  24  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Clinical situations conducive to proactive skin health and anti-

aging improvement  .   J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc     2008  ;   13  :   25  –  7  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    Concepts  in  a  multiprong  approach  to  phototaging  .    Skin  Ther 

Lett     2006  ;   11  :   1  –  3  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   The cosmeceutical realm   .   Clin Dermatol     2008  ;  26 :   627  –  32  .   
     Draelos      ZD    .    Concepts  in  skin  care  maintenance  .    Cutis      2005  ;    76      (6  Suppl)  : 

  19  –  25  .   

     Scully     K    .   Topical agents for the aging face  .   J Cutan Med Surg     1999  ;   3     (Suppl 4)  : 

  51  –  6  .   

     Serri     R   ,    Iorizzo     M    .   Cosmeceuticals: focus on topical retinoids in photoaging  . 

  Clin Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   633  –  5  .   

     Singh     M   ,    Griffiths     CE    .   The use of retinoids in the treatment of photoaging  . 

  Dermatol Ther     2006  ;   19  :   297  –  305  .   

     Sorg     O   ,    Antille     C   ,    Kaya     G   ,    Saurat     JH    .   Retinoids in cosmeceuticals  .   Dermatol 

Ther     2006  ;   19  :   289  –  96  .   

     Fisher     G   ,    Kang     S   ,    Varani     J    ,   et al  .   Mechanisms of photoaging and chronological 

     Stratigos     AJ   ,    Katsambas     AD    .   The role of topical retinoids in the treatment of 

skin aging  .   Arch Dermatol     2002  ;   138  :   1462  –  70  .   

photoaging  .   Drugs     2005  ;   65  :   1061  –  72  .   

     Gao     XH   ,    Zhang     L   ,    Wei     H   ,    Chen     HD    .   Efficacy and safety of innovative cosme-

     Thornton     MJ    .   The biological actions of estrogens on skin  .   Exp Dermatol     2002  ; 

ceuticals  .   Clin Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   367  –  74  .   

  11  :   487  –  502  .        

             6  

 Facial scarring and camouflaging      

  Special  color  cosmetics  are  available  for  individuals  with 
acquired or congenital contour and color defects of the face. 
These cosmetics are known as camouflage cosmetics since they 
attempt to recreate a more attractive appearance. They do not, 
however,  duplicate  the  appearance  of  a  freshly  washed, 
unadorned face. It is obvious to all that the individual is wear-
ing a cosmetic. Therefore, camouflage cosmetics are designed 
to  minimize  facial  defects  while  accentuating  the  attractive 
features of the face ( 1 ). 

 Paramedical camouflage artists, estheticians, dermatologists, 
plastic  surgeons,  and  cosmetic  consultants  use  camouflaging 
cosmetics.  Their  successful  use  requires  a  well-formulated, 
quality product applied with the skill of a stage makeup techni-
cian and the artistic abilities of a painter. 

  camouflaging of facial defects 
 Key to understanding the importance and use of camouflage 
cosmetics is a basic discussion of the types of facial defects that 
can  occur.  There  are  defects  of  contour,  pigmentation,  or  a 
combination of both.  

   Camouflaging is required for facial defects of contour, 
pigmentation, or a combination of both. 

 Defects of contour are defined as areas where the scar tissue 
is hypertrophied or atrophied. In addition, the scar tissue may 
also demonstrate a texture difference due to absence of follicu-
lar  ostia  and  hair.  Pigmentation  defects  are  abnormalities 
solely  in  the  color  of  the  skin  and  not  in  the  texture.  Some 
pigmentation  abnormalities  arise  from  tumors  of  the  skin 
while  others  are  due  to  systemic  abnormalities  or  extrinsic 
effects, such as sun exposure ( Table 6.1 ) ( 2 , 3 ).  

 These defects can be camouflaged using principles that are 
adapted from stage makeup texts. Camouflaging is the art of 
illusion and demands that the cosmetics be applied both with 
skill and artistic ability. Fortunately, the cosmetics can be easily 
applied and removed providing opportunity for experimenta-
tion and easy alteration of a bad result. 

  Facial Scar Recontouring 
 The basic concept of facial scar recontouring is predicated on 
the fact that dark colors make surfaces recede while light colors 
make surfaces appear to project ( 4 ). Thus, lighter colors will 
minimize depressed areas of scarring while darker colors will 
minimize protuberant areas of the scar.  

   Facial scar contouring is predicated on the fact that dark 
colors make surfaces recede while light colors make 
surfaces appear to project. 

  Figure  6.1   demonstrates  how  this  technique  works  on  a 
patient who has sustained a depressed scar following a surgery 
for the removal of a skin cancer on the nose. The scar itself is 

lightened  to  compensate  for  decreased  light  reflection  while 
the sides and tip of the nose are darkened to draw attention 
away from the surgical defect.   

  Camouflaging of Pigmentation Defects 
 Pigmentation defects can be camouflaged by either applying 
an opaque cosmetic that allows none of the abnormal underly-
ing skin tones to be appreciated or by applying foundations of 
complementary colors ( Fig. 6.2 ). For example, red pigmenta-
tion defects can be camouflaged by applying a green founda-
tion, which is the complementary color to red. The blending of 
the  red  skin  with  the  green  foundation  yields  a  brown  tone, 
which  can  be  readily  covered  by  a  more  conventional  facial 
foundation.  Furthermore,  yellow  skin  tones  can  be  blended 
with a complementary colored purple foundation to also yield 
brown tones. Skin areas that are lighter or darker than desired 
complexion  can  be  camouflaged  by  applying  facial  founda-
tions with the appropriate amount of brown pigment to hide 
the defect ( 5 ) ( Fig. 6.3 ).      

   Pigmentation defects can be camouflaged either by 
applying an opaque cosmetic that allows none of the 
abnormal underlying skin tones to be appreciated or by 
applying foundations of complementary colors. 

  camouflage cosmetics 
 There  are  many  companies  in  the  U.S.A.  and  Europe,  who 
manufacture cosmetics specifically designed for camouflaging 
purposes. A good camouflage artist will generally purchase a 
color palette from at least two different companies to provide 
the necessary mixture of cosmetic shades required to match a 
given patient’s skin tone ( 6 ). 

 Different  formulations  of  camouflaging  cosmetics  are 
designed to meet the needs of each defect to be concealed. The 
basic  products  required  for  camouflaging  are  makeup  bases, 
lining colors, and rouges. Makeup bases or facial foundations 
are designed to create the desired skin color. They are available 
as hard grease paints, soft grease paints, pancakes, and liquids. 
Hard grease paints come in stick form and consist of pigments 
in  an  anhydrous,  waxy  base.  Application  requires  great  skill 
and is more time consuming than other makeup bases. This 
product  is  extremely  long-wearing,  but  mainly  reserved  for 
theatrical uses. 

 Soft grease paints come in a jar or are squeezed from a tube 
and have a creamy texture due to the incorporation of low vis-
cosity oils in addition to waxes in the anhydrous preparation 
( Fig. 6.4 ). They usually contain a high proportion of titanium 
dioxide to provide superior coverage ( 7 ). These products tend 
to have a high shine and do not survive body heat, thus some 
type of setting preparation is required to prolong wear.  

 Pancake  products  are  packaged  in  a  flat,  round  container. 
The product is removed from the compact by stroking with a 

47

48

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

are the easiest to use since they exhibit a long playtime, good 
blending  characteristics,  minimal  application  skill,  excellent 
coverage, and adequate wearability for most individuals ( 9 ). 

 Initially, a makeup base must be selected that is closest to the 
patient’s natural skin color. Blending usually is necessary, but 
no  more  than  three  colors  should  be  combined  as  this  pro-
duces a final muddy color quality. If the patient has an under-
lying pigmentation problem, this counts as one color. In this 
case, the pink color of the wound due to an increased vascular 
supply  to  promote  healing,  counts  as  one  color.  Other  color 
abnormalities may be due to increased melanin, producing a 
brown color, or increased hemosiderin, producing a rust color, 
or degenerated facial elastin, producing a yellow color, etc. 

 Depending on the situation, it may be desirable to camou-
flage  the  red  hues  by  initially  applying  a  green  undercover 
 cosmetic  and  then  a  traditional  facial  foundation,  thus 

wet sponge ( Fig. 6.5 ). It is composed of talc, kaolin, zinc oxide, 
precipitated chalk, titanium dioxide, and iron oxide ( 8 ). This 
product  dries  quickly  and  possesses  a  matte,  or  dull,  finish. 
Unfortunately, it is easily removed with body warmth and per-
spiration, but is easy to retouch, if necessary ( Fig. 6.6 ).   

 Liquid  foundations  for  camouflaging  are  similar  to  those 
marketed for general use; however, increased amounts of tita-
nium dioxide provide a superior coverage. Also, these products 
usually contain higher concentration oils to allow a complete 
color  development  and  improved  wearability.  Special  liquid 
cosmetics  are  available  for  application  under  a  traditional 
facial foundation. These products, as discussed previously, are 
formulated with green and purple pigments to camouflage red 
and yellow color defects, respectively.  

   Liquid foundations for camouflaging are similar to those 
marketed for general use; however increased amounts of 
titanium dioxide provide superior coverage. 

 Special colors are required in localized facial areas to provide 
shading  and  highlighting  for  contour  defects.  Products  used 
for this purpose are known as lining colors, also called moist 
rouges,  and  dry  rouges,  otherwise  called  powdered  rouges. 
Lining  colors are available in all shades of gray, maroon, red, 
brown, green, blue, white, and black. They are packaged both 
in hard sticks and soft tins. These products can be mixed to 
obtain the desired final specialty color for use. Dry rouges are 
compressed  powder  compacts  and  are  available  in  shades  of 
red. They do not wear as long as their oil-containing counter-
parts, but are easily used for quick touch-ups and final shading 
purposes.  

  application of camouflage cosmetics 
 The  most  popular  camouflage  facial  foundations  are  the 
creamy products, which are scooped from a jar or tin with a 
spatula and applied to the hand for warming. These products 

Table 6.1  Facial Pigmentation Defects

Facial color

Disease process

Foundation color

Psoriasis, lupus, 

Green undercover 

Red

Yellow

Brown 

rosacea

Solar elastosis, 

chemotherapy, 
dialysis
Chloasma, 

foundation

Purple undercover 

foundation

White undercover 

foundation

Brown undercover 

foundation

 Figure 6.2     An opaque facial foundation that camouflages underlying pigmen-
tation abnormalities can be easily applied from a roll-up tube.    

hyperpigmentation
Hypopigmentation 

and depigmentation

lentigines, nevi
Post-inflammatory, 
congenital, vitiligo

 Figure 6.1     Cosmetic camouflaging of a depressed scar on the nose.    

FACIAL SCARRING AND CAMOUFLAGING

 avoiding the surgical products. If, however, the color contrast 
is  too  prominent,  a  high  coverage  surgical  foundation  that 
covers all underlying skin tones may be a better camouflaging 
makeup selection. 

 Once the closest foundation color has been selected, it may 
necessary  to  blend  in  yellow,  if  the  individual  has  a  sallow 
complexion, or red, if the patient has a ruddy complexion, etc. 
All facial tones should be represented in the final foundation 
blend  if  a  good  color  match  is  to  be  obtained.  Blending  is 

 Figure 6.3     The brown facial foundation can be stroked directly over the facial 
pigmentation defect.    

49

 usually done by applying a small amount of the makeup to the 
back of the hand. This provides a good surface for blending, 
which can be easily held up to the face to evaluate the color 
match,  and  also  warms  the  product  which  allows  an  easier 
mixing and application. 

 The final foundation color mix is then dabbed, not rubbed, 
over  the  scarred  area  and  then  applied  from  the  central  face 
outward  into  the  hairline  for  approximately  0.25 inch  and 
blended over the ears and beneath the chin. It is necessary to 
feather the cosmetic where the application ends to achieve a 
more natural appearance. The importance of dabbing cannot 
be  overemphasized  since  scars  do  not  contain  appendageal 
structures, such as follicular ostia, that are necessary for good 
cosmetic adherence. Rubbing will remove the makeup as it is 
applied. The cosmetic should be actually pressed into the skin 
and allowed to dry for five minutes. 

 Following this brief drying period, the cosmetic must be set 
with  an  unpigmented,  finely  ground,  talc-based  powder  to 
prevent  smudging,  improve  wearability,  provide  waterproof 
characteristic, and impart a matte finish. Camouflaging make-
ups are designed to be worn with this powder and do not func-
tion properly without it. The powder should be pressed, not 
dusted, on top of the foundation. 

 Lastly,  shading  and  highlighting  principles  are  employed 
to minimize the scar contour abnormalities. Unfortunately, 

 Figure  6.5     An  example  of  a  camouflage  cosmetic  that  is  stroked  from  the 
 compact with a wet sponge.    

 Figure 6.4     Camouflage cosmetics can be squeezed from a tube for application 
to the face.    

 Figure 6.6     The cream foundation is stroked from a sponge onto the entire face 
or just the areas where camouflage is required.    

50

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

the  camouflage  foundation  may  actually  accentuate  the 
 surface irregularities of the scar and normal skin structures, 
such as pores and wrinkles. Depressed scars usually appear 
darker  than  the  surrounding  skin  even  though  the  same 
color   foundation  has  been  applied,  due  to  the  presence  of 
shadows.  Figure 6.1  demonstrates areas to be highlighted in 
an atrophic scar. Thus, a lighter powdered rouge is applied 
over the scar. If the scar is elevated, a darker powdered rouge 
needs  to  be  applied.  Lastly,  a  reddish  powdered  rouge  is 
dusted  over  the  central  face  (central  forehead,  nose,  and 
chin) and upper cheeks to mimic natural color variations of 
the face. Unfortunately, the high-coverage surgical makeup 
also  covers  these  facial  landmarks  resulting  in  a  flat, 
 mask-like face. Other colored facial cosmetics (eye shadow, 
eyeliner,  mascara,  etc.)  are  usually  necessary  to  give  an 
attractive final appearance ( 10 ). 

 In general, the removal of camouflaging cosmetics requires 
more than soap and water washing because of the waterproof 
nature of the product. Most companies provide an oily cleanser 
for  cosmetic  removal  and  then  recommend  soap  and  water 
cleansing of the skin. The cosmetic should only be worn when 
needed and definitely thoroughly removed at bedtime ( 11 ). 

 Camouflage cosmetics are generally used by patients with-
out difficulty. Usually, a specially trained paramedical camou-
flage  artist  or  esthetician  will  train  the  patient  in  proper 
blending and application of the makeup. Two to three hourly 
session are enough to solve most of the problems encountered 
with  the  cosmetic,  but  sometimes  special  difficulties  arise. 
Most camouflage foundations contain a high concentration of 
oils  which  may  rarely  cause  comedone  formation  in  predis-
posed individuals. Evaluating ingredient lists for the absence 
or presence of comedogenic oils is not of much practical value; 
rather the foundation should be tested by the patient. This is 
accomplished by applying a little amount of the cosmetic to 
the  upper  lateral  cheek  for  two  to  four  weeks,  followed  by  a 
dermatologic evaluation. 

 Acne  can  also  arise  in  certain  susceptible  individuals  who 
use  camouflaging  foundations.  Camouflaging  cosmetics  are 
much  more  likely  to  be  acnegenic  than  comedogenic,  since 
they  are  worn  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  and  must  be 
occlusive to provide adequate coverage and waterproof prop-
erties.  The  occlusion  may  also  lead  to  miliaria  formation. 
However, allergic contact dermatitis to camouflage makeups is 
rare  since  the  formulation  is  generally  fragrance-free  with  a 
low  preservative  concentration.  It  is  possible,  however,  for 
both allergic and irritant contact dermatitis to occur from the 
use of camouflage cosmetics. These products can be open or 
closed patch tested “as is.”  

  body camouflaging 
 Camouflaging  cosmetics  appropriate  for  covering  macular 
pigmentation  defects  on  the  legs,  arms,  and  body  are  also 
available.  The  easiest  products  to  apply  are  thinner  creams 
squeezed from a tube that spread better over larger areas, but 
provide less coverage than the thicker facial products. Unfor-
tunately,  application  is  difficult  and  unsatisfactory  in  body 
areas densely covered with hair. Application with a sponge is 
recommended followed by loose powder to improve wearabil-
ity  and  impart  a  better  waterproof  finish. A  special  removal 
product is required.  

   Camouflaging cosmetics appropriate for covering macular 
pigmentation defects on the legs, arms, and body are also 
available. 

 These products use either zinc oxide or titanium dioxide for 
coverage,  iron  pigments  for  color,  methyl  cellulose  or  other 
waxes for viscosity, and glycerin or other nonevaporating sub-
stances  for  increased  adherence  of  the  product  to  the  skin. 
They are a rare cause of irritant or allergic contact dermatitis 
and can be open or closed patch tested “as is.”  

  summary 
 Camouflaging techniques are important to the dermatologist 
who may need to counsel patients on temporary use or perma-
nent use. For temporary redness or discoloration of the skin 
that may occur after a surgery or laser resurfacing, a camou-
flage cosmetic will be used for a limited period until the skin 
heals.  Other  patients  may  experience  permanent  contour  or 
pigmentation problems that require continued use of camou-
flaging  techniques.  This  chapter  has  highlighted  the  theory, 
application,  and  removal  of  cosmetics  for  camouflaging 
 purposes.   

   references 
    1.       Stewart      TW   ,     Savage      D    .    Cosmetic  camouflage  in  dermatology  .    Br  J 

 Dermatol     1972  ;   86  :   530  –  2  .   

    2.       Draelos     ZK    .   Cosmetic camouflaging techniques  .   Cutis     1993  ;   52  :   362  –  4  .   
    3.       Benmaman      O   ,     Sanchez      JL    .    Treatment  and  camouflaging  of  pigmentary 

disorders  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   50  –  61  .   

    4.       Helland      JR   ,     Schneider      MF    .    Special  features  .    New  York  :    M  Evans  and 

 Company  ,   1985  :   41  –  6  .   

    5.       Draelos      ZD    .    Use  of  cover  cosmetics  for  pigmentation  abnormalities  . 

   Cosmet Dermatol     1989  ;   2  :   14  –  16  .   

    6.       Rayner      V    . 

  Clinical  cosmetology:  a  medical  approach  to  esthetics 
 procedures  .    Albany,  New  York  :    Milady  Publishing  Company  ,    1993  : 
  116  –  22  .   

    7.       Schlossman      ML   ,     Feldman      AJ    .    Fluid  foundation  and  blush  makeup  .    In  : 
    deNavarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  . 
   Wheaton, Illinois  :   Allured Publishing Company  ,   1988  :   748  –  51  .   

    8.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  cosmeticology  ,    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   304  –  7  .   

    9.       Reisch     M    .   Masking agents as adjunct therapy in cutaneous disorders  .   Clin 

Med     1961  ;   8   .   

   10.       Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics have a positive effect on the postsurgical patient  . 

  Cosmet Dermatol     1991  ;   4  :   11  –  14  .   

   11.       Thomas     RJ   ,    Bluestein     JL    .   Cosmetics and hairstyling as adjuvants to scar 
camouflage  .    In  :      Thomas      RJ   ,     Richard      G    ,    eds  .    Facial  scars  ,    St.  Louis  :    CV 
Mosby  ,   1989  :   349  –  51  .    

  suggested reading 
      Akerson     J   ,    Imokawa     G    .   Miscellaneous skin care products; skin bleaches and 
others (Chapter 19)  .   In  :     Reiger     MM    ,   ed  .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  . 
  Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  :   393   –  413  .   

     Antoniou     C   ,    Stefanaki     C    .   Cosmetic camouflage  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2006  ;   5  : 

  297  –  301  .   

     Aydogdu     E   ,    Misirlioglu     A   ,    Eker     G   ,    Akoz     T    .   Postoperative camouflage therapy 

in facial aesthetic surgery  .   Aesthetic Plast Surg     2005  ;   29  :   190  –  4  .   

     Balkrishnan     R   ,    McMichael     AJ   ,    Hu     JY    ,   et al  .   Corrective cosmetics are effective 
for women with facial pigmentary disorders  .   Cutis     2005  ;   75  :   181  –  7  .   
     Benmaman      O   ,     Samchez      JL    .    Treatment  and  camouflaging  of  pigmentary 

 disorders  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   50  –  61  .   

     Boehncke     WH   ,    Ochsendorf     F   ,    Paeslack     I   ,    Kaufmann     R   ,    Zollner     TM    .    Decorative 
cosmetics  improve  the  quality  of  life  in  patients  with  disfiguring  skin 
 diseases  .   Eur J Dermatol     2002  ;   12  :   577  –  80  .   

FACIAL SCARRING AND CAMOUFLAGING

51

     Draelos      ZD    .    Camouflaging  techniques  and  dermatologic  surgery  .    Dermatol 

     Johnson     BA    .   Requirements in cosmetics for black skin  .   Dermatol Clin     1988  ;   6  : 

Surg     1996  ;   22  :   1023  –  7  .   

  489  –  92  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    Degradation  and  migration  of  facial  foundations  .    J  Am  Acad 

 Dermatol     2001  ;   45  :   542  –  3  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Colored facial cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   621  –  31  .   
     Draelos     ZK    .   Cosmetic camouflaging techniques  .   Cutis     1993  ;   52  :   362  –  4  .   
     Draelos      ZK    .    Cosmetics  in  the  postsurgical  patient  .    Dermatol  Clin      1995  ;    13  : 

  461  –  5  .   

     Draelos     ZD   ,    Ertel     K   ,    Schnicker     M   ,    Bacon     R   ,    Vickery     S    .   Facial foundation with 
niacinamide  and  N-acetylglucosamine  improves  skin  condition  in 
women with sensitive skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2009  ;   60     (Suppl 1)  :   AB82  .   
     Fesq     H   ,    Brockow     K   ,    Strom     K    ,   et al  .   Dihydroxyacetone in a new formulation – a 
powerful therapeutic option in vitiligo  .   Dermatology     2001  ;   203  :   241  –  3  .   
     Grimes     PE    .   Skin and hair cosmetic issues in women of color  .   Dermatol Clin   

  2002  ;   18  :   659  –  65  .   

     Hakozaki     T   ,    Minwalla     L   ,    Zhuang     J    ,   et al  .   The effect of niacinamide on reducing 
cutaneous  pigmentation  and  suppression  of  melanosome  transfer  .    Br  J 
Dermatol     2002  ;   147  :   20  –  31  .   

     Hamed     S   ,    Sriwiriyanont     P   ,    deLong     MA    ,   et al  .   Comparative efficacy and safety 
of deoxyarbutin, a new tyrosinase-inhibiting agent  .   J Cosmet Sci     2006  ;   57  : 
  291  –  308  .   

     Hell      B   ,     Frangillo-Engler      F   ,     Heissler      E    ,    et  al  .    Camouflage  in  head  and  neck 
region-a non-invasive option for skin lesions  .   Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg   
  1999  ;   28  :   90  –  4  .   

     Korichi     R   ,    Pelle-de-Queral     D   ,    Gazano     G   ,    Aubert     A    .   Why women use makeup: 
implication  of  psychological  traits  in  makeup  functions  .    J  Cosmet  Sci   
  2008  ;   59  :   127  –  37  .   

     Loden     M   ,    Buraczewska     I   ,    Halvarsson     K    .   Facial anit-wrinkle cream: influence 
of  product  presentation  on  effectiveness:  a  randomized  and  controlled 
study  .   Skin Res Technol     2007  ;   13  :   189  –  94  .   

     Paine     C   ,    Sharlow     E   ,    Liebel     F    ,   et al  .   As alternative approach to depigmentation 
by  soybean  extracts  via  inhibitions  of  the  PAR-2  pathway  .    J  Invest 
 Dermatol     2001  ;   116  :   587  –  95  .   

     Rayner     VL    .   Camouflage cosmetics (Chapter 35)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     H    ,   eds  .   Text-
book of Cosmetic Dermatology  ,   2nd edn  .   Martin Dunitz Ltd.  ,   1998  :   417   –  32  .   

     Rayner     VL    .   Camouflage therapy  .   Dermatol Clin     1995  ;   13  :   467  –  72  .   
     Sarwer     DB   ,    Crecand     CE    .   Body image and cosmetic medical treatments  .   Body 

Image     2004  ;   1  :   99  –  111  .   

     Seiberg     M   ,    Paine     C   ,    Sharlow     E    ,   et al  .   Inhibition of melanosome transfer results 

in skin lightening  .   J Invest Dermatol     2000  ;   15  :   162  –  7  .   

     Stewart     TW   ,    Savage     D    .   Cosmetic camouflage in dermatology  .   Br J Dermatol   

  1972  ;   86  :   530  –  2  .   

     Tanioka      M   ,     Miyachi     Y    .    Camouflaging  vitiligo  of  the  fingers  .   Arch  Dermatol   

  2008  ;   144  :   Correspondence  .   

     Taylor      SC    .    Cosmetic  problems  in  skin  of  color  .    Skin  Pharmacol  Appl  Skin 

Physiol     1999  ;   12  :   139  –  43  .   

     Holme      SA   ,     Beattie      PE   ,     Fleming      CJ    .    Cosmetic  camouflage  advice  improves 

     Tedeschi      A   ,     Dall’Oglio      F   ,     Micali      G   ,     Schwartz      RA   ,     Janniger      CK    .    Corrective 

quality of life  .   Br J Dermatol     2002  ;   147  :   946  –  9  .   

     Hsu     S    .   Camouflaging vitiligo with dihydroxyacetone  .   Dermatol Online J     2008  ; 

  14  :   23  .   

     Ichihashi     M   ,    Funasaka     Y   ,    Oka     M   ,    Keishi     A   ,    Ando     H    .   UV-melanogenesis and 

cosmetic whitening  .   IFSCC Magazine     2003  ;   6  :   279  –  86  .   

     Iredale      J   ,     Linder      J    .    Mineral  makeup  and  its  role  with  acne  and  rosacea  .   

J Cosmet Dermatol     2009  ;   22  :   407  –  12  .   

 camouflage in pediatric dermatology  .   Cutis     2007  ;   79  :   110  –  12  .   

     Zhai     H   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Skin-whitening products (Chapter 37)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     A   , 
   Maibach     H    ,   eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  ,   2nd edn  . 
  Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   457  –  63  .   

     Zhu     W-Y   ,     Zhang      R-Z    .    Skin  lightening  techniques  (Chapter  13)  .    In  :      Draelos   
  ZD   ,    Thaman     LA    ,   eds  .   Cosmetic formulation of skin care products  .   Vol. 30  . 
  Taylor & Francis Group, LLC  ,   2006  :   205  –  17  .        

             7  

 Ethnic skin and pigmentation      

  Beneath the stratum corneum and epidermis, skin is the same, 
although skin complexions and tones vary. The dermis appears 
a  creamy  white  in  persons  of  all  cultural  backgrounds,  thus 
ethnic  skin  concerns  focus  primarily  on  the  interaction 
between  melanin  production,  melanin  transfer,  and  factors 
affecting  melanogenesis  ( Fig.  7.1 ).  Light  reflection  from  the 
skin surface and within the skin accounts for the blending of 
brown melanin, red hemoglobin, and yellow collagen. Subtle 
differences in melanin allow skin to appear almost black when 
the  concentration  is  high  and  a  reddish-white  when  the 
 concentration  is  low.  Melanin  is  produced  in  two  forms: 
 pheomelanin,  a  polymer  of  benzothiazine  which  is  red,  and 
eumelanin,  a  polymer  of  dihydroxyindole  and  dihydroxyin-
dole carboxylic acid, and their reduced forms, which is a dark 
brown  ( Fig.  7.2 ).  Eumelanin  is  the  ancestral  brown-black 
 melanin  formed  as  an  oblong  or  spherical  granule  about 
0.9 µm long and 0.3 µm wide. Pheomelanin is the red-yellow 
pigment  formed  as  a  spherical  granule  about  0.7 µm  in  dia-
meter. It is a less common form of melanin found in higher 
 concentration in the female lips, areola, and genitalia. It is the 
various combinations of these two pigments that produce the 
diversity  of  skin  colors  observed  in  modern  society.  This 
 chapter examines the ethnic skin and pigmentation issues.    

   Subtle differences in melanin concentration allow the skin to 
appear almost black when the melanin concentration is high 
and a reddish-white when the melanin concentration is low. 

  melanin and skin color 
 Melanin  production  is  the  primary  differentiating  factor  in 
multicultural skin. Skin color is determined by several genes, 
including  the  recently  discovered  SLC24A5,  which  accounts 
for  the  average  difference  of  30  melanin  units  between 
 European  and  African  skin.  Another  important  gene  is  the 
MC1R,  also  known  as  melanocortin-1-receptor,  which  is  a 
hormone  produced  by  the  pituitary  gland  that  stimulates 
 melanin production. The MC1R gene consists of 954 nucleo-
tides. Among Africans  there  are  no  differences  in  the  amino 
acid sequences of the receptor proteins, but 18 differences were 
noted  among  light-skinned  populations  in  Ireland,  England, 
and Sweden. While it has been thought that light skin was a 
genetic mutation to allow adequate vitamin D production by 
the body, this theory has been questioned.  

   Skin color is determined by several genes, including the 
recently discovered SLC24A5, which accounts for the 
average difference of 30 melanin units between European 
and African skin. 

 Melanin  is  produced  in  response  to  sun  exposure,  trans-
forming  harmful  UV  radiation  into  heat.  This  explains  the 

52

uncomfortable skin warmth when dark skin is exposed to the 
sun, which is not the case with poorly melanized skin, account-
ing  for  the  preponderance  of  light-complected  persons 
 engaging  in  tanning  practices.  Tanning  is  a  boon  for  skin 
injury and not a health benefit. 

 The  number  of  melanocytes,  typically  1000–2000/mm 2   of 
skin, does not differ between skin  colors, but their ability to 
produce  and  transfer  melanin  is  different.  Melanocytes  are 
located at the lower level of the epidermis transferring melanin 
to skin cells in packages known as melanosomes.  Melanosomes 
in recipient cells accumulate atop the cellular nucleus, where 
they protect nuclear DNA from ionizing radiation damage and 
the  resultant  cellular  mutations.  These  cellular  mutations 
 contribute  to  photoaging  when  mild,  precancerous  changes 
when  moderate,  and  photocarcinogenesis  when  severe. 
 Irregular  melanin  transfer  results  in  a  mottled  pigmentation 
characteristic of photoaged skin.  

   The number of melanocytes, typically 1000–2000/mm2 of 
skin, does not differ between skin colors, but the ability to 
produce and transfer melanin is different. 

 Melanogenesis  can  be  affected  by  many  factors  that  differ 
cross culturally. Irregular melanin production is of prime cos-
metic importance. Increased melanin production can occur in 
response to a variety of different stimuli, including UV radia-
tion, injury, and hormone production. Melanogenesis can be 
epidermal or dermal. Epidermal melanogenesis is due to the 
release and subsequent oxidation of arachidonic acid to pros-
taglandins,  leukotrienes,  and  other  inflammatory  mediators, 
which  initiate  pigment  production.  If  the  inflammation 
 disrupts the basal cell layer, the melanin is released and trapped 
by macrophages in the dermis. Dermal pigment, also known as 
pigmentary  incontinence,  is  not  amenable  to  cosmetic 
 intervention  while  epidermal  pigment  can  be  effectively 
 modulated.  The  difference  can  be  detected  visually,  since 
 epidermal pigment can vary from light brown to dark black 
while dermal pigment has a grayish appearance. 

 Besides  skin  color  appearance,  there  are  other  differences  of 
cosmetic  importance  between  Caucasian  skin  and  African-
American skin. These include the presence of more mixed apo-
crine and eccrine sweat glands ( 1 ), increased blood and lymphatic 
vessels ( 2 ), a predisposition to hyperpigmentation ( 3 ), a denser 
and  more  compact  stratum  corneum  ( 4 ),  an  increased 
 transepidermal water loss following irritation ( 5 ) and possibly 
an increased skin sensitivity to irritants in African-American 
skin ( 6 , 7 ).  

  skin lightening 
 Skin lightening is an important cosmetic need that has been 
poorly addressed to date. Many prescription and nonprescrip-
tion  skin  lightening  agents  have  been  developed,  but  none 

ETHNIC SKIN AND PIGMENTATION

53

Melanocytes

Blood vessels

Collagen

 Figure 7.1     Light reflection from the skin surface and within the skin account for the blending of brown melanin, red hemoglobin, and yellow collagen.    

Eumelanogensis

Pheomalanogenesis

Tyrosinase

Tyrosinase

CO2H

NH2

HO

HO

CO2H

NH2

O

O

CO2H

NH2

Tyrosine

DOPA

DOPAquinone

HO

O

O

Peroxidase

Tyrosinase

HO

HO

N
H

Indole-5,6-quinone

N
H

DHI

X

Stablin

Inhibitor

X

Eumelanin

glutathione
or
cysteine

CO2H

N
H
LeucoDOPAchrome

DOPAchrome
tautomerase (TRP2)

HO

HO

N

CO2H

DOPAchrome

HO

HO

CO2H

N
H
Indole-5,6-quinone-
carboxylic acid

CO2H

N
H
DHICA

DHICA
oxidase (TRP1)

O

HO

O

O

CO2H

NH2

HO

HO

S

H2N

CO2H
CysteinyIDOPA

HO

N

CO2H

NH2

S

Alanyl-hydroxy-
benzothiazine

CO2H

 Figure 7.2     The biosynthetic pathway for melanin demonstrating the differences between eumelanin and pheomelanin. DOPA, L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine.    

Mixed melanins

Pheomelanin

work efficiently to completely lighten the skin. A brief review 
of these substances used in over-the-counter (OTC) skin light-
ening preparations is discussed.  

   The gold standard for pigment lightening in the U.S.A. 
remains hydroquinone. 

  Hydroquinone 
 The  gold  standard  for  hyperpigmentation  therapy  in  the 
U.S.A. remains hydroquinone. This substance is actually quite 
controversial having been removed from the OTC markets in 
Europe  and  Asia.  Concern  arose  because  oral  hydroquinone 
has  been  reported  to  cause  cancer  in  mice  that  are  fed  large 

amounts of the substance. While oral consumption probably 
is  not  related  to  topical  application,  hydroquinone  remains 
controversial  because  it  actually  is  toxic  to  melanocytes. 
Hydroquinone,  a  phenolic  compound  chemically  known  as 
1,4 dihydroxybenzene, functions by inhibiting the enzymatic 
oxidation of tyrosine and phenol oxidases ( Fig. 7.3 ). It cova-
lently binds to histidine or interacts with copper at the active 
site of tyrosinase. It also inhibits RNA and DNA synthesis and 
may  alter  melanosome  formation,  thus  selectively  damaging 
melanocytes. These activities suppress the melanocyte meta-
bolic  processes  inducing  a  gradual  decrease  in  melanin  pig-
ment production ( 8 ).  

 Hydroquinone is available both as an OTC and prescription 
drug in the US markets. The maximum concentration in OTC 

 Figure 7.4     The chemical structure of highly photosensitive vitamin C.    

HO

54

HO

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

OH

O

O

HO

OH

OMe

 Figure 7.3     The chemical structure of hydroquinone.    

HO

OH

O

O

HO

H

OH

formulations is 2% while most prescription formulations have 
4%.  In  all  formulations,  hydroquinone  is  unstable  turning 
brown upon contact with air. Once the hydroquinone has oxi-
dized, it is no longer active and should be discarded.  

  Ascorbic Acid 
 Ascorbic acid, also known as vitamin C, is used in the treat-
ment  of  hyperpigmentation  ( Fig.  7.4 ).  It  interrupts  the 
 production of melanogenesis by interacting with copper ions 
to  reduce  dopaquinone  and  blocking  dihydrochinindol-2- 
carboxyl acid oxidation ( 9 ). Ascorbic acid, an antioxidant, is 
rapidly oxidized when exposed in air and is of limited stability. 
High concentrations of ascorbic acid must be used with cau-
tion as the low pH can be irritating to the skin.   

  Licorice Extract 
 Licorice extracts are being used as topical anti-inflammatory 
preparations to decrease skin redness and hyperpigmentation 
( Fig. 7.5 ). The active agents are known as liquiritin and isoli-
quertin,  which  are  glycosides  containing  flavonoids  ( 10 ). 
Liquiritin induces skin lightening by dispersing melanin. It is 
typically applied to the skin in a dose of 1 g/day for four weeks 
to see the clinical result. Irritation is not a side effect.   

  Alpha Lipoic Acid 
 Alpha lipoic acid is found in a variety of antiaging cosmeceu-
ticals to function as an antioxidant, but it may also have very 
limited pigment lightening properties. It is a disulfide deriva-
tive of octanoic acid that is able to inhibit tyrosinase. However, 
it is a large molecule and therefore, cutaneous penetration to 
the level of the melanocyte is challenging for the acid.  

  Kojic Acid 
 Kojic acid, chemically known as 5-hydroxymethyl-4H-pyrane-
4-one) is one of the most popular cosmeceutical skin lighten-
ing  agents  found  in  the  cosmetic-counter  skin  lightening 
cream distributed worldwide ( Fig. 7.6 ). It is a hydrophilic fun-
gal derivative obtained from  Aspergillus  and  Penicillium  spe-
cies. It is the most popular agent employed in the Orient for 
the  treatment  of  melasma  ( 11 ).  Some  studies  indicate  that 
kojic acid is equivalent to hydroquinone in pigment lightening 
ability ( 12 ). The activity of kojic acid is attributed to its ability 
to prevent tyrosinase activity by binding to copper.   

   Kojic acid is a popular cosmetic skin-lightening ingredient. 

HO

OH

O

 Figure 7.5     A licorice extract used in skin care products.    

O

O

OH

 Figure 7.6     Kojic acid is a highly effective skin lightening agent widely used in 
the cosmetic industry.    

HO

HO
HO

O

OH

O

OH

 Figure  7.7     Arbutin  is  a  botanical,  skin  lightening  agent  that  is  not  toxic  to 
melanocytes.    

  Aleosin 
 Aleosin  is  a  low-molecular-weight  glycoprotein  obtained  from 
the aloe vera plant. It is a natural hydroxymethylchromone func-
tioning  to  inhibit  tyrosinase  by  competitive  inhibition  at  the 
DOPA (L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) oxidation site ( 13 , 14 ). In 
contrast to hydroquinone, it shows no cell cytotoxicity; however, 
it has a limited ability to penetrate the skin due to its hydrophilic 
nature.  It  is  sometimes  mixed  with  arbutin,  our  next  topic  of 
 discussion, to enhance its skin lightening abilities.  

  Arbutin 
 Arbutin  is  obtained  from  the  leaves  of  the   Vaccinicum  vitis-
idaea  and other related plants ( Fig. 7.7 ). It is a naturally occur-
ring  gluconopyranoside  that  causes  decreased  tyrosinase 
activity without affecting the messenger RNA expression ( 15 ). 
It also inhibits melanosome maturation. Arbutin is not toxic 
to melanocytes and is used in a variety of pigment lightening 
preparations in Japan at a concentration of 3%. Higher con-
centrations  are  more  efficacious  than  lower  concentrations, 
but a paradoxical pigment darkening may occur.    

  ethnic cosmetics for skin of color 
 The  formulations  and  types  of  facial  cosmetics  available  to 
patients with darker skin tones are the same as those formu-
lated for lighter skin tones. Some cosmetic companies that tra-
ditionally cater to light-skinned customers have now enlarged 
their color selection to include darker skin  tones. But,  many 
new cosmetic companies are producing product lines specifi-
cally created for women of color ( 16 ). 

 The unique aspect of color cosmetic formulation for darker 
skin tones is the blending of pigments with the underlying skin 
color.  Fair-skinned  individuals,  with  little  underlying  skin 

ETHNIC SKIN AND PIGMENTATION

 pigment, can select a color cosmetic and expect it to look simi-
lar in the packaging and on the skin. However, women of color 
can expect the cosmetic to look entirely different in the package 
than on the skin. For example, a light pink blush that provides 
cheek highlights in a Caucasian patient is imperceptible on a 
Fitzpatrick type V skin. Therefore, cosmetics for skin of color 
generally contain vivid pigments to provide the desired result.  

   It is estimated that 35 shades of facial foundation are 
necessary to match skin of color while only 7 shades of 
facial foundation are necessary to match Caucasian skin. 

 Facial foundations for women of color are found both at the 
cosmetic counter and in mass merchandisers. It is estimated 
that there are over 35 different colors of dark skin requiring 
tremendous  color  selection  for  complexion  matching  ( 17 ). 
This  is  compared  to  the  7  basic  colors  of  Caucasian  skin. 
 African-American  women  traditionally  wear  facial  founda-
tions  to  blend  uneven  facial  tones,  whereas  fair-skinned 
 individuals wear facial foundations to add color to the skin. A 
greater emphasis is placed on skin of color foundations for dry 
skin, as pigmented skin is more subject to the ashy appearance 
of dry skin scale due to its higher rate of transepidermal water 
loss  ( 5 , 18 ).  Many   women  of  color  consider  their  skin  to  be 
extremely “sensitive,” even though studies do not demonstrate 
a genetic predisposition to contact dermatitis. This may be due 
to the long lasting postinflammatory hyperpigmentation seen 
with skin care product irritation in women of color ( 19 , 20 ).  

   The description of skin of color requires consideration of 
value, intensity, and undertone. 

 The description of deeply pigmented skin requires a more 
complex discussion of color in terms of value, intensity, and 
undertone ( 21 ). The value of a color is a measure of its light 
reflectivity. Dark skin with blue/black or mahogany hues may 
appear  deeper  in  color  due  to  the  low  value  of  these  colors. 
Intensity refers to the brightness or dullness of a color. True 
colors,  without  the  addition  of  white,  brown  or  black  pig-
ments,  tend  to  have  higher  intensity  than  mixed  colors.  For 
example,  primary  red  has  a  greater  intensity  than  brick  red 
produced by the mixing of primary red with brown. This is an 
important  concept  in  selecting  facial  foundations  for  dark 
skin,  since  too  many  pigments  can  leave  the  skin  muddy 
appearing  due  to  reduced  color  intensity.  Lastly,  undertones 
are extremely important. The undertones account for the tre-
mendous  variation  seen  in  skin  of  color.  Red,  yellow,  and 
orange undertones are said to give the skin a warm appearance 
while blue, purple, and green undertones are said to give the 
skin  a  cool  appearance.  Based  on  an  analysis  of  undertones 
skin of color can be further classified as jet black, blue/black, 
purple/black, brown/red, bronze, honey, etc. 

 Color cosmetics applied to the face in women of color must 
contain deeper pigments. Popular eye shadow colors include 
deep blue, lilac, wine, gold, or emerald. Facial highlighter and 
blush  colors  for  facial  contouring  in  skin  of  color  are  deep 
plum,  bronze,  deep  orange,  coral,  wine,  or  burgundy.  The 
color selected depends upon the skin color shade, for example: 

55

wine or plum blush for jet-black skin, coral, or deep orange for 
brown skin and pink or peach for light brown skin. The eye 
and face contouring methods, however, are the same for light- 
and dark-skinned patients.   

  summary 
 This chapter has examined the unique needs of skin of color, 
including OTC, pigment lightening preparations. It has assessed 
the use of color cosmetics for facial adornment. Even though 
the genetic differences among various skin colors are minimal, 
cosmetic formulations must be tailored to suit all skin colors.   

   references 
    1.       Anderson     KE   ,    Maibach     HI    .   African-American and white skin differences  . 

  J Am Acad Dermatol     1979  ;   1  :   276  –  86  .   

    2.       Montagna     W   ,    Carlisle     K    .   The architecture of black and white facial skin  . 

  J Am Acad Dermatol     1991  ;   24  :   929  –  37  .   

    3.       McLaurin     DI    .   Unusual patterns of common dermatoses in blacks  .   Cutis   

  1983  ;   32  :   352  –  60  .   

    4.       Weigand     DA   ,    Haygood     C   ,    Baylor     JR    .   Cell layers and density of negro and 

caucasian stratum corneum  .   J Invest Dermatol     1974  ;   62  :   563  –  8  .   

    5.       Wilson     D   ,    Berardesca     E   ,    Maibach     HI    .   In vitro transepidermal water loss: 
differences  between  black  and  white  human  skin  .    Br  J  Dermatol      1988  ; 
  119  :   647  –  52  .   

    6.       Stephens      TJ   ,     Oresajo      C    .    Ethnic  sensitive  skin  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1994  ;    109  : 

  75  –  80  .   

    7.       Berardesca     E   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Sensitive and ethnic skin  .   A need for special 

skin care agents? Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   89  –  92  .   

    8.       Halder      RM   ,     Richards      GM    .    Management  of  dischromias  in  ethnic  skin  . 

  Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17  :   151  –  7  .   

    9.       Espinal-Perez      LE   ,     Moncada      B   ,     Castanedo-Cazares      JP    .    A  double  blind 
 randomized trial of 5% ascorbic acid vs 4% hydroquinone in melasma  . 
  Int J Dermatol     2004  ;   43  :   604  –  7  .   

   10.       Amer     M   ,    Metwalli     M    .   Topical liquiritin improves melasma  .   Int J Dermatol   

  2000  ;   39  :   299  –  301  .   

   11.       Lim      JT    .    Treatment  of  melasma  using  kojic  acid  in  a  gel  containing 

 hydroquinone and glycolic acid  .   Dermatol Surg     1999  ;   25  :   282  –  4  .   

   12.       Garcia     A   ,    Fulton     JE    .   Jr. The combination of glycolic acid and hydroqui-
none or kojic acid for the treatment of melasma and related conditions  . 
   Dermatol Surg     1996  ;   22  :   443  –  7  .   

   13.       Choi     S   ,    Lee     SK   ,    Kim     JE    ,   et al  .   Aloesin inhibits hyperpigmentation induced 

by UV radiation  .   Clin Exp Dermatol     2002  ;   27  :   513  –  15  .   

   14.       Jones      K   ,     Hughes      J   ,     Hong      M    ,    et  al  .    Modulation  of  melanogenesis  by 
aloesin: a competitive inhibitor of tyrosinase  .   Pigment Cell Res     2002  ;   15  : 
  335  –  40  .   

   15.       Hori     I   ,    Nihei     K   ,    Kubo     I    .   Structural criteria for depigmenting mechanism 

of arbutin  .   Phytother Res     2004  ;   18  :   475  –  69  .   

   16.       Chester     J   ,    Dixon     M    .   Ethnic market feels growth  .   Manufacturing Chemist   

  1988  ;   59  :   32  .   

   17.       McLaurin     CI    .   Cosmetic for blacks a medical perspective  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1983  ;   98  :   47  –  53  .   

   18.       Hood      HL   ,     Wickett      RR    .    Racial  differences  in  epidermal  structure  and 

function  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107  :   47  –  8  .   

   19.       Maibach     HI    .   Racial and skin color differences in skin sensitivity  .   Cosmet 

Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   35  –  6  .   

   20.       Berardesca     E   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Racial differences in sodium lauryl sulphate 
induced cutaneous irritation: black and white  .   Contact Dermatitis     1988  ; 
  18  :   65  .   

   21.       Patton     JE    .   Color to Color  .   New York  :   Fireside  ,   1991  :   31  –  3  .    

  suggested reading 
      Abdel-Malek     Z   ,    Suzuki     I   ,    Tada     A   ,    Im     S   ,    Akcali     C    .   The melanocortin-1 receptor 

and human pigmentation  .   Ann NY Acad Sci     1999  ;   885  :   117  –  33  .   

     Badreshia-Bansal     S   ,    Draelos     ZD    .   Insight into skin lightening cosmeceuticals 

for women of color  .   J Drugs Dermatol     2007  ;   6  :   32  –  9  .   

     Baumann     L   ,    Rodriguez     D   ,    Taylor     SC   ,    Wu     J    .   Natural considerations for skin of 

color  .   Cutis     2006  ;   76     (6 Suppl)  :   2  –  19  .   

     DeLeo     VA   ,     Taylor      SC   ,     Belsito      DV    ,    et  al  .    The  effect  of  race  and  ethnicity  on 
patch test results  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2002  ;   46     (2 Suppl)  :   S107  –  S112  .   

56

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

     Halder     RM   ,    Nootheti     PK    .   Ethnic skin disorders overview  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   

     Ortonne     JP   ,    Bissett     DL    .   Latest insights into skin hyperpigmentation  .   J Invest 

  2003  ;   48     (6 Suppl)  :   S143  –  8  .   

Dermatol Symp Proc     2008  ;   13  :   10  –  14  .   

     Halder      RM   ,     Richards      GM    .    Management  of  dyschromias  in  ethnic  skin  . 

   Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17  :   151  –  7  .   

     Hillebrand     GG   ,    Schnell     B   ,    Miyamoto     K    ,   et al  .   The age-dependent changes in 
skin  condition  in  Japanese  females  living  in  Northern  versus  Southern 
Japan  .   IFSCC Magazine     2001  ;   4  :   89  –  96  .   

     Holloway     VL    .   Ethnic cosmetic products  .   Dermatol Clin     2003  ;   21  :   743  –  9  .   
     Johnson     BA    .   Requirements in cosmetics for black skin  .   Dermatol Clin     1988  ;   6  : 

  489  –  92  .   

     Levin     CY   ,    Maibach     H    .   Exogenous ochronosis. An update on clinical features, 
causative  agents  and  treatment  options  .    Am  J  Clin  Dermatol      2001  ;    2  : 
  213  –  17  .   

     Petit     A   ,    Cohen-Ludmann     C   ,    Clevenbergh     P   ,    Bergmann     JF   ,    Dubertret     L    .   Skin 
lightening  and  its  complications  among  African  people  living  in  Paris  . 
  J Am Acad Dermatol     2006  ;   55  :   873  –  8  .   

     Pichon      LC   ,     Corral      I   ,     Landrine      H   ,     Mayer      JA   ,     Norman      GJ    .    Sun-protection 
behaviors among African Americans  .   Am J Prev Med     2010  ;   38  :   288  –  95  .   
     Rawlings      AV    .    Ethnic  skin  types:  are  there  differences  in  skin  structure  and 

function?     IFSCC Magazine     2006  ;   9  :   3  –  11  .   

     Stephens     TJ   ,    Oresajo     C    .   Ethnic sensitive skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     1994  ;   109  :   75  –  80  .   
     Sugden     D   ,    Davidson     K   ,    Hough     KA   ,    Teh     MT    .   Melatonin, melatonin receptors 
and melanophores: a moving story  .   Pigment Cell Res     2004  ;   17  :   454  –  60  .   
     Taylor     SC    .   Enhancing the care and treatment of skin of color, part 1: the broad 

     Martín      RF   ,     Sánchez      JL   ,     González     A   ,     Lugo-Somolinos     A   ,     Ruiz      H    .    Exogenous 

scope of pigmentary disorders  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76  :   249  –  55  .   

ochronosis  .   P R Health Sci J     1992  ;   11  :   23  –  6  .   

     Taylor      SC    .    Enhancing  the  care  and  treatment  of  skin  of  color,  part  2: 

     Mahe      A   ,     Ly      F   ,     Aymard      G   ,     Dangou      JM    .    Skin  disorders  associated  with  the 
 cosmetic use of bleaching products in women from Dakar, Senegal  .   Br J 
Dermatol     2003  ;   148  :   493  –  500  .   

 understanding skin physiology  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76  :   302  –  6  .   

     Taylor      SC    .    Cosmetic  problems  in  skin  of  color  .    Skin  Pharmacol  Appl  Skin 

Physiol     1999  ;   12  :   139  –  43  .   

     Olumide     YM   ,    Akinkugbe     AO   ,    Altraide     D    ,   et al  .   Complications of chronic use 

     Yamaguchi     Y   ,    Hearing     VJ    .   Physiological factors that regulate skin  pigmentation  . 

of skin lightening cosmetics  .   Int J Dermatol     2008  ;   47  :   344  –  53  .   

  Biofactors     2009  ;   35  :   193  –  9  .   

               
             8  

 Male skin care      

  The male skin care market is rapidly expanding in the United 
States  because  of  new  product  development  and  aggressive 
marketing tactics. Manufacturers see male skin care as a large 
area for economic growth as the female skin care market has 
shown  sales  for  a  number  of  years.  Much  of  the  interest  in 
male skin care has focused on the concept of the “metrosexual” 
man.  The  metrosexual  man  is  concerned  with  fashion,  hair 
care, nail appearance, skin treatments, and cosmetic products. 
This  image  is  in  contrast  to  the “urban”  man  who  is  a  low-
maintenance  person  and  uses  toothpaste,  bar  soap,  mass- 
market  shampoo,  and  shaving  cream  as  the  sum  total  of  his 
products.  The  advertising  push  to  popularize  the  image  of  a 
metrosexual man is seen as a way to boost the sale of hair, skin, 
and nail care products and services by creating an image for 
which men of all ages can aspire. 

 Men use many of the same skin care products as women. Do 
these formulations need to be different or can the same mois-
turizer with a more masculine fragrance be used on the male 
face?  Is  male  skin  that  different  from  the  female  skin?  This 
chapter  examines  the  unique  issues  differentiating  male  and 
female skin care.  

   Male facial skin is thicker than female facial skin due to the 
presence of terminal hair follicles. 

  male vs. female skin 
 The  differences  between  the  skin  of  men  and  women  are 
obvious to the human eye. Male skin is thicker than female 
skin,  in  part  due  to  the  presence  of  terminal  hair  follicles 
over much of the body. This difference is most pronounced 
on the face where women have only vellus hairs, which are 
fine and colorless, while men have fully developed terminal 
hairs,  which  are  coarse  and  pigmented,  taking  up  space 
within the skin. The presence of male facial hair is partially 
responsible  for  the  more  favorable  appearance  of  mature 
men over mature women. As UV radiation activates collage-
nase to destroy dermal collagen, the male beard allows the 
skin  to  resist  wrinkling.  Thus,  photoaged  males  do  not 
exhibit the pronounced redundant facial skin seen in photo-
aged females. 

 What does the thicker male skin mean for the skin care mar-
ket? It means that photoaging does not appear as early in men 
as it does in women. While women are eager at a young age to 
engage in the purchase of wrinkle creams, men are more resis-
tant. The rugged coarse look is valued as a sign of masculinity 
and maturity. The thicker male skin is also less able to respond 
to beneficial effects of moisturization, especially on the hair-
bearing upper cheeks. Wrinkle creams simply do not appeal to 
men immediately, due to their perceived lack of need and poor 
immediate efficacy. 

 The male beard also gives the skin a coarse texture hiding sur-
face  cosmetic  irregularities,  such  as  scarring,  pigmentation 

changes, and broken capillaries. If the beard containing skin of 
the male face is stretched, many of these problems become appar-
ent. Thus, women are much more anxious to “fix” problems than 
men who do not see skin changes as easily or as early in life. 

 Some  of  the  resistance  of  male  skin  to  aging  is  due  to  its 
inherent ability to diffuse UV radiation, especially in the UVA 
range. UVA radiation is the wavelength responsible for photo-
aging,  which  penetrates  more  deeply  in  women  causing  a 
greater damage in female skin. This allows women to age more 
rapidly  than  men,  a  phenomenon  magnified  by  the  media 
preference  for  younger  leading  women  paired  with  older 
 leading men.   

   Male skin is more resistant to adverse reactions. 

  male skin and adverse reactions 
 The difference in skin thickness also affects the decreased fre-
quency  of  adverse  product  reactions  experienced  by  men. 
Women  experience  adverse  reactions  more  commonly  than 
men.  The  thinner  skin  may  allow  irritants  and  allergens  to 
penetrate  deeper  in  female  skin,  but  the  increased  incidence 
may also be due to greater product usage. Women overall use 
more  skin  care  products  and  cosmetics  than  men.  This 
increased usage magnifies the chances of contacting an irritant 
or an allergen. Women are also more likely to undergo proce-
dures that destroy the skin barrier, such as facial peels, micro-
dermabrasion,  spa  treatments,  etc.  This  may  account  for  the 
sensitive skin appeal of products marketed to women, which 
does not necessarily resonate with the male skin care market. 
In  general,  male  skin  is  less  subject  to  irritation  and  adverse 
reactions than female skin.  

  hormonal considerations in male skin care 
 The discussion to this point has focused on the most obvious 
visual difference, which is skin thickness and the presence of 
the  male  beard,  but  other  equally  important  considerations 
also merit mention that affect product formulation. Perhaps 
one of the most important unique features of male skin is the 
dominance  of  testosterone.  Testosterone  secretion  rises  at 
puberty in males, with constant levels throughout life. Testos-
terone causes the production of facial and body sebum, which 
sets  the  stage  for  the  growth  of   Propionibacterium  acnes   and 
the onset of acne. Acne is generally more severe in men than 
women. 

 Since  testosterone  secretion  is  present  throughout  life  in 
men, it means that sebum production also remains high. This 
provides skin moisturization making the needs for facial and 
body  creams  for  men  somewhat  different.  While  men  do 
indeed develop dry skin about age 60 years and beyond, dry 
skin is a much greater concern for females. The male need for 
emollience is perhaps greater in middle age than for moistur-
ization, unless skin disease is present.  

57

58

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Men prefer deodorant cleansers with antibacterials, since 
bacteria rapidly degrade the abundant apocrine sweat 
 produced. 

 Testosterone not only triggers the onset of abundant sebum 
production but also increases the secretion of apocrine sweat in 
the eyelids, breasts, scalp, buttocks, and armpits. Both sebum 
and apocrine sweat create different skin cleansing needs. Odor 
must be controlled, but the formulator must also consider the 
interaction of the sebum and sweat with skin care products. It 
is for this reason that fragrance must be carefully considered in 
male skin care. Men typically prefer deodorant soaps and anti-
bacterial  products,  since  bacteria  degrade  the  apocrine  sweat 
rapidly  creating  a  characteristic  musty  smell.  This  apocrine 
sweat, mixed with sebum rich in testosterone, creates a locker 
room smell that can ruin the most carefully balanced fragrance. 
This  means  that  male  products  need  more  careful  fragrance 
development for body odor than female products.  

  male skin and hair removal 
 While male body hair provides excellent sunscreen, better than 
anything packaged in a bottle, it also requires grooming. Shav-
ing is the most common method used for body hair manage-
ment, but some men have embraced laser hair removal. One of 
the  problems  with  laser  hair  removal  is  that  it  changes  the 
apparent skin color and texture. Loss of the hair in the follicu-
lar ostia eliminates brown tones, the most common color of 
male facial hair, leaving the skin appearing lighter. Loss of the 
hair also eliminates the coarse texture of the male facial skin 
and predisposes to wrinkling, as discussed earlier. It is unlikely 
that shaving will be abandoned by the entire male community 
for  these  reasons.  A  more  detailed  discussion  of  shaving  is 
found in the chapter on hair removal techniques.  

   Shaving is the most effective physical method of 
 exfoliation. 

 Shaving also produces some unexpected skin benefits. It is 
probably  the  most  effective  physical  method  of  exfoliation, 
better than topical hydroxy acids, hand-held microdermabra-
sion  devices,  or  mechanical  brushes.  It  efficiently  removes 
desquamating corneocytes along with beard debris. Shaving 
also  is  an  effective  method  of  removing  open  comedones 
from the skin, providing acne treatment. However, improper 
shaving techniques result in razor burn and pseudofolliculitis 
barbae.  Razor  burns  result  from  the  removal  of  the  skin 
around where the hair exits, an opening known as the follicu-
lar ostia. Newer razors with spring-mounted blades and shav-
ing gels that reduce friction can minimize the occurrence of 
razor  burn.  Pseudofolliculitis  barbae  is  seen  in  individuals 
with  kinky  facial  hair  where  the  sharp  edge  of  the  cut  hair 
 re-enters  the  skin  causing  inflammation  in  the  form  of  a 
 papule  or  pustule.  This  can  result  in  darkening  of  the  skin, 
which is discussed next.  

  pigmentation issues 
 Darkening of the skin, known as postinflammatory hyperpig-
mentation, is a reaction to injury in persons with darker skin 
tones,  such  as  males  of  Mediterranean,  Oriental,  Indian,  or 

African descent. The injury can be from acne, sunburn, skin 
disease, irritant contact dermatitis, allergic contact dermati-
tis, or a traumatic scratch. Since melanocytes are felt to be an 
important  part  of  the  immune  system,  it  is  postulated  that 
this hyperpigmentation is an immune response to skin injury, 
but  the  exact  reason  for  this  reaction  is  largely  unknown. 
Thus, products designed for male skin of color must be care-
fully formulated to minimize any skin irritation, since postin-
flammatory hyperpigmentation is the inevitable result. It may 
take six months to one year to return the skin to normal color 
after  the  injury,  which  accounts  for  the  tremendous  skin 
lightening product focus in cultures with darker complected 
individuals. In order for the skin to return to proper color, the 
extra melanin produced must be phagocytized or consumed 
by white blood cells and then removed from the skin.   

   Men typically need emollients to smooth facial skin scale 
after shaving rather than true moisturizers. 

  moisturizers 
 Shaving  is  usually  the  final  male  grooming  activity,  which  is 
different  from  those  of  women  who  usually  apply  a  facial 
moisturizer  after  cleansing.  Why  do  most  men  not  apply  a 
moisturizer? This is because male facial sebum production is 
typically high, obviating the need to moisturize. Most men do 
not need to retard transepidermal water loss because they do 
not expose their skin to a number of products used by women, 
they do not engage in multiple barrier damaging procedures, 
and their rapid sebum replacement is adequate. Men typically 

 Figure 8.1     More aesthetic, high-SPF (sun protection factor) sunscreens have 
been developed with new formulation technology to appeal more to men.    

MALE SKIN CARE

need emollients, rather than moisturizers, unless skin disease 
is present, which smooth down the desquamating corneocytes 
by filling in the intercellular spaces where lipids may have been 
removed  from  over  aggressive  cleansing.  The  most  popular 
emollient is dimethicone, which may be delivered to the skin 
surface in the form of a toner, aftershave lotion, skin bracer, 
etc. This is a key difference in products developed for men and 
women. 

 Female moisturizers are typically more occlusive to increase 
skin  hydration  and  minimize  periorbital  wrinkling  due  to 
dehydration. These fine periorbital wrinkles are seen as signs 
of aging in women, but appear to contribute to character in 
men. Thus, antiaging moisturizers have been slow to catch on 
in the male skin care market. While young women are eager to 
purchase wrinkle creams, men are not. They value their rug-
ged,  tough  look  as  a  sign  of  masculinity  and  maturity.  The 
thicker male skin is also not as responsive to beneficial effects 
of moisturization as female skin, especially on the hair-bearing 
upper cheeks. Wrinkle creams simply do not appeal to men as 
they do to women due to their perceived lack of need and poor 
immediate efficacy.   

   Some of the resistance of male skin to aging is due to the 
photoprotection afforded by facial hair. 

59

  photoprotection 
 Some of the resistance of male skin to aging is due to the pho-
toprotection  afforded  by  facial  hair.  The  hair  follicles  also 
increase the skin thickness, decreasing the penetration of UVA 
radiation  into  male  skin.  This  allows  women  to  age  more 
 rapidly  than  men,  a  phenomenon  magnified  by  the  media 
preference for younger leading women paired with older lead-
ing men. Thus, men do not see the need for the application of 
sun  protection  to  same  degree  as  their  female  counterparts, 
although the incidence of skin cancer is higher in men than 
women  ( Fig.  8.1 ).  A  thorough  discussion  of  sunscreens  is 
found in the photoprotection and sunscreen chapter.   

  summary 
 Male skin care is similar, but different, from female skin care. 
The presence of the facial beard provides photoprotection and 
resistance  to  facial  wrinkling,  but  hair  removal  can  be  chal-
lenging. Shaving can improve skin texture and minimize acne, 
but poor shaving techniques can cause razor burn and aggra-
vate pseudofolliculitis barbae. The unique male biofilm, com-
posed of apocrine sweat and sebum, requires different hygiene 
needs. It is not enough to package male skin care products in 
blue bottles and female skin care products in pink bottles. The 
material inside the bottle must cater to the unique skin needs 
of the different sexes.     

             9  

 Facial photoprotection      

  No  one  knows  what  encouraged  the  desire  for  tanned  skin. 
Some  believe  that  during  prohibition,  alcoholic  beverages 
were readily available on the offshore islands of the U.S.A. and 
the affluent visited these islands to drink and tan. From this 
point forward, tanning became synonymous with wealth and 
tanned  facial  skin  continues  to  be  desirable  to  this  day.  The 
facial skin is constantly bombarded with photons of light dur-
ing the day and shows the effects of excess UV radiation more 
readily than any other body area. The skin both absorbs and 
scatters these energetic photons. Photons that are scattered are 
reflected back to the eye and create the perception of beautiful 
skin that can be enhanced or adorned by cosmetics. The pho-
tons that are absorbed are converted into energy, which dam-
ages the collagen and promotes photoaging.  

   The solar radiation, also known as the electromagnetic 
spectrum, comprises about 5% ultraviolet rays, 35% 
visible light, and 60% infrared rays. 

 The radiation that is emitted by the sun, also known as the 
electromagnetic spectrum, is about 5% ultraviolet (UV), 35% 
visible, and 60% infrared rays of light ( Fig. 9.1 ). UV radiation 
in the form of UVB, in the range of 280–320 nm, and UVA, in 
the  range  of  320  to  380 nm,  is  invisible  to  the  eye.  Proteins, 
including DNA, absorb most of the UV rays and the amount 
absorbed is known as the dose calculated as intensity multi-
plied by time. High-intensity UV for a short period can be very 
damaging,  which  is  the  issue  with  artificial  tanning  booth 
radiation. These bulbs emit a predetermined number of watts 
per  square  centimeter  with  UVB  possessing  1000 times  the 
energy of UVA.   

   The stratum corneum is the first line of defense function-
ing to reflect and scatter the damaging radiation and 
minimize penetration. 

 The stratum corneum is the first line of UV defense mecha-
nism to reflect and scatter the damaging radiation and mini-
mize  penetration.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  facial  exfoliants, 
containing glycolic acid, lactic acid, and salicylic acid, should 
be  followed  by  sunscreen  application,  since  they  decrease 
endogenous  skin  photoprotection.  The  sun  rays  are  further 
absorbed  by  melanin,  which  is  a  physiochemical  defense 
absorbing both UV and visible radiation. It is the oxidation of 
melanin that results in a tanned facial appearance not synony-
mous with health, but rather an oxidative damage. Radiation 
wavelengths of less than 320 nm are absorbed by the stratum 
corneum  and  epidermis,  while  wavelengths  greater  than 
320 nm enter the dermis. Penetration into the dermis can be 
enhanced  by  wetting  the  stratum  corneum  and  altering  the 
refractive  index.  This  is  why  applying  baby  oil  to  the  face, 

60

which  contains  primarily  mineral  oil,  increases  the  tanning 
response by decreasing endogenous facial photoprotection. 

 The target of UVA and UVB damage is DNA, cell membrane 
lipids,  structural  proteins,  and  enzymes.  These  breakdown 
products incite an inflammatory response designed to initiate 
skin  repair,  but  may  result  in  further  skin  damage.  Cells  that 
have been damaged by UV activate the p53 gene that determines 
whether the damage is fatal and the cell should be destroyed, a 
process known as apoptosis, or whether a DNA repair should be 
initiated. Apoptosis is the systematic destruction of the nucleus 
and cytoskeleton that results in a protein shell formation. Since 
its pink amorphous structure on H&E staining, it is also called a 
sunburn cell. They contain clumped filaments, melanin gran-
ules, and intact lysosomes amid a pink nucleus and cytoplasm. 
While UV damage can activate apoptosis and prevent abnormal 
cells from reproducing, it can also deactivate the p53 gene allow-
ing genetically damaged cells to divide, which leads to neoplasia 
and skin cancer formation over time. 

 The initial symptom of sun damage is skin erythema pro-
duced  by  vasodilation  in  response  to  cellular  damage.  Ery-
thema appears two to six hours after sun damage, also known 
as sunburn, and may peak up to 12 to 20 hours later depending 
on the amount of radiation received. It is this sunburn response 
that accounts for the minimal erythemal dose (MED) that is 
used  to  determine  the  sun  protection  factor  (SPF)  for  sun-
screens. The SPF, discussed again in detail in the body photo-
protection chapter, indicates the increase in time afforded by a 
sunscreen to receive a dose of UV that induces erythema. Fol-
lowing  the  appearance  of  erythema,  tanning  occurs  due  to 
photo-oxidation of melanin, which is the immediate pigment 
darkening  effect.  Further  pigment  production  occurs  two  to 
three  days  after  sunburn  when  melanogenesis  is  initiated  on 
the basis of the skin type ( Table 9.1 ).  

 Over time, this cumulative skin damage manifests as photo-
aging.  Histologically,  the  epidermis  possesses  a  flattened 
 dermal–epidermal junction and thinning of the spinous layer. 
The papillary dermis is thinned with dilated blood vessels and 
an  amorphous,  fragmented,  fibrotic  material  representing 
solar elastosis accumulates in the reticular dermis. Facial pho-
toprotection  attempts  to  prevent  such  effects.  This  chapter 
examines  the  topic  facial  photoprotection  in  detail,  but  this 
should be read in conjunction with the body photoprotection 
chapter for a complete overview. 

  sunscreen filter classification 
 The first sunscreen was marketed in the United States in 1928 
and consisted of an emulsion of benzyl salicylate and benzyl 
cinnamate.  Para-aminobenzoic  acid  was  introduced  in  1943, 
which  paved  the  way  for  many  new  sunscreen  formulations. 
Physical agents, such as red petrolatum, were used by the mili-
tary  during  World  War  II  ( 1 ).  In  1978,  the  FDA  reclassified 
sunscreens from cosmetics to over-the-counter drugs designed 
to protect “the structure and function of the human  integument 

FACIAL PHOTOPROTECTION

61

Frequency
(MHz)

Wavelength

12

10

13

10

14

10

15

10

16

10

17

10

18

10

19

10

Infrared

Visible

Ultra-
violet

300 µm

30 µm

3 µm

0.3 µm

300 Å

30 Å

3 Å

0.3 Å

0.7 µm

0.7 µm

0.4 µm

 Figure 9.1     The electromagnetic spectrum.    

Table 9.1  Skin Type Classifications

Fitzpatrick 
skin type

Description

I
II
III
IV
V

VI

Extremely fair skin, always burns, never tans
Fair skin, always burns, sometimes tans
Medium skin, sometimes burns, always tans
Olive skin, rarely burns, always tans
Moderately pigmented brown skin, never burns, 

always tans

Markedly pigmented black skin, never burns, 

always tans

against  actinic  damage”  ( 2 ).  From  that  point  forward,  many 
sunscreen formulations have been introduced providing  better 
and better photoprotection. 

 Sunscreen  filters  are  the  active  ingredients  providing 
photoprotection  ( Table  9.2 ).  Active  ingredients  can  be 

 classified into two major categories, organic and inorganic. 
Organic filters undergo a chemical transformation, known 
as  resonance   delocalization,  to  absorb  UV  radiation  and 
transform it to heat ( 3 ). They are generally aromatic com-
pounds  based  on  the  benzene  ring’s  ability  to  transform 
high-energy  ultraviolet  radiation  into  harmless  long-wave 
radiation above the 380 nm range. They are used up in the 
process  of  photoprotection  and  must  be  frequently  reap-
plied  to  maintain  proper  protection  from  the  sun.  Inor-
ganic  filters,  in  contrast,  are  usually  ground  particulates 
that  reflect  or  scatter  UV  radiation,  absorbing  relatively 
little of the energy. They are not used up and therefore, they 
stay and act longer on the skin surface, a property known as 
photostability.    

   Sunscreen filters can be classified as organic and inorganic 
filters. 

62

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 9.2  Sunscreen Filter Concentrations Allowed in the 
United States (FDA-OTC Panel)

UVB filters

Aminobenzoic acid
Amyl dimethyl PABA
2-ethoxyethyl p-methoxycinnamate
Diethanolamine p-methoxycinnamate
Digalloyl trioleate
Ethyl 4-bis (hydroxypropyl) aminobenzoate
2-ethylhexyl-2-cyano-3,3-diphenyl-acrylate
Ethylhexyl p-methoxycinnamate
2-ethylhexyl salicylate
Glyceryl aminobenzoate
Homomenthyl salicylate
Octyl dimethyl PABA
2-penylbenzimidazole-5-sulfonic acid
Triethanolamine salicylate

UVA filters

Oxybenzone
Sulisobenzone
Dioxybenzone
Menthyl anthranilate

Organic filters

Red petrolatum
Titanium dioxide

(%)

5–15
1–5
1–3
8–10
2–5
1–5
7–10
2–7.5
3–5
2–3
4–25
1.4–8
1.4
5–12

2–6
5–10
3
3.5–5

3–100
2–25

Abbreviations:  FDA-OTC,  Food  and  Drug  Administration-over-the- 
counter; PABA, para-aminobenzoic acid.

 Sunscreen  filters  can  be  divided  into  the  following  three 

groups: 

 ●    UVA absorbers: 320 to 360 nm (benzophenones, avo-

benzone, and anthranilates)  

 ●   UVB absorbers: 290 to 320 nm [para-amino benzoic 
acid (PABA) derivatives, salicylates, and cinnamates]  
 ●   UVB/UVA  blocks:  reflect  or  scatter  UVA  and  UVB 

(titanium dioxide and zinc oxide)   

 The FDA has rated the chemicals listed in Table 9.2 as safe, 
effective sunscreen filters as described in the Sunscreen Mono-
graph ( 4 , 5 ).  

  uva organic sunscreen filters 
 There are three main families of UVA organic sunscreen filters. 
These are the benzophenones, avobenzone, and anthranilates. 
Each  of  these  filters  undergoes  a  chemical  reaction  when  a 
photon of UV is absorbed with the energy released from the 
skin surface as heat. Their different aesthetic and photoprotec-
tive properties are used by the sunscreen formulator to develop 
a product that protects the skin, yet is pleasant to use. 

  Benzophenones 
 There are three sunscreens in the benzophenone family: oxy-
benzone,  dioxybenzone,  and  sulisobenzone.  Oxybenzone  is 
approved for use in the U.S.A. and provides weak UVA photo-
protection  below  320 nm.  Dioxybenzone  and  sulisobenzone 
are unapproved. With the increasing push for UVA photopro-
tection,  the  use  of  oxybenzone  has  increased  dramatically 
resulting  in  increased  reports  of  allergic  contact  dermatitis. 
Oxybenzone  is  also  used  in  conjunction  with  avobenzone, 

 Figure 9.2     An avobenzone formulation stabilized with octocrylene to achieve 
a high sun protection factor rating.    

 discussed next, to enhance photostability of sunscreen formu-
lations.  Oxybenzone  is  commonly  used  as  a  secondary  sun-
screen because it is an oily liquid making the sunscreen sticky 
if used in too high a concentration.   

   Oxybenzone and avobenzone are two commonly used 
organic UVA sunscreen filters. 

  Avobenzone 
 Avobenzone, also known as Parsol 1789, was an important step 
forward in UVA photoprotection. It is the most recently mono-
graphed  sunscreen  ingredient.  Unfortunately,  it  is  highly 
 photounstable with 36% of the avobenzone destroyed shortly 
after sun exposure. It is estimated that all of the avobenzone is 
gone from a sunscreen after five hours or 50 Joules of exposure, 
necessitating frequent reapplication. Avobenzone is also chemi-
cally  incompatible  with  other  commonly  used  physical  sun-
screens,  such  as  zinc  oxide  and  titanium  dioxide.  However, 
avobenzone can now be stabilized by adding oxybenzone and 
other  ingredients,  such  as  2-6-diethylhexylnaphthalate  or 
octocrylene ( Fig. 9.2 ). These ingredients absorb the photon of 
energy  from  avobenzone  allowing  avobenzone  to  return  to  a 
ground  state  and  not  undergo  photodegradation.  Since 
2-6-diethylhexylnaphthalate  is  photostable,  it  radiates  off  the 
energy  as  heat  or  phosphorescence.  Octocrylene,  also  an 
organic sunscreen, is photostable and can absorb the photon of 
energy  without  undergoing  degradation  ( Fig.  9.3 ).  This 
 relatively  new  concept  of  photostabilization  is  important  to 
ensure  the  longevity  of  sunscreens  on  the  skin.  Combining 

FACIAL PHOTOPROTECTION

63

15.5% lost with UV exposure. There have been some popular 
press articles questioning the cancer causing potential of pure 
PABA. This is not a relevant concern, since pure PABA is not 
used in any of the modern sunscreens.  

  Salicylates 
 The  salicylates  are  an  important  class  of  UVB  photoprotec-
tants.  This  class  includes  octyl  salicylate  (octisalate),  homo-
menthyl salicylate (homosalate), and trolamine salicylate. The 
internal hydrogen bonding of the salicylates provides for UVB 
absorption at 300 to 310 nm. Approximately 56% of the sun-
screens in the current marketplace use the salicylates as a sec-
ondary  active  sunscreen  agent  since  they  have  an  excellent 
safety record with minimal reports of allergic reactions.  

  Cinnamates 
 The cinnamates are the most popular sunscreen category cur-
rently used in sunscreens, sunscreen-containing moisturizers, 
and  facial  foundations;  86%  of  products  with  an  SPF  rating 
contain  octyl  methoxycinnamate,  also  known  as  Octinoxate, 
which  has  maximal  absorption  at  305 nm.  Octyl  methoxy-
cinnamate  has  excellent  photostability  with  only  4.5% 
 degradation  after  UVB  exposure.  For  this  reason,  octyl 
methoxycinnamate  is  a  popular  primary  sunscreen.  Primary 
sunscreen means that it is used in highest concentration and is 
listed first under the active ingredient disclosure on the back of 
the sunscreen box. All sunscreens must have an active ingredi-
ent  disclosure  required  by  law  as  they  are  classified  as  OTC 
drugs.  The  secondary  sunscreen  is  listed  second  and  is  next 
highest  in  concentration  followed  the  by  the  tertiary  and 
 quaternary sunscreens. Most sunscreen formulations contain 
several sunscreen filters to provide broad-spectrum photopro-
tection by mixing filters with different absorptive wavelengths 
while balancing aesthetic qualities.   

  uva  ⁄  uvb inorganic sunscreen filters 
 The inorganic UVA/UVB sunscreen filters are titanium diox-
ide and zinc oxide. These are the main inorganic filters, but a 
complete  list  of  the  monographed  ingredients  is  found  in 
 Table 9.3 . Titanium dioxide is usually micronized to contain 
particles  of  various  sizes  to  provide  optimal  UV  scattering 
abilities ( Fig. 9.4 ). Unfortunately, it leaves a white film on the 
skin and is used mainly for beach wear products. Zinc oxide is 
usually available in a microfine form meaning it contains small 
particles  of  one  size  making  it  appropriate  for  day  wear 
( Fig. 9.5 ). Titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are known as inor-
ganic filters because they do not undergo a chemical reaction 
when struck by a photon of UV energy. They are inherently 
photostable. These particulates reflect most of the energy, but 
a small amount may be absorbed. The absorbed energy may 
result  in  the  formation  of  secondary  oxygen  radicals;  there-
fore, most titanium dioxide and zinc oxide sunscreen powders 
are  now  coated  with  dimethicone  to  quench  the  secondary 
oxygen  radicals ( Fig. 9.6 ).     

   Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide are the two broad- 
spectrum inorganic sunscreen filters. 

 A  newly  introduced  colorless  zinc  oxide  with  extremely 
small  particles  is  finding  its  way  into  many  cosmetics  and 

 Figure 9.3     Octocrylene is a sticky thick liquid in the raw material form.    

photounstable avobenzone with other photostable substances 
was a novel advance in photoprotection.    

  Anthranilates 
 There  are  several  anthranilates  available  for  sunscreen 
 formulation,  but  only  menthyl  anthranilate  is  used  in  the 
U.S.A.  Menthyl  anthranilate,  also  known  as  meradimate, 
has its peak absorption at 336 nm and is used as a secondary 
sunscreen because it too is a clear thick sticky oil that can 
only  be  used  in  low  concentration  in  formulations  meant 
for  aesthetic  reasons.  It  has  an  excellent  safety  profile  and 
low  allergenicity.  It  is  very  stable  in  formulation  without 
the  photodegradation  issues  discussed  in  the  case  of 
 avobenzone.    

   Menthyl anthranilate, a clear sticky oil, is a secondary UVA 
organic filter, because in high concentration it makes the 
sunscreen sticky. 

  uvb organic sunscreen ingredients 
 UVB  organic  sunscreen  ingredients  also  undergo  a  chemical 
reaction radiating off the UV rays as heat. The chemical fami-
lies that function in UVB photoprotection are the PABA deriv-
atives, salicylates, and cinnamates. Each are briefly discussed in 
relation to current sunscreen formulations.  

   PABA derivatives, salicylates, and cinnamates are the 
major UVB organic sunscreen filters. 

  PABA Derivatives 
 For all practical purposes, the PABA derivatives are rarely used 
in modern sunscreen formulations. A recent review of market-
place showed that as few as 2% of sunscreens use PABA deriv-
atives because of allergenicity concerns. PABA derivatives can 
also stain clothing. Octyl dimethyl PABA, also known as Padi-
mate  O,  is  the  most  commonly  PABA  used  with  a  maximal 
absorption at 296 nm. It has average photostability with about 

64

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 9.3  Inorganic Sunscreen Filters

Kaolin
Magnesium silicate
Magnesium oxide
Red petrolatum
Titanium dioxide
Iron oxide
Zinc oxide
Red veterinary petrolatum

 Figure  9.6     Dimethicone-coated  zinc  oxide  is  used  to  decrease  secondary 
 oxygen radical formation in sunscreens.    

  nanoparticle sunscreens 
 There is a growing concern over the presence of nanoparticles 
in the environment. These particles with size less than 100 nm 
are invisible to the human eye and can penetrate the skin and 
lung tissues, gaining access to the lymphatics and blood circu-
lation.  From  there,  these  particles  can  be  widely  distributed 
throughout the body. Once these particles enter the body, they 
cannot be removed because their small size escapes detection. 
Concern  has  been  voiced  in  the  medical  community  that 
nanoparticles  of  metals  might  be  responsible  for  neurologic 
diseases. Others have wondered whether the chronic inflam-
mation  induced  by  nanoparticles  might  not  cause  other 
degenerative diseases. 

 The biggest present concern in the skin care industry is the 
use  of  nanoparticle  zinc  oxide  and  titanium  dioxide.  These 
white  particles  become  invisible  when  manufactured  in  a 
nanoparticle size making them suitable for all skin types. Oth-
erwise, persons of Fitzpatrick skin types III to VI cannot use 
these inorganic sunscreens. These highly effective, nanoparti-
cle sunscreens are poised to dominate the market, but environ-
mental concerns arise when the disposition of nanoparticles in 
the  environment  is  considered. After  a  day  at  the  beach,  the 
sunscreen is rinsed into the ocean water and finally completely 
removed  in  the  shower.  These  zinc  oxide  nanoparticles  find 
their way into the water columns of the world. Nanoparticle 
zinc is antibacterial, another possible use for this technology, 
but it is also toxic to plankton, the first line of the aquatic food 
chain. Imagine the consequences of large-scale aquatic organ-
ism death due to invisible nanoparticles. It is for this reason 
that many countries are taking a regulatory stance on nanopar-
ticle use. 

 The cosmetic industry in the U.S.A. has called for a volun-
tary halt on widespread nanoparticle use until more informa-
tion can be obtained. No reputable manufacturer wants to put 
nanoparticle  products  in  the  marketplace  with  long-term 
adverse health implications, even though there is no govern-
mental  organization  forbidding  its  use  in  the  United  States. 
This is not the case in Europe. Sweden has banned the use of 

 Figure 9.4     Micronized titanium dioxide in the raw material form.    

 Figure 9.5     Microfine zinc oxide in the raw material form.    

moisturizers. Some of the particles are so small that they are 
known  as  nanoparticles,  which  are  less  than  100  µm  in  size. 
These particles are controversial because their small size may 
allow them to penetrate the skin, but they escape body removal 
by macrophage phagocytosis. Nanoparticle sunscreens are the 
next topic of discussion.  

FACIAL PHOTOPROTECTION

nanoparticle formulations and the European Union has asked 
that all presently marketed nanoparticle-containing products 
have the term “nano” on the packaging. Further, all products 
marketed  with  nanoparticles  after  2013  must  be  registered 
with the government. The U.S. FDA convened a taskforce to 
examine nanoparticles, but no documents have been  produced. 
 The penetration of nanoparticles into the skin is perhaps the 
biggest immediate health concern. However, it is impossible to 
generalize. The skin barrier composed of protein-rich corneo-
cytes and intervening covalently bound lipid layers is extremely 
effective  at  keeping  out  substances  deleterious  to  the  body. 
Larger nanoparticles of size 14 to100 nm do not penetrate the 
skin, but smaller nanoparticles 13 nm and less can penetrate 
the skin. These extremely small nanoparticles in the range of 
10 nm  are  labeled  as  quantum  dots.  Quantum  dots  are  a 
 specialized  form  of  nanoparticle  with  unique  electrical  and 
magnetic properties. Quantum dots are currently being inves-
tigated for their use in computing for the next generation of 
microcomputers.  

   Nanoparticles less than 13 nm in size can penetrate the 
skin. 

 So, the answer to the question of nanoparticle penetration is 
it is theoretically less if they are smaller than 13 nm. However, 
in reality, nanoparticles do not remain as nanoparticles in skin 
care and sunscreen formulations. Nanoparticles can be sprin-
kled into an emulsion and put into a zinc oxide sunscreen, but 
they do not remain nanoparticles. Nanoparticles like to aggre-
gate, meaning that they stick together. A clump of 15 10 nm 
nanoparticles is no longer a nanoparticle, since their cumula-
tive size of 150 nm is larger than 100 nm, the upper limit for 
nanoparticles.  Further,  nanoparticles  placed  in  emulsions, 
which are the basis for the lotion that suspends the nanopar-
ticles in sunscreens, tend to agglomerate. This means that the 
clumps  of  nanoparticles  stick  together  even  further  when 
placed  in  an  oil–in-water  mixture.  Ten  clumps  of  150 nm 
aggregated  nanoparticles  become  1500 nm,  well  above  the 
nanoparticle limit. In theory, nanoparticles could exist singly 
and  penetrate  the  skin,  but  in  actuality  the  aggregation  and 
agglomeration of particles found in nature protects both the 
body and the environment from deleterious effects. This is not 
to say, however, that further research is not needed to evaluate 
the behavior and safety of nanoparticles.   

   The tendency of nanoparticles to aggregate and agglomer-
ate prevents them from penetrating the skin when used in 
sunscreen formulations. 

  sunscreen formulation 
 Sunscreens are typically made from combinations of the ingre-
dients previously discussed. Usually, sun filters with different 
areas of UV protection are combined to yield a sunscreen with 
the broadest protection possible. Oily ingredients are usually 
used in low concentration to prevent a sticky feel, but may be 
required to achieve the desired SPF. Sunscreen formulation is 
definitely an art, yet the question remains as to why sunscreens 
do not provide optimal protection. Careful formulation is only 

65

 Figure 9.7     A sun protection factor rating of 30 or higher is indicative of some 
degree of UVA photoprotection.    

a  part  of  the  success  of  a  sunscreen.  The  ability  of  the  sun-
screen to be applied in an even thin film that will not separate 
or move is important. Sunscreens combine with sebum, sweat, 
topical  medications,  and  cosmetics,  which  can  interrupt  or 
destroy the film. Furthermore, most sunscreens are tested in a 
laboratory under ideal wearing conditions. For practical pur-
poses, it can be assumed that most sunscreens perform at half 
of their rated SPF. 

 The SPF is calculated as follows: 

UV energy required to produce an MED on protected skin
UV energy required to produce an MED on unprotected skin

 Thus,  a  patient  who  experiences  reddening  of  the  skin  in 
10 minutes of sun exposure without protection would be able 
to stay in the sun 60 minutes before the same degree of ery-
thema developed while wearing a sunscreen with an SPF of 6. 
Many  dermatologists  feel  that  patients  should  wear  a  sun-
screen with an SPF of 15 or higher to obtain adequate sun pro-
tection.  Unfortunately,  SPF  is  an  evaluation  of  the  UVB 
protective skin effects and does not account for UVA photo-
protection.  Methods  have  been  proposed  to  define  a  protec-
tion  factor  for  UVA  protection  factor,  but  no  final  rating 
system as been released as of this writing ( 6 ). Given the current 
SPF rating system, patients probably need to use a sunscreen 
with  an  SPF  of  30  or  higher  to  receive  some  degree  of  UVA 
photoprotection, especially important on the face for photo-
aging and skin prevention ( Fig. 9.7 ).   

66

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   The performance of a sunscreen depends on the concen-
tration of the sunscreen filter and its ability to remain on 
the skin. 

 The performance of a sunscreen depends on the concentra-
tion of the filters and the ability to remain on the skin. Increas-
ing the concentration of a sunscreen filter can increase the SPF, 
for example 3% octyl dimethyl PABA has an SPF of 4 while 4% 
octyl  dimethyl  PABA  has  an  SPF  of  5. A  better  performance 
can be obtained with the octyl dimethyl ester of PABA since it 
is less water soluble than PABA accounting for its use in water-
proof  sunscreens  and  superior  performance  under  humid 
conditions. Environmental factors such as heat, wind, humid-
ity, perspiration, and thickness of sunscreen film application 
are also important in sunscreen performance, but these cannot 
be  controlled  ( 7 ).  Higher  SPF  sunscreens  are  not  necessarily 
more irritating than lower SPF varieties. 

 A  superior  sunscreen  can  also  be  produced  by  combining 
sunscreening  agents.  A  sunscreen  containing  only  8%  octyl 
dimethyl PABA has an SPF of 8 while a sunscreen combining 
8% octyl dimethyl PABA with 3% oxybenzone has an SPF of 
20. Most sunscreens will combine organic and inorganic filters 
for optimal photoprotection.  

   Sunscreens are a more common source of irritant than 
allergic contact dermatitis. 

 Sunscreens are a more common source of irritant than aller-
gic  contact  dermatitis,  but  distinguishing  dermatitis  from 
solar-induced phenomena can occasionally be difficult ( 8 , 9 ). 
Reports  of  contact  urticaria  have  also  been  published,  but 
again the reaction may be solar induced rather than sunscreen 
induced  ( 10 ).  PABA  is  a  known  sensitizer  at  a  5%  concen-
tration ( 11 ), but few presently marketed sunscreen formula-
tions  contain  PABA.  PABA  esters,  such  as  padimate  A  and 
padimate O, are used instead and possess a lower sensitization 
potential  ( 12 ).  The  cinnamates  are  also  sensitizers,  even 
though they are commonly incorporated into hypoallergenic 
sunscreen formulations. Cinnamates interact with balsam of 
Peru,  coca  leaves,  cinnamic  acid,  cinnamic  aldehyde,  and 
 cinnamon oils ( 13 ). Both the salicylates ( 14 ) and anthranilates 
are  rare  sensitizers  ( 15 , 16 ).  Finally,  photoallergic  reactions 
have been reported with the benzophenones ( 17 , 18 ). 

 The organic filters are not sensitizers, but are occlusive and 
can produce miliaria. It has been reported that the inclusion of 
titanium dioxide in sunscreen formulations reduces the inci-
dence of photoallergic contact dermatitis, possibly due to its 
ability to reflect ultraviolet  radiation ( 10 ).  

  summary 
 Photoprotection of the face is an important dermatologic con-
sideration.  Most  of  the  antiaging  facial  products  based  their 
claim on the inclusion of sunscreen filters. While no one has 
proven  that  sunscreens  inhibit  skin  aging  in  humans,  it  is 
assumed that photoprotection is the key to beautiful skin for 
life.  This  chapter  has  discussed  the  types  of  ingredients  that 
can be incorporated into sunscreens to provide photoprotec-
tion and sunless tanning products as a method for simulating 

tanned skin. The best solution to the problems associated with 
tanning is to change current fashion norms to rediscover the 
beauty of untanned naturally pigmented skin.    

  references 
    1.       Shaath      NA    .    Evolution  of  modern  chemical  sunscreens  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ   , 
   Shaath      NA    ,    eds  .    Sunscreens  Development,  Evaluation  and  Regulatory 
Aspects  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   3  –  4  .   

    2.     Food  and  Drug  Administration  .    Sunscreen  drug  products  for  over  the 
counter human drugs: proposed safety, effective and labeling conditions  . 
  Fed Regist     1978  ;   43  :   38206  .   

    3.       Shaath      NA    .    The  chemistry  of  sunscreens  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ   ,     Shaath      NA    ,    eds  . 
  Sunscreens Development, Evaluation and Regulatory Aspects  .   New York  : 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   223  –  5  .   

    4.       Murphy      EG    .    Regulatory  aspects  of  sunscreens  in  the  United  States  .    In  : 
    Lowe     NJ   ,    Shaath     NA    ,   eds  .   Sunscreens Development, Evaluation and Regu-
latory Aspects  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   127  –  30  .   

    5.       Lowe     NJ    .   Sun protection factors: comparative techniques and selection of 
ultraviolet sources  .   In  :     Lowe     NJ    ,   ed  .   Physician’s Guide to Sunscreens  .   New 
York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1991  :   161  –  5  .   

    6.       Ole     C    .   Multicenter evaluation of sunscreen UVA protectiveness with the 
protection factor test method  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1994  ;   30  :   729  –  36  .   
    7.       Geiter     F   ,    Bilek     PK   ,    Doskoczil     S    .   History of sunscreens and the rationale for 
their  use  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  .    Principles  of  Cosmetics  for  the 
 Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby Company  ,   1982  :   187  –  206  .   

    8.       Freeman      S   ,     Frederiksen      P    .    Sunscreen  allergy  .    Am  J  Contact  Dermatitis   

  1990  ;   1  :   240  .   

    9.       Thompson      G   ,     Maibach      HI   ,     Epstein      J    .    Allergic  contact  dermatitis  from 
sunscreen  preparations  complicating  photodermatitis  .    Arch  Dermatol   
  1977  ;   113  :   1252  .   

   10.       Dromgoole     SH   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Sunscreening agent intolerance: contact and 
photocontact  sensitization  and  contact  urticaria  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   
  1990  ;   22  :   1068  –  78  .   

   11.       Mathias     CGT   ,    Maibach     HI   ,    Epstein     J    .   Allergic contact photodermatitis to 

para-aminobenzoic acid  .   Arch Dermatol     1978  ;   114  :   1665  –  6  .   

   12.       Fisher     AA    .   Sunscreen dermatitis: para-aminobenzoic acid and its deriva-

tives  .   Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   190  –  2  .   

   13.       Thune     P    .   Contact and photocontact allergy to sunscreens  .   Photoderma-

tology     1984  ;   1  :   5  –  9  .   

   14.       Rietschel     RL   ,    Lewis     CW    .   Contact dermatitis to homomenthyl salicylate  . 

  Arch Dermatol     1978  ;   114  :   442  –  3  .   

   15.       Fisher     AA    .   Sunscreen dermatitis: part IV the salicylates, the anthranilates 

and physical agents  .   Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   397  –  8  .   

   16.       Menz     J   ,    Muller     SA   ,    Connolly     SM    .   Photopatch testing: a six year experi-

ence  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1988  ;   18  :   1044  –  7  .   

   17.       Knobler     E   ,    Almeida     L   ,    Ruzkowski     A    ,   et al  .   Photoallergy to benzophenone  . 

  Arch Dermatol     1989  ;   125  :   801  –  4  .   

   18.       Ramsay     DL   ,    Cohen     HS   ,    Baer     RL    .   Allergic reaction to benzopenone  .   Arch 

Dermatol     1972  ;   105  :   906  –  8  .    

  suggested reading 
      Bennat     C   ,    Müller-Goymann     CC    .   Skin penetration and stabilization of formu-
lations containing microfine titanium dioxide as physical UV filter  .   Int J 
Cosmet Sci     2000  ;   22  :   271  –  83  .   

     Berneburg     M   ,    Plettenberg     H   ,    Krutmann     J    .   Photoaging of human skin  .   Photo-

dermatol Photoimmunol Photomed     2000  ;   16  :   239  –  44  .   

     Cross     SE   ,    Innes     B   ,    Roberts     MS    ,   et al  .   Human skin penetration of sunscreen 
nanoparticles: in-vitro assessment of a novel micronized zinc oxide for-
mulation  .   Skin Pharmacol Physiol     2007  ;   20  :   148  –  54  .   

     Diffey     BL    .   When should sunscreen be reapplied?     J Acad Dermatol     2001  ;   45  : 

  882  –  5  .   

     Fisher     GJ   ,    Wang     ZQ   ,    Datta     SC    ,   et al  .   Pathophysiology of premature skin aging 

induced by ultraviolet light  .   N Engl J Med     1997  ;   337  :   1419  –  28  .   

     Giacomoni      PU    .    Sunscreens,  suntan  and  anti-sun-burn  preparations  today  . 

  J Appl Cosmetol     2002  ;   20  :   129  –  36  .   

     Gonzalez     H    .   Percutaneous absorption with emphasis on sunscreens  .   Photo-

chem Photobiol Sci     2010  ;   9  :   482  –  8  .   

     Green     HA   ,    Drake     L    .   Aging, sun damage, and sunscreens  .   Clin Plast Surg     1993  ; 

  20  :   1  –  8  .   

FACIAL PHOTOPROTECTION

67

     Harrison     JA   ,    Wlaker     SL   ,    Plastox     SR    ,   et al  .   Sunscreens with low sun protec-
tion  factor  inhibit  ultraviolet  B  and  A  photoaging  in  the  skin  of  the 
hairless  albino  mouse  .    Photodermal  Photoimmunol  Photomed      1991  ; 
  8  :   12  –  20  .   

     Nole     G   ,    Johnson     AW    .   An analysis of cumulative lifetime solar ultraviolet radi-
ation exposure and the benefits of daily sun protection  .   Dermatol Ther   
  2004  ;   17  :   57  –  62  .   

     Palm      MD   ,     O’Donoghue      MN    .    Update  on  photoprotection  .    Dermatol  Ther   

     Klein     K   ,    Kollias     N    .   Sunscreens (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Reiger     MM    ,   ed  .   Harry’s Cos-

  2007  ;   20  :   360  –  76  .   

meticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  :   415  –  36  .   

     Rabe     JH   ,    Mamelak     AJ   ,    McElgunn     JS   ,    Morison     WL   ,    Sauder     DN    .   Photoaging: 

     Klein     K   ,    Palefsky     I    .   Formulating sunscreen products (Chapter 18)  .   In  :     Shaath   

mechanisms and repair  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2006  ;   55  :   1  –  19  .   

  N    ,   ed  .   Sunscreens  ,   3rd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group  ,   2005  :   354  –  83  .   
     Kligman     LH    .   Photoaging: manifestations, prevention, and treatment  .   Derma-

tol Clin     1986  ;   4  :   517  –  28  .   

     Scharffetter-Kochanek     K   ,    Brenneisen     P   ,    Wenk     J    ,   et al  .   Photoaging of the skin 

from phenotype to mechanisms  .   Exp Gerontol     2000  ;   35  :   307  –  16  .   

     Seite      S   ,     Fourtanier      AM    .    The  benefit  of  daily  photoprotection  .    J  Am  Acad 

     Kullavanijaya      P   ,     Lim      H    .    Photoprotection  .    J  Am  Acad  Deratol      2005  ;    52  : 

 Dermatol     2008  ;   58     (5 Suppl 2)  :   S160  –  6  .   

  937  –  58  .   

     Levy     S    .   UV filters (Chapter 23)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Hand-
book of Cosmetic Science and Technology  ,   2nd edn  .   Informa Healthcare 
USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   299  –  311  .   

     Lintner     K    .   Antiaging actives in sunscreens (Chapter 33)  .   In  :     Shaath     N    ,   ed  .   Sun-

screens  ,   3rd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group  ,   2005  :   673  –  95  .   

     Maier     H   ,    Schauberger     G   ,    Brunnhofer     K   ,    Honigsmann     H    .   Change of ultravio-
let  absorbance  of  sunscreens  by  exposure  to  solar-simulated  radiation  . 
  J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   117  :   256  –  62  .   

     Nohynek      GJ   ,     Dufour      EK   ,     Roberts      MS    .    Nanotechnology,  cosmetics  and  the 
skin: is there a health risk?     Skin Pharmacol Physiol     2008  ;   21  :   136  –  49  .   
     Nohynek     GJ   ,    Lademann     J   ,    Ribaud     C   ,    Roberts     MS    .   Grey goo on the skin? Nan-
otechnology,  cosmetic  and  sunscreen  safey  .    Crit  Rev  Toxical      2007  ;    37  : 
  251  –  77  .   

     Shaath     NA    .   The chemistry of ultraviolet filters (Chapter 13)  .   In  :     Shaath     N    ,   ed  . 

  Sunscreens  ,   3rd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group  ,   2005  :   218  –  38  .   

     Steinberg     D    .   Sunscreens  .   Cosmet Toilet     2006  ;   121  :   40  –  6  .   
     Uitto      J    .    The  role  of  elastin  and  collagen  in  cutaneous  aging:  intrinsic  aging 
versus photoexposure  .   J Drugs Dermatol     2008  ;   7     (2 Suppl)  :   s12  –  16  .   
     Wang     SQ   ,    Balagula     Y   ,    Osterwalder     U    .   Photoprotection: a review of the current 

and future technologies  .   Dermatol Ther     2010  ;   23  :   31  –  47  .   

     Wissing     AS   ,    Müller     RH    .   Solid lipid nanoparticles as carrier for sunscreens: in 
vitro  release  and  in  vivo  skin  penetration  .    J  Control  Release      2002  ;    81  : 
  225  –  33  .   

     Wlaschek      M   ,     Tantcheva-Poor      I   ,     Naderi      L    ,    et  al  .    Solar  UV  irradiation  and 

 dermal photoaging  .   J Photochem Photobiol B     2001  ;   63  :   41  –  51  .   

     Wright     MW   ,    Wright     ST   ,    Wagner     RF    .   Mechanisms of sunscreen failure  .   J Acad 

Dermatol     2001  ;   44  :   781  –  4  .        

             10    Lip cosmetic considerations      

  The lips are a site of great interest, since they are involved in 
phonation  and  eating.  Also,  they  are  an  important  part  of 
 personal  appearance.  Lips  are  formed  from  transitional 
 epithelium  wedged  between  traditional  keratinized  dry  skin 
and moist mucosal skin, which is a portal of entry for bacteria, 
viruses, food, and medication ( Fig. 10.1 ). They are an instru-
ment of affection as delivered by a kiss and the focal point of 
the face. Much poetry has been written about beautiful ruby 
red lips through the ages. However, as the lips age, they begin 
to thin and lose their characteristic shape. This is due to loss of 
the fat that gives the lip substance. A profile view of a child will 
reveal lips that protrude from the face, while the profile of a 
70-year-old  woman  will  reveal  lips  that  are  flat  and  even 
depressed form the facial surface. Many of the new cosmetic 
fillers, such as hyaluronic acid, are designed to replace this lost 
fat. The loss of lip shape is also accentuated by loss of teeth and 
bony  gum  structures  that  give  the  lips  their  characteristic 
Cupid’s bow shape. The lip muscles remain intact throughout 
life,  but  cannot  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  underlying  fat 
 suspended over a bony frame.  

 Luscious lips are considered a sign of female beauty. While 
lip fashion may change over the time, the definition of beauti-
ful lips is constant. Well-proportioned lips should begin at one 
pupil  and  extend  to  the  opposite  the  pupil.  Lipsticks  can  be 
used to elongate the lips and correct suboptimal proportions. 
They can also be used to add shine, attract attention, and coor-
dinate  colors.  Lip  cosmetics  have  been  used  since  7000  BC 
when the Sumerians adorned the lips of their male and female 
royalty. The art of lip adornment was passed on through gen-
erations from the Egyptians to the Syrians to the Babylonians 
to  the  Persians  to  the  Greeks  to  the  Romans  to  present  day 
civilizations. Usually plant materials, such as hybrid saffron or 
brazilwood  were  used  to  obtain  a  reddish  color.  The  earliest 
true lipsticks consisted of beeswax, tallow, and pigment. Mod-
ern lipstick was introduced in the 1920s when the “push-up” 
holder,  still  used  today,  was  invented.  Lipsticks  can  create  or 
assist  in  the  treatment  of  lip  conditions  ( Table  10.1 ).  This 
chapter focuses on the various types of lip cosmetics and their 
use in a variety of dermatologic situations.  

  lipstick formulation 
 Lipstick is an extruded rod of color dispersed in a blend of oils, 
waxes, and fats packaged in a roll-up tube ( Fig. 10.2 ). The ratio 
of the oils and waxes is varied by the cosmetic chemist to arrive 
at the final attributes of the product. For example, a lipstick 
designed to camouflage lip imperfections must be long wear-
ing. Elevating the wax concentration, reducing the oil concen-
tration, and increasing the pigment concentration can increase 
the length of time the color remains on the lips. Lipsticks can 
also be used to treat non–actinic chelitis by providing higher 
lip emollience. This formulation would be composed of a low-
wax and high-oil concentration to produce a smooth creamy 
lip feel.   

68

   Lipsticks can be used to treat non–actinic chelitis by 
providing higher lip emollience. 

 Waxes are used to facilitate the lip color adhere to the lip. 
The  waxes  commonly  incorporated  into  lipstick  formula-
tions are white beeswax, candelilla wax, carnauba wax, ozo-
kerite  wax,  lanolin  wax,  ceresin  wax,  and  other  synthetic 
waxes.  Usually,  lipsticks  contain  a  combination  of  these 
waxes  carefully  selected  and  blended  to  achieve  the  desired 
melting point. Oils are then added to soften the wax and add 
shine to the lips. The oils that can be used include castor oil, 
white mineral oil, lanolin oil, hydrogenated vegetable oils, or 
oleyl alcohol. The oils are also necessary for the dispersion of 
the pigments. 

 Various  types  of  coloring  agents  are  used  in  lipsticks  in 
addition to the waxes and oils previously discussed. Recently, 
the safety of these coloring agents has been questioned, since 
a consumer watchdog group announced that several red lip-
sticks possessed detectable lead levels. The colors used in all 
cosmetics, including lipsticks, must be approved by the Food 
and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  ( Table  10.2 ).  The  FDA 
divides certified colors into three groups: food, drug, and cos-
metic (FD&C) colors, drug and cosmetic (D&C) colors, and 
external drug and cosmetic colors. Only the first two groups 
can be used in lipsticks. The external drug and cosmetic col-
ors can only be used in locations where they are not likely to 
enter the mouth.  

 Companies  that  manufacture  lip  cosmetics  purchase  their 
individual ingredients from suppliers. The cosmetic company 
typically  receives  a  certificate  indicating  that  the  purchased 
ingredient meets certain standards. On top of this safeguard, 
most companies also perform internal testing to ensure ingre-
dient purity. There are many checks and balances to prevent 
the inadvertent contamination of cosmetics. 

 There  are  a  variety  of  lipsticks  designed  for  unique  con-
sumer  needs.  Since  lipsticks  can  be  used  for  camouflaging, 
moisturizing,  and  photoprotection,  there  are  formulations 
designed specifically for each need ( Fig. 10.3 ). An evaluation 
of these special needs products is important, as the dermatolo-
gist is likely to encounter patients who can supplement their 
lip therapy with proper lipstick selection.   

  long wearing lipsticks 
 Individuals  who  have  a  lip  deformity  or  problems  with  lip 
bleeding due to upper and lower lip rhagades may find a long 
wearing lipstick helpful. Basically, the lipstick stays in place 
once applied and does not migrate because it stains the lip. 
These lipsticks should be used in persons who are undergo-
ing lip filler enhancement where not all of the lines can be 
filled or when the lines cross from the perioral skin onto the 
vermillion. 

LIP COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

69

Vermillion
border

Philtrum

 Figure 10.1     Anatomy of the normal lips.    

Table 10.1  Lip Cosmetics

Lipsticks

Lipsticks

Pigmented
Frosted
Transparent
Indelible
Lip crayons
Lip liners
Lip creams and gloss pots
Lip sealants
Lip balm

Appearance

Coverage

Wearability

Main ingredients

Matte
Pearlescent
Shiny
Matte
Pearlescent or matte
Matte
Shiny
Matte
Matte

Full
Full
Very sheer
Moderate
Full
Not applicable
Sheer
Not applicable
None

Moderate
Moderate
Short
Very long
Moderate
Long
Very short
Long
Long

Wax, oil, pigment
Wax, oil, pigment
High percentage of oil, soluble dyes
Wax, oil, bromo acid dyes
Wax, less oil lipstick, pigment
Wax, pigment
Petrolatum, oil, pigment
Water, glycerin, wax, oil, dimethicone
Wax, mineral oil, chemical sunscreen

Coverage: very sheer = transparent, sheer = semitransparent, moderate = translucent, heavy = semiopaque, full = opaque.
Wearability: very short = 2 hours, short = 3 hours, moderate = 4 hours, long = 8 hours.

Table 10.2  Lipstick Colorants Permitted in the U.S.A.

FD&C or D&C Blue No. 1, 

D&C Red No. 11, Ca

Al Lake

FD&C or D&C Blue No. 2, 

D&C Red No. 12, Ba

Al Lake

FD&C or D&C Red No. 2, 

D&C Red No. 13, Sr

Al Lake

FD&C or D&C Red No. 3, 

D&C Red No. 19, Al Lake

Al Lake

FD&C Yellow No. 5, Al Lake
D&C Yellow No. 5, Zr-Al Lake
D&C Yellow No. 6, Al Lake
FD&C or D&C Yellow, No. 6, 

Al Lake

D&C Orange No. 5
D&C Orange No. 5, Al Lake
D&C Orange No. 10
D&C Orange No. 10, Al Lake
D&C Orange No. 17, Ba Lake
D&C Red No. 3, Al Lake
D&C Red No. 6, Na or Ba
D&C Red No. 7, Ca
D&C Red No. 8, Na
D&C Red No. 9, Ba
D&C Red No. 10, Na

D&C Red No. 21
R&C Red No. 27
D&C Red No. 27, Al Lake
D&C Red No. 30D&C 

Red No. 36

D&C Blue No. 1, Al Lake
Iron oxide—all shades
Carmine
Bronze powder
Carbon black
Guanine
Manganese violet
Mica
Aluminum powder
Bismuth oxychloride
Carotene

 Figure 10.2     Lipstick is a creamy pigmented cosmetic dispensed from a roll-up 
tube to temporarily color the lips.    

Source:  Adapted  from  deNavarre  MG.  Lipstick.  In:  The  Chemistry  and 
Manufacture  of  Cosmetics.  2nd  edn.  Allured  Publishing  Corporation, 
Wheaton, IL: 1975: 778.

70

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 The  biggest  problem  with  long  wearing  lipsticks  is  that 
they  dry  the  lips  and  precipitate  chelitis.  For  this  reason, 
long  wearing  lipsticks  should  not  be  used  in  persons  with 
dry lips, as the lip xerosis will worsen with continued use of 
a lip stain. It is also possible to develop an irritant contact 
dermatitis to bromo acid in lipsticks. In patients who have 
unexplained lip dryness and irritation, it may be worthwhile 
to  recommend  the  discontinuation  of  long  wearing  lip 
products.  

  lip balms 
 An important variant of the lipstick is the lip balm. Lip balms 
do not contain pigment and are not used for decoration of the 
lips, but rather to provide moisturization of the lips and protec-
tion from the sun and cold. These products form a moisture-
resistant film over the lips and act as an occlusive moisturizer to 
prevent water loss from the transitional mucosa. They usually 
contain  a  mixture  of  mineral  oil,  wax,  and  dimethicone.  Lip 
balms  may  also  contain  organic  sunscreens.  Most  lip  balms 
have a sun protection factor (SPF) in the 15 to 30 range. Higher 
SPF lip balms are difficult to develop because the organic filter 
concentration would need to be increased and these filters have 
a horrible bitter taste. Yet, lip balms remain an excellent source 
of photoprotection in persons with actinic chelitis, leukoplakia, 
or a history of photo-induced lip cancer.  

 Figure 10.3     A moisturizing lipstick with a central core of lip moisturizer sur-
rounded by an outer layer of pigmented lipstick.    

   Lip balms can provide both moisturization and photopro-
tection to the lips. 

 There is a great deal of information on the Internet about 
the  “addictive”  potential  of  lip  balms.  Some  consumers 
claim that they are addicted to lip balm, carry a tube in their 
pocket  at  all  times,  and  must  reapply  the  lip  balm  several 
times  an  hour.  I  did  some  research  into  this  phenomenon 
several  years  ago  and  determined  that  patients  were  not 
addicted to the lip balm, but rather the waxy feel of the lip 
balm on the lips. It was a sensory rather than a functional 
addiction.  The  lip  balm  did  not  precipitate  further  lip 
 dryness,  but  created  a  warm  moist  feel  immediately  after 
application that disappeared as the product remained on the 
lips. This necessitated the frequent reapplication as the film 
 dissolved.  

  lip sealants 
 Lip  sealants  are  similar  in  function  to  eye  shadow  setting 
creams  in  that  both  products  prepare  the  skin  for  increased 
cosmetic  wearability.  Lip  sealants  prevent  movement  of  the 
product into the fine lines around the lips, encouraging the lip 
cosmetic to remain in place. They contain water, talc, glycerin, 
wax, mineral oil, and dimethicone. The cream is applied to the 
lips like lipstick or with a finger and allowed to dry before a 
pigmented lip cosmetic is applied. Facial foundation can also 
be applied to the lips as a sealant.   

 Figure 10.4     A long wearing lipstick in the form of a lip crayon.    

 Long  wearing  lipsticks  employ  indelible  coloring  agents 
to  stain  the  lip.  Indelible  coloring  agents  include  bromo 
acids,  such  as  fluoresceins,  halogenated  fluoresceins,  and 
related  water-insoluble  dyes.  The  most  commonly  used 
indelible coloring agent is acid eosin, a tetrabromo deriva-
tive of fluorescein. Acid eosin, also known as bromo acid or 
D&C Red No. 21, is naturally colored orange, but changes 
to  a  red  salt  at  a  pH  of  4.  Conditions  present  on  the  lip 
change the orange lipstick to a vivid red indelible stain that 
is  long  lasting.  This  accounts  for  the  red  color  of  all  long 
wearing lipsticks ( Fig. 10.4 ).   

   Long wearing lipsticks employ indelible coloring agents, 
most commonly eosin, to stain the lip. 

   Lip sealants contain dimethicone; can fill in lip wrinkles 
and provide a base for the subsequent application of 
lipstick. 

LIP COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

71

 Figure 10.5     Lip gloss may be dispensed from a plastic tube and stroked over 
the lips with its angled application tip.    

 Figure 10.7     Angled brushes are used to stroke the colored polymer lip product 
over the lips.    

 Figure  10.6     Tubes  of  various  polymer  lipstick  colors  that  also  contain  a  lip 
stain.    

 Figure 10.8     The artistic application of the lip polymer to the lips.    

  lip gloss 
 Another popular product to moisturize the lips is lip gloss. Lip 
gloss is different from lip balm as it does not contain waxes, 
but  only  oils  and  dimethicone.  Lip  gloss  is  most  popular 
among  adolescents  who  may  select  lip  gloss  as  their  first 
 cosmetic.  It  adds  shine,  smell,  and  taste  to  the  lips,  but  not 
 necessarily  moisturization  ( Fig.  10.5 ).  Lip  gloss  migrates 
 rapidly off the lip and is not a good choice in mature individu-
als. Additionally,  some  of  the  oils  may  be  comedogenic.  The 
dermatologist should caution about the use of lip gloss in acne 
patients with refractory vermillion border comedones.  

 Lip  gloss  has  seen  a  resurgence  in  the  popularity  of  film-
forming  polymer  lipsticks.  The  polymer  dries  to  a  hard 
 pigmented film on the lips, but is extremely drying. To prevent 
chelitis  and  add  shine,  many  polymer  lip  products  are 
 co-packaged with a lip gloss for frequent application, and this 
is the next topic of discussion.  

  polymer film lipsticks 
 Another  method  for  enhancing  the  ability  of  a  lip  color  to 
remain on the lips is through the creation of polymer films. 
Polymer  film  lipsticks  are  the  newest  introduction  into  the 
 lipstick market. These lip products are packaged as two-tube 
products  where  one  end  contains  the  lip  color  and  the 

opposite  end  contains  a  lip  gloss  or  balm.  The  pigmented 
polymer  is  applied  first  and  allowed  to  dry  followed  by  the 
moisturizing  gloss  or  balm.  These  products  stay  on  until 
peeled or rubbed off ( Fig. 10.6 ).  

 For persons who need a long wearing lip product for cam-
ouflage  purposes,  the  polymer  film  lipsticks  are  wonderful. 
They form an opaque film, which can cover pigmentation or 
vascular abnormalities of the lip. Another layer of camouflage 
can be added by putting a creamy opaque lipstick on top for 
moisturization and shine. 

 The polymer lip products can be used to artistically draw on 
the lips, if they are asymmetric or too small ( Fig. 10.7 ). The 
polymer film sticks well to any skin surface, but the best results 
are  obtained  when  combined  with  a  lip  liner.  The  lip  liner 
forms an even edge that can be painted over with the polymer 
film applicator. As opposed to lipsticks that are rubbed from a 
waxy  stick,  polymer  film  lip  products  are  stroked  across  the 
lips with an angled sponge brush. This requires a steady hand 
for successful application ( Fig. 10.8 ).     

   To prevent chelitis and add shine, many polymer lip 
products are co-packaged with a lip gloss for frequent 
application. 

72

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 10.9     Pigmented lip liners in an automatic pencil-type holder.    

 Figure 10.10     Opaque lipsticks provide excellent sun protection in women.    

  lip liners 
 As  mentioned  previously,  the  new  polymer  lip  products  are 
best  combined  with  a  lip  liner.  Lip  liners  are  thin  extruded 
 pigmented  rods  encased  in  wood  or  placed  in  an  automatic 
pencil-type holder ( Fig. 10.9 ). Their formulation is similar to 
lipsticks, except that stiffer waxes with higher melting points 
are used with minimal oil. This creates an extremely hard rod 
that applies a thick layer of pigment to the lips. Lip liners are 
used  to  define  the  outer  edge  of  the  lips  and  are  valuable  in 
reconstructing  a  normal  lip  contour.  The  thick  wax  layer 
applied  around  the  lips  also  prevents  creamier  lip  products 
from bleeding. Lip liner is usually selected one to two shades 
darker than the lipstick.   

   Lip liners are used to define the outer edge of the lips and 
are valuable in reconstructing a normal lip contour. 

 Lip liners are indispensable in persons who require lip defi-
nition or lip enhancement. They can nicely aid in lip definition 
for women who have undergone lip augmentation with fillers. 
Lip liner can also be used to temporarily draw lip proportions 
prior to filler injections to make sure that the patient is com-
fortable with the proposed lip size.  

  opaque lipsticks 
 Opaque lip cosmetics can be used over polymer lip products 
to prevent inevitable lip dryness ( Fig. 10.10 ). An opaque lip 
cosmetic is also preferred in patients who require lip camou-
flaging. The opaqueness is due to incorporation of high tita-
nium dioxide levels in the lipstick. Titanium dioxide provides 
the  best  coverage  of  all  the  white  pigments,  including  zinc 
oxide. It must be ground to a fine powder to enable smooth 
application of the lipstick. It also adds color brightness to lip 
cosmetics and is used to create pastel shades. Opaque lipsticks 
are  the  best  lip  protection  for  women  with  actinic  chelitis. 
They  can  nicely  protect  the  lip  transitional  mucosa  after 
 cryosurgery or lip advancement for reconstruction following 
lip cancer surgery.    

   Opaque lipsticks are the best lip protection for women 
with actinic chelitis. 

  tooth whitening lipsticks 
 Another new category of lipsticks is tooth whitening lipsticks. 
These are sold primarily in drug stores. The name may be mis-
leading,  however,  since  the  lipstick  does  not  actually  whiten 
the teeth like the popular tooth whitening kits containing per-
oxide. These lipsticks have a bluish-red color that makes the 
teeth appear white due to the color contrast.   

   Tooth whitening lipsticks have a bluish-red color that 
makes the teeth appear white due to the color contrast. 

  lip cosmetics and allergic contact 
dermatitis 
 Lipstick can be a cause of allergic contact dermatitis. The  lipstick 
ingredients reported to cause allergic contact  dermatitis include 
ricinoleic acid ( 1 ), benzoic acid ( 2 ), lithol rubine BCA (Pigment 
Red 57-1) ( 3 ), microcrystalline wax ( 4 ),  oxybenzone ( 5 ), propyl 
gallate ( 6 ), and C18 aliphatic  compounds ( 7 ).  

   The most common cause of allergic contact dermatitis in 
lipstick is castor oil. 

 The castor oil in lipstick causes allergic contact dermatitis. 
Castor oil is found in all lipsticks. It is used to dissolve bromo 
acid  dyes  ( 8 – 10 ).  However,  the  bromo  acid  dye  eosin  (D&C 
Red No. 21) is also a cause ( 11 ). If a patient has recurrent aller-
gic contact dermatitis to different types and brands of lipstick, 
castor  oil  allergy  is  almost  always  the  problem.  Still,  most 
women want to wear lipstick. An excellent alternative is one of 
the polymer lipsticks previously discussed. These products do 
not contain castor oil.  

  lip tattooing 
 Definition of the vermillion border can be achieved temporar-
ily with lip cosmetics, as previously discussed, or permanently 
enhanced  through  lip  tattooing.  Less  conventional  than  the 
use  of  lip  liners,  this  method  is  practiced  by  dermatologists 
and plastic surgeons. Lip tattooing is performed by inserting a 
red pigment such as cinnabar, a red dye containing mercuric 
sulfide,  into  the  upper  dermis  along  the  vermilion  border 

LIP COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

through punctures created by a specially designed needle. The 
normal lip contour can be followed, resulting in the appear-
ance of permanent lipstick, or the pigment can be placed to 
reshape  malformed  lips.  Lip  tattooing  can  also  be  used  to 
reconstruct  the  vermilion  border  in  patients  with  treated 
actinic cheilitis or leukoplakia. It is possible to develop a tattoo 
granuloma since cinnabar is the most allergenic of the tattoo 
pigments.  

   Lip tattoo granulomas may occur from cinnabar, the red 
pigment used for permanently tattooed lipstick. 

 This  technique  is  not  recommended  for  women,  except  in 
cases of extreme surgical deformity, since fashion dictates the 
desirable  lip  appearance  and  the  patient  will  not  be  able  to 
wear lighter lipstick shades in pink or peach. However, the per-
manence of lip color may be more desirable in male patients, 
who do not require fashion flexibility. Patients should recog-
nize that there is some fading of the pigment color with time 
and the movement of the pigment within the dermis occurs 
due to macrophage phagocytosis. 

 Lip cosmetics are used by many individuals, some of whom 
may  have  special  dermatologic  needs.  The  discussion  now 
turns to the special lip needs of acne patients, mature patients, 
and  individuals  who  require  the  assistance  of  corrective  lip 
cosmetics.  

  lip cosmetics for acne patients 
 Lip cosmetics are used by acne patients, but must be care-
fully selected to avoid worsening of the acne. Acne patients 
should select lip cosmetics with low oil content to minimize 
the  formation  of  comedones  around  the  vermilion  border 
and perioral acne. Lip creams and gloss pots contain mostly 
oil  and  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of  lip  crayons  and  lip-
sticks. Lip cosmetics with a higher oil content have a creamy 
feel  and  a  glossy  shine  on  application.  Acne  patients  with 
oily  complexions  will  also  notice  the  movement  of  the  lip 
cosmetic  away  from  the  lips  as  sebum  combines  with  the 
cosmetic. Lip crayons and lip liners will provide the longest 
wear  in  these  patients.  The  use  of  a  lip  stain  may  also  be 
considered.   

   Acne patients should select lip cosmetics with low oil 
content to minimize the formation of comedones around 
the vermilion border and perioral acne. 

  lip cosmetics for mature patients 
 Lip cosmetics are important to mature patients also, not only 
to pigment and enlarge the important facial landmark, that is 
the lips, but also to assist in the prevention and treatment of lip 
disease. With maturity, the lip architecture changes giving rise 
to  a  biofilm  disease  of  the  lips  known  as  perleche.  Perleche 
arising as the collection of saliva in the folds of the corners of 
the  mouth  creates  maceration  providing  a  perfect  environ-
ment for the growth of yeast. The yeast causes further tissue 
breakdown and painful cracked skin that is best treated by a 
combination  of  topical  low-potency  topical  corticosteroids 

73

and topical antifungal/anti-yeast creams. Perleche can actually 
be prevented by the use of an occlusive lip balm that does not 
support  the  yeast  growth  and  protects  the  lip  corners  from 
moisture contact.  

   Perleche can be prevented by using an occlusive lip balm 
that does not support yeast growth and protects the lip 
corners from moisture contact. 

 In addition to biofilm diseases, the lips can also be subject to 
dryness in mature patients. Abundant oil glands can be visual-
ized  lining  the  vermillion  of  the  lips,  but  the  production  of 
these glands decreases with advancing age. Dryness of the lips, 
known  as  chelitis,  leads  to  cracking  and  peeling  of  the  lips. 
Chelitis can be accentuated by heat exposure from smoking or 
actinic damage. Lip balms, lip moisturizers, or lipsticks can be 
used to aid in the treatment of chelitis. Good occlusion is typ-
ically  required  to  allow  these  conditions  to  resolve,  achieved 
with oily substances, such as petrolatum, waxes, and silicones. 
Some elderly individuals may appear to have chronic chelitis 
due to the continual presence of peeling skin over the lips. This 
may  be  due  to  dryness,  but  may  also  be  due  to  insufficient 
exfoliation of the lip surface. The use of a stiff lip balm with 
high  drag  over  the  lips  when  applied  may  be  helpful  in  this 
condition, as well. 

 Lip balms can be further adapted to provide both lip mois-
turization  and  sun  protection.  A  quality  lip  balm  used  on  a 
daily basis with an SPF of at least 15 can prevent actinic cheli-
tis. A sunscreen-containing lip balm is also the best way to pre-
vent the recurrence of a herpes simplex fever blister, since the 
virus  is  photo  reactivated.  Lastly,  sunscreen-containing  lip 
balms can prevent skin cancer of the lip, a serious medical con-
dition in mature individuals. 

 Finally,  color  can  be  added  to  a  pale  mature  face  quickly 
with  lip  cosmetics.  In  addition,  only  a  minimal  application 
skill  is  required  and  the  steady  hand  necessary  for  eye  cos-
metic  application  is  not  needed.  These  characteristics  make 
lip cosmetics popular among mature patients. The most com-
mon complaint in this age group is the movement, or “bleed-
ing,” of lip cosmetics into the fine wrinkles that develop on 
the upper and lower lips from elastic tissue degeneration or 
gingival bone resorption. Often mature persons with dry lips 
select a moisturizing lipstick and subsequently experience lip-
stick  bleeding.  Lip  cosmetic  bleeding  can  be  minimized  by 
preparing the lips first with a lip sealant or facial foundation, 
using  a  stiff  lip  liner,  and  avoiding  creamy  lipsticks  or  lip 
creams in favor of lip crayons. All lipsticks are moisturizers to 
some  extent.  Stiff  lip  balms  or  sticks  cannot  be  applied  as 
moisturizers under  lipsticks since this will encourage lipstick 
bleeding. 

 Mature  patients  may  wish  to  use  a  lip  cosmetic  to  cover 
 lentigines,  venous  lakes,  or  actinic  cheilitis.  Darker  lipstick 
 colors  provide  better  coverage  than  lighter  colors.  Lipsticks 
that contain titanium dioxide are superior to lip crayons or lip 
creams. Application to the lips of a facial foundation contain-
ing  titanium  dioxide  adds  additional  coverage.  A  bluish-red 
lipstick  will  have  the  added  advantage  of  seeming  to  whiten 
the discolored teeth.  

74

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

in with a deeply pigmented, matte finish lipstick ( Fig. 10.12A ). 
Uniformly thin lips ( Fig. 10.12B ), a thin lower lip possibly due 
to lip advancement surgery, ( Fig. 10.12C ), or a thin upper lip 
( Fig. 10.12D ) can be thickened by also lining outside the ver-
milion  where  required  and  selecting  a  lighter,  frosted  finish 
lipstick.  Conversely,  thick  lips  possibly  due  to  a  congenital 
hemangioma  are  lined  inside  the  vermilion  ( Fig.  10.12E ). 
  Figure 10.12  also demonstrates the lip lining technique with a 
dashed line for crooked ( Fig. 10.12F ), bow ( Fig. 10.12G ), and 
downturned  lips  ( Fig.  10.12H ).  The  lip  liner  should  be  one 
shade darker than the lipstick for optimal effect.     

   Abnormal lip shape due to congenital causes or surgery 
can be masked by effective application of lip cosmetics. 

  summary 
 Lipsticks are useful for cosmetic adornment, but can also be 
used by the dermatologist to facilitate the healing of a variety 
of  lip  conditions.  For  example,  actinic  chelitis  can  be  mini-
mized by using a sunscreen-containing lip balm or an opaque 
lipstick. Remember that an opaque lipstick has an unlimited 
SPF, since the transitional lip mucosa is completely protected. 
Lip  abnormalities  can  be  minimized  by  selecting  a  polymer 
lip  product  combined  with  a  lip  liner.  Finally,  patients  who 
experience problems such as lip swelling with the use of lip-
sticks may be allergic to castor oil. Lipsticks and lip balms are 
to the lips what hand cream is to the hands. Both are impor-
tant therapeutic adjuvants in the treatment of dermatologic 
disease.    

  references 
    1.       Sai      S    .    Lipstick  dermatitis  caused  by  ricinoleic  acid  .    Contact  Dermatitis   

  1983  ;   9  :   524  .   

    2.       Calnan     CD    .   Amyldimethylamino benzoic acid causing lipstick dermatitis  . 

  Contact Dermatitis     1980  ;   6  :   233  .   

    3.       Hayakawa      R   ,     Fujimoto     Y   ,     Kaniwa      M    .    Allergic  pigmented  lip  dermatitis 

from lithol rubine BCA  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  :   34  –  7  .   

    4.       Darko     E   ,    Osmundsen     PE    .   Allergic contact dermatitis to Lipcare lipstick  . 

  Contact Dermatitis     1984  ;   11  :   46  .   

    5.       Aguirre      A   ,     Izu      R   ,     Gardeazabal      J    ,    et  al  .    Allergic  contact  cheilitis  from  a 
 lipstick containing oxybenzone  .   Contact Dermatitis     1992  ;   27  :   267  –  8  .   
    6.       Cronin      E    .    Lipstick  dermatitis  due  to  propyl  gallate  .    Contact  Dermatitis   

  1980  ;   6  :   213  –  14  .   

    7.       Hayakawa     R   ,    Matsunaga     K   ,    Suzuki     M    ,   et al  .   Lipstick dermatitis due to C18 

aliphatic compounds  .   Contact Dermatitis     1987  ;   16  :   215  –  19  .   

    8.       Sai     S    .   Lipstick dermatitis caused by castor oil  .   Contact Dermatitis     1983  ; 

  9  :   75  .   

    9.       Brandle      I   ,     Boujnah-Khouadja      A   ,     Foussereau      J    .    Allergy  to  castor  oil  . 

   Contact Dermatitis     1983  ;   9  :   424  –  5  .   

   10.       Andersen     KE   ,    Neilsen     R    .   Lipstick dermatitis related to castor oil  .   Contact 

Dermatitis     1984  ;   11  :   253  –  4  .   

   11.       Calan     CD    .   Allergic sensitivity to eosin  .   Acta Allergol     1959  ;   13  :   493  –  9  .   
   12.       Powell      N   ,     Humphreys      B    .    Proportions  of  the  aesthetic  face  .    New  York  : 

  Thieme-Stratton Inc  ,   1984  :   32  –  4  .    

  suggested reading 
      Angelini     E   ,    Marinaro     C   ,    Carrozzo     AM    ,   et al  .   Allergic contact dermatitis of the 
lip  margins  from  para-tertiary-butylphenol  in  a  lip  liner  .    Contact 
 Dermatitis     1993  ;   28  :   146  –  8  .   

     Duke     D   ,    Urioste     SS   ,    Dover     JS   ,    Anderson     RR    .   A reaction to a red lip cosmetic 

tattoo  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1998  ;   39  :   488  –  90  .   

 Figure 10.11     The length of the closed, relaxed mouth should equal the  distance 
between the medial aspect of the irises in a well-proportioned face.    

(A)

(C)

(E)

(B)

(D)

(F)

 Figure 10.12     Contouring of the lips: ( A ) to enlarge small lips, ( B ) to thicken 
thin lips, ( C ) to thicken a thin lower lip, ( D ) to thicken a thin upper lip, ( E ) to 
decrease the size of thick lips, ( F ) to correct crooked lips, ( G ) to correct bow 
lips, and ( H ) to correct downturned lips.    

  corrective lip cosmetics 
 Abnormal lip shape due to congenital causes or surgery can be 
masked  by  an  effective  application  of  lip  cosmetics.  A  well-
proportioned mouth in a closed, relaxed state should be posi-
tioned between the medial aspect of the irises ( Fig. 10.11 ) ( 12 ). 
Lips  that  do  not  extend  this  distance  are  perceived  as  small. 
Small lips can be enlarged by using a lip liner to draw the lip 
boundary on the outer edge of the vermilion and then filling 

LIP COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

75

     Engasser     PG    .   Lip cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   641  –  9  .   
     Ha      JH   ,     Kim      HO   ,     Lee      JY   ,     Kim      CW    .   Allergic  contact  cheilitis  from  D&C  Red 

no 7 in lipstick  .   Contact Dermatitis     2003  ;   48  :   231  .   

     Le  Coz      CJ   ,     Ball      C    .    Recurrent  allergic  contact  dermatitis  and  cheilitis  due  to 

castor oil  .   Contact Dermatitis     2000  ;   42  :   114  –  15  .   

     Schena     D   ,    Antuzzi     F   ,    Girolomoni     G    .   Contact allergy in chronic eczematous lip 

dermatitis  .   Eur J Dermatol     2008  ;   18  :   688  –  92  .   

     Schram      SE   ,     Glesne      LA   ,     Warshaw      EM    .    Allergic  contact  cheilitis  from 
 benzophenone-3 I lip balm and fragrance/flavorings  .   Dermatitis     2007  ;   18  : 
  221  –  4  .   

     Leveque      JL   ,     Goubanova      E    .    Influence  of  age  on  the  lips  and  perioral  skin  . 

     Wilson     AG   ,    White     IR   ,    Kirby     JD    .   Allergic contact dermatitis from propyl gallate 

   Dermatology     2004  ;   208  :   307  –  13  .   

     Ryu     JS   ,    Park     SG   ,    Kwak     TJ    ,   et al  .   Improving lip wrinkles: lipstick-related image 

analysis  .   Skin Res Technol     2005  ;   11  :   157  –  64  .   

     Sai     S    .   Lipstick dermatitis caused by castor oil  .   Contact Dermatitis     1983  ;   9  :   75  .   

in a lip balm  .   Contact Dermatitis     1989  ;   20  :   145  –  6  .   

     Zug     KA   ,    Kornik     R   ,    Belsito     DV    ,   et al  .   Patch-testing North America lip  dermatitis 
patients: data from the North American Contact Dermatitis Group, 2001 
to 2004  .   Dermatitis     2008  ;   19  :   202  –  8  .        

             11    Eyes      

  Eyes, more than any other body part, express a person’s inner 
thoughts  and  emotions.  For  this  reason,  the  eyes  are  elabo-
rately adorned, but the anatomy of the eyelid area also makes 
the eyes a common site of irritation, dermatitis, and infection. 
Eyelid cosmetic use dates back to antiquity, recorded as early as 
4000  BC.  Green  powder  made  from  malachite  was  heavily 
applied to both the upper and lower eyelids accompanied by 
dark  kohl  eyeliner  paste  composed  of  powdered  antimony, 
burnt almonds, black copper oxide, and brown clay ocher. The 
eyeliner paste was stored in a pot and moistened with saliva 
prior  to  application.  Eyelid  glitter  from  ground  beetle  shells 
was used for additional effect ( 1 ). 

 This chapter examines eyelid cosmetics, eyelash cosmetics, and 
eyelid skin issues. It assesses the unique needs of the eyelid skin 
and the impact of colored adornments in the form of eye shadow, 
eyeliner, mascara, and eyebrow pencil as it relates to dermatology. 
Our discussion opens with a discussion of the eye area skin and 
then segue ways to the world of colored eye cosmetics. 

  eyelid considerations 
 The eyelid skin is one of the most interesting areas on the body 
( Fig. 11.1 ). It moves constantly as the eyes open and close, thus 
it must possess unique mechanical properties. It must be thin 
enough for rapid movement, yet strong enough to protect the 
tender eye tissues. Eyelid tissue shows the state of health and 
age of an individual more rapidly than any other skin of the 
body. When others comment on a tired appearance, they are 
usually assessing the appearance of the eyes and the eyelid tis-
sue. When  others  comment  on  a  sickly  appearance,  they  are 
also assessing the appearance of the eyes and the eyelid tissue. 
The eyelid skin appears to age quickly resulting in the presence 
of  redundant  upper  eyelid  tissue  and  lower  eyelid  bags.  The 
redundant upper eyelid tissue is due to loss of facial fat, cumu-
lative collagen loss in the eyelid skin from UV exposure, and 
the effect of gravity pulling down the upper eyelid skin. Lower 
eyelid bags are also formed due to the effect UV damage and 
gravity, but edema or swelling may also contribute. This edema 
may be due to retained body fluids or the release of histamine 
from  inhaled  allergens. All  of  these  factors  contribute  to  the 
complexity of the eyelid skin.   

   The eyelids are the most common site for irritant and 
allergic contact dermatitis from cosmetics and skin care 
products. 

 The  eyelids  are  the  thinnest  skin  on  the  body;  hence,  the 
 eyelids are the most common site for irritant contact dermati-
tis  and  allergic  contact  dermatitis,  either  from  products  that 
are directly applied to the eyelids or from products transferred 
to the eyelids by the hands. The eyelid skin also has a paucity 

76

of sebaceous glands, making it a common area of skin dryness. 
While there are no hairs on the eyelids themselves, the  eyelashes 
form an interesting transition between the keratinized eyelid 
skin and the cartilage of the tarsal plate giving structure to the 
edge of the eyelid. Tearing from the eye impacts the skin of the 
eyelid,  since  wetting  and  drying  of  the  eyelid  tissues  can 
 predispose to dermatitis. 

 The eyelids are also a common source of symptoms induced 
by allergies. These symptoms can be itching, stinging, and/or 
burning. Most persons with these symptoms respond by vig-
orously rubbing the eyelids. This can cause a mechanical dam-
age  to  the  eyelid  skin  from  a  minor  trauma  resulting  in 
sloughing of portions of the protective stratum corneum to a 
major trauma resulting in small tears in the skin. Most of the 
skin on the body responds by thickening or callousing when 
rubbed.  Eyelid  skin  will  also  thicken,  but  this  predisposes  to 
decreased functioning and worsening of the symptoms. 

 The  eyelid  bridges  the  transitional  area  between  the 
 well-keratinized  skin  of  the  face  and  the  moist  tissue  of 
the conjunctiva that lines the inner eyelid and the eyeball. The 
moisture  from  tearing  wets  the  eyelid  skin  and  enhances 
 irritant and allergen penetration. It can also help dissolve any 
allergen  or  irritant,  possibly  enhancing  the  adverse  reaction. 
The eyes are also uniquely designed to sense substances that 
might cause vision damage and thus the eyelids have a height-
ened immune response. Swelling induced by topical, inhaled, 
or ingested allergens are frequently seen initially in the eyelids. 
The  thin  nature  of  the  skin  also  allows  the  swelling,  due  to 
 tissue  edema,  to  appear  more  dramatic  than  on  other  body 
areas where the skin is thicker and less mobile. 

 In  addition  to  irritant  and  allergic  contact  dermatitis 
involving  the  eyelid  skin,  the  eyelids  can  also  be  the  site  of 
biofilm diseases. Ocular rosacea and styes are basically acne of 
the glands in the eyelid resulting from alterations in the tear 
biofilm. Overgrowth of bacteria can precipitate the problem. 
Fungal  overgrowth  in  the  eye  area  results  in  seborrheic 
 blepharitis. 

 The eyelid skin is also uniquely affected by the immune sta-
tus  of  the  individual.  Most  persons  with  inhaled  allergies  to 
pollen, fragrance, dust, etc. will complain not only of a runny 
nose but also of itchy eyes. The eyelids and the nose both rep-
resent  areas  possessing  transitional  skin  bridging  the  wet 
mucosa with the traditional dry keratinized skin. Since the wet 
mucosa is devoid of a skin barrier to allergens and infection, 
the immune system is particularly fortified in these locations. 
For  this  reason,  hyperimmune  states  that  affect  the  overall 
body skin are keenly present in the eyelid area. For example, 
persons with atopic dermatitis will demonstrate an additional 
skin fold on the lower eyelid, an accurate marker for the diag-
nosis. They represent a unique population of sensitive eyelid 
persons who have problems with many eye area cosmetics and 
skin care products. 

EYES

77

1

3

2

4

 Figure 11.1     The eyelids are of considerable medical and cosmetic concern: 1, puffiness may develop in the upper eyelid; 2, extra skin in the upper eyelid may 
obscure the natural fold and impair vision; 3, extra skin in the lower eyelid may cause fine wrinkles; 4, bags or dark circles can develop under the lower eyelid.    

 By  far  the  most  common  dermatologic  disease  to  afflict  the 
eyelid is eczema. Since the eyelid is relatively poor in oil glands, 
dry eyelid skin is frequently seen due to overaggressive removal 
of lipids. This may be due to the use of a strong cleanser or prod-
ucts designed to solubulize oil-based waterproof  cosmetics, such 
as mascara and eyeliner. Anything that  damages the intercellular 
lipids or the corneocytes will result in eyelid eczema. Thus, eyelid 
hygiene  must  strike  a  careful  balance  between  the  removal  of 
excess sebum and old cosmetics to prevent from eyelash infec-
tions and seborrheic blepharitis, while preventing any damage to 
the intercellular lipids and ensuing eyelid eczema. Moisturizers 
for  the  eye  area  should  contain  occlusive  substances  that  have 
minimal chance for allergenicity or irritancy, reduced ability to 
enter the eye, and excellent moisturization properties. 

 The thinness of the eyelid skin also makes the use of  sunscreens 
important. UVA radiation can easily penetrate to the dermis of 
the thin eyelid skin, causing premature  wrinkling. The eyelids 
are also a common site for UVB-induced sunburn. Eyelid sun-
screens must be carefully formulated to avoid allergic and irri-
tant contact dermatitis, prevent stinging and burning should the 
product enter the eye, and provide superior photoprotection.  

   There are more color cosmetics for the eyelid area than 
any other body area such as mascara, eyeliner, eye shadow, 
and eyebrow pencil. 

 Finally, eyelids are also a common site for cosmetic adorn-
ment. The eyelid area has more separate color cosmetics than 
any other body area like mascara, eyeliner, eye shadow, and eye-
brow pencil. These cosmetics and the products used to remove 
them can be a source of both allergic and irritant  contact der-
matitis.  Modern,  color  cosmetics  for  eyelids  became  popular 
between 1959 and 1962 ( 2 ). This chapter will now focus on eye 
cosmetics and discuss the subject for the  dermatologist.  

  eye shadows 
 Eye shadows are applied to the upper eyelid to add color to the 
face and accentuate the emotionally expressive eyes. Eye shad-
ows are available in several forms: pressed powders, anhydrous 

Table 11.1  Eyelid-Approved Pigments

Iron oxides
Titanium dioxide (alone or combined with mica)
Copper, aluminum, and silver powder
Ultramarine blue, violet, and pink
Manganese violet
Carmine
Chrome oxide and hydrate
Iron blue
Bismuth oxychloride (alone, or on mica or talc)
Mica

creams, emulsions, sticks, and pencils. Color variety is exten-
sive,  but  coal  tar  derivatives  cannot  be  used  in  the  eye  area. 
Only  purified,  natural  colors  or  inorganic  pigments  can  be 
used  in  the  United  States  as  a  result  of  the  Food,  Drug  and 
Cosmetic Act of 1938 ( Table 11.1 ) ( 3 ).   

   No coal tar derivatives for pigments can be used in the eye 
area, only approved purified natural colors or inorganic 
pigments can be used. 

 Variations in eye shadow surface texture can range from dull 
to  a  pearly  shine  to  an  iridescent  finish.  Titanium  dioxide 
(TiO 2 )  is  used  in  pastel  matte  (dull)  finish  eye  shadows  to 
improve coverage. However, it is not found in frosted (pearled 
shine)  finish  eye  shadows  since  it  tends  to  mask  the  desired 
pearled  effect.  Bismuth  oxychloride  (BiOCl),  mica,  and  fish 
scale  essence  are  the  standard  materials  used  to  produce  a 
pearly  shine.  A  metallic  (iridescent)  finish  is  provided  by 
 copper, brass, aluminum, gold, or silver powders ( Fig. 11.2 ).   

   Eye shadows are used to adorn the eyelid with a rainbow 
of colors for personal expression. 

 Pressed powder eye shadows are the most popular formula-
tion  and  are  applied  to  the  eyelid  by  lightly  stroking  a  soft 
sponge-tipped applicator across the skin ( Fig. 11.3 ). They are 

78

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 11.2     An iridescent eye shadow with a glittery shine draws attention to 
the eyelid, but can cause irritation in persons with sensitive eyes.    

 Figure 11.5     Cream eye shadows tend to migrate into the eyelid folds in mature 
patients, but are more water resistant than powder varieties.    

 Figure  11.3     Pressed  powder  eye  shadows  are  the  most  popular  formulation 
and  are  packaged  in  compacts  with  various  color  combinations  to  create 
 dramatic upper eyelid fashion statements.    

 Figure 11.6     An eye shadow palate created for hazel eyes with tones of brown 
and green.    

 Anhydrous, or water-free, cream eye shadows contain pig-
ments in petrolatum, cocoa butter, or lanolin ( Fig. 11.5 ). These 
formulations  are  waterproof,  but  have  a  short  wearing  time 
due  to  their  tendency  to  migrate  into  the  eyelid  folds,  espe-
cially  in  patients  with  oily  complexions  or  redundant  eyelid 
skin. The product is applied with the finger and gently rubbed 
across the eyelid skin. Anhydrous cream eye shadows have also 
been formulated as an emulsion applied with a sponge-tipped 
applicator  or  wand  withdrawn  from  a  cylindrical  tube  and 
stroked across the eyelid. These products, known as automatic 
eye  shadows,  are  also  waterproof,  with  increased  wear  dura-
tion over the creams. They contain beeswax, cyclomethicone, 
and pigments in a volatile petroleum distillate vehicle.  

 The  most  popular  anhydrous  eye  shadows  are  eye  shadow 
sticks and pencils. They are composed of pigments in petrola-
tum,  but  have  added  waxes,  such  as  paraffin,  carnauba,  or 
 ozokerite wax, to allow extrusion of the product into a rod. Eye 
shadow  sticks  come  in  roll-up  tubes  and  must  be  creamy  to 
prevent drag as they are rubbed across the eyelid skin. For this 
reason, eye shadow sticks tend to migrate into eyelid creases in 
oily-complected patients or those with redundant eyelid skin. 
A more modern packaging is to encase the rod in wood, thus 
forming an eye shadow pencil that is rubbed across the eyelid. 
The pencil form is not as creamy as the eye shadow stick. 

 Figure 11.4     A brush is used to apply the powder eye shadow to the eyelid.    

predominantly  talc  with  pigments  and  zinc  or  magnesium 
stearate  used  as  a  binder.  Kaolin  or  chalk  may  be  added  to 
improve  oil  absorption  and  increase  wearability.  A  water  or 
oily binder system may also be used, with oily binder systems 
such  as  mineral  oil,  beeswax,  or  lanolin  is  predominating. 
Powder  eye  shadows  that  are  labeled “creamy”  or “enriched” 
contain increased amounts of the oily binder ( Fig. 11.4 ).   

EYES

79

Table 11.2  Causes of Upper Eyelid Dermatitis Syndrome

Mechanical rubbing
Irritant contact dermatitis
Allergic contact dermatitis
Infection
Photoirritation
Contact urticaria
Atopic dermatitis
Psoriasis
Collagen vascular disease
Conjunctivitis
Seborrheic blepharitis
Idiopathic causes

 Figure 11.7     Eye shadows are applied with a variety of brushes, similar to paint 
brushes, to create living temporary art on the female eyelid.    

 Eye shadows are stroked or rubbed across the eyelid, depend-
ing on the type of formulation. Selection of eye shadow color 
is a matter of personal preference and fashion, although colors 
complementary  to  the  natural  color  of  the  iris  are  most 
 attractive ( Figs. 11.6  and  11.7 ).    

  eye shadow setting creams 
 Eye shadow setting creams are unpigmented and designed to 
provide  an  adherent  base  over  which  the  pigmented  eye 
shadow  can  be  applied.  They  increase  the  wearability  of  eye 
shadows  and  are  most  useful  in  oily-complected  patients  or 
those with redundant eyelid skin who experience migration of 
eye shadow into eyelid creases. The setting cream is composed 
of beeswax, talc, and cyclomethicone. Beeswax seals the eyelid 
skin while the talc provides an increased adherence for the eye 
shadow  pigment.  Some  of  the  newer  cream  eye  shadows 
 incorporate a setting cream for a longer wear.   

   Eye shadow setting creams are useful in patients with 
redundant upper eyelid skin to prevent migration of 
makeup materials into the folds. 

  eyelid cosmetic removers 
 Waterproof  eye  shadows  must  be  removed  with  special 
removal products containing surfactants, such as cocamido-
propyl betaine. These products may be oil based or oil free 
and can be designed to remove all eye cosmetics, including 
eyeliner and mascara. Incidence of allergic contact dermati-
tis  has  been  reported  with  the  use  of  these  eye  cosmetic 
removers ( 4 ).  

  eyelid contact dermatitis 
 The  eyelid  skin  is  the  thinnest  on  the  body  and  frequently 
affected by both irritant and allergic contact dermatitis ( 5 ,  6 ). 
The  North  American  Contact  Dermatitis  Group  has  deter-
mined that 12% of cosmetic reactions occur on the eyelid, but 
only 4% could be linked to eye makeup use ( 7 ). Furthermore, 
it  may  be  difficult  to  determine  the  etiology  of  the  eyelid 
 dermatitis with routine patch testing ( 8 ). Many substances can 
be transferred to the eye area by the hands, such as nail polish, 
complicating dermatologic evaluation ( 9 ).  

Table 11.3  Cosmetic Ingredients that Cause Allergic 
Contact Dermatitis in Eyelids

Preservatives (12)
Parabens
Phenyl mercuric acetate
Imidazolidinyl urea
Quaternium-15
Potassium sorbate

Antioxidants

Butylated hydroxyanisole (13)
Butylated hydroxytoluene (13)
Di-tert-butyl-hydroquinone (14)

Resins

Colophony (15)
Pearlescent additives

Bismuth oxychloride (16)

Emollients

Lanolin (17)
Propylene glycol (18)

Fragrances (19)
Pigment contaminants

Nickel (20)

   The North American Contact Dermatitis Group has 
determined that 12% of cosmetic reactions occur on the 
eyelid, but only 4% could be linked to eye makeup use. 

 A thorough evaluation of eyelid dermatitis requires consid-
eration  of  a  variety  of  entities.  Maibach  and  Engasser  have 
developed  the  concept  of  upper  eyelid  dermatitis  syndrome 
( Table 11.2 ) ( 10 , 11 ).  

 Once  it  has  been  determined  that  eye  cosmetics  are  the 
source of the dermatitis, the distinction between irritant and 
allergic contact dermatitis must be made. Irritant contact der-
matitis is more common than allergic contact dermatitis. Eye 
cosmetic ingredients associated with allergic contact dermati-
tis are listed in  Table 11.3  ( 21 , 22 ).  

 Open  or  closed  patch  testing  can  be  performed  “as  is” 
with  eye  cosmetics,  but  automatic  emulsions,  such  as 
 mascara,  should  be  allowed  to  thoroughly  dry  prior  to 
occlusion  ( 23 ).  Use  testing  is  recommended,  however,  for 
eye cosmetics: the product is placed at the corner of the eye 
for  five  consecutive  nights  and  evaluated  for  allergic  or 
 irritant contact dermatitis.  

80

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

  eyelid cosmetics for special populations 
  Eyelid Cosmetics for Sensitive Skin Patients and Contact 
Lens Wearers 
 Patients with sensitive skin and multiple allergies frequently 
have difficulty finding an eye shadow product that does not 
burn  or  itch  upon  application.  Certainly,  any  eye  shadow 
applied  over  a  broken  or  inflamed  skin  will  cause  discom-
fort.  Patients  with  these  problems  should  avoid  all  eye 
 cosmetics until they heal. The patients should also be evalu-
ated  for  Upper  Eyelid  Dermatitis  Syndrome,  as  previously 
discussed. 

 In order to minimize the recurrence of dermatitis, allergic 
patients should avoid shiny, frosted, or iridescent eye shadows; 
the  bismuth  oxychloride,  mica,  metal  powders,  or  fish  scale 
essence may contribute to an irritant contact  dermatitis. These 
substances  may  have  sharp  edged   particles  that  can  produce 
pruritus. Matte finish eye shadows are therefore recommended 
for sensitive skin patients ( Fig. 11.8 ).  

 Some  patients  also  experience  more  irritation  with  darker 
eye shadow colors, such as deep purple, forest green, or navy 
blue. Selection of a lighter shade product in peach, pink, or tan 
may resolve the irritancy.  

   Patients with sensitive upper eyelid skin should select 
matte finish eye shadows without shine or iridescence. 

 Creams,  sticks,  and  pencils  may  cause  irritation  as  the 
 product is rubbed on the eyelid. The friction from this rubbing 
may  cause  tears  to  develop  in  the  eyelid  skin,  increasing  the 
probability  of  irritation.  Automatic  eye  shadows  containing 
volatile vehicles, emulsifiers, and surfactants that may also be 
irritating.  Thus,  matte  finish,  pressed  powder  eye  shadows 
applied gently with a sponge applicator have the least potential 
for irritation ( 24 ). 

 Matte finish eye shadows are also recommended for contact 
lens  wearers  because  the  mica,  metal  powders,  or  fish  scale 
essence  in  frosted  finish  eye  shadows  may  lodge  under  the 
 contact lens causing irritation or possibly corneal abrasion. It 
is advisable to insert the contact lens prior to application of an 
appropriate  eye  shadow  and  to  take  the  lens  out  prior  to 
 cosmetic removal.  

  Eyelid Cosmetics for Acne Patients 
 Cream, stick, and pencil eye shadows do not perform well on 
acne patients with oily complexions. Since these products are 
oil  based,  the  patient’s  sebum  mixes  with  the  eye  shadow, 
encouraging migration into folds. Placing an unpigmented eye 
shadow  setting  cream  beneath  the  colored  eye  shadow  may 
improve  wearability  slightly,  but  the  oil-based  eye  shadow 
product may exacerbate acne or increase follicular irritation. 
Pressed  powder  eye  shadows  are  recommended  for  acne 
patients since the talc base has oil-control qualities and does 
not  place  additional  oils  on  the  face.  For  extended  wear,  the 
powder eye shadow can be applied with a moistened sponge 
applicator.   

   Cream, stick, and pencil eye shadows do not perform well 
on acne patients with oily complexions. 

 Figure  11.8     The  matte  finish  eye  shadow  on  the  left  will  cause  less  irritant 
contact dermatitis than the frosted shiny finish eye shadow on the right.    

  Eyelid Cosmetics for Mature Patients 
 Mature patients should select eyelid cosmetics that minimize 
the appearance of redundant skin on the upper eyelid. Redun-
dant skin encourages migration of cream, stick, and pencil eye 
shadows  into  the  folds,  drawing  attention  to  the  creases. 
Pressed powder eye shadows are recommended, even though 
patients may think that rich creamy eye shadows aid in mois-
turizing dry eyelids. Frosted finish and iridescent eye shadows 
also draw attention to the crepe texture of the redundant skin. 
Therefore, matte finish or light shine eye shadows are recom-
mended. All eye shadows should be placed over an eye shadow 
setting  cream  in  mature  patients.  Mature  patients  can  also 
extend the wearing time of powder eye shadow by applying it 
with a moistened sponge applicator. 

 The mature skin on the upper eyelid may also demonstrate 
dyspigmentation  from  lentigines  or  telangiectasias.  Mature 
patients may be tempted to select vivid, dark eye shadow col-
ors to cover the undesirable eyelid skin color. However, vivid 
colors  draw  attention  to  the  upper  eyelid  and  should  be 
avoided in favor of pastels and muted colors (pink, bluish gray, 
mauve, tan, and peach). Dyspigmentation can be covered by 
applying a facial foundation to the upper eyelid followed by a 
pressed powder eye shadow. Applying facial foundation to the 
upper eyelid improves the eye shadow wearability also.   

   Dyspigmentation of the upper eyelid in mature patients 
can be camouflaged by applying a facial foundation to the 
upper eyelid followed by a pressed powder eye shadow. 

  Eye Cosmetic Camouflage Techniques 
 Eye  cosmetics  can  be  used  to  correct  the  appearance  of  eye 
defects arising from surgery, congenital anomalies, or derma-
toheliosis. The correction is effected by carefully selecting eye 
shadow colors and placing them appropriately on the eyelids. 
 The  eyes  on  a  well-proportioned  face  are  placed  in  such  a 
way that the inner canthal distance is equal to the width of one 
eye  ( Fig.  11.9 ).  If  the  eyes  are  closer  together,  the  patient 
appears hypoteloric; if the eyes are further apart, the patient 
appears  hyperteloric.  Abnormal  intercanthal  distance  is 
 congenital  and  may  or  may  not  be  associated  with  other 
anomalies.  A  more  pleasing  appearance  can  be  imparted  to 

EYES

81

(A)

(B)

(C)

 Figure 11.9     The intercanthal distance should equal the width of one eye in a 
well-proportioned face.    

(D)

hypoteloric  eyes  by  sweeping  deeply  colored  eye  shadow 
up  and  out  from  the  center  to  outer  corners  of  the  lid 
( Fig. 11.10A ). Hyperteloric eyes are de-emphasized by  placing 
deeply  colored  eye  shadow  from  the  inner  canthus  to  the 
 central  eyelid  ( Fig.  11.10B ).  The  color  draws  any  attention 
away from the abnormality ( 25 ).    

   The eyes should be placed on the face in a way that the 
inner canthal distance is equal to the width of one eye. 

 Deeply colored eye shadows can also be effectively used to 
correct the size of the eyes. Female patients who have had skin 
cancer on the eyelid margin may appear to have smaller eyes 
due to wedge resection. The eyes can be made to appear larger 
if deeply colored eye shadow is placed along the lateral orbital 
ridge  and  eyebrow  with  a  small  amount  placed  beneath  the 
lateral lower lash line ( Fig. 11.10C ). A light colored eye shadow 
should be placed medially beneath the eyebrow. Large eyes in 
a  female  patient  with  exophthalmos  due  to  hyperthyroidism 
can be made to appear smaller by applying a dark eye shadow 
only  in  the  crease  and  on  the  lateral  eyelid  ( Fig.  11.10D ).  A 
light eye shadow is then placed on the medial eyelid ( 26 ). 

 Probably the most common cosmetic eye problem seen in 
female  patients  is  blepharochalasis,  commonly  known  as 
drooping or hooded eyelids. A drooping eyelid can be cosmet-
ically corrected by covering the entire eyelid from the lash line 
to the crease with a light matte finish eye shadow ( Fig. 11.10E ). 
A complementary matte finish eye shadow two to three shades 

(E)

(F)

 Figure 11.10     Contouring of eyes ( A ) to make hypoteloric eyes appear more 
widely  set,  ( B )  to  make  hyperteloric  eyes  appear  more  closely  set,  ( C )  to 
enlarge  small  eyes,  ( D )  to  decrease  large  eyes,  ( E )  to  de-emphasize  bilateral 
blepharochalasis, and ( F ) to de-emphasize unilateral ptosis.    

darker  should  be  applied  on  the  medial  and  lateral  eyelids, 
leaving  the  area  above  the  iris  in  a  lighter  color.  Sometimes 
unilateral  ptosis  develops  following  Bell’s  palsy  or  surgery. 
Normally, the upper eyelid should touch the superior border 
of the iris and the lower eyelid should touch the inferior  border 
of the iris. More dramatic eye makeup should be applied to the 
drooping  eyelid.  Both  eyes  should  be  initially  colored  as 
 illustrated  in  Figure  11.10E;  however,  a  brown  eye  shadow 
crayon should be used on the dropping eyelid to apply a line in 
the crease and above the lash line ( Fig. 11.10F ). 

82

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Unfortunately, none of these suggestions for eye recontour-
ing can restore the eye to its normal appearance. The intention 
is to provide the physician with some suggestions to share with 
female  patients  who  are  distraught  about  their  appearance 
 following surgery or as a result of the process of aging.   

  eyelash cosmetics 
 Eyelash  cosmetics  include  mascaras,  eyeliners,  eyelash  dyes, 
and  artificial  eyelashes  ( Table  11.4 ).  Our  discussion  begins 
with  mascara,  the  most  commonly  used  eyelash  cosmetic, 
whose  application  dates  to  Biblical  times.  Its  purpose  is  to 
darken, thicken, and lengthen the eyelashes. Since the  eyelashes 
form a frame for the eye, luxuriant eyelashes can attract atten-
tion  to  this  expressive  facial  feature.  Most  women  consider 
long eyelashes a prerequisite to being attractive.  

 The original mascara worn by women of many ancient civi-
lizations  was  kohl,  which  was  based  on  antimony  trisulfide. 
Mascara  was  subsequently  refined  into  a  cake  comprising 
sodium stearate soaps and lampblack. The product was mixed 
with water and stroked from the cake with a brush and applied 
to the eyelashes. This formulation produced eye irritation on 
contact  and  the  reason  was  sodium  stearate;  and  it  was 
 reformulated  with  triethanolamine  stearate.  Beeswax  was 
 subsequently  added  to  allow  the  product  to  be  somewhat 
water resistant ( 27 ). 

 Mascaras  must  be  carefully  formulated  to  allow  easy  and 
even application without smudging, irritancy, or toxicity. Coal 
tar colors are prohibited by the U.S. Food, Drug and Cosmetic 
Act for use on the eyelashes. Therefore, mascara colorants must 
be  selected  from  vegetable  colors  or  inorganic  pigments  and 
lakes.  Colors  employed  include  iron  oxide  to  produce  black, 
ultramarine blue to create navy, and umber (brown ochre) or 
burnt sienna (a mixture of hydrated ferric oxide with manganic 
oxide) or synthetic brown oxide to create brown ( 28 ). 

 Modern  liquid  mascaras,  available  in  tubes  with  a  mul-
titufted  applicator  brush,  have  virtually  replaced  cake-  and 
cream-type  mascaras  ( Fig.  11.11 ).  The  applicator  is  inserted 
into the tube between uses, providing numerous opportunities 

to inoculate bacteria into the mascara. The most dangerous of 
these  bacteria  is 
 Pseudomonas  aeruginosa .  Even  though 
 mascaras  contain  antibacterials,  it  is  still  wise  to  discard  all 
mascara  tubes  after  three  months  and  not  allow  multiple 
 persons to use the same mascara tube ( 29 ). Persons susceptible 
to infection, or known bacterial carriers should select solvent-
based or disposable mascaras.   

   It is still wise to discard all mascara tubes after three 
months and not allow multiple persons to use the same 
mascara tube to prevent serious eye infections. 

 Mascaras are available in a variety of formulas to coordinate 
with current color and fashion styles. Color selection is wide, 
with  various  shades  of  blacks  and  browns  most  commonly 
seen,  but  pinks,  greens,  yellows,  purples,  and  blues  are  also 
available.  Even  unpigmented  mascara  is  available  for  those 
who wish to lengthen but not darken lashes. 

 Mascara styles, dictated by fashion, are based on the type of 
applicator brush employed. If thick eyelashes are fashionable, 

 Figure 11.11     Mascara is removed from a tube on a tufted applicator to darken 
the eyelashes.    

Table 11.4  Eyelash Cosmetics

Eyelash cosmetics

Main ingredients

Function

Adverse reactions

Cake mascara
Cream mascara
Water-based liquid mascara

Soap and pigments
Vanishing base and pigments
Waxes, pigments, and resins

Darken and thicken eyelashes
Darken and thicken eyelashes
Darken and thicken eyelashes

Irritation due to soaps
Irritant contact dermatitis
Irritant and allergic contact 

Solvent-based liquid mascara

Petroleum distillates, pigments, 

Darken and thicken eyelashes

Irritant and allergic contact 

Water/solvent mascara

Water-in-oil or oil-in-water 

Darken and thicken eyelashes

Irritant and allergic contact 

and waxes

dermatitis

dermatitis

Cake eyeliner
Liquid eyeliner

Pencil eyeliner
Eyeliner tattooing
Eyelash dyes

emulsions

Talc, pigment, and binders
Latex or other polymers and 

Define eyelash line
Define eyelash line

pigments

Waxes and pigment
Tattoo pigments
See chart under hair dyes (page )

Define eyelash line
Permanently define lash line
Darken eyelashes

dermatitis

Minimal
Irritant contact dermatitis

Minimal
Minimal
Irritant and allergic contact 

dermatitis

Artificial eyelashes

Human or synthetic hair fibers

Thicken eyelashes

Irritant contact dermatitis to 

lashes, allergic contact 
dermatitis to glue

EYES

lash-thickening mascaras are used with a larger, longer bristle 
brush applicator to apply mascara generously. If long eyelashes 
are fashionable, lash-lengthening mascaras with a short bristle 
brush  are  used  to  apply  successive  thin  mascara  coats  and 
increase lash separation ( Fig. 11.12 ).  

 Mascaras  are  available  in  several  modern  formulations: 
cake,  cream,  and  liquid.  The  liquid  mascaras  can  be  further 
divided into water-based, solvent-based, and a water/solvent 
hybrid. 

  Cake Mascara 
 Cake  mascara  consists  of  soap  and  pigments  compressed 
into  a  cake.  The  cake  is  stroked  with  a  water-moistened 
brush  and  applied  to  the  eyelashes  ( Fig.  11.13 ).  Unfortu-
nately,  this  form  is  not  water-resistant  and  smudges  with 
tears,  perspiration,  or  rain.  Furthermore,  the  soaps  are 
somewhat irritating to the eye. Less irritating soaps, such as 
triethanolamine stearate, and waxes have been subsequently 
added  to  make  the  mascara  less  irritating  and  more 
 water-resistant.  

 Cake  mascaras  remained  popular  until  the  1960s  when 
cream  and  liquid  preparations  were  introduced,  which 
 provided a greater ease of application. Cake mascaras are still 
available  and  may  be  appropriate  for  patients  who  have 
 developed  eyelid  or  conjunctival  irritation  to  the  newer 
 formulations.  

 Figure 11.12     Mascara can be stroked over the eyelashes in successive coats to 
thicken and lengthen the eyelashes.    

 Figure 11.13     Cake mascaras are moistened and then stroked over the  eyelashes.    

83

  Cream Mascara 
 Cream mascaras developed after cake mascaras, were quickly 
becoming popular due to their lesser propensity to run with 
moisture contact. Additionally, they did not clump or cake as 
easily  on  the  eyelashes.  The  product  consisted  of  a  pigment 
suspended in a vanishing cream base that was brushed from a 
tube onto the eyelashes.  

  Liquid Mascara 
 Liquid  mascara  has  largely  replaced  cake  and  thicker  cream 
mascaras  since  the  development  of  the  automatic  mascara 
tube.  This  invention  consists  of  a  tube  into  which  a  round 
brush is inserted through a small aperture to remove a metered 
amount of the product. There are water-based, solvent-based, 
and hybrid mascaras, which are discussed next. 

   Water-based Mascaras  
 Water-based  mascaras  are  so  named  because  they  are  formu-
lated of waxes (beeswax, carnauba wax, and synthetic waxes), in 
addition to pigments (iron oxides, chrome oxides, ultramarine 
blue,  carmine,  and  titanium  dioxide)  and  resins  dissolved  in 
water. They are classified as oil-in-water emulsions. The water 
evaporates readily, creating a fast-drying product that thickens 
and darkens the lashes. The product is water soluble, allowing 
for easy removal, but unfortunately smudges with perspiration 
and  tearing.  Some  water-based  mascaras  are  labeled  “water-
resistant”  if  they  contain  an  increased  amount  of  wax  or  a 
 polymer to improve adherence of pigment to the lashes. 

 Water-based mascaras are easily contaminated with  bacteria, 
which readily grow in water, and must include preservatives, 
usually parabens. Thus, these products may potentially cause 
an allergic reaction in paraben-sensitive individuals; however, 
water-based mascaras are generally the least sensitizing of the 
mascara types. Some patients may experience a  contact irrita-
tion from the emulsifiers required to maintain the pigment in 
solution.  

   Water-based mascaras are easily contaminated with 
bacteria, which readily grow in water, and must include 
preservatives, usually parabens. 

 Specialty additives can be incorporated into the formulation 
to  enhance  the  cosmetic  appearance  of  the  lashes.  These 
 substances  include  hydrolyzed  animal  protein  to  condition 
lashes, nylon or rayon fibers to elongate lashes and polyvinyl-
pyrrolidone resins to decrease smudging.  

   Solvent-based Mascara  
 Solvent-based  mascaras  are  formulated  with  petroleum 
 distillates  to  which  pigments  (iron  oxides,  chrome  oxides, 
ultramarine blue, carmine, and titanium dioxide) and waxes 
(candelilla  wax,  carnauba  wax,  ozokerite,  and  hydrogenated 
castor  oil)  are  added,  thus  making  them  waterproof.  As  a 
result,  the  product  performs  well  with  perspiration  and 
 tearing, but the removal of which is difficult and requires an 
oil-based lotion or cream. Deposits may form on the lashes if 
the product is not removed completely. Care must be taken to 
avoid smudging the product immediately after application, as 
solvent-based mascaras have a prolonged drying time. 

84

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Preservatives are still added, but microbial contamination is 
not a great problem since the petroleum-based solvent is anti-
bacterial. Some products also contain talc or kaolin to improve 
lash thickening and nylon or rayon fibers to lengthen lashes. 
Solvent-based mascaras can be an eye irritant.  

   Water/Solvent Hybrid Mascaras  
 Some of the mascaras combine both solvent-based and water-
based  systems  to  form  either  a  water-in-oil  or  oil-in-water 
emulsion. The idea is to create an optimal product that thick-
ens with a short drying time like the water-based mascaras, but 
provides  waterproof  lash  separation  like  a  solvent-based 
 mascara. The water in the formulation requires incorporation 
of a good preservative system.    

  eyelash cosmetic safety issues 
 The most feared adverse reaction to mascaras is that of infec-
tion,  particularly   P.  aeruginosa   corneal  infections  which  can 
permanently  destroy  visual  acuity  ( 30 , 31 ).   Staphylococcus  
  epidermidis   and   S.  aureus   organisms  may  also  proliferate  in 
contaminated mascaras ( 32 ). Infections are more common if 
the  eyeball  is  traumatized  with  the  infected  mascara.  As 
 mentioned  previously,  individuals  with  recurrent  bacterial 
infections  due  to  colonization  should  probably  select 
 solvent-based mascaras ( 33 ). 

 Fungal organisms can also contaminate mascaras and result 
in eye infection ( 34 ). This is rarer and usually only found in 
patients who are immunocompromised or wear contact lenses. 
 The  pigment  contained  within  mascaras  can  result  in 
 conjunctival  pigmentation  if  the  mascara  is  washed  into  the 
conjunctival sac by lacrimal fluid ( 35 ). This colored particu-
late matter can be observed on the upper margin of the tarsal 
 conjunctiva. Histologically, the pigment is seen within macro-
phages and extracellularly with varying degrees of lymphocytic 
infiltrates. Electron microscopy suggests that ferritin, carbon, 
and iron oxides are present within the tissues ( 36 ). Unfortu-
nately,  there  is  no  treatment  for  the  condition,  which 
 fortunately is usually asymptomatic.  

   The pigment contained within mascaras can result in 
conjunctival pigmentation if the mascara is washed into 
the conjunctival sac by lacrimal fluid. 

 Allergic  contact  dermatitis  has  been  reported  of  rosin 
( colophony) ( 37 ) and dihydroabietyl alcohol (Abitol, Eastman 
Chemical Company) ( 38 , 39 ) contained in some mascaras. But 
waterproof  eye  cosmetic  removal  products  (discussed  on 
page),  used  to  remove  solvent-based  mascaras,  can  also  be  a 
source of eyelid dermatitis  ( 4 ). Mascaras can be open or closed 
patch tested “as is,” but should be allowed to thoroughly dry 
prior to closed patch testing to avoid an irritant reaction from 
the volatile vehicle.  

  eyeliner 
 Eyeliner defines the margins of the eye. It is placed immediately 
outside and sometimes inside the lash line. The color and place-
ment of eyeliner are dictated by fashion. In the 1960s, a well-
defined, thin black line drawn outside the upper and lower lash 
line was considered appropriate; however, the 1980s look was 

 Figure 11.14     Pencil eyeliners are rubbed on the eyelash line and leave behind 
a wax pigmented film.    

to use a subdued gray or deep blue smudged thick line outside 
the lower lash line only. The look of the 1990s was a thick sharp 
black  line  surrounding  the  entire  eye  with  extension  beyond 
the lateral canthus, a look sometimes termed as “cat eye.”  

   Eyeliner defines the margins of the eye and can be placed 
outside or inside the lash line. 

 Eyeliner is available in cake, liquid, and pencil forms. Cake 
eyeliner has the same composition as eye shadow, except for 
the  addition  of  surfactants  promoting  formation  of  a  paste 
when the powder is mixed with water. Cake eyeliner has largely 
been  replaced  by  liquid  eyeliner,  which  contains  the  same 
 pigments premixed in a water-soluble latex base. Latex-based 
liquid  eyeliners  contain  water,  cellulose  gum,  thickeners 
( magnesium aluminum silicate), and styrene-butadiene latex. 
These products are packaged as marking pens or in the same 
form as mascaras, with a cylindrical tube and unitufted appli-
cator brush. Automatic eyeliners are based on polymers, such 
as an ammonium acrylate copolymer, which leave a pigmented 
film after drying ( 40 ). 

 Pencil  type  eyeliners  are  popular  due  to  their  application 
ease ( Fig. 11.14 ). Automatic liquid eyeliners create a defined 
line  that  requires  a  steady  artistic  hand  for  application,  but 
pencil eyeliners give a smudged look and require less applica-
tion skill. Pencil eyeliners contain natural and synthetic waxes 
combined with pigments, mineral or vegetable oils, and  lanolin 
derivatives that are extruded into rods and encased in wood. 
The pencil is then sharpened to the desired tip, which can be 
thin or broad depending on the patient’s preference. Resharp-
ening  also  removes  the  exposed  part  of  the  eyeliner,  thus 
decreasing contamination.  

 The application method used for eyeliners depends largely 
on  fashion.  The  cake,  liquid,  or  pencil  is  stroked  across  the 
upper and/or lower eyelid in the amount and position desired 
( Fig. 11.15 ).  

 Eyeliners  are  subject  to  the  same  bacterial  and  fungal 
 contamination  seen  with  mascaras,  especially  if  the  liquid 
form is chosen. But the main adverse reaction is the possibility 
of  conjunctival  pigmentation,  also  seen  with  mascaras  ( 41 ). 
This  problem  is  more  commonly  associated  with  eyeliner 
when it is applied within the lower lid margin. Usually, blue 
eyeliner is used in this location to create the appearance of a 
whiter sclera. This practice is unsafe. 

EYES

85

   Eyelash dyes are not available for home use. 

 Eyelash  dyes  should  not  be  used  more  than  every  three 
weeks  since  they  are  extremely  irritating  to  the  eye  and  can 
cause an irritant or allergic contact dermatitis. They are patch 
tested in the same manner as hair dyes. 

 Light-colored eyelashes can be darkened nicely by a repeated 
application of black or brown waterproof mascara containing 
talc or kaolin for lash thickening.  

  artificial eyelashes 
 Artificial eyelashes are most popular among those in the enter-
tainment  industry,  although  they  can  be  effectively  used  by 
patients who have thin or absent eyelashes. Human hair and 
synthetic  nylon  lashes  are  available  in  varying  colors  and 
lengths  with  costs  ranging  from  $1  to  $20.  The  lashes  are 
attached to existing lashes on the upper or lower eyelids with a 
clear or pigmented methacrylate-based glue.  

   Artificial eyelashes are available as singlets, demilashes, 
and complete eyelashes to camouflage eyelash loss. 

 Artificial eyelashes are available as lash singlets, demilashes, 
and complete eyelashes. If lash singlets are used, several artifi-
cial lashes are glued to the patient’s existing natural eyelashes. 
Demilashes,  which  are  sparse  artificial  lashes,  and  complete 
lashes, which are dense artificial lashes, are glued immediately 
above the existing lash line. The eyelashes are removed with a 
solvent specially designed to remove the adhesive. 

 Lash singlets are difficult for the novice to apply, but can be 
used effectively at the lateral upper lash line to minimize the 
appearance of overhanging eyelids. Complete lashes are only 
appropriate  for  patients  who  have  total  loss  of  their  own 
 eyelashes.  Demilashes  are  appropriate  for  the  patient  with 
short,  thinned,  or  partially  absent  lashes.  Demilashes  are 
 routinely  worn  by  television  personalities  and  can  be  quite 
natural  appearing  if  the  length  is  not  exaggerated.  Artificial 
eyelashes can be easily trimmed and customized with scissors. 
 Artificial  eyelashes  may  be  difficult  to  wear  since  the 
 eyelashes  themselves  can  irritate  the  eye,  tarsal  plate,  and 
 eyelid. Both irritant and allergic contact dermatitis can develop 
in response to the attachment glue and removal solvent. The 
most adherent eyelash glues are methacrylate based, which is a 
known sensitizer.  

  eyelash cosmetics for special needs 
 Certain  patients  within  a  physician’s  practice  may  require 
 careful selection of eyelash cosmetics. These are patients with 
allergies and/or contact lenses, as well as patients undergoing 
treatment for acne. Mature patients may require special eyelash 
cosmetic consultation to achieve an optimal appearance. 

  Eyelash Cosmetics for Sensitive Patients and/or Contact 
Lens Wearers 
 Eyelash cosmetics are commonly a source of irritant or allergic 
contact  dermatitis.  Most  cases  represent  irritant  dermatitis, 
since  the  FDA  closely  regulates  the  chemicals,  preservatives, 
and pigments used in eyelash cosmetics. Many sensitive skin 

 Figure 11.15     Liquid eyeliners are frequently stroked outside the eyelash line 
and leave behind a pigmented polymer film.    

 Open and closed patch testing can be performed “as is,” but 

liquid eyeliner should be allowed to dry prior to occlusion.  

  eyeliner tattooing 
 Eyeliner tattooing, practiced by ophthalmologists, dermatolo-
gists, plastic surgeons, and some beauty operators, involves the 
intradermal  insertion  of  black  pigment,  or  other  colored 
 pigments  such  as  brown  or  navy  blue,  on  or  outside  of  the 
upper and lower eyelash line. The pigment is inserted into the 
upper dermis at a constant depth by punctures created with a 
 specially  designed  needle.  The  black,  brown,  green,  or  navy 
blue pigments are of low allergenic potential, accounting for 
the rare incidence of side effects.  

   Permanent eyeliner is a black tattoo artistically placed to 
highlight the eyelash margin. 

 Eyeliner tattooing has gained popularity among entertain-
ment  personalities,  both  male  and  female;  however,  for  the 
average  patient,  a  permanent  eyeliner  does  not  allow  the 
 fashion  versatility  that  most  people  desire.  Patients  with 
 permanent eyelash loss may wish to consider eyeliner tattoo-
ing, which can be applied as outlined under corrective eyelash 
 cosmetics. The tattooing should be done in a thin line so that 
the  patient  can  apply  a  colored  eyeliner  pencil,  if  desired,  to 
conform to fashion trends. 

 Patients who elect eyeliner tattooing should recognize that 
the  color  will  fade  with  time  and  some  migration  of  the 
 pigment  is  possible.  The  decision  should  be  considered 
 carefully  prior  to  tattooing  as  the  pigment  is  exceedingly 
 difficult to remove once inserted into the dermis.  

  eyelash dyes 
 Eyelash dyes are used by those persons who have light-colored 
eyelashes  due  to  canities,  natural  hair  color,  or  dermatoses 
such as vitiligo. No over-the-counter eyelash dyes are available, 
due  to  the  risk  of  eye  damage.  The  U.S.  FDA  is  currently 
attempting  to  outlaw  the  use  of  eyelash  dyes.  Some  dyeing 
products are imported illegally from Europe, and other salons 
use products intended for scalp hair on the eyelashes. Products 
used by professional cosmetologists may contain either para-
phenylenediamine dyes or metallic dyes. A further discussion 
of these products is included in the chapter on hair coloring.  

86

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

patients  find  mascaras  extremely  irritating  to  their  eyes  and 
should be advised to wear a product specifically designed for 
allergic  patients  or  a  water-based  mascara.  Unpigmented 
 mascaras seem to cause less irritation in some patients. 

 Application  techniques  can  also  minimize  problems. 
 Mascara can be applied in several coats only to the eyelash tips. 
This  emphasizes  the  lashes  while  limiting  mascara  contact 
with  the  eye  and  skin.  All  waterproof  mascaras  should  be 
avoided since the removal solvent and the rubbing required to 
remove the mascara may produce irritation. Artificial  eyelashes 
and eyelash dyeing should also be avoided. 

 Pencil-type eyeliners are better tolerated by some sensitive 
skin  patients,  but  the  eyeliner  should  never  be  placed  inside 
the lower lid margin where it will be removed by tearing and 
washed into the eye. This is not advisable as the pigment may 
tattoo the conjunctiva and possibly the lower palpebral sac. 

 Some  contact  lens  wearers  are  bothered  by  mascaras  that 
cake on the lashes and flake into the eye. Water-based mascaras 
are more likely to cake than solvent-based mascaras. Patients 
wearing  soft  contact  lenses,  with  a  high  water  content,  may 
prefer waterproof solvent-based mascaras since these are less 
likely to bind to the lens. The pigment in mascaras and eyelin-
ers can actually stain water- and gas-permeable contact lenses.  

  Eyelash Cosmetics for Acne and/or Oily-Complected 
Patients 
 Many  dermatologists  recommend  water-based  cosmetics  for 
their  acne  patients  as  a  general  rule,  including  water-based 
mascaras. Acne patients who have oily complexions may find 
that water-based mascaras become easily wet by sebum, caus-
ing running and smudging. Solvent-based mascaras should be 
recommended  for  oily-complected  patients.  The  solvent-
based mascaras can smudge if not adequately allowed to dry 
between coats but, once dry, they are resistant to smudging. 

 Patients with oily complexions may also notice that pencil-
type  eyeliners  wear  poorly  and  smudge.  This  is  due  to  poor 
adhesion between the cosmetic and skin caused by sebum. The 
pencil-type eyeliner will wear longer if a foundation covered by 
a loose powder is placed on the eyelid prior to eyeliner applica-
tion. A polymer eyeliner could also be selected as an alternative.  

 The  appearance  of  blepharochalasis  can  be  minimized  by 
lengthening the eyelashes, since some of the eyelash length is 
covered  by  redundant  skin.  An  appearance  of  lengthened 
 eyelashes  can  be  created  by  curling  the  eyelashes  with 
an  eyelash curler immediately after mascara application. The 
eyelashes  are  placed  in  a  rubber  padded  holder  that  bends 
them upward at a more acute angle. This decreases the natural 
curl of the eyelashes, making them appear longer, but can also 
 promote eyelash breakage. Demilashes slightly longer than the 
patient’s natural lashes can also be used to create the  appearance 
of longer eyelashes.   

  corrective eyelash cosmetics 
 Eyelashes function cosmetically as a frame for the eye. Unfor-
tunately,  they  may  thin  due  to  age,  alopecia  areata  or  eyelid 
scarring  secondary  to  surgery,  or  infections  such  as  herpes 
 zoster. Thinned or absent eyelashes result in nondescript eyes 
and loss of the main focal point for the face. 

 Eyeliner, mascara, and loose transparent face powder can be 
used  to  cosmetically  compensate  for  thinned  eyelashes.  The 
first step is to use a liquid eyeliner to dot the upper and lower 
eyelid  ( Fig.  11.16A )  creating  the  illusion  of  eyelashes. A  light 
application  of  dark  brown  or  black  fibered  mascara  should 
then be applied to the remaining lashes. A powder brush is then 
dipped in loose powder and dusted on the wet mascara with 
the eye closed to prevent powder from entering the eye. Another 
layer  of  mascara  is  then  applied  and  the  process  is  repeated 
until the remaining lashes have been thickened to the desired 
degree.  This  technique  is  useful  only  in  patients  who  have 
 generalized eyelash thinning or focal areas of complete loss.  

 It  is  more  difficult  to  reconstruct  the  lash  line  in  patients 
who  have  large  areas  of  eyelash  loss  or  total  eyelash  loss.  In 
these female patients, a brown or black liquid or pencil  eyeliner 
should  be  used  to  rim  the  entire  eye,  except  for  one-quarter 

  Eyelash Cosmetics for Mature Patients 
 Eyelash  cosmetics  are  important  in  the  mature  patient. 
 Mascara can darken lashes lightened by canities and should be 
applied from the base of the lash to the tips in long strokes to 
cover  the  lashes  completely  with  pigment.  However,  black 
mascara should be avoided in patients with recessed eyes since 
it will only darken the already shadowed eyes. Brown or navy 
blue mascara is more appropriate.  

(A)

   Eyelash length and thickness decrease in mature patients 
and can be camouflaged with mascara. 

(C)

 Eyelash  length  and  thickness  also  tend  to  decrease  in  the 
mature patient. Eyelash length can be maximized by using a 
lengthening mascara that contains nylon or rayon fibers. Each 
successive coat should dry completely to maximize lash length. 
Thickening  mascaras  containing  talc  or  kaolin  can  increase 
lash size with repeated applications to the tips only. 

(B)

(D)

 Figure  11.16     Eye  lining  techniques  ( A )  to  reconstruct  thinned  or  partially 
absent  eyelashes,  ( B )  to  reconstruct  totally  absent  eyelashes,  ( C )  to  enlarge 
small eyes, and ( D ) to widen hypoteloric eyes.    

EYES

inch around the inner canthus on the upper and lower eyelids 
( Fig. 11.16B ). On the normal eye, terminal hairs do not grow 
around  the  inner  canthus.  For  female  patients  with  more 
extensive loss, artificial demilashes can be applied at this point 
or,  in  patients  with  total  eyelash  loss,  complete  artificial 
 eyelashes can be applied. 

 Eyeliner can also be used to contour the eyes while simultane-
ously  reconstructing  a  lash  line.  Small  eyes  can  be  enlarged  by 
lining the entire upper lash line and the lateral half of the lower 
lash line ( Fig. 11.16C ). Hypoteloric eyes can be widened by lining 
the lateral half of both the upper and lower lash lines ( Fig. 11.16D ).  

  eyebrow cosmetics 
 The accepted shape and width of the eyebrows are subject to 
fashion  trends.  Eyebrows  were  almost  completely  plucked  in 
the  1950s  with  a  thin  pencil  line  drawn  to  connect  the  few 
remaining hairs. Unfortunately, many women who are now in 
their 60s and 70s can no longer grow eyebrow hairs as a result 
of  overplucking  during  their  younger  years.  This  is  in  direct 
contrast to the eyebrow look of the 1960s, which was totally 
natural  and  ungroomed.  The  1990s  have  compromised  with 
thick eyebrows considered attractive, but stray hairs beneath 
the brow line are plucked to give a groomed appearance. 

 There  are  several  eyebrow  cosmetics:  pencils,  sealers,  dyes, 

and artificial eyebrows ( Table 11.5 ).  

  Eyebrow Pencil 
 Eyebrow pencils are used to darken light or gray eyebrows, fill 
in sparse or absent eyebrow hairs, and reconstruct malformed 
or misshapen eyebrows. Eyebrow pencils are formed by  mixing 
pigments, petrolatum, lanolin, and synthetic or natural waxes 
( Fig.  11.17 ).  This  formulation  is  similar  to  that  of   lipstick 
products, but differs in one aspect that higher melting point 
waxes are used to yield a firmer product. Formulations may be 
encased in wood to form a pencil, or extruded into rods placed 
in a plastic holder.  

Table 11.5  Eyebrow Cosmetics

Function

Adverse reactions

Eyebrow 
cosmetic

Eyebrow 
pencil

Eyebrow 
sealer

Eyebrow 
dye

Artificial 

eyebrows

Main 
ingredients

Pigment, 
wax, 
petrolatum, 
lanolin
Synthetic 
polymer

Metallic dyes, 
stains, or 
permanent 
dyes
Human, 

synthetic, 
or wool hair

Darken and 
thicken 
eyebrows

Eyebrow hair 
grooming 
agent
To darken 

eyebrow hairs

Replace 

missing 
eyebrow hair

Eyebrow 

Tattoo 

tattooing

pigments

Replace 

missing 
eyebrows

Minimal

Minimal

May be illegal, 
blindness, 
contact 
dermatitis
Irritant contact 
dermatitis to 
hair, allergic 
contact 
dermatitis to 
adhesive

Allergic contact 
dermatitis to 
tattoo pigment

87

 Pencils  are  available  in  a  variety  of  colors  from  grays  to 
browns to blacks. Inert, mainly inorganic, pigments are used 
since the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act prohibits the 
use of coal tar colors in the eye area. They are stroked over the 
skin  in  the  eyebrow  region  to  actually  color  the  skin  and 
 eyebrow hairs ( 42 ). 

 Contact dermatitis to eyebrow pencils is rare. The product 

can be open or closed patch tested “as is.”  

  Eyebrow Sealer 
 Eyebrow  sealers  are  intended  as  a  grooming  agent  for 
unruly eyebrows and a glossing agent to add shine to eyebrow 
hairs.  Originally,  white  petroleum  jelly  was  used  for  this 
 purpose, but now cosmetic companies market a more elegant 
product. The sealer is essentially a liquid hair spray containing 
polymer-holding  agents  packaged  in  a  mascara-type  tube. 
A brush is used to stroke the product over the eyebrow hairs.  

   Eyebrow sealers can be used to groom unruly eyebrows in 
mature individuals. 

 Eyebrow sealers can be used by persons with bushy eyebrows 
to hold the hairs closer to the orbital ridge or by those with 
multidirectional eyebrow hairs who wish to hold the hairs in a 
more  cosmetically  acceptable  line.  The  sealer  can  also  be 
 pigmented to darken graying eyebrows. The product is easily 
removed with soap and water. 

 Eyebrow sealers could be a source of irritant contact derma-
titis due to the incorporation of volatile vehicles. The product 
can be patch tested “as is,” but should thoroughly dry prior to 
occlusion.  

  Eyebrow Dye 
 Eyebrow hair can be dyed in the same manner as scalp hair. 
This service is offered by many professional salons; however, 
hair dye packaging specifically states the dyestuff is not to be 
used  in  the  eye  area  and  contains  the  following  warning: 
“ Caution: This product contains ingredients which may cause 
skin  irritation  on  certain  individuals  and  a  preliminary  test 
according  to  accompanying  directions  should  first  be  made. 

 Figure 11.17     The upper tufted brush contains a pigmented eyebrow sealer to 
groom  and  darken  the  eyebrows.  The  lower  stick  is  an  eyebrow  pencil 
 dispensed from a plastic tube and stroked across the eyebrow to darken and 
thicken the brow appearance.    

88

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

This  product  must  not  be  used  for  dyeing  the  eyelashes  or 
 eyebrows;  to  do  so  may  cause  blindness.”  The  U.S.  FDA  has 
engaged unsuccessfully in several law suits to remove eye area 
dyes from the market ( 43 ). 

 Eyebrow  dyes  that  are  present  in  some  salons  are  of  the 
metallic type, stains, or permanent hair dyes. The metallic dyes, 
containing lead or silver, are applied over a period of weeks and 
cause gradual darkening of the hairs due to the  formation of 
metallic  oxides  and  sulfides  on  the  hair  shaft,  imparting  a 
 yellow  brown  to  black  color.  Some  salons  use   professional 
stains  that  are  specifically  manufactured  for   eyebrow  dyeing. 
The stain is applied with a toothpick only to the eyebrow hairs 
as skin contact will result in staining. A special product is used 
to remove stain from the skin. Other salons use the same dye 
that is applied to the scalp for dyeing the  eyebrows, taking care 
to keep material from entering the eye.  

   The U.S. FDA considers eyebrow dye products illegal. 

 It  should  be  reemphasized  that  the  U.S.  FDA  considers  all 
the  eyebrow  dyeing  products  that  have  been  previously 
 discussed dangerous and illegal.  

  Artificial Eyebrows 
 Artificial eyebrows are available for individuals who have per-
manently lost a substantial amount of their natural eyebrow 
hair. Synthetic or natural human hair can be knotted onto a 
thin  netting  in  the  appropriate  amount  and  shape  for  a 
patient’s face. The netting is then glued on the superior orbital 
ridge  with  a  waterproof  adhesive.  Salons  specializing  in  hair 
replacement can provide patient assistance. 

 The use of crepe hair is an eyebrow replacement technique, 
adapted  from  the  theater,  which  is  more  appropriate  for  the 
patient who has temporarily lost substantial eyebrow hair ( 44 ). 
Crepe  hair  is  made  from  wool  and  available  as  braids  in  a 
 variety of colors. The braided fibers are separated, straightened, 
and cut to the desired length. Adhesive is then used to glue the 
fibers  directly  to  the  skin.  New  fibers  must  be  prepared  and 
glued for each application. 

 Possible adverse reactions include irritant contact dermatitis 
to the eyebrow prosthesis and/or allergic contact dermatitis to 
the adhesive, which may contain methacrylate.  

  Eyebrow Tattooing 
 Eyebrows can be reconstructed or thickened with the use of a 
tattoo pigment. Brown, black, gray, yellow, or orange pigments 
can be blended and placed within the superficial dermis to add 
color  to  the  eyebrow  area.  Certainly,  this  must  be  done  by  a 
trained  individual  under  hygienic  conditions.  Unfortunately, 
eyebrow tattooing is less than optimal since the overlying skin 
has  a  rather  unnatural  shiny  appearance.  Allergic  contact 
 dermatitis is possible to some of the pigments.  

  Corrective Eyebrow Cosmetics 
 The  structure  of  the  eyebrows  can  be  abnormal  due  to  con-
genital  deformity,  surgical  procedures,  or  acquired  loss  from 
alopecia universalis, hypothyroidism, leprosy, traumatic scar-
ring, and other conditions. Before cosmetic reconstruction can 
begin,  it  is  important  to  identify  the  proper  location  of  the 

A

B

C

 Figure 11.18     A well-proportioned eyebrow should begin at point A,  maximally 
arch at point B, and end at point C.    

(A)

(B)

(C)

 Figure 11.19     The intercanthal distance is the same in  A ,  B , and  C ; however, the 
distance between the medial eyebrows has been changed. Note the resultant 
illusion of hypertelorism in  B  and hypotelorism in  C .    

 eyebrow  on  the  face  ( Fig.  11.18 ).  The  medial  aspect  of  the 
 eyebrow  should  begin  at  a  point  defined  by  a  straight  line 
drawn  from  the  lateral  nose  upward.  The  eyebrow  should 
maximally  arch  at  a  point  defined  by  a  line  drawn  from  the 
lateral nose through the pupil. The eyebrow should end at a 
point defined by a line drawn from the lateral nose through 
the lateral aspect of the eyeball. Any hair removal to improve 
eyebrow appearance should be from the inferior aspect of the 
eyebrow.  Hairs  should  never  be  removed  from  the  superior 
border; this will disturb the natural eyebrow contour.   

   Improper placement of the eyebrows can alter facial 
expression and the appearance of the eyes. 

 Improper placement of the eyebrows can alter facial expres-
sion and the appearance of the eyes while normal placement 
gives  an  aesthetically  pleasing  appearance  ( Fig.  11.19A ). 

EYES

 Figure 11.20     An eyebrow crayon can be used to draw in absent hairs, shown at 
the bottom of the image, with further darkening provided with pigment on a 
tufted brush, shown in the upper image.    

 Figure 11.21     An eyebrow brush and comb can be used to groom thinning or 
absent eyebrows.    

 Eyebrows that are placed too far apart give the impression of 
surprise  and  can  make  the  patient  appear  hyperteloric 
( Fig. 11.19B ) while eyebrows that are too close together give an 
angry, intense look and impart hypotelorism ( Fig. 11.19C ). If 
the eyes are improperly placed on the face, these concepts can 
be  used  to  alter  eyebrow  position  to  create  the  illusion  of 
 properly spaced eyes.   

   Eyebrow pencil can be used to camouflage thinning 
eyebrows. 

 An eyebrow pencil or a crayon can be used to draw absent 
hairs ( Fig. 11.20 ). A more natural appearance is created if the 
pencil is used in short strokes rather than to draw one straight 
line ( 45 ). The eyebrow pencil will adhere better if the skin is 
first covered with a facial foundation. A brush can also be used 
to push the eyebrows into place to cover areas of thinning or 
loss ( Fig. 11.21 ).     
  summary 
 Eye cosmetics can be used to both adorn and camouflage. They 
can  minimize  the  appearance  of  eyelash  loss  seen  in   several 
 dermatologic conditions while also serving as a source of con-
tact  dermatitis  and  infection.  This  chapter  has  presented  the 
formulation of eye cosmetics for the lid and eyelashes to help 
the dermatologist understand the important considerations for 
this class of popular cosmetics.   

89

   references 
    1.       Panati     C    .   Extradordinary origins of everyday things  .   New York  :   Harper & 

Row Publishers  ,   1987  :   223  .   

    2.       Wells     FV   ,    Lubowe     II    .   Rouge and eye make-up  .   In  :    Cosmetics and the Skin  . 

  New York  :   Reinhold Publishing Corporation  ,   1964  :   173  –  4  .   

    3.       Lanzet      M    .    Modern  formulations  of  coloring  agents:  facial  and  eye  .    In  : 
    Frost     P   ,    Horowitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Principles of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist  . 
  St. Louis  :   C. V. Mosby Company  ,   1982  :   138  –  9  .   

    4.       Ross     JS   ,    White     IR    .   Eyelid dermatitis due to cocamidopropyl betaine in an 

eye make-up remover  .   Contact Dermatitis     1991  ;   25  :   64  .   

    5.       Fisher     AA    .   Cosmetic dermatitis of the eyelids  .   Cutis     1984  ;   34  :   216  –  21  .   
    6.       Valsecchi      R   ,     Imberti      G   ,     Martino      D   ,     Cainelli      T    .    Eyelid  dermatitis:  an 

 evaluation of 150 patients  .   Contact Dermatitis     1992  ;   27  :   143  –  7  .   

    7.       Adams      RM   ,    Maibach     HI    .   A  five-year study of cosmetic reactions  .   J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13 : 1062  –  9  .   

    8.       Wolf      R   ,     Perluk      H    .    Failure  of  routine  patch  test  results  to  detect  eyelid 

 dermatitis  .   Cutis     1992  ;   49  :   133  –  4  .   

    9.       Nethercott     JR   ,    Nield     G   ,    Linn     Holness. D    .   A review of 79 cases of eyelid 

dermatitis  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1989  ;   21  :   223  –  30  .   

   10.       Maibach     HI   ,    Engasser     PG    .   Dermatitis due to cosmetics  .   In  :     Fisher     AA    ,   ed  . 
  Contact Dermatitis  ,   3rd edn  .   Philadelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  :   378  –  9  .   
   11.       Maibach      HI   ,     Engasser      P   ,     Ostler      B    .    Upper  eyelid  dermatitis  syndrome  . 

   Dermatol Clin     1992  ;   10  :   549  –  54  .   

   12.       Marks     JG   ,    DeLeo     VA    .   Preservatives and vehicles  .   In  :   Contact and Occupa-

tional Dermatology  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby  ,   1992  :   107  –  33  .   

   13.       White      IR   ,     Lovell      CR   ,     Cronin      E    .    Antioxidants  in  cosmetics  .    Contact 

 Dermatitis     1984  ;   11  :   265  –  7  .   

   14.       Calnan      CD    .    Ditertiary  butylhydroquinone  in  eye  shadow  .    Contact 

 Dermatitis Newsl     1973  ;   14  :   402  .   

   15.       Fisher      AA    .    Allergic  contact  dermatitis  due  to  rosin  (colophony)  in 

 eyeshadow and mascara  .   Cutis     1988  ;   42  :   505  –  8  .   

   16.       Eiermann      HJ   ,     Larsen      W   ,     Maibach      HI   ,     Taylor      JS    .    Prospective  study  of 
 cosmetic reactions: 1977-1980  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1982  ;   6  :   909  –  17  .   
   17.       Schorr     WF    .   Lip gloss and gloss-type cosmetics  .   Contact Dermatitis Newsl   

  1973  ;   14  :   408  .   

   18.       Hannuksela      M   ,     Pirila      V   ,     Salo      OP    .    Skin  reactions  to  propylene  glycol  . 

   Contact Dermatitis     1975  ;   1  :   112  –  16  .   

   19.       Larsen     WG    .    Cosmetic  dermatitis  due  to  a  perfume  .    Contact  Dermatitis   

  1975  ;   1  :   142  –  5  .   

   20.       Goh      CL   ,     Ng      SK   ,     Kwok      SF    .    Allergic  contact  dermatitis  from  nickel  in 

 eyeshadow  .   Contact Dermatitis     1989  ;   20  :   380  –  1  .   

   21.       deGroot     AC   ,    Weyland     JW   ,    Nater     JP    .   Face cosmetics  .   In  :   Unwanted Effects 
of  Cosmetics  and  Drugs  Used  in  Dermatology  .    Amsterdam  :    Elsevier  , 
  1994  :   513  .   

   22.       Pascher     F    .   Adverse reactions to eye area cosmetics and their management  . 

  J Soc Cosmet Chem     1982  ;   33  :   249  –  58  .   

   23.       Van Ketel     WG    .   Patch testing with eye cosmetics  .   Contact Dermatitis     1979  ; 

  5  :   402  .   

   24.       Draelos     ZK    .   Eye cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   1  –  5  .   
   25.       Greene     A   ,    Pomerance     M    .   The successful face  .   New York  :   Summit Books  , 

  1985  :   67  –  73  .   

   26.       Arpel     A    .   851 Fast Beauty Fixes and Facts  .   New York  :   GP Putnam’s Sons  , 

  1985  :   97  –  100  .   

   27.       Rutkin      P    .    Eye  make-up  .    In  :      deNavarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and 
 Manufacture of Cosmetics. Allured Publishing Corp  ,   1988  :   712  –  17  .   
   28.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  ,    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   341  –  7  .   

   29.       Bhadauria     B   ,    Ahearn     DG    .   Loss of effectiveness of preservative systems of 

mascaras with age  .   Appl Environ Microbiol     1980  ;   39  :   665  –  7  .   

   30.       Wilson      LA   ,     Ahern      DG    .    Pseudomonas-induced  corneal  ulcer  associated 
with contaminated eye mascaras  .   Am J Ophthalmol     1977  ;   84  :   112  –  19  .   
   31.     MMWR  Reports :  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  corneal  infection  related  to 

mascara applicator trauma  .   Arch Dermatol     1990  ;   126  :   734  .   

   32.       Ahearn      DG   ,     Wilson  ,    LA    .    Microflora  of  the  outer  eye  and  eye  area 

 cosmetics  .   Dev Ind Microiol     1976  ;   17  :   23  –  8  .   

   33.       Ahern     DG   ,    Wilson     LA   ,    Julian     AJ    ,   et al  .   Microbial growth in eye cosmet-

ics: contamination during use  .   Dev Ind Microbiol     1974  ;   15  :   211  –  16  .   
   34.       Kuehne     JW   ,    Ahearn     DG    .   Incidence and characterization of fungi in eye 

cosmetics  .   Dev Ind Microbiol     1971  ;   12  :   1973  –  7  .   

   35.       Jervey      JH    .    Mascara  pigmentation  of  the  conjunctiva  .    Arch  Opthalmol   

  1969  ;   81  :   124  –  5  .   

90

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   36.       Platia     EV   ,    AMichaels     RG   ,    Green     WR    .   Eye cosmetic-induced conjunctival 

pigmentation  .   Ann Ophthalamol     1978  ;   10  :   501  –  4  .   

     Goldstein     N    .   Tattoos defined  .   Clin Dermatol     2007  ;   25  :   417  –  20  .   
     Goossens     A    .   Contact allergic reactions on the eyes and eyelids  .   Bull Soc Beige 

   37.       Fisher      AA    .    Allergic  contact  dermatitis  due  to  rosin  (colophony)  in 

Ophtalmol     2004  ;   292  :   11  –  17  .   

 eyeshadow and mascara  .   Cutis     1988  ;   42  :   507  –  8  .   

     Guin     JD    .   Eyelid dermatitis: experience in 203 cases  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2002  ; 

   38.       Rapaport     MJ    .   Sensitization to abitol  .   Contact Dermatitis     1980  ;   6  :   137  –  8  .   
   39.       Dooms-Goosens     A   ,    Degreef     J   ,    Luytens     E    .   Dihydroabietyl alcohol (Abitol), 

a sensitizer in mascara  .   Contact Dermatitis     1979  ;   5  :   350  –  3  .   

   40.       Lanzet      M    .    Modern  formulations  of  coloring  agents:  facial  and  eye  .    In  : 
    Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Principles of Cosmetics for the Dermatolgist  .   St. 
Louis  :   CV Mosby  ,   1982  :   143  –  4  .   

   41.       Stewart     CR    .   Conjunctival absorption of pigment from eye make-up  .   Am J 

Optom     1973  ;   50  :   571  –  4  .   

  47  :   755  –  65  .   

     Kaiserman      I    .    Servere  allergic  blepharoconjunctivitis  induced  by  a  dye  for 
 eyelashes and eyebrows  .   Ocul Immunol Inflamm     2003  ;   11  :   149  –  51  .   
     Karlberg      AT   ,     Liden      C   ,     Ehrin      E    .    Colophony  in  mascara  as  a  cause  of  eyelid 

 dermatitis  .   Acta Dermatol Venereol     1991  ;   71  :   445  –  7  .   

     Lee     IW   ,    Ahn     SK   ,    Choi     EH   ,    Whang     KK   ,    Lee     SH    .   Complications of eyelash and 
eyebrow tattooing: report of 2 cases of pigment fanning  .   Cutis     2001  ;   68  : 
  53  –  5  .   

   42.       Klarmann      EG    .    Cosmetic  Chemistry  for  the  Dermatologist  .    Springfield, 

     Loden     M   ,    Wessman     C    .   Mascaras may cause irritant contact dermatitis  .   Int J 

IL  :   Charles C Thomas  ,   1962  :   53  –  4  .   

Cosmet Sci     2002  ;   24  :   281  –  5  .   

   43.       Draelos      ZK    .   Caution: eyebrow dyeing may be illegal  .   Cosmet Dermatol   

     Loginova      Y   ,     Shah      V   ,     Allen      G   ,     Macchio      R   ,     Farer      A    .    Approaches  to  polymer 

  1990  ;   3  :   39  –  40  .   

 selection for mascara formulation  .   J Cosmet Sci     2009  ;   60  :   125  –  33  .   

   44.       Rayner      V    . 

  Clinical  cosmetology:  a  medical  approach  to  esthetics 
 procedures  .   Albany, New York  :   Milady Publishing Company  ,   1993  :   143  –  5  .   
   45.       Allsworth      J    .    Skin  Camouflage  .    Cheltenham,  England:  Stanley  Thornes 

     Meinik     JD    .   Eye cosmetics for wearers of contact lenses  .   Cutis     1987  ;   39  :   549  –  50  .   
     O’Donoghue     MN    .   Eye cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   633  –  9  .   
     Pack      LD   ,     Wickham      MG   ,     Enloe      RA   ,     Hill      DN    .    Microbial  contamination 

Ltd  ,   1985  :   41  –  2  .    

  suggested reading 
      Bielory     L    .   Contact dermatitis of the eye  .   Immunol Allergy Clin N Am     1997  ;   17  : 

  131  –  8  .   

     Cuyper   

  CD    . 

  Permanent  makeup:  indications  and  complications  . 

  Clin 

 Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   30  –  4  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Special considerations in eye cosmetics  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  : 

  424  –  30  .   

     Draelos     ZK    .   Eye cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   1  –  7  .   
     Draelos      ZK   ,     Yeatts      RP    .    Eyebrow  loss,  eyelash  loss,  and  dermatochalasis  . 

   Dermatol Clin     1992  ;   10  :   793  –  8  .   

     Gallardo      MJ   ,     Bradley      J    .    Ocular  argyrosis  after  long-term  self-application  of 

eyelash tint  .   Am J Ophthalmol     2006  ;   141  :   198  –  200  .   

     Goh     CL   ,    Ng     SK   ,    Kwok     SF    .   Allergic contact dermatitis from nickel in  eyeshadow  . 

  Contact Dermatitis     1989  ;   20  :   380  –  1  .   

 associated with mascara use  .   Optometry     2008  ;   79  :   587  –  93  .   

     Peralego      B   ,     Beltrni      V    .    Dermatologic  and  allergic  conditions  of  the  eyelid  . 

  Immunol Allergy Clin N Am     2008  ;   28  :   137  –  68  .   

     Ross     JS   ,    White     IR    .   Eyelid dermatitis due to cocamidopropyl betaine in an eye 

make-up remover  .   Contact Dermatitis     1991  ;   25  :   64  .   

     Saxena     M   ,    Warshaw     E   ,    Ahmed     DD    .   Eyelid allergic contact dermatitis to black 

iron oxide  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     2001  ;   12  :   38  –  9  .   

     Sher     MA    .   Contact dermatitis of the eyelids  .   S Afr Med J     1979  ;   55  :   511  –  13  .   
     Vagefi     MR   ,    Dragan     L   ,    Hughes     S    ,   et al  .   Adverse reactions to permanent eyeliner 

tattoo  .   Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg     2006  ;   22  :   48  –  51  .   

     Van  Ketel      WG   ,     Liem      DH    .    Eyelid  dermatitis  from  nickel  contaminated 

 cosmetics  .   Contact Dermatitis     1981  ;   7  :   217  .   

     Wachsmuth     R   ,    Wilkinson     M    .   Loss of eyelashes after use of a tinting mascara 

containing PPD  .   Contact Dermatitis     2006  ;   54  :   169  –  70  .        

             12    Postsurgical cosmetics      

  Postsurgical  cosmetics  are  important  in  dermatology  to  aid 
the  patient  in  proper  wound  healing  while  attending  to  the 
appearance  and  emotional  needs  of  the  patient.  Cosmetics 
assume  medical  importance  when  used  in  the  postsurgical 
patient  to  facilitate  return  to  normal  daily  activities  and 
improve emotional well-being ( 1 , 2 ). This chapter discusses the 
proper use and selection of cosmetics and skin care products 
in the postsurgical period. 

 Cosmetic  selection  criteria  in  the  postsurgical  patient 
depend upon the type of wound created. Incisional wounds, 
closed  by  sutures,  expose  only  a  small  amount  of  unhealed 
skin to topical cosmetics while large surface area wounds, such 
as those created by shave excisions, dermabrasions, and chem-
ical peels, are allowed to heal by secondary intention exposing 
large unhealed skin areas to topical cosmetics. 

  wound healing and cosmetics 
 Wounds  created  in  dermatology  heal  by  both  primary  and 
secondary  intention.  Incisional  wounds,  closed  by  sutures 
that remain in place for 5 to 14 days, heal by primary inten-
tion and require a clean surgical site free of foreign bodies. 
Therefore,  cosmetics  should  not  be  applied  to  the  wound 
until the sutures are removed. Facial foundations should be 
avoided  over  sutured  areas  as  they  contain  finely  ground 
titanium  dioxide  particles  that  could  act  as  foreign  bodies 
and  impeding  wound  healing  through  initiation  of  an 
inflammatory response or by inciting milia formation. Facial 
foundation  pigments,  such  as  iron  oxide,  can  also  become 
imbedded in the dermis during healing resulting in perma-
nent  tattooing  of  the  skin.  Once  the  sutures  have  been 
removed the skin barrier has returned and cosmetics of all 
types can be safety used. 

 Large  surface  area  wounds  healing  by  secondary  intention 
are  devoid  of  the  protective  stratum  corneum  making  post-
surgical cosmetic selection important. No cosmetics should be 
applied  to  the  wound  until  serous  drainage  has  stopped 
( Fig. 12.1 ). This is generally not a problem for patients, since 
cosmetics will not adhere to the skin until an epithelial barrier 
has  been  reestablished.  Premature  application  of  cosmetics 
can create the same foreign body problem and pigment tattoos 
discussed under incisional wounds. Individuals who attempt 
to apply facial foundation too soon following chemical peeling 
or dermabrasion may also encourage milia formation, a com-
mon side effect of both the procedures. Bland moisturizers to 
impede transepidermal water loss, such as purified petroleum 
jelly, are recommended; however, until re-epithelialization has 
occurred.    

   Cosmetics should not be worn over an incision until the 
sutures have been removed. 

  color cosmetic selection 
 Following  re-epithelialization  or  suture  removal,  patient 
may wish to use color cosmetics to camouflage the postsur-
gical  erythema.  The  application  of  color  cosmetics  to  the 
face  is  important  for  the  patient  to  re-establish  social  and 
emotional well-being following surgery. New cosmetics may 
need  to  be  selected  on  a  temporary  or  permanent  basis 
 following surgery. 

  Facial Foundations 
 Facial foundation is the most important cosmetic used in the 
postsurgical  patient.  It  can  camouflage  redness  and  scarring 
while providing photoprotection ( 3 ). The foundation selected 
should be easily applied and removed while containing a pau-
city of ingredients. Cream or cream/powder formulations are 
recommended.  Cream  foundations  are  dipped  from  a  jar  or 
squeezed  from  a  tube  while  cream/powder  foundations  are 
wiped from a compact with a dry sponge (powder) or a moist-
ened sponge (cream) ( 4 ). These foundations are more difficult 
to bacterially contaminate than liquid foundations due to their 
low water content. The cream also provides a good barrier to 
transepidermal  water  loss  and  smoothes  easily  around  any 
remaining  desquamating  stratum  corneum  ( Fig.  12.2 ).  They 
cause less stinging and burning as compared with liquid vari-
eties. A loose powder can be applied over the facial foundation 
to improve coverage and impart better rub resistant character-
istics ( Fig. 12.3 ).    

   Cream or cream/powder foundations are the best choice 
in the postsurgical period. 

 In addition, the patient may need to alter facial foundation 
color  selection  in  the  immediate  postoperative  period.  The 
color  of  the  foundation  may  need  to  contain  more  reddish 
hues; however, most patients can return to their pre-surgery 
foundation formulation four to six weeks postoperatively.  

  Undercover Foundations 
 Some patients with pronounced, long-lasting redness or bruis-
ing following surgery may wish to use a product known as an 
undercover foundation or a color corrector foundation. These 
products are designed to mask undesirable tones present in the 
skin using a complementary color combination rather than a 
heavy-coverage, surgical facial foundation ( 5 ). Coverage refers 
to the ability of the facial foundation to obscure the view of the 
underlying  skin  and  is  related  to  the  opaqueness  of  the  cos-
metic.  Use  of  color  correctors  allows  the  patient  to  wear  a 
moderate-coverage  foundation,  which  appears  more  natural 
and  may  be  more  acceptable  to  the  patient.  For  example, 
 redness  of  the  face  common  after  dermabrasion,  chemical 

91

92

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure  12.1     Pigmented  facial  foundations  should  be  avoided  until  re- 
epithelialization has occurred.    

 Figure 12.2     Higher-coverage facial foundations are useful for camouflaging in 
postsurgical patients while waiting for the erythema to resolve, especially in 
post–laser resurfacing patients.    

peeling,  and  laser  resurfacing  procedures  can  be  minimized 
with a green color corrector. Green is the complementary color 
to  red  and  the  combination  of  both  colors  yields  brown. 
A green cream or liquid cosmetic applied over a red scar allows 
camouflaging with a facial foundation that is less opaque and 
 provides less coverage. Less opaque facial foundations appear 
more  natural and are easier to apply and wear.  

   Green color correctors are the complementary color to red 
and may assist in camouflaging red scars. 

 Color correctors are available in other colors besides green 
for  camouflaging  other  unwanted  skin  colors.  For  example, 
yellow facial tones can be masked by the complementary color 
purple. Yellow and purple when mixed yield brown. The sal-
lowness of photoaging or the yellow hemosiderin deposits of 
bruising can be masked by applying a purple cream or liquid 
color  corrector.  Conversely,  purple  bruising  commonly  seen 
after  facial  surgery  can  be  camouflaged  with  a  yellow  color 
corrector  ( 6 ).  Standard  brown  concealers  can  also  be  used 
( Fig. 12.4 ).    

   Purple is the complementary color to yellow and purple 
color correctors can be used to camouflage the final yellow 
stage of ecchymosis resolution. 

 Figure 12.3     A loose powder over a cream or liquid foundation can improve 
rub-resistant characteristics.    

  Powders and Blushes 
 Facial powders and blushes are applied alone or on top of a 
facial foundation. Generally, their use should not be resumed 
until the face has healed to the point where facial foundations 
can be worn, as discussed previously. Powders without ground 
particulate matter, such as nutshells or mica, should be selected 
to avoid damaging the follicular ostia, which can lead to milia 

POSTSURGICAL COSMETICS

93

 Figure 12.4     An example of a liquid brown concealer with an automatic appli-
cator brush that can be dabbed over healing surgical scars.    

 Figure 12.5     A blush can help redefine the cheeks after applying a full- coverage 
more opaque facial foundation in postsurgical patients.    

and closed comedone formation. Thus, powders with a dull or 
matte finish are preferred ( Fig. 12.5 ).   

   Matte finish powders and blushes without iridescent 
particles are the best choice after surgery. 

 Facial blushes are colored powders designed to add color to 
the  cheeks  and  face.  These  products  are  extremely  useful  in 
postsurgical patients to:  

1.    restore facial landmarks, such as cheekbones, in patients 

who are wearing a high-coverage foundation;  

2.    camouﬂ age facial redness by applying the blush to 
the  upper  cheeks,  central  forehead,  nasal  tip,  and 
central chin;  

3.    add color to impart the appearance of health.   

 As  with  facial  powders,  blushes  should  be  selected  with  a 
matte finish, meaning a dull finish, to avoid the light reflective 
particulate  matter.  The  particulates  can  cause  itching  in  an 
unhealed or early healed surgical wound.  

  Eye Cosmetics 
 Most  patients  can  resume  wearing  selected  eye  cosmetics 
immediately following surgery, unless the surgery involves the 
eye area (i.e., eyelid tumor, blepharoplasty, eyelid resurfacing, 
etc.).  Mascara,  applied  to  darken,  lengthen,  and  thicken  the 
eyelashes  may  be  immediately  resumed.  However,  water- 
soluble varieties are recommended since the solvents required 
to  remove  waterproof  varieties  may  cause  stinging.  Water- 
soluble  eyeliners  may  also  be  resumed  to  highlight  and 
 cosmetically enlarge the eye. Eye shadows, on the other hand, 
represent  a  pigmented  powder  cosmetic  and  should  not  be 
worn until facial foundation use is resumed.   

   Water-removable mascara and eyeliner should be used in 
the postsurgical period. 

  Lip Cosmetics 
 Lip  cosmetics  may  also  be  resumed  immediately  following 
surgery, unless the surgical site involves the lips (i.e. lip tumor 
removal, lip advancement flap, upper lip dermabrasion, etc.). 
Lip  cosmetics  are  highly  recommended  as  they  represent  a 
quick way to add color to the face and restore an acceptable 
cosmetic appearance.    

   All cosmetics should be removed from the face before bed. 

  removal of cosmetics 
 Postsurgical  patients  should  wear  cosmetics  only  when 
necessary and thoroughly remove them as soon as possi-
ble. They should remove all cosmetics before going to bed. 
Ideally,  the  cosmetic  should  be  removed  with  mild  soap 
and water; however, the waterproof camouflaging founda-
tions  require  a  special  removal  product. Waterproof  cos-
metics should be avoided until healing is complete as the 
solvents required to remove cosmetics can sting and burn. 
With new rub-resistant polymer-based mascaras and eye-
liners, it is no longer necessary to use waterproof cosmet-
ics.  Removal  of  the  cosmetics  is  necessary  to  prevent 
infection  and  other  complications  in  the  postsurgical 
period.   

   references 
   1.       Theberge     L   ,    Kernaleguen     A    .   Importance of cosmetics related to aspects of 

self  .   Precept Mot Skills     1979  ;   48  :   827  .   

   2.       Cash     TF   ,    Cash     DW    .   Women’s use of cosmetics: psychosocial correlates and 

consequences  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     1982  ;   4  :   1  .   

   3.       Brauer     EW    .   Coloring and corrective make-up preparations  .   Clin Dermatol   

  1988  ;   6  :   62  –  7  .   

   4.       Schlossman      ML   ,     Feldman      AJ    .    Fluid  foundation  and  blush  make-up  .    In  : 
    deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Whea-
ton IL  :   Allured Publishing Corp  ,   1988  :   748  –  51  .   

   5.       Draelos     ZK    .   Cosmetic camouflaging techniques  .   Cutis     1993  ;   52  :   362  .   
   6.       Draelos      ZK    .    Use  of  cover  cosmetics  for  pigment  abnormalities  .    Cosmet 

Dermatol     1989  ;   5  :   14  .    

94

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

  suggested reading 
      Arpey      CJ   ,     Whitaker      DC    .    Post  surgical  wound  management  .    Dermatol  Clin   

  2001  ;   19  :   787  –  97  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    Camouflaging  techniques  and  dermatologic  surgery  .    Dermatol 

Surg     1996  ;   22  :   1023  –  7  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics, skin care products, and the dermatologic surgeon  .   post-
surgical selection of cleansing products. Dermatol Surg     1998  ;   24  :   543  –  6  .   
     Draelos      ZK    .    Cosmetics  in  the  postsurgical  patient  .    Dermatol  Clin      1995  ;    13  : 

  461  –  5  .   

     Karagoz     H   ,    Yuksel     F   ,    Ulkur     E   ,    Evinc     R    .   Comparison of efficacy of silicone gel, 
silicone  gel  sheeting,  and  topical  onion  extract  including  heparin  and 
allantoin for the treatment of postburn hypertrophic scars  .   Burns     2009  ; 
  35  :   1097  –  103  .   

     Morganroth     P   ,    Wilmot     AC   ,    Miller     C    .   Over-the-counter scar products for 
postsurgical  patients:  disparities  between  online  advertised  benefits 
and  evidence  regarding  efficacy  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      2009  ;    61  : 
  e31  –  47  .        

             13    Facial adornment      

  Facial  adornment  is  the  use  of  colored  facial  cosmetics  to 
improve appearance. These cosmetics serve little use for func-
tional purpose, but can de-emphasize facial defects and accen-
tuate  attractive  facial  features.  The  basic  facial  cosmetics  for 
adornment  are  powders,  blushes ,  bronzing  gels,  cover  sticks, 
and undercover creams. 

  facial powders 
 Facial powders provide coverage of complexion imperfections, 
oil control, a matte finish, and tactile smoothness to the skin. 
Originally,  facial  powder  was  applied  over  a  moisturizer  to 
function as a type of powder foundation. Liquid foundations 
have largely replaced the powder foundation, but for patients 
who wish sheer coverage with excellent oil control, a powder 
foundation  performs  excellently. An  appropriate  moisturizer 
for the patient’s skin type is first applied and allowed to set or 
dry,  followed  by  application  of  a  full-coverage,  translucent 
powder.  

   Facial powders provide coverage of complexion 
 imperfections, oil control, a matte finish, and tactile 
smoothness to the skin. 

 Full  coverage  powders  contain  predominantly  talc,  also 
known as hydrated magnesium silicate, and increased amounts 
of  covering  pigments.  The  covering  pigments  used  in  face 
powder are listed in order of increasing opaqueness: titanium 
dioxide,  kaolin,  magnesium  carbonate,  magnesium  stearate, 
zinc stearate, prepared chalk, zinc oxide, rice starch, precipi-
tated chalk, and talc. It is generally accepted that the optimum 
opacity is achieved with a particle size of 0.25 µm. Magnesium 
carbonate can also be used to improve oil blotting, keep the 
powder fluffy, and absorb any added perfume. Kaolin (hydrated 
aluminum silicate) may also function to absorb oil and perspi-
ration.  Full-coverage  face  powders  are  usually  packaged  in  a 
compact and applied to the face with a puff ( Fig. 13.1 ) ( 1 ).  

 Transparent facial powders are more popular today to add 
coverage  and  improve  oil  blotting  abilities  of  a  previously 
applied liquid foundation. Transparent powders have the same 
formulation as full-coverage powders except they contain less 
talc,  titanium  dioxide,  or  zinc  oxide,  since  coverage  is  not  a 
priority.  Transparent  facial  powders  commonly  have  a  light 
shine, produced by nacreous pigments, such as bismuth oxy-
chloride,  mica,  titanium-dioxide-coated  mica,  or  crystalline 
calcium carbonate. 

 Facial powder usually uses iron oxides as the main pigment, 
but  other  inorganic  pigments  such  as  ultramarines,  chrome 
oxide, and chrome hydrate may also be used. These powders are 
designed to augment the underlying skin and foundation tones, 
thus transparent powders can be used by patients who have dif-
ficulty finding an appropriately tinted facial  foundation. Trans-
parent powders may also be selected in  complementary colors, 

such  as  a  pale  bluish-green,  to  decrease  facial  erythema  in 
 rosacea, psoriasis, and systemic lupus patients (see for further 
details chap. 2 and  Table 13.1 ).   

   Facial powder usually uses iron oxides as the main 
pigment, but other inorganic pigments such as 
 ultramarines, chrome oxide, and chrome hydrate may also 
be used. 

 Specialty  additives  to  some  transparent  powders  include 
partially  hydrolyzed  ground  raw  silk  to  improve  absorbency 
and  impart  a  velvety  matte  finish;  corn  silk  also  to  impart  a 
velvety matte finish; and treated starch and synthetic resins for 
increased  oil  absorption.  Most  transparent  powders  are 
 packaged loose and come with an applicator brush or puff. 

 Facial powders are removed from a compact with a puff or 
dusted loosely from a container with a brush. They impart a 
matte finish to the face. Patients who desire a shiny or moist 
semimatte  facial  appearance  should  avoid  powder  since  it 
will  absorb  the  oil  in  the  foundation,  thus  destroying  the 
“dewy” look. Patients with dry complexions may also wish to 
avoid facial powder since it can further dry the skin. How-
ever, the oil-absorbing abilities of facial powder are extremely 
valuable  in  a  patient  with  an  oily  complexion  prone  to 
develop a facial shine. 

 The incidence of allergic contact dermatitis to facial powder 
itself is low; however, added fragrances may pose a problem. A 
more common problem with facial powders is irritant contact 
dermatitis due to coarse particulate matter, such as nacreous 
pigments, in the formulation. Inhalation of the powders may 
cause problems in patients with asthma or vasomotor rhinitis. 
Facial powder may be open or closed patch tested “as is.”  

  facial blushes 
 Facial blushes, also known as rouges, are designed to enhance 
rosy  cheek  color.  In  many  cases,  rosy  cheeks  simply  indicate 
vasomotor instability or fine telangiectatic mats from actinic 
damage; however, cheek color remains fashionable.  

   Facial blushes are designed to enhance rosy cheek color. 

 Blush  and  rouge  are  actually  synonyms  for  a  cosmetic 
designed to add color to the cheeks, but to many consumers 
blush  denotes  a  powdered  product  while  rouge  denotes  a 
cream  product.  Powdered  blushes  are  more  popular  and  are 
formulated  identically  to  compact  face  powder,  except  more 
vivid pigments are added ( Fig. 13.2 ). Since color rather than 
coverage  is  desired,  powdered  blushes  do  not  contain  much 
zinc oxide. Cream rouges are formulated like anhydrous foun-
dations which contain light esters, waxes, mineral oil, titanium 
dioxide, and pigments ( 2 ). Some patients use lipstick on the 

95

96

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

cheeks as a form of cream rouge. Lipstick-type formulations 
used as cream rouge are known as facial gleamers. Powdered 
blushes  can  be  easily  brushed  over  any  foundation  formula-
tion, but cream rouges will remove and smudge oil-free and 
low-oil-content  foundations.  Cream  rouges  also  do  not  per-
form well if the face is powdered.  

 For  a  natural  appearance,  cheek  color  should  be  applied 
beginning at a point directly beneath the pupil on the fleshy 
part  of  the  cheek,  sweeping  upward  beyond  the  lateral  eye 
( Fig. 13.3 ) ( 3 ). This placement is designed to create or accen-
tuate  high  cheek  bones,  which  are  a  desired  quality  among 
women ( 4 ).  

 The adverse reaction concerns with blushes and rouges are 
identical to those for facial powders. The products can be open 
or closed patch tested “as is.”  

 Figure  13.1     Compact  facial  powder  can  add  color  and  coverage  to  the  face 
while assisting with oil control.    

Table 13.1  The Color Chart Showing Cosmetics for Different Skin Colors

Light skin

Medium skin

Dark skin

Eyebrow pencil and 

Charcoal gray, dark brown, 

Dark brown

Light beige, pale ivory, 

light pink

Rose pink, true red

Medium beige, ivory, 
medium pink, peach

Deep pink, blue red, 
cherry red, coral

brown black

Charcoal gray, brown black
Light green, purple, pink, light 

Dark brown
Deep green, brown, blue

brown, light blue

Beige, tan, dark peach

Deep red, cinnamon, 

burgundy
Dark brown

Black
Muted green, brown, 

muted blue

Rose, medium beige, medium 

Medium beige, bronze

Sun bronze, taupe

Blush and lipstick

Medium coral, medium pink, 

Eyebrow pencil and 

Dark brown, charcoal, black

orange red

peach

Beige, charcoal, black
Beige, lavender, aqua, 

light blue

Deep coral, rose, 
translucent red

Charcoal, black

Beige, charcoal, black
Beige, deep lavender, 

medium blue

Cinnamon, deep translucent 
rose, true translucent red

Black

Beige, charcoal, black
Deep violet, deep sea green

Light pink, peach, beige

Medium pink, deep peach, 

Dark pink, dark beige

Light pink, orange
Black, charcoal

Black, charcoal
Beige, pink, violet, blue

Light beige
Pink, light red
Charcoal, dark brown, black
Black, charcoal
Beige, cool turquoise, green, 

aqua

Beige, rose beige
Peach, pale orange, rose
Dark brown, charcoal
Black, charcoal
Pink, lavender, blue, 
turquoise, sea green

medium beige

Rose, light red
Black, charcoal

Rose, red
Black

Black, charcoal
Turquoise, aqua, lavender, 

deep blue, green

Black
Deep violet, deep pink, 
vivid blue, vivid green

Medium beige
Peach, pink, light red
Black, charcoal
Black, charcoal
Medium beige, turquoise, 
aqua, green, deep blue

Medium beige, rose beige
Red, rose, pink, coral
Black, charcoal
Black, charcoal
Deep violet, deep beige, 

deep pink

Dark beige
Deep rose, cranberry red
Black
Black
Beige, deep green, 

deep blue

Beige, light taupe
Deep red, deep rose, orange
Black
Black
Violet, purple, blue

Cosmetic

(A) Caucasian skin

Facial foundation

Blush and lipstick

mascara

Eyeliner
Eye shadow

(B) Black skin

Facial foundation

mascara

Eyeliner
Eye shadow

(C) Oriental skin

Facial foundation

Blush and lipstick
Eyebrow pencil and 

mascara

Eyeliner
Eye shadow

(D) American indian skin
Facial foundation
Blush and lipstick
Eyebrow pencil and mascara
Eyeliner
Eye shadow

(E) Asian skin

Facial foundation
Blush and lipstick
Eyebrow pencil and mascara
Eyeliner
Eye shadow

FACIAL ADORNMENT

  facial bronzing gels 
 Facial  bronzing  gels  are  alternative  products  available  to 
add facial color. If the product is intended to add color only to 
the cheeks, it is called a gel rouge, but if the product is designed 
to provide overall facial color, it is known as a bronzing gel. Gel 
rouge is available in shades of red and orange while bronzing 
gels,  as  the  name  suggests,  are  intended  to  give  a  tanned 
appearance ( 5 ). Both products stain the skin and provide no 
coverage. They contain light esters, propylene glycol, alcohol, 
and  water-soluble  organic  colors  in  a  neutral  aqueous  gel. 
They must be applied and spread quickly as the volatile vehicle 
yields a short playtime. Staining of the fingertips and clothing 
during application is a common problem.  

 Figure 13.2     A powdered blush appears similar to a face powder except that the 
product is pigmented more vividly to create the appearance of rosy cheeks, 
considered a sign of general health.    

97

   Bronzing gels add color to the face usually simulating a 
tan. 

 Another product that provides facial color without coverage is 
a color wash. Color washes are liquid foundations with pigment 
but no titanium dioxide, frequently containing some pearl addi-
tive, such as bismuth oxychloride or mica. Color washes can be 
worn  alone  or  under  a  sheer  foundation.  They  may  not  be 
applied over a foundation or on a powdered face. Color washes 
are more appropriate for patients with dry skin, while bronzing 
gels are more appropriate for patients with oily skin.  

  facial buffers and highlighters 
 Facial  buffers  and  highlighters  are  formulated  exactly  like 
powdered facial blushes except that the color and amount of 
pearl may vary. Facial blushes are usually of an intense color, 
ranging from red to orange for accentuating the upper cheeks. 
Facial  buffers,  on  the  other  hand,  are  usually  a  light  pink  or 
peach with a moderate amount of pearl. Their purpose is to 
blend  other  facial  cosmetics.  For  example,  after  the  blush  is 
applied  to  the  cheek,  a  border  forms  where  the  color  stops. 
Applying  a  facial  buffer  over  the  blush  blends  the  edges  of 
color  into  the  natural  skin  tones.  Facial  buffers  can  also  be 
used to blend eye shadows into the upper eyelid. 

 Facial highlighters are more intensely pigmented than facial 
blushes. They are available in deep burgundy, bronze, or brown 
and  function  to  color  and  contour  the  face  ( Fig.  13.4 ).  For 
example, a bronze facial highlighter can be applied to the central 
forehead, nasal tip, and central chin to create the appearance of 
a tan, since these three protuberant areas of the face generally 
are more deeply pigmented in a patient with recent sun expo-
sure. Facial buffers and highlighters can be artfully used by the 
patient with facial defects to improve facial contour.   

  facial cover sticks 
 Facial cover sticks are intended for use under a facial founda-
tion to cover imperfections. Facial cover sticks, also known as 
under eye concealers, are matched to the skin color and applied 
to cover an abnormal skin color, such as the redness of an acne 

 Figure 13.3     Placement of a blush on the cheek.    

 Figure 13.4     Facial highlighter compressed powder beads that are stroked and 
blended with a brush to obtain the desired color blend prior to brushing over 
the face and body.    

98

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

increased amounts of titanium dioxide without any pigment. 
This  undercover  is  designed  for  the  patient  with  actinically 
damaged skin characterized by fine wrinkling, telangiectasia, 
and  mottled  pigmentation.  The  increased  amount  of  tita-
nium dioxide whitens the discolored skin and the pearl cre-
ated  by  bismuth  oxychloride  or  mica  minimizes  the  fine 
wrinkling.  

  bronzing powders and tinted moisturizers 
 Bronzing  powders  and  tinted  moisturizers  are  used  to  add 
 temporary color the face and body, generally trying to simulate 
a  tan.  Bronzing  powders  are  identical  in  formulation  to  face 
powders  except  for  the  addition  of  different  pigments.  The 
powder  is  stroked  from  a  compact  with  a  powder  sponge  or 
puff  and  applied  to  the  body.  The  product  is  usually  dusted 
down the central face, neck, and shoulders to simulate a tan ( 7 ). 
The powder is easily removed by rubbing and provides slight 
physical  sun  protection  due  to  the  titanium  dioxide  in  most 
formulations.  

   Bronzing powders and tinted moisturizers are used to add 
temporary color to the face and body to simulate a tan. 

 Tinted moisturizers are liquids, as opposed to the previously 
discussed  bronzing  powders,  and  they  contain  a  brown  pig-
ment that provides a sheer tanned appearance in addition to 
possessing emollient qualities. Technically, it is impossible to 
separate a tinted moisturizer from a sheer, moisturizing facial 
foundation.  Usually,  a  facial  foundation  contains  titanium 
dioxide to provide coverage to underlying cutaneous pigment 
defects whereas a tinted moisturizer does not, but the distinc-
tion is slight.  

  facial cosmetics for acne patients 
 Facial cosmetics selection for acne patients poses a challenge 
for  the  dermatologist.  Acne  patients  are  generally  self- 
conscious about the blemishes on their complexion and anx-
ious to apply cosmetics that will completely mask the erythema, 
papules, and nodules that characterize acne. They will gener-
ally  select  the  facial  foundation  with  the  longest  wear  and 
highest amount of coverage. These products are inevitably oil 
based and extremely occlusive, resulting in additional facial oil 
and  follicular  irritation  that  may  aggravate  the  underlying 
acne,  necessitating  further  cosmetic  application.  High- 
coverage foundations also create a need to use blush, lipstick, 
and eye shadow since they cover not only the acne lesions but 
all facial contours. Unfortunately, there is no optimal solution 
to this problem.  

   Facial powder can aid in oil control in the acne patient. 

 Figure  13.5     A  skin  colored  cream  is  dabbed  and  blended  under  the  eyes  to 
camouflage under eye circles.    

lesion or the darkness of under eye circles ( 6 ) ( Fig. 13.5 ). These 
are maximum coverage products with high amounts of tita-
nium  dioxide.  Other  ingredients  include  mineral  oil,  waxes, 
pigments, and kaolin or talc. Formulations available in a roll-
up  stick  contain  more  wax  than  cream  formulations,  which 
contain more oil. A popular packaging of the cream formula-
tion is in a cylindrical tube with an insertable sponge tip appli-
cator. The long wearing, high coverage characteristics of facial 
cover sticks require pigment suspended in an oil base. There 
are some products labeled as “oil-free,” however they contain 
silicone oils.    

   Facial cover sticks are intended for use under a facial 
foundation to cover imperfections. 

  facial undercover creams 
 Facial  undercover  creams  are  designed  to  mask  undesirable 
skin tones. They are formulated like cream foundations with 
oils, waxes, talc, and pigment. Undercover creams come in a 
variety of complementary colors and are intended for applica-
tion under a full-coverage facial foundation. Green undercover 
creams are used to camouflage a reddish complexion created 
by such dermatologic conditions as rosacea, psoriasis, lupus, 
acne, or a facial nevus flammeus. The application of a green 
cover over underlying red skin produces a net result of brown 
under a foundation since green mixed with red pigments pro-
duces a brown tone. A light purple undercover can be used by 
patients with a yellow complexion due to renal failure or Ori-
ental background to yield a pink skin tone. A peach colored 
undercover  can  be  used  to  mask  the  bluish  tones  of  bruised 
skin.  If  the  patient  chooses  to  use  an  undercover  cream,  she 
must also commit herself to wearing a full line of facial cos-
metics since the cream by itself does not cover the defect.  

   Facial undercover creams come in a variety of comple-
mentary colors for camouflage purposes and are intended 
for application under a full-coverage facial foundation. 

 Another  undercover  product,  known  as  a  white  pearlized 
undercover,  is  an  oil-based  liquid  makeup  that  contains 

 Facial powder can be extremely valuable for the acne patient. 
It  can  absorb  oil,  thus  increasing  the  wear  of  oil-free  facial 
foundations  that  will  rub  off  or  separate  when  mixed  with 
sebum.  Powder  can  also  increase  the  coverage  of  an  oil-free 
foundation. In order to obtain maximum benefits from pow-
der  and  eliminate  a “floured”  facial  appearance,  the  powder 
must  be  properly  selected  and  applied.  A  loose  transparent 

FACIAL ADORNMENT

powder  is  best.  Transparent  powders  come  in  tones  of  pink, 
yellow,  or  brown  and  the  patient  should  select  the  tone  that 
best matches her underlying complexion and foundation. The 
fingertips are then dipped in the loose powder and it is mas-
saged  into  the  foundation  over  the  entire  face.  Rubbing  the 
powder into the foundation is superior to dusting the powder 
onto the face, since it adheres more closely to the foundation, 
resulting in an increased foundation wearability and better oil 
control. Rubbing also eliminates the “floured” facial look and 
imparts a smooth feel. A fluffy brush is then used to dust away 
excess powder. The technique may be repeated if oily break-
through occurs. Oily breakthrough occurs when the founda-
tion  has  absorbed  as  much  oil  as  possible,  resulting  in  the 
development of a facial shine due to oil seeping through the 
layer of foundation. 

 Powder can also be used to increase the coverage of oil-free 
foundations in acne blemish areas. Foundation is dabbed onto 
the acne lesions with the fingertips and allowed to dry. Loose 
transparent  powder  is  then  massaged  into  the  area. Another 
layer of foundation is then applied and the process is repeated 
until  the  desired  coverage  is  achieved.  Foundation  is  then 
applied to the entire face and finished with a facial powder rub 
as previously described. 

 Loose powders usually contain less oil than pressed compact 
powders and are therefore recommended for the acne patient. 
Most of the loose talc-based powders will work well, except for 
those that contain ground particulate matter, such as walnut 
shell powder. These products tend to encourage the formation 
of  closed  comedones  and  milia.  Perhaps  this  is  due  to 
 sharp-edged  particles  occluding  the  follicle,  forming  closed 
comedones, or causing epidermal damage resulting in milia. 

 Acne  patients  should  also  select  powdered  and  gel  facial 
 cosmetic formulations over oily creams. This means that pow-
dered blush should be selected over cream rouge and bronzing 
gels should be selected over color washes. Powdered blush can 
be used effectively by acne patients to absorb oil and provide a 
reddish color to the upper cheeks, which may aid in blending 
acne blemishes. For light-skinned acne patients, bronzing gels 
can  effectively  add  facial  color  without  worsening  acne  or 
 creating the need to wear a full line of facial cosmetics.  

  facial cosmetics for mature patients 
 Mature patients generally have dry skin with wrinkling and 
other effects of actinic damage. In the presence of dry skin, 
oil-absorbing products such as powders should be avoided. If 
a powder is desired, it should be low in magnesium carbon-
ate and zinc oxide, since these two substances have an astrin-
gent or drying effect on the face. Powder also tends to migrate 
into the creases accentuating wrinkling. However, powdered 
blushes  are  still  recommended  over  cream  rouges.  Cream 
rouge does not spread well when applied over a foundation 
of  any  type.  Facial  bronzing  gels  are  also  difficult  to  apply 
over  a  furrowed  skin.  If  increased  facial  color  is  desired,  a 
color wash used alone or under an oil-containing foundation 
is preferable. 

   Powders should be avoided in mature patients with dry 
skin. 

99

  Cream undercover cosmetics perform well on mature skin 
because their oil base can replace a facial moisturizer. Green 
undercover  on  the  upper  cheeks  is  especially  useful  in  the 
mature  patient  with  fine  facial  telangiectasias.  The  green 
undercover  must  be  covered  with  an  oil-containing  founda-
tion. Powder blush applied to the upper cheeks will also help 
to blend the telangiectasias. White pearlized undercover can be 
used beneath a foundation to minimize wrinkling and improve 
uneven facial pigmentation.  

  facial cosmetics for men 
 Facial color cosmetics for men have been slowly gaining accep-
tance, but they remain unpopular ( 8 , 9 ). Men in the entertain-
ment industry use cosmetics designed for women and apply 
the  cosmetics  in  the  same  manner  as  women  to  accentuate 
facial  color  ( 10 ).  For  average  daily  use,  facial  cosmetics  are 
impractical for men. The beard precludes even application of 
facial  foundations,  since  the  pigment  tends  to  adhere  to  the 
hair shafts and prominent follicular structures. The coarse tex-
ture  of  male  skin  also  is  accentuated.  If  total  facial  color  is 
required,  facial  foundations  should  be  avoided  in  favor  of 
bronzing  gels.  This  product  stains  the  skin,  thus  providing 
color, but does not provide coverage. If coverage is required, 
men  should  select  opaque  cover  cosmetics  discussed  in  the 
chapter on facial scarring. Color can be effectively added to the 
cheeks, forehead, nose, and chin with powdered facial blushes, 
buffers,  or  highlighters.  A  transparent  facial  powder  dusted 
over the entire face can minimize the appearance of large pore 
structures and the “five o’clock shadow” created on the cheeks 
by the regrowth of dark facial hair after early morning shaving. 
No nationally distributed color cosmetic line developed espe-
cially for men is currently available.  

  facial cosmetics for children 
 Color facial cosmetics are available for young girls to adorn the 
face and cheeks. Most preadolescent and early adolescent girls 
do not want to “look like they wear makeup,” but still want to 
go  through  the  motions  of  applying  cosmetics  to  their  face. 
Popular facial cosmetics in this age group include transparent 
facial color gels and rouges. Transparent facial color gels and 
teenage rouges are similar in formulation except that color gels 
are more lightly colored for all over application to the face while 
the  rouge  is  brightly  colored  and  only  applied  to  the  upper 
cheeks. They contain light esters, propylene glycol, alcohol, and 
water-soluble  organic  colors  in  a  neutral  aqueous  gel.  The 
product must be applied evenly and quickly to avoid streaking 
and stains everything it contacts, including fingertips.  

  corrective facial cosmetics 
 Corrective  cosmetics  for  facial  lesions  are  based  on  the 
 principle  that  dark  colors  make  the  lesions  appear  smaller 
and to recede while light colors make the lesions look larger 
and  appear  to  come  forward.  This  concept  is  illustrated  in  
Figure 13.6  where the black oval appears recessed and smaller 
compared with the white oval. Powdered blush-type products 
are best suited for this purpose. Areas of the face that need to 
be  lightened  should  be  brushed  with  a  light  pink  or  peach 
pearled blush or buffer. Areas of the face that need to be dark-
ened  should  be  brushed  with  a  deep  plum  or  bronze  matte 
finish blush or highlighter.   

100

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure  13.6     The  two  fundamental  rules  of  facial  contouring:  dark  contours 
look smaller and appear to recede; light contours look larger and appear to 
come forward.    

   Corrective facial cosmetics are based on the principle that 
dark colors make the lesions appear smaller and to recede 
while light colors make the lesions look larger and appear 
to come forward. 

 Cosmetic facial sculpting is most successful for optimizing 
the shape of the face, the size of the forehead and chin, or the 
contour of the nose. The perfect facial shape is oval and sym-
metrical about the midline, as this form is most pleasing to the 
eye. An oval face is one and one-half times as long as it is wide 
and should taper gradually from its widest dimension at the 
forehead to its smallest dimension at the chin. The face should 
be  divided  into  equal  thirds  from  superior  to  inferior:  fore-
head to the glabella, glabella to the subnasale, and subnasale to 
the base of the chin. The face should divide equally into fifths 
from ear to ear with each fifth being the width of one eye ( 11 ).  

   The ideal face should be divided into three equal parts 
from superior to inferior: forehead to the glabella, glabella 
to the subnasale, and subnasale to the base of the chin. 

 Other  facial  shapes  are  round,  where  the  facial  length  is 
short; oblong, where the facial length is long; square, where the 
jaw is wide; diamond, where the forehead is small; triangular, 
where the cheeks are wide; and inverted triangular, where the 
jaw  is  narrow.  By  appropriately  shading  the  face,  the  less 
 optimal  shapes  described  can  more  closely  approximate  a 
 perfect oval. 

 For  example,  a  round  face  should  be  shaded  with  a  dark 
color along the lateral margins to de-emphasize the increased 
width,  whereas  an  oblong  face  should  be  shaded  along  the 
forehead  and  chin  to  de-emphasize  the  increased  length.  A 
square  face  should  be  darkened  bilaterally  at  the  jaws.  Both 
diamond and triangular faces should be lightened at the fore-
head for emphasis and an inverted triangular face should be 
lightened at the chin ( 12 ). 

 This same shading technique can also be used to correct a 
poorly  formed  forehead  and  chin.  Low-set  foreheads  should 
have a light blush applied beneath the hairline while high fore-
heads should have a dark blush applied here. A receding chin 
should have a light blush applied at the tip and sides. A double 

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

 Figure 13.7     Contouring of the nose. ( A ) Crooked nose. ( B ) Hook or aquiline 
nose. ( C ) Bulbous nose. ( D ) Long nose. ( E ) Short nose.    

chin  should  be  shaded  with  a  dark  blush  under  the  entire 
 jawbone ( 13 ). 

 Facial recontouring is most useful on the nose, where hair, 
jewelry,  or  glasses  cannot  hide  the  abnormality.   Figure  13.7  
illustrates  the  shading  techniques.  Areas  to  be  darkened  are 
cross-hatched  and  areas  to  be  lightened  are  outlined.   Figure 
13.7A   demonstrates  a  broken  nose  that  has  healed  crookedly 
with a deviation to the patient’s left. The prominent upper left 
side of the nose is darkened, along with the lower right side and 
right tip. The opposite sides are lightened. A hook nose or aqui-
line nose ( Fig. 13.7B ) can also be minimized by darkening the 
hook along with the lateral nasal tips. A bulbous nose can be 
improved by shading the entire bulb on the tip and the lateral 
margins  to  the  nasal  root  ( Fig.  13.7C ).  Shading  for  long  and 
short noses is shown in  Figure 13.7D  and  E , respectively ( 14 ).  

FACIAL ADORNMENT

 Corrective  facial  cosmetics  are  no  substitute  for  a  perfect 
face, and in some cases patients should be advised to consider 
surgical  revision.  These  suggestions  may  be  offered  to  the 
patient who is awaiting surgery or the patient who has not pre-
viously considered cosmetics as a way of creating the illusion 
of a more perfect face.  

  advising the patient on cosmetic selection 
 The dermatologist is called upon with increasing frequency to 
give  advice  on  cosmetic  selection.  Patients  are  searching  for 
cosmetics  that  improve  skin  quality  while  offering  value. 
 Dermatologists,  with  their  understanding  of  skin  physiology 
and  disease,  are  best  suited  to  render  opinions  in  this  area; 
however, unfamiliarity with available cosmetics and their use 
may make physicians unable to give valuable, concrete advice. 
This text is intended to serve as a basic guide for formulating 
individual  patient  recommendations.  I  now  outline  my 
approach to advising the patient on cosmetic selection. 

 The first step in making cosmetic selection recommendations 
is to determine where the patient purchases her cosmetics. This 
is important because the point of purchase is related to the cost 
of  the  product.  It  is  wise  to  keep  cost  in  mind  when  making 
patient recommendations. Cosmetic manufacturers intention-
ally produce products to reach consumers through a variety of 
markets. Some cosmetics are sold in mass merchandisers, such 
as  grocery  stores,  drug  stores,  and  discount  stores.  Cosmetics 
sold through these vendors generally range in price from $2 to 
$15.  Other  cosmetics  are  sold  exclusively  through  cosmetic 
counters  in  department  stores.  Even  within  the  department 
store market there are products designed for lower price point 
department  stores  and  higher  price  point  department  stores. 
Lower price-point department stores market cosmetics that sell 
for  $8  to  $20  as  compared  to  higher  price-point  department 
store cosmetics that sell for $20 to $60. The most expensive cos-
metics  are  sold  through  boutiques  and  spas.  These  products 
range  from  $25  to  $90.  Interestingly  enough,  some  of  these 
exclusive  products  are  manufactured  by  the  same  companies 
that produce cosmetics under a different label for sale in mass 
merchandisers. Generally, boutique lines have more attractive, 
elaborate packaging accompanied by a greater color selection, 
more expensive fragrances, and innovative specialty additives. 

 Another route for cosmetics purchase is through household 
parties and individuals who sell door-to-door in their neigh-
borhood. These products generally are in the $8 to $25 range. 
Lastly, private cosmetics are produced on a contract basis, gen-
erally through small manufacturers. Cosmetics can be custom-
ized  to  the  needs  of  the  business  or  simply  a  standard 
formulation  with  a  customized  label.  The  price  variation  in 
this  market  is  tremendous.  It  is  worthwhile  noting  that  cos-
metics sold in these manners, which are produced and mar-
keted for intrastate use, do not fall under the guideline of the 
U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  Furthermore,  smaller 
cosmetic manufacturers do not have the capital or the facilities 
to undertake extensive premarketing and postmarketing con-
sumer  research.  However,  there  are  several  large  cosmetic 
companies that market quality products worldwide who reach 
the consumer through these routes. 

 The second step is to determine the patient’s skin type: very 
oily, oily, combination, normal, dry, very dry, etc. Moisturizer 
and  facial  foundation  recommendations  must  be  carefully 

101

chosen with the skin type in mind. Interestingly enough, many 
patients do not know their skin type or have been erroneously 
assigned a skin type by a salesperson at a cosmetic counter. In 
my opinion, skin type can be most easily assigned by asking 
the patient about the amount of sebum production on her/his 
nose throughout the day following morning washing. Sebum 
production can be assessed by having the patient run her/his 
finger  down  the  nose  at  various  times  during  the  day.  If  the 
patient has flaking skin on the nose all day and no sebum from 
morning until 5 PM, they have very dry skin. If the patient has 
no flaking, but no sebum on their nose at 5 PM, they have dry 
skin. If the patient has minimal sebum on the nose at 5 PM, 
they have normal skin. If the patient has sebum on the nose at 
noon, they have oily skin. Moreover, if the patient has sebum 
on the nose one hour following morning washing, they have 
very oily skin. Combination skin, the most common skin type 
in  both  women  and  men,  can  be  assessed  by  comparing  the 
amount of sebum present on the nose at 5 PM with the amount 
present on the cheeks. This is a simplistic, but fairly accurate, 
method of determining the skin type. 

 Thirdly, once the skin type has been determined, appropri-
ate sections within this text can be consulted for specific cos-
metic  product  recommendations.  Some  patients,  however, 
also wish to know what color cosmetics should be selected to 
enhance the appearance of their skin and facial features. This 
advice may be beyond the realm of what most dermatologists 
can provide and questions of this nature may be more appro-
priately handled by cosmetologists. Nevertheless, for the phy-
sician with an interest in this area, color charts based on skin 
pigmentation have been provided to coordinate facial founda-
tion, blush, lipstick, eyebrow pencil, mascara, and eye shadow 
color with skin tones (Table 13.1) ( 15 , 16 ). 

 Finally, there is no doubt that a personal visit to a mass mer-
chandiser cosmetic display or the department store cosmetic 
counter can provide valuable first-hand experience. Smelling, 
touching,  and  applying  cosmetics  can  provide  a  wealth  of 
information that cannot be fully described in a text.   

   references 
    1.       Wetterhahn     J    .   Loose and compact face powder  .   In  :     deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The 
Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Vol. 4  .   2nd edn  .   Wheaton, IL  : 
  Allured Publishing Corportation  ,   1988  :   921  –  46  .   

    2.       Lanzet      M    .    Modern  formulations  of  coloring  agents:  facial  and  eye  .  
 In  :     Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Cosmetics for the Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  : 
  CV Mosby  ,   1982  :   133  –  51  .   

    3.       Begoun     P    .   Blue eyeshadow should be illegal  .   Seattle, WA  :   Beginning Press  , 

  1986  :   62  –  4  .   

    4.       Soldo      BL   ,     Drahos      M    .    The  Inside-Out  Beauty  Book  .    Old  Tappan  ,   

New Jersey  :   Fleming H. Revell Company  ,   1978  :   78  –  9  .   

    5.       Jackson      EM    .    Tanning  without  the  sun:  accelerators,  promoters,  pills, 
bronzing gels, and self-tanning lotions  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  : 
  38  –  40  .   

    6.       Wesley-Hosford     Z    .   Face value  .   Toronto  :   Bantam Books  ,   1986  :   148  –  50  .   
    7.       Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics to imitate a summer tan  .   Cosmet Dermatol     1990  ; 

  3  :   8  –  10  .   

    8.       Dichter      P   ,     Fils      VM    .    The  men’s  product  explosion  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1985  : 

  75   –  6  .   

    9.       Kavaliunas      DR   ,     Nacht      S   ,     Bogardus      RE    .    Men’s  skin  care  needs  .    Cosmet 

 Toilet     1985  :   29  –  32  .   

   10.       Draelos     ZD    .   Cosmetics designed for men  .   Cosmet Dermatol     1992  ;   5  :   14  –  16  .   
   11.       Powell      N   ,     Humphreys      B    .    Proportions  of  the  aesthetic  face  .    New  York  : 

  Thieme-Stratton Inc  ,   1984  :   1  –  13  .   

   12.       Taylor      P    .    Milady’s  makeup  techniques  .    Albany,  New  York  :    Milady 

 Publishing Company  ,   1994  :   18  –  23  .   

102

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   13.       Miller      C    .    8  minute  makeovers  .    Washington,  DC  :    Acropolis  Books  Ltd.  , 

     Palma      DD    .    Looking  younger:  cosmetics  and  clothing  to  look  more  vibrant  . 

  1884  :   166  –  7  .   

  Clin Dermatol     2008  ;   26  :   648  –  51  .   

   14.       Newman     A   ,    Ebenstein     RS    .   Adrian Arpel’s 851 Fast Beauty Fixes and Facts  . 

  New York  :   G. P. Putnam’s Sons  ,   1985  :   47  .   

   15.       Soldo      BL   ,     Drahos      M    .    The  Inside-Out  Beauty  Book  .    Old  Tappan,  NJ  : 

  Fleming H. Revell Company  ,   1978  :   85  –  100  .   

     Schlossman      ML    .    Decorative  products  (Chapter  54)  .    In  :      Barel      AO   ,     Paye      M   , 
   Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  .   Marcel 
Dekker, Inc.  ,   2001  :   649  –  83  .   

     Sun      JZ   ,     Erickson      MCE   ,     Parr      JW    .    Refractive  index  matching:  principles  and 

   16.       Bruce     J   ,    Cohen     SS    .   About face  .   New York  :   G. P. Putnam’s Sons  ,   1984  :   94  –  6  .    

cosmetic application  .   C & T magazine  .   

  suggested reading 
      Draelos     ZD    .   Colored facial cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   621  –  31  .   
     Hollenberg      J    .    Color  cosmetics  (Chapter  26)  .    In  :      Rieger      MM    ,    ed  .    Harry’s 
 Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  :   523  –  72  .   

     Tedeschi      A   ,     Dall’Oglio      F   ,     Micali      G   ,     Schwartz      RA   ,     Janniger      CK    .    Corrective 

 camouflage in pediatric dermatology  .   Cutis     2007  ;   79  :   110  –  12  .   

     Weisz      A   ,     Milstein      SRT   ,     Scher      AL    .    Colouring  agents  in  cosmetic  products 
(excluding  hair  dyes):  regulatory  aspects  and  analytical  methods  .    Anal 
Cosmet Prod     2007  :   153   –  89  .   

     Westmore     MG    .   Camouglage and makeup preparations  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ; 

     Levy     SB    .   Cosmetics that Imitate a Tan  .   Dermatol Ther     2001  ;   14  :   215  –  19  .   

  19  :   406  –  12  .        

             14 

  Troubleshooting problematic ingredients      

  Cosmetic  formulation  involves  the  careful  selection  of 
 ingredients to produce a safe, elegant, efficacious product suit-
able for patient purchase ( 1 ). There are many substances that 
must be combined to produce such a cosmetic, and consider-
ation must be given to factors, such as moisture barrier effects, 
pH, lubricating action, soothing effects, osmotic effects, emol-
lience,  and  percutaneous  absorption  ( 2 ).  This  chapter  dis-
cusses the dermatologic concerns of key ingredients found in 
many  cosmetic  formulations,  which  are  preservatives,  color 
additives,  biologic  additives,  herbal  additives,  vitamin  addi-
tives, and liposomes. 

  preservatives 
 Preservatives have received their share of bad press as of late, 
being  accused  of  everything  from  breast  cancer  to  environ-
mental damage. While preservatives are not terribly appealing 
ingredients  they  are  a  necessary  part  of  every  cosmetic  and 
skin  care  formulation.  Without  a  preservative,  the  lipids  in 
most formulations would rapidly oxidize rendering the cream 
rancid, or the bacterial contamination would render the prod-
uct unsafe. Preservatives are the second most common aller-
genic group of substances beyond fragrances ( 3 ). However, the 
number of cases of irritant and allergic contact dermatitis is 
indeed small compared with the two necessary functions pre-
servatives perform in cosmetics: spoilage prevention prior to 
purchase  and  prevention  of  contamination  after  purchase 
( 4 , 5 ). In short, preservatives reduce the likelihood of infection 
from cosmetics use. An independent survey of 250 cosmetics 
covering a wide range of products revealed a 24.4% contami-
nation  rate  in  unused  products,  primarily  by   Pseudomonas  
species  and  other  gram-negative  rods  in  1969  ( 6 ).  The  most 
frequently contaminated products were hand and body lotions 
and liquid eyeliners. The development of new and better pre-
servatives has improved cosmetic preservation tremendously.  

   Preservatives are the second most common allergenic 
group of substances beyond fragrances. 

 Unfortunately, the ideal preservative does not exist ( 7 ). Valu-
able qualities in a cosmetic preservative include those listed in 
 Table 14.1 (8). An important function of the cosmetic chemist 
and the microbiologist is to select the preservative that most 
closely meets all of the aforementioned needs in a given prod-
uct. Additionally, the preservative must undergo rigorous der-
matologic  testing  to  ensure  that  it  is  safe  for  use  on  human 
skin ( 9 , 10 ). Some Internet watchdog groups have singled out 
preservatives as bad or unnatural ingredients that are unsafe 
for human use. Much of the data they cite is from the animal 
ingestion of large quantities of preservatives. The preservatives 
used in skin care products are not intended for consumption 
and the concentration of preservatives in skin care products is 

small, evidenced by the fact that they are listed at the end of the 
ingredient  disclosure.  Preservatives  are  necessary  to  ensure  a 
long shelf life and prevent infection.   

   All cosmetics and skin care products contain preservatives. 

 There is no such thing as a product is designed without pres-
ervation considerations. All products use some type of preser-
vation technique either in packaging, such as an oxygen-free 
dispenser  with  a  one-way  valve,  or  in  formulation,  such  as 
incorporating spice extracts as fragrances and natural preser-
vatives. Key to stability of any skin care product on the shelf is 
consumer safety. The concept that the elimination of preserva-
tives is beneficial for the consumer is not necessarily true. 

 Numerous preservatives are available for incorporation into 
cosmetics.  Table 14.2  lists some of the preservative substances 
organized  into  chemical  classes.  Each  of  these  chemicals  has 
certain advantages and disadvantages which are summarized 
in   Table  14.3 .  There  is  no  perfect  preservative  substance  for 
cosmetics on the market. Some of the more popular preserva-
tives  in  use  today,  due  to  their  relatively  low  irritancy  and 
 allergenicity,  include  paraben  esters,  imidazolidinyl  urea, 
phenoxyethanol,  Quaternium-15,  and  Kathon  CG  ( 11 ).  The 
most commonly used preservative in cosmetics in the United 
States  are  the  paraben  esters  followed  by  imidazolidinyl 
urea ( 12 ).    

   The most commonly used preservative in U.S. cosmetics 
and skin care products is paraben ester followed by 
imidazolidinyl urea. 

 There has been a move as of late to eliminate paraben pre-
servatives  from  some  skin  care  products.  Consumer  groups 
have  linked  parabens  with  breast  cancer  on  their  websites 
encouraging manufacturers to use other preservatives. One of 
the  more  popular  preservatives  substituted  for  parabens  is 
Kathon-CG, but this preservative is a much greater source of 
contact dermatitis than parabens and in many respects more 
problematic.  Some  of  the  “natural”  skin  care  products  use 
essential  oils  and  fragrances  with  antimicrobial  capabilities, 
such  as  oil  of  clove,  cinnamon,  eucalyptus,  rose,  lavender, 
lemon, thyme, rosemary, and sandalwood ( 13 ). Products that 
claim to be preservative-free may actually incorporate one of 
these aromatic preservatives accompanied by special  packaging 
( Fig. 14.1 ).  

 The  complexity  of  cosmetic  formulations  requires  a 
 preservative  to  function  under  a  variety  of  conditions. 
 Microorganisms  tend  to  proliferate  in  the  aqueous  phase  of 
cosmetics. Under these circumstances the preservative selected 
must  have  a  high  water  solubility  and  low  oil  solubility  to 

103

104

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 14.1  Characteristics of an Ideal Cosmetic 
Preservative

Table 14.2  (Continued) Some Preservatives Used 
in Cosmetics 

1.  Lack of irritation
2.  Lack of sensitization
3.  Stable at a wide range of temperatures and pH
4.  Stable for extended periods of time
5.   Compatible with numerous ingredients and packaging 

materials

6.  Effective against numerous microorganisms
7.  No odor or color

Table 14.2  Some Preservatives Used in Cosmetics

Organic acids

Benzoic acid
Sorbic acid
Monochloroacetic acid
Formic acid
Salicylic acid
Boric acid
Propionic acid
Sulfurous acid
Citric acid
Dehydroacetic acid

Parabens

Methyl p-hydroxybenzoate
Ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate
Propyl p-hydroxybenzoate
Butyl p-hydroxybenzoate
Benzyl p-hydroxybenzoate

Mercurial compounds

Phenyl mercury acetate
Phenyl mercury borate
Phenyl mercury nitrate

Essential oils

Eucalyptus
Origanum
Thyme
Savory
Lemongrass oil

Aldehydes

Formaldehyde

Alcohols

b-Phenoxy ethyl alcohol
b-p-Chlorophenoxy ethyl alcohol
b-Phenoxy propyl alcohol
Benzyl alcohol
Isopropyl alcohol
Ethyl alcohol
Phenolic compounds

Phenol
o-Phenylphenol
Chlorothymol
Methyl cholorthymol
Dichlorophene
Hexachlorophene

Quaternary ammonium compounds

Benzethonium chloride
Benzalkonium chloride
Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide
Cetylpyridinium chloride

(Continued)

Miscellaneous

5-Bromo-5-nitro-1,3-dioxan (Dioxin)
2-Bromo-2-nitropropane-1,3-diol (Bronopol)
Imidazolidinyl urea (Germall 115)
Trichlorosalicylanilide
Trichlorocarbanilide
5-Chloro-2-methyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one and 2-methyl-

4-isothiazolin-3-one (Kathon CG)

Source: Adapted from Harry’s Cosmeticology. In: Wilkinson JB, Moore RJ, 
eds. 7th edn. New York: Chemical Publishing, 1982: 673–706.

function.  Furthermore, care must be taken to ensure that other 
ingredients in the formulation do not inactivate the preserva-
tive either by binding to active sites or altering the effective pH 
range.  Some  solid  substances  such  as  talc,  kaolin,  titanium 
dioxide, and zinc oxide actually adsorb the preservative, thus 
lowering its effective concentration ( 14 ). 

 Organisms  that  frequently  contaminate  cosmetics  include 
gram-positive  bacteria  ( Staphylococcus  aureus ,   Streptococcus 
 species),  gram-negative  bacteria  ( Pseudomonas  aeruginosa, 
Escherichia  coli,  Enterobacter  aerogenes ),  fungi  ( Asperigillus 
niger ,   Penicillium   species,   Alternaria   species),  and  yeasts 
( Candida  species) ( 15 ). The necessity of preservatives cannot 
be denied, but infrequently adverse reactions to cosmetic and 
skin care preservatives can occur. Paraben esters are the most 
popular preservatives used in cosmetics as their sensitization 
potential  is  low  and  they  infrequently  cause  irritancy  when 
applied to healthy skin ( 16 ). They are usually found in con-
centrations of 0.5% or less in the United States, but concen-
trations  up  to  5%  have  been  shown  to  produce  minimal 
irritation. Some individuals who are allergic to parabens may 
actually  tolerate  cosmetics  containing  them,  a  phenomenon 
known as the “paraben paradox” ( 17 ). Tolerance is related to 
application site, concentration, duration, and the status of the 
skin ( 18 ). Since they are most effective against gram-positive 
organisms  and  fungi,  paraben  esters  are  sometimes  used  in 
combination  with  phenoxyethanol  to  provide  better  gram-
negative  coverage  ( 19 ).  Parabens  and  imidazolidinyl  urea 
(Germall 115) or diazolidinyl urea (Germall II) also act syner-
gistically ( 20 ). 

 Some  preservatives,  such  as  imidazolidinyl  urea  (Germall 
115),  2-bromo-2  nitropropane-1,3-diol  (Bronopol)  ( 21 , 22 ), 
Quaternium-15 (Dowicil 200) ( 23 ), and dimethylol dimethyl 
hydantoin (Glydant) are formaldehyde releasers. This means 
that free formaldehyde is produced in the presence of water. 
However, the concentration of formaldehyde is usually too low 
to cause irritancy or allergenicity. Nevertheless, patients who 
are  allergic  to  formaldehyde  may  have  difficulty  with  these 
preservatives ( 24 ). 

 Kathon-CG, the CG standing for cosmetic grade, is a rela-
tively new preservative to the United States ( 25 ). It is a source 
of  sensitization  and  recommended  for  use  in  products  that 
are rinsed off the skin, such as hair conditioners and sham-
poos, in concentrations of less than 5 ppm ( 26 , 27 ). It is used, 
however, in some leave-on products, such as hand creams, in 
low  concentration.  Kathon-CG  and  quaternium-15  were 

TROUBLESHOOTING PROBLEMATIC INGREDIENTS

105

Table 14.3  A Comparison of Preservatives

Preservative

Advantage

Disadvantage

Alcohols
Quaternium-15 (Dowicil 200)

Broad coverage, inexpensive
Broad coverage (bacteria, yeasts, molds)

Volatile, high concentration required
Ineffective against some Pseudomonas species, 

 formaldehyde releaser

Formaldehyde

Broad coverage (fungicide and 

Irritant, allergen, concentration-regulated unpleasant 

Quaternary ammonium compounds

Mainly gram-positive bacteria, some 

Incompatible with anionics and proteins

 bactericide)

odor

Parabens

gram negative

Moderate coverage (fungi, gram positive 
bacteria), low allergenicity, low irritancy

Poor against gram-negative bacteria, incompatible 
with nonionics and cationics, effective only at 
acidic pH

Organic mercurials
Phenolics

Broad coverage
Broad coverage, effective over wide pH 

High toxicity, high irritancy
High irritancy, volatile

range

2-Bromo-2-nitropropane-1,3-diol 

Moderate coverage (bacteria)

Formaldehyde releaser, least effective against yeast 

(Bronopol)

Methylisothiazolinone and 

 methylchloroisothiazolinone 
(Kathon CG)

Broad coverage (bacteria, yeasts, fungi)

Allergenicity, irritancy, inactivated at high pH

and fungi

Imidazolidinyl urea (Germall 115)

Moderate coverage (gram-negative 

Best used combined with parabens and antifungals 

Diazolidinyl urea (Germall II)

Organic acids
Dimethyloldimethyl hydantoin 

(Glydant)

bacteria)

Moderate coverage (gram-negative 
bacteria, Pseudomonas species)
Broad coverage (bacteria, yeasts)
Broad coverage, effective over wide pH 

range

to obtain a broader coverage

Best used combined with parabens and antifungals 

to obtain a broader coverage

Irritating, effective only at acidic pH
Less active against yeasts

Source: Adapted from Harry’s Cosmeticology. In: Wilkinson JB, Moore RJ, eds. 7th edn. New York: Chemical Publishing, 1982: 673–707.

found to be the most allergic preservatives in a patch testing 
study ( 28 ).  

   Parabens are being replaced by Kathon-CG in many 
cosmetic formulations, but Kathon-CG is a source of 
allergic contact dermatitis. 

 Some patients may also develop allergic contact dermatitis 
or  contact  urticaria  to  sorbic  acid,  but  this  a  less  frequently 
used preservative in cosmetics ( 29 ). It is patch tested at a 2% 
concentration in petrolatum ( 30 ). 

 Preservatives can be difficult to patch test due to their inher-
ent irritancy. Excellent articles discussing patch testing meth-
ods and concentrations are available ( 31 ).  Table 14.4  lists the 
patch test concentrations of some of the more commonly used 
preservatives and their typical concentration in cosmetic for-
mulations. It is interesting to note that there is some variability 
in recommended patch concentrations depending on the ref-
erence used ( 32 , 33 ).   

  color additives 
 The  other  problematic  groups  of  ingredients  from  a  media 
standpoint,  besides  preservatives,  are  color  additives.  Color 
additives are indispensable in colored cosmetics and account 
for the perceived benefits of other cosmetic preparations. The 
use of synthetic organic colors for cosmetic purposes has been 
regulated since 1938 ( 34 ) ( Fig. 14.2 ). The coloring agents most 
frequently  used  in  cosmetics  are  listed  in   Table  14.5   ( 35 ). 

 Figure 14.1     This facial moisturizer is packaged in an air-free sack inside a plas-
tic container dispensed through a one-way valve. This prevents oxygen from 
contacting the moisturizer and aids in product preservation.    

106

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 14.4  Patch Test and Use Concentrations

Preservative

Use 
 concentration

Patch test 
 concentration

Quaternium-15 (Dowicil 

0.02–0.3%

2% in petrolatum

200)

Formaldehyde
Parabens

0.05–0.2%
0.1–0.8%

2-Bromo-2-nitropropane-

0.01–0.1%

1% aqueous
3% in petrolatum if 
tested individually, 
otherwise use 12% 
in petrolatum of 
paraben mixturea
0.5% in petrolatum

1,3-diol (Bronopol)

Methylisothiazolinone and 
methylchloroisothiazoli-
none (Kathon CG)

3–15 PPM

100 PPM aqueous

Imidazolidinyl (Germall 

0.05–0.5%

1% in petrolatum or 

115)

Diazolidinyl urea 
(Germall II)

Dimethylol dimethyl 
hydantoin (Glydant)

0.1–0.5%

aqueous
1% aqueous

0.15–0.4%

1–3% aqueous

aParaben mixture contains 3% each of methyl-, ethyl-, propyl-, and butyl 
paraben.

 Figure  14.2     Coloring  agents  used  in  lip  products  are  regulated  by  the  U.S. 
government.    

There  are  116  permitted  certified  colors  available  for  the 
 cosmetic chemist to combine into three classes:    

1.    FD&C  colorants  are  permitted  for  use  in  food, 

drugs, and cosmetics.  

2.    D&C colorants are permitted for use in drugs and 

cosmetics.  

Table 14.5  Frequency of Cosmetic Color Additive Use 
(in Order of Decreasing Frequency)

Titanium dioxide
Iron oxides
Mica
FD&C Yellow No. 5
Ultramarine blue
FD&C Blue No. 1
D&C Red No. 7 calcium lake
Bismuth oxychloride
FD&C Red No. 4
FD&C Yellow No. 6

3.    External  D&C  colorants  are  permitted  for  use  in 
externally applied drugs and cosmetics, but the lips 
and any body surface area covered by mucous mem-
branes are excluded.    

   The use of synthetic organic colors for cosmetic purposes 
has been regulated since 1938. 

 Color additives can be divided into those that are soluble and 
insoluble  ( 36 ).  Soluble  colors  may  be  soluble  in  a  variety  of 
substances which include water, alcohol, and oil. These colors 
are almost all synthetic organic dyestuffs that impart color only 
when  in  solution.  These  soluble  synthetic  dyestuffs  can  be 
 further  divided  into  acid  dyes,  mordant  dyes,  basic  dyes,  vat 
dyes, solvent dyes, and xanthene dyes. Acid dyes are used in the 
dyeing  of  many  items,  such  as  cosmetics,  textiles,  food,  inks, 
wood stains, and varnishes. The dyestuffs of this category used 
in cosmetics are FD&C Blue No. 1,2; FD&C Green No. 1,2,3; 
FD&C Red No. 2,3,4; FD&C Violet No. 1, FD&C Yellow No. 5,6; 
D&C  Blue  No.  4;  D&C  Green  No.  5;  D&C  Orange  No.  4,11; 
D&C Red No. 22,23,28,33; D&C Yellow No.7,10 and Ext. D&C 
Yellow  No.  7.  Mordant  dyes,  basic  dyes,  and  vat  dyes  are  not 
generally used in cosmetics. Solvent dyes listed for use are D&C 
Green No. 6; D&C Red No. 17, 37; D&C Violet No. 2 and D&C 
Yellow No. 11. Xanthene dyes, such as fluorescein, are used in 
the coloring of lipsticks. Dyes of this group approved for use 
are the acid forms of D&C Orange No. 5,6,7,10 and D&C Red 
No. 21,27 and D&C Yellow No. 7. These xanthene dyes are used 
in  their  water-soluble  form:  FD&C  Red  No.  3;  D&C  Orange 
No. 11,12 and D&C Red No. 22,23,28. 

 Insoluble colors consist of inorganic and organic substances. 
The organic materials are lakes of soluble dyes and pigments 
while  the  inorganic  materials  are  largely  oxides  and  metals. 
The lakes are soluble dyestuffs that are rendered insoluble by 
precipitation onto a base. Pigments are usually dyes of the azo 
type. Oxide pigments that are naturally occurring include iron 
oxides known as ochre, raw and burnt siennas, red oxides, and 
raw  and  burnt  umbers.  Synthetic  oxides  and  ochres  are  also 
available to yield shades of red and yellow. Blues are produced 
as ultramarines, greens formed from chrome oxide, and Guig-
net’s green while blacks are available as carbon black, vegetable 
black,  bone  black,  and  black  oxide  of  iron.  Metallic  colors 
include  aluminum  powders  and  bronze  powders.  This  is  a 
quick,  but  useful,  overview  of  the  many  colorants  use  in 
 cosmetics and skin care products. 

TROUBLESHOOTING PROBLEMATIC INGREDIENTS

107

 Other  popular  colorants  that  do  not  fit  into  the  above 
 classification include pearl essences, formed from fish scale or 
bismuth  oxychloride,  and  manganese  violet.  Color  additives 
are  rarely  a  cause  of  dermatitis  in  cosmetics,  but  reports  of 
dermatitis  to  coal  tar  dyes  exist  ( 37 ). Additionally,  the  D&C 
Red dyes have been shown to be comedogenic ( 38 ).  

neck ligaments, but most preparations contain some collagen 
contamination. The elastin is usually added in the form of a 
hydrolysate  consisting  of  a  clear  yellow  liquid  with  a  pro-
nounced odor. It is added for its ability to function as a humec-
tant;  however,  collagen  has  a  greater  water-binding  capacity 
than elastin.  

  biologic additives 
 Another controversial area of product formulation is the use 
of  biologic  additives,  or  substances  that  are  animal  derived. 
Some cosmetic companies advertise that none of their prod-
ucts  contain  animal  materials,  which  may  be  of  more  value 
from  a  marketing,  than  formulation,  standpoint.  Biologic 
additives  are  derived  from  the  extracts  and  hydrolysates  of 
glands  and  tissues  of  animals  of  different  species.  Animal 
organ  extracts  can  be  formulated  as  aqueous,  hydroglyceric, 
hydroalcoholic, hydroglycolic, and oily. Examples of biologic 
additives  are  collagen,  elastin,  hyaluronic  acid,  keratin,  pla-
centa, amniotic fluid, pancreas, egg extract, blood derivatives, 
and extracts of the brain and aorta.  

   Biologic additives are derived from animal products. 

 Topically  applied  biologic  additives,  also  known  as  biofac-
tors,  are  thought  by  the  cosmetic  community  to  function  as 
active ingredients due to the presence of “intrinsic factors” ( 39 ). 
Intrinsic factors are as of yet unidentified chemicals that have 
physiologic effects on the human body. These animal-derived 
materials are briefly examined. 

  Collagen 
 Collagen is a biologic additive found in moisturizers, hair con-
ditioners, hair shampoos, and nail polishes. It is also available 
in a form suitable for cutaneous and subcutaneous injection. 
Collagen is a large molecule composed of three twisted alpha 
helical  peptide  chains.  It  is  usually  obtained  from  shredded 
calf  skin  that  is  carefully  handled  to  eliminate  denaturation. 
Injectable collagen is processed to separate the chains through 
hydrolysis.  The  nonhelical  end  of  the  chains,  known  as  the 
telopeptide, is also removed since it is responsible for the anti-
genicity of bovine collagen experienced in  humans ( 39 ). 

 Injectable bovine and porcine collagen used to be marketed 
as a filler substance to cosmetically improve facial depressions 
due to scarring or wrinkling, but it was recently removed. Top-
ical collagen, on the other hand, can be used in its microfibril-
lar form for hemostasis or in its hydrolyzed form as a protein 
humectant in moisturizers. Collagen can absorb up to 30 times 
its  weight  in  water.  Hydrolyzed  collagen  protein  can  also  be 
used in hair products, especially instant conditioners, as it can 
reversibly  penetrate  chemically  treated  or  damaged  hair. 
Hydrolyzed  collagen  is  still  widely  used  in  many  modern 
 formulations  even  though  its  use  decreased  during  the  mad 
cow scare.  

  Elastin 
 Elastin is a structural component of the dermis responsible for 
the ability of the skin to regain its original configuration fol-
lowing  stretching  and  other  deformations.  The  elastin  used 
topically  in  cosmetic  preparations  is  obtained  from  bovine 

  Hyaluronic Acid 
 Hyaluronic acid is a component of the dermis that has a great 
cosmetic  potential  for  water  retention.  In  other  words,  hyal-
uronic  acid  can  function  as  a  humectant  when  topically 
applied. It also can facilitate penetration of other substances 
through  the  stratum  corneum  since  a  hydrated  epidermis  is 
more  permeable.  For  this  reason,  hyaluronic  acid  has  been 
termed  a  “transdermal  delivery  system”  by  some  cosmetic 
manufacturers. 

 Hyaluronic acid is a glycosaminoglycan as are chitin, chon-
droitin sulfate, and heparin. It falls into the broad category of 
mucopolysaccharides which are hexosamine-containing poly-
saccharides of animal origin occurring in their pure state or as 
protein salts. Hyaluronic acid is obtained from animal sources 
such  as  avian  combs,  calf  connective  tissue,  umbilical  cord, 
and  synovia.  The  hyaluronic  acid  that  is  used  as  a  filler  for 
injection is NASHA, which is human hyaluronic acid manu-
factured by bacteria to eliminate any animal components. This 
form of hyaluronic acid is not widely used in topical skin care 
preparations due to cost.  

  Keratin 
 Keratin, a protein component of the stratum corneum, is used 
in cosmetics as a humectant moisturizer and to deposit a thin 
film on the hair and nails. It allows longer curl retention in hair-
setting products and can minimally penetrate chemically treated 
or damaged hair to temporarily replace removed hair proteins. 
Several salon lines use keratin as their major “hero” ingredient 
for marketing purposes. One line uses heat-denatured human 
hair keratin for its hair-strengthening products. Keratin is also 
found  in  nail  polishes  to  improve  nail  hardness.  Keratin  is  a 
scleroprotein  and  typically  obtained  from  hydrolyzed  bovine 
horn, horse hair, and boar bristles. It is a brown powder that can 
be readily added to gels, solutions, and emulsions thus  facilitating 
its addition to many cosmetic products.   

   Keratin obtained from heated denatured human hair is a 
high priced cosmetic additive in many hair care products. 

  Placenta 
 Placenta, as used in cosmetic preparations, is a complex mix-
ture  of  proteins  and  enzymes  such  as  alkaline  phosphatase, 
lactate dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, glutamate oxa-
loacetate transaminase, and glutamate pyruvate transaminase. 
The number of substances present within the extract depends 
upon the care with which the placenta was handled. Human 
and animal placentas are used as sources. In general, the pla-
centa is frozen, ground, and rinsed with sterile deionized water 
to  remove  any  blood  products.  The  cells  are  then  lysed.  The 
preparation can be treated further depending on the needs of 
the  cosmetic  chemist.  In  the  cosmetic  literature,  placenta 
extract is thought to accelerate cellular mitosis, enhance blood 

108

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

circulation, and stimulate cellular metabolism ( 39 ). It is used 
in  a  variety  of  cosmetics  from  facial  moisturizing  creams  to 
hair conditioners.  

  Amniotic Fluid 
 Amniotic fluid is used in cosmetics as a moisturizer and a pur-
ported “epidermal growth enhancer.” It is found in facial and 
body moisturizers, bust creams, hair lotions, and scalp treat-
ments.  Amniotic  fluid  is  formed  by  the  secretions  of  the 
amnion  and  the  vascular  transudate.  The  origin  of  the  fluid 
used  for  cosmetic  purposes  is  pregnant  cows  at  three  to  six 
months’ gestation. The fluid is withdrawn from the amniotic 
sac through a hollow needle. It is a sterile yellow liquid of pH 
7 that can be supplied as a water-soluble additive or a sterile 
powder. At present, the use of placenta in skin care formula-
tions is minimal.  

  Egg Extract 
 The  whole  egg  extract  and  the  egg  yolk  extract  are  used  in 
shampoos,  face  masks,  hair  conditioners,  and  moisturizers. 
Egg  extract  is  obtained  from  chicken  eggs  in  the  form  of  a 
hydrolyzed  transparent  yellow  liquid. An  extract  can  also  be 
prepared  from  the  egg  yolk  alone.  This  extract  is  viscous, 
 opalescent, gold liquid containing fats, lecithin, and sterols.  

  Blood Derivatives 
 There  are  several  cosmetic  extracts  obtained  from  bovine 
blood: blood extract, serum albumin, fetuin, and fibronectin. 
Pure bovine blood extract is obtained by treating the blood to 
remove unwanted substances, histamines, and pyrogens. The 
remaining product is then dried to yield a water-soluble yellow 
powder.  It  is  thought  that  this  extract  stimulates  oxygen 
absorption  and  is  therefore  used  in  shampoos,  conditioners, 
revitalizing creams, and after shave products. 

 Bovine  serum  albumin  is  the  fluid  that  remains  after  the 
fibrin and blood cells have been removed. It is available as a 
liquid and freeze dried powder. Since bovine serum albumin is 
used as a growth factor in cultured skin cells, it is thought to 
increase epidermal cell renewal rate. It is a common additive in 
creams that “revitalize” the skin.   

  herbal additives 
 Herbal  additives  are  currently  more  popular  than  biologic 
additives as plants are felt to be more “pure” and less problem-
atic, even though many herbals are contaminated with herbi-
cides and heavy metals. The list of cosmetic plant materials is 
almost endless and can only be appreciated by reading chemi-
cal company advertisements in cosmetics and toiletries trade 
journals. Most cosmetic manufacturers do not formulate their 
own additives, but rather buy them in bulk from wholesalers. 
 Table  14.6   contains  a  few  of  the  many  herbal  additives  and 
their purported benefit ( 40 ).  

 The area of plant additives is made more confusing by the 
centuries of mystique that have surrounded herbal medicine, 
still actively practiced, and herbal aestheticians, who are mak-
ing a resurgence with aromatology and herbology. There is no 
doubt that many of the plant additives impart a pleasing smell 
and color to the cosmetic ( 41 ). Plant additives can be obtained 
as  hydroglycolic  extracts,  essential  oils,  and  whole  plant 
extracts  ( 42 ).  Hydroglycolic  extracts  are  a  combination  of 

Table 14.6  Herbal Additives

Plant derivative

Allantoin
Almond oil
Aloe vera
Avocado oil
Camomile (bisabolol)
Camphor
Cypress
Elder
Geranium
Hawthorne
Hazelnut oil
Horse tail
Hypericum
Jojoba
Licorice
Linden flower
Lotus
Marigold
Marjoram
Myrrh
Sage
Seaweed
Sesame oil
Shea butter
Wheat germ oil
Witch hazel

Purported function

Anti-irritating
Emollient
Skin soother, moisturizer
Skin soother
Skin soother
Skin refresher
Skin refresher
Skin toner
Skin softener
Astringent
Emollient
Skin toner
Skin refresher
Humectant, moisturizer
Skin soother, softener
Skin soother
Skin soother, softener
Decrease skin edema
Skin toner
Nail strengthener
Skin toner
Skin soother
Emollient
Moisturizer
Emollient
Astringent

 propylene  glycol  and  water,  which  yield  the  water-soluble 
plant constituents, but not the oil-soluble aromatic fragrances. 
These  extracts  are  formulated  into  finished  cosmetics  in  a 
3–10%  concentration.  Essential  oils,  extensively  discussed 
under  fragrance  chapter,  yield  the  volatile  nonaqueous  con-
stituents but no tannins, flavonoids, carotenoids, or polysac-
charides.  These  extracts  are  formulated  into  cosmetics  in  a 
2–5% concentration. Lastly, whole plant extracts, also known 
as aromaphytes, are produced by double extraction and con-
tain all the constituents of the plant. They are used at a 5–20% 
concentration in cosmetic formulations.  

   Plant additives impart a pleasing smell and color to 
cosmetics. 

 Some of the currently popular herbal additives include aloe, 
avocado  oil,  sesame  oil,  and  tea  tree  oil. Aloe  is  derived  as  a 
gelatinous substance squeezed from the leaf of the  Aloe arbore-
scens  Miller ( 43 ). It is thought to be of benefit in healing burns 
and  enhancing  skin  repair,  although  no  published  wound-
healing studies have confirmed this belief ( 44 ). However, it has 
been shown to induce capillary vasodilation and act as an anti-
microbial in concentrations greater than 70% ( 45 ). Avocado, 
sesame, and tea tree oil are used in moisturizers as emollients. 
But tea tree oil, also known as melaleuca oil, is derived from 
the   Melaleuca  alternifolia   Cheel  and  thought  to  be  effective 
in the treatment of furuncles, psoriasis, and fungal infections. 
These claims have not been proven, but cases of allergic  contact 
dermatitis  to  d-limonene,  a  constituent  of  tea  tree  oil,  have 
been documented ( 46 ). 

TROUBLESHOOTING PROBLEMATIC INGREDIENTS

109

Table 14.7  Vitamin Additives

Vitamin

Beta-carotene
Biotin
Panthenol
Riboflavin
Vitamin A

Vitamin C
Vitamin E
Vitamin F (essential fatty acids)

Purported function

Antioxidant
Improve fat metabolism
Hair conditioner
Maintain healthy skin
Promote skin elasticity, 

smoothness

Antioxidant
Antioxidant
Skin nourishing

 Other plant additives, such as witch hazel, are well-established 
astringents  while  allantoin  and  alpha-bisabolol,  a  chamomile 
extract, have been used for years in cosmetics designed for sensi-
tive skin due to anti-inflammatory properties. There is no doubt 
that many of the original dermatologic medications had their 
origin as herbal derivatives.  

  vitamin additives 
 Vitamin additives have become popular due to the recognition 
that beta-carotene, vitamin C, and vitamin E can act as anti-
oxidants.   Table  14.7   summarizes  some  of  the  currently  used 
vitamins and their purported cosmetic value.  

 Further study is required before it can be stated that topical 
vitamin C, vitamin E, and beta-carotene can function as anti-
oxidants,  quenching  oxygen  radicals  that  can  damage  struc-
tures  within  the  dermis  ( 47 ).  Nevertheless,  some  interesting 
preliminary work has been published in this area. Vitamin C is 
a hydrophilic substance that can function as an antioxidant, or 
as an oxidant if combined with iron. It has been shown to pro-
tect  porcine  skin  from  UVB-  and  UVA-induced  phototoxic 
reactions  when  topically  applied  ( 48 ).  Thus,  it  may  act  as  a 
broad-spectrum photoprotectant by enhancing cutaneous lev-
els of vitamin C ( 49 ). Studies have demonstrated the value of 
alpha-tocopherol, also known as vitamin E, as a lipid-soluble 
chain-breaking  antioxidant  in  erythrocyte  membranes  ( 50 ). 
Topically  applied  alpha-tocopherol  has  also  been  shown  to 
inhibit  UVB-induced  edema  and  erythema  conferring  a  sun 
protection factor (SPF) of 3 ( 51 ). This is thought to be due to 
its  ability  to  marginally  absorb  light  and  function  as  a  free 
radical quenching, lipid-soluble antioxidant ( 52 ). Carotenoids, 
of  which  beta-carotene  is  an  example,  have  been  shown  to 
function  as  antioxidants  in  hydrophobic  compartments  not 
accessible  to  tocopherols  due  to  their  unique  solubility 
 properties ( 53 ).   

   Vitamin additives are commonly used as topical antioxi-
dants, although their oral efficacy is higher. 

  liposomes and niosomes 
 Liposomes  and  niosomes  are  not  individual  ingredients,  but 
rather a formulation technique used to deliver materials to the 
skin.  Nanoparticles  are  another  delivery  method,  but  this 
 discussion is found in the sunscreen chapter. Liposomes and 
niosomes were initially discovered in the 1960s and reported 
by AD Bangham in 1965 in the Journal of Molecular Biology. 

His discovery centered on the observation that phospholipids 
could  be  dispersed  in  an  aqueous  solution  to  spontaneously 
form hollow vesicles, or liposomes, containing the dispersing 
medium ( 54 ). This observation received immediate attention 
from  the  pharmaceutical  industry  who  theorized  that  lipo-
somes could be used as a delivery system for aqueous solutions 
of  active  agents.  Later,  the  cosmetics  industry  adapted  the 
technology  for  the  delivery  of  nonprescription  items  to 
the skin.  

   Liposomes are spherical vesicles with diameters between 
25 and 5000 nm formed from membranes which consist of 
a bilayer of amphiphilic molecules space (55). 

 Amphiphilic refers to the fact that the molecules have both 
polar  and  nonpolar  ends.  Both  the  polar  heads  are  directed 
toward the inside of the vesicle and to its outer surface. The 
nonpolar, or lipophilic tails, are directed toward the middle of 
the  bilayer.  This  unique  structure  thus  allows  the  sustained 
release  of  water-soluble  chemicals  from  the  liposome  struc-
ture. Liposomes may be one double layered (unilamellar), two 
to four double layered (oligolamellar), or multilayered (multi-
lamellar) vesicles. 

 The bilayer that forms the liposome and separates its inte-
rior compartment from the external environment is remark-
ably  similar  to  the  cell  membrane  of  mammalian  cells.  This 
membrane  structure  has  been  highly  conserved  through 
 evolutionary  change. Advocates  of  liposomes  argue  that  this 
allows  biocompatibility  with  cells,  minimizing  adverse 
 reactions ( 56 ). 

 The  primary  substances  used  to  form  liposomes  are 
 phospholipids  such  as  phosphatidylcholine.  Other  minor 
components  may  include  phosphatidylethanolamine,  phos-
phatidylinositol,  and  phosphatidic  acid.  Vegetable  phospho-
lipids are also used because of their high concentration of the 
essential  fatty  acids,  linoleic  and  linolenic  acid.  Parameters 
that  influence  the  function  of  liposomes  in  topical  prepara-
tions include chemical composition, vesicle size, shape, surface 
charge,  lamellarity,  and  homogeneity.  Liposome  function  is 
also dependent upon where the active agent is trapped (inside 
the vesicles, in the membrane, or on the outer surface of the 
vesicle)  and  the  chemical  nature  of  the  active  agent  (hydro-
philic, amphiphilic, or lipophilic). 

 Niosomes are a specialized form of liposome composed of 
non-ionic  surfactants.  Their  main  components  are  ethoxyl-
ated fatty alcohols and synthetic polyglycerol ethers (polyoxy-
ethylene alkyl ester, polyoxyethylene alkyl ether).  

   Niosomes are a specialized form of liposome composed of 
non-ionic surfactants. 

 Theoretically, liposomes offer the cosmetic chemist new for-
mulations with new physical properties, a new transport sys-
tem for active agents and possibly increased efficacy of active 
agents. Liposomes, however, are somewhat unstable as they are 
readily deformed and possibly lysed by the weight of a glass 

110

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

cover slip when viewed under the microscope. They are also 
subject to fusion, aggregation and precipitation. The vesicular 
structure can be stabilized by cholesterol and incorporation of 
an ionic charge, but they remain fragile. 

 The mechanism of action of liposomes and niosomes on the 
skin  remains  controversial.  Many  articles  in  cosmetic  trade 
publications  have  tried  to  use  radiolabeled  substances  and 
freeze  fracture  electron  microscopy  to  observe  their  interac-
tion  with  the  stratum  corneum  and  papillary  dermis.  It  is 
unlikely that liposomes and niosomes are able to diffuse intact 
intercellularly  across  the  stratum  corneum.  The  corneocytes 
are imbedded in lipids, such as ceramides, glycosylceramides, 
cholesterol,  and  fatty  acids,  which  are  structurally  different 
from  the  phospholipids  and  non-ionic  surfactants  ( 57 ).  It  is 
possible  that  they  may  enter  the  skin  through  appendageal 
structures, but this accounts for only a small proportion of the 
skin surface area. Thus, absorption through this route is small. 
 There  is  evidence,  however,  that  the  components  of  lipo-
somes and niosomes are able to interact with skin lipids, even 
if they are not in an intact vesicular form ( 58 ). They may be 
able  to  reduce  transepidermal  water  loss  by  supplementing 
missing substances within the skin lipid barrier. Furthermore, 
liposomes and niosomes can form chemical associations with 
keratin proteins. 

 Liposomes  can  also  be  incorporated  into  cosmetics,  bath 
products, moisturizers, and sunscreens. Empty liposomes have 
possibilities  as  bath  oils,  emollients  and  wound  healing  aids 
due to their rich concentration of phospholipids. Loaded lipo-
somes can be devised to release their contents at specific tem-
peratures or specific pH levels, a concept known as “triggering.” 
These  liposomes  can  be  loaded  with  sunscreens  to  enhance 
distribution  within  the  stratum  corneum  or  moisturizers  to 
reduce transepidermal water loss. The liposome concentration 
in such formulations is usually 1% to 10%.  

  summary 
 This chapter has discussed some of the problematic ingredi-
ents  in  cosmetic  formulations.  Certainly,  preservatives  and 
color additives lead the list. Recently, there was some media 
discussion that lipsticks contained lead and could be a source 
of  lead  poisoning.  As  with  all  media  reports,  there  is  some 
truth to the concern. Many red lipstick pigments contain very 
small amounts of lead, but their safety is excellent due to the 
extremely small amount and the fact that lipstick is not eaten 
500 tubes at a time. It must be remembered that no ingredient 
is 100% safe in all individuals. This realization is important, 
as the dermatologist must listen carefully to patients who note 
difficulty  with  certain  ingredients  in  order  to  troubleshoot 
the  problem  and  to  arrive  at  acceptable  formulations  for 
patient use.   

   references 
    1.       Kabara     JJ    .   Cosmetic preservation  .   In  :     Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and Drug 

Preservation  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   3  –  5  .   

    2.       Van  Abbe      NJ   ,     Spearman      RIC   ,     Jarrett      A    .    Pharmaceutical  and  Cosmetic 
Products  for  Topical  Administration  .    London  :    William  Heinemann 
Medical Books Ltd  ,   1969  :   91  –  105  .   

    3.       Adams     RM   ,    Maibach     HI    .   A five-year study of cosmetic reactions  .   J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .   

    4.       Orth     DS    .   Handbook of Cosmetic Microbiology  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, 

Inc.  ,   1993  :   75  –  99  .   

    5.       Parsons     T    .   A microbiology primer  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   73  –  7  .   
    6.       Wolven     A   ,    Levenstein     I    .   TGA  .   Cosmet J     1969  ;   1  :   34  .   
    7.       Smith      WP    .    Cosmetic  preservation:  a  survey  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1993  ;    108  :

   67  –  75  .   

    8.       Wells      FV   ,     Lubowe      II    .    Cosmetics  and  the  skin  .    New  York  :    Reinhold 

Publishing Corporation  ,   1964  :   586  .   

    9.       Bronaugh      RL   ,     Maibach      HI    .    Safety  evaluation  of  cosmetic  preservatives  . 
  In  :      Kabara      JJ    ,    ed  .    Cosmetic  and  Drug  Preservation  .    New  York  :    Marcel 
Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   503  –  27  .   

   10.       Eiermann     HJ    .   Cosmetic product preservation: safety and reulatory issues  . 
  In  :      Kabara      JJ    ,    ed  .    Cosmetic  and  Drug  Preservation  .    New  York  :    Marcel 
Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   559  –  69  .   

   11.       Steinberg      DC    .    Cosmetic  preservation:  current  international  trends  .  

 Cosmet Toilet     1992  :   77   –  82  .   

   12.     Frequency  of   preservative  use  in  cosmetic  formulas  as  disclosed  to  the 

FDA-1990  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   45  –  7  .   

   13.       Kabara     JJ    .   Aroma preservatives: essential oils and fragrances as antimicro-
bial agents  .   In  :     Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and Drug Preservation  .   New York  : 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   237  –  70  .   

   14.       McCarthy      TJ    .    Formulated  factors  affecting  the  activity  of  preservatives  . 
  In  :      Kabara      JJ    ,    ed  .    Cosmetic  and  Drug  Preservation  .    New  York  :    Marcel 
Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   359  –  86  .   

   15.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  .    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   673  –  706  .   

   16.       Schorr     WF   ,    Mohajerin     AH    .   Paraben sensitivity  .   Arch Dermatol     1966  ;   93  : 

  721  –  3  .   

   17.       Fisher     AA    .   The paraben paradoxes  .   Cutis     1973  ;   12  :   830  .   
   18.       Fisher     AA    .   The parabens: paradoxical preservatives  .   Cutis     1993  ;   51  :   405  –  6  .   
   19.       Hall      AL    .    Cosmetically  acceptable  phenoxyethanol  .    In  :      Kabara      JJ    ,    ed  . 
   Cosmetic  and  Drug  Preservation  .    New York  :    Marcel  Dekker,  Inc  ,    1984  : 
  79  –  107  .   

   20.       Rosen     WE   ,    Berke     PA    .   Germall 115: a safe and effective preservative  .   In  : 
    Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and Drug Preservation  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, 
Inc  ,   1984  :   191  –  203  .   

   21.       Croshaw      B   ,     Holland      VR    .    Chemical  preservatives:  use  of  Bronopol  as  a 
 cosmetic preservative  .   In  :     Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and Drug Preservation  . 
  New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   31  –  59  .   

   22.       Frosch     PJ   ,    White     IR   ,    Rycroft     RJG    ,   et al  .   Contact allergy to Bronopol  .   Con-

tact Dermatitis     1990  ;   22  :   24  –  6  .   

   23.       Marouchoc     SR    .   Dowicil 200 preservative  .   In  :     Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and 

Drug Preservation  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1984  :   143  –  59  .   

   24.       Fransway     AF    .    The  problem  of  preservation  in  the  1990s  .   Am  J  Contact 

Dermatitis     1991  ;   2  :   6  –  23  .   

   25.       DeGroot     AC   ,    Weyland      JW    .    Kathon  CG:  a  review  .    J Am Acad  Dermatol   

  1988  ;   18  :   350  –  8  .   

   26.       Law      AB   ,     Moss      JN   ,     Lashen      ES    .    Kathon  CG:  a  new  single-component, 
broad-spectrum  preservative  system  for  cosmetics  and  toiletries  .    In  : 
    Kabara     JJ    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic and Drug Preservation  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, 
Inc  ,   1984  :   29  –  141  .   

   27.       DeGroot     AC   ,    Liem     DH   ,    Weyland     JW    .   Kathon CG: cosmetic allergy and 

patch test sensitization  .   Contact Dermatitis     1985  ;   12  :   76  –  80  .   

   28.       DeGroot     AC   ,    Liem     DH   ,    Nater     JP   ,    Van Ketel     WG    .   Patch tests with fragrance 

materials and preservatives  .   Contact Dermatitis     1985  ;   12  :   87  –  92  .   

   29.       Luck     E   ,    Remmert     IK    .   Sorbic acid the preservation of cosmetic products  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   108  :   65  –  70  .   

   30.       Marks     JG   ,    DeLeo     VA    .   Contact and occupational dermatology  .   St. Louis  : 

  Mosby Yearbook  ,   1992  :   119  –  20  .   

   31.       Andersen     KE   ,    Rycroft     RJG    .   Recommended patch test concentrations for 
preservatives, biocides and antimicrobials  .   Contact Dermatitis     1991  ;   25  : 
  1  –  18  .   

   32.       DeGroot     AC   ,    Weyland     JW   ,    Nater     JP    .   Unwanted effects of cosmetics and 
drugs used in dermatology  ,   3rd edn  .   Amsterdam: Elsevier,     1994  :   57  –  65  .   
   33.       Fisher     AA    .   Contact dermatitis  .   3rd edn  .   Philadelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  : 

  238  –  57  .   

   34.       Berdick      M    .    Color  additives  in  cosmetics  and  toiletries  .    Cutis      1978  ;    21  : 

  743  –  7  .   

   35.     US Food and Drug Administration: cosmetic color additives: frequency of 

use  .   Cosmet Toilet     1989  ;   104  :   39  –  40  .   

   36.       Anstead      DF    .    Cosmetic  colours  .    In  :      Hibbott      HW    ,    ed  .    Handbook  of 
 Cosmetic Science  .   New York  :   The Macmillan Company  ,   1963  :   101  –  18  .   
   37.       Sugai     T   ,    Takahashi     Y   ,    Tagaki     T    .   Pigmented cosmetic dermatitis and coal tar 

dyes  .   Contact Dermatitis     1977  ;   3  :   249  –  56  .   

TROUBLESHOOTING PROBLEMATIC INGREDIENTS

111

   38.       Fulton      JE   ,     Pay      SR   ,     Fulton      JE    .    Comedogenicity  of  current  therapeutic 
products, cosmetics, and ingredients in the rabbit ear  .   J Am Acad Derma-
tol     1984  ;   10  :   96  –  105  .   

   52.       Mayer      P   ,     Pittermann     W   ,    Wallat      S    .    The  effects  of  vitamin  E  on  the  skin  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   108  :   99  –  109  .   

   53.       Sies     H    .   Oxidative stress: from basic research to clinical applications  .   Am J 

   39.       Hermitte     R    .   Formulating with selected biological extracts  .   Cosmet Toilet   

Med     1991  ;   91  :   31S  –  38S  .   

  1991  ;   106  :   53  –  60  .   

   54.       Lautenschlager      H    .    Liposomes  in  dermatological  preparations,  Part  1  .  

   40.       Dweck     AC   ,    Black     P    .   Natural extracts and herbal oils: concentrated benefits 

 Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   89  –  96  .   

for the skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107  :   89  –  98  .   

   55.       Junginger      HE   ,     Hofland      HEJ   ,     Bouwstra      JA    .    Liposomes  and  niosomes: 

   41.       Purohit     P   ,    Kapsner     TR    .   Natural essential oils  .   Cosmet Toilet     1994  ;   109  :   51  –  5  .   
   42.       Bishop     MA    .   Botanicals in bath care  .   Cosmet Toilet     1989  ;   104  :   65  –  9  .   
   43.       McKeown     E    .   Aloe vera  .   Cosmet Toilet     1987  ;   102  :   64  –  5  .   
   44.       Jackson     EM    .   Natural ingredients in cosmetics  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis   

  1994  ;   5  :   106  –  9  .   

   45.       Waller     T    .   Aloe vera in personal care products  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107  : 

  53  –  4  .   

   46.       Knight     TE   ,    Hausen     BM    .   Melaleuca oil dermatitis  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   

  1994  ;   30  :   423  –  7  .   

   47.       Rieger     MM    .   Oxidative reactions in and on skin: mechanism and preven-

tion  .   Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   108  :   43  –  56  .   

   48.       Darr      D   ,     Combs      S   ,     Dunston      S    ,    et  al  .    Topical  vitamin  C  protects  porcine 
skin from ultraviolet radiation-induced damage  .   Br J Dermatol     1992  ;   127  : 
  247  –  53  .   

   49.       Rackett     SC   ,    Rothe     MJ   ,    Grant-Kels     JM    .   Diet and dermatology  .   J Am Acad 

Dermatol     1993  ;   29  :   447  –  61  .   

   50.       Burton     GW   ,    Joyce     A   ,    Ingold     KU    .   Is vitamin E the only lipid-soluble, chain-
breaking  antioxidant  in  human  blood  plasma  and  erythrocyte  mem-
brances? Arch Biochem Biophys   1983  ;   221  :   281  –  90  .   

interactions human skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   45  –  50  .   

   56.       Hayward      JA    .    Potential  of  liposomes  in  cosmetic  science  .    Cosmet  Toilet   

  1990  ;   105  :   47  –  54  .   

   57.       Elias     PM    .   Structure of function of the stratum corneum permeability bar-

rier  .   Drug Dev Res     1988  ;   13  :   97  .   

   58.       Mahjour     M   ,    Mauser     B   ,    Rashidbaigi     Z   ,    Fawzi     MB    .   Effect on egg yolk leci-
thins  and  commercial  soybean  lecithins  on  in  vitro  skin  permeation  of 
drugs  .   J Control Release     1990  ;   14  :   243  –  52  .    

  suggested reading 
      Albrecht     J   ,    Begby     M    .   The meaning of “safe and effective”  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   

  2003  ;   48  :   144  –  7  .   

     Bergfeld     WF   ,    Belsito     DV   ,    Marks     JG   ,    Andersen     FA    .   Safety of ingredients used in 

cosmetics  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2005  ;   52  :   125  –  31  .   

     Fox     C    .   Skin and skin care  .   Cosmet Toilet     2001  ;   116   .   
     Fox     C    .   Ceramides and other topics  .   Cosmet Toilet Magazine     2002  ;   117  :   37  –  42  .   
     Matts     PJ   ,    Oblong     JE   ,    Bissett     DL    .   A review of the range of effects of niacina-

mide in human skin  .   IFSCC Magazine     2002  ;   5  :   2  –  6  .   

     Rangarajan     M   ,    Zatz     JL    .   Effect of Formulation on the topical delivery of alpha-

   51.       Idson     B    .   Vitamins and the skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   108  :   79  –  92  .   

tocopherol  .   J Cosmet Sci     2003  ;   54  :   161  –  74  .        

              Facial cosmetic dermatology: Summary      

  This section of the book discusses color cosmetics and skin 
care  products  for  the  face  with  special  reference  to  the 
incorporation of these products into the practice of derma-
tology.  Cosmetics  are  useful  for  camouflaging  and  for 
 presenting  a  more  polished,  youthful  facial  appearance. 
They  can  supplement  the  treatment  of  facial  dermatoses 
with skin care products that can maintain facial skin health. 
However, sometimes a patient will present who has under-
gone a major life change and requests cosmetic assistance to 
achieve  a  better  self-image.  The  dermatologist  should  be 
prepared to counsel this patient in an organized meaningful 
manner. 

 The  first  step  in  providing  a  cosmetic  consultation  is  to 
identify the area of concern. A hand-held mirror in the hand 
of the patient is indispensable when asking them to point to 
the exact features they wish to address. Once the patient has 
identified the area that has to be improved cosmetically and a 
realistic goal has been established, the dermatologist can pro-
ceed with counseling. The second step is to evaluate whether 
the  defect  should  be  corrected  surgically  or  cosmetically; 
sometimes  a  combination  of  both  is  optimal.  The  following 
discussion will focus on a patient who has completed surgery 
or needs only cosmetic correction in keeping with the scope of 
this book. 

 The third step is to determine whether the defect should be 
covered or de-emphasized. Discrete defects are generally best 
covered.  A  forehead  scar  can  be  covered  with  bangs,  a  dark 
congenital nevus on the cheek can be covered with an opaque 
facial  foundation,  psoriatic  nails  can  be  covered  with  sculp-
tured nails, ophiasis can be covered with a hair piece, etc. If the 
defect is not discrete, it may not be possible to cover it appro-
priately. For example, the appearance of actinically wrinkled 
facial skin will not improve with use of a thick foundation. On 
the  contrary,  the  thick  foundation  will  only  accentuate  the 
wrinkling.  This  situation  demands  that  the  defect  be 
 de-emphasized. 

 De-emphasizing a defect involves drawing attention away from 
the  negative  feature  and  directing  it  toward  positive  features. 
For example, upper eyelid blepharochalasis cannot be improved 
by thick application of colored eye shadow. Rather, a patient with 
intact eyelashes can de-emphasize the blepharochalasis by using 
fibered lash lengthening mascara followed by curling the thick-
ened, elongated eyelashes. A thin, subdued eye shadow can then 
be  applied  to  the  upper  lid.  Learning  how  to  de-emphasize 
 negative features is part of the art of using cosmetics. 

 The  fourth  step  is  to  encourage  the  patient  to  practice  and 
experiment. A  proper  cosmetic  application  is  not  easy.  Fortu-
nately, a bad result can be removed in a matter of minutes. Even 
though the patient may choose not to purchase cosmetic coun-
ter  products,  most  clerks  are  more  than  happy  to  assist  the 
patient  in  the  use  of  sample  cosmetics.  Some  physicians  may 
wish to have sample products in their office for demonstration. 
 The  fifth  and  final  step  is  to  have  the  patient  evaluate  the 
success  of  the  cosmetic  result.  The  patient  should  check 
the  appearance  under  the  lighting  conditions  present  where 
the cosmetic will be worn. A patient who works in an office 
should  look  at  the  appearance  under  bright  office  lighting, 
while a cosmetic for evening wear should be evaluated under 
subdued  incandescent  lighting.  A  makeup  mirror  that  simu-
lates  various  lighting  conditions  is  valuable  since  color  is 
 perceived  as  reflected  light.  Subtle  changes  in  lighting  may 
change  an  attractive  cosmetic  application  into  a  theatrical 
result.  Patients  should  be  advised  that  department  and  drug 
store  lighting  is  extremely  bright  and  most  cosmetics  will 
appear  lighter  than  under  natural  sunlight.  This  means  that 
when  selecting   cosmetics  for  purchase,  a  sample  should  be 
placed on the skin and then evaluated under natural sunlight. 
 The physician can optimize patient satisfaction by taking a 
systematic approach when advising the patient with cosmetic 
problems.  This  section  on  facial  cosmetics  has  provided  the 
background  information  required  to  provide  an  effective 
 cosmetic consultation.       

112

             II   Cosmetics in dermatology of the body: Introduction      

  The body encompasses the largest area of skin including the 
neck,  back,  chest,  arms,  and  legs.  Unique  cosmetic  products 
are  available  for  the  adornment  and  treatment  of  all  these 
body  areas  to  meet  the  needs  of  odor  management,  hair 
growth, and sebum removal. This customization of products 
has given rise to a multitude of bottles on the store shelf, yet 
each  must  have  a  need,  since  products  that  do  not  sell  are 
quickly  removed.  Let  us  begin  our  discussion  with  the  neck 
and move down the body to examine how skin care products 
can  be  used  in  the  treatment  and  maintenance  of  this  large 
body surface area. 

 The neck is an interesting area of a highly mobile skin that 
provides a transition between the thin skin of the face and the 
thicker  skin  of  the  upper  chest  and  back.  It  contains  fully 
mature hairs in men and thin vellus hairs in women. It is an 
important area from a cosmetic standpoint since it is an area 
affected by shaving in men, fragrance application in women, 
and  photodamage  in  both  sexes.  Poikiloderma  is  one  of  the 
most common visible cosmetic problems of the neck resulting 
from  photoaging  that  results  in  the  loss  of  dermal  collagen, 
visible sebaceous glands, damaged elastin, mottled pigmenta-
tion, and telangiectasia. The neck is also the site where women 
and men apply fragrance, which can be a cause of allergic or 
irritant contact dermatitis. Finally, the neck in men is a transi-
tion area for hair growth between the beard of the face and the 
body hair of the chest. For this reason, the hair exits the skin in 
many different directions, which predisposes to inflammation 
of  the  hair  follicular  ostia,  more  commonly  known  as  razor 
burn.  Severe  razor  burn  accompanied  by  ingrown  hairs  in 
African  American  men,  known  as  pseudofolliculitis  barbae, 
occurs when the curved hair shafts re-enter the skin causing 
inflammation  and  infection.  Thus,  the  neck  requires  careful 
cosmetic consideration. 

 The next area moving down the body is the back and chest. 
These areas contain the thickest skin of the body required to 
sustain  pulling  and  twisting  movements  from  arm  motion. 
This  thick  skin  does  not  heal  well  and  is  a  common  site  of 
unsightly hypertrophic or keloidal scars. In addition, the chest 
and back have fewer sebaceous glands than the face, yet receive 
abundant  hot  water  from  the  shower  head,  predisposing  to 
eczematous  conditions  and  the  need  for  mild  cleansing  and 
superb moisturization. 

 Tucked away between the chest and the back are the under-
arms,  representing  a  unique  intertriginous  body  area.  Other 
intertriginous  sites  on  the  body  that  have  the  same  hygiene 
and  skin  care  needs  include  the  ones  beneath  the  female 
breasts, between the upper inner thighs, and in persons who 
are obese, beneath the abdomen. Intertriginous sites are char-
acterized by moisture retention, skin movement, and warmth. 
This  environment  is  perfect  for  the  growth  of  fungus,  yeast, 
and bacteria, thus the intertriginous sites are frequent sites of 
dermatologic  disease.  These  areas  combine  hair  with  abun-
dant eccrine and apocrine sweat glands. Eccrine sweat glands 

produce a clear odorless sweat designed to cool the body and 
prevent overheating. Apocrine sweat glands do not participate 
in  thermoregulation,  but  rather  produce  a  yellowish  scented 
sweat that provides a perfect growth media for odor- producing 
bacteria and yeast. Controlling the sweat prevents body odor, 
skin  barrier  damage,  infection,  and  emotionally  disturbing 
wetness. This is the realm of deodorants and antiperspirants. 
Further,  hair  removal  is  challenging  in  the  armpit  due  the 
 concavity. 

 Similar  challenges  for  hair  removal  exist  on  the  arms  and 
legs of both men and women. Shaving these large body  surfaces 
can  result  in  irritation  from  razor  trauma  while  depilatories 
and waxing can traumatize the follicular ostia. These areas also 
receive excess bathing resulting in eczematous disease that can 
be  minimized  by  proper  cleanser  selection  and  the  use  of 
moisturizers. 

 Perhaps one of the most interesting aspects of cosmetics in 
dermatology  is  the  difference  between  the  skin  structure, 
 biochemistry,  and  functionality  of  men  versus  women  as  it 
may explain the gender aspects of dermatologic disease. While 
obvious differences exist between men and women concerning 
hair growth patterns, the other subtle aspects of skin structure 
uniqueness may not be so apparent ( Table II.1 ). For example, 
male skin is more deeply pigmented than female skin, perhaps 
accounting  for  the  saying  that  women  are  the “fairer”  of  the 
species. Male skin is also thicker and thus contains more col-
lagen.  This  may  explain  why  women  appear  to  age  more 
quickly than men, as both genders experience the same rate of 
collagen  loss,  but  women  begin  with  a  lower  baseline  and 
loose,  proportionately  more  collagen.  Women,  on  the  other 
hand,  possess  more  subcutaneous  fat,  which  predisposes  to 
cellulite and creates less muscle definition. Gender-specific fat 
also  distributes  in  different  body  areas,  with  men  depositing 
truncal fat while women deposit more gluteal and femoral fat. 
Men also appear to age more slowly than women, not only due 
to  increased  skin  thickness  but  also  due  to  the  presence  of 
facial  hair.  As  the  collagen  is  degraded  with  intrinsic  and 
extrinsic aging, the terminal hair bulbs on the male face take 
up more of the space preventing the fine cigarette paper wrin-
kling on female cheeks.  

 Structural  skin  differences  can  be  visibly  appreciated,  but 
skin biochemical differences are equally important ( Table II.2 ). 
Male  skin  secretes  more  sebum  than  female  skin  throughout 
life.  While  female  sebum  production  dramatically  decreases 
after menopause, male sebum secretion continues. This reduc-
tion is sebum is also accompanied by a reduction in stratum 
corneum lipids in women, which may be attributed to a reduc-
tion in estrogen with advancing age. This sebum reduction may 
explain why mature men have a higher incidence of seborrheic 
dermatitis than mature women.  

 There are also differences in the ability of female versus male 
fibroblasts  to  proliferate.  Female  fibroblasts  proliferate  at  a 
16%  higher  rate  than  male  fibroblasts  at  age  30.  This  may 
113

114

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table II.1  Gender Differences in Skin Structure

Table III. 3  Gender Differences in Skin Functionality

Attribute

Skin color
Red skin tones
Yellow skin tones
Skin thickness
Amount of collagen
Rate of collagen loss
Subcutaneous fat
Fat distribution
Cellulite
Appearance of aging

Female

Lighter
Lower
Higher
Thinner
Less
Same
More
Gluteal and femoral
More
Faster

Table II. 2  Gender Differences in Skin Biochemistry

Attribute

Sebum production
Fibroblast proliferation
Sweat production
Sweat evaporation rate
Transcutaneous oxygen level
Body skin pH
Axilla skin pH

Female

Less
More
Less
Higher
Higher
Higher
Same

Male

Darker
Higher
Lower
Thicker
More
Same
Less
Truncal
Less
Slower

Male

More
Less
More
Lower
Lower
Lower
Same

explain why women tend to heal better than men, especially 
after facial surgery. Another explanation for superior healing 
may also be the reduced thickness of female facial skin. 

 While differences exist in skin structure between men and 
women,  there  are  also  differences  in  the  substances  that  are 
present  on  the  skin  surface.  Men  tend  to  sweat  more  than 
women, creating an environment more conducive to bacteria 
growth resulting in odor production. Male sweat also remains 
on the skin longer. In addition, men possess more body hair, 
which increases the body surface area for bacterial coloniza-
tion. This may be due to the increased popularity of antibacte-
rial  soaps  among  men.  The  presence  of  sweat  may  also 
contribute  to  differing  skin  pH  measurements  between  men 
and  women. Women  have  a  higher  more  alkaline  pH,  while 
men  have  a  relatively  lower  pH,  but  the  pH  of  the  axilla  is 
 identical in both sexes. 

 Finally,  women  have  a  higher  transcutaneous  oxygen  level 
than men. The exact significance of this is not known, but may 
be explained by the thinner epidermis. 

Attribute

Transepidermal water loss rate
Skin blistering times
Skin elasticity
Stratum corneum stiffness
Tape stripping removal of stratum 

corneum

Skin temperature
Fingertip temperature
Heat-induced vasodilatation 

temperature
Sympathetic tone
Irritant contact dermatitis incidence
Facial lactic acid stinging
Minimal erythema dose

Female

Lower
Longer
Same
Higher
Same

Cooler
28C
Lower

Male

Higher
Shorter
Same
Lower
Same

Hotter
33C
Higher

Increased
Higher
Higher
Higher

Decreased
Lower
Lower
Lower

 In addition to skin biochemical differences, there are also 
differences  in  skin  functionality  ( Table  II.3 ).  These  func-
tional differences can impact how skin care products  perform 
on the skin and may dictate product formulation specifics. It 
is interesting to note that transepidermal water loss is lower 
in women than in men, even though women feel that their 
skin  is  drier  when  polled.  Women  also  generally  feel  that 
their skin sags more than that of men, but skin elasticity is 
identical  between  the  sexes.  The  increased  impression  of 
 sagging  may  be  due  to  thinning  collagen  rather  than 
decreased skin elasticity.  

 Female  skin  is  more  functionally  responsive  than  male 
skin.  This  is  manifested  by  the  lower  temperature  at  which 
heat induces vasodilatation. It also presents as an increase in 
irritant  contact  dermatitis  and  increased  sympathetic  tone. 
This may explain why women exhibit increased redness and 
irritation  to  skin  care  products,  sometimes  referred  to  as 
“tender”  skin,  over  men,  who  are  characterized  as  having 
“tough” skin. 

 The  differences  between  male  and  female  skin  structure, 
biochemistry, and functionality and the differences in skin of 
various  body  areas  of  create  opportunities  for  skin  care  and 
cosmetic product development. This section of the book will 
examine products for skin care of the body from moisturizers 
to  cleansers,  sunless  tanners  to  sunscreens,  and  cellulite  to 
stretch mark creams to encompass the entire category of body 
cosmetics in dermatology.    

             15    Personal hygiene, cleansers, and xerosis      

  Optimal  personal  hygiene  has  come  to  mean  bathing  daily 
with lots of soap lather and abundant hot water, as hot as the 
skin  can  stand.  Furthermore,  many  patients  bathe  in  the 
morning to “wake up” and bathe in the evening to “go to sleep.” 
Others bathe a third time after finishing a workout at the gym. 
Certainly, these personal hygiene habits require lots of cleans-
ers  and  may  result  in  xerosis  and  ultimately  xerotic  eczema. 
Cleansing the body has become an essential part of personal 
hygiene and the desire to bathe daily has created a demand for 
cleansing  products  that  simply  do  not  cleanse  as  well.  This 
chapter examines cleanser formulations for the body and how 
cleanser selection can aid the patient in maintaining their self-
perceived personal hygiene standards without creating derma-
tologic problems. 

  cleanser types 
 Selecting  a  good  cleanser  can  be  a  challenge  for  any  patient. 
The shelves are full of body cleansing products in every color 
of the rainbow, each with a unique skin-enhancing ingredient 
like vitamin E, shea butter, jojoba oil, emu oil, cleansing cream, 
lavender, chamomile, ginger, glycerin, panthenol, and  collagen. 
Every scent imaginable can be found including kiwi, pineap-
ple, pear, vanilla, raspberry, apple, lemon, sage, rosemary, and 
mango to name a few. Every scent can also be found in combi-
nation with every other scent to create stores selling nothing 
but hundreds of cleansers each with a different color and scent 
combination, but all accomplishing the same end of removing 
sebum,  perspiration,  environmental  dirt,  cosmetics,  and 
 medications from the skin surface.  

   Selecting the proper cleanser is key to maintaining the skin 
acid mantle and preserving skin health. 

 Cleansers  come  in  many  different  formulations  for  body 
cleansing  including  bars,  liquids,  and  scrubs  all  trying  to 
achieve  the  optimal  clean  and  fresh  feel.  There  are  foaming 
and nonfoaming cleansers customized to each and every body 
area.  There  are  scented  and  unscented  cleansers  with  some 
labeled as appropriate for sensitive skin. There are cleansers for 
women  and  separate  formulations  for  men.  However,  in 
 reality, there are some basic categories of cleansers upon which 
many variations have been manufactured.   

   The three basic cleansing types are true soaps, syndets, and 
combars. 

  soaps 
 Soap is the most basic of cleansers and has been a cleansing 
staple  for  4000  years,  ever  since  the  Hittites  of  Asia  Minor 
cleaned  their  hands  with  the  ash  of  the  soapwort  plant 

 suspended in water and the Sumerians of Ur produced alkali 
solutions for washing. Neither of these products, however, is 
chemically  similar  to  soap  as  it  is  known  today.  The  actual 
modern soap preparation was developed about 600 BC by the 
Phoenicians who first saponified goat fat, water, and  potassium 
carbonate-rich ash into a solid, waxy product. The popularity 
of  soap  has  waxed  and  waned  over  the  years.  During  the 
 Middle Ages, soap was outlawed by the Christian Church who 
believed that exposing the flesh, even to bathe, was evil. Later, 
when the idea of bacteria-induced infection surfaced, the sale 
of soap soared. 

 The  first  widely  marketed  soap  was  developed  by  Harley 
Procter in 1878, who decided that his father’s soap and candle 
factory should produce a delicately scented, creamy white soap 
to  compete  with  imported  European  products.  He  accom-
plished  this  feat  with  the  help  of  his  cousin  chemist,  James 
Gamble,  who  made  a  richly  lathering  product  called “White 
Soap.” By accident, they discovered that whipping air into the 
soap solution prior to molding resulted in a floating soap that 
could not be lost in the bathe ( 1 ). This resulted in a product 
known as “Ivory” soap, still manufactured today. 

 Soap functions by employing a surfactant to lower the inter-
skin tension between the nonpolar soil and the rinsing water, 
which  floats  away  the  dirt  in  the  lather.  The  manufacturing 
stages in a typical bar soap are listed in  Table 15.1  ( 2 ).  

 In basic chemical terms, soap is a reaction between a fat and an 
alkali resulting in a fatty acid salt with detergent properties ( 3 ). 
Modern  refinements  have  attempted  to  adjust  its  alkaline  pH, 
possibly  resulting  in  less  skin  irritation  ( 4 ),  and  incorporate 
 substances to prevent precipitation of calcium fatty acid salts in 
hard  water,  known  as “soap  scum”  ( 5 ).  Nevertheless,  modern 
soap is basically a blend of tallow and nut oil, or the fatty acids 
derived from these products, in a ratio of 4:1. Increasing this ratio 
results  in  “superfatted”  soaps  designed  to  leave  an  oily  film 
behind on the skin. Bar soaps can be divided into three different 
cleanser types as listed in  Table 15.2 .   

   Soap is a reaction between a fat and an alkali resulting in a 
fatty acid salt with detergent properties. 

 Soap is a common term used by many as synonymous with 
cleanser.  However,  soap  is  a  specific  cleanser  with  a  definite 
chemical composition. Soap is defined as a chemical reaction 
between a fat and an alkali resulting in a fatty acid salt with 
detergent properties ( 7 ). The simplest soaps are manufactured 
in the bar form. There are currently three different types of bar 
cleansers  on  the  market,  all  called “soap”  by  consumers,  but 
with very different skin effects. There are the true soaps, which 
are composed of long-chain fatty acid alkali salts, with a pH 
between  9  and  10  ( 8 ).  This  is  the  original  soap  formulation 
developed that revolutionized health care in the United States. 
Perhaps  soap,  more  than  any  other  invention,  has  improved 

115

116

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 15.1  Steps in Soap Manufacture

1.  Saponification of natural fats and preparation of milling chips
2.  Blending of soap chips with other ingredients
3.  Milling and shredding
4.   Extrusion into long strips, known as billets, and cutting into 

appropriate lengths

5.  Stamping into the final shape
6.  Ageing and packaging

Table 15.2  Types of Cleansers

1.   True soaps composed of long-chain fatty acid alkali salts, 

pH 9–10

2.   Syndets composed of synthetic detergents and fillers, which 
contain less than 10% soap, pH adjusted to 5.5–7.0 (6)

3.   Combars composed of alkaline soaps to which surface active 

agents have been added, pH 9–10

the quality of human life by preventing the spread of disease. 
This is the type of soap that grandma cooked in her backyard 
from  ash  and  animal  fat.  The  high  pH  of  these  cleansers  is 
excellent at thoroughly removing sebum, but can also damage 
the  intercellular  lipids  in  diseased  or  sensitive  skin.  This 
 formulation  also  experiences  difficulty  when  used  with  hard 
water. The alkali chemically combines with calcium and other 
minerals in the water to form what is commonly termed “soap 
scum.”  Soap  scum  decreases  the  ability  of  the  soap  to  rinse 
cleanly  from  the  skin,  causing  irritant  contact  dermatitis  in 
susceptible individuals. The only major brand of true soap left 
on  the  market  today  is  Ivory  soap  (Procter  &  Gamble, 
 Cincinnati, Ohio), as previously mentioned.  

  syndets 
 Following the development of true soaps, came the invention 
of  synthetic  detergents.  Synthetic  detergents  are  known  as 
 syndets  and  contain  less  than  10%  real  “soap.”  Rather  than 
 possessing  a  highly  alkaline  pH,  these  products  can  be  made 
with a pH adjusted to 5.5 to 7. This more neutral pH is similar 
to the normal acid mantle pH of the skin causing less irritation. 
The tightness that is experienced following cleansing is actually 
the perception of altered skin pH. This is not a problem in nor-
mal complected individuals, but can be a source of concern in 
persons with eczema or atopic dermatitis. Unfortunately, many 
associate the tight feeling with cleanliness and it can be a chal-
lenge to convince a patient that the tight feeling is possibly an 
indicator  of  impending  skin  disease.  Most  syndet  cleansers 
leave the skin with a smooth, sometimes slimy, feel that indi-
cates that the intercellular lipids have not been removed and the 
skin  barrier  is  intact.  Syndet  cleansers,  sometimes  known  as 
beauty bars, are the most popular cleansers in use today. They 
offer milder, yet thorough, cleansing of all body areas.  

   Syndets are made from synthetic detergents, most 
 commonly sodium cocoyl isethionate, and provide the 
most gentle cleansing. 

 The  purpose  in  developing  new  synthetic  detergents  over 
traditional soaps was to provide a product less irritating to the 

isethionate,  sodium 

skin.  Commonly  used  detergents  in  bar  type  cleansers 
are sodium cocoate, sodium tallowate, sodium palm kernelate, 
sodium stearate, sodium palmitate, triethanolamine stearate, 
sodium  cocoyl 
isethionate,  sodium 
dodecyl bezene sulfonate, and sodium coco glyceryl ether sul-
fonate. Detergents in liquid formulations are sodium laureth 
sulfate, cocoamido propyl betaine, lauramide diethanolamine , 
sodium  cocoyl  isethionate,  and  disodium  laureth  sulfosucci-
nate. The normal pH of the skin is acidic, between 4.5 and 6.5. 
Applying  alkali  soap  theoretically  raises  the  pH  of  the  skin 
allowing it to feel dry and uncomfortable ( 9 ). However, healthy 
skin  rapidly  regains  its  acidic  pH  ( 10 ).  The  effects  and 
 measurement  of  surfactant-induced  irritation  remains  a 
 controversial area under investigation ( 11 ).  

  combars 
 The  third  form  of  cleanser  is  combination  bar  (combar). 
Combars combine true alkaline soaps with syndets to create a 
bar with greater cleansing abilities, but less intercellular lipid 
damage ( 12 ). The majority of the bars in this category are also 
known as deodorant bars. They contain triclosan, a commonly 
used  topical  antibacterial,  to  decrease  body  odor  caused  by 
bacteria, especially in the armpits and groin.  

   Combars contain soap and synthetic detergents to provide 
moderate cleansing and are most commonly formulated as 
deodorant soaps with triclosan. 

 Selecting  the  proper  type  of “soap”  may  be  tricky  for  the 
physician, but once the three categories of cleansers are identi-
fied the task becomes much easier. In general, all beauty bars, 
mild cleansing bars, and sensitive skin bars are of the syndet 
variety (Oil of Olay, Dove, and Cetaphil). Most deodorant bars 
or  highly  fragranced  bars  are  of  the  combar  variety  (Dial, 
Coast, and Irish Spring), and very few true soaps are currently 
on the market (Ivory).  

  cleanser additives 
 Special additives added to the previously discussed formula-
tions  allow  the  tremendous  variety  of  soaps  marketed  today 
( Table 15.3 ). Lanolin and paraffin may be added to a moistur-
izing  syndet  soap  to  create  a  superfatted  soap  while  sucrose 
and glycerin can be added to create a transparent bar. Adding 
olive oil instead of another form of fat distinguishes a castile 
soap. Medicated soaps may contain benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, 
resorcinol,  or  salicylic  acid.  Deodorant  bars  have  an  added 
antibacterial, such as triclocarban or triclosan. Triclocarban is 
excellent at eradicating gram-positive organisms, but triclosan 
eliminates  both  gram-positive  and  gram-negative  bacteria. 
These soaps have a pH between 9 and 10 and may cause skin 
irritation.  Moisturizing  syndet  bar  soaps  contain  sodium 
 lauryl isethionate with a pH adjusted to between 5 and 7 by 
lactic  or  citric  acid.  These  products  are  less  irritating  to  the 
skin and are sometimes labeled beauty bars. 

 Additives  to  soap  are  also  responsible  for  a  characteristic 
appearance,  feel,  and  smell.  Titanium  dioxide  is  added  in 
 concentrations up to 0.3% to opacify the bar and increase its 
optical whiteness. Pigments, such as aluminum lakes, can color 
the  bar  without  producing  colored  foam,  a  characteristic 

PERSONAL HYGIENE, CLEANSERS, AND XEROSIS

117

Table 15.3  Specialty Soap Formulations

Type of soap

Superfatted soap
Castile soap
Deodorant soap
French milled soap
Floating soap
Oatmeal soap

Acne soap

Facial soap
Bath soap
Aloe vera soap

Vitamin E soap
Cocoa butter soap
Nut or fruit oil soap
Transparent soap
Abrasive soap

Unique ingredients

Increased oil and fat; fat ratio up to 10%
Olive oil used as main fat
Antibacterial agents
Additives to reduce alkalinity
Extra air trapped during mixing process
Ground oatmeal added (coarsely ground 
to produce abrasive soap, finely ground 
for gentle cleanser)

Sulfur, resorcinol, benzoyl peroxide, or 

salicylic acid added

Smaller bar size, no special ingredients
Larger bar size, no special ingredients
Aloe vera added to soap, no special skin 

benefit

Vitamin E added, no special skin benefit
Coca butter used as major fat
Nut or fruit oils used as major fat
Glycerin and sucrose added
Pumice, coarse oatmeal, maize meal, 
ground nut kernels, dried herbs, or 
flowers added

Soap-free soap

Contains synthetic detergents 

(syndet bar)

 considered  undesirable.  Foam  builders,  such  as  sodium 
 carboxymethyl  cellulose  and  other  cellulose  derivatives,  can 
make the lather feel creamy. Lastly, perfume in concentrations 
of 2% or more can be added to ensure that the soap bar retains 
its scent until completely  used ( 2 ).   

  assessing cleanser irritancy 
 Several methods are used to evaluate the effect of various soap 
and  detergent  formulations  on  the  skin.  One  method  of 
 measuring the effects of cleansers on the skin is the soap cham-
ber test developed by Frosch and Kligman ( 13 ). An 8% soap 
solution is applied under occlusion to the volar surface of the 
forearm in human volunteers. The site is evaluated for scaling 
and erythema several days later ( 14 ). This technique has been 
expanded  to  include  measurements  of  transepidermal  water 
loss (TEWL). As expected, soaps induce more transepidermal 
water  loss  than  the  synthetic  detergents  listed  previously. 
A modified chamber test is also used where a 5% solution of 
the  soap  or  detergent  is  applied  to  the  forearm  and  covered 
with an aluminum chamber for 18 hours. These tests exagger-
ate  the  cleanser’s  contact  with  the  skin,  thus  an  actual  use 
is required. This is accomplished by having human volunteers 
wash  their  forearms  for  two-minute  duration  four  times 
per  day  for  a  week.  Visual  and  transepidermal  water  loss 
 assessments are used to evaluate the skin effect. 

 One of the most important aspects of cleanser interaction 
with the skin is the ability of the cleanser to thoroughly rinse 
from the skin surface. Excellent rinsing ensures minimal irrita-
tion, but the ability of soap to rinse from the skin depends on 
the mineral content of the water. As mentioned previously, cal-
cium in the water can interact with soap to form a sticky white 
film that can adhere to the sink, tub, and even the skin. Soap 
scum has an alkaline pH that breaks down the skin acid mantle 

and cause barrier damage. Mild soaps with minimal irritancy 
must rinse clean from the skin with water to avoid this prob-
lem. Thus, tests are commonly performed to assess the rinsabil-
ity of cleansers under various pH values and water conditions. 
Most  soap  manufacturers  have  a  laboratory  where  they  can 
adjust the pH, hardness, and temperature of the water to simu-
late  washing  under  various  conditions  that  exist  throughout 
the world. Excellent cleansers with minimal irritancy perform 
superbly under a wide variety of cleansing environments.  

  lipid-free low foaming cleansers 
 In  addition  to  soaps,  syndets,  and  combars,  there  is  another 
category  of  cleanser  that  produces  minimal  foam  specially 
designed  for  persons  with  limited  sebum  production.  These 
cleansers are known as lipid-free low-foaming cleansers. Lipid-
free  cleansers  are  liquid  products  that  clean  without  fats,  a 
point which distinguishes them from the cleansers previously 
discussed. They are applied to dry or moistened skin, rubbed 
to produce minimal lather, and rinsed or wiped away ( Cetaphil 
cleanser, Aquanil cleanser, and CeraVe cleanser). 

 Lipid-free 

low-foaming  cleansers  may  contain  water, 
 glycerin,  cetyl  alcohol,  stearyl  alcohol,  sodium  laurel  sulfate, 
and  occasionally  propylene  glycol.  They  leave  behind  a  thin 
moisturizing film and can be used effectively in persons with 
excessively dry, sensitive, or dermatitic skin. They do not have 
strong antibacterial properties, however, and may not remove 
odor  from  the  armpits  or  groin.  They  also  are  not  good  at 
removing  excessive  environmental  dirt  or  sebum.  Lipid-free 
cleansers are best used where minimal cleansing is desired, but 
can be used to remove face and eye cosmetics in persons with 
sensitive skin.   

   Lipid-free low-foaming cleansers are excellent for dry, 
sensitive skin and effective at removing eye cosmetics. 

  body scrubs 
 Another  form  of  body  cleansing  combines  sebum  removal 
with  exfoliation,  the  removal  of  the  desquamating  corneo-
cytes.  With  advancing  age,  the  ability  of  the  corneocytes  to 
slough is decreased. The retained corneocytes give the skin a 
rough texture and yellowish appearance. Exfoliation removes 
the  corneocytes,  smoothes  the  skin  surface,  and  restores  a 
pinker skin color. Many antiaging cleansers are abrasive scrubs 
because  the  exfoliated  skin  may  have  a  younger  appearance. 
However, an aggressive frequent use of an abrasive scrub can 
remove too much stratum corneum resulting in sensitive skin 
and can even provoke eczema.  

   Body scrubs produce cleansing and exfoliation 
simultaneously. 

 Abrasive  scrubs  use  a  particulate  material  rubbed  over  the 
skin surface with the hands to mechanically remove the corneo-
cytes.  Abrasive  scrubs  incorporate  polyethylene  beads,  alumi-
num oxide, ground fruit pits, or sodium tetraborate decahydrate 
granules to induce various degrees of exfoliation ( 15 ). The most 
abrasive  scrub  is  produced  by  aluminum  oxide  particles  and 
ground fruit pits. In general, products containing these rough 

118

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

edged particulates are not appropriate for sensitive skin patients, 
eczema  patients,  or  atopic  dermatitis  patients.  Polyethylene 
beads are the most common particle used in body scrubs and 
produce mild exfoliation without damaging the skin due to the 
round  bead.  Recently,  concern  has  arisen  about  the  safety  of 
polyethylene beads in the environment as the beads remain in 
the water columns for years without degrading. The beads can 
act  as  a  nidus  for  the  growth  of  bacteria  and  may  be  toxic  to 
some marine life forms. This concern has increased the popu-
larity of dissolving scrubs using sodium tetraborate decahydrate 
granules. 

 The main problem with abrasive scrub products for exfolia-
tion is the tendency for overuse by the patient. The harder and 
longer  the  patient  rubs,  the  more  that  the  stratum  corneum 
will  be  removed.  Too  much  stratum  corneum  abrasion  will 
result  in  self-induced  sensitive  skin.  One  of  the  best  uses  of 
body scrubs is on the anterior shins of patients with ichthyosis 
vulgaris. The occurrence of ichthyosis vulgaris increases with 
advancing age due to a desquamatory failure resulting in the 
appearance of dry skin. Moisturizers can improve the appear-
ance by smoothing down the edges of the desquamating cor-
neocytes, but the effect is cosmetic and temporary. Body scrubs 
can dislodge the corneocytes revealing the well-hydrated skin 
beneath. Lactic acid and other hydroxy acid moisturizers have 
been  recommended  to  chemically  exfoliate  the  skin,  but  the 
body scrub is the most efficient way to improve the appearance 
of ichthyosis vulgaris.  

  body washes 
 A  variation  on  the  soap,  syndet,  and  combar  detergents 
 discussed  earlier  is  the  body  wash.  Body  washes  are  liquid 
cleansers with a unique emulsion. The emulsion is character-
ized  as  a  two-phase  liquid  with  a  hydrophobic  phase  and  a 
hydrophilic phase held together by an emulsifier. The surfac-
tant cleanser is in the hydrophilic phase and binds to the dirt, 
which is washed down the drain. Vegetable oils, humectants, 
dimethicone,  and  petrolatum  are  in  the  hydrophobic  phase, 
which  bind  to  the  skin  surface  decreasing  transepidermal 
water loss and providing an environment optimal for barrier 
repair. This is the mechanism of action body washes claiming 
to both cleanse and moisturize. These products are of use in 
atopic  patients  who  either  wish  to  bathe  more  frequently  or 
those with severe disease. 

 The key question is how does the body wash know whether 
to  cleanse  away  sebum  or  deposit  the  moisturizer?  This  is 
accomplished by varying the water concentration between the 
two skin care events, one being cleansing and the other being 
moisturizing. During the first phase of washing, the body wash 
is placed on a puff, to increase the amount of air and water in 
the emulsion, followed by rubbing it over the body ( Fig. 15.1 ). 
At  this  time,  the  concentration  of  water  is  very  low  and  the 
concentration of body wash is very high, and cleansing occurs. 
During the rinse phase, the water concentration is very high 
and the body wash concentration is very low. It is during the 
rinse phase that the moisturizing ingredients are deposited on 
the skin surface.  

 Body washes are available for extra dry, dry, and normal skin. 
These products can deposit different amounts of moisturizer 
based  on  the  construction  of  the  emulsion  ( Fig.  15.2 ). 
Large  moisturizing  ingredient  droplets  within  the  emulsion, 

 Figure 15.1     An example of a puff that is necessary to introduce air and water 
into the body wash emulsion.    

 Figure 15.2     A body wash designed for dry skin.    

 containing petrolatum, soybean oil, and dimethicone, create a 
high depositing body wash. During the rinse phase, these drop-
lets are left behind on the skin surface. A product for normal 
skin might be a medium depositing product with smaller drop-
lets leaving behind a lesser amount of moisturizing ingredients. 
The  dry  skin  body  washes  are  most  appropriate  for  atopic 
patients  because  they  leave  behind  a  lot  of  skin  protectant 
ingredients. Thus, the size of the oil droplets in the emulsion 
determine the amount of moisturizing ingredient left behind 
on the skin during the rinse phase of body wash use ( Fig. 15.3 ).   
 It is possible to measure the efficacy of body wash products 
by  examining  TEWL  measurements  in  patients  with  atopic 

PERSONAL HYGIENE, CLEANSERS, AND XEROSIS

119

has a large amount of surfactant and a small amount of the 
skin  conditioning  agents,  dimethicone,  and  other  oils.  The 
moisturinse  deposits  moisturizing  ingredients  on  the  skin 
during the rinse phase and increases the amount of moistur-
izer  left  on  the  skin  during  bathing.  The  goal  is  to  remove 
sebum, perspiration, and environmental dirt, but replace the 
lost skin lipids with synthetic and natural oils to decrease the 
barrier damage. 

 Moisturinses are of use in patients who insist on bathing 
frequently  despite  problems  with  recurrence  eczema.  It  is 
possible  that  the  moisturinse  will  allow  daily  bathing  in 
some  patients  assisting  in  compliance  and  minimizing  the 
use of prescription medications, such as topical corticoste-
roids.  Moisturinses  also  can  be  used  as  cleanser  in  atopic 
dermatitis  patients  who  need  minimal  cleansing  and 
 maximal moisturization.    

   Moisturinses are similar in formulation to hair conditioners 
and can leave a thin moisturizing film on dry skin. 

   references 
    1.       Panati     C    .   Extraordinary Origins of Everyday Things  .   New York  :   Perennial 

Library, Harper & Row Publishers  ,   1987  :   217  –  19  .   

    2.       Van  Abbe      NJ   ,     Spearman      RIC   ,     Jarrett      A    .    Pharmaceutical  and  Cosmetic 
Products  for  Topical  Administration  .    London  :    William  Heinemann 
 Medical Books Ltd  ,   1969  :   136  –  9  .   

    3.       Willcox      MJ   ,     Crichton      WP    .    The  soap  market  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1989  ;    104  : 

  61  –  3  .   

    4.       Wortzman     MS    .   Evaluation of mild skin cleansers  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  35  –  44  .   

    5.       Jackson      EM    .    Soap:  a  complex  category  of  products  .    Am  J  Contact 

 Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  :   173  –  5  .   

    6.       Wortzman      MS   ,     Scott      RA   ,     Wong      PS    ,    et  al  .    Soap  and  detergent  bar 

 rinsability  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1986  ;   37  :   89  –  97  .   

    7.       Willcox      MJ   ,     Crichton      WP    .    The  soap  market  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1989  ;    104  : 

  61  –  3  .   

    8.       Wortzman     MS    .   Evaluation of mild skin cleansers  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  35  –  44  .   

    9.       Prottey      C   ,     Ferguson      T    .    Factors  which  determine  the  skin  irritation 

 potential of soap and detergents  .   J Soc Cosmet Cem     1975  ;   26  :   29  .   

   10.       Wickett     RR   ,    Trobaugh     CM    .   Personal care products  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ; 

  105  :   41  –  6  .   

   11.       Wilhelm     KP   ,    Freitag     G   ,    Wolff     HH    .   Surfactant-induced skin irritation and 

skin repair  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1994  ;   30  :   944  –  99  .   

   12.       Wortzman      MS   ,     Scott      RA   ,     Wong      PS    ,    et  al  .    Soap  and  detergent  bar 

 rinsability  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1986  ;   37  :   89  –  97  .   

   13.       Frosch      PJ   ,     Kligman      AM    .    The  soap  chamber  test.  A  new  method  for 

 assessing the irritancy of soaps  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1979  ;   1  :   35  .   

   14.       Frosch     PJ    .   Irritancy of soaps and detergents  .   In  :     Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  . 
  Principles  of  Cosmetics  for  the  Dermtologist  .    St.  Louis  :    CV  Mosby 
 Company  ,   1982  :   5  –  12  .   

   15.       Mills      OH   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Evaluation  of  abrasives  in  acne  therapy  .    Cutis   

  1979  ;   23  :   704  –  5  .    

 Figure 15.3     An example of a body wash with two phases for extra dry skin.    

dermatitis.  TEWL  measurements  are  made  with  an  evapo-
rimeter,  which  consists  of  two  humidity  meters  placed  at  a 
known distance from the skin surface. The distance between 
the two humidity meters is also known, as well as how much 
water vapor is going into the probe, allowing the calculation 
of water loss from the skin surface in terms of grams of water 
loss  per  meter  square  per  hour.  This  water  vapor  loss  is  an 
indirect measurement of the degree of barrier damage, which 
directly correlates with the skin injury caused by cleansing. 
Patients  with  atopic  dermatitis  have  an  increased  TEWL 
based  on  their  disease  and  defective  barrier  function.  The 
improvement in barrier function following the use of a body 
wash  can  be   measured  by  assessing  TEWL  before  and  after 
bathing. Good cleansers for patients with dermatologic dis-
ease will not increase TEWL with repeated use.   

       Body washes can both clean and moisturize the skin on 
the basis of sophisticated emulsion technology. 

  moisturinses 
 A variant of the body wash is known as a moisturinse. Body 
washes  are  comparable  in  formulation  to  2-in-1  hair  sham-
poos  and  moisturinses  are  comparable  to  hair  conditioners. 
After the cleansing has occurred with the body wash, a mois-
turinse  can  be  applied.  The  moisturinse  is  nonfoaming  and 
rubbed over the entire body followed by rinsing. It has a very 
small  amount  of  surfactant  and  a  large  amount  of  dimethi-
cone and other oils. This is in contrast to the body wash that 

  suggested reading 
      Abbas     S   ,    Goldberg     JW   ,    Massaro     M    .   Personal cleanser technology and clinical 

performance  .   Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17    (Suppl 1)  :   35  –  42  .   

     Ananthapadmanabhan      KP   ,     Moore      DJ   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Misra      M   ,     Meyer      F    . 
  Cleansing  without  compromise:  the  impact  of  cleansers  on  the  skin 
 barrier  and  the  technology  of  mild  cleansing  .    Dermatol  Ther      2004  ;    17   
  (Suppl 1)  :   16  –  25  .   

     Ananthapadmanabhan      KP   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Nole      G    .    Moisturizing  cleansers 
(Chapter 31)  .   In  :     Loden     M   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Dry Skin and Moisturizers: 
Chemistry  and  Function  ,    2nd  edn  .    Taylor  &  Francis  Group,  Ltd.  ,    2006  : 
  405  –  28  .   

120

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

     Bikowski      J    .    The  use  of  cleansers  as  therapeutic  concomitants  in  various 

 dermatologic disorders  .   Cutis     2001  ;   68    (5 Suppl)  :   12  –  19  .   

     Boonchai      W   ,     Iamtharachai      P    .    The  pH  of  commonly  available  soaps,  liquid 

cleansers, detergents, and alcohol gels  .   Dermatitis     2010  ;   21  :   154  –  6  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    Cosmeceuticals  off  the  face  in  body  rejuvenation  (Part  7)  .   

New York  :   Springer  ,   2010  :   227  –  32  .   

     Ertel      E    .    Personal  cleansing  products:  properties  and  use  (Chapter  4)  .    In  : 
    Draelos      ZD   ,     Thaman      LA    ,    eds  .    Cosmetic  Formulation  of  Skin  Care 
 Products  .   Vol. 30  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.  ,   2006  :   40  –  8  .   
     Ertel     K    .   Modern skin cleansers  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   561  –  75  .   
     Fox     C    .   Skin cleanser review  .   Cosmet Toilet Magazine     2001  ;   116  :   61  –  70  .   
     Friedman      M   ,     Wolf      R    .    Chemistry  of  soups  and  detergents:  various  types  of 
commercial products and their ingredients  .   Clin Dermatol     1996  ;   14  :   7  –  13  .   
     Ghaim     JB   ,    Volz     ED    .   Skin cleansing bars (Chapter 39)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   , 
   Maibach      HI    ,    eds  .    Handbook  of  Cosmetic  Science  and  Technology  ,    2nd 
edn  .   Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   479  –  503  .   

     Kanko     D   ,    Sakamoto     K    .   Skin cleansing liquids (Chapter 40)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   , 
   Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  ,   2nd edn  . 
  Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   493  –  503  .   
  CW    . 

  Soaps  and  detergents:  understanding  their 
 composition  and  effect  .    Ostomy  Wound  Manage      1998  ;    44    (3A  Suppl)  : 
  62S  –  9S  ;   discussion 70S  .   

   Froelich   

     Kersner   

  RS   , 

     Kuehl     BL   ,    Shear     NH    .   Cutaneous cleansers  .   Skin Ther Lett     2003  ;   8  :   1  –  4  .   
     Story     DC   ,    Simion     FA    .   Formulation and assessment of moisturizing cleansers 
(Chapter 26)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    ,   eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  . 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   585  –  95  .   

     Subramanyan     K    .   Role of mild cleansing in the management of patient skin  . 

  Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17    (Suppl 1)  :   26  –  34  .   

     Suero     M   ,    Miller     D   ,    Walsh     S   ,    Wallo     W    .   Evaluating the effects of a lipid-enriched 
body cleanser on dry skin  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2009  ;   60    (3 Suppl 1)  :   AB87  .   
     Tan      L   ,     Nielsen      MH   ,     Young      DC   ,     Trizna      Z    .    Use  of  antimicrobial  agents  in 

 consumer products  .   Arch Dermatol     2002  ;   138  :   1082  –  8  .        

             16    Body xerosis and moisturization      

  The  body  is  particularly  prone  to  xerosis  due  to  aggressive 
 frequent  bathing  habits  and  the  decrease  in  sebaceous  gland 
concentration. Current beliefs regarding hygiene have created 
the need for bathing followed by moisturization, which may 
seem paradoxical since cleansers remove the intercellular  lipids 
from the body skin that are then temporarily and artificially 
replaced  by  moisturizers.  Problems  arise  because  cleansers 
cannot distinguish between sebum, which has to be removed 
for hygiene reasons, and intercellular lipids, which should not 
be removed to maintain a healthy skin barrier. The skin barrier 
is an essential element of health, separating the body from the 
external world. Without this barrier, human life cannot exist. 
Protection is necessary from infectious organisms that might 
enter  the  body  causing  a  serious  disease  and  possibly  death. 
A means of regulating electrolyte balance, body temperature, 
and sensation is also part of this barrier. While the barrier is 
self-maintaining, with replacement on a 14-day cycle, disease 
states may perturb the barrier delaying repair or altering repair 
kinetics.  This  chapter  examines  body  xerosis  and  the  role  of 
moisturizers. 

  the body skin barrier 
 The skin barrier is formed by the protein-rich cells of the stra-
tum corneum with intervening intercellular lipids. In the via-
ble  epidermis,  the  nucleated  cells  possess  tight,  gap,  and 
adherens  junctions  with  desmosomes  and  cytoskeletal  ele-
ments that contribute to the barrier. Moisturizers attempt to 
mimic the intercellular lipids that are synthesized in the kera-
tinocytes during epidermal differentiation and then extruded 
into the extracellular domains. These lipids are composed of 
ceramides,  free  fatty  acids,  and  cholesterol,  which  covalently 
bind to the cornified envelope proteins. It is changes in these 
intercellular lipids and alterations in  epidermal differentiation 
that lead to barrier defects and ultimately skin disease. 

 Moisturizers  do  not  moisturize  the  body.  This  is  a  misno-
mer.  The  water  that  is  listed  as  the  first  ingredient  in  body 
lotions does not increase the water content of the skin, since 
the skin cannot be moisturized externally unless the ambient 
humidity exceeds 70%. Most controlled indoor spaces main-
tain  humidity  below  30%,  meaning  that  there  is  continuous 
water loss to the environment. Only the protein-rich corneo-
cytes  and  intercellular  lipids  prevent  the  entire  body  from 
dehydration.  Water  that  is  orally  consumed  or  topically 
sprayed  on  the  body  does  not  increase  skin’s  water  content. 
Moisturizers  work  by  preventing  evaporation  in  the  short 
term and providing an environment for barrier repair in the 
long  term.  They  are  composed  of  oily  substances  that  lower 
transepidermal water loss (TEWL), the technical term for skin 
water  evaporation,  allowing  barrier  repair  to  proceed.  Only 
when the skin barrier is intact is TEWL normalized and healthy 
skin achieved.   

   Moisturizers do not moisturize the body. They create an 
environment for barrier repair. 

  body moisturizer ingredients 
 Even  though  the  number  of  moisturizers  available  for  pur-
chase  is  astounding,  most  body  moisturizers  use  the  same 
basic ingredients as the formulation backbone to achieve effi-
cacy. The three main ingredients in most of the modern body 
moisturizers are petrolatum, dimethicone, and glycerin. These 
are the substances that provide the barrier repair environment 
for the healing of body dermatoses that can be characterized 
by xerosis. 

  Petrolatum 
 The most commonly used active agent in skin care products, 
after water, is petrolatum. 

 Petrolatum is a semisolid mixture of hydrocarbons obtained 
through  the  dewaxing  of  heavy  mineral  oils.  Pure  cosmetic 
grade petrolatum is practically odorless and tasteless appear-
ing in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia in 1880. It is interesting that it 
has never been duplicated synthetically. 

 Petrolatum is the most effective moisturizing ingredient on 
the market today, reducing TEWL by 99% ( 1 ). It functions as 
an occlusive to create an oily barrier through which water can-
not pass. Thus, it maintains cutaneous water content until bar-
rier repair can occur. Petrolatum is able to penetrate into the 
upper layers of the stratum corneum and aid in the restoration 
of  the  barrier,  which  is  initiated  through  the  production  of 
intercellular lipids, such as sphingolipids, free sterols, and free 
fatty  acids  ( 2 ).  Products  containing  petrolatum  increase  the 
rapidity with which these lipids are synthesized. 

 Petrolatum impacts all phases of skin remoisturization, the 
first step toward barrier repair and wound healing. Petrolatum 
allows the water content of the skin to rise by decreasing evap-
orative losses, which creates the moist environment necessary 
for fibroblast migration leading to wound healing and even-
tual  barrier  restoration.  Furthermore,  it  is  hypoallergenic, 
noncomedogenic, and nonacnegenic. 

 Petrolatum also decreases the appearance of fine lines on the 
face  and  body  due  to  dehydration.  It  functions  to  reduce 
 itching  and  mild  pain  by  creating  a  protective  film  over 
exposed lower epidermal and dermal nerve endings. It acts as 
an emollient by entering the space between the rough edges of 
desquamating  corneocytes,  restoring  a  smooth  skin  surface. 
It can also function as an exfoliant by loosening desquamating 
corneocytes, which are physically removed as the petrolatum is 
rubbed  into  the  skin.  Petrolatum  is  also  an  important 
 component  of  many  other  cosmeceutical  formulations  that 
contain additional actives.   

121

122

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Petrolatum is the occlusive moisturizing substance most 
like the intercellular lipids. 

  Dimethicone 
 The major drawback with pure petrolatum as a moisturizer is its 
greasiness,  which  most  patients  find  unaesthetic.  This  can  be 
minimized by lowering the petrolatum concentration and add-
ing dimethicone, known as an astringent moisturizer, to improve 
product  aesthetics.  Dimethicone  is  the  second  most  common 
active  agent  in  moisturizers  today  because  it  too  is  hypoaller-
genic, noncomedogenic, and nonacnegenic ( 3 ). Dimethicone is 
one  of  a  family  of  silicones  that  form  the  basis  of  all  oil-free 
moisturizers and facial foundations. 

 Silicone  originates  from  silica,  which  is  found  in  sand, 
quartz, and granite. It derives its properties from the alternat-
ing silica and oxygen bonds, known as siloxane bonds, which 
are exceedingly strong. These strong bonds account for the tre-
mendous thermal and oxidizing stability of silicone. Silicone is 
resistant  to  decomposition  from  ultraviolet  radiation,  acids, 
alkalis,  ozone,  and  electrical  discharges.  The  silicone  used  in 
topical preparations is an odorless, colorless, nontoxic liquid. 
It is soluble in aromatic and halocarbon solvents, but poorly 
soluble  in  polar  and  aliphatic  solutes.  Because  silicone  is 
immiscible and insoluble in water, it is used as an active agent 
in products designed to be water resistant. To date there is no 
report of toxicity from the use of topical silicone. 

 Dimethicone  cannot  replace  petrolatum,  however,  as  a 
moisturizer for decreasing fine facial lines of dehydration or 
for  creating  an  environment  optimal  for  healing  skin  ( 4 ). 
While  dimethicone  is  insoluble  in  water,  it  is  permeable  to 
water vapor. Thus, if the skin barrier is wounded, dimethicone 
will not reduce transepidermal water loss. However, this water 
vapor permeability is important in the manufacture of facial 
foundations  and  sunscreens,  since  perspiration  must  evapo-
rate  or  the  product  will  contribute  to  miliaria  and  leave  the 
skin feeling warm and heavy. 

 Dimethicone  can  provide  many  other  skin  benefits  as  an 
active  agent  besides  moisturization.  It  can  function  as  an 
emollient,  making  the  skin  smooth  and  soft  to  the  touch  by 
filling in spaces between the desquamating corneocytes. It can 
also  smooth  skin  scale  from  the  use  of  drying  acne  medica-
tions, such as benzoyl peroxide or tretinoin, without creating a 
greasy shine undesirable in oily-complected patients. Dimeth-
icone  also  does  not  easily  mix  with  facial  sebum,  allowing 
other ingredients in the formulation to remain in place on the 
face. This is valuable in sunscreens and facial cosmetics.   

   Dimethicone is a popular body moisturizer ingredient 
because it leaves the skin smooth without a greasy feeling. 

  Glycerin 
 Glycerin is a commonly used humectant in skin moisturizers. 
Humectants are substances that attract water from the dermis 
and viable epidermis into the dehydrated stratum corneum ( 5 ). 
However, if the skin barrier is damaged, the water will immedi-
ately evaporate into the lower humidity environment. For this 
reason, humectants are always combined with occlusive mois-
turizers that retard water loss, such as the previously discussed 

petrolatum  and  dimethicone.  Glycerin,  petrolatum,  and 
dimethicone form the backbone of most skin care products to 
which other novel agents are added. 

 Glycerin  offers  some  unique  skin  benefits.  It  is  one  of  the 
few moisturizers, in addition to petrolatum, that is able form a 
reservoir  effect  on  the  skin.  In  other  words,  the  effect  of 
 glycerin appears to persist long after the glycerin is no longer 
present. Previously, this effect was thought to be due to glyc-
erin affecting the intercellular lipids. It is now recognized that 
glycerin is capable of modulating water channels in the skin, 
known as aquaporins. 

 Aquaporins are highly conserved water channels present in 
plants, bacteria, and human skin composed of integral mem-
brane  proteins  from  a  larger  family  of  major  intrinsic 
 proteins ( 6 ). The 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded 
to Peter Agre and Roderick MacKinnon for their research on 
aquaporins and ion channels. These channels conduct water 
in  and  out  of  the  cell  while  preventing  the  passage  of  ions 
and  some  solutes.  They  are  composed  of  a  six  transmem-
brane  alpha  helical  structures  arranged  in  a  right-handed 
bundle.  Aquaporins  form  tetramers  in  the  cell  membrane 
and control the transport of water as well as glycerin, carbon 
dioxide,  ammonia,  and  urea.  Different  aquaporins  contain 
different peptide sequences controlling the size of the mole-
cules that are able to pass; however, aquaporins are imperme-
able  to  charged  molecules,  such  as  protons.  Typically, 
molecules can only pass a single file through the channel. 

 The primary aquaporin in the epidermis is aquaporin-3. It is 
found in the basal and suprabasal layers of the epidermis, but 
not  in  the  stratum  corneum. Aquaporin-3  expression  is  also 
increased in human skin diseases with elevated transepidermal 
water loss. Thus, glycerin is being rediscovered as a moisturiz-
ing  ingredient  with  the  potential  to  dramatically  affect  skin 
water balance. Since facial lines of dehydration are the easiest 
sign of aging to rapidly correct, skin care products based on 
glycerin, petrolatum, and dimethicone are commonly used to 
rapidly  hydrate  the  skin  and  improve  appearance.  However, 
petrolatum, dimethicone, and glycerin are also present in the 
vehicle of most facial skin care creams and lotions. The vehicle 
not only is responsible for improving skin condition but also 
delivers other active agents to the skin surface.    

   Glycerin is a time-tested body moisturizer that modulates 
cell osmotic balance through aquaporin channels. 

  specialty moisturizing ingredients 
 Many  substances  can  be  added  to  moisturizers  to  enhance 
their marketing claims and possibly their efficacy, which can 
be  characterized  as  specialty  moisturizing  ingredients.  These 
ingredients provide for a tremendous variety of body moistur-
izers available for consumer purchase. This section evaluates 
the scientific data published regarding the utility of the most 
popular moisturizer specialty additives. 

  Ceramides 
 Ceramides  are  an  important  component  of  the  intercellular 
lipids. The initiating step in barrier repair is ceramide  synthesis. 
Many  body  moisturizers  contain  ceramides  as  a  specialty 
ingredient  theorizing  that  externally  applied  ceramides  may 

BODY XEROSIS AND MOISTURIZATION

somehow  facilitate  barrier  repair.  There  are  nine  different 
ceramides that have been identified and three are synthetically 
available  to  the  cosmetic  chemist.  Ceramides  are  oily  sub-
stances and it is unclear whether their efficacy is derived from 
their incorporation into the intercellular lipids or their effect 
as an occlusive moisturizer. The location of ceramides in the 
skin has been studied through tape stripping where the cor-
neocytes are removed layer by layer with an adhesive tape for 
20  tape  strippings.  My  research  has  shown  that  externally 
applied ceramides can be retrieved in the first 5 to 8 corneo-
cyte layers. 

 One commercially available body lotion formulation com-
bines ceramides in a multivesicular emulsion, also known as 
an MVE ( Fig. 16.1 ). MVEs are physically constructed by rapid 
stirring to create a moisturizing entity known as a liposome. 
Liposomes are discussed more fully under the chapter on facial 
moisturization, but are briefly spheres composed of phospho-
lipids  containing  moisturizing  ingredients  in  their  interior. 
MVEs  are  a  liposome  within  a  liposome  within  a  liposome. 
The  multiple  vesicles  can  time-release  moisturizing  ingredi-
ents onto the skin surface, one layer at a time to create a physi-
cal  sustained  delivery  system  for  moisturizers.  MVEs  are 
manufactured using a cationic quaternary amine salt emulsi-
fier, such as behentrimonium methosulfate. The active agents, 
such  as  ceramides  which  may  be  combined  with  other 
 moisturizing  ingredients  (hyaluronic  acid,  phospholipids, 
and dimethicone) are mixed into either the oil or water phase, 
depending  on  the  compatibility.  High-shear  mixing  of 
the  active  agents  with  the  emulsifier  produces  an  MVE. 

 Figure 16.1     A commercially available over-the-counter moisturizer containing 
ceramides.    

123

 Behentrimonium  methosulfate  is  the  unique  emulsifier 
 allowing formation of the multilamellar concentric spheres of 
oil and water that trap the active agents in either the alternat-
ing  lamellar  lipid  layers  or  within  the  aqueous  sphere 
 compartment.  

 Ceramides are found along with petrolatum, dimethicone, 
and glycerin in many higher priced body moisturizers in the 
mass and prestige markets. As more of the naturally produced 
ceramides are available synthetically, more ceramide contain-
ing products will appear in the marketplace. Most newly syn-
thesized moisturizing ingredients are first used in department 
store and spa moisturizers that sell for a premium price. As the 
novelty  of  the  ingredient  wears  off  and  manufacturing  costs 
drop, new moisturizing ingredients find their way into prod-
ucts  sold  at  department  stores  and  boutiques.  Finally,  when 
the ingredient can be synthesized in mass quantities, it can be 
found in drug store and mass merchandiser lines. This is the 
natural  history  of  most  cosmetic  ingredients,  which  are 
affected by fashion trends and marketing efforts.   

   Synthetic ceramides are found in body moisturizers with 
the intent to stimulate barrier repair by providing a 
substance found in the intercellular lipids. 

  Essential Fatty Acids 
 In addition to ceramides, another component of the intercel-
lular lipids is essential fatty acids, such as unsaturated linoleic 
and linolenic acid. In the body moisturizing vernacular, these 
fatty acids are sometimes referred to as vitamin F. The ratio-
nale for topical application is to supplement the skin with fatty 
acids  to  drive  production  of  the  intercellular  lipids,  though 
this  fact  has  never  been  proven.  It  is  known  that  fatty-acid-
deficient  rodents  present  with  skin  that  resembles  xerotic 
eczema. The topical application of sunflower oil, a rich source 
of essential fatty acids, on these rodents normalizes the condi-
tion ( 7 ). It is rare to find fatty-acid-deficient humans and it is 
uncertain  whether  increased  fatty  acids  make  for  improved 
skin. Much of the problem with the topical supplementation 
in  body  moisturizers  is  the  questionable  penetration  of  the 
ingredient  into  the  skin  and  its  ability  to  improve “normal” 
skin beyond its healthy state.  

  Vitamins 
 Vitamins are also a common body moisturizer additive. Their 
popularity is due to their safety, low cost, and consumer popu-
larity.  It  seems  natural  that  you  should  be  able  to “feed”  the 
skin from the outside. Most consumers understand the need to 
“eat a healthy diet for healthy skin” so it seems a natural exten-
sion that topical vitamins might also be beneficial. Pantothenic 
acid or vitamin B complex is commonly used in many chemi-
cal  forms:  panthenol,  pantethine,  or  pangamic  acid.  Many 
body moisturizers contain bee pollen and jelly, naturally high 
sources of vitamin B that have a “natural” appeal. Panthenol, 
also  known  as  vitamin  B5,  is  the  most  commonly  used  syn-
thetic form of vitamin B and functions as a humectant to draw 
water  from  the  dermis  and  viable  epidermis  to  the  stratum 
corneum.  The  water  must  of  course  be  trapped  in  the  skin 
with either an intact skin barrier or occlusive agents, such as 
petrolatum or dimethicone, as previously discussed. 

124

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Niacinamide, also known as the amide form of vitamin B3, 
is  found  in  body  moisturizers  for  its  purported  ability  to 
increase cell turnover and lighten skin pigmentation by inter-
fering with melanin transfer. Since niacin is part of the nico-
tinamide  adenine  dinucleotide  phosphate  (NADP)  and 
NADPH   energy  production  pathway  in  the  mitochondria, 
some  believe  that  niacinamide  can  make  older  skin 
cells behave more youthfully. These are very ingenious con-
sumer appealing concepts, but cosmetic companies can only 
make appearance claims, such as niacinamide “improves the 
appearance  of  aging  skin.”  This  claim  does  not  imply  func-
tionality.  If  niacinamide  were  claimed  to  decrease  skin  pig-
mentation, it would be considered a drug not allowed in the 
cosmetic market. It is this approach to cosmetic development 
that has limited the ability of manufacturers to more scien-
tifically validate their claims. 

 Perhaps the most popular vitamin in a body moisturizer is 
vitamin E. Vitamin E is a fat-soluble antioxidant vitamin that 
is  easily  mixed  with  the  occlusive  lipids  to  retard  TEWL  in 
body  moisturizers.  It  is  inexpensive  and  widely  available.  In 
actuality, vitamin E functions as an emollient to smooth down 
the  desquamating  corneocytes  making  the  skin  feel  smooth 
and  soft.  Vitamin  E  is  also  said  to  enhance  percutaneous 
absorption  of  other  oil-soluble  substances.  Sometimes  body 
moisturizers  will  contain  a  cocktail  of  fat-soluble  vitamins 
including vitamins E, A, and D which are added, but the use-
fulness of topical vitamins is dubious. Vitamins must be in a 
water-soluble form to have any chance of penetrating the stra-
tum  corneum,  and  thus  oil-soluble  preparations  are  of  little 
value  ( 8 ).  Oral  administration  of  vitamins  is  far  superior  to 
cutaneous  administration  for  the  treatment  of  vitamin  defi-
ciencies. It is thought, however, that some vitamins can act as 
humectants  thus  enhancing  the  efficacy  of  the  moisturizing 
product.   

   Vitamin E is the most commonly used vitamin in body 
moisturizers because it functions as an emollient to make 
the skin smooth and soft. 

  Natural Moisturizing Factor 
 A  group  of  substances  reported  to  regulate  the  moisture 
content of the stratum corneum is known collectively as the 
natural moisturizing factor (NMF). The NMF consists of a 
mixture  of  amino  acids,  derivatives  of  amino  acids,  and 
salts. More specifically it contains amino acids, pyrrolidone 
carboxylic  acid,  lactate,  urea,  ammonia,  uric  acid,  glucos-
amine, creatinine, citrate, sodium, potassium, calcium, mag-
nesium,  phosphate,  chlorine,  sugar,  organic  acids,  and 
peptides  ( 9 ).  Ten  percent  of  the  dry  weight  of  the  stratum 
corneum cells is composed of NMF. Skin that cannot pro-
duce  NMF  is  dry  and  cracked  ( 10 ).  More  recently,  it  has 
been discovered that fillaggrin breaks down to become the 
NMF of the skin. It is theorized that abnormalities in fillag-
grin  breakdown  may  account  for  the  dry  skin  associated 
with atopic dermatitis.   

   A synthetic NMF has been created for use in body 
moisturizer formulations. 

  Sodium PCA 
 Sodium  PCA  is  a  sodium  salt  of  2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic 
acid and has been termed one of the NMFs, along with urea 
and lactic acid. Experimentally, it has been shown to be a bet-
ter  moisturizer  than  glycerol  ( 11 ).  Sodium  PCA  is  used  as  a 
humectant  in  many  cosmetics  in  concentrations  of  2%  or 
greater. It can prevent a body lotion from desiccating on the 
store shelf, but also draw water to the stratum corneum. Many 
of  the  spray  body  moisturizers  contain  water  and  sodium 
PCA.  It  is  best  to  use  a  body  moisturizer  that  contains  both 
humectants,  such  as  sodium  PCA,  and  occlusive  substances, 
such  as  petrolatum,  mineral  oil,  or  dimethicone.  The  more 
mechanisms  of  moisturization  that  are  employed,  the  more 
successful the body moisturizer will be in promoting an envi-
ronment for barrier repair.  

  Urea 
 Another way to increase water in the stratum corneum is to 
use  a  substance  that  can  create  water  binding  sites  on  the 
 protein-rich  desquamating  corneocytes.  Urea  is  such  a 
 substance.  It  digests  keratin  and  allows  water  to  bind,  thus 
hydrating and softening the rigid corneocyte protein shells. It 
is for this reason that urea is commonly used in dermatology 
for the treatment of calluses and cracked heels. Only when the 
skin is hydrated can the enzymes that promote desquamation 
function.  Thus,  urea  diffuses  into  the  outer  layers  of  the 
 stratum  corneum  and  disrupts  hydrogen  bonding,  which 
exposes the water-binding sites on the corneocytes. Urea also 
promotes  desquamation  by  dissolving  the 
intercellular 
cementing substance between the corneocytes. In this manner, 
it can also promote the absorption of other topically applied 
drugs, functioning as a penetration enhancer ( 12 ). However, 
urea  is  a  challenge  to  formulate,  since  it  must  be  kept  at  an 
acidic pH in formulation or it will decompose to the malodor-
ous  ammonia.  Problems  with  irritancy  have  been  somewhat 
overcome by adsorbing the urea onto talc prior to dispersion 
into the emulsion. Urea is an important therapeutic ingredient 
in many body moisturizers.   

   Urea functions as a humectant to increase water binding 
sites on corneocytes that are not desquamating properly. 

  Lactic Acid 
 Lactic acid, or sodium lactate, is also considered a NMF in that 
it  enhances  water  uptake  better  than  glycerin.  It  is  found  in 
many  therapeutic  moisturizers  as  it  can  increase  the  water-
binding capacity of the stratum corneum. Additionally, it can 
increase stratum corneum pliability in direct proportion to the 
amount of lactic acid that is absorbed ( 13 ). Lactic acid, in the 
form of ammonium lactate, is found in many body moistur-
izers  recommended  for  improvement  in  the  feel  of  keratosis 
pilaris, a condition where there is retained stratum corneum 
around the hair as it exits the follicular ostia. Lactic acid is a 
hydroxy acid and can also enhance desquamation in mature 
individuals,  thus  providing  treatment  for  ichthyosis  vulgaris 
when placed in a body moisturizer. Many a time urea and lac-
tic acid have been combined for optimal therapeutic benefit in 
body moisturizers designed to encourage desquamation.   

BODY XEROSIS AND MOISTURIZATION

  body moisturizer formulations 
 Body moisturizers come in a variety of preparations including 
lotion,  cream,  mousse,  and  ointment.  Lotions  are  the  most 
popular  formulation  because  they  are  easy  to  spread,  but 
lotions typically contain more water and offer less moisturiza-
tion. Creams and ointments can be used on the body, but are 
more difficult to spread, especially in hair-bearing areas. Female 
patients  desire  a  nongreasy  body  lotion  with  a  rich  texture; 
however, a rich texture does not necessarily identify a superior 
moisturizer. Richness can be added to a thin lotion with water-
soluble gums that impart a silky feel to the skin but do not pro-
vide  improved  moisture  retention.  Patients  should  be  careful 
not to equate body moisturizer viscosity with efficacy. 

 Body lotions are generally oil-in-water emulsions contain-
ing 10–15% oil phase, 5–10% humectant, and 75–85% water 
phase. More specifically, they are composed of water, mineral 
oil, propylene glycol, stearic acid, and petrolatum or lanolin. 
Most also contain an emulsifier such as triethanolamine stea-
rate.  Humectants  such  as  glycerin  or  sorbitol  may  also  be 
used along with other vitamin additives, such as vitamins A, 
D, and E, and soothing agents, such as aloe and allantoin that 
are  anti-inflammatories.  Most  body  lotions  contain  some 
“hero” ingredient or a patented combination of ingredients 
to allow for expanded consumer claims and distinction in the 
marketplace.  

   Body lotions are generally oil-in-water emulsions contain-
ing 10–15% oil phase, 5–10% humectant, and 75–85% 
water phase. 

 The basic recipe for a body moisturizer is water, lipids, emul-
sifiers,  preservatives,  fragrance,  color,  and  specialty  additives. 
Interestingly enough, water accounts for 60–80% of any mois-
turizer, however, externally applied water does not remoisturize 
the  skin.  In  fact,  the  rate  of  water  passage  through  the  skin 
increases with increased hydration ( 14 ). The water functions as 
a  diluent  and  evaporates  leaving  the  active  agents  behind. 
Emulsifiers  are  generally  soaps  in  concentrations  of  0.5%  or 
less and function to keep the water and lipids in one continu-
ous phase. Parabens, the most commonly used preservatives in 
moisturizers,  are  combined  with  one  of  the  formaldehyde 
donor  preservatives  to  prevent  bacteria  from  growing  in  the 
water phase of the body moisturizer ( 15 ). All body lotions must 
contain some type of a preservative to prevent contamination. 
The idea of a preservative-free body lotion is an illusion. 

 A  marketable  body  moisturizer  formulation  must  fulfill 
three  criteria:  it  must  increase  the  water  content  of  the  skin 
(moisturization), it must make the skin feel smooth and soft 
(emollience), and it must protect injured or exposed skin from 
harmful or annoying stimuli (skin protectant). The formula-
tion designed by the cosmetic chemist must fulfill these three 
needs to be successful in producing skin appearance improve-
ment. The dermatologist should keep these concepts in mind 
when assessing body moisturizer efficacy.   

   The basic recipe for a body moisturizer comprises water, 
lipids, emulsifiers, preservatives, fragrance, color, and 
specialty additives. 

125

  prescription body moisturizers 
 The prior discussion has focused on body moisturizers in the 
over-the-counter (OTC) realm. However, the invention of pre-
scription  body  moisturizers,  known  as  barrier  creams,  has 
changed the moisturizer category. Recently, moisturizers have 
been developed and approved as medical devices by the U.S. 
Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  through  the  510K 
approval  route,  which  requires  the  demonstration  of  safety, 
but  does  not  require  the  rigid  clinical  testing  required  for 
pharmaceuticals.  The  use  of  occlusive,  humectant,  and  anti-
inflammatory ingredients in 510K barrier devices provides an 
alternative to the more traditional topical corticosteroids used 
in dermatologic therapy. The barrier repair creams can be used 
as steroid-sparing aids or to maintain barrier health once the 
prescription  drugs  have  been  discontinued.  The  main  ques-
tion is whether these more expensive 510K barrier devices pro-
vide anything that is currently not available in the OTC body 
moisturizing market. All of the ingredients that are used in the 
device creams are found in cosmetic formulations. These bar-
rier devices are not drugs; they are simply devices that must be 
obtained with a prescription. 

 Prescription barrier repair moisturizers possess many of the 
same ingredients found in the OTC body moisturizing market, 
yet these creams are different because the FDA has approved 
them as a 510K device. The 510K device approval process was 
originally developed to ensure the safety of equipment with an 
on/off  switch.  Lasers,  light  devices,  cardiac  pacemakers,  and 
insulin  pumps  represent  equipment  requiring  this  type  of 
approval.  While  creams  are  not  traditionally  thought  of  as 
“devices,” they received approval because they induce a physi-
cal change in the skin. This physical change was documented 
as an increase in skin hydration resulting from a decrease in 
water loss to the environment, known as TEWL.  

   Prescription moisturizers, known as barrier creams, are 
510K-approved medical devices that function to decrease 
TEWL. 

 Barrier repair products place a water impervious film over 
the  skin  surface,  which  decreases  TEWL.  TEWL  is  elevated 
when  the  skin  barrier  is  damaged,  representing  the  physio-
logic signal for barrier repair initiated by ceramide synthesis. 
There  are  a  variety  of  different  formulations  that  presently 
have  510K  approval  producing  barrier  repair  by  different 
mechanisms based on a key ingredient. The key ingredients in 
the  prescription  moisturizers  are  all  available  in  the  OTC 
body  moisturizer  market;  however,  their  value  in  barrier 
repair is discussed.  

  the skin barrier and ceramide replacement 
 As mentioned previously, ceramide synthesis is the first step 
in  barrier  repair.  This  recognition  has  led  to  a  variety  of 
OTC  creams  based  on  ceramide  technology  (CeraVe, Vale-
ant; Curel, Kao Corporation). Nine different ceramides have 
been identified and synthetically duplicated for inclusion in 
moisturizer  formulations  ( 16 ).  The  ceramides  are  distin-
guished by their polar head group architecture, as well as by 
their  hydrocarbon  chain  properties  ( 17 ).  A  ceramide- 
dominant, triple-lipid barrier repair formulation ( EpiCeram, 

126

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Promius  Pharma)  was  designed  to  correct  the  lipid- 
biochemical abnormalities in atopic dermatitis. It contains 
capric  acid,  cholesterol,  and  conjugated  linolenic  acid.  In 
addition candelilla in the past and petrolatum are included 
to  decrease  TEWL.  It  received  FDA  approval  in April  2006 
for use as a nonsteriodal lipid barrier emulsion to manage 
the  symptoms  of  dry  skin  associated  with  a  variety  of 
 dermatologic  diseases  ( 18 ).  It  was  compared  with  flutica-
sone  cream  in  121 patients  with  moderate  to  severe  atopic 
dermatitis  for  28 days.  The  researchers  found  that  the 
ceramide  device  reduced  SCORAD  (SCORing  Atopic 
 Dermatitis) scores, decreased pruritus, and improved sleep 
habits;  however,  a  faster  improvement  was  seen  with  the 
topical  corticosteroid  at  day  14  ( 19 ).  The  unique  aspect  of 
this  cream  is  that  the  patented  ratio  of  the  triple  lipid 
 combination  mimics that of physiologic lipids. 

 OTC ceramide formulations contain similar ceramides to 
prescription  formulations,  but  do  not  utilize  the  patented 
ratio. To do so, they would have to purchase a license for use 
of the patent from the inventor. It is unknown how impor-
tant the ratio is versus the presence of ceramides. While it is 
possible  to  demonstrate  penetration  of  ceramides  into  the 
stratum corneum by analyzing the tape stripping of the skin 
following  application,  it  is  hard  to  know  exactly  how  these 
externally applied ceramides affect skin physiology. Since the 
skin  heals  itself  eventually,  with  or  without  the  external 
application of moisturizers, it is difficult to study the subtle-
ties of moisturizer that expedited healing. OTC moisturizers 
cannot make the same claims as barrier repair device mois-
turizers, but their ingredient disclosure and effect on the skin 
are similar.  

  natural hyaluronic acid humectancy 
and barrier repair 
 Maintaining proper water balance in the skin is key to human 
life for surviving in a hostile environment. The skin must have 
some capacity to hold water or desiccation would occur imme-
diately.  The  natural  water-holding  material  in  the  dermis  is 
primarily hyaluronic acid, which is the same material used for 
injection  as  a  cosmetic  filler  (Juvaderm, Allergan;  Restylane, 
Medicis).  These  injectable  hyaluronic  acids  are  approved  as 
devices  and  so  are  some  prescription  moisturizers  based  on 
hyaluronic  acid.  Topically,  hyaluronic  acid  is  known  as  a 
humectant,  which  is  the  technical  name  for  substances  that 
attract and hold water. Prescription hyaluronic acid moistur-
izers are available as high concentration foams combined with 
glycerin,  dimethicone,  and  petrolatum  (Hylatopic,  Onset 
Therapeutics)  and  liquids  in  combination  with  glycerol  and 
sorbitol (Bionect, JSJ Pharmaceuticals). 

 Does  the  inclusion  of  hyaluronic  acid  make  a  product  a 
prescription?  Not  necessarily.  Several  high-end  OTC  cos-
metic  moisturizers  contain  hyaluronic  acid.  Is  hyaluronic 
acid  the  only  humectant  in  the  marketplace?  No.  Glycerin, 
proteins, vitamins, propylene glycol, and polyethylene glycol 
are  more  commonly  used,  less  expensive  humectants. 
Humectant  ingredients  are  included  in  all  highly  effective 
OTC moisturizers. The difference is that prescription mois-
turizers  have  submitted  a  510K  application  based  on  the 
humectancy of hyaluronic acid while the OTC moisturizers 
have not.  

  fatty acids, lipid trilayers, and barrier 
repair 
 A different approach to skin moisturization is the use of free 
fatty acids. Free fatty acids are found in the intercellular lipids 
that reside between corneocytes to create a waterproof, mod-
erately  impermeable  barrier.  Scanning  electron  micrographs 
show  the  intercellular  lipid  bands  as  trilayer  entities  with  a 
dimension of 3.3 nm. These bands usually occur in groups of 6 
or 9 and are again essential for human life. It is estimated that 
the lipid layer has a total thickness of 13 nm and accounts for 
the  inability  of  particles  larger  than  13 nm  to  penetrate  the 
skin. Indeed, nanoparticles smaller than 13 nm can penetrate 
causing the health concerns currently debated. 

 It  is  theorized  that  supplementing  the  skin  with  free  fatty 
acids can lead to barrier repair. One such 510K-approved bar-
rier  cream  contains  palmitamide  monoethanolamine  (PEA) 
and olive oil, glycerin, and vegetable oil (Mimyx, Stiefel a GSK 
Company).  PEA  is  a  fatty  acid  that  is  said  to  be  deficient  in 
atopic skin and it is theorized that replacing this fatty acid can 
hasten disease resolution ( 20 ). It is also thought that PEA, an 
analogue of cannabis, the active agent in marijuana, may also 
affect the itch pathways. 

 In  an  open  label  study  of  2456 patients,  the  intensity  of 
erythema, pruritus, excoriation, scaling, lichenification, and 
dryness  were  significantly  reduced  with  a  combined  score 
reduction  of  58.6%  when  subjects  applied  the  PEA-based 
barrier  cream  ( 21 ).  However,  there  was  no  placebo  in  this 
uncontrolled prospective cohort study. This always presents 
challenges in data interpretation. Is it the olive oil and glyc-
erin that are the active agents or the PEA? Olive oil has been 
touted to have many healing properties in the homeopathic 
literature. It is rich in essential fatty acids, perhaps account-
ing for its reputation as healthy heart cooking oil, which have 
also  been  shown  to  reduce  signs  of  atopic  dermatitis  when 
topically  applied  to  rodents.  Certainly,  animals  that  feed 
essential  fatty-acid-deficient  diets  experience  a  skin  condi-
tion  similar  to  atopic  dermatitis,  but  oral  consumption  is 
preferable to topical application. Olive oil is also on the list of 
facial comedogens, being the culprit in pomade acne. While 
the final formulation has unique effects, it can be difficult to 
determine which ingredient really works. This is easy to do 
with  prescription  dermatologics  where  the  main  drug  is 
identified,  followed  by  the  other  inactive  constituents.  This 
type of disclosure is not required of prescription device bar-
rier creams.  

  barrier repair with anti-inflammatory 
agents 
 One  of  the  earliest  signs  of  barrier  damage  is  the  onset  of 
inflammation, accounting for the redness and itching charac-
teristic  of  dermatoses  manifesting  barrier  issues.  To  alleviate 
symptoms,  many  barrier  repair  products  incorporate  anti-
inflammatory  agents  derived  from  botanical  sources.  These 
anti-inflammatory  agents  are  found  in  both  OTC  and  pre-
scription  moisturizers.  One  currently  marketed  prescription 
barrier  cream  contains  glycyrrhetinic  acid  and   Vitis  vinifera  
extracts (Atopiclair, Graceway). In addition, it contains allan-
toin, alpha-bisabolol, hyaluronic acid, and shea butter. Glycyr-
rhetinic acid is a licorice extract that was reported to be safe by 
the Cosmetic Ingredient Review. It has the ability to block gap 

BODY XEROSIS AND MOISTURIZATION

junction intracellular communication; however, it is cytotoxic 
at high concentrations. It is mainly used in moisturizer formu-
lations as an anti-inflammatory agent ( 22 ). In an open label 
multicenter  study,  the  product  was  shown  to  reduce  the 
median visual analogue scale (VAS) rating for itching in atopic 
dermatitis  from  48.5 mm  to  34.1 mm  after  three  weeks  of 
treatment with a further reduction to 24.6 mm after six weeks 
of treatment ( 23 ). In a second study of 142 pediatric patients 
at ages 6 months to 12 years, the same formulation was com-
pared  to  a  vehicle  cream  and  found  to  be  statistically  more 
effective in reducing the symptoms of mild to moderate atopic 
dermatitis ( 24 ). 

 Licorice  derivatives  are  also  found  in  OTC  moisturizers, 
especially  those  targeted  for  redness  reduction  in  rosacea 
patients (Eucerin, Beiersdorf). One formulation contains an 
extract of  Glycyrrhiza inflata . There are many different spe-
cies  of  licorice  extracts,  not  all  of  which  possess  the  same 
cutaneous  effects.  Some  licorice  extracts  are  used  for  skin-
lightening purposes and not primarily as anti- inflammatories. 
Again,  is  the  licorice  extract  anti-inflammatory  the  active 
agent in the barrier repair cream? Does it function like a nat-
urally  occurring  topical  corticosteroid  to  reduce  the  signs 
and symptoms of atopic dermatitis? Or, is it the hyaluronic 
acid humectant that is attracting water, which is trapped in 
the skin by the shea butter occlusive moisturizer? In reality, it 
may be hard to tell what is really working unless each of the 
“active agents” is tested separately in the same vehicle. Even 
then,  it  may  be  hard  to  separate  the  vehicle  arm  from  the 
vehicle plus single ingredient arms. This is the challenge in 
designing  clinical  studies  to  validate  the  efficacy  of  barrier 
creams.   

   Licorice extract is a popular anti-inflammatory agent in 
OTC and prescription body moisturizers. 

  body moisturizer efficacy 
 The efficacy of moisturizers can be difficult to assess, but all 
formulations  should  be  clinically  tested  for  both  efficacy 
and tolerability. The major part of this assessment involves 
the trained eye and hands of the investigator to assess skin 
barrier improvement and better tactile qualities. Subjective 
assessments  from  the  study  participants  can  be  used  to 
evaluate the alleviation of noxious sensory stimuli, such as 
itching,  stinging,  burning,  and  tingling. Yet,  this  objective 
and  subjective  data  requires  the  addition  of  instrumenta-
tion  to  assess  the  functioning  of  the  skin  in  real  time.  A 
good  body  moisturizer  should  yield  excellent  results  with 
all  three  assessment  methods.  The  use  of  instrumentation 
to  study  the  skin  uses  probes  that  noninvasively  assessed 
water  leaving  the  skin  and  water  in  the  skin.  Several 
methods are commonly used including regression analysis, 
profilometry,  squametry,  twistometry,  corneometry,  and 
evaporimetry ( 25 ). 

 Regression analysis is a method of evaluating the moistur-
izer  efficacy  under  clinical  conditions.  Here  patients  are 
selected and treated by an objective observer with moisturizers 
applied at a predetermined test site for two weeks. The test site 
is evaluated on days 7 and 14. If an improvement is noted, the 
moisturizer  application  is  discontinued  and  the  test  site  is 

127

evaluated daily for two weeks, or until the baseline pathology 
has reappeared ( 26 ). This method is particularly valuable since 
the  efficacy  of  all  moisturizers  is  excellent  immediately 
 following  application,  but  the  true  effectiveness  can  only  be 
assessed with the passage of time ( 27 ). 

 Profilometry involves an analysis of silicone rubber (Silflo) 
replicas of the skin surface. These silicone replicas are then cast 
into plastic positives, which are then measured with a comput-
erized stylus instrument that provides a contour tracing of the 
surface.  Thus,  a  two-  or  three-dimensional  topogram  is  cre-
ated. Unfortunately, this method can be inaccurate since the 
silicone application to the skin surface tends to flatten and dis-
turb the desquamating skin scale ( 28 ). This method is best to 
assess the skin around the eyes for improvement in wrinkles of 
dehydration. 

 Squametry  involves  an  analysis  of  skin  squames  harvested 
by pressing a sticky tape against the skin known as a D-squame. 
The  outermost,  loosely  adherent  skin  scale  is  then  removed. 
The  tape  provides  a  specimen  that  retains  the  topographical 
relationships of the skin surface and the pattern of desquama-
tion. Image processing is then used to evaluate the scaliness of 
the skin ( 29 ). This evaluation is helpful in assessing the amount 
of  exfoliation  induced  by  a  body  moisturizer.  The  skin  scale 
can also be removed from the tape and various lipid fractions 
are extracted to determine the composition of the intercellular 
lipids and the presence of various body moisturizer ingredi-
ents in the skin scale. Thus, squametry can be used to assess 
the extent of moisturizer  penetration in a noninvasive manner 
without skin biopsy. 

 Several other noninvasive skin assessment methods deserve 
a  quick  mention  including  twistometry,  corneometry,  and 
evaporimetry.  The  twistometer  uses  torsion  to  measure  in 
vivo  the  influence  of  stratum  corneum  hydration  on  skin 
extensibility. A weak torque is applied to a rotating disk that is 
placed  in  contact  with  the  skin.  It  has  been  shown  that  dry 
skin is much less extensible than well-hydrated skin ( 30 ). Skin 
impedance can also be evaluated through a method known as 
corneometry. Here a dry electrode consisting of two concen-
tric brass cylinders separated by a phenolic insulator operat-
ing  at  3.5 MHz  is  applied  to  the  skin  ( 31 ).  The  impedance 
drops as the skin is better hydrated. This technique can evalu-
ate the efficacy and the duration of effect of moisturizers by 
measuring  the  amount  of  water  in  the  skin  with  a  device 
known  as  a  corneometer  ( 32 ).  Lastly,  evaporimetry  can  be 
used  to  measure  the  cutaneous  TEWL  ( 33 ).  More  occlusive 
substances would be expected to lower water loss while some 
humectants,  such  as  glycerin,  actually  increase  water  loss 
( 34 , 35 ).  Evaporimetry  measures  the  water  leaving  the  skin 
while corneometry measures the water in the skin. All of these 
measurements can be used to noninvasively assess the efficacy 
of a body moisturizer. 

 Even  though  these  sophisticated  noninvasive  methods  of 
cutaneous evaluation sound appealing, there is no substitute 
for the opinion of a trained unbiased observer when evaluat-
ing  moisturizer  effectiveness.  Mechanistic  evaluation  can  be 
easily biased to produce data that serve the best interest of the 
manufacturer. Computers cannot yet accurately synthesize all 
the  tactile  and  visual  information  that  can  be  obtained  with 
human evaluation. The noninvasive techniques simply present 
another tool for assessing moisturizer function ( 36 ).   

128

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Noninvasive assessments can be used to better characterize 
the behavior of skin before and after application of a body 
moisturizer. 

  adverse reactions of body moisturizers  
 Many patients with dry skin will claim that they are “allergic” 
to most moisturizers as a result of skin stinging experienced 
following application. This may represent an irritant contact 
dermatitis rather than a true allergic contact dermatitis ( 37 ). 
These  patients  should  avoid  moisturizers  containing  propyl-
ene  glycol  which  may  cause  burning  upon  application  to 
damaged skin. Other substances found in facial moisturizers 
that  cause  stinging  include  benzoic  acid,  cinnamic  acid 
compounds, lactic acid, urea, emulsifiers, formaldehyde, and 
sorbic acid. 

 Moisturizing ointments, creams, lotions, and gels should be 
patch tested “as is.” If an irritant reaction is experienced with 
closed patch testing, the product should be retested with open 
patch testing and provocative use testing ( 38 ).   

   references 
    1.       Friberg      SE   ,     Ma      Z    .    Stratum  corneum  lipids,  petrolatum  and  white  oils  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   107  :   55  –  9  .   

    2.       Grubauer     G   ,    Feingold     KR   ,    Elias     PM    .   Relationship of epidermal  lipogenesis 

to cutaneous barrier function  .   J Lip Res     1987  ;   28  :   746  –  52  .   

    3.       Nair     B    .   Final report on the safety assessment of dimethicone. Cosmetic 
Ingredient Review Expert Panel  .   Int J Toxicol     2003  ;   22    (Suppl 2)  :   11  –
  35  .   

    4.       Short     RW   ,    Chan     JL   ,    Choi     JM   ,    et     al    .   Effects of moisturization on epidermal 
homeostasis and differentiation  .   Clin Exp dermatol     2007  ;   32  :   88  –  90  .   
    5.       Spencer     TS    .   Dry skin and skin moisturizers  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   24  –  8  .   
    6.       Hara-Chikuma      M   ,     Verkman      AS    .    Aquaporin-3  functions  as  a  glycerol 

transporter in mammalian skin  .   Bio Cell     2005  ;   97  :   479  –  86  .   

    7.       Elias     PM   ,    Brown     BE   ,    Ziboh     VA    .   The permeability barrier in essential fatty 
acid  deficiency:  evidence  for  a  direct  role  for  linoleic  acid  in  barrier 
 function  .   J Invest Dermatol     1980  ;   75  :   230  –  3  .   

   20.       Amado      A   ,     Taylor      JS   ,     Murray      DA   ,     Reynolds      JS    .    Contact  dermatitis  to 
 pentylene  glycol  in  a  prescription  cream  for  atopic  dermatitis  .    Arch 
Deratmol     2008  ;   144  :   810  –  12   .

   21.     Cosmetic  Ingredient  Review  Expert  Panel,  Final  Report  on  the  Safety 
Assessment of Glycyrrhetinic Acid, Potassium Glycyrrhetinate, Disodium 
Succinoyl  Glycyrrhetinate,  Glyceryl  Glycyrrhetinate,  Glycyrrhetinyl 
 Stearate, Stearyl Glycyrrhetinate, Glycyrrhizic Acid, Ammonium Glycyr-
rhizate, Dipotassium Glyvyrrhizate, Disodium Glycyrrhizate, Trisodium 
Glycyrrhizate, Methyl Glycyrrhizate, and Potassium Glycyrrhizinate  .   Int J 
Toxicol     2007  ;   26    (Suppl 2)  :   79  –  112  .   

   22.       Eberlein     B   ,    Eicke     C   ,    Reinhardt     H-W   ,    Ring     J    .   Adjuvant treatment of atopic 
eczema: assessment of an emollient containing N-Palmitoylethanolamine 
(ATOPA Study)  .   J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol     2008  ;   22  :   73  –  82  .   

   23.       Veraldi     S   ,    De Micheli     P   ,    Schianchi     R   ,    Lunardon     L    .   Treatment of pruritus in 
mild-to-moderate  atopic  dermatitis  with  a  topical  non-steroidal  agent  . 
  J Drugs Dermatol     2009  ;   8  :   537  –  9  .   

   24.       Boguniewicz     M   ,    Zeichner     JA   ,    Eichenfield     LF    ,   et al  .   MAS063DP is effective 
monotherapy  for  mild  to  moderate  atopic  dermatitis  in  infants  and 
 children:  a  multicenter,  randomized,  vehicle-controlled  study  .    J  Pediatr   
  2008  ;   152  :   854  –  9  .   

   25.       Grove     GL    .   Noninvasive methods for assessing moisturizers  .   In  :     Waggoner   
  WC    ,    ed  .    Clinical  Safety  and  Efficacy  Testing  of  Cosmetics  .    New  York  : 
   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1990  ,   121  –  48   .

   26.       Kligman     AM    .   Regression method for assessing the efficacy of  moisturizers  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1978  ;   93  :   27  –  35  .   

   27.       Lazar     AP   ,    Lazar     P    .   Dry skin, water, and lubrication  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ; 

  9  :   45  –  51  .   

   28.       Grove      GL   ,     Grove      MJ    .    Objective  methods  for  assessing  skin  surface 
 topography noninvasively  .   In  :     Leveque     JL    ,   ed  .   Cutaneous Investigation in 
Health and Disease  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1988  :   1  –  32  .   

   29.       Grove     GL    .   Dermatological applications of the Magiscan image analysing 
computer  .    In  :      Marks      R   ,     Payne      PA,      eds  .    Bioengineering  and  the  Skin  . 
   Lancaster, England  :   MTP Press  ,   1981  :   173  –  82   .

   30.       de  Rigal      J   ,     Leveque      JL    .    In  vivo  measurements  of  the  stratum  corneum 

elasticity  .   Bioeng Skin     1985  ;   1  :   13  –  23  .   

   31.       Tagami      H    .    Electrical  measurement  of  the  water  content  of  the  skin 

 surface  .   Cosmet Toilet     1982  ;   97  :   39  –  47  .   

   32.       Grove      GL    .    The  effect  of  moisturizers  on  skin  surface  hydration  as 
measured in vivo by electrical conductivity  .   Curr Ther Res     1991  ;   50  : 
  712  –  19  .   

   33.       Idson      B    .    In  vivo  measurement  of  transdermal  water  loss  .    J  Soc  Cosmet 

Chem     1976  ;   29  :   573  –  80  .   

   34.       Rietschel      RL    .    A  method  to  evaluate  skin  moisturizers  in  vivo  .    J  Invest 

 Dermatol     1978  ;   70  :   152  –  5  .   

    8.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  ,    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

   35.       Rietschel     RL    .   A skin moisturization assay  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1979  ;   30  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   61  .   

  360  –  73  .   

    9.       Wehr      RF   ,     Krochmal      L    .    Considerations  in  selecting  a  moisturizer  .    Cutis   

   36.       Grove     GL    .   Design of studies to measure skin care product performance  . 

  1987  ;   39  :   512  –  15  .   

   10.       Rawlings      AV   ,     Scott      IR   ,     Harding      CR   ,     Bowser      PA    .    Stratum  corneum 
 moisturization at the molecular level  .   Prog Dermatol     1994  ;   28  :   1  –  12  .   
   11.       Wilkinson      JB    ,    Moore  RJ:  Harry’s  Cosmeticology  ,    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   62  –  4  .   

   12.       Raab     WP    .   Uses of urea in cosmetology  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   97  –  102  .   
   13.       Idson     B    .   Dry skin: moisturizing and emolliency  .   Cosmet Toilet     1992  ;   107  : 

  69  –  78  .   

   14.       Warner      RR   ,     Myers      MC   ,     Taylor      DA    .    Electron  probe  analysis  of  human 
skin: determination of the water concentration profile  .   J Invest Dermatol   
  1988  ;   90  :   218  –  24  .   

   15.       Jackson      EM    .    Moisturizers:  what’s  in  them?  How  do  they  work?      Am  J 

 Contact Dermatitis     1992  ;   3  :   162  –  8  .   

   16.       Novotny      J   ,     Hrabalek      A   ,     Vavrova      K    .    Synthesis  and  structure-activity 
 relationships of skin Ceramides  .   Curr Med Chem     2010     May  ;   (Epub ahead 
of print)  .   

   17.       Garidel     P   ,    Fölting     B   ,    Schaller     I   ,    Kerth     A    ,   The microstructure of the stratum 
corneum  lipid  barrier:  mid-infrared  spectroscopic  studies  of  hydrated 
ceramide: palmitic acid: cholesterol model systems  .   Biophys Chem     2010  ; 
  150  :   144  –  56  .   

   18.       Madaan     A    .   Epiceram for the treatment of atopic dermatitis  .   Drugs Today 

(Barc)     2008  ;   44  :   751  –  5  .   

   19.       Sugarman      JL   ,     Parish      LC    .    Efficacy  of  a  lipid-based  barrier  repair 
 formulation  in  moderate-to-severe  pediatric  atopic  dermatitis  .    J  Drugs 
Dermatol     2009  ;   8  :   1106  –  11  .   

  Bioeng Skin     1987  ;   3  :   359  –  73  .   

   37.       Lazar      PM    .    The  toxicology  of  moisturizers  .    J  Toxicol-Cut  Ocul  Toxicol   

  1992  ;   11  :   185  –  191   .   

   38.       Maibach      HI   ,     Engasser      PG    .    Dermatitis  due  to  cosmetics  .    In  :      Fisher      AA   , 
   Contact     Dermatitis    ,   3rd edn  .   Phildelphia  :   Lea & Febiger  ,   1986  :   371    .

  suggested reading 
      Altemus     M   ,    Rao     B   ,    Dhabhar     F   ,    Ding     W   ,    Granstein     R    .   Stress-induced changes 
in skin barrier function in healthy women  .   J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   117  : 
  309  –  17  .   

     Ananthapadmanabhan      KP   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Rattinger      GB    .    Moisturizing 
cleansers (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    ,   eds  .   Skin  Moisturization  . 
  Vol. 25  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   405  –  32   .   

     Arct     J   ,    Gronwald     M   ,    Kasiura     K    .   Possibilities for the prediction of an active 
substance  penetration  through  epidermis  .    IFSCC  Magazine      2001  ;    4  : 
  179  –  183  .   

     Atrux-Tallau     N   ,    Romagny     C   ,    Padois     K    ,   et al  .   Effects of glycerol on human skin 
damaged by acute sodium lauryl sulphate treatment  .   Arch Dermatol Res   
  2009     December  ;   [Epub ahead of print]  .   

     Barton      S    .    Formulation  of  skin  moisturizers  (Chapter  25)  .    In  :      Leyden      JJ   , 
    Rawlings     AV    ,   eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  : 
  547  –  75  .   

     Bikowski      J    .    The  use  of  therapeutic  moisturizers  in  various  dermatologic 

 disorders  .   Cutis     2001  ;   68    (5 Suppl)  :   3  –  11  .   

BODY XEROSIS AND MOISTURIZATION

     Bissonnette     R   ,    Maari     C   ,    Provost     N    ,   et al  .   A double-blind study of tolerance and 
efficacy  of  a  new  urea-containing  moisturizer  in  patients  with  atopic 
 dermatitis  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2010  ;   9  :   16  –  21  .   

     Buraczewska     I   ,    Berne     B   ,    Lindberg     M    ,   et al  .   Changes in skin barrier function 
long-term  treatment  with  moisturizers,  a  randomized 

following 
 controlled trial  .   Br J Dermatol     2007  ;   156  :   492  –  8  .   

     Chamlin     SL   ,    Kao     J   ,    Frieden     IJ    ,   et al  .   Ceramide-dominant barrier repair lipids 
alleviate childhood atopic dermatitis: change in barrier function provide 
a  sensitive  indicator  of  disease  activity  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      2002  ;    47  : 
  198  –  208  .   

     Coderch     L   ,    Lopez     O   ,    de la Maza     A   ,    Parra     JL    .   Ceramides and skin function  .   Am 

J Clin Dermat     2003  ;   4  :   107  –  29  .   

     Crowther      JM   ,     Sieg      A   ,     Clenkiron      P    ,    et  al  .    Measuring  the  effects  of  topical 
 moisturizers on changes in stratum corneaim thickness, water gradients 
and hydration in vivo  .   Br J Dermatol     2008  ;   159  :   567  –  77  .   

     Denda     M   ,    Kumazawa     N    .   Negative electric potential induces alteration of ion 
gradient  and  lamellar  body  secretion  in  the  epidermis,  and  accelerates 
skin barrier recovery after barrier disruption  .   J Invest Dermatol     2002  ;   118  : 
  65  –  72  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Botanicals as topical agents  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   474  –  7  .   
     Draelos      ZD   ,     Ertel      K   ,     Berge      C    .    Niacinamide-containing  facial  moisturizer 
improves skin barrier and benefits subjects with rosacea  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76  : 
  135  –  41  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Therapeutic moisturizers  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   597  –  607  .   
     Draelos      ZD    .    Concepts  in  skin  care  maintenance  .    Cutis      2005  ;    76    (6  Suppl)  :  

 19  –  25  .   

     Draelos      ZD    .    The  ability  of  onion  extract  gel  to  improve  the  cosmetic 
 appearance of postsurgical scars  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2008  ;   7  :   101  –  4  .   
     Draelos     ZD    .   Therapeutic moisturizers  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   597  –  607  .   
     Endo      K   ,     Suzuki      N   ,     Yoshida      O    ,    et  al  .    Two  factors  governing  transepidermal 
water loss: barrier and driving force components  .   IFSCC Magazine     2003  ; 
  6  :   9  –  13  .   

     Fluhr      J   ,     Holleran      WM   ,     Berardesca      E    .    Clinical  effects  of  emollients  on  skin 
(Chapter 12)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    ,   eds  .   Skin Moisturization  .   Vol. 25  . 
  New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2002  :   223  –  43   .   

     Fluhr     JW   ,    Bornkessel     A   ,    Berardesca     E    .   Glycerol—just a moisturizer? Biologi-
cal and biophysical effects (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Loden     M   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  . 
  Dry Skin and Moisturizers  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC     2006  : 
  227  –  43   .   

129

     Johnson  ,   AW    .   Overview: fundamental skin care—protecting the barrier  .   Derm 

Ther     2004  ;   17  :   1  –  5  .   

     Kao      JS   ,     Garg      A   ,     mao-Qiang      M    ,    et  al  .    Testosterone  perturbs  epidermal 
 permeability barrier homeostasis  .   J Invest Dermatol     2001  ;   116  :   443  –  50  .   
     Kraft     JN   ,    Lynde     CW    .   Moisturizers: what they are and a practical approach to 

product selection  .   Skin Therapy Lett     2005  ;   10  :   1  –  8  .   

     Lachapelle     JM    .   Efficacy of protective creams and/or gels  .   Curr Probl Dermatol   

  1996  ;   25  :   182  –  92  .   

     Le Fur     I   ,    Reinberg     A   ,    Lopez     S    ,   et al  .   Analysis of circadian and ultradian rhythms 
of skin surface properties of face and forearm of healthy women  .   J Invest 
Dermatol     2001  ;   117  :   718  –  24  .   

     Lebwohl      M   ,     Herrmann      LG    .    Impaired  skin  barrier  function  in  dermato-
logic disease and repair with moisturization  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76    (6 Suppl)  : 
  7  –  12  .   

     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    .   Humectants (Chapter 13)  .   In  :     Leyden     JJ   ,    Rawlings     AV    , 
  eds  .    Skin  Moisturization  .   Vol.  25  .    New York  :    Marcel  Dekker,  Inc.  ,    2002  : 
  245  –  66  .   

     Lipozencic     J   ,    Pastar     Z   ,    Marinovic-Kulisic     S    .   Moisturizers  .   Acta  Dermatovenerol 

Croat     2006  ;   14  :   104  –  8  .   

     Loden     M   ,    Andersson     AC   ,    Lindberg     M    .   Improvement in skin barrier function 
in  patients  with  atopic  dermatitis  after  treatment  with  a  moisturizing 
cream (Canoderm)  .   Br J Dermatol     1999  ;   140  :   264  –  7  .   

     Loden     M    .   Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry 

skin barrier disorders  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2003  ;   4  :   771  –  88  .   

     Loden      M    .    Barrier  recovery  and  influence  of  irritant  stimuli  in  skin  treated 

with a moisturizing cream  .   Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   36  ;   256  –  60  .   
     Loden     M    .   Do moisturizers work?     J Cosmet Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   141  –  9   .   
     Loden     M    .   Hydrating substances (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   ,    Maibach   
  HI    ,    eds  .    Handbook  of  Cosmetic  Science  and  Technology  ,    2nd  edn  . 
  Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   265  –  80  .   

     Loden     M    .   Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry 

skin barrier disorders  .   Am J Clin Dermatol.     2003  ;   4  :   771  –  88  .   

     Loden     M    .   Skin barrier function: effects of moisturzers  .   Cosmet Toilet     2001  ; 

  116  :   31  –  40   .   

     Loden     M    .   The clinical benefit of moisturizers  .   J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol   

  2005  ;   19  :   672  –  88  ;   quiz   686  –  7  .   

     Loden      M    .    Urea-containing  moisturizers  influence  barrier  properties  of 

 normal skin  .   Arch Dermatol Res     1996  ;   288  :   103  –  7  .   

     Lynde     CW    ,   Moisturizers: what they are and how they work  .   Skin Terapy Lett   

     Ghali      FE   .     Improved      clinical        outcomes  with  moisturization  in  dermatologic 

  2001  ;   6  :   3  –  5  .   

disease  .   Cutis     2005  ;   76    (6 Suppl)  :   13  –  18  .   

     Madison  ,   KC    .   Barrier function of the skin: “La Raison d’Etre” of the epidermis  . 

     Giusti     F   ,    Martella     A   ,    Bertoni     L   ,    Seidernari     S    .   Skin barrier, hydration, and pH of 
the skin of infants under 2 years of age  .   Pediatr Dermatol     2001  ;   18  :   93  –  6  .   
     Hannuksela      A   ,     Kinnunen      T    .    Moisturizers  prevent  irritant  dermatitis  .    Acta 

Derm Venereol     1992  ;   72  :   42  –  4  .   

     Hannuksela      M    .    Moisturizers  in  the  prevention  of  contact  dermatitis  .    Curr 

Probl Dermatol     1996  ;   25  :   214  –  20  .   

     Harding      CR   ,     Rawlings      AV    .    Effects  of  natural  moisturizing  factor  and  lactic 
acid isomers on skin function (Chapter 18)  .   In  :     Loden     M   ,    Maibach     HI    , 
  eds  .   Dry Skin and Moisturizers  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC   
  2006  :   187  –  209  .   

  J Invest Dermatol     2003  ;   121  :   231  –  41  .   

     Maes     DH   ,    Marenus     KD    .   Main finished products: moisturizing and cleansing 
creams (Chapter 10)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Textbook of Cosmetic 
Dermatology  ,   2nd edn  .   Martin Dunitz Ltd     1998  ;   113  –  24   .   

     Mao-Qiang      M   ,     Feingold      KR   ,     Thornfeldt      CR   ,     Elias      PM    .    Optimization  of 
 physiological  lipid  mixtures  for  barrier  repair  .    J  Invest  Dermatol      1996  ; 
  106  :   1096  –  101  .   

     Mao-Qiang     M   ,    Feingold     KR   ,    Wang     F    ,   et al  .   A natural lipid mixture improves 
barrier function and hydration in human and murine skin  .   J Soc Cosmet 
Chem     1996  ;   47  :   157  –  66   .   

     Harding  ,    CR    .    The  stratum  corneum:  structure  and  function  in  health  and 

     Norlen      L    .    Skin  barrier  formation:  the  membrane  folding  model  .    J  Invest 

 disease  .   Derm Ther     2004  ;   17  :   6  –  15  .   

 Dermatol     2001  ;   117  :   823  –  36  .   

     Hawkins      SS   ,     Subramanyan      K   ,     Liu      D   ,     Bryk      M    .    Cleansing,  moisturizing,  and 
sun-protection  regimens  for  normal  skin,  self-perceived  sensitive  skin, 
and dermatologist- assessed sensitive skin  .   Derm Ther     2004  ;   17  :   63  –  8  .   
     Held     E   ,    Agner     T    .   Effect of moisturizers on skin susceptibility to irritants  .   Acta 

     Prasch      Th   ,     Schlotmann      K   ,     Schmidt-fonk      K   ,     Forster      Th    .    The  influence  of 
 cosmetic products on the stratum corneum by infrared and spectroscopy  . 
  IFSCC Magazine     2001  ;   4  :   201  –  3  .   

     Rawlings      AV   ,     Canestrari      DA   ,     Dobkowski      B    .    Moisturizer  technology  versus 

Derm Venereol     2110  ;   81  :   104  –  7  .   

clinical performance  .   Dermatol Ther     2004  ;   17    (Suppl 1)  :   49  –  56  .   

     Held      E   ,     Lund      H   ,     Agner      T    .    Effect  of  different  moisturizers  of  SLS-irritated 

     Rawlings     AV   ,    Harding     CR    .   Moisturization and skin barrier function  .   Dermatol 

human skin  .   Contact Dermatitis     2001  ;   44  :   229  –  34  .   

Ther     2004  ;   17  :   43  –  8  .   

     Held     E   ,    Sveinsdottir     S   ,    Agner     T    .   Effect of long-term use of moisturizer on skin 
hydration,  barrier  function  and  susceptibility  to  irritants  .    Acta  Derm 
Venereol     1999  ;   79  :   49  –  51  .   

     Herman     S    .   Lipid assets  .   GCI  .   2001  :   12  –  14  .   
     Herman     S    .   The new polymer frontier  .   GCI  .   2002  .   
     Jemec     GB   ,    Wulf     HC    .   Correlation between the greasiness and the plasticizing 

effect of moisturizers  .   Acta Derm Venereol     1999  ;   79  :   115  –  17  .   

     Rieger      M    .    Moisturizers  and  humectants  .    In  :      Rieger      MM    ,    ed  .    Harry’s 

 Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc  ,   2000   .   

     Simion     FA   ,    Abrutyn     ES   ,    Draelos     ZD    .   Ability of moisturizers to reduce dry skin 
and irritation and to prevent their return  .   J Cosmet Sci     2005  ;   56  :   427  –  44  .   
     Simion      FA   ,     Story      DC    .    Hand  and  body  lotions  (Chapter  33)  .    In  :      Baran      R   , 
    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology  ,   4th edn  .   Informa 
Healthcare  ,   2011  :   269  –  89  .        

             17    Hand dermatitis and moisturization      

  The hand is an amazing organ providing the structures needed 
to  write,  draw,  paint,  dance,  and  express  affection.  It  is 
 frequently  said  that  much  can  be  said  about  a  person  from 
their handshake, which is an assessment of the skin, muscle, 
and bones that form the hand. The hand can express gender, 
occupation, and age. Female hands are small while male hands 
are  large  and  muscular.  People  who  work  with  their  hands 
 outdoors  have  a  much  different  skin  feel  than  persons  who 
type  on  a  computer  for  most  of  the  day.  Children  have  soft, 
doughy,  padded  hands  while  the  elderly  have  thin,  sinewy, 
bony, arthritic hands. Hands are what make humans unique 
from every other living thing on the earth. 

 Hands  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  xerotic  dermatitis 
because  they  sustain  considerable  chemical  and  physical 
trauma. They are washed more than any other body area, yet 
are  completely  devoid  of  oil  glands  on  the  palmar  surface. 
While the stratum corneum of the palm is uniquely designed 
to  withstand  physical  trauma,  it  is  not  designed  to  function 
optimally  when  wet  or  when  dehydrated.  Thus,  adequate 
moisturization is important to hand health, but overhydration 
can be disastrous.  

   Adequate hand moisturization is important to hand 
health, but overhydration can be disastrous. 

 The hand responds to trauma by forming a callus. Calluses 
are formed from retained layers of keratin that form a dead 
skin pad over the area subjected to repeated physical trauma. 
For example, the palm of the hand will callus to protect the 
small bones in persons who use a hammer. The finger will cal-
lus in the location where a pencil is held in both children and 
adults. While  the  body  forms  a  callus  to  protect  underlying 
tender  tissues,  the  callus  can  also  cause  dermatologic  prob-
lems.  Since  a  callus  is  made  of  retained  keratin,  it  is  dehy-
drated  and  inflexible  and  will  fissure  readily  with  trauma. 
Such are the complexities of designing products designed for 
the hands. 

  hand dermatoses 
 Dermatologic disease needs to be divided into conditions that 
affect the dorsum of the hand and those that affect the palm 
of the hand. This is an important distinction because the two 
skin surfaces are quite different. The dorsum of the hand is a 
thin skin that becomes increasingly thinner with age. After the 
face,  the  back  of  the  hand  is  generally  the  most  photoaged 
skin location. The skin of the hand loses its dermal strength 
early leading to decreased skin elasticity, which can be simply 
measured by pinching the skin on the back of the hand and 
watching  for  the  amount  of  time  it  takes  for  the  skin  to 
rebound  to  its  original  conformation.  Skin  that  takes  a 
long time to return to normal configuration is more photo-
aged  than  youthful  skin  that  bounces  back  energetically. 

130

In addition to losing elasticity, photoaged skin also becomes 
irregularly  pigmented  leading  to  lentigines  and  idiopathic 
guttate  hypomelanosis.  This  irregular  pigmentation  is  also 
accompanied  by  skin  that  is  easily  injured  exhibiting  senile 
purpura,  and  tissue  tears  from   minimal  trauma,  which  heal 
with  unattractive white scars. 

 The palm of the hand is affected uniquely by inflammatory 
conditions  like  eczema  and  palmar  psoriasis.  Because  the 
palm  is  the  surface  that  the  body  uses  to  pick  and  touch,  it 
more commonly is affected by chemical and physical trauma. 
This trauma may manifest as hand eczema. Highly occlusive 
and  emollient  hand  creams  are  necessary  to  rehydrate 
 damaged  keratin  and  create  an  optimal  environment  for 
 barrier repair.   

   Highly occlusive and emollient hand creams are necessary 
to rehydrate damaged keratin and create an optimal 
environment for barrier repair. 

  hand hygiene needs 
 The hands receive more cleansing than any other part of the 
body. The basic ritual of washing the hands before eating is 
an effective method of preventing disease transmission, but 
may take its toll on the physiologically sebum lacking skin of 
the palms. Excessive hand washing can even be considered a 
medical  disease,  especially  in  persons  with  obsessive- 
compulsive disorder. There are a variety of methods of wash-
ing the hands. Basic hand washing is usually performed with 
a bar or liquid soap followed by water rinsing. Regimented, 
timed hand washing routines are used to thoroughly remove 
all bacteria from the hands before surgery. Lastly, a variety of 
hand cleansing antibacterial gels have been introduced, usu-
ally based on triclosan, which can be used without water to 
clean the hands. In general, it is felt that the physical rubbing 
of the hands to lather the cleanser followed by rubbing in a 
running stream of water to rinse away the cleanser is impor-
tant. Both the physical  rubbing of the hands and the chemi-
cal  interaction  of  the  cleanser  and  water  are  necessary  for 
optimal hand hygiene.   

   Physical rubbing of the hands and the chemical interac-
tion of the cleanser and water are necessary for optimal 
hand hygiene. 

  hand skin care needs 
 The skin care needs of the hands go beyond basic cleansing to 
moisturization, healing, photoprotection, and skin lightening. 
As mentioned previously, hand moisturization is very impor-
tant due to frequent cleansing. Hand moisturizers should be 
designed  to  occlude  the  skin  reducing  transepidermal  water 

HAND DERMATITIS AND MOISTURIZATION

loss, rehydrate the skin through the use of humectants,  alleviate 
itch  and  pain,  and  smooth  the  skin  surface  with  emollients. 
Hand moisturizers with this type of construction can be used 
for simple dry skin, as well as providing healing qualities for 
the dermatologic conditions previously discussed. 

 In  addition  to  moisturization,  the  hands  also  need  photo-
protection  both  during  sports  and  while  driving  a  car,  since 
photoaging UVA radiation passes through the windshield of a 
car. Sun protection is a unique challenge for the hands because 
they  are  frequently  aggressively  washed  removing  the  sun-
screen. However, the need for sun protection is obvious when 
one  considers  the  thin  dyspigmented  skin  that  characterizes 
mature  hands.  This  means  that  the  hands  require  aggressive 
antiaging therapy and skin lightening.   

   Hand moisturizers should occlude the skin reducing 
transepidermal water loss, rehydrate the skin through the 
use of humectants, alleviate itch and pain, and smooth the 
skin surface with emollients. 

  hand moisturizer formulation 
 The simplest hand ointment is petroleum jelly, but most patients 
find this too greasy. To improve cosmetic appeal, the petroleum 
jelly can be whipped with water, color, and  fragrance to make a 
hand cream. Thus, hand creams are oil-in-water emulsions with 
15–40% oil phase, 5–15% humectant, and 45–80% water phase 
( 1 ).  The  addition  of  silicone   derivatives  can  also  render  the 
hand cream water resistant through four to six washings. Some 
hand creams even include a  sunscreen agent.  

131

   Hand creams are oil-in-water emulsions with 15–40% oil 
phase, 5–15% humectant, and 45–80% water phase. 

 One of the most effective hand moisturizing ingredients is 
glycerin.  Glycerin  can  attract  water  to  dehydrated  hand 
 keratin and encourage exfoliation of callused skin around the 
fingertips. High-glycerin- containing hand creams, identified 
by glycerin being listed among the first five substances in the 
ingredient  disclosure,  are  especially  effective  at  night  to 
restore  hand  moisture  balance.  Day  use  of  glycerin  hand 
creams is not popular among patients because the glycerin is 
sticky and can leave fingerprints on paper. Since the hands are 
rested  at  night,  bedtime  hand  moisturization  is  the  most 
effective. 

 Urea can also be effectively used on the hands for the treat-
ment  of  calluses  and  enhanced  hydration  of  hyperkeratotic 
palms. It digests keratin and can increase the binding of water 
to callused skin. Once the callus is hydrated, it becomes soft 
and  can  be  easily  scrapped  away  or  peeled  off.  In  addition, 
hydrated callus can begin the natural desquamatory process, 
since the enzymes involved in hand desquamation only func-
tion in a moist environment. Hand creams using 5–10% urea, 
combined with glycerin and petrolatum, are very effective in 
treating hyperkeratotic palms.   

   reference 
   1.       Schmitt      WH    .    Skin-care  products  .    In  :      Williams      DF   ,     Schmitt      WH    ,    eds  . 
  Chemistry  and  Technology  of  the   Cosmetics  and  Toiletries  Industry  . 
   London  :   Blackie  Academic & Professional  ,   1992  :   121  .       

             18    Hyperhidrosis and antiperspirants      

  The desire to smell pleasant seems to be a basic human need. 
Olfactory stimulation seems to be an important human input 
to  determine  positive  or  negative  evaluations  of  others. 
 Certainly,  the  cosmetics  and  skin  care  industry  understands 
this well as careful attention is paid to scent. An area of social 
concern  for  odor  is  the  underarms  because  this  moist,  dark, 
warm  body  area  is  perfect  for  the  growth  of  odor-causing 
 bacteria, fungi, and yeast. This chapter investigates the axillary 
hyperhidrosis and the efficacy of antiperspirants. 

 The original deodorant to control axillary odor appeared 
on the U.S. market in 1888. Later, in 1919, advertising first 
introduced  the  notion  that  body  odor  was  offensive,  thus 
creating a market for deodorants and antiperspirants. Pres-
ent popularity of such products can be attributed to social 
consciousness of body odor, development of nonirritating 
germicides,  and  products  that  do  not  contribute  to  fabric 
deterioration ( 1 ). Most patients would consider themselves 
uncivilized  if  an  odor  control  product  was  not  applied  to 
the armpits, thus dermatologists must understand the effect 
of  antiperspirants  on  the  skin  and  how  they  function  to 
minimize hyperhidrosis. 

  axillary odor 
 Axillary  odor  is  caused  by  the  action  of  bacteria  on  sterile 
eccrine and apocrine sweat. The apocrine sweat is responsible 
for a large part of the odor as it is rich in organic material ideal 
for bacterial growth. Eccrine sweat, on the other hand, is more 
dilute and does not provide a high concentration of bacterial 
nutrients  ( Fig.  18.1 ).  However,  eccrine  sweat  indirectly  pro-
motes odor by dispersing the apocrine sweat over a larger area 
and  providing  the  moisture  necessary  for  bacterial  growth. 
Axillary hair also contributes to odor by acting as a collecting 
site  for  apocrine  secretions  and  increasing  the  surface  area 
suitable for bacterial proliferation ( 2 ).  

 Each  person  has  a  unique  odor  due  to  a  combination  of 
physiologic factors, including sebaceous gland secretions, the 
combined  effect  of  the  foods  last  eaten,  and  the  physical  or 
psychological  state  of  the  body.  Once  the  source  of  axillary 
odor is understood, a list of mechanisms to reduce odor can be 
developed ( Table 18.1 ). These are the goals of all antiperspi-
rant/deodorant products.   

  antiperspirants vs. deodorants 
 The words antiperspirant and deodorant are sometimes used 
interchangeably  in  the  common  vernacular,  but  to  the  cos-
metic  chemist  these  are  two  very  different  personal  care 
products.  Antiperspirants  contain  ingredients  to  decrease 
sweating, while deodorants are used solely to manage axillary 
odor.  For  this  reason,  all  antiperspirants  can  be  considered 
deodorants, but not all deodorants are antiperspirants. Most 
products in the current marketplace are both antiperspirants 
and deodorants.   

132

   Antiperspirants contain ingredients to decrease sweating, 
while deodorants are used solely to manage axillary odor. 

  deodorants 
 Deodorants function either by masking the axillary odor with 
a perfume or by decreasing axillary bacteria. Therefore, many 
deodorants contain antibacterials, such as quaternary ammo-
nium  compounds  (benzethonium  chloride)  and  cationic 
compounds (chlorhexidine, triclosan).  Staphylococcus aureus , 
Corynebacteria, and  Aerobacter aerogenes  are some of the key 
odor-causing axillary bacteria whose growth can be inhibited 
simply by decreasing the axillary pH to 4.5 or less ( 3 ). Antiper-
spirants are different in that they physically reduce the amount 
of sweat in the axilla. 

 A  popular  additive  of  deodorants  and  deodorant  soaps, 
hexachlorophene, was banned by the Food and drug adminis-
tration  (FDA)  in  all  nonprescription  products  in  September 
1972.  Many  companies  were  forced  to  reformulate  their 
deodorant products at that time since it had been shown that 
brain lesions were produced in test animals fed high doses of 
hexachlorophene ( 4 ). Recently, natural deodorant/antibacteri-
als  have  made  a  comeback  in  organic  products  containing 
ethyl alcohol, thyme oil (thymol) and/or, clove oil (eugenol). 

 The  effectiveness  of  a  deodorant  can  be  measured  in  two 
ways: bacterial culture plates and the sniff test. Application of 
a proposed deodorant formulation to a culture plate swabbed 
with human perspiration can determine the percent reduction 
of bacterial growth, but this is not the best method to evaluate 
the  consumer  acceptability  of  a  deodorant  product.  Most 
companies retain several individuals with highly trained noses 
to “sniff ” armpits before and after application of a deodorant. 
Perspiration is usually induced by placing the subject in a hot 
room and a cupped hand is waved across the armpit to bring 
the odor to the trained nose ( 5 ).  

  mechanism of action of antiperspirants 
 Antiperspirants  attempt  to  accomplish  the  daunting  task  of 
preventing  perspiration  release  onto  the  skin  surface  from 
25,000 eccrine glands per axilla capable of secreting in response 
to heat and emotional stimuli. There are several chemical cat-
egories  of  effective  antiperspirants  listed  in   Table  18.2   ( 6 ). 
Antiperspirants are considered over-the-counter (OTC) drugs 
and  must  use  ingredients  in  the  amount  specified  on  the 
monograph. For this reason, most antiperspirant formulations 
are similar with different physical appearances and fragrances.  
 The efficacy of these antiperspirants is based on an under-
standing of the mechanism of sweat production. Several theo-
ries have been advanced to explain the efficacy of metal salts, 
which  are  the  primary  antiperspirants  used  today.  Papa  and 
Kligman originally proposed that the metal salts damaged the 

HYPERHIDROSIS AND ANTIPERSPIRANTS

133

Opening of eccrine sweat duct

Hair shaft

Eccrine sweat duct

Eccrine sweat gland

Apocrine duct

Hair follicle

Apocrine sweat gland

 Figure 18.1     The anatomy of the apocrine and eccrine glands.    

Table 18.1  Mechanisms for Axillary Odor Reduction

1.  Reduce apocrine gland secretions
2.  Reduce eccrine gland secretions
3.  Remove apocrine and eccrine gland secretions from the axilla
4.  Decrease axillary bacterial colonization

Table 18.2  Effective Antiperspirant Chemical Categories

1.   Metal salts (aluminum chlorohydrate, aluminum zirconium 

chlorohydrate)

2.  Anticholinergic drugs
3.  Aldehydes (formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde)
4.  Antiadrenergic drugs
5.  Metabolic inhibitors
6.  Botulinum toxin

sweat  duct  causing  the  secreted  sweat  to  diffuse  into  the 
 interstitial  space  ( 7 ),  they  have  since  retracted  their  theory. 
Shelley and Hurley proposed that the metal salts combine with 
intraductal  keratin  fibrils  to  cause  eccrine  duct  closure  and 
formation of a horny plug to obstruct sweat flow to the skin 
surface ( 8 ). A second paper by Holzle and Kligman also pro-
vided evidence that the metal salts cause a physical obstruction 
of the duct opening ( 9 ).  

   The most effective antiperspirants are metal salts that 
cause a physical obstruction of the eccrine duct opening. 

 Anticholinergic drugs are the most effective antiperspirant 
agents known. Blockage of the cholinergic innervation of the 

eccrine sweat glands effectively stops the sweating. Agents such 
as scopolamine and atropine have been studied in this regard; 
however,  skin  penetration  is  poor  unless  administered  via 
injection or iontophoresis. Furthermore, their action is non-
specific  allowing  for  side  affects  such  as  dry  mouth,  urinary 
retention, and mydriasis. No antiperspirants containing anti-
cholinergic drugs are available for OTC purchase in the U.S.A. 
at this time. 

 Aldehydes,  such  as  formaldehyde  and  glutaraldehyde,  can 
effectively decrease axillary sweating ( 10 , 11 ). It is believed that 
these chemicals also result in the blockage of the eccrine sweat 
duct. They are not popular at this time due to the sensitizing 
potential of formaldehyde and the brownish-yellow skin stain-
ing associated with glutaraldehyde. Both substances are toxic 
and are not in OTC use at this time. 

 Antiadrenergic  drugs  theoretically  could  also  decrease 
sweating. Adrenergic  neurotransmitters,  such  as  epinephrine 
and norepinephrine, have been shown to decrease sweating in 
humans when they are injected intradermally. This is perhaps 
due to some adrenergic nerve fibers providing dual innerva-
tion to the sweat glands in addition to the cholinergic fibers. 
But this aspect of sweating is poorly understood. There are no 
commercially  marketed  antiperspirants  of  this  type  in  the 
U.S.A. Lastly, metabolic inhibitors may decrease perspiration. 
Since the process of sweating is dependent upon a supply of 
energy, drugs that interrupt Na+/K+ - ATPase, such as  ouabain, 
might also be effective. These substances are only of academic 
interest. 

 Perhaps the most promising antiperspirants are topical bot-
ulinum  toxin  formulations  that  interrupt  nervous  innerva-
tions of the sweat gland. It is unlikely that these formulations 
will enter the OTC market, however, making the metal salts the 

134

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

safest  and  most  efficacious  antiperspirants.  The  rest  of  our 
 discussion will focus on these metal salts.  

  antiperspirant formulation 
 Metal  salts  of  aluminum,  zirconium,  zinc,  iron,  chromium, 
lead, and mercury have astringent properties on the skin. The 
only two metal salts that are presently used in antiperspirants 
are aluminum and zirconium ( 12 ). Zirconium salts, however, 
have had an interesting safety profile over the last 35 years. In 
1955, sodium zirconyl lactate was used in deodorant sticks, but 
was found to cause axillary granuloma formation ( 13 , 14 ). In 
1973,  aerosol  zirconium-based  products  were  voluntarily 
removed from the market by several manufacturers who had 
received  reports  of  skin  irritation.  Aerosol  zirconium-based 
products were banned by the FDA in 1977, but no such prod-
ucts were left on the market at that time. Nonaerosol formula-
tions at concentrations less than 20% are still allowed, but the 
incidence of axillary granulomas has greatly decreased ( 15 , 16 ). 
 The original antiperspirant formulation developed in 1914 
was  a  25%  solution  of  aluminum  chloride  hexahydrate  in 
 distilled  water  ( 17 ).  This  solution  was  so  effective  that  every 
second  or  third  day  application  reduced  axillary  moisture. 
However, the solution was extremely irritating to skin and its 
high  acidity  damaging  to  clothing.  Newer,  less  irritating 
 aluminum formulations are more popular today, but they are 
also less effective. The FDA did express some concern in 1978 
regarding 
long-term  inhalation  of  aluminum-containing 
aerosol preparations ( 18 ). 

 Commonly  used  active  agents  in  antiperspirants  include 
aluminum chloride (concentration of 15% or less in an aque-
ous nonaerosol dosage form), aluminum chlorohydrate (con-
centration of 25% or less in an aerosol and nonaerosol dosage 
form), aluminum zirconium chlorohydrate (concentration of 
20% or less or a nonaerosol dosage form), and buffered alu-
minum sulfate (concentration of 8% or less aluminum sulfate 
buffered  with  an  8%  concentration  of  sodium  aluminum 
 lactate in a nonaerosol dosage form) ( 19 ). Other additives are 
employed to package the product as a stick, roll-on, or spray 
antiperspirant. Stick antiperspirants are packaged in a roll-up 
tube and consist of waxes, oils, volatile silicones, anti bacterials, 
and aluminum or aluminum/zirconium complexes ( Fig. 18.2 ). 
Roll-on products are an emulsion or clear liquid applied with 
a  rolling  ball  mechanism  to  the  armpits.  These  consist  of 
 aluminum chlorohydrate as the active ingredient in combina-
tion  with  gelling  agents,  emollients,  and  antibacterials.  The 
spray antiperspirants are  aluminum chlorohydrate  complexes, 
oils,  solvents,  and  antibacterials  propelled  by  hydrocarbon 
gases ( 20 , 21 ).   

  antiperspirant efficacy 
 In order to be effective, an antiperspirant must reduce axillary 
sweating by 20% or more. Interestingly enough, antiperspirant 
effectiveness  is  dependent  upon  both  the  formulation  and 
the form in which the product is applied, as demonstrated in 
 Table 18.3 . Efficacy is defined as the percentage reduction in 
the rate of sweating achieved after application of the antiper-
spirant  product.  The  percentage  sweating  reduction  can  be 
determined  gravimetrically,  where  a  human  volunteer  holds 
an absorbent pad in the armpit while in a hot room, or hygro-
metrically, where the water content of dry gas sprayed in the 

 Figure 18.2     Stick products are presently the most popular in the marketplace.    

Table 18.3  Antiperspirant Effectiveness by Form U.S. FDA 
OTC Antiperspirant Review Panel

Dosage form

Percent sweat reduction (%)

Aerosols
Creams
Roll-ons
Lotions
Liquids
Sticks

20–33
35–47
14–70
28–62
15–54
35–40

armpit  of  a  human  volunteer  is  measured  and  the  rate  of 
sweating calculated ( 22 ). 

 Antiperspirants  are  considered  OTC  drugs  and  thus  must 
follow the rules set forth in the monograph covering their for-
mulation. The types of materials that can be incorporated in 
antiperspirants  and  their  concentration  are  carefully  con-
trolled by the FDA. This accounts for the similarity in formu-
lation by a variety of manufacturers; however, the effectiveness 
of  antiperspirants  varies  by  formulation  as  demonstrated  in 
 Table 18.3 .   

   Twice daily application of antiperspirants is the key to 
enhanced efficacy of clinical strength products. 

 A new category of antiperspirants introduced are labeled as 
“clinical  strength”  products.  These  products  have  a  slightly 
higher  concentration  of  active  ingredients  that  must  reduce 
sweat  by  30%  to  substantiate  the  highly  effective  claim  on 
package  labeling,  but  are  also  recommended  for  twice  daily 
use. The twice daily use is actually the key to their enhanced 
efficacy.  The  antiperspirant  must  remain  the  axillary  vault 
long  enough  to  form  or  maintain  the  plug  in  the  acrosyrin-
gium.  If  heavy  sweating  is  occurring  during  application,  the 

HYPERHIDROSIS AND ANTIPERSPIRANTS

antiperspirant is washed away and ineffective. Since the armpit 
is generally at rest at night, bedtime application of antiperspi-
rants allows the ingredients to contact the skin longer and cre-
ate  a  better  plug  that  translates  into  enhanced  efficacy. 
Increased efficacy can be achieved with any antiperspirant that 
is used morning and evening. 

 The most effective antiperspirants create a deep plug in the 
acrosyringium.  The  more  superficial  the  plug,  the  less  the 
sweat  control  obtained.  Unfortunately,  there  is  a  direct  con-
nection between skin irritation and acrosyringial plug depth. 
Efficacious formulations must address both issues to create a 
skin friendly product. Some manufacturers are including skin 
protectant ingredients, such as dimethicone, in antiperspirant 
formulations  to  increase  efficacy  while  counteracting  the 
inherent possibility of irritant contact dermatitis.  

  perspiration control requirements 
 Antiperspirants reduce axillary moisture by employing alumi-
num salts to create a plug within the acrosyringium to occlude 
eccrine and apocrine ducts. Sometimes the aluminum is com-
bined  with  zirconium  to  enhance  efficacy.  It  takes  about  10 
days to create the plug, which physically blocks the transport 
of sweat from the gland on to the skin surface. Conversely, it 
takes 14 days for the plug to dissolve. It is for this reason that 
best results with antiperspirants are achieved with daily use to 
maintain the plug. 

 In  order  for  the  antiperspirant  to  work,  it  must  physically 
contact every sweat duct. An even and thorough application to 
entire axillary vault is necessary for optimal results. Some anti-
perspirants  have  a  grid  to  encourage  even  application  and 
metered  dosing  administered  through  turning  a  knob  at  the 
bottom of the stick container. Using the amount of antiperspi-
rant recommended on the packaging is important.  

  adverse reactions 
 The major drawback of aluminum and zirconium salt antiper-
spirants is their acidic pH (pH 1.8–4.2), which can irritate the 
skin, cause clothing discoloration, and weaken natural fabrics 
such as linen and cotton. Aluminum and zirconium chlorohy-
drates have the least skin irritancy. The sulfate forms are inter-
mediate and chloride forms are the most irritating. Zinc oxide, 
magnesium oxide, aluminum hydroxide, and triethanolamine 
may be added to reduce irritancy in some products. 

 Many patients who develop underarm irritation to aerosol 
antiperspirants/deodorants find they can tolerate the roll-on 
type better or possibly need a product designed for sensitive 
skin in a cream or stick form. Certainly, these products are a 
common  cause  of  irritant  contact  dermatitis  in  abraded 
underarm skin ( 23 ). A variety of different ingredients in anti-
perspirants  and  deodorants  have  been  reported  as  causes  of 
dermatitis:  vitamin  E  ( 24 ),  propantheline  ( 25 ),  quaternary 
ammonium  compounds  ( 26 ),  etc.  These  products  are  open 
patch tested “as is.” Stick antiperspirants that contain dimethi-
cone appear to be the least irritating in consumer trials.  

  maximizing antiperspirant efficacy 
 Antiperspirants can and do fail to meet patient expectations 
for sweat control. As a matter of fact, most of the patients who 
enter  a  dermatologist’s  clinic  for  the  purpose  of  discussing 
sweat control are antiperspirant failures. Following are a few 

135

Table 18.4  Patient Recommendations for Optimal 
 Antiperspirant Performance

1.  Apply the antiperspirant to a dry armpit.
2.  Do not shave the armpit aggressively.
3.  Apply the recommended amount of antiperspirant.
4.  Apply the antiperspirant daily.

easy  tips  that  the  dermatologist  might  wish  to  share  with 
patients in need of assistance ( Table 18.4 ): 

1.     Apply the antiperspirant to a dry armpit. 

 The antiperspirant must remain in physical contact with the 
acrosyringium long enough to create a plug. If the antiperspi-
rant is applied to a wet armpit, wet either from showering or 
from perspiration, it will be diluted and not as effective. The 
armpit  can  be  dried  with  a  hair  dryer  before  antiperspirant 
application, if necessary.  

2.    Do not shave the armpit aggressively. 

 The  plugs  created  in  the  acrosyringium  can  be  physically 
removed by shaving if they are located close to the skin surface. 
Persons  who  shave  repeatedly  over  the  armpit  skin  or  shave 
multiple  times  daily  may  notice  a  decreased  antiperspirant 
efficacy. It is best to shave the armpits weekly by dragging the 
razor once over the skin and avoid pulling the skin tight. This 
minimizes the chance of removing the sweat duct plug.  

3.    Apply the recommended amount of antiperspirant. 

 Many antiperspirants recommend twisting the knob at the 
bottom of the container three times and applying this amount 
in the axilla. This is the dose needed to obtain the optimal effi-
cacy. Encourage patients to read the instructions and under-
stand that just like medicines that do not work if enough is not 
ingested, antiperspirants also require the proper dose for opti-
mal efficacy. The recommended amount should be thoroughly 
massaged throughout the armpit, especially over hair-bearing 
skin where the concentration of sweat glands is the greatest.  

4.    Apply the antiperspirant daily. 

 Compliance is the key to many things in medicine, including 
antiperspirant  efficacy.  As  with  any  topical  dermatologic,  if 
you don’t use it doesn’t work. People who apply their antiper-
spirant  sporadically  will  not  get  good  sweat  control.  Daily 
application is necessary to efficacy, and twice daily application 
is even better, as previously discussed. Consecutive application 
for 10 days is necessary to determine the optimal benefit that 
can be achieved from a given antiperspirant  formulation.     

  summary 
 Antiperspirants remain the most widely used method for con-
trolling axillary perspiration. Proper application is the key to 
achieving the best results. The antiperspirant should be applied 
liberally  to  the  entire  axilla  morning  and  evening  to  reduce 
sweating. In general, roll-on cream products offer the best effi-
cacy, but care should be taken to apply the packaging recom-
mended  dose.  Remember 
that  shaving  can  decrease 
antiperspirant efficacy by physically removing the plug from 
the acrosyringium. For this reason, aggressive armpit shaving 

136

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

by pulling the skin and shaving repeatedly over the skin should 
be avoided. Finally, compliance is important, as daily applica-
tion  is  necessary  to  maintain  the  acrosyringial  plug.  The 
 optimal effect for any antiperspirant can only be assessed after 
10 consecutive days of use. Perhaps these are a few ideas that 
the dermatologist can share with patients in search of better 
topical axillary sweat control.   

   references 
    1.       Mueller     WH   ,    Quatrale     RP    .   Antiperspirants and deodorants  .   In  :     deNavarre   
  MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  .    Wheaton,  IL  : 
  Allured Publishing Corporation  ,   1975  :   205  –  6  .    

    2.       Plechner      S    .   Antiperspirants  and  deodorants  .    In  :      Balsam      MD   ,     Safarin      E    , 
  eds  .   Cosmetics, Science and Technology  .   Vol. 2  .   2nd edn  .   New York, NY  : 
  Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   373  –  415  .    

    3.       Chavkin     L    .   Antiperspirants and deodorants  .   Cutis     1979  ;   23  :   24  –  90  .    
    4.       Mueller     WH   ,    Quatrale     RP    .   Antiperspirants and deodorants  .   In  :     deNavarre   
  MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  .    Wheaton,  IL  : 
  Allured Publishing Corporation  ,   1975  :   215  –  17  .    

    5.       Wilkinson     JB   ,    Moore     RJ    .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  .   7th edn  .    New York, NY:   

  Chemical Publishing   ,   1982  :   133  –  4  .    

    6.       Quatrale      RP    .    The  mechanism  of  antiperspirant  action  in  eccrine  sweat 
glands  .    In  :      Laden      K   ,     Felger      CB    ,    eds  .    Antiperspirants  and  deodorants  .   
New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1988  :   89  –  110  .    

    7.       Papa      CM   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Mechanisms  of  eccrine  anhidrosis:  II.  The 
 antiperspirant effects of aluminium salts  .   J Invest Dermatol     1967  ;   49  :   139  –  45  .    
    8.       Shelley      WB   ,     Hurley      HJ        Jr.  Studies  on  topical  antiperspirant  control  of 

 axillary hyperhidrosis  .   Acta Dermatol Venereol     1975  ;   55  :   241  –  60  .    

   18.       Klepak     PB    .   Aluminum and health: a perspective  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  : 

  53  –  6  .    

   19.       Morton     JJP   ,    Palazzolo     MJ    .   Antiperspirants  .   In  :     Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic 
Safety  a  Primer  for  Cosmetic  Scientists  .    New York  :    Marcel  Dekker,  Inc  , 
  1987  :   221  –  63  .    

   20.       Calogero     AV    .   Antiperspirant and deodorant formulation  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1992  ;   107  :   63  –  9   

   21.       Walder     D   ,    Penneys     NS    .   Antiperspirants and deodorizers  .   Clin Dermatol   

  1988  ;   6  :   29  –  36  .    

   22.       Wilkinson     JB   ,    Moore     RJ    .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  .   7th edn  .   New York, NY  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   130  –  2  .    

   23.       Mukin     W   ,    Cohen     HJ   ,    Frank     SB    .   Contact dermatitis from deodorants  .   Arch 

Dermatol     1973  ;   107  :   775  .    

   24.       Aeling      JL   ,     Panagotacos      PJ   ,     Andreozzi      RJ    .    Allergic  contact  dermattis  to 

vitamin E in aerosol deodorant  .   Arch Dermatol     1973  ;   108  :   579  .    

   25.       Hannuksela      M    .    Allergy  to  propantheline  in  an  antiperspirant  .    Contact 

Dermatits     1975  ;   1  :   244  .    
  EJ    . 
  E   , 

   Levy   

   26.       Shmunes   

  Quaternary  ammonium  compound  contact 

 dermatitis from a deodorant  .   Arch Dermatol     1972  ;   105  :   91  .     

  suggested reading 
      Benohanian      A    .    Antiperspirants  and  deodorants  .    Clin  Dermatol      2001  ;    19  : 

  398  –  405  .    

     Bowman      JP   ,     Wild      JE   ,     Shannon      K   ,     Browne      J    .    A  comparison  of  females  and 
males for antiperspirant efficacy and sweat output  .   J Cosmet Sci     2009  ;   60  : 
  1  –  5  .    

     Burry     JS   ,    Evans     RL   ,     Rawlings     AV   ,     Shiu     J    .   Effect  of antiperspirants on whole 
body sweat rate and thermoregulation  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     2003  ;   25  :   189  –  92  .    
     Darrigrand      A   ,     Reynolds      K   ,     Jackson      R   ,     Hamlet      M   ,     Roberts      D    .    Efficacy  of 

    9.       Holzle     E   ,    Kligman     AM    .   Mechanism of antiperspirant action of aluminum 

 antiperspirants on feet  .   Mil Med     1992  ;   157  :   256  –  9  .    

salts  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1979  ;   30  :   279  –  95  .    

   10.       Juhlin     L    .   Topical glutaraldehyde for plantar hyperhidrosis  .   Arch Dermatol   

  1968  ;   97  :   327  –  30  .    

     Johansen     JD   ,    Rastogi     SC   ,    Bruze     M    ,   et al  .   Deodorants: a clinical provocation 
study  in  fragrance-sensitive  individuals  .    Contact  Dermatitis      1998  ;    39  : 
  161  –  5  .    

   11.       Sato      K   ,     Dobson      RL    .    Mechanism  of  the  antiperspirant  effect  of  topical 

     McGee      T   ,     Rankin      KM   ,     Baydar     A    .    The  design  principles  of  axilla  deodorant 

 glutaraldehyde  .   Arch Dermatol     1969  ;   100  :   564  –  9  .    

fragrances  .   Ann NY Acad Sci     1998  ;   855  :   841  –  6  .    

   12.       Jass     HE    .   Rationale of formulations of deodorants and antiperspirants  .   In  : 
    Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Principles of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist  . 
   St. Louis:     CV Mosby Company   ,   1982  :   98  –  104  .    

   13.       Rubin     L   ,    Slepyan     H   ,    Weber     LF    ,   et al  .   Granulomas of the axilla caused by 

deodorants  .   JAMA     1956  ;   162  :   953  –  5  .    

   14.       Shelled      WB   ,     Hurley      KJ    .    The  allergic  origin  of  zirconium  deodorant 

 granulomas  .   Br J Dermatol     1958  ;   70  :   75  –  101  .    

   15.       Lisi     DM    .   Availability of zirconium in topical antiperspirants  .   Arch Intern 

Med     1992  ;   152  :   421  –  2  .    

   16.       Skelton     HG   ,    Smith     KJ   ,    Johnson     FB    ,   et al  .   Zirconium granuloma resulting 
from and aluminum zirconium complex  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1993  ;   28  : 
  874  –  6  .    

   17.       Emery     IK    .   Antiperspirants and deodorants  .   Cutis     1987  ;   39  :   531  –  2  .    

     Minkin     W   ,     Cohen      HJ   ,     Frank      SB    .    Contact  dermatitis  from  deodorants  .   Arch 

Dermatol     1973  ;   107  :   774  –  5  .    

     Schreiber     J    .   Antipersirants (Chapter 45)  .   In  :     Barel     AO   ,    Paye     M   ,    Maibach     HI    , 
  eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  .   2nd edn  .   New York: 
Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  .    

     Schreiber     J    .   Deodorants (Chapter 63)  .   In  :     Barel     AO   ,    Paye     M   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  . 
  Handbook  of  Cosmetic  Science  and  Technology  .    3rd  edn  .    New  York: 
Informa Healthcare USA, Inc  .   2009  .    

     Taghipour     K   ,    Tatnall     F   ,    Orton     D    .   Allergic axillary dermatitis due to hydroge-
nated castor oil in a deodorant  .   Contact Dermatitis     2008  ;   58  :   168  –  9  .    
     Uter     W   ,     Geier      J   ,     Schnuch      A   ,     Frosch      PJ    .    Patch  test  results  with  patients’  own 
perfumes, deodorants and shaving lotions: results of the IVDK 1998–2002  . 
  J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol     2007  ;   21  :   374  –  9  .         

             19    Fragrances, dermatitis, and vasomotor rhinitis      

  Fragrance  is  an  interesting  part  of  any  skin  care,  cosmetic, 
 cosmeceutical,  hair  care,  and  nail  care  product.  In  many 
instances,  the  fragrance  is  the  most  expensive  part  of  the 
 formulation and accounts for much of the consumer enthusi-
asm regarding product use. While fragrance is often viewed as 
the most problematic part of any formulation from a contact 
dermatitis or vasomotor rhinitis standpoint, it is important to 
the  consumer  perception  of  beauty.  Certainly,  fragrance-free 
products have more dermatologic appeal, but many products 
without a scent fail in the marketplace even though they offer 
the same degree of efficacy as scented products. The ingredi-
ents  used  to   construct  a  formulation  have  a  chemical  smell 
that  may  not  be  pleasant,  thus  fragrances  are  used  to  mask 
unappealing  smells,  to  neutralize  minimally  noxious  odors, 
and  to  heighten  the  consumer  product  experience.  This 
 chapter analyzes  fragrances from a dermatologic perspective. 
 Perfumes and fragrances appeal to the most primordial part 
of the brain and can produce feelings of well being, lassitude, 
affection, disgust, etc. The use of fragrance to affect mood or 
induce relaxation is known as “aromatherapy” ( 1 ). Perfumery, 
the  art  of  fragrance  development,  involves  blending  and 
 mixing with more than 6000 possible ingredients to obtain a 
special scent. 

 Originally,  perfume  was  used  in  the  form  of  incense  for 
 religious  purposes.  The  word  itself  is  Latin  for “through  the 
smoke” ( 2 ). Incense was invented to mask the smell of burning 
flesh when an animal was sacrificed to the gods. The transition 
from  incense  to  perfumes  for  adornment  occurred  about 
6000 BC both in the Far East and the Middle East. By 3000 BC, 
the Sumerians and Egyptians were bathing in oils and alcohols 
of jasmine, iris, hyacinth, and honeysuckle. Cleopatra is said to 
have  anointed  her  hands  with  an  oil  of  roses,  crocus,  and 
 violets and her feet with a lotion of almond oil, honey, cinna-
mon, orange blossoms, and tinting henna. Greek and Roman 
men both embraced perfumes considering a soldier unfit for 
battle unless he was duly anointed with fragrances. 

 The concept of cologne was introduced by an Italian barber, 
Jean-Baptiste  Farina,  who  arrived  in  Cologne,  Germany  in 
1709 to develop a fragrance trade. He concocted an alcoholic 
blend of lemon spirits, orange bitters, and mint oil from the 
bergamot  fruit  that  became  the  first  cologne.  Soon  perfume 
meant any mixture of ethyl alcohol with 25% or more essential 
fragrant  oils;  toilet  water  contained  5%  essential  oils  and 
cologne contained 3% essential oils. These definitions are still 
used in the manufacture of modern fragrances.  

   Perfume is any mixture of ethyl alcohol with 25% or more 
essential fragrant oils; toilet water contains 5% essential 
fragrant oils and cologne contains 3% essential oils. 

 While fragrances are powerful modulators of emotion and 
mental  functioning,  they  also  can  cause  problems  such  as 

allergic  contact  dermatitis,  irritant  contact  dermatitis,  and 
vasomotor  rhinitis.  The  development  of  hypoallergenic 
 fragrances  has  helped  minimize  contact  dermatitis  to  some 
extent, but vasomotor rhinitis remains a problem. Modern fra-
grance trends are combinations of scents to produce complex 
mixtures, such as vanilla, lavender, pineapple, and kiwi. Fur-
ther, fragrance has transcended body use and extended to can-
dles, potpourri, air fresheners, jar oil wicks, soaps, shampoos, 
lipsticks, and hand lotions. Beauty products simply cannot be 
beautiful without a fragrance. 

  fragrance formulation 
 The raw materials for perfume formulation fall into two cate-
gories: natural and synthetic. Natural components are of ani-
mal  or  plant  origin  while  synthetic  products  are  produced 
from a wide range of raw materials. The use of animal extracts 
in perfumery has declined due to animal rights issues; how-
ever,  animal-derived  products  include  musk  from  the  musk 
deer, castoreum from the beaver, civet from the civet cat, and 
ambergris  from  the  sperm  whale.  Most  of  these  substances 
have been chemically analyzed and are now synthesized ( 3 ). 

 Plant  products  comprise  the  majority  of  substances  used 
within  perfumery.  These  extracts  can  be  obtained  through 
steam  distillation,  expression,  and  extraction.  Distillation  is 
the method used for removal of geranium, lavender, rose, and 
orange blossom scents. Expression is used to squeeze oil from 
the peel of bergamot, lemon, lime, and other citrus fruits. If 
the aromatic substance is unstable at the higher temperatures 
required for distillation or the yield of the oil minimal through 
expression, then extraction is employed. 

 Extraction can be accomplished by enfleurage, maceration, 
or the use of volatile solvents. Enfleurage involves the use of 
animal fats or vegetable oils to extract the scent at room tem-
perature.  The  flower  petals  are  sprinkled  on  glass  plates 
encased in wooden frames that have been brushed with fats or 
oils. The wooden frames are then stacked to sandwich the pet-
als between two glass plates. Fresh petals are added daily until 
the grease, known as pomade, absorbs a sufficient amount of 
perfume.  This  method  is  used  for  extracting  the  perfume  of 
jasmine, orange blossom, jonquil, and lily ( 4 ). If heat is added, 
then the extraction technique is termed maceration. Here the 
flowers are mixed with hot liquid fats or oils at 60 to 70°C and 
stirred  until  the  cells  containing  the  fragrance  rupture.  The 
mixture is then poured on a screen allowing the scented grease 
to drain. Rose, acacia, and violet perfumes are obtained in this 
manner. Volatile  solvents  and  percolators  are  used  to  extract 
the essential oils of mimosa, carnation, heliotrope, stock, and 
oakmoss ( 5 ). 

 Steam  distillates  are  called  “essential  oils”  while  solvent 
extracts  result  in  a  nearly  solid  perfume  wax  referred  to  as 
“concretes.”  Ethanolic  extractions  of  concretes  yield  “abso-
lutes,” but if raw materials are subjected to ethanolic extraction 
“tinctures”  are  produced.  Organic  solvent  extraction  yields 

137

138

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 19.1  Common Fragrance Materials

Table 19.2  Odor Descriptors

Fragrance material

Characteristics

Odor

Description

Benzyl acetate
Benzyl salicylate
Isobornyl acetate
p-t-Butyl cyclohexyl acetate
Cedryl acetate
Citronellol
Dihydro myrcenol
Geraniol
Heliotropine
Hexyl cinnamic aldehyde
Indole
Gamma-methyl ionone
Musk ketone
Phenyl ethyl alcohol
Vanillin

Source: Adapted from Ref. 7.

Light floral, slightly fruity
Warm, balsamic
Fresh, piney
Soft, woody
Sharp, woody
Rosy
Citrus
Floral, rosy
Sweet, floral, powdery
Light, delicate
Floral, animalic
Woody, floral
Musky, animalic, warm
Floral
Sweet, powdery, vanilla

“resinoids,”  which  can  be  further  extracted  with  ethanol  to 
yield “resin  absolutes”  ( 6 ).  All  parts  of  the  plant,  to  include 
roots,  fruits,  leaves,  flowers,  bark,  rind,  etc.,  can  be  used  in 
 perfume  production.  Of  the  250,000  species  of  flowering 
plants,  only  2000  contain  essential  oils  appropriate  for 
 fragrance production. 

 Synthetic fragrances are becoming more popular due to cost and 
inability  to  obtain  natural  animal  and  plant  sources.   Table  19.1  
lists  some  of  the  more  common  aroma  chemicals  used  in 
 perfumery today ( 7 ).   

  fragrance classification 
 A special vocabulary is used to describe the fragrances briefly 
outlined in  Table 19.2 . The perception of smell is very subjec-
tive  accounting  for  the  tremendous  number  of  popular  per-
fumes presently on the market. A successful formulation is a 
prized secret among fragrance manufacturers. Generally, per-
fumes fall into three categories:  

1.     simple  notes  representing  naturally  occurring  aro-
mas, such as fruits, herbs, spices, ﬂ owers, and animal 
smells;  

2.    complexes  representing  combinations  of  odors, 
such as green ﬂ oral, spicy citrus, and fruity ﬂ oral;  
3.    multicomplexes  representing  up  to  12  identiﬁ able 

fragrance themes.   

 Perfumes are further described by the manner in which their 
smell changes with time ( 8 ). The top note of a perfume refers 
to  the  rapidly  evaporating  oils  that  are  discernible  when  the 
bottle is opened, but disappear shortly after skin application. 
The middle note is the smell of the dried perfume on the skin 
and the end note is the ability of the perfume to diffuse fra-
grance over time ( 9 ).  

  fragrance-induced dermatitis  
 Irritant  and  allergic  contact  dermatitis  to  perfumes  and 
 fragrances  is  a  well-known  phenomenon  (10–13).  In  fact, 
 fragrances have been reported as the most common cause of 
cosmetic-related  allergic  contact  dermatitis  ( 14 ).  The  North 
American Contact Dermatitis Group reported that cinnamic 

Aldehydic
Amber
Animalic
Balsamic
Camphoraceous
Chemical
Citrus
Earthy
Fatty
Floral
Fresh
Fruity
Green
Herbal
Leather
Light
Medicinal
Mossy
Nutty
Pine
Powdery
Resinous
Spicy
Sweet
Warm
Woody

Sharp, fatty, or soapy
Sweet, warm
Redolent of animal odors
Warm, sweet, and resinous
Medicated
Harsh, aggressive, and basic
Fresh, tangy, and zesty
Green, rooty, and dank
Odor of animal or vegetable oil
Odor of flowers
Used subjectively
Odor of natural fruit
Odor of grass or leaves
Odor of fresh plants
Phenolic, warm, and animalic
Discrete
Pungent
Earthy, mossy, phenolic, or green
Odor of natural nuts
Odor or fine wood, needles, and resin
Soft, gentle
Warm, sweet, balsamic
Pungent, hot, culinary
Heavy, cloying
Ambery, animalic, sweet
Odor of natural wood

Source: Adapted from Ref. 7.

aldehyde, a fragrance material, was one of the 10 most  common 
allergens  on  the  standard  dermatology  patch  test  tray  ( 15 ). 
 Table 19.3  lists some of the more common fragrances and their 
irritancy potential as represented in the fragrance litera ture ( 16 ). 
 Table 19.4  lists some of the common fragrances and their aller-
genic potential as represented in the dermatologic literature ( 17 ). 
The  North  American  Contact  Dermatitis  Group  found  the 
 following fragrance materials to be sources of allergic contact 
dermatitis in order of decreasing frequency: cinnamic alcohol, 
hydroxycitronellal,  musk  ambrette, 
 geraniol, 
isoeugenol, 
 cinnamic aldehyde, coumarin, and eugenol ( 18 , 19 ).    

   The most allergenic fragrances are cinnamic alcohol, 
hydroxycitronellal, musk ambrette, isoeugenol, geraniol, 
cinnamic aldehyde, coumarin, and eugenol. 

 Fragrance sensitivities can be detected by patch testing with 
a  fragrance  mixture  containing  the  most  common  fragrance 
allergens. It consists of a 2% concentration of cinnamic alco-
hol, cinnamic aldehyde, eugenol, isoeugenol, hydroxycitronel-
lal,  oakmoss  absolute,  geraniol,  and  alpha  amyl  cinnamic 
alcohol  in  petrolatum  ( 20 ).  Unfortunately,  irritant  reactions 
can occur ( 21 ). This mixture detects approximately 70–80% of 
fragrance sensitivities  ( 17 ). Further evaluation of the allergic 
contact  dermatitis  needs  to  be  carried  out  with  individual 
 fragrances  ( 22 ).  The  patient’s  perfume  can  also  be  used  for 
patch testing if diluted to a 10–30% concentration in alcohol 
or  petrolatum.  Interestingly  enough,  balsam  of  Peru,  one  of 
the standard substances on a patch test tray, serves as a marker 

FRAGRANCES, DERMATITIS, AND VASOMOTOR RHINITIS

139

Table 19.3  Irritant Potential of Perfumes

Irritating perfumes

Benzylidene acetone
Methyl heptin carbonate
Methyl octin carbonate
Moderately irritating perfumes

Cyclamen aldehyde
Ethyl methylphenyl glycinate
Eugenols gamma-nonyl lactone
Balsam of Peru
Phenyl acetaldehyde
Vanillin

Least irritating perfumes

Benzaldehyde
Benzoin resin
Benzyl benzoate
Cinnamic acid and cinnamates
Citrus oils
Cresol and methyl cresol
Diethyl phthalate
Heliotropin
Higher aliphatic aldehydes
Hydroxycitronellal
Menthol
Salicylates

Source: Adapted from Ref. 16.

Table 19.4  Allergic Potential of Perfumes

Perfume

Cinnamic alcohol
Cinnamic aldehyde
Hydroxycitronellal
Isoeugenol
Eugenol
Oakmoss absolute
Alpha amy cinnamic alcohol
Geraniol
Benzyl salicylate
Sandalwood oil
Anisyl alcohol
Benzyl alcohol
Coumarin
Musk ambrette

Source: Adapted from Ref. 17.

Allergic 
potential

High
High
High
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Photoallergen

Patch test 
concentration 
in petrolatum 
(%)

5
1
4
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
5
5
5
5

for fragrance sensitivity and is patch test positive in about 50% 
of cases of perfume allergy.  

 Determining the source of fragrance allergies can be quite com-
plex ( 23 ). The average soap contains 50–150 fragrance ingredi-
ents, the average cosmetic contains 200–500 fragrance ingredients, 
and the average perfume contains 700 fragrance ingredients ( 24 ). 
The concentration of fragrance ingredients also varies. Fine per-
fumes  contain  15–30%  fragrance,  colognes  contain  5–8%  fra-
grance, and scented cosmetics contain 0.1–1% fragrance, while 
masking fragrances are used at concentrations below 0.1% ( 25 ). 
Most  of  the  cosmetic  houses  are  able  to   provide  fragrance 
 products for testing ( 26 ).  

  fragrance and vasomotor rhinitis 
 While  patch  testing  is  effective  for  the  detection  of  contact 
dermatitis,  it  is  not  effective  for  the  understanding  of  vaso-
motor rhinitis. Vasomotor rhinitis occurs when a fragrance is 
first perceived by a patient and consists of tearing, sneezing, a 
runny nose, nasal congestion, and headache. The symptoms 
appear to be autonomic, as the patient cannot control them. 
Problems  can  arise  from  fragrances  found  in  perfumes,  air 
fresheners, candles, laundry detergents, potpourri, etc. Some-
times  the  symptoms  can  be  controlled  with  antihistamines, 
such as cetirizine, or nasal decongestants, such as oxymetazo-
line. Scent avoidance is the best treatment for this condition, 
which  can  be  disabling  for  the  patient.  Vasomotor  rhinitis 
does not appear to be related to asthma and is not found with 
increased  incidence  in  patients  with  atopy.  It  occurs  with 
many diverse fragrances that are different from those found 
on  patch  test  trays.  The  phenomenon  of  vasomotor  rhinitis 
has  recently  been  identified  by  the  fragrance  industry  and  I 
am currently involved in a research to better understand this 
condition.   

   references 
    1.       Jackson     EM    .   Aromatherapy  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     1993  ;   4  :   240  –  2  .   
    2.       Panati     C    .   Extraordinary origins of everyday things  .   New York  :   Perennial 

Library, Harper & Row, Publishers  ,   1987  :   238  –  43  .   

    3.       Launert      E    .    Scent  &  Scent  Bottles  .    London  :    Barrie  &  Jenkins  ,    1974  : 

  29  –  32  .   

    4.       Guin     JD    .   History, manufacture, and cutaneous reactions to perfumes  .   In  : 
    Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Prinicples of Cosmetics for the Dermatologist  . 
  St. Louis  :   CV Mosby Company  ,   1982  :   111  –  29  .   

    5.       Ellis     A    .   The Essence of Beauty  .   New York  :   The Macmillan Company  ,   1960  : 

  132  –  42  .   

    6.       Balsam     MS    .   Fragrance  .   In  :     Balsam     MD   ,    Gerson     SD   ,    Rieger     MM   ,    Sagarin     E   , 
   Strianse     SJ    ,   eds  .   Cosmetics Science and Technology  .   2nd edn  .   New York  : 
  Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   599  –  634  .   

    7.       Dallimore     A    .    Perfumery  .    In  :     Williams      DF   ,     Schmitt     WH    ,    eds  .    Chemistry 
and Technology of the Cosmetics and Toiletries Industry  .   London  :   Blackie 
Academic & Professional  ,   1992  :   258  –  74  .   

    8.       Jellinek     JS    .   Evaporation and the odor quality of perfumes  .   J Soc Cosmet 

Chem     1961  ;   12  :   168  .   

    9.       Poucher     WA    .   A classification of odours and its uses  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem   

  1955  ;   6  :   80  .   

   10.       Rothengorg      HW   ,     Hjorth      N    .    Allergy  to  perfumes  from  toilet  soaps  and 

detergents in patients with dermatitis  .   Arch Dermatol     1968  ;   97  :   417  –  21  .   
   11.       Maibach     HI    .   Fragrance hypersensitivity  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   25  –  6  .   
   12.       Maibach     HI    .   Fragrance hypersensitivity, part II  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  : 

  35  –  6  .   

   13.       Larsen      WG   ,     Maibach      HI    .    Fragrance  contact  allergy  .    Semin  Dermatol   

  1982  ;   1  :   85  –  90  .   

   14.       Eiermann      HJ   ,     Larsen      WG   ,     Maibach      HI   ,     Taylor      JS    .    Prospective  study  of 
cosmetic reactions; 1977-1980  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1982  ;   6  :   909  –  17  .   
   15.       Storrs      FJ   ,     Rosenthal      LE   ,     Adams      RM    ,    et  al  .    Prevalence  and  relevance  of 
allergic reactions in patients patch tested in North America  .   J Am Acad 
Dermatol     1989  ;   20  :   1038  –  45  .   

   16.       Wells      FV   ,     Lubowe      II    .    Cosmetics  and  the  Skin  .    New  York  :    Reinhold 

 Publishing Corporation  ,   1964  :   370  –  4  .   

   17.       Larsen     WG    .   Perfume dermatitis  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   12  :   1  –  9  .   
   18.       Adams     RM   ,     Maibach     HI    .   A five-year study of cosmetic  reactions  .   J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .   

   19.       Larsen     WG    .   How to instruct patients sensitive to fragrances  .   J Am Acad 

Dermatol     1989  ;   21  :   880  –  4  .   

   20.       Larsen     WG    .    Perfume  dermatitis:  a  study  of  20  patients  .   Arch  Dermatol   

  1977  ;   113  :   623  –  6  .   

   21.       Calnan     CD   ,    Cronin     E   ,    Rycroft     R    .   Allergy to perfume ingredients  .   Contact 

Dermatitis     1980  ;   6  :   500  –  1  .   

   22.       Fisher      AA    .    Patch  testing  with  perfume  ingredients  .    Contact  Dermatitis   

  1975  ;   1  :   166  –  8  .   

140

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   23.       Larsen     WG    .    Cosmetic  dermatitis  due  to  a  perfume  .    Contact  Dermatitis   

  1975  ;   1  :   142  –  5  .   

     de Groot     AC    .   Adverse reactions to fragrances  .   Contact Dermatitis     1997  ;   36  :   57  –  86  .   
     Ellena      C    .    Perfume  formulation:  words  and  chats  .    Chem  Biodivers      2008  ;    5  : 

   24.       Jackson      EM    .    Substantiating  the  safety  of  fragrances  and  fragranced 

  1147  –  53  .   

 products  .   Cosmet Toilet     1993  ;   108  :   43  –  6  .   

     Frater     G   ,    Bajgrowicz     JA   ,    Kraft     P    .   Fragrance chemistry  .   Tetrahedron     1998  ;   54  : 

   25.       Marks     JG   ,    DeLeo     VA    .   Contact and occupational dermatology  .   St. Louis  : 

  7633  –  703  .   

  Mosby Yearbook  ,   1992  :   145  –  7  .   

     Herman     SJ    .   Odor reception: structure and mechanism  .   Cosmet Toilet     2002  ; 

   26.       Yates     RL    .   Analysis of perfumes and fragrances  .   In  :     Senzel     AJ    ,   ed  .    Newburger’s 
Manual of Cosmetic Analysis  .   2nd edn  .   Washington, DC  :   Published by the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists, Inc  ,   1977  :   126  –  31  .    

  suggested reading 
      Cadby     PA   ,    Troy     WR   ,    Vey     MGH    .   Consumer exposure to fragrance ingredients: 
providing estimates for safety evaluation  .   Regul Toxicol Pharmacol     2002  ; 
  36  :   246  –  52  .   

  117  :   83  –  93  .   

     Larsen     W   ,    Nakayama     H   ,    Fischer     T    ,   et al  .   A study of new fragance mixtures  .   Am 

J Contact Dermatitis     1998  ;   9  :   202  –  6  .   

     Parekh     JC    .   Axillary odor: its physiology, microbiology and chemistry  .   Cosmet 

Toilet     2002  ;   117  :   53  –  60  .   

     Teixeira     MA   ,    Rodriquez     O   ,    Mata     VG   ,    Rodrigues     AE    .   The diffusion of per-
fume  mixtures  and  the  odor  performance  .    Chem  Eng  Sci      2009  ;    64  : 
  2570  –  89  .        

             20   Body photoprotection      

  We  live  in  an  environment  dependent  on  our  sun,  a  third 
 generation star from which all the elements on our earth and 
in our bodies arose. The sun provides energy that drives our 
solar system, but it also produces UVB and UVA radiation that 
damages our DNA and activates our collagenase. In order to 
maintain this delicate balance between the life-giving qualities 
of  the  sun  and  sun  protection,  our  bodies  have  evolved  an 
elaborate  system  of  endogenous  defenses.  Sunscreens  simply 
represent an extension and an amplification of these natural 
defense mechanisms. This chapter examines body photopro-
tection. Some of the basic principles of sunscreen formulation 
and use have already been discussed under facial sunscreens in 
chapter 9.  

   Sunscreen formulations are based on the natural 
 endogenous body protective mechanisms. 

  natural photoprotective mechanisms 
 The  natural  protective  mechanisms  of  the  body  begin  at  the 
stratum  corneum  and  extend  into  the  dermis.  They  are 
 summarized in  Table 20.1 . In each layer of the skin, there are a 
variety  of  techniques  used  to  reflect  ultraviolet  radiation, 
quench  oxygen  radicals,  and  repair  the  resultant  cellular 
 damage. Beginning at the outermost structure of the skin with 
the  stratum  corneum,  ultraviolet  radiation  is  scattered  and 
reflected by the corneocytes. This is why the endogenous sun 
protection factor (SPF) of the skin is lower through procedures 
that induce exfoliation. The use of topical hydroxy acid body 
moisturizers also removes the corneocytes, further decreasing 
the  SPF  of  the  skin.  This  concept  of  light  scattering  is  built 
upon  by  the  inorganic  sun  filters,  such  as  zinc  oxide  and 
 titanium  dioxide.  Most  currently  marketed  beach  sunscreens 
for body application include an inorganic filter for this reason.  
 The next natural body defense mechanism against UV radi-
ation is the melanin. Melanin performs numerous functions to 
act as a UV absorber and dissipate the heat byproduct.  Melanin 
itself is a free radical scavenger and undergoes oxidation in the 
300–360 nm range. It is this oxidation of melanin that results 
in the immediate pigment darkening phenomenon associated 
with  the  dermatologic  use  of  therapeutic  UVA  exposure.  In 
many ways, organic sun filters function like melanin, absorb-
ing  a  photon  of  UV  radiation  and  undergoing  a  chemical 
 reaction  to  diffuse  the  energy  and  prevent  collagen  damage. 
The  cinnamates,  salicylates,  oxybenzone,  and  avobenzone 
function in this manner.  

   Melanin absorbs UV radiation and dissipates the energy 
as heat. 

 Finally,  the  body  relies  on  antioxidants  to  prevent  UV 
 photodamage.  Endogenous  body  antioxidants  include  the 
carotenoid pigments, urocanic acid, and superoxide dismutase, 

which  quench  oxygen  radicals  and  stabilize  cell  membranes. 
No  sunscreen  can  duplicate  the  protection  of  these  endoge-
nous substances. There are oral and topical supplements that 
claim  to  enhance  this  mechanism  of  photoprotection,  but 
none have been proven effective. Two of the most important 
antioxidants in the body are vitamins C and E, but an increased 
dietary intake of these vitamins has not been shown to increase 
the antioxidant capacity of the skin. For this reason, clothing 
and sunscreens are important body photoprotection.  

  body photoprotection 
 Sunscreens for the face and body are very similar in composi-
tion.   Table  20.2   lists  the  approved  sunscreens  for  use  in  the 
U.S.A. and their maximum allowable concentration. There is 
no  difference  in  the  composition  of  sunscreens  for  different 
body areas, but the attributes of sunscreens for the body are 
different  from  those  for  the  face.  Body  sunscreens  may  be 
selected  with  a  higher  SPF  and  it  may  also  be  desirable  for 
the  formulation  to  have  some  water-  resistant  capabilities. 
The reader is referred to chapter 9 on facial sunscreens for an 
ingredient discussion.   

  sunburn protection factor 
 The dermatologic community is anxiously awaiting the final 
version of the sunscreen monograph. Sunscreens are consid-
ered over-the-counterdrugs and are therefore regulated by the 
monograph as to which filters may be used in which combina-
tion and in which amounts. This need to stick to the mono-
graph  allows  for  less  variation  in  formulations  and  provides 
for less formulation ingenuity. One of the anticipated changes 
in the final sunscreen in monograph is the relabeling of SPF 
from sun protection factor to sunburn protection factor. This 
is  probably  a  worthwhile  change,  since  SPF  only  reports  the 
UVB  photoprotective  properties  of  the  sunscreen.  A  rating 
system for UVA photoprotection is anticipated, but the details 
have not been finalized.  

   SPF has been redefined as Sunburn Protection Factor. 

 The SPF is currently the only comparative rating available 
for determining the superiority of one product over another in 
terms of possible sun protection. Patients are misled, however, 
when they purchase products on the basis of SPF alone. There 
is  no  substitute  for  a  quality  formulation  from  a  reputable 
manufacturer.  Further,  on  the  only  way  a  consumer  would 
know that they are getting adequate UVA photoprotection is 
by looking for products with an SPF above 30 and finding the 
words  “broad  spectrum”  on  the  label  ( Fig.  20.1 ).  It  is  not 
 possible to make a sunscreen with an SPF above 30 that does 
not have some UVA photoprotection. The current inflation in 
SPF values is an attempt by the manufacturers to report their 
superior  UVA  photoprotective  qualities.  While  a  higher  SPF 

141

142

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 20.1  Natural Ultraviolet Protective Mechanisms

Cutaneous structure

Compact horny layer
Keratinocyte melanin

Carotenoid pigments

Urocanic acid

Superoxide dismutase

Epidermal DNA excision 

repair

Sun protective mechanism

Absorbs and scatters UV
1.   UV absorbing filter
2.   Free radical scavenger
3.   Dissipates UV as heat
4.   Undergoes oxidation in 

300–360 nm range to produce 
immediate pigment darkening

1.   Membrane stabilizers
2.   Quench oxygen radicals
Oxidized to stabilize UV-induced 

oxygen radicals

1.   Oxygen radical scavenger
2.   Protects cell membrane from 

lipoprotein damage
Repairs UV-induced DNA 

damage

Table 20.2  Category 1 Monographed Sunscreen Active 
Ingredients

Active sunscreen ingredient

Aminobenzoic acid (p-Aminobenzoic acid, 

PABA)
Avobenzone
Cinoxate
Dioxybenzone (benzophenone-8)
Homosalate
Menthyl anthranilate
Octocrylene
Octyl methoxycinnamate
Octyl salicylate
Oxybenzone (benzophenone-3)
Padimate-O (octyl dimethyl PABA)
Phenylbenzimidazole sulfonic acid
Sulisobenzone (benzophenone-4)
Titanium dioxide
Trolamine salicylate
Zinc oxide

Maximum 
concentration (%)

15

3
3
3
15
5
10
7.5
5
6
8
4
10
25
12
25

has little meaning in terms of UVB photoprotection, it is an 
important indicator of UVA photoprotection. Patients at pres-
ent should be encouraged to use higher SPF formulations in 
the range of 40–55 for excellent body photoprotection.  

 Both  chemical  and  biologic  methods  are  used  to  deter-
mine the SPF; however, only the biologic evaluation will be 
discussed in this chapter. Most commonly, the lower back of 
untanned  individuals  is  divided  into  small  test  sites  and 
exposed to UVB light until a minimum amount of erythema 
develops,  known  as  the  minimal  erythemal  dose  (MED). 
Lightproof barriers are placed around the test sites to pre-
vent light contamination from one test site to another. Once 
the MED for the test subject has been determined, the sub-
ject is invited to return to the test site the next day for appli-
cation of sunscreen. The sunscreen is placed on the test sites 
and allowed to dry. The skin is then exposed to UVB light at 
the  expected  SPF  of  the  sunscreen  product.  The  expected 

 Figure 20.1     A sunscreen label containing the wording “broad spectrum” with 
an accompanying high SPF.    

SPF  is  roughly  determined  by  spectrophotometric  absorp-
tion. The amount of UVB light required to obtain the same 
degree of erythema as the preceding day is determined and 
the SPF calculated. 

 This  measurement  is  the  optimum  SPF  the  product  can 
deliver under optimum conditions. The subjects have a mea-
sured amount of the product rubbed into the skin by a skilled 
technician.  This  eliminates  the  complicating  factor  of  too 
little  sunscreen  applied  in  an  erratic  manner.  Subjects  are 
also  evaluated  indoors,  eliminating  the  effects  of  wind, 
humidity, and perspiration due to high temperature. In my 
opinion, the biologic SPF determined under laboratory con-
ditions  in  human  test  subjects  should  be  halved  to  give  an 
approximation of what can actually be expected under actual 
use conditions.  

  water resistance 
 Water-resistant  qualities  are  very  important  in  body  photo-
protection  where  sweating  and  water  contact  are  common. 
Separate testing must be conducted to meet criteria required 
by the FDA to place the water-resistant label on a body sun-
screen bottle. Water resistance is determined by applying the 
sunscreen  with  a  predetermined  SPF  to  human  volunteers 
over a body surface area of 50 cm 2 . The product is allowed to 
dry  for  20 minutes  and  reapplied  with  another  20 minutes 
allowed for drying. The subjects are then asked to swim in an 
indoor  pool  for  20 minutes.  The  skin  is  then  dried  and  the 
 subjects  sit  outside  the  pool  and  rest  for  20 minutes.  The 
 subjects then re-enter the pool for another 20 minutes. Thus, a 
total of 40 minutes of water contact is required to substantiate 
 water-resistant claims ( 1 ).  

   Sunscreen water resistance is determined by two 
20- minute water exposures. 

BODY PHOTOPROTECTION

143

Table 20.3  Water-Resistant Sunscreens

Table 20.4  Methods of Sunscreen Removal by Water

Chemical technology

Mechanism of efficacy

Water-in-oil emulsions

Oil is the main ingredient and resists 

Silicones

removal by water

Hydrophobic oily liquid that resists 
removal by water and forms film 
over skin surface

Acrylate crosspolymer

No emulsifier required which 

Liquid crystal gels

Phospholipid emulsifiers

Film forming polymers

prevents water from dissolving the 
sunscreen, used in titanium 
dioxide preparations

Hydrophobic emulsifiers used that 
resist water, used in titanium 
dioxide preparations

Substances engineered to mimic 
natural sebum (potassium cetyl 
phosphate) with water-resistant 
properties

Thin polymer film formed over the 
skin with inherent water resistance

 The SPF of the product is determined after this routine of 
water contact and skin drying. If the SPF following water con-
tact is the same as the SPF prior to water contact, the product 
is considered to be water resistant. This testing also maximizes 
the water-resistant characteristics of the sunscreen. Notice that 
two applications of the sunscreen are performed prior to water 
contact. Also  notice  that  the  sunscreen  is  allowed  to  dry  for 
20 minutes prior to water contact. Double application ensures 
good coverage while the drying period maximizes the substan-
tivity of the product for the skin. This is the advice that should 
be given to patients who expose themselves and their children 
to  the  sun  at  the  beach.  The  patient  should  do  everything 
 possible to maximize the water-resistant qualities of the sun-
screen since the product will not perform up to standards in 
real life at the beach, since the effects of wind and sand have 
been  eliminated  in  the  indoor  pool  environment  used  to 
 perform the testing.  

  water-resistant sunscreen formulations 
 There  is  a  great  deal  of  chemical  science  that  goes  into  the 
development  of  a  successful  water-resistant  sunscreen.  The 
basic  methods  of  imparting  water  resistance  are  listed  in 
 Table  20.3 .  All  of  the  technologies  for  imparting  water 
 resistance are predicated on the fact that water-soluble and 
oil-soluble  substances  do  not  mix  meaning  that  water  can 
dissolve  water-soluble  substances,  but  not  oil-soluble  sub-
stances.  Thus,  if  a  sunscreen  is  predominantly  oil  with 
 minimal water, it will not solubilize in the presence of water 
or  perspiration.  However,  oil-dominant  sunscreens  are 
greasy  and  sticky.  This  has  led  to  development  of  silicone 
liquid-based  sunscreens,  since  silicone  is  an  oil  that  is  not 
greasy or sticky with excellent water-resistant properties.  

 Another  method  of  creating  water  resistance  is  to  alter  or 
eliminate  the  emulsifier.  Remember  that  the  function  of  an 
emulsifier is to allow water- and oil-loving substances to mix 
into  one  continuous  phase.  The  emulsifier  in  the  sunscreen 
formulation can allow perspiration or swimming pool water 

1.  Emulsification of the sunscreen film by water
2.  Removal of the sunscreen film by rubbing
3.  Separation of the UV filters from the sunscreen film

 Figure 20.2     A sunscreen with a water-resistant labeling.    

to  mix  with  the  oily  ingredients  facilitating  removal.  Thus, 
acrylate crosspolymers and liquid crystal gels are being used 
where  no  emulsifier  or  hydrophobic  emulsifiers  can  prevent 
solubilization of the sunscreen film by water. 

 The last methods used to confer water resistance are predi-
cated on creating a film that is resistant to water removal. One 
technique involves the use of phospholipids, which are struc-
turally similar to natural sebum, and create a thin oily film on 
the skin. The other technique involves the use of polymers that 
leave a thin water-resistant film on the skin surface.  

  water-resistant sunscreen failure 
 Unfortunately,  water-resistant  sunscreens  fail.  All  derma-
tologists  have  seen  patients  who  have  experienced  severe, 
blistering, second-degree sunburns at the beach while wear-
ing  sunscreen.  The  methods  by  which  sunscreens  can  be 
removed from the skin by water are listed in  Table 20.4  ( 2 ). 
It  is  important  to  understand  why  body  sunscreens  fail  so 
that  better  advise  patients  on  superior  sunscreen  selection 
and use ( Fig. 20.2 ).    

   Sunscreens are removed by water due to emulsification, 
rubbing, and separation of the sunscreen film. 

144

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 There  are  three  primary  mechanisms  that  account  for  the 
removal of sunscreens from the skin surface. One method is 
water which actually dissolves the oily sunscreen film by inter-
acting with the emulsifier in the formulation. This means that 
the  emulsifier  in  water-resistant  sunscreens  must  be  of  low 
concentration or possibly eliminated. For this reason, many of 
the best water-resistant and water proof sunscreens are anhy-
drous, meaning they contain no water. Products that are anhy-
drous  do  not  require  an  emulsifier.  This  point  should  be 
emphasized  to  patients  when  selecting  water-resistant  sun-
screens.  Even  though  the  patient  may  prefer  a  lighter  feel  in 
sunscreens,  money,  and  application  time  are  wasted  if  the 
product is immediately removed upon water contact. 

 The second manner in which water-resistant sunscreens can 
fail is with rubbing removal. This can be the case if the sun-
screen does not stick well to the skin, a quality known as sub-
stantivity. The rubbing of water over the sunscreen film on the 
skin can also mechanically remove the product by lifting it off 
the skin surface. This quality of a sunscreen is tested in part by 
the  evaluation  of  the  SPF  following  two  20-minute  swims. 
Dermatologists  who  are  interested  in  personally  testing  the 
ability  of  a  sunscreen  to  remain  in  place  on  the  skin  should 
apply the sunscreen to a glass slide and allow it to thoroughly 
dry. The glass slide should then be swirled in a glass of water. 
If the sunscreen film is even and continuous, it will remain on 
the slide and the water will remain clear. If a thin film is seen 
in  the  glass  or  the  water  becomes  cloudy,  the  sunscreen  has 
failed the test. 

 Lastly, the sunscreen film can physically degrade, a phenom-
enon  most  commonly  seen  with  particulate  sunscreens  con-
taining micronized titanium dioxide or microfine zinc oxide. 
In this case, the oily sunscreen film or polymer film adheres 
well to the skin, but the water-soluble titanium dioxide or zinc 
oxide does not remain contained within the film. Water washes 
away the water-soluble particulates, leaving behind a film lack-
ing  some  of  the  ingredients  required  to  achieve  the  labeled 
SPF.  This  problem  can  be  overcome  by  using  hydrophobic 
grades of titanium dioxide.  

  sunscreen degradation and 
incompatibilities 
 Sunscreen failure can also occur from degradation or interac-
tion between the filters. This is why sunscreens are expiration 
dated  and  outdated  sunscreen  should  not  be  used  by  the 
patient.  Sunscreens  are  complex  formulations  without  an 
unlimited shelf life. Some of the unwanted interactions can be 
suspected by the patient if the normally white sunscreen dis-
colors to a pale yellow or brown color. These discolored prod-
ucts  will  not  provide  optimal  sun  protection  and  should  be 
discarded. Discoloration may be seen in sunscreens containing 
octyl methoxycinnamate, which can undergo a photochemical 
reaction to form an intensely yellow pigment when exposed to 
sunlight. This can be prevented by packaging the sunscreen in 
an opaque container. Adding other UV absorbers, such as ben-
zophenone-3 or zinc oxide, can stabilize the octyl methoxycin-
namate  while  acting  as  active  sunscreens  and  increasing  the 
product SPF. 

 Degradation of another sort can occur with particulate sun-
screens, such as micronized titanium dioxide or microfine zinc 
oxide. In order to be an effective sunscreen, the particles must 

Table 20.5  Methods of Improving Sunscreen Compliance

  1.   Begin developing habits during childhood for good hygiene: 

brush teeth, wash face, apply sunscreen

  2.   Select sunscreen formulations that are appropriate for the 

body area of application

  3.   Use sunscreen-containing moisturizers instead of plain 
moisturizers on face, neck, upper chest, and hands

  4.   Select a sunscreen-containing facial foundation for a female 

face

  5.   Use a sunscreen-containing lip balm or lipstick
  6.   Use a gel sunscreen as an aftershave on the male face
  7.   Apply a quarter sized dab of sunscreen to the hand and use 

the entire amount on the face, neck, and ears

  8.   Develop a routine for sunscreen application to include face, 
front of neck, back of neck, ears, behind the ears, and central 
chest

  9.   Select separate products with different aesthetics for daily 

wear and beach wear

10.   Use clothing effectively in the form of long pants, long sleeves, 

hats, scarves, and umbrellas as photoprotection

be dispersed evenly within the sunscreen lotion. If the particles 
coalesce, an even film of the active sunscreen is not achieved 
on the skin and the SPF of the product is that of the unpro-
tected skin. It is important that physical sunscreens are used 
within their expiration period so that the suspension remains 
intact. The suspension should be a white color and discolored 
products should also be discarded. The fragrance of particu-
late  sunscreens  can  also  disappear  with  time  in  suboptimal 
formulations as it is absorbed by the titanium dioxide or zinc 
oxide. One of the newest developments that has improved the 
feel,  water  resistance,  and  SPF  of  physical  sunscreens  is  the 
incorporation  of  film-forming  polymers,  such  as  acrylate 
copolymers or polyvinyl pyrolidone (PVP) . 

 UV filters can also be absorbed by plastic packaging or the 
cap inserts. For example, polystyrene and low-density polyeth-
ylene can absorb the UV filters. For this reason, high-density 
polyethylene  or  high-density  polypropylene  must  be  chosen 
for packaging.   

   Sunscreens can interact with plastic packaging making 
bottle construction important in sunscreen efficacy. 

  sunscreen compliance 
 Compliance  is  key  to  sunscreen  efficacy.  Sunscreens  do  not 
work if they remain in the bottle. It is estimated by sunscreen 
manufacturers  that  an  average  U.S.  adult  uses  less  than  one 
bottle of sunscreen per year. Clearly, this is indicative of poor 
compliance, since one bottle, if applied as directed on a daily 
basis,  should  last  one  month.  The  major  issues  in  sunscreen 
compliance are examined next and presented in  Table 20.5 .  

  Issue 1. Sunscreens Are Sticky 
 One  of  the  most  common  reasons  patients  do  not  like 
 sunscreens is because they can be sticky ( Fig. 20.3 ). Perhaps 
it  may  be  helpful  to  obtain  more  insight  into  this  issue. 
Most  of  the  chemical  sunscreen  actives  are  sticky  oils, 
such  as  methyl  anthranilate.  Usually  a  sunscreen  formula-
tion will combine at least two to three different actives to get 

BODY PHOTOPROTECTION

145

  Issue 3. Sunscreens Cause Acne 
 Many patients have the perception that sunscreens cause acne. 
Usually the acne is in the form of inflammatory papules, not 
open or closed comedones, and presents within 48 hours after 
initial application. This is not true acne because sufficient time 
has  not  passed  since  the  sunscreen  application  for  follicular 
rupture to occur. The acne seen with sunscreens is more of an 
acneiform  eruption,  which  I  personally  feel  is  indicative  of 
irritant contact dermatitis. Some of the more extended wear 
water-resistant  sunscreens  are  more  occlusive  by  nature  and 
may cause difficulty at the follicular ostia. The solution to this 
problem  is  sorting  through  a  variety  of  sunscreen  formula-
tions  by  trial  and  error.  Major  problems  can  be  avoided  by 
applying the sunscreen for five consecutive nights to a small 
area of skin in front of the ear. The skin should be observed for 
the presence of inflammatory papules and pustules. Another 
helpful tip is the avoidance of long wearing sunscreen prod-
ucts.  For  daily  use,  long  wearing  products  are  not  necessary 
and a sunscreen containing moisturizer may be a good alter-
native.  If  a  beach  wear  product  is  desired,  the  vehicle  of  gel 
sunscreens, which may contain a polymer, should be avoided. 
Instead, a light-weight cream formulation should be selected 
and then applied frequently to obtain maximal protection.  

  Issue 4. Sunscreens Sting When Applied 
 It is true that some sunscreens sting when applied and this is 
more  common  in  gel  sunscreen  formulations  with  a  high 
concentration of a volatile vehicle, such as alcohol. Creamy 
sunscreens  are  a  possible  solution  to  this  problem,  as  well 
( Fig.  20.4 ).  Sunscreens  may  also  sting  when  they  enter  the 
eye. One option is to use one of the waxy stick sunscreens in 
the eye area that will not melt or run when combined with 
sweat. These sunscreens can be stroked above the eyebrows 
and on the upper and lower eyelid. One of the methods for 
improving compliance is to pick the proper sunscreen for the 
proper skin site. No one sunscreen formulation will work in 
all body areas ( Fig. 20.5 ).    

  Issue 5. Sunscreens Do Not Work 
 There are some who are skeptical of sunscreen efficacy from 
the start. This concern may be well founded, since sunscreens 
can fail. How does this occur? It is important to remember that 
sunscreens  do  not  work  unless  present  on  the  skin  surface. 
Thus, failure to coat the entire exposed skin surface with sun-
screen  and  sunscreen  removal  from  rubbing  or  sweating  are 
two  of  the  most  common  causes  of  sunscreen  failure.  Sun-
screens may also fail if the film applied to the skin is too thin. 
A thin film, created by failure to apply the proper amount of 
sunscreen, yields skin areas leaving the skin unprotected. For-
mulation issues are also important. Some sunscreens have bet-
ter  skin  substantivity.  Substantivity  is  a  term  used  by  the 
cosmetic  chemist  to  explain  the  ability  of  the  sunscreen  to 
remain in place on the skin. Not all bottles of sunscreen with 
an identical SPF are equivalent. There is no substitute for the 
formulation  knowledge  of  an  experienced  sunscreen  manu-
facturer.  By  law,  all  products  labeled  with  an  SPF  of  15,  will 
provide consistent sun protection under optimal conditions. 
These  optimal  conditions  include  minimal  perspiration,  no 
water contact, low humidity, minimal activity, no wind, thick 

 Figure 20.3     Some of the spray sunscreen formulations may offer an alternative 
for patients who do not like sticky creams.    

 broader-spectrum  coverage  and  a  higher  SPF.  The  SPF  is 
increased  as  the  concentration  of  the  active  is  increased. 
Thus,  higher  SPF  products  are  usually  stickier.  Sunscreens 
with  an  SPF  of  30  or  higher  are  usually  stickier  than  sun-
screens with an SPF of 15 or lower. Yet, an SPF of 15 blocks 
about 93% of the UVB radiation while an SPF of 30 blocks 
out 97% of the UV radiation. This is only a 4% difference in 
UVB photoprotection that may make the difference between 
an aesthetically pleasing sunscreen and one that is undesir-
able.  For  this  reason,  dermatologists  should  reconsider 
advising  patients  to  use  the  highest  SPF  product  possible. 
Lower  SPF  products  generally  have  better  aesthetics  and 
may  yield  better  compliance.  My  recommendation  is  that 
patients  should  use  an  SPF  30+,  which  provides  excellent 
photoprotection and optimal aesthetics.   

  Issue 2. Sunscreens Make you Hotter in the Sun 
 Another  common  complaint  regarding  sunscreen  use  is  that 
patients feel hot and sweaty while they are wearing sunscreens. 
While some of this may be due to the fact that sunscreens are 
worn  in  the  hot  sun,  chemical  sunscreens,  such  as  octyl 
methoxycinnamate,  benzophenone,  methyl  anthranilate,  and 
homosalate, actually function by transforming UVB radiation 
to heat energy. This generation of heat by the sunscreen con-
tributes  to  the  feeling  of  skin  warmth.  This  should  not  be  a 
deterrent  to  wearing  sunscreen;  however,  physical  sunscreen 
agents, such as zinc oxide or titanium dioxide, do not produce 
heat.  Selecting  the  proper  sunscreen  can  help  minimize  this 
problem which may lead to decreased compliance.  

146

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

film application, etc. In reality, sunscreens are not worn under 
these conditions. The sunscreen in the bottle may be an SPF 15, 
but  its  performance  on  the  skin  may  differ  depending  on 
 formulation.  I  encourage  my  patients  to  avoid  off  brand 
 sunscreens in favor of well-established branded products.   

  summary 
 It is evident from this discussion that tremendous science, art, 
chemistry, and testing must be combined to achieve a success-
ful sunscreen product. The UV filters selected must be placed 
in a stable vehicle that not only creates an even water-resistant 
film on the skin to maintain the labeled SPF, but also is per-
ceived  by  the  patient  as  aesthetically  pleasing.  The  best  sun-
screen  formulations  combine  oil-soluble  and  water-soluble 
UV  filters  that  are  attracted  to  both  the  hydrophobic  and 
hydrophilic areas of the skin to provide maximum coverage. 
The packaging is selected to maintain the integrity of the sun-
screen. Dermatologist should be aware of these factors when 
considering sunscreen recommendations.   

   references 
   1.       Schueller     R   ,    Romanowski     P    .   The ABCs of SPFs  .   Cosmet Toilet     1999  ;   114  : 

  49  –  57  .    

   2.       Hewitt      JP    .    Formulating  water-resistant  titanium  dioxide  sunscreens  . 

   Cosmet Toilet     1999  ;   114  :   59  –  63  .     

  suggested reading 
      Bissett     DL   ,    Oelrich     DM   ,    Hannon     DP    .   Evaluation of a topical iron chelator in 
 animals  and  in  human  beings:  short-term  photoprotection  by  2-furil-
dioxime  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1994  ;   31  :   572  –  8  .    

     Cole      C    .    Multicenter  evaluation  of  sunscreen  UVA  protectiveness  with  the 
 protection factor test method  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1994  ;   30  :   729  –  36  .    
     Dromgoole      SH   ,     Maibach      HI    .    Sunscreening  agent  intolerance:  contact  and 
photocontact  sensitization  and  contact  urticaria  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   
  1990  ;   22  :   1068  –  78  .    

     Fisher     AA    .   Sunscreen dermatitis: para-aminobenzoic acid and its derivatives  . 

  Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   190  –  2  .    

     Fisher     AA    .   Sunscreen dermatitis: part IV the salicylates, the anthranilates and 

physical agents  .   Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   397  –  6  .    

     Fisher     AA    .   Sunscreen dermatitis: part II the cinnamates  .   Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   253  –  4  .    
    Food and Drug Administration   .   Sunscreen drug products for over the counter 
human drugs: proposed safety, effective and labeling conditions  .   Fed Reg   
  1978  ;   43  :   38206  .    

     Freeman     S   ,    Frederiksen     P    .   Sunscreen allergy  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     1990  ; 

  1  :   240  .    

     Geiter      F   ,     Bilek      PK   ,     Doskoczil      S    .    History  of  sunscreens  and  the  rationale  for 
their  use  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  .    Principles  of  Cosmetics  for  the 
Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby Company  ,   1982  :   187  –  206  .    

     Knobler      E   ,     Almeida      L   ,     Ruzkowski      A    ,    et  al  .    Photoallergy  to  benzophenone  . 

  Arch Dermatol     1989  ;   125  :   801  –  4  .    

     Kollias     N   ,    Bager     AH    .   The role of human melanin in providing photoprotec-
tion  from  solar  mid-ultravioet  radiation  (280–320  nm)  .    J  Soc  Cosm 
Chem  1988;     39 :  347  –  54    .   

     Lowe      NJ    .    Sun  protection  factors:  comparative  techniques  and  selection  of 
ultraviolet  sources  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ    ,    ed  .    Physician’s  Guide  to  Sunscreens  .   
New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1991  :   161  –  5  .    

     Mathews-Roth     MM   ,    Pathak     MA   ,    Parrish     JA    ,   et al  .   A clinical trial of the effects 
of oral beta-carotene on the response of skin to solar radiation  .   J Invest 
Dermatol     1972  ;   59  :   349  –  53  .    

     Mathias      CGT   ,     Maibach      HI   ,     Epstein      J    .    Allergic  contact  photodermatitis  to 

para-aminobenzoic acid  .   Arch Dermatol     1978  ;   114  :   1665  –  6  .    

     Menter      JM    .    Recent  developments  in  UVA  photoprotection  .    Int  J  Dermatol   

  1990  ;   29  :   389  –  94  .    

     Menz     J   ,    Muller     SA   ,    Connolly     SM    .   Photopatch testing: a six year experience  . 

  J Am Acad Dermatol     1988  ;   18  :   1044  –  7  .    

     Murphy     EG    .   Regulatory aspects of sunscreens in the United States  .   In  :     Lowe   
  NJ   ,    Shaath     NA    ,   eds  .   Sunscreens Development, Evaluation and Regulatory 
Aspects  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   127  –  30  .    

 Figure  20.4     Many  of  moisturizing  sunscreens  do  not  sting  when  applied  to 
sensitive complexion patients.    

 Figure 20.5     For female patients who experience problems with many sunscreen 
formulations, an opaque facial foundation can be used for photoprotection.    

BODY PHOTOPROTECTION

147

     Ramsay      DL   ,     Cohen      HS   ,     Baer      RL    .    Allergic  reaction  to  benzopenone  .    Arch 

 Dermatol     1972  ;   105  :   906  –  8  .    

     Rietschel     RL   ,    Lewis     CW    .   Contact dermatitis to homomenthyl salicylate  .   Arch 

Dermatol     1978  ;   114  :   442  –  3  .    

     Roelandts      R    .    Which  components  in  broad-spectrum  sunscreens  are  most 
 necessary for adequate UVA protection?     J Am Acad Dermatol     1991  ;   25  : 
  999  –  1004  .    

     Shaath      NA    .    Evolution  of  modern  chemical  sunscreens  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ   ,     Shaath   
  NA    ,    eds  .    Sunscreens  Development,  Evaluation  and  Regulatory  Aspects  . 
  New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   3  –  4  .    

     Shaath      NA    .    The  chemistry  of  sunscreens  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ   ,     Shaath      NA    ,    eds  . 
   Sunscreens  development,  evaluation  and  regulatory  aspects  .    New  York  : 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   223  –  5  .    

     Shaath      NA    .    Evolution  of  modern  chemical  sunscreens  .    In  :      Lowe      NJ   ,     Shaath   
  NA    ,    eds  .    Sunscreens  development,  evaluation  and  regulatory  aspects  .    
New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1990  :   9  –  12  .    

     Sterling     GB    .   Sunscreens: a review  .   Cutis     1992  ;   50  :   221  –  4  .    
     Thompson     G   ,    Maibach     HI   ,    Epstein     J    .   Allergic contact dermatitis from  sunscreen 
preparations complicating photodermatitis  .   Arch Dermatol     1977  ;   113  :   1252  .    
     Thune     P    .   Contact and photocontact allergy to sunscreens  .   Photodermatology   

  1984  ;   1  :   5  –  9  .         

             21  

 Sunless tanning creams      

  Skin color has always been a source of preoccupation for the 
human  race.  There  are  reports  of  ancient  man  using  burnt 
ashes to blacken the skin, Egyptians applying burnt ochre and 
beetle shells to adorn the face, and American Indians decorat-
ing  their  bodies  with  vivid  pigments.  This  concept  of  self-
adornment  still  persists  in  the  form  of  recreational  tanning. 
The  desirability  of  a  tan  was  popularized  by  Coco  Chanel, 
who was famous for her Couture Fashions. She conceived the 
idea  of  using  tanned  women  in  advertisements  designed  to 
promote her clothing and perfume. Prior to this time, women 
had shunned the sun, since tanned skin indicated that a woman 
performed  manual  labor  outdoors.  Society  women,  who 
dwelled  indoors,  used  their  fair  skin  color  as  a  sign  of  class 
status. With the industrial revolution, more and more women 
were leaving their jobs in the fields to live in the city and work 
indoors  in  factories.  These  women  had  little  time  for  recre-
ational sunning. Thus, skin tanning became popular as a sign 
that northerners were able to vacation in a sunny locale. 

 Despite the known risks of premature aging and skin cancer 
associated with tanning, this remains a popular practice. Tan-
ning  from  natural  sun  exposure  or  from  artificial  tanning 
booth light poses a health risk that is ignored by many. Since 
the societal desirability of tanned skin among Caucasians has 
not decreased, skin care manufacturers have searched for ways 
of  achieving  tanned  skin  without  photodamage.  Products 
designed to simulate a tan without sun exposure are known as 
sunless tanning creams. 

 Sunless tanning creams utilize dihydroxyacetone (DHA) as 
the active agent ( 1 ). This chemical was originally discovered in 
the 1920s as a possible substitute for sweetener in diabetic diets 
by  Procter  &  Gamble,  Cincinnati,  OH.  When  the  DHA  was 
chewed in concentrated form as a candy, it was noted that the 
saliva turned the skin brown without staining clothing or the 
mouth. This side effect made the substance unsuitable as a glu-
cose  substitute  and  DHA  was  not  marketed  until  the  1950s 
when the first sunless tanning cream was introduced into the 
marketplace. 

  sunless tanning cream formulation 
 DHA is a 3-carbon sugar that is manufactured as a white, crys-
talline hygroscopic powder. It interacts with amino acids, pep-
tides,  and  proteins  to  form  chromophobes  known  as 
melanoidins ( 2 ). Melanoidins structurally have some similari-
ties  to  skin  melanin  ( 3 ).  The  browning  reaction  that  occurs 
when  DHA  is  exposed  to  keratin  protein  is  known  as  the 
 Maillard  reaction  ( 4 ).  DHA  is  technically  categorized  as  a 
 colorant or colorless dye that glycates the protein found in the 
 stratum corneum.  

 DHA is usually added to a creamy base in concentrations of 
3–5% ( 5 ). Lower concentrations of DHA produce mild tanning 
while  higher  concentrations  produce  greater  darkening  ( 6 ). 
This allows sunless tanning creams to be formulated in light, 
medium,  and  dark  shades.  The  depth  of  color  produced  by 
sunless tanning creams can be enhanced by increasing the pro-
tein content of the stratum corneum. This is accomplished by 
applying a sulfur-containing amino acid, such as methionine 
sulfoxide, to the skin just before applying the DHA. 

 As might be expected, skin areas with more protein stain a 
darker  color.  For  example,  keratotic  growths  such  as  sebor-
rheic  keratoses  or  actinic  keratoses  will  hyperpigment. 
 Protein-rich areas of the skin, such as the elbows, knees, palms, 
and soles, also stain more deeply. For this reason, it is advisable 
to remove all dead skin through exfoliation prior to applying 
the  sunless  tanning  cream.  DHA  does  not  stain  the  mucous 
membranes, but will stain the hair and nails. 

 The  chemical  reaction  is  usually  visible  within  one  hour 
after DHA application, but maximal darkening may take 8 to 
24 hours  ( 7 ).  Many  sunless  tanning  preparations  contain  a 
temporary dye to allow the user to note the sites of application 
and  to  promote  even  application,  but  this  immediate  color 
should not be confused with the Maillard reaction. 

 Sunless tanning creams have enjoyed a renewed popularity 
since  their  original  introduction  in  the  1950s.  The  original 
self-tanners  produced  a  somewhat  unnatural  orange  skin 
color.  This  problem  has  been  corrected  through  the  use  of 
more purified sources of DHA that yield a more natural golden 
color. Yet, for persons with pink skin tones, the sunless tanning 
creams may still appear unnatural.  

  sunless tanning and photoprotection 
 DHA is a nontoxic ingredient both for ingestion and topical 
application.  It  has  a  proven  safety  record  with  only  a  few 
reported  cases  of  allergic  contact  dermatitis  ( 8 ).  Unfortu-
nately, the browning reaction does not produce adequate pho-
toprotection.  At  most,  sunless  tanning  preparations  may 
impart an SPF of 3 to 4 to the skin for up to one hour after 
application ( 9 ). The photoprotection does not last as long as 
the artificial tan. The brown color imparts limited photopro-
tection at the low end of the visible spectrum with overlap into 
the  UVA  portion  of  the  spectrum  ( 10 ).  DHA  used  to  be 
approved as a sun protective agent in combination with law-
sone;  however,  the  new  sunscreen  monograph  has  removed 
this ingredient largely due to its lack of popularity.  

   Sunless tanning creams confer no photoprotection and 
must be used with sunscreen when going outdoors. 

   Dihydroxyacetone (DHA) glycates proteins in the outer 
stratum corneum to produce a brown stain, known as 
melanoidins. 

 The  staining  reaction  that  occurs  with  DHA  is  limited 
strictly  to  the  stratum  corneum  and  can  be  readily  removed 
with tape stripping and exfoliation. Thus, the product must be 

148

SUNLESS TANNING CREAMS

149

Table 21.1  Tips for Sunless Tanning Cream Application

1.   Bathe the areas for application to eliminate any other creams 
or sebum from the skin surface. Always start with clean skin
2.   Use an abrasive scrub with polyethylene beads to thoroughly 

exfoliate the skin after bathing

3.  Dry the skin thoroughly
4.   Apply petroleum jelly to these areas of the body that will 

overstain with the sunless tanning cream: wrists, back of the 
neck, ankles, toes, fingers, antecubital fossae, and popliteal 
fossae

5.  Put on disposable gloves to avoid staining the palms
6.   Squeeze out of the bottle a small amount of cream and rub 

evenly between the palms. Rub the palms over the application 
area. Rub until the cream is evenly distributed to avoid 
streaking. Apply to one body area at a time working from the 
arms to the legs

7.   Remain still until the cream has thoroughly dried to avoid 

removal and unintentional application to hair and cloth items

8.  Repeat every two weeks or as necessary

reapplied daily to maintain the optimal skin darkening. There 
are no known side effects, except for possible irritation, from 
frequent  application.  The  DHA  does  have  a  distinct  odor, 
which is difficult to mask with fragrances.  

  sunless tanning cream application 
 Sunless tanning creams can produce a natural appearing tan if 
artistically applied. One of the problems is that the cream will 
stain everything it touches, including the palms of the hands 
that do not tan with sun exposure. It will also stain hair and 
clothing.  There  are  several  tips  summarized  in   Table  21.1 , 
which can assist in achieving an even application. The key to a 
good result is aggressive exfoliation of the skin with an abra-
sive scrubbing cream. These creams contain particulates, such 
as  polyethylene  beads,  which  mechanically  remove  desqua-
mating corneocytes from the surface. An accumulation of cor-
neocytes will stain the area darker as there is more protein for 
the DHA to glycate. Gloves should be worn during application. 
The cream has to be applied in an even thin layer. Less cream 
should  be  applied  to  areas  where  the  skin  is  hyperkeratotic, 
such as the wrists, back of the neck, ankles, toes, fingers, ante-
cubital fossae, and popliteal fossae. These areas tend to stain 
unnaturally darker. The brown stain will last about two weeks 
until the stained corneocytes have sloughed. 

 A  newer  technique  of  applying  sunless  tanning  cream  is 
known as a spray tan. Spray tans are applied professionally in 
hair salons, nail salons, and artificial UV tanning booths. The 
client is placed in a booth naked surrounded by a curtain and 
the DHA solution is sprayed on the body for a more even appli-
cation.  Petroleum  jelly  is  placed  over  the  easily  overstaining 

areas mentioned above to more closely simulate a natural tan. 
Professional  application  eliminates  the  mess  and  odor  of 
at-home application.   

  summary 
 Sunless  tanning  creams  show  a  safe,  cost-effective,  efficient 
manner to obtain temporary skin darkening. They should not 
be used in place of a sunscreen, however. A natural simulated 
tan  can  be  achieved  by  applying  the  sunless  tanning  cream 
evenly to the desired areas. Care should be taken to apply less 
cream  to  the  easily  staining  areas,  such  as  the  ankles,  knees, 
elbows, and toes. Since a tan remains fashionable in our mod-
ern  millennium  society,  sunless  tanning  creams  should  be 
used to stain the skin rather than risking sun exposure that will 
ultimately result in premature skin aging and skin cancer.   

   references 
    1.       Maibach      HI   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Dihydroxyacetone:  a  sun-tan-simulating 

agent  .   Arch Dermatol     1960  ;   82  :   505  –  7  .    

    2.       Wittgenstein      E   ,     Berry      KH    .    Reaction  of  dihydroxyacetone  (DHA)jwith 
human  skin  callus  and  amino  compounds  .    J  Invest  Dermatol      1961  ;    36  : 
  283  –  6  .    

    3.       Meybeck     A    .   A spectroscopic study of the reaction productsof dihydroxy-

acetone with aminoacids  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1977  ;   28  :   25  –  35  .    

    4.       Wittgenstein      E   ,     Berry      KH    .    Staining  of  skin  with  dihydroxyacetone  . 

   Science     1960  ;   132  :   894  –  5  .    

    5.       Kurz     T    .   Formulating effective self-tanners with DHA  .   Cosmet Toilet     1994  ; 

  109  :   55  –  61  .    

    6.       Maes     DH   ,    Marenus     KD    .   Self-tanning products  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    , 

  eds  .   Cosmetic Dermatology  .   London  :   Martin Dunitz  ,   1994  .    

    7.       Goldman     L   ,    Barkoff     J   ,    Glaney     D    ,   et al  .   The skin coloring agent dihydroxy-

acetone  .   GP     1960  ;   12  :   96  –  8  .    

    8.       Morren     M   ,    Dooms-Goossens     A   ,    Heidbuchel     M    ,   et al  .   Contact allergy to 

dihydroxyacetone  .   Contact Dermatitis     1991  ;   25  :   326  –  7  .    

    9.       Muizzuddin     N   ,    Marenus     KD   ,    Maes     DH    .   UVA and UVB protective effect 
of  melanoids  formed  with  dihydroxyacetone  and  skin  .    San  Francisco  : 
  Poster presentation, AAD meeting  ,   1997  .    

   10.       Johnson      JA   ,     Fusaro      RM    .    Protecton  against  long  ultraviolet  radiation: 
topical  browning  agents  and  a  new  outlook  .    Dermatologica      1987  ;    175  : 
  53  –  7  .     

  suggested reading  
     Chaudhuri     RK   ,    Hwang     C    .   Self-Tanners: formulating with Dihydroxyacetone  . 

  Cosmet Toilet Magazine     2001  ;   116  :   87  –  94  .    

     Gonzalez      AD   ,     Kalafsky      RE    .    Sunless  Tanning  and  Tanning  Accelerators 
(Chapter  29)  .    In  :      Shaath      N    ,    ed  .    Sunscreens  .    3rd  edn  .    Taylor  &  Francis 
Group  ,   2005  :   574  –  99  .    

     Herman     S    .   Non-Enzymatic Browning: Tan Minus Sun  .   GCI  ,   2002  :   22  –  4  .    
     Levy     S    .   Cosmetics that imitate a tan  .   Dermatol Ther     2001  ;   14  :   1  –  5  .    
     Levy     S    .   Skin Care Products: Artificial Tanning  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     A   ,    Maibach   
  HI    ,   eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  .   3rd edn  .   Informa 
Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2009  .    

     Levy     S    .   Tanning Preparations  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   591  –  6  .    
     Whitmore     SE   ,    Morison     WL   ,    Potten     CS   ,    Chadwick     C    .   Tanning salon exposure 

and molecular alterations  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2001  ;   44  :   775  –  9  .         

             22    Cellulite      

   definition 
 Cellulite  is  the  most  common  poorly  understood  aesthetic 
condition affecting women worldwide ( 1 ). This can be verified 
by the many names ascribed to this uneven bumpy skin tex-
ture appearing on the buttock and thighs ( Fig. 22.1 ), including 
adiposis  edematosa,  dermopanniculosis  deformans,  status 
protrusus  cutis,  and  gynoid  lipodystrophy  ( 2 ).  Under  ultra-
sound visualization, cellulite appears as low-density fat herni-
ations  into  the  denser  dermal  tissue  ( 3 ).  There  are  many 
theories purported to describe the pathophysiology of cellu-
lites,  none  can  be  verified  however.  These  theories  include 
dietary influences, genetically determined fat deposition, vas-
cular insufficiency, excess adipose tissue, and chronic inflam-
mation  ( Table  22.1 )  ( 4 ).  Although  there  are  a  variety  of 
treatments for cellulite, none of which can permanently erase 
the unattractive dimpled skin. Yet, a sizeable number of cos-
metic products can be purchased, which promise a smoother 
skin. This chapter is presented largely for informational pur-
poses  to  assist  the  dermatologist  in  discussing  cellulite  with 
patients.    

  dietary influences 
 The theory that diet contributes to the pathophysiology of cel-
lulite  has  been  popularized  by  the  consumer  press.  Articles 
abound stating that a low carbohydrate, low fat, low salt, high 
fiber diet can minimize cellulite. A controlled medical study to 
verify  the  effect  of  diet  on  cellulite  minimization  has  never 
been conducted; however, a low calorie diet, which might be 
low in high calorie carbohydrates and fats, may decrease adi-
pose tissue and improve cellulite ( 5 ). Low salt, high fiber diets 
may indeed decrease extracellular fluid volume thus minimiz-
ing vascular effects. 

 When considering how diet affects the pathophysiology of 
cellulite, it is interesting to look at how cultural eating habits 
may contribute. Cellulite is more commonly seen in Caucasian 
women than Oriental women. It is true that visualization of 
skin  texture  irregularities  is  easier  in  fair  skin,  yet  Oriental 
women seem to demonstrate less cellulite. One theory regard-
ing the pathophysiology of cellulite is the effect of diet on cir-
culating  estrogens.  The  consumption  of  cow’s  milk  in  the 
Orientals is low; however, much of the milk consumed in the 
U.S.A. contains estrogens that enter the milk from the food fed 
to the cows. Another possible explanation is reduced endoge-
nous  estrogen  production  in  Oriental  women  who  consume 
large amounts of fermented soy in the form of tofu or soy nuts. 
Fermented soy is high in phytoestrogens, which may suppress 
adrenal and ovarian estrogen production, which is not the case 
with the estrogens ingested in cow’s milk. 

 Thus, one explanation for cellulite is a poor diet leading to 
the deposition of excess fat, fluid retention, and a high circu-
lating  estrogen  level  ( 6 ).  Another  theory  is  that  cellulite  is 
 present due to predetermined genetic influences.  

150

  genetically determined fat deposition 
 Many  researchers  believe  that  the  pattern  of  adipose  deposit 
that  leads  to  cellulite  is  genetically  determined  ( 7 ).  Thus, 
women  will  age  and  deposit  fat  in  the  same  areas  as  their 
mother  regardless  of  diet  or  estrogen  stimulation  ( 8 ).  This 
may be due to a hormone receptor allele that determines the 
receptor number and sensitivity to estrogen. This may deter-
mine  the  distribution  of  subcutaneous  fat.  Pierard  espoused 
this theory noting that cellulite is not a result of increase body 
mass, but rather can be influenced by the inherited waist-to-
hip ratio ( 9 ).  

  vascular insufficiency 
 One of the most widely held theories about the pathophysiol-
ogy  of  cellulite  is  the  effect  of  vascular  insufficiency.  Smith 
postulates  that  cellulite  is  a  degradation  process  initiated  by 
the deterioration of the dermal vasculature, particularly loss of 
the capillary networks ( 10 ). As a result, excess fluid is retained 
with the dermal and subcutaneous tissues ( 11 ). This loss of the 
capillary  network  is  thought  to  be  due  to  engorged  fat  cells 
clumping together and inhibiting the venous return ( 12 ). 

 After  the  capillary  networks  have  been  damaged,  vascular 
changes begin to occur within the dermis resulting in decreased 
protein  synthesis  and  an  inability  to  repair  tissue  damage. 
Clumps  of  protein  are  deposited  around  the  fatty  deposits 
beneath the skin causing an “orange peel” appearance to the 
skin as it is pinched between the thumb and forefinger. At this 
stage, however, there is no visual evidence of cellulite. 

 The characteristic appearance of cellulite is only seen after 
hard  nodules  composed  of  fat  surrounded  by  hard  reticular 
protein form within the dermis. Ultrasound imaging of skin 
affected by cellulite at this stage reveals thinning of the dermis 
with subcutaneous fat pushing upward, which translates into 
the rumpled skin known as cellulite. 

 Thus, this theory holds that hormonally mediated fat depo-
sition,  fat 
lobule  compression  of  capillary  vasculature, 
decreased  venous  return,  formation  of  clumped  fat  lobules, 
and  deposition  of  protein  substances  around  clumped  fat 
 lobules lead to the appearance of cellulite.  

  excess adipose tissue 
 Some  investigators  have  observed  that  cellulite  is  more  com-
mon in overweight and obese women. This was felt to be due to 
the presence of copious fat lobules within the subcutaneous tis-
sue  encased  in  fibrous  septae  with  dermal  attachments  ( 13 ) 
( Fig. 22.2 ). These fibrous attachments surrounding abundant 
fat lead to the rumpled appearance of the skin characteristic of 
cellulite ( 14 ). Thus, weight loss, which reduces the size of the fat 
lobules and removes the metabolic influences of excess adipos-
ity, improves the appearance of cellulite ( 15 ). Improvement can 
also  be  achieved  with  exercise,  since  improved  muscle  tone 
 creates a better foundation to support the overlying fat.   

CELLULITE

151

 Figure 22.1     The most common location for cellulite is the upper posterior thighs. It may also occur on the upper posterior arms, buttocks, and anterior thighs.    

Table 22.1  Cellulite Pathophysiology Controversy

Cellulite theory

Dietary influences

Pros

Cons

Oriental women who consume phytoestrogens in 

80% of women worldwide exhibit cellulite 

soy exhibit less cellulite

regardless of diet

Genetically determined fat deposition

Daughters of mothers with cellulite are also likely 

Cellulite can be minimized by less body fat, 

Vascular insufficiency

Deterioration of dermal vasculature results in 

Ultrasound imaging of cellulite shows 

to exhibit cellulite

which is self-determined

Excess adipose tissue

Women with more body fat tend to exhibit more 

Weight loss does not eliminate cellulite

increased fluid retention and cellulite  appearance

adipose tissue impinging on dermis, not 
only fluid

Chronic inflammation

Inflammation from collagenase breaks down 

Not all menstruating women exhibit 

dermal collagen allowing for adipose  herniations

cellulite to the same degree

cellulite

Dimpling on surface

Anchor point

Epidermis
Dermis

Swollen
fat lobules

Fibrous
septae

 Figure 22.2     Shrinking of the fibrous septae has been argued to result in the dimpling of the skin characteristic of cellulite.    

Swollen fat layer

Muscle

152

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

  chronic inflammation 
 The final theory espouses that cellulite is an inflammatory pro-
cess resulting in the breakdown of the collagen in the dermis 
providing for the subcutaneous fat herniations seen on ultra-
sound ( Fig. 22.3 ). The onset of cellulite with puberty and men-
struation has caused some researchers to evaluate the hormonal 
changes  necessary  for  sloughing  of  the  endometrium  ( 16 ).  It 
appears that menstruation requires the secretion of metallo-
proteases, (MMP) such as collagenase (collagenase-1, MMP-1) 
and gelatinase (gelatinase A, MMP-2) ( 17 ). The endometrial 
glandular  and  stromal  cells  secrete  these  enzymes  to  allow 
menstrual  bleeding  to  occur.  Collagenases  cleave  the  triple 
helical  domain  of  fibrillar  collagens  at  a  neutral  pH  and  are 
secreted just prior to menstruation. However, the collagenase 
may break down the fibrillar collagens present not only in the 
endometrium but in the dermis also.  

 Furthermore,  gelatinase  B  is  produced  by  stromal  cells  or 
mast cells during the late proliferative endometrial phase and 
just after ovulation. Gelatinase B is associated with an influx of 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes,  macrophages,  and  eosino-
phils, which also contribute to inflammation ( 18 ). A marker 
for this inflammation is the synthesis of dermal glycosamino-
glycans, which enhance water binding further worsening the 
appearance of the cellulite through swelling. The presence of 
these  glycosaminoglycans  has  been  observed  on  ultrasound 
as  low-density  echoes  at  the  lower  dermal/subcutaneous 
junction ( 19 ). 

 The secretion of endometrial collagenase to initiate men-
struation also provides for collagen breakdown in the der-
mis ( 20 ). With repeated cyclic collagenase production, more 
and  more  dermal  collagen  is  destroyed  accounting  for  the 
worsening of cellulite seen with age. Eventually, enough col-
lagen is destroyed to weaken the reticular and papillary der-
mis  and  allow  subcutaneous  fat  to  herniate  between  the 

Collagen

Dimpling

Epidermis
Dermis

 Figure 22.3     Chronic inflammation leading to degrading of collagen is another 
theory proposed for the development of cellulite.    

structural  fibrous  septa  found  in  female  fat.  Obviously,  if 
more subcutaneous fat is present, more pronounced hernia-
tion can occur.  

  cellulite treatments 
 A  variety  of  cellulite  treatments  are  available  for  consumer 
purchase. None of them can completely resolve cellulite, but a 
discussion of the options is useful to better understand how to 
scientifically discuss cellulite with inquiring patients. Presently 
marketed over-the-counter (OTC) treatments include topical 
herbals, wraps, devices, massage, and oral supplements, which 
are discussed next. Surgical and laser interventions are beyond 
the scope of this cosmetic text. 

  Topical Herbals 
 Topical herbals are placed in creams designed to improve the 
appearance  of  cellulite  in  the  OTC  market.  They  can  only 
claim to improve the appearance of cellulite or they would be 
classified as drugs. It is very challenging for any topical agent 
to reach the subcutaneous tissue as it must be both water- and 
fat-soluble to traverse the skin and then affect the adipocyte. 
Herbals  such  as  caffeine,  theophylline,  and  coleus  forskohlii 
are  found  in  moisturizing  cellulite  creams  to  stimulate  the 
breakdown  of  the  lipids  into  triglycerides.  Most  of  these 
creams make claims of skin smoothness and softness based on 
their ability to moisturize the skin, not reduce cellulite.   

   Herbals such as caffeine, theophylline, and coleus 
forskohlii are found in moisturizing cellulite creams. 

  Wraps 
 Wraps are used for cellulite at home, in spas, and in body slim-
ming franchise businesses to reduce the appearance of cellu-
lite.  Cloth  strips  are  impregnated  with  herbal  solutions  and 
wrapped around the legs, buttocks, or any other area exhibit-
ing cellulite. Sometimes the wraps are warmed and sometimes 
the wrap environment is set to a high temperature to encour-
age sweating for “fat detoxification” treatment. Herbs that are 
used in the wraps include gotu kola, Paraguay tea, coleus for-
skohlii, and fennel. Again, it is doubtful that these herbs can 
actually reach the subcutaneous tissue. In some cases, the tight 
wrap may reduce the extracellular fluid in the leg to minimize 
cellulite,  and  weight  loss  may  be  seen  due  to  sweating.  It  is 
doubtful that the wrap has any permanent effect and even spas 
state that weekly sessions are necessary to maintain any result.  

  Devices 
 Several  OTC  devices  have  been  purported  to  improve  the 
appearance of cellulite. These devices usually manipulate the 
skin by suction, rolling, and/or pressure. The suction devices 
draw up the skin and claim to “break up” the cellulite as if the 
lumps  were  due  to  something  that  could  be  crushed.  Some-
times  the  suction  is  combined  with  rolling  and  pressure.  If 
extracellular fluid is present due to poor venous return in the 
legs, removal of this fluid can improve the appearance of cel-
lulite. Support stockings or reclining has much the same effect. 
Of course, the effect is temporary unless something is done to 
prevent fluid reaccumulation. These devices attempt to mimic 
the effect of massage, which is discussed next.  

CELLULITE

  Massage 
 One common method adopted by aestheticians for improving 
cellulite is massage. Deep venous massage can remove extra-
cellular  fluid  and  improve  lymphatic  drainage.  Sometimes 
herbals  that  produce  vasoconstriction,  such  as  wild  horse 
chestnut, is used in the massage cream as “circulation enhanc-
ers” and said to have “venotonic” effects. Massage can be relax-
ing  and  enjoyable,  but  20 mmHg  or  higher  compression 
support stockings produce the same effect.    

   Massage can improve lymphatic drainage and temporarily 
improve the appearance of cellulite. 

  oral supplements 
 The recent market has seen the introduction of oral supple-
ments  for  cellulite,  some  of  which  have  been  challenged  by 
consumer groups for false advertising claims. Cellulite claims 
are  always  very  carefully  worded  so  as  not  to  promise  too 
much. One category of compounds found in oral cellulite sup-
plements are xanthines. Xanthines are found in foods contain-
ing  caffeine,  such  as  coffee,  tea,  and  chocolate.  Xanthines 
inhibit  phosphodiesterase,  which  destroys  cAMP  and  stimu-
lates lipolysis. The lipolysis is thought to decrease cellulite. The 
most effective xanthine is aminophylline, but no reduction in 
cellulite has been noticed in persons taking this drug for respi-
ratory disease. 

 Another  oral  supplement  for  cellulite  contains  bioflavo-
noids, such as proanthocyanidins, which are derived from ber-
ries  and  extensively  studied  in  animals  as  caloric  restriction 
mimetics and as potent antioxidants. In mice, proanthocyani-
dins  have  been  shown  to  reduce  the  breakdown  of  collagen 
and elastin, possibly through modulation of collagenase and 
elastase. This has not been demonstrated in humans.   

   Xanthines and proanthocyanidins are found in some oral 
cellulite supplements. 

  summary 
 The  etiology  of  cellulite  is  still  unknown  and  the  efficacy  of 
cellulite  treatments  is  highly  controversial.  Perhaps  if  the 
pathophysiology  were  understood,  more  effective  treatments 
could be developed. It is most likely that cellulite is due to a 
combination of all the factors discussed including hormones, 
genetics, adipose tissue, microcirculation, and chronic inflam-
mation.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  cellulite  is  a  widespread 
human  condition  more  commonly  observed  in  women  that 

153

worsens  with  advancing  age  and  may  even  represent  part  of 
normal human anatomy. Only prepubertal women are with-
out  cellulite.  Patients  frequently  ask  for  cellulite  treatments 
and it is unfortunate that we have little to offer in dermatology.   

   references 
    1.       Nurnberger     F   ,    Muller     G    .   So-called cellulite: an invented disease  .   J Derma-

tol Surg Oncol     1978  ;   4  :   221  –  9  .    

    2.       Dahl     PR   ,    Salla     MJ   ,    Winkelmann     RK    .   Localized involutional lipoatrophy: a 
clinicopathologic  study  of  16  patients  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol      1996  ;    35  : 
  523  –  8  .    

    3.       Mirrashed     F   ,    Sharp     JC   ,    Krause     V   ,    Morgan     J   ,    Tomanek     B    .   Pilot studyof der-
mal and subcutaneous fat structures by MRI in individuals who differ in 
gender, BMI, and cellulite grading  .   Skin Res Technol     2004  ;   10  :   161  –  8  .    
    4.       Avram     MM    .   Cellulite: a review of its physiology and treatment  .   J Cosmet 

Laser Ther     2004  ;   6  :   181  –  5  .    

    5.       Rawlings      AV    .    Cellulite  and  its  treatment  .    Int  J  Cosmet  Sci      2006  ;    28  : 

  175  –  90  .    

    6.       Draelos      ZD   ,     Marenus      KD    .    Cellulite-etiology  and  purported  treatment  . 

  Dermatol Surg     1997  ;   23  :   1177  –  81  .    

    7.       Scherwitz      C   ,     Braun-Falco      O    .    So-called  cellulite  .    J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol   

  1978  ;   4  :   230  –  4  .    

    8.       Ortonne     JP   ,    Zartarian     M   ,    Verschoore     M   ,    Queille-Roussel     C   ,    Duteil     L    .   Cel-
lulite and skin ageing: is there any interaction?     J Eur Acad Dermatol Vene-
reol     2008  ;   22  :   827  –  34  .    

    9.       Pierard      GE    .    Commentary  on  cellulite:  skin  mechanobiology  and  the 

waist-to-hip ration  .   J Cosmet Dermatitis     2005  ;   4  :   151  –  2  .    

   10.       Smith     WF    .   Cellulite treatments: snake oil or skin science  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1995  ;   110  :   61  –  70  .    

   11.       Curri     SB    .   Cellulite and fatty tissue microcirculation  .   Cosmet Toilet     1993  ; 

  108  :   51  –  8  .    

   12.       Curri     SB   ,    Bombardelli     E    .   Local lipodystrophy and districtual microcircu-

lation  .   Cosmet Toilet     1994  ;   109  :   51  –  65  .    

   13.       Quatresooz     P   ,    Xhauflaire-Uhoda     E   ,    Pierard-Franchimont     C   ,    Pierard     GE    . 
  Cellulite  histopathology  and  related  mechanobiology  .    Int.  J  Cosmet  Sci   
  2006  ;   28  :   207  –  10  .    

   14.       Pierard     GE   ,    Nizet     JL   ,    Pierard-Franchimont     C    .   Cellulite: from standing fat 
herniation to hypodermal stretch marks  .   Am J Dermatolpathol     2000  ;   22  : 
  34  –  7  .    

   15.       Terranova     F   ,    Berardesca     E   ,    Maibach     H    .   Cellulite: nature and aetiopatho-

genesis  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     2006  ;   28  :   157  –  67  .    

   16.       Marbaix     E   ,    Kokorine     I   ,    Henriet     P    ,   et al  .   The expresssion of interstitial col-
lagenase  in  human  endometrium  is  controlled  by  progesterone  and  by 
oestadiol and is related to menstruation  .   Biochem J     1995  ;   305  :   1027  –  30  .    
   17.       Singer     CF   ,    Marbaix     E   ,    Lemoine     P   ,    Courtoy     PJ   ,    Eeckhout     Y    .   Local cytokines 
induce differrential expression of matrix metalloproteinases but not their 
tissue inhibitors in human endometrial fibroblasts  .   Eur J Biochem     1999  ; 
  259  :   40  –  5  .    

   18.       Jeziorska     M   ,    Nagasae     H   ,    Salamonsen     LA   ,    Woolley     DE    .   Immunolocaliza-
tion of the matrix metalloproteinases gelatinase B and stromelysin 1 in 
juman  endometrium  throughout  the  menstrual  cycle  .    J  Reprod  Fertil   
  1996  ;   107  :   43  –  51  .    

   19.       Lotti     T   ,    Ghersetich     MD   ,    Grappone     C   ,    Dini     G    .   Proteoglycans in so-called 

cellulite  .   Int J Dermatol     1990  ;   29  :   272  –  4  .    

   20.       Marbaix     E   ,    Kokorine     I   ,    Donnez     J   ,    Eeckhout     Y   ,    Courtoy     PJ    .   Regulation and 
restricted expression of interstitial collagenase suggest a pivotal role in the 
initiation of menstruation  .   Hum Reprod     1996  ;   11     (Suppl 2)  :   134  –  43  .        

             23  

 Stretch marks      

  Perhaps the biggest challenge for dermatologists is discussing 
the presence of stretch marks with a recently pubertal female. 
It is disappointing for both the patient and her parents to see 
the presence of stretch marks, medically known as striae dis-
tensae, on the breasts, abdomen, hips, and thighs ( 1 ). Stretch 
marks  may  appear  due  to  the  rapid  hormonal  changes  and 
growth  associated  with  puberty,  during  pregnancy,  or  with 
medical  diseases,  such  as  Cushing’s  syndrome.  Under  the 
microscope,  they  appear  as  dermal  atrophy  accompanied  by 
loss of the rete ridges, a finding similar to scar tissue. No cura-
tive  treatment  has  been  developed;  however,  moisturizers, 
massage,  microdermabrasion,  and  laser  resurfacing  may 
improve their appearance.  

   Histologically stretch marks appear as areas of dermal 
atrophy accompanied by loss of the rete ridges, a finding 
similar to scar tissue. 

  causes of stretch marks 
 Stretch  marks  may  occur  during  various  phases  of  life,  but 
may  be  related  to  increased  cortisol  secretion  or  increased 
body mass. The most common cause of stretch marks is preg-
nancy, when the stretch marks are medically known as striae 
gravidarum.  It  is  thought  that  the  rapid  growth  of  the  baby 
may play a role, but not all pregnancies produce stretch marks. 
A  relationship  between  pregnancy,  obesity,  and  increased 
stretch marks has been reported ( 2 ). In obesity, it is thought 
that  the  stretching  of  the  skin  with  weight  gain  causes  the 
scars,  but  stretch  marks  have  also  been  observed  in  persons 
who experience a rapid increase in muscle mass with weight 
lifting ( 3 ). Some medications, such as internal corticosteroids, 
may also produce stretch marks.   

   Increased stretch marks are related to pregnancy and 
obesity. 

  stretch marks: signs and symptoms 
 Stretch  marks  do  not  generally  produce  any  symptoms,  but 
have a characteristic visual appearance no matter when they 
appear  or  what  causes  them.  They  initially  appear  as  raised, 
pink  to  purple  lines  longitudinally  arranged  over  the  abdo-
men, lateral upper thighs, inner arms, or upper breasts. With 
time, the purplish-pink color lightens and they appear as sil-
very lines on the skin, similar to a scar. The purplish-pink scars  
are termed striae rubra, while the silvery lines are termed striae 
alba. Stretch marks can also occur in dark-complected persons 
where they appear as dark brown lines, in which case they are 
termed striae nigra ( 4 ). In short, stretch marks are scars that 
are permanent once formed ( 5 ).  

154

  stretch marks: treatments 
 The  treatment  for  stretch  marks  is  limited  ( 6 ).  The  most 
 invasive  therapies  for  stretch  marks  involve  a  physician-
administered  laser  surgery.  Improvement  in  stretch  marks 
with  laser  therapy  is  accomplished  by  wounding  the  scarred 
skin and hoping that the newly healed skin will have a more 
normal  cosmetically  acceptable  appearance  ( 7 ).  Medical 
reports of Nd:YAG laser ( 8 ), radiofrequency devices ( 9 ), and 
fractional photothermolysis ( 10 , 11 ) have shown some degree 
of stretch mark appearance improvement, but not resolution. 
 The earlier the stretch mark is treated, generally the better 
the result. Red immature stretch marks are more amenable to 
treatment than those that have matured to a silvery white. This 
is because the reddish stretch marks are still healing and the 
healing can be modified by intervention. Sometimes camou-
flage is the best option for treatment to hide the scars ( 12 ). 

 A spa treatment for stretch marks is the use of microderm-
abrasion.  Microdermabrasion  uses  a  spray  head  to  bombard 
the skin with tiny salt, baking soda, or aluminum particles to 
exfoliate the skin and smooth stretch marks possibly encour-
aging  collagen  production  through  mild  wounding.  While 
microdermabrasion can temporarily smooth the skin surface, 
it cannot remove the stretch mark. 

 A variety of products can be purchased over-the-counter for 
improving  the  appearance  of  stretch  marks.  There  are  anec-
dotal stories of cocoa butter, emu oil, vitamin E, onion extract, 
and other oils aiding in the prevention and treatment of stretch 
marks.  The  most  common  dermatologist-recommended 
treatment for scars, such as stretch marks, is massage. Massag-
ing the skin in a circular motion with oil using the fingers to 
reduce  friction  is  helpful  in  stretching  the  skin  collagen  and 
elastin, making it more pliable and more normal appearing.  

   Topical moisturizers for stretch marks contain ingredients 
such as cocoa butter, emu oil, vitamin E, and/or onion extract. 

 The  prevention  of  stretch  marks  is  challenging.  It  appears 
that stretch marks do not occur when the stretching of the skin 
is gradual rather than abrupt. Thus, rapid changes in body size 
should  be  avoided,  if  possible.  Since  stretch  marks  represent 
small scars, the rapid growth of the body can result in more 
stretch marks while slower changes in body size may allow the 
skin to adjust more gradually. Persons with a better skin elas-
ticity and less rigid collagen are less likely to develop stretch 
marks, but it is not possible to modify these skin characteris-
tics at present ( 13 ). The presence of stretch marks during preg-
nancy has been associated with pelvic relaxation resulting in 
prolapse of the pelvic organs with advancing age ( 14 ). Other 
medical associations, outside of endocrinologic disease, have 
not been demonstrated. In summary, stretch marks remain a 
treatment enigma.   

STRETCH MARKS

   references 
    1.       Salter      SA   ,     Kimball      AB    .    Striae  gravidarum  .    Clin  Dermatol      2006  ;    24  : 

  97  –  100  .   

    2.       Thomas      RG   ,     Liston      WA    .    Clinical  associations  of  striae  gravidarum  . 

  J Obstet Gynaecol     2004  ;   24  :   270  –  1  .   

    3.       García  Hidalgo      L    .    Dermatological  complications  of  obesity  .    Am  J  Clin 

Dermatol     2002  ;   3  :   497  –  506  .   

    4.       Piérard-Franchimont     C   ,    Hermanns     JF   ,    Hermanns-Lê     T   ,    Piérard     GE    .   Striae 
distensae in darker skin types: the influence of melanocyte mechanobiol-
ogy  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2005  ;   4  :   174  –  8  .   

    5.       Zheng      P   ,     Lavker      RM   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Anatomy  of  striae  .    Br  J  Dermatol   

  1985  ;   112  :   185  –  93  .   

    6.       Elsaie     ML   ,    Baumann     LS   ,    Elsaaiee     LT    .   Striae distensae (stretch marks) and 
different modalities of therapy: an update  .   Dermatol Surg     2009  ;   35  :   563  –  73  .   
    7.       McDaniel     DH    .   Laser therapy of stretch marks  .   Dermatol Clin     2002  ;   20  : 

  67  –  76  ,   viii  .   

155

    8.       Goldman     A   ,    Rossato     F   ,    Prati     C    .   Stretch marks: treatment using the 1,064-nm 

Nd:YAG laser  .   Dermatol Surg     2008  ;   34  :   686  –  91  ;   discussion 691–2  .   

    9.       Manuskiatti     W   ,    Boonthaweeyuwat     E   ,    Varothai     S    .   Treatment of striae dis-
tensae with a TriPollar radiofrequency device: a pilot study  .   J Dermatolog 
Treat     2009   :   1  –  6  .   

   10.       Bak     H   ,    Kim     BJ   ,    Lee     WJ    ,   et al  .   Treatment of striae distensae with fractional 

photothermolysis  .   Dermatol Surg     2009  ;   35  :   1215  –  20   .   

   11.       Stotland      M   ,     Chapas     AM   ,     Brightman      L    ,    et  al  .    The  safety  and  efficacy  of 
fractional photothermolysis for the correction of striae distensae  .   J Drugs 
Dermatol     2008  ;   7  :   857  –  61  .   

   12.       Tedeschi     A   ,    Dall’Oglio     F   ,    Micali     G   ,    Schwartz     RA   ,    Janniger     CK    .   Corrective 

camouflage in pediatric dermatology  .   Cutis     2007  ;   79  :   110  –  12  .   

   13.       Shuster      S    .    The  cause  of  striae  distensae  .    Acta  Derm  Venereol  Suppl 

(Stockh)     1979  ;   59  :   161  –  9  .   

   14.       Watson     RE    .   Stretching the point: an association between the occurrence 
of striae and pelvic relaxation?     J Invest Dermatol     2006  ;   126  :   1688  –  9  .       

            III    Hair: Introduction      

  Hair is believed to serve no current physiological function in 
humans, but it is of considerable appearance and social con-
cern. Hair washing, grooming, styling, coloring, waving, and 
straightening are the focus of consideration attention requir-
ing  the  dedication  of  considerable  financial  resources.  Both 
men  and  women  desire  a  full  head  of  perfectly  coifed  hair 
complying with all the current fashion ideals. Hair is a nonver-
bal indication of our gender, health, style, and self-obsession. 
A great head of shiny long hair is synonymous with health, as 
hair  is  one  of  the  first  structures  lost  with  illness  or  chemo-
therapy administration. A face full of dirty stringy hair may be 
the first indication of a disturbed youth. A woman who is con-
stantly pulling, primping, and grooming her hair in front of 
every mirror may be the first indication of insecurity or emo-
tional instability. Yes, hair says a lot about who we are and what 
we aspire to be. 

 Hair  is  a  fibrous  protein  structure  that  consists  of  at  least 
three different proteins. The basic structure of the hair arises 
from  a  series  of  six  concentric  rings  in  the  hair  bulb,  which 
arise  from  a  single  stem  cell  group  called  the  matrix  of  the 
hair  bulb.  The  three  major  structures  of  the  hair  relevant  to 
hair  cosmetics  are  the  medulla,  the  cortex,  and  the  cuticle 
( Fig.  III.1 ).  Permanent  hair  dyes,  hair  straightening,  and 
 permanent hair waving affect the medulla and the cortex while 
all hair grooming procedures affect the cuticle. Beautiful hair 
is defined as hair with an intact cuticle, making the cuticle the 
most important structure in hair cosmetics.  

 The  cuticle  provides  strength  to  the  hair  shaft  and  is  lost 
with aggressive grooming and chemical hair processing. Loss 
of the cuticle is inevitable over time and this process is known 
as  weathering.  When  the  cuticle  is  lost,  the  fragile  cortex  is 
exposed. Exposure of the weak cortex leads to splitting of the 
hair, especially at the ends of the hair shaft, which is commonly 
known as a split end. The function of the medulla in the hair is 
unknown and not all hairs possess a medulla. With advancing 
age, the medulla is lost from the hair. 

 Hair grows at varying rates in different regions of the body. 
Scalp  hair  grows  about  0.37 mm  a  day  making  it  the  fastest 
growing hair on the body. In women, hair on the scalp grows 
faster than in men, but men have faster growing body hair. An 
individual hair grows for a period of about three years in the 
anagen  phase  before  entering  the  catagen  phase  and  finally 
falling  out  and  entering  the  telogen  phase  ( Fig.  III.2 ).  The 
length  of  time  the  hair  remains  in  the  growth  phase  deter-
mines how long a person can grow their hair. People who have 
hairs  that  remain  in  anagen  longer  than  five  years  can  grow 
hair below their waist, while people who have hairs that remain 
in anagen only two years can only grow shoulder length hair or 
less.  About  100–150  hairs  a  day  are  shed  asynchronously 
accounting for the replacement of shed hairs in telogen being 
replaced with growing hairs in anagen. Without this cyclic loss 
and regrowth of hair, humans would be bald every three years.  
 This section of the book examines all the cosmetic  procedures 
used  to  modify  the  hair  appearance  according  to  personal 

Opening of
eccrine sweat duct

Hair shaft

Cortex

Medulla

Cuticle

Arrector pili muscle

Eccrine sweat duct

Matrix

Eccrine sweat gland

(A)

(B)

 Figure III.1     ( A ) The layers of the hair shaft. ( B ) The structures of the hair unit.    

156

Apocrine duct

Hair follicle

Apocrine
sweat gland

HAIR: INTRODUCTION

157

ANAGEN

Hair shaft

Fibrous
root sheath

Dermal
papilla

TELOGEN

Club hair

Dermal
papilla

Fibrous
root sheath
streamer

CATAGEN

Hair shaft

Dermal
papilla

 Figure III.2     The hair cycle through anagen (active growth phase), catagen (transitional phase), and telogen (resting phase).    

grooming  desires.  It  explores  shampoos  and  conditioners  to 
maintain  scalp  hygiene  and  beautify  the  hair.  It  examines 
chemical  processing  resulting  in  color  and  shape  changes  to 
the hair shaft. It discusses hair removal techniques and evalu-
ates the use of hair cosmetics in common scalp diseases. Even 

though  the  hair  is  a  useless  nonliving  structure,  patients 
 frequently visit the dermatologist requesting hair care advice. 
It is hoped that this section will provide ideas for dealing with 
the  challenges  posed  by  patients  looking  for  assistance  in 
obtaining that great looking head of hair.    

             24    Shampoos for hair health      

  Shampoo is a specialized cleanser designed to beautify the hair 
and to either treat or prevent scalp disease. While this sounds 
like  a  simple  task,  the  average  woman  has  4  to  8 m 2   of  hair 
surface  area  to  clean  ( 1 ).  Shampoos  are  intended  to  remove 
sebum,  sweat  components,  desquamated  stratum  corneum, 
styling products, and environmental dirt deposited on the hair 
and to maintain scalp health ( 2 ). It is very easy to formulate a 
shampoo  that  will  remove  sebum  and  dirt  to  ensure  scalp 
health, but studies have shown that consumers do not favor a 
shampoo  that  only  cleans  efficiently  without  beautifying  the 
hair. Hair that has been thoroughly cleaned and is devoid of 
sebum is dull in appearance, coarse to touch, subject to static 
electricity,  and  more  difficult  to  style.  Therefore,  consumers 
want a shampoo that cleans the scalp, but also beautifies the 
hair,  which  is  a  formulation  challenge.  This  challenge  is  not 
optimally met by any one shampoo, which has led to the tre-
mendous variety of shampoo formulations on the market for 
various hair types and amounts of sebum production. 

 Shampoo is a relatively new concoction, as the bar soap was 
used  to  clean  the  hair  and  scalp  until  the  middle  1930s.  Bar 
soap  was  an  unsatisfactory  hair  cleanser  since  hard  water  in 
combination with soap formed a nonrinsable scum that dulled 
the hair and irritated the scalp. Early shampoo formulations 
were liquid coconut oil soaps that lathered and rinsed better 
than bar soap, but shampoos really came of age with the devel-
opment  of  synthetic  detergents  ( 3 ).  This  chapter  examines 
shampoos and their appropriateness for the various therapeu-
tic requirements of the dermatologist. 

  formulation 
 Shampoos are a complex formulation containing detergents, 
foaming agents, conditioners, thickeners, opacifiers, softeners, 
sequestering  agents,  fragrances,  preservatives,  and  specialty 
additives  ( 4 ).  These  ingredients  and  their  function  are  sum-
marized in  Table 24.1 . Detergents are the primary sebum and 
dirt  removal  shampoo  components;  however,  excessive 
removal  of  sebum  leaves  the  hair  dull,  susceptible  to  static 
electricity  and  difficult  to  comb.  Furthermore,  consumers 
equate cleansing ability with foaming ability thus demanding 
shampoos  that  produce  abundant,  long-lasting  foam.  Exces-
sive  bubbles  are  not  a  technical  requirement  for  good  hair 
cleansing and bacteria removal, but shampoo manufacturers 
add  increased  amounts  of  detergents,  in  addition  to  foam 
boosters, to obtain the foam that consumers desire ( Fig. 24.1 ). 
This increased concentration of detergent creates the need for 
conditioners and other additives in shampoos to improve their 
cosmetic acceptability.    

   Shampoos are a complex formulation which contain 
detergents, foaming agents, conditioners, thickeners, 
opacifiers, softeners, sequestering agents, fragrances, 
preservatives, and specialty additives. 

158

 Our  discussion  now  turns  to  an  evaluation  of  each  of  the 
shampoo ingredients to better understand how shampoos can 
be formulated to assist in the maintenance of scalp health and 
the improvement of scalp disease. 

  Shampoo Detergents 
 Shampoos  function  by  employing  detergents,  also  known  as 
surfactants,  which  are  able  to  bind  both  oil-soluble  dirt  and 
water. The oil-soluble dirt binds to the detergent that is then 
washed down the drain with water. Cleansing occurs when the 
oil-soluble,  or  lipophilic,  sebum  and  oily  hair  care  products 
bind to the detergent while the water soluble, or hydrophilic, 
styling  products  and  environmental  dirt  are  removed  during 
the rinse phase along with the emulsified oils. Thus, detergents 
are amphiphilic substances that can emulsify oils into water ( 5 ). 
A tremendous variety in detergents is available to the cosmetic 
chemist formulating a shampoo ( Table 24.2 ), including those 
listed in  Table 24.3  ( 6 ), which are the most common detergents 
in use today.    

   Shampoo detergents can be chemically characterized as 
anionics, cationics, amphoterics, nonionics, and natural 
surfactants. 

 Shampoo  detergents  can  be  chemically  characterized  as 
anionics,  cationics,  amphoterics,  nonionics,  and  natural  sur-
factants ( Table 24.4 ). Anionic detergents are named for their 
negatively  charged  hydrophilic  polar  group.  The  commonly 
used anionics are fatty alcohols that clean well, but may leave 
the  hair  harsh  ( 7 ).  There  are  several  detergents  contained 
within the anionic group: 

1.     Lauryl  sulfates  (sodium  lauryl  sulfate,  triethanol-
amine lauryl sulfate, ammonium lauryl sulfate) are 
found  in  most  shampoos  as  the  main  surfactant 
since  they  work  well  in  both  hard  and  soft  water, 
produce  rich  foam,  and  are  easy  to  remove.  This 
group  produces  good  cleansing  but  is  hard  on  the 
hair.  

2.    Laureth sulfates (sodium laureth sulfate, triethanol-
amine  laureth  sulfate,  ammonium  laureth  sulfate) 
produce  rich  foam,  provide  good  cleansing,  and 
leave hair in good condition. They also are a com-
mon main surfactant.  

3.    Sarcosines  (lauryl  sarcosine,  sodium  lauryl  sar-
cosinate)  are  poor  cleansers  but  are  excellent 
 conditioners.  This  group  is  commonly  used  as  a 
 secondary surfactant.  

4.    Sulfosuccinates (disodium oleamine sulfosuccinate, 
sodium  dioctyl  sulfosuccinate)  are  strong  degreas-
ers and commonly used as a secondary surfactant in 
oily hair shampoos.    

SHAMPOOS FOR HAIR HEALTH

Table 24.1  Basic Shampoo Ingredient Formulation and 
Function

Ingredient 
 formulation

Detergents

Function

Remove environment dirt, styling 

products, sebum, and skin scale from 
the hair and scalp

Foaming agents

Allow the shampoo to suds, since 

Conditioners

Thickeners

Opacifiers

Sequestering agents

consumers equate cleansing with 
foaming even though the two are 
unrelated

Leave the hair soft and smooth after 
sebum removal by the detergent

Thicken the shampoo, since consumers 
feel that a thick shampoo works better 
than a thin shampoo

Make a shampoo opaque as opposed to 
translucent for aesthetic purposes, 
unrelated to cleansing

Prevent soap scum from forming on the 
hair and scalp in the presence of hard 
water. The basic difference between a 
liquid shampoo and a bar cleanser

Fragrances

Give the shampoo a consumer acceptable 

Preservatives

Specialty additives

smell

Prevent microbial and fungal contamina-
tion of the shampoo before and after 
opening

Treatment ingredients or marketing aids 
added to impart other benefits to the 
shampoo besides hair and scalp 
cleansing

Table 24.2  Shampoo Detergents by Chemical Category

159

  1.  Alkyl sulfates
  2.  Alkyl ether sulfates
  3.  Alpha-olefin sulfonates
  4.  Paraffin sulfonates
  5.  Isethionates
  6.  Sarcosinates
  7.  Taurides
  8.  Acyl lactylates
  9.  Sulfosuccinates
10.  Carboxylates
11.  Protein condensates
12.  Betaines
13.  Glycinates
14.  Amine oxides

Table 24.3  The Most Common Shampoo Detergents

1.  Sodium laureth sulfate
2.  Sodium lauryl sulfate
3.  TEA lauryl sulfate
4.  Ammonium laureth sulfate
5.  Ammonium lauryl sulfate
6.  DEA lauryl sulfate
7.  Sodium olefin sulfonate

Table 24.4  Shampoo Detergent Characteristics

Surfactant 
type

Anionics

Cationics

Nonionics

Chemical class

Characteristics

Lauryl sulfates, laureth 
sulfates, sarcosines, 
sulfosuccinates
Long chain amino 

esters, ammonioesters

Polyoxyethylene fatty 
alcohols, polyoxyeth-
ylene sorbitol esters, 
alkanolamides

Deep cleansing, may 
leave hair harsh

Poor cleansing, poor 

lather, impart softness 
and manageability

Mildest cleansing, 

impart manageability

Amphoterics Betaines, sultaines, 

Nonirritating to eyes, 

imidazolinium 
derivatives

Natural 

surfactants

Sarsaparilla, soapwort, 
soap bark, ivy, agave

mild cleansing, impart 
manageability

Poor cleansing, excellent 

lather

 Figure 24.1     Abundant foam is not necessary for good hair cleansing, but is a 
consumer requirement.    

 The  cationic  detergents  are  named  for  their  positively 
charged polar group. They are relatively poor detergents and 
do not lather well, but their unpopularity is largely due to their 
incompatibility  with  other  anionic  surfactants.  Some  sham-
poos  designed  for  dyed  or  bleached  hair  use  cationic  deter-
gents,  as  they  are  excellent  at  imparting  softness  and 
manageability  ( 1 ).  

   Shampoos designed for dyed or bleached hair use cationic 
detergents because they impart hair softness and manage-
ability. 

 The nonionic detergents are the second most popular and 
have no polar group. These are the mildest of all surfactants 
and are used in combination with ionic surfactants as a sec-
ondary  cleanser  ( 8 ).  Examples  include  polyoxyethylene  fatty 
alcohols, polyoxyethylene sorbitol esters, and alkanolamides. 

160

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 The  amphoteric  detergents  contain  both  an  anionic  and  a 
cationic group such that they behave as cationics at lower pH 
values and anionics at higher pH values. The detergents that 
fall within this group are the betaines, sultaines. and imidazo-
linium derivatives. Ingredients such as cocamidopropyl beta-
ine  and  sodium  lauraminopropionate  can  be  found  in  baby 
shampoos since they are nonirritating to the eyes. These sur-
factants foam moderately well and leave the hair manageable, 
making  them  a  good  choice  for  chemically  treated  and  fine 
hair. 

 The last group of detergents is the natural surfactants, such 
as sarsaparilla, soapwort, soap bark, and ivy agave. These natu-
ral saponins have excellent lathering capabilities, but are poor 
cleansers, thus must be present at high concentration. Usually, 
they are combined with the other synthetic detergents  outlined  
above ( 5 ).  

  Foaming Agents 
 Foaming agents in shampoos introduce gas bubbles into the 
water.  Many  consumers  believe  that  shampoos  that  generate 
copious foam are better cleansers than poorly foaming sham-
poos. This is not true. As the shampoo removes sebum from 
the  hair,  the  amount  of  foam  will  decrease  because  sebum 
inhibits  bubble  formation.  This  accounts  for  the  increased 
foam seen on the second shampooing, when the majority of 
the sebum has been removed.   

   As the shampoo removes sebum from the hair, the amount 
of foam will decrease because sebum inhibits bubble 
formation. 

  Thickeners and Opacifiers 
 Thickeners and opacifiers have no part in hair cleansing; they 
simply  make  the  product  more  appealing  to  the  consumer. 
Many people incorrectly believe that a thick shampoo is more 
concentrated  than  a  thin  shampoo;  others  want  a  shampoo 
that appears opaque or pearlescent.  

  Conditioners 
 Conditioners impart manageability, gloss, and antistatic prop-
erties to the hair. They are found in most shampoos for dry, 
damaged, or treated hair. These are usually fatty alcohols, fatty 
esters, vegetable oils, mineral oils, or humectants. Many condi-
tioners are used in dry hair shampoos, including hydrolyzed 
animal protein, glycerin, dimethicone, simethicone, polyvinyl-
pyrrolidone, propylene glycol, and stearalkonium chloride ( 9 ). 
Other protein sources, such as lanolin, beer and egg yolk, con-
taining lecithin and cholesterol, are also used in dry hair sham-
poos  that  claim  to  be  “natural.”  Of  all  these  conditioners, 
hydrolyzed animal protein is probably the best for extremely 
dry  hair  since  it  has  some  substantivity  for  keratin  and  can 
mend split ends (trichoptilosis) ( 10 ).  

  Sequestering Agents 
 Sequestering agents make shampoos function better than bar 
soaps in cleansing the hair. They chelate magnesium and cal-
cium  ions  so  that  other  salts  or  insoluble  soaps  known  as 
“scum”  are  not  formed.  Without  sequestering  agents,  sham-
poos would leave a film on the hair rendering it dull. For this 

 Figure  24.2     High  pH  results  in  cuticle  swelling  and  excessive  hair  damage, 
thus most shampoos are formulated at a slightly acidic pH.    

reason,  patients  should  be  encouraged  to  use  shampoo  and 
not  bar  soap  when  cleansing  the  hair.  In  areas  of  extremely 
hard  water,  the  film  that  remains  may  contribute  to  scalp 
 pruritus.   

   Sequestering agents are the major difference between a 
shampoo and a bar soap, and function to prevent soap 
scum from adhering to the hair shafts. 

  pH Adjusters 
 Some  shampoos  contain  ingredients  designed  to  alter  pH 
allowing the marketing claim of “pH balanced.” Most sham-
poos are alkaline, which can swell the hair shaft and render it 
more  susceptible  to  damage.  This  is  not  a  problem  for 
patients  with  healthy,  nonporous  hair  containing  an  intact 
cuticle.  Patients  with  damaged  or  chemically  treated  hair 
with a fragmented cuticle may wish to avoid hair swelling by 
selecting a shampoo that has an acid added to balance the pH 
( Fig. 24.2 ).   

  Specialty Additives 
 The key differences between similar purpose shampoos manu-
factured by various personal care product companies are the 
fragrance and special care additives. Additives such as wheat 
germ  oil  (containing  vitamin  E)  and  panthenol  (a  form  of 
vitamin  B)  are  added  mainly  for  marketing  reasons  but  are 
thought to leave hair more silky and manageable. Other pro-
ducers add fatty substances such as plant extracts or mink oil. 
Proteins such as ribonucleic acid, collagen, and placenta may 
be  added  to  act  somewhat  as  conditioners.  Some  shampoos 
now include a chemical sunscreen.   

  types of shampoo 
 Shampoos have been formulated in liquids, gels, creams, aero-
sols, and powders. Only the liquids will be discussed, as these 
are  the  most  popular. A  number  of  different  types  of  sham-
poos are also available: basic shampoos (normal, dry, oily, and 
chemically  treated  hair  shampoos),  baby  shampoos,  condi-
tioning  shampoos,  medicated  shampoos,  and  professional 
shampoos. 

SHAMPOOS FOR HAIR HEALTH

  Basic Shampoos 
 Basic  shampoos  may  be  selected  from  several  formulations 
depending  on  the  amount  of  scalp  sebum  production,  hair 
shaft  diameter,  and  hair  shaft  condition.  The  label  usually 
defines  the  intended  consumer  by  stating  normal  hair,  oily 
hair, dry hair or damaged, colored-treated hair. Some compa-
nies alter the concentrations of detergents and conditioners to 
make the different formulations, so the ingredient lists may be 
identical for all formulations. Other product lines have differ-
ent formulations for each type. 

 Normal hair shampoos use lauryl sulfate detergents, giving 
them  good  cleansing  and  minimal  conditioning  characteris-
tics. These products work well for adults with moderate sebum 
production  and  coarse  hair;  however,  they  do  not  work  well 
for persons with fine, unmanageable hair. 

 Oily  hair  shampoos  have  excellent  cleansing  and  minimal 
conditioning properties. They may use lauryl sulfate or sulfos-
uccinate detergents and are intended for adolescents with oily 
hair  or  persons  who  have  extremely  dirty  hair.  They  can  be 
drying  to  the  hair  shaft  if  used  daily.  Following  an  oily  hair 
shampoo with a heavy conditioner is self-defeating. 

 Dry hair shampoos provide mild cleansing and good con-
ditioning.  Some  companies  recommend  the  same  product 
for dry hair and damaged hair. These products are excellent 
for  mature  persons  and  those  who  wish  to  shampoo  daily. 
They reduce static electricity and increase manageability in 
fine hair; however, some products provide too much condi-
tioning,  which  may  result  in  limp  hair.  Dry  hair  shampoos 
may also cleanse so poorly that the conditioner can build up 
on  the  hair  shaft.  This  condition  has  been  labeled  as  the 
“greasies”  in  popular  advertising  and  may  account  for  the 
observation that hair sometimes has more body after using a 
different shampoo.  

   Dry hair shampoos provide mild cleansing and good 
conditioning to prevent further drying of the hair. 

 Damaged hair shampoos are intended for hair that has been 
chemically treated with permanent hair colors, hair bleaching 
agents,  permanent  waving  solutions,  or  hair  straighteners. 
Hair can also be damaged physically by overcleansing, exces-
sive  use  of  heated  styling  devices,  and  vigorous  brushing  or 
combing.  Longer  hair  is  more  likely  to  be  damaged  than 
shorter  hair  since  it  undergoes  a  natural  process  known  as 
“weathering,”  whereby  the  cuticular  scales  are  decreased  in 
number from the proximal to distal hair shaft ( Fig. 24.3 ). As 
mentioned previously, damaged hair shampoos may be identi-
cal to dry hair shampoos or may contain mild detergents and 
increased  conditioners.  Hydrolyzed  animal  protein  is  the 
superior conditioner for damaged hair since it can minimally 
penetrate the shaft and temporarily plugging surface defects, 
resulting  in  hair  with  a  smoother  feel  and  more  shine.  It  is 
important that the protein is hydrolyzed: larger protein mole-
cules cannot penetrate the hair shaft.    

   Weathering is the loss of cuticular scale from the shaft due 
to trauma from combing, brushing, wind, etc. 

161

 Figure 24.3     Weathering of the hair shaft as evidenced by an uplifted cuticle 
leads to the feel and appearance of damaged hair.    

  Baby Shampoos 
 Baby  shampoos  are  nonirritating  to  the  eyes  and  designed  as 
mild cleansing agents since babies produce limited sebum. These 
shampoos  use  detergents  from  the  amphoteric  group  ( 11 ). 
Baby shampoos are also appropriate for mature hair and for 
individuals who wish to shampoo daily.   

   Baby shampoos are nonirritating to the eyes due to their 
anesthetic effect. 

  Conditioning Shampoos 
 Conditioning  shampoos  may  be  labeled  as  such  or  may  be 
labeled as shampoos for dry or damaged hair. These products 
may actually be self-defeating since the shampoo is intended 
to remove sebum, the body’s natural conditioner, and replace 
it  with  a  synthetic  conditioner,  which  consumers  somehow 
interpret as cleaner. As a consequence, conditioning shampoos 
neither clean nor condition well ( 12 ). Detergents used in con-
ditioning shampoos are generally amphoterics and anionics of 
the sulfosuccinate type. These products are sometimes known 
as one-step shampoos, since a conditioner need not be applied 
following shampooing. Patients should not use a conditioning 
shampoo  prior  to  permanent  dyeing  or  permanent  waving 
because maximum color uptake or curling may be inhibited.  

  Medicated Shampoos 
 Medicated shampoos, also known as dandruff shampoos, con-
tain additives such as tar derivatives, salicylic acid, sulfur, sele-
complex, 
nium  disulfide,  polyvinylpyrrolidone-iodine 
chlorinated phenols, or zinc pyrithione ( 13 ). Medicated sham-
poos  have  several  functions:  to  remove  sebum  efficiently,  to 
remove scalp scale, to decrease scalp scale production, and to 
act as an antibacterial/antifungal. The shampoo base removes 
sebum  while  mechanical  scrubbing  removes  scalp  scale.  Tar 
derivatives  are  commonly  used  as  anti-inflammatory  agents. 
Sulfur and zinc pyrithione are used for their antibacterial/anti-
fungal qualities. Menthol is added to some shampoos to pro-
duce  a  tingling  sensation  some  patients  find  aesthetically 
pleasing ( Fig. 24.4 ).   

162

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

of  dimethicone  on  the  hair  and  scalp.  Dimethicone  will  not 
leave the scalp or hair feeling greasy and also will not support 
the growth of bacteria or malassezia organisms. The shampoo 
should be followed by a dimethicone-containing instant con-
ditioner, which is applied in the shower and rinsed again with 
cool  water.  Finally,  a  leave-in  conditioner  should  be  applied 
again  with  dimethicone  and  massaged  into  the  scalp.  The 
leave-in conditioner remains on the scalp as a moisturizer and 
is not rinsed. The next chapter provides more information on 
conditioners.  

  shampoos for thinning hair 
 There are a variety of scalp conditions that can be character-
ized as thinning hair. They include lichen planopilaris, alope-
cia  areata,  and  androgenetic  alopecia.  No  matter  what  the 
cause of hair thinning, the shampoo recommendations are the 
same. Most people with thin hair like to maximize the appear-
ance of the hair remaining by grooming it to stand away from 
the scalp as much as possible, since the appearance of full hair 
is measured by the distance the hair protrudes above the scalp. 
Aggressive shampooing that removes all of the sebum from the 
hair  shafts  and  slightly  damages  the  cuticle  will  produce  the 
“fluffiest” hair because the hair will be more subject to static 
electricity and friction effects. While this is the appearance of 
damaged hair, it is felt to be desirable by those with thinning, 
which  is  somewhat  of  a  contradiction.  Healthy  hair  lays  flat 
and  smooth  on  the  scalp  while  damaged  hair  is  frizzy  and 
unmanageable. 

 Shampoos for persons with hair loss should be selected from 
those  labeled  for  fine  hair.  Fine  hair  shampoos  do  not  have 
heavy conditioning agents that can make the hair heavy and 
limp. They clean away the sebum modestly, but do not deposit 
much conditioner on the hair. Baby shampoo is also an excel-
lent selection in persons with thinning hair who are on a lim-
ited budget.  

  shampoos for seborrheic dermatitis 
 Seborrheic dermatitis is a shampoo challenge! The ideal sham-
poo  will  contain  salicylic  acid,  tar,  and  zinc  pyrithione.  This 
will  provide  excellent  control  of  the  condition  because  the 
salicylic acid will remove the scalp skin scale, the tar will func-
tion as an anti-inflammatory, and the zinc pyrithione will keep 
the fungal organisms at bay addressing all three causative fac-
tors. This combination is not possible because dandruff sham-
poos  are  considered  OTC  drugs  and  only  one  active  agent 
from the monograph can be placed in a shampoo. It is for this 
reason that the best control of seborrheic dermatitis is achieved 
by  rotating  shampoos.  Salicylic  acid  is  excellent  at  removing 
scalp scale, but it can also remove the hair shaft cuticle result-
ing  in  harsh  feeling  hair.  Every  third  shampoo  exposure  to 
salicylic  acid  limits  this  damage.  Tar  is  a  good  anti- 
inflammatory, but it can stain light colored hair if it has not 
been  purified  to  remove  the  creosote.  Many  believe  that  the 
creosote  is  the  key  natural  anti-inflammatory,  but  it  will 
change white or silver hair to a yellowish-brown color that is 
not easily removed. Using purified tar is best and also reduces 
the topical carcinogen exposure. Finally, zinc pyrithione is an 
excellent anti- fungal, but it must be left behind on the scalp to 
be  effective.  The  newer  zinc  pyrithione  shampoos  contain  a 
smaller  particle  size  material  that  can  deposit  on  the  scalp 

 Figure 24.4     Dandruff shampoos are designed to remove skin scale from the 
scalp and hair.    

  Professional Shampoos 
 There are two types of professional shampoos: those intended 
for hair washing prior to cutting or styling and those intended 
to  precede  or  follow  a  chemical  process.  Professional  sham-
poos for hair washing are of the same formulation as the over-
the-counter varieties except that they are more concentrated 
and must be diluted 8 to 10 times before to use. Special anionic, 
acidic professional shampoos are used after bleaching to neu-
tralize residual alkalinity and prepare the hair for subsequent 
dyeing. Acidic, cationic shampoos are used after dyeing to act 
as  a  neutralizing  rinse. A  subset  of  these  shampoos  includes 
those designed to maintain the color of bleached or dyed hair. 
These shampoos are only available to licensed cosmetologists. 
 Our attention now turns to shampoos for scalp conditions 
that require both medical and cosmetic treatment. These con-
ditions  include  dry  postmenopausal  scalp,  thinning  hair, 
 seborrheic dermatitis, and scalp psoriasis.   

  shampoos for dry postmenopausal scalp 
 Dry postmenopausal scalp is a challenging condition for the 
dermatologist  to  treat.  Postmenopausal  women  will  note 
extreme itching, stinging, and burning of the scalp, but there is 
little to see on physical examination except a few powdery dry 
flakes on the scalp and perhaps a few excoriations. The thick 
silvery scales of scalp psoriasis and the yellow sticky scales of 
seborrheic dermatitis are absent. At first glance, the clinician 
might be tempted to wonder if the scalp symptoms are either 
nonexistent  or  a  sign  of  depression.  They  are  neither.  Dry 
postmenopausal  scalp,  a  descriptive  term  for  the  condition 
that will not be found as a scalp dermatosis in a dermatology 
textbook, really relates all about this condition. It is found in 
postmenopausal  women  who  usually  have  accompanying 
body eczema. It can be best described as scalp eczema where 
the  lack  sebum  production  results  in  the  powdery  dry  scale 
and the clinical symptoms of barrier disruption. 

 The problem in postmenopausal dry scalp is underproduc-
tion of sebum and overlying aggressive removal of sebum. The 
best solution is to recommend a 2-in-1 shampoo for dry hair 
containing  dimethicone,  and  cool  water  when  shampooing 
and  rinsing  to  minimize  further  scalp  dryness.  The  2-in-1 
shampoo will remove less sebum and leave behind a thin film 

SHAMPOOS FOR HAIR HEALTH

 during  the  rinse  phase  of  shampooing.  In  addition,  zinc 
 pyrithione-containing  conditioners  can  increase  the  deposi-
tion. Since recolonization with malassezia occurs very rapidly 
in seborrheic dermatitis patients, the ability of the zinc pyri-
thione to prevent the release of free fatty acids by the malas-
sezia can result in better symptom control.  

  shampoos for scalp psoriasis 
 There is no doubt that the most challenging scalp condition to 
treat with shampoos is psoriasis. The thick, silvery scale resists 
detergent  breakdown  and  removal.  Salicylic  acid  is  best  at 
removing the scale, but it only works in an oily environment 
making it less effective in persons with thick dry scalp scale. In 
these  patients,  it  is  best  to  first  soften  the  scale  with  an  oily 
substance, such as mineral oil or peanut oil, for one hour prior 
to shampooing with a salicylic acid shampoo. The oil softens 
the scale and enhances the ability of the salicylic acid to dis-
solve  the  clumped  corneocytes.  Many  psoriasis  sufferers 
aggressively  scrub  their  scalp  to  remove  the  scale,  but  this 
should be avoided as the scalp is subject to the Koebner effect 
and  damage  to  the  scalp  can  result  in  worsening  psoriasis. 
Gentle rubbing with the fingertips and fingernails is best since 
the amount of pressure exerted is felt. Scalp brushes and other 
implements should be avoided.  

  shampoos and contact dermatitis 
 Shampoos  do  not  represent  a  common  cause  of  cutaneous 
irritant  or  allergic  contact  dermatitis  due  to  their  relatively 
brief contact with the skin prior to rinsing. Eye irritation, how-
ever, can be a problem which some shampoos overcome with 
the addition of imidazoline-type amphoteric surfactants, suc-
cinic ester sulfonates, silicone glycols, and fatty acid–peptide 
condensates   ( 3 ).  Ingredients  in  shampoos  that  are  possible 
sensitizers include formalin, parabens, hexachlorophene, and 
miranols ( 14 ).  

   Ingredients in shampoos that are possible sensitizers 
include formalin, parabens, hexachlorophene, and 
miranols. 

 Shampoos should be diluted to form a 1–2% aqueous solu-
tion  for  closed  patch  testing  and  a  5%  aqueous  solution  for 
open  patch  testing.  However,  it  should  be  recognized  that 
false-positive reactions due to irritation may still occur. A bet-
ter  assessment  may  be  obtained  by  patch  testing  individual 
ingredients separately ( 15 ).   

   references 
    1.       Bouillon     C    .   Shampoos and hair conditioners  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   83  –  92  .    
    2.       Robbins      CR    .    Interaction   of  shampoo  and  creme  rinse  ingredients  with 
human hair  .   In  :   Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair  ,   2nd edn  . 
  New York  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1988  :   122  –  67  .    

    3.       Markland      WR    .    Shampoos  .    In  :      deNavarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  Chemistry  and 
Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Vol. 4  .   2nd edn  .   Wheaton IL  :   Allured Publish-
ing Corporation  ,   1988  :   1283  –  312  .    

163

    4.       Fox     C    .   An introduction to the formulation of shampoos  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1988  ;   103  :   25  –  58  .    

    5.       Zviak     C   ,    Vanlerberghe     G    .   Scalp and hair hygiene  .   In  :     Zviak     C    ,   ed  .   The Sci-

ence of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1986  :   49  –  86  .    

    6.       Shipp     JJ    .   Hair-care products  .   In  :     Williams     DF   ,    Schmitt     WH    ,   eds  .   Chemis-
try  and  Technology  of  the  Cosmetics  and  Toiletries  Industry  .    London  : 
  Blackie Academic & Professional  ,   1992  :   32  –  54  .    

    7.       Tokiwa      F   ,     Hayashi      S   ,     Okumura      T    .    Hair  and  surfactants  .    In  :      Kobori      T   , 
    Montagna     W    ,   eds  .   Biology and Disease of the Hair  .   Baltimore  :   University 
Park Press  ,   1975  :   631  –  40  .    

    8.       Powers     DH    .   Shampoos  .   In  :     Balsam     MS   ,    Gershon     SD   ,    Reiger     MM   ,    Sagarin   
  E   ,    Strianse     SJ    ,   eds  .   Cosmetics Science and Technology  .   2nd edn  .   New York  : 
  Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   73  –  116  .    

    9.       Harusawa     F   ,    Nakama     Y   ,    Tanaka     M    .   Anionic-cationic ion-pairs as condi-

tioning agents in shampoos  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   35  –  9  .    

   10.       Karjala      SA   ,     Williamson      JE   ,     Karler      A    .    Studies  on  the  substantivity  of 
 collagen-derived peptides to human hair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1966  ;   17  : 
  513  –  24  .    

   11.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  .    New  York  :    Chemical 

Publishing  ,   1982  :   457  –  8  .    

   12.       Hunting     ALL    .   Can there be cleaning and conditioning in the same prod-

uct?     Cosmet Toilet     1988  ;   103  :   73  –  8  .    

   13.       Spoor     HJ    .   Shampoos  .   Cutis     1973  ;   12  :   671  –  2  .    
   14.       Bergfeld     WF    .   The side effects of hair products on the scalp and hair  .   In  : 
    Orfanos      CE   ,     Montagna      W   ,     Stuttgen      G    ,    eds  .    Hair  Research  .    New  York  : 
  Springer-Verlag  ,   1981  :   507  –  11  .    

   15.       De Groot     AC   ,    Weyland     JW   ,    Nater     JP    .   Unwanted effects of cosmetics and 

drugs used in dermatology  .   Amsterdam  :   Elsevier , 1994:  473  –  6  .     

  suggested reading 
      Andrasko      J   ,     Stocklassa      B    .    Shampoo  residue  profiles  in  human  head  hair  . 

  J Forensic Sci     1990  ;   35  :   569  –  79  .    

     Beauquey     B    .   Scalp and hair hygiene: shampoos (Chapter 3)  .   In  :     Bouillon     C   , 
   Wilkinson     J    .   The science of hair care  .   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group  , 
  2005  :   83  –  127  .    

     Bolduc     C   ,    Shapiro     J    .   Hair care products: waving, straightening, conditioning, 

and coloring  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   431  –  6  .    

     Bulmer     AC   ,    Bulmer     GS    .   The antifungal action of dandruff shampoos  .   Myco-

pathologia     1999  ;   147  :   63  –  5  .    

     Draelos     ZD    .   The biology of hair care  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   651  –  8  .    
     Draelos     ZK    .   Hair cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   19  –  27  .    
     Draelos      ZD   ,     Kenneally      DC   ,     Hodges      LT    ,      .    A  comparison  of  hair  quality  and 
cosmetic  acceptance  following  the  use  of  two  ant-dandruff  shampoos  .  
 J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc     2005  ;   10  :   201  –  4  .    

     Garlen     D    .   Shampoos (Chapter 29)  .   In  :     Rieger     MM    ,   ed  .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  . 

  8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  :   601  –  34  .    

     Gray     J    .   Hair care and hair care products  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   227  –  36  .    
     Hossel     P   ,    Dieing     R   ,    Norenberg     R   ,    Pfau     A   ,    Sander     R    .   Conditioning polymers in 
today’s shampoo formulations-efficacy, mechanism and test methods  .   Int 
J Cosmet Sci     2000  ;   22  :   1  –  10  .    

     Nagahara      Y   ,     Nishida      Y   ,     Isoda      M    ,      .    Structure  and  performance  of  cationic 
assembly dispersed in amphoteric surfactants solution as a shampoo for 
hair damaged by coloring  .   J Oleo Sci     2007  ;   56  :   289  –  95  .    

     Rushton     H   ,    Gummer     CL   ,    Flasch     H    .   2-in-1 shampoo technology: state-of-the-
art shampoo and conditioner in one  .   Skin Pharmacol     1994  ;   7  :   78  –  83  .    
     Warner     RR   ,    Schwartz     JR   ,    Boissy     Y   ,    Dawson     T    .   Jr. Dandruff has an altered stra-
tum corneum ultrastructure that is improved with zinc pyrithione sham-
poo  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2001  ;   45  :   897  –  903  .    

     Wolf      R   ,     Wolf      D   ,     Tuzun      B   ,     Tuzun     Y    .    Soaps,  shampoos,  and  detergents  .    Clin 

Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   393  –  7  .    

     Wong     M    .   Cleansing of hair (Chapter 3)  .   In  :     Johnson     DH    ,   ed  .   Hair and hair 

care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1997  :   33  –  64  .    

     Wong     M    .   Multifunctional shampoo: the two-in-one (Chapter 4)  .   In  :     Schueller     R   , 
   Romanowski     P    ,   eds  .   Multifunctional cosmetics  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   2003  : 
  64  –  81  .         

             25    Hair conditioners      

  The  need  for  hair  conditioners  arose  following  the  develop-
ment of shampoos with extremely good detergent action ( 1 ). 
These new shampoos cleaned too well: they removed sebum 
from the hair shaft so thoroughly that the hair became unman-
ageable, dull, and harsh to touch. The role of a conditioner is 
to mimic sebum in making the hair manageable, glossy, and 
soft.  Conditioners  also  attempt  to  recondition  hair  that  has 
been  damaged  by  chemical  or  mechanical  trauma  ( 2 ). 
 Common  sources  of  trauma  include  excessive  brushing,  hot 
blow-drying, detergent shampoos, alkaline permanent waves, 
bleaching, etc. Obviously, since hair is a nonliving tissue, any 
reconditioning that occurs is minimal and temporary until the 
next shampooing. 

 Hair  conditioners  were  developed  during  the  early  1930s 
when  self-emulsifying  waxes  became  available.  These  waxes 
were combined with protein hydrolysates, polyunsaturates, and 
silicones  to  give  the  hair  an  improved  feel  and  texture.  Early 
sources  of  the  proteins  included  gelatin,  milk,  and  eggs  ( 3 ). 
The  discovery  of  silicone  and  its  adaptation  to  the  hair  care 
industry  has  revolutionized  hair  conditioners.  Silicone  is 
found in hair conditioners in several different forms including 
dimethicone,  cyclomethicone,  and  amodimethicone.  This 
chapter examines hair conditioners and their use in  beautifying 
the hair. 

  conditioner mechanism of action 
 Healthy, undamaged hair is soft, resilient, and easy to disen-
tangle ( 4 ). Unfortunately, the trauma caused by shampooing, 
drying, combing, brushing, styling, dyeing, and permanently 
waving damages the hair making it harsh, brittle, and difficult 
to  disentangle  ( 5 ).  Hair  conditioners  are  designed  to  reverse 
this  hair  damage  by  improving  sheen,  decreasing  brittleness, 
decreasing porosity, increasing strength, and restoring degra-
dation in the polypeptide chain. Damage to the hair shaft can 
also occur through environmental factors such as exposure to 
sunlight, air pollution, wind, seawater, and chlorinated swim-
ming pool water ( 6 ). This type of hair damage is technically 
known as “weathering” ( 7 ).  

   Hair conditioners are designed to reverse hair damage by 
improving sheen, decreasing brittleness, decreasing 
porosity, and increasing strength. 

   Weathering is damage to the hair shaft that occurs over 
time from any external source including grooming, wind, 
sun, and tangling. 

shafts by as much as 50% ( 8 ). This leads to enhanced disentan-
gling of the hair, as well.  

 Hair gloss results from light reflected by individual hair shafts. 
The  smoother  the  hair  surface,  the  more  light  reflected  ( 9 ). 
Conditioners  increase  hair  gloss  primarily  by  increasing  the 
adherence  of  cuticular  scale  to  the  hair  shaft.  Gloss  is  also 
related to the hair structure. Maximum gloss is produced by 
large-diameter, elliptical hair shafts with a sizable medulla and 
intact, overlapping cuticle scales. Hair softness too results from 
an even overlap of cuticular scales ( 10 ). 

 Conditioners attempt to mend the split ends resulting from 
missing cortex, the structural component responsible for hair 
shaft  strength.  The  resulting  exposure  of  the  soft  keratin 
medulla results in a condition known as trichoptilosis, or split 
ends.  Conditioners  temporarily  reapproximate  the  frayed 
remnants of remaining medulla and cortex. 

 All the problems associated with damaged hair are magni-
fied if the hair is fine in texture. There are more fine hair fibers 
per weight than coarse hair fibers, so the net surface area of 
fine hair is greater. Proportionally, more irregular cuticle scales 
can develop and more of these fine hair fibers are subject to 
static  electricity.  Thus,  special  conditioner  formulations  are 
designed to meet the grooming needs of fine hair.  

  formulation of a conditioner 
 Hair  conditioners  may  contain  as  many  as  nine  different 
conditioning  agents  from  the  chemical  classes  listed  in 
 Table 25.1  ( 11 ).  

 Of these, the quaternaries, protein derivatives, and alkanol-
amides  are  the  most  frequently  used  ( 12 ).  Each  of  these 
 categories is discussed in detail next ( Table 25.2 ).   

   The quaternaries, protein derivatives, and alkanolamides 
are the most frequently used compounds in modern hair 
conditioners. 

 Hair  conditioners  improve  manageability  by  decreasing 
static electricity. Following combing or brushing, the hair shaft 
becomes negatively charged, thus repelling one another to pre-
vent the hair from lying smoothly in a given style. Condition-
ers deposit positively charged ions on the hair shaft neutralizing 
the  electrical  charge.  Improved  manageability  also  derives 
from cuticle alterations and reduction of friction between hair 

  Quaternary Conditioning Agents 
 The cationic detergents, also known as quaternaries or quater-
nary  ammonium  compounds  or  quats,  are  conditioning 
agents  found  in  both  shampoos  and  hair  conditioners  ( 13 ). 
They are excellent at increasing the adherence of the cuticular 
scales to the hair shaft, which increases the light reflective abil-
ities of the hair, adding shine and luster. Additionally, they are 
able  to  electrically  neutralize  static  electricity  based  on  the 

164

HAIR CONDITIONERS

Table 25.1  Chemical Classes of Conditioners

Alkanolamides
Glycols
Lipids
Protein derivatives
Quaternaries
Surface active agents
Specialty ingredients

Table 25.2  Hair Conditioner Formulations

Type

Ingredient

Advantage

Hair type

Cationic 

detergent

Quaternary 

ammonium 
compounds

Film former

Polymers

Protein-

containing

Hydrolyzed 
proteins

Smooth cuticle, 
decrease static

Fill shaft defects, 
decrease static, 
add shine
Penetrate shaft

Chemically 
processed 
hair

Dry hair, not 
fine hair

Temporarily 
mend split 
ends

 Figure  25.1     An  instant  conditioner  for  damaged  dyed  hair  containing 
 quaternary ammonium compounds.    

negative (anionic) charge of processed or damaged hair, which 
attracts  the  positively  (cationic)  charged  quaternary  com-
pound to adhere to the hair shaft, thus improving manageabil-
ity  ( 14 ).  These  qualities  make  them  an  excellent  conditioner 
choice  in  patients  with  permanently  dyed  or  permanently 
waved hair ( Fig. 25.1 ).   

165

  Film-Forming Conditioning Agents 
 Film-forming conditioners apply a thin layer of polymer, such 
as  polyvinylpyrrolidone  (PVP),  over  the  hair  shaft  ( 15 ).  The 
polymer  fills  hair  shaft  defects  creating  a  smooth  surface  to 
increase  shine  and  luster  while  eliminating  static  electricity 
due to its cationic nature. The polymer also coats each indi-
vidual hair shaft, thus “thickening” the hair shaft. Film-former 
conditioners  should  not  be  used  on  fine  hair  as  the  added 
weight of the polymer decreases the ability of the hair to hold 
a style. They are excellent, however, on normal to dry hair.  

  Protein Conditioning Agents 
 Protein-containing conditioners are the only product that can 
actually penetrate and alter the damaged hair shaft. These pro-
teins, derived from animal collagen, keratin, placenta, etc., are 
hydrolyzed to a particle size (molecular weight 1000 to 10,000) 
able to enter the hair shaft ( 16 ). Hydrolyzed protein condition-
ers can temporarily strengthen the hair shaft and mend split 
ends until the subsequent shampooing when the product must 
be reapplied. The source of the protein is not as important as 
the protein particle size ( 17 ).    

   Hair conditioners are available in three forms: instant 
conditioners and rinses, deep conditioners, and leave-in 
conditioners. 

  conditioner types 
 Hair conditioners are available in three forms: instant condi-
tioners and rinses, deep conditioners, and leave-in condition-
ers  ( Table  25.3 ).  Their  names  describe  their  use  as  instant 
conditioners and rinses are applied and immediately removed 
in the shower. Deep conditioners remain in contact with the 
hair for 30 minutes and leave-in conditioners remain in place 
until the subsequent shampooing.  

  Instant Conditioners 
 Instant conditioners are so named as they are applied follow-
ing shampooing, left on the hair for five minutes and subse-
quently rinsed. These products provide minimal conditioning 
due to their short contact time with the hair and are basically 
useful to aid in wet combing and manageability. Their ability 
to  repair  damaged  hair  is  somewhat  limited.  Nevertheless, 
they are the most popular type of conditioner for both home 
and salon use. Instant conditioners contain water, condition-
ing  agents,  lipids,  and  thickeners.  The  conditioning  agents 
consist of combinations of cationic detergents, film formers, 
and proteins.  

  Rinses 
 Rinses  are  similar  to  instant  conditioners  in  that  they  are 
applied  immediately  following  shampooing  and  removed 
prior to drying the hair. There are two types: clear rinses and 
cream rinses. Clear rinses, formed from lemon juice and vin-
egar,  were  used  prior  to  the  development  of  pH-balanced 
shampoos with sequestering agents designed to prevent soap 
scum formation on the hair. These acidic chemicals removed 
calcium and magnesium soap residue and returned the hair to 
a neutral pH following the use of an alkaline shampoo. Resi-
due  removal  restores  hair  shine  while  pH  neutralization 

166

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 25.3  Hair Conditioner Products

Type

Use

Indication

Instant

Apply after shampoo, 

Minimally damaged hair, 

Deep

Leave-in

rinse

Apply 20–30 min, 
shampoo, rinse
Apply to towel dried 

hair, style

Rinse

Apply following 
shampoo, rinse

aids wet combing

Chemically damaged hair

Prevent hair dryer 

damage, aid in combing 
and styling

Aid in disentangling if 
creamy rinse, remove 
soap residue if clear 
rinse

restores hair manageability. Clear rinses work well in patients 
with oily hair, but are not recommended for patients with nor-
mal to dry hair. 

 Cream rinses utilize cationic quaternary ammonium com-
pounds,  such  as  stearalkonium  chloride  and  benzalkonium 
chloride. Cream rinses are thinner than conditioners, but the 
differences  in  formulation  are  small.  Some  companies  even 
label their products as “cream rinse/conditioners.” As a general 
rule, cream rinses provide less conditioning than conditioners 
and are intended for oily to normal hair.  

  Deep Conditioners 
 Deep conditioners are creams, compared to instant condition-
ers,  which  are  liquids.  They  contain  the  same  conditioning 
agents as instant conditioners, but are more concentrated ( 18 ). 
They remain on the hair for 20 to 30 minutes and may include 
the application of heat from a hair dryer or warm towel. The 
extended application time allows more conditioner to coat the 
hair  shaft,  while  heat  causes  hair  shaft  swelling  and  allows 
increased  conditioner  penetration.  These  products  are 
intended for extremely dry hair. Deep conditioners used prior 
to some permanent coloring or permanent waving procedures 
are called “fillers.” Fillers are designed to condition the distal 
hair shaft and reverse some of the effects of weathering, allow-
ing  even  application  of  the  subsequent  coloring  or  waving 
procedure. 

 Some salons offer a deep conditioning treatment known as 
trichotherapy  or  aromatherapy.  Aromatherapy  involves  sev-
eral steps, the first of which is to condition the hair and scalp 
with rare oils and herbal extracts. The scalp is then vigorously 
brushed. A scalp and facial massage are also performed with 
fragrant oils to release tension and soothe the senses. The hair 
is then shampooed and conditioned. The value of this treat-
ment is primarily aesthetic.  

  Leave-in Conditioners 
 Leave-in  conditioners  are  applied  following  towel  drying  of 
the hair and designed to remain on the hair shaft through styl-
ing.  They  are  removed  with  the  next  shampooing.  Products 
designed for straight hair are known as blow drying lotions or 
hair thickeners. Blow drying lotions are massaged through the 
scalp after towel drying and prior to heat drying. Since they 
contain no oils, they are not rinsed from the hair. They contain 
the same conditioning agents previously described for instant 

 Figure 25.2     A leave-in cream conditioner that is applied to towel-dried hair.    

 Figure 25.3     A leave-in conditioner designed to decrease the frizziness of curly 
hair.    

HAIR CONDITIONERS

167

 The leave-in conditioners based on film-forming polymers 
too  are  infrequent  causes  of  contact  dermatitis;  however, 
 contamination  with  monomeric  impurities,  such  as  acryl-
amide,  ethyleneimine,  or  acrylic  acid,  can  cause  problems. 
Acrylamide is highly toxic, ethyleneimine is carcinogenic, and 
acrylic  acid  is  highly  irritating  to  the  skin.  The  safety  and 
 performance of polymers used in hair conditioners are related 
to their purity ( 20 ). 

 There  have  been  some  reports  of  reactions  to  proteins  in 
some conditioners in the form of contact urticaria ( 21 ). While 
this is rare, it should be considered when evaluating the patient 
with the elusive chronic case of urticaria.   

   references 
    1.       Goldemberg   

  RL    . 

for  modern 
 formulations  .   In  :     Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Principles of Cosmetics for the 
Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby Company  ,   1982  ,   157  –  9  .    

  Hair  conditioners: 

the  rationale 

    2.       Swift      JA   ,     Brown      AC    .    The  critical  determination  of  fine  change  in  the 
 surface  architecture  of  human  hair  due  to  cosmetic  treatment  .    J  Soc 
 Cosmet Chem     1972  ;   23  :   675  –  702  .    

    3.       deNavarre     MG    .   Hair conditioners and rinses  .   In  :     deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The 
Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Vol. 4  ,   2nd edn  ,   Wheaton, IL  : 
  Allured Publishing Corporation  ,   1988  ,   1097  –  109  .    

    4.       Garcia     ML   ,    Epps     JA   ,    Yare     RS   ,    Hunter     LD    .   Normal cuticle-wear patterns in 

human hair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1978  ;   29  :   155  –  75  .    
    5.       Corbett     JF    .   Hair conditioning  .   Cutis     1979  ;   23  :   405  –  13  .    
    6.       Zviak     C   ,    Bouillon     C    .   Hair treatment and hair care products  .   In  :     Zviak     C    , 
  ed  .   The Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  ,   115  –  16  .    
    7.       Rook      A    .    The  clinical  importance  of  “weathering”  in  human  hair  .    Br  J 

 Dermatol     1976  ;   95  :   111  –  12  .    

    8.       Price     VH    .   The role of hair care products  .   In  :     Orfanos     CE   ,    Montagna     W   , 
   Stuttgen     G    ,   eds  .   Hair Research  .   Berlin  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1981  ,   501  –  6  .    
    9.       Robinson     VNE    .   A study of damaged hair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1976  ;   27  : 

  155  –  61  .    

   10.       Zviak     C   ,    Bouillon     C    .   Hair treatment and hair care products  .   In  :     Zviak     C    , 
  ed  .   The Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  ,   134  –  7  .    

   11.       Rieger     M    .   Surfactants in shampoos  .   Cosmet Toilet     1988  ;   103  :   59  .    
   12.       Corbett     JF    .   The chemistry of hair-care products  .   J Soc Dyers Colour     1976  ; 

  92  :   285  –  303  .    

   13.       Allardice      A   ,     Gummo      G    .    Hair  conditioning  .    Cosmet  Toilet      1993  ;    108  : 

  107  –  9  .    

   14.       Idson      B   ,     Lee     W    .    Update  on  hair  conditioner  ingredients  .    Cosmet  Toliet   

  1983  ;   98  :   41  –  6  .    

   15.       Finkelstein     P    .   Hair conditioners  .   Cutis     1970  ;   6  :   543  –  4  .    
   16.       Fox     C    .   An introduction to the formulation of shampoos  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1998  ;   103  :   25  –  58  .    

   17.       Spoor     HJ   ,    Lindo     SD    .   Hair processing and conditioning  .   Cutis     1974  ;   14  : 

  689  –  94  .    

   18.       Bouillon      C    .    Shampoos  and  hair  conditioners  .    Clin  Dermatol      1988  ;    6  : 

  83  –  92  .    

   19.       Whittam      JH    .    Hair  care  safety  .    In  :      Whittam      JH    ,    ed  .    Cosmetic  Safety  .   

New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1987  ,   335  –  43  .    

   20.       Robbins      CR    .    Polymers  and  polymer  chemistry  in  hair  products  .    In  : 
  Chemical  and  Physical  Behavior  of  Human  Hair  ,    2  edn  .    New  York  : 
  Springer-Verlag  ,   1988  ,   196  –  224  .    

   21.       Niinimäki     A   ,    Niinimäki     M   ,    Mäkinen-Kilunen     S   ,    Hannuksela     M    .   Contact 
urticaria from protein hydrolysates in hair conditioners  .   Allergy     1998  ;   53  : 
  1078  –  82  .     

  suggested reading 
      Bhushan     B    .   Nanoscale characterization of human hair and hair conditioners  . 

  Prog Mater Sci     2008  ;   53  :   585  –  710  .    

     Bolduc     C   ,    Shapiro     J    .   Hair care products: waving, straightening, conditioning, 

and coloring  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   431  –  6  .    

     Erazo-Majewicz     PE   ,    Su     SC    .   Cationic conditioning-polymer deposits on hair  .   

J Cosmet Sci     2004  ;   55  :   125  –  7  .    

     Goddard      ED    .    Mechanisms  in  combination  cleaner/conditioner  systems  .   

J  Cosmet Sci     2002  ;   53  :   283  –  6  .    

 Figure 25.4     A hair thickener and hair shine formulation based on  dimethicone 
that can be applied to wet or dry hair.    

conditioners. The thin coating of conditioner on the hair only 
minimally prevents heat damage ( Figs. 25.2  and  25.3 ).   

 Hair  thickeners  are  another  form  of  leave-in  conditioner. 
They  do  not  thicken  hair  by  increasing  the  number  of  hair 
shafts, but rather provide a coating on each shaft that increases 
its diameter minutely. These products are protein-containing, 
conditioning liquids that are massaged through a towel-dried 
scalp before styling to increase shine, improve manageability, 
and  impart  softness. A  hair  thickener  is  thicker  than  a  blow 
drying  lotion  and  intended  for  persons  with  dry,  damaged 
hair.  Some  of  the  newer  hair  thickeners  are  dimethicone- 
containing liquids ( Fig. 25.4 ).  

 Special  leave-in  conditioners  are  used  by  Black  and  Asian 
individuals with tightly kinked hair to aid in combing, provide 
additional shine, improve manageability, and enhance styling 
options. These products are discussed more fully in the  chapter 
on ethnic hair.   

  adverse reactions to conditioners 
 Since hair conditioners are applied to the hair and eventually 
rinsed,  they  must  be  nonirritating  to  the  eyes  as  well  as  the 
skin ( 19 ). The most popular instant conditioners only remain 
in  contact  with  the  skin  for  a  brief  period  of  time  and  are 
therefore infrequent causes of allergic and/or irritant contact 
dermatitis.  These  products  can  be  patch  tested “as  is”  in  an 
open or closed manner. 

168

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

     Hoshowski     MA    .   Conditioning of hair (Chapter 4)  .   In  :     Johnson     DH    ,   ed  .   Hair 

and Hair Care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1997  ,   65  –  104  .    

     Idson     B    .   Polymers as conditioning agents for hair and skin (Chapter 11)  .   In  : 
    Schueller     R   ,    Romanowski     P    ,   eds  .   Conditioning Agents for Hair and Skin  . 
  Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1999  ,   251  –  79  .    

     Ruetsch     SB   ,    Kamath     YK   ,    Kintrup     L   ,    Schwark     HJ    .   Effects of conditioners on 
surface  hardness  of  hair  fibers:  an  investigation  using  atomic  force 
microscopy  .   J Cosmet Sci     2003  ;   54  :   579  –  88  .    

     Trüeb     RM    ,   the Swiss Trichology Study Group. The value of hair cosmetics and 

pharmaceuticals  .   Dermatology     2001  ;   202  :   275  –  82  .         

             26    Hair styling aids      

  Nothing beats a great looking head of hair, and styling aids are 
an important part of this quest for men and women. Prepara-
tions  for  hair  adornment  are  some  of  the  oldest  cosmetic 
products known. Even the ancient Assyrians invented elabo-
rate  hair  styles  with  layered  cuts  combined  with  oiling,  per-
fuming,  and  hot  iron  curling.  Hair  styles  assumed  a  great 
significance  in  their  society  as  the  more  elaborate  coifs  were 
indicative of a high social status ( 1 ). Still today many products 
and devices are used to shape, mold, fix, set, and rearrange hair 
into a fashionable personal statement discussed in this chapter. 
 The key concept in hair styling is fashion. Each modern era 
can  be  characterized  by  a  certain  hair  style  so  much  so  that 
most  can  identify  the  decade  in  which  an  old  magazine  was 
published by the hair style of the cover model. Hair styles in 
the 1960s were long, straight, and ungroomed, so styling aids 
were minimal and consisted of hair spray alone. Hair styles in 
the 1970s were curly and short so styling aids were destined to 
condition damage induced by permanent waving. Hair styles 
of the 1980s were gravity defying and demanded styling aids 
that provided the maximum hold. The 1990s were marked by 
hair styles with emphasis on smoothness and shine, requiring 
styling  products  that  impart  gloss.  The  millennium  saw  the 
popularity  of  the  “bed  head”  look  requiring  hair  waxes  to 
make the hair clump and mold. And, finally, 2010 is character-
ized by the sleek straight look resembling 1960s hair styles and 
lending  credence  to  the  old  fashion  saying  that  what  “goes 
around comes around.” 

  hair styling products 
 Hair styling products are applied following shampooing and 
are  completely  removed  with  the  subsequent  shampooing. 
There are four categories  of modern styling products: sprays, 
mousses, gels, and serums ( Table 26.1 ).  

  Hair Spray 
 Hair  sprays  are  used  to  keep  the  hair  in  a  desired  style 
( Fig. 26.1 ). They are a temporary water removal fixative that 
can hold hair in gravity-defying positions or simply smooth a 
few fly-away hairs, depending on their composition. Early hair 
sprays  were  aerosolized  shellac,  a  natural  resin  composed  of 
polyhydroxy acids and esters. Shellacs are no longer used since 
they form insoluble films that are not easily removed. In addi-
tion,  chlorinated  propellants  have  not  been  used  since  the 
1979 U.S. Food and Drug Administration ban and states are 
now imposing limits on volatile organic compound emissions 
from hair sprays and other personal care products ( 2 ). Copo-
lymers  such  as  polyvinylpyrrolidone  (PVP)  are  the  main 
ingredient  in  hair  sprays,  now  widely  available  in  aerosol 
pumps.  PVP  is  a  resin  that  is  soluble  in  water  and  easily 
removed by shampooing. However, it is also hydroscopic: the 
film becomes sticky upon water contact from rain, humidity, 
or  perspiration.  Once  wet,  the  film  loses  its  holding  ability. 

Vinyl acetate (VA) was added to PVP to make the product less 
hydroscopic,  but  this  also  made  the  removal  difficult.  Most 
hair sprays now combine PVP/VA and utilize anywhere from 
30–70% PVP ( 3 ). Other newer polymer combinations are con-
stantly  being  developed,  such  as  copolymer  resins  of  vinyl 
methyl ether and maleic acid hemiesters (PVP/MA) or copoly-
mer  resins  of  vinyl  acetate  and  crotonic  acid  or  dimethyl 
hydantoin-formaldehyde resins, with a few products now con-
taining  methacrylate 
(polyvinylpyrrolidone 
copolymer 
dimethyl aminoethyl methacrylate or PVP/DMAEMA) ( 4 , 5 ).  
 Besides polymer resins, hair sprays also contain plasticizers 
(mineral oil, lanolin, castor oil, and butyl palmitate), humec-
tants (sorbitol and glycerol), solvents (SD alcohol 40, isopropyl 
alcohol,  etc.),  and  conditioners  (panthenol,  plant  proteins, 
hydrolyzed animal proteins, quaternium-19, and so on). More 
expensive hair sprays contain panthenol and quaternium-19, 
which are more expensive conditioners while low-priced con-
ditioning hair sprays use hydrolyzed animal protein ( 6 ). High-
priced  hair  sprays  may  also  include  a  more  costly  fragrance 
than the low-priced brands. 

 Hair  sprays  are  usually  applied  following  hair  styling,  but 
may also function as a setting lotion, although this is not rec-
ommended. Hair sprays are available in several formulations 
providing varying degrees of hold. Regular hold hair sprays are 
designed to simply keep the hair in place. Super or extra hold 
hair sprays, hair styling fixes, and hair spritzes contain more 
copolymer than regular hold products and afford tremendous 
gravity-defying hold. These products also contain a less vola-
tile  vehicle  than  standard  hair  sprays,  thus  prolonging  the 
 drying time and allowing complex hair styling. 

 There was some concern in the 1960s regarding inhalation 
of PVP/VA aerosolized particles. These copolymers were origi-
nally developed in the medical industry for use as plasma dilu-
ents and were subsequently adopted by the cosmetics industry. 
Some reports indicated that thesaurosis was due to hair sprays, 
and  inhalation  of  PVP  solid  particles  could  induce  foreign 
body granuloma formation in the lung. After extensive animal 
testing, it was concluded that PVP resin did not provoke pul-
monary  lesions  ( 7 , 8 ).  Nevertheless,  persons  who  are  predis-
posed  to  lung  conditions  or  those  with  allergic  tendencies 
should use hair spray products with care ( 9 ).  

   Hair sprays are applied to dry hair and designed to 
maintain the hair in a desired style after the hair has been 
groomed. 

 Hair sprays may produce dermatologic problems, such as nail 
damage  ( 10 ).  Patients  who  have  their  hair  done  weekly  in  a 
salon, especially if styled with an excessive amount of hair spray 
may develop hair spray buildup, resulting in hair shaft dullness. 
If applied as a coarse mist, the hair spray can bead on the hair 

169

170

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

shaft,  resembling  pediculosis  capitis  or  trichorrhexis  nodosa. 
The  hair  spray  will  also  attract  dirt,  causing  scalp  irritation. 
Finally, once weekly shampooing may not be adequate to con-
trol seborrheic dermatitis in predisposed patients. There is some 
debate in cosmetic circles as to whether alcohol, an inexpensive 
evaporating solvent, also contributes to hair shaft dryness.  

  Hair Gel 
 Hair sprays are applied once the hair has been combed into a 
final position as the last step in hair styling ( Fig. 26.2 ). This is in 
contrast to hair gels that can be applied to both wet and dry 

Table 26.1  Hair Styling Aids

Styling aid

Type

Main ingredients

Purpose

Hair spray

Aerosol

Solution of 

film-forming 
resin

Styling fix

Aerosol

Solution of 

Spritz

Aerosol

Solution of 

film-forming 
resin

Styling gel

Gel

film-forming 
resin

Gel of film- 

forming resin

Sculpturing 

Gel

Gel of film- 

gel
Mousse

Foam

forming resin
Aerosolized foam 
of film-forming 
resin

Hold finished 
hair style

Add strong hold 
to finished hair 
style

Add strong hold 
to finished hair 
style

Add moderate 
hold before 
styling

Add extreme hold 
before styling
Add mild hold 
before styling

hair.  Hair  gels  are  stronger  fixatives  used  to  hold  the  hair  in 
more  difficult  to  maintain  positions.  They  contain  the  same 
PVP-type copolymers as hair sprays, except they are formulated 

 Figure 26.2     A clear hair gel contains a fixative that dries and stiffens the hair to 
add body and maintain a desired style.    

(A)

(B)

 Figure 26.1     ( A ) A typical nonaerosol hair spray to maintain the hair in a desired style. ( B ) A high hold hair spray designed to maximally stiffen hair.    

HAIR STYLING AIDS

into a gel and packaged in soft plastic squeeze tubes. They are 
available  in  both  alcohol-containing  and  alcohol-free  forms 
and  contain  glossening  agents  that  coat  the  hair  shaft  and 
restore shine. Conditioning agents, such as hydrolyzed animal 
proteins, panthenol, keratin polypeptides, and amino acids, are 
also  incorporated  into  some  hair  gels  for  added  appeal.  Two 
formulations  are  available:  styling  gels  and  sculpturing  gels. 
As the names suggest, sculpturing gels afford more hold than 
styling gels.   

   Hair gels can be applied to dry or wet hair to create gravity 
defying hair styles. 

 Hair gels may contain synthetic color, usually in unnatural 
shades, such as blue, red, or purple. The colored gel coats the 
hair  shaft,  imparting  tones  of  the  color  that  is  selected.  The 
color molecules are too large to penetrate the undamaged hair 
shaft so the colored coating can be removed with one sham-
pooing. However, persons with chemically dyed or waved hair 
have a porous shaft that may semi permanently absorb color 
molecules,  requiring  four  to  six  shampooings  for  removal. 
Glitter may also be added to hair gels for effect. 

 Hair  gels  can  be  applied  to  towel-dried  wet  hair,  damp 
hair, or distributed selectively on certain hair shafts depend-
ing on the desired style. If an increased hold of a hair style is 
desired,  the  gel  can  be  combed  thinly  over  all  hair  shafts 
prior to blow drying. If a small amount of gel is applied, the 
hair  will  have  a  natural  look  and  feel.  If  a  large  amount  is 
applied, the hair will have a wet, “spiky” look and a stiff feel. 
The  product  can  also  be  applied  to  completely  dry  hair  to 
get the hair to stand straight up. This is a currently popular 
look among teenage men. 

 Hair gels can be used in persons with thinning, dull hair to 
enhance hair fullness and restore cosmetic acceptability. The 
eye  interprets  hair  thickness  by  the  hair  elevation  over 
the crown, lateral displacement at the sides, and the extent of 
the visible scalp ( 11 ). Hair gels can hold the hair away from the 
scalp, creating the illusion of fullness ( 12 ). Glossening agents 
can bring shine, the visual clue to hair health based on light 
reflection from an intact cuticle. 

 These products adhere well to the hair shaft since PVP/VA 
has some substantivity, or increased affinity, for keratin. The 
films  are  flexible  and  colorless  on  the  hair  shaft,  but  can  be 
removed by combing and brushing. This results in white poly-
mer flakes in the hair that may resemble seborrheic dermatitis. 
The high concentration of PVP/VA also makes these products 
sticky with water contact. Persons who are exposed to mois-
ture, such as athletes who perspire, should not use these styling 
products  since  the  PVP/VA  will  fix  the  hair  upon  redrying, 
possibly in an undesirable position.  

 Hair gels can be both open and closed patch tested “as is,” 
but they should be allowed to dry prior to occlusion. They are 
of low irritant potential, but may cause allergic contact derma-
titis  in  those  methacrylate-sensitive  patients  who  choose  a 
product containing a methacrylate-based polymer.  

  Hair Mousse 
 Hair gel is very similar in formulation to hair mousse, except 
hair gel is squeezed from a tube while hair mousse is a foam 

171

released under pressure from an aerosolized can. Both contain 
the  same  copolymer-containing  hair  styling  aids  to  provide 
gloss to the hair and add an additional application of condi-
tioner. Hair mousses can also be purchased tinted to tempo-
rarily cover gray hair. For example, persons with less than 15% 
gray hair can use colored mousse with brown or auburn hues 
to blend gray hair. Unnatural colors such as yellow, green, red, 
orange, purple, and blue are also available. The color is tempo-
rary  and  removed  with  one  shampooing  unless  applied  to 
chemically treated hair.  

   Hair mousse is similar in formulation to hair gel, except 
that it is aerosolized foam. 

 Hair mousse is applied in the same manner as a hair gel to 
towel-dried hair. It can also be applied to dry hair to create a 
wet “spiky” look. Hair mousse yields a lighter copolymer appli-
cation and does not provide as strong a hold as gel formula-
tions.  It  also  produces  less  flaking  and  less  stickiness  under 
moist  conditions  due  to  the  low  concentration  of  polymer. 
Many of the styling hold products for men are hair mousses, 
since a lighter application is desirable. 

 Hair styling mousses can be used to create natural- appearing 
fullness more easily than hair gels due to their low moisture 
content. A half-dollar-sized mound of mousse is placed in the 
palm.  Small  amounts  are  then  dabbed  onto  the  fingers  and 
massaged into the proximal hair shaft. Drying occurs almost 
immediately. The mousse adds stiffness to the hair shaft, creat-
ing the illusion of fullness. This technique can be used by both 
men and women with thinning hair to create hair that is more 
attractive. A small amount of mousse applied to the palms and 
lightly touched to a finished style can smooth unmanageable 
hairs.  Mature  persons  will  probably  find  hair  mousse  more 
satisfactory than hair gel as a styling aid.  

  Hair Serums 
 The  newest  category  of  hair  care  products  is  hair  serums. 
These are clear viscous liquids squirted from a nonaerosolized 
jar onto the palm. Hair serums are hair moisturizers based on 
dimethicone ( Fig. 26.3 ). Hair becomes brittle when devoid of 
water, just like skin. This occurs until low humidity conditions, 
such as in the western U.S.A., or when the hair has been chem-
ically processed by permanent dyeing, waving, or straighten-
ing.  The  disruption  of  the  cuticle  that  occurs  with  chemical 
processing allows water to evaporate from the hair shaft into 
the environment. Remoisturization of the hair can occur with 
dimethicone just like remoisturization of the skin. Thus, the 
dimethicone  functions  as  an  occlusive  agent  to  retard  water 
loss ( Fig. 26.4 ).    

   Hair serums are based on dimethicone and function as a 
hair shaft moisturizer. 

 Hair serums can be useful to maintain the health of the hair 
shaft  in  persons  with  damaged  hair.  The  hair  serum  is  best 
applied  to  dry  hair  by  rubbing  the  hands  together  and  then 
pulling the hands through the hair to distribute an even thin 

172

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 26.5     Nonelectric hair rollers come in a variety of sizes to create differ-
ent curl sizes.    

styling devices include hair dryers, curling irons, electric curl-
ers, and crimping irons. 

  Nonelectric Hair Styling Devices 
 Nonelectric  rollers  function  to  impart  curl  and  add  body  to 
create  a  desirable  hair  style. A  variety  of  sizes  and  styles  are 
available, with larger rollers forming looser curls while smaller 
rollers  form  tighter  curls  ( Fig.  26.5 ).  Toothed  rollers  are 
designed to hold the hair without the aid of a hair pin, but may 
fracture the hair shaft on removal. Hair breakage can be mini-
mized by using toothless smooth rollers held in place with hair 
pins and a hair net.   

   Pulling and rolling wet hair onto curlers allows partial 
transformation of the normal alpha-keratin structure to a 
beta-keratin structure of the hair shaft allowing the 
curling of straight hair. 

 Wet hair is required to produce optimal curls with nonelec-
tric  rollers.  Physically,  wet  hair  is  more  elastic  than  dry  hair, 
allowing  partial  transformation  of  the  normal  alpha-keratin 
structure to a beta-keratin structure under tension. This trans-
formation shifts the relative position of the polypeptide chains 
and brings about a disruption of ionic and hydrogen bonds. 
During the drying process, new ionic and hydrogen bonds are 
formed, blocking return to the natural alpha-keratin configu-
ration and allowing the hair to remain in its newly curled posi-
tion. Wetting the hair, however, returns hair bonds immediately 
to  the  natural  alpha  configuration  ( 13 ).  Hair  must  be  rolled 
under tension to provide the load required for bond breakage, 
but  hair  should  not  be  stretched  beyond  the  point  at  which 
more  than  one-third  of  the  alpha-keratin  bonds  have  been 
unfolded to beta-keratin bonds. Excessive stretching will result 
in permanent deformation causing the inelastic hair to frac-
ture ( Fig. 26.6 ).   

  Electric Hair Styling Devices 
 Electric styling devices operate on the principle that heat can 
temporarily  reform  water  bonds  within  the  hair  shaft.  The 
style  can  be  maintained  until  the  next  water  exposure  when 
the  bonds  will  return  to  the  natural  shape.  Electric  styling 
devices  are  used  by  professionals  in  the  salon,  as  well  as 

 Figure  26.3     A  hair  serum  designed  to  add  shine  and  decrease  hair  frizz  by 
imparting a water-resistant dimethicone layer to each hair shaft.    

 Figure 26.4     A hair cream designed to both moisturize and stiffen hair to create 
the popular “bed head” hair style.    

film on each hair shaft. The serum can be applied daily prior to 
hair  styling.  The  dimethicone  smoothes  down  the  cuticle, 
restoring shine and manageability, and prolongs the life of hair 
dye by preventing passive loss of the hair dye. It also makes the 
hair smooth and soft, just like on the skin. For patients who 
complain  of “unhealthy”  hair,  hair  serum  is  quickest  way  to 
restore the appearance of healthy hair.   

  hair styling devices 
 Two types of modern hair styling devices are available: non-
electric  and  electric.  Nonelectric  styling  devices  include  dry 
rollers,  combs,  brushes  and  a  variety  of  hair  clasps.  Electric 

HAIR STYLING AIDS

173

 Figure  26.7     A  hooded  hair  dryer  is  used  in  a  professional  salon  to  rapidly 
dry  wet  hair  into  a  desired  style  after  setting  on  the  curlers  illustrated  in 
Figure 26.5.    

 Figure 26.6     The hair is tightly wrapped around the rollers and dried to create 
temporary curls.    

 consumers at home. This section highlights the use and misuse 
of these devices. 

   Hair Dryer  
 The  most  popular  electric  styling  device  is  the  hair  dryer, 
which can be hooded or hand-held. Hooded hair dryers are 
mainly seen in professional salons and can be used for two 
purposes. The first is to dry the hair after it has been placed 
on  rollers  and  the  second  is  to  process  chemical  hair  treat-
ments,  such  as  permanent  hair  dyes  or  hair  straightening. 
Hooded  dryers  are  more  efficient  at  drying  the  hair  than 
blow dryers, but can cause more hair and scalp damage, espe-
cially  if  excess  heat  is  present  between  the  hood  and  scalp 
( Fig.  26.7 ).  Second  degree  scalp  burns  have  been  reported 
when a hood hair dryer is used to process dyed hair that has 
been wrapped in aluminum foil to contain the hair dye only 
to certain hair shafts. This dyeing technique is used to dye the 
hair  several  different  colors  to  mimic  the  natural  variation 
seen in some individuals artificially. Problems can arise when 
the foil is heated against the scalp resulting in scarring and 
baldness.   

   Blow dryers are the most popular method of hair drying, 
but should be used on low heat to avoid damaging the hair 
protein. 

 Figure 26.8     A hand-held blow dryer should be held at least 8 inches from the 
head to avoid burning the scalp and the hair.    

 Hand-held blow dryers do not dry the hair as efficiently as 
a hooded hair dryer, but also cannot produce scalp burns as 
easily ( Fig. 26.8 ). To avoid burning the skin or the hair, the 
hand-held blow dryer should be positioned at least 8 inches 
from the scalp. High temperatures can denature hair protein 
resulting in permanent damage to the hair shafts perceived 
as easily fractured hair. A vented styling brush can be used to 
shape  hair  while  blow  drying  to  minimize  overheating 
the hair.   

   Curling Iron  
 The  second  most  popular  hair  appliance  is  the  curling  iron, 
which is a modern version of the oven-heated metal rods that 
were wrapped with hair in the pre-electric era. Modern curling 
irons  are  thermostatically  controlled  to  prevent  overheating, 
but  temperatures  capable  of  producing  first-  and  second-
degree burns are still attainable. Some irons come with vari-
able temperature settings, but most patients prefer the hottest 
setting since the curls produced are tighter and longer lasting. 
It is recommended that patients remove excess heat from the 
curling iron prior to use by placing it in a moist towel. This 
lowers the rod temperature preventing burns of the hair and 
scalp ( Fig. 26.9 ).   

174

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure  26.9     A  curling  iron  can  cause  second-degree  burns  if  not  properly 
handled.    

   Hot curling irons can cook the water in the hair shaft 
causing irreversible damage in the form of bubble hair. 

 Removal of hair from the curling iron is another frequently 
encountered problem. Most curling irons have a spring loaded 
clip to hold the hair to the rod. Failure to release the clip com-
pletely  can  cause  hair  breakage.  Newer  rods  are  now  coated 
with nonstick materials to facilitate hair release or made out of 
ceramic. However, certain styling products, such as hair spray, 
can melt and glue hair to the rod. Thus, patients should curl 
their  hair  first  and  then  add  hair  spray  or  other  styling 
 products.  

   Electric Curlers  
 Electric curlers are individually heated, plastic coated rods of 
varying sizes ( Fig. 26.10 ). A curler set is more expensive than a 
curling iron, but the chance of burning is lessened since hot 
metal does not come in contact with the hair or scalp. Many 
patients prefer curling irons since they have a shorter heating 
period, but fast, 60-second heating curlers are available. A vari-
ation on the firm, molded electric roller is a smaller-diameter, 
rubber-coated,  bendable  rod  or  disk.  The  shape  and  type  of 
curlers available is fashion dictated.     

   Electric hair curlers can curl dry straight hair by affecting 
the water deformable bonds. 

   Crimping Iron  
 The last major type of electric hair styling appliance is a varia-
tion on the old-fashioned hair iron, known as a crimping iron 
or a straightening iron. This device contains two hinged metal 
plates  that  are  heated  with  hair  placed  between  them.  If  the 
plates are corrugated, the device is called a crimping iron and 
produces tight bends in the hair shaft. If the plates are smooth, 
the device is known as a hair straightener for those with kinky 
hair. This type of iron can be used to straighten mildly curly 
hair, but cannot be used to straighten kinky hair ( Fig. 26.11 ). 
Heat straightening methods for kinky hair are covered in the 
chapter discussing ethnic hair.   

 Figure 26.10     Electric curlers are less likely to cause skin burns, but to avoid 
hair damage only dry hair should be placed in contact with the warm curlers.    

 Figure  26.11     A  crimping  iron  uses  heat  to  straighten  the  hair  by  pressing 
between two warm ceramic plates.    

   Crimping irons are used to straighten mildly curly hair. 

 It is important for the physician to consider electric styling 
device burns in the patient with scarring alopecia, especially of 
the  frontal  and  vertex  areas.  In  these  locations,  it  is  easier 
for the heated device to rest on the head. Also, most women 
curl  this  area  more  frequently  than  the  sides  of  the  head, 
increasing the opportunity for burns.    

  summary 
 It is the artful combination of hair styling products and devices 
that  yields  a  fashionable  coif.  From  smooth  and  straight  to 
curly  and  fluffy,  all  things  are  possible  with  the  right  sprays, 
gels,  mousses,  serums,  curlers,  and  irons.  The  different  hair 
styles that can be attained are only limited by the imagination 
of the artist. The many variations in hair styles can be appreci-
ated by examining a portrait art book followed by a visit to a 
local  mall.  This  chapter  has  educated  the  dermatologists  on 
the possibilities and identified issues where possible.   

   references 
    1.       Henkin      H    .    Hair  grooming  .    In  :    The  Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of 
 Cosmetics  ,   2nd edn  .   Wheaton, IL  :   Allured Publishing Corporation  ,   1988  , 
  1111  –  24  .    

    2.       Oteri     R   ,    Tazi     M   ,    Walls     E   ,    Kosiek     JC    .   Formulating hairsprays for new air 

quality regulations  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   29  –  34  .    

    3.       Wells     FV   ,    Lubowe     II    .   Hair grooming aids, part III  .   Cutis     1978  ;   22  :   407  –  25  .    

HAIR STYLING AIDS

175

    4.       Zviak  ,   C    .   The Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1986  ,   153  –  65  .    
    5.       Stutsman      MJ    .    Analysis  of  hair  fixatives  .    In  :      Senzel      AJ    ,    ed  .    Newburger’s 
Manual of Cosmetic Analysis  ,   2nd edn  .   Washington, DC  :   Published by the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists, Inc  ,   1977  ,   72  .    

     Dallal      JA    .    Hair  setting  products  (Chapter  30)  .      Rieger      MM    ,    ed  .    Harry’s 
 Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  ,   635  –  67  .    
     Gao      T   ,     Pereira      A   ,     Zhu      S    .    Study  of  hair  sine  and  hair  surface  smoothness  . 

  J Cosmet Sci     2009  ;   60  :   187  –  97  .    

    6.       Lochhead      RY   ,     Hemker      WJ   ,     Castaneda      JY    .    Hair  care  gels  .    Cosmet  Toilet   

     Gummer      CL    .    Hair  shaft  effects  from  cosmetics  and  styling  .    Exp  Dermatol   

  1987  ;   102  :   89  –  100  .    

  1999  ;   8  :   317  .    

    7.       Zviak  ,   C    .   The Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1986  ,   167  –  8  .    
    8.       Wells     FV   ,    Lubowe     II    .   Hair grooming aids, part IV  .   Cutis     1978  ;   22  :   557  –  62  .    
    9.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  .    New  York  :    Chemical 

Publishing  ,   1982  ,   481  –  3  .    

   10.       Daniel     DR   ,    Scher     RK    .   Nail damage secondary to a hair spray  .   Cutis     1991  ; 

  47  :   165  –  6  .    

   11.       Clarke     J   ,    Robbins     CR   ,    Reich     C    .   Influence of hair volume and texture on 

     Jachowicz      J    .    Dynamic  hairspray  analysis.  III.  Theoretical  considerations  . 

  J Comet Sci     2002  ;   53  :   249  –  61  .    

     Rafferty      DW   ,     Zellia      J   ,     Hasman      D   ,     Mullay      J    .    Polymer  composite  principles 

applied to hair styling gels  .   J Cosmet Sci     2008  ;   59  :   497  –  508  .    

     Rafferty      DW   ,     Zellia      J   ,     Hasman      D   ,     Mullay      J    .    The  mechanics  of  fixatives  as 
explained by polymer composite principles  .   J Cosmet Sci     2009  ;   60  :   251  –  9  .    
     Ruetsch     SB   ,    Kamath     YK    .   Effects of thermal treatments with a curling iron on 

hair body of tresses  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1991  ;   42  :   341  –  52  .    

hair fiber  .   J Cosmet Sci     2004  ;   55  :   13  –  27  .    

   12.       Rushton     DH   ,    Kingsley     P   ,    Berry     NL   ,    Black     S    .   Treating reduced hair volume 

in women  .   Cosmet Toliet     1993  ;   108  :   59  –  62  .    

   13.       Robbins     CR    .   Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair  ,   2nd edn  . 

  New York  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1988  ,   89  –  91  .     

     Sendelbach      G   ,     Liefke      M   ,     Schwan      A   ,     Lang      G    .    The  new  method  for  testing 
removability of polymers in hair sprays and setting lotions  .   Int J Cosmet 
Sci     1993  ;   15  :   175  –  80  .    

     Trüeb      RM    .    Dermocosmetic  aspects  of  hair  and  scalp  .    J  Investig  Dermatol 

  suggested reading 
      Dallal     JA   ,    Rocafort     CM    .   Hair styling/fixative products (Chapter 5)  .   In  :     John-

son     DH    ,   ed  .   Hair and Hair Care  .   Marcel Dekker  ,   1997  ,   105  –  65  .    

Symp Proc     2005  ;   10  :   289  –  92  .    

     Zhou     Y   ,     Foltis      L   ,     Moore      DJ   ,     Rigoletto      R    .    Protection  of  oxidative  hair  color 
 fading  fram  shampoo  washing  by  hydrophobically  modified  cationic 
polymers  .   J Cosmet Sci     2009  ;   60  :   217  –  38  .         

             27    Hair styling with prostheses      

  The prior chapters have focused on methods of optimizing the 
appearance of the patient’s natural hair through proper sham-
poo selection, conditioner application, and the use of styling 
aids and devices. Natural hair can be optimized through all of 
these  cosmetic  manipulations;  however,  the  dermatologist 
may encounter patients with substantial temporary or perma-
nent  hair  loss  that  may  require  the  use  of  hair  prostheses. 
Patients  with  temporary  hair  loss,  such  as  chemotherapy-
induced hair loss or alopecia areata, or persons with perma-
nent  scarring  alopecia,  such  as  lichen  planopilaris  or  central 
centrifugal alopecia, are grateful for the advice a dermatologist 
can provide regarding the use of prostheses. This chapter pres-
ents knowledge on hair techniques for the patient in need of 
reassurance and compassion. 

 Hair pieces have been a part of history since the Egyptians 
invented them in 3000 BC, many of which still survive today. 
Hair pieces were popular among both ruling men and women 
and were fashioned from human and vegetable fibers coated 
with beeswax. Blond wigs were popularized by the Romans in 
the  first  century  BC  made  of  hair  taken  from  German  cap-
tives. Eventually, however, blonde wigs became the trademark 
of  Roman  prostitutes  and  were  outlawed  by  the  Christian 
Church.  By  1580,  wigs  were  again  fashionable  due  to  the 
influences of the English queens who developed female pat-
tern hair loss. Even Mary, Queen of Scots, wore a wig, a fact 
unknown by her followers until she was beheaded. The popu-
larity of wigs spread to France by the 18th century such that 
the French Court of Versailles employed 40 resident wigmak-
ers.  Today,  wigs  remain  a  part  of  the  formal  attire  of  some 
judges ( 1 ). 

  hair pieces 
 The use of hair pieces can restore a positive self-image in those 
patients  who  have  temporary  or  permanent  hair  loss.  Both 
natural human hair and synthetic fiber types are available. The 
custom-made natural human hair products are more expen-
sive ($100–$2000) and have a short life (2–3 yrs) due to hair 
breakage. Synthetic hair products are less expensive ($10–100) 
and have a longer life (3–5 yrs), but are limited in their styling 
possibilities. Synthetic fibers are designed to have a permanent 
curl and require less maintenance than natural fibers making 
them a better choice for most patients.  

   Hair pieces are constructed by attaching individual fibers 
by hand-tying or machine-wefting to a meshwork 
designed to fit a specific scalp location. 

 A  hair  piece  is  formed  by  attaching  individual  fibers  to  a 
meshwork designed to fit a specific scalp location. Two meth-
ods of attaching hair fibers to the mesh are used: hand tied and 
machine  wefted.  Hand-tied  hair  pieces  are  more  expensive 
because  the  fibers  are  individually  knotted  to  the  mesh. 

176

Machine-wefted wigs are made by sewing the fibers onto strips 
of material and then attaching wefts to the mesh. 

 Synthetic and natural fiber hair pieces are cleaned in much 
the same manner as a head of hair. The hair piece is turned 
inside out, and a drop of mild shampoo is placed in the center 
and gently agitated under a stream of warm water. Once the 
shampoo is completely removed, a drop of instant conditioner 
is placed in the wig and again rinsed. The hair piece is allowed 
to air dry while inside out by attaching it with a clothespin to 
an indoor clothesline. Once dry, the hair piece may be styled 
with a specially designed wig brush. 

 Hair  pieces  come  in  seven  basic  types,  depending  on  the 
scalp area to be covered.  Table 27.1  and  Figure 27.1  show these 
types.   

 Patients with severe alopecia areata, alopecia totalis, alopecia 
universalis,  or  chemotherapy-induced  anagen  effluvium 
require  complete  wigs.  It  is  recommended  that  the  patient 
select  a  wig  prior  to  complete  hair  loss,  thus  allowing  the 
patient  to  emotionally  adjust  and  aid  in  selecting  a  wig  that 
mimics the patient’s natural hair color and style. If this is not 
possible, a picture of the patient prior to hair loss is helpful to 
the wig artist. 

 Most  patients,  however,  only  require  supplementation  of 
their natural hair by a hair piece selected to cover areas of thin-
ning or loss. For example, female pattern alopecia can be cov-
ered  with  a  demiwig  known  as  a “hair  thickener.”  This  hair 
piece is attached to a loosely woven mesh through which the 
patient pulls her own hair, allowing blending of the hair fibers 
and  also  firmly  securing  the  hair  piece  to  the  scalp. Women 
who note that their hair will no longer grow to a length desired 
may wish to consider a fall to add length or a cascade to add a 
bun or mass of curls. 

 Toupees  are  specifically  designed  for  the  balding  men  and 
are  available  in  a  variety  of  colors  with  the  appropriate  per-
centage  of  gray  hair  to  match  the  patient’s  state  of  canities. 
Natural  part  line  toupees,  which  add  a  small  insert  of  sheer 
plastic in the part line to expose the natural color of the under-
lying scalp, may create a more natural appearance. Some tou-
pees come uncut, allowing the patient to take the toupee to the 
barber for styling along with the patient’s natural hair. Attach-
ment of toupees to the scalp, however, remains poor relying on 
clips or adhesives ( Fig. 27.2 ).  

 Chemotherapy  patients  with  scalp  tenderness  or  patients 
undergoing immunotherapy utilizing contact sensitization for 
alopecia may wish to cover their head with a soft terry cloth 
turban. A more natural appearance can be achieved by adding 
a wiglet of bangs.  

  hair additions 
 Another  semipermanent  approach  to  thinning  or  locally 
absent scalp hair is the use of hair additions. Hair additions are 
worn continuously for approximately eight weeks, remaining 
in  place  while  swimming,  bathing,  sleeping,  and  exercising. 

HAIR STYLING WITH PROSTHESES

Table 27.1  Types of Hair Pieces

1.   Wigs: constructed on a flexible cap-shaped mesh designed to cover the entire head
2.   Falls: long locks of hair attached to a firm contoured mesh designed to rest on the scalp vertex (Fig. 27.1A)
3.   Cascades: curled locks or buns attached to a firm oblong contoured base designed to rest on the posterior scalp (Fig. 27.1B)
4.   Toupees: custom fitted hair piece on a woven base to cover the top of the head (Fig. 27.1C)
5.   Demiwigs: flexible cap-shaped mesh designed to cover the entire scalp except the front hairline (Fig. 27.1D)
6.   Wiglets: localized hairpieces designed to create bangs or add additional hair on the top of the head (Fig. 27.1E)
7.   Switches: long strands of hair in the form of braids or ponytails secured together at one end (Fig. 27.1F)

177

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

 Figure 27.1     Types of artificial hair pieces. ( A ) Fall. ( B ) Cascade. ( C ) Toupee. ( D ) Demiwig. ( E ) Wiglet. ( F ) Switch.    

178

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

(A)

(B)

 Figure 27.2     A patient before and after application of a toupee.    

The technique utilizes synthetic or natural human hair fibers 
to supplement existing hair where needed. Hair additions can 
be tied, woven, or glued to the scalp or existing hair and may 
be obtained in full service beauty salons or at salons specializ-
ing in the technique. Augmentation of hair through additions 
is widely used in the entertainment industry, by Black people 
who wish to achieve hair length, by men who wish to camou-
flage androgenetic alopecia, and by women who desire special 
effect hair styles.  

   Hair additions and wigs can be formed from synthetic 
modacrylic fibers or natural human hair. 

 There are several different types of fibers that can be used for 
temporary hair additions or for the construction of wigs. Syn-
thetic fibers are man made and natural hair fibers are obtained 
from  women  who  sell  their  hair.  Most  of  the  human  hair 
comes from the Orient and is dyed and mixed from multiple 
donors to obtain a swatch that is then made into a wig. Syn-
thetic  fibers  are  formed  from  modacrylic,  composed  of  two 
polymerized monomers: acrylonitrile and vinyl chloride. The 
polymer is drawn through a multihole metal disk, dried, and 
stretched. The disk design is such that fibers with an irregular 
cross-section  and  surface  variations  are  produced  to  more 
closely mimic natural human hair. Dye may be added to the 
polymer  either  before  or  after  extrusion  to  create  any  hair 
color desired. Various colored hair fibers are then combined to 
make a more realistic appearing wig. 

 The  art  of  making  a  hair  piece  is  to  artistically  combine 
fibers of varying diameters and color hues, as not all natural 
hair shafts are of the same thickness or color. Additionally, the 
fiber thickness should be varied to more accurately simulate 
hair  shaft  size  in  Black,  Caucasian,  and  Oriental  hair.  The 
modacrylic can also be permanently heat formed to reproduce 
the  appropriate  amount  and  tightness  of  curl  unique  to  the 
hair  of  different  ethnic  groups.  Synthetic  hair  offers  some 
advantages over natural human hair for use in hair additions. 
First, synthetic fibers are of lighter weight than natural human 
hair,  thus  exerting  less  pull  on  existing  scalp  hairs.  Second, 
 synthetic  fibers  are  less  expensive  than  human  hair.  Third, 
 synthetic fibers can be melted to bond to existing scalp hair. 

 As mentioned previously, human hair obtained from Indian 
or Chinese women who grow their hair for sale is used for hair 
additions  and  wigs.  Indian  hair  has  a  fine  diameter  and  a 
slight  natural  wave  whereas  Chinese  hair  is  coarser  and 
straighter. Usually, the human hair is lightened and redyed to 
obtain a range of colors and may also be permanently waved 
to obtain the desired amount of curl. Coloring and curling of 
hair  used  in  additions  may  be  performed  both  before  and 
after  the  added  hair  is  attached  to  the  scalp  using  standard 
salon products. 

 Human hair does not require the color and fiber diameter 
mixing of synthetic hair fibers as natural variations are already 
present. Thus, the main advantage of human hair additions is 
their  ability  to  blend  with  existing  scalp  hair.  Disadvantages 
include  the  weight  of  the  natural  fibers  and  the  cost,  which 
increases with longer lengths of hair.  

HAIR STYLING WITH PROSTHESES

179

(A)

(B)

 Figure 27.3     Braiding on the scalp can create an attachment site for sewing a toupee to the hair braid.    

  methods of hair attachment 
 Hair additions use existing scalp hair to anchor the synthetic 
or natural human hair fibers. The added fibers may be affixed 
by  braiding,  sewing,  bonding,  or  gluing.  The  attachment 
method selected depends on the amount of natural hair and 
the number or length of fibers to be added.   

   Hair fibers can be attached to the scalp by braiding, 
sewing, bonding, or gluing. 

  Braiding on the Scalp 
 The most popular method of hair additions employs braiding 
on the scalp, adapted from the Black hair style known as “corn-
rows.” Cornrows are plaited on the scalp in geometric designs 
with tension applied to the hair shafts exposing scalp between 
the braids. This is a popular hairstyle among Black individuals 
as it allows for organization of tightly kinked hair. Braiding on 
the scalp can also be used to attach a toupee ( Fig. 27.3 ). Indi-
vidual hair fibers can be woven into the braids to either thicken 
their appearance or, more commonly, to add length. Wefted hair, 
or hair fibers sewn together in a strip, can be sewn with a needle 
and thread to the cornrows to quickly add large amounts of hair.    

  Braiding off the Scalp 
 Braiding off the scalp employs a standard plaiting technique to 
which individual hair fibers are added. Fibers are attached by 
working  them  securely  into  the  braids  and  leaving  the  loose 
ends  for  curling  and  styling  ( Fig.  27.4 ).  This  technique  is 

 Figure  27.4     Braiding  off  the  scalp  can  be  used  to  weave  in  synthetic  hair 
strands to create the illusion of long hair in African American individuals with 
short hair.    

 popular among individuals with short kinky hair, who wish to 
have long straight hair but long-term use can result in traction 
alopecia ( Fig. 27.5 ).    

  Bonding 
 Bonding employs a hot glue gun to fuse individual synthetic 
hair fibers to the base of clumps of existing scalp hair. Only a 
few fibers can be attached at a time, due to the weight of the 

180

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 27.5     Traction alopecia is a possible permanent side effect of braiding off the scalp.    

additions. This technique is used in both men and women to 
thicken the hair. The bonds are intended to remain in place for 
eight  weeks;  however,  individuals  with  excessive  sebum  pro-
duction may notice early loosening and loss of the added hair.  

  Gluing 
 This hair addition technique combines braiding on the scalp 
with adhesive attachment. The existing hair is initially braided 
into concentric arcs on the posterior scalp, known as “tracks.” 
These  tracks  serve  as  anchors  to  which  wefted  hair  is  glued. 
The adhesive employed is a cold latex-based glue that is  subject 
to removal by scalp sebum production ( Fig. 27.6 ).    

  care of hair additions 
 Hair  additions  are  worn  continually  for  a  period  of  eight 
weeks, or less, at which time they must be removed. Individu-
als  with  slowly  growing  hair  may  wear  the  hair  style  longer, 
while  those  with  rapidly  growing  hair  notice  the  added  hair 
fibers  loosen  more  quickly.  The  additions  are  shampooed 
along  with  the  individual’s  existing  hair  using  the  same 
 cleansing products and cleansing frequency. Many individuals 
are  afraid  to  wash  the  additions  as  they  fear  loosening  will 
occur, but good hygiene is important.   

   Hair additions must be removed at 8 weeks to avoid 
hygiene problems and traction alopecia. 

 Hair  additions  must  be  removed  at  eight  weeks  to  avoid 
hygiene  problems  and  other  complications  such  as  traction 
alopecia. If the hair and scalp have been properly cleansed, hair 
additions begin to loosen and look ungroomed at eight weeks. 
Removal  of  braided  additions  simply  requires  undoing  the 
braid and removing the added strands of hair which may be 
reused in later procedures. Bonded additions are removed by 
melting the hot glue with the tip of the glue gun and pulling 
out  the  individual  or  wefted  hair  fibers.  Peanut  oil  is  then 
rubbed through the scalp to facilitate removal of any remain-
ing  material.  Latex-based  glue  is  removed  with  a  specially 

designed  solvent.  Lastly,  sewn  additions  can  be  removed  by 
cutting the attachment thread. 

 It  is  understandable  that  individuals  would  like  to  wear  the 
additions  as  long  as  possible,  since  the  cost  may  vary  between 
$250 and $1000 depending on the complexity of the hair style, 
the amount and length of the added hair fibers, the salon time 
required and whether synthetic or human hair fibers are used. 
The average hair addition requires three to five hours in a salon. 
 Successful use of hair additions requires a hair stylist who is 
trained  in  the  technique  and  a  client  who  will  put  forth  the 
effort to maintain the added hair. Braided and sewn hair addi-
tions pose the least problem as no adhesives are used; however, 
the added hair fibers put increased pull on existing scalp hair 
augmenting  the  pull  already  exerted  by  the  tight  braids.  For 
these reasons, traction alopecia is a problem arising in individ-
uals who continually wear hair additions. The traction alopecia 
is  identical  to  that  seen  in  Black  patients  who  wear  tightly 
pulled hair styles. Initially, only loss of the hair shaft is observed, 
but with continued traction, the process can result in loss of the 
follicular ostia and permanent alopecia. Extensive traction alo-
pecia will eventually preclude the use of hair additions as no 
existing scalp hair will be available to anchor added hair.  

 Glued  additions  employ  adhesives  which  must  be  patch 
tested prior to use. Additionally, the hair stylist must take care 
not to carelessly apply glue throughout the scalp which may 
increase hair breakage since hair combing is impeded by glue. 
The  hot  bonding  gun  must  be  kept  from  the  scalp  to  avoid 
scalp burns which could result in permanent alopecia, if severe. 
 High  standards  of  hygiene  must  be  maintained  to  prevent 
inflammation of the scalp, in the form of seborrheic dermati-
tis, and infection of the scalp, in the form of bacterial folliculi-
tis.  The  individual  who  chooses  to  have  hair  additions  must 
realize  that  the  new  hair  style  requires  more  grooming  and 
upkeep than natural scalp hair.  

  hair integration systems 
 Hair integration systems are a useful method of allowing the 
patient to supplement hair loss only where necessary. These 
hair pieces are custom made by fashioning a loose net to fit 

HAIR STYLING WITH PROSTHESES

181

(A)

(B)

 Figure 27.6     Glue can be used to affix a toupee to the scalp. ( A ) demonstrates glue application followed by attachment of a woven mesh in ( B ) and finally the tou-
pee is glued to the woven mesh in ( C ).    

(C)

182

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

YES

“HAIR INTEGRATION SYSTEM”

CLIENT CONSULTATION AND ANALYSIS CHART

The  process  must  be  redone  with  each  shampooing  and  the 
adhesive removed with a specially formulated product.  

Clients Name:                                                            Designer:                                                                    
Technician:                                                                 
Address:                                                                   
Order Date:                                                                 
Phone:                                                                      
Amount Enclosed : $                                                  
Fitting Date:                                                              

   Crepe hair is composed of wool fibers that can be glued to 
the scalp and dusted onto the hair with a fixative. 

2 3 4

5

1

6

A

B

7

8

C

D

9

6

6

5

C

B

A

A

B

C

A A

B

B

C

D

C

D

Elastic

5

4

4

3

A

A

B

B

2

2

C

D

C

D

4

3

12

Elastic

3

7

8

5

6

A

B

C

D

9

9
8
0
2
2
0

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n
I

i

t
n
o
P

t
o
v
P

i

t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C

LENGTH ADDTION

TEXTURE ADDTION

COLOR ADDTION

STRUCTURES

TEXTURE

TOOL

LEVEL

HUE

Solid
Graduated
Increase
Uniform
Combination
Textutining

Red
Gold
Yellow
Blue
Violet
Green

 Figure 27.7     Hair integration systems are custom designed adding hair where 
needed to camouflage loss.    

the scalp. Synthetic or natural human hair fibers are tied to 
the meshwork in the desired location, amount, length, color, 
and  texture.  Any  hairstyle  can  be  easily  created  ( Fig.  27.7 ). 
The patient puts the integration system over their scalp and 
pulls their existing hair through the fenestrations in the net. 
This affixes the hair piece securely to the scalp and also allows 
a  natural  appearance.  Integration  systems  can  be  rather 
costly  depending  upon  the  amount  and  length  of  hair 
attached.  They  are  extremely  versatile  for  patients  with 
 alopecia areata, androgenetic alopecia, scarring, or radiation 
hair loss.     

   Hair integration systems are custom made by fashioning 
a loose net to fit the scalp to which synthetic or natural 
human hair fibers are tied. 

  crepe hair techniques 
 Crepe hair can be used to temporarily camouflage very small, 
localized areas of scalp hair loss. Its utility is in patients who 
have recent-onset alopecia areata with an excellent prognosis 
for  hair  regrowth  who  need  an  inexpensive,  short-term 
 camouflage. Crepe hair is made from wool and purchased as 
braids in a variety of colors. The wool strands are pulled from 
the  braid  and  artistically  glued  to  the  scalp  with  adhesive. 

 Another more modern use of crepe hair is the fibered hair 
sprays  or  fibered  powders  containing  the  wool  fibers.  The 
fibers are charged with static electricity to allow them to adhere 
to the natural hair fibers and create the illusion of fuller hair. 
Some products also have a hair spray fixative in the formula-
tion  to  increase  the  ability  of  the  crepe  hair  to  stay  in  place. 
Products are available in seven different shades to match most 
hair colors. These crepe hair products are popular among men 
to  camouflage  vertex  balding.  The  product  is  removed  with 
shampooing and must be reapplied as needed.  

  scalp camouflage techniques 
 Many times, it is the contrast between the pale bald scalp and 
the dark hair that accentuates hair loss. This contrast can be 
minimized by coloring the scalp to match the hair temporarily 
with wax crayons or vegetable dyes, or permanently with tat-
too pigment. The wax crayons are stroked over the scalp artis-
tically  to  mimic  hair  and  the  color  is  easily  removed  with 
shampoo.  Tattoo  pigment  can  also  be  placed  in  streaks  to 
mimic hair shafts. The tattoo looks realistic when combined 
with hair, but if all the hair is lost in an area, the tattoo looks 
quite unusual. Patients should consider their natural heredi-
tary pattern of balding prior to undergoing scalp tattooing.   

   Scalp camouflaging can be performed with wax crayons, 
vegetable dyes, or tattoo pigment. 

  summary 
 Hair prostheses can be quite effective in camouflaging tempo-
rary  or  permanent  alopecia.  Many  patients  are  not  familiar 
with the options available to restore scalp hair and appreciate 
unbiased advice from their trusted dermatologist. This chapter 
has presented the basics of hair prostheses utilization. There 
are other cosmetic methods that can be used to optimize the 
appearance of thinning hair presented in the chapter on alope-
cia and cosmetic considerations.   

   reference 
   1.       Panati      C    .    Atop  the  vanity  .    In   :    Extraodinary  Origins  of  Everyday  Things  . 

  New York  :   Harper & Row Publishers  ,   1987  :   234  –  6  .     

  suggested reading 
      Beitone     R   ,    Sturla     JM   ,    Paty     H   ,    Meurice     P   ,    Samain     H    .   Temporary restyling of the 
hair  (Chapter  5)  .    In  :      Bouillon      C   ,    Wilkinson      J    ,    eds  .    The  Science  of  Hair 
Care  .   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC  ,   2005  :   187  –  92  .    

     Harrison     S   ,    Sinclair     R    .   Hair colouring, permanent styling, and hair structure  . 

  J Cosmet Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   180  –  5  .    

     O’Hara     CM   ,    Izadi     K   ,    Albright     L   ,    Bradley     JP    .   Case report of optic atrohpy in 
pansynostosis: an unusual presentation of scalp edema from hair braid-
ing  .   Pediatric Neurosurg     2006  ;   42  :   100  –  4  .    

     Seidel     JS    .   The danger of scald burns during hair braiding  .   Ann Emerg Med   

  1994  ;   23  :   1388  –  9  .         

 
 
 
 
             28    Hair permanent waving      

  The idea of making straight hair permanently curly is appeal-
ing to both men and women who want to achieve fashionable 
hair styles. It always seems that those with straight want curly 
hair and those with curly hair want straight hair! While this 
seems rather silly, a whole industry is predicated on changing 
the  conformation  of  hair  to  the  likes  of  the  individual.  Hair 
permanent  waving  is  a  complex  chemical  process  based  on 
altering the 16% cystine incorporated into disulfide linkages 
between polypeptide chains in the hair keratin filament. These 
disulfide linkages are responsible for hair elasticity and can be 
re-formed to change the configuration of the hair shaft. 

 Methods of waving and curling straight hair have been prac-
ticed since ancient Egyptian times when water and mud were 
applied to hair wound on sticks and allowed to dry in the sun. 
The ancient Greeks refined the technique with hot irons, which 
were wrapped with hair. The use of hot irons to curl hair was 
rediscovered by Marcel in 1872 and is still a popular technique 
among Black men and women. The first hair waving solution 
was developed by Nessler in 1906 and consisted of borax paste, 
which produced longer lasting waves, but was very damaging 
to  the  hair.  This  method  utilized  external  heat  either  in  the 
form  of  electrically  heated  hollow  iron  tubes  or  a  chemical 
heating pad that was attached to the curling rods with a clamp. 
Temperatures reached about 115°C and heating continued for 
10 to 15 minutes ( 1 ). 

 In the 1930s, the first cold wave was introduced which virtually 
replaced heat methods of curling. The solution was based on ammo-
nium thioglycolate containing free ammonia and a controlled pH. 
The  original  U.S.  patent  was  granted  to  E.  McDonough  on 
June 16, 1941. Interestingly enough, this cold wave solution, with 
slight variations, is still popular today for both salon and home 
use. It is estimated that more than 65 million permanent waves 
are sold in salons and 45 million home waves are  performed on 
an annual basis in the U.S.A. ( 2 ).  

   Hair permanent waving is a complex chemical process 
based on altering the 16% cystine incorporated into 
disulfide linkages between polypeptide chains in the hair 
keratin filament. 

  chemistry 
 Permanent  waving  is  a  complex  chemical  process  with  three 
distinct steps: chemical softening, rearranging, and fixing ( 3 ). 
The  basic  chemistry  involves  the  reduction  of  the  disulfide 
hair  shaft  bonds  with  mercaptans  ( 4 ).  The  process  can  be 
chemically characterized as listed in  Table 28.1  ( 5 ).    

   Permanent waving is a complex chemical process with 
three distinct steps: chemical softening, rearranging, and 
fixing. 

  application technique 
 Cold permanent waves can be administered at home or in a 
salon, but involve the same application technique ( 6 ). It usu-
ally  takes  about  90 minutes  to  complete  the  entire  process, 
depending on the length of the hair. 

 The standard procedure involves initial shampooing of the 
hair  to  remove  dirt  and  sebum.  This  wetting  process  is  the 
first  step  in  preparing  the  hair  for  chemical  treatment  since 
the  water  enters  the  hair’s  hydrogen  bonds  and  allows 
increased  flexibility.  The  hair  is  then  sectioned  into  30  to 
50 areas,  depending  on  the  length  and  thickness  of  the  hair, 
and  wound  on  mandrels  or  rods.  The  size  of  the  rod  deter-
mines the diameter of the curl with smaller rods producing 
tighter curls ( Fig. 28.1 ). A sufficient amount of tension must 
be applied to the hair as it is wound around the rod to provide 
the stress required to encourage bond breaking. If too much 
tension is applied, the hair can be stretched beyond its elastic 
range, transforming it into a brittle substance that will easily 
fracture. Tissue paper squares about 5 × 5 cm, known as “end 
papers,” are applied to the distal hair shafts to prevent irregu-
lar wrapping of the ends around the rod. Failure to use end 
papers can result in a frizzy appearance of the distal hair shaft 
( Fig. 28.2 ).   

 Next, the waving lotion is applied and left in contact with 
the hair for 5 to 20 minutes, depending on the condition of 
the hair ( Fig. 28.3 ). The reducing action of the waving lotion 
is  said  to  “soften”  the  hair  and  contains  a  disulfide  bond-
breaking agent, such as ammonium or calcium thioglycolate, 
and an antioxidant, such as sodium hydrosulfite, to prevent 
the  lotion  from  reacting  with  air  before  it  reaches  the  hair. 
Sequestering agents, such as tetrasodium EDTA, are added to 
prevent trace metals such as iron in tap water from reacting 
with the thioglycolate lotion. Other ingredients include pH 
adjusters,  conditioners,  and  surfactants  to  remove  the 
remaining  sebum  from  the  hair  ( Fig.  28.4 ).  Coarse  hair 
requires a longer processing time than fine hair and undyed 
hair  requires  a  longer  processing  time  than  permanently 
dyed or bleached hair. A “test curl” is then checked to deter-
mine  if  the  desired  amount  of  curl  has  been  obtained  and 
overprocessing avoided ( Fig. 28.5 ).    

 The hair disulfide bonds are subsequently reformed with the 
hair in the new curled conformation around the perming rods. 
This process is known as neutralization, fixation, or “harden-
ing”  ( Fig.  28.6 ).  The  neutralization  procedure,  chemically 
characterized  as  an  oxidation  step,  should  involve  two  steps. 
First, two-thirds of the neutralizer should thoroughly saturate 
the hair with the rods in place and allowed to set for five min-
utes. The rods are then removed and the remaining one-third 
of the neutralizer applied for an additional five minutes. The 
hair  is  then  carefully  rinsed.  Patients  who  complain  of  an 
undesirable odor following permanent waving, especially after 
shampooing,  have  undergone  incomplete  neutralization. 

183

184

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Repeating  the  neutralization  process  as  outlined  above  will 
reduce the excessive odor ( 7 ).  

 The newly curled hair is now ready for drying and styling. 
Most companies recommend avoiding shampooing or manip-
ulating the hair for one to two days following the cold wave 
procedure to ensure long lasting curls. 

Table 28.1  Permanent Waving Process

1.  Penetration of the thiol compound into the hair shaft.
2.   Cleavage of the hair keratin disulfide bond (kSSk) to produce a 
cysteine residue (kSH) and the mixed disulfide of the thiol 
compound with the hair keratin (kSSR).

kSSk + RSH → kSH + kSSR

3.   Reaction with another thiol molecule to produce a second 
cysteine residue and the symmetrical disulfide of the thiol 
waving agent (RSSR).

kSSR + RSH → kSH + RSSR

4.   Rearrangement of the hair protein structure to relieve internal 
stress, which is determined by curler size and hair wrapping 
tension.

5.   Application of an oxidizing agent to reform the disulfide 

cross-links.

+
kSH HSk 

oxidizing agent
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→

+
kSSk water

 A permanent wave is designed to last three to four months. 
Curl relaxation occurs with time as the hair returns to its orig-
inal conformation. Hairdressers generally will therefore select 
a curl tighter than the patient desires with this fact in mind. 
Most of the curl relaxation occurs within the first two weeks 
after processing, a fact that is reassuring to the patient who has 
had  an  undesirable  result.  Curl  relaxation  can  be  increased 
slightly  by  frequent  shampooing  beginning  immediately  fol-
lowing the permanent waving procedure. Some strong deter-
gent  shampoos,  such  as  those  recommended  for  seborrheic 
dermatitis, will cause curl relaxation more rapidly than condi-
tioning shampoos. New hair growth also decreases the curled 
appearance of the hair. Patients with rapidly growing hair need 
to  repeat  the  permanent  waving  procedure  more  frequently. 
Increased hair growth during pregnancy could account for the 
fact  that  some  hairdressers  note  permanent  waves  do  not 
“take” in pregnant women. Hair at the nape of the neck also 
has a decreased “take.”  

  factors influencing permanent waving 
 There are several factors that determine the success or failure 
of  a  cold  waving  procedure.  Most  of  the  suboptimal  results 
that cause patients to seek dermatologic help result from fail-
ure to consider the key points listed in  Table 28.2  while per-
forming the procedure ( 8 ).   

(A)

(B)

 Figure 28.1     Hair is wound on mandrels of various sizes with ( A ) smaller rods producing tighter curls and ( B ) larger rods producing looser curls.    

(A)

(B)

 Figure 28.2     The ends of the hair are wrapped in end papers to make sure that all hairs are wound around the mandrel to prevent hair frizziness.    

HAIR PERMANENT WAVING

  assessing the permanent wave 
effectiveness 
 Several  methods  are  used  by  manufacturers  of  cold  waving 
products to determine wave efficiency and degree of hair shaft 
damage. These are known as the deficiency in tightness (DIT) 
value, the curl length, and the 20% index ( 8 ). 
 The DIT value is determined as follows: 

DIT 

=

−
diameter of curl (mm) diameter of rod (mm)

diameter of rod (mm)

×

100

185

 Figure 28.3     The hair is wrapped around the mandrel ready for waving lotion 
application.    

 Figure 28.5     A test curl must be performed to ensure adequate curl formation 
and avoid overprocessing of the hair shafts.    

 Figure  28.4     The  waving  lotion  is  evenly  applied  to  cause  disulfide  bond 
 breaking in each hair shaft for an even curl.    

 Figure  28.6     Each  hair  shaft  must  come  in  contact  with  the  neutralizer  to 
reform the disulfide bonds in the new curled shape and restore hair strength.    

 
    
186

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 28.2  Permanent Waving Guidelines

1.   The hair must not be wound with excessive tension around the 

rods, or an increased breakage may occur (9).

2.   Smaller rods will produce smaller curls, which are more 

damaging to the hair shaft.

3.   The hair must fit around the rod at least once for complete curl 

formation in patients with short hair.

4.   A stronger waving lotion will not produce a tighter curl. The 

curl diameter is determined by the rod diameter.

5.   Weak waving lotions with shorter processing times should be 

used for damaged hair.

6.   It may be necessary to use different strengths of waving lotions 
on new proximal growth and previously waved distal growth, 
especially in patients with bleached hair.

7.   A test curl should be performed to avoid over-processing the 
hair. Long processing times can excessively damage hair, 
increasing the breakage.

8.   Discoloration of the hair may occur in patients who have used 
para-phenylenediamine-based permanent dyes that have been 
incompletely oxidized.

 The higher the DIT value, the greater the effectiveness of the 
curling  solution.  In  other  words,  weak  cold  wave  solutions 
have low DIT values. 

 The curl length is evaluated by suspending a fresh curl and 
observing the spring of the formed coil. The degree of laxity is 
indicative of the efficiency of the wave and also of the degree 
of  hair  shaft  damage.  Thus,  longer  curls  are  indicative  of 
greater hair shaft damage. 

 The 20% index is determined by stretching freshly permed 
hair  with  a  uniformly  increasing  load.  The  ratio  of  the  load 
required after perming to the load required prior to perming to 
stretch a wet strand of 12 hairs to 20% of their original length 
is known as the 20% index. The higher the index, the lower the 
reduction in hair strength due to the cold wave procedure. 

 Cold wave chemists use these three criteria to determine not 
only the success of the permanent wave procedure, but also the 
degree of hair shaft damage. Factors affecting the efficacy of a 
permanent  waving  product  are  processing  time,  processing 
temperature, concentration of reducing agent, ration of lotion 
to hair quantities, penetration of the lotion, pH and the nature 
and condition of the untreated hair ( 10 ). A marketable perma-
nent wave solution must produce the best curl with the least 
amount of hair damage ( 11 ).   

   Factors affecting the efficacy of a permanent waving 
product are processing time, processing temperature, 
concentration of reducing agent, ration of lotion to hair 
quantities, penetration of the lotion, pH and the nature 
and condition of the untreated hair. 

  hair alterations following permanent 
waving 
 Following  the  permanent  waving  process,  the  hair  has  been 
irreversibly  altered.  These  changes  contribute  to  some  of 
the  dermatologic  problems  noted  in  chemically  waved  hair. 
First, the dry waved hair shaft is shorter than the original hair 
shaft  ( 12 ).  This  may  account  for  the  perception  by  many 

patients that their hair was cut too short following a perming 
procedure.  Second,  the  chemically  treated  hair  shaft  is  17% 
weaker and thus less able to withstand the trauma of combing 
and brushing ( 13 ). Patients comment that their hair is falling 
following permanent waving when in actuality the hair shaft is 
fracturing  more  readily.  Third,  the  hair  demonstrates  more 
frictional  resistance  following  permanent  waving  ( 14 ).  This 
means  it  is  more  difficult  to  comb.  Lastly,  the  hair  demon-
strates increased swelling capacity, which is evidence of corti-
cal  damage  ( 15 ).  This  swelling  accounts  for  the  increased 
penetration  of  other  chemicals  applied  to  the  hair,  such  as 
dyes, yielding unexpected results ( Fig. 28.7 ).   

  types of permanent waves 
 Waving  lotions  consist  primarily  of  a  reducing  agent  in  an 
aqueous solution with an adjusted pH ( 16 ).  Table 28.3  sum-
marizes waving lotion ingredients and their function ( 1 ). The 
most popular reducing agents are the thioglycolates, glycerol 
thioglycolates,  and  sulfites.  On  the  basis  of  waving  lotion 
type,  permanent  waves  can  be  classified  into  the  following 
groups ( 4 , 17 ): 

1.     Alkaline permanents  
2.    Buffered alkaline permanents  
3.    Exothermic permanents  
4.    Self-regulated permanents  
5.    Acid permanents  
6.    Sulﬁ te permanents    

  Table 28.4  summarizes differences between each of the per-

manent wave types.  

  Alkaline Permanents 
 Alkaline permanents utilize ammonium thioglycolate or etha-
nolamine  thioglycolate  as  the  reducing  agent  in  the  waving 
lotion. The pH is adjusted to between 9 and 10 since the thio-
glycolates are not as effective at lower pH. These products pro-
cess extremely rapidly and produce a tight, long-lasting curl; 
however they are harsh on the hair. The alkalinity allows hair 
shaft  swelling  which  can  cause  problems  in  individuals  with 
color-treated hair, especially bleached hair. For this reason, the 
concentration  of  the  thioglycolate  waving  lotion  is  adjusted 
from  the  7%  used  on  natural  hair  to1%  used  on  heavily 
bleached hair.  

  Buffered Alkaline Permanents 
 In order to decrease hair swelling encountered due to the high 
pH  of  alkaline  permanent  waves,  a  buffering  agent  such  as 
ammonium  bicarbonate  is  employed.  These  products  are 
known  as  buffered  alkaline  permanents  and  result  in  a  tight 
curl at a pH of 7 to 8.5. Their advantage is the production of a 
tight, long-lasting curl with less hair damage.  

  Exothermic Permanents 
 Exothermic permanent waves produce heat as a by-product to 
increase client comfort as some individuals may feel chilled dur-
ing the permanent waving process. The heat is produced when 
an oxidizing agent, such as hydrogen peroxide, is mixed with the 
thioglycolate-based  waving  lotion  immediately  prior  to  scalp 
application. The reaction of the thioglycolate with the peroxide 
produces dithiodiglycolate (the disulfide of thioglycolate) which 

HAIR PERMANENT WAVING

187

(A)

(B)

 Figure 28.7      (A)  A tight permanent wave as evidenced by tightly curled hair.  (B)  A medium permanent wave showing relaxed ringlets.  (C)  A loose permanent wave, 
also known as body wave, demonstrating loose curls.    

(C)

188

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 28.3  Permanent Waving Lotion Ingredients

Ingredient

Chemical examples

Function

Reducing agent Thioglycolates sulfites
Alkaline agent

Ammonium hydroxide, 

Break disulfide bonds
Adjust pH

triethanol-amine
Chelating agent Tetrasodium EDTA
Wetting agent

Fatty alcohols

Conditioner

Proteins, humectants, 

Opacifier

quaternium 
compounds
Polyacrylates, 

Remove trace metals
Improve hair 

saturation with 
waving lotion

Protect hair during 
waving process

Opacify waving 

polystyrene latex

lotion

Source: Adapted from Ref. 1.

Table 28.4  Function of Neutralizer Ingredients

Ingredient

Chemical example

Function

Oxidizing agent Hydrogen peroxide, 
sodium bromated
Citric acid, acetic acid, 

Acid buffer

Reform broken 

disulfide bonds
Maintain acidic pH

Stabilizer

Sodium stannate

Prevent hydrogen 

lactic acid

Wetting agent

Fatty alcohols

peroxide 
breakdown
Improve hair 

saturation with 
neutralizer

Conditioner

Proteins, humectants, 

Improve hair feel

quaternium 
compounds

Opacifier

Polyacrylates, polystyrene 

Make neutralizer 

latex

opaque

Source: Adapted from Ref. 1.

limits  the  extent  to  which  the  permanent  wave  can  process. 
 Irreversible hair damage will result if the waving lotion is not 
mixed  with  the  oxidizing  agent  prior  to  application.  For  this 
 reason,  exothermic  permanent  waves  are  mainly  available  for 
professional use only.  

  Self-Regulated Permanents 
 Self-regulated  permanent  waves  are  designed  to  limit  the 
amount  of  hair  disulfide  bond  breakage  so  that  irreversible 
hair damage is prevented. Overprocessing, due to leaving the 
permanent  wave  solution  on  the  hair  longer  than  recom-
mended,  causes  extensive  hair  breakage  acting  like  a  depila-
tory. It is not unusual for a busy beautician to have three to 
four  permanent  waves  processing  at  the  same  time.  Self- 
regulated  permanent  waves  are  designed  to  form  a  chemical 
equilibrium such that the disulfide bond breakage is stopped. 
This  is  accomplished  by  adding  dithioglycolic  acid  to  the 
 thioglycolate-based waving lotion. This is the same chemical 
reaction discussed for exothermic permanent waves.  

  Acid Permanents 
 Acid permanent waves occur in an acidic environment with a 
pH of 6.5 to 7. They are based on thioglycolate esters such as 

glycerol  monothioglycolate.  The  lower  pH  is  an  advantage 
since less hair shaft swelling occurs than at higher pH levels, 
thus  hair  damage  is  minimized.  These  products  result  in  a 
looser,  shorter-lasting  curl,  but  leave  the  hair  soft.  They  are 
ideal for bleached or color-treated hair. It is possible to achieve 
a tighter curl if the permanent wave is processed with added 
heat under a hair dryer, but more hair shaft damage results. 

 The  glycerol  monothioglycolate  in  this  type  of  permanent 
wave  is  responsible  for  allergic  contact  dermatitis  in  both 
beauticians  and  clients  ( 18 ).  Interestingly  enough,  the  hair 
may continue to be allergenic even after all products have been 
thoroughly rinsed from the hair.   

   Glycerol monothioglycolate found in acid permanent 
waves is responsible for allergic contact dermatitis in both 
beauticians and clients. 

  Sulfite Permanents 
 Sulfite  permanent  waves  are  mainly  marketed  for  home  use 
and  have  not  found  popularity  among  salons  in  the  U.S.A. 
These products differ in that the reducing agent is a sulfite or 
bisulfite, instead of a mercaptan. This accounts for the reduced 
odor  which  is  their  primary  advantage.  They  require  a  long 
processing time at a pH of 6 to 8 and result in loose curls. A 
conditioning agent must be added to the formulation as the 
sulfite permanent waves can leave the hair feeling harsh.  

  Home Permanents 
 Home permanents are designed for the nonprofessionals and 
are  of  two  types:  ammonium  thioglycolate  permanents  and 
sulfite permanents. The ammonium thioglycolate permanents 
have the same characteristics as the salon solutions except they 
are one-third strength. This is to prevent excessive hair damage 
by the novice. Thus, home thioglycolate permanents produce 
looser curls that are not as long lasting as salon permanents. 

 As mentioned previously, sulfite permanents are manufac-
tured only for home use and have no professional counterpart. 
The  major  advantage  of  this  type  of  permanent  wave  is 
decreased odor. The head is covered with a plastic cap to use 
body heat for processing and an alkaline rinse is applied as a 
neutralizer. The mild curls produced are not long lasting.  

  Neutralizers 
 Neutralizers function to reform the broken disulfide bonds and 
restore the hair to its original condition. Two methods are avail-
able:  self-neutralization  and  chemical  neutralization.  Both 
methods  rely  on  oxidation.  Self-  neutralization  allows  air  to 
 oxidize  the  permanent  wave,  but  this  requires  6  to  24 hours. 
During this time, the hair must be left on the permanent wave 
rods.  This  method  is  rarely  used.  Chemical  neutralization  is 
more popular, due to its speed, and relies upon the use of an 
oxidizing agent. The oxidizing agent is usually 2%hydrogen per-
oxide adjusted to an acidic pH. Bromates may also be used , but 
are more expensive. The ingredients found in a chemical neu-
tralizer and their functions are summarized in  Table 28.4  ( 1 ).   

  adverse reactions 
 The use of permanent wave solutions is considered safe; however, 
incidence  of  both  irritant  and  allergic  contact  dermatitis  has 
been  reported  to  thioglycolate-containing  waving  lotions  ( 19 ). 

HAIR PERMANENT WAVING

Irritant contact dermatitis is more common and can be avoided 
by  minimizing  skin  contact  with  the  solution  ( 20 ).  This  is 
 especially  important  in  patients  using  topical  tretinoin,  who 
seem to experience skin irritation more readily with permanent 
waving.  Prior  to  application  of  the  waving  lotion,  a  layer  of 
petroleum jelly should be applied to the margins of the scalp and 
covered with a band of absorbent cotton. This provides a protec-
tive  covering  for  the  non-hair  bearing  skin  that  might  contact 
any waving lotion running over the scalp. Patients with a sensi-
tive scalp can even apply petroleum jelly to the scalp as protec-
tion.  The  petroleum  jelly  contacts  the  proximal  hair  shaft, 
however, preventing curling in this region. 

 Allergic  contact  dermatitis  can  occur  immediately  after 
 permanent waving or persist due to an allergen in the hair of 
patients who undergo permanent waving procedures involv-
ing glyceryl monothioglycolate ( 18 , 21 ). The North American 
Contact Dermatitis Group found this chemical to be the fifth 
most common cause of dermatitis ( 22 ). The substance should 
be patch tested at a 1% concentration in petrolatum ( 23 ).  

  summary 
 Permanent waving is a popular hair styling technique for both 
men  and  women.  The  increased  curl  makes  straight  hair 
appear  fuller  and  provides  for  fashionable  styles.  Unfortu-
nately,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  body  building  permanent 
wave  or  a  hair  restorative  permanent  wave.  All  permanent 
wave processes damage and weaken the hair fiber. This chapter 
has evaluated the chemistry of the various permanent waves 
on the market for their effect of the hair shaft presenting infor-
mation  to  help  the  dermatologist  understand  the  procedure 
and  advise  patients  in  a  meaningful  way  when  they  present 
with problems from permanent waving.   

   references 
    1.       Lee     AE   ,    Bozza     JB   ,    Huff     S   ,    de la Mettrie     R    .   Permanent waves: an overview  . 

  Cosmet Toilet     1988  ;   103  :   37  –  56  .    

    2.       Wickett      RR    .    Disulfide  bond  reduction  in  permanent  waving  .    Cosmet 

 Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   37  –  47  .    

    3.       Wickett     RR    .   Permanent waving and straightening of hair  .   Cutis     1987  ;   39  : 

  496  –  7  .    

    4.       Zviak     C    .   Permanent waving and hair straightening  .   In  :     Zviak     C    ,   ed  .   The 

Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker  ,   1986  ,   183  –  209  .    

    5.       Cannell      DW    .    Permanent  waving  and  hair  straightening  .    Clin  Dermatol   

  1988  ;   6  :   71  –  82  .    

    6.       Draelos     ZK    .   Hair cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   19  –  27  .    
    7.       Brunner     MJ    .   Medical aspects of home cold waving  .   Arch Dermatol     1952  ; 

  65  :   316  –  26  .    

    8.       Heilingotter      R    .    Permanent  waving  of  hair  .    In  :      de  Navarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The 
Chemistry  and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  .    Illinois  :    Allured  Publishing 
Co  ,   1988  ,   1167  –  227  .    

    9.       Wortman      FJ   ,     Souren      I    .    Extensional  properties  of  human  hair  and 

 permanent waving  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1987  ;   38  :   125  –  40  .    

189

   10.       Shipp      JJ    .    Hair-care  products  .    In  :    Chemistry  and  Technology  of  the 
  Blackie  Academic  & 

  London  : 

 Cosmetics  and  Toiletries  Industry  , 
 Professional  ,   1992  ,   80  –  6  .    

   11.       Szadurski     JS   ,    Erlemann     G    .   The hair loop test—a new method of  evaluating 

perm lotions  .   Cosmet Toilet     1984  ;   99  :   41  –  6  .    

   12.       Garcia     ML   ,    Nadgorny     EM   ,    Wolfram     LJ    .   Letter to the editor  .   J Soc Cosm 

Chem     1990  ;   41  :   149  –  54  .    

   13.       Feughelman      M    .   A  note  on  the  permanent  setting  of  human  hair  .    J  Soc 

Cosmet Chem     1990  ;   41  :   209  –  12  .    

   14.       Robbins     CR    .   Chemical and Physical Behavior of Human Hair  .   New York  : 

  Springler-Verlag  ,   1988  ,   94  –  8  .    

   15.       Shansky     A    .   The osmotic behavior of hair during the permanent waving 
process as explained by swelling measurements  .   J Soc Cosm Chem     1963  ; 
  14  :   427  –  32  .    

   16.       Ishihara     M    .   The composition of hair preparations and their skin hazards  . 
  In  :     Koboir     T   ,    Montagna     W    ,   eds  .   Biology and Disease of the Hair  .    Baltimore  : 
  University Park Press  ,   1975  ,   603  –  29  .    

   17.       Gershon     SD   ,    Goldberg     MA   ,    Rieger     MM    .   Permanent waving  .   In  :     Balsam   
  MS   ,    Sagarin     E    ,   eds  ,   Cosmetics Science and Technology  ,   2nd edn  ,   Vol. 2  , 
  New York  :   Wiley-Interscience, John Wiley & Sons  ,   1972  ,   167  –  250  .    

   18.       Morrison      LH   ,     Storrs      FJ    .    Persistence  of  an  allergen  in  hair  after  glyceryl 
monothioglycolate-containing  permanent  wave  solutions  .    J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol     1988  ;   19  :   52  –  9  .    

   19.       Lehman      AJ    .    Health  aspects  of  common  chemicals  used  in  hair-waving 

preparations  .   JAMA     1949  ;   141  :   842  –  5  .    

   20.       Fisher      AA    .    Management  of  hairdressers  sensitized  to  hair  dyes  or 

 permanent wave solutions  .   Cutis     1989  ;   43  :   316  –  18  .    

   21.       Storrs     FJ    .   Permanent wave contact dermatitis: contact allergy to glyceryl 

monothioglycolate  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1984  ;   11  :   74  –  85  .    

   22.       Adams     RM   ,    Maibach      HI    .   A five-year study of cosmetic reactions  .    J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .    

   23.       White      IR   ,     Rycroft      RJG   ,     Anderson      KE    ,    et  al.      The  patch  test  dilution  of 

 slyceryl thioglycolate  .   Contact Dermatitis     1990  ;   23  :   198  –  9  .     

  suggested reading 
      Bolduc     C   ,    Shapiro     J    .   Hair care products: waving, straightening, conditioning, 

and coloring  .   Clin Dermatol     2001  ;   19  :   431  –  6  .    

     Borish     ET    .   Hair waving (Chapter 6)  .   In  :     Johnson     DH    ,   ed  .   Hair and Hair Care  . 

  Marcel Dekker  ,   1997  ,   167  –  90  .    

     DeGeorge  ,    MS    .    Permanent  waving,  hair  straightening,  and  depilatories 
(Chapter 32)  .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co., 
Inc.  ,   2000  ,   695  –  723  .    

     Han      MO   ,     Chun      JA   ,     Lee      JW   ,     Chung      CH    .    Effects  of  permanent  waving  on 
changes of protein and physicomorphological properties in human head 
hair  .   J Cosmet Sci     2008  ;   59  :   203  –  15  .    

     Hishikawa     N   ,    Tanizawa     Y   ,    Tanaka     S   ,    Honiguchi     Y   ,    Asakura     T    .   Structural change 
of  keratin  protein  in  human  hair  by  permanent  waving  treatment  . 
   Polymer     1998  ;   39  :   3835  –  40  .    

     Kuzuhara     A    .   Analysis of structural changes in permanent waved human hair 

using Raman spectroscopy  .   Biopolymers     2007  ;   85  :   274  –  83  .    

     Syed      AN   ,     Ayoub      H    .    Correlating  porosity  and  tensile  strength  of  chemically 

modified hair  .   Cosmet Toilet     2002  ;   117  :   1245  –  30  .    

     Wickett      RR    .    Permanent  waving  and  straightening  of  hair  .    Cutis      1987  ;    39  : 

  496  –  7  .    

     Zviak     C   ,    Sabbagh     A    .   Permanent waving and hair straightening (Chapter 6)  .   In  : 
    Bouillon     C   ,    Wilkinson     J    ,   eds  .   The Science of Hair Care  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & 
Francis Group, LLC  ,   2005  ,   201  –  27  .         

             29    Hair straightening      

  Hair straightening is truly an art. It is a commonly practiced 
procedure among persons with wavy and curly hair to allow 
versatility  in  hair  styling  that  otherwise  could  not  be 
achieved ( 1 ). Hair straightening requires skill, dexterity, and 
knowledge  to  obtain  an  optimal  result.  Skill  is  required  to 
apply the straightening cream evenly to the entire hair shaft 
in an organized methodical fashion. Dexterity is required to 
apply  the  straightening  cream,  comb  the  hair  straight,  and 
remove  the  cream  within  a  20-minute  time  period.  Lastly, 
knowledge is required to select the hair straightening chem-
ical that will break enough disulfide bonds in the hair shaft 
to allow straightening to occur without weakening the hair 
shaft to the point of fracture. There is no substitute for the 
skill of a well-trained beautician when it comes to straight-
ening  hair.  It  is  infinitely  more  difficult  than  permanent 
waving or dyeing hair.  

   Permanent hair straightening is a procedure technically 
known as lanthionization. 

 Hair can be straightened with heat or chemical techniques ( 2 ). 
 Heat straightening techniques are temporary and have already 
been covered. This chapter shall discuss the permanent method 
of  hair  straightening,  also  known  as  lanthionization.  Hair 
straightening is undertaken for many reasons including those 
listed in  Table 29.1  ( 3 ).  

 The first permanent hair straighteners, also known as hair 
relaxers or perms, were developed around 1940 and consisted 
of  sodium  hydroxide  or  potassium  hydroxide  mixed  into 
potato starch. Once the disulfide bonds were broken, the hair 
was pulled straight and the disulfide bonds reformed in their 
new  configuration.  This  section  examines  the  physical  and 
chemical differences between African American hair and Cau-
casian  hair,  discusses  the  chemistry  of  hair  straightening, 
reviews  the  unique  aspects  of  the  hair  straightening  tech-
niques, and presents the relevant dermatologic considerations. 

  hair straightening characteristics 
 There are some unique differences between Caucasian hair and 
African American hair.  Table 29.2  summarizes some of the key 
differences ( 4 ). It is interesting to note that African American 
hair has a greater thickness but requires less strength to break 
than  Caucasian  hair.  Notice  that Asian  hair  grows  the  longest 
and is the most resistant to breakage. This may account for the 
fact that most human hair wigs for African Americans are woven 
from treated Asian hair. There are also subtle differences in the 
chemical substances such as amino acid, sulfur, and ammonia 
between African American and Caucasian hair ( Table 29.3 ).    

   African American hair has a greater thickness than 
Caucasian hair, but requires less force to break. 

190

 In summary, it can be said that African American hair has 
fewer cuticle layers than Caucasian hair, 7 as compared to 12. 
The hair shafts have a larger diameter, but tend to break where 
the  hair  begins  to  kink  at  pinch  points  ( 5 ).  Lastly,  African 
American  hair  has  a  lower  moisture  content  than  Caucasian 
hair,  which  reduces  the  hair  shaft  elasticity  and  encourages 
breakage.   

   African American hair has a lower moisture content than 
Caucasian hair, reducing the hair shaft elasticity and 
encouraging breakage. 

  hair straightening chemistry 
 Hair  relaxing,  also  known  as  lanthionization,  is  a  chemical 
process whereby extremely curly hair is straightened through 
the use of metal hydroxides, such as sodium, lithium, potas-
sium, or guanidine hydroxide, to change about 35% of the cys-
teine  contents  of  the  hair  to  lanthionine  along  with  minor 
hydrolysis  of  the  peptide  bonds.  Chemical  relaxing  can  be 
accomplished with lye-based, lye-free, ammonium thioglyco-
late, or bisulfite creams ( 6 ). 

 Lye-based,  or  sodium  hydroxide  straighteners  are  alkaline 
creams with a pH of 13. Sodium hydroxide is a caustic sub-
stance that can damage hair, produce scalp burns, and cause 
blindness if exposed to the eye. These products are generally 
restricted to professional or salon use and may contain up to 
3.5% sodium hydroxide. The basic chemistry of hair relaxing 
with  lye  products  is  depicted  in   Table  29.4   while  the  hair 
 rearrangement schematic is presented in  Table 29.5  ( 7 ).    

   Lye-based hair straighteners are the most popular 
 straighteners and are alkaline creams with a pH of 13. 

 Lye  relaxers  are  available  in  “base”  and  “no-base”  forms 
( Table 29.6 ). The “base” is usually petrolatum that is applied to 
the  scalp  and  hair  line  prior  to  application  of  the  sodium 
hydroxide. This prevents scalp irritation and burns. The “base” 
relaxers  contain  between  1.5%  and  3.5%  sodium  hydroxide 
and therefore require that the scalp and hairline be coated with 
a petrolatum base prior to application. These high-concentration 
lye  products  are  necessary  for  hard-to-straighten  hair. 
“No-base” relaxers, on the other hand, contain 1.5% to 2.5% 
sodium  hydroxide  and  only  require  base  application  to  the 
hairline ( 8 ). They are more popular since it is time consuming 
for the beautician to apply the base to the scalp and most indi-
viduals are re-straightening hair that has already been chemi-
cally weakened.  

 Other  strong  alkali  chemicals  sometimes  used  in  place  of 
sodium hydroxide are guanidine hydroxide and lithium hydrox-
ide,  which  are  known  as “no-lye”  chemical  hair   straighteners 

HAIR STRAIGHTENING

191

Table 29.1  Rationale for Permanent Hair Straightening

Table 29.4  Chemistry of Hair Relaxing

1.  Hair manageability is improved
2.  The hair can be more easily combed and styled
3.  Hair breakage may be decreased due to less combing friction
4.  Hair shine is improved with a straighter hair shaft
5.  Fashion may dictate the need for straight hair
6.   Versatility in straightening techniques allows multiple styling 
options: completely straightened, minimally straightened, 
texturized, or straightened and recurled

Table 29.2  Comparative Physical Characteristics of African 
American Hair

Property evaluated

Maximum length (mm)
Thickness
Shape
Force (g)
Breaking strength dry (N/m2)
Breaking strength wet (N/m2)
Elongation at breaking 

point wet (%)

African 
American Caucasian

Asian

15–30
High
Kidney
33
0.153
0.089
42

100–150

60–100
Medium Low
Oval
43
0.189
0.165
62

Round
63

Elongation at breaking 

39

50

point dry (%)

Source: Adapted from Vermeulen S, Banham A, Brooks G. Ethnic hair care. 
Cosmet Toilet 2002; 117: 69–78.

Table 29.3  Comparative Chemical Amino Acid 
 Characteristics of African American Hair

Amino acids and other hair 
components

African American 
hair content

Caucasian 
hair content

Glycine
Alanine
Valine
Leucine
Isoleucine
Serine
Threonine
Tyrosine
Phenylalanine
Aspartic acid
Glutamic acid
Lysine
Arginine
Histidine
Sulfur
Half cystine
Cysteic acid
Proline
Ammonia

541
509
568
570
277
672
615
202
179
436
915
23
482
84
1380
1370
10
662
935

539
471
538
554
250
870
653
132
130
455
871
213
512
63
1440
1380
55
672
780

Source: Adapted from Vermeulen S, Banham A, Brooks G. Ethnic hair care. 
Cosmet Toilet 2002; 117: 69–78.

( Table 29.7 ). These relaxing kits contain 4–7% cream calcium 
hydroxide and liquid guanidine carbonate. The guanidine car-
bonate activator is then mixed into the calcium hydroxide cream 
to  produce  calcium  carbonate  and  guanidine  hydroxide,  the 

Strong alkali chemical relaxing

+
NaOH K S S K

- - -

-OH
⎯⎯→

(Alkali can be Na+, K+, or Li+)

K S K Na S + H O

- -

+

2

2

Source: Adapted from Obukowho P, Birman M. Hair curl relaxers: a  discussion 
of their function, chemistry, and manufacture. Cosmet Toilet 1995; 110: 65–9.

Table 29.5  Two-Part Guanidine Carbonate Relaxing

Part One

C·8-8-C

C-8-8-C

C-8-8-C

C-8-8-C

Disulfide
bonds

Part Two

OH

pH 12

C-8 8-C

C-8 8-C

C-8 8-C

C-8 8-C

C-8-C

C-8-C

C-8-C

C-8-C

β elimination
sulfur atom

Lanthionine
formation

1: NaOH + K-S-S-K

−

OH

 K-S-K + Na2S + H2O

(Alkali can be Na , K , Li )

NH2-CO3

NH2-OH

2a: NH2-C-NH2

 Ca(OH) 2

−

OH

 NH2-C-NH2

 CaCO3

NH2-OH

2b: NH2-C-NH2

 K-S-S-K 

−

OH

K-S-K 

(NH4)2-S 

 H2O etc.

Source:  Adapted  from  Obukowho  P,  Birman  M.  Hair  curl  relaxers:  a 
 discussion  of  their  function,  chemistry,  and  manufacture.  Cosmet  Toilet 
1995; 110: 65–9.

Table 29.6  Ingredients in a Lye No-Base Relaxer

Petrolatum
Mineral oil
Fatty alcohol
Emulsifying wax
Simethicone
Water
Propylene glycol
Sodium lauryl sulfate
Sodium hydroxide (lye)

active agent. These products do not require basing of either the 
scalp or the hairline. The chemical reaction that occurs with a 
guanidine hydroxide product is illustrated in  Table 29.5 .   

   No lye relaxers are based on guanidine hydroxide and 
lithium hydroxide, which may be more damaging to the 
hair shaft than lye relaxers, if not properly applied. 

  Table 29.8  compares the lye and no-lye relaxers in terms of 

their effect on the hair shaft.  

192

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 29.7  Ingredients in a No-Lye Cream Relaxer

Table 29.9  Considerations for Selecting a Hair Relaxer

Cream Relaxer Components

Petrolatum
Mineral oil
Fatty alcohol
Emulsifying wax
Simethicone
Water
Propylene glycol
Calcium hydroxide

Liquid Activator Components

Water
Propylene glycol
Xanthan gum
Guanidine carbonate

Table 29.8  Comparison of Lye and No-Lye Chemical 
Relaxers

Hair quality

Relative strength on a 
scale of 1–3 (higher 
no. is stronger)
Alkaline relaxing 

agent

Chemical agent
PH
Hair shaft 

Lye chemical 
relaxer

No-Lye chemical 
relaxer

3

1

NaOH or KOH

Guanidine hydroxide

OH
12.5–14
Faster

OH
12.5–13.5
Slower

penetration
Processing time
Irritation
Hair drying potential Less drying to hair 

Shorter
High

Longer
Low
More drying to hair 

and scalp

and scalp

Source:  Adapted  from  Obukowho  P,  Birman  M.  Hair  curl  relaxers:  a 
 discussion  of  their  function,  chemistry,  and  manufacture.  Cosmet  Toilet 
1995; 110: 65–9.

 Thioglycolate  can  also  be  used  as  an  active  agent  in  hair 
straightening  ( 9 ).  These  are  the  same   thioglycolate  chemicals 
that were described as permanent wave solutions, except that 
they are formulated as thick creams, rather than lotions. The 
cream  adds  weight  to  hair  and  helps  to  pull  it  straight. Also, 
instead  of  the  hair  being  wound  on  mandrels,  it  is  combed 
straight while the thioglycolate cream is in contact with the hair 
shaft. Thioglycolate hair straighteners are extremely harsh on 
the hair and are the least popular of all the relaxing chemicals 
for this reason. The thioglycolate cream has a pH of 9.0 to 9.5, 
which removes the protective sebum and facilitates hair shaft 
penetration. Chemical burns can also occur with this variety of 
chemical hair straightener ( 10 ). 

 The  least  damaging  of  all  hair  straightening  chemicals  are 
the  ammonium  bisulfite  creams.  These  products  contain  a 
mixture of bisulfite and sulfite in varying ratios depending on 
the pH of the lotion. Many of the home chemical straightening 
products  are  of  this  type,  but  can  only  produce  short  lived 
straightening. These are very similar to the home sulfite per-
manent waves, except here again the hair is combed straight 
instead of being wound on curling rods.  

1.  Relaxer must effectively straighten hair
2.   Relaxer must contain adequate petrolatum and other oils to 

protect against scalp and hairline irritation
3.  Relaxer must be stable at room temperature
4.   Relaxer must be an easy-to-apply cream that spreads over hair 

with sufficient weight to pull hair straight
5.  Relaxer must rinse easily with warm water
6.  Relaxer must not damage hair beyond acceptable limits

Table 29.10  Hair Relaxing Steps

  1.  Do not shampoo
  2.  Apply petrolatum base to scalp and hairline
  3.  Section hair
  4.   Apply cream relaxer from hair root to end beginning at nape 

of neck

  5.   Gently comb hair straight for 10 to 30 min until the degree of 

relaxation is achieved

  6.  Rinse thoroughly with water
  7.  Apply neutralizer
  8.  Shampoo
  9.  Apply conditioner
10.  Style
11.  Apply styling conditioner

   Chemical hair straightening chemicals that produce the 
longest-lasting hair straightening are also the most 
damaging to the hair shaft. 

 As  a  general  rule,  the  chemicals  that  produce  the  greatest, 
longest-lasting hair straightening are also the most damaging 
to the hair shaft.  Table 29.9  presents the important consider-
ations when selecting a relaxer product.   

  application technique 
 This section has presented the basic chemistry involved in hair 
relaxing and now presents the application technique. Whether 
the patient chooses to utilize lye-based, no-lye, thioglycolate, or 
sulfite  chemicals  to  induce  the  straightening,  the  application 
technique is similar ( Table 29.10 ) ( 11 ). The relaxing process is 
illustrated  in   Figure  29.1 .  Shampooing  is  the  first  step  in  the 
permanent waving technique for straight hair, but the hair is 
not  shampooed  when  straightening  is  undertaken.  This  is 
because hair straightening chemicals are far more irritating and 
shampooing  would  remove  the  protective  sebum  from  the 
scalp. As a matter of fact, the protective sebum is supplemented 
with a petrolatum base applied to the scalp and hairline to pre-
vent skin burns. Following application of the base, the hair is 
divided into quadrants allowing the hair stylist to work system-
atically.  For  previously  untreated  hair,  the  chemical  straight-
ener  is  applied  from  hair  root  to  distal  end  beginning  at  the 
nape of the neck and moving forward to the anterior hairline. 
The hair at the nape of the neck receives the chemical first, since 
it is subject to less weathering, resulting in the presence of more 
cuticular scale. This means it will be more resistant to the lan-
thionization process. The chemicals are left in contact with the 
hair only 20 to 30 minutes during which time the hair stylist is 

HAIR STRAIGHTENING

193

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

(F)

(G)

(H)

 Figure 29.1     ( A ) A petrolatum base is applied to the entire hairline and scalp. ( B ) The hair is divided by parting into quadrants. ( C ) The cream is scooped from its 
jar and applied to the scalp with a stiff brush. ( D ) Application of the straightener to the hair close to the scalp at the nape of the neck. ( E ) The straightener is applied 
to the hair next to the scalp over the entire head. ( F ) A protective rubber glove is worn to prevent the strong alkali from producing cutaneous burns. ( G ) The relaxer 
has been applied to the entire scalp within 10 minutes. ( H ) The hair is combed and pulled straight.    

194

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

combing the hair straight. The hair stylist must work quickly to 
get  the  straightening  cream  worked  through  all  areas  of  the 
scalp  quickly.  Longer  contact  of  the  chemicals  with  the  hair 
shafts will result in irreversible damage.    

   The hair stylist must work quickly to get the hair 
 straightening chemicals in and out of the hair as quickly 
as possible to avoid overprocessing, which irreversibly 
weakens the hair shafts. 

 For previously treated hair, the chemical straightener is applied 
to  the  new  growth  only  taking  care  to  minimize  scalp  contact. 
 Usually, the straightening cream is applied to the hair closest to the 
scalp first and then combed through the previously relaxed distal 
ends for the last 10 minutes of the process. The hair is combed to 
pull it straight concurrently with the straightening cream applica-
tion. The hair stylist should completely remove all of the straight-
ening  chemicals  within  20 minutes.  This  requires  skill  and 
organization. It is for this reason that hair straightening should not 
be attempted by someone without education and experience. 

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

 Figure  29.2     ( A )  The  neutralizer  lotion.  ( B )  The  neutralizer  has  a  pH  indicator  and  turns  pink  when  applied  to  any  hair  that  still  contains  the  alkaline  lye. 
( C ) The hair has been shampooed and conditioned. ( D ) The appearance of the newly straightened hair.    

HAIR STRAIGHTENING

 When the hair has relaxed to desired degree of straightening, 
the  cream  must  be  thoroughly  removed  with  water  rinsing 
( Fig. 29.2 ). A neutralizer is then smoothed on the hair taking 
care to keep it straight and untangled, since the hair shafts can 
very  easily  fracture  until  the  neutralization  process  is  com-
plete.  Once  the  hair  has  been  thoroughly  neutralized,  it  is 
shampooed  with  a  nonalkaline  shampoo  to  minimize  hair 
shaft swelling. A conditioner must be applied immediately fol-
lowing shampooing to decrease water loss from the hair shaft. 
The  hair  straightening  chemicals  produce  holes  in  the  hair 
shaft  cuticle  through  which  the  hair  shaft  water  evaporates 
leaving  the  hair  shaft  dry  and  inelastic.  The  remoisturizing 
poststraightening conditioner minimizes hair shaft brittleness 
and breakage. The formulation presented in  Table 29.11  con-
tains panthenol as a humectant, stearaylkonium chloride and 
dicetyldimonium  chloride  as  conditioners,  cetearyl  alcohol 
and mineral oil as emollients, and octyl dimethyl PABA as a 
UV  protectant.  The  hair  is  then  dried  and  styled.  Following 
styling,  a  second  conditioner  is  applied  to  further  condition 
the  hair  shafts.  The  formulation  presented  in   Table  29.12  
contains  petrolatum,  mineral  oil,  and  beeswax  to  prevent 
water loss and add hair shaft shine.     

   If the hair is not properly neutralized, it will easily break 
after the relaxing procedure because the disulfide bonds 
have not been restored. 

 There are two other styling variations of hair relaxers known 
as  blow-out  relaxers  and  texturizing  relaxers.  The  chemicals 
employed and the lanthionization process are identical to that 

Table 29.11  Remoisturizing Post-Straightening  Conditioner

Water
Methyl paraben
Imidazolidinyl urea
Panthenol
Sodium PCA
Cetearyl alcohol
Dicetyldimonium chloride
Mineral oil
Polysorbate-20
Propyl paraben
Octyl dimethyl PABA
Fragrance

Table 29.12  Ingredients in Oil Moisturizing Lotion Styling 
Conditioner

Petrolatum
Mineral oil
Propyl paraben
Beeswax
Stearic hydrazide
Sorbitan sesquioleate
Polysorbate-80
Water
Methylparaben
Imidazolidinyl urea
Sodium borate
Fragrance

195

previously  discussed.  The  blow-out  relaxers  minimally 
straighten the hair shaft leaving it more manageable, but pre-
serving  some  of  the  curl.  Texturizing  relaxers  leave  the  hair 
wavy and not completely straight. Both of these relaxer variet-
ies are most popular among men with short hair. 

 The key to successful hair relaxing is an experienced beauti-
cian  who  can  quickly  apply  and  remove  the  chemicals  and 
determine when the desired degree of disulfide bond breaking 
has occurred. It is estimated that virgin hair loses about 30% 
of its tensile strength following a properly performed chemical 
straightening procedure. It also becomes more porous allow-
ing future relaxing procedures to process more quickly ( 12 ). 
Hair  relaxing  is  a  careful  balance  between  achieving  the 
straightening  of  kinky  hair  and  minimizing  irreversible  hair 
shaft damage.   

   It is estimated that virgin hair loses about 20% of its 
tensile strength following a properly performed chemical 
straightening procedure. 

  hair perming application technique 
 Another  technique  for  relaxing  kinky  hair  is  known  as  hair 
perming. The products used are similar to Caucasian perma-
nent waves, in that they are based on ammonium thioglycolate, 
which is neutralized with ammonium hydroxide. The main dif-
ferences between a straight hair perm and a kinky hair perm are 
the level of the active ingredients and the application technique. 
Perming is performed in four stages consisting of rearranging, 
boosting, neutralizing, and conditioning ( Table 29.13 ).  

 Permanent waving of kinky hair begins by shampooing and 
sectioning the hair as described for hair straightening. A cream 
is then applied containing high levels of ammonium thiogly-
colate  in  the  range  of  7–7.5%.  This  cream  is  known  as  the 
reducing cream or rearranger. It is applied from the hair root 
to  distal  end  on  virgin  hair  starting  at  the  nape  of  the  neck 
proceeding to the anterior hair line. In previously chemically 
treated hair, the rearranger is only applied to new growth. Its 
purpose is to straighten the hair in preparation for the curling 

Table 29.13  Kinky Hair Permanent Waving Technique

  1.  Shampoo hair
  2.  Section hair into quadrants
  3.   Apply rearranger from hair root to distal hair shaft starting 
with hair at the nape of the neck and moving forward

  4.  Rinse rearranger with water
  5.   Apply booster from hair root to distal hair shaft starting with 

the hair at the nape of the neck and moving forward

  6.  Section hair
  7.  Wrap hair around rods
  8.  Place patient under hooded hair dryer for 15–20 min
  9.  Perform test curl
10.  Rinse hair thoroughly
11.  Apply neutralizer to each rod for 15–20 min
12.  Remove curling rods
13.  Rinse hair thoroughly
14.  Apply conditioner for 10–20 min
15.  Dry hair
16.  Apply glycerin curl activator
17.  Style hair

196

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

procedure. The rearranger is then rinsed and a reducing lotion 
or curl booster is applied from the hair root to the distal end. 
The hair is then sectioned and wrapped around perming rods. 
The patient is placed under a hooded hair dryer to increase the 
rate of the chemical reaction with heat. After 15–20 minutes, a 
test  curl  is  performed  to  determine  whether  the  desired 
amount of curl has been obtained. This is assessed by unwrap-
ping  several  rods  and  observing  whether  the  hair  makes  a 
complete  “s”,  meaning  that  the  desired  amount  of  curl  has 
been achieved. This is identical to the reducing step in a per-
manent  wave  on  straight  hair.  The  hair  is  then  thoroughly 
rinsed. 

 Next the hair is ready for neutralization with an oxidizing 
solution containing 10–13% sodium bromate for 15 to 20 min-
utes. This sets the curls and the rods are removed. The hair is 
then thoroughly rinsed. A variety of conditioners and glycerin 
curl activators are now applied to prevent excessive hair shaft 
water loss and hair brittleness. The hair is then dried and styled 
as desired. 

 These kinky hair perm products, known as the “Jheri” curl 
after  the  company  that  pioneered  the  technology,  were 
 introduced in the late 1970s. They have recently lost some of 
their original appeal since the curling procedure is extremely 
 damaging  to  African  American  hair  leaving  it  frizzy,  dry, 
and  brittle.  Daily  use  of  propylene  glycol  and  glycerin  curl 
 activators is required prior to styling to maintain the hair style 
and  decrease  breakage.  Unfortunately,  the  glycerin  styling 
products leave the hair sticky and tend to stain clothing and 
pillow cases. It is also necessary to repeat the procedure every 
12 weeks, further weakening the hair shafts and predisposing 
to hair loss through breakage.  

  addressing patient problems 
 The dermatologist may frequently encounter patients who are 
experiencing problems related to the use of hair straighteners. 
Most patients will complain of hair loss immediately following 
a relaxing procedure. It is important to verify that the relaxer is 
indeed the cause. Hair that has been relaxed has undergone a 
significant insult to the disulfide backbone of hair strength. As 
previously mentioned, the disulfide bonds must be broken to 
straighten  the  hair  and  not  all  of  them  can  be  reconnected 
resulting in weaker hair. The dermatologist can verify whether 
the hair has been damaged by grasping the end of the hair and 
pulling. If the hair breaks, it has been over-relaxed and chemi-
cally damaged. The hair should also be pulled where it exits the 
scalp.  If  breakage  occurs,  the  damaged  induced  by  chemical 
relaxing can be confirmed. 

 Once it has been confirmed that the hair loss is due to chem-
ical straightening, the dermatologist should offer some helpful 
suggestions. Of course, the damaged hair cannot repair itself. 
The brittle hair must be trimmed, and overprocessing of the 
new growth should be avoided. Overprocessing can be avoided 
by decreasing the strength of the solution and, more impor-
tantly, leaving the chemicals on the hair for a shorter period of 
time.  The  beautician  must  get  the  chemicals  applied  quickly 
and removed quickly for best results and minimum hair weak-
ening. Hair around the face experiences more trauma, a phe-
nomenon known as weathering, than hair in other locations. 
For this reason, the relaxer should be applied first at the nape 
of the neck and moved forward. This minimizes the time the 

relaxer  remains  on  this  damaged  hair,  since  it  is  applied 
last and removed first. In addition, worsening hair damage can 
be  avoided  by  allowing  as  long  as  possible  between  hair 
 straightening procedures.  

   Hair breakage can be minimized by combing or styling the 
hair as little as possible, applying moisturizing condition-
ing agents, and avoiding any further chemical treatments 
such as permanent hair dyeing or bleaching. 

 Hair breakage can be minimized by combing or styling the 
hair  as  little  as  possible,  applying  moisturizing  conditioning 
agents, and avoiding any further chemical treatments such as 
permanent hair dyeing or bleaching ( 13 ). Protein-containing 
deep  conditioners  may  be  helpful  to  temporarily  strengthen 
the damaged hair by 5–10%. The holes that are created in the 
cuticle  by  the  straightening  chemicals  never  completely  seal 
and  can  be  used  to  passively  diffuse  small-molecular-weight 
proteins  into  the  hair  shaft.  Protein-containing  deep  condi-
tioners are thick creams applied to the hair and left in contact 
for 20–30 minutes sometimes under a hair dryer set at low. The 
prolonged  contact  and  heat  encourage  the  proteins  to  enter 
the hair shaft. Weekly protein pack leave-in conditioners may 
minimize hair breakage. 

 Hair  that  has  been  over-relaxed  may  also  break  due  to 
decreased  water  content. When  holes  are  created  in  the  hair 
shaft by the relaxer to break the disulfide bonds in the cortex, 
water is released from the hair. Water allows the hair to behave 
as  an  elastic  material.  While  the  water  cannot  be  replaced, 
moisturizing  the  hair  shaft  to  restore  protein  flexibility  may 
decrease breakage. Heavy occlusive hair conditioners that con-
tain  petrolatum,  glycerin,  and  dimethicone  can  minimize 
water loss, decrease combing friction, and add shine to relaxed 
hair. These products were originally known as pomades, but 
are now called hair conditioners. It is impossible to overcondi-
tion relaxed hair. Since sebum is the best conditioning agent, 
once weekly or every other week shampooing also minimizes 
hair damage, but can compromise hair hygiene. 

 Dermatologists should also recognize that hair straightening 
chemicals are all well-known cutaneous irritants. It is for this 
reason that a petrolatum cream is applied as a base to the scalp 
and hairline. This process, known as “basing,” is important not 
to damage the scalp skin. Hair straightening solutions are not 
suitable for patch testing and chemical burns are possible if a 
novice  is  performing  the  straightening  procedure.  Patients 
should select only experienced, salon trained professionals to 
perform hair straightening to avoid adverse reactions.   

   references 
    1.       Bernard     B    .   Hair shape of curly hair  .   Supp J Am Acad Dermatol     2003  ;   48  : 

  S120  –  6  .    

    2.       McDonald      CJ    .    Special  requirements  in  cosmetics  for  people  with  black 
skin  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  .    Principles  of  Cosmetics  for  the 
 Dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby  ,   1982  :   302  –  4  .    

    3.       Syed     A   ,    Kuhajda     A   ,    Ayoub     H   ,    Ahmad     K    .   African-American hair  .   Cosmet 

Toilet     1995  ;   110  :   39  –  48  .    

    4.       Franbourg      A   ,     Hallegot      P   ,     Baltenneck      F   ,     Toutain      C   ,     Leroy      F    .    Current 
research on ethnic hair  .   Supp J Am Acad Dermatol     2003  ;   48  :   S115  –  19  .    
    5.       McMichael      A    .    Ethnic  hair  update:  past  and  present  .    Supp  J  Am  Acad 

 Dermatol     2003  ;   48  :   S127  –  33  .    

HAIR STRAIGHTENING

197

    6.       Cannell      DW    .    Permanent  waving  and  hair  straightening  .    Clin  Dermatol   

     Etemesi      BA    .    Impact  of  hair  relaxers  in  women  in  Nakuru,  Kenya  .    Int 

  1988  ;   6  :   71  –  82  .    

J  Dermatol     2007  ;   46    (Suppl 1)  :   23  –  5  .    

    7.       Syed     A    .   Ethnic hair care: history, trends, and formulation  .   Cosmet Toilet   

     Grimes     PE    .   Skin and hair cosmetic issues in women of color  .   Dermatol Clin   

  1993  ;   108  :   99  –  108  .    

  2000  ;   18  :   659  –  65  .    

    8.       Khalil     EN    .   Cosmetic and hair treatments for the black consumer  .   Cosmet 

Toilet     1986  ;   101  :   51  –  8  .    

    9.       Ogawa      S   ,     Fufii      K   ,     Kaneyama      K   ,     Arai      K   ,     Joko      K    .    A  curing  method  for 
 permanent  hair  straightening  using  thioglycolic  and  dithiodiglycolic 
acids  .   J Cosmet Sci     2000  ;   51  :   379  –  99  .    

   10.       Bulengo-Ransby     SM   ,    Bergfeld     WF    .   Chemical and traumatic alopecia from 

thioglycolate in a black woman  .   Cutis     1992  ;   49  :   99  –  103  .    

   11.       Brooks     G    .   Treatment regimes for styled black hair  .   Cosmet Toilet      1983  : 

  59  –  68  .    

     Grimes     PE   ,    Davis     LT    .   Cosmetics in blacks  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   53  –  68  .    
     Halder     RM    .   Hair and scalp disorders in blacks  .   Cutis     1983  ;   32  :   378  –  80  .    
     Holloway     VL    .   Ethnic cosmetic products  .   Dermatol Clin     2003  ;   21  :   743  –  9  .    
     Kahre     J    .   Ethnic differences in haircare products (Chapter 52)  .   In  :     Barel     A   ,    Paye     M   , 
   Maibach     H    ,   eds  .   Handbook of Cosmetic Science and Technology  .   Marcel 
Dekker, Inc.  ,   2001  :   605  –  18  .    

     Khumalo      NP   ,     Jessop      S   ,     Gumedze      F   ,     Ehrlich      R    .    Determinants  of  marginal 
 traction alopecia in African girls and women  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2008  ; 
  59  :   432  –  8  .    

   12.       Syed     A   ,    Ayoub     H    .   Correlating porosity and tensile strength of chemically 

     McMichael      AJ    .    Ethnic  hair  update:  past  and  present  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   

modified hair  .   Cosmet Toilet     2002  ;   117  :   57  –  62  .    

  2003  ;   489    (Suppl)  :   S127  –  33  .    

   13.       Burmeister     F   ,    Bollatti     D   ,    Brooks     G    .   Ethnic hair: moisturizing after relaxer 

     Quinn      CR   ,     Quinn      TM   ,     Kelly      AP    .    Hair  care  practices  in  African  American 

use  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   49  –  51  .     

women  .   Cutis     2003  ;   72  :   280  –  2  ,   285  –  9  .    

  suggested reading 
      De Sa Dias     TC   ,    Baby     AR   ,    Kaneko     TM   ,    Robles Velasco     MV    .   Relaxing/straight-
ening of afro-ethnic hair: historical overview  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2007  ;   6  : 
  2  –  5  .    

     Quinn      CR   ,     Quinn      TM   ,     Kelly      AP    .    Hair  care  practices  in  African  American 

women  .   Drug Ther Topics     2003  ;   72  :   280  –  9  .    

     Roseborough      IE   ,     McMichael      AJ    .    Hair  care  practices  in  African-American 

patients  .   Semin Cutan Med Surg     2009  ;   28  :   103  –  8  .    

     Smith     W   ,    Burns     C    .   Managing the hair and skin of African American pediatric 

patients  .   J Pediatr Health Care     1999  ;   13  :   72  –  8  .    

     Draelos     ZD    .   Understanding African-American hair  .   Dermatol Nurs     1997  ;   9  : 

     Syed     AN    .   Ethnic hair care products (Chapter 9)  .   In  :     Johnson     DH    ,   ed  .   Hair and 

  227  –  31  .    

hair care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1997  :   235  –  59  .         

             30    Hair dyeing      

  Hair dyes represent a major hair cosmetic used by both men 
and women. It is estimated that 40% of women regularly use 
hair  dyes  to  blend  gray  tones,  cover  gray  hair,  add  colored 
highlights,  produce  unnatural  temporary  colors,  and  either 
lighten or darken the original hair color. Hair dyeing is used to 
cover gray and achieve a more youthful appearance, but it is 
also used to change the natural hair color based on personal 
preference.  A  number  of  different  hair  dye  cosmetics  have 
been developed to fulfill all of these needs: gradual, temporary, 
semipermanent,  and  permanent.  Approximately  65%  of  the 
hair  dye  market  is  for  permanent  hair  colorings,  20%  for 
 semipermanent colorings, and 15% for the remaining types. 

 Hair  coloring  is  an  ancient  tradition  that  was  common 
among  the  ancient  Persians,  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Romans. 
The use of henna, a naturally occurring plant dye, dates to the 
third  dynasty  of  Egypt  4000 years  ago.  The  Egyptians  mixed 
the  Lawsonia  plant  from  which  henna  is  derived  with  hot 
water  and  placed  the  material  on  the  head  to  produce  an 
orange-red  hair  color.  Metallic  dyes  containing  lead  acetate, 
obtained  by  dipping  lead  combs  in  sour  wine,  were  used  by 
Roman  men  to  cover  gray  hair  ( 1 ).  Roman  women,  on  the 
other  hand,  attempted  to  lighten  their  hair  by  applying  lye 
 followed by sun exposure. 

 The modern concept of permanent hair dyeing dates back to 
1883 when Monnet patented a process for coloring fur using 
p-phenylenediamine and hydrogen peroxide. Feathers and hair 
were later dyed in 1888 and the first human application was in 
Paris  in  1890  and  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  U.S.A.  in  1892  ( 2 ). 
Temporary and semipermanent dyes were not developed until 
the 1950s when they were incorporated from the textile indus-
try  into  the  cosmetic  industry.  Bleaching  of  the  hair  with 
hydrogen peroxide was first demonstrated at the Paris Exposi-
tion of 1867 by Thillary and Hugo ( 3 ). All of these products 
form the basis for modern hair coloring, which can produce a 
myriad of hair colors ( Fig. 30.1 ).  

  hair color physiology 
 Pigment comprises less than 3% of the fiber mass of hair, yet is 
one  of  the  most  important  hair  cosmetic  aspects  ( 4 ).  Three 
pigment types produce the tremendous variety of colors seen 
in human hair: eumelanins, pheomelanins, and oxymelanins. 
Eumelanins are insoluble polymers accounting for the brown 
and black hues consisting mainly of 5,6-dihydroxyindole with 
lesser amounts of 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid. Phe-
omelanins are soluble polymers accounting for the yellow to 
red hues containing 10–12% sulfur and 1,4-benzothiazinylala-
nine. Eumelanin contains less sulfur than pheomelanin ( 5 ). A 
lesser pigment, known as oxymelanin, is yellow or reddish in 
color  and  probably  represents  bleached  eumelanin  pigment 
arising from partial oxidative cleavage of 5,6-dihydroxyindole 
units. Oxymelanin is distinct in that it contains no sulfur ( 6 ). 
Hair dyes attempt to mimic these pigments in reproducing a 
natural appearing hair color.  

198

   The tremendous variety observed in natural human hair 
color is due to three pigments: eumelanin, pheomelanin, 
and oxymelanin. 

 The  principal  aim  of  hair  dyeing  is  to  cover  gray  hair.  The 
mechanism of graying is not totally understood, however. It is 
thought  that  the  death  of  some  melanocytes  within  the  hair-
melanocyte unit triggers a chain reaction resulting in the death of 
the rest of the unit melanocytes in a relatively short period ( 7 ). 
A possible mechanism of death is the accumulation of a toxic 
intermediate metabolite, such as dopaquinone ( 8 ).   

   Hair dyes can be divided into several types based on their 
formulation and permanency: gradual, temporary, 
semipermanent, and permanent. 

  types of hair dyes 
 Hair  dyes  can  be  divided  into  several  types  based  on  their 
 formulation  and  permanency:  gradual,  temporary,  semiper-
manent, and permanent ( Table 30.1 ).  

  Gradual 
 Gradual hair dyes, also known as metallic or progressive hair 
dyes, require repeated application to result in gradual darken-
ing of the hair shaft. This product will change the hair color 
from  gray  to  yellow-brown  to  black  over  a  period  of  weeks 
( Fig. 30.2 ) ( 9 ). There is no control over the final color of the 
hair,  only  the  depth  of  color  and  lightening  is  not  possible. 
They  employ  water-soluble  metal  salts  which  are  deposited 
on the hair shaft in the form of oxides, suboxides, and sulfides. 
The  most  common  metal  used  is  lead,  but  silver,  copper, 
 bismuth,  nickel,  iron,  manganese,  and  cobalt  have  also  been 
used. In the U.S.A., 2–3% solutions of lead acetate or nitrate 
are used to dye the hair while 1–2% solutions of silver nitrate 
are used to dye eyelashes and eyebrows ( 10 ).   

   Gradual hair dyes employ water-soluble metal salts which 
are deposited on the hair shaft in the form of oxides, 
suboxides, and sulfides. 

 Metallic  hair  dyes  are  inexpensive  and  do  not  require  a 
professional  operator  for  application.  Their  disadvantages 
include poor color quality and stiff, brittle, or dull hair that 
may not withstand further chemical processing. In addition, 
the trace metals left on the hair will cause permanent dyes or 
permanent  waving  solutions  to  perform  poorly.  The  metal 
can cause breakdown of the hydrogen peroxide in bleaching 
or  permanent  waving  products,  resulting  in  the  rupture  of 
the hair shaft. The hair that has been treated with the gradual 

HAIR DYEING

hair  colorant must, therefore, grow out before other dyeing 
or  waving  procedures  are  used,  to  guarantee  an  optimal 
result ( 11 ). 

 The gradual color change induced by metallic dyes requires 
continued  use  if  the  color  is  to  be  maintained;  however,  the 
hair  shaft  damage  induced  by  the  product  is  permanent. 
Therefore, metallic dyes are not appropriate for female patients 
who desire more color darkening than the product can pro-
vide and who are likely to undergo permanent waving. These 
products are most appropriate for male patients who cut their 
hair frequently, only need minimal darkening, and are unlikely 
to process their hair further ( 12 ).  

 Figure 30.1     Hair coloring technology can produce a myriad of hair colors.    

199

  Temporary 
 Temporary hair coloring agents are designed to be removed 
in one shampoo washing ( 13 ). They are used to add a slight 
tint,  brighten  a  natural  shade,  or  improve  an  existing  dyed 
shade. Their particle size is too large to penetrate through the 
cuticle,  accounting  for  their  temporary  nature  ( 1 ).  Tempo-
rary dyes can be easily rubbed off the hair shaft, however, and 
will run onto clothing if the hair gets wet from rain or per-
spiration. They can be formulated as a liquid, mousse, gel, or 
spray ( Fig. 30.3 ).   

   Temporary hair dyes are designed to be removed in one 
shampooing to tint or brighten or improve hair color. 

 Liquid temporary hair colorants are also referred to as “hair 
rinses” since they are frequently applied in the shower follow-
ing shampooing, with the excess dyestuff removed by rinsing. 
They contain acid dyes of the same type used to dye wool fab-
rics and belong to the following chemical classes: azo, anthra-
quinone, 
triphenylmethane,  phenzainic,  xanthenic,  or 
benzoquinoneimine ( 14 ). These dyes are known as FDC and 
DC blues, greens, reds, oranges, yellows, and violets. No dam-
age is imparted to the hair shaft by these dyes because they are 
composed of large molecules that are deposited on the surface 
of the hair, and are unable to penetrate due to size. 

 The  liquid  rinse  formulation  is  most  popular,  especially 
among  mature  patients  with  gray  hair  who  wish  to  remove 
undesirable yellow tones and achieve a purer platinum color. A 
sample product for this purpose may contain a 0.001% con-
centration of methylene blue, acid violet 6B, and water-soluble 
nigrosin  in  an  aqueous  preparation  ( Fig.  30.4 ).  Temporary 
hair colorants are recommended for mature patients since the 
hair  shaft  is  not  damaged  and  many  patients  only  require 
weekly  shampooing.  The  liquid  rinse  can  also  be  used  by 
patients  who  have  achieved  an  undesirable  permanent  dye 
color and wish to tone the bad result until the poorly colored 
hair grows out and is cut.  

 Mousse formulations of temporary hair colorants are avail-
able in both natural and party colors. They are applied soon 
after  shampooing  to  towel-dried  hair  and  are  not  removed. 
Because the coloring agent is dispersed in a styling polymer, 
such as polyvinylpyrrolidone/vinyl acetate, the mousse serves 

Table 30.1  Hair Coloring

Type

Gradual

Main ingredient

Duration of effect

Effect on hair

Advantages/disadvantages

Aqueous solution of lead or 
silver oxides, suboxides, 
and sulfides

Color persists with 
continued use

Darkens gradually by 
“plating” hair shaft

Cannot be combined with 

permanent dye or permanent 
wave

Temporary

High-molecular-weight, 

Removal with one 

Large color molecules 

Can blend or tone undesirable hair 

Semipermanent

Permanent

textile dyes

Low-molecular-weight, 
natural or synthetic 
textile-type dye
Oxidation coloring 

employing primary 
intermediates, couplers, 
and an oxidant

shampooing

deposited in hair shaft

color

Removal with four or six 

shampooings

Small color molecules 
penetrate hair cortex

Permanent

New color molecules 
formed within hair 
shaft

Tone-on-tone coloring. Will cover 

less than 30% gray. May be 
allergenic

Lighten (two-step processing) or 

darken (one-step processing).Will 
cover gray 100%. Need to cover 
new growth with monthly dyeing. 
May be allergenic

200

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

both as a styling agent and temporary colorant. This product 
may be used to add highlights or blend gray hair in brunette 
patients with less than 15% gray hair. Mousse temporary col-
oring  agents  are  ideal  for  the  female  patient  with  minimal 
bitemporal graying. These products are also available in party 
colors  such  as  yellow,  orange,  blue,  green,  purple,  and  red, 
which can be used to create special multicolored effects. 

 Gel formulations of temporary hair colorants are identical 
to mousse formulations, except that they are packaged as a gel 
in a tube rather than as foam released from an aerosol can. Gel 
temporary hair colorants also combine a styling aid with col-
oring; however, the hold provided by the gel is generally supe-
rior to that provided by the mousse. These products are only 
available  in  party  colors,  with  some  lines  including  a  hair 
 glitter. Gel temporary hair colorants are only appropriate for 
creating unusual hair styles. 

 Spray  formulations  of  temporary  hair  colorants  are  also 
available to professional cosmetologists. A pressurized aerosol 
spray  is  used  to  apply  the  temporary  liquid  dyestuff  to  the 
hair ( 15 ). 

 Temporary, hair coloring agents should be used with care in 
patients with damaged or chemically treated hair because the 
hair  shaft  has  increased  porosity  due  to  loss  of  the  cuticular 
scale. The porous hair shafts allow entrance of the color mol-
ecules  into  the  hair  shaft,  rendering  them  more  permanent. 

 Figure 30.2     Gradual hair dyes are popular in male patients who wish to darken 
hair color slowly over time.    

 Figure  30.3     Spray  temporary  coloring  agents  are  popular  among  teens 
 wanting a pink, blue, or green lock of hair for fashion purposes.    

 Figure 30.4     Unwanted yellow overtones in graying hair can be minimized by 
using a purple rinse, but in some cases the rinse can inadvertently dye the hair 
purple as demonstrated in this image.    

HAIR DYEING

Under these conditions, it may take more than one shampoo-
ing to remove the color.  

  Semipermanent 
   Textile Dyes  
 Semipermanent  hair  coloring  is  popular  with  both  men  and 
women.  Formulated  for  use  on  natural,  unbleached  hair,  it  can 
cover gray, add highlight, or rid hair of unwanted tones ( Fig. 30.5 ). 
Semipermanent hair dyes are removed in four to six shampoo-
ings  due  to  their  intermediate  sized  particles  that  can  both 
enter and exit the hair shaft ( 16 ). Recently, longer lasting prod-
ucts  within  this  category  incorporating  hydrogen  peroxide 
have become available. The dyes are retained in the hair shaft 
by  weak  polar  and  van  der  Waals  attractive  forces,  thus 
 dyestuffs with increased molecular size will remain longer. The 
formulation  of  a  typical  semipermanent  hair  dye  comprises 
these: dyes (nitroanilines, nitrophenylenediamines, nitroami-
nophenols,  azos,  and  anthraquinones),  alkalizing  agent,  sol-
vent, surfactant, thickener, fragrance, and water ( 17 ). Usually, 
10 to 12 dyes are mixed to obtain the desired shade ( 18 ).   

   Semipermanent hair dyes are removed in 4 to 6 
 shampooings and can cover gray, add highlights, or get rid 
hair of unwanted tones. 

 Semipermanent dyes are available as lotions, shampoos, and 
mousses. The shampoo-in process is most popular for home 
use.  The  dyestuff  is  combined  with  an  alkaline  detergent 
shampoo  to  promote  hair  shaft  swelling  so  that  the  dye  can 

 Figure  30.5     Semipermanent  hair  coloring  is  used  in  persons  with  minimal 
gray hair to add red or blonde highlights.    

201

penetrate, a thickener so that the product will remain on the 
scalp,  and  a  foam  stabilizer  so  that  the  product  will  not  run 
and  stain  facial  skin.  The  mousse  formula  incorporates  the 
dyestuff in aerosolized foam. Both products are applied to wet, 
freshly  shampooed  hair  and  are  rinsed  in  20  to  40 minutes. 
Semipermanent dyes can become more permanent if applied 
to porous, chemically treated hair. 

 Semipermanent dyes produce tone-on-tone coloring rather 
than effecting drastic color changes, so their role is actually in 
toning  rather  than  dyeing  the  hair.  The  less  color  change 
required  by  the  patient,  the  more  satisfied  he  or  she  will  be 
with the semipermanent dye result. Semipermanent dyes are 
best suited for patients with less than 30% gray hair who want 
to restore their natural color ( 19 ). This is done by selecting a 
dye color that is lighter than the natural hair color since the 
dye will penetrate both the gray and the nongray hairs, result-
ing in an increased darkening of the nongray hairs. It is not 
possible to lighten hair with semipermanent dyes, since they 
do not contain hydrogen peroxide, nor is it possible to darken 
hair more than three shades beyond the patient’s natural hair 
color. Thus, in the cosmetic industry, semipermanent dyes are 
known as suitable only for staying “on shade.”  

   Stains  
 A  newer  type  of  semipermanent  hair  coloring  is  hair  stain. 
Hair stain is a synthetic polymer, usually in unnatural shades 
such as reds, blues, purples, or yellows, that imparts a hue or 
highlight  to  the  hair.  For  example,  brunette  hair  with  a  red 
stain will have a reddish glow or blond hair with a yellow stain 
will have a yellow glow. The stain appears transparent so that 
it  blends  with  the  underlying  hair  color.  The  stain  does  not 
cover, but only tones. If heat is added to the staining process, 
the  stain  is  more  resistant  to  shampoo  removal  and  if  both 
heat and hydrogen peroxide are added to the staining process, 
the  stain  can  penetrate  the  hair  shaft  deeply  and  become 
 permanent.  

   Semipermanent hair stains are synthetic polymers 
designed to add hues and highlights to the hair. 

 Rarely, individuals with multiple dye sensitivities may wish 
to stain hair with natural agents, such as walnut stain (Herba-
sol, extract of walnut leaves; Cosmetochem USA, Clifton, NJ). 
This extract of black walnut leaves produces a deep brownish-
black color when applied to the hair.  

   Vegetable Dyes  
 Vegetable dyes, the first form of hair coloring developed, fall 
under  the  semipermanent  category  because  they  minimally 
penetrate  the  cuticle,  although  four  to  six  shampooings  are 
required  for  removal  ( Fig.  30.6 ).  The  only  vegetable  dye 
remaining  today  is  henna,  derived  from  the   Lawsonia  alba 
 plant. As originally used, the dried plant leaves were ground to 
form a powder that was activated with water to form an acidic 
naphthoquinone  dye  that  was  then  applied  as  a  paste  to  the 
hair for 40 to 60 minutes. The henna imparted a reddish hue to 
the hair. Metallic salts were combined with henna to produce 
what  was  termed  a  “compound  henna”,  to  provide  a  wider 

202

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

range of colors. Today, natural henna dyes have been replaced 
by  synthetic  henna-type  products  with  dye  shades  ranging 
from auburn to blonde to gray. These synthetic henna prod-
ucts combine a conditioning agent with the dye, but they are 
still powders mixed with water to form a paste that remains in 
contact with the hair for 40 minutes. Hennas can be used for 
darkening, but not lightening, of the original hair color. Natu-
ral hennas are inferior to synthetic hennas because they leave 
the hair stiff and brittle after repeated applications. Henna has 
not  been  reported  to  cause  allergic  contact  dermatitis  when 
used as a hair dye.    

   Semipermanent vegetable dyes from henna are used to 
create red hair tones, but most modern hennas contain 
synthetic coloring ingredients. 

   Permanent  
 Permanent  hair  coloring  accounts  for  $3  of  every  $4 dollars 
spent  on  hair  dyeing  in  the  U.S.A.  It  is  more  popular  with 
women than men since women are more likely to effect a com-
plete hair color change than men. Permanent hair coloring is 
so named because the dyestuff penetrates the hair shaft to the 
cortex and forms large color molecules that cannot be removed 
by shampooing ( Fig. 30.7 ) ( 20 ). It can be used to both cover 
gray  and  produce  a  completely  new  hair  color.  Redyeing  is 
 necessary every four to six weeks, as new growth, known in the 
cosmetic industry as “roots,” appears at the scalp.   

   Permanent hair dyes contain colorless dye precursors that 
chemically react with hydrogen peroxide inside the hair 
shaft to produce colored molecules. 

 This type of hair coloring does not contain dyes, but rather 
colorless dye precursors that chemically react with hydrogen per-
oxide  inside  the  hair  shaft  to  produce  colored  molecules  ( 21 ). 
The  process  entails  the  use  of  primary  intermediates 
(p- phenylenediamine,  p-toluenediamine,  and  p-aminophe-
nols)  which  undergo  oxidation  with  hydrogen  peroxide. 
These  reactive  intermediates  are  then  exposed  to  couplers 
(resorcinol, 1-naphthol, m-aminophenol, etc.) to result in a 

wide variety of indo dyes. These indo dyes can produce shades 
from  blonde  to  brown  to  black  with  highlights  of  gold  to 
red  to  orange.  Variations  in  the  concentration  of  hydrogen 
peroxide and the chemicals selected for the primary interme-
diates and couplers produce this color selection ( 22 ). Red is 
 produced by using nitro para phenylenediamine alone or in 
combination  with  mixtures  of  para-aminophenol  with 
meta  phenylenediamine,  alpha  naphthol,  or  1,5-dihydro-
xynaphthalene.  Yellow  is  produced  by  mixtures  of  ortho 
amino phenol,  ortho  phenylenediamine,  and  nitro-ortho 
phenylenediamine. Blue has no single oxidation dye interme-
diate and is produced by combinations of para phenylenedi-
amine,  phenylenediamine,  methyl  toluylenediamine,  or 
2,4 diaminoanisol ( 23 ). 

 Permanent  dyeing  allows  shades  to  be  obtained  both 
lighter  and  darker  than  the  patient’s  original  hair  color. 
Higher concentrations of hydrogen peroxide can bleach mel-
anin thus the oxidizing step functions both in color produc-
tion and bleaching. Due to the use of hydrogen peroxide in 
the formation of the new color molecules, hair dyes must be 
adjusted so that hair lightening is not produced with routine 
dyeing ( 24 ). However, hydrogen peroxide cannot remove suf-
ficient melanin alone to lighten dark brown or black hair to 
blonde  hair.  Boosters,  such  as  ammonium  persulfate  or 
potassium sulfate, must be added to achieve great degrees of 
color  lightening.  The  boosters  must  be  left  in  contact  with 
the hair for one to two hours for an optimal result. Neverthe-
less, individuals with dark hair who choose to dye their hair 
a  light  blonde  color  will  notice  the  appearance  of  reddish 
hues with time. This is due to the inability of the peroxide/
booster  system  to  completely  remove  reddish  pheomelanin 
pigments, which are more resistant to removal than brown-
ish eumelanin pigments. 

 Permanent hair dyes are sold as two bottles containing col-
orless liquid within a kit. One bottle contains the dye precur-
sors  in  an  alkaline  soap  or  synthetic  detergent  base  and  the 
other contains a stabilized solution of hydrogen peroxide. The 
two bottles are mixed immediately prior to use and applied to 
the  hair.  The  dye  precursors  and  hydrogen  peroxide  diffuse 
into the hair where the new color is created. 

 Permanent hair dyes are the most damaging to the hair. This 
type  of  hair  dye  alters  the  internal  hair  shaft  structure  and 

 Figure 30.6     Henna has recently seen an increase in popularity as a hair dye 
because it is a natural dye of plant origin.    

 Figure  30.7     Professional  salon  permanent  hair  dyes  can  produce  more 
 dramatic color changes than those designed for at home use.    

HAIR DYEING

203

thereby  decreases  its  strength.  Several  key  points  should  be 
remembered to minimize hair shaft damage: 

on the new proximal hair growth, not the previously 
dyed distal hair shaft.   

1.     If  both  permanent  waving  and  permanent  dyeing 
are to be performed, the hair should be permanently 
waved first and permanently dyed second. Ten days 
should be allowed between the procedures.  

2.    Lightening, or bleaching, the hair is more damaging 

than dyeing the hair to a darker color.  

3.    Each  redyeing  procedure  further  damages  the  hair 
shaft, thus the period between redyeing should be as 
long as possible and the dye should be concentrated 

 Permanent hair coloring agents are available for both home 
and professional salon use. The chemistry is identical for both 
home  and  salon  products,  except  that  more  drastic  color 
changes  require  a  salon  product  ( Fig.  30.8 ).  Permanent  hair 
coloring agents for home use are available in several different 
formulations: liquid, cream, and gel. The liquid shampoo-in 
formulas are most popular. All formulations come with a hair 
color  tint  and  developer  that  must  be  mixed  immediately 
before application on dry hair. The product must saturate the 

(A)

(B)

(C)

 Figure 30.8     ( A ) The appearance of a cream professional permanent hair dye. ( B ) The permanent hair dye is mixed with hydrogen peroxide. ( C ) The hair dye and 
hydrogen peroxide are mixed to begin the chemical reaction and are now ready for hair application.    

204

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

  hair bleaching 
 Two-step hair processing involves bleaching or lifting the nat-
ural hair color, with subsequent redyeing to the desired lighter 
shade. This technique is used when patients wish to dye their 
hair  much  lighter  than  their  natural  color.  The  bleaching  is 
achieved with an alkaline mixture of hydrogen peroxide and 
ammonia,  which  causes  swelling  of  the  hair  shaft  to  allow 
 easier penetration of the dye, known as a toner ( 27 ). A toner 
must be used as the hair, when completely stripped of its color, 
has  an  undesirable  appearance.  The  toner  can  be  either  a 
 permanent or semipermanent dye.  

   Hair bleaching to lightening hair color is achieved with an 
alkaline mixture of hydrogen peroxide and ammonia, 
which causes swelling of the hair shaft to allow easier 
penetration of the dye, known as a toner. 

 The hair must be lightened to the desired color group and 
then  dyed  to  the  desired  shade.  There  are  seven  levels  of 
 lightening: 

1.     Black  
2.    Brown  
3.    Red  
4.    Red gold  
5.    Gold  
6.    Yellow  
7.    Pale yellow   

 A patient with a black natural hair color would have to go 
through all seven stages of lightening to become a pale yellow 
blonde, whereas a patient with a natural gold hair color would 
have to go through three stages of lightening to become a pale 
yellow blonde. The more are the stages of lightening required 
to achieve the end result, the stronger the bleaching agent used 
and  the  more  damaging  the  process  is  to  the  hair  ( 26 ).  A 
“booster” such as ammonium persulfate or potassium persul-
fate  may  be  added  to  the  hydrogen  peroxide  and  ammonia 
solution for patients who desire an extreme lightening of hair 
color  ( 27 ).  Allergic  reactions  to  ammonium  persulfate  have 
been  reported  ( 28 ).  The  eumelanin  pigments  in  the  hair  are 
easily  bleached  by  hydrogen  peroxide,  but  the  pheomelanins 
are somewhat resistant. This accounts for the increased diffi-
culty in bleaching the hair of persons with reddish hair. It is 
difficult to formulate a solution strong enough to degrade hair 
pigment without damaging the hair keratin structure. 

 Some patients do not wish to lighten the hair on the entire 
scalp. For example, if only selected hairs are lightened in color, 
a  technique  known  as  “highlighting,”  a  cap  with  holes  is 
applied to the scalp and only certain hairs are pulled through 
and exposed to the bleaching and dyeing process. If only the 
tips  of  the  selected  locks  of  hair  are  treated,  the  process  is 
known  as “tipping”  whereas “streaking”  involves  treating  the 
entire  hair  shaft  of  certain  locks  of  hair. “Frosting”  the  hair 
entails bleaching a larger proportion of entire hair shafts than 
streaking. Fashion trends dictate the proportion of bleached to 
unbleached hairs in the scalp. One popular method of lighten-
ing  the  hair  and  dyeing  to  different  shades  is  known  as  hair 
“foiling” ( Fig. 30.10 ).  

 Figure 30.9     The hair dye must thoroughly saturate the hair to achieve even 
color.    

hair,  with  thicker  cream  formulations  requiring  parting  and 
sectioning of the hair to ensure an even application ( Fig. 30.9 ). 
The excess dye is then rinsed and frequently a conditioner is 
applied. Home permanent dye products can be purchased to 
lighten  or  darken  the  hair  by  three  shades.  Products  that 
lighten the hair contain ammonia and more hydrogen perox-
ide, thus bleaching as well as dyeing the hair. Most home prod-
ucts are designed to achieve a 35% coverage of gray hair. More 
dramatic color changes require professional products.   

 Even though oxidation dyes are said to be permanent, some 
color drift or “off-shade fading” does occur. This is due to slow 
chemical changes in the indo dyes, which produce a reddish to 
yellowish  cast.  Thus,  permanent  hair  colors  may  become 
“brassy” with age. Semipermanent hair colorings may be used 
to  cover  the  brassy  tones  until  redyeing  occurs.  Sometimes, 
undesirable reddish and yellowish tones develop immediately 
following  dyeing.  In  this  case “drabbers”  are  used  to  remove 
the  harshness  from  a  color.  Examples  of  drabbers  are  resor-
cinol to yield dark green to brown colors, pyrocatechol to yield 
deep  gray,  pyrogallol  to  yield  gold,  alpha  naphthol  to  yield 
bright violet, beta naphthol to yield red brown, and hydroqui-
none to yield yellow brown ( 23 ).    

  one- and two-step processing 
 Professional permanent hair dyeing techniques can be classi-
fied  into  one-  and  two-step  processing.  One-step  processing 
permanently darkens the hair color, whereas two-step process-
ing permanently lightens the hair color. In one-step process-
ing, a cream tint is used in a shampoo formulation. Often a 
conditioner or filler must be used prior to processing to ensure 
even uptake of the dye by the entire hair shaft. Damaged distal 
hair  shafts  or  previously  treated  hair  will  absorb  or  “grab” 
color  more  quickly.  The  filler  prevents  the  distal  hair  shaft 
from dyeing darker than the proximal hair shaft. However, in 
extremely  damaged  hair,  a  filler  cannot  ensure  an  even  dye 
uptake. In these cases the dyestuff is applied to the scalp first 
and the ends last so that the distal hair shafts have a shorter 
dyeing  time.  The  cream  tint  is  then  rinsed  and  a  postdyeing 
conditioner may be applied. Sometimes the hydrogen perox-
ide used in the oxidation dyeing process can lighten the exist-
ing hair color, a phenomenon known as “lift.” Hair cosmetic 
companies  formulate  one-step  permanent  oxidation  dyes  to 
avoid lift.  

HAIR DYEING

205

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

 Figure 30.10     ( A ) The hair bleach is placed in a bowl for easy application. ( B ) The bleach is applied to selected hair strands and wrapped in foil for about 20 minutes. 
( C ) The foil is unwrapped to expose the newly bleached hair. ( D ) The hair is rinsed to remove excess bleach and the appearance of the lightened hair is immediately 
apparent. ( E ) The dried hair demonstrates selectively bleached blonde strands among brunette strands, which is a  popular hair fashion.    

206

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 There is no doubt that the two-step processing is the most 
damaging form of hair coloring. Hair that has been bleached is 
extremely  porous  and  as  a  result  is  brittle,  hard  to  untangle, 
and lacking in luster. Conditioners can do very little to improve 
the appearance of hair that has sustained damage this severe. 
Most patients with double-processed hair who are dissatisfied 
with the appearance and texture of their hair are best advised 
to cut the damaged portion of the hair shafts and await new 
growth. Unfortunately, once the hair has been bleached many 
shades lighter than the natural hair color, the proximal dark 
regrowth is cosmetically unattractive. This further encourages 
the  patient  to  reprocess  the  hair.  Perhaps  patients  can  be 
encouraged to change to a shorter hair style or wear a wig dur-
ing the regrowth period. Another alternative is to use a semi-
permanent  dye  to  blend  the  bleached  and  naturally  colored 
areas of the hair shaft, but if a color difference of more than 
three shades is present, the result will be suboptimal. Two-step 
processing  should  be  minimized.  It  is  recommended  that 
patients stay within their own color group to maintain a natu-
ral appearance and prevent extensive hair shaft damage. Gen-
erally, a patient’s natural hair color group will complement the 
eye color and skin tone for an overall attractive blend. Patients 
who distort this balance create many cosmetic problems. 

 Two-step processing, however, can be successful and attrac-
tive in the mature patient who had dark brown hair and now 
has more than 60% gray hair. If the patient does not like the 
appearance  of  this  hair  coloring,  some  dyeing  procedure  is 
required. The patient is faced with the dilemma of whether to 
restore the original dark brown color or to lighten the remain-
ing dark brown hairs and redye the hair blonde. This is a per-
sonal  decision,  since  both  hair  color  changes  require 
permanent dyeing. Restoring the entire scalp to a dark brown 
might  increases  the  contrast  between  the  lighter  scalp  and 
darker hair in a mature women with female pattern alopecia. 
In addition, the problem of new hair growth will be magni-
fied due to the color difference between the natural gray color 
and dark brown dyed color. Lightening the hair by two shades 
followed  by  a  toner  could  give  the  patient  dark  blonde  hair 
with excellent coverage of the gray hair, a minimal scalp con-
trast, and a decreased color difference between dyed hair and 
new growth. 

 Melanin pigment is very resistant to reducing agents but is 
easily degraded by oxidizing agents. Therefore, hair bleaching 
can be considered an oxidative alkaline treatment. Hydrogen 
peroxide is the major oxidizer in the process, causing oxygen 
to be released from the hair keratin. The amount of hair light-
ening obtained is related to the amount of oxygen released, a 
quantity expressed as volumes by the cosmetic industry. The 
volume of a hydrogen peroxide solution is the number of liters 
of  oxygen  released  by  a  liter  of  the  bleaching  solution.  For 
example, a 20-volume solution contains 6% hydrogen peroxide 
and a 30-volume solution contains 9% hydrogen peroxide ( 29 ). 
Home bleaching products generally contain 6% hydrogen per-
oxide and professional bleaching products may contain up to 
9%  hydrogen  peroxide.  The  hydrogen  peroxide  solution  is 
mixed with an alkaline ammonia solution immediately prior 
to application to speed the reaction. The pH of the final solu-
tion  is  between  9  and  11.  The  amount  of  alkaline  material 
added must be limited, however, because excess keratin dam-
age and scalp irritation may result. 

 The hair should not be washed prior to bleaching because 
scalp  sebum  provides  protection  from  the  harsh  chemicals. 
The hair should be shampooed following the bleaching pro-
cess to remove excess solution. This is best accomplished with 
an  acid  pH  shampoo  with  minimal  detergent  action.  The 
shampooing should be done gently to avoid scalp irritation. 

 The  ease  with  which  pigment  bleaching  occurs  differs 
throughout the length of the hair shaft, with the hair near the 
scalp  bleaching  more  easily  than  the  distal  shaft.  This  is 
thought to be due to the acceleration of the bleaching process 
by  body  heat  radiating  from  the  scalp.  Proper  bleaching 
requires that the solution be applied at the ends first and then 
the roots to ensure an even color throughout the hair shaft. 

 As mentioned previously, bleaching is extremely damaging 
to  the  hair  shaft.  This  damage  results  in  a  2–3%  weight  loss 
from  the  individual  shaft,  which  causes  weakening  and  pro-
motes an increased hair breakage. Small amounts of the amino 
acids tyrosine, threonine, and methionine are degraded. It is 
estimated  that  15–25%  of  the  hair’s  disulfide  bonds  are 
degraded  during  moderate  bleaching  with  up  to  45%  of  the 
cystine bonds broken during severe bleaching ( 30 ). This weak-
ening of the hair shaft is more pronounced in wet hair, thus 
the hair should be handled minimally until dry ( 31 ). Bleached 
hair is also more porous and tends to absorb increased water, 
making it more susceptible to humidity changes and prolong-
ing  the  drying  time.  Decreased  overlapping  of  the  cuticular 
scales  also  leads  to  increased  hair  friction,  which  allows  the 
hair  to  tangle  more  readily.  Finally,  an  increased  porosity 
allows a better penetration of permanent dyeing and waving 
preparations, so bleached hair will dye to a darker shade than 
natural hair and will curl more readily than untreated hair. All 
further  chemical  processing  requires  weaker  solutions  to 
obtain desirable results.  

  hair dye removal 
 Removal of hair dye depends upon the type of coloring pro-
cess  used.  As  discussed  previously,  temporary  hair  dyes  are 
removed  with  one  shampooing  while  semipermanent  hair 
dyes are removed in four to six shampooings. The amount of 
time for a dye to wash out is equal to the time required for the 
dye to color the hair shaft. For example, if it takes 20 minutes 
for a semipermanent dye to penetrate from the cuticle to the 
cortex, then it will also take 20 minutes for the dye to exit the 
hair shaft. Thus, if the hair is shampooed for five minutes, the 
dye will be removed in four shampooings for a total elapsed 
time of 20 minutes.  

   The amount of time for a hair dye to remove from the hair 
shaft is equal to the time required for the dye to color the 
hair shaft. 

 Permanent  hair  dye  removal  is  a  much  different  matter, 
 however. It is actually easier to bleach hair than to remove these 
unnatural  pigments.  Permanent  dyes  can  be  removed  with 
reducing  agents  or  oxidants,  such  as  high-strength  peroxide. 
Reducing  agents,  such  as  sodium  hydrosulfite  or  sodium 
 formaldehyde sulfoxylate, are dissolved in water to form a 2–5% 
solution followed by an alkaline rinse ( 26 ). Special salon removal 
products  are  available  (Clairol,  Metalux).  This  procedure  is 

HAIR DYEING

extremely damaging to the hair, leaving it largely cosmetically 
unacceptable. If at all possible, the hair should be appropriately 
trimmed and possibly toned with other dyestuffs. 

 Metallic  dyes  should  not  be  removed  with  peroxide  as  the 
hair can become darkened or discolored. Sulfonated castor oil 
with the addition of salicylic acid or chelating agents may be 
effective ( 32 ).  

  adverse reactions 
 Hair coloring is generally regarded as a safe product with low 
risk of mutagenicity and oncogenicity ( 33 – 35 ). A prospective 
study of permanent hair dye use found no increase in hemato-
poietic cancers ( 36 ). Furthermore, the skin penetration is min-
imal and limited to 0.02–0.2% of the quantity of dye applied 
to the head ( 37 ). Gradual and temporary hair dyes represent 
minimal risk for irritant and allergic contact dermatitis. How-
ever,  semipermanent  dyes  can  cause  contact  allergic  contact 
dermatitis since they may contain “para” dyes (diamines, ami-
nophenols,  and  phenols)  or  dyes  that  cross-react  with  the 
“para” dyes. Paraphenylenediamine (PPD) is the sensitizer in 
permanent  hair  dyeing  ( 38 ),  with  an  estimated  incidence  of 
allergic  contact  dermatitis  of  1  in  every  50,000  applications 
( Fig. 30.11 ) ( 39 ). However, patch testing may overestimate the 
incidence of reactions to PPD-containing hair dyes. This is due 
to the limited contact time during dyeing and the less than 3% 
concentration of PPD. Furthermore, PPD combines with oxi-
dizing agents in hair dyes, which quickly react to create a new 
chemical moiety ( 40 ).   

   Para phenylenediamine (PPD) is the sensitizer in perma-
nent hair dyeing, with an estimated incidence of allergic 
contact dermatitis of 1 in every 50,000 applications. 

 Permanent and semipermanent hair dyes must be tested on 
the patient prior to use, preferably using a small swatch of hair 
and skin hidden on the posterior neck. The testing is necessary 
to  avoid  the  possibility  of  an  overwhelming  allergic  contact 
dermatitis  to  the  dye  stuff.  The  hair  dye  should  be  tested  in 
addition to the following substances ( 41 ): 

 para-phenylenediamine, 1% in petrolatum 
 para-toluylenediamine, 1% in petrolatum 
 ortho-nitro-para phenylenediamine, 1% in petrolatum 

 Figure  30.11     Allergic  contact  dermatitis  due  to  hair  dye  occurs  1  in  every 
50,000 hair dye applications.    

207

 meta-toluylenediamine, 1% in petrolatum 
 resorcinol, 2% in petrolatum 
 meta-aminophenol, 2% in petrolatum 
 hydroquinone, 1% in petrolatum 

 In addition, the dye should be tested on the hair to prevent 
undesirable  color  results.  Virgin,  untreated  hair  does  not 
accept  the  dyestuff  as  readily  as  previously  treated  hair. 
Untreated hair with an intact cuticle may even be so resistant 
to coloring as to require an alkaline agent to loosen the cuticle 
or increase porosity prior to dyeing. This type of hair is termed 
“dye resistant.” Previously treated hair will absorb or “grab” the 
color  readily,  which  can  result  in  overdyeing  if  the  beauty 
operator is careless. Hair previously treated with metallic dyes 
or conditioners may not respond as expected. A color test area, 
known as a “strand test,” allows the beautician to determine if 
the  appropriate  color  has  been  applied  to  the  hair  for  the 
appropriate amount of time. 

 Once  the  hair  has  been  semipermanently  or  permanently 
dyed,  it  is  no  longer  allergenic  ( 42 ).  However,  all  excess  dye 
must be removed with a final acidic shampoo, known as a neu-
tralizing  rinse.  Sometimes  patients  with  a  tremendous  para-
phenylenediamine  allergy,  who  have  previously  used  home 
dyeing  preparations,  develop  swelling  and  bullae  formation 
immediately  upon  application  of  the  dye  product.  In  their 
haste to come to the dermatologist’s office, they may neglect to 
remove all of the excess dye. Schueller recommends a chloride 
peroxide rinse to neutralize the excess dye, which is formulated 
as follows ( 43 ): 

 Sodium chloride, 150 g 
 Hydrogen peroxide (20 volume), 50 ml 
 Water q.s. 1000 ml 

 This  preparation  can  be  mixed  by  the  pharmacist  and 
applied to the patient’s hair to remove any remaining allergen. 
It  is  not  necessary  for  the  patient  to  cut  his  or  her  hair,  but 
further hair dyeing should be avoided. 

 Hair bleaching has been reported to cause hair breakage, skin 
irritation,  allergic  sensitization,  and  scarring  alopecia  ( 44 ). 
Cutaneous  and  respiratory  allergic  reactions  have  been 
reported to ammonium persulfate, mentioned previously as a 
booster  in  the  hair  bleaching  process.  Reported  reactions 
include allergic contact dermatitis, irritant contact dermatitis, 
localized  edema,  generalized  urticaria,  rhinitis,  asthma,  and 
syncope (45,46). Some of the reactions are thought to be truly 
allergic while others appear to be due to nonimmunologic his-
tamine  release  ( 47 ).  Patch  testing  may  be  performed  with  a 
2–5% aqueous solution of ammonium persulfate ( 48 ).  

   The cancer risk of hair dyeing is likened to the cancer risk 
of smoking one cigarette. 

 There has been some concern over the carcinogenicity of hair 
dyes and their appropriateness for use during pregnancy ( 49 ). 
There has been no link between hair dye and cancer in humans, 
but the cancer risk has been likened to smoking one cigarette 
each time the hair is dyed. Thus, the desire of the patient to dye 
their hair must be balanced with the chemical exposure ( 50 ). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Pregnant  women  frequently  ask  if  hair  dyeing  is  safe  during 
pregnancy. There are no restrictions placed on hair dyes  during 
pregnancy, but again the risks should be weighed.   

   references 
    1.       Corbett     JF    .   Hair coloring  .   Clin Dermatol     1988  ;   6  :   93  –  101  .    
    2.       Spoor      HJ    .    Permanent  hair  colorants:  oxidation  dyes  1.  Chemical 

 technology  .   Cutis     1977  ;   19  :   424  –  30  .    

    3.       Corbett      JF    .    Changing  the  color  of  hair  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  . 
   Principles  of  Cosmetics  for  the  Dermatologist  .    St.  Louis  :    CV  Mosby 
 Company  ,   1982  :   160  –  3  .    

    4.       Menkart      J   ,     Wolfram      LJ   ,     Mao      I    .    Caucasian  hair,  negro  hair,  and  wool; 
 similarities and differences  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1966  ;   17  :   769  –  89  .    
    5.       Arakindakshan      MI   ,     Persad      S   ,     Haberman      HF   ,     Kurian      CJ    .   A  comparative 
study of the physical and chemical properties of melanins isolated from 
human black and red hair  .   J Invest Dermatol     1983  ;   80  :   202  –  6  .    

    6.       Brown      KC   ,     Prota      G    .    Melanins:  hair  dyes  for  the  future  .    Cosmet  Toilet   

  1994  ;   109  :   59  –  64  .    

    7.       Cesarini     JP    .   Hair melanin and hair colour  .   In  :     Orfanos     CE   ,    Happle     R    ,   eds  . 

  Hair and Hair Diseases  .   Berlin  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1990  :   166  –  97  .    

    8.       Vardy     DA   ,    Marcus     B   ,    Gilead     L    ,   et al  .   A look at gray hair  .   J Geriatric Derma-

tol     1993  ;   1  :   22  –  7  .    

    9.       Pohl     S    .   The chemistry of hair dyes  .   Cosmet Toilet     1988  ;   103  :   57  –  66  .    
   10.       Spoor     HJ    .   Part II: metals  .   Cutis     1977  ;   19  :   37  –  40  .    
   11.       O’Donoghue     MN    .   Hair cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1987  ;   5  :   619  –  25  .    
   12.       Casperson     S    .   Men’s hair coloring  .   Comet Toilet     1994  ;   109  :   83  –  7  .    
   13.       Spoor     HJ    .   Hair dyes: temporary colorings  .   Cutis     1976  ;   18  :   341  –  4  .    
   14.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  Cosmeticology  ,    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   526  –  8  .    

   15.       Corbett      JF    .    Hair  dyes  .    In  :    The  Chemistry  of  Synthetic  Dyes  ,    Vol.  5  ,   

New York  :   Academic Press, Inc  ,   1971  :   475  –  534  .    

   16.       Spoor     HJ    .   Semi-permanent hair color  .   Cutis     1976  ;   18  :   506  –  8  .    
   17.       Corbett     JF    .   Hair coloring processes  .   Cosmet Toilet     1991  ;   106  :   53  .    
   18.       Robbin      CR    .    Chemical  and  Physical  Behavior  of  Human  Hair  ,    2nd  edn  . 

  New York  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1988  :   185  –  8  .    

   19.       Zviak      C    .    Hair  coloring,  nonoxidation  coloring  .    In  :      Zviak      C    ,    ed  .    The 
 Science of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  :   235  –  61  .    
   20.       Tucker      HH    .    Formulation  of  oxidation  hair  dyes  .    Am  J  Perfum  Cosmet   

  1968  ;   83  :   69  .    

   21.       Corbett     JF   ,    Menkart     J    .   Hair coloring  .   Cutis     1973  ;   12  :   190  .    
   22.       Zviak     C    .   Oxidation coloring  .   In  :     Zviak     C    ,   ed  .   The Science of Hair Care  . 

  New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  :   263  –  86  .    

   23.       Spoor     HJ    .   Permanent hair colorants: oxidation dyes. Part II Colorist’s art  . 

  Cutis     1977  ;   19  :   578  –  88  .    

   24.       Corbett      JF    .    Chemistry  of  hair  colorant  processes  –  science  as  an  aid  to 
formulation and development  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1984  ;   35  :   297  –  310  .    

   25.     Spoor HJ: Hair coloring – a resume  .   Cutis     1977  ;   20  :   311  –  13  .    
   26.       Zviak      C    .    Hair  bleaching  .    In  :      Zviak      C    ,    ed  .    The  Science  of  Hair  Care  .   

New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  :   213  –  33  .    

   27.       Corbett     JF    .   Hair coloring processes  .   Cosmet Toliet     1991  ;   106  :   53  –  7  .    
   28.       Fisher      AA   ,     Dooms-Goossens      A    .    Persulfate  hair  bleach  reactions  .    Arch 

Dermatol     1976  ;   112  :   1407  .    

   29.       Kass     GS    .   Hair coloring products  .   In  :     deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The Chemistry 
and  Manufacture  of  Cosmetics  ,    Vol.  4  ,    2nd  edn  .    Allured  Publishing 
 Corporation  ,   1988  :   841  –  920  .    

   34.       Morikawa     F   ,    Fujii     S   ,    Tejima     M   ,    Sugiyama     H   ,    Uzuak     M    .   Safety evaluation 
of hair cosmetics  .   In  :     Kobori     T   ,    Montagna     W    ,   eds  .   Biology and Disease of 
the Hair  .   Baltimore  :   University Park Press  ,   1975  :   641  –  57  .    

   35.       Corbett     JF    .   Hair dye toxicity  .   In  :     Orfanos     CE   ,    Montagna     W   ,    Stuttgen     G    , 

  eds  .   Hair Research  ,   New York  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1981  :   529  –  35  .    

   36.       Grodstein      F   ,     Hennekens      CH   ,     Colditz      GA   ,     Hunter      DJ   ,     Stampfer      MJ    .    A 
 prospective study of permanent hair dye use and hematopoietic cancer  .  
 J Natl Cancer Inst     1994  ;   86  :   1466  –  70  .    

   37.       Kalopissis      G    .    Toxicology  and  hair  dyes  .    In  :      Zviak      C    ,    ed  .    The  Science  of 

Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  :   287  –  308  .    

   38.       Goldberg      BJ   ,     Herman      FF   ,     Hirata      I    .    Systemic  anaphylaxis  due  to  an 
 oxidation  product  of  p-phenylenediamine  in  a  hair  dye  .    Ann  Allergy   
  1987  ;   58  :   205  –  8  .    

   39.       Rostenberg     A   ,     Kass      GS    .    Hair  Coloring, AMA  Committee  of  Cutaneous 

Health and Cosmetics  ,   1969      

   40.       Corbett      JF    .    p-benzoquinonediimine  –  a  vital  intermediate  in  oxidative 

hair dyeing  .   J Soc Cosmetic Chemists     1969  ;   20  :   253  .    

   41.       DeGroot     AC   ,    Weyland     JW   ,    Nater     JP    .   Unwanted Effects of Cosmetics and 

Drugs Used in Dermatology  .   Amsterdam  :   Elsevier  ,   1994  :   481  –  2  .    

   42.       Reiss     F   ,    Fisher     AA    .   Is hair dyed with para-phenylenediamine allergenic?  

 Arch Dermatol     1974  ;   109  :   221  –  2  .    

   43.       Calnan     C    .   Adverse reactions to hair products  .   In  :     Zviak     C    ,   ed  .   The Science 

of Hair Care  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1986  :   409  –  23  .    

   44.       Bergfeld     WF    .   Hair research  .   In  :     Orfanos     CE   ,    Montagna     E   ,    Stuttgen     G    ,   eds  . 

  Berlin  :   Springer-Verlag  ,   1981  :   534  –  47  .    

   45.     Brubaker  MM:  Urticarial  reaction  to  ammonium  persulfate  .    Arch 

 Dermatol     1972  ;   106  :   413  –  14  .    

   46.       Blainey      AD   ,     Ollier      S   ,     Cundell      D   ,     Smith      RE   ,     Davies      RJ    .    Occupational 

asthma in a hairdressing salon  .   Thorax     1986  ;   41  :   42  –  50  .    

   47.       Calnan     CD   ,    Shuster     S    .   Reactions to ammonium persulfate  .   Arch Derma-

tol     1963  ;   88  :   812  –  15  .    

   48.       Fisher      AA   ,     Dooms-Goossens      A    .    Persulfate  hair  bleach  reactions  .    Arch 

Dermatol     1976  ;   112  :   1407  –  9  .    

   49.       Czene      K   ,     Tiikkaja      S   ,     Hemminki      K   ,     Cancer      Risks        in  Hairdressers. 
 Assessment  of  carcinogenicity  of  hair  dyes  and  gels  .    Int  J  Cancer      2003  ; 
  105  :   108  –  12  .    

   50.       Bolt     HA   ,    Golka     K   ,    The     debate       on carcinogenicity of permanent hair dyes. 

New insights  .   Crit Rev Toxicol     2007  ;   37  :   521  –  36  .     

  suggested reading 
      Anderson      JS    .    Hair  colorants  (Chapter  31)  .    In  :      Rieger      MM    ,    ed  .    Harry’s 
 Cosmeticology  ,   8th edn  .   Chemcial Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  ,   669  –  94  .    
     Brown      KC    .    Hair  coloring  (Chapter  7)  .    In  :      Johnson      DH    ,    ed  .    Hair  and  Hair 

Care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   191  –  215  .    

     Corbett     JF    .   An historical review of the use of dye precursors in the formulation 
of commercial oxidation hair dyes  .   Dyes Pigments     1999  ;   41  :   127  –  36  .    
     Harrison     S   ,    Sinclair     R    .   Hair colouring, permanent styling, and hir structure  .   

J Cosmet Dermatol     2003  ;   2  :   180  –  5  .    

     Krasteva     M   ,    Bons     B   ,    Ryan     C   ,    Gerberick     GF    ,   Consumer Allergy to Oxidative 
Hair Coloring Proudcts  .   Epidemiologic data in the literature  .   Dermatitis  
 2009  ;   20  :   123  –  41  .    

     Sosted     H   ,    Agner     T   ,    Andersen     KE   ,    Menne     T    .   55 cases of allergic reactions to hair 
dye: a descriptive, consumer complaint-based study  .   Contact Dermatitis   
  2002  ;   47  :   299  –  303  .    

     Takkouche     B   ,    Etminan     M   ,    Montes-Martinez     A    .   Personal use of hair dyes and 

   30.       Robbins C  ,   Kelly    .   Amino acid analysis of cosmetically altered hair  .   J Soc 

risk of cancer  .   JAMA     2005  ;   293  :   2516  –  25  .    

Cosmet Chem     1969  ;   20  :   555  –  64  .    

   31.       Robbins      CR    .    Physicial  properties  and  cosmetic  behavior  of  hair  .    In  : 
  Chemical  and  Physical  Behavior  of  Human  Hair  ,    2nd  edn  .    New  York  : 
  Springer-Verlag  ,   1988  :   225  –  8  .    

   32.       Wall  ,    FE    .    Bleaches,  hair  colorings,  and  dye  removers  .    In  :      Balsam      MS   , 
    Gershon     SD   ,    Rieger     MM   ,    Sagarin     E   ,    Strianse     SJ    ,   eds  .   Cosmet Sci Technol  , 
  Vol. 2  ,   2nd edn  .   New York  :   Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   279  –  343  .    

   33.       Marcoux      D   ,     Riboulet-Delmas      G    .    Efficacy  and  safety  of  hair-coloring 

agents  .   Am J Contact Dermatitis     1994  ;   5  :   123  –  9  .    

     Zviak     C   ,    Millequant     J    .   Hair bleaching (Chapter 7)  .   In  :     Bouillon     C   ,    Wilkinson   
  J    ,   eds  .   The Science of Hair Care  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & Francis Group, LLC  , 
  2005  :   229  –  301  .    

     Zviak     C   ,    Millequant     J    .   Hair coloring: non-oxidation coloring (Chapter 8)  .   In  : 
    Bouillon     C   ,    Wilkinson     J    ,   eds  .   The Science of Hair Care  ,   2nd edn  .   Taylor & 
Francis Group, LLC  ,   2005  :   251  –  75  .    

     Zviak      C   ,     Millequant      J    .    Oxidation  coloring  (Chapter  9)  .    In  :      Bouillon      C   , 
    Wilkinson      J    ,    eds  .    The  Science  of  Hair  Care  ,    2nd  edn  .    Taylor  &  Francis 
Group, LLC  ,   2005  :   277  –  312  .         

             31    Folliculitis and shaving      

  Shaving  is  an  important  grooming  procedure  with  tremen-
dous  dermatologic  ramifications.  Shaving  removes  not  only 
hair, but also more or less of the stratum corneum depending 
on  the  quality  of  the  shave.  A  successful  shave  requires  an 
excellent implement, good skin conditioning, and superb hair 
removal.  The  idea  of  shaving  was  popularized  by  Alexander 
the Great who required his Greek soldiers to shave to prevent 
the  beard  from  being  used  as  an  aid  for  throat  slashing  or 
decapitation.  Shaving  products  necessarily  developed  as  the 
practice  of  shaving  became  more  common.  From  the  14th 
century to World War I, shaving soaps were the main prepara-
tion  available.  Lathering  shaving  creams  were  introduced  in 
1936 and continue in popularity ( 1 ). 

 Many dermatologic conditions are related to problems with 
unwanted  hair  growth  necessitating  some  form  of  hair 
removal. While shaving can exacerbate eczema, pseudofollicu-
litis barbae, folliculitis, impetigo, verruca planae, and sensitive 
skin,  most  dermatologists  know  relatively  little  about  this 
grooming activity. This chapter investigates common shaving 
practices  and  offers  practical  tips  to  optimize  hair  removal 
while minimizing dermatologic complications. The topics for 
consideration  are  razor  selection,  razor  design,  razor  care, 
shaving cream selection, shaving technique, spread of  infection, 
and shaving of special skin areas. 

  razor selection 
 Razor selection is perhaps one of the most important consid-
erations for achieving an excellent hair removal result. With-
out good tools, a good result cannot be obtained. Many people 
with  dermatologic  problems  complain  that  shaving  causes 
pain, discomfort, and razor burn, which could be minimized 
through proper razor selection. 

 Razors can be purchased with a disposable blade and handle 
or  only  with  a  disposable  blade.  The  completely  disposable 
razors should not be selected for the dermatologic patient with 
folliculitis. First, the disposable razors are made out of a thin 
plastic shell and are not heavy. A good razor with replaceable 
cartridge blades will have good weight in the handle to ensure 
that the blades strike the skin at the proper angle. When the 
razor is held in the hand, the head angles the blade to meet the 
skin for optimal hair removal while minimizing skin removal 
( Fig.  31.1 ).  Second,  disposable  razors  generally  do  not  have 
high quality laser cut, spring mounted blades.  

 As of late, there has been inflation in the number of blades 
found on the razor. The first razors to enter the market were 
single edged. These old fashioned blades are used by some der-
matologists  to  remove  seborrheic  keratoses  and  nevi  when 
longitudinally broken. While these blades may function well as 
a  scalpel,  they  are  not  a  good  choice  for  hair  removal.  The 
 double-edged razor replaced the single blade razor when it was 
recognized  that  the  first  blade  lifts  the  hair  from  the  skin 
 surface for cutting by the second blade. This lifting of the hair 
increases the chances for a close shave while minimizing the 

unnecessary removal of skin, a condition commonly known as 
razor burn. 

 The next development in razor design was the addition of 
glide strip. This strip placed on the leading edge of the blade 
was intended to reduce friction when the razor was dragged 
across the skin leading to fewer problems when shaving over 
curved  surfaces.  The  strip  was  later  loaded  with  skin  condi-
tioning agents, such as aloe, to provide additional skin bene-
fits.  The  loaded  glide  strip  was  problematic  in  some  of  the 
early  razor  designs  as  the  moisturizer  became  stringy  and 
clogged the blades. This problem has now been overcome by 
the use of a thinner more flexible glide strip ( Fig. 31.2 ).  

 The most significant development in razor design has been 
the development of five multiblade razors ( Fig. 31.3 ). The hair 
is lifted and successively cut by each of the blades to produce a 
very  close  shave  without  using  undue  razor  pressure  on  the 
skin. Blade pressure on the skin leads to razor burn. The mul-
tiblade razor produces a close shave without the requirement 
of  pressure  causing  less  razor  burn,  less  skin  irritation,  and 
fewer  skin  cuts.  Further  shaving  pressure  reduction  can  be 
 created by vibrating the razor and manually dragging it over 
the skin surface. This is the rationale behind the new battery-
operated razors.   

   The multiblade razor produces a close shave without the 
requirement of pressure causing less razor burn, less skin 
irritation, and fewer skin cuts. 

 The most expensive razor blades also have laser cut blades 
with spring mounts, in addition to multiple blades. The laser 
cut  blades  have  a  more  accurate  edge  with  fewer  defects, 
 providing for less razor burn and a closer shave. The springs 
help to allow the blades to rotate over the skin surface reducing 
cuts and providing a close shave over curved surfaces, such as 
the chin or the knees. While the high cost of the blades may 
deter some patients, the extra expense is well justified. There is 
no substitute for a blade that is designed for optimal perfor-
mance. A blade with an angle of 28 to 32° between the blade 
and the skin produces the closest shave with the least amount 
of irritation ( 2 ).  

  razor care 
 An expensive blade requires excellent care to deliver a superior 
shave over the blade lifetime. It is important to counsel patients 
on good blade care to prevent blade damage that compromises 
the shave quality. Razor blades should not be stored in the wet 
environment  of  the  shower.  They  should  be  allowed  to  dry 
between shaves and kept in a dry location, such as the counter 
top or the drawer. Prior to drying, the blades should be thor-
oughly rinsed of hair and skin debris to prevent the material 
from sticking to the blade and compromising the sharp edge. 

209

210

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 31.3     This five multiblade razor produces a close shave by allowing each 
successive blade to cut the hair closer and closer to the skin.    

   Most razor blades are designed to be used five to seven 
shaves, meaning that the blade should be replaced at least 
on a weekly basis. 

  shaving product selection 
 Shaving preparations are intended to decrease the amount of 
trauma that results from using a sharp metal blade to remove 
hair from the body. Proper shaving product selection is neces-
sary to achieve the optimal shave and the currently available 
products  include  preshave  products,  shaving  products,  and 
aftershave products, discussed next. 

  Preshave Products 
 Preshave  products,  popular  among  men  who  use  an  electric 
razor, are designed to reduce friction between the shaver and 
the beard, thus allowing a greater pressure to be applied on the 
shaver. This allows a closer shave, but with reduced irritation. 
These are mainly fragranced alcoholic solutions which reduce 
surface friction by reducing surface moisture and dry the hair 
allowing it to stand more upright. Some products also contain 
volatile silicones to function as lubricants ( 3 ).  

  Shaving Products 
 Shaving  products  may  be  formulated  as  soaps,  sticks,  pow-
ders, and creams. However, aerosol shaving creams have vir-
tually  replaced  the  other  forms  ( 4 ).  Shaving  creams  are 
essentially a modern version of fatty acid shaving soaps, but 
with  an  increased  amount  of  water  and  additives  to  ensure 
stability. The goal of a shaving cream is to allow a close shave 
without removing excess stratum corneum or promoting cor-
rosion of the razor blade. This can only be accomplished if the 
hair  is  softened  through  adequate  hydration  and  the  skin 
lubricated.  The  force  required  to  cut  water-saturated  beard 
hair is about 65% less than that for dry hair ( 5 , 6 ). Thus, an 
effective shaving cream should possess low solution viscosity, 
high foam density, small molecular diameter, low solute con-
centration, good detergent action, low film strength, and high 
diffusivity ( 7 ).  

   The force required to cut water-saturated beard hair is 
about 65% less than that for dry hair. 

 Figure 31.1     A razor blade handle with a good weight is important to allow the 
razor to touch the skin at the proper angle to cut the hair optimally without 
cutting the skin.    

 Figure 31.2     The green glide strip shown on this razor blade decreases friction 
between the razor blade cartridge and the skin to decrease razor burn.    

 It  is  also  important  not  to  drop  the  blade  or  bang  it  into 
other objects. Dropping the razor on the blade creates a dull 
spot on the edge. There is a saying in razor blade technology 
that “the patient always shaves with the dullest portion of the 
blade.” This means that razor burn results from the damaged 
blade areas, not the sharp blade areas. If the blade is only 5% 
damaged and 95% undamaged, razor burn will still occur even 
though the majority of the blade is still in optimal condition. 
Most  razor  blades  are  designed  to  be  used  for  five  to  seven 
shaves, meaning that the blade should be replaced at least on a 
weekly basis.   

FOLLICULITIS AND SHAVING

211

 Figure  31.4     An  example  of  a  postfoaming  shave  gel  designed  for  men.  It 
 dispenses as a gel and then turns into foam when rubbed into the skin.    

 Figure 31.5     The shave gel will turn into foam when rubbed on the skin and 
should be left in place for three to four minutes before beginning to shave to 
soften the hair.    

 Shaving creams are formulated as foaming shaving creams 
and postfoaming shave gels. There is some evidence that post-
foaming  shave  gels  are  superior  lubricants  over  shave  foams 
( Fig. 31.4 ). The reason for this is not clear, but may be related 
to the orientation of the fatty acids into the lamellar layers nec-
essary to form a gel ( 8 ).  

 Shaving creams contain either sodium or potassium hydrox-
ide, a superfatting agent (stearic acid, vegetable oils, mineral 
oil,  or  lanolin)  and  glycerol  or  propylene  glycol  to  allow  the 
cream to remain soft and improve lather by aiding moisture 
retention. Menthol is added to some preparations to provide 
both fragrance and a cooling effect on the skin. Beard softeners 
are wetting agents such as sulfuric acid esters of lauryl alcohol 
or fatty acid amides.  

  Aftershave Products 
 Aftershave products function to relieve the discomfort induced 
by  shaving.  They  are  designed  to  soothe  and  cool  the  skin 
while imparting a feeling of well being. The fragranced alco-
holic lotions are the most popular. Other additives may include 
menthol for its cooling effect, an antibacterial to prevent infec-
tion,  and  glycerol  or  propylene  glycol  to  act  as  an  emollient 
and  humectant  ( 9 ).  These  products  have  enjoyed  a  renewed 
popularity as they are now formulated to cross over into the 
fragrance market for men.   

  application of shaving products  
 Proper shaving cream application is important in patients who 
are prone to develop irritant contact dermatitis. These patients 
generally do not allow the skin and hair shaft to absorb suffi-
cient moisture prior to shaving. A shaving cream left in con-
tact with the skin for at least four minutes will decrease razor 
trauma in most patients. Some patients will require additional 
lubrication and softening, which can be provided by applying 
a  lipid-free  cleanser  to  the  area  for  an  additional  15 minutes 
followed by shaving cream application. 

 A good well-maintained blade is part of the equation for a 
superior  shave,  but  the  shaving  cream  is  equally  important. 
The shaving cream creates the interface between the blade and 
the skin. A good interface sets the stage for a good shave and a 
poor interface sets the stage for a poor shave. Many patients 
feel  that  a  shaving  cream  is  extraneous  and  use  nothing,  or 

other items handy in the bath such as bar soap, shampoo, or 
hair conditioner. It is important to remember that all personal 
care  products  are  carefully  designed  for  their  intended  pur-
pose  and  are  not  well  suited  for  any  other  use.  Bar  soaps, 
shampoo, and hair conditioner leave a film on the blade has-
tening  blade  dulling  and  do  not  optimally  alleviate  friction 
between  the  blade  and  the  skin.  Shaving  cream  is  specially 
designed for this purpose. 

 There  are  many  shaving  products  on  the  market.  Some  of 
them are old fashioned soaps applied with a brush, some are 
dispensed  and  warm  when  rubbed  on  the  face,  others  are 
foams  squirted  from  a  can,  and  the  best  are  gels  dispensed 
from an aerosol can that foam when rubbed on the face. The 
latter are known as postfoaming shave gels. The postfoaming 
shave gel is the best choice for persons with shaving challenges 
because they entrain water better than any other type of shave 
product.  Entraining  water  is  the  event  that  occurs  when  the 
hair shaft becomes hydrated. Hydration is the first step in pre-
paring the hair for cutting because the keratin softens and can 
be cut with less force. A dry hair likened to a similar diameter 
copper wire while a wet hair is likened to an aluminum wire. 
Aluminum is much easier to cut than copper. These metals are 
used to model the physical dynamics of shaving. 

 The proper way to prepare the skin for shaving is by washing 
the face and then thoroughly wetting the face with lukewarm 
water. This wetting step places a thin layer of water over the 
hair and skin. Next, the shaving gel should be dispensed from 
the can and placed in the palm. The palms should be rubbed 
together to generate a rich foam, which is generously applied 
to  the  premoistened  face.  The  shaving  gel  should  remain  on 
the face for three to four minutes before commencing shaving 
( Fig. 31.5 ). This allows time for more water to enter the hair 
shaft. At this point, the hair and skin are ready for shaving.    

   The shaving gel should remain on the face for three to four 
minutes before commencing shaving. 

  optimal shaving technique 
 Once  the  skin  has  been  properly  prepared,  it  is  necessary  to 
execute the proper shaving technique. The blade should gently 
glide over the skin surface with minimal pressure. The quality 

212

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

of  a  shave  is  measured  as  the  ratio  of  the  amount  of  hair 
removed to the amount of skin removed. If the ratio is high, 
the shave is good. Conversely, if the ratio is low, the shave is 
poor. The blade should be dragged over each area for shaving 
only once. If the blade is rubbed multiple times over the same 
area,  the  chance  for  razor  burn  increases. Any  areas  that  are 
not shaved as closely as desired should be left for shaving on 
the following day. 

 Shaving  should  occur  in  parallel  strokes,  even  though  the 
hair may grow in many different directions. The newer multi-
ple  blade  razors  provide  for  excellent  shaving  of  hairs  that 
demonstrate different skin exit angles. It is also important to 
rinse  the  blade  after  each  stroke,  to  remove  hair,  skin,  and 
shaving gel debris.  

  infection prevention 
 A  common  dermatologic  problem  related  to  shaving  is  the 
spread  of  disease.  Bacterial  diseases,  such  as  impetigo  and 
methicillin-resistant   Staphylococcus  aureus   infection,  can  be 
spread on a razor blade in addition to viral diseases, such as 
verruca and molluscum contagiosum. A good razor and shav-
ing cream can help in minimizing skin trauma and the oppor-
tunity for infection, but it may be necessary for shaving to be 
discontinued in infection areas until treatment is complete. 

 Razor blades can pass bacterial and viral infection to various 
sites on an individual patient or between family members who 
all use the same razor. It is best not to share razors for hygiene 
reasons, but also for optimal blade performance. Blades that 
are used to shave a male face experience a razor wear in a dif-
ferent manner than blades used to shave female legs. Different 
patterns of blade wear can lead to increased razor burn. 

 Allowing  the  razor  to  dry  between  uses  can  minimize  the 
spread of infection. Soaking the razor head and blade in rub-
bing  alcohol  for  a  minute  can  also  decrease  spread,  but  can 
decrease razor blade life. Patients can put 2 inches of isopropyl 
alcohol in a jar and let the razor sit in the jar for 60 seconds, 
remove, and allow to dry, if recurrent infection is a problem.   

   Patients can put 2 inches of isopropyl alcohol in a jar and 
let the razor sit in the jar for 60 seconds, remove, and allow 
to dry, if recurrent infection is a problem. 

  shaving of special skin areas 
 Special  skin  areas,  such  as  the  female  underarms  and  bikini 
area,  deserve  special  mention.  The  underarms  are  unique  in 
that they are concave, instead of convex, like most other shaved 
body areas. Likewise, the bikini area requires shaving areas that 
may be difficult to visualize again with tight concave areas that 
the razor must reach. There are razors designed for male and 
female use. Male razors are designed to shave the small curved 
areas  of  the  face.  Female  razors  are  designed  to  shave  the 
straight  long  surfaces  of  the  legs  and  not  necessarily  the 

Table 31.1  10 Tips for a Successful Shave

  1.   Select a multiblade razor with replaceable blades and a glide 

strip

  2.  Purchase a postfoaming shave gel
  3.  Change the razor blade weekly
  4.  Always clean the face prior to shaving
  5.  Wet the face with lukewarm water prior to shaving
  6.   Leave the shave gel on the face for three to four minutes 

before shaving

  7.  Shave with minimal pressure
  8.  Never shave with a damaged blade
  9.  Shave daily
10.  Store the razor out of the bath in a dry location

 armpits and the groin. It is important to pick a razor that fits 
nicely in the hand of the user. For patients with shaving chal-
lenges, it is well worth the money to buy several different han-
dles with a few blades to see which one provides the best shave. 
Just like many people have a favorite pen, it is also necessary to 
find that one favorite razor.  

  summary 
 This  chapter  has  discussed  the  finer  points  of  shaving  from 
blade design to shaving gel selection to shaving technique to 
minimize the presence of folliculitis. These points are summa-
rized in  Table 31.1 . Shaving is a daily event for both male and 
female patients. Understanding the physics behind blade and 
razor design accompanied by the physiology of hair and skin is 
necessary to achieve the optimal shave.    

   references 
   1.       Saute     RE    .   Shaving preparations  .   In  :     deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The Chemistry and 
Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Wheaton, IL  :   Allured Publishing Corporation  , 
  1975  :   1313  –  14  .    

   2.       Hollander     J   ,    Casselman     EJ    .   Factors involved in satisfactory shaving  .   JAMA   

  1937  ;   109  :   95  .    

   3.       Brooks     GJ   ,    Burmeister     F    .   Preshave and aftershave products  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1990  ;   15  :   67  –  9  .    

   4.       Flaherty     FE    .   Updating the art of shaving  .   Cosmet Toilet     1976  ;   91  :   23  –  8  .    
   5.       Deem      DE   ,     Rieger      MM    .    Observations  on  the  cutting  of  beard  hair  .    J  Soc 

Cosmet Chem     1976  ;   27  :   579  –  92  .    

   6.       Breuer     MM   ,    Sneath     RL   ,    Ackerman     CS   ,    Pozzi     SJ    .   Perceptual evaluation of 

shaving closeness  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1989  ;   40  :   141  –  50  .    

   7.       Saute     RE    .   Shaving preparations  .   In  :     deNavarre     MG    ,   ed  .   The Chemistry and 
Manufacture of Cosmetics  .   Wheaton, IL  :   Allured Publishing Corporation  , 
  1975  :   1317  –  19  .    

   8.       Wickett     RR    .   The effect of gels and foams on shaving comfort and efficacy  . 

  Skin Care J     1993  ;   2  :   1  –  2  .    

   9.       Bell     SA    .   Preshave and aftershave preparations  .   In  :     Balsam     MD   ,    Safarin     E    , 
  eds  .    Cosmetics,  Science  and  Technology  .   Vol.  2  .    2nd  edn  .    New York,  NY  : 
  Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   13  –  37  .     

  suggested reading 
      Foltis     P    .   Shaving preparations (Chapter 25)  .   Harry’s Cosmeticology  .   8th edn  . 

  Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.  ,   2000  :   501  –  21  .    

     Olsen     EA    .   Methods of hair removal  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1999  ;   40    (2 Pt 1)  : 

  143  –  55  ;   quiz     156  –  7  .         

             32    Hair removal      

  Hair removal is an important hygiene undertaking with both 
social and religious underpinnings. For example, Roman sol-
diers shaved all body hair prior to entering a battle as part of 
their  worthiness  for  combat.  Women  shave  their  legs  and 
underarms in western culture as it is felt that women should be 
devoid of terminal body hair for physical attractiveness. Men, 
on the other hand, sport chest hair in Mediterranean culture as 
a sign of virility while the present trend among young men in 
the  U.S.A.  is  for  shaving  of  chest  and  pubic  hair.  No  single 
method of hair removal is appropriate for all body locations 
and all circumstances, thus there are several methods of hair 
removal  that  are  presently  available.  Chapter  33  presented  a 
discussion  of  wet  shaving  with  a  razor  and  this  chapter 
 discusses the remaining hair removal techniques that can be 
used for basic grooming and also for the cosmetic treatment of 
 hirsutism. The various methods of hair removal are summa-
rized  in   Table  32.1 .  Methods  discussed  include  dry  shaving, 
plucking,  epilating,  waxing,  hair-removing  gloves,  abrasives, 
threading,  chemical  depilatories,  electrolysis,  and  laser  hair 
removal.  

  dry shaving 
 Shaving is the most widespread method of hair removal due to 
its rapid speed, effectiveness, and low expense. Shaving is the 
preferred removal technique for facial hair in men and under-
arm or leg hair in women. A major limitation of this technique 
is rapid, bristly regrowth due to a hair shaft now devoid of a 
naturally tapered tip ( 1 , 2 ). Shaving can be accomplished with 
a razor blade combined with a shaving cream, a hair removal 
technique  known  as  wet  shaving,  or  with  an  electric  shaver 
without moisture or shaving cream, a technique known as dry 
shaving.  The  electric  shaver  contains  multiple  blades,  which 
rotate or vibrate thereby cutting the hair shaft. In general, an 
electric shaver cannot cut the hairs close to the skin surface as 
nearly as a razor, but skin abrasion is not as great a problem. 
Skin irritation and the spread of cutaneous infections may still 
occur ( 3 ). 

 Many factors influence the closeness of a dry shave, mainly 
achieved  by  the  optimum  interaction  between  the  moving 
blades and the skin. Skin factors that contribute to dry shave 
closeness, which are identical to wet shave closeness, include 
abundant facial subcutaneous fat (resulting in improved resil-
iency),  the  absence  of  deep  pits  around  hair  ostia,  and  ostia 
containing only one hair ( 4 ). Factors that lead to increased dry 
shaving irritation are old razor blades, a large shaving angle, 
thin lathers, high skin tension, shave against the direction of 
hair growth, repeat shave over a given facial area, and increased 
shaving pressure ( 5 ). 

 Advantages  of  dry  shaving  include  the  rapidity  and  the 
ease with which the hair can be removed. Large surface areas 
can be shaved with minimal effort, as long as the hair shafts 
are short. Clippers, a variant of the electric razor, can be used 

to  easily  shave  longer  hairs.  It  is  difficult  to  injure  the  skin 
with  dry  shaving,  which  can  be  an  advantage  for  persons 
with poor vision and/or poor manual dexterity. However, in 
areas where rapid hair regrowth or bristly hair is a problem, 
such as the face of women, dry shaving should not be used. 
Furthermore, the sharp regrowing hair shafts may cause irri-
tation in intertriginous areas such as the underarms or ingui-
nal folds ( Fig. 32.1 ). Dry shaving may also cause irritation of 
the follicular ostia resulting in perifollicular pustules, a prob-
lem seen especially in the female pubic area, and the regrown 
hair  shafts  have  a  sharp  tip,  which  may  re-enter  the  skin, 
resulting in pseudofolliculitis barbae, commonly seen in the 
neck area of Black patients ( 6 , 7 ).   

   The biggest problem with dry shaving is failure of the 
patient to use sharp blades. 

 The  biggest  problem  with  dry  shaving  is  the  failure  of  the 
patient to use sharp blades. Since the shaver blades cannot be 
replaced, it is important that the patient sharpen the blades as 
needed.  Shaver  blades  are  not  designed  to  stay  sharp  for  the 
lifetime of the electrical device. Also, the blades can be difficult 
to clean and the hair debris can clog the proper contact of the 
blade with the skin. Finally, it is possible to transmit an infec-
tious disease from the moist skin and hair debris that remains 
under the protective screens in the shaver head. Proper shaver 
care is the secret to successful dry shaving.  

  plucking 
 Plucking of the hair is a method of removing the entire hair 
shaft, including the bulb, with a pair of tweezers ( 8 ) ( Fig. 32.2 ). 
It  is  an  easy,  inexpensive  method  of  hair  removal  requiring 
minimal equipment, but is tedious and mildly uncomfortable. 
Plucking does not encourage rapid regrowth. Removal of hair 
from  large  areas  is  not  feasible,  but  plucking  is  effective  for 
removal of stray eyebrow hairs or isolated coarse hairs on the 
chin of postmenopausal women. Only terminal hairs can be 
efficiently  plucked,  as  vellus  hairs  usually  break  close  to  the 
skin surface.  

 Plucking produces little skin damage and provides a longer 
regrowth period due to complete hair shaft removal. It should 
be  remembered,  however,  that  repeated  plucking  of  a  given 
hair may result in ingrown hairs or failure of the hair to regrow, 
due to follicular damage ( 9 ). For this reason, overplucking of 
the eyebrow area should be avoided ( Fig. 32.3 ).    

   Only terminal hairs can be efficiently plucked, as vellus 
hairs usually break close to the skin surface. 

213

214

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 32.1  Methods of Hair Removal

Equipment

Cost

Regrowth period

Body sites for use

Advantages

Disadvantages

Technique

Shaving

Razor or shaver

Plucking

Tweezers

Epilating

Epilator

+

+

+

Days

Weeks

Weeks

Face, arms, legs, axilla

Fast, easy

Eyebrows, facial hair

Longer regrowth 

period

Irritating, rapid 

regrowth
Painful, slow

Arms, legs

Longer regrowth 

Painful, 

Waxing

Wax and melting pot

++

Weeks

Face, eyebrows, groin

Longer regrowth 

period, fast

Hair-removing 

Sand-paper gloves

++

Days

Legs, male face

period

None

gloves
Abrasives
Threading
Depilatories
Electrolysis

Pumice stone
Thread
Depilatory
Trained professional

++
+
++
++++ May be 

Days
Days
Days

Legs, male face
Legs, arms
Legs, groin
All

None
None
Quick
May be permanent

permanent

Bleaching

Peroxide bleach

++

Does not remove 

Female facial and arm 

Quick

hair

hair

irritating
Painful, slow

Irritating, slow

Irritating, slow
Painful, slow
Irritating
Painful, time 
consuming, 
expensive

Irritating

Laser

Selective 

++++

Permanent

All body areas, does 

Long lasting

Expensive

photothermolysis 
with laser

not work on 
unpigmented hair

 Figure 32.1     The rough cut end of a male beard hair accounting for the harsh 
feel of hair cut by a mechanized shaver.    

 Figure  32.2     A  variety  of  tweezers  are  shown.  A  pair  of  tweezers  with  a  flat 
smooth tip is recommended over that with a pointed tip, shown in the middle, 
which can break the hair prior to complete removal.    

 Figure 32.3     Plucking is an inexpensive method to remove unwanted eyebrow 
hairs, but overplucking should be avoided to minimize permanent hair loss.    

  epilating 
 Epilating has now come to refer to a mechanized method of 
plucking hair ( 10 ). Most electric hand-held epilating devices 
are  stroked  over  the  skin  much  like  an  electric  shaver.  They 
consist of a rotating, tightly coiled spring that traps the hair 
and pulls it out at the level of the hair bulb. Retail cost for the 
device  is  $30  to  $50.  This  efficient  plucking  of  the  hair  pro-
vides a long regrowth period, but is somewhat painful. Addi-
tionally, the device functions poorly on curved surfaces, such 
as  the  underarms,  and  can  do  considerable  damage  to  body 
areas with thin skin, such as the face. 

 Epilating is best used on large flat surfaces such as the arms 
and legs, but the hair must be of sufficient length for entrap-
ment in the coiled spring. Follicular disruption is a problem 
that  can  result  in  ingrown  or  coiled  hairs  beneath  the  skin 
 surface ( 11 , 12 ). Infection may also be a problem, so use of an 
antibacterial  agent  prior  to  and  following  hair  removal  is 

HAIR REMOVAL

215

 Cold waxing, a newer method, employs a wax-like substance 
that is squeezed as a liquid from a pouch, thus eliminating the 
need  for  melting.  Sometimes  cold  waxing  uses  a  cloth  piece 
which is initially placed on the hair removal area followed by 
liquid application. The cloth is then ripped from the skin with 
the hair and the wax ( Fig. 32.5 ). The advantage of the cloth is 
that  it  provides  strength  so  the  wax  can  theoretically  be 
removed in one piece rather than numerous smaller pieces.  

 Waxing has the advantage of adequate removal of both ter-
minal  and  vellus  hairs.  This  works  significantly  well  on  the 
upper lip, chin, eyebrows, cheeks and groin of women where 
removal of all hair is desirable. Men generally do not find wax-
ing of facial hair acceptable as the hair has to grow to at least 
one-sixteenth of an inch before it can be reliably removed by 
waxing. Excess hair present in Becker’s nevi, congenital hairy 
nevi, and benign hairy nevi can be removed in both men and 
women with this technique. 

 The major disadvantages of waxing are discomfort and poor 
removal of hairs shorter than one-sixteenth of an inch. Patients 
may also need to tweeze a few hairs that still remain and a thick 
hair growth may require two treatments for complete removal. 
 The results of waxing are identical to hair plucking. The two-
week regrowth period is longer than that for shaving since the 
hair is removed by the root. When regrowth occurs, the hair has 
a tapered tip rather than the sharp, blunt tip produced by shav-
ing.  No  damage  to  the  surrounding  skin  occurs,  but  patients 
must test the heated wax prior to application to avoid a burn. 
Waxing can be done professionally in a salon or at home. Profes-
sional fees vary depending on the size of the removal area. For 
example, it costs about $20 to have the eyebrows professionally 
waxed. Home waxing is much less expensive: $4 will purchase 
sufficient wax to remove excess eyebrow hair for 30 treatments.   

   Waxing has the advantage of adequate removal of both 
terminal and vellus hairs on the face. 

  hair-removing gloves 
 Hair-removing gloves consist of a mitten of fine sandpaper that 
is rubbed over the hair-bearing skin in a circular fashion ( 13 ). 
This mechanically fractures the hair shaft, but is also irritating 
to the skin. This is a method used to remove female leg hair and 
male  facial  hair  in  some  countries,  but  is  not  popular  in  the 
U.S.A. The most important use of hair-removing gloves is in a 
female patient with excessive white vellus hair on the face. It is 
easy  to  break  off  the  vellus  hairs  without  the  irritation  from 
depilatories or shaving.  

  abrasives 
 A variation on hair-removing gloves is the use of abrasive sub-
stances to break and remove the hair. Pumice stone or other abra-
sives  can  be  rubbed  over  the  skin  to  remove  hair  through 
mechanical  friction ( 13 ). Again, this is very irritating to skin and 
not  a  popular  hair  removal  technique  in  the  U.S.A.  This  hair 
removal method is more commonly found in third world nations.  

  threading 
 Threading  is  a  hair  removal  technique  popular  in  India  that 
has found a following in the U.S.A., especially for the removal 
of eyebrow hair and unwanted vellus facial hair that is hard to 

 Figure 32.4     A typical hot wax pot as photographed in a salon illustrating the 
poor hygiene standards that may be present.    

 Figure 32.5     The eyebrow hairs are shown attached to the adhesive, which is 
affixed to the cloth. Cold waxing is an efficient method of plucking multiple 
hairs simultaneously.    

 recommended. If the epilator is pressed too firmly against the 
skin, purpura may result.   

   Follicular disruption is a problem that can result in 
ingrown or coiled hairs beneath the skin surface following 
traumatic epilation. 

  waxing 
 Waxing is another variation on plucking of the hair. Two wax-
ing techniques are available: hot waxing and cold waxing. Hot 
wax is composed of rosin, beeswax, paraffin wax, petrolatum 
and mineral or vegetable oil. Some products are mentholated. 
The wax is melted in a double boiler or professional wax pot 
and  applied  to  the  hairs  with  a  wooden  spatula  ( Fig.  32.4 ). 
Hair becomes embedded within the wax, which is allowed to 
cool and harden. The hair is then pulled out at the level of the 
hair  bulb  as  the  wax  is  ripped  from  the  skin.  Care  must  be 
taken not to burn the skin.  

216

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

pluck.  Threading  is  performed  by  looping  a  cotton  thread 
around  the  neck  of  the  operator  and  twisting  the  other  end 
into a loop held in one hand. Then the ends are twisted and the 
loop is pulled across the skin. The thread catches the hair and 
removes some at the level of the follicle while some hairs break 
above   the  skin  surface  ( 8 ).  Threading  is  an  efficient  way  of 
plucking  the  hair  that  involves  minimal  trauma,  if  properly 
done. The success of the hair removal result is highly operator 
dependent, but the supplies to perform threading are simple 
and inexpensive.   

   Threading is performed by looping a cotton thread around 
the neck of the operator and twisting the other end into a 
loop held in one hand. 

  depilatories 
 From the mechanical methods of hair removal, the discussion 
now turns to chemical hair removal with products known as 
depilatories.  Chemical  depilatories  function  by  sufficiently 
softening  the  hair  shaft  above  the  skin  surface  so  it  can  be 
 gently wiped away with a soft cloth ( Fig. 32.6 ). Presently mar-
keted  chemical  depilatories  are  available  in  pastes,  powders, 
creams,  and  lotions  with  formulations  specially  adapted  for 
use on the legs, groin area, and face. All formulations function 
by softening the cysteine-rich hair disulfide bonds to the point 
of  dissolution.  This  is  accomplished  by  combining  five 
 different classes of ingredients.  

 The agents combined to produce a chemical depilatory are 
detergents, hair shaft swelling agents, adhesives, pH adjusters, 
and bond-breaking agents ( 14 ). Together they function to pre-
pare  the  hair  for  and  facilitate  removal.  Detergents  such  as 
sodium lauryl sulfate, laureth-23, or laureth-4 remove protec-
tive hair sebum and allow penetration of the bond-breaking 
agent.  Further  penetration  is  accomplished  with  swelling 
agents  such  as  urea  or  thiourea.  Adhesives  such  as  paraffin 
allow the mixture to adhere to the hairs while adjustment of 
pH, to between 9.0 and 12.5, is important to minimize cutane-
ous irritation. Lastly, the bond-breaking agent is able to suc-
cessfully destroy the hair shaft. 

 Several bond-breaking agents are available: thioglycolic acid, 
calcium  thioglycolate,  strontium  sulfide,  calcium  sulfide, 
sodium  hydroxide,  and  potassium  hydroxide.  The  most 
 popular commercial bond-breaking agents are the thioglyco-
lates  as  they  minimize  cutaneous  irritation  while  effectively 
breaking  disulfide  bonds;  however,  they  are  less  effective  at 
 dissolving  coarse  hair  such  as  the  male  beard.  Sulfide  bond-
breaking agents are faster acting, but are more irritating and 
sometimes  produce  an  undesirable  sulfur  odor.  Sodium 
hydroxide, also known as lye, is the best bond-breaking agent, 
but extremely damaging to the skin. 

 Chemical depilatories are designed to remain in contact with 
the skin for five to ten minutes, shorter for fine hair and longer 
for  coarse  hair.  The  products  are  somewhat  selective  for  hair 
shaft damage since the hair shafts contain more cysteine than the 
surrounding skin, but are still irritating to skin, especially if the 
contact is prolonged. The hairs are wiped away once they assume 
a  corkscrew  appearance.  Under  no  circumstances  should 
 chemical depilatories be applied to abraded or dermatitic skin. 

 Figure 32.6     Male facial hair depilatories are popular among African American 
men who avoid the disfigurement of pseudofolliculitis barbae from shaving by 
dissolving the hair shaft at the follicular ostia.    

 The main advantage of chemical depilatory hair removal is 
slower regrowth than with shaving and, if used properly, the 
technique is painless and free of scarring. The major disadvan-
tage is the skin irritancy ( 8 ).  

   The main advantage of chemical depilatory hair removal is 
slower regrowth than with shaving. 

 Chemical depilatories are best used for removal of hair on 
the  legs  to  include  the  upper  thigh.  Darkly  pigmented  hair 
seems  somewhat  more  resistant  to  removal  than  lighter  hair 
and coarse hair is more resistant than fine hair. This explains 
why  these  products  are  difficult  to  use  on  the  male  beard. 
However, a variety of powder depilatories, containing barium 
sulfide, are available for the Black male who has difficulty with 
pseudofolliculitis  barbae  ( 15 , 16 ).  These  powdered  products 
are mixed with water to form a paste and applied to the beard 
with a wooden applicator for three to seven minutes. The hair 
and depilatory are then removed with the same applicator and 
the skin is rinsed with cool water. This procedure should be 
performed no more frequently than every other day. 

 Both allergic and irritant contact dermatitis can occur with the 
use  of  chemical  depilatories.  Allergic  contact  dermatitis  is  less 
common but may be seen due to fragrances, lanolin derivatives, 

HAIR REMOVAL

or other cosmetic additives. Irritant contact dermatitis is com-
mon, especially in individuals who use the product more than 
once weekly or apply it close to mucous membranes. Generally, 
the product is not appropriate for any patient with dermatologic 
problems. Most cutaneous problems can be remedied by discon-
tinuing  use  and  applying  a  topical  corticosteroid.  Depilatories 
also can damage fabrics and furniture.  

  electrolysis 
 Electrolysis is a permanent method of hair removal. It is not so 
commonly performed now that laser hair removal has become 
mainstream method; yet it is worth discussing. Dermatologists 
are  well  aware  of  the  complications  of  electrolysis,  which 
include  scarring,  failure  to  destroy  the  germinative  follicular 
cells, and the transmission of viral and bacterial diseases. Yet, 
electrolysis  remains  a  tremendously  popular  hair  removal 
technique among women for unwanted hairs on the face, chin, 
neck, and bikini areas ( 17 ). There are three electrolysis tech-
niques: galvanic electrolysis, thermolysis, and the blend. 

 The first individual to use electrolysis for hair removal was a 
Missouri ophthalmologist, named Dr. Charles E. Michel, who 
in1875 used the technique in the treatment of trichiasis. The 
technique became well known during the later part of the 19th 
century. In 1924, the technique of thermolysis was developed 
by  Dr.  Henri  Bordier  of  Lyon,  France.  The  combination  of 
electrolysis  and  thermolysis,  known  as  the  blend,  was  devel-
oped  by  Arthur  Hinkel  and  Henri  St.  Pierre  in  1945  and  a 
 patent was granted for the technique in 1948 ( 18 ). 

 All electrolysis techniques involve the insertion of a needle 
into the follicular ostia down to the follicular germinative cells. 
The  dermal  papillae  must  be  destroyed  to  permanently  pre-
vent hair growth. There are several important considerations 
in determining the effectiveness of electrolysis techniques. 

  Telogen vs. Anagen 
 Only hairs that are visible can be removed by electrolysis, and 
only  anagen  hairs  can  be  adequately  treated.  On  the  other 
hand, follicles in the telogen phase, without a visible hair shaft, 
cannot be treated. If there is a high telogen to anagen ratio, a 
substantial amount of hair growth will be seen in the treated 
area. This ratio varies depending on the body area ( 19 ). 

 Many electrologists advise that their clients shave the hair in 
the area to be treated several days prior and refrain from other 
temporary  hair  removal  techniques.  This  ensures  that  only 
anagen hair follicles are treated. Prior waxing or plucking of 
the  hairs  may  delay  regrowth  thus  decreasing  the  thorough-
ness of electrolysis.  

  Moisture Content 
 Moisture content of the hair follicle is also important in deter-
mining the success of electrolysis. The lower part of the hair 
follicle  is  better  hydrated  than  the  more  superficial  follicle. 
Water is necessary for transmitting electrical energy between 
the needle and dermal papillae. For this reason, the electrolysis 
needle must be inserted to the depth of the hair follicle.  

  Depth 
 The depth of needle insertion is determined by the hair shaft 
diameter.  As  is  readily  demonstrated  in   Table  32.2 ,  larger-
diameter  hairs  require  deeper  needle  insertion  for  adequate 

217

Table 32.2  Hair Shaft Diameter and Hair Follicle Depth

Hair shaft 
diameter (inches)

Description of hair

Hair follicle 
depth (mm)

<0.001
0.001–0.002
0.002–0.003
0.003–0.004
0.004–0.005
0.005–0.006
>0.006

Very fine
Fine
Medium
Coarse
Very coarse
Extra coarse
Super coarse

Source: Adapted from Ref. 21.

<1
1–2
2–3
3–4
4–5
5
5

destruction.  Knowledge  of  follicular  depth  is  necessary  to 
ensure adequate follicular destruction without scarring.   

  Intensity and Duration 
 Dermal  papillae  damage  depends  both  on  the  intensity  and 
duration  of  the  current  administered.  High-intensity  energy 
may  be  used  for  a  short  duration  or  lower-intensity  energy 
may be used for a longer duration. The decision of how much 
energy to use depends upon both the technique used by the 
electrologist and the pain tolerance of the client. As might be 
expected,  pain  increases  with  high-intensity  energy.  Low 
intensity energy, however, is unable to destroy some hairs. In 
general, coarse hairs require a longer-duration treatment than 
fine hairs ( 20 ).  

  Follicular Shape 
 Electrolysis is much more difficult to perform on individuals 
with  curly,  wavy,  or  kinky  hair.  This  is  due  to  difficulty  in 
 placing the needle accurately into the hair follicle.    

   Only visible hairs can be removed by electrolysis, thus only 
anagen hairs can be adequately treated. 

  hair removal technique 
 Electrolysis,  thermolysis,  and  the  blend  represent  the  three 
techniques that can be used to permanently remove unwanted 
hair ( 21 ). Other advertised methods, such as electronic twee-
zers, do not work. 

  Electrolysis 
 This technique is properly known as “galvanic electrolysis” and 
utilizes direct current (DC) which is passed through a stainless 
steel needle into sodium chloride and water in the tissue sur-
rounding the hair follicle. The DC current causes ionization of 
the salt (NaCl) and water (H 2 O) into free sodium (Na + ), chlo-
ride  (Cl – ),  hydrogen  (H + )  and  hydroxide  (OH – )  ions.  These 
free  ions  then  recombine  into  sodium  hydroxide  (NaOH), 
known  as  lye,  and  hydrogen  gas  (H 2 ).  The  caustic  sodium 
hydroxide  destroys  the  hair  follicle  while  the  hydrogen  gas 
escapes into the atmosphere. The amount of sodium hydrox-
ide produced is greater at the base of the hair follicle due to 
increased  moisture  content  and  minimal  at  the  skin  surface. 
Less lye production near the skin surface accompanied by the 
protective effect of sebum decreases the skin irritancy poten-
tial  of  this  technique.  The  amount  of  follicular  destruction 

218

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

induced is measured in units of lye, defined by Arthur Hinkel 
as: the amount of lye produced when 0.1  mA of current flows 
for one second ( 22 ). 

 Galvanic electrolysis is the most effective method of produc-
ing permanent hair removal, but is tedious and slow. This has 
led to the development of multiple needle techniques.  

  Thermolysis 
 Thermolysis, also known as short-wave radio frequency dia-
thermy,  differs  from  galvanic  electrolysis  in  that  alternating 
high frequency (AC) current is passed down the needle. This 
current  causes  vibration  of  the  water  molecules  around  the 
hair  follicle  and  produces  heat.  Thus,  heating  occurs  in  the 
same manner as in a microwave oven ( 23 ). 

 The needle begins to heat at the tip first and spreads toward 
the  skin  surface.  This  means  that  the  heat  remains  longer 
around  the  hair  follicle  than  at  the  skin  surface,  minimizing 
discomfort and cutaneous damage. If too much AC current is 
administered, steam is produced which exits through the fol-
licular ostia resulting in a burn and possible scarring. 

 Thermolysis  is  much  faster  than  galvanic  electrolysis,  but 
does not destroy the hair follicle as reliably. Additionally, ther-
molysis does not work well on distorted or curved hair folli-
cles. An extremely rapid method of thermolysis, known as the 
flash method, was introduced several years ago, but unfortu-
nately was plagued by high hair regrowth rates.  

  Blend 
 The blend is a combination of both galvanic electrolysis and 
thermolysis ( 24 ). Both direct and high-frequency alternating 
current are passed down the needle at the same time to pro-
duce  sodium  hydroxide  and  heat.  The  hot  lye  is  extremely 
effective in destroying the dermal papillae, allowing superior 
results  with  less  regrowth.  Furthermore,  the  tissue  damage 
induced  by  the  thermolysis  allows  the  lye  to  spread  through 
the  hair  follicle  more  rapidly.  The  blend  requires  only  one-
fourth the time of galvanic electrolysis alone.   

  needle selection 
 Needle  selection  is  important  to  the  success  of  electrolysis. 
Needles are available in a variety of shapes: straight, tapered, 
bulbous,  and  insulated  ( 25 )  ( Fig.  32.7 ).  Most  electrologists 
prefer  to  use  a  straight  needle  with  a  gently  rounded  tip. 
Tapered needles (narrower at the tip than the base) are some-
times selected for the removal of deep terminal hairs. Electrol-
ysis of these hairs requires more energy, which can be delivered 
at  the  tip  without  exposing  the  more  superficial  tissues  to 
excessive damage.  

 A variety of sizes are also available since the needle diameter 
should  match  the  diameter  of  the  hair  shaft  to  be  treated. 
Smaller needles generally get hotter than larger needles. Client 
pain can be reduced by selecting the largest needle possible. 

 Stainless steel is the standard material from which needles 
are made; however, one company markets a gold plated needle 
which is termed “hypoallergenic.” Sometimes the electrologist 
may  use  multiple  needles  at  a  time  to  speed  the  treatment. 
A  computerized  electrolysis  machine  is  used  to  sequentially 
administer energy to the needles in the proper order and for 
the specified length of time.  

 Figure  32.7     Single-use  electrolysis  needles  are  recommended  to  prevent  the 
inadvertent transmission of contagious diseases.    

  needle insertion techniques 
 The needle must be properly inserted into the follicular ostia 
to  insure  destruction  of  the  hair  follicle  without  cutaneous 
scarring. The most popular technique for needle insertion is 
known as the forehand technique. The needle holder is held 
much  like  a  pencil  between  the  thumb  and  forefinger.  The 
removal forceps are then placed between the needle holder and 
thumb of the same hand. This allows the free hand to be used 
for  stretching  the  skin.  Skin  stretching  is  important  to  open 
the follicular ostia for needle insertion. 

 The needle is always inserted parallel to the hair shaft oppo-
site to the direction of hair growth. Hairs may exit the skin at 
angles  varying  between  10°  and  90°.  The  needle  must  be 
inserted at the same angle as hair growth. If the hair is long and 
lays on the skin surface, it should be clipped to gain a better 
appreciation of its exit angle. The needle should also always be 
inserted  below  the  hair  shaft.  These  steps  are  necessary  to 
destroy the follicle without scarring the surrounding skin. 

 It  is  important  that  needle  insertion  occurs  to  the  proper 
depth. A general rule is that coarse hairs have deeper follicles 
than  fine  hairs.  A  slight  dimpling  of  the  overlying  skin  and 
resistance  means  that  the  bottom  of  the  follicle  has  been 
reached and the needle should be withdrawn slightly until the 
dimpling  disappears.  A  proper  needle  insertion  should  be 
painless and bloodless for the client. Shallow needle insertions 
may result in pain and scarring for the client.  

  electrolysis hair removal techniques 
 Once  the  hair  has  been  treated,  the  needle  should  be  with-
drawn at exactly the same angle as it was inserted. The forceps 
held between the thumb and needle holder are now positioned 
90° to the hair shaft for epilation. The hair should be grasped 
firmly and gently slide out of the follicle, if the treatment has 
been  properly  performed.  Resistance  in  removing  the  hair 
means  that  the  hair  has  been  epilated  and  not  treated  with 
electrolysis, thus regrowth may occur.  

  electrolysis adverse reactions 
 Electrolysis  must  be  properly  performed  to  minimize  client 
scarring.   Table  32.3   summarizes  the  pointers  that  must  be 
 followed  for  successful  electrolysis  ( 26 ).  Care  must  also  be 
taken to perform the procedure under sanitary conditions to 
prevent the spread of bacterial and viral infection ( 27 ).  

HAIR REMOVAL

219

Table 32.3  Method for Electrolysis Scar Prevention

1.   The treated hair should be pulled effortlessly from the follicular 

ostia.

2.  The needle size should be the same as the hair diameter.
3.  The skin should be dry.
4.  The skin should not be blanched following treatment.
5.   The current should only flow when the needle has been 

completely inserted in the follicular ostia to the level of the 
follicle.

6.   The needle should only be removed when the current has 

stopped.

7.   The same follicular ostia should not be re-entered or treated 

twice.

 The real concern regarding electrolysis is the lack of regula-
tion,  as  23  states  do  not  require  licensing  for  electrologists. 
This lack of licensing means that training and health standards 
are  apt  to  vary  tremendously  between  salons.  Improper 
 techniques  can  result  in  permanent  scarring  while  failure  to 
adequately sterilize equipment can result in the transmission 
of bacterial and viral infections. If a good operator with supe-
rior health standards can be found, electrolysis may be useful 
in a female with a few unwanted facial hairs on the upper lip or 
chin. This technique is not suitable for removal of large hairy 
areas, such as the male beard, as only 25 to 100 hairs can be 
removed per sitting.  

  bleaching 
 Bleaching is not a method of hair removal, but is included in 
this section because it can make unwanted hair less apparent. 
Commercial  products  are  available  for  bleaching  hair;  how-
ever  a  home-made  bleach  can  be  made  by  mixing  40 ml  of 
hydrogen peroxide with 7 ml of 20% ammonia. The bleach is 
left in contact with the hair until the color is removed, about 
five to ten minutes. This product is irritating to the skin and 
should not be used around the eyes or mucous membranes. 

 Hair  bleaching  is  most  appropriate  in  the  female  patient 
who  notes  excess  pigmented  hair  on  the  arms,  upper  lip,  or 
jawline. The hair may be pigmented due to a Hispanic, Medi-
terranean,  or  Middle  Eastern  genetic  background.  Bleaching 
may be the most acceptable alternative when shaving produces 
an unacceptable regrowth appearance and the area is too large 
for waxing.   

   Hair bleaching is most appropriate in the female patient 
who notes excess pigmented hair on the arms, upper lip, 
or jawline. 

  laser 
 Lasers have revolutionized professional hair removal and are 
presently poised to enter the consumer market, as well. Home 
lasers  may  become  commonplace  as  the  safety  and  reduced 
cost  of  these  devices  make  them  more  appealing.  Laser  hair 
removal  is  clearly  more  permanent  and  more  effective  than 
any  other  method.  Many  different  types  of  lasers  and 
light  sources  can  be  used  to  destroy  hair  growth,  including 
normal-mode  ruby,  neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet 
(Nd:YAG), diode, and intense pulsed light (IPL). 

 Even  though  laser  hair  removal  is  considered  permanent, 
the  FDA  definition  of  permanent  is  a  stable  decrease  in  the 
number of terminal hairs for a period longer than one com-
plete hair cycle at a given site. This does not mean that the hair 
is all gone! This is why it takes several treatments to completely 
remove the hair and some hair may regrow, but it is finer and 
less pigmented. How much hair reduction occurs depends on 
the treatment type, the hair location, and the color of the hair. 
Persons with deeply pigmented hair do the best, but persons 
with  red,  blonde,  gray,  or  white  hair  may  not  get  as  much 
reduction requiring treatments every three months.  

   Laser hair removal works best in deeply pigmented hair 
meaning patients with red, blonde, gray, or white hair 
achieve as much hair growth reduction. 

 In order for the hair to be permanently removed, complete 
destruction only occurs when both the germinative cells in the 
hair bulb and the stem cells in the hair bulge area are destroyed. 
This topic is discussed in the hair chapter in more detail. The 
melanin  in  the  hair  serves  as  the  target  for  the  laser  energy. 
This  means  that  selective  thermolysis  is  used  to  damage  the 
hair growth. The hair melanin functions to absorb energy in 
the range of 600 to1100 nm and is known as the chromophore. 
The energy is then released by melanin as heat. This allows the 
light energy to penetrate to the bottom of the hair follicle and 
rapidly  heat  the  water  thus  cooking  and  destroying  the  hair. 
Hairs in the telogen resting cycle cannot be treated with laser 
hair removal, accounting for the multiple treatments needed 
to  achieve  a  satisfactory  result.  A  variety  of  laser  and  light 
devices can be used for permanent hair removal as long as they 
follow the concept of selective thermolysis.  

  summary 
 The hair removal techniques discussed here should be used in 
combination  with  wet  shaving,  discussed  in  chapter  31,  to 
assist  the  patient  concerned  about  hirsutism.  Every  hair 
removal technique has pluses and minuses that should be eval-
uated in light of the needs of the patient and the risk versus 
benefit ratio. In the case of laser hair removal, the cost and the 
suitability  of  the  hair  for  selective  photolysis  should  also  be 
considered.  These  hair  removal  techniques  should  be  com-
bined  with  medical  treatment,  where  appropriate,  in  the 
 hirsute patient.   

   references 
    1.       Bhaktaviziam     C   ,    Mescon     H   ,    Matolsky     AG    .   Shaving  .   Arch Dermatol     1963  ; 

  88  :   242  –  7  .    

    2.       Lynfield     YL   ,    MacWilliams     P    .   Shaving and hair growth  .   J Invest Dermatol   

  1970  ;   55  :   170  –  2  .    

    3.       Brooks     GJ   ,    Burmeister     F    .   Preshave and aftershave products  .   Cosmet Toilet   

  1990  ;   105  :   67  –  9  .    

    4.       Hollander     J   ,    Casselman     EJ    .   Factors involved in satisfactory shaving  .   JAMA   

  1937  ;   109  :   95  .    

    5.       Elden      HR    .   Advances  in  understanding  mechanisms  of  shaving  .    Cosmet 

Toilet     1985  ;   100  :   51  –  62  .    

    6.       Strauss      J   ,     Kligman      AM    .    Pseudofolliculitis  of  the  beard  .    Arch  Dermatol   

  1956  ;   74  :   533  –  42  .    

    7.       Spencer      TS    .    Pseudofolliculitis  barbae  or  razor  bumps  and  shaving  . 

   Cosmet Toilet     1985  ;   100  :   47  –  9  .    

220

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

    8.       Richards     RN   ,    Uy     M   ,    Meharg     G    .   Temporary hair removal in patients with 

hirsuitism: a clinical study  .   Cutis     1990  ;   45  :   199  –  202  .    

    9.       Blackwell      G    .    Ingrown  hairs,  shaving,  and  electrolysis  .    Cutis      1977  ;    19  : 

  172  –  3  .    

   10.       Scott     JJ   ,    Scott     MJ   ,    Scott     AM    .   Epilation  .   Cutis     1990  ;   46  :   216  –  17  .    
   11.       Wright     RC    .   Traumatic folliculitis of the legs: a persistent case associated 
with use of a home epilating device  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1992  ;   27  :   771  –  2  .    
   12.       Dilaimy     M    .   Pseduofolliculitis of the legs  .   Arch Dermatol     1976  ;   112  :   507  –  8  .    
   13.       Wagner      RF    .    Physical  methods  for  the  management  of  hirsutism  .    Cutis   

  1990  ;   45  :   319  –  26  .    

   14.       Breuer     H    .   Depilatories  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   61  –  4  .    
   15.       de la Guardia     M    .   Facial depilatories on black skin  .   Cosmet Toilet     1976  ;   91  : 

  37  –  8  .    

   16.       Halder      RM    .    Pseudofolliculitis  barbae  and  related  disorders  .    Dermatol 

Clin     1988  ;   6  :   407  –  12  .    

   17.       Goldberg     HC   ,    Hanfling     SL    .   Hirsutism and electrolysis  .   J Med Soc NJ     1965  ; 

  62  :   9  –  14  .    

   18.       Richards      RN   ,     Meharg      GE    .    Cosmetic  and  medical  electrolysis  and 

 temporary hair removal  .   Ontario  :   Medric Ltd.  ,   1991  :   17  –  18  .    

   19.       Richards      RN   ,     Meharg      GE    .    Cosmetic  and  medical  electrolysis  and 

 temporary hair removal  .   Ontario  :   Medric Ltd.  ,   1991  :   24  –  5  .    

   20.       Hinkel     AR   ,    Lind     RW    .   Electrolysis, thermolysis and the blend  .   California  : 

  Arroway Publishers  ,   1968  :   181  –  7  .    

   21.       Fino     G    .    Modern electrology  .   New York  :   Milady Publishing Corp.  ,   1987  : 

  35  –  69  .    

   22.       Cipollaro     AD    .   Electrolysis: discussion of equipment, method of  operation, 
indications,  contraindications,  and  warnings  concerning  its  use  .    JAMA   
  1938  ;   110  :   2488  –  91  .    

   23.       Wagner      RF   ,     Tomich      JM   ,     Grande      DJ    .    Electrolysis  and  thermolysis  for 

 permanent hair removal  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   12  :   441  –  9  .    

   24.       Hinkel     AR   ,    Lind     RW    .   Electrolysis, thermolysis and the blend  .   California  : 

  Arroway Publishers  ,   1968  :   199  –  223  .    

   25.       Gior      F    .    Modern  electrology  .    New York  :    Milady  Publishing  Corporation  , 

  1987  :   32  –  3  .    

   26.       Richards      RN   ,     Meharg      GE    .    Cosmetic  and  medical  electrolysis  and 

 temporary hair removal  .   Ontario  :   Medric Ltd.  ,   1991  :   85  –  6  .    

   27.       Petrozzi     JW    .   Verrucae planae spread by electrolysis  .   Cutis     1980  ;   26  :   85  .     

  suggested reading 
      Alster      TS   ,     Tanzi      EL    .    Effect  of  a  novel  low-energy  pulsed-light  device  for 

 home-use hair removal  .   Dermatol Surg     2009  ;   35  :   483  –  9  .    

     Casey     AS   ,    Goldberg     D    .   Guidelines for laser hair removal  .   J Cosmet Laser Ther   

  2008  ;   10  :   24  –  33  .    

     Dierickx      CC    .    Photoepilation  (Chapter  21)  .    In  :      Blume-Peytave      U   ,     Tosti      A   , 
   Whiting     DA   ,    Trueb     RM    ,   eds  .   Hair growth and disorders  .   Springer  ,   2008  : 
  427  –  45  .    

     Fodor      L   ,     Menachem      M   ,     Ramon     Y    ,    et  al  .    Hair  removal  using  intense  pulsed 
light (EpiLight): patient satisfaction, our experience, and literature review  . 
  Ann Plast Surg     2005  ;   54  :   8  –  14  .    

     Gault     D    .   Treatment of unwanted hair in auricular reconstruction  .   Facial Plast 

Surg     2009  ;   25  :   175  –  80  .    

     Gold     MH   ,    Bell     WE   ,    Teresa     DF    .   Long-term epilation using the epilight broad 
band, intense pulsed light hair removal system  .   Dermatol Surg     2008  ;   23  : 
  909  –  13  .    

     Görgü     M   ,    Aslan     G   ,    Aköz     T   ,    Erdogan     B    ,   ASVAK Laser Center  .   Comparison of 
alexandrite laser and electrolysis for hair removal  .   Dermatol Surg   2000  ; 
  26  :   37  –  41  .    

     Liew     SH    .   Laser hair removal: guidelines for management  .   Am J Clin Dermatol   

  2002  ;   3  :   107  –  15  .    

     Littler     CM    .   Hair removal using an Nd: YAG laser system  .   Dermatol Clin     1999  ; 

  17  :   401  –  30  .    

     Ort     RJ   ,    Dierickx     C    .   Laser hair removal  .   Semin Cutan Med Surg     2002  ;   21  :   129  –  44  .    
     Pickens     JE   ,    Zakhireh     M    .   Permanent removal of unwanted hair  .   Aesthetic Surg 

J     2004  ;   24  :   442  –  5  .    

     Ramos-el-Silva     M   ,    de Castro     MCR   ,    Carneiro     LV    .   Hair removal  .   Clin Dermatol   

  2001  ;   19  :   437  –  44  .    

     Spencer     JM    .   Clinical evaluation of a handheld self-treatment device for hair 

removal  .   J Drugs Dermatol     2007  ;   6  :   788  –  92  .    

     Tatlidede      S   ,     egemen      O   ,     Saltat      A    ,    et  al  .    Hair  removal  with  the  long-pulse 

 alexandrite laser  .   Aesthetic Surg J     2005  ;   25  :   138  –  43  .    

     Traversa      E   ,     Machado-Santelli      GM   ,     Velasco      MVR    .    Histological  evaluation  of 
hair follicle due to papain’s depilatory effect  .   Int J Pharm     2007  ;   335  :   163  –  6  .    
     Zoumaras     J   ,    Kwei     JSS   ,    Vandervord     J    .   A case review of patients presenting to 
royal north shore hospital, with hair removal wax burns between January 
and November 2006  .   Burns     2008  ;   34  :   254  –  56  .         

             33    Hair and photoprotection      

  Photoprotection as it pertains to hair is not a common topic 
addressed by the dermatologist. After all, hair is nonliving and 
as  such  requires  no  protection  from  UV  radiation,  because 
carcinogenesis  of  the  hair  shaft  itself  is  not  possible.  If  hair 
proteins  are  altered  by  sun  exposure,  damaged  hair  can  be 
removed and replaced by new growth. Thus, at first glance, the 
whole issue of photoprotection for the hair might seem irrel-
evant; however, patients frequently consult the dermatologist 
for advice on hair growth and appearance problems. Hair pho-
toprotection is an important part of maintaining the cosmetic 
value of the hair shaft. This chapter will focus on the chemical 
effects  of  UV  radiation  on  the  hair  shaft,  hair  photoaging, 
intrinsic hair UV photoprotective mechanisms, and the use of 
hair sunscreens. The whole science of hair and photoprotec-
tion is currently in its infancy and an area of focused research 
within the hair care product and salon industries. 

  hair and uv radiation 
 Much of the understanding regarding hair and how it interacts 
with UV radiation has come from the textile industry. Natural 
fibers,  such  as  wool,  cotton,  silk,  and  rayon,  discolor  when 
exposed  to  sunlight.  White  fabrics  tend  to  take  on  a  light 
brown/yellow color, a process known as photoyellowing ( 1 , 2 ). 
The same chemical process of photoyellowing can also occur 
in natural unprocessed human hair. Human hair contains two 
pigments,  eumelanin  and  pheomelanin,  accounting  for  the 
brown and red hues seen in hair, respectively. A third melanin 
pigment,  known  as  oxymelanin,  is  found  in  unprocessed 
human hair that has been exposed to sunlight. Oxymelanin is 
an oxidative photodegradation product. While the presence of 
this  photodegraded  melanin  decreases  the  cosmetic  value  of 
the hair, it also chemically affects hair dye and permanent wave 
solution interaction with the hair shaft. Most importantly, the 
amount of oxymelanin present equates with the degree of hair 
shaft photoaging.  

   Oxymelanin is a photodegradation pigment that accounts 
for photoyellowing in hair. 

 UV radiation also damages the hair lipids. It is for this rea-
son that photodamaged hair is dull and dry. Intact hair lipids 
are required to coat the hair shaft imparting shine and man-
ageability. Manageability is the ease with which the hair shaft 
can be styled. Hair that is devoid of intact lipids is subject to 
static  electricity,  fractures  easily  with  combing  friction,  and 
appears frizzy.  

  hair photoaging and endogenous 
protection 
 In  order  to  understand  hair  photoaging,  it  is  necessary  to 
understand  how  UV  radiation  interacts  with  the  proteins  of 
the hair shaft. Hair is a complex nonliving structure with an 

outer  cuticle  that  provides  a  hard  protective  barrier  for  the 
inner  cortex.  The  cortex  is  composed  of  fibrillar  proteins, 
which are responsible for the mechanical strength of the hair 
shaft. Melanin pigments are contained in the cortex embedded 
in  an  amorphous  protein  matrix.  Sometimes  the  hair  shaft 
may contain a medulla, but the function of this inner structure 
is largely unknown and is found less frequently in mature hair 
shafts.  Sunlight  damages  the  strength  of  the  hair  shaft  by 
increasing the scission of the cystine disulfide bonds. The hair 
disulfide  bonds  prevent  the  hair  shaft  from  fracturing  with 
minimal trauma. Thus, the primary photoaging effect of sun-
light on hair is physical weakening of the shaft.  

   The protein structure of the hair is damaged by UV 
radiation. 

 The second major effect of sunlight on the hair shaft is oxy-
melanin  production,  as  previously  mentioned.  While  oxy-
melanin leads to pigment dilution and lightening of hair color, 
it is the pigments within the hair shaft that provide the only 
source of endogenous photoprotection. The natural pigments 
actually  prevent  disulfide  bond  disruption,  preserving  the 
strength  of  the  hair  shaft,  even  though  a  hair  color  change 
occurs.  In  other  words,  chemical  alterations  in  the  hair  pig-
ment  function  to  protect  the  protein  structural  backbone  of 
the hair. Hair contains the original pigment sunscreen, which 
is an area of rapid technical development in the commercial 
skin sunscreen industry. 

 The  third  major  effect  of  sunlight  on  hair  is  bleaching,  or 
lightening, of the hair color ( 3 ). Brunette hair tends to develop 
reddish  hues  due  to  photo-oxidation  of  melanin  pigments 
while blonde hair develops photoyellowing. The yellow discol-
oration  is  due  to  photodegradation  of  cystine,  tyrosine,  and 
tryptophan residues within the blonde hair shaft ( 4 ). Further-
more,  hair  treated  with  permanent  or  semipermanent  hair 
dyes may also shift color when exposed to UV radiation ( 5 ).  

  topical hair photoprotection 
 Until  recently,  the  main  approach  to  topical  exogenous  hair 
photoprotection  was  no  different  from  skin  photoprotection. 
UVB and UVA sunscreens were added to formulations designed 
for hair use, such as instant conditioners, styling gels, and hair 
sprays.  The  main  problem  with  this  topical  approach  to  hair 
photoprotection was the failure to create an even film protect-
ing  the  entire  surface  area  of  every  hair  on  the  head.  This  is 
virtually impossible since the collective surface area of the hair 
on a human head is huge. Another challenge is creating a sun-
screen formulation that will adhere to the hair cuticle. Further-
more, coating each and every hair shaft with an equal thickness 
of sunscreen without making the hair appear limp or greasy is 
a cosmetic challenge no hair care product has yet overcome. 

221

222

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 A photoprotection rating system has been proposed for hair 
care products known as an HPF or hair protection factor ( 6 ). 
This is similar to the concept of SPF, or skin protection factor, 
except  that  tensile  strength  assessments  of  the  hair  shaft  are 
used for grading instead of sunburn assessment. HPF ratings 
follow a logarithmic scale from 2 to 15. At present, this system 
has not caught on because skin care products labeled with an 
SPF are considered over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. Hair care 
products are true cosmetics and do not wish to be included in 
the  sunscreen  monograph  or  subject  to  the  regulations  gov-
erning OTC drugs. This dilemma led cosmetic researchers to 
question  whether  photoprotection  could  be  imparted  to  the 
hair shaft through another means, perhaps through the inter-
nal structure of the hair shaft.  

  intrinsic hair photoprotection 
 An  analysis  of  the  internal  structure  of  the  hair  shaft  led  to 
some interesting insight into possible mechanisms of photo-
protection. The natural color of the hair shaft results from a 
combination  of  visible  light  absorption  and  light  scattering 
abilities of the pigment granules distributed within the cortex. 
Exposure of the hair to sunlight leads to lightening of the hair 
color, known as bleaching, and ultimately damage to the fiber 
itself, as previously discussed. The pigment lightening is obvi-
ous when looking at a woman with long brown hair. The distal 
hair tips have a reddish hue while the proximal hair shafts have 
a  brown  hue.  This  loss  of  pigment  and  the  resultant  amino 
acid changes appear to predispose the hair shaft to more accel-
erated photoaging. This led the cosmetics industry to question 
whether  alterations  in  hair  color  could  be  used  to  enhance 
intrinsic hair photoprotection. 

 Industry  hair  researchers  have  demonstrated  that  unpig-
mented hair is much more susceptible to UV-induced damage 
than pigmented hair, meaning that the color granules are pro-
viding some protection from oxidative damage. Hair protein 
degradation  is  induced  by  light  wavelengths  from  254  to 
400 nm ( 7 ). Chemically, these changes are thought to be due to 
ultraviolet  light–induced  oxidation  of  the  sulfur  molecules 
within in the hair shaft ( 8 ). Oxidation of the amide carbon of 
polypeptide chains also occurs producing carbonyl groups in 
the hair shaft ( 9 ). This is explained by the fact that the rate of 
cystine  disulfide  bond  breakage  due  to  environmental  expo-
sure  is  greater  for  unpigmented  than  pigmented  hair.  Thus, 
white hair and advanced gray hair are more susceptible to the 
damaging  effects  of  UV  radiation  than  youthful  pigmented 
hair. Even though it has been traditionally held that hair dyes 
are damaging to the hair shaft, the photoprotective effects of 
replacing hair shaft pigments may offset some of this damage.   

   Pigmented hair is much less susceptible to UV 
 photodamage than pigmented hair. 

  methods of enhancing intrinsic 
photoprotection 
 If natural pigments within the hair shaft provide photoprotec-
tion,  it  may  be  possible  to  preserve  the  hair  cosmetic  value 
with synthetic pigments deposited on the cuticle and within 
the cortex via hair dyes. There are two types of hair dyes that 

can  artificially  increase  the  hair  shaft  pigments:  semiperma-
nent and permanent hair dyes. 

 Semipermanent hair dyes are composed of a combination 
of  dyes,  such  as  nitrophenylenediamines,  nitroaminophe-
nols,  and  aminoanthraquinones.  These  dyes  are  left  on  the 
hair for 25 minutes and used in combination to arrive at the 
final  desired  color.  As  might  be  imagined,  there  is  damage 
that  occurs  to  the  hair  fibers  upon  dyeing.  However,  as  the 
hair is exposed to longer periods of UV radiation, the initial 
damaging  effect  of  the  dyeing  procedure  is  outweighed  by 
antioxidant effect of the color deposited on and in the hair 
shaft. Thus, white hair that is undyed exhibits more mechan-
ical  strength  damage  from  UV  radiation  than  semiperma-
nently dyed hair after four days of exposure. This means the 
darker  the  hair  dye  color,  the  more  photoprotection  pro-
vided. The semipermanent hair colors are a mixture of dyes 
designed to create the desired final color. Usually, a mixture 
of reds and blues are used to create brown. It is interesting to 
note  that  the  red  pigments  produce  better  photoprotection 
than the blue pigments. This is probably due to the red dyes 
absorbing the more energetic part of the UV spectrum than 
the blue dyes. 

 This  same  effect  was  also  observed  with  permanent  hair 
dyes. Permanent hair dyes penetrate more deeply into the hair 
shaft  creating  color  because  of  an  oxidation/reduction  reac-
tion.  They  too  act  as  photoprotectants;  however,  the  perma-
nent  hair  dyes  are  more  damaging  due  to  the  hydrogen 
peroxide and ammonia used to allow the chemicals to pene-
trate the hair shaft. It is somewhat paradoxical that the more 
alkaline  dyes,  which  produce  more  cuticular  and  structural 
hair shaft damage, provide better photoprotection. This is due 
to the ability of permanent hair dyes to act as passive photofil-
ters  by  reducing  hair  fiber  protein  damage  through  incident 
light  attenuation.  The  dye  molecule  absorbs  light  energy, 
which promotes it to a more excited state, followed by a return 
to ground state via radiative and nonradiative pathways. This 
is the mechanism by which hair dyes can function as antioxi-
dants  to  prevent  hair  weakening  through  disulfide  bond 
 dissolution ( Fig. 33.1 ).    

   Brown permanent hair dyes provide excellent 
photoprotection. 

  sunscreen containing hair care products 
 There are a variety of hair care products, in addition to hair 
dyes,  which  can  provide  some  hair  photoprotection.  These 
include  shampoos,  instant  conditioners,  deep  conditioners, 
and hair styling products. Some of the higher priced prestige 
shampoos  are  incorporating  sunscreens  into  their  formula-
tions  designed  for  dyed  hair. As  mentioned  previously,  since 
UVA  radiation  alters  the  color  of  dyed  hair,  these  shampoos 
are marketed as products that extend the life of the hair dye. 
They  may  prevent  dyed  blonde  hair  and  dyed  brunette  hair 
from developing red hues or brassy overtones. Certainly, the 
delivery  of  photoprotection  from  a  shampoo  is  challenging, 
since the surfactant must be completely rinsed from the hair 
prior to styling. It is my opinion that these products do indeed 
contain  added  chemical  sunscreens,  such  as  oxybenzone  or 

HAIR AND PHOTOPROTECTION

223

(A)

(B)

 Figure 33.1     ( A ) Dyed brunette hair is more photo resistant than gray hair because the dye within the hair shaft is able to absorb UV radiation preventing hair 
protein damage. ( B ) Dyed blonde hair is more susceptible to photodamage than dyed brunette hair.    

octyl methoxycinnamate, but their ability to coat and protect 
the hair is limited. 

 A better approach to hair photoprotection is through the use 
of conditioners. Some of the newer conditioners based on sili-
cones, such as dimethicone, can indeed deposit a thin film of 
both conditioner and sunscreen on the hair shaft. While it is 
likely  that  the  film  will  not  evenly  coat  each  hair  shaft,  sun-
screens have better substantivity when applied in this manner. 
Instant  conditioners  that  are  applied  immediately  following 
shampooing and rinsed prior to towel drying are not as effec-
tive  as  deep  conditioners  that  remain  on  the  hair  for  15  to 
30 minutes.  The  longer  the  conditioner  remains  on  the  hair 
shaft,  the  more  likely  the  added  sunscreen  ingredient  will 
adhere to the hair. Thus, the contact time of the conditioner 
with  the  hair  will  determine  the  degree  of  photoprotection 
obtained, to some extent. 

 Styling  products  that  are  applied  following  drying  of  the 
hair  are  probably  the  most  effective  in  terms  of  delivering 
photoprotection.  These  include  blow  drying  conditioners, 
styling  gels,  and  hair  sprays.  Blow  drying  conditioners  are 
massaged through the hair when wet, just prior to drying to 
act as a protectant against heat damage. If they are massaged 
thoroughly through the hair, they may provide excellent pho-
toprotection. Styling gels that may be applied to only certain 
areas of the hair, such as the hair shaft roots or tips, may not 
provide much protection due to limited contact. This is also 
the case with hair sprays that are applied as a thin film to a 
finished hair style.  

   Sunscreen containing hair sprays and conditioning sprays 
can reduce hair UV damage. 

 The degree of photoprotection offered by a hair care prod-
ucts is minimal at best. A more thorough, thicker application 
will result in better photoprotection, but this is difficult given 
the  massive  surface  area  of  a  head  of  hair.  Many  currently 
available sunscreen actives are not substantive to hair, meaning 
that  they  do  not  stick  or  adhere  to  the  hair  well  preventing 
sunscreen  deposition  and  facilitating  removal.  A  better 
approach to hair photoprotection may be the use of clothing, 
such as a hat, scarf, or umbrella. Much research and develop-
ment remains in the realm of hair photoprotection.  

  summary 
 New  insights  into  semipermanent  and  permanent  dyes  as  a 
means  of  hair  photoprotection  are  intriguing.  Many  of  the 
female patients who present to the dermatologist for sugges-
tions  regarding  hair  growth  are  mature  with  gray  hair.  The 
temptation is to bleach the hair, thus removing any remaining 
pigment granules to produce hair color lightening. Hair that is 
gray or bleached possesses fewer pigment granules than brown 
hair and is thus more susceptible to photoaging. Darker hair 
colors are more resistant to photodegradation. Thus, it may be 
beneficial  to  mature  women  who  enjoy  the  outdoors  to  dye 
their hair a darker color to prevent hair shaft weakening from 

224

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

UVA exposure. At the present time, hair dye is the best sun-
screen  available.  Sunscreen  containing  shampoos  and 
 conditioners offer limited photoprotection at best.   

   8.       Jachowicz     J    .   Hair damage and attempts to its repair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem   

  1987  ;   38  :   263  –  86  .    

   9.       Holt     LA   ,    Milligan     B    .   The formation of carbonyl groups during irradiation 
of wool and its releance to photoyellowing  .   Textile Res J     1977  ;   47  :   620  –  4  .     

   references 
   1.       Launer      HF    .    Effect  of  light  upon  wool.  IV.  Bleaching  and  yellowing  by 

 sunlight  .   Textile Res J    1965 ;   35   :   395  –  400  .    

  suggested reading 
      Draelos      ZD    .    Sunscreens  and  hair  photoprotection  .    Dermatol  Clin      2006  ;    24  : 

   2.       Inglis      AS   ,     Lennox      FG    .    Wool  yellowing.  IV.  Changes  in  amino  acid 

  81  –  4  .    

 composition due to irradiation  .   Textile Res J     1963  ;   33  :   431  –  5  .    
   3.       Tolgyesi     E    .   Weathering of the hair  .   Cosmet Toilet     1983  ;   98  :   29  –  33  .    
   4.       Milligan      B   ,     Tucker      DJ    .    Studies  on  wool  yellowing.  Part  III  sunlight 

 yellowing  .   Text Res J     1962  ;   32  :   634  .    

   5.       Berth      P   ,     Reese      G    .    Alteration  of  hair  keratin  by  cosmetic  processing  and 
natural environmental influences  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1964  ;   15  :   659  –  66  .    

   6.       Nacht     S    .   Sunscreens and hair  .   Cosmet Toilet     1990  ;   105  :   55  –  9  .    
   7.       Arnoud     R   ,    Perbet     G   ,    Deflandre     A   ,    Lang     G    .   ESR study of hair and melanin-
keratin  mixtures:  the  effects  of  temperature  and  light  .    Int  J  Cosmet  Sci   
  1984  ;   6  :   71  –  83  .    

     Hoting      E   ,     Zimmerman      M    .    Sunlight-induced  modifications  in  bleached, 
permed, or dyed human hair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1997  ;   48  :   79  –  91  .    
     Hoting     E   ,    Zimmerman     M   ,    Hilterhaus-Bong     S    .   Photochemical alterations in 
human  hair:  I.  Artificial  irradiation  and  investigation  of  hair  proteins  .   
J Soc Cosmet Chem     1995  ;   46  :   85  –  99  .    

     Jachowicz     J    .   Hair damage and attempts at its repair  .   J Soc Cosmet Chem     1987  ; 

  38  :   263  –  86  .    

     Pande      CM   ,     Albrecht      L    .    Hair  photoprotection  by  dyes  .    J  Soc  Cosmet  Chem   

  2001  ;   52  :   377  –  89  .    

     Tolgyesi     E    .   Weathering of hair  .   Cosmet Toilet     1983  ;   98  :   29  –  33  .         

             34    Alopecia and cosmetic considerations      

  The  practicing  dermatologist  frequently  encounters  patients 
who express concerns regarding hair loss. Generally, patients 
state that their usually thick, shiny, and manageable hair has 
become thin and difficult to style. If this is the dermatologist’s 
first consultation with the patient, verifying the degree of hair 
loss  is  difficult.  It  is  estimated  that  an  individual  must  lose 
approximately  50%  of  their  hair  before  an  unacquainted 
observer  can  examine  the  scalp  and  note  a  reduction  in  the 
hair shaft number. In the hair cosmetic industry, the number 
of hairs required for hair fullness is listed in  Table 34.1 . Notice 
that the lighter the hair color, the greater the number of hairs 
that are required for visually thick hair.  

 Red hair requires fewer shafts than blond hair to appear full 
since  red  hair  shafts  have  the  thickest  diameter  while  blond 
hair  shafts  are  the  thinnest.  This  is  of  interest,  since  more 
blond and brown haired patients seem to present for hair loss 
issues than black or red hair, in my practice. Nevertheless, hair 
loss is a complex dermatologic problem mediated by internal 
and external factors. It may be difficult for the dermatologist 
to know where to begin when assisting the distressed patient 
who is complaining of hair loss. An algorithm must be in mind 
when the patient requests help in order to efficiently and logi-
cally address the problem. This chapter describes my approach 
to the patient with diffuse, nonscarring hair loss, which can be 
addressed medically and cosmetically. Scarring causes of hair 
loss are beyond the scope of this book and unfortunately must 
be addressed by the use of hair prostheses, discussed in a prior 
chapter ( 1 ). 

  evaluation of external vs. internal hair 
loss causation 
 It is of utmost importance to begin an evaluation of the hair 
loss patient by differentiating internal versus external factors. 
Generally, internal causes of hair loss result in shedding of the 
complete hair shaft, including the bulb. If the bulb is  elongated, 
the  hair  has  been  shed  during  the  anagen  phase,  indicating 
anagen  effluvium.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  bulb  is  club 
shaped,  the  hair  has  been  shed  during  the  telogen  phase, 
 indicating telogen effluvium.  

   Patient hair loss must be evaluated for external and 
internal causes. 

 External causes of hair loss resulting from grooming prac-
tices  or  cosmetic  chemical  hair  treatments  weaken  the  hair 
shaft so that breakage occurs. These broken hair shafts do not 
contain  the  bulb.  However,  abnormally  formed  hair  shafts, 
found  sporadically  or  in  association  with  genodermatoses 
(trichoschisis, trichorrhexis invaginata, pili torti, monilethrix, 
and  trichorrhexis  nodosa)  can  also  result  in  decreased  hair 
shaft  strength  and  subsequent  breakage.  Examination  of 

 several  plucked  hairs  under  the  microscope  is  necessary  to 
ensure normal hair structure. 

 Hair loss can be easily distinguished from hair breakage by 
performing 10 hair pulls over various areas of the scalp. The 
hair  pull  is  performed  by  grasping  the  hair  shaft  close  to 
the scalp with the fingers and firmly pulling over the length of 
the  shaft.  Removed  hairs  are  examined  for  the  presence  and 
formation of the bulb. If more than six hairs are removed per 
pull, excessive hair loss is present. This procedure also provides 
an opportunity to ascertain that no localized areas of total hair 
loss are present, allowing elimination of tinea capitis, alopecia 
areata, and so on as the cause.  

  evaluating the magnitude of hair loss 
 Hair  pulls  in  the  office  can  be  misleading,  especially  if  the 
patient  has  shampooed  prior  to  being  examined  and  has 
removed the loose or broken hairs. It may prove difficult to 
get  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  the  hair  loss 
from the patient, since most are not aware that a normal indi-
vidual  may  lose  approximately100  to  125  hairs  per  day.  If 
grooming of the hair is infrequent, shampooing may cause a 
loss of up to 200 hairs.  

   Normal hair loss is around 100 to 125 hairs per day. 

 Information  on  the  magnitude  of  the  loss  can  best  be 
obtained by having the patient collect all hair lost for four con-
secutive days and place each day’s loss in separate envelopes, 
noting  days  on  which  shampooing  was  performed.  The  hair 
should be brushed or combed over the sink and the hair col-
lected from the sink and also from the brush or comb. Hairs 
should also be removed from the drain following shampooing. 
The dermatologist can examine each day’s loss noting both the 
amount and presence or absence of the hair bulb.  

  internal causes of hair loss 
 Once  it  has  been  determined  that  the  hair  loss  is  indeed  in 
excess of 100 hairs per day and that normally formed hairs are 
being  shed  diffusely  from  a  nonscarred  scalp  with  an  intact 
bulb, anagen effluvium and telogen effluvium must be consid-
ered. Anagen effluvium is generally due to internally adminis-
tered medications, such as chemotherapy agents, which act as 
cell  poisons  and  disrupt  the  growing  hair  follicle.  Telogen 
effluvium, on the other hand, is due to an increased number of 
hair  follicles  prematurely  exiting  the  anagen  phase  or  hair 
cycle synchronization ( 2 ). Premature anagen exit can be due to 
medications,  such  as  coumarin  or  heparin,  while  hair  cycle 
synchronization occurs during pregnancy and with oral con-
traceptive use. 

 The  causes  of  diffuse,  nonscarring  telogen  hair  loss  to  be 
considered  are  summarized  in   Table  34.2 .  Most  of  these 

225

226

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 34.1  Number of Hairs by Hair Color for Hair 
Fullness

Blond: 140,000 hairs
Brown: 110,000 hairs
Black: 108,000 hairs
Red: 90,000 hairs

Table 34.2  Internal Causes of Diffuse, Nonscarring 
Alopecia

1.   Hormonal causes: postpartum, oral contraceptives,  menopause, 

hormone supplementation

2.  Physical stress: surgery, illness, anemia, rapid weight change
3.  Emotional stress: psychiatric illness, death of family member
4.   Endocrinopathy: hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, 

 hypoparathyroidism, hyperparathyroidism

5.  Oral medications:

a.  blood thinning agents: heparin, coumarin
b.  retinoids: high-dose vitamin A, isotretinoin, etretinate
c.  antihypertensive agents: propranolol, captopril
d.   miscellaneous: quinacrine, allopurinol, lithium carbonate, 

thiouracil compounds

 considerations can be eliminated by a review of systems and 
some  basic  laboratory  work.  Anemia,  thyroid  abnormalities, 
and many illnesses can be evaluated by obtaining a complete 
blood  count  with  differential,  thyroid  panel,  and  chemistry 
panel  to  include  liver  function  studies.  If  deemed  clinically 
necessary, an antinuclear antibody can also be obtained to rule 
out  any  collagen  vascular  diseases.  A  complete  history  can 
determine the nature of any severe physical or emotional stress 
and  document  the  ingestion  of  prescription  or  over-the- 
counter medications or vitamin supplements.  

  Physical or Emotional Stress 
 Surgeries, febrile illnesses, and severe emotional stresses must 
be evaluated by the dermatologist for the past six months. In 
many cases, a three-month delay is present between the actual 
event and the patient’s onset of hair loss. Furthermore, there 
may  be  another  three-month  delay  prior  to  the  return  of 
noticeable hair regrowth. Thus, the total hair loss and regrowth 
cycle can last six months or possibly longer. Patients should be 
educated as to when a reasonable regrowth can be expected.  

  Diet Considerations 
 Hair  loss  due  to  rapid  weight  loss  is  not  uncommon.  Many 
times  patients  embark  on  franchised  diet  programs  adminis-
tered under the direction of a physician with prescribed meals 
and dietary supplements. Sometimes patients are told that vita-
min supplements purchased as part of the weight loss program 
are necessary to prevent hair loss associated with dieting. From 
a  dermatologist’s  standpoint,  however,  the  vitamins  cannot 
prevent hair loss associated with a rapid, significant weight loss.  

  Hormonal Considerations 
 Hormonal  causes  of  hair  loss  deserve  special  attention  in 
the female patient. Many women do not realize that hair loss 
can present postpartum or following discontinuation of oral 
 contraceptives.  It  is  important  to  remind  the  female  patient 

that  hair  loss  may  be  delayed  by  three  months  following  a 
 hormonal status change and another three to six months may 
be required for regrowth to be fully appreciated. 

 Menopausal women with decreased ovarian estrogen produc-
tion may also experience diffuse hair thinning, generally more 
prominent over the top of the head with bitemporal recession. A 
thin  strip  of  hair  at  the  anterior  hairline  is  usually  spared.  A 
follicle-stimulating  hormone  (FSH)  level  can  be  obtained  to 
document the onset of menopause, although menopausal hair 
thinning may be present even though FSH levels are not low. 
Institution of estrogen replacement can prevent further loss, but 
has  not  been  shown  to  promote  regrowth.  Other  treatments 
such as topical minoxidil may be indicated. 

 Lastly, it is important to rule out any hormonal abnormali-
ties  in  the  female  patient.  Inquiring  as  to  the  regularity  of 
menses and the presence of infertility problems can uncover 
ovarian  hormonal  failure  or  the  presence  of  excess  endoge-
nous  androgens.  Questions  should  also  be  directed  as  to 
whether the patient is ingesting oral steroids with androgenic 
effects. If necessary, hormone levels such as free testosterone 
and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) can be drawn 
and  an  endocrinologic  evaluation  initiated  ( 3 ).  A  more 
detailed discussion of hormonally induced hair loss is beyond 
the scope of this book ( 4 , 5 ).   

  external causes of hair loss 
 Shed  hairs  without  a  hair  bulb  are  considered  broken  hairs. 
Hair  breakage  is  generally  due  to  external  factors;  however, 
abnormalities  in  hair  shaft  formation  must  be  eliminated. 
 Table 34.3  contains the technical terms used to describe hair 
shaft abnormalities and a definition of the term ( 6 ). Tricho-
schisis, trichorrhexis invaginata, pili torti, and monilethrix are 
all abnormalities intrinsic to the hair shaft ( 7 ). Trichoptilosis 
and  trichonodosis  may  be  due  to  cosmetic  manipulation  of 
the  hair.  Trichorrhexis  nodosa  may  be  due  to  intrinsic 
 abnormalities  or  cosmetic  manipulation. All  of  these  condi-
tions predispose the hair to breakage, which can become mag-
nified by extensive grooming, chemical waving procedures, or 
permanent dyeing.   

   The hair shaft should be examined under the microscope 
in the alopecia patient to evaluate intrinsic malformations 
in the hair shaft and abnormalities due to cosmetic 
procedures. 

  Gross Hair Shaft Evaluation 
 Once  it  has  been  determined  that  the  primary  cause  of  hair 
loss  is  breakage,  the  patient’s  scalp  hair  should  be  grossly 
examined  to  assess  the  state  of  the  hair  shafts.  An  overall 
impression should be formed: 

1.     Does the hair have shine?  
2.    Does the hair feel soft?  
3.    Does the hair lay in an orderly fashion?  
4.    Is there an evidence of hair styling aid being used?  
5.    Does  the  hair  color  appear  natural  and  match  the 

patient’s eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair?  

6.    Is the hair curly or straight?  
7.    How long is the hair and when was it last cut?   

ALOPECIA AND COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

227

Table 34.3  Structural Hair Shaft Abnormalities

Intrinsic abnormalities
1.   Trichoschisis: a clean, transverse fracture across the hair shaft 
through both cuticle and cortex. Congenital forms seen in 
trichothiodystrophy characterized by hair with an abnormally 
low sulfur content

2.   Trichorrhexis invaginata: a nodular expansion of the hair shaft 
in which a ball in socket joint is formed, also known as bamboo 
hair. Congenital forms seen in Netherton’s syndrome

3.   Pili torti: a flattened hair shaft that is twisted through 180° on 

its own axis

4.   Monilethrix: elliptical nodal swellings along the hair shaft with 
intervening, tapering constrictions that are nonmedullated

Extrinsic abnormalities
1.   Trichoptilosis: a longitudinal splitting or fraying of the distal 

end of the hair shaft, also known as split ends

2.   Trichonodosis: knotting of the hair shaft
Intrinsic or extrinsic abnormalities
1.   Trichorrhexis nodosa: small, beaded swellings associated with a 
loss of the cuticle. Congenital forms seen in argininosuccinic 
aciduria and Menkes disease, but may also be due to cosmetic 
hair shaft manipulation

 Figure 34.1     Weathered hair is characterized by cuticle loss.    

   Hair Shine  
 Hair  possessing  an  intact  cuticle  with  closely  overlapping 
 cuticular  scales  is  shiny,  healthy  hair.  It  is  the  smoothness 
of  the  overlapping  scales  that  promotes  light  reflection, 
 interpreted by the eye as shine. Normal grooming processes 
such  as  combing  and  brushing  result  in  loss  of  cuticular 
scales, which is more pronounced at the distal hair shaft ( 8 ). 
This process is known as “weathering” and is accelerated by 
overly  aggressive  grooming  and  chemical  processing  ( 9 , 10 ) 
( Fig. 34.1 ).   

   Hair Frizziness  
 Hair that has been chemically processed is also prone to static 
electricity.  This  allows  the  hair  to  appear  frizzy  and  unruly, 
especially at the distal hair shafts. Generally, chemicals applied 
to the hair penetrate better at the distal hair shaft due to less 
cuticular scale. A well-educated cosmetologist is aware of this 
fact, especially when processing long hair, and will apply the 
chemicals to the scalp first and then dilute the product prior to 
applying the solutions to the distal hair shafts. Overprocessed 
hair appears frizzy and is severely weakened.  

   Use of Styling Aids  
 It is important not to be misled when evaluating hair shine, 
softness, and frizziness by the use of hair styling aids such as 
hair  spray,  mousse,  and  styling  gels.  These  products  usually 
contain a polymer which forms a thin film over the hair shafts 
imparting shine and stiffness. Combing the hair will remove 
the  polymer  film  which  will  appear  as  tiny  white  flakes 
throughout the hair, but the true state of the hair shafts can be 
better appreciated.  

   Use of Hair Coloring  
 Unfortunately,  some  patients  who  dye  their  hair  will  not 
openly admit that they use hair coloring. Furthermore, many 
patients do not know what kind of dye has been applied to 
the hair and whether any bleaching has occurred. This means 
that  the  dermatologist  must  rely  on  his  or  her  powers  of 
observation. 

 Hair color should be compared with eyelashes, eyebrows, or 
other  body  hair.  (It  is  possible  to  dye  the  eyelashes  and  eye-
brows.) If the scalp hair color is lighter than hair of other body 
parts,  bleaching  has  occurred.  If  regrowth  is  present  at  the 
scalp,  a  permanent  hair  color  has  been  used.  If  the  color 
appears to gradually vary from the proximal hair shaft to the 
distal  hair  shaft  with  the  presence  of  some  grayish  hairs,  a 
semipermanent  hair  color  has  been  used.  If  the  hair  has  a 
 yellowish  cast,  a  metallic  hair  color  has  been  used.  These 
guidelines can be used to initiate conversation when obtaining 
a patient history.  

   Degree of Curl  
 The degree of curl the hair possesses should also be evaluated 
since tightly curled hair is more prone to breakage. It should 
also be determined whether the curl is natural or due to per-
manent waving. Hair that has been chemically waved appears 
straight at the scalp and curlier at the ends. Hair that is natu-
rally curly will have an even curl throughout the length of the 
hair shaft. If the hair has been chemically waved, the type of 
permanent wave and length of processing should be obtained 
either from the patient or from the salon. These factors cannot 
be determined by visual examination.  

   Hair Softness  
 Hair softness, also due to an intact cuticle, creates a smooth hair 
shaft surface. Permanently waved or dyed hair must have a dis-
rupted  cuticle  in  order  to  allow  penetration  of  the  waving 
lotion or dye. Thus, chemically processed hair never feels as soft 
as virgin hair, even though hair conditioners attempt to tempo-
rarily  smooth  the  disrupted  cuticle.  Harsh  feeling  hair  is  an 
 evidence of cuticular damage.  

   Hair Length  
 Lastly, it is important to note the length of the hair and ask the 
patient  when  it  was  last  cut.  Longer  hair  is  subject  to  more 
weathering, and so an increased breakage is expected. Patients 
also evaluate hair loss by the amount of hair in the brush or 
sink; longer hair shafts will create a larger lump than shorter 
hair  shafts  even  though  the  same  number  of  hairs  has  been 
lost. Thus, patients with longer hair tend to overestimate their 

228

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

actual  loss.  Hair  which  has  been  cut  frequently  shows  less 
 evidence of damage than infrequently cut hair. If the damaged 
hair shaft ends have been removed prior to visiting the derma-
tologist, the full extent of hair damage may not be appreciated; 
however,  chemical  processing  damages  the  whole  hair  shaft 
and the evidence of damage will reappear shortly.   

  Microscopic Examination of a Hair Shaft 
 The  gross  findings  should  be  confirmed  by  a  microscopic 
examination of a shed hair shaft. The cuticular scales should 
be examined to note if weathering is present. The decrease or 
absence of scales can confirm the gross observation that the 
hair is dull, harsh, and frizzy. If the cuticular scales are greatly 
decreased  at  the  distal  hair  shaft,  trichoptilosis  results  from 
exposure  of  the  soft  medulla.  If  trichonodosis  is  observed, 
hair twisting or teasing may be the cause of the knots predis-
posing the hair to breakage. If trichorrhexis nodosa is present, 
and not part of a genodermatosis, this suggests an extensive 
cuticular loss.   

  cosmetic techniques for minimizing 
the hair loss 
 Hair grooming includes cleansing, drying, combing, brushing, 
and  styling  of  the  hair.  While  any  manipulation  of  the  hair 
shaft  can  cause  breakage,  loss  can  be  minimized  by  recom-
mending proper grooming practices to the patient.  

   Proper grooming practices can minimize hair loss. 

  Hair Cleansing 
 Cleansing the hair should be done only when hair has dirt or 
excess sebum. If sebum production is minimal and the patient 
has  a  sedentary  lifestyle,  daily  washing  is  not  necessary  for 
good  hygiene.  Patients  should  select  a  shampoo  appropriate 
for their hair type: normal, oily, dry, fine, damaged, or chemi-
cally treated. These labels usually appear on the outside of the 
shampoo bottle. If the patient with normal to minimal sebum 
production insists on daily shampooing, a dry hair shampoo 
with less detergent action should be recommended. Aggressive 
removal of sebum results in hair that tangles readily, appears 
dull, and attracts static electricity.  

  Hair Conditioning 
 An  instant  conditioner  or  a  cream  rinse  can  be  valuable  in 
minimizing  hair  loss  by  detangling  the  hair,  especially  long 
hair  ( 11 ).  Patients  who  have  excess  sebum  production  may 
prefer  a  cream  rinse  over  a  conditioner.  All  formulations  of 
instant conditioners are good at detangling hair by smoothing 
the cuticle and reducing friction. However, if the hair has been 
severely damaged and the cuticular scales are sparse with the 
presence  of  trichoptilosis,  only  a  protein-containing  condi-
tioner can penetrate the hair shaft and temporarily mend split 
ends. This is due to the substantivity of protein conditioners 
for hair keratin.  

  Hair Drying 
 It is best if the hair is allowed to dry without externally applied 
heat; however, many patients wish to speed up the drying pro-
cess or style their hair while drying. Heat-damaged hair from 

 Figure 34.2     Bubble hair forms when the hair is rapidly heated and the water 
within the hair shaft turns to highly energetic steam and exits the hair shaft 
creating a bubble.    

improper dryer use appears frizzy and curly at the ends. It may 
also  develop  an  abnormality  known  as  “bubble  hair”  ( 12 ) 
( Fig. 34.2 ). Any tension applied to the burned hair shaft will 
cause the hair to break in tiny fragments, some of which can be 
crushed between the fingers. Heat damage can be avoided by 
using  the  lowest  heat  setting  and  holding  the  nozzle  at  least 
6 inches  from  the  scalp.  A  specially  designed  vented  blow- 
drying  brush  should  be  used  to  prevent  high  temperatures 
along the brush.   

  Hair Combing and Brushing 
 Hair shafts are subject to fracture most when they are wet, due 
to  increased  elasticity.  It  is  much  easier  to  stretch  a  wet  hair 
shaft  to  the  breaking  point  than  a  dry  one.  Therefore,  hair 
should be initially detangled with the fingers and slightly dried 
prior to detangling with a wide toothed comb. Brushes should 
not be used for detangling. Combing and brushing should be 
kept to a minimum. The idea that 100 brush strokes a day is 
beneficial to the hair is mistaken. Combs should be selected for 
their  smooth,  widely  spaced  teeth  so  that  they  glide  freely 
through the hair. Brushes should have widely spaced bristles 
with rounded tips for the same reasons. Whether the bristles 
are synthetic or natural is less important than the spacing of 
the bristles.   

   Hair shafts are most subject to fracture when wet due to 
increased elasticity and stretching of the hair beyond the 
breaking point. 

  Hair Styling 
 Hair  styles  should  be  loose  to  minimize  breakage  and  not 
require excessive hair pins or combs. All hair pins should be 
rubber coated with smooth edges so that the hair is not broken 
as the clasp is closed. Unfortunately, the clasp must hold the 
hair tightly or it will not remain in place. Rubber bands should 
not be used in the hair as they are difficult to remove. 

 There are several common presentations of patients who are 
experiencing hair breakage due to hair styling. The first is the 
patient who wears her or his hair in a pony tail or braid, and 

ALOPECIA AND COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

claims decreased hair growth. Examination of the hair shows 
hair shafts fractured at the same distance from the scalp. This 
is due to repeated breakage where the hair clasp is placed. A 
second  presentation  is  the  patient  who  wears  braids  on  the 
scalp, also known as cornrows, and notes thinning at the front 
hairline. In this instance, the hair is broken due to maximum 
tension  at  the  front  hairline;  traction  alopecia  may  also  be 
present. The third presentation is the patient who has had hair 
extensions glued or woven into their natural hair. The weight 
of the extensions can cause hair breakage and traction alope-
cia. It may be necessary to question the patients on hair styling 
practices  as  they  may  wear  their  hair  differently  on  the  day 
they visit the dermatologist.  

  Hair Appliances 
 Burning  of  the  hair  and  subsequent  breakage  can  also  be 
caused  by  heated  hair  appliances:  curling  irons,  crimping 
irons,  straightening  irons,  and  heated  curlers.  Most  patients 
prefer  to  use  these  appliances  at  their  hottest  setting  as  this 
produces the tightest, longest lasting curl, but also induces hair 
damage to the greatest extent. This burning is minimized if a 
lower heat setting is chosen. Hair that is burned with a heated 
appliance appears frizzy at the ends.  

  Permanent Hair Coloring 
 Darkening the natural hair color is less damaging than lighten-
ing the natural hair color as the original eumelanins and phe-
omelanins are not removed. Any lightening of the hair color 
requires the use of bleaching to remove the existing pigments. 
In general, the more the bleaching required to achieve the final 
hair color, the weaker the hair shaft at the end of the chemical 
process. Many patients erroneously think that if the bleached 
blonde  hair  is  redyed  to  its  darker  original  color,  it  will  be 
healthier. This is not true. Any further dyeing only contributes 
to additional weakening of the hair shaft.  

  Permanent Waving of Hair 
 Permanent waving of the hair is more damaging than dyeing 
since the protein structure of the hair shaft is actually degraded 
and reconstructed in a new form. Damage can be minimized, 
however, by wrapping the hair loosely around larger curlers. 
This  results  in  a  looser,  shorter  lasting  curl,  but  breakage  is 
minimized ( Fig. 34.3 ).  

 The processing time can also be shortened which decreases 
the degree of bond breaking. The processing time is checked 
by  performing  a  “test  curl.”  The  test  curl  is  a  rod,  usually 
selected  at  the  nape  of  neck,  where  the  hair  is  periodically 
unwound to determine if the desired amount of curl has been 
achieved. Not all cosmetologists use a test curl, but it is highly 
recommended. It is also recommended that the test curl not be 
placed at the nape of the neck, but rather at the front hairline. 
Traditionally, the nape of the neck is chosen because hair here 
is more difficult to permanently wave than in any other area of 
the scalp. If the appropriate amount of curl is present at the 
nape, then the rest of the scalp will also be curled. However, 
hair at the front hairline curls more readily and may be over-
processed by the time the nape has curled. This accounts for 
patients noting more breakage at the anterior hairline. 

 Many patients both permanently dye and wave their hair. 
While the damage produced by these procedures is additive, 

229

 Figure  34.3     A  proper  technique  for  wrapping  hair  around  mandrels  for 
 permanent waving procedure.    

it can be minimized by allowing 10 days between procedures 
and  permanently  waving  the  hair  first  followed  by  dyeing 
the hair.   

  camouflage techniques for female pattern 
hair loss 
 Female pattern hair loss affects susceptible women beginning 
at puberty with noticeable thinning present by age 40. These 
women  present  with  hair  loss  over  the  entire  scalp,  but  the 
thinning is most prominent over the frontoparietal areas with 
sparing of a thin fringe along the anterior hair line. This pat-
tern  was  first  illustrated  by  Ludwig  ( 13 ).  Camouflaging  hair 
loss over the top of the scalp presents a greater challenge than 
that over the sides of the scalp. Cosmetic methods of camou-
flaging  female  androgenetic  alopecia  should  be  combined 
with  appropriate  medical  treatments  ( 14 ).  Only  cosmetic 
approaches  for  androgenetic  alopecia  are  discussed:  hair 
 styling,  hair  styling  products,  hair  permanent  waving,  hair 
 coloring agents, hairpieces, and hair additions. 

  Hair Styling 
 Careful  hair  style  selection  can  minimize  the  appearance  of 
female  pattern  hair  loss.  Since  the  hair  is  thinned  predomi-
nantly  on  the  top  of  the  head,  styling  techniques  should  be 
aimed at adding volume and fullness in this area. The percep-
tion of thick hair is based on the distance that the hair stands 
away from the scalp, but hair styling and styling products can 
create the illusion of fullness. 

 Two styling techniques are valuable for creating the illusion 
of hair volume: curling and back combing. Curled hair does 
not  lay  as  close  to  the  scalp  as  straight  hair  and  therefore 
appears fuller. Temporary curls can be created by heat styling 
with a blow dryer and a round brush, setting wet hair on roll-
ers, wrapping hair around heated rollers or a curling rod, and 
forming  pin  curls  close  to  the  scalp.  Tighter  curls  will  yield 
more hair fullness. 

 Back combing involves combing the hair in the opposite direc-
tion  from  which  it  would  normally  lay  on  the  scalp.  In  most 
women, the hair pattern is such that the hair on the top of the 
scalp lays forward. Combing the hair backward from the front of 
the head to the crown lifts the hair creating the illusion of vol-
ume. The hair will not stay in this unnatural position for long; 
therefore, styling aids are necessary for the hair to hold this shape. 

230

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Teasing is another technique, popular in the 1960s “beehive” 
hair styles, the change of which used to create volume. Teasing 
involves  combing  the  hair  from  the  distal  to  proximal  hair 
shaft using a fine-toothed comb or teasing brush to create tan-
gles between the hair shafts. These tangles, or “rats” as they are 
known, allow the hair to stand away from the scalp. Teasing, 
however, can result in the disruption of the hair shaft cuticle 
and  accelerate  hair  breakage.  It  is  important  to  avoid  hair 
breakage in areas where the hair is already thinned.  

  Hair Styling Products 
 Hair styling products can aid in creating the illusion of fullness 
by  allowing  the  hair  to  stand  away  from  the  scalp. Available 
styling products include styling gels, sculpturing gels, mousses, 
and hair sprays. Styling gels, sculpturing gels, and mousses are 
generally applied to towel-dried hair while hair sprays are used 
to improve the hold of a finished hair style. Sculpturing gels 
provide a stiffer hold than styling gels, which provide a better 
hold than mousses. 

 A small amount of gel or mousse is massaged into the base 
of the hair shafts and then the hair is dried with a blow dryer 
while combing the hair away from the scalp. This will increase 
the ability of the hair to stand away from the scalp creating the 
illusion of volume. The styling products lose their hold once 
the  hair  is  combed  or  gets  wet,  so  reapplication  is  necessary 
each time the hair is styled. 

 Hair spray can be used to keep the final hair style in place. 
For  example,  after  back  combing  the  hair,  it  can  be  liberally 
sprayed to allow the hair to fall backward instead of forward 
on the forehead.  

  Permanent Waving 
 Permanent waving of the hair increases the apparent hair vol-
ume allowing less amount of hair to cover more area of scalp 
due to increased curl. Thus, a permanent wave in the frontopa-
rietal area can nicely camouflage the female pattern hair loss. 
However, chemical curling damages the hair shaft by decreas-
ing  its  strength,  degrading  its  structure,  and  causing  protein 
loss. This damage can be minimized if the permanent wave is 
performed with care. 

 Hair  shaft  damage  can  be  decreased  by  wrapping  the  hair 
loosely  around  larger  curling  rods  resulting  in  a  looser  curl 
that is shorter lasting, but also less likely to fracture the hair 
shaft. Another  method  of  decreasing  hair  shaft  damage  is  to 
shorten  the  processing  time,  which  decreases  the  degree  of 
bond  breaking.  It  is  also  advisable  to  allow  as  much  time  as 
possible between permanent waving procedures.  

  Dyeing 
 Hair color lightening can be an effective camouflage technique 
for female pattern hair loss because it blends very well with a 
fair scalp. Of all the hair coloring types available, only perma-
nent  hair  dyes  can  achieve  color  lightening,  but  permanent 
hair dyes also can cause damages to the hair shaft most.  

  Hairpieces 
 A valuable hairpiece in the female with androgenetic alopecia is 
a hair thickener, which sits on top of the head, to provide addi-
tional hair in the frontoparietal region. The hair is wefted to a 
mesh through which the patient can pull her own hair to both 

anchor  the  hairpiece  and  provide  a  natural  appearance.  This 
type  of  hairpiece  costs  between  $30  and  $100,  depending  on 
whether it is constructed of synthetic or natural human hair.  

  Hair Additions 
 Hair additions can nicely camouflage frontoparietal thinning, 
but must be used cautiously as the weight of the hair addition 
can result in traction alopecia, only augmenting hair loss. Hair 
additions can be expensive, depending on the time required to 
complete the hair style, and are not appropriate for all patients.   

  camouflage techniques for male pattern 
hair loss 
 The  same  basic  camouflage  techniques  described  previously 
for female pattern hair loss also apply to male pattern hair loss. 
However, male pattern hair loss does not spare a thin strip of 
hair at the anterior hairline ( 15 ). This makes recreation of a 
natural appearing anterior hair line more challenging.  

  cosmetic techniques for damaged hair 
 Unfortunately, cosmetically damaged hair cannot be repaired 
by the body. However, cosmetic remedies may allow the hair to 
assume  an  acceptable  appearance  until  new  growth  occurs. 
 Table  34.4   lists  cosmetic  suggestions  for  the  common  hair 
problems.  

 The initial step in advising a patient on cosmetic remedies 
for hair problems is to ensure that he or she is using the appro-
priate  shampoo.  Patients  with  light-colored  hair  may  note  a 
greenish  discoloration  following  swimming  in  a  pool  with 
copper-contaminated water from copper-containing algicides 
or  copper  pipes  ( 16 ).  Low  water  pH,  chlorinated  water,  and 
copper contamination all must be present for the hair discol-
oration  to  occur.  This  problem  is  most  pronounced  in  indi-
viduals  with  bleached  hair  as  the  copper  is  readily  absorbed 
due to the increased content of cysteic acid and other anionic 
sulfonate groups ( 17 ). The use of special shampoos (Clairol, 
Metalux) or 2% penicillamine shampoos have been reported 
to  be  effective  in  removing  the  abnormal  color  ( 18 ).  Green 
hair  may  also  be  seen  after  using  copper-  contaminated  tap 
water ( 19 ), and some tar-based shampoos. Special shampoos 
can aid in removing the undesirable hue. 

 Shampoo selection is also important for chemically treated 
hair, which is dry and more subject to static electricity and tan-
gling than healthy hair. Patients can achieve an improved feel 
and  manageability  if  a  conditioning  shampoo  is  selected. 
Patients with fine, chemically treated hair, however, may find 
that a conditioning shampoo works well for about one to two 
weeks and then leaves the hair limp and without ability to hold 
a curl. This is due to excess conditioner on the hair shaft, which 
is  inadequately  removed  by  the  mild  shampoo.  Shampooing 
with a deep cleaning detergent shampoo once weekly will pre-
vent  conditioner  buildup.  Patients  should  be  encouraged  to 
allow  their  hair  to  begin  drying  prior  to  combing,  since  wet 
hair is more elastic and more subject to fracture. 

 It is recommended that patients with chemically treated hair 
use  an  instant  conditioner  following  shampooing.  The  opti-
mal  instant  conditioner  should  contain  hydrolyzed  animal 
protein. For severely damaged hair, a deep conditioner is rec-
ommended  every  two  weeks,  although  too  frequent  applica-
tion will render the hair limp. Patients who have a permanent 

ALOPECIA AND COSMETIC CONSIDERATIONS

231

Table 34.4  Cosmetic Suggestions for the Common Hair Problems

Problem

Hair texture

Possible cosmetic cause

Possible cosmetic solution

Fine, limp hair
Coarse, unmanageable hair
Fine, frizzy hair

Overconditioning
Underconditioning
Underconditioning

Hair contour
Too curly
Too straight

Hair color

Underconditioning
Overconditioning

Use instant oily hair conditioner
Use deep conditioner
Use instant conditioner for dry hair

Use instant conditioner for dry hair
Use instant conditioner for oily hair

Early graying, less than 15% Normal process
Yellow-gray hair tones
Hair grow out
Undesirable permanent 

Gradual loss of eumelanin pigments
New undyed hair growth
Dyeing of previously chemically treated hair

Vegetable or synthetic semipermanent dye or stain
Temporary rinse applied following shampooing
Touch up dye to roots, not entire hair shaft
Use semipermanent dye to tone undesirable shade 

dye hair color

Green hair
Hair thinning
Total scalp
Top of scalp

Copper in swimming pool water

Wear swim cap, treat pool water, use special shampoo

until grown out

Numerous medical problems
Male or female pattern baldness

Wig
Partial hair piece, spot permanent wave; use of styling 

gels, sculpturing gels, or mousse

Decreased length

Slower growth rate, hair breakage

Remove damaged hair to halt inevitable breakage

Hair breakage

Trichoptilosis

Loss of cuticle on distal hair shaft

Cut damaged hair or use an instant conditioner 

Trichoclasis

Styling trauma

General shaft fragility

Overprocessed hair

Hair appearance

Dull
Lack of body

Hair texture

Dry, rough

Cuticle irregularities
Fine hair texture

Overshampooing, permanent wave process time 

to long 

Greasy, slick

Overconditioning or inadequate shampooing

containing hydrolyzed animal protein for temporary 
repair

Avoid tight hair clasps and use ball-tipped styling 

combs and brushes

Use semipermanent instead of permanent hair dyes, 

use short permanent wave processing time

Use styling glaze or leave-in conditioner
Hair permanent wave, styling gel, or sculpturing gel to 

increase hold

Deep conditioner, shorten permanent wave processing 
time, do not repeat permanent wave for 3 months
Avoid conditioning shampoos and deep or oily hair 

conditioners

wave will note that heavy conditioners tend to relax the curl, 
which may or may not be desirable. 

 Damaged chemically treated hair should be subjected to as 
little  physical  stress  as  possible.  Permanent  waving  alone 
decreases  hair  strength  by  15%.  Styling,  including  combing 
and brushing, should be kept to a minimum. Tight hair clasps 
and hair styles that pull on the hair shaft should be avoided. 
Patients  should  be  encouraged  not  to  sleep  with  brush-type 
plastic rollers in their hair. Curling irons that clamp the hair to 
the  heated  rod  should  be  avoided.  In  other  words,  anything 
that might result in hair breakage should be minimized since 
chemically treated hair is more likely to demonstrate tricho-
ptilosis  and  trichoclasis.  Recommended  styling  procedures 
include the use of a round, ball-tipped brush to curl the hair 
while blow drying and heat-set rollers.  

   Permanent waving decreases hair strength by at least 15%. 

 Shine, or gloss, can be restored to chemically damaged hair 
with a hair glaze or leave-in conditioner. Additional shine and 

hold can be achieved with a styling gel for minimal hold or a 
sculpturing  gel  for  maximal  hold.  These  products  work  best 
when applied sparingly to damp hair and massaged through-
out the hair prior to styling. 

 Many patients undergo another chemical process to improve 
the appearance of damaged hair. For example, a patient who 
notes that her permanently dyed hair does not hold a curl may 
undergo a “conditioning” permanent wave. The end result is 
more  hair  damage  and  further  problems.  Patients  are  better 
advised to opt for an attractive wig, which may cost no more 
than a permanent wave, until new hair growth occurs.  

  cosmetic techniques for medical hair 
conditions 
 Numerous  inherited  medical  hair  conditions  (trichorrhexis 
nodosa, trichorrhexis invaginata, pili annulati, etc.) exhibit a 
variety of hair shaft defects. The end result of all these condi-
tions  is  a  fragile  hair  shaft  lacking  shine  or  grow  slowly. 
 Defective hair shafts should not undergo permanent dyeing or 
waving  procedures.  The  end  result  will  be  cosmetically 
poor  and  the  hair  shaft  will  fracture  more  readily.  However, 

232

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

temporary  or  semipermanent  hair  dyes  may  be  used;  these 
coat  or  minimally  penetrate  the  hair  shaft  without  causing 
severe internal shaft damage. 

 Hair manipulation, including shampooing, combing, brush-
ing, and curling, should be minimized. Patients generally do 
best with a short, straight hair style. Infrequent shampooing 
with a conditioning shampoo, followed by an instant condi-
tioner, decreases breakage and increases manageability. 

 If the quality of the scalp hair is poor, patients may wish to 

investigate the possibility of wearing a hair piece.  

   15.       Hamilton     JB    .   Patterned long hair in man: types and incidence  .   Ann NY 

Acad Sci     1951  ;   53  :   708  .   

   16.       Roomans     GM   ,    Forslind     B    .   Copper in green hair: a quantitative investiga-
tion  by  electron  probe  x-ray  microanalysis  .    Ultrastruct  Pathol      1980  ;    1  : 
  301  –  7  .   

   17.       Zultak     M   ,    Rochefor     A   ,    Faivre     B   ,    Claudet     MH   ,    Drobacheff     C    .   Green hair: 
clinical, chemical, and epidemiologic study  .   Ann Dermatol Venereol     1988  ; 
  115  :   807  –  912  .   

   18.       Person      JR    .    Green  hair:  treatment  with  a  penicillamine  shampoo  .    Arch 

Dermatol     1985  ;   121  :   717  –  18  .   

   19.       Nordlund     JJ   ,    Hartley     C   ,    Fister     J    .   On the cause of green hair  .   Arch  Dermatol   

  1977  ;   113  :   1700  .    

  summary 
 Alopecia  is  a  physically  and  emotionally  disabling  condition 
for many patients. The dermatologist may find it challenging 
to assist patients with hair loss because of the relatively little 
knowledge that is available in medical textbooks on the subject 
and the lack of exposure to hair care issues during residency. 
This chapter has distilled the medical and cosmetic treatment 
of alopecia down to each basic step. Familiarity and personal 
customization of these guidelines can make assisting patients 
with hair issues rewarding and productive.   

   references 
    1.       Bergfeld      WF    .    Scarring  alopecia  .    In  :      Roenigk      RR   ,     Roenigk      HR    ,    eds  . 
   Dermatolgic  Surgery,  Principles  and  Practice  .    New  York,  NY  :    Marcel 
Dekker  ,   1989  :   759  –  79  .   

    2.       Headington     JT    .   Telogen effluvium  .   Arch Dermatol     1993  ;   129  :   356  –  63  .   
    3.       Redmond     GP   ,    Bergfeld     WF    .   Diagnostic approach to androgen disorders in 

  suggested reading 
      Chartier     MB   ,    Hoss     DM   ,    Grant-Kels     JM    .   Approach to the adult female patient 
with diffuse nonscarring alopecia  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2002  ;   47  :   809  –  18  .   
     De Lacharriere     O   ,    Deloche     C   ,    Misciali     C    ,   et al  .   Hair diameter diversity  .   Arch 

Dermatol     2001  ;   137  :   641  –  6  .   

     Feughelman     M    .   Morphology and properties of hair (Chapter1)  .   In  :     Johnson   

  DH    ,   ed  .   Hair and hair care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1997  :   1  –  12  .   

     Feughelman     M    .   Physical properties of hair (Chapter2)  .   In  :     Johnson     DH    ,   ed  . 

  Hair and hair care  .   Marcel Dekker, Inc.  ,   1997  :   13  –  32  .   

     Feughelman      M   ,     Willis      BK    .    Mechanical  extension  of  human  hair  and  the 

movement of the cuticle  .   J Cosmet Sci     2001  ;   52  :   185  –  93  .   

     Fiedler     VC   ,     Alaiti      S    .    Treatment  of  alopecia  areata  .    Dermatol  Clin      1996  ;    14  : 

  733  –  7  .   

     Gamez-Garcia      M    .    Cuticle  decementation  and  cuticle  buckling  produced  by 
Poisson contraction on the cuticular envelope of human hair  .   J Cosmet 
Sci     1998  ;   49  :   213  –  22  .   

     Gamez-Garcia      M    .    Plastic  yielding  and  fracture  of  human  hair  cuticles  by 

 cyclical torsion stresses  .   J Cosmet Sci     1999  ;   50  :   69  –  77  .   

     Gamez-Garcia      M    .    The  cracking  of  human  hair  cuticles  by  cyclical  thermal 

women  .   Cleve Clin J Med     1990  ;   57  :   423  –  32  .   

stresses  .   J Cosmet Sci     1998  ;   49  :   141  –  53  .   

    4.       Sperling     LC   ,    Heimer     WL    .   Androgen biology as a basis for the diagnosis 
and treatment of androgenic disorders in women. I  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   
  1993  ;   28  :   669  –  83  .   

    5.       Sperling     LC   ,    Heimer     WL    .   Androgen biology as a basis for the diagnosis 
and treatment of androgenic disorders in women. II  .   J Am Acad Dermatol   
  1993  ;   28  :   901  –  16  .   

     Gummer     CL    .   Cosmetics and hair loss  .   Clin Exp Dermatol     2002  ;   27  :   418  –  21  .   
     Harrison      S   ,     Sinclair      R    .    Optimal  management  of  hair  loss  (alopecia)  in 

 children  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2003  ;   4  :   757  –  70  .   

     Hermann     S    .   Hair 101  .   GCI  .   2001  :   14  .   
     Price     VH    .   Treatment of hair loss  .   Drug Ther     1999  ;   341  :   964  –  73  .   
     Ross      EK   ,     Shapiro      J    .    Management  of  hair  loss  .    Dermatol  Clin      2005  ;    23  : 

    6.       Whiting      DA    .    Structural  abnormalities  of  the  hair  shaft  .    J  Am  Acad 

  227  –  43  .   

 Dermatol     1987  ;   16  :   1  –  25  .   

    7.       Camacho-Martinez      F   ,     Ferrando      J    .    Hair  shaft  dysplasias  .    Int  J  Dermatol   

  1988  ;   27  :   71  –  80  .   

     Rushton      DH   ,     Morris      MJ   ,     Dover      R   ,     Busuttil      N    .    Causes  of  hair  loss  and  the 
developments in hair rejuvenation  .   Int J Cosmet Sci     2002  ;   24  :   17  –  23  .   
     Shapiro     J   ,    Wiseman     M   ,    Lui     H    .   Practical management of hair loss  .   Can Fam 

    8.       Wolfram     L   ,    Lindemann     MO    .   Some observations on the hair cuticle  .   J Soc 

Physician     2000  ;   46  :   1469  –  77  .   

Cosmet Chem     1971  ;   2  :   839  .   

     Sinclair     RD    .   Healthy hair: what is it?   J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc     2007  ;   12  : 

    9.       Rook      A    .    The  clinical  importance  of  “weathering”  in  human  hair  .    Br  J 

  2  –  5  .   

 Dermatol     1976  ;   95  :   111  .   

     Swift     JA    .   Human hair cuticle: biologically conspired to the owner’s advantage  . 

   10.       Robbins     C    .   Weathering in human hair  .   Text Res J     1967  ;   37  :   337  .   
   11.       Menkart     J    .   Damaged hair  .   Cutis     1979  ;   23  :   276  –  8  .   
   12.       Detwiler     SP   ,    Carson     JL   ,    Woosley     JT   ,    et     al    .   Bubble hair  .   J Am Acad  Dermatol   

  1994  ;   30  :   54  –  60  .   

   13.       Ludwig     E    .   Classification of the types of androgenetic alopecia (common 
baldness) occurring in the female sex  .   Br J Dermatol     1977  ;   97  :   247  –  54  .   
   14.       Bergfeld     WF    .   Etiology and diagnosis of androgenetic alopecia  .   In  :      DeVillez   
  RL    ,   ed  .   Clinics in dermatology  .   Vol. 6  .   Philadelphia  :   JB Lippincott  ,   1988  : 
  102  –  7  .   

  J Cosmet Sci     1999  ;   50  :   23  –  47  .   

     Swift     JA    .   Letter to the editor(The cuticle controls bending stiffness of hair)  .   

J Cosmet Sci     2000  ;   51  :   37  –  8  .   

     Wolfram      LJ    .    Human  hair:  a  unique  physicochemical  composite  .    J Am Acad 

Dermatol     2003  ;   48    (6 Suppl)  :   S106  –  14  .        

             35  

 Seborrheic dermatitis      

  Seborrheic  dermatitis,  which  is  considered  a  severe  case  of 
symptomatic dandruff, is one of the most challenging condi-
tions  for  the  dermatologist  to  treat  because  it  is  a  chronic 
relapsing disease. While the exact etiology is known to be the 
overgrowth  of  fungal  organisms  such  as   Malassezia  globosa  
and  M. restricta , the reason for some exhibiting the inflamma-
tory condition and others not is unknown. Proper treatment 
requires both prescription agents and proper shampoo selec-
tion to prevent recurrence. The biggest challenge is recurrence 
since these organisms are normal flora on the scalp, but can 
reproduce rapidly in the absence of an intact immune system 
using sebum as food for growth. The sebum is broken down 
into  free  fatty  acids  that  cause  scalp  irritation  and  signs  and 
symptoms  of  seborrheic  dermatitis.  Seborrheic  dermatitis  is 
frequently  seen  in  immunosuppressed  persons  and  elderly 
individuals, especially after myocardial infarction, stroke, and 
the onset of Parkinson’s disease. It is interesting to note that 
the signs and symptoms of seborrheic dermatitis can be elic-
ited by applying oleic acid, a free fatty acid, to the scalp of sus-
ceptible individuals in the absence of fungal organisms. This 
means that scalp hygiene is key to the prevention of seborrheic 
dermatitis.  

   The signs and symptoms of seborrheic dermatitis can be 
reproduced by placing oleic acid on the scalps of 
 susceptible individuals. 

  shampoo selection for seborrheic 
 dermatitis 
 The treatment for seborrheic dermatitis may include a variety 
of prescription antifungals, such as ketoconazole, either orally 
for five days accompanied by sweating to allow the ketocon-
azole to reach the skin surface via eccrine secretions or topi-
cally.  Many  other  topical  antifungals,  such  as  clotrimazole, 
terbinafine, and ciclopirox, may also be used. Usually topical 
corticosteroids are added to reduce the inflammation induced 
by the  Malassezia  produced free fatty acids. It is interesting to 
note that topical corticosteroid alone will alleviate the symp-
toms of seborrheic dermatitis without an antifungal. However, 
the  symptoms  will  rapidly  return  without  the  use  of  some-
thing  to  decrease  the   Malassezia   population.  This  is  where 
shampoos  become  important  in  aiding  treatment  and  pre-
venting recurrence.  

   Shampoos are important in aiding the treatment and 
prevention of seborrheic dermatitis. 

 Seborrheic  dermatitis  cannot  be  adequately  controlled 
 without proper shampoo selection. Effective shampoo ingre-
dients  include  sulfur,  tar,  selenium  sulfide,  zinc  pyrithione, 

and  salicylic  acid.  Sulfur  shampoos  have  fallen  out  of  favor 
because  they  can  stain  light  colored  hair  yellow,  but  sulfur 
pomades are still used in persons with kinky hair both on the 
hair  and  scalp  to  control  fungal  growth  since  shampoo  fre-
quency is weekly or biweekly. Sulfur is a potent antifungal and 
will maintain scalp hygiene without the need to shampoo, but 
scalp scale will accumulate because the physical removal of the 
dander with scrubbing is absent. For this reason, the accumu-
lation of scalp scale in African American individuals cannot be 
used as a definitive marker for seborrheic dermatitis, although 
the two observations are many times related. 

 Tar  shampoos  are  some  of  the  most  effective  cleansers  in 
seborrheic  dermatitis.  This  is  because  tar  is  a  naturally 
 occurring  anti-inflammatory  agent.  By  definition,  anti- 
inflammatory agents decrease the white blood cell population 
in a given skin area. Inflammation in the skin always occurs for 
a reason, but the dermatologist may not be able to determine 
the  cause.  Many  skin  conditions  are  treated  with  anti- 
inflammatory  agents  nonspecifically  without  understanding 
the etiology. Psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis are excellent 
examples.  Anti-inflammatories  can  only  control  symptoms 
and not produce a cure. While chasing the white blood cells 
out  of  the  skin  with  tar  in  seborrheic  dermatitis  produces 
remission of the scaling and itching associated with the condi-
tion, it is also a carcinogen for the same reason. The carcinoge-
nicity  of  tar  has  been  a  source  of  controversy  discussed  on 
some consumer websites. Tar is a carcinogen, but purified tar 
with the creosote removed is less of a carcinogen. The newer 
dandruff shampoos use purified tar because it does not stain 
fabric washcloths, it has a more pleasant odor, and it is less of 
a  carcinogen.   Interestingly,  it  is  also  less  effective  in  treating 
seborrheic  dermatitis.  

   Small particle zinc pyrithione dandruff shampoos can 
decrease fungal colonization on the scalp. 

 Selenium  sulfide  and  zinc  pyrithione  are  two  ingredients 
with similar effects on the scalp. They also function as antifun-
gal and anti-inflammatory agents. Zinc pyrithione is felt to be 
a  better  anti-inflammatory  than  selenium  sulfide  due  to  the 
known benefits of zinc on the skin. An antifungal can only be 
effective, however, if it is present on the scalp. The newer dan-
druff  shampoo  formulations  use  smaller  particle  size  zinc 
pyrithione allowing more particles to be present in the bottle 
with the same percentage of the active ingredient. It is only the 
particle  edge  that  touches  the  scalp  which  is  effective  in 
 preventing fungal growth so the smaller particle formulations 
are more effective. Also, the formulations that leave behind the 
small zinc pyrithione particles in the follicular ostia are more 
effective. Since this is the most sebum-rich area of the scalp, 
the  follicular  ostia  contain  more 
 Malassezia   organisms 
 representing the target site for zinc pyrithione deposition. 

233

234

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Finally,  salicylic  acid  is  useful  in  seborrheic  dermatitis  to 
remove scalp scale and function as an anti-inflammatory, since 
it is of the salicylate family. Salicylic acid shampoos are most 
efficacious in patients who have seborrhiasis, an overlap con-
dition of seborrheic dermatitis and psoriasis. Another discus-
sion of shampoos for this purpose is found in the chapter on 
psoriasis. 

 Even though most dermatologists focus on the active agent 
in  the  shampoo,  the  workhorse  of  the  shampoo  is  really  the 
detergent. The detergents are what remove the sebum nutrient 
source for the  Malassezia  and physically break apart the skin. 
The detergents are applied with vigorously rubbing and mas-
saging, which further removes the skin scale. Shampooing is 
both a chemical and a physical process that prevents the recur-
rence of seborrheic dermatitis and this cannot be overlooked. 
Most  dandruff  shampoos  contain  excellent  foaming  agents 
and strong surfactants. The foaming allows the detergent to be 
effectively spread over the hair and scalp for more thorough 
sebum  removal,  up  to  a  point.  While  consumers  associate 
abundant  foam  with  good  cleansing,  foaming  agents  can  be 
added  in  any  quantity  desired  by  the  formulator.  Clean  hair 
foams better than dirty hair, so patients should not use this as 
a criterion for efficacious shampoo selection.  

women  do  like  the  feel  of  their  hair  after  using  this  type  of 
conditioner.  These  products  are  well  accepted  by  men  with 
shorter  hair,  however.  Women  using  dandruff  shampoos 
should definitely be encouraged to use a conditioner. Condi-
tioners  do  not  worsen  seborrheic  dermatitis  as  they  do  not 
increase  Malassezia  growth and do not interfere with prescrip-
tion medications.  

   Conditioners do not worsen seborrheic dermatitis. 

 Instant  conditioners  are  the  best  way  to  overcome  the 
reduced  aesthetics  of  dandruff  shampoos.  Dandruff  sham-
poos  tend  to  overcleanse  the  hair  and  the  conditioner  can 
restore  hair  shine.  Instant  conditioners  are  applied  immedi-
ately  following  shampooing  and  rinsed  before  leaving  the 
shower  and  towel  drying  the  hair.  The  instant  conditioner 
should be rubbed generously onto every hair shaft by pulling 
the fingers through the hair multiple times from proximal to 
distal end. If possible, the conditioner should be left in contact 
with the hair for three to five minutes, perhaps while shaving 
in the shower. It should be rinsed with cool water, which leaves 
more conditioner residue behind to beautify the hair.  

   Many seborrheic dermatitis patients apply shampoo to the 
hair only and do not clean the scalp adequately. 

   Rinsing an instant conditioner with cool water can 
increase the amount of dimethicone left on the hair to 
improve appearance in patients using dandruff shampoos. 

 Seborrheic dermatitis is a condition of the scalp and not the 
hair. Many patients with this disease are focused on hair beau-
tification, apply shampoo only to the hair, and do not clean the 
scalp adequately. Remind patients that shampoo is primarily 
to clean the scalp and not the hair. Proper shampoo technique 
should be to apply a half dollar dab of shampoo to the palm 
and rub into the scalp thoroughly. Leave the shampoo on the 
scalp while washing the rest of the body. This increases contact 
time between the active ingredient in the shampoo, such as tar 
or  zinc  pyrithione,  and  the  scalp  thereby  increasing  efficacy. 
The shampoo can then be worked through the hair and rinsed 
immediately. Gently scrubbing with a scalp brush or the fin-
gernails is necessary to remove the skin scalp and clean every 
portion  of  the  scalp.  The  frequency  of  shampooing  is  deter-
mined by the scalp sebum production. Oily scalp may require 
daily  shampooing  while  dry  scalp  may  only  require  twice 
weekly shampooing. One of the biggest contributing factors to 
seborrheic dermatitis is poor scalp hygiene.  

  conditioners for seborrheic dermatitis 
 Conditioning the hair is very important in the seborrheic der-
matitis patient. Most dandruff shampoos do not do a good job 
of beautifying the hair. They attempt to remove sebum thor-
oughly from the scalp, but overdry the hair. This leaves the hair 
dry, brittle, rough, frizzy, hard to style, dull, and susceptible to 
humidity  and  static  electricity.  All  of  these  problems  can  be 
overcome by proper conditioning. 

 Treatment conditioners containing zinc pyrithione are avail-
able for dandruff. The conditioner leaves behind zinc pyrithi-
one  in  the  follicular  ostia  in  greater  concentration  than  the 
zinc  pyrithione–containing  dandruff  shampoo.  This  may  be 
helpful  in  preventing  the  growth  of   Malassezia ,  but  many 

 The  two  best  conditioning  agents  for  persons  with  sebor-
rheic  dermatitis  are  dimethicone  and  the  polyquaternium 
compounds. Both coat the hair shaft and smooth the cuticle, 
which  increases  hair  shine.  They  also  provide  a  protective 
coating over the hair to minimize the effects of humidity and 
static  electricity.  The  conditioner  can  protect  the  hair  from 
heat damage due to the use of hair dryers, curling irons, hot 
curlers,  crimping  irons,  or  heated  hair  straightening  devices. 
Conditioners  can  reduce  combing  friction  decreasing  hair 
breakage and improve the softness of the hair. Instant condi-
tioners  can  be  combined  with  leave-in  conditioners  applied 
after  towel  drying  the  hair  to  increase  hair  beautification. 
There are not special leave-in conditioners for seborrheic der-
matitis patients and a thorough discussion of this topic can be 
found in the chapter on hair conditioners.  

  grooming practices 
 Grooming  practices  are  important  to  increase  the  success  of 
treatment  in  seborrheic  dermatitis  patients.  Combing  and 
brushing gently can help to dislodge skin scale, but aggressive 
scalp  manipulation  should  be  avoided.  The  most  important 
activity  to  avoid  in  seborrheic  dermatitis  patients  is  scalp 
scratching.  Unfortunately,  pruritus  is  the  most  bothersome 
symptom of seborrheic dermatitis and may be the main rea-
son  for  which  the  patient  seeks  treatment.  Scalp  scratching 
must  be  stopped  immediately  to  prevent  hair  damage.  It  is 
impossible to scratch only the scalp; the hair is scratched at the 
same  time.  In  only  45 minutes,  the  entire  cuticle  can  be 
removed from a hair shaft. Once the cuticle is removed, it can-
not be restored and the hair devoid of the cuticle will readily 
fracture  and  break.  This  is  why  many  seborrheic  dermatitis 

SEBORRHEIC DERMATITIS

patients  complain  of  poor  hair  growth.  The  hair  is  growing 
fine since seborrheic dermatitis does not generally affect the 
hair  shaft;  but  the  hair  is  damaged  cosmetically  by  scalp 
scratching giving the impression of poor hair growth. 

 Topical  prescription  corticosteroids  to  alleviate  itching  are 
probably the best solution to poor hair quality in seborrheic 
dermatitis patients. This will work better than any high priced 
hair procedure or concoction to beautify the hair. It may seem 
too simple, but the key to great looking hair in the seborrheic 
dermatitis patient is itch control.   

   The key to great looking hair in the seborrheic dermatitis 
patient is alleviating pruritus. 

  otc treatments 
 A variety of over-the-counter (OTC) scalp treatments, based 
on  salicylic  acid  and  hydrocortisone,  are  available  for 

235

 seborrheic dermatitis. These treatments may not be sufficient 
for alleviating pruritus, but may be used in the maintenance 
phase  of  disease.  Salicylic  acid  can  remove  some  of  the  skin 
scale, but is probably more effective in patients with a psoria-
sis/seborrheic  dermatitis  overlap  condition  where  the  skin 
scale does not slough from the scalp properly. Once it has been 
well  treated,  1%  hydrocortisone  solutions  can  aid  in  the 
 control of itching.  

   OTC seborrheic dermatitis treatments contain salicylic 
acid and hydrocortisone. 

 Seborrheic dermatitis is a challenging condition to treat, but 
the judicious selection of shampoos and conditioners can pro-
long remission and increase hair beauty. Both are important to 
the patient, as well as the dermatologist who will understand 
the hair care market and offer patients better advice.     

             36   Psoriasis and hair      

  Dermatologists  are  preoccupied  most  with  improving  scalp 
psoriasis  to  alleviate  itching  and  reduce  scaling.  While  these 
are important goals, patients with scalp psoriasis are also con-
cerned  with  the  health  and  appearance  of  their  hair.  Most 
patients  will  not  have  beautiful  hair  until  the  psoriasis  has 
been treated, but providing advice on hair beautification dur-
ing the early phase of treatment can be helpful in building a 
strong  physician–patient  relationship  and  encouraging  com-
pliance. This chapter discusses the psoriasis patient and hair 
care practices. 

  shampoos 
 A variety of shampoos are available to meet the needs of the 
scalp psoriasis patient. These shampoos are considered over-
the-counter (OTC) drugs and list an active agent on the label, 
which is the distinct packaging attribute of all OTC drugs. The 
limitations of OTC drugs are that they can only contain one 
active  agent  and  this  agent  must  be  selected  from  a  list  of 
approved active agents on a monograph that is set forth by the 
government. There is no psoriasis scalp monograph; so all of 
the  active  agents  for  psoriasis  shampoos  are  taken  from  the 
dandruff shampoo monograph. This monograph has limited 
ingredients  for  selection,  which  is  why  most  shampoos  for 
psoriasis  are  basically  dandruff  shampoos,  even  though  the 
etiology of psoriasis is much different from that of seborrheic 
dermatitis.  

   Psoriasis shampoos are basically dandruff shampoos, even 
though psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis have different 
etiologies. 

 Psoriasis treatment shampoos usually contain a very strong 
detergent to deliver the active agent to the scalp and to remove 
as much sebum as possible. While this is important to improv-
ing scalp psoriasis, this type of shampoo does not beautify the 
hair. Thus, psoriasis shampoo selection is a balance between 
optimizing  scalp  treatment  while  not  damaging  the  hair. 
Sodium  laureth  sulfate  or  sodium  lauryl  sulfate  are  the  two 
main cleansers in the shampoos. A new trend is to eliminate 
the sulfates from shampoos, since they are considered “unnat-
ural”  ingredients.  Sulfates  are  the  most  important  synthetic 
detergents in all body and hair cleansers today and eliminating 
them for replacement by another detergent is really immate-
rial, since cleansers remain in contact with the skin for a brief 
period of time before removal and are not ingested. 

 In additional to the detergent, psoriasis shampoos may con-
tain sulfur, tar, botanicals, salicylic acid, zinc pyrithione, and 
selenium  sulfide.  Sulfur  is  an  antifungal  and  antibacterial. 
Some  dermatologists  believe  that  bacterial-induced  inflam-
mation may worsen psoriasis, which may point to the value of 
sulfur  shampoos.  Furthermore,  many  patients  have  psoriasis 

236

that  overlaps  with  seborrheic  dermatitis  and  may  find  the 
 antifungal properties important, but for the most part sulfur is 
not a good ingredient in shampoos. It stains light colored hair 
and is damaging to the hair shaft. Tar can similarly stain light 
colored hair, if it has not been purified to remove the creosote. 
However, creosote is one of the most potent anti- inflammatory 
agents in the complex naturally occurring mixture known as 
tar. Creosote is also carcinogenic. Botanical anti-inflammatory 
concoctions blending green tea, lavender, chamomile, tea tree 
oil, and oatmeal extract are also on the market. It is unlikely 
that  these  ingredients  have  much  effect  separate  from  their 
detergent vehicle in improving scalp psoriasis.  

   Salicylic acid is the most useful shampoo ingredient for 
scalp psoriasis. 

 Salicylic acid is in my opinion the most helpful ingredient in 
scalp psoriasis. It is an oil-soluble substance that can mix with 
scalp sebum to cause the thick collected scalp corneocytes to 
exfoliate. Unless the scalp scale is removed, prescription topi-
cal  treatments  do  not  physically  touch  the  scalp  and  cannot 
provide  improvement.  It  is  the  chemical  effect  of  the  deter-
gents  on  the  scalp  scale  and  the  physical  effect  of  scrubbing 
that provide most of the improvement, which are augmented 
by the exfoliating effect of the salicylic acid. Salicylic acid can 
also function as a mild anti-inflammatory, but the brief con-
tact  of  the  salicylic  acid  with  the  scalp  may  minimize  this 
effect. Unfortunately, salicylic acid is not a hair-friendly sub-
stance. It can remove scalp skin scale and also hair cuticular 
scale. This means that a conditioner must be used following 
shampooing to smooth the cuticle and restore the softness and 
luster of the hair. 

 Zinc  pyrithione  and  selenium  sulfide  are  the  last  two 
 ingredients that can be used in scalp psoriasis. Selenium  sulfide 
is not used as much because it is an orange ingredient that is 
fairly expensive and difficult to formulate. Its efficacy is similar 
to  zinc  pyrithione,  but  zinc  pyrithione  is  a  better  anti- 
inflammatory  agent.  New  grinding  technology  has  allowed 
very  small  size  zinc  pyrithione  particles  to  be  produced  that 
can  deposit  in  the  follicular  ostia.  This  technology  may  be 
worthwhile in psoriasis, since this delivery may provide longer 
lasting anti-inflammatory effects. The zinc pyrithione is also 
antifungal, providing benefit in patients with seborrhiasis, an 
overlap between seborrheic dermatitis and psoriasis.  

   Rotating shampoos in the psoriasis patient is very impor-
tant as use of one shampoo may create cosmetic scalp and 
hair issues. 

 Rotating shampoos in the psoriasis patient is very important 
as use of one shampoo may create cosmetic scalp issues. Many 

PSORIASIS AND HAIR

237

Table 36.1  Sample Shampoo Regimens for Patients 
with Scalp Psoriasis

   Leave-in conditioners can function as a scalp moisturizer 
to lubricate skin scale and reduce scalp itching. 

(A) Sample Scalp Psoriasis Daily Shampoo Regimen

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Salicylic acid shampoo
Conditioning shampoo
Zinc pyrithione shampoo
Conditioning shampoo
Salicylic acid shampoo
Conditioning shampoo
Conditioning shampoo

(B) Sample Scalp Psoriasis Thrice Weekly Shampoo Regimen

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Salicylic acid shampoo
No shampoo
Conditioning shampoo
No shampoo
Zinc pyrithione shampoo
No shampoo
No shampoo

(C) Sample Scalp Psoriasis Twice Weekly Shampoo Regimen

Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Salicylic acid shampoo
No shampoo
No shampoo
Conditioning shampoo
No shampoo
No shampoo
No shampoo

psoriasis  patients  wish  to  shampoo  daily  to  optimize  scale 
removal, which can create dry hair issues. A possible shampoo 
regimen to maximize scalp and hair appearance might be as 
listed in  Table 36.1 . Patients with drier hair and less scalp scale 
may wish to shampoo twice or thrice weekly and possible reg-
imens  are  also  presented  in   Table  36.1 .  Using  a  hair  condi-
tioner  is  very  important  in  all  regimens  to  maintain  the 
cosmetic beauty of hair, the next topic of discussion.   

  conditioners 
 Conditioners  are  very  important  in  the  psoriasis  patient  to 
beautify  the  hair  while  minimizing  the  presence  of  disease. 
Some of the newer zinc pyrithione dandruff hair conditioners 
are worthwhile in the psoriasis patient as these instant condi-
tioners applied after shampooing can leave behind additional 
zinc pyrithione in the follicular ostia to decrease inflammation 
and the colonization of the scalp by malassezia species. This 
type  of  conditioner  should  be  used  once  or  twice  weekly.  A 
standard instant conditioner that is applied immediately fol-
lowing shampooing should be used the rest of the time. Instant 
conditioners  can  leave  behind  dimethicone  during  the  rinse 
phase to minimize the damaging effect of the psoriasis sham-
poo surfactant. The instant conditioner will provide more hair 
benefits if left on the hair for a longer period of time in the 
bath. A possible recommendation might be to have the patient 
shampoo first in the shower and rinse, then apply the instant 
conditioner. The conditioner should be left on while bathing 
the rest of the body or shaving and then rinsed just before leav-
ing the shower. This allows more time for the conditioner to 
coat the hair shaft and smooth the cuticle. Instant conditioner 

can also be rubbed into the scalp to soften the psoriatic scale 
and rinsed.  

 Once  the  instant  hair  conditioner  is  rinsed,  the  hair  is 
towel dried and a leave-in conditioner that is not removed is 
applied. These are creams providing additional dimethicone 
to  further  smooth  the  cuticle.  The  cream  should  be  mas-
saged through the hair and lightly rubbed into the scalp. The 
leave-in conditioner can function as a scalp moisturizer to 
lubricate scalp scales and reduce the scalp itching. Once the 
hair has dried, further conditioning can be provided with a 
dimethicone-containing hair serum. These are clear liquids, 
also  known  as  products  to  control  hair  frizz;  they  further 
smooth the cuticle. The hair serum should be applied daily 
to keep the hair moisturized, but can also be applied to the 
scalp as a moisturizer. Skin moisturizers are frequently used 
by  psoriasis  patients  to  make  the  skin  feel  smoother  and 
softer and can also be used to lubricate the scalp in the form 
of hair serums.  

  grooming practices 
 Patients  with  scalp  psoriasis  are  very  self-conscious  of  their 
hair  and  sometimes  have  elaborate  grooming  practices  that 
can be detrimental to disease treatment. Aggressive combing 
and brushing are sometimes used on a daily basis to decrease 
the amount of scalp scale. Psoriasis patients sometimes mis-
takenly think that they can brush out all of the scalp disease. 
Since  psoriasis  exhibits  the  Koebner  phenomenon,  where 
trauma to the scalp increases the inflammation and resultant 
scaling,  combing  and  brushing  of  the  scalp  are  not  recom-
mended.  The  hair  should  be  gently  groomed  and  the  scalp 
manipulated  as  little  as  possible.  Psoriasis  patients  may  also 
wish to permanently dye, wave, or straighten their hair with 
chemicals that can also be damaging to the scalp. One way to 
minimize inflammation is to pretreat the scalp with a clobeta-
sol solution or gel on the night prior to and after the chemical 
hair  procedure.  This  can  aid  in  reducing  the  inflammation 
preventing  a  flare  of  psoriasis.  In  general,  advise  psoriasis 
patients to minimize manipulation of the scalp.   

   Aggressive combing and brushing should be avoided to 
decrease scalp trauma, which may worsen scalp psoriasis. 

  otc treatments 
 OTC  treatments  for  scalp  psoriasis  are  available  in  plenty  to 
alleviate scaling and itching. Again, since only one active agent 
can  be  present,  most  psoriasis  scalp  solutions  have  either 
hydrocortisone  or  salicylic  acid.  The  prescription  formula-
tions at higher concentrations utilizing fluorinated corticoste-
roids are more effective, but understanding the OTC market is 
important  to  the  dermatologist.  OTC  salicylic  acid  solutions 
can formulate with up to 2% salicylic acid, which should be 

238

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

applied directly to the scalp and not to the hair. OTC topical 
corticosteroid solutions can contain up to 1% hydrocortisone, 
which  is  only  effective  in  the  thinnest  of  plaques.  The  best 
 efficacy is achieved by using the 2% salicylic acid in the morn-
ing  and  1%  hydrocortisone  in  the  evening  for  patients  with 
limited funds or those who are in the maintenance phase of 
treatment.  

  summary 
 This chapter has evaluated the use of OTC drugs and hair care 
products in patients with psoriasis. It is important for the der-
matologist to skillfully transition the patient from prescription 
products to OTC treatments as the disease improves. Treatment 
can be supplemented by the careful selection of shampoos and 
hair conditioners to optimize scalp psoriasis treatment.     

             37  

 Aging hair issues      

  Hair ages differently than other body structures because it is 
one of the few nonliving tissues that is constantly renewed, the 
only other similar structure being the nails. Hair care becomes 
important as aging progresses because damage to the hair is 
irreversible and the average hairs on a mature head are three 
years old. This means that the effect of any cosmetic procedure 
gone awry will be present for a long time. Changes that occur 
as  the  follicle  matures  include  a  decrease  in  rapidity  of  hair 
growth,  a  reduction  in  the  diameter  of  the  hair  shaft,  and  a 
failure to pigment the hair shaft. All of these observations are 
consistent  with  a  loss  of  follicle  vigor.  Since  hair  growth 
requires high-energy output, this decreased vigor is consistent 
with  the  slowing  of  other  body  activities  with  age,  but  the 
senescence of the hair shaft is particularly visible. Gray hair is 
the first sign of maturity noticed by both men and women. 

 This chapter addresses methods of maintaining the hair in a 
state of health. Much of the information regarding hair behav-
ior  is  obtained  from  the  textile  literature,  especially  the  pro-
cessing  and  dyeing  of  wool  fabrics.  Human  hair  experiences 
most of the same phenomenon exhibited by wool and extrap-
olations can be made with accuracy. Healthy hair is full, shiny, 
soft, and manageable. It resists static electricity, maintains the 
desired  hairstyle,  and  bounces  with  movement.  Since  hair  is 
nonliving, hair care becomes very important, especially with 
maturity. This chapter presents nine concepts important when 
considering the unique needs of aging hair. 
  healthy hair is natural hair 
 Many  mature  women  are  dissatisfied  with  the  appearance  of 
their hair and seek cosmetic alterations, such as hair dyeing or 
permanent  waving.  These  procedures  work  well  on  hair  that 
grows quickly because the hair damaged by the chemical pro-
cess is removed and not reprocessed repeatedly. This is not the 
case with aging hair that has a slower growth rate. Hair manip-
ulations of all types should be kept to a minimum and as much 
time as possible be allowed between chemical processing. The 
hair should be protected when outdoors at all times by wearing 
a hat or scarf. Sun, wind, and humidity are the enemies of aging 
hair. It may be hard to convince the mature woman that the less 
she does to her hair the better! It is just too simple to believe.  

   Sun, wind, and humidity are the enemies of aging hair. 

cortex,  and  creates  fresh  hair  ends  that  are  less  frizzy,  more 
likely to maintain a curl, and less subject to static electricity. 
Trimming also eliminates the irregularity of broken hairs that 
creates the illusion of fuller, healthier hair. Frequent haircuts 
are recommended to improve hair appearance.  

  treat underlying scalp conditions 
 The health of the hair is directly related to the health of the 
scalp. Many mature patients have postmenopausal itchy scalp, 
seborrheic dermatitis, or scalp folliculitis. When assessing the 
hair of a mature patient, do not forget to assess the scalp. Any 
pruritic scalp disease will cause hair problems. It is possible to 
remove all of cuticular scale from a hair shaft with only 45 min-
utes  of  continuous  scratching  with  the  fingernails.  Most 
patients will not scratch their scalp continuously for 45 min-
utes,  but  the  hair  shaft  effects  of  scratching  are  additive. 
45 minutes  can  easily  be  added  up  if  the  patient  scratches 
5 minutes a day for 9 days. For this reason, it is important to 
treat  scalp  itching  and  any  other  scalp  conditions  noted  on 
physical examination.  

  aging hair and heat exposure 
 It is common for mature individuals to applying external heat 
to speed hair drying and prevent chilling of the body. While 
the blow dryer is an excellent way to rewarm a wet head, the 
heat can permanently damage the protein structure of the hair. 
Once  the  water  has  evaporated  from  the  outside  of  the  hair 
shaft, overdrying of the hair can occur where the water within 
the shaft turns to steam and exits the hair shaft creating a loss 
of cuticular scale, known as “bubble hair” ( Fig. 34.2  in a previ-
ous chapter is a scanning electron micrograph demonstrating 
the  bubbles  created  by  the  energetic  steam.).  Unfortunately, 
the condition is permanent and bubble hair results in a weak-
ening of the mature hair shaft and eventual breakage. For this 
reason, aging hair should be dried until very slightly damp, but 
not  completely  dry  to  avoid  bubble  hair.  The  dermatologist 
can  easily  detect  the  presence  of  hair  shaft  damage,  such  as 
bubble hair, by grasping the hair 1 inch from the end with one 
hand and pulling on the hair ends with the other. If the hairs 
break, hair damage from bubble hair or other causes may be 
present.  

  trim hair frequently 
 Many mature patients are hesitant to cut their hair, since the 
hair growth rate slows down decreasing the maximal achiev-
able length. If the hair shafts have been damaged by too much 
manipulation and chemical processing, no special shampoo or 
pricey conditioner can restore hair beauty. For these patients, 
the overall hair appearance can be improved by removing 1 to 
2 inches from the distal hair shafts every other month depend-
ing  on  the  rate  of  hair  growth.  This  trims  away  split  ends, 
formed  when  the  missing  cuticle  exposes  the  softer  internal 

  aging hair and chemical processing 
 Chemical processing becomes an important part of grooming 
in aging hair. Gray hair is dyed to bring back a more youthful 
color  and  also  permanently  waved  to  make  the  hair  appear 
thicker  and  fuller.  Both  procedures  damage  aging  hair,  but 
most mature women are resistant to giving up chemical pro-
cessing. For many, the hairdresser is a weekly social outing that 
is an enjoyable part of retirement. Chemical processing can be 
continued with maturity as long as the hairdresser realizes that 
the  aging  hair  will  process  more  quickly  than  youthful  hair. 

239

240

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

This  is  because  aging  is  smaller  in  diameter  allowing  easier 
penetration of the chemicals and the slower growth rate means 
that  the  same  hair  is  reprocessed  repeatedly. Already  chemi-
cally processed hair processes more rapidly with each subse-
quent chemical exposure due to the already damaged cuticle. 
 Overprocessing of aging hair by leaving the permanent wave 
solution on too long or the hair bleach on too long is the most 
common problem I see in my office. It is easy to avoid if the 
beautician is aware of the issues. When the processing time is 
completed, the beautician must attend to the patient immedi-
ately  rather  than  allowing  another  10  to  15 minutes  to  pass 
while she attends to other customers. Unfortunately, there is 
no  way  to  undo  the  damage  caused  by  overprocessing.  This 
means that the mature patient must pick a beautician who is 
careful in her technique and experienced in treating aging hair.  

   Overprocessing  of  aging  hair  leads  to  hair  breakage  and 
poor manageability. 

  shampoos for aging hair 
 Many  mature  patients  who  present  to  the  dermatologist  have 
already severely damaged their hair and permanent restoration 
is not possible. Yet, it is important to counsel the patient on how 
to  optimize  hair  appearance  until  new  growth  occurs.  One 
method  of  minimizing  hair  damage  is  to  select  a  shampoo 
designed to remove sebum and simultaneously beautify the hair, 
known  as  a  conditioning  shampoo.  Conditioning  shampoos, 
also  known  as  2-in-1  shampoos,  perform  two  separate  func-
tions based on the difference in shampoo to water ratio during 
the washing and rinsing phases. During the washing phase, the 
shampoo is applied to damp hair and massaged into the scalp. 
In this phase, the shampoo quantity is high and the water quan-
tity is low resulting in detergent cleansing primarily of the scalp, 
but also the hair. Following completion of the cleansing phase, 
the shampoo is rinsed from the hair progressively lowering the 
amount of shampoo and increasing the amount of water. Dur-
ing this rinse phase, a thin layer of conditioner is left behind to 
coat each hair shaft thus minimizing damage.  

  conditioners for aging hair 
 Conditioners are very important in aging hair to preserve the 
architecture of the cuticle and make the hair soft and shiny. As 
the rapidity of hair growth slows down with age, the hair is cut 
less frequently. This means that mature patients must take  better 
care of their hair and the damage resulting from any unsuccess-
ful cosmetic manipulation will be longer lasting. Conditioners 
place a coating over the hair shaft that can be protective against 
the heat damage from blow dryers and heated hair styling appli-
ances. Conditioners also decrease hair grooming friction thereby 
minimizing hair breakage. Mature patients should first condi-
tion with an instant conditioner that is applied in the shower 
immediately  following  shampooing.  The  conditioner  is  then 
rinsed with cool water and the hair is towel dried. When the hair 
is mildly damp, a quarter-sized amount of leave-in cream con-
ditioner containing dimethicone should be dispensed into the 
hand and stroked through the hair in an attempt to cover every 
hair shaft. More should be applied to the distal hair shaft and 
less to the proximal hair shaft. The hair should then be allowed 
to air dry to minimize heat damage. When the hair is almost dry, 

 Figure 37.1     An example of a hair conditioning spray for dyed hair containing 
photoprotection.    

a hair serum should be applied with two to four squirts into the 
palm  and  again  rubbed  gently  through  the  hair.  The  stepwise 
application  of  these  conditioners  will  protect  the  hair  and 
enhance its ability to shine. The conditioner will also improve 
the  ability of the hair to hold a style.  
  styling products for aging hair 
 Once the hair has been shampooed, conditioned, and dried, it is 
ready for styling. Hair styling is best done when the hair is almost 
dry. Whatever the hair configuration be, the instant the hair shaft 
goes from wet to dry, it will determine the final shape of the hair. 
For this reason, it is best to style almost dry hair. The hair should 
be handled gently, since wet hair is more prone to breakage than 
dry  hair.  Another  layer  of  hair  serum  containing  dimethicone 
should be applied at this point. A hair conditioning spray con-
taining sunscreen, most commonly benzophenone, can also be 
applied to minimize UV damage to the hair ( Fig. 37.1 ). The hair 
can then be finger styled or styled with a curling iron or hot roll-
ers set on low to avoid heat  damage. Finally, once styled, the hair 
can be sprayed with a flexible-hold pump hair spray.    

   Aging  hair  should  be  manipulated  as  little  as  possible  to 
prevent hair breakage from hair styling. 

  hair styles for aging hair 
 The  hair  style  selected  for  aging  hair  should  be  simple  and 
require little hair manipulation. Combing and brushing fre-
quently  fracture  the  fine  hair  shafts  characteristic  of  aging 
hair ( Fig. 37.2 ). Combs should be wide toothed and brushing 

AGING HAIR ISSUES

241

 Figure 37.2     A wide toothed smooth bristle brush is less likely to fracture weak 
aging hair shafts.    

 Figure 37.3     Combs with broadly spaced teeth will style hair while minimizing 
hair shaft cuticle damage.    

should  be  avoided,  if  possible  ( Fig.  37.3 ).  The  hair  should 
only  be  styled  when  dry  and  handled  minimally  when  wet, 
since wet hair is more susceptible to hair breakage. Elaborate 
hair styles requiring teasing, pulling, clasps, barrettes, rubber 
bands and the like are not recommended because hair break-
age  will  be  increased.  Hair  styles  that  can  only  be  achieved 
with permanent waving or frequent hair setting are also not 
advised.  Simple  is  again  the  most  important  consideration 
when  selecting  a  hair  style  to  optimize  the  appearance  of 
aging hair.    

  summary 
 It is important for the dermatologist to understand the needs 
of aging hair. Mature men and women want to look their best 
at any age and hair is an important part of appearance. While 
aging hair is not as forgiving as youthful hair, it can be care-
fully  groomed  and  styled  to  optimize  appearance.  It  is  most 
important not to undergo risky procedures that might end up 
in a disastrous cosmetic result because scalp hair growth slows 
with age and it is not as easy to cut away the unattractive hair 
in anticipation of regrowth.                  

             38    Damaged hair issues      

  One of the most common problems the dermatologist faces is 
the patient who is experiencing hair loss, which can result from 
either medical or cosmetic causes. No matter what the cause of 
the hair loss, premature hair breakage is an important contribut-
ing factor. Hair is protein and anything that weakens the protein 
structure  will  cause  the  hair  to  fracture  with  minimal  trauma. 
Patients are usually seeking medical help to determine how to 
strengthen their hair and sometimes resort to body building per-
manent waves or hair-strengthening hair dyes or expensive hair 
conditioners with caviar. The truth is that once the nonliving hair 
is damaged it cannot be permanently repaired. Furthermore, any 
additional cosmetic manipulations will result in more problems. 
The  best  and  simplest  answer  for  the  patient  who  wishes  to 
restore hair beauty is to cut the hair off and allow new hair to 
grow, avoiding the cosmetic mistakes of the past. This is excellent 
advice, but usually not well received by the patient. 

 This chapter discusses 10 easy tips to be shared with patients, 
in  search  of  elusive  great  looking  hair.  Providing  these  ideas 
will  help  the  patient  minimize  problems  and  perhaps  allow 
them to feel that their problems were seriously addressed by 
the physician. These tips are summarized in  Table 38.1  and can 
be easily placed in a handout for patient distribution.  
  hair manipulation 

Manipulate the hair as little as possible ( Fig. 38.1 ) . 

 There is a misnomer among hair stylists that the more you do 
to the hair, the healthier it becomes. This is not true. There is 
no  such  thing  as  a  “body  restoring  permanent  wave”  or  a 
“strengthening hair dye.” The more you dye or perm the hair, 
the weaker it becomes. The more you comb, brush, curl, twist, 
clip, tease, braid, etc. the hair, the more damage it incurs. This 
damage  is  permanent,  since  the  hair  is  nonliving.  Basically, 
any manipulation of the hair shaft results in the possibility of 
cuticular damage, which is known in the hair care industry as 
“weathering.”  Weathering  is  visible  even  on  the  healthiest 
head of hair as a tightly overlapped intact cuticle on the newly 
grown  proximal  hair  shaft,  with  a  disrupted,  sometimes 
absent  cuticle  on  the  older  distal  hair  shaft.  Weathering  is 
basically  the  sum  of  chemical  and  physical  environmental 
insults  on  the  hair  shaft,  which  can  be  minimized  through 
reduced manipulation.  
  hair comb selection 

Select a wide-toothed comb with Teflon coated tips ( Fig. 38.2 ) . 

  One of the most common insults the hair receives on a daily 
basis is grooming. This grooming is usually done with a comb. 
Thus, it is important to select a comb that decreases hair break-
age by minimizing the friction between the hair and the teeth 
of  the  comb.  For  this  reason,  a  comb  should  have  broadly 
spaced  smooth  teeth,  preferably  Teflon  coated,  to  reduce 
combing friction. A comb that tends to grab the hair shafts as 
they pass through the tangled hair increases hair shaft fracture, 
242

usually at the point where cuticular scale is most disrupted or 
completely absent. 

 Combing friction is also maximal when the hair shafts are 
tangled. Unfortunately, the most common reason for combing 
the hair is to remove tangles. This means that the hair should 
be  protected  from  situations  that  might  cause  hair  tangles, 
such as wind, unconscious hair twisting, or teasing. The most 
effective way to reduce hair combing friction, besides proper 
comb selection, is application of a conditioner.  
  hair styling 

 Select a vented ball-tipped styling brush ( Fig. 38.3 ). 

 The  second  most  commonly  used  grooming  implement  is  a 
brush and it too requires careful selection. The main goal again is 
to reduce friction between the brush and the hair shafts. Natural 
bristle brushes or brushes with a dense arrangement of bristles 
have recently become popular since they fit quite nicely with the 
current “back to nature” trend and the use of botanicals in the 
hair care industry; however, these brushes maximize hair break-
age. A better option is to select a brush design, known as a blow-
drying brush, for general grooming needs. These brushes possess 
vents or openings on the brush head to prevent heat from build-
ing up between the hair and the brush head. The widely spaced 
bristles are also plastic and ball tipped to minimize friction. If 
drawing the brush across the palm of the hand causes discom-
fort, the brush is not  recommended for use on the hair.  
  hair grooming 

 Do not comb hair when wet ( Fig. 38.4 ). 

 Hair is much more likely to fracture when wet than dry. For this 
reason,  it  is  advisable  to  gently  detangle  hair  following  sham-
pooing from the distal ends to the proximal ends with the fin-
gers,  not  attempting  combing  or  brushing  until  the  hair  is 
almost dry. Many persons feel that the hair must be styled wet in 
order to attain the desired style. This is only partially true. Hair 
will set in the position in which it is placed the instant that the 
last water molecule evaporates from the hair shaft. This means 
that the hair is optimally styled just before it is completely dry. 
Thus, it is best to finger-detangle the hair wet and then allow it 
to almost dry prior to styling to prevent hair breakage.  
  hair drying 

Allow hair to air dry avoiding heated drying appliances 
( Fig. 38.5 ) . 

 Many  people  prefer  to  speed  the  drying  process  by  applying 
heat  to  the  hair  shaft  to  speed  up  the  evaporation  of  water. 
This  can  be  done  with  a  hand-held  blow  dryer  or  a  hooded 
professional  salon  dryer.  Heat  is  also  used  to  style  the  hair 
shafts in the form of heated rollers or a curling iron. Unfortu-
nately, any type of heat that is applied to the hair shafts can 
permanently damage the protein structure of the hair. 

 
DAMAGED HAIR ISSUES

Table 38.1  Care Instructions for Damaged Hair

  1.  Manipulate the hair as little as possible
  2.  Select a wide-toothed comb with Teflon coated tips
  3.  Select a vented ball-tipped styling brush
  4.  Do not comb hair when it is wet
  5.  Allow hair to air dry avoiding heated drying appliances
  6.  Avoid scratching the hair and scalp
  7.  Select a conditioning shampoo
  8.  Apply an instant conditioner after each shampooing
  9.  Consider use of a deep conditioner once weekly
10.  Cut away damaged hair shafts

243

 It is important to distinguish between the water that resides 
on the outside of the hair shaft when the hair is wet and the 
water that resides inside the hair shaft to act as a plasticizer. 
Hair dryers attempt to speed evaporation of the water on the 
outside of the hair shaft and heating styling appliances attempt 
to rearrange the water deformable bonds within the hair shaft. 
Remember  that  water  is  the  plasticizer  of  all  of  the  keratin-
based structures of the body including the skin, hair, and nails. 
When  the  hair  is  rapidly  exposed  to  high  temperatures,  the 
water within the shaft turns to steam and exits the hair shaft 
creating  a  loss  of  cuticular  scale  and  a  condition  known  as 

Figure 38.1  Thinning hair that has been manipulated too much will break and 
appear even thinner.

Figure 38.2  A wide-toothed comb should be used especially when detangling 
the hair after shampooing to minimize hair shaft breakage.

(A)

(B)

Figure  38.3  (A)  A  vented  ball-tipped  blow-drying  brush  is  demonstrated  that  minimized  hair  breakage  from  grooming.  (B)  A  brush  without  ball  tips  is 
 demonstrated representing a poor-grooming brush choice.

244

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

“bubble hair.” Under scanning electron microscopy it is actu-
ally possible to see the bubbles created by the energetic steam. 
Unfortunately,  the  condition  is  permanent  and  bubble  hair 
results  in  a  weakening  of  the  hair  shaft  that  contributes  to 
breakage. 

 The dermatologist should be aware that many patients who 
present with hair loss may be experiencing hair breakage due 
to  bubble  hair.  While  it  is  not  possible  to  see  bubble  hair 
under a light microscope, it is possible to have the patient col-
lect four days worth of hair loss, by placing each day’s loss in 
a separate bag. The dermatologist can examine these bags to 
determine the ratio of broken hairs without the hair bulb to 
shed telogen hairs containing the hair bulb. If the number of 
broken  hairs  exceeds  20%,  the  patient  is  experiencing  hair 

Figure 38.4  Freshly shampooed hair is tangled and fragile creating a situation 
conducive to hair shaft fracture.

breakage. At this point, the dermatologist should inquire as to 
the use of heated hair drying and styling appliances and make 
some recommendations; however, most patients will not dis-
continue the use of heat. 

 Even though all forms of heat are damaging to the hair shaft, 
it is possible to minimize damage by altering the abrupt manner 
in  which  the  hair  contacts  heat.  Bubble  hair  is  more  likely  to 
occur if the hair shaft at room temperature is suddenly exposed 
to high heat. If the hair exposure to the heat is gradual, the dam-
aging effect is not as great. Thus, a gradual temperature increase 
is recommended. This means that hair dryers can be safely used 
if the nozzle blowing out hot air is held at least 12 inches from 
the hair, allowing the air to cool prior to touching the hair shaft. 
Hair dryers also should be started on low heat to initially warm 
the hair prior to drying at higher temperatures. 

 Heat  hair  rollers  and  curling  irons  can  be  used  safely  if 
allowed to cool prior to application to the hair. These thermo-
statically  controlled  devices  tend  to  slightly  overheat,  which 
can induce bubble hair immediately on hair contact. Heated 
styling devices should be unplugged for 1 to 2 minutes prior to 
placing them in contact with the hair. If possible, the styling 
devices  should  be  operated  on  a  low,  rather  than  high,  tem-
perature setting. If the device does not have multiple tempera-
ture  settings,  the  temperature  of  the  metal  or  plastic  that 
contacts the hair can be lowered by placing it in a damp towel. 
Many  patients  prefer  to  use  styling  heated  devices  at  a  high 
temperature setting, since the high temperature results in the 
rearrangement of more water deformable bonds and a tighter, 
longer-lasting curl. Hair that has been heat damaged appears 
wavy and friable to the human eye.  

  scalp scratching 

Avoid scratching the hair and scalp ( Fig. 38.6 ) . 

 It is not usual for patients with seborrheic dermatitis to pres-
ent with the complaint of hair loss. Medically, it is difficult to 
reconcile how a fungal infection of the skin of the scalp could 
alter hair growth from the hair follicles located deep within the 
dermis and in the superficial subcutaneous tissue. The answer 
to hair loss in the seborrheic dermatitis patient lies in having 

(A)

(B)

Figure 38.5  (A) Blow drying the hair can lead to heat damage and a condition known as bubble hair. (B) An electron micrograph of bubble hair illustrating the 
bubbles or lumps in the hair shaft created by escaping steam.

DAMAGED HAIR ISSUES

the patient collect all hairs lost while shampooing or grooming 
over a 24-hour period in a bag. Examination of these hairs will 
reveal absence of the cuticle and hair shaft fracture. Remark-
ably,  it  is  possible  to  remove  the  entire  cuticle  from  the  hair 
shaft with 1 hour of vigorous scratching. Most patients will not 

Figure 38.6  Scratching of the scalp can lead to increased hair breakage only 
magnifying the hair loss characteristic of a scarring alopecia.

Figure 38.7  Use of a conditioning shampoo can minimize hair shaft damage 
due to shampoo detergents.

245

scratch their scalp continuously for 1 hour, but the effects of 
scratching are additive to the hair shaft. One hour can easily be 
achieved if the patient scratches 10 minutes a day for 6 days. 
Usually patients are intending to scratch only the itching pres-
ent on the scalp, but it is impossible to scratch the scalp with-
out scratching the hair shafts, as well. 

 Thus, the solution to hair loss in the seborrheic dermatitis 
patient  is  to  treat  the  underlying  disease.  Many  times  I  have 
treated  my  patients  complaining  of  hair  loss  aggressively  for 
scalp  pruritus  in  addition  to  my  standard  hair  loss  workup. 
Fingernail damage to the hair shaft will result in dull, unman-
ageable, broken hair that performs poorly. Stopping hair shaft 
damage from scalp itching is key to solving the cause of hair 
loss in some patients.  
  shampoo selection 

Select a conditioning shampoo ( Fig. 38.7 ) . 

 Unfortunately, many patients who present to the dermatolo-
gist have already severely damaged their hair and therefore, a 
permanent restoration is not possible. Yet, it is important to 
counsel the patient on how to optimize the appearance of their 
damaged hair until new growth occurs and the damaging cos-
metic procedure has been discontinued. One such method of 
minimizing hair damage is to select a conditioning shampoo. 
There is no doubt that sebum is the optimal hair conditioner 
and all synthetic conditioners are a poor substitute, however, 
patients do not like the greasy, flat appearance sebum imparts 
to  the  hair  shaft.  This  led  to  the  introduction  of  shampoos 
designed to remove sebum from the hair. Remember that the 
original  intention  of  shampoo  was  to  remove  sebum,  skin 
scale, environmental dirt, and apocrine and eccrine secretions 
from the scalp. Patients forget that shampoo is to cleanse the 
scalp and not the hair when they are in the shower. 

 The need to improve the hair while cleansing the scalp has 
led to the development of conditioning shampoos. The main 
ingredient in this technology is silicone, a light-weight, clear 
oil that can coat the hair shaft and smooth the disrupted cutic-
ular scale. This technology was pioneered as part of the Pan-
tene line of shampoos (Procter & Gamble, Cincinnati, Ohio), 
still  manufactured  today.  These  shampoos  were  originally 
known as 2-in-1 shampoos, since they both cleansed the scalp 
and  conditioned  the  hair.  They  are  available  for  all  types  of 
hair including dry, normal, oily, and chemically treated. Sili-
cone is instrumental in these formulas since it can coat the hair 
shaft  without  leaving  the  greasy  appearance  of  sebum.  The 
silicone also significantly reduces the friction of combing and 
brushing, minimizing hair breakage. Thus, patients with hair 
loss or chemically damaged hair may benefit from the use of a 
silicone-containing conditioning shampoo.  
  conditioner selection 

Apply an instant conditioner after each shampooing 
( Fig. 38.8 ) . 

 Silicone technology has also been applied to instant condition-
ers. Instant conditioners are products applied immediately fol-
lowing shampooing in the bath or shower. They are left on the 
scalp  for  a  short  period  of  time  and  then  thoroughly  rinsed 
from  the  hair,  hence  the  name  “instant”  conditioner.  Since 
these products do not contain a surfactant designed to remove 

246

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Figure  38.8  An  instant  conditioner  is  important  to  prevent  tangles  from 
developing among the hair shafts predisposing to hair shaft breakage.

oils from the scalp, they can focus on augmenting the effect of 
a  previously  applied  conditioning  shampoo.  Instant  hair 
 conditioners  usually  incorporate  cyclomethicone,  dimethi-
cone, or amodimethicone as their active agent, in addition to 
quaternary  ammonium  compounds.  Amodimethicone  is  a 
cyclic silicone that appears to have more substantivity for hair 
keratin. This means that it sticks to the cuticle better and resists 
water  rinsing,  thus  providing  longer-lasting  conditioning. 
Quaternary ammonium compounds, also known as quats, are 
excellent  at  decreasing  static  electricity,  which  produces 
unmanageable frizzy hair. 

 While  these  important  ingredients  function  to  smooth  the 
loosened cuticular scale and increase hair shine, they also reduce 
friction. By doing so, it is easier to detangle freshly washed hair, 
thus reducing hair breakage during the hair drying process. Hair 
conditioners  also  decrease  the  grooming  friction  between  the 
comb and brush and the hair fibers. Hair conditioners also pro-
vide  a  protective  coating  over  the  hair  shaft  that  can  protect 
from heat damage and the effects of UV radiation. 

 In short, one of the best recommendations the dermatolo-
gist can provide to the patient who experiences hair loss is to 
use an instant conditioner following shampooing. Use of this 
product will prolong hair longevity, no matter what the under-
lying cause of hair loss may be. No fabrics are sold without a 
fabric finish, which improves with wear and imparts shine to 
the  fabric.  It  is  actually  the  removal  of  the  fabric  finish  that 
changes a soft cotton t-shirt into a stiff faded rag with repeated 
visits  to  the  wash  machine.  These  same  changes  occur  with 
hair. Restoring the softness of fabric by using a fabric softener 
in  the  wash  machine  or  dryer  is  analogous  to  applying  an 
instant conditioner to the hair.  

  deep conditioners 

Consider use of a deep conditioner once weekly ( Fig. 38.9 ) . 

 Occasionally it is necessary to impart more conditioning ben-
efits to the hair fiber than an instant conditioner can deliver. 
This is especially the case in hair that has underdone chemical 
processing, such as permanent dyeing, bleaching, permanent 
waving,  or  chemical  straightening.  These  procedures  all 
intentionally disrupt the cuticular scale in order to reach the 
cortex  and  medulla  of  the  hair  shaft  to  induce  a  change  in 

Figure 38.9  Deep conditioners are especially important in chemically straight-
ening African-American hair to prevent hair shaft breakage.

color  or  configuration.  Once  the  cuticle  has  been  disrupted 
with chemical processing, it can never be fully restored. Thus, 
there is a trade off for the patient between the cosmetic value 
of chemically treating the hair shaft and its reduced ability to 
function optimally. Some of the damage can be minimized by 
using what is known as a deep  conditioner. 

 Deep conditioners are applied to hair for 20 to 30 minutes 
outside  the  bath  or  shower.  They  can  be  used  both  at  home 
and in a salon. There are basically two types of deep condition-
ers: oil treatments and protein packs. Oil treatments are usu-
ally used for kinky hair that has been straightened. The process 
of lye straightening hair results in decreased hair water con-
tent, which reduces the hair shaft elasticity and predisposes to 
hair breakage. Apply a heavy oil to the hair shaft is much like 
moisturizing the skin in that it attempts to both smooth the 
cuticle and prevent further water loss from the hair shaft. In 
general, oil treatments are not used for straight hair, since the 
heavy oil leaves the hair limp and difficult to style. 

 Protein  packs  represent  a  second  type  of  deep  conditioner 
and can be used for all hair types. These conditioners are for-
mulated as creams or lotions and are a variation on the instant 
conditioner, except that they remain on the hair longer prior to 
rinsing.  Protein  packs  may  contain  silicones  and  quaternary 
ammonium compounds, as previously discussed, but they also 
contain  some  form  of  hydrolyzed  protein.  Usually,  collagen 
from  animal  sources  is  used,  but  any  hydrolyzed  protein  will 
do.  The  protein  can  diffuse  into  the  hair  shaft  through  the 
cuticular defects created by the chemical treatment. The  protein 
can impart some strength to the hair shaft and also smooth the 
cuticular scale more thoroughly than an instant conditioner. 

 For patients who have chemically processed hair, I recom-
mend  a  deep  conditioner  once  every  one  to  two  weeks  in 
 addition to an instant conditioner after shampooing.  

DAMAGED HAIR ISSUES

247

(A)

(B)

Figure 38.10  (A) Broken irregular hair shafts must be cut away to restore the hair to a presentable appearance, since the hair is nonliving. (B) Patients with thinning 
hair may be tempted to decrease the frequency of hair trimming. Hair trimming should be performed on an approximately six-week basis to keep the hair looking 
full and healthy.

  hair trimming 

Cut away damaged hair shafts ( Fig. 38.10 ) . 

 Many  patients  who  are  losing  their  hair  are  reluctant  to  cut 
their  hair.  I  believe  that  they  feel  they  should  hang  onto  all 
their hair in case no more grows. Unfortunately, hair that has 
been damaged by too much chemical processing and too little 
 conditioner application cannot be restored. For these patients, 
the overall appearance of the hair can be improved simply by 
removing 1 to 2 inches from the distal hair shafts. This trims 
away  the  split  ends  and  creates  new  hair  ends  that  are  less 
frizzy, more likely to maintain a curl, less subject to static elec-
tricity.  Trimming  also  eliminates  the  irregularity  of  broken 
hairs that creates a thin appearance. In short, removal of the 
damaged hair can create the illusion of fuller, healthier hair. Of 
course,  the  newly  exposed  ends  must  receive  proper  care  or 
they  too  will  develop  an  unattractive  cosmetic  appearance 
with time.  

  summary 
 Even though hair is a nonliving substance, proper care can allow 
it to resist breakage that contributes to hair loss. Much of the 
product development regarding hair care has been the adapta-
tion  of  textile  processing  techniques  to  the  human  hair  fiber. 
When hair is thought of as a fabric, it is easy to understand how 
proper handling of the hair fiber and limited  exposure to dam-
aging chemicals and environmental variables can influence its 
cosmetic  performance.  This  section  has   presented  some  ideas 
for the dermatologist to use when  assisting patients concerned 
about medical or cosmetic hair loss.   

   suggested reading 
      Robbins     C    .   Hair breakage during combing. I. Pathways of breakage  .   J Cosmet 

Sci     2006  ;   57  :   233  –  43  .   

     Robbins      C    .    Hair  breakage  during  combing.  II.  Impact  loading  and  hair 

 breadage  .   J Cosmet Sci     2006  ;   54  :   245  –  57  .   

     Robbins      C   ,     Kamath      Y    .    Hair  breakage  during  combing.  IV.  Brushing  and 

 combing hair  .   J Cosmet Sci     2007  ;   58  :   629  –  36  .         

             iv    Nail: Introduction      

  The nails are interesting structures. Perhaps they are vestiges of 
claws used by animals for eating and self-protection. Maybe, 
they are necessary for protection of the highly innervated tis-
sues of the fingertips. Perhaps nails are there just for nothing 
more than cosmetic adornment! Certainly, there are a myriad 
of products to improve the appearance of the nails from some-
thing as simple as a nail clipper to something as complex as a 
polymerized acrylic prosthesis placed on the nail for elonga-
tion.  It  is  said  that  nails  can  tell  a  lot  about  the  individual. 
Grease-stained fingernails indicate work as an auto mechanic 
while  yellowed  fingernails  may  indicate  excessive  cigarette 
smoking. Clean well-trimmed fingernails may indicate physi-
cal  health  and  excellent  hygiene  while  misshapen  fingernails 
may indicate an underlying dermatologic disease. Nails can be 
a clue to a lung or renal disease that may be lurking inside the 
body  as  of  yet  undiagnosed  except  by  the  skillful  eye  of  the 
dermatologist! There is no doubt that nails tell an unspoken 
story about the life of a person. 

 Given this preoccupation with nails, the cosmetic industry 
has found a ripe opportunity. There are products designed to 

bleach discolored nails and moisturize brittle nails. There are 
nail polishes to coordinate nail color with clothing, moods, or 
fashion trends. Some nail prostheses are designed to be worn 
only  for  one  day  or  for  months  at  a  time  in  short,  medium, 
long, and excessively long lengths. The prostheses have become 
an art form for many with elaborate painting, jewels, or sculp-
tures stuck to the natural nail plate. And, these manipulations 
are  not  only  performed  on  the  fingernails,  but  also  on  the 
 toenails, creating 20 little canvases for artistic expression. 

 Besides the cosmetic intrigue, nails also have specific groom-
ing and hygiene needs. It is said that outside of the mouth, the 
skin beneath the nails is one of the dirtiest areas on the human 
body. Indeed, many diseases are passed from the hands to the 
mouth, eyes, or nose with the aid of the fingernails. This means 
that nail hygiene can assume paramount importance in both 
sexes  and  in  persons  of  all  ages.  There  are  specific  needs  for 
nails in children and also in nail disease, including nail dystro-
phy and nail psoriasis. This section of the book covers all of 
these areas to provide a compendium of nail cosmetics in nail 
health and disease.    

248

             39    A problem-oriented approach to fingernail issues      

  Nail problems are perplexing for the dermatologist and in many 
ways more challenging than skin problems, since the nails are 
nonliving ( Fig. 39.1 ). The renewal time for the stratum corneum 
is a mere two weeks, but it takes three to six months to grow a 
new fingernail and 6 to 12 months to grow a new toenail. This 
means  the  time  between  treatment  and  visible  results  is  pro-
longed creating problems with unrealistic patient expectations. 
Nevertheless,  the  nails  are  an  important  appearance  attribute 
nonverbally communicating our sex, personal care habits, occu-
pation, hobbies, and habits. While the nails function primarily 
to  protect  the  tender  fingertip  and  facilitate  manipulation  of 
small items, modern society assigns paramount importance to 
the appearance of nails as a manner of determining social status. 
Persons who perform manual labor cannot maintain long nails, 
while individuals who work in managerial positions use longer 
nail  length  as  one  method  of  indicating  occupational  success. 
Women spend both time and money pursuing long brightly col-
ored prosthetic fingernails and toenails as nonverbal body art to 
display social standing.  

 Nail  adornment  is  an  interesting  topic,  because  it  allows 
expression of subtle personality characteristics. Is red nail pol-
ish an indication of an extrovert while a clear nail polish an 
indication of an introvert? Are damaged nails from biting an 
indication of a nervous timid personality? This reasoning fur-
ther extends into the concern over nail disease. Do the yellow/
green thickened nails of fungal infection indicate a contagious 
condition?  Are  the  pitted  nails  characteristic  of  psoriasis 
socially  associated  with  ill  health?  Certainly,  the  hands  and 
nails are the second area of visual contact when meeting a new 
individual after the face. There can be no doubt that nails say a 
great deal about who we are and what we aspire to be. 

 This chapter takes a problem-oriented approach to nail cos-
metic problems and issues of nail disease. It begins by dividing 
nail issues into those pertinent to the fingernails, toenails, and 
unique  issues  in  children.  Common  patient  cosmetic  prob-
lems are presented with a discussion of the issues and products 
that  may  cause  and  improve  the  condition.  Since  most  cos-
metic  problems  require  that  the  damaged  nail  grow  until 
replaced by new normal growth, identifying the problem and 
suggesting solutions is paramount. Nail disease, on the other 
hand, can be challenging to treat; yet, cosmetic interventions 
may provide a temporary solution until new nail appears. This 
chapter links nail cosmetics and nail cosmetic procedures to 
the problems they create and camouflage ( Table 39.1 ).  

  nail discoloration 
 Nail discoloration is a common cosmetic concern ( Table 39.2 ) 
( 1–4 ). The normal nail plate is transparent, allowing the nail 
bed  to  be  visualized  as  pink  through  the  proximal  nail  plate 
with the air interface allowing the nail to appear white at the 
distal free edge. With advancing age and the onset of nail disease, 
the nail plate becomes less transparent and more translucent 
making the nail bed appear paler and giving the impression of 

reduced blood flow. The aging nail may also be yellowed, either 
from a poorly formed nail plate or staining from environmen-
tal substances, such as nicotine, foodstuffs, cleaning fluids, pig-
mented cosmetics, etc. ( Fig. 39.2 ). Nail growth also slows down 
increasing the renewal time for the nail plate and the opportu-
nity for nail staining. The easiest camouflage for nail discolor-
ation is the use of nail polish, which is also the most common 
nail  cosmetic  for  adornment.  Discolored  nails  can  also  be 
treated by bleaching.   

  Nail Polish 
 Nail polish, also known as nail enamel, is a pigmented coating 
applied to the nail plate. It was introduced in the 1920s when 
lacquer technology was developed in the automobile industry 
to replace slow-drying oil-based paints. The basis of nail pol-
ish  is  nitrocellulose  created  by  reacting  cellulose  fiber,  from 
cotton linters or wood pulp, with nitric acid. The boiled nitro-
cellulose is dissolved in organic solvents, which evaporate leav-
ing a hard, glossy film known as a lacquer ( 5 ). In 1930, Charles 
Revson developed the idea of adding pigments to the clear lac-
quer to form an opaque, colored nail polish and founded the 
cosmetic company, Revlon, in 1932.  

   Nail polish can be used to camouflage nail discoloration. 

 Nail polish consists of pigments suspended in a volatile sol-
vent to which film-formers have been added ( Fig. 39.3 ). The 
ingredients  are  listed  in   Table  39.3   ( 6 ).  Nitrocellulose  is  the 
most commonly employed primary film-forming agent in nail 
lacquer because it produces a shiny, tough film that sticks well 
to the nail plate. The film is oxygen permeable, which is felt to 
be  important  to  nail  plate  health.  This  is  the  advantage  of 
using nail polish to camouflage nail discoloration, instead of 
artificial nail prostheses, which are oxygen impermeable. Thus, 
nail polish places an inert protective coating on the nail plate 
that does not produce damage.   

   Toluene-sulfonamide-formaldehyde resin found in many 
nail polishes is a common allergen. 

 A secondary film-forming resin must be added, however, to 
make  the  nail  polish  film  flexible,  otherwise  it  would  crack 
with  movement  of  the  nail  plate.  The  main  resin  used  to 
enhance  the  nitrocellulose  film  was  toluene-sulfonamide-
formaldehyde; however, this resin is allergenic and found on 
the standard dermatology patch test tray. Nail polishes labeled 
“hypoallergenic,” meaning reduced allergy, should not use this 
resin. This resin is still widely used, however, some individuals 
are sensitive to this substance, which is found on the standard 
dermatology patch test tray. The resin has been eliminated in 

249

250

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

328

9

4

5
10

6

10

457

3

2

8
1

(A)

(B)

 Figure 39.1     Normal anatomy of the nail: ( A ) top view; ( B ) sagittal section. 1, distal groove; 2, hyponychium; 3, nail bed; 4, distal border of lunula; 5, cuticle; 
6, proximal matrix; 7, distal matrix; 8, free edge; 9, lateral nail fold; 10, proximal nail fold.  Source : Reproduced from Richert B, Di Chiachio N, Haneke E. Nail 
Surgery. Informa Healthcare, 2010.    

Table 39.1  Nail Cosmetics

Nail cosmetic

Nail polish

Main ingredients

Function

Adverse reactions

Nitrocellulose, toluene-sulfonamide 
resin, plasticizers, solvents, and 
colorants

Add color and shine to nail plates

Allergic contact dermatitis to 

toluene-sulfonamide resin, nail 
plate staining

Nail hardener

Formaldehyde, acetates, acrylics, or 

To increase nail strength and prevent 

Allergic contact dermatitis to 

Nail enamel remover

Acetone, alcohol, ethyl acetate, or 

Remove nail polish

other resins

breakage

Cuticle remover

Sodium or potassium hydroxide

butyl acetate

Nail bleach
Nail polish drier

Hydrogen peroxide
Vegetable oils, alcohols, or silicone 

derivatives

Destroy keratin that forms excess 
cuticular tissue on nail plate

Remove nail plate stains
Speed drying time of nail polish

formaldehyde

Irritant contact dermatitis

Irritant contact dermatitis

Irritant contact dermatitis
Practically none

Nail buffing cream
Nail moisturizer

Pumice, talc, or kaolin
Occlusives, humectants, and lactic 

Smooth ridges in nails
Increase water content of nails

Practically none
Practically none

acid

some hypoallergenic nail enamels and replaced with a polyes-
ter  resin  or  cellulose  acetate  butyrate,  but  sensitivity  is  still 
possible and the enamel is less resistant to wear, meaning it is 
readily removed from the nail plate with friction ( 7 ).  

 Nail lacquers also contain other ingredients, such as plasti-
cizers like dibutyl phthalate and dioctyl phthalate, which func-
tion to keep the product soft and pliable in the bottle. It should 
be  mentioned  that  the  phthalates  have  recently  come  under 
criticism for their possible estrogenic side effects. Some states 
are  considering  legislation  to  remove  this  family  of  ingredi-
ents,  which  is  also  used  for  preservative  purposes,  from  the 
market. However, there is little evidence that phthalates have 
caused health issues in humans. 

 All of the ingredients discussed are then dissolved in a solvent, 
such as N-butyl acetate and ethyl acetate, leaving a colored film 
on the nail plate. Toluene and isopropyl alcohol may be added to 
act as diluents to keep the lacquer thin and lower its cost. To this 
vehicle, a variety of coloring agents and specialty fillers can be 
added to determine the final cosmetic appearance of the nail pol-
ish. Coloring agents, such as organic colors, can be selected from 
a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved list of certified 
colors. Inorganic colors and pigments may also be used, but must 
conform to low heavy metal content standards ( 8 ). These colors 
can  be  suspended  within  the  lacquer  with  suspending  agents, 
such as stearalkonium hectorite, to produce colors ranging from 
white to pink to purple to brown to orange to blue to green. 

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

251

Table 39.2  Nail Discoloration Causes

1.  Aging nail plate with poor keratin production
2.  Nicotine staining from cigarette smoking
3.   Handling fruits (peaches, oranges, tomatoes, strawberries) and 
vegetables (yellow squash, beets, pumpkin) with carotenoids 
that are colored yellow, orange, or red

4.  Nail polish staining from red and orange nail polish
5.   Solvent contact, such as turpentine, glutaraldehyde, 

formaldehyde, etc.

6.   Poor internal health (respiratory disease, cancer chemotherapy, 

heart disease)

7.   Contact with pigmented products, such as hair dye, self-

tanning preparations, facial foundations, etc.

8.  Yellow nail syndrome
9.  Onychomycosis

 Figure 39.2     Discolored nail plate.    

 Specialty fillers, such as guanine fish scale, bismuth oxychlo-
ride, or titanium dioxide-coated mica, can be added to give a 
frosted appearance, due to enhanced light reflection. Chopped 
aluminum, silver, and gold can be added for a metallic shine. 
For  optimal  nail  discoloration  camouflaging,  the  nail  polish 
should be opaque and properly applied. The technique for nail 
polish application is discussed next.  

  Nail Polish Camouflaging Technique  

   Nail polish does not damage the nail plate, but nail polish 
remover dehydrates the nail plate. 

 Nail  polish  must  be  properly  applied  to  camouflage  the 
 underlying  discolored  nail  plate.  Proper  application  ensures 
longevity of the camouflage. This is important because it is not 
the nail polish that damages the nail plate, but rather the nail 
polish remover. Proper application requires three layers of nail 
polish:  a  base  coat,  pigmented  nail  enamel,  and  a  top  coat 
( Table 39.4 ). The base coat ensures good adhesion to the nail 
plate  and  prevents  polish  chipping.  It  contains  no  pigment, 
less primary film-former, more secondary film-forming resin 
and  is  of  a  lower  viscosity  since  a  thinner  film  is  desirable. 
The second layer is the actual pigmented nail enamel. The top 
coat, or third layer, provides gloss and resistance to chipping. 

 Figure 39.3     Nail polish is available in a myriad of modern colors.    

Table 39.3  Nail Polish Ingredients

1.   Primary film-former (nitrocellulose, methacrylate polymers, 

vinyl polymers)

2.   Secondary film-forming resin (formaldehyde, p-toluene 
sulfonamide, polyamide, acrylate, alkyd and vinyl resins)
3.   Plasticizers (dibutyl phthalate, dioctyl phthalate, tricresyl 

phosphate, camphor)

4.   Solvents and diluents (acetates, ketones, toluene, xylene, 

alcohols)

5.  Colorants (organic D&C pigments, inorganic pigments)
6.   Specialty fillers (guanine fish scale or titanium dioxide-coated 

mica flakes or bismuth oxychloride for iridescence)

7.  Suspending agents

Table 39.4  Nail Polish Application Technique

1.   Base coat: clear polish designed to seal nail plate with a thin 

coat of film-former

2.   Nail enamel: pigmented polish producing an opaque film to 

camouflage underlying discolored nail plate

3.   Top coat: thin clear polish containing sunscreen to prevent 

polish color fading, add high shine, and prevent removal of nail 
enamel

4.   Nail polish drier: liquid that speeds up the drying of the nail 

polish by encouraging evaporation of the solvent

252

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

It contains increased amounts of primary film former, more 
plasticizer  and  less  secondary  film-forming  resins.  Some  top 
coats may contain sunscreen, to prevent the nail lacquer but do 
not contain pigment. Finally, a nail polish drier, consisting of 
vegetable  oils,  alcohols,  and  silicone  derivatives  may  be 
brushed or sprayed over the completed nails to induce rapid 
hardening of the enamel by drawing off the nail polish solvent.  
 These three consecutive coats increase the ability of the nail 
polish to stay on the nail plate, a characteristic known as nail 
lacquer “wear.” The wear of the nail polish is determined by the 
film hardness, water resistance, adhesion to the nail, and abil-
ity  to  resist  abrasion.  Since  it  is  the  nail  polish  remover  that 
damages  the  nail  plate,  it  is  desirable  for  the  nail  polish  to 
remain on the nail plate as long as possible.  

  Nail Polish Staining  

   Nail polish containing D&C Reds No. 6, 7, 34, or 5 
Lake can temporarily stain the nail plate yellow. 

 It is important to remember that nail polish can also stain the 
nail plate ( Fig. 39.4 ). The nail staining occurs when the polish 
pigment is dissolved rather than suspended. It is most common 
with deep red nail polishes containing D&C Reds No. 6, 7, 34, 
or 5 Lake ( 9 ). The nail plate will be stained yellow after 7 days of 
continuous wear, but the stain will fade without treatment in 
approximately  14 days,  once  the  enamel  has  been  removed. 
Scrapping of the nail plate with a scalpel blade can be used to 
confirm that only the nail surface has been stained, an impor-
tant distinction in nail pigmentation abnormalities ( 10 ).   

  French Manicure Camouflage 
 A camouflage technique known as the French manicure, which 
artistically utilizes a variety of colors of nail polish to simulate 
the  normal  nail  plate,  can  be  remedy  for  nail  discoloration 
( Fig. 39.5 ). First, the nail is painted with a white opaque base 
coat to cover the discoloration. A light pink enamel is added to 
the entire nail plate to simulate the nail bed. Finally, a white 
enamel is applied to the distal nail tip, simulating the nail free 
edge. A clear top coat is applied last to prevent color fading and 
minimize enamel chipping ( Fig. 39.6 ). French manicures can 

be performed professionally by a manicurist or at home with 
prepackaged kits available at mass merchandisers.    

  Nail Bleach 
 It is possible to bleach superficial stains out of the nail plate. 
For example, food and nicotine stains can be removed with the 
high volume peroxide found in nail bleach; however, irritant 
contact  dermatitis  can  occur  ( 11 ). A  safer  alternative  to  nail 

 Figure 39.4     Nail plate staining can occur with deep red nail polish.    

 Figure 39.5     White and pink nail polishes are used to simulate a healthy natural 
nail plate.    

(A)

(B)

 Figure  39.6     A  French  manicure  is  an  effective  way  to  camouflage  discolored,  unattractive  nails.  ( A )  Colored  enamels  are  artistically  applied  to  the  nail  plate. 
( B ) The finished appearance of the decorated nails.    

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

253

bleach is nail filling. This technique is discussed next and can 
also be used to treat ridged nails.   

  nail ridging  

   Nail ridging can be minimized with nail files or nail 
buffing creams. 

 Another  common  nail  problem,  seen  primarily  in  persons 
40 years and older, is nail ridging. Longitudinal nail ridging is 
common as the nail bed ages and can be likened to gray hairs 
on the head. The ridge represents a group of nail matrix cells 
that are no longer producing a quality smooth nail plate, much 
like  a  gray  hair  produced  by  an  aging  follicle  that  no  longer 
manufactures  pigment.  Typically,  the  ridge  is  permanent,  as 
more ridges appear with advancing age ( 12 ). Fortunately, the 
ridge is only on top of the nail plate and can be removed by 
sanding or buffing the nail plate along with any nail plate dis-
coloration that may be present. 

 The nail plate is best sanded with a series of three nail files 
( Table 39.5 ). The first nail file is coarse and should sand the 
nail  ridge  until  smooth.  This  is  best  determined  by  rubbing 
the treated nail with the finger pad of the same nail from the 
opposite hand. Once the nail is smooth, it is then filed with a 
finer file to increase smoothness and finally filed to achieve a 
high shine. Usually, the three files are sold together for under 
$5 in mass merchandisers and labeled as cleaning, condition-
ing,  and  shining  files.  Each  time  the  nails  are  cut,  the  filing 
sequence must be repeated, as new nail growth will contain the 
longitudinal ridge ( Fig. 39.7 ).   

 If the patient does not wish to perform the filing at home, 
this sequential filing routine can be included as part a regular 
manicure.  The  technique  can  be  used  by  both  men  and 
women  to  minimize  longitudinal  ridges,  remove  nail  plate 
discoloration, and restore a more youthful appearance to the 
nail plate. 

Table 39.5  Nail Filing Technique for Nail Ridging

1.   Cleaning file: coarse file to grind the nail plate leaving a rough 

surface

2.  Conditioning file: finer file to remove nail dust
3.  Shining file: smooth file to add high shine to nail plate

 Figure 39.7     Demonstration of the filing technique to smooth out nail ridges.    

 An alternative to nail filing is the use of a nail buffing cream 
to smooth nail plate ridges. Nail buffing creams contain finely 
ground pumice, talc, kaolin, or precipitated chalk as abrasives. 
Waxes are also added to increase the nail shine ( 13 ). 

 A  variant  of  nail  ridging  is  the  habit  tic  deformity.  In  this 
condition,  the  nail  is  characterized  by  horizontal  ridges, 
instead of longitudinal ridges, down the nail center. It results 
from a repeated picking trauma to the nail and is most com-
mon when the thumbnail is manipulated by the first fingernail 
of the same hand. In most patients, it is a subconscious behav-
ior in individuals who like to keep their hands moving. It is a 
hard habit to break. Some success can be achieved by offering 
another  object  for  manipulation,  such  as  a  smooth  stone,  a 
strand of beads, a piece of cloth, or a compressible ball. The 
patient can select a comforting object to manipulate in their 
pocket,  instead  of  nail  picking.  The  ridges  can  be  smoothed 
once  the  nail  picking  stops  with  the  same  sequential  filing 
technique described for the longitudinal ridges.  

  nail splitting  

   Nails split due to loss of nail plasticity from lack of water. 

 In addition to nail ridging, the nails may also split for many 
reasons, but primarily due to loss of nail plasticity. Water is the 
plasticizer  of  the  nail  plate  allowing  it  to  bend  and  rebound 
with trauma. Since the hands grasp, type, write, dig, scratch, 
squeeze,  etc.,  the  nails  are  subject  to  more  trauma  than  any 
other nonliving portion of the body. It is no wonder then that 
the nails split. The best method to prevent nail splitting, also 
known  as  onychorrhexis,  is  to  preserve  the  water  content  of 
the nail plate. No one exactly knows how much water should 
be in the nail plate, since underhydration results in the crack-
ing of the keratin and overhydration results in the softening of 
the nail keratin, both of which result in a nail plate less resis-
tant to trauma. The best sources available state that the normal 
nail contains about 16% water, becoming soft with saturation 
at  30%.  The  water  content  of  nail  keratin  is  proportional  to 
relative humidity being 7% at 20% relative humidity and 30% 
at 100% relative humidity ( 14 ). 

 There  are  several  different  techniques  of  addressing  nail 
splitting  issues,  sometimes  also  termed  brittle  nails,  in 
patients  ( 15 – 17 ).  The  obvious  explanation  is  that  the  nails 
should be protected from trauma of all types, but this is not 
a practical advice.  Table 39.6  lists some of the cosmetic meth-
ods  for  helping  patients  minimize  nail  plate  splitting  and 
fracture ( 18 ).  

 Due  to  the  nonliving  nature  of  the  nail  plate,  once  the 
water  is  lost,  it  can  never  be  fully  replaced.  Thus,  patients 
with nail splitting should be advised to prevent nail dehydra-
tion at all costs ( 19 , 20 ). Hand washing is the obvious cause of 
nail plate dehydration, lending credence to the concept that 
the  nails  should  not  be  washed  unless  dirty  focusing  the 
cleansing  on  the  hands  only.  Another  cause  of  nail  plate 
dehydration  is  the  use  of  waterless  hand  sanitizers.  These 
products contain triclosan, an antibacterial agent, in a rap-
idly  evaporating  vehicle.  The  vehicle  efficiently  removes 
water from the nail plate to a greater degree than traditional 
soap  and  water.  For  this  reason,  hand  sanitizers  should  be 
avoided to prevent nail splitting. 

254

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 39.6  Methods to Minimize Nail Plate Splitting 
and Fracture

1.  Minimize water loss from nail plate

a.  Wash hands, not nails, if not soiled
b.  Avoid waterless hand sanitizers
c.  Eliminate antibacterial soaps and cleansers with triclosan
d.   Wear gloves when using cleaning solvents, hair dyes, and 

hair permanent wave solutions

2.   Apply nail moisturizers to trap and bind water within the nail 

plate
a.   Use nail moisturizer with petrolatum to trap water and 

glycerin to attract water to the nail plate

b.   Increase the water-binding sites on nail keratin with urea or 

lactic acid

3.  Increase oral biotin intake
4.  Apply a fibered nail polish
5.  Apply a nail hardener, but use with caution

 Nails are also dehydrated by the use of cleaning fluids that 
contain ammonia, bleach, and strong detergents ( 21 ). Contact 
with these substances may be necessary, but gloves should be 
worn to protect the nails from dehydration. It is worthwhile 
reminding the patient that only one contact with strong sur-
factants  is  necessary  for  dehydration  to  occur.  Thus,  consis-
tency in hand protection is important.  

   Nail moisturizers temporarily increase nail plate hydration 
by increasing water binding sites on nail keratin. 

 Figure  39.8     An  example  of  a  commercially  available  nail-strengthening 
product.    

 Nail  moisturizers  may  temporarily  increase  nail  plate 
hydration  to  prevent  splitting.  The  products  are  usually 
creams or lotions containing occlusives, such as petrolatum, 
mineral  oil,  lanolin,  etc   ( 15 ).  Humectants,  such  as  glycerin, 
propylene  glycol,  and  proteins,  may  also  be  added.  Alpha-
hydroxy acids, lactic acid, and urea are active ingredients used 
to  increase  the  water-binding  capacity  of  the  nail  plate.  A 
well-formulated  nail  moisturizer  should  contain  substances 
from all of the aforementioned groups to maximally treat the 
dehydrated nail plate. 

 A possible solution to nail splitting is oral supplementation 
with biotin ( 22 ). A variety of commercial products are avail-
able in tablet form. Biotin was originally used to prevent hoof 
splitting  in  racehorses  by  veterinarians  and  then  adapted  to 
humans.  It  is  possible  biotin  deficiency  may  occur  in  the 
elderly  where  biotin  transport  across  the  gastrointestinal 
mucosa may be decreased. Furthermore, the highest concen-
tration of biotin is found in egg whites, and elderly individuals 
typically limit their egg consumption due to elevated choles-
terol issues. For this reason, it may be worthwhile for the phy-
sician  to  consider  a  biotin  supplement  (250 mg  per  day)  in 
persons with brittle, splitting nails ( 22 ). There is no evidence 
that  topical  biotin  added  to  nail  moisturizers  has  a  similar 
beneficial effect. There is also no evidence that topical gelatin, 
calcium,  iron,  botanical  extracts,  biological  extracts,  etc.  are 
effective in treating brittle nails ( 23 ). 

 Nail cosmetics can also be used to prevent nail splitting. Nail 
polishes, as previously discussed, can increase the thickness of 
the nail plate thereby improving the ability of the nail to resist 

trauma. Since nail polish forms a flexible film, it can bend as 
the nail is deformed increasing resistance to fracture. The nail 
polish can add further strength to the nail by containing 1% 
nylon or rayon fibers. These polishes, termed fibered nail pol-
ishes, add further flexibility to the nail plate. They can be used 
as  an  alternative  top  coat  in  persons  with  extremely  brittle 
nails. Nail polish may actually prevent nail plate dehydration 
by preventing detergent contact with the nail plate acting as a 
protectant  and  decreasing  nail  water  vapor  loss  from  1.6  to 
0.4 mg/cm 2 /hour ( 24 ).  

   The main active ingredient in nail hardeners is the allergen 
formaldehyde. 

 Finally,  products  known  as  nail  hardeners  are  available 
( Fig.  39.8 ).  The  main  active  ingredient  in  nail  hardeners  is 
formaldehyde, originally used in concentrations greater than 
10%  resulting  in  onycholysis,  subungual  hyperkeratosis, 
reversible subungual hemorrhage, and bluish discoloration of 
the nail plate ( 25 – 27 ). Formaldehyde is also a cause of allergic 
contact dermatitis ( 28 , 29 ). Recognition of this problem led to 
regulation prohibiting formaldehyde in concentrations greater 
than  5%  in  nail  hardener  preparations  manufactured  for 
interstate sale, as mandated by the U.S. FDA. Free formalde-
hyde in concentrations of 1–2% is still used, but acetates, tolu-
ene,  nitrocellulose,  acrylic  and  polyamide  resins,  substances 
found in the nail polishes previously discussed, are now used 
to structurally reinforce the nail plate.  

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

255

 Once the nail plate has split, there is little that can be done 
except to address the issues listed in  Table 39.6  and wait for a 
new nail plate to grow. Sometimes the nail will split into the 
nail bed causing pain and bleeding. This can be aided with a 
nail repair technique called the tea bag repair. 

  Repairing Split Nails  

   A split nail can be repaired with a tea bag until new growth 
occurs. 

 A  technique  that  can  be  safely  recommended  to  patients  to 
repair a painful split nail is the tea bag repair. This method can 
be used to repair a broken nail where the break occurs proxi-
mal to the nail free edge resulting in the removal of the nail 
from the nail bed. This type of broken nail is painful and a site 
of  injury  for  infection.  While  the  medical  solution  to  this 
problem is new nail growth, a cosmetic repair can be helpful in 
alleviating pain and preventing infection. This technique uti-
lizes a tea bag and clear nail polish and can be performed at 
home by the patient. The tea bag is cut and the tea leaves emp-
tied  to  obtain  the  surrounding  fiber  paper.  A  small  piece  of 
fiber paper is cut to fit over the nail break and an additional 
2 mm around the break. The broken nail is pushed back into 
place and covered with a layer of clear nail polish. The fibered 
paper is placed on the break and embedded in the clear nail 
polish  followed  by  two  to  three  extra  coats.  This  technique 
reinforces  the  break  with  fibered  paper  held  in  place  by  nail 
polish as a semipermanent band aid until healing can occur. 

 This repair can be repeated, as the nail grows as often as nec-
essary. It uses commonly found materials costing little. Most 
patients who experience this type of painful broken nail wear 
their nails too long. The easiest suggestion to remedy recurrent 
broken nails is to cut the nail such that the free edge cannot be 
visualized  over  the  fingertip  as  viewed  from  the  palm  of  the 
hand. While the patient may not take kindly to the suggestion 
that she wear shorter nails, this is the only clinically reproduc-
ible method for reducing broken nails of this type.   

  nail peeling  

   Cutting the nail plate with a sharp scissors perpendicularly 
to the nail plate can prevent nail peeling. 

 Nail peeling, also known as onychoschizia, is lamellar splitting 
of the nail. The keratin peels from the nail tip in layers weaken-
ing the nail and catching on clothing. This condition is most 
commonly due to poor nail manicuring techniques. If the nail 
is not cut sharply perpendicular to the nail plate, nail peeling 
can occur. The steps in performing a nail manicure to prevent 
nail peeling are reviewed. 

 The main goal of a manicure is proper trimming of the nails 
to  maintain  a  strong,  healthy  nail  plate.  The  nail  should  be 
rounded at the tip for aesthetics, but the corners should be left 
square to maximize strength. Too sharp an arc extending from 
the lateral to medial nail margin will weaken the nail structur-
ally resulting in nail plate fracture. Ideally, the nail plate should 
not be cut, but filed frequently with an orange stick to avoid 
cracking  the  nail  plate  through  shearing  forces  generated  by 
scissors or clippers. However, most patients groom their nails 

 Figure 39.9     Properly designed nail cutters to minimize nail peeling.    

infrequently  necessitating  cutting.  Cutting  should  be  done 
with a pair of curved nail clippers, since scissors may not cut 
the nail plate squarely ( Fig. 39.9 ). An angle on the distal nail 
plate predisposes to nail peeling. Any remaining sharp edges 
should be filed with a diamond dust file ( 30 ). Under no cir-
cumstances should the cuticle be removed or traumatized as 
this may precipitate the formation of paronychia, onychomy-
cosis, or onychodystrophy.  

 Nail peeling can also be minimized with nail polish. Once 
the nail is properly cut, a thin coat of clear nail polish is placed 
at the distal free edge and underneath the free edge. This place-
ment protects the nail tip from the trauma that results in nail 
splitting. However, it should be mentioned that the removal of 
nail  polish  may  also  contribute  to  onychoschizia  ( 31 ).  Nail 
polish removers are liquids designed to strip nail polish from 
the nail plate. They may contain solvents such as acetone, alco-
hol, ethyl acetate, or butyl acetate. These solvents break down 
the nail polish film, but also dehydrate the nail plate contribut-
ing to brittle nails and nail peeling. Conditioning nail enamel 
removers are available, containing fatty materials such as cetyl 
alcohol, cetyl palmitate, lanolin, castor oil, or other synthetic 
oils. It is thought that these oily substances act as occlusive nail 
moisturizers  retarding  water  evaporation,  but  they  cannot 
totally prevent nail plate dehydration, if used frequently. Thus, 
nail polish should be properly applied, as discussed under the 
title, nail splitting.  

  onycholysis  

   The most common cosmetic cause of onycholysis is nail 
prostheses. 

 Onycholysis is removal of the nail plate from the nail bed, usu-
ally due to trauma. Onycholysis can also be seen in nail fungal 
infection, a condition known as onychomycosis. However this 
discussion will focus on onycholysis related to the use of cos-
metic nail products. 

 The most common cause of onycholysis is the use of artifi-
cial  nails,  also  known  as  nail  prostheses.  Onycholysis  occurs 
because  the  bond  between  the  artificial  nail  and  the  natural 
nail  plate  is  stronger  than  the  adhesion  between  the  natural 
nail and nail bed ( Fig. 39.10 ). Thus, minor trauma rips the nail 

256

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 Figure 39.10     Onycholysis between the natural nail bed and the nail prosthesis.    

 Figure  39.11     Press-on  nails  are  the  simplest  at  home  application  of  nail 
 prostheses.    

from the nail bed, an injury that cannot be repaired until new 
nail growth occurs. Onycholysis can also occur due to sensitiv-
ity to the methacrylate polymer ( 32 , 33 ).  

 In addition to onycholysis, many patients are appalled at the 
broken, thinned, yellowed appearance of their nails following 
sculpture removal. This is due to interference with the nail’s 
normal vapor exchange, nail plate trauma during the removal 
process,  and  damage  to  the  underlying  nail  bed  ( 34 ).  While 
nail  prostheses  are  extremely  popular  among  women  of  all 
ages, they present an opportunity for the onset of nail disease. 
This section examines nail prostheses and their relevant der-
matologic issues. 

  Preformed Nail Prostheses 
 The original artificial nail was a preformed piece of plastic that 
was  glued  over  the  natural  nail  plate  with  a  methacrylate-
based adhesive ( 35 ) ( Fig. 39.11 ). These nails are still popular 
today  and  available  in  a  variety  of  styles:  precolored,  uncol-
ored,  precut,  and  uncut.  Preformed  nails  come  in  press-on, 
preglued forms and in forms requiring glue application, but 
the  nails  usually  pop  off  before  onycholysis  can  occur  with 
trauma. The nails also come in a variety of sizes and shapes to 
match the patient’s natural nail plate ( 36 ). Even with the vari-
ety available, most patients do not find a suitable preformed 
nail accounting for the increasing popularity of custom-made 
nail prostheses discussed next.   

  Custom Nail Prostheses  

   Sculptured nails are custom-made nail prostheses created 
on a template attached to the natural nail plate. 

 Custom-made nail prostheses are known as sculptured nails, 
an increasingly popular method of obtaining long, hard nails. 
The word “sculptured” is used since the custom-made artificial 
nail is sculpted on a template attached to the natural nail plate. 
The sculpted nail fits perfectly and, if well done, can be hard to 
differentiate from a natural nail. These sculptured nails are the 
most common cosmetic cause of onycholysis in women who 
present to the dermatologist. 

Table 39.7  Sculptured Nail Prosthesis Technique

1.   All nail polish and oils are removed from the nail
2.   The nail is roughened with a coarse emery board, pumice 

stone, or grinding drill to create an optimal surface for sculpted 
nail adhesion

3.   An antifungal, antibacterial liquid, such as decolorized iodine, 
is applied to the entire nail plate to minimize onychomycosis 
and paronychia

4.   The loose edges of the cuticle are either trimmed, removed, or 

pushed back depending on the operator

5.   A flexible template is fit beneath the natural nail plate upon 

which the elongated sculpted nail will be built

6.   The acrylic is mixed and applied with a paint brush to cover 

the entire natural nail plate and extended onto the template to 
the desired nail length. A clear acrylic is used over the natural 
nail plate attached to the nail bed so that the natural pink color 
shows through. A white acrylic is used from the nail plate’s free 
edge distally

7.   The nail prosthesis is sanded to a high shine
8.   Nail polish, jewels, decals, decorative metal strips, and air 

brushed designs may be added, depending on the fashion tastes 
of the patient

10  fingernails.  Originally,  methyl  methacrylate  was  the 
 monomer used to fashion the nail, but its use has been dis-
continued  due  to  its  sensitizing  potential.  Currently,  liquid 
ethyl  or  isobutyl  methacrylate  are  utilized  as  the  monomer 
and mixed with powdered polymethyl methacrylate polymer. 
The  product  is  allowed  to  polymerize  in  the  presence  of  a 
benzoyl peroxide accelerator and a formable acrylic is made 
which hardens in seven to nine minutes ( 37 ). Usually, hydro-
quinone, monomethyl ether of hydroquinone, or pyrogallol 
is  added  to  slow  down  polymerization  ( 38 ).  The  acrylic  is 
then shaped to the length and fingernail style desired by the 
patient. The bond formed between the acrylic and the natu-
ral nail plate is extremely strong, since the nail plate is chem-
ically and sometimes physically etched with a drill to increase 
the  surface  area  over  which  polymerization  can  occur.  It  is 
for this reason that trauma usually separates the natural nail 
plate from the nail bed.   

 The  application  technique  is  summarized  in   Table  39.7  
( Fig. 39.12 ). The entire process takes 2 hours to create a set of 

 Many  patients  are  not  aware  that  the  finished  nail  sculp-
tures  require  more  care  than  natural  fingernails.  With 

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

257

(A)

(B)

 Figure 39.12     ( A ) A form is placed beneath the natural slide over which the nail prostheses will be formed. ( B ) The polymerized acrylate is formed over the natural 
nail plate and the form to create the illusion of nail length. ( C ) The finished appearance of the nail sculpture.    

(C)

 continued wear of the sculpture, the acrylic loosens from the 
natural nail, especially around the edges. These loose edges 
must be clipped and new acrylic should be applied approxi-
mately every three weeks, to prevent development of an envi-
ronment  for  infection.  The  sculpture  grows  out  with  the 
natural nail plate, and more polymer material must be added 
proximally,  depending  on  the  nail  growth  rate.  This  proce-
dure is known as “filling.” Failure to undergo filling every 2 to 
3 weeks will result in creation of a lever arm that predisposes 
to traumatic onycholysis or damage to the natural nail plate. 
If necessary, the sculptured nails can be removed by soaking 
in acetone. 

 Damage  to  the  natural  nail  plate  still  occurs  with  nail 
sculpture use, even if the patient is conscientious. After two 
to  four  months  of  wear,  the  natural  nail  plate  becomes 
 yellowed,  dry,  and  thin.  Most  operators  prefer  to  allow  the 
patient’s  natural  nail  to  grow  and  act  as  a  support  for  the 
sculpture.  However,  the  nails  become  thin,  bendable,  and 
weak. For this reason, it is not advisable to wear sculptured 
nails  for  more  than  three  months  consecutively  with  a 
month’s rest between applications.  

  Nail Sculptures with Preformed Tips  

   Preformed tips allow the creation of excessively long nails 
that can increase the chance for onycholysis. 

 A  less  time-consuming  and  less  expensive  method  to  make 
custom  nail  prostheses  is  to  combine  custom-made  nail 
sculptures  with  preformed  artificial  tips  ( Fig.  39.13 ).  This 
involves  applying  the  liquid  acrylic  to  the  natural  nail  and 
embedding a preformed nail tip at the distal end. This method 
is used for patients who wish to have extremely long nails or 
nails  embedded  with  numerous  jewels.  The  possibility  of 
developing  traumatic  onycholysis  is  enhanced  with  this 
variation due to the extreme length of the nails.   

  Photo-Induced Onycholysis  

   Photo-induced onycholysis can occur when patients on 
photosensitizing oral medications use photobonded 
sculptured nails. 

 A variation on nail sculptures, known as photobonded nails, can 
precipitate photo-induced onycholysis. This nail technique uti-
lizes a UV cured acrylic sculpted on the natural nail. The nail is 
exposed to a magnesium light for one to two minutes. This tech-
nique is similar to restorative dental bonding, however a patient 
on  photosensitizing  oral  medications,  such  as  tetracycline  or 
doxycycline, may experience photo-onycholysis ( 39 ) ( Fig. 39.14 ). 
When the onycholysis does not involve the distal nail plate and 
nail sculptures are present, the physician should inquire as to the 
use  of  photobonded  nails.  In  addition  to  photo-onycholysis, 
nails may get allergic contact dermatitis also.    

258

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

(A)

(C)

(E)

(B)

(D)

(F)

(G)

 Figure 39.13     ( A ) Roughening the surface of the nail plate with a file to increase the surface for the nail prosthesis to attach. ( B ) Application of an antifungal solu-
tion to the natural nail plate to prevent infection. ( C ) Methacrylate-based glue is used to stick in the artificial nail to the natural nail plate. ( D ) Trimming of the 
artificial nail plate with scissors to the desired length. ( E ) Mixing of the powdered polymethyl methacrylate with the liquid isobutyl methacrylate to create a form-
able acrylic to fill the distance between the natural nail plate and the proximal nail fold. ( F ) A drill is used to smooth the natural nail plate in the prosthesis. 
( G ) The finished appearance of a nail prosthesis.    

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

259

  cuticle problems  

   A large proportion of cosmetic nail issues arise from the 
removal or trimming of the cuticle. 

 Cuticle problems are varied and can range from paronychial 
infection to irritant contact dermatitis. Most cuticle problems 
arise from removal of the tissue, since it is considered cosmet-
ically  unattractive.  Perhaps  the  true  reason  the  cuticle  is 
removed,  is  to  aid  the  nail  artist  in  more  easily  painting  the 
fingernails  or  applying  nail  prostheses.  The  cuticle  can  be 
removed chemically or physically. Chemical cuticle removers 
are  formulated  as  liquids  or  creams  and  contain  an  alkaline 
substance to digest the keratin ( 50 ). They may contain sodium 
or potassium hydroxide, a common cause of irritant contact 
dermatitis, in a 2–5% concentration with propylene glycol or 
glycerin  added  as  a  humectant.  Milder  preparations  can  be 
made  with  trisodium  phosphate  or  tetrasodium  pyrophos-
phate, but they are also less effective ( 51 ). 

 A variant of cuticle removers are known as cuticle softeners. 
These are quaternary ammonium compounds in a 3–5% con-
centration, sometimes combined with urea, designed to soften 
the  cuticular  protein  and  facilitate  mechanical  removal. 
Mechanical removal consists of either trimming the softened 
cuticle or pushing the cuticle back with a plastic or wood stick. 
Aggressive physical removal of the cuticle can damage the nail 
matrix cells resulting in nail dystrophy, which can be  temporary 
or permanent based on the severity of the injury. 

 Both chemical and physical cuticle removal results in break-
ing the watertight seal the cuticle provides between the proxi-
mal nail fold and the nail plate. Removal of the cuticle creates 
a potential space for water and other liquids to reside. Since it 
is difficult to dry this area, water accompanied by body warmth 
creates an environment for the growth of bacteria and yeast. 
Usually, the yeast colonization occurs first, setting the stage for 
subsequent bacterial infection and a paronychia. If the cuticle 
has  been  removed,  isopropyl  alcohol  (rubbing  alcohol)  or 
 acetic acid (vinegar) can aid in the evaporation of the water, 
preventing paronychial formation. Treatment with a medium-
potency  topical  corticosteroid  combined  with  a  topical  anti-
fungal can aid in the resolution of a paronychia. However, if 
the lesion is draining pus, an oral antibiotic may be necessary. 
 The solution has to allow the cuticle to remain in place to 
prevent a paronychia, since it performs an important anatomic 
function.  The  physician  may  wish  to  establish  a  relationship 
with a nail technician who is willing to groom the nails with-
out  removing  the  cuticle.  This  is  especially  important  in  the 
patient who experiences recurrent or chronic paronychia.  

  ingrown fingernails  

   Proper nail grooming can minimize the recurrence of 
ingrown nails. 

 Another  frequently  encountered  medical  nail  problem  is  an 
ingrown fingernail. Ingrown fingernails are most commonly 
due to improper fingernail cutting. Most people with ingrown 
fingernails  either  bite  their  nails  or  cut  their  fingernails  too 
short. Most people like to cut their fingernails in a gentle arc 

 Figure 39.14     Photo-induced onycholysis.    

  allergic contact dermatitis  

   Nail polish allergy may be observed not only in the fingers, 
but also around the eyes. 

 Patients with proximal nail fold erythema and edema, finger-
tip tenderness and swelling, and/or eyelid dermatitis should be 
evaluated for allergic contact dermatitis to nail products ( 40 ). 
The most common cause of allergic contact dermatitis of this 
type is nail polish allergy. The North American Contact Der-
matitis Group determined that 4% of positive patch tests were 
due to toluene sulfonamide–formaldehyde resin used in nail 
polish, as discussed previously. Patients who are allergic to the 
toluene  sulfonamide–formaldehyde  resin  should  consider 
using  hypoallergenic  nail  polish  containing  the  alternative 
polyester resins, which are less allergenic ( 41 ). Even though the 
allergic  reaction  is  most  commonly  due  to  wet  nail  enamel, 
Tosti  et  al.  found  11  out  of  59  patients  who  were  patch  test 
positive to wet polish, also reacted to the dried enamel ( 42 ). 
Allergic  reactions  can  be  severe  necessitating  time  lost  from 
work ( 43 ). 

 Patch testing to verify allergy to toluene sulfonamide/form-
aldehyde resin can be performed using the standard patch test 
tray  or  the  patient’s  bottle  of  nail  polish.  Nail  polish  can  be 
tested “as is,” but should be allowed to thoroughly dry as the 
volatile solvent can cause an irritant reaction if not allowed to 
evaporate  rapidly.  The  toluene  sulfonamide/formaldehyde 
resin can be also tested alone in 10% petrolatum ( 44 ). Patients 
who are allergic to this resin should select hypoallergenic nail 
polishes ( 45 ). 

 The second most common cause of nail area allergic contact 
dermatitis  is  allergy  to  the  methacrylates,  which  are  used  to 
glue artificial nails and create sculptured nail prostheses. Even 
though methyl methacrylate is no longer used, isobutyl, ethyl 
and tetrahydrofurfuryl methacrylate are still strong sensitizers 
( 46 , 47 ). It is important to remember the polymerized, cured 
acrylic is not sensitizing, only the liquid methacrylate mono-
mer ( 48 ). Therefore, a careful nail operator, who avoids skin 
contact  with  the  uncured  acrylic,  can  avoid  sensitizing  the 
patient. Patch testing should be performed in suspected sensi-
tized individuals with methyl methacrylate monomer, 10% in 
olive oil, and methacrylate acid esters, 1% and 5% in olive oil 
and petrolatum ( 49 ).  

260

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

with  the  longest  part  of  the  nail  in  the  center  of  the  finger. 
This grooming method causes trouble at the sides of the fin-
gernail where improper cutting can leave nail fragments that 
may ingrow. 

 The  best  way  to  cut  fingernails  is  straight  across  with  no 
curve. This leaves the sides longer making the nail too long to 
ingrow. If the nail should ingrow, I prefer to wrap a piece of 
Teflon dental tape beneath the ingrown nail lifting it out to the 
skin surface. Regular dental floss can also be used, but the Tef-
lon is less likely to break and is smoother at the edges prevent-
ing skin trauma. The dental tape is then covered by an adhesive 
dressing, which can be replaced as necessary.  

  summary 
 An understanding of common nail problems and their treat-
ment through medical and cosmetic techniques is important 
to the physician. Nail cosmetics can both cause disease and 
provide valuable camouflaging benefits. It has been said that 
nails  are  an  indicator  of  social  status,  age,  sex,  and  general 
health.  Perhaps  nail  cosmetics  are  popular  since  they  can 
conceal the underlying truth. The physician should never be 
hesitant to remove nail polish or an artificial nail in the office 
to adequately diagnose disease. For this reason, it is worth-
while to invest a dollar in a bottle of acetone-containing nail 
polish remover. The nail polish remover can be placed on a 
cotton  ball  and  stroked  over  the  nail  to  remove  polish  or 
poured  into  a  crucible  to  soak  off  an  artificial  nail.  It  is 
important  never  to  miss  a  diagnosis  because  of  failure  to 
visualize the natural nail plate.   

   references 
    1.       Mautner     G   ,    Scher     RK    .   Yellow nail syndrome  .   J Geriatric Dermatol     1993  ;   1  : 

   20.       Finlay     AY   ,    Frost     P   ,    Keith     AD   ,    Snipes     W    .   An assessment of factors  influencing 

flexibility of human fingernails  .   Br J Dermatol     1980  ;   103  :   357  –  65  .   

   21.       Cohen      PR   ,     Scher      RK    .    Geriatic  nail  disorders:  diagnosis  and  treatment  .   

J Am Acad Dermatol     1992  ;   26  :   521  –  31  .   

   22.       Hochman      LG   ,     Scher      RK   ,     Meyerson      MS    .    Brittle  nails:  response  to  daily 

biotin supplementation  .   Cutis     1993  ;   51  :   303  –  5  .   

   23.       Wing      HJ    .    Nail  preparations  .    In  :      Navarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  chemistry  and 
 manufacture  of  cosmetics  .    2nd  edn  .    Wheaton  :    Allured  Publishing 
 Company  ,   1988  :   994  –  6  .   

   24.       Mast     R    .   Nail products  .   In  :     Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic safety a primer for 

cosmetic scientists  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1987  :   265  –  313  .   

   25.       Jawny      L   ,     Spada      FJ    .    Contact  dermatitis  to  a  new  nail  hardener  .    Arch 

 Dermatol     1967  ;   95  :   199  .   

   26.       Paltzik      RL   ,     Enscoe      I    .    Onycholysis  secondary  to  toluene  sulfonamide 
 formaldehyde  resin  used  in  a  nail  hardener  mimicking  onychomycosis  . 
  Cutis     1980  ;   25  :   647  –  8  .   

   27.       Donsky     HJ    .   Onycholysis due to nai hardener  .   Canadian Med Assoc J     1967  ; 

  96  :   1375  –  6  .   

   28.       Lazar     P    .   Reactions to nail hardeners  .   Arch Dermatol     1966  ;   94  :   446  –  8  .   
   29.       Huldin     DH    .   Hemorrhages of the lips secondary to nail hardeners  .   Cutis   

  1968  ;   4  :   709  .   

   30.       Engasser     PG   ,    Matsunaga     J    .   Nail cosmetics  .   In  :     Scher     RK   ,    Daniel     CR    ,   eds  . 
  Nails: therapy, diagnosis, surgery  .   Philadelphia  :   WB Saunders Company  , 
  1990  :   214  –  15  .   

   31.       Wallis     MS   ,    Bowen     WR   ,    Guin     JD    .   Pathogenesis of onychoschizia (lamellar 

dystrophy)  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1991  ;   24  :   44  –  8  .   

   32.       Goodwin     P    .   Onycholysis due to acrylic nail applications  .   J Exp Dermatol   

  1976  ;   1  :   191  –  2  .   

   33.       Lane     CW   ,    Kost     LB    .   Sensitivity to artificial nails  .   Arch Dermatol     1956  ;   74  : 

  671  –  2  .   

   34.       Baden      H    .    Cosmetics  and  the  nail.  In  diseases  of  the  hair  and  nails  . 

   Yearbook Publishers  ,   1987  :   99  –  102  .   

   35.       Baran     R    .   Pathology induced by the application of cosmetics to the nails  . 
  In  :     Frost     P   ,    Horwitz     SN    ,   eds  .   Cosmetics for the dermatologist  .   CV Mosby  , 
  1982  :   182  .   

   36.       Brauer     EW    .   Selected prostheses primarily of cosmetic interest  .   Cutis     1970  ; 

  6  :   521  –  4  .   

   37.       Barnett     JM   ,    Scher     RK   ,    Taylor     SC    .   Nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  106  –  9  .   

  9  –  17  .   

    2.       Nelson     LM    .   Yellow nail syndrome  .   Arch Dermatol     1969  ;   100  :   499  –  500  .   
    3.       Venencie      PY   ,     Dicken      GH    .    Yellow  nail  syndrome  .    J  Am  Acad  Dermatol   

  1984  ;   10  :   187  –  92  .   

   38.       Viola     LJ    .   Fingernail elongators and accessory nail preparations  .   In  :     Balsam   
  MS   ,     Sagarin      E    ,    eds  .    Cosmetics,  science  and  technology  .    2nd  edn  .   
New York  :   Wiley-Interscience  ,   1972  :   543  –  52  .   

    4.       Samman     PD   ,    White     WF    .   The “yellow nail” syndrome  .   Br J Dermatol     1964  ; 

   39.       Fisher      AA    .    Adverse  nail  reactions  and  paresthesia  from  photobonded 

  76  :   153  –  7  .   

acrylate sculptured nails  .   Cutis     1990  ;   45  :   293  –  4  .   

    5.       Wimmer     EP   ,    Scholssman     ML    .   The history of nail polish  .   Cosmet Toilet   

   40.       Scher     RK    .   Cosmetics and ancillary preparations for the care of the nails  .   

  1992  ;   107  :   115  –  20  .   

    6.       Wing      HJ    .    Nail  preparations  .    In  :      deNavarre      MG    ,    ed  .    The  chemistry  and 
manufacture  of  cosemtics  .    Wheaton  :    Allured  Publishing  Corporation  , 
  1988  :   983  –  1005  .   

    7.       Schlossman     ML    .   Nail-enamel resins  .   Cosmet Technol     1979  ;   1  :   53  .   
    8.       Schlossman     ML    .   Nail polish colorants  .   Cosmet Toilet     1980  ;   95  :   31  .   
    9.       Samman     PD    .   Nail disorders caused by external influences  .   J Soc Cosmet 

Chem     1977  ;   28  :   351  .   

   10.       Daniel     DR   ,    Osmet     LS    .   Nail pigmentation abnormalities  .   Cutis     1980  ;   25  : 

  595  –  607  .   

   11.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  cosmeticology  .    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

J Am Acad Dermatol     1982  ;   6  :   523  –  8  .   

   41.       Adams     RM   ,    Maibach     HI    .   A five-year study of cosmetic reactions  .   J Am 

Acad Dermatol     1985  ;   13  :   1062  –  9  .   

   42.       Tosti     A   ,    Buerra     L   ,    Vincenzi     C    ,   et al  .   Contact sensitization caused by tolu-
ene sulfonamide-formaldehyde resin in women who use nail cosmetics  . 
  Am J Contact Dermatitis     1993  ;   4  :   150  .   

   43.       Liden      C   ,     Berg      M   ,     Farm      G    ,    et  al  .    Nail  varnish  allergy  with  far-reaching 

consequences  .   Br J Dermatol     1993  ;   128  :   57  –  62  .   

   44.       deGroot     AC   ,    Weyland      JW   ,     Nater      JP    .    Unwanted  effects  of  cosmetics  and 
drugs used in dermatology  .   3rd edn  .   New York  :   Elsevier  ,   1994  :   526  .   
   45.       Shaw      S    .    A  case  of  contact  dermatitis  from  hypoallergenic  nail  varnish  . 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   371  .   

  Contact Dermatitis     1989  ;   20  :   385  .   

   12.       Lewis      BL   ,     Montgomery      H    .    The  senile  nail  .    J  Invest  Dermatol      1955  ;    24  : 

   46.       Marks     JG   ,    Bishop     ME   ,    Willis     WF    .   Allergic contact dermatitis to sculptured 

  11  –  18  .   

   13.       Cohen      PR   ,     Scher      RK    .    Nail  changes  in  the  elderly  .    J  Geriatic  Dermatol   

  1993  ;   1  :   45  –  53  .   

   14.       Mast     R    .   Nail products  .   In  :     Whittam     JH    ,   ed  .   Cosmetic safety a primer for 

cosmetic scientists  .   New York  :   Marcel Dekker, Inc  ,   1987  :   265  –  313  .   

   15.       Scher     RK    .   Brittle nails  .   Int J Dermatol     1989  ;   28  :   515  –  16  .   
   16.       Kechijian     P    .   Brittle fingernails  .   Dermatol Clin     1985  ;   3  :   412  –  29  .   
   17.       Silver     H   ,    Chiego     B    .   Nail and nail changes. III Brittleness of nails (fragilitas 

unguium)  .   J Invest Dermatol     1940  ;   3  :   357  –  73  .   

   18.       Samman     PD    .   Nail disorders caused by external influences  .   J Soc Cosmet 

Chem     1977  ;   28  :   351  .   

   19.       Finlay     AY   ,    Frost     P   ,    Keith     AD   ,    Snipes     W    .   Effects of phospholipids and water 
on  brittleness  of  nails  .    In  :      Frost      P   ,     Horwitz      SN    ,    eds  .    Cosmetics  for  the 
 dermatologist  .   St. Louis  :   CV Mosby  ,   1982  :   175  –  80  .   

nails  .   Arch Dermatol     1979  ;   115  :   100  .   

   47.       Fisher     AA    .   Cross reactions between methyl methacrylate monomer and 
acrylic  monomers  presently  used  in  acrylic  nail  preparations  .    Contact 
Dermatitis     1980  ;   6  :   345  –  7  .   

   48.       Fisher     AA   ,    Franks     A   ,    Glick     H    .   Allergic sensitization of the skin and nails to 

acrylic plastic nails  .   J Allergy     1957  ;   28  :   84  .   

   49.       Baran     R   ,    Dawber     RPR    .   The nail and cosmetics  .   In  :     Samman     PD   ,    Fenton   
  DA    ,   eds  .   The nails in disease  .   4th edn  .   Chicago  :   Yearbook Publishers  ,   1986  : 
  129  .   

   50.       Brauer      E    .    Cosmetics:  the  care  and  adornment  of  the  nail  .    In  :      Baran      R   , 
   Dawber      RPR    ,    eds  .    Diseases  of  the  nail  and  their  management  .    Oxford  : 
  Blackwell  ,   1984  :   289  –  92  .   

   51.       Wilkinson      JB   ,     Moore      RJ    .    Harry’s  cosmeticology  .    7th  edn  .    New  York  : 

  Chemical Publishing  ,   1982  :   369  –  72  .    

A PROBLEM-ORIENTED APPROACH TO FINGERNAIL ISSUES

261

  suggested reading 
      Baran     R    .   Nail cosmetics: allergies and irritation  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2002  ;   3  : 

  547  –  55  .   

     Baran     R   ,    Schoon     D    .   Nail beauty  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2004  ;   3  :   167  –  70  .   
     Barnett     JM   ,    Scher     RK   ,    Taylor     SC    .   Nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  :   9  –  17  .   
     Chang      RM   ,     Hare      AQ   ,     Rich      P    .    Treating  cosmetically  induced  nail  problems  . 

  Dermatol Ther     2007  ;   20  :   54  –  9  .   

     Draelos     ZD    .   Nail cosmetics issues  .   Dermatol Clin     2000  ;   18  :   675  –  83  .   
     de     Berker       DAR  .   Nails. Medicine     2004  ;   32  :   32  –  5  .   
     De      Wit        FS.  An  outbreak  of  contact  dermatitis  from  toleuneseulfonamide 
formaldehyde  resin  in  a  nail  hardener  .    Contact  Dermatitis      1988  ;    18  : 
  280  –  3  .   

     Egawa     M   ,    Ozaki     Y   ,    Takahashi     M    .   In vivo measurement of water content of the 
fingernails and its seasonal change  .   Skin Res Technol     2005  ;   12  :   126  –  32  .   

     Haneke     E    .   Onychocosmeceuticals  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2006  ;   5  :   95  –  100  .   
     Heising     P   ,    Austad     J   ,    Talberg     HJ    .   Onycholysis induced by nail hardener  .   Contact 

Dermatitis     2007  ;   57  :   280  –  1  .   

     Kanerva      L   ,     Estlander      T    .    Allergic  onycholysis  and  paronychia  caused  by 
 cyanoacrylate nail glue, but not by photobonded methacrylate nails  .   Eur J 
Dermatol     2000  ;   10  :   223  –  5  .   

     Lazzarini     R   ,    Duarte     I   ,    de Farias     DC   ,    Santos     CA   ,    Tsai     AI    .   Frequency and main 
sites of allergic contact dermatitis caused by nail varnish  .   Dermatitis     2008  ; 
  19  :   319  –  22  .   

     Militello     G    .   Contact and primary irritant dermatitis of the nail unit diagnosis 

and treatment  .   Dermatol Ther     2007  ;   20  :   47  –  53  .   

     Mowad     CM   ,    Ferringer     T    .   Allergic contact dermatitis from acrylates in artificial 

nails  .   Dermatitis     2004  ;   15  :   51  –  3  .   

     Norton     LA    .   Common and uncommon reactions to formaldehyde-containing 

nail hardeners  .   Semin Dermatol     1991  ;   10  :   29  –  33  .   
     Rich     P    .   Nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     2006  ;   24  :   393  –  9  .   
     Rich     P    .   Nail cosmetics and esthetics  .   Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol     1999  ; 

  12  :   144  –  5  .   

     Scher      RK    .    Cosmetics  and  ancillary  preparations  for  the  care  of  nails. 
 Composition, chemistry, and adverse reations  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     1982  ; 
  6    (4 Pt 1)  :   523  –  8  .   

     Schoon     D    .   Nail varnish formulation (Chapter 20)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    , 
  eds  .    Textbook  of  cosmetic  dermatology  .    2nd  edn  .    Martin  Dunitz  ,    1988  : 
  213  –  18  .   

     Schoon     D   ,    Baran     R    .   Cosmetics for nails (Chapter 44)  .   In  :     Paye     M   ,    Barel     AO   , 
   Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Handbook of cosmetic science and technology  .   2nd edn  . 
  Informa Healthcare USA, Inc.  ,   2007  :   593  –  6  .   

     Slodownik     D   ,    Williams     JD   ,    Tate     BJ    .   Prolonged paresthesia due to sculptured 

acrylic nails  .   Contact Dermatitis     2007  ;   56  :   298  –  9  .   

     Vilaplana     J   ,    Romaguera     C    .   Contact dermatitis from tosylamide/formaldehyde 

resin with photosensitivity  .   Contact Dermatitis     2000  ;   42  :   311  –  12  .   

     Wimmer     E    .   Nail polishes (Chapter 27)  .   In  :     Rieger     MM    ,   ed  .   Harry’s cosmetology  . 

  8th edn  .   Chemical Publishing Co.  ,   2002  :   573  –  88  .   

     Yokota     M   ,    Thong     HY   ,    Hoffman     CA   ,    Maibach     HI    .   Allergic contact dermatitis 
caused by tosylamide formaldehyde resin in nail varnish: an old allergen 
that has not disappeared  .   Contact Dermatitis     2007  ;   57  :   277  .        

             40   Understanding and treating brittle nails      

  There is one condition that is more challenging to treat than 
bullous pemphigoid or granuloma annulare, and it is simply 
known  as  “brittle  nails.”  Most  dermatologists  have  had  this 
experience: the patient who has been treated for a major skin 
condition  during  an  office  visit  asks  as  a  quick  end-of-visit 
aside for advice on her brittle nails. While at first glance brittle 
nails  may  appear  to  be  a  simple  problem,  treatment  for  this 
common condition is perplexing. It may even be argued that 
brittle state is a variant of normal change associated with aging 
and should not even be considered a problem worthy of treat-
ment. Nevertheless, a few ideas on why brittle nails occur and 
how to effectively minimize the problem are worthwhile. 

 This  chapter  examines  the  physiology  behind  brittle  nails 
and presents suggestions on how to prevent the condition. Nail 
problems are particularly challenging to treat, since the non-
living nail cannot be healed and can only be replaced by new 
growth. This new growth occurs slowly, requiring six months 
or  longer  for  a  new  fingernail  to  be  produced.  Treating  nail 
problems  never  results  in  immediate  gratification  requiring 
faith on the part of the patient, who eventually heeds to the 
dermatologic advice for a positive outcome. 

  nail physiology 
 Brittle nails are the equivalent of xerotic eczema. Water is the 
plasticizer  of  both  the  nails  and  the  skin.  Dehydrated  nails 
become brittle and fractured while dehydrated skin cracks and 
flakes exposing the underlying nerve endings to the environ-
ment, precipitating itching. While topical corticosteroid anti-
inflammatories accompanied by moisturizers are the mainstay 
of  eczema  treatment,  only  moisturizers  can  be  used  in  the 
treatment of brittle nails. A barrier composed of corneocytes 
and intercellular lipids maintains the water content of the skin 
at 30%. Healing of the skin usually occurs within two weeks, 
which is the turnover time for the stratum corneum. Simply 
put, the nails do not heal. 

 At  30%  water  content,  the  nails  are  overhydrated  and  soft, 
which is different from skin. The optimal water content for the 
nails is 16%, but this varies with ambient humidity. Under con-
ditions of 20% relative humidity, the water content of the nails 
drops to 7%. Proper hydration is key, as water allows the nails 
to bend without fracturing. Problems arise when the water is 
lost, because it is not possible to permanently replace the water. 
Nail soaking results in enhanced water loss, not rehydration.   

   The water content of a proper nail is 16%. 

  preventing brittle nails 
 The best treatment for brittle nails is prevention of damage to 
the  newly  growing  nail  plate.  Nails  become  dehydrated  with 
exposure  to  surfactants  and  solvents.  When  the  hands  are 
washed, so are the nails. Once piece of advice for patients is to 

262

wash  their  hands,  but  avoid  placing  surfactant  on  the  nails 
unless they require cleansing. Hand sanitizers, which are replac-
ing hand washing, are very damaging to the nail plate. The com-
bination  of  the  rapidly  evaporating  vehicle  and  the  triclosan 
both cause water loss. All soaps and household cleansers cause 
nail water loss making glove protection of the nails essential.   

   Dehydration from nail exposure to surfactants and 
solvents is the most common cause of brittle nails. 

  strengthening brittle nails 
 Many cosmetic techniques are available to strengthen nails, as 
this  is  a  profitable  market.  The  common  products  are  nail 
hardeners that contain formaldehyde. Formaldehyde works to 
harden  nails  by  cross-linking  the  keratin  protein.  While  this 
cross-linking  makes  the  keratin  harder,  it  can  also  paradoxi-
cally make the nails more brittle. Thus, nail hardeners are not 
recommended for strengthening brittle nails. 

 Perhaps  the  best  way  to  strengthen  brittle  nails  rests  with 
nail  polish.  Nail  polish  places  a  protective  film  over  the  nail 
plate that thickens the nail. The flexible nail polish polymer, 
which  may  be  toluene  sulfonamide  resin  or  polyester,  also 
increases nail flexibility and acts as a barrier to nail water con-
tact.  Problems  arise,  however,  when  the  nail  polish  must  be 
removed.  Both  acetone-containing  and  acetone-free  nail 
 polish removers dehydrate the nail plate. Thus, nail polish can 
be used in the treatment of brittle nails, but should be removed 
as infrequently as possible ( Fig. 40.1 ).  

 Some also advocate the use of nail prostheses in brittle nail 
treatment. While it is true that artificial nails can protect the 
underlying nail plate, removal of the prostheses is always trau-
matic to the nail. With prolonged wearing, oxygen transport is 
decreased and the nail weakens. While prostheses can be worn 
for a limited time, continued use for the treatment of brittle 
nails is not recommended.   

   Nail polish may be helpful in placing a polymer coating 
over brittle nails to increase flexibility. 

  diet and brittle nails 
 Some also believe that brittle nails can be improved through 
dietary  modification.  Nails  are  pure  protein,  thus  adequate 
protein intake is necessary for healthy nails. Many strict vege-
tarians find their nails to be one of the first places to show the 
effects  of  incomplete  protein  ingestion.  Biotin  has  also  been 
implicated  as  necessary  for  healthy  nails.  Egg  whites  are  the 
richest source of biotin and many individuals do not consume 
eggs.  Nutritionists  also  believe  that  biotin  absorption  across 
the  small  intestine  decreases  with  advancing  age.  This  is  the 
rationale for providing biotin supplementation as part of nail 
health in mature individuals. 

UNDERSTANDING AND TREATING BRITTLE NAILS

263

(A)

(B)

 Figure 40.1     ( A ,  B ) Nail growth and nail-strengthening products that are primarily nail polishes, but contain other ingredients to support their marketing claim.    

 The use of biotin in human nails was adapted from the veteri-
nary use of biotin in racehorses. If the hoof of a racehorse splits, it 
ends  the  career  of  the  animal.  Veterinarians  supplement  horse 
diets with biotin believing that it prevents hoof cracking. Whether 
biotin is useful in humans to prevent nail splitting has not been 
proven in large double-blind placebo controlled studies.   

   Adequate protein intake is necessary for good nail plate 
formation, which may not be present in strict vegetarian 
diets. 

  nail moisturization 
 Perhaps the best way to treat dehydrated brittle nails is with a 
moisturizer.  Two  ingredients  have  the  greatest  efficacy:  urea 

and  lactic  acid.  Both  urea  and  lactic  acid  are  classified  as 
humectants because they increase the water-holding capacity 
of the nail. This occurs from the digestion of nail keratin that 
opens  up  water-binding  sites  and  enhances  hydration.  The 
hydration  is  only  temporary,  however,  requiring  continued 
moisturizer application. 

 The urea concentration should be between 5 and 20%. And 
20–40% urea digests too much of the nail keratin and softens 
the nails. Remember that 40% urea is used to avulse toenails. 
The lactic acid concentration should be between 5 and 10%. 
Twice-daily application of the urea or lactic acid preparation 
is sufficient, as too frequent application will damage the nail 
plate. More frequent use of nonmedicated moisturizers rich 
in glycerin and petrolatum can be used each time the hands 
are washed.   

264

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

   Urea and lactic acid are humectants that increase nail 
hydration by opening up water-binding sites on nail keratin. 

Table 40.1  Brittle Nails Summary

Nails require hydration for flexibility
Too much or too little nail water causes problems
Nail polish and nail prostheses provide only temporary nail 

strength improvement

Biotin may be a useful dietary supplement
Any change in nail treatment will take 3–6 mon to see results
Avoid nail exposure to triclosan, solvents, household cleaners
Wear gloves
Apply urea or lactic acid to increase water-binding sites on nail 

keratin

  summary 
 Brittle nails are indeed a perplexing problem. The basic con-
cepts surrounding brittle nails are summarized in  Table 40.1 . 
Prevention is as important as treatment for brittle nails. This 
article has presented the nail physiology accounting for brittle 
nails and ideas for prevention. Prevention is perhaps the best 
treatment,  but  other  options  have  also  been  discussed.  It  is 
hoped  that  this  article  has  demystified  brittle  nails  offering 
insight for the next patient challenge.    

   suggested reading 
      Baran      R   ,     Schoon      D    .    Nail  fragility  syndrome  and  its  treatment  .    J  Cosmet 

 Dermatol     2004  ;   3  :   131  –  7  .   

     Kechijian     P    .   Brittle fingernails  .   Dermatol Clin     1985  ;   3  ;   421  –  9  .   
     Stern     DK   ,    Diamantis Smith     E   ,    Wei     H    ,   et al.     Water content and other aspects of 
brittle versus normal fingernails  .   J Am Acad Dermatol     2007  ;   7  :   31  –  6  .        

             41  

 Cosmetics in nail disease      

  Cosmetics can be of use in nail disease to provide camouflag-
ing or to restore a damaged nail plate to functionality. Anyone 
who has had a nail torn or ripped can identify with the pain 
associated with nail damage. Many persons with nail disease 
experience this same type of discomfort until the nail can be 
repaired. Since nails are nonliving, nail repair can take three to 
six months depending on the rate of growth; however, in the 
case of nail disease no improvement may be expected for lon-
ger. The cosmetic solutions for nail problems are summarized 
in  Table 41.1 .  

  psoriatic nails 
 One of the most common nail diseases seen by the dermatolo-
gist is nail psoriasis characterized by minor as nail pitting to 
dramatic nail plate disintegration. The severity of nail disease 
in nail psoriasis is quire variable. Minor nail pitting results in 
the irregularity of the nail plate. This can be easily corrected by 
applying  a  thin  layer  of  nail  sculpture  polymer  over  the  nail 
plate in a procedure known as “shellacking.” The term comes 
from  the  shellac  shiny  finish  placed  over  wood  to  seal  the 
porous material and provide a waterproof protective covering. 
Shellacking provides the same benefits to psoriatic nails. Just 
like in the nail prostheses, previously discussed in chapter 39, 
liquid ethyl or isobutyl methacrylate are utilized as the mono-
mer and mixed with powdered polymethyl methacrylate poly-
mer. The shellac is allowed to polymerize in the presence of a 
benzoyl  peroxide  accelerator  and  a  formable  acrylic  is  made 
which hardens in seven to nine minutes ( 1 ). The acrylic is then 
painted over the fingernail in a thin coating and not used to 
elongate the fingernail. The acrylic can be pigmented with any 
color  desired  to  camouflage  the  underlying  nail  to  create  a 
smooth  shiny  fashionable  nail  appearance  for  persons  with 
mild nail psoriasis. The coating also strengthens the nail and 
prevents  further  pits  from  occurring  due  to  reduced  nail 
trauma. 

 For persons with more severe nail psoriasis involving break-
down  of  the  entire  nail  plate,  cloth  wraps  can  be  used  to 
strengthen and create a nail plate for adornment. A simple nail 
acrylic will not be able to create a smooth surface and the nail 
will not be strong enough to resist flaking and cracking. Cloth 
wraps provide reinforcement across the entire nail plate, but 
are  most  appropriate  for  female  patients  ( Fig.  41.1 ). A  cloth 
wrap is created by placing a layer of acrylic over the nail plate, 
as described previously. Before acrylic dries, a piece of silk or 
linen material is placed in the acrylic sized to fit the nail. Once 
this dries in place, another layer of acrylic is placed on top to 
imbed the cloth between two acrylic layers ( Fig. 41.2 ). The nail 
can then be painted to camouflage the cloth. This technique is 
very effective in severely dystrophic female psoriatic nails.     

  mycotic nails 
 Mycotic nails combine nail thickening, subungual debri, and 
nail  discoloration.  The  nail  thickening  and  subungual  debri 
can be minimized by proper pedicuring. The nails should be 
soaked for at least 30 minutes in a pan of warm water with a 
few  drops  of  liquid  dishwashing  detergent.  The  soaking  will 
soften the dystrophic nail plate and subungual debris. The nail 
can be trimmed with a double action nail cutter and the sub-
ungual debri can be removed with a nail spatula. Certainly, an 
oral antifungal therapy should be considered, but a nail pros-
thesis can be used temporarily. One of the easiest ways to cam-
ouflage the abnormal mycotic nail bed is to employ a French 
manicure,  which  is  appropriate  for  both  male  and  female 
patients. A French manicure utilizes a number of colored nail 
enamels to simulate the natural appearance of unpainted nail. 
Initially, the nail is painted with an unpigmented opaque base 
coat  to  cover  the  discoloration.  A  light  pink  enamel  is  then 
added to the entire nail plate followed by white enamel to the 
tip,  simulating  the  nail  free  edge.  Lastly,  a  clear  top  coat  is 
applied to prevent enamel chipping. French manicures can be 
performed professionally by a manicurist or with kits available 
for home use. This type of artistic recreation of a normal nail 
plate is effective following a pedicure in patients with mycotic 
nails ( Fig. 41.3 ).    

   A French manicure can restore a discolored mycotic nail to 
a more normal appearance in male and female patients. 

  nail dystrophy 
 Nail  dystrophy  is  an  inherited  or  acquired  nail  condition 
involving all 20 nails or selective fingernails and toenails. The 
cause of the condition is poorly understood, but nail dystro-
phy can be a presenting finding of several dermatologic condi-
tions that are beyond the scope of this text. One method that 
can be used to camouflage dystrophic nails is known as “pho-
tobonding.” Photobonded nails are a variation on cured acrylic 
sculptured nails, which has been discussed in chapter 39. Pho-
tobonding refers to light curing of the acrylic instead of chem-
ical curing. More recently, photobonded nails are referred to as 
“gel nails” because the acrylic is a clear gel squeezed out of a 
tube and allowed to dry under a magnesium light for one to 
two minutes. This same type of photobonding is used in den-
tistry  to  seal  children’s  teeth  protecting  them  from  decay. 
However,  photo-onycholysis  and  paresthesias  have  been 
reported as a result of this procedure ( 2 ). In summary, photo-
bonding is an excellent solution to male or female nail dystro-
phy resulting in a smooth nail plate with a restored nail shape.   

   Shellac or cloth wraps can be used to camouflage the nail 
pitting characteristic of psoriasis. 

   Photobonding can smooth the surface and restore shape 
to dystrophic nails. 

265

266

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

Table 41.1  Cosmetic Techniques for Damaged Nails

Damage

Nail color
Yellowish stain

Possible cosmetic 
cause

Possible cosmetic 
solution

Nail polish 

Discontinue nail 

containing D & C 
Reds No. 6, 7, 34, 
5 Lake

polish

Poor nail color

Numerous medical 

French manicure 

conditions

technique

Nail Structure
Onychoschizia 

lamellina

Nail plate 

 dehydration

Application of 
lactic acid- or 
 urea-containing 
cream

Mild median canal 

Trauma

Sculptured nail with 

dystrophy

Uneven nail surface 

Trauma to nail 

contour
Nail fragility

Nail thinning

Nail dystrophy

matrix

Numerous medical 

conditions, 
idiopathic
Nail sculptures 
worn too long
Numerous medical 

conditions, 
idiopathic

Broken nail

Trauma

linen wrap
Artificial or 

sculpture nails
Fiber nail polish

Remove nail 
sculptures

Sculptured nails

“Tea bag repair” 

technique

 Figure 41.2     The finished appearance of a nail cloth wrap.    

 Figure 41.3     The finished appearance of a French manicure.    

 Nail deformity can also be repaired so that the nail does not 
catch on clothing or interfere with the use of the hands. A tem-
porary, effective, inexpensive solution known as the “tea bag 
repair,” requires a tea bag and fiber clear nail polish; this is dis-
cussed in chapter 39. The broken edges of the nail are reap-
proximated  and  the  entire  nail  painted  with  fiber  clear  nail 
polish. A piece of tea bag paper, or other fiber paper, is then cut 
and shaped to fit over the nail surface and embedded in the 
wet  polish.  Several  more  nail  polish  coats  are  subsequently 
applied.  This  repair  covers  the  rough  broken  nail  edge  and 
provides strength. The repair can be removed with fingernail 
polish  remover  and  reapplied  as  the  repair  wears.  If  a  more 
professional  solution  is  desired,  the  cloth  wraps  discussed 
under nail psoriasis can also be used.   

 Figure 41.1     A silk or linen cloth is used to create a cloth wrap for damaged 
nails.    

  median canal dystrophy and habit tic 
deformity 
 Median canal dystrophy and habit tic deformity may result in 
nail plate damage ( 3 , 4 ). External trauma including nail biting, 
occupational  damage,  and  exposure  to  harsh  chemicals  or 
 solvents may also be problematic ( 5 ). Nail biting and habit tic 
picking are difficult to treat in the unmotivated patient; how-
ever, nail enamel can act as a deterrent to manipulation, since 
picking  damages  the  enamel,  which  is  time  consuming  to 
apply. 

   A tea bag can temporarily assist patients with median 
canal dystrophy where the nail edges are not easily 
approximated. 

  summary 
 Nail  surface  contour  abnormalities  result  from  a  variety  of 
medical  conditions  and  may  be  temporary  or  permanent. 
Temporary abnormalities may be seen after the treatment of a 
paronychia  or  hand  dermatitis,  involving  the  proximal  nail 
fold,  or  longer  lasting,  as  in  psoriasis.  For  patients  who  are 

COSMETICS IN NAIL DISEASE

267

bothered  by  poor  nail  appearance,  only  sculptured  nails  can 
offer a solution. The use of sculptured nails in these patients 
requires  a  skilled  operator  and  a  motivated  patient.  Poorly 
applied  or  poorly  maintained  nail  sculptures  could  result  in 
worsening of the nail abnormality. The physician should per-
sonally visit a number of nail sculpturing salons and select an 
operator  for  patient  referral  who  upholds  the  highest  stan-
dards of hygiene. It is also important that the artist work with 
the  physician  and  accept  suggestions  for  nail  grooming.  In 
these patients, the cuticle should never be removed and metic-
ulous care must be taken to avoid contact of liquid acrylic with 
skin.  If  a  suitable  salon  cannot  be  found  in  the  community, 
patients  should  not  undergo  cosmetic  nail  reconstruction. 
Patient safety and the cosmetic results are only as good as the 
skill and intellect of the nail artist.   

   references 
   1.       Barnett     JM   ,    Scher     RK   ,    Taylor     SC    .   Nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  9  –  17  .   

   3.       Baden      HP    .    The  physical  properties  of  nail  .    J  Invest  Dermatol      1970  ;    55  :   

115  –  22  .   

   4.       Scott     DA   ,    Scher     RK    .   Exogenous factors affecting the nails  .   Dermatol Clin   

  1985  ;   3  :   409  –  13  .   

   5.       Samman      PD    .    Nail  disorders  caused  by  external  influences  .    J  Soc  Cosmet 

Chem     1977  ;   28  :   351  .    

  suggested reading 
      Baran     R    .   Nail beauty therapy: an attractive enhancement or a potential haz-

ard?   J Cosmet Dermatol     2002  ;   1  :   24  –  9  .   

     Baran     R    .   Nail cosmetics: allergies and irritations  .   Am J Clin Dermatol     2002  ;   3  : 

  547  –  55  .   

     Baran     R   ,    Andre     J    .   Side effects of nail cosmetics  .   J Cosmet Dermatol     2005  ;   4  : 

  204  –  9  .   

     Baran     R   ,    Schoon     D    .   Cosmetics for abnormal and pathological nails (Chapter 
22)  .   In  :     Baran     R   ,    Maibach     HI    ,   eds  .   Textbook of cosmetic dermatology  .   2nd 
edn  .   Martin Dunitz Ltd  ,   1998  :   233  –  44  .   

     Dahdah     MJ   ,    Scher     RK    .   Nail diseases related to nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin   

  2006  ;   24  :   233  –  9  .   

     Iorizzo     M   ,    Piraccini     BM   ,    Tosti     A    .   Nail cosmetics in nail disorders  .   J Cosmet 

Dermatol     2007  ;   6  :   53  –  8  .   

   2.       Fisher      AA    .    Adverse  nail  reactions  and  paresthesia  from  photobonded 

     Rich     P    .   Nail cosmetics and camouflaging techniques  .   Dermatol Ther     2001  ;   14  : 

 acrylate sculptured nails  .   Cutis     1990  ;   45  :   293  –  4  .   

  228  –  36  .        

             42    Children and nail cosmetic issues       

  soft nails 
 The nail plate of children is not as thick or as well keratinized 
as an adult nail plate. Because the nails are soft, they are easily 
torn. Traditional nail clippers do not work well on children’s 
nails  for  this  reason.  The  nail  plate  cannot  be  easily  broken 
because it tends to bend. It is better to cut the nails of children 
with scissors; however, this may be impractical in children who 
refuse to sit still. Sometimes it is best to simply tear the soft nail 
plate with the fingers. 

 Many  parents  are  concerned  that  the  nails  of  their  child 
become floppy when they grow long. This is normal. I would 
not  advise  painting  the  fingernails  with  nail  polish  to  make 
them  stronger.  Most  young  children  put  their  fingernails 
in  their  mouth  and  may  ingest  the  nail  polish,  which  is  not 
recommended.   

   Soft nails are normal in a child and do not require 
treatment. 

  nails and finger sucking 
 Continuous wetting of the nail plate from finger sucking can 
cause unusual nail deformities that may be concerning to par-
ents. The overhydrated nail plate may be very soft and dissolve, 
but  will  regrow  because  the  nail  matrix  remains  intact.  Fur-
ther, the overhydrated nail plate may appear an opaque white 
color. This results from nail keratin hydration, but is reversible 
once the nail plate returns to its normal state of hydration. 

 Many parents are concerned about thumb or finger sucking 
because  of  dentition  and  speech  problems.  Sometimes  the 
child will discard the behavior with maturity, but other chil-
dren hang onto the habit. The most effective way I have found 
to break the habit is by painting a thin nail lacquer containing 
capsaicin on the nail of the digit favored for sucking. The cap-
saicin is released from the lacquer into the mouth with mois-
ture  and  creates  an  unpleasant  taste  without  damaging  the 
mouth. This type of aversion therapy seems to be effective in 
most children, since thumb and/or finger sucking is a subcon-
scious habit.   

   Thumb or finger sucking may be a subconscious habit that 
can be broken with a taste aversive nail lacquer. 

268

  nail trimming 
 Nail trimming can be a big challenge for parents of an active 
toddler. Several ideas for nail trimming have been presented 
earlier such as simply tearing the soft nail plate. If this is not 
possible,  the  parent  can  carefully  bite  the  nail  away  without 
hurting  the  child  in  a  playful  game  followed  by  filing  the 
nail  plate  with  a  soft  orange  stick  ( Fig.  42.1 ).  Scissors  could 
scare  the  child  and  make  nail  cutting  difficult  while  awake. 
The  parent could consider cutting the nails carefully with scis-
sors  while  the  child  is  sleeping,  or  purchasing  a  nail  clipper 
specifically designed for children. The arc of an adult nail clip-
per is too large to trim small nails. Remember, however, that 
soft nails cannot be broken with a nail clipper.    

   The nails of a young child could be trimmed while 
sleeping. 

 Figure 42.1     Examples of nail files that can be used to groom nails. The recom-
mended orange stick nail file is shown in the middle.    

  summary 
 Nail cosmetics should be largely avoided in children. Children 
grow fingernails very rapidly so most problems resolve with-
out  the  need  for  treatment.  The  best  advice  you  can  give  to 
worried  parents  is  that  the  nails  will  normalize  as  the  child 
matures.     

             43    Toenails and cosmetic issues      

  Toenails  are  most  important  for  protection  of  the  tender 
 tissues at the tip of the toes, yet most women prize them for 
their  cosmetic  value  rather  than  their  physiologic  purpose. 
Toenails grow slower than fingernails with progressive slowing 
in growth with advancing age. Regrowth of a new great toenail 
can take six months to one year requiring patience on the part 
of  the  dermatologist  and  patient  while  addressing  toenail 
problems.  This  chapter  examines  cosmetic  issues  associated 
with  the  toenail  and  presents  cosmetic  remedies 
for 
 consideration. 

  toenail dystrophy 
 Toenail  dystrophy  can  take  the  form  of  nail  thickening,  nail 
ridging,  or  onycholysis.  Many  times  all  of  the  findings  are 
observed  simultaneously.  The  most  common  cause  of  nail 
thickening  is  trauma,  followed  by  fungal  infection,  which  is 
discussed  in  the  next  section.  Trauma  to  the  toenail  that  is 
transmitted to the nail matrix results in the thickening of the 
nail plate and sometimes horizontal ridging, if the trauma is 
severe. This trauma occurs usually due to the tip of the toenail 
receiving  a  vertical  head-on  impact  from  the  toe  box  of  the 
shoe.  This  trauma  can  be  due  to  wearing  shoes  that  are  too 
short or the foot moving forward in the shoe during walking, 
running, or other athletic activity. Patients with a narrow heal 
and  wide-toe  spread  encounter  more  problems  because  the 
heel of the shoe is too large when a shoe is purchased to accom-
modate the width of the foot across the base of the toes. The 
toenail thickening can be remedied by placing a piece of adhe-
sive foam in the shape of figure 8 in the heel of the shoe. This 
takes up the extra space and holds the foot in place. These shoe 
inserts can be purchased at most of the shoe stores. Alterna-
tively,  tie  shoes  tend  to  hold  the  foot  in  place  better  than 
 slip-on shoes, thus shoe selection may also help. 

 Certain athletic activities also predispose to toenail thicken-
ing. These include tennis, where the toe is dragged across the 
ground during serving, and sports that involve kicking a ball, 
such as football and soccer. Basketball players also experience 
toenail thickening when the toe is banged against the toe box 
with rapid pivoting during blocking and shooting. A solution 
to toenail thickening in these sports is taken from ballet pointe 
shoes. Lamb’s wool is placed in the tip of the toe shoe to pre-
vent the toenail from digging into the shoe and to prevent toe-
nail injury. Similarly, lamb’s wool can be placed in the athletic 
shoe  to  prevent  toenail  thickening.  Lamb’s  wool  is  preferred 
over cotton or other textiles because it is stiff, yet soft, and does 
not pack down in the shoe with wearing. 

 If  the  toenail  injury  is  severe,  horizontal  grooves  may  also 
appear  in  the  toenail.  It  is  very  hard  to  camouflage  these 
grooves  with  nail  polish.  The  best  solution  to  improving 
appearance in thickened, grooved nails is to file the nail with a 
sequential file. A sequential file has sand paper of different tex-
tures. The coarse file is used first to smooth out the grooves 

and thin the nail. The remaining finishing files use finer and 
finer  grades  of  sand  paper  to  progressively  shine  the  nail  by 
smoothing  the  surface.  Filing  can  improve  nail  smoothness, 
but  also  increase  nail  transparency  by  removing  the  opaque 
poor quality nail keratin. Once the nail has been filed smooth, 
nail polish can be applied to achieve a better cosmetic result. 

 While  toenail  trauma  of  the  type  previously  discussed  is 
usually seen in the great toenails, it can also be seen in other 
toenails for different reasons. For example, in persons with an 
athlete’s toe, where the second toe is longer than the great toe, 
thickening and ridging will be preferentially seen in this digit. 
In addition, in persons with a wide foot or a little toe that rolls 
laterally with walking, the little toenail will also thicken. The 
little  toenail  is  the  second  most  common  toenail  to  thicken. 
Usually the thickening is due to the little toe being squeezed 
out in shoes, especially in shoes with a pointed toe and a high 
heel. The foot moves forward in the heel and the little toenail 
is tightly pressed against the toe box. The remedy for this situ-
ation is to recommend avoidance of heels and a square toe box 
with ample room for the little toe. Many patients select their 
footwear based on fashion. This may not be the best approach. 
The  shoes  should  be  purchased  that  fit  the  foot.  The  foot 
should  not  be  deformed  to  fit  the  shoe!  This  is  how  toenail 
problems  arise.  The  dermatologists  have  no  true  effective 
treatment for shoe-induced toenail trauma except to recom-
mend that the patient select better-fitting shoes. 

 Severe injury to the toenail can result in onycholysis, which 
is the lifting of the nail plate from the nail bed. This is espe-
cially painful on the toenails because the nail plate continues 
to be traumatized with walking and other activities. Once the 
nail  plate  has  been  lifted,  it  cannot  reattach,  much  to  the 
patient’s  dismay.  The  nail  bed  immediately  keratinizes  when 
the toenail is lifted so there is no tissue available for reattach-
ment. The best solution is to cut the torn toenail away, but this 
is not always possible as the toenail may be irregularly attached. 
The best solution, in a patient who is not methacrylate allergic, 
is to drip some methacrylate-based super glue beneath the nail 
plate, pressing and holding the nail plate against the nail bed 
until the glue has polymerized. This will prevent the nail from 
ripping  further  and  also  reduce  pain.  It  will  not  help  with 
appearance, since the nail will have an air interface and appear 
white. Nail polish can be used to camouflage the onycholysis, if 
the patient desires.   

   The most common cause of toenail dystrophy is ill-fitting 
shoes. 

  fungal infection 
 Nail fungus is the most common medical cause of nail dystro-
phy. The best treatment is oral medication to incorporate an 
antifungal  barrier  into  the  nail  plate  and  prevent  further 

269

270

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 infection spreading from the distal free edge of the nail plate to 
the  proximal  nail  plate.  Terbinafine  is  most  commonly  used 
for this purpose, but the mycotic nail plate must grow out for 
a normal nail plate to be present. This can take about three to 
six months or longer, depending on the percentage of the nail 
plate involved. Some patients may request a cosmetic solution 
to nail improvement while waiting for the oral antifungal to 
take  effect.  Sequential  nail  filing,  as  described  above  for  nail 
dystrophy, may be used to thin the nail plate, which can then 
be painted with nail polish to camouflage the infection. More 
deeply pigmented nail polishes, such as burgundy, brown, or 
black, provide the best camouflage. Alternatively, nail prosthe-
ses can be applied to the mycotic nail, a topic discussed later in 
this chapter under cosmetic issues. 

 Patients may also be bothered by the smell and appearance 
of the subungual debris beneath the mycotic nail. This debris 
can be more easily removed after soaking the foot and nail in 
water  with  a  triclosan-containing  surfactant.  Triclosan  is 
found in all deodorant liquid soaps, such as Dial hand soap, or 
in surgical scrubs, such as Septisol. Advise the patient to add a 
generous  amount  of  the  triclosan-containing  surfactant  to 
some warm water until it foams. Soak the foot every evening in 
the basin for 30 minutes using a nail file to gently remove any 
loosened nail debris. The odor is in part due to bacterial colo-
nization of the potential space between the nail plate and the 
nail bed. The triclosan will kill the bacteria thereby reducing 
odor. This is the same effect triclosan has in deodorant soaps 
to reduce axillary odor. Manual debridement is also important 
to  remove  the  keratin  food  source  for  organisms  growing 
beneath  the  nail  plate.  Finally,  clear  vinegar  can  be  dropped 
beneath  the  nail  plate  to  remove  any  remaining  water  and 
lower the pH beneath the nail to inhibit organism growth. The 
judicious use of this at-home self-administered pedicure can 
aid in the treatment of onychomycosis.   

   A 30-minute soak of mycotic toenails in the triclosan-
containing surfactant can reduce nail odor. 

  ingrown toenails 
 Ingrown toenails are another complex dermatologic problem 
with poor treatment options. One of the most important con-
siderations is to analyze why the ingrown toenail occurred and 
then take steps to prevent recurrence. Typically, the great toe-
nail ingrowth occurs due to trauma, ill-fitting shoes, improper 
nail grooming, or cutting the toenails too short. It is important 
to identify the cause of the ingrown nail to allowing healing to 
occur and prevent recurrence. I find that educating the patient 
on proper nail cutting is very helpful. Most people like to cut 
their toenails in a gentle arc with the longest part of the nail in 
the center of the toe, similar to the technique used for finger-
nail cutting. This grooming method causes trouble on the toe-
nails,  but  not  on  the  fingernails,  because  the  feet  are  forced 
into rigid shoes compressing the toenail against the skin. 

 The best way to cut the toenails when they frequently grow 
inward and cause pain, sometimes accompanied by infection, 
is to cut the sides of the nail longer than the center. This arc is 
opposite  to  the  arc  created  by  the  toe  pad. When  the  nail  is 
shorter  in  the  center,  and  pressure  is  applied  to  the  nail,  the 
corners of the nail move out, instead of moving in toward the 

skin. This alternation in nail mechanics prevents the nail from 
growing inward. It is also more difficult for the sides of the nail 
to grow inward when they are longer. 

 Once  the  nail  has  ingrown,  the  best  way  to  encourage  the 
nail to grow properly is to place a small ball of cotton under 
the nail that is entering the skin. The cotton will elevate the 
nail and allow it to grow beyond the surrounding edematous 
tissue. It is easiest for the dermatologist to insert the cotton in 
small amounts with a toothless Adson–Brown forcep, pushing 
as far under the nail as possible with minimal pain. If the cot-
ton becomes dislodged, it can be replaced by the patient, who 
can participate in the process in the office. 

 Once  the  nail  begins  to  grow  out,  the  cotton  ball  can  be 
replaced  with  Teflon  dental  tape.  The  dental  tape  is  placed 
beneath  the  nail  to  continue  to  lift  the  nail  above  the  sur-
rounding tissue to prevent a recurrence of the ingrown nail.   

   Ingrown toenails can be prevented by properly cutting the 
toenails longer at the edges than at the center. 

  cosmetic issues 
 The  use  of  nail  polish  in  camouflaging  toenail  issues  has 
already been covered in the preceding discussion, but the use 
of  toenail  prostheses  is  increasing  at  a  rapid  rate  ( Fig.  43.1 ). 
Since toenails come in sizes and shapes that are more varied 
than  fingernails,  custom-made  sculptured  nails  are  popular. 
The sculptured toenail is made in a fashion similar to sculp-
tured  fingernails  as  detailed  in   Table  43.1   ( 1 ).  I  recommend 
that my patients take their own toenail grooming instruments 
to the nail salon to prevent infection. Toenail instruments may 
be contaminated with fungi because persons with onychomy-
cosis frequently go to nail salons since they cannot cut their 
toenails by themselves. This increases the chance of contract-
ing onychomycosis.   

 The toenail sculptures must be groomed every three weeks, 
depending on the nail growth, or onycholysis may occur. The 
loosened polymer must be replaced by a new one to cover the 
proximal new nail. Allergic contact dermatitis may also occur 
in methacrylate-sensitive patients even though methyl meth-
acrylate is no longer used; isobutyl, ethyl, and tetrahydrofurfu-
ryl methacrylate are still strong sensitizers ( 2 , 3 ). But it should 
be emphasized that the polymerized, cured acrylic is not sensi-
tizing,  only  the  liquid  monomer  ( 4 ).  Therefore,  a  careful 

 Figure 43.1     An example of toenail prostheses.    

TOENAILS AND COSMETIC ISSUES

271

Table 43.1  Toenail Nail Sculpture Prostheses

1.   The nail is roughened with a coarse emery board, pumice 

stone, or grinding drill to create an optimal surface for sculpted 
nail adhesion

2.   An antifungal, antibacterial liquid, such as decolorized iodine, 
is applied to the entire nail plate to minimize onychomycosis 
and paronychia

3.   The loose edges of the cuticle are typically trimmed, removed, 
or pushed back depending on the operator. The patient with 
toenail disease should request that this step is not performed
4.   A flexible template is fit beneath the natural toenail plate upon 

which the elongated sculpted nail will be built

5.   The liquid methacrylate monomer is mixed with the powdered 
polymethyl methacrylate polymer in the presence of benzoyl 
peroxide as an accelerator to yield a formable polymer that is 
placed using a paintbrush to cover the entire natural nail plate. 
A clear acrylic is used over the natural nail plate attached to the 
nail bed so that the natural pink color shows through. A white 
acrylic is used from the nail plate’s free edge distally

6.   The final sculpture is sanded to a high shine
7.   An air brushed design or stencil may be placed over the toenail, 

depending on the client wishes

 operator who avoids skin contact with the uncured acrylic can 
avoid  sensitizing  the  patient.  Patch  testing  should  be  per-
formed in suspected sensitized individuals with methyl meth-
acrylate  monomer,  10%  in  olive  oil,  and  methacrylate  acid 
esters, 1% and 5% in olive oil and petrolatum ( 5 ).   

   Toenail prostheses may be used to camouflage unattractive 
toenails until new growth occurs. 

  summary 
 Toenails  are  both  functionally  and  cosmetically  important. 
Thickening, ridging, nail odor, and onycholysis are conditions 
that cannot be treated by traditional prescription medications. 
Cosmetic  solutions  are  all  that  can  be  recommended  until  a 
new  toenail  grows  to  replace  the  damaged  nail  plate.  Since 
patients want to be empowered to care for their own bodies, 
the dermatologist must recommend something or the patient 
will feel that the medical visit was incomplete. This chapter has 
presented some practical ideas for the treatment of common 
toenail maladies.   

   references 
   1.       Barnett     JM   ,    Scher     RK   ,    Taylor     SC    .   Nail cosmetics  .   Dermatol Clin     1991  ;   9  : 

  9  –  17  .   

   2.       Marks     JG   ,    Bishop     ME   ,    Willis     WF    .   Allergic contact dermatitis to sculptured 

nails  .   Arch Dermatol     1979  ;   115  :   100  .   

   3.       Fisher      AA    .    Cross  reactions  between  methyl  methacrylate  monomer  and 
acrylic  monomers  presently  used  in  acrylic  nail  preparations  .    Contact 
 Dermatitis     1980  ;   6  :   345  –  7  .   

   4.       Fisher     AA   ,    Franks     A   ,    Glick     H    .   Allergic sensitization of the skin and nails to 

acrylic plastic nails  .   J Allergy     1957  ;   28  :   84  .   

   5.       Baran      R   ,     Dawber      RPR    .    The  nail  and  cosmetics  .    In  :      Samman      PD   ,     Fenton   
  DA    ,    eds  .    The  nails  in  disease  .    4th  edn  .    Chicago  :    Yearbook  Publishers  ,   
1986  :   129  .       

              Summary       

 Cosmetics and skin care products can be used as adjuvants to 
traditional dermatologic care. Healthy skin is characterized by 
an intact skin barrier, which must be maintained after disease 
resolution. Moisturizers and cleansers can improve therapeu-
tic  outcomes  in  a  wide  range  of  dermatoses  from  eczema  to 
atopic dermatitis to psoriasis to seborrheic dermatitis to acne. 
Further, the skin is impacted by the use of ancillary cosmetic 
treatments  of  the  nails  and  hair.  It  is  impossible  to  treat  the 
entire dermatologic patient without understanding the basic 
care  issues  created  by  the  use  of  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
 products.  This  book  has  provided  the  basic  information 
needed to create a dermatologic armamentarium that expands 
traditional therapeutic considerations. 

 Skin, hair, and nail care information can only be incorpo-
rated into a patient’s office visit by creating an organized for-
mat for their inclusion. The final topic I would like to address 
in this closing summary is an outline of how I approach my 
patients requiring assistance in this realm. 

 It is always important to be objective when making product 
recommendations.  Do  not  only  consider  products  that  are 
sold  in  the  office.  There  are  excellent  formulations  sold 
through  dermatologists,  mass  merchandisers,  spa  facilities, 
and boutique outlets. All must be considered and familiarity 
can only be obtained through personal experience. The wider 
the  knowledge  base  of  the  dermatologist,  the  more  valuable 
becomes the recommendation. 

  understand the purchasing habits of your 
patient 
 The  first  step  in  making  skin  care  recommendations  is  to 
determine the patient preferred purchase point, which directly 
determines  the  cost.  Skin  care  manufacturers  intentionally 
produce  products  to  reach  consumers  through  a  variety  of 
markets. Some skin care products are sold exclusively in mass 
merchandisers,  such  as  grocery  stores,  drug  stores,  and  dis-
count  stores.  Skin  care  products  sold  through  these  vendors 
generally  range  in  price  from  $2  to  $15,  although  recently 
some  companies  are  pushing  the  envelope  marketing  high 
price point products in the $30 range. Other skin care prod-
ucts are sold exclusively through cosmetic counters in depart-
ment  stores.  Even  within  the  department  store  market  there 
are products designed for lower-price point department stores 
and  for  higher-price  point  department  stores.  Lower-price 
point department stores market cosmetics sell for $10 to $50 
as compared to higher price point department store cosmetics 
that sell for $40 to $200. The most expensive skin care prod-
ucts  are  sold  through  boutiques,  spas,  and  medical  offices. 
These products range from $50 to $400 and possibly higher. 
The  envelope  on  expensive  cosmetics  is  expanding  upward 
and newer pricier technologies are reaching the marketplace. 
Interestingly  enough,  some  of  these  exclusive  products  are 
manufactured  by  the  same  companies  that  produce  items 

272

under  a  different  label  for  sale  in  mass  merchandisers. 
 Generally, boutique products have more attractive, elaborate 
packaging  accompanied  by  a  greater  color  selection,  more 
expensive  fragrances,  and  innovative  specialty  additives. 
Remember 
that  excellent  products  can  be  purchased 
 inexpensively! 

 Another popular route for product purchase is at household 
parties and individuals who sell door-to-door in their neigh-
borhood. Some of these products are sold through distributors 
who do not maintain product stock personally, but rather turn 
their orders into a central distribution center that fulfills and 
mails the orders. Another model for personal sales requires the 
salesperson  to  maintain  their  own  stock  and  deliver  orders 
personally. This difference is important because the indepen-
dent  salespersons  may  not  take  care  to  maintain  fresh  stock 
and  may  not  store  the  products  under  optimal  conditions. 
These products generally are in the $4 to $100 range. 

 Lastly, private label skin care products can be manufactured 
on  a  contract  basis,  generally  through  small  manufacturers. 
Products  can  be  customized  to  the  needs  of  the  business  or 
simply  a  standard  formulation  with  a  customized  label.  The 
price variation in this market is tremendous. It is worthwhile 
noting that skin care products that are both sold and manufac-
tured in the same state do not need to follow any Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) monographs that may apply. All 
products manufactured and sold between states fall under the 
FDA  jurisdiction,  keeping  in  mind  that  cosmetics  and  skin 
care products are unregulated. Products under FDA regulation 
are  the  OTC  drugs  including  sunscreens,  antiperspirants, 
 sunscreen-containing moisturizers, acne treatments, and any 
product that lists an active ingredient. It is important to care-
fully evaluate these products because smaller cosmetic manu-
facturers  do  not  have  the  capital  or  facilities  to  undertake 
product testing.  

  identify the patient’s unique skin needs 
 The second step is to understand the specific skin needs of the 
patient. Begin by determining the patient’s skin type: very oily, 
oily, combination, normal, dry, very dry, etc. Skin care prod-
ucts  must  be  carefully  chosen  with  the  skin  type  in  mind. 
Interestingly,  many  patients  do  not  know  their  skin  type  or 
have been erroneously assigned a skin type by a salesperson at 
a cosmetic counter or after reading a book. It is quite straight-
forward  to  determine  the  skin  type  of  a  patient  based  on 
sebum production. The skin type can be most easily assigned 
by asking the patient about the amount of sebum production 
on her and his nose at various time points throughout the day 
following morning washing. 

 Sebum production can be assessed by having the patient run 
her and his finger down the nose several hours following wash-
ing. If the patient has flaking skin on the nose all day and no 
sebum  from  morning  until  5  PM,  they  have  very  dry  skin. 

SUMMARY

If  the  patient  has  no  flaking  and  no  sebum  on  their  nose  at 
5 PM, they have dry skin. If the patient has minimal sebum on 
the  nose  at  5  PM,  they  have  normal  skin.  If  the  patient  has 
sebum on the nose at noon, they have oily skin. Finally, if the 
patient has sebum on the nose one hour following morning 
washing, they have very oily skin. 

 The  most  common  skin  type  found  in  mature  men  and 
women is combination skin. This is understandable given the 
large sebaceous glands on the central forehead, nose, medial 
cheeks, and central chin. Combination skin can be assessed by 
comparing the amount of sebum present on the nose at 5 PM 
with the amount present on the cheeks. If there is more sebum 
present on the nose than on the cheeks, the patient has combi-
nation skin. Combination skin can be more challenging, since 
there  are  differing  needs  for  different  facial  areas.  It  may  be 
necessary  to  use  a  different  cleanser  and  moisturizer  on  the 
central face and another formulation on the lateral face. Thus, 
the  skin  could  be  classified  as  dry  on  the  lateral  face,  if  no 
sebum is present at 5 PM, and oily on the nose, if sebum prod-
uct  is  present  at  noon.  Any  combination  of  the  skin  types 
 identified above can be present. 

 This is a simplistic, but accurate and effective approach to 
identifying skin type, but there are many other labels on skin 
care products besides the designation dry, normal, and oily. In 
fact, there is a current move away from classifying products by 
skin  type  and  moving  toward  a  problem-oriented  approach. 
For example, products for oily skin may be labeled as appro-
priate  for “acne-prone”  skin.  Further,  products  for  dry  skin 
may be labeled as developed for “sensitive” skin. This can cre-
ate confusion in the mind of the patient as to which products 
to  choose.  Thus,  dermatologist  education  is  important  to 
 provide accurate patient recommendations.  

  take a product use history 
 Once the patient purchasing habits and skin needs have been 
identified,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a  product  use  history.  This 
means  asking  what  products  the  patient  is  currently  using 
including facial cleansers, facial moisturizers, body cleansers, 
and  body  moisturizers.  In  addition,  cosmeceuticals  and  skin 
treatment products (exfoliants, astringents, antiaging serums, 
home use devices, shaving products, etc.) should also be dis-
cussed. Many times the patient has concocted a skin care regi-
men  based  on  visits  to  three  dermatologists,  six  cosmetic 
counters,  and  four  day  spas.  This  leads  to  skin  care  product 
overload. The problems that the patient is experiencing may 
be due to skin barrier damage from an overzealous approach 
to  skin  care.  The  dermatologist’s  first  goal  is  to  examine  the 
products and arrive at a logical, beneficial skin care regimen. 

 In any skin care regimen, there are certain common factors 
such  as  cleanser,  moisturizer,  and  sunscreen.  These  products 
do not need to be duplicated. Examine the patient’s regimen 
eliminating duplications in product use. Look at the ingredi-
ents in each product and select the one that you believe will 
provide the most benefit with the least problems. For example, 
a glycolic acid cleanser can cause barrier damage when used in 
combination with an exfoliant, while the benefits of brief skin 
contact with the glycolic acid cleanser are minimal. The gly-
colic  acid  cleanser  should  be  eliminated  in  favor  of  a  bland 
moisturizer that will prevent the development of self-induced 
sensitive skin. Similarly, the sunscreen can also be evaluated. 

273

Select the sunscreen that offers the highest sun protection fac-
tor (SPF). While SPF is an indicator of UVB photoprotection, 
the sunscreens with an SPF of 30+ cannot achieve this SPF rat-
ing  without  some  UVA  photoprotection.  Until  the  new  sun-
screen monograph is released with a UVA rating system, SPF 
can  be  used  indirectly  to  assess  UVA  photoprotection.  Since 
UVA  radiation  is  most  important  in  protection  against  skin 
cancer  and  premature  photoaging,  this  is  a  valuable  patient 
service. 

 Do not forget to ask patients about their use of devices to 
include  hand-held  microdermabraders,  rotary  or  sonicating 
skin  brushes,  red  light  devices,  blue  light  acne  treatment 
devices, home lasers, and hand-held hair removal devices. You 
may discover some interesting combinations that could be cre-
ating  skin  disease  or  creating  problems  with  your  medical 
therapy.  Exfoliation  is  the  quickest  way  to  make  the  skin 
smoother and induce a small amount of edema, minimizing 
fine lines on the face. Problems arise when patients adopt an 
aggressive attitude and damage the skin barrier. Several years 
ago we did a study where computer chips were placed in a face 
brush to measure the amount of time research subjects used 
the device for cleansing. Detailed instructions and a demon-
stration were provided indicating the brush was to be used for 
5 minutes twice daily for 2 weeks. As might be expected, some 
brushes  were  returned  with  only  10 minutes  total  use  while 
others recorded 8 hours of use. Be sure to ask the subject how 
long they are using the device and for how much time. 

 Perhaps  the  hardest  area  to  evaluate  is  moisturizer  use.  If 
one really used all of the “beneficial” ingredients in the cosme-
ceutical  marketplace,  it  would  take  8 hours  to  complete  the 
applications.  I  think  it  is  very  hard  to  counsel  patients  as  to 
which  moisturizer  is  the  best.  Of  course,  a  sunscreen- 
containing moisturizer should be used in the morning and a 
moisturizer without sunscreen should be applied in the eve-
ning. Other than that, there are very few absolute recommen-
dations.   Nevertheless,  patients  are  looking  for  instructions 
that are more detailed. This is difficult given the rapid change 
in the cosmeceutical marketplace. 

 I believe that best approach is to look for ingredients in the 
moisturizer  that  maintain  skin  barrier  hydration  by  creating 
an optimal environment for barrier repair. These ingredients 
include petrolatum, dimethicone, and glycerin. They represent 
the  workhorse  moisturizing  ingredients  in  any  formulation. 
Petrolatum is the premier ingredient for reducing transepider-
mal  water  loss,  which  becomes  more  aesthetically  pleasing 
when mixed with dimethicone to reduce stickiness. Glycerin, 
as a humectant, helps the water-holding capacity of the skin. 
However, these are not new or uncommon ingredients. There 
is  nothing  much  novel  that  can  be  said  about  this  type  of  a 
moisturizer  from  a  marketing  standpoint.  This  explains  the 
need to find unusual substances to add to a basic formulation 
to  provide  a  distinguishing  characteristic  in  a  crowded  mar-
ketplace. It is hoped that this book has clarified some of these 
issues.  

  evaluate skin care needs in light of the 
presence of dermatologic disease 
 Most patients who seek dermatologic care have skin disease of 
one sort or another accompanied by the inevitable photoag-
ing.  Skin  care  products  can  be  used  to  supplement  the 

274

COSMETICS AND DERMATOLOGICAL PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

 prescription treatment of most skin disorders. If proper skin 
care  products  are  not  used,  disease  recurrence  and  a  short 
remission time are certain. The dermatologist who strives for 
excellence  in  patient  care  not  only  tries  to  treat  the  disease, 
but goes beyond to consider the prevention aspects of treat-
ment. If a patient has seborrheic dermatitis, a shampoo that 
reduces scalp sebum and possesses antifungal properties, such 
as those formulations containing zinc pyrithione in a strong 
surfactant base, should be advised once the dermatitis com-
ponent has resolved. If the patient has psoriasis, an excellent 
moisturizer should be recommended to prevent barrier dam-
age  and  initiate  new  psoriatic  plaques  due  to  the  Koebner 
phenomenon.  It  is  this  type  of  thinking  that  combines  the 
prescription  realm  with  the  OTC  realm  to  yield  superior 
 therapeutic results.  

  develop an algorithmic approach to skin 
care for the patient 
 In  order  to  easily  combine  prescription  and  OTC  products 
into one treatment plan, it is necessary to develop an algorith-
mic approach. An algorithmic approach means that a mental 
checklist has already been imprinted on the brain that can eas-
ily be recalled when a patient presents. Each of the chapters in 
this book has been aimed at providing the material for devel-
oping  these  personal  algorithms.  Formulations  and  their 
effects on the skin, hair, and nails have been discussed. Review 

of these previously read chapters with this idea in mind may 
help you personalize your algorithms.  

  update personal and patient database, 
as needed 
 Now that you have obtained an understanding of the patient’s 
product  use  and  formulated  your  recommendation,  make  a 
record in the chart. Just like the necessity of documenting the 
past medical history and the review of systems findings, you 
must also document your skin care profile. Update this infor-
mation with each patient encounter. This will allow the most 
thorough integration of skin, hair, and nail care products into 
your dermatologic armamentarium. 

 This  text  has  attempted  to  take  a  serious  look  at  the 
 integration of skin care products, cosmetics, hair adornments, 
and nail cosmetics in the practice of dermatology, thus expand-
ing the realm of disease treatment beyond the diagnosis and 
treatment  into  the  maintenance  phase  of  healthy  skin,  hair, 
and nails. The impact of OTC products on the structures of 
the external body cannot be ignored. Major developments are 
taking place at an accelerating pace in this area requiring vigi-
lance on the part of the dermatologist to remain up-to-date. It 
is my hope that you have enjoyed reading this book and will 
use  it  as  a  foundation  for  future  learning.  Perhaps  you  can 
sense my enthusiasm and will no longer look at this area with 
bewilderment, but will accept the challenge!     

Index

Abnormal lip shape, 74
Abrasives, 215
Abrasive scrubs, 14, 117–118
Acid permanents, 188
Acne cosmetica, 8
Acnegenicity, 9
Acne patients

cosmetic therapies, 4–5
eyelash cosmetics, 86
eyelid cosmetics, 80
facial cosmetics, 98–99
lip cosmetics, 73
OTC drug acne therapies, 3–4
skin care formulations

acnegenicity, 9
comedogenicity, 8–9

skin care products
astringents, 6
cleansers, 6
epidermabrasion, 7–8
exfoliants, 7
face mask, 8
mechanized skin care devices, 8
textured clothes, 7–8

Acne scrub creams, 6
Additives

biologic, 107–108
cleansers, 116–117
color, 105–107
herbal, 108–109
specialty, 160
vitamin, 109
Adverse reactions

antiperspirants, 135
body moisturizers, 128
electrolysis, 218–219
facial moisturizers, 24
hair coloring, 207–208
hair conditioners, 167
male skin care, 57

African American hair, 190
Aftershave products, 211
Aging and hormones, 35–36
Aging hair

and chemical processing, 239–240
conditioners, 240
hair styles, 240–241
heat exposure, 239
shampoos, 240
styling products, 240

Aging skin, 34–35
Aldehydes, 133
Aleosin, 54
Alkaline permanents, 186
Allantoin, 16
Allergic contact dermatitis, 30, 259
Aloe vera, 15–16
Alopecia, 232

Alpha lipoic acid, 54
Amniotic fluid, 108
Amphoteric detergents, 160
Anionic detergents, 158
Anthranilates, 63
Antiadrenergic drugs, 133
Anticholinergic drugs, 133
Antiperspirants

adverse reactions, 135
vs. deodorants, 132
efficacy, 134–135
formulation, 134
maximizing efficacy, 135
mechanism of action, 132–134
perspiration control requirements, 135

Apoptosis, 60
Arbutin, 54
Artificial eyebrows, 88
Artificial eyelashes, 85
Artificial hair pieces, 177
Ascorbic acid, 54
Astaxanthin, 38
Astringent emollients, 21
Astringents, 6
Atopic dermatitis, 27
Avobenzone, 62–63
Axillary odor, 132

Baby shampoos, 161
Back combing, 229
Barrier creams. See Prescription body 

moisturizer

Basic shampoos, 161
Benzophenones, 62
Benzoyl peroxide, 3–4
Biologic additives

amniotic fluid, 108
blood derivatives, 108
collagen, 107
egg extract, 108
elastin, 107
hyaluronic acid, 107
keratin, 107
placenta, 107–108
Blend hair removal, 218
Blood derivatives, 108
Blow dryers, 173
Blushes, 93
Body camouflaging, 50
Body lotions, 125
Body moisturizer

adverse reactions, 128
efficacy, 127–128
formulations, 125
ingredients

dimethicone, 122
glycerin, 122
petrolatum, 121–122

prescription, 125
specialty moisturizing ingredients

ceramides, 122–123
essential fatty acids, 123
lactic acid, 124
natural moisturizing factor, 124
sodium PCA, 124
urea, 124
vitamins, 123–124
Body photoprotection, 141
Body scrubs, 117–118
Body skin barrier

and anti-inflammatory agents, 126–127
and ceramide replacement, 125–126
and fatty acids, 126
formation, 121
and lipid trilayers, 126
and natural hyaluronic acid 
humectancy, 126

Body sunscreens

sunburn protection factor, 141–142
water resistance, 142–143
water-resistant sunscreen 
failure, 143–144
water-resistant sunscreen 
formulations, 143

Body washes, 118–119
Brittle nails

and diet, 262–263
physiology, 262
prevention, 262
strengthening, 262
Bronzing powders, 98
Buffered alkaline permanents, 186

Cake mascara, 83
Camellia sinensis. See Green tea
Camouflaging
body, 50
cosmetics, 47–50
eye cosmetics, 80–82
of facial defects, 47
female pattern hair loss, 229–230
male pattern hair loss, 230
scalp, 182
Carotenoids

astaxanthin, 38
lutein, 38
lycopene, 38

Castor oil, 72
Cationic detergents, 159
Cellulite

chronic inflammation, 152
diet effects, 150
excess adipose tissue, 150
genetically determined fat
deposition, 150
oral supplement, 153

275

276

Cellulite (Continued )

treatments

massage, 153
OTC devices, 152
topical herbals, 152
wraps, 152

vascular insufficiency, 150

Ceramides, 122–123
Chemical depilatories, 216
Chemical hair straightening, 192
Chemical neutralization, 188
Cinnamates, 63
Cleanser

in acne patients, 6
additives, 116–117
combars, 116
irritancy assessment, 117
lipid-free low-foaming, 117
soaps, 115–116
syndets, 116

Cleansing cream, 14
Cleansing devices, 14
Cleansing implements, 14
Clear rinses, 165–166
Closed weave cloths, 7, 14
Cold cream, 14
Cold waxing, 215
Collagen, 107
Color additives, 105–107
Color cosmetics, 43

blushes, 93
eye cosmetics, 93
facial foundation, 91
lip cosmetics, 93
powders, 92
undercover foundations, 91–92

Coloring agents, 68
Combars, 13, 116
Comedogenicity, 8–9
Comedogenic substances, 9
Compliance, sunscreen, 144–146
Conditioners. See Hair conditioners
Conditioning shampoos, 161
Contact dermatitis

allergic, 30
contact urticaria, 30
irritant, 29
phototoxic and photoallergic dermatitis, 

30–31

Contact lens wearers, 85–86
Contact urticaria, 30
Corneometry

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 24

Cosmeceuticals, 15
carotenoids

astaxanthin, 38
lutein, 38
lycopene, 38

development of, 36–37
flavonoids

curcumin, 38
pycnogenol, 40
silymarin, 39
hydroxy acids, 42

INDEX

polyphenols, 40–41
retinoids, 41–42

Cosmetic acne therapies
hydroxy acids, 4–5
miscellaneous acne ingredients, 5
OTC retinoids, 5
tea tree oil, 5
triclosan, 5

Cosmetic facial sculpting, 100
Cosmetics

color chart, 96
preservatives usage, 104
removal of, 93
selection, recommendations, 101
and wound healing, 91

Cream mascara, 83
Cream rinses, 166
Crepe hair, 182
Crimping iron, 174
Cumulative irritancy test, 31–32
Curcumin, 38
Curling iron, 173–174
Custom nail prostheses, 256–257
Cutaneous stinging, 32
Cuticle nail problems, 259

Damaged hair

conditioner selection, 245–246
cosmetic techniques, 230–231
deep conditioners, 246
hair comb selection, 242
hair drying, 242–244
hair grooming, 242
hair manipulation, 242
hair styling, 242
hair trimming, 247
scalp scratching, 244–245
shampoos, 161, 245

Damaged nails, 266
Dandruff shampoos. See Medicated shampoos
Day-time moisturizers, 22
Deep conditioners, 166, 246
Defects of contour, 47
Deficiency in tightness (DIT), 185
Demilashes, 85
Deodorants, 132
Depilatories, 216–217
Dihydroxyacetone (DHA), 148–149
Dimethicone, 21, 122
Draize test, 31
Dry emollients, 21
Dry hair shampoos, 161
Dry postmenopausal scalp, 162
Dry shaving, 213
Dry skin

facial cleansers, 13
facial moisturizers, 22–23

Earth-based facial mask, 8, 44
Eczema, 27
Egg extract, 108
Elastin, 107
Electric curlers, 174
Electric hair styling devices

crimping iron, 174

curling iron, 173–174
electric curlers, 174
hair dryer, 173

Electrolysis

adverse reactions, 218–219
hair removal technique, 217–218
Electromagnetic spectrum. See Solar 

radiation

Emollience, 21
Emotional stress, 226
Epilating hair removal, 214–215
Ethnic cosmetics, 54–55
Evaporimetry

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 24

Exfoliants, 7, 44
Exothermic permanents, 186, 188
Eyebrow cosmetics

artificial eyebrows, 88
corrective, 88–89
Eyebrow dyes, 87–88
Eyebrow pencil, 87
Eyebrow sealers, 87
Eyebrow tattooing, 88
Eye cosmetics, 93
Eye irritancy test, 32
Eyelash cosmetics

cake mascara, 83
corrective, 86–87
cream mascara, 83
liquid mascara, 83–84
for mature patients, 86
for oily-complected patients, 86
safety issues, 84
for sensitive patients, 85–86

Eyelash dyes, 85
Eyelid-approved pigments, 77
Eyelid cosmetics

for acne patients, 80
camouflage techniques, 80–82
contact dermatitis, 79
for mature patients, 80
removers, 79
for sensitive skin patients, 80

Eyelid skin, 76–77
Eyeliner

definition, 84–85
tattooing, 85

Eye shadows

anhydrous, 78
pressed powder, 71
setting creams, 79

Face cloths, 7
Face mask, 8, 43–44
Facial adornment, 95
Facial blushes, 95–96
Facial bronzing gels, 97
Facial buffers, 97
Facial camouflage cosmetics, 16
Facial cleansers

cleansing devices, 14
cleansing implements, 14
cosmetic removal, 13–14
dry and/or sensitive skin, 13

INDEX

normal and oily skin, 13
problematic cleansers, 14

Facial cosmeceuticals

allantoin, 16
aloe vera, 15–16
ginkgo biloba, 15
green tea, 15
licochacone A, 16

Facial cosmetics

acne patients, 98–99
children, 99
corrective, 99–101
mature patients, 99
Facial cover sticks, 97–98
Facial defects, camouflaging, 47
Facial highlighters, 97
Facial moisturizers

adverse reactions, 24
dry skin, 22–23
efficacy evaluation, 23–24
in rosacea patients, 14–15

Facial powders, 92–93, 95
Facial scar recontouring, 47
Facial scrubs, 6
Facial sting test, 12
Facial undercover creams, 98
Fattening emollients, 21
Fatty acids

and body skin barrier, 126
specialty body moisturizing
ingredients, 123

FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic

Act, 77, 82, 87

Female moisturizers, 59
Fiber cloths, 7
Fiber weaves, 7, 14
Film-forming conditioning agents, 165
Finger sucking, 268
Flavonoids

curcumin, 38
pycnogenol, 40
silymarin, 39
Foaming agents, 160
Follicular biopsy, 8
Follicular disruption, 215
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 36, 

68, 125, 132, 250, 272

Fragrance

classification, 138
formulation, 137–138
materials, 138
and perfume, 137
and vasomotor rhinitis, 139

Fragrance-induced dermatitis, 138–139
French manicure camouflage, 252
Full coverage powders, 95

Galvanic electrolysis, 217–218
Gelatinase B, 152
Gender differences

skin biochemistry, 114
skin functionality, 114
skin structure, 114

Ginkgo biloba, 15

277

Gluing, 180
Glycerin, 20, 122, 131
Glycerol monothioglycolate, 188
Glycolic acid, 4–5, 42
Gradual hair dyes, 198–199
Green moisturizers, 16
Green tea, 15
Grooming practices, 234–235

psoriasis, 237
seborrheic dermatitis, 234–235
Gross hair shaft evaluation, 226–228

Habit tic deformity, 265
Hair additions
care of, 180
description of, 176, 178
female pattern hair loss, 230

Hair appliances, 229
Hair attachment methods

bonding, 179–180
braiding off scalp, 179
braiding on scalp, 179
gluing, 180

Hair bleaching, 204–206, 219
Hair breakage, 196
Hair care products, 222–223
Hair cleansing, 228
Hair coloring

adverse reactions, 207–208
physiology, 198
Hair combing, 228
Hair comb selection, 242
Hair conditioners, 160

adverse reactions, 167
aging hair, 240
formulation

film-forming conditioning agents, 165
protein conditioning agents, 165
quaternary conditioning agents, 

164–165

mechanism of action, 164
types

deep conditioners, 166
instant conditioners, 165
leave-in conditioners, 166–167
rinses, 165–166

Hair conditioning, 228
Hair dryer, 173
Hair drying, 228, 242–244
Hair dyes

gradual, 198–199
one- and two-step dyeing processing, 204
permanent, 202–204
removal, 206–207
semipermanent, 201–202
temporary, 199–201
Hair follicle depth, 217
Hair frizziness, 227
Hair gel, 170–171
Hair integration systems, 180, 182
Hair length, 227–228
Hair loss

cosmetic techniques, 228–229
external causes, 226–228
external vs. internal causation, 225

female pattern, 229–230
internal causes, 225–226
male pattern, 230

Hair mousse, 171
Hair permanent waving

adverse reactions, 188–189
alterations, 186
application technique, 183–184
effectiveness, 185–186
guidelines, 186
influencing factors, 184
lotion ingredients, 188
process, 184
types, 186–188

Hair perming, 195–196
Hair photoaging, 221
Hair photoprotection
conditioners, 223
intrinsic, 222
topical, 221–222
Hair pieces, 176, 230
Hair relaxer, 192
Hair removal methods

abrasives, 215
blend, 218
depilatories, 216–217
dry shaving, 213
electrolysis, 217–218
epilating, 214–215
hair-removing gloves, 215
needle insertion, 218
plucking, 213–214
thermolysis, 218
threading, 215–216
waxing, 215

Hair-removing gloves, 215
Hair serums, 171–172
Hair shaft diameter, 217
Hair shine, 227
Hair softness, 227
Hair sprays, 169–170
Hair stain, 201
Hair straightening

application technique, 192, 194–195
characteristics, 190
chemical process, 190–192
patient issues, 196
permanent, 191
perming applications, 195–196

Hair styling

female pattern hair loss, 229–230
with prostheses, 176–182

Hair styling aids, 170
Hair styling devices
electric, 172–174
nonelectric, 172

Hair styling products, 230

hair gel, 170–171
hair mousse, 171
hair serums, 171–172
hair sprays, 169–170

Hair trimming, 247
Hand creams, 131
Hand dermatoses, 130
Hand hygiene, 130

278

Hand moisturizer, 131
Hand skin care, 130–131
Healthy hair, 239
Herbal additives, 108–109
Home permanents, 188
Humectants, 20–21
Hyaluronic acid, 107
Hydrocolloid mask, 43–44
Hydrophilic matrices, 21
Hydrophilic moisturizers, 21
Hydroquinone, 53–54
Hydroxy acids, 4–5, 42
2-Hydroxybenzoic acid. See Salicylic acid
5-Hydroxymethyl-4H-pyrane-4-one. 

See Kojic acid

Ingrown fingernails, 259–260
Ingrown toenails, 270
Inorganic sunscreen filters, 64
Instant conditioners, 165, 234
Intercellular lipid composition, 2
Intrinsic hair photoprotection, 222
Invisible sensitive skin, 28
In vivo image analysis

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 24

Irritant contact dermatitis, 29

Kathon-CG, 104
Keratin, 107
Kinky hair permanent waving 
technique, 195

Kojic acid, 54

Lactic acid, 124
Laser hair removal, 219
Lash singlets, 85
Leave-in conditioners, 166–167
Licochacone A, 16
Licorice extracts, 54
Light-colored eyelashes, 85
Lip balms, 70
Lip cosmetics. See also Lipstick

for acne patients, 73
and allergic contact dermatitis, 72
color selection, 93
corrective, 74
for mature patients, 73

Lip gloss, 71
Lipid-free cleansers, 13
Lipid-free low-foaming cleanser, 117
Lipid trilayers, 126
Lip liners, 72
Liposomes, 109–110
Lip sealants, 70
Lipstick

castor oil, 72
formulation, 68
long wearing, 68, 70
opaque, 72
polymer film, 71
tooth whitening, 72
Lip tattoo granulomas, 73
Lip tattooing, 72–73

Liquid mascara

solvent-based mascara, 83–84
water-based mascara, 83
water/solvent hybrid mascaras, 84

Long wearing lipstick, 68, 70
Lutein, 38
Lycopene, 38
Lye-based hair straighteners, 190
Lye relaxers, 190

Male skin care

adverse reactions, 57
hair removal, 58
hormonal considerations, 57–58
male vs. female skin, 57
moisturizers, 58–59
photoprotection, 59
pigmentation issues, 58

Mascaras
cake, 83
cream, 83
liquid, 83–84

Matte finish powders, 93
Mature skin

color cosmetics, 43
exfoliants, 44
face masks, 43–44

Mechanized skin care devices, 8
Median canal dystrophy, 265
Medical hair conditions, 231–232
Medicated shampoos, 161
Melaleuca alternifolia. See Tea tree oil
Melanin, 52
Melanocortin-1-receptor (MC1R), 52
Melanogenesis, 52
Menthyl anthranilate, 63
Meradimate, 63
Metallic hair dyes, 198
Microdermabrasion, 8
Moisturinses, 119
Moisturization mechanism

humectants, 20–21
hydrophilic matrices, 21
occlusives, 20
sunscreen, 21

Moisturizing cleansing cloths, 14
Mud packs. See Earth-based facial mask
Multiblade razors, 209
Mycotic nails, 265

Nail bleach, 252–253
Nail deformity, 265
Nail discoloration, 249–253
Nail dystrophy, 265–266
Nail enamel. See Nail polish
Nail fungus, 269–270
Nail lacquers, 250
Nail moisturization, 263–264
Nail moisturizers, 254
Nail peeling, 255
Nail polish, 249–251

application technique, 251
camouflaging technique, 251–252
ingredients, 251
staining, 252

INDEX

Nail ridging, 253
Nail sculptures, 257
Nail splitting, 253–255
Nail trimming, 268
Nanoparticle sunscreens, 64–65
Natural hair, 239
Natural hyaluronic acid humectancy, 126
Natural moisturizing factor (NMF), 124
Natural protective mechanism, 141
Natural surfactants, 160
Needle insertion, 218
Neutralization, 183
Neutralizers, 188
Niacinamide, 124
Night creams, 22
Niosomes, 109–110
No-lye chemical relaxers, 192
No-lye cream relaxer, 192
No lye relaxers, 191
Nonelectric hair styling devices, 172
Nonionic detergents, 159
Normal hair shampoos, 161
Normal skin

facial cleansers, 13
facial moisturizers, 22

Occlusives, 20
Oily complexion moisturizers, 22
Oily hair shampoos, 161
Oily skin, 13
One-step hair dyeing technique, 204
Onycholysis

custom nail prostheses, 256–257
photo-induced, 257
preformed nail prostheses, 256

Onychoschizia. See Nail peeling
Opaque lipsticks, 72
Open weave cloths, 7, 14
OTC drug acne therapies
benzoyl peroxide, 3–4
salicylic acid, 4
sulfur, 4

OTC retinoids, 5, 41
Over the counter (OTC) formulations, 3
Oxybenzone, 62
Oxymelanin, 221

PABA derivatives, 63
Palmitamide monoethanolamine 

(PEA), 126

Parabens, 105
Paraphenylenediamine (PPD), 207
Paste mask. See Earth-based facial mask
Patch testing method, 31
Pencil type eyeliners, 84
Perfume

allergic potential, 139
and fragrance, 137
irritant potential, 139

Perleche, 73
Permanent eyeliner, 85
Permanent hair coloring, 229
Permanent hair dyes, 202–204
Permanent hair straightening, 191

INDEX

279

Permanent waving. See Hair permanent 

facial cosmeceuticals

Shaving

waving
Petrolatum, 20, 121–122
Photoallergens, 31
Photoallergic dermatitis, 30–31
Photopatch testing, 32
Phototoxic dermatitis, 30–31
Physical stress, 226
Pigmentation defects, 47
Pinus pinaster. See Pycnogenol
Placenta, 107–108
Plant additives, 108
Plucking hair removal, 213–214
Polymer film lipsticks, 71
Polyphenols, 40–41
Pomegranate, 40–41
PPD. See Paraphenylenediamine
Preformed nail prostheses, 256
Prescription body moisturizer, 125
Prescription retinoids, 41
Prescription tretinoin, 41
Preservatives, 103–105
Preshave products, 210
Problematic cleansers, 14
Professional shampoos, 162
Profilometry

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 23
Propionibacterium acnes, 3
Protective emollients, 21
Protein conditioning agents, 165
Psoriasis

conditioners, 237
grooming practices, 237
OTC treatments, 237–238
shampoos, 236–237

Psoriatic nails, 265
Punica granatum. See Pomegranate
Pycnogenol, 40

Quaternary conditioning agents, 164–165

Razors

care, 209–210
female, 212
male, 212
multiblade, 209
selection, 209
Regression analysis

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 23

Repeat insult patch testing, 31
Resonance delocalization, 61
Retinoids, 41–42
Rinses, 165–166
Rosacea patients

facial camouflage cosmetics, 16
facial cleansers

cleansing devices, 14
cleansing implements, 14
cosmetic removal, 13–14
dry and/or sensitive skin, 13
normal skin, 13
oily skin, 13
problematic cleansers, 14

allantoin, 16
aloe vera, 15–16
ginkgo biloba, 15
green tea, 15
licochacone A, 16

facial moisturizers, 14–15
skin care, 16
testing of facial products, 12
troubleshooting facial cosmetics, 16
visible sensitive facial skin, 27–28

Rotating shampoos, 236
Rouges. See Facial blushes
Rubber-based mask, 43

Salicylates, 63
Salicylic acid, 4
Scalp camouflaging, 182
Scalp psoriasis, 163
Seborrheic dermatitis, 162–163

conditioners, 234
grooming practices, 234–235
OTC treatments, 235
shampoo selection, 233–234
signs and symptoms, 233

Self-neutralization, 188
Self-regulated permanents, 188
Semipermanent hair dyes

stain, 201
textile dyes, 201
vegetable dyes, 201–202

Sensitive facial skin

eyelid cosmetics, 80
invisible, 28
product guidelines, 28–29
rosacea patients, 13
visible, 27–28

Sensitivity testing methods

cumulative irritancy test, 31–32
cutaneous stinging, 32
Draize test, 31
eye irritancy test, 32
photopatch testing, 32
repeat insult patch testing, 31

Sequestering agents, 160
Shampoos

aging hair, 240
baby, 161
basic, 161
conditioners, 160
conditioning, 161
and contact dermatitis, 163
detergents, 158–160
dry postmenopausal scalp, 162
foaming agents, 160
medicated, 161
pH adjusters, 160
professional, 162
scalp psoriasis, 163
seborrheic dermatitis, 162–163
sequestering agents, 160
specialty additives, 160
thickeners and opacifiers, 160
thinning hair, 162

aftershave products, 211
dry, 213
hair removal, 58
infection prevention, 212
optimal technique, 211–212
preshave products, 210
product applications, 211
special skin areas, 212

Silymarin, 39
Skin care

and acnegenicity, 9
in acne patients
astringents, 6
cleansers, 6
epidermabrasion, 7–8
exfoliants, 7
face mask, 8
mechanized skin care devices, 8
textured clothes, 7–8
algorithmic approach, 274
and comedogenicity, 8–9
hand, 130–131
in mature patients

color cosmetics, 43
exfoliants, 44
face masks, 43–44
rosacea patients, 16
specific skin needs, 272–273
update personal and patient database, 274

Skin color

ethnic cosmetics, 54–55
and melanin, 52

Skin lightening
aleosin, 54
alpha lipoic acid, 54
arbutin, 54
ascorbic acid, 54
hydroquinone, 53–54
kojic acid, 54
licorice extracts, 54

Skin physiology, 1
Skin structure, 1–2

gender differences, 114

Soaps, 115–116
Sodium PCA, 124
Soft nails, 268
Solar radiation, 60
Solvent-based mascara, 83–84
Specialty additives, 160
Specialty body moisturizing ingredients

ceramides, 122–123
fatty acids, 123
lactic acid, 124
natural moisturizing factor, 124
sodium PCA, 124
urea, 124
vitamins, 123–124

SPF. See Sunburn protection factor; 
Sun protection factor

Split nails, repairing, 255
Squametry

body moisturizers, 127
facial moisturizers, 23–24

280

Staphylococcus aureus, 5
Stratum corneum, 2, 60
Stretch marks

causes of, 154
signs and symptoms, 154
treatments, 154

Structural hair shaft abnormalities, 227
Sulfite permanents, 188
Sulfur, 4
Sunburn cell, 60
Sunburn protection factor (SPF), 141–142
Sunless tanning creams
application, 149
formulation, 148
and photoprotection, 148–149

Sun protection factor, 65
Sunscreen, 21

compliance, 144–146
degradation and incompatibilities, 144
filter classification, 60–62
formulations, 65–66
hair care products, 222–223
nanoparticle, 64–65

Syndets, 116
Synthetic fragrances, 138

Tar shampoos, 233
Tattooing

eyebrow, 88
eyeliner, 85
lip, 72–73
Teasing, 230
Tea tree oil, 5
Temporary hair dyes, 199–201

Testosterone secretion, 57
Tetrahydrocurcumin, 38
Textile dyes, 201
Textured clothes, 7–8
The North American Contact Dermatitis 

Group, 30–31, 79, 138, 189, 259

Thermolysis, 218
Thioglycolate, 192
Threading hair removal, 215–216
Thumb sucking, 268
Tinted moisturizer, 98
Toenail dystrophy, 269
Toenail nail sculpture prostheses, 270–271
Tooth whitening lipstick, 72
Topical hair photoprotection, 221–222
Topical herbals, 152
Topical hyaluronic acid, 21
Topical moisturizers, 154
Topical tretinoin, 41
Toupees, 176
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), 14
Transparent facial powders, 95
Tretinoin, 5, 41
Triclosan, 5
Trim hair, 239
Two-step hair dyeing technique, 204

Urea, 124
UVA organic sunscreen filters

anthranilates, 63
avobenzone, 62–63
benzophenones, 62

UVA organic sunscreen ingredients

cinnamates, 63

INDEX

PABA derivatives, 63
salicylates, 63

UVA/UVB inorganic sunscreen filters, 

63–64

UV radiation and hair, 221

Vasomotor rhinitis, 139
Vegetable dyes, 201–202
Vinyl mask, 43
Visible sensitive facial skin
atopic dermatitis, 27
components of, 27
eczema, 27
rosacea, 27–28

Vitamin C. See Ascorbic acid
Vitamins

additives, 109
specialty body moisturizing ingredients, 

123–124

Water, 18
Water-based mascara, 83
Water resistance, 142–143
Water-resistant sunscreen failure, 143–144
Water-resistant sunscreen formulations, 143
Water/Solvent hybrid mascaras, 84
Waxes, 68
Waxing hair removal, 215
Wax mask, 43
Weathering, 161, 164
Wound healing, 91
Wraps, 152

Xerosis, physiology of, 18

