Lasers in 
Dermatology 
and Medicine

Dermatologic Applications

Keyvan Nouri
Editor 

Second Edition

123





Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine





Keyvan Nouri
Editor

Lasers in Dermatology 
and Medicine

Dermatologic Applications

Second Edition





Editor
Keyvan Nouri
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine
University of Miami
Miami, FL
USA

ISBN 978-3-319-76116-9 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3

ISBN 978-3-319-76118-3 

(eBook)

Library of Congress Control Number: 2018950469

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2011, 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part  of  the  material  is  concerned,  specifically  the  rights  of  translation,  reprinting,  reuse  of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, 
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, 
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication  does  not  imply,  even  in  the  absence  of  a  specific  statement,  that  such  names  are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in 
this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor 
the  authors  or  the  editors  give  a  warranty,  express  or  implied,  with  respect  to  the  material 
contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

 
 
 




Foreword—And Forward!

This, Nouri’s book, is a thorough, recent, practical, and refreshing one that 
puts “laser dermatology” into a broader perspective; it is a pleasure to update 
my brief contribution for this edition. Almost immediately after the first laser 
was created in 1960, a handful of visionary physicians recognized the poten-
tial for surgical applications, starting with the organ systems readily accessi-
ble to light. Lasers in laryngology, ophthalmology, and dermatology are so 
fully adopted now that the standards of care have forever been changed. Now, 
light is marching inside the body. Laser lithotripsy is widely practiced all over 
the world. Know-how about lasers and biomedical optics is jumping between 
medical  specialties.  Optical  coherence  tomography,  a  rapid  form  of  live 
microscopy invented for retinal imaging, is starting to impact dermatology 
while making a larger splash for upper GI tract and coronary artery diagnostic 
imaging.  Dermatology  was  the  first  to  figure  out  how  to  target  individual 
pigmented cells with laser pulses, a capability later adopted into ophthalmol-
ogy  for  glaucoma  treatment.  Recently,  the  various  optical  nanoparticles 
developed for laser photo-thermal cancer therapy are being used in dermatol-
ogy for acne treatment.

How did we get such a wide, almost dazzling, variety of treatment lasers 
in dermatology? (Because, we need them for different uses in various practice 
settings; lasers are the most tissue-specific surgical tools in existence.) Do we 
really need so many? (Well, we need most all of them. Only a few are inter-
changeable.) Are the mechanistic, clinical, safety, ethical, and practice-related 
chapters of this book worthy of study? (Yes.) Can’t we just learn which but-
tons to push, in courses provided by the more reputable device manufacturers 
just after a laser is purchased? (This approach is foolish beyond words, yet 
such fools exist). Even more foolish are those who purchase a used laser and 
start using it without any training whatsoever.

A great asset of this book is the breadth of its practical, clinical discus-
sions. There is no substitute for hands-on training, which cannot be obtained 
even  from  this  practical  book.  If  you  use  lasers  in  practice,  talk  with  your 
colleagues and attend medical laser conferences in which you are free to ask 
questions to faculty who are not trying to sell something. Many laser compa-
nies provide useful information, but are inherently biased. Laser companies 
are restricted from discussing off-label indications. FDA clearance of a device 
for a particular indication cannot be taken as assurance that it will work safely 
and effectively enough to satisfy you and your patients, while lack of FDA 
clearance for a specific indication cannot be taken as assurance that it will not 

v





vi

Foreword—And Forward!

work safely and effectively. Some of the best uses for dermatological lasers 
are not FDA-labeled indications, and probably never will be.

It is remarkable what lasers already can do for our patients, yet this field is 
clearly  still  in  its  youth.  What  comes  next?  With  the  advent  of  fiber  laser 
technology, various industries and telecommunications now have extremely 
powerful,  efficient,  wavelength-versatile  lasers  that  operate  reliably  for 
decades with little or no maintenance. Those have begun to make their way 
into  dermatology,  and  may  ultimately  do  better  what  we  do  now,  plus  add 
wholly new capabilities. Fractional lasers have taught us how amazingly tol-
erant skin is, to a large volume of micro-injury. Up to 30% of skin can be 
killed or removed in random, full-thickness wounds that heal rapidly without 
scarring. The caveat is that every little wound must be less than about 0.4 mm 
wide. Given that, is it possible to “target” anything in the skin that can be 
localized, regardless of its optical or thermal properties? If we knew where 
various  things  are  in  the  skin,  can’t  we  just  aim  at  them? Yes,  we  could! 
Image-guided smart fractional lasers will be used to selectively treat struc-
tures and lesions not now addressed with lasers—and with that, we will have 
software-programmable  laser  targeting.  For  example,  all  three  cutaneous 
glands—eccrine, sebaceous, and apocrine—are reasonable targets, as well as 
nerves, lymphatics, sensory end organs, mast cells, antigen-presenting cells, 
and other components of normal skin. Microscopy-driven ablative lasers may 
even rival conventional microscopic margin-controlled tumor surgery, some 
day. When laser microscopy and laser tissue ablation are finally married, sur-
gical oncology in general may be impacted. This new era is coming sooner 
than you think.

I  have  been  fortunate  to  play  a  role  in  launching  many  aspects  of  laser 
dermatology, starting with some fundamental understanding of skin optics, 
the  concept  of  selective  photothermolysis,  lasers  specifically  designed  for 
dermatological  use,  permanent  laser  hair  removal,  scanning  confocal  laser 
microscopy, and “fractional” laser treatments. Each of these arose from try-
ing to understand or solve one clinical problem, but now the panoply of clini-
cal  laser  applications  far  exceeds  the  initial  effort.  For  example,  fractional 
lasers  arose  as  a  safer  alternative  to  fully  ablative  laser  skin  resurfacing,  a 
safer way to induce skin remodeling. We had no idea that tissue so grossly 
abnormal  as  a  hypertrophic  wound  scar  could  be  stimulated  to  normalize 
itself this way. Fractional ablative lasers also offer a new way for delivery of 
topical agents, including very high molecular weight macromolecules, parti-
cles, and even cells. The current widespread and diverse use of lasers in der-
matology attests not so much to new technology, as to the extreme value of 
astute clinical observations made by dedicated dermatologists. Nouri’s text is 
aimed  exactly  at  achieving  that.  So  please  be  a  gourmet  laser  chef,  not  a 
short-order  cook.  Contribute 
to  an  amazing  and  evolving  part  of 
dermatology.

Thank you, Dr. Nouri and the many authors involved in this text, for your 

excellent contribution.

R. Rox Anderson 

 




Preface

Laser technology is quickly evolving with the presence of newer lasers, along 
with new indications, that are constantly being introduced. The use of lasers 
has become a major discipline and is currently practiced in a variety of fields 
of medicine today. This book specifically offers a comprehensive literature 
covering the different ways lasers are being used in the field of dermatology. 
The authors of Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine are well known in their 
respective fields and have attempted to cover each topic in the most compre-
hensive,  readable,  and  understandable  format.  Each  chapter  consists  of  an 
introduction and summary boxes in bulleted formats with up-to-date informa-
tion  highlighting  the  importance  of  each  respective  section,  enabling  the 
reader to have an easy approach towards reading and understanding the vari-
ous topics on lasers. This book has been written with the sincere hope of the 
editors and the authors to serve as a cornerstone of laser usage in dermatol-
ogy, ultimately leading to better patient care and treatments. Lasers in derma-
tology have clearly expanded. The areas or laser treatments include port wine 
stains,  vascular  anomalies  and  lesions,  pigmented  lesions  and  tattoos,  hair 
removal  and  hair  re-growth,  acne,  facial  rejuvenation,  psoriasis,  hypopig-
mented lesions and vitiligo, and treatment of fat and cellulites, among others. 
The lasers are also being used for treatment and diagnosis of skin cancers.

We anticipate that this book will be of interest to all the physicians in the 
field of dermatology who use or are interested in using lasers in their practice. 
We are extremely grateful to our contributing authors. This book will serve as 
a potential study source for physicians that would like to expand their knowl-
edge in lasers and light devices.

Miami, FL, USA 

Keyvan Nouri  

vii





Acknowledgements

I would like to sincerely thank my family for their support and encourage-
ment  throughout  my  life.  Special  thanks  to  Dr. William  H.  Eaglestein,  Dr. 
Lawrence A. Schachner (former Chairman of Dermatology at the University 
of  Miami  School  of  Medicine),  and  Dr.  Robert  Kirsner  (Chairman  of  the 
Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery  at  the  University  of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine). They have given me great support and 
have  served  as  mentors  throughout  my  professional  career. Their  guidance 
and encouragement over the years has been greatly appreciated. Dr. Dr. Perry 
Robins, Dr. Robin Ashinoff, Dr. Vicki Levine, Dr. Seth Orlow, the late Dr. 
Irvin  Freedberg,  Dr.  Hideko  Kamino,  and  the  entire  faculty  and  staff  at 
New  York  University  School  of  Medicine  Department  of  Dermatology: 
Thank you all for the wonderful learning and friendship during my surgery 
fellowship.

I would like to thank the faculty and dermatology residents, and the staff 
of the Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery at the University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, for their teaching, expertise, and friend-
ship. Special acknowledgements to the Mohs and Laser Center staff at the 
Sylvester  Cancer  Center  for  their  dedication,  hard  work,  and  support  on  a 
daily basis. I would also like to thank Dr. Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi, my research 
fellow, for his diligence and hard work and the rest of the Mohs staff, includ-
ing Cathy Mamas, Juana Alonso, Gladys Quintero, Destini M. Adkins, and 
Ileana P. Reyes.

Special  thanks  to  my  clinical  research  fellows  in  dermatologic  surgery, 
Sofia  Iglesia,  Ariel  Eva  Eber,  Sebastian  H.  Verne,  Marina  Perper,  Robert 
Magno, Alaleh Dormishian, and Samuel C. Smith, for all their hard work and 
contributions to this book.

I would also like to acknowledge the publishing staff Mr. Grant Weston, 
Ms. Tracy Marton, Mr. Leo Johnson, and the entire Springer Publishing team 
for  having  done  a  superb  job  with  the  publication.  It  has  been  a  pleasure 
working with them and this excellent project to compile the textbook.

Lastly,  I  would  like  to  sincerely  thank  all  the  authors  of  this  textbook. 
These  individuals  are  world-renowned  in  their  respective  specialties  and 
without their time and energy, writing this book would have not been possi-
ble. These individuals have made this a comprehensive, up-to-date, and reli-
able source on Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine. I truly appreciate their 
hard work and thank them for their contributions.

Keyvan Nouri

ix





Contents

  1 

  2 

  3 

  4 

  5 

  6 

  7 

  8 

  9 

 10 

 11 

 12 

 Laser-Tissue Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1
Amanda Abramson Lloyd, Michael S. Graves, and Edward 
Victor Ross

 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards  
and Practice Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37
Brienne D. Cressey, Ashley Keyes, and Murad Alam

 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      49
Jayne Joo, Daniel Michael, and Suzanne Kilmer

 Laser for Scars  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      63
Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Shalu S. Patel, and Keyvan Nouri

 Laser Treatment of Leg Veins  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      73
Julie K. Karen and Shields Callahan

 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions . . . . . . . . .      83
Emmy M. Graber and Jeffrey S. Dover

 Laser Treatment of Tattoos  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    109
Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Caroline V. Caperton,  
Christopher Wong, Rawat Charoensawad, and Keyvan Nouri

 Laser for Hair Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    121
Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Keyvan Nouri, Anita Singh,  
Ran Huo, Rawat Charoensawad, Isabella Camacho, and Ali 
Rajabi-Estarabadi

 Lasers for Resurfacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    137
Rungsima Wanitphakdeedecha and Tina S. Alster

 Fractional Photothermolysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    165
Dieter Manstein, Hans-Joachim Laubac, Sofia Iglesia,  
Alaleh Dormishian, Ali Rajabi- Estarabadi, and Keyvan Nouri

 Sub-surfacing Lasers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    197
Michael Howard Gold

 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening:  
Light-Based Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    213
Marina Perper, John Tsatalis, Ariel E. Eber, and Keyvan Nouri

xi





Contents

xii

 13 

 14 

 15 

 16 

 17 

 18 

 19 

 20 

 21 

 22 

 23 

 24 

 25 

 26 

 27 

 Laser and Light Therapies for Acne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    227
Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi, Ariel E. Eber, and Keyvan Nouri

 Lasers for Psoriasis and Hypopigmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    237
Laura Jordan, Summer Moon, and James M. Spencer

 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    247
Molly Wanner and Mathew M. Avram

 Photodynamic Therapy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    261
Ariel E. Eber, Marina Perper, Sebastian H. Verne,  
Robert Magno, Ibrahim Abdullah Omair ALOmair,  
Mana ALHarbi, and Keyvan Nouri

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    275
Sanjana Iyengar, Keyvan Nouri, Peter Bjerring,  
Kåre Christiansen, Robert A. Weiss, Girish S. Munavalli, 
Sonal Choudhary, and Angel Leiva

 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy 
in Dermatological Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    285
R. Glen Calderhead

 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation  . . . . . . . . . .    339
Ehsan Azimi, Navid Bouzari, and Keyvan Nouri

 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation . . . . . . . . . .    351
Nicole E. Rogers, Marc R. Avram, Isabella Camacho,  
and Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi

 Photobiomodulation and Hair Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    367
Molly B. Hirt and Ronda S. Farah

 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy  
in Oncological Dermatology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    375
Pablo Fernández-Crehuet Serrano,  
Gonzalo Segurado-Miravalles, and Salvador González

 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    401
Hana Jeon, Lori A. Brightman, and Roy G. Geronemus

 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients . . . . . . . . . . . .    415
Murad Alam and Meghan Dubina

 Anesthesia for Laser Surgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    427
Marina Perper, Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi, Ariel E. Eber,  
Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Ran Huo, Keyvan Nouri,  
and John Tsatalis

 Lasers in Skin of Color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    437
Heather Woolery-Lloyd and Nkanyezi Ferguson

 Laser Applications in Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    449
Jessica Cervantes, Sebastian H. Verne,  
and Mercedes E. Gonzalez





Contents

xiii

 28 

 29 

 30 

 31 

 32 

 33 

 34 

 35 

 Dressing/Wound Care for Laser Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    467
Ariel E. Eber, Vincent M. Hsu, Stephen C. Davis,  
and Keyvan Nouri

 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications . . . . . . . . .    475
Rachael L. Moore, Juan-Carlos Martinez, Ken K. Lee,  
Yun Ehrlich, Brian Simmons, and Keyvan Nouri

 Ethical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    493
Abel Torres, Tejas Desai, Alpesh Desai, William T. Kirby,  
and Maren C. Locke

 Medicolegal Issues (Documentation/Informed  
Consent/Non-physician Operators) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    499
Abel Torres, Tejas Desai, Sailesh Konda, Alpesh Desai,  
and William T. Kirby

 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment . . . . . . . . . .    505
Shraddha Desai and Ashish C. Bhatia

 Online Resources of Dermatologic Laser Therapies . . . . . . . .    517
Shraddha Desai, Elizabeth Uhlenhake, and Ashish C. Bhatia

 Starting a Laser Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    523
Vic A. Narurkar

 Research and Future Directions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    527
Yakir S. Levin, Fernanda Hidemi Sakamoto,  
and R. Rox Anderson

 Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    541





Contributors

Murad  Alam  Department  of  Dermatology,  Otolaryngology,  and  Surgery, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Mana  ALHarbi  Department  of  Dermatology,  College  of  Medicine,  Al 
Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU), Riyadh, Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia

Ibrahim Abdullah Omair ALOmair  Department of Dermatology, College 
of  Medicine, Al  Imam  Muhammad  Ibn  Saud  Islamic  University  (IMSIU), 
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Tina S. Alster  Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington Institute 
of Dermatologic Laser Surgery, Washington, DC, USA

Marc  R.  Avram  Department  of  Dermatology,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Mathew  M.  Avram  Department  of  Dermatology,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Ehsan  Azimi  Department  of  Dermatology,  Cutaneous  Biology  Research 
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA

Ashish C. Bhatia  Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University – 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA

Oak Dermatology, Schaumburg, IL, USA

Peter Bjerring  Department of Dermatology, Swansea University, Swansea, 
Wales, UK

Navid Bouzari  South Shore Skin Center, Plymouth, MA, USA

Lori A. Brightman  Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, New York, 
NY, USA

R.  Glen  Calderhead  Research  Division,  VP  Medicoscientific  Affairs, 
Clinique L, Goyang-shi, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea

Shields  Callahan  Department  of  Dermatology,  Virginia  Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA

xv





xvi

Contributors

Isabella Camacho  School of Medicine, Georgetown University, Washington, 
DC, USA

Caroline  V.  Caperton  Miller  School  of  Medicine,  University  of  Miami, 
Miami, FL, USA

Jessica Cervantes  Department of Dermatology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Rawat Charoensawad  Rawat Clinic, Bangkok, Thailand

Biophile Training Center, Bangkok, Thailand

Sonal  Choudhary  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Kåre Christiansen  Molholm Research, Molholm Hospital, Vejle, Denmark

Brienne D. Cressey  Department of Dermatology, New York Presbyterian-
Weill Cornell Hospital, New York, NY, USA

Stephen  C.  Davis  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Alpesh  Desai  Heights  Dermatology  and  Aesthetic  Center,  Houston,  
TX, USA

Shraddha Desai  Dermatology Institute, DuPage Medical Group, Naperville, 
IL, USA

Tejas Desai  Heights Dermatology and Aesthetic Center, Houston, TX, USA

Roberto  Diaz  Department  of  Neurosurgery,  University  of  Miami,  Miami, 
FL, USA

Alaleh  Dormishian  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Jeffrey  S.  Dover  Department  of  Dermatology, Yale  University  School  of 
Medicine and Brown University, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA

Meghan  Dubina  Department  of  Dermatology,  Northwestern  University, 
Chicago, IL, USA

Ariel  E.  Eber  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Yun Ehrlich  Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University 
of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Ronda  S.  Farah  Department  of  Dermatology,  University  of  Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA

Nkanyezi  Ferguson  Department  of  Dermatology,  University  of  Iowa 
Hospital and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA

Elizabeth A. M. Frost  Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

Julie A. Gayle  Department of Anesthesiology, LSUHSC School of Medicine, 
New Orleans, LA, USA





Contributors

xvii

Roy G. Geronemus  Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, New York, 
NY, USA

Department  of  Dermatology,  New  York  University  Medical  Center,  
New York, NY, USA

Michael  C.  Giovingo  Department  of  Ophthalmology,  Stroger  Hospital  of 
Cook County, Chicago, IL, USA

Michael  Howard  Gold  Gold  Skin  Care  Center  and  Tennessee  Clinical 
Research Center, Nashville, TN, USA

Mercedes  E.  Gonzalez  Department  of  Dermatology,  University  of  Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Salvador  González  Department  of  Medicine  and  Medical  Specialities, 
Alcalá University, Madrid, Spain 

Department of Dermatology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA

Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Alcala University, Madrid, Spain

Emmy M. Graber  Dermatology Institute of Boston, PC, Boston, MA, USA

Michael S. Graves  Southwest Skin Cancer & Vein Clinic, Austin, TX, USA

Ramez  I.  Haddadin  Department  of  Ophthalmology,  Feinberg  School  of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Molly  B.  Hirt  Department  of  Dermatology,  University  of  Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA

Vincent  M.  Hsu  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Ran Huo  Broward Dermatology Clinic, Pembroke Pines, FL, USA

Sofia Iglesia  Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Viacheslav  Iremashvili  Department  of  Urology,  Jackson  Memorial 
Hospital, Miami, FL, USA

Michael E. Ivan  Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami 
Hospital, Jackson Memorial Hospital, and Jackson South Hospital, Miami, 
FL, USA

Sanjana Iyengar  Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Hana Jeon  Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, New York, NY, USA

Jayne Joo  Department of Dermatology, Davis and Sacramento VA Medical 
Center, University of California, Sacramento, CA, USA

Laura Jordan  Kansas City University Consortium, Tri-County Dermatology 
Residency Program, Cuyahoga Falls, OH, USA





xviii

Contributors

Julie  K.  Karen  Department  of  Dermatology,  CompleteSkinMD,  NYU 
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

Alan David Kaye  Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana Health Sciences 
Center, School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA

Ashley Keyes  Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Lincoln 
Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA

Suzanne  Kilmer  Laser  &  Skin  Surgery  Center  of  Northern  California, 
Sacramento, CA, USA

Department of Dermatology, Davis Medical Center, University of California, 
Sacramento, CA, USA

William T. Kirby  Laseraway Hermosa Beach, Hermosa Beach, CA, USA

Ricardo  J.  Komotar  Department  of  Neurosurgery,  University  of  Miami, 
Miami, FL, USA

Sailesh Konda  Department of Dermatology, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA

Raymond  J.  Lanzafame  Raymond  J.  Lanzafame,  MD  PLLC,  Buffalo,  
NY, USA

School of Dental Medicine, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY, USA

Hans-Joachim 
Krankenhäuser von Gen, Genf, Schweiz

Laubac  Dermatologische  Abteilung,  Universitäre 

Ken K. Lee  Dermatologic and Laser Surgery, Oregon Health and Sciences 
University, Portland, OR, USA

Angel  Leiva  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery,  Miller 
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Yakir  S.  Levin  Department  of  Dermatology,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA

Amanda Abramson Lloyd  Skin and Vein Institute, Encinitas, CA, USA

Maren  C.  Locke  Department  of  Dermatology,  MetroHealth  System, 
Cleveland, OH, USA

Robert  Magno  Department  of  Dermatology,  University  of  Miami,  Toms 
River, NJ, USA

Dieter  Manstein  Wellman  Center  for  Photomedicine,  Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Robert  Marcovich  Department  of  Urology,  University  of  Miami,  Miami, 
FL, USA

Juan-Carlos  Martinez  Dermatologic  and  Laser  Surgery,  Oregon  Health 
and Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA





Contributors

xix

Daniel Michael  Department of Dermatology, Laser and Skin Surgery Center 
of  Northern  California,  University  of  California,  Davis,  Medical  Center, 
Sacramento, CA, USA

Summer Moon  Dermatology Specialists of West Florida, FL, USA

Rachael L. Moore  Dermatology Specialists of West Florida, Oregon Health 
and Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA

Girish  S.  Munavalli  Dermatology,  Laser,  and  Vein  Specialists  of  the 
Carolinas, Charlotte, NC, USA

Timothy  G.  Murray  Department  of  Ophthalmology/Ocular  Oncology, 
Retina  Vitreous  Diseases/Pediatric  Ophthalmology,  Medical  Arts  Surgery 
Center Baptist, Nicklaus Children’s Hospital, Miami, FL, USA

Vic A. Narurkar  Bay Area Laser Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA

Keyvan Nouri  Dermatology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Ophthalmology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Otolaryngology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Dermatologic Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery,  University  of  Miami 
Medical Group, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Dermatology Services at Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of Miami Hospital and Clinics, Miami, FL, USA 

MOHS, Dermatologic and Laser Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, FL, 
USA 

Surgical Training, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Mahnaz Nouri  Boston Eye Group, Brookline, MA, USA

Peter  O’Kane  Dorset  Heart  Centre,  Royal  Bournemouth  Hospital, 
Bournemouth, Dorset, UK

Carolyn  Orgain  Department  of  Otolaryngology,  University  of  California, 
Irvine, Orange, CA, USA

Steven Parker  , Harrogate, North Yorkshire, UK

Krishna B. Patel  Department of Ophthalmology, John H. Stroger Hospital 
of Cook County, Lombard, IL, USA

Shalu S. Patel  Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Miller 
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Robert Perez  Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Miller 
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Marina  Perper  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami Hospital, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA





xx

Contributors

Roberto Pineda  Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Ear and Eye 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi  Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

John  Rawlins  Dorset  Heart  Centre,  Royal  Bournemouth  Hospital, 
Bournemouth, UK

Douglas  J.  Rhee  Department  of  Ophthalmology  and  Visual  Science, 
University Hospitals, Cleveland, OH, USA

Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA

Cornelia Selma de Riese  Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Texas 
Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA

Nicole E. Rogers  Hair Restoration of the South, Metairie, LA, USA

Edward  Victor  Ross  Department  of  Dermatology,  Scripps  Clinic,  San 
Diego, CA, USA

Vanessa  Rothholtz  Pacific  Coast  Ear  Nose  and  Throat,  Beverly  Hills,  
CA, USA

R.  Rox  Anderson  Department  of  Dermatology,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Ryan  Rubin  Department  of  Anesthesiology,  Louisiana  Health  Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, LA, USA

Fernanda Hidemi Sakamoto  Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Amy  C.  Schefler  Department  of  Ophthalmology,  Bascom  Palmer  Eye 
Institute, Miami, FL, USA

Gonzalo  Segurado-Miravalles  Department  of  Dermatology,  Ramón  y 
Cajal Hospital, Madrid, Spain

Pablo  Fernández-Crehuet  Serrano  Department  of  Dermatology,  Alto 
Guadalquivir de Andújar, Andújar, Jaén, Spain

Brian  Simmons  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Anita  Singh  Montefiore  Medical  Center,  Albert  Einstein  College  of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA

James M. Spencer  Spencer Dermatology and Skin Surgery Center (Spencer 
Dermatology, Carillon Outpatient Center), St. Petersburg, FL, USA





Contributors

xxi

Joseph  Stuto  Department  of  Dermatology, Weill  Cornell  Medical  Center, 
New York, NY, USA

Amit  Todani  Department  of  Ophthalmology,  Goodman  Eye  Medical  & 
Surgical Center, Milford, MA, USA

Allyne  Topaz  Hackensack  University  Medical  Center,  Hackensack,  
NJ, USA

On Topaz  Asheville VA Medical Center, Asheville, NC, USA

Abel Torres  Department of Dermatology, Loma Linda University School of 
Medicine, Loma linda, CA, USA

John  Tsatalis  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Elizabeth Uhlenhake  The Dermatology Group, Mason, OH, USA

Voraphol  Vejjabhinanta  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous 
Surgery, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
FL, USA

Department of Dermatology, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand

Sebastian  H.  Verne  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous  Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

Victor M. Villegas  Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Miami, FL, USA

Rungsima  Wanitphakdeedecha  Department  of  Dermatology,  Faculty  of 
Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

Molly  Wanner  Department  of  Dermatology,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

Robert  A.  Weiss  Department  of  Dermatology,  Maryland  Dermatology 
Laser Skin and Vein Institute, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Hunt Valley, MD, USA

Andrew Whittaker  Department of Cardiology, Dorset Heart Centre, Royal 
Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth, Dorset, UK

Heather  Woolery-Lloyd  Department  of  Dermatology  and  Cutaneous 
Surgery, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Brian J. F. Wong  Department of Otolaryngology, University of California, 
Irvine, Orange, CA, USA

Christopher Wong  Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
FL, USA

Charles  C.  Wykoff  Department  of  Ophthalmology,  Bascom  Palmer  Eye 
Institute, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Roger  B.  Yandell  Department  of  Obstetrics  and  Gynecology,  Texas  Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, USA





Laser-Tissue Interactions

Amanda Abramson Lloyd, Michael S. Graves, 
and Edward Victor Ross

1

Abstract
The best gauge of laser interactions is the tis-
sue response, and experiment is the most real-
istic  manner  to  address  medical  treatment 
challenges.  However,  theoretical  models  are 
helpful in planning treatment approaches and 
laser  parameters.  In  this  chapter  we  discuss 
basics  of  lasers,  their  non  laser  counterparts, 
and laser-tissue interactions.

Many physicians choose laser settings out 
of habit (or reading it off of a label attached to 
the side of the machine—a “cheat” sheet with 
skin-type  specific  parameters),  using  tissue 
endpoints  to  confirm  the  appropriateness  of 
the parameters. For example, when treating a 
tattoo  with  a  Q-switched  laser,  the  operator 
looks  for  immediate  frosty  whitening.  Like 

A. A. Lloyd 
Skin and Vein Institute,  
Encinitas, CA, USA 

M. S. Graves 
Southwest Skin Cancer and Vein Clinic,  
Austin, TX, USA 

E. V. Ross (*) 
Laser and Cosmetic Dermatology, Scripps Clinic,  
San Diego, CA, USA
e-mail: ross.edward@scrippshealth.org

driving a car (where the operator may have no 
idea  about  nature  of  the  drive  train  compo-
nents),  successful  laser  operation  does  not 
demand  a  complete  understanding  of  the 
machine or the details of the light-tissue inter-
action.  However,  a  comprehension  of  first 
principles allows for a logical analysis of final 
clinical  outcomes—furthermore,  more  cre-
ative  uses  of  equipment  should  follow.  For 
example,  with  an  education  in  laser  tissue 
interactions (LTIs) and tissue cooling, one can 
deploy the alexandrite (long pulse) laser either 
as a hair removal device, vascular laser, or to 
remove lentigines.

this  chapter 

The  reader  should  note  that  although  the 
title  of 
is  “Laser  Tissue 
Interactions”,  the  introduction  of  many  new 
and diverse technologies make the term some-
what  obsolete.  We  will  continue  to  use  the 
term, but a more appropriate term is “energy–
tissue  interactions.”  As  both  radiofrequency 
and  ultrasound  are  increasingly  applied  in 
medicine. We will use both terms interchange-
ably in the remainder of the text.

Keywords
Laser · Radiofrequency · Ultrasound · Skin · 
Lentigines · Hair removal · Vascular · 
Dermatology

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_1

1





2

 Introduction

 1.  Light represents one portion of a broader elec-

tromagnetic spectrum.

 2.  Light-tissue interactions involve the complex 
topics  of  tissue  optics,  absorption,  heat  gen-
eration, and heat diffusion

 3.  Lasers are a special type of light with the char-
acteristics  of  monochromaticity,  directional-
ity, and coherence.

 4.  Coagulation/denaturation is time and temper-

ature dependent

 5.  Proper selection of light parameters is based 
on the color, size, and geometry of the target
 6.  Wound healing is the final but not least impor-
tant  part  of  the  laser  tissue  sequence  (the 
epilogue)

 7.  Laser-tissue interactions are fluid—the opera-
tor  should  closely  examine  the  skin  surface 
during all aspects of the procedure

 8.  Pulse  duration  and  light  doses  are  often  as 
important  as  wavelength  in  predicting  tissue 
responses to laser to irradiation

The best gauge of laser interactions is the tis-
sue response, and experiment is the most realistic 
manner to address medical treatment challenges. 
However, theoretical models are helpful in plan-
ning treatment approaches and laser parameters. 
In this chapter we discuss basics of lasers, their 
non-laser  counterparts,  and  laser-tissue  interac-
tions [1].

Many physicians choose laser settings out of 
habit (or reading it off of a label attached to the 
side of the machine—a “cheat” sheet with skin- 
type specific parameters), using tissue endpoints 
to confirm the appropriateness of the parameters. 
For  example,  when  treating  a  tattoo  with  a 
Q-switched laser, the operator looks for immedi-
ate  frosty  whitening.  Like  driving  a  car  (where 
the operator may have no idea about nature of the 
drive train components), successful laser opera-
tion does not demand a complete understanding 
of  the  machine  or  the  details  of  the  light-tissue 
interaction.  However,  a  comprehension  of  first 
principles  allows  for  a  logical  analysis  of  final 
clinical  outcomes—furthermore,  more  creative 
uses  of  equipment  should  follow.  For  example, 

with  an  education  in  laser  tissue  interactions 
(LTIs)  and  tissue  cooling,  one  can  deploy  the 
alexandrite  (long  pulse)  laser  either  as  a  hair 
removal device, vascular laser, or to remove len-
tigines [2].

The reader should note that although the title 
of this chapter is “Laser Tissue Interactions”, the 
introduction of many new and diverse technolo-
gies make the term somewhat obsolete. We will 
continue to use the term, but a more appropriate 
term  is  “energy–tissue  interactions.”  As  both 
radiofrequency  and  ultrasound  are  increasingly 
applied  in  medicine.  We  will  use  both  terms 
interchangeably in the remainder of the text.

 Light

Light represents one portion of a much broader 
electromagnetic  spectrum.  Light  can  be  divided 
into the UV (200–400 nm), VIS (400–700 nm), 
NIR “I” (755–810 nm), NIR “II” (940–1064 nm), 
MIR (1.3–3 μm), and Far IR (3 μm and beyond). 
On a macroscopic level, light is adequately char-
acterized as waves. The amplitude of the wave is 
perpendicular to the propagation direction. Light 
waves behave according to our “eyeball” obser-
vations  in  day-to-day  life.  For  example,  we  are 
familiar  with  refraction  and  reflection. The  sur-
face  of  a  pond  is  a  partial  mirror  (reflection);  a 
fish  seen  in  the  pond  is  actually  deeper  than  it 
appears  (refraction)  [3].  Normally,  the  percent-
age of incident light reflected from the skin sur-
face  is  determined  by  the  index  of  refraction 
difference between the skin surface (stratum cor-
neum n = 1.55) and air (n = 1) [4]. This regular 
reflectance  is  about  4–7%  for  light  incident  at 
right angles to the skin [3, 5]. The angle between 
the  light  beam  and  the  skin  surface  determines 
the % of reflected light. More light is reflected at 
“grazing” angles of incidence. It follows that, to 
minimize  surface  losses,  in  most  laser  applica-
tions, one should deliver light approximately per-
pendicular to the skin [3, 6]. One can deliberately 
angle  the  beam,  on  the  other  hand,  to  decrease 
penetration depth and also attenuate the surface 
fluence by “spreading” the beam. One can reduce 
interface losses by applying an alcohol solution 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



(n = 1.4), water (n = 1.33), or a sapphire crystal 
(n = 1.55 μm). This allows for optical coupling 
(vide infra). On the other hand, the surface of dry 
skin reflects more light because of multiple skin–
air  interfaces  (hence  the  white  appearance  of  a 
psoriasis plaque).

Light penetrates into the epidermis according 
to wavelength dependent absorption and scatter-
ing  (vide  infra)  [1,  6–8].  Because  of  scattering, 
much incident light is remitted (remittance refers 
to the total light returned to the environment due 
to  multiple  scattering  in  the  epidermis  and  der-
mis, as well as the regular reflection from the sur-
face).  In  laser  surgery,  light  reflected  from  the 
surface is typically “wasted”. This “lost” energy 
varies from 15% to as much as 70% depending 
on  wavelength  and  skin  type.  For  example,  for 
1064 nm, 60% of an incident laser beam may be 
remitted. One can easily verify this by holding a 
finger just adjacent to the beam near the skin sur-
face. Warmth can be felt from the remitted por-
tion of the beam.

To  describe  laser  tissue  interactions  at  the 
molecular/microscopic  level,  light  is  considered 
as a stream of “particles” called photons, where 
the photon energy depends on the wavelength of 
light.

E

photon =

hc

/ l

(1.1)

Where h is Plank’s constant (6.6 × 10−34 J -s), 

and c is the speed of light (3 × 1010 cm/s) [9].

 Types of Light Devices

In  principle,  many  non-laser  devices  could  be 
used for heating skin [9]. Most properties of laser 
light (i.e., coherence) are unimportant insofar as 
the way light interacts with tissue in therapeutic 
applications. And  although  collimation  (lack  of 
divergence) of the incident beam might increase 
the % of transmitted light with laser versus IPL, 
the increasing use of filtered flash lamps in der-
matology  suggests  that  losses  from  IPL  beam 
divergence are not critical. In lieu of lasers, some 
thermal sources can be used in skin surgery (i.e., 
nitrogen plasma device) for resurfacing (Portrait, 
Rhytec, MA). The critical features of any device 

3

are controlling the device–tissue interaction time 
to allow for precise heating (vide infra).

Lasers are useful because they allow for pre-
cise  control  of  where  and  how  much  one  heats 
[10]. There are four properties that are common 
to  all  laser  types  (1)  Beam  directionality  (colli-
mation),  (2)  Monochromaticity,  (3)  Spatial  and 
temporal  coherence  of  the  beam,  and  (4)  High 
intensity  of  the  beam  [11]. The  intensity,  direc-
tionality,  and  monochromaticity  of  laser  light 
allow the beam to be expanded, or focused quite 
easily.  With  non-laser  sources  like  flashlamps 
directed toward the skin surface, the light inten-
sity at the skin surface cannot exceed the bright-
ness of the source lamp. With many lasers, a lamp 
similar to the intense pulsed light (IPL) flashlamp 
pumps the laser cavity [12]. The amplification of 
light within the laser cavity sets laser light apart 
from other sources.

For most visible light applications, laser rep-
resents a conversion from lamplight to an ampli-
fied  monochromatic  form  [13]. The  high  power 
possible  with  lasers  (especially  peak  power)  is 
achieved  through  resonance  in  the  laser  cavity. 
For many dermatology applications requiring ms 
or  longer  pulses  delivered  to  large  skin  areas, 
IPLs are either adequate or preferable to lasers. 
The scientific principle on which lasers are based 
is  stimulated  emission. With  spontaneous  emis-
sion,  electrons  transition  to  the  lower  level  in  a 
random  process.  With  stimulated  emission,  the 
emission occurs only in the presence of photons 
of a certain energy. The critical point is maintain-
ing a condition where the population of photons 
in a higher state is larger than that in the lower 
state. To create this population inversion, a pump-
ing energy must be directed either with electric-
ity, light, or chemical energy.

All lasers contain four main components, the 
lasing  medium,  the  excitation  source,  feedback 
apparatus, and an output coupler. With respect to 
lasing  media,  there  are  diode  lasers,  solid-state 
lasers, dye, and gas lasers. Most solid state and 
dye  lasers  use  optical  exciters  (lamps),  whereas 
gas and diode lasers use electrical excitation (i.e., 
CO2 and RF). The feedback mechanism consists 
of  mirrors  where  one  mirror  reflects  100%  and 
the other transmits a small fraction of light [14]. 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions 
 




4

An  example  of  a  solid-state  laser  is  the  alexan-
drite  laser. A  solid-state  laser  consists  of  a  rod 
that is pumped by a flashlamp. The lamp pumps 
the  rod  for  stimulated  emission.  The  rod  and 
lamp  assembly  must  also  be  designed  for  ade-
quate  cooling.  Lasers 
typically  are  finicky 
because  all  of  the  components  are  driven  near 
their damage thresholds (like redlining your car 
all the time). As an example of this concept, con-
sider  the  pulsed  dye  laser  (PDL).  As  the  dye 
degrades, the lamps must work harder to generate 
higher pulse energies from the dye. Also, mirrors 
become  contaminated  over  time  such  that  the 
lamps  must  work  harder  and  harder.  These 
demands stress the power supply. Thus, eventu-
ally, the dye kit, the power supply, lamps, and dye 
are  all  working  at  their  maximal  output.  Often 
people speak of a tunable dye laser. In fact many 
dye  lasers  are  tunable;  the  manufacturers  have 
simply chosen one wavelength. An example of a 
tunable laser was the Sclero-plus pulsed dye laser 
(tunable from 585 to 600 nm in 5 nm increments) 
from Candela (Candela, Wayland, MA).

Laser  systems  differ  with  regard  to  duration 
and power of the emitted laser radiation. In con-
tinuous wave lasers (CW mode) with power out-
puts of up to 103 W, the lasing medium is excited 
continuously.  With  pulsed  lasers,  excitation  is 
effected  in  a  single  pulse  or  in  on-line  pulses 
(free-running mode). Peak powers of 105 W can 
be  developed  for  a  duration  of  100  μs–10  ms. 
Storing the excitation energy and releasing it sud-
denly (Q-switch mode or mode-locking) leads to 
a peak power increase of up to 1010–1012 W, and a 
pulse duration of 10 ps–100 ns [13].

Light  emitting  diodes  (LEDs)  are  becoming 
commonplace in dermatology (Fig. 1.1). Primarily 
used as a PDT light source, they are also used in 
biostimulation. LEDs are similar to semiconduc-
tor  (aka  diode)  lasers  in  that  they  use  electrical 
current placed between two types of semiconduc-
tors. However, they lack an amplification process 
(no  mirrors).  LEDs  do  not  produce  coherent 
beams  but  can  produce  monochromatic  light. 
Semiconductor (diode) lasers contain an LED as 
the active gain medium. A current passes through 
a sandwich of two layers consisting of compounds 
(called p type and n type). Below threshold, there 

Fig. 1.1  A red LED (OmniLux, Phototherapeutics, Inc.)

is  no  oscillation  and  the  semiconductor  LASER 
acts like an LED. This emission is very similar to 
the  visible  emission  of  light  emitting  diodes.  If 
one adds mirrors it operates as a tiny laser instead 
of an LED. The overall efficiency of semiconduc-
tor  lasers  is  quite  high,  approximately  30%  and 
among  the  highest  available  for  any  laser  types. 
Most semiconductor (diode) lasers are operated in 
CW  mode  but  can  be  pulsed.  New  visible 
light semiconductor lasers are available, and also 
laser  diode  arrays  are  available  where  scientists 
have  created  large  numbers  of  semiconductor 
lasers  on  one  substrate.  Some  diode  lasers  are 
housed separate from the handpiece and delivered 
by  fiber  optics.  Others  are  configured  with  the 
laser  diodes  in  the  handpiece  as  arrays.  Modern 
diode  lasers  achieve  higher  powers  than  in  the 
past,  but  their  peak  powers  are  still  lag  behind 
most pulsed solidstate lasers [14].

Excimer lasers emit UV light and are used for 
photomodulation  of  the  immune  system.  They 
have also been used in surgery. The possible muta-
genicity of these lasers has not been well studied. 
Materials such as the KTP crystal can be used to 
generate harmonics with lasers. The KTP crystal is 
used  to  convert  1064  nm  radiation  to  532  green 
light. Also quality (Q) switching is used for gener-
ating  short  pulses.  Much  of  the  electrical  energy 
used  to  create  laser  emissions  is  wasted  as  heat, 
which is why water is used for cooling most lasers. 
Air cooling is used for some high-powered flash 
lamps  and  many  diode  lasers.  In  the  future,  free 
electron lasers might be useful but presently they 
are  too  cumbersome  and  only  generate  small 
amounts of energy per unit wavelength.

A. A. Lloyd et al.



Intense  pulsed  light  devices  are  becoming 
increasingly  comparable  to  lasers  that  emit  ms 
domain  pulses  [15]. Absorption  spectra  of  skin 
chromophores show multiple peaks (HgB) or can 
be broad (melanin) [16], and therefore a broad-
band light source is a logical alternative to lasers. 
Proper filtration of a xenon lamp tailors the out-
put  spectrum  for  a  particular  application.  Some 
concessions  are  made  with  direct  use  of  lamp-
light.  For  example,  rapid  beam  divergence 
obliges that the lamp source be near the skin sur-
face.  This  subsequent  requirement  makes  for  a 
typically heavier handpiece compared with most 
lasers (Fig. 1.2) (the exception being some diode 
arrays where the light source is also housed in the 
handpiece-(i.e.,  Light  Sheer,  Lumenis,  CA)). 
Also IPL cannot be adapted to fibers for subsur-
face  delivery.  High  energy 
short  pulses 
(Q-switched  ns  pulses)  are  not  possible  with 
flashlamps. They can, however, be used to pump 
a  laser,  and  some  modern  IPLs  feature  a  laser 
attachment where the flashlamp and laser rod are 
in the handpiece. In general, the size, weight, and 

5

cost of both laser and flashlamp technology  are 
steadily decreasing.

 Light Device Terminology

Basic  parameters  for  light  sources  are  power, 
time,  and  spot  size  for  continuous  wave  lasers, 
and  for  pulsed  sources,  the  energy  per  pulse, 
pulse duration, spot size, fluence, repetition rate, 
and  the  total  number  of  pulses  [17].  Energy  is 
measured  in  joules  (J).  The  amount  of  energy 
delivered per unit area is the fluence, sometimes 
called  the  dose  or  radiant  exposure,  given  in  
J/cm2. The rate of energy delivery is called power, 
measured in watts (W). One watt is one joule per 
second (W = J/s). The power delivered per unit 
area  is  called  the  irradiance  or  power  density, 
usually given in W/cm2. Laser exposure duration 
(called pulse width for pulsed lasers) is the time 
over which energy is delivered. Fluence is equal 
to  the  irradiance  times  the  exposure  duration 
[10]. Power density is a critical parameter, for it 

a

b

Fig. 1.2  IPL and green light laser—note smaller size of laser handpiece

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



6

often  determines  the  action  mechanism  in  cuta-
neous applications. For example, a very low irra-
diance emission (typical range of 2–10 mW/cm2) 
does not heat tissue and is associated with diag-
nostic  applications,  photochemical  processes, 
and biostimulation. On the other extreme, a very 
short ns pulse can generate high peak power den-
sities  associated  with  shock  waves  and  even 
plasma formation [18]. Plasma is a “spark” due 
to ionization of matter.

Another factor is the laser exposure spot size 
(which can greatly affect the beam strength inside 
the skin). Other characteristics of importance are 
whether  the  incident  light  is  convergent,  diver-
gent, or diffuse, and the uniformity of irradiance 
over the exposure area (spatial beam profile). The 
pulse  profile,  that  is,  the  character  of  the  pulse 
shapes in time (instantaneous power versus time) 
also affects the tissue response [19].

Many  lasers  in  dermatology  are  pulsed,  and 
the user interface shows pulse duration, fluence, 
spot  size  and  fluence.  Some  multi-wavelength 
lasers also allow for wavelength selection. Some 
older  lasers,  for  example  a  popular  CO2  laser, 
showed only the pulse energy on the instrument 
panel,  or  in  continuous  wave  (CW)  mode,  the 
number  of  watts.  In  these  cases  one  uses  the 
exposure area and exposure time to calculate the 
total light dose (fluence).

Fluence

=

time

Power

´
area

(1.2)

With  the  exception  of  PDT  sources  and  CW 
CO2  lasers,  most  aesthetic  lasers  create  pulsed 
light. In many CW applications (i.e., wart treat-
ment with a CO2 laser), the fluence is not of great 
importance  in  characterizing  the  overall  tissue 
effect. A more important parameter is power den-
sity (where higher power densities achieve abla-
tion  and  lower  power  densities  cause  charring), 
and  the  physician  stops  the  procedure  when  an 
appropriate  endpoint  is  reached.  On  the  other 
hand, in PDT applications with CW light where 
the clinical endpoint might be delayed, the total 
fluence and power density are important predic-
tors of the tissue response.

In  CW  mode,  CO2  lasers  are  used  with  a 
focusing (noncollimated) handpiece such that the 

physician can control spot size and tissue effects 
simply  by  moving  the  handpiece  tip  toward  or 
away  from  the  skin.  The  subsequent  rapid 
changes in power density offer “on the fly” flexi-
bility and control.

A  thorough  knowledge  of  a  specific  laser’s 
operation and quirks is imperative for optimal and 
“safe”  lasering.  Vendors  are  creating  lasers  that 
are more intuitive to operate. Increasingly, manu-
facturers have added touch screen interfaces with 
application-driven  menus  and  skin- type  specific 
preset  parameters.  Some  devices  permit  patient 
laser parameters to be stored for future reference. 
Most lasers are designed such that the handpiece 
and  instrument  panels  are  electronically  inter-
faced.  It  follows  that  the  laser  control  module 
“knows” what spot size is being used. Typically 
this  “handshake”  occurs  when  one  inserts  the 
handpiece into the calibration port, or through a 
control  cable  from  the  handpiece  to  the  laser 
“main frame”. With others, one selects the spot-
size on the display, and the laser calculates the flu-
ence accordingly. For example, one of our erbium 
YAG lasers possesses interchangeable lenses for 
1, 3, 5, and 7 mm spots. However, there is no feed-
back  from  the  handpiece  to  the  laser  control 
board. The user “tells” the laser which lens cell is 
inserted, and the laser calculates the fluence based 
on the selected spot and selected pulse energy. In 
this case, if one changes the spot size (for exam-
ple, by exchanging the 7 mm for the 3 mm lens 
cell), the laser still “thinks” the 7 mm spot is being 
used,  and  the  actual  surface  fluence  is  now  ~5× 
the fluence on the panel. The resulting impact on 
the skin surface (the wound depth and diameter) 
should  alert  the  enlightened  user  to  reassess  his 
parameter selection.

Most lasers calibrate through a system where 
the end of the handpiece is placed in a portal on 
the base unit (Fig. 1.3). This configuration allows 
for  interrogation  of  the  entire  system,  from  the 
“pumping” lamps to the fiber/articulated arm to 
the  handpiece  optics.  For  example,  if  a  fiber  is 
damaged,  the  laser  will  fail  calibration,  and  an 
error  message  appears.  Other  systems  measure 
the output within the distal end of the handpiece 
using a small calibration module that “picks off” 
a portion of the beam.

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 




a

b

Handpiece
tip

Calibration port

7

Fig. 1.3  Figures show handpiece before and during insertion into calibration port of a Q switched alexandrite laser

There are some simple ways to interrogate for 
system  integrity.  One  can  examine  the  aiming 
beam  as  it  illuminates  a  piece  of  white  paper, 
checking  that  the  beam  edges  are  sharp—this 
suggests that the treatment beam is also sharp and 
the  profile  is  according  to  the  manufacturer’s 
specifications.  Also,  burn  paper  can  be  used—
here the laser is used with a low energy and the 
spot is checked for uniformity from beam edge to 
edge.  By  checking  the  impact  pattern,  one  can 
uncover  damaged  mirrors  in  the  knuckle  of  the 
articulated arm, or a damaged focusing lens that 
renders the laser unstable or unsafe. Likewise, for 
scanners, one can ensure that skin coverage will 
be uniform.

 1.  LEDs are becoming commonplace in biomed-

ical applications

 2.  Solid state lasers generally achieve the largest 

peak powers among laser types

 3.  The  laser  operator  should  know  every  nook 
and  cranny  of  a  laser’s  features  to  optimize 
patient outcomes and safety

 4.  Power density determines the mechanism for 

many LTIs

 Beam Profiles: Top Hat Versus 
Gaussian

Laser  beam  profiles  vary  based  on  intercavity 
design, lasing medium, and the delivery system. 
A  common  profile  is  Gaussian  or  bell-shaped. 
For many lasers, this profile represents the fun-

damental  optimized  “mode”  of  the  laser.  This 
shape  is  usually  observed  when  the  beam  has 
been  delivered  through  an  articulated  arm.  For 
some  wavelengths,  this  is  an  effective  way  to 
deliver energy (CO2 and erbium). The disadvan-
tage  of  the  rigid  arm  is  limited  flexibility,  the 
typically short arm length, the possibility of mis-
alignment  from  even  minor  impact,  and  a  ten-
dency  for  non- uniform  heating  across  the  spot 
[20].  For  example,  in  treating  a  lentigo  with  a 
Q-switched  alexandrite  laser  equipped  with  a 
rigid articulated arm, one may observe complete 
ablation  of  the  epidermis  at  the  center  of  the 
“spot”, but only whitening at the periphery. On 
the other hand, sometimes a bell-shaped profile 
is desirable, for example, when applying a small 
spot FIR beam with a scanner. In this scenario, 
the wings of the beam allows for some overlap 
without delivering “too much” energy at points 
of overlap.

The Gaussian profile can be modified outside 
the  cavity,  which  is  desirable  in  many  applica-
tions. With a fiber equipped delivery system, the 
beam is mixed within the fiber and can be shaped 
to be more flat-topped. The lentigo then is more 
likely  to  be  uniformly  heated  (so  long  as  the 
lesion  itself  if  uniformly  colored!).  Although 
fiber  delivery  systems  are  usually  preferred  by 
physicians,  some  laser  beams  are  difficult  to 
deliver through a fiber. Examples include far IR 
wavelengths  and  very  short  pulses  (i.e.,  few  ns 
with  typical  Q  switched  Nd YAG  lasers  whose 
high  peak  power  exceeds  the  damage  threshold 
of most fibers).

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



8

C
°

,
i
p
e
T
∆

;
u
a
,
r
e
w
o
P

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
–5

Palomar smooth pulse technology

Competing system

Skin safety level

Skin temperature

Skin temperature

Skin safety level

30

25

20

15

10

5

C
°

,
i
p
e
T
∆

;
u
a
,
r
e
w
o
P

0

5

10

15

20

25

0
–5

0

5

10

15

20

25

Time, ms

Time, ms

Fig. 1.4  Figure shows spiky versus smooth pulse and effect on epidermal temperature

 Pulse Profiles: Square Versus Spiky

The  pulse  profile  is  the  temporal  shape  of  the 
laser pulse (Fig. 1.4) [21]. In many pulsed laser 
applications, the “macro pulse” is comprised of 
several  shorter  micropulses  [22].  Depending  on 
the  application,  the  temporal  pulse  profile  may 
impact the tissue effect. For example, simply by 
increasing  the  pulse  number  from  four  to  six 
pulselets, the purpura threshold is increased with 
the  PDL.  Also,  highly  energetic  spikes  tend  to 
increase the epidermal to dermal damage ratio in 
applications such as laser hair reduction. This is 
especially true with green-yellow light in vascu-
lar applications.

 Summary of Wavelength Ranges

In  this  section  we  examine  wavelength  ranges 
that are useful for cutaneous surgery.

 1.  UV laser and light sources have been used pri-
marily for treatment of inflammatory skin dis-
eases  and/or  vitiligo,  as  well  as  striae.  The 
presumed  action  is  immunomodulatory.  The 
XeCl excimer laser emits at 308 nm, near the 
peak action spectrum for psoriasis. Other UV 
non-laser  sources  have  also  been  used  for 
hypopigmentation, striae, and various inflam-
matory  diseases  [22,  23].  Excimer  lasers  at 

193 nm have been used for skin and corneal 
ablation.

 2.  Violet  IPL  emissions,  low  power  410  nm 
LED,  and  fluorescent  lamps  are  used  either 
alone  or  with ALA.  Alone,  the  devices  take 
advantage of endogenous porphyrins and kill 
P. acnes [24]. After application, of ALA, this 
wavelength range is highly effective in creat-
ing singlet O2 after absorption by PpIX. Uses 
include treatment of actinic keratoses, actinic 
cheilitis, and basal cell carcinomas [25].

 3.  Visible light (green yellow) - VIS (GY). These 
wavelengths are highly absorbed by HgB and 
melanin  and  are  especially  useful  in  treating 
epidermal  pigmented  lesions  and  superficial 
vessels [26–28]. Their relatively poor penetra-
tion in skin (and the even poorer penetration 
in  blood—see  Table  1.1)  make  them  poor 
choices  for  treatment  of  deeper  pigmented 
lesions or deeper larger vessels. Their shallow 
penetration  depths  preclude  their  use  in  per-
manent  hair  reduction  (with  the  possible 
exception  of  very  large  spots  (i.e.,  IPL)  that 
enhance light depth). The effective portions of 
many IPL spectra include the GY range.

By the proper manipulation a laser delivery 
device, one can optimize parameters for selec-
tive  heating  of  pigmented  versus  vascular 
lesions. For example, by applying a compres-
sion handpiece without cooling with 595 nm, 
blood  is  depleted  as  a  target  and  pigment  is 

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Table 1.1  Absorption coefficients (cm−1) for various chromophores

Wavelength (nm)
Oxy HgB (40% Hct)
Deoxy HgB
Melanina
Water
Bloodless dermis
OPD in skin (μm)
a(net epidermis) for moderately pigmented adult—10% mel. volume fraction in epidermis [7, 29]

410
1990
1296
140
6.7 × 10−5
10
100

532
187
138
56
0.00044
3
350

595
35
96
38
0.0017
2
550

694
1.2
6.6
23
0.005
1.2
750

755
2.3
5.2
17
0.03
0.8
1000

810
3.6
2.7
13
0.02
0.6
1200

9

940
5.2
3.0
7
0.27
0.5
1500

1064
2.2
0.6
5.7
0.15
0.4
1700

a

b

In “sun” mode T
is increased

Fig. 1.5  Figure shows user controllable temperature change with an IPL. By increasing the handpiece tip temperature, 
pigmented lesion heating is favored over vascular heating

preferentially heated [30]. Also, by (see lime-
light desert mode—Fig. 1.5), one can increase 
or decrease the sapphire window temperature 
to enhance epidermal versus vascular heating. 
By reducing the pulsewidth into the nanosec-
ond  range,  melanosomes  are  preferentially 
heated  over  vessels.  For  example,  extremely 
short  Q-switched  532  nm  pulses  will  cause 
fine vessels to rupture, but inadequate heat dif-
fusion to the vessel wall precludes long term 
vessel destruction. On the other hand, melano-
somes  are  sufficiently  heated  for  single- 
session  lentigo  destruction.  By  choosing 
specific wavelengths with respect to HgB and 
melanin,  one  can  achieve  some  degree  of 
selective melanin or HgB heating. For exam-
ple, if one wanted to avoid HgB in heating a 
lentigo,  694  nm  (ruby)  represents  a  better 
choice than 532 or 595 nm. This choice might 
decrease inflammation by unintended heating 
of normal vessels in the dermis.

There are absorption peaks for PpIX in the 
green–yellow  range,  making  these  wave-

lengths  useful  for  PDT  (i.e.,  sodium  lamp, 
IPL,  frequency  doubled  Nd  YAG,  or  PDL) 
[31,  32].  On  the  other  hand,  all  visible  light 
can  be  used  for  PDT,  as  the  Soret  band  and 
smaller “Q-bands” can all create singlet O2 on 
irradiation  of  PpIX.  Therefore  the  532,  595, 
and IPL devices, when used adjunctively with 
ALA,  can  all  augment  the  cosmetic  result 
through  both  photothermal  and  photochemi-
cal effects.

 4.  Red and Near IR (I) (630, 694, 755, 810 nm). 
Deeply penetrating red light (630 nm) contin-
uous  wave  devices  are  efficient  activators  of 
PpIX  after  topical  application  of  ALA.  The 
694 nm (ruby) laser is optimized for pigment 
reduction  and  hair  reduction  in  lighter  skin 
types. The 810 nm diode and 755 nm alexan-
drite  laser,  depending  on  spot  size,  cooling, 
pulse duration, and fluence can be configured 
to optimize outcomes for hair reduction, len-
tigines, or blood vessels [33]. They are posi-
tioned  in  the  absorption  spectrum  for  blood 
and melanin between the GY wavelengths and 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



10

1064 nm. They will penetrate deeply enough 
in blood to coagulate vessels up to 2 mm [34–
36]; also, they are reasonably tolerant of epi-
dermal pigment in hair reduction (with surface 
cooling)  so  long  as  very  dark  skin  is  not 
treated  [37].  By  decreasing  the  pulsewidth 
into  the  nanosecond  range,  the  alexandrite 
laser  is  a  first  line  treatment  for  many  tattoo 
colors.

 5.  Near  IR  (II).  940  and  Nd  YAG  (1064  nm). 
These two wavelengths have been used for a 
broad range of vessel sizes on the leg and face 
[38].  They  occupy  a  unique  place  in  the 
absorption  spectrum  of  our  “big  3”  chromo-
phores,  that  is  blood,  melanin,  and  water. 
Because  of  the  depth  of  penetration  (on  the 
order  of  mm),  they  are  especially  useful  for 
hair  reduction  and  coagulation  of  deeper 
blood  vessels.  By  varying  fluence  and  spot 
size,  reticular  ectatic  veins,  as  well  as  those 
associated  with  nodular  port  wine  stains  or 
hemangiomas, can be safely targeted. On the 
other  hand,  they  are  not  well  suited  for 
epidermal- pigmented  lesions. Also,  although 
water absorption is poor, it exceeds that of the 
VIS and near VIS wavelengths. The result is 
that  940  and  1064  nm  achieve  large  volume 
temperature  elevation  in  the  skin,  and  with 
repeated  laser  impacts,  because  of  the  slow 
cooling  of  this  volume  (large  τ–vide  infra), 
catastrophic pan-cutaneous thermal damage is 
possible.  This  wavelength  (1064  nm)  repre-
sents  the  extreme  example  of  a  “what  you 
don’t see can hurt you laser” [18] (Fig. 1.6). 
The Q-switched YAG laser plays an expand-
ing  role  in  the  treatment  of  tattoos,  nevus  of 
Ota, and even melasma.

 6.  MIR-lasers  and  deeply  penetrating  halogen 
lamps.  These  lasers  and  lamps  heat  tissue 
water.  With  macrowounding  (>1  mm)  spot 
sizes, depending on where we want to heat, we 
can  “choreograph”  our  laser  and/or  cooling 
settings  to  maximize  the  skin  temperature  in 
certain  skin  layers.  In  general,  with  more 
deeply  penetrating  wavelengths,  larger  vol-
umes are heated. On the other hand, achieving 
temperature  elevations  in  the  volume  will 
require  higher  fluences  than  with  highly 

Fig. 1.6  Note scar after 1064 nm irradiation of a nodule 
within a port wine stain

absorbing wavelengths. Without surface cool-
ing, unless very small fluences are applied, a 
top  to  bottom  thermal  injury  occurs.  The 
absorption  coefficients  for  the  1320  nm, 
1450 nm, and 1540 nm systems are ~3 cm−1, 
20  cm−1,  and  8  cm−1  respectively  [39],  while 
the  effective  scattering  coefficients  are  about 
14, 12, and 11 cm−1. The corresponding pene-
tration depths are ~1500, 300, and 700 μm. It 
follows  that  for  equal  surface  cooling  and 
equal  fluences,  the  most  superficial  heating 
will occur with the 1450 nm laser, followed by 
the  1540  and  1320  nm  lasers.  Newer  deeply 
penetrating lamps have been introduced (Titan, 
Cutera, Brisbane, CA). They emit light over a 
1–2  μm  wavelength  band  with  relatively  low 
power  densities  and  long  exposures  (several 
seconds). In a typical scenario, the irradiation 
begins after a roughly 2 s period of cooling. At 
this point, a band of tissue from roughly 700–
1.5 μm deep in the skin is heated. By varying 
the fluence, this relatively large volume can be 
heated to different peak temperatures. As part 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



of each iteration, post pulse cooling is impera-
tive  because  such  a  large  volume  of  skin  is 
heated that a “thermal wake” advances toward 
the skin surface. If one removes the handpiece 
prematurely,  heat  accumulates  near  the  skin 
surface with the risks of pain, dermal thermal 
injury,  and  scarring  [40].  The  1320  nm 
Nd:YAG  has  been  used  in  the  endovenous 
ablation of the deep saphenous venous system 
as  well  as  laser  liposculpture.  Recently  the 
MIR spectral subset has become the mainstay 
for fractional non-ablative technologies.

 7.  Far infrared systems. The major lasers are the 
CO2,  erbium  YAG,  and  erbium  YSGG 
(chromium:yttrium-scandiumgallium-garnet) 
lasers. Overall, the ratio of ablation to heating 
is  much  higher  with  the  erbium YAG  laser. 
However, one can enhance the thermal effects 
of the Er YAG laser by extending the pulse or 
increasing the repetition rate, and likewise one 
can decrease residual thermal damage (RTD) 
of  the  CO2  laser  by  decreasing  pw  [41,  42]. 
Where  precision  is  required  in  ablation,  Er 
YAG is preferred. On the other hand, depend-
ing on settings, the CO2 laser enjoys a desir-
able  blend  of  ablation  and  heating.  The 
thresholds  for  ablation  for  CO2  and  erbium 
lasers  vary  inversely  with  their  optical  pene-
tration  depths  in  tissue  (20  μm  and  1  μm 
respectively).  This  assumes  thermal  confine-
ment.  It  follows  that  less  surface  fluence  is 
required  for  ablation  with  the  erbium  laser. 
The  CO2  laser  at  typical  operating  “pulsed” 
parameters  performs  self-limited  controlled 
heating  of  the  skin  [43,  44],  whereas  the 
erbium  laser  operates  in  an  almost  purely 
ablative regime. The erbium YSGG (2.79 μm) 
laser has recently been applied to LSR and its 
absorption  coefficient  makes  it  a  kind  of 
hybrid between CO2 and erbium YAG insofar 
as the ratios of heating to ablation. All three 
wavelengths  (2.79,  2.94,  and  10.6  μm)  have 
recently been integrated into fractional deliv-
ery systems.

11

 Beam Propagation: How the Laser 
Energy Gets to the Target

Skin optical properties determine the penetration, 
absorption, and internal dosimetry of laser light. 
The  laser  surgeon  can  divide  the  skin  into  two 
components,  (1)  the  epidermis  (primarily  an 
absorber of visible light due to melanin) and (2) 
The dermis (which can be envisioned as a carton 
of milk with red dots in it). Light tissue interac-
tions can be broken down into A. The transport of 
light  in  tissue,  B.  Absorption  of  light  and  heat 
generation  in  tissue,  C.  Localized  temperature 
elevation in the target tissue (and denaturation of 
proteins),  and  D.  Heat  diffusion  away  from  the 
target [17, 45].

The optical properties of the skin mimic a tur-
bid medium intermixed with focal discrete visi-
ble and infrared light absorbers (blood, melanin, 
bilirubin, and dry collagen) [46]. The thermal or 
photochemical effects depend on the local energy 
density at the target. Once the light penetrates the 
surface,  it  undergoes  a  series  of  absorbing  and 
scattering events. Photons statistically are either 
scattered or absorbed in a wavelength dependent 
fashion [1, 47]. Scattering is affected by the shape 
or size of the particle and the index of refraction 
mismatch between the particle and medium. For 
most tissues, for λ > 2.5 μm or < 250 nm, absorp-
tion dominates over scattering. For the remainder 
of  the  EM  spectrum,  scattering  is  the  primary 
attenuator of light in tissue with the exception of 
focal discrete absorbers (melanosome, HgB, etc.)
The  probabilities  of  absorption  or  scattering 
(designated μa and μs respectively, Table 1.1) are 
determined by experiment. For example, for a μa 
of 0.3 cm−1, the mean free path before absorption 
is 1/μa or 3.3 cm. Generally, light is attenuated as 
it propagates through tissue. In turbid tissue (i.e., 
the dermis, where collagen acts as the major scat-
terer),  the  fluence  attenuation  can  be  described 
by:

( ) =
I z

I keo

-(

z

/d

)

(1.3)

There are four key components in the sequence 
of  most  photothermal  laser-tissue  interactions 
(Sects. 7.1–7.4).

where  I(z)  is  the  local  subsurface  fluence  at 
some  depth  z,  k  is  a  constant  that  accounts  for 
backscattered  light  and  δ  is  the  wavelength 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions 
 




12

dependent  optical  penetration  depth  of  light,  or 
the depth at which there is attenuation to 37% of 
the surface value (37% = l/e, where e = 2.7, the 
base  of  the  natural  logarithm).  This  depth  is 
determined  by  absorption  and  scattering  coeffi-
cients,  as  related  by  the  simple  equation  below 
[1, 47]:

d

=

1

3
m m m
s
a

+

a

(

(1.4)

-(
1

g

)

)

Where g is the anisotropy coefficient (a mea-
sure of the “mean” direction of the scattered pho-
tons). g = 0.9 for the skin. As μa and μs increase, δ 
decreases  accordingly.  For  example,  for  hair 
removal,  based  solely  on  depth  of  penetration, 
longer  wavelengths  such  as  800  and  1064  nm 
should be preferable to 694 and 755 nm. In the 
visible light range, this is why red light can pen-
etrate  one’s  hand  when  shining  a  flash  light  on 
the surface. Scattering decreases roughly propor-
tional  to  λ3/2,  so  that,  for  example,  an  800-nm 
photon will on average travel about 1.3 times as 
far  in  tissue  as  a  700-nm  photon  without  being 
scattered.  It  follows  that  for  “more”  scattering 
wavelengths, there will be greater accumulation 
of photons near the surface. In addition to scatter-
ing,  this  superficial  convergence  of  photons  is 
based on index of refraction mismatches between 
air  and  tissue  [1].  Accordingly,  light  must  be 
deposited more slowly with shorter wavelengths 
to avoid overheating the superficial tissue.

There  is  backscattered  light  that  can  yield  a 
higher fluence beneath the tissue than at the tis-
sue surface [48]. This paradox of tissue optics is 
that the internal fluence can actually exceed that 
at the surface, as below:

I

I
o=

+(
1 6

R

)

(1.5)

Where I is the subsurface energy density, Io is 
the  surface  fluence,  R  =  the  surface  remittance 
(0.3,  0.6,  and  0.7  for  585  nm,  694  nm,  and 
1064 nm respectively). (personal communication 
from RR Anderson, 1994)

Since  neither  macromolecules  nor  water 
strongly absorb in the red light and near IR (600–
1200 nm) this range allows deeper penetration in 

most tissues [10]. Various skin pigments can play 
optical  “tricks”  on  the  cutaneous  surgeon.  For 
example,  poikiloderma  appears  to  be  a  mix  of 
hyperpigmentation and hypervascularity. In fact, 
although there is some melanin influence in the 
red-brown appearance, the dyschromia is by far 
more a disorder of matted telangiectasia. This is 
confirmed by the good response of the condition 
to the PDL, even with aggressive surface cooling 
that  should  preclude  any  impact  on  superficial 
cutaneous hyperpigmentation. Additionally, with 
diascopy, “poikilodermatous” skin often appears 
no browner than the surrounding apparently nor-
mal skin. The explanation is that deoxy-Hb con-
tributes to a “pigmented skin appearance”. This 
finding follows from the absorption spectrum of 
deoxy-Hb  in  the  630–700  nm  range,  which  is 
very similar to the absorption spectrum of epider-
mal melanin. The size of the vessels in the super-
ficial venous plexus is such that the transmitted 
light through these vessels is approximately 50% 
lower  than  the  incident  intensity.  These  vessels 
therefore appear dark [49].

In most biological systems, tissue constituents 
show broad absorption bands with only a few dis-
tinct  absorption  peaks.  From  200  to  290  nm 
(UVC),  all  biological  objects  (cells  and  tissue) 
absorb  energy  very  strongly.  From  290  to  320 
(UVB)  nm,  only  a  limited  number  of  biomole-
cules show absorption (aromatic amino acids and 
nucleic  acids).  For  UVA  320–400  nm,  light  is 
weakly  absorbed  by  colorless  skin  parts.  From 
400  to  1000  nm  mainly  pigments—bilirubin, 
blood, and melanin absorb light. The heterogene-
ity  of  the  skin  allows  for  discrete  heating  over 
this range, and therefore selective photothermol-
ysis  (SPT)  is  exploited  in  this  band.  For 
>1100 nm, all biomolecules have specific strong 
vibrational absorption bands. Tissue water is the 
primary determiner of the response to laser in this 
wavelength range [9].

The absorption coefficient (μa) is the relative 
“probability” per unit path length that a photon at 
a  particular  wavelength  will  be  absorbed.  It  is 
therefore measured in units of 1/distance and is 
typically  designated  μa,  given  as  cm−1.  The 
absorption coefficient is chromophore and wave-
length dependent. For larger heterogeneous vol-

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 
 
 




umes,  μa  can  be  weighted  according  to  the 
fraction of a specific chromophore. For example, 
for a dermis a typical blood fraction (f.blood) is 
0.2%, assuming that the blood is uniformly dis-
tributed in the skin [7].

Following 

the  descriptive  convention  of 
describing  an  equivalent  average  homogeneous 
f.blood, the net absorption of the dermis, μa.derm, 
is calculated:

m
a

derm
.

= (
.
f blood

f blood
.
)(

)(
m
a

)

.

blood

m
a
skinbaseline
.

+ -(
1

(1.6)

)

Scattering  is  responsible  for  much  of  light’s 
behavior  in  skin  (beam  dispersion,  spot  size 
effects, etc.). The dermis appears white because 
of light scatter. The main scattering wavelengths 
(relative  to  absorption)  are  between  400  and 
1200 nm. Absorption occurs where the laser fre-
quency  equals  the  natural  frequency  of  the  free 
vibrations  of  the  particles  (absorption  is  associ-
ated  with  resonance)  [50].  Scattering  occurs  at 
frequencies  not  corresponding  to  those  natural 
frequencies  of  particles.  Scattering  is  decreased 
as wavelength increases [7].

There  are  four  major  chromophores  (water, 
blood, tattoo ink, and melanin) in cutaneous laser 
medicine [50]. Water makes up about 65% of the 
dermis and lower epidermis. There is some water 
absorption in the UV. Between 400 and 800 nm, 
water absorption is quite small (which is consis-
tent  with  our  real  world  experience  that  light 
propagates quite readily through a glass of water). 
Beyond 800 nm, there is a small peak at 980 nm, 
followed by larger peaks at 1480 and 10,600 nm. 
The  water  absorption  maximum  is  2940  nm 
(erbium YAG).

Hemoglobin: There is a large HgBO2 (oxyhe-
moglobin) peak at 415 nm, followed by smaller 
peaks at 540 and 577 nm. An even smaller peak is 
at  940  nm.  For  deoxyhemoglobin  (HgB),  the 
peaks are at 430 and 555 nm. The discrete peaks 
of hemoglobin absorption allow for selective ves-
sel heating. Although the 410 nm peak achieves 
the greatest theoretical vascular to pigment dam-
age ratio among the other peaks, scattering is too 
strong  for  violet  light  to  be  a  viable  option  for 
vascular applications.

13

Melanin: Most pigmented lesions result from 
excessive melanin in the epidermis. By choosing 
almost any wavelength (<800 nm), one can pref-
erentially heat epidermal melanin. Shorter wave-
lengths will create very high superficial epidermal 
temperatures,  whereas  longer  wavelengths  tend 
to bypass epidermal melanin (i.e., 1064 nm).

Fat: Fat shows strong absorption at 1200 and 
1700 nm [51]. Although the ratios of fat to water 
absorption  are  small,  the  small  differences  are 
exploited  with  the  proper  choice  of  parameters. 
1200 nm might represent the best choice due to 
decreased overall water absorption and therefore 
increased penetration. Sebum is similar to fat but 
also is comprised of wax esters and squalene.

Carbon:  Carbon  is  a  product  of  prolonged 
skin heating. Once carbon is formed at the skin 
surface, the skin becomes “opaque” to most laser 
wavelengths  (that  is,  most  energy  will  be 
absorbed  very  superficially).  It  follows  that  the 
dynamics  of  surface  heating  changes  immedi-
ately  once  carbon  is  formed.  This  can  be  used 
creatively as an advantage. For example, one can 
convert  a  deeply  penetrating  laser  to  one  that 
would only affect the surface by using a carbon 
dye. This has been accomplished with a laser peel 
using a Q Switched Nd YAG laser.

Collagen: Dry collagen has absorption peaks 
near 6 and 7 μm. With a free electron laser oper-
ating  at  these  wavelengths,  collagen  can  be 
directly  heated.  Ellis  et  al.  found  that  this 
approach  might  allow  for  less  tissue  irradiation 
and less thermal damage than CO2 laser [52].

 Heat Generation

 Selective Photothermolysis (SPT)
Non-bulk  skin  heating  is  based  on  selective 
absorption  by  discrete  chromophores  of  rela-
tively low concentration (i.e., melanin, hemoglo-
bin).  Dr.  Leon  Goldman  showed  that  color 
contrast allowed for selective damage of dermal 
targets as early as 1963 [53]. However, it was Dr. 
RR Anderson  who  elegantly  described  the  con-
cept of selective photothermolysis [26]. Selective 
photothermolysis offered a mathematically rigor-
ous  rationale  for  tissue-selective  lasers.  As 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions 




14

described  by  Dr.  Anderson,  extreme  localized 
heating relies on: (1) a wavelength that reaches 
and is preferentially absorbed by the desired tar-
get structures; (2) an exposure duration less than 
or equal to the time necessary for cooling of the 
target  structures;  and  (3)  sufficient  energy  to 
damage the target. The heterogeneity of the skin 
allows for selective injury in microscopic targets. 
The focal nature of the heating decreases the like-
lihood  of  catastrophic  pancutaneous  thermal 
damage.  For  example,  one  can  apply  a  4  mm 
laser beam and observe only a 1 mm wide tattoo 
line  “whiten”  with  Q  switched  Nd  YAG  laser 
with a larger round spot (Fig. 1.7)—the skin out-
side the tattoo but within the spot will appear nor-
mal. Also, a darker lentigo will become white but 
a lighter lentigo will remain unchanged. The pri-
mary areas where SPT is helpful in dermatology 
is  in  the  treatment  of  vascular  lesions,  tattoos, 
and pigmented lesions. However, even in applica-
tions where water is the chromophore, the prin-
ciples of SPT are useful, as one can design precise 
heating  and  ablation  protocols  based  on  wave-
length and pulse duration [54].

Thermal Relaxation Time
The  thermal  relaxation  time  (τ)  is  the  interval 
necessary for a target to cool to a certain percent-
age of its peak temperature [28]. Larger objects 
require  longer  times  than  smaller  volumes  to 
cool.  For  example,  a  tubful  of  warm  bathwater 
requires much longer than a thimbleful to cool to 
room  temperature.  With  laser  irradiation,  we 

Fig. 1.7  Tattoo treated with 4 mm spot Q YAG laser; note 
only 1 mm linear tattoo is heated (indicated by immediate 
frosty whitening) 

assume  instantaneous  heating  of  the  target,  so 
that τ is the time for cooling after the pulse. If the 
pulse  is  too  long,  the  target  cools  during  the 
pulse,  akin  to  one  pouring  water  slowly  into  a 
leaky  bucket.  If  the  water  represents  heat,  one 
observes that the bucket never fills (akin to a tar-
get  never  becoming  very  hot).  If  one  wants  to 
spatially  confine  heating  one  chooses  a  short 
pulse  less  than  τ  of  the  chromophore.  For  the 
same volume, a sphere will cool faster than a cyl-
inder,  which  will  cool  faster  than  a  slab. When 
defining  thermal  relaxation  time,  the  target  size 
and  geometry  are  important.  Normally,  τ  is 
defined by:

d

k2 / g

(1.7)

where  δ  is  the  optical  penetration  depth  for 
homogeneously absorbing layers (such as tissue 
water  for  IR  applications),  and  κ  is  the  thermal 
diffusivity (a measure of heat capacity and con-
ductivity—for tissue, κ ~ 1.3 × 10−3 cm2/s). For 
discrete  absorbers,  i.e.,  the  melanosome  or  a 
blood vessel, τ is defined in terms of the particle 
size, and δ represents the diameter of the particle. 
κ  is  the  thermal  diffusivity,  a  quantity  based  on 
the thermal conductivity and specific heat of the 
medium,  and  “g”  is  a  constant  based  on  the 
geometry of the target (slab, cylinder, or sphere) 
[26]. See Table 1.2 for sample thermal relaxation 
times for common targets in skin.

The often-used term “thermal relaxation time 
of  the  skin”  is  meaningful  only  when  used  for 
specific wavelengths (or specific skin structures, 
i.e.,  the  epidermis).  With  a  ubiquitous  absorber 
such  as  tissue  water,  τ  should  be  considered 
within  the  context  of  the  wavelength  dependent 
optical penetration depth (δ) and the laser source, 
not the dimensions of the skin constituents. For 

Table  1.2  Thermal  relaxation  time  of  some  potential 
targets

Erythrocyte—2 μs
200 μm hair follicle—40 ms
Melanosome (0.5 μm)—0.25 μs
Nevus cell (10 μm)—0.1 ms
0.1 mm diameter vessel—10 ms
0.4 mm diameter vessel—80 ms
0.8 mm diameter vessel—300 ms

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 




example, if one uses the 1540 nm laser, the entire 
epidermis  and  large  portions  of  the  dermis  are 
heated, and τ is on the order of seconds, because 
δ is several hundred micrometer. So even though 
τ  of  the  epidermis  is  about  10  ms  based  on  its 
thickness,  a  thicker  slab  of  skin  is  heated  at 
1540 nm, the epidermis will take several seconds 
to cool because there is little temperature gradi-
ent between it and that of the dermis.

For most targets a simple rule can be used: the 
thermal relaxation time in seconds is about equal 
to the square of the target dimension in millime-
ters. Thus a 0.5 μm melanosome (5 × 10−4 mm) 
should  cool  in  about  25  ×  10−8  s,  or  250  ns, 
whereas  a  0.1  mm  PWS  vessel  should  cool  in 
about  10−2  s,  or  10  ms.  Recall  that  τ  is  derived 
from  a  solution  of  a  differential  equation  and 
does not represent an absolute cooling time, but 
rather  provides  approximate  pulsewidths  for 
varying degrees of thermal confinement [13].

Once the local subsurface energy density has 
been determined (Eq. 3), heat generation can be 
predicted  by  energy  balance  (conservation  of 
energy), pulse duration, thermal relaxation time, 
and  the  wavelength  specific  absorption  for  that 
target.

The  temperature  increase  of  a  desired  target 
can be roughly calculated by knowing the absorp-
tion  and  scattering  coefficients,  surface  light 
dose,  size  of  the  target,  and  the  length  of  the 
pulse, as follows:

DT

=

g

/ 2

F
m
a
z
c
r

æ
çç
è

t
r
+
t t
r
p

ö
÷÷
ø

(1.8)

where Fz is the local subsurface fluence, ρ is 
the density, c is the specific heat “g” is a geomet-
ric factor (“1” for planes, “2” for cylinders, and 
“3”  for  spheres),  τp  is  the  laser  pulse  duration, 
and τr is the thermal relaxation time of the target 
(time for target to cool to 37% of peak tempera-
ture), defined by Eq. 1.7. Thus one can perform 
some quick algebraic calculations to estimate the 
peak temperatures of local targets in the skin. The 
temperature  generally  decays  as  a  function  of 
diameter and time from the target. For ex, in hair 
removal the shaft and bulb, heavily invested with 
melanin,  reach  high  temperatures,  and  as  the 

15

wave of heat diffuses from this cylinder, the tem-
perature decreases.

Spatially  selective  temperature  elevation  is 
possible  when  (1)  the  absorption  coefficient  of 
the target exceeds that of collateral tissue (selec-
tive photothermolysis), or (2) when the “innocent 
bystander” tissues are cooled so their peak tem-
peratures do not exceed some damage threshold 
or (3) with very small microwounds (fractional). 
Localized heating, for example, in telangiectasia 
and  lentigines,  follows  from  the  concentrations 
of  blood  and  melanin  there,  respectively,  such 
that  μa  is  focally  increased.  Verification  of  the 
models can be made by real-time measurements, 
thermocouple needles, thermal cameras, etc.

The geometry (and therefore the microscopic 
characteristics)  of  lesions  is  important—for 
example in the treatment for a nevus versus a len-
tigo,  the  nevus  is  composed  of  melanocytes  in 
aggregates  as  nodules  (collectively  the  nodules 
are often several hundred micrometer in diame-
ter) whereas the lentigo is a mere sheet of mela-
nocytes  some  10  μm  thick.  For  example,  in 
treating  nevus  with  a  long  pulsed  alexandrite 
laser with a high fluence, the TRT will approach 
a second. From the above equation, it follows that 
thermal  confinement  will  be  high,  and  the  peak 
temperature  will  rise  accordingly.  More  impor-
tantly,  the  thick  slab  of  melanocytes  will  take 
long  to  cool,  such  that  the  will  be  considerable 
heat diffusion away from the target. On the other 
hand,  the  lentigo  represents  a  slab  only  tens  of 
microns thick; there will be heat diffusion during 
the long pulse and rapid cooling after the pulse. 
Thus,  with  ms-domain  fluences,  the  nevus  case 
might  result  in  scarring,  and  a  lighter  lentigo 
might  not  become  hot  enough  for  clearance.  If 
one applies ns pulses to the two lesion types, the 
lentigo  shows  a  good  response  with  possibly 
complete clearing, whereas the nevus will require 
multiple  sessions,  as  each  laser  application  will 
result in heat confined to the most superficial part 
of the lesion.

Two  “offshoots”  of  SPT  are  the  concepts  of 
thermal damage time and thermokinetic selectiv-
ity (TKS).

Thermal  damage  time.  In  some  applications 
the  immediate  absorber  and  the  intended  target 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions 
 




16

are not collocated (i.e., hair shaft and hair bulb/
bulge).  Thermal  damage  time  is  defined  as  the 
pulsewidth that achieves irreversible target dam-
age  with  sparing  of  the  surrounding  tissue. The 
thermal  damage  time  represents  the  interval 
when the outermost part of the target reaches the 
target damage temperature through heat diffusion 
from  the  heater.  In  this  case  the  eventual  target 
and the heater (for example, hair shaft) are differ-
ent  and  at  a  considerable  distance  from  each 
other [55]. Using this model, the thermal damage 
time can be many times longer than the thermal 
relaxation  time.  For  example,  for  laser  hair 
removal, with a 100 μm shaft and 30 μm follicle, 
the TDT can approach several hundred millisec-
onds [55].

Thermokinetic  selectivity:  Along  the  same 
lines is the concept of thermal kinetic selectivity 
(TKS). Using this principle, one selects larger or 
smaller targets for heating based on pulse dura-
tion. For example, if one wants to damage larger 
targets while sparing relatively smaller ones, the 
pulse  duration  is  extended  beyond  the  thermal 
relaxation time of the smaller target. In this man-
ner, i.e., a melanosome will be heated to a lower 
temperature than the subjacent vessel.

 Molecular Basis of LTI
Most devices for cosmetic rejuvenation are based 
on  photothermal  or  “electrothermal”  mecha-
nisms, that is, the conversion of light or electrical 
energy to heat. Two fundamental processes gov-
ern all interactions of light with matter: absorp-
tion and scattering. Absorption and excitation are 
necessary for all photobiologic effects and laser- 
tissue interactions. Energy is proportional to fre-
quency and inversely proportional to wavelength. 
Thus  a  532  nm  photon  (532  nm  is  the  distance 
between two of the transverse waves in a stream 
of  light)  is  twice  as  energetic  as  a  1064  nm 
photon.

Macroscopically,  the  atomic  events  in  LTIs 
are  not  identifiable,  but  on  the  molecular  level, 
EMR exchanges energy only in discrete quanti-
ties  (photons).  The  molecular  basis  of  LTIs  is 
based on electronic transitions for the ultraviolet 
(UV) and visible (VIS) wavelengths. For exam-
ple, hemoglobin is excited to a higher electronic 

(internal 

state,  followed  by  a  complete  relaxation  into 
vibrational  modes 
conversion). 
However,  NIR  wavelengths  and  beyond  are 
absorbed  via  rotational  and  vibrational  excita-
tions in biomolecules (all of which are hydrocar-
bons  with  the  exception  of  pigments).  These 
reactions  can  be  considered  a  two-step  process. 
In the first the molecule is “pumped” to an excited 
state.  Then,  through  a  process  known  as  non- 
radiative decay, there are inelastic collisions with 
nearby  molecules  [50].  The  temperature  rise 
results  from  the  transfer  of  photon  energy  to 
kinetic energy.

For  thermal  reactions  to  occur,  the  energy 
must  be  randomized  with  a  large  ensemble  of 
molecules  through  statistical  processes.  With 
HgB,  the  electronic  excited  state  gives  way  to 
vibrational modes. With longer wavelengths, the 
quantized  energy  packets  correlate  with  vibra-
tional transitions from NIR and MIR.

 Reaction Types and Effects of Heating

•  Photochemical  effects  (usually  10–1000  s; 

10−3–10 W/cm2)

•  Photothermal  effects  (1  ms–100  s;  1–106  W/

cm2)

•  Photomechanical  and  photoionizing  effects 

(10 ps–100 ns; 108–1012 W/cm2)

 Photothermal Effects
Photothermal  processes  depend  on  type  and 
degree of heating, from coagulation to vaporiza-
tion. With a very short pulsewidths (pw),  lasers 
vaporize  targets.  For  example,  in  treating  blood 
vessels, rapid heating results in acute vessel wall 
damage  and  petechial  hemorrhage  (with  Q 
switched  532  nm)  [56–58].  With  intermediate 
length  pulses  (0.1–1.5  ms),  one  can  gently  heat 
targets without immediate rupture of the vessels. 
Still intravascular thrombosis can create purpura 
and delayed hemorrhage. With still longer pulses 
(6–100 ms), the ratio of contraction to thrombo-
sis increases and side effects are less likely. On 
the  other  hand,  too  long  pulses  with  very  small 
targets  can  create  two  problems.  With  highly 
absorbing  targets,  (i.e.,  tattoo  inks)—the  heat 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



17

shorter wavelengths and are therefore preferable 
for  treatment.  In  fact,  as  the  blood  temperature 
rises during laser irradiation, 532 nm light trans-
mission  increases  and  longer  wavelength  (i.e. 
595 nm) transmission decreases [29, 60].

Even  after  the  heating  source  is  removed, 
whole blood optical properties change. A macro-
scopic  coagulum  emerges  comprised  of  dena-
tured  HgB,  cell  membranes  of  erythrocytes  and 
plasma  proteins.  Met  HgB  formation  is  also 
important,  with  absorption  peaks  near  630–
635  nm.  With  increasing  met  HgB  and  deoxy 
production,  755–1064  nm  lasers  penetrate  less 
and  will  generate  more  heat  in  vessels.  This  is 
one argument for sequential pulses with 1064 nm 
lasers. One potential downside of this is that an 
abrupt  increase  in  absorption,  particularly  with 
940–1064  nm,  causes 
too  much  collateral 
damage.

Thermal Injury to Cells
There  is  a  range  of  measurable  effects  on  skin 
based  on  temperature.  Below  43  °C,  the  skin 
remains intact, even for very long exposures [45, 
61]. The first change is a conformational change 
in the molecular structure that occurs at tempera-
tures  from  43  to  50  °C.  After  several  minutes, 
there will be tissue necrosis as described by the 
Arrhenius  equation  (an  equation  that  quantita-
tively describes conversion of tissue from a native 
to denatured state). Thermal denaturation is a rate 
process: temperature increases the rate at which 
molecules  denature,  depending  on  the  specific 
molecule. For example, at 45 °C, cultured human 
fibroblasts die after about 20 min. However, the 
same cells can withstand over 100 °C for 10−3 s. 
In  general,  a  temperature  of  >60°  lasting  for  at 
least 6 s leads to irreversible damage.

Coagulation
Temperature,  directly  related  to  the  average 
kinetic energy of molecules, is a critical factor in 
tissue coagulation. Denaturation depends on time 
and temperature, and at least for exposures >1 s, 
conforms  to  a  rate  process  as  described  by  the 
Arrhenius  equation.  The  characteristic  behavior 
of  the  Arrhenius-type  kinetic  damage  model  is 
that,  below  a  threshold  temperature,  the  rate  of 

Fig.  1.8  Figure  shows  extensive  damage  from  long 
pulsed 1064 nm irradiation of tattoo particle

generation is so great and long-lived that signifi-
cant  diffusion  occurs  to  the  surrounding  dermis 
(Fig. 1.8). On the other hand, using a long pulse 
YAG for a nevus of Ota results in an insufficient 
temperature  rise  as  the  pigmented  nevus  cells 
cool off too fast during the delivery of the pulses 
(also  melanin  absorption  is  much  weaker  than 
black ink).

A mild–moderate temperature increase results 
in  denaturation  of  enzymes  and  function.  If  the 
heating is very fast, a phase change occurs [50, 
59].  Depending  on  the  rate  of  energy  delivery, 
photovaporization occurs with or without inertial 
confinement  (vide  infra),  where  time  is  short 
compared  to  the  time  for  pressure  relaxation. 
Here the laser induced pressure causes compres-
sive stresses in tissue. Microcracks in the tissue 
are the result of these large stress gradients [13]. 
Whitening  after  ns  irradiation  is  thought  be  gas 
vacuoles with scattering that resolve as the as the 
“spaces” are refilled with interstitial fluid.

Hemoglobin undergoes a complex set of reac-
tions  when  heated.  Formation  of  met  HgB  and 
deoxy HgB occur during irradiation on the order 
of ms, representing a real-time change in tissue 
optics.  During  the  heating  phase,  hemoglobin 
absorption undergoes a bathochromic (red) shift 
of the 580 nm absorption peak (the 540 nm peak 
does  not  shift). This  has  important  implications 
for designing optimal blood vessel protocols. For 
example,  it  has  been  suggested  that  585  nm 
though  600  nm  should  penetrate  deeper  than 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



18

is  negligible;  and 
this  value 

it 
damage  accumulation 
increases  precipitously  when 
is 
exceeded. An example of coagulation is the cook-
ing of an egg white. Thermal denaturation is both 
temperature  and  time  dependent,  yet  it  usually 
shows an all or none like behavior. Most denatur-
ation reactions follow first order rate kinetics. For 
a  given  heating  time  there  is  usually  a  narrow 
temperature region above which complete dena-
turation  occurs.  As  a  rule,  for  denaturation  of 
most proteins, one must increase the temperature 
by about 10 °C for every decade of decrease in 
the heating time to achieve the same amount of 
thermal coagulation [13].

An  absolute  temperature  for  coagulation- 
denaturation does not exist. For very short times, 
higher  temperatures  than  the  oft-quoted  “62–
65 °C” should be required. Early signs of micro-
scopic  damage  are  vacuolization,  nuclear 
hyperchromasia and protein denaturation (recog-
nized  as  a  birefringence  loss  for  collagen). 
Moderate temperature-induced damage phenom-
ena in tissue are difficult to assess with conven-
light  microscopy.  In  fact,  histology 
tional 
represents and conveys the overall reactions of a 
complex system and cannot be related to molecu-
lar species. Specimens obtained 24 h after irradi-
ation tend to be more sensitive than those obtained 
immediately  after  treatment,  as  often  a  day  is 
required to show sign of necrosis; also, an inflam-
matory response might be the most sensitive indi-
cator of injury. Particularly in light of newer large 
volume low intensity heating devices for rejuve-
nation, more sensitive tools might be required to 
characterize  subtle  thermal  effects.  Beckham 
et al. [62]. found that over a narrow temperature 
range, heat shock protein (HSP) expression cor-
related with laser induced heat stress, and that the 
HSP production followed the Arrhenius integral. 
Thus HSP expression (in addition to tissue ultra-
structure, i.e., EM) might be an excellent tool to 
examine low intensity high volume heat injury.

Vaporization
At a certain threshold power density, coagulation 
gives way to photovaporization (ablation). Water 
expands as it is converted to steam. Vaporization 
is  beneficial  in  that  much  of  the  heat  is  carried 

away  from  the  skin.  The  evaporation  of  tissue 
water acts as a sort of buffer, reducing the peak T 
to just over 100 °C. When there is vaporization 
there is also increasing pressure as the water tries 
to  expand  in  volume.  The  expansion  leads  to 
localized microexplosions. At the surface, parti-
cles are ejected at supersonic velocities. At tem-
peratures  beyond  100  °C  (without  further 
vaporization), carbonization takes place, which is 
obvious by blackening of adjacent tissue and the 
escape  of  smoke.  Carbon  is  the  ultimate  end 
product of all living tissues being heated and car-
bon temperatures often reach up to 300 °C. When 
treating  a  wart  at  low  power  densities  with  the 
CO2  laser,  one  can  observe  almost  simultane-
ously  incandescence  and  combustion.  In  water 
free  structures,  such  as  char,  temperatures  can 
reach  1000  °C,  and  incandescence  can  be 
observed  with  continued  irradiation  of  char  at 
long pulse cw CO2 lasers. Normally, this should 
be  avoided,  because  the  depth  of  tissue  injury 
will extend well beyond the blackened skin sur-
face [50]. This is particularly true, for example, 
when treating a rhinophyma or performing laser 
skin resurfacing.

 Photomechanical Effects
With very short pulses, there is insufficient time 
for  pressure  relaxation.  Mechanical  damage  is 
observed  with  high-energy,  submicrosecond 
lasers  for  tattoo  and  pigmented  lesion  removal. 
The  time  threshold  for  inertial  confinement  is 
predicted by the relation [1]:

d / v  

(1.9)

where  δ  is  the  target  diameter  and  v  is  the 

velocity of sound in tissue.

Inertially confined ablation occurs when there 
is  high-pressure  at  constant  volume.  In  a  very 
short pulse, the energy is invested so quickly one 
that there is no time for the pressure to be relieved. 
Under  these  conditions  of  inertial  confinement, 
there’s  not  enough  time  for  material  to  move—
this  can  lead  to  the  generation  of  tremendous 
pressures  and  relief  through  shock  waves.  For 
example, one can feel the recoil during laser tat-
too treatment if one touches the skin surface near 
the impact site.

A. A. Lloyd et al. 




 Photochemical Effects
The absorption of light in tissue does not always 
generate  heat.  A  term  luminescence  describes 
cases  where  absorbed  light  causes  emission  of 
light of a different color. This occurs after elec-
trons are excited from some lower (ground) state, 
to an upper level, excited state. If the process is 
fast, fluorescence occurs. If the is an intermediary 
reaction and longer decay time, phosphorescence 
occurs.  Most  photochemical  reactions  occur  in 
the UV and violet portion of the spectrum as the 
electronic  transitions  demand  highly  energetic 
photons.

Photochemical reactions are governed by spe-
cific  reaction  pathways,  whereas  thermal  reac-
tions  tend  to  be  non  specific.  Photochemical 
reactions include fluorescence, phosphorescence 
and  photodynamic  action.  The  former  two 
involve the reemission of light after absorption at 
lesser  wavelengths.  Fluorescence  spectra  are 
increasingly used in diagnostic applications. An 
example  is  PpIX  fluorescence  to  determine  the 
amount of photosensitizer (PS) in the skin after 
application  of  ALA.  Fluorescence  spectra  can 
also  be  used  to  assess  collagen  content  in  the 
skin. Also, keratin fluoresces such that a milium 
will display a bright yellow color during irradia-
tion with a green light laser. We have occasion-
ally  used 
to  distinguish  a 
technique 
deep-seated  milium 
from  a  small  pearly 
BCC. Endogenous fluorescence applications are 
increasing  and  have  included  assays  of  NADH, 
collagen, and amino acids [63].

this 

In  photodynamic  reactions,  a  photosensitizer 
(acting as a catalyst) is excited by a certain wave-
length  of  light.  The  PS  then  undergoes  several 
sequential  decays,  forming  singlet  O2.  In  the 
presence of oxygen, oxygen is transformed from 
its triplet state, which is its normal ground state, 
to  an  excited  singlet  state.  The  excited  singlet 
state  oxygen  reacts  with  biological  molecules 
and attacks plasma and intracellular membranes 
(type II PDT reactions). The most common pho-
tosensitizer (PS) in dermatology is PpIX. This PS 
is  formed  by  skin  cells  by  the  pro-drug,  ami-
nolevulinic  acid  (ALA).  Most  photochemical 
reactions  proceed  more  efficiently  with  lower 
power densities, such that for example, the Blu-U 

19

light  (DUSA,  Vahalla,  NY)  or  Omni  Lux 
(Phototherapeutics, CA, USA) will outperform a 
pulsed source (IPL, KTP, or PDL) for AKs with 
one  treatment.  However,  largely  because  most 
practitioners  posses  at  least  one  pulsed  visible 
light source, they have been widely used in PDT 
and  shown  to  be  useful  in  a  range  of  PDT- 
responsive  skin  disorders  [64,  65].  Because 
pulsed light sources in dermatology do not meet 
the 
threshold 
(4  ×  108  W/m2)  [66],  in  theory  there  should  be 
significant PDT activity [67].

theoretical  PDT 

saturation 

Most  photochemical  activity  is  observed 
between  320  and  630  nm. The  main  absorption 
peaks  for  PpIX  are  415,  504,  538,  576,  and 
630  nm.  Beyond  800  nm,  photochemistry,  even 
with exogenous photosensitizers or pro-drugs, is 
unlikely. PDT reactions are complex; for exam-
ple,  with  ALA,  optimization  require  an  under-
standing  of  skin  pharmacokinetics,  conversion 
kinetics of ALA to PpIX, and proper delivery of 
light dose (including power density, wavelength, 
etc.). A  new  development  is  a  possible  role  for 
vascular  specific  therapy  with  PDT.  Both  with 
hematoporphyrin  and  benzoporphyrin  deriva-
tives,  this  approach  is  being  investigated  for 
refractory deeper vascular lesions [68].

Photodisruption or Photodecomposition
This  reaction  type  is  usually  observed  at  107–
108 W/cm2 in the UV range. Usually there is little 
residual thermal damage (RTD).

Rather than heating water directly as their FIR 
counterparts,  these  lasers  can  exceed  the  bond 
energies of many organic compounds. Among the 
available  wavelengths  (193,  241  and  308  nm) 
XeCl (308 nm) is more likely to be more thermal 
because of the lowered energy per photon.

Excimer Laser (308 nm)
The  mechanism  of  action  for  the  excimer  laser 
(XeCl) is thought to be the same as narrow band 
UV therapy. A reduction in cellular proliferation 
most  likely  plays  a  role  in  epidermal  cellular 
DNA synthesis and mitosis. In Parrish’s original 
study  in  1981,  he  showed  that  wavelengths 
between  300  and  313  nm  were  most  effective 
[69].  It  appears  that  the  excimer  laser  works 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



20

through in an immunomodulatory way much like 
standard non coherent UVB “light boxes”. There 
may be a thermal component as well at fluences 
>800 mJ/cm2.

Biostimulation
Biostimulation  belongs  to  the  group  of  photo-
chemical  interactions.  Increasingly  this  field  is 
validated by the number of well-executed investi-
gations.  Typical  fluences  are  in  the  range  of 
1–10 J/cm2, and temperature elevation is absent. 
Potentially positive reactions include (1) Increase 
in  phagocytic  activity  (2)  Depression  in  rate  of 
bacteria replication (3) Increase in repair of skin, 
and (4) Stimulation of wound healing. We should 
not debunk these applications—certainly they are 
being studied more and we are witnessing a tran-
sition from lab to bedside. One example of a “bio-
stimulation”  device  is  the  Gentlewaves  LED 
Photomodulation  unit  (Light  BioScience,  LLC, 
Virginia  Beach,  VA).  This  device  uses  590  nm 
light in a high repetition rate and low power den-
sity  to  increase  collagen  synthesis  and  enhance 
facial  tone.  Cell  culture  work  supports  this  con-
cept [70]. Newer LED devices (800 nm) also sup-
port  a  role  for  photorejuvenation  and  even  hair 
growth.  It  is  unknown  if  any  special  features  of 
laser light are relevant for biostimulation, although 
at least one study supports coherence as a possible 
factor  in  photomodulation.  Some  investigators 
have shown that laser showed the best effect while 
the non-coherent LED light showed the poorest. 
Coherence  does  not  influence  the  transmission; 
rather,  because  of  interference  in  the  scattered 
light field, coherency influences the microscopic 
light distribution into tissue.

Plasma Induced Ablation
With very high power densities exceeding 108 W/
cm2, optical breakdown occurs. Plasma removes 
skin without evidence of mechanical or thermal 
damage  when  choosing  appropriate  parameters. 
Plasmas are sometimes produced by laser tattoo 
removal,  where  one  can  observe  a  spark  [13]. 
There  is  a  new  resurfacing  system  that  uses 
plasma created by an RF excited N2 gas. Unlike 
laser-induced  plasma,  this  flame  heats  tissue  by 
direct heat transfer from the plasma edge.

 Heat Conduction Away 
from the Chromophore

This final “physical” step in LTIs in important in 
characterizing  collateral  damage.  Once  heat  is 
generated, heat losses are based on heat conduc-
tion, heat convection, or radiation. Radiation can 
be neglected in most types of laser applications. 
A  good  example  of  heat  convection  is  transfer 
from blood flow. Heat conduction is the primary 
mechanism by which heat is transferred to unex-
posed tissue structures.

 Cooling
Surface cooling enhances efficacy and safety in 
skin laser surgery, especially for visible light tech-
nologies,  (i.e.,  green–yellow  light  sources  such 
as IPL, KTP laser, and PDL) that are popular in 
cutaneous laser surgery. They are also the wave-
length  ranges  where  epidermal  damage  is  most 
likely. The epidermis is an innocent bystander in 
cutaneous laser applications where the intended 
targets, such as hair follicles or blood vessels, are 
located in the dermis. Specifically, absorption of 
light  by  epidermal  melanin  causes  skin  surface 
heating.

The first goal is of surface cooling is preserva-
tion  of  the  epidermis.  The  second  and  related 
goal of surface cooling permits higher fluences to 
the  intended  target  (i.e.,  the  hair  bulb  and/or 
bulge or a subsurface blood vessel). Another ben-
efit of surface cooling is analgesia, as almost all 
cooling  strategies  will  provide  some  pain  relief 
[71–79].

The  timing  of  the  cooling  relative  to  the 
laser  pulse  is  important.  Cooling  can  be  pre, 
during  the  pulse  (parallel),  or  after  the  pulse 
(post)  [79].  Post  cooling  may  prevent  retro-
grade heating (i.e., from the vessel back to the 
epidermis) from damaging the skin surface. A 
cooling protection factor (CPF) has been pro-
posed by Dr. Rox Anderson. The cooling pro-
tection  factor  is  the  ratio  of  fluence,  with  and 
without surface cooling, that spares the epider-
mis. It is defined by:

CPF

=

T T
-
ic
c
T T
-
i

c

(1.10)

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 




21

In the above equation, Tic and Ti are basal layer 
temperatures  before  laser  irradiation  with  and 
without  cooling,  respectively.  Tc  is  the  critical 
temperature at which thermal injury occurs. The 
detailed calculations described later indicate that 
if  the  initial  skin  temperature  is  30  °C,  contact 
cooling reduces the temperature of the basal layer 
to about 20 °C. If Tc is assumed to be 60 °C (it is 
actually  somewhat  higher  for  the  brief  laser 
exposure times in this analysis), this would give 
the  CPF  as  (60–20)/(60–30)  or  1.33.  Similarly, 
cryogen cooling reduces the temperature to about 
0 °C, thus giving a CPF value as (60–0)/(60–30) 
or  2.0.  Finally,  there  is  convective  air  cooling, 
where cold air is commonly used in skin chilling. 
The Zimmer (Cyro5, Zimmer Medizin Systeme, 
Ulm, Germany) directs −10 °C air at the skin at a 
rapid rate (1000 L/min). This system proves for 
good bulk cooling but spatial localization of the 
cooling  is  poor. The  CPF,  depending  on  the  air 
temperature  and  nozzle  velocity,  is  near  that  of 
contact cooling.

in macrophages of the dermis—the combination 
of  gold  and  Q-switched  lasers  produces  a 
photothermal- photochemical  conversion  such 
that the gold darkens to a light blue or grey color 
(Fig. 1.9). This reaction is a good teaching tool in 
that it points out the role of pulse duration on the 
laser tissue interaction [80, 81]. As noted earlier, 
some  reactions  are  dependent  on  power  den-
sity—with higher power densities, multi-photon 
interactions  are  possible,  that  is,  the  energy  is 
condensed into such a short duration, that simul-
taneous  “arrival”  of  two  photons  at  the  same 
locale can result in two-photon absorption. In the 
case  of  gold,  the  chemical  compound  structure 
can  be  changed  (from  crystalline  to  elemental). 
Once  the  reaction  occurs,  one  can  apply  longer 
pulses  to  diminish  the  dyspigmentation  (even 
with  the  same  wavelength!).  This  reaction  also 
underscores  the  importance  of  beam  scattering, 
as the “gold” Q-switched laser reaction extends 
beyond the diameter of the beam with each pulse.

 Some Interesting Concepts 
and Ideas in Laser Tissue 
Interactions

With  Q  switched  lasers,  one  might  hear  a  loud 
“pop”  accompanied  by  a  spark-like  emission  at 
the  skin  surface.  Normally  this  is  the  result  of 
inorganic  compounds  (make-up)  remaining  in 
the skin during irradiation. Thorough cleaning of 
the skin will remove this distraction. One should 
ensure  that  any  dark  markers  are  off  the  skin, 
especially  when  using  long  pulsed  visible  light 
technologies.  For  example,  one  of  our  trainees 
placed a black marking pen to outline an area for 
a test spot for laser hair removal. During irradia-
tion, the beam was absorbed almost completely 
by the ink—the hot ink cooled at the expense of 
the skin surface, such that a very superficial burn 
occurred.

Also,  one  should  consider  oral  medications 
both  in  the  genesis  of  treatable  lesions  (i.e., 
 minocycline hyperpigmentation), and in the cau-
sation  of  pigmentation  disturbances  (i.e.,  gold). 
In the case of gold, the medication is sequestered 

Fig. 1.9  Note blue macules

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



22

Focusing  the  laser  beam: A  trick  to  increase 
the dermal to epidermal damage ratio is use of a 
convergent  lens.  This  tool  increases  the  local 
radiant exposure in the dermis (targeting the hair 
bulb,  a  blood  vessel,  or  dermal  water). 
Theoretically, one should be able to use smaller 
incident fluences, therefore achieving some pro-
tection of the epidermis.

Vacuuming  the  target  in  the  laser  beam:  A 
company (Aesthera, Livermore, CA) has created 
a  pneumatic  device  whereby  the  skin  is  vacu-
umed into the light path such that the light pene-
tration  in  skin  is  enhanced.  In  this  way  more 
energetic  high  frequency  photons  can  be  deliv-
ered, for example, to the hair follicle, with rela-
tive epidermal sparing. By applying suction, the 
absorption  coefficient  of  the  epidermis  can  be 
reduced  by  up  to  25%.  The  technologies  have 
also been used for acne and pain reduction.

By proper timing of the suction with respect to 
irradiation, selective targeting of various chromo-
phores can be achieved, for example, to increase 
the  dermal  blood  fraction  in  pale  PWS  (and 
increase  the  blood  vessel  diameter).  The  very 
small vessels in paler PWS have too small vessel 
diameters  for  thermal  confinement—that  is,  the 
vessels cool too quickly to reach a critical tem-
perature. By applying suction, the blood volume 
fraction  increases,  not  simply  a  result  of  the 
mechanical  force  but  a  physiologic  response  as 
well [82, 83].

Pixilated Injury (aka fractional photothermol-
ysis): One can use a “pixilated” injury with water 
as  a  chromophore  in  what  is  called  fractional 
photothermolysis.  Roughly  100  μm  spots  have 
been  used  with  250–500  μm  spacing  [84].  The 
tissue  can  recover  from  this  fractional  injury 
without the widespread epidermal loss observed 
after traditional resurfacing applications. A num-
ber of technologies have been introduced. Despite 
a wide range of devices, the pitch, wound diam-
eter, wound depth, and other wound features have 
not  been  optimized.  Ideally  one  would  design 
devices that maximize downtime while maximiz-
ing  cosmetic  enhancement.  One  can  consider 
ablative and non ablative approaches. Early evi-
dence suggests that there is a difference between 
ablative  and  non  ablative  wound  healing  even 

with similar microvolumes of injury, that is, even 
when the same total volume is observed, wound 
healing proceeds differently.

In  the  most  common  approach,  75–150  μm 
wide  microwounds  are  created  in  the  skin 
(Fig.  1.10)  with  densities  ranging  from  100  to 
1500  microwounds/cm2.  By  spatially  confining 

Fig. 1.10  Note damage pattern with 1540 nm microbeam

A. A. Lloyd et al.



the micro-lesions, deeper wounds can be created 
than with a “slab-like” approach, while still man-
aging a larger measure of safety. There are both 
ablative  and  nonablative  approaches.  Ablative 
devices  include  the  Profractional  laser  (Sciton), 
equipped  with  a  scanned  microbeam,  the  Pixel 
erbium  YAG  laser  from  Alma  (Alma  lasers, 
Buffalo  Grove,  IL),  and  a  newly  introduced 
2940  nm  technology  from  Palomar.  Reliant 
Technologies manufactures a fractional CO2 laser 
system  (Re  Pair)  that  creates  125  μm  diameter 
“ablative” wounds as deep as 1 mm. Early inves-
tigations have shown immediate superficial skin 
tightening.

“Macrowound”  fractional  technologies  create 
wounds >300 μm in diameter. These include the 
KTP  laser  with  a  scanner  (with  approximately 
700 μm wounds) as well as the active FX CO2 sys-
tem (Lumenis, Santa Clara, CA), which creates an 
array  of  1.3  mm  wounds  and  covers  approxi-
mately  60%  of  the  surface  area  per  session. 
Wound depths range from 80 to 150 μm depend-
ing  on  pulse  energy.  Fluences  with 
these 
approaches range from 5 to 15 J/cm2. The applied 
fluences are another means (besides wound diam-
eter)  to  differentiate  microwound  injuries  from 
macrowound 
injuries.  With  ablative  micro-
wounds, fluences tends to exceed 30× the ablation 
threshold,  whereas  with  traditional  resurfacing 
laser  applications  (CO2  and  erbium)  fluences 
range from 0.8 to 10× ablation threshold per pass.
The  original  non  ablative  fractional  laser  was 
(Reliant  Technologies,  Mountain  View,  CA), 
deploying  a  1550  nm  scanned  microbeam  that 
required  a  surface  blue  dye  for  proper  tracking 
along  the  skin.  The  newer  Fraxel  technology 
achieves deeper wounds and does not require the 
dye. Palomar introduced a fractional 1540-nm sys-
tem.  This  device  uses  a  “stamping”  approach, 
where  each  10  mm  macro-spot  is  comprised  of 
100 beamlets. With progressive passes, an increas-
ing skin surface area is covered. Another nonabla-
tive example is a 1440-nm/1320-nm Nd YAG laser 
(Affirm, Cynosure, Chelmsford, MA) that delivers 
hundreds of beamlets interspersed with a relatively 
uniform low-fluence background irradiation.

After  high-fluence  fractional  CO2  and  erbium 
YAG laser (50–200 J/cm2), one observes microcrat-

23

ers on routine histology. Particularly for the erbium 
YAG  laser,  there  is  immediate  water  loss  through 
these  portals  of  entry  [85],  and  postoperative  dis-
comfort is often severe for an hour after the proce-
dure.  Pinpoint  bleeding  is  sometime  observed, 
particularly with higher- pulse energies and shorter 
pulsed erbium YAG applications.

Optical damping: Replacing air (n = 1.0) with a 
higherindex  medium  at  the  skin  surface  such  as 
glass (n = 1.5) or sapphire (n = 1.7) tends to spare 
the epidermis. This effect has nothing to do with 
heat transfer, but rather is a consequence of optical 
scattering  behavior.  At  wavelengths  from  about 
600–1200 nm, most light in Caucasian epidermis is 
back- and multiply-scattered light. By providing a 
match to the skin’s refractive index, internal reflec-
tion of the back-scattered light is greatly reduced, 
decreasing  the  natural  convergence  of  photons  at 
the skin surface. This version of optical epidermal 
sparing requires a physically thick external medium 
such as a sapphire window or heavy layer of gel.

 Compacting the Dermis

One can decrease the depth photons must propa-
gate  by  applying  pressure  over  the  treated  area. 
This  maneuver  may,  for  example,  decrease  the 
relative  depth  of  the  bulb  and  bulge  of  the  hair 
follicle  up  to  30%  relative  to  the  skin  surface. 
Disadvantages include variability in the amount 
of pressure, such that adjacent treatment areas are 
exposed to different subsurface fluences. Also, it 
is unclear if compacting the dermis might alter its 
scattering  properties.  In  theory  compression 
should decrease water content and improve der-
mal transmission [86].

Spot diameter: In general the spot size should 
be  3–4×  >  δ  (for  wavelengths  where  scattering 
dominates  absorption),  as  larger  spots  make  it 
more  likely  that  photons  will  be  scattered  back 
into the incident collimated beam [13]. Photons 
scattered out of the beam are essentially wasted. 
Traveling “alone”, they carry insufficient energy 
to  cause  macroscopic  thermal  responses.  The 
consequences of spot size can be explained best 
on  surface  to  volume  arguments.  Larger  beams 
(with the same surface fluence as smaller beams) 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



24

create  deeper  subsurface  cylinders  of  injury 
because  there  is  less  surface  versus  volume  for 
photons  to  escape.  Basically,  for  small  beams 
(narrow), scattered photons are carried out of the 
beam path after only a few scattering events. As a 
clinical  example  of  the  effect  of  spot  size,  we 
have  found  for  3  mm  vs.  6  mm  spots  with  the 
YAG laser that roughly ½ the fluence is required 
with  the  larger  spot  for  leg  vein  clearance.  For 
shallow  penetrating  lasers  such  as  CO2  and 
erbium where the δ ≪ spotsize (all cases except 
for fractional devices), the diameter of the beam 
does not affect the tissue response. That is why 
equivalent results can be obtained for skin resur-
facing  using  pulsed  CO2  lasers  versus  scanned, 
tightly  focused  cw  CO2  lasers  [44].  Although 
studies suggest that large spots increase the ratio 
of  dermal  to  epidermal  damage  (usually  desir-
able,  for  example,  when  treating  a  hair  bulb), 
there  are  instances  where  small  spots  are  desir-
able. For example, when treating a smaller vessel 
with an Nd YAG laser, a small spot with higher 
fluence will result in a higher percentage of the 
energy  being  invested  in  vessel  heating  versus 
larger spots. For any turbid medium, even if the 
spot is “top hat”, there will be an accumulation of 
photons near the center of the beam such that a 
greater  clinical  effect  will  often  be  noted  at  the 
center of the spot.

Changing  optical  properties 

in  real-time: 
Chromophore concentrations can change during a 
treatment session. One should never consider each 
laser tissue interaction as an independent event, but 
rather a cumulative process where visual endpoints 
are  the  most  important  ally  for  the  physician. 
Optical properties of the skin are like the weather 
[3],  and  one  must  accommodate  the  changes  in 
real-time. For example, the dermal blood fraction 
increases after one pass of the PDL, such that for a 
second pass, the skin temperature will increase due 
to the higher μa. The phenomenon will, for exam-
ple, lower the purpura threshold on a second pass. 
On the other hand, general anesthesia can decrease 
the blood flow in PWS and require a higher light 
dose.  A  failure  to  respond  to  these  real-time 
changes accounts for many laser treatment short-
comings. In treating a PWS, tetracaine, for exam-

ple, can increase local blood flow, as can applying 
heating  pad  or  simply  placing  a  patient  in 
Trendelenburg position. One of our patients actu-
ally  performs  jumping  jacks  prior  to  her  rosacea 
laser therapy to increase the response [87].

Most  laser  tissue  interactions  are  threshold- 
based, that is, a certain amount of energy must be 
invested  over  a  specific  time  to  achieve  the 
desired efficacy. For example, to lighten a lentigo 
on the nose, even ten very–low-fluence passes, so 
long as the interval between passes is long enough 
to preclude cumulative heating, will not result in 
clearance. The analogy is a smallish man trying 
to push a car up a hill. Even if the man were to 
arrive every day at 6 AM to push the heavy car, 
the  vehicle  will  remain  stationary.  There  is  no 
incremental car movement each day. One “laser” 
exception to this analogy is perhaps tissue tight-
ening  and  protein  denaturation  over  large  vol-
umes  with  complex  molecules  (i.e.,  collagen), 
where  repeated  low  impact  low  fluence  passes 
have  been  shown  to  increase  the  percentage  of 
denatured collagen fibers recruited in to the tight-
ening process. Part of this phenomenon might be 
secondary  to  differential  denaturation  tempera-
tures of older versus younger fibers.

When 

treating  vascular 

lesions,  multiple 
“low”  fluence  passes  can  achieve  cumulative 
improvement.  For  example,  a  second  pass  even 
seconds after an initial pass with the YAG laser or 
PDL  will  achieve  additional  bluing  of  an  angi-
oma. The dynamics of vascular heating is some-
what  different  than  for  water  and  melanin.  In 
vascular applications, dynamic changes in blood 
properties  play  a  role.  Met-Hg  is  produced  by 
one pass so that additional passes can result in an 
increase  in  absorption.  Also  the  partial  clot 
enhances absorption venous red blood.

With  pigment  lesions,  repeated  laser  pulses 
delivered over short periods (0.25–1 s) intervals 
results in progressive graying or darkening of the 
lesions. On the other hand, repeated passes (after 
>1 min) will result in cumulative extent.

Both immediate and delayed pigmented dark-
ening  (seconds  to  minute  after  irradiation)  after 
application is most likely due to optical property 
changes in melanin as well as erythema deep to 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



25

the lesions that might add to the darkening per-
ception of (Fig. 1.11).

Optical clearing with hyperosmolar solutions: 
Transparency of the skin is enhanced by topical 
application or intradermal injection of solutions 
such as glycerin [88]. Water and collagen become 
less bound such that the effective scattering coef-
ficient of the dermis is reduced. Already this con-
cept has been applied to increase the visibility of 
blood vessels from the surface. Possible applica-
tions  include  tattoo  removal,  where  particles 
often are found several mm deep in tissue. More 
recently Perfluorodecalin has been applied topi-
cally to accelerate the clearing of the immediate 
tissue  whitening  response  after  tattoo  removal. 
Once  the  whitening  response  has  diminished 
(usually about 5 min after the application), a sec-
ond treatment can be applied in the same session 
without the tissue scattering created by the first 
pass [89].

“Carbonization” at the surface: Carbon will 
cause all wavelengths to increase absorption such 
that one can convert a deeply penetrating laser to 

a more superficially penetrating laser by having a 
fine carbon layer at the surface. For example, one 
can  “convert”  a  694  nm  ruby  laser  into  a  laser 
with  CO2  laser  like  effects  by  applying  a  fine 
layer of graphite from a copy machine to the skin 
surface.  In  this  way  the  694  nm  laser  energy  is 
confined  to  the  surface  by  the  almost  100% 
absorption  by  carbon.  This  fine  layer  of  heated 
materiel then cools much like a superficial layer 
of tissue heated by a CO2 laser alone.

Photon  recycling:  The  remittance  of  human 
skin is wavelength dependent (vide supra). These 
reflected photons are scattered into the environ-
ment and “wasted” in surgical laser applications. 
One can design a simple hemispherical reflector 
to return reflected light to the incident spot on the 
skin. In theory the gain in total energy available 

to skin is a factor of 

1
R RS M

)

1 -(

, where RS is the 

skin reflectance, and RM is that of a hemispherical 

mirror. For example, if RS is 0.7, and RM is 0.9, a 

Darkening
after IPL

Whitening
after Q alex

Fig.  1.11  Figure  shows  immediate  pigment  response 
after IPL and Q switched alexandrite laser

gain  of 

1
-(
1 0 63
.

)

achieved.

,  or  almost  threefold,  can  be 

Photothermal  responses  in  individual  cells. 
Most  of  our  characterization  of  laser-tissue 
responses  is  based  on  “macroscopic”  responses. 
That is, individual cells are rarely examined dur-
ing  and  after  laser  irradiation.  When  focal  cell 
damage has been examined, the following consid-
erations are made. (1) Heterogeneity of cell struc-
ture can lead to extreme localized light absorption 
and temperature elevation different from that of a 
homogenous medium. (2) Localized overheating 
may  cause  cell  damage,  even  in  the  absence  of 
average thermal effects over larger volumes [90].
After  absorption  of  a  laser  pulse,  non-radia-
tive  relaxation  of  optical  energy  occurs  within 
10−11 s. Thus heating at the site of absorption is 
instantaneous. On the other hand, heat diffusion 
is much slower and characterized by the TRT. In 
experiment, not unexpectedly, it was found that 
that  temperature  fields  in  cells  were  more  uni-
form  with  longer  pulses.  It  follows  that  short 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



26

pulses  have  smaller  thermal  fields  but  higher 
localized  T  elevations.  The  shorter  the  laser 
pulse,  the  more  the  final  tissue  response  will 
depend on the properties of the local absorbing 
components. One interesting phenomenon is that 
on a localized level, an initial thermal field does 
not provide the maximum amplitude of the inte-
gral photothermal response inside a cell. Rather, 
the T response reaches its maximum as a result 
of the multiple secondary thermal fields as they 
emerge.

Using a polarizing lamp to enhance illumina-
tion. Laser treatment can be enhanced by using a 
polarizing lamp during procedures to treat vascu-
lar  and  pigmented  lesions.  This  is  particularly 
helpful, for ex. when treating PWS in kids using 
general  anesthetic,  the  lamp  is  [91]  helpful  to 
delineate  the  edges  of  the  PWS  prior  to  treat-
ment.  Also,  the  visual  enhancement  tends  to 
result  in  more  complete  elimination  of  vessels, 
therefore patients are more satisfied.

Selective  cell  targeting.  A  process  called 
selected  cell  targeting  has  been  examined  as  a 
way to destroy selected cells. This precise energy 
deposition is achieved by using laser pulses and 
light absorbing immunoconjugates tagged to the 
respective  cells.  The  investigators  in  one  study 
showed, for example, that lymphocytes could be 
selectively damaged by attaching iron oxide mic-
roparticles  absorbing  565  nm  radiation  at  those 
sites [92]. One can imagine, in the future, using 
this type of modality to treat T-cell mediated dis-
eases  such  as  atopic  dermatitis  or  psoriasis.  In 
this way, one makes the “bad guy” more notice-
able to the laser.

Scatter  limited  therapy—using  small  micro-
beams. Reinisch [93] proposed the use of beam 
diameter  to  titrate  the  depth  of  penetration,  For 
example,  we  have  studied  a  fractional  1064  nm 
ms  laser  (100  μm  diameter  microbeam  and 
100  mb/cm2)  technology  to  achieve  superficial 
vessel  heating  with  relative  epidermal  sparing 
with just such a device to limit penetration into 
the  dermis.  By  using  the  aforementioned  spot 
size arguments, one can exploit the properties of 
small  spots  to  change  the  way  particular  wave-
lengths behave in the skin. For example, one can 
tailor a 1064 nm laser to heat progressively larger 
depths of skin by increasing the spot size.

 1.  LTIs are usually based on varying degrees of 
light absorption by tissue HgB, melanin, and 
water.

 2.  Wavelength  ranges  should  be  chosen  to 
achieve as much specificity as possible in tis-
sue heating

 Radiofrequency (RF) Technology

With R  radiofrequency energy, local heat gener-
ation  depends  on  the  local  electrical  resistance 
and current density. The distribution of the cur-
rent density is determined by the configuration of 
the electrodes with respect to the skin anatomy. 
There  are  multiple  types  of  electrode  deploy-
ments [94–97].

 Monopolar vs. Bipolar

Radiofrequency energy induces tissue heating in 
multiple  ways,  one  by  creating  bulk  heating  of 
the dermis while sparing the epidermis via cool-
ing mechanisms, and alternatively, micro needles 
can be placed in the skin to deliver small coagula-
tive injuries [98, 99].

Since  radiofrequency  energy  stimulates  the 
generation  of  new  collagen  and  elastin,  most 
devices  require  at  least  three  treatments  and 
effects are not typically fully seen until 1–3 months 
after the last treatment. One benefit to using radio-
frequency devices is that the energy is colorblind 
and passes through the melanin and hemoglobin 
present in the tissue; therefore, all skin types can 
be treated. One should note that there is attenua-
tion of the electrical field as a function of depth 
(like light and lasers); however, the specific equa-
tions that guide the specifics of the attenuation are 
beyond the scope of this chapter.

There are four broad types of RF interventions 
in  the  skin.  One  is  a  monopolar  system  where 
a  capacitive  coupling  device  is  placed  on  the 
surface and heat is delivered for a few  seconds. 
Simultaneously  and  just  after  the  “pulse”,  the 
surface  is  cooled.  The  second  is  a  bipolar  sys-
tem comprised of metal rails on the skin surface 
where the current is alternated in a rapid manner 
(300  kHz–1  MHz)  between  the  superficial  skin 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



layers. Generally, in this configuration, the depth 
of the heating is roughly ½ the distance between 
the electrodes. In the third type of intervention, 
an array of needle or pin electrodes is placed in 
the  skin  such  that  very  focal  heating  zones  are 
created  at  predetermined  depths.  A  final  type 
of  RF  heating  is  capacitive  far  field  heating, 
where a system of electrodes delivers energy at 
27.12 MHz to create apoptosis in fat.

For  monopolar  radiofrequency,  the  delivery 
electrode is in the hand piece and the return elec-
trode  is  placed  elsewhere  on  the  patient’s  body 
whereas  with  bipolar  radiofrequency,  the  deliv-
ery  and  return  electrodes  are  both  incorporated 
into  the  hand  piece. Therefore,  with  monopolar 
radiofrequency  the  area  of  heating  is  a  column/
cylinder  extending  from  the  epidermis  towards 
the subcutaneous tissue. The electrical energy is 
most  concentrated  near  the  tip  of  the  delivery 
electrode  and  decreases  rapidly  with  distance, 
with the penetration depth about half the size of 
the delivery electrode. However, the behavior of 
the  current  as  it  passes  through  the  body  to  the 
return  electrode  is  somewhat  unpredictable. 
Monopolar  skin  rejuvenation  systems  create 
large-volume heating. Electrical energy is distrib-
uted uniformly over the electrode surface through 
“capacitive  coupling”.  This  type  of  coupling 
reduces  the  natural  accumulation  of  electrical 
energy at the electrode edge [100]. The first non- 
ablative  RF  device  (Therma  Cool  TC,  Solta 
Medical, Hayward, CA) uses cryogen spray cool-
ing (CSC), where the spray is started before the 
RF  current.  Interestingly,  if  an  electric  field  is 
induced perpendicular to the skin-fat interface, a 
monopolar device can selectively heat large areas 
of fat while sparing the skin and muscle [98].

With  bipolar  radiofrequency,  a  U  shaped  area 
of  heating  is  created  between  the  delivery  and 
return  electrodes  in  the  hand  piece  and  thus  the 
current travels a fixed distance. The depth of the 
“U”  is  limited  to  one  half  of  the  fixed  distance 
between the electrodes. Therefore, the distribution 
of,  as  well  as  the  location  of  the  radiofrequency 
current,  is  controlled  and  predictable  within  the 
tissue. In one scenario, cooled bipolar electrodes 
are combined with a diode laser, halogen lamp, or 
intense pulsed light device. In this configuration, 
there is synergy between the two energy sources 

27

[99]. The theory predicts that once the selectively 
targeted  chromophores  are  heated  by  the  visible 
light,  their  impedance  decreases  and  the  subse-
quent RF energy will preferentially heat those tar-
geted  tissues  (i.e.  hair  and  vessels). A  purported 
advantage  of  the  treatment  is  that  lower  optical 
energies  can  be  used  to  selectively  heat  sub-sur-
face targets than if a light source were used alone 
(thus enhancing epidermal preservation).

In  microneedling  fractional  radiofrequency 
devices, the needles become the delivery and return 
electrodes  and  the  electric  power  and  current  is 
divided among the needles. In this configuration, 
the device fractionates the radiofrequency energy 
among several delivery and return  electrodes. With 
uninsulated needles as electrodes, the entire needle 
conducts heat, and wounds are created along the 
entire length of the needle. Insulated needles only 
allow  the  tip  of  the  needle  to  heat  and  therefore 
the epidermis is preserved. There are also devices 
where  the  needles  (or  “pins”)  are  deployed  very 
superficially  (only  down  to  100–300  μm)  where 
both fine lines and pigment can be reduced with 
multiple treatment sessions.

 How RF Creates Dermal Heating

Skin has inherent impedance, which is the resis-
tance  to  electric  current,  and  when  an  electric 
current  meets  resistance  it  generates  heat  in 
accordance with Joule’s law,

Q = I2Rt

where Q is the heat generated in joules, I is the 
electric  current,  R  is  the  resistance  and  t  is  the 
time of application. Ohm’s law is V = IR where V 
is the voltage, I is the electric current and R is the 
resistance. Ultimately, it is the local current dis-
tribution,  time,  and  resistance  (impedance)  that 
determine the local heat generation.

One can envision local RF effects as P = GV2 
where  P  is  the  power  loss  in  the  tissue,  G  is  the 
local conductivity of the tissue, and V is the voltage 
drop across the target. If one examines Fig. 1.12, 
the local heat generation can always be determined 
if one knows the microenvironment of the electrical 
system. Oftentimes, we must simplify the  analysis 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



28

Fig. 1.12  Heating 
homogeneous tissue 
with direct-contact, 
conducting plates

E

I

I

G

a

C

d

J

Id

Ic

Physical
Configuration

b

jB

Equivalent
Circuit 

c

δ

V

~

V

~

J

δ

δ

Elemental
Volume

Where

I    = Current
G  = Admittance
J  = Current density
V  = Rms voltage
C  = Capacitance
Id  = Displacement current
B  = Susceptance

by characterizing the interaction in terms of macro 
scale electrical equivalent circuits.

For  example,  if  we  consider  a  non-contact 
capacitive  electrode  system,  where  we  have  a 
“series  circuit”  comprised  of  capacitive  and 
resistive parallel parts (Fig. 1.13), the fat will be 
preferentially heated according to Joules law. In 
this  particular  capacitive  electrode  application 
(i.e.  Vanquish,  BTL  Aesthetics,  Prague,  Czech 
Republic), spacing of the plates is important. The 
spacing  should  prevent  too  close  positioning  to 
the skin surface, or the superficial skin might be 
overloaded  with  current.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
sweating  occurs  under  the  spacer,  local  current 
on the skin can produce thermal injury.

If  we  look  at  the  scenario  in  Fig.  1.14,  one 
sees  the  highest  T  will  be  achieved  in  the  sub-
cutaneous  fat  under  the  electrodes,  where  the 
tissues are modeled as a “series” circuit. On the 
other  hand,  between  the  electrodes,  the  superfi-
cial muscles will be heated more. If one examines 
the accompanying equations above Fig. 1.14, one 
can see that the power delivery in the fat will be 
roughly an order of magnitude larger than that in 

the muscle. This observation only holds true for 
this  particular  electrode  configuration  and  can-
not be extrapolated to other dissimilar electrode 
deployments.

Blood  has  the  highest  electrical  conductivity 
among most body components. At 1 MHz, blood 
conductivity  is  0.7  siemens/meter  (S/m),  where 
1 S is equal to the reciprocal of 1 Ω. Wet skin is 
at  0.25  S/m  and  finally  dry  skin,  fat,  and  bone 
have  the  lowest  conductivity  at  around  0.02–
0.03  S/m  [99]. Additionally,  tissue  conductivity 
is  significantly  correlated  with  tissue  tempera-
ture, where every 1 °C of increase in temperature 
lowers skin impedance by 2% [101]. Thus, sur-
face  cooling  drives  the  electrical  current  deeper 
into the tissue which allows for selective dermal 
heating  by  the  radiofrequency  current  and  pro-
vides  epidermal  protection.  This  electrothermal 
reaction results in selective heating of the dermis, 
and when the temperature reaches 65 °C for 1 s, 
tissue  is  coagulated.  It  should  be  noted  that  for 
most RF applications (save the needle configura-
tions),  the  peak  temperatures  are  much  lower 
(38–42 °C) but delivered over much longer times.

A. A. Lloyd et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 




I

 Monopolar Devices

29

d

Air

Muscle

Fat

Fat

V

~

E0

E0

Physical Configuration

Y0

C0

Yt

Ct

Ym
Cm

Yt

Ct

Gf

Gm

Gf

V

~

Y0

C0

Equivalent Circuit 

Where

Y  = The admittanace for Fat,
  Muscle, and Air layers
E0 = Electric Field strength
I  = Current
V  = Voltage
E  = The Conductance
C  = Capacitance

Fig.  1.13  Heating  multiple  layers  of  tissue  with  non- 
contacting capacitor plates

SKIN

FAT

MUSCLE

Due to electrical and thermal properties of
Fat Vs. Muscle, there is a tendency for greater
Fat Vs. Muscle, heating in this electrode
Configuration.

Fig.  1.14  Cross-sectional  sketch  showing  fields  in  lay-
ered  tissue  exposed  to  shortwave  diathermy  capacitor- 
type electrodes

For  the  monopolar  devices,  the  radiofrequency 
energy  can  be  delivered  by  a  stamped  mode,  a 
continuously  gliding  movement,  or  via  a  fiber 
that is placed internally.

Thermage (Comfort pulsed technology, Solta 

Medical Hayward, CA)

Thermage  (Comfort  pulsed  technology,  Solta 
Medical  Hayward,  CA)  is  a  monopolar  radiofre-
quency device where the radiofrequency is deliv-
ered  via  a  stamped  method.  For  each  “stamp” 
pulse, the hand piece is held in place and within a 
short 3–4 s sequence; the hand piece tip releases a 
cooling  cryogen  spray  simultaneously  with  the 
delivery of the radiofrequency energy. The cryogen 
cooling  spray  provides  epidermal  protection  and 
the  device  continuously  monitors  the  epidermal 
temperature  with  each  pulse  so  that  it  does  not 
exceed  45  °C.  The  peak  heating  depth  is  most 
likely  around  1–4  mm  and  the  intention  is  (1) 
immediate tissue tightening and (2) delayed colla-
gen production. There is minimal downtime from 
the procedure as the post treatment redness resolves 
in a few hours and bruising and discomfort are very 
rare. With the initial protocol of a single pass with 
a  high  fluence,  there  was  intense  pain  during  the 
procedure, and on occasion scars and surface irreg-
ularities  were  seen,  therefore  the  protocol  was 
revised to multiple passes with lower fluence [102]. 
The  new  protocol  has  no  reports  of  scarring,  fat 
atrophy, and the treatment is much less painful.

Exilis system (BLT Aesthetics, Prague, Czech 

Republic)
Exilis 

(BLT  Aesthetics,  Prague,  Czech 
Republic) is a monopolar radiofrequency device 
that delivers its radiofrequency via a continuous 
motion  hand  piece  which  has  a  cooled  gliding 
electrode ball tip with an integrated “energy flow 
control  system”  which  senses  if  contact  is  lost, 
therefore eliminating peaks of energy that could 
arc and burn the skin [102]. In combination with 
the hand piece, a bipolar grounding pad is used to 
allow  for  real  time  monitoring  of  impedance  to 
eliminate  spikes  of  radiofrequency  and  increase 
patient comfort [102]. As the hand piece is con-
tinuously moved over the patient’s skin, it deliv-
ers its radiofrequency energy; the goal of therapy 
is to maintain the skin at 40–43 °C for 10–15 min 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




30

for  each  region  treated.  It  is  indicated  for  skin 
tightening  and  body  contouring.  Side  effects 
include redness and edema.

Pelleve (Ellman International, Inc., Oceanside, 

NY)

Pelleve (Ellman International, Inc., Oceanside, 
NY)  is  a  monopolar  radiofrequency  device  that 
delivers  its  radiofrequency  via  a  continuous 
motion  hand  piece.  The  epidermis  is  cooled  in 
this system via two mechanisms, first with the gel 
that is applied to the skin and second by convec-
tion to the surrounding air created by the continu-
ous motion use of the device. During the treatment 
an  infrared  laser  thermometer  is  used  to  fre-
quently  monitor  the  epidermal  temperature  and 
ensure  the  epidermal  temperature  is  maintained 
between  41  and  43  °C  for  the  duration  of  the 
treatment.  It  is  FDA  indicated  for  treatment  of 
mild  to  moderate  facial  wrinkles.  The  patient 
experiences  minimal  pain  during  the  procedure 
and  there  is  little  to  no  down  time.  Side  effects 
are minimal and include erythema and edema.

ThermiTight (ThermiTight; Thermi Aesthetics, 

Southlake, TX)

ThermiTight (ThermiTight; Thermi Aesthetics, 
Southlake, TX) is a minimally invasive monopolar 
radiofrequency  device  that  delivers  its  radiofre-
quency via a 600 μm electrode enclosed in a 1 mm 
cannula  that  is  inserted  into  the  subcutaneous 
layer in order to completely spare the epidermis 
and  to  more  directly  heat  the  dermal  hypoder-
mal  interface.  The  target  temperature  is  set  to 
the optimal temperature for the target; the skin 
surface  T  should  not  exceed  about  42  °C, 
whereas  the  T  to  shrink  fibrous  septae  is 
55–65 °C and to melt fat it is 70 °C. The device 
features dual T monitoring, where the internal T 
is measured firm the probe tip and the skin T is 
monitored  from  an  external  thermal  camera. 
This  configuration  optimizes  safety  and  effi-
cacy. If the temperature exceeds the set temper-
ature by 7 °C, the system is automatically turned 
off [102]. Additionally, a forward looking infra-
red camera (FLIR) (FLIR E40; FLIR Systems, 
Inc.,  Wilsonville,  OR)  provides  infrared  video 
streaming  of  the  entire  epidermis  in  the  treat-
ment field so epidermal temperature is simulta-
neously  visually  monitored.  It  has  its  FDA 
indication to treat glabellar lines; however, it is 

used off label to treat areas of unwanted local-
ized fat and/or loose skin of the arms, abdomen, 
love  handles,  thighs  or  knees.  Side  effects 
include  erythema  and  edema  which  typically 
resolve  in  24  h.  The  procedure  does  require 
injections with local anesthetic.

to 

the 

TrueSculpt (Cutera, Inc., Brisbane, CA)
TrueSculpt  (Cutera,  Inc.,  Brisbane,  CA)  is  a 
monopolar radiofrequency device that creates an 
electric  field  perpendicular 
skin- 
subcutaneous interface and results in bulk heat-
ing of the adipose layer. During a treatment, the 
area is treated with a stamping delivery technique 
and with each individual iteration the fat is heated 
to 43–45 °C for 15 min, which results in a delayed 
adipocyte cellular death response at about day 9 
post  treatment  [98].  The  operational  frequency 
can  be  adjusted  to  match  the  anatomic  site  of 
treatment,  using  high  frequencies  in  areas  that 
have a thin layer of adipose and low frequencies 
in  areas  with  thicker  adipose  layers  [98].  The 
device  has  target  depths  of  7–14  mm  and  has  a 
16 cm2 and a 40 cm2 hand piece. It is indicated for 
noninvasive  body  contouring.  There  is  minimal 
downtime. Reported side effects include redness, 
swelling  and  mild  tenderness  in  treated  areas 
which typically resolve in a few hours.

Vanquish  (BLT  Aesthetics,  Prague,  Czech 

Republic)

Vanquish  (BLT  Aesthetics,  Prague,  Czech 
Republic)  is  a  non-invasive  and  non-contact, 
hands free body contouring device. It uses radio-
frequency energy to selectively heat the adipose 
tissue  to  the  point  of  adipocyte  apoptosis  while 
sparing the epidermis. The device uses a capaci-
tive coupling far field configuration and automat-
ically  adjusts  its  energy  output  based  on  the 
resistance of adipose tissue to maintain homoge-
neous heating of the tissue [103, 104]. The adi-
pose  tissue  is  heated  to  40–45  °C  and  the 
surrounding tissue only experiences temperatures 
of 40–41 °C [103, 104]. There is minimal down-
time from the procedure as the device never con-
tacts  the  patient.  Side  effects  include  transient 
erythema,  warmth  and  tenderness  which  last  at 
most 1 h post treatment.

Infini (Lutronic, Inc., Fremont, CA)
The  Infini  (Lutronic,  Inc.,  Fremont,  CA)  is 
an  insulated  microneedle  fractional  rejuvenation 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



device with a 49 needle tip and a 16 needle tip. 
The  microneedles  are  made  of  surgical  stainless 
steel, are coated with gold for increased conduc-
tivity, and then double coated with an insulating 
silicone  compound  except  for  the  300  μm  clos-
est to the point of the needle. Therefore, only the 
tip of each needle is active and there is no elec-
trothermal damage to the epidermis. The needles 
are each 200 μm in diameter and a point diameter 
of 20 μm. The maximum power for the device is 
50 W at level 20 and the exposure times can range 
from 10 to 1000 ms. It is the exposure time that 
provides the user with the most control over the tis-
sue damage as the exposure time can be decreased 
for  the  higher  power  levels.  The  maximum  cur-
rent density is near the electrodes. At 1 MHz, the 
current flows rapidly to and fro between the alter-
nating rows of electrodes and creates small ~0.5–
0.7 mm diameter subsurface microthermal zones. 
In these applications we model the micro-currents 
as purely resistive and would find the greatest cur-
rent density at the needle tip; as heating proceeds, 
the tissue impedance (Z) will decrease so long as 
the tissue is not vaporized neat her needle surface.
As we proceed to the midpoints between the 
electrode arrays, the absorbed power density (or 
heat generation) drops off to a very small value. 
By manipulating the applied voltage to the elec-
trode and “on” times, one can optimize localized 
heating around the electrodes. In our application 
with  microneedles,  the  time  scales  are  short 
enough such that blood flow is irrelevant in  the 
calculations.

The  needles  can  penetrate  from  a  depth  of 
0.5–3.5  mm,  which  allows  the  user  to  set  treat 
multiple layers of the dermis. It is currently indi-
cated for the treatment of wrinkles. There is mini-
mal  downtime  and  moderate  intra-treatment 
discomfort. Side effects include mild edema can 
occur for 12–48 h post procedure and erythema 
can last 3–5 days post procedure. There typically 
is no persistent erythema. Mild crusting as well 
as  pin  point  bleeding  can  occur  and  typically 
resolves spontaneously in 3–5 days. Mild PIH is 
possible  at  the  needle  insertion  points.  This 
observation  brings  up  an  important  point.  As 
noted earlier, the RF immediate tissue interaction 
is colorblind; however, depending on where and 
how intense the injury is, the skin response might 

31

not  be  colorblind. Any  superficial  needle  based 
RF systems can create hyperpigmentation (PIH) 
like their laser counterparts.
EndyMed  Intensif 

(EndyMed  Medical, 

Cesarea, Israel)

The  EndyMed  intensif  (EndyMed  Medical, 
Cesarea, Israel) is a fractionated radiofrequency 
device  with  gold  plated,  sharp  tapered  noninsu-
lated needles. The needles are 300 μm in diame-
ter  and  the  tips  are  tapered.  The  needles  can 
achieves dermal heating up to 3.5 mm deep with 
minimal epidermal damage using a fractionated 
pulse  mode  which  enables  uniform  distribution 
of  the  energy.  There  is  built  in  constant  energy 
delivery circuitry. It is indicated for treatment of 
acne scarring, deep wrinkles, atrophic scars and 
stretch  marks. After  treatment,  there  is  minimal 
micro-crusting and erythema lasts <24 h. There is 
no  risk  for  hypopigmentation,  and  only  a  mini-
mal risk for hyperpigmentation.

InMode  Fractora 

(InMode  MD  Ltd. 

Yokneam, Israel)

The  InMode  Fractora  (InMode  MD  Ltd. 
Yokneam, Israel) is a bipolar fractional radiofre-
quency resurfacing device which uses either a 24 
needle,  a  60  needle  and  a  126  high  density  tip. 
The 24 pin tip can be coated to create an insulated 
needle option. The needles penetrate up to 3 mm 
in  depth  and  when  used  with  ablative  settings, 
they create a zone of coagulation up to 100 μm 
around  the  ablated  area.  It  is  indicated  for  fine 
lines, deep wrinkles, scars and discolored red and 
brown skin tone. The downtime involves moder-
ate  redness  and  swelling  for  the  first  3–5  days, 
however, the redness can last up to a week.

 Ultrasound Tissue Interaction

Ultrasound waves can travel several millimeters 
deep through tissue. Their propagation results in 
vibration at the molecular level that can lead to 
tissue  heating  in  a  dose-dependent  fashion. 
Unlike  EMR  waves,  US  is  comprised  of  com-
pressive  and  refracted  longitudinal  waves  that 
behave like a “slinky” toy. Generally, as the fre-
quency  and  the  focusing  increase,  the  injuries 
become  smaller  in  volume.  Different  physical 
processes are operative in US interactions, such 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



32

as  cavitation  in  lower  frequency,  lower  power 
density, non focused applications. With very low 
power density applications, gentle diffuse waves 
can  be  delivered  as  a  physical  therapy  tool  for 
heating muscles after injuries (US diathermy).

By utilizing a specialized hand piece to focus 
ultrasound  waves  tightly  at  a  controlled  depth 
and using much higher fluences than needed for 
imaging, selective zones of thermal injury can be 
created. The  result  is  collagen  denaturation  and 
coagulative necrosis [105].

One advantage of US over light is the capacity 
to deliver energy deeper in the tissues. For exam-
ple, even with relatively deeply penetrating light 
(1064 nm), the surface intensity will diminish by 
a factor of over 60% over a depth of 2 mm in the 
skin. If follows that in the absence of cooling and 
very long exposures (>1 s), very deep tissue heat-
ing with laser is challenging, particularly where 
water is the target. The only viable way to create 
focal deep heating in the tissue is with the assis-
tance of a cannula or other conduit that allows the 
laser beam to bypass the highly scattering dermis 
and fat tissues.

Two other focused US technologies are avail-
able  in  the  USA  and  target  fat.  One  targets  fat 
about  1–2  cm  deep  in  the  tissue  and  the  other 
(Ultra  shape)  about  2–4  cm  deep  in  the  tissue. 
The  volumes  of  damage  (although  focused)  are 
larger than the Ulthera device.

Overall,  lower  frequencies  will  result  in 
deeper penetration and larger volumes of injury. 
For  example,  an  US  system  (ultrashape)  uses  a 
200 KHz transducer and cavitation to target fat.

Another  system  (Liposonix,  Solta  Medical) 
uses HIFU but at a lower frequency (2 MHz ver-
sus 4–7 MHz for Ulthera) and targets tissue in a 
plane down to about 1–2 cm.

If  one  looks  at  the  total  amount  of  tissue 
affected,  the  lower  frequency  devices  create 
larger wounds deeper in the tissue, such that after 
an Ulthera procedure only about a tsp of tissue is 
damaged, whereas the for the deeper heating fat 
destruction US devices, a few hundred milliliter 
(size of soda can) are damaged.

In  the  case  of  HIFU  (specifically  Ulthera), 
studies of this technology on both porcine soft 

tissue and cadaveric human skin have revealed 
predictable,  reproducible  and  dose-dependent 
creation of thermal injury zones at the level of 
the  subcutaneous  fat  down  to  the  superficial 
musculoaponeurtoic  system  [106].  Increased 
energy  levels  results  in  thicker  thermal  injury 
zones. The  epidermis  is  spared  from  injury  by 
focusing the beam several millimeters below the 
surface  of  the  skin,  although  with  increased 
injury  the  thermal  injury  zones  extend  more 
superficially  [106].  A  limited  degree  of  direct 
collagen contraction has been observed.

Ulthera (Ulthera, Inc, Mesa, AZ) is currently 
the only microfocused ultrasound device on the 
market. It is FDA approved for lifting of the eye-
brow,  neck  and  submental  areas  as  well  as  for 
improvement  of  décolletage  lines  and  wrinkles. 
The device allows one to with visualize the skin 
with the same ultrasound probe as the treatment 
transducer. There is no downtime with treatment 
and it is safe for use in all skin types. Potential 
side effects tend to be transient and can include 
erythema,  edema,  temporary  pain,  bruising, 
numbness  and  scarring.  It  is  contraindicated  in 
patients with open wounds, severe acne or active 
implants in the treated area.

 Summary

An understanding of the scientific principles in 
laser  applications  empowers  the  physician  to 
optimize the use of this very expensive equip-
ment. At every patient encounter, the physician 
should  craft  an  approach  based  on  the  logical 
sequence of laser tissue interactions outlined in 
this chapter. By appropriate choreographing of 
cooling and heating, the physician can be con-
fidant 
tissue 
response.  However,  all  approaches  should  be 
undertaken  within  the  context  of  an  under-
standing  of  wound  healing.  The  physical 
aspects  of  the  interaction  are  typically  more 
the  subsequent  healing 
predictable 
response. If in doubt, test spots are always an 
option  and  should  be  considered  for  the  anx-
ious patient (or physician).

in  predicting 

immediate 

than 

the 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



References

  1.  Jacques 

SL. 

interactions. 
Photochemical,  photothermal,  and  photomechani-
cal. Surg Clin North Am. 1992;72:531–58.

Laser-tissue 

  2.  Ross  E, Anderson  R.  Laser  tissue  interactions.  In: 
Goldman  M,  editor.  Cutaneous  and  cosmetic  laser 
surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2006.

  3.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. The optics of human skin. 

J Invest Dermatol. 1981;77:13–9.

  4.  Grossweiner  L.  The  science  of  phototherapy.  Boca 

Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1994.

  5.  Wan S, Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Analytical model-
ing for the optical properties of the skin with in vitro 
and  in  vivo  applications.  Photochem  Photobiol. 
1981;34:493–9.

  6.  van Gemert MJ, Jacques SL, Sterenborg HJ, et al. Skin 

optics. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1989;36:1146–54.

  7.  Jacques  S.  Skin  optics  summary.  http://www.omlc.
Accessed 

ogi.edu/news/jan98/skinoptics.html. 
September 2007.

  8.  Jacques SL, Prahl SA. Modeling optical and thermal 
distributions in tissue during laser irradiation. Lasers 
Surg Med. 1987;6:494–503.

  9.  Hillenkamp  F.  Interaction  between  laser  radiation 
and biological systems. In: Hillenkamp FRP, Sacchi 
C,  editors.  Lasers  in  medicine  and  biology,  Series 
A. New York, NY: Plenum; 1980. p. 37–68.

  10.  Anderson  R,  Ross  E.  Laser-tissue  interactions.  In: 
Fitzpatrick  R,  Goldman  M,  editors.  Cosmetic  laser 
surgery. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2000. p. 1–30.
  11.  Katzir A. Lasers and optical fibers in medicine. San 

Diego, CA: Academic; 1993.

  12.  Ross EV. Laser versus intense pulsed light: compet-
ing technologies in dermatology. Lasers Surg Med. 
2006;38:261–72.

  13.  Anderson R. Laser tissue interactions. In: Goldman 
M,  Fitzparick  R,  editors.  Cutaneous  laser  surgery- 
the art and science of selective photothermolysis. St. 
Louis, MO: Mosby; 1994. p. 3–5.

  14.  Reinisch  L.  Laser  physics  and  tissue  interactions. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 1996;29:893–914.
  15.  Ross  EV,  Smirnov  M,  Pankratov  M,  et  al.  Intense 
pulsed  light  and  laser  treatment  of  facial  telan-
giectasias  and  dyspigmentation:  some  theoreti-
cal  and  practical  comparisons.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2005;31:1188–98.

  16.  Boulnois J. Photophysical processes in recent medi-
cal laser developments - a review. Lasers Med Sci. 
1986;1:47–66.

  17.  Welch AJ, van Gemert MJ. Overview of optical and 
thermal interaction and nomenclature. In: Welch AJ, 
van  Gemert  MJ,  editors.  Optical  thermal  response 
of  laser-irradiated  tissue.  New  York,  NY:  Plenum; 
1995. p. 1–14.

  18.  Fisher JC. Basic biophysical principles of resurfac-
ing of human skin by means of the carbon dioxide 
laser. J Clin Laser Med Surg. 1996;14:193–210.

33

  19.  Tanghetti E, Sierra RA, Sherr EA, et al. Evaluation of 
pulse-duration on purpuric threshold using extended 
pulse pulsed dye laser (cynosure V-star). Lasers Surg 
Med. 2002;31:363–6.

  20.  Reinisch  L,  Ossoff  RH.  Laser  applications  in 
otolaryngology.  Otolaryngol  Clin  North  Am. 
1996;29:891–2.

  21.  Shafirstein G, Baumler W, Lapidoth M, et al. A new 
mathematical approach to the diffusion approxima-
tion theory for selective photothermolysis modeling 
and  its  implication  in  laser  treatment  of  portwine 
stains. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:335–47.

  22.  Raulin C, Greve B, Warncke SH, et al. Excimer laser. 
Treatment of iatrogenic hypopigmentation following 
skin resurfacing. Hautarzt. 2004;55:746–8.

  23.  Alexiades-Armenakas MR, Bernstein LJ, Friedman 
PM,  et  al.  The  safety  and  efficacy  of  the  308-nm 
excimer  laser  for  pigment  correction  of  hypopig-
mented  scars  and  striae  alba.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2004;140:955–60.

  24.  Gold MH, Goldman MP. 5-aminolevulinic acid pho-
todynamic therapy: where we have been and where 
we are going. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:1077–83.
  25.  Itkin  A,  Gilchrest  BA.  delta-Aminolevulinic  acid 
and blue light photodynamic therapy for treatment of 
multiple basal cell carcinomas in two patients with 
nevoid  basal  cell  carcinoma  syndrome.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30:1054–61.

  26.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermoly-
sis: precise microsurgery by selective absorption of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

  27.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Lasers in dermatology pro-
vide a model for exploring new applications in surgi-
cal oncology. Int Adv Surg Oncol. 1982;5:341–58.

  28.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Microvasculature can be 
selectively damaged using dye lasers: a basic theory 
and  experimental  evidence  in  human  skin.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 1981;1:263–76.

  29.  Black  JF,  Barton  JK.  Chemical  and  structural 
changes  in  blood  undergoing  laser  photocoagula-
tion. Photochem Photobiol. 2004;80:89–97.

  30.  Kono  T,  Manstein  D,  Chan  HH,  et  al.  Q-switched 
ruby  versus  longpulsed  dye  laser  delivered  with 
compression  for  treatment  of  facial  lentigines  in 
Asians. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:94–7.

  31.  Avram DK, Goldman MP. Effectiveness and safety 
of ALA-IPL in treating actinic keratoses and photo-
damage. J Drugs Dermatol. 2004;3(Suppl 1):S36–9.
  32.  Gold MH, Bradshaw VL, Boring MM, et al. The use 
of a novel intense pulsed light and heat source and 
ALA-PDT  in  the  treatment  of  moderate  to  severe 
inflammatory  acne  vulgaris.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2004;3(Suppl 6):S15–9.

  33. Trafeli JP, Kwan JM, Meehan KJ, et al. Use of a long-
pulse alexandrite laser in the treatment of superficial 
pigmented lesions. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:1477–82.
  34. McDaniel  DH,  Ash  K,  Lord  J,  et  al.  Laser  ther-
apy  of  spider  leg  veins:  clinical  evaluation  of  a 

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



34

new  long  pulsed  alexandrite  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1999;25:52–8.

  35.  Dover  JS.  New  approaches  to  the  laser  treat-
ment  of  vascular  lesions.  Australas  J  Dermatol. 
2000;41:14–8.

  36.  Kauvar AN,  Lou WW.  Pulsed  alexandrite  laser  for 
the  treatment  of  leg  telangiectasia  and  reticular 
veins. Arch Dermatol. 2000;136:1371–5.

  37.  Eremia S, Li C, Umar SH. A side-by-side compara-
tive study of 1064 nm Nd:YAG, 810 nm diode and 
755 nm alexandrite lasers for treatment of 0.3-3 mm 
leg veins. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:224–30.

  38.  Passeron  T,  Olivier  V,  Duteil  L,  et  al.  The  new 
940-nanometer  diode  laser:  an  effective  treat-
ment  for  leg  venulectasia.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2003;48:768–74.

  39.  Paithankar  DY,  Clifford  JM,  Saleh  BA,  et  al. 
Subsurface skin renewal by treatment with a 1450- 
nm  laser  in  combination  with  dynamic  cooling.  J 
Biomed Opt. 2003;8:545–51.

  40.  Zelickson  B,  Ross V,  Kist  D,  et  al.  Ultrastructural 
effects  of  an  infrared  handpiece  on  forehead  and 
abdominal skin. Dermatol Surg. 2006;32:897–901.

  41.  Majaron B, Verkruysse W, Kelly KM, et al. Er:YAG 
laser  skin  resurfacing  using  repetitive  long-pulse 
exposure and cryogen spray cooling: II. Theoretical 
analysis. Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28:131–8.

  42.  Majaron B, Kelly KM, Park HB, et al. Er:YAG laser 
skin resurfacing using repetitive long-pulse exposure 
and  cryogen  spray  cooling:  I.  Histological  study. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28:121–31.

  43.  Ross EV, Yashar SS, Naseef GS, et al. A pilot study 
of  in  vivo  immediate  tissue  contraction  with  CO2 
skin  laser  resurfacing  in  a  live  farm  pig.  Dermatol 
Surg. 1999;25:851–6.

  44.  Ross EV, Grossman MC, Duke D, et al. Long-term 
results  after  CO2  laser  skin  resurfacing:  a  com-
parison of scanned and pulsed systems. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 1997;37:709–18.

  45.  Pearce J, Thomsen SL. Rate process analysis of ther-
mal damage. In: Welch AJ, van Gemert MJ, editors. 
Optical  thermal  response  of  laser-irradiated  tissue. 
New York, NY: Plenum; 1995. p. 561–608.

  46.  Welch AJ, Yoon G, van Gemert MJ. Practical models 
for light distribution in laser-irradiated tissue. Lasers 
Surg Med. 1987;6:488–93.

  47.  Wang  L,  Jacques  S,  Zheng  L.  MCML  -  Monte 
Carlo modeling of photon transport in multi- layered 
tissues.  Comput  Methods  Programs  Biomed. 
1995;47:131.

  48.  Jacques S. Simple optical theory for light dosimetry 
during PDT. In: Tuchin V, editor. Selected papers on 
tissue  optics,  MS  102,  vol.  655.  Bellingham,  WA: 
SPIE - International Society for Optical Engineering; 
1992.

  49.  Stamatas GN, Kollias N. Blood stasis contributions 
to  the  perception  of  skin  pigmentation.  J  Biomed 
Opt. 2004;9:315–22.

  50.  Niemz M. Laser-tissue interactions. 2nd ed. Berlin: 

Springer; 2002.

  51.  Anderson RR, Farinelli W, Laubach H, et al. Selective 
photothermolysis of lipid-rich tissues: a free electron 
laser study. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:913–9.
  52.  Ellis DL, Weisberg NK, Chen JS, et al. Free electron 
laser  infrared  wavelength  specificity  for  cutaneous 
contraction. Lasers Surg Med. 1999;25:1–7.

  53.  Goldman  L,  Rockwell  RJ.  Laser  action  at  the  cel-

lular level. JAMA. 1966;198:641–4.

  54.  Anderson  RR.  Laser  medicine  in  dermatology.  J 

Dermatol. 1996;23:778–82.

  55.  Altshuler  GB,  Anderson  RR,  Manstein  D,  et  al. 
Extended  theory  of  selective  photothermolysis. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2001;29:416–32.

  56.  Anderson  RR,  Margolis  RJ,  Watenabe  S,  et  al. 
Selective  photothermolysis  of  cutaneous  pigmenta-
tion  by  Q-switched  Nd: YAG  laser  pulses  at  1064, 
532, and 355 nm. J Invest Dermatol. 1989;93:28–32.
  57.  Parrish JA, Anderson RR, Harrist T, et al. Selective 
thermal  effects  with  pulsed 
from 
lasers:  from  organ  to  organelle.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
1983;80(Suppl):75s–80s.

irradiation 

  58.  Anderson RR, Jaenicke KF, Parrish JA. Mechanisms 
of selective vascular changes caused by dye lasers. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1983;3:211–5.

  59.  Itzkan  I,  Izatt  J.  Medical  use  of  lasers.  In: 
Encyclopedia  of  applied  physics.  Washington, 
DC: VCH Publishers, Inc. & American Institute of 
Physics; 1994. p. 33–59.

  60.  Black  JF,  Wade  N,  Barton  JK.  Mechanistic  com-
parison  of  blood  undergoing  laser  photocoagu-
lation  at  532  and  1,  064  nm.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2005;36:155–65.

  61.  Polla  BS,  Anderson  RR.  Thermal  injury  by  laser 
pulses:  protection  by  heat  shock  despite  failure 
to  induce  heat-shock  response.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1987;7:398–404.

  62.  Beckham  JT,  Mackanos  MA,  Crooke  C,  et  al. 
thermal 
Assessment  of  cellular 
laser 
imaging 
of  heat  shock  protein  70.  Photochem  Photobiol. 
2004;79:76–85.

to 
through  bioluminescence 

response 

injury 

  63.  Kollias  N,  Gillies  R,  Moran  M,  et  al.  Endogenous 
skin  fluorescence  includes  bands  that  may  serve 
as  quantitative  markers  of  aging  and  photoaging.  J 
Invest Dermatol. 1998;111:776–80.

  64.  Alexiades-Armenakas  MR,  Geronemus  RG.  Laser- 
mediated photodynamic therapy of actinic cheilitis. 
J Drugs Dermatol. 2004;3:548–51.

  65.  Karrer  S,  Baumler  W,  Abels  C,  et  al.  Long-pulse 
dye  laser  for  photodynamic  therapy:  investigations 
in vitro and in vivo. Lasers Surg Med. 1999;25:51–9.
  66.  Seguchi K, Kawauchi S, Morimoto Y, et al. Critical 
parameters  in  the  cytotoxicity  of  photodynamic 
therapy  using  a  pulsed  laser.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2002;17:265–71.

  67.  Sterenborg HJ, van Gemert MJ. Photodynamic ther-
apy with pulsed light sources: a theoretical analysis. 
Phys Med Biol. 1996;41:835–49.

  68.  Smith  TK,  Choi  B,  Ramirez-San-Juan  JC,  et  al. 
Microvascular  blood  flow  dynamics  associated 

A. A. Lloyd et al.



with  photodynamic  therapy,  pulsed  dye  laser  irra-
diation  and  combined  regimens.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2006;38:532–9.

  69.  Parrish  JA,  Jaenicke  KF.  Action  spectrum  for 
phototherapy  of  psoriasis.  J  Investig  Dermatol. 
1981;76:359–62.

  70.  Weiss  RA,  McDaniel  DH,  Geronemus  RG,  et  al. 
Clinical  trial  of  a  novel  non-thermal  LED  array 
for  reversal  of  photoaging:  clinical,  histologic,  and 
surface  profilometric  results.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2005;36:85–91.

  71.  Hohenleutner U, Walther T, Wenig M, et al. Leg tel-
angiectasia treatment with a 1.5 ms pulsed dye laser, 
ice cube cooling of the skin and 595 vs 600 nm: pre-
liminary results. Lasers Surg Med. 1998;23:72–8.
  72.  Greve  B,  Hammes  S,  Raulin  C.  The  effect  of  cold 
air cooling on 585 nm pulsed dye laser treatment of 
port-wine stains. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:633–6.
  73.  Chan  HH,  Lam  LK,  Wong  DS,  et  al.  Role  of 
skin  cooling  in  improving  patient  tolerability  of 
Q-switched Alexandrite (QS Alex) laser in nevus of 
Ota treatment. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32:148–51.

  74.  Raulin  C,  Greve  B,  Hammes  S.  Cold  air  in  laser 
therapy: first experiences with a new cooling system. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2000;27:404–10.

  75.  Huang  PS,  Chang  CJ.  Cryogen  spray  cooling  in 
conjunction  with  pulse  dye  laser  treatment  of  port 
wine stains of the head and neck. Chang Gung Med 
J. 2001;24:469–75.

  76.  Weiss  RA,  Sadick  NS.  Epidermal  cooling  crystal 
collar device for improved results and reduced side 
effects  on  leg  telangiectasias  using  intense  pulsed 
light. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:1015–8.

  77.  Tunnell JW, Nelson JS, Torres JH, et al. Epidermal 
protection  with  cryogen  spray  cooling  during  high 
fluence pulsed dye laser irradiation: an ex vivo study. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2000;27:373–83.

  78.  Kelly  KM,  Nelson  JS,  Lask  GP,  et  al.  Cryogen 
spray  cooling  in  combination  with  nonablative 
laser  treatment  of  facial  rhytides.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1999;135:691–4.

  79.  Zenzie  HH,  Altshuler  GB,  Smirnov  MZ,  et  al. 
Evaluation  of  cooling  methods  for  laser  dermatol-
ogy. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;26:130–44.

  80.  Almoallim  H,  Klinkhoff  AV,  Arthur  AB,  et  al. 
Laser  induced  chrysiasis:  disfiguring  hyperpig-
mentation  following  Q-switched  laser  therapy  in  a 
woman  previously  treated  with  gold.  J  Rheumatol. 
2006;33:620–1.

  81.  Trotter MJ, Tron VA, Hollingdale J, et al. Localized 
chrysiasis induced by laser therapy. Arch Dermatol. 
1995;131:1411–4.

  82.  Franco W, Childers M, Nelson JS, et al. Laser surgery 
of  port  wine  stains  using  local  vacuum  [corrected] 
pressure:  changes  in  calculated  energy  deposition 
(Part II). Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:118–27.
  83.  Childers MA, Franco W, Nelson JS, et al. Laser sur-
gery of port wine stains using local vacuum pressure: 
changes  in  skin  morphology  and  optical  properties 
(Part I). Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:108–17.

35

  84.  Manstein D, Herron GS, Sink RK, et al. Fractional 
photothermolysis:  a  new  concept  for  cutaneous 
remodeling  using  microscopic  patterns  of  thermal 
injury. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:426–38.
  85.  Jaffe  BH,  Walsh  JT  Jr.,  Water  flux 

from 
partial-thickness  skin  wounds:  comparative  study 
of the effects of Er:YAG and Ho:YAG lasers. Lasers 
Surg Med. 1996;18(1):1–9.

  86.  Dierickx  CC.  Hair  removal  by  lasers  and  intense 
pulsed  light  sources.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2000;19:267–75.

  87.  Jasim  ZF,  Handley  JM.  Treatment  of  pulsed  dye 
laser-resistant port wine stain birthmarks. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2007;57:677–82.

  88.  Choi B, Tsu L, Chen E, et al. Determination of chem-
ical  agent  optical  clearing  potential  using  in  vitro 
human skin. Lasers Surg Med. 2005;36:72–5.
  89.  Biesman  BS,  O'Neil  MP,  Costner  C.  Rapid,  high‐
fluence  multi‐pass  q‐switched  laser  treatment  of 
tattoos  with  a  transparent  perfluorodecalin‐infused 
patch: A pilot study. Lasers Surg Med. 2015;47(8): 
613–8.

  90.  Lapotko  D,  Shnip  A,  Lukianova  E.  Photothermal 
responses  of  individual  cells.  J  Biomed  Opt. 
2005;10:14006.

  91.  Anderson  RR.  Polarized 

examination 
and  photography  of  the  skin.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1991;127:1000–5.

light 

  92.  Pitsillides CM, Joe EK, Wei X, et al. Selective cell 
targeting  with  light-absorbing  microparticles  and 
nanoparticles. Biophys J. 2003;84:4023–32.

  93.  Reinisch  L.  Scatter-limited  phototherapy:  a  model 
for  laser  treatment  of  skin.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2002;30:381–8.

  94.  Carniol  PJ,  Maas  CS.  Bipolar  radiofrequency 
resurfacing.  Facial  Plast  Surg  Clin  North  Am. 
2001;9:337–42.

  95.  Ruiz-Esparza J, Gomez JB. The medical face lift: 
a  noninvasive,  nonsurgical  approach  to  tissue 
tightening  in  facial  skin  using  nonablative  radio-
frequency.  Dermatol  Surg.  2003;29:325–32.  dis-
cussion 32.

  96.  Sadick  NS.  Update  on  non-ablative  light  ther-
apy  for  rejuvenation:  a  review.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2003;32:120–8.

  97.  Koch  RJ.  Radiofrequency  nonablative 

tissue 
tightening.  Facial  Plast  Surg  Clin  North  Am. 
2004;12:339–46.

  98.  Franco  W,  et  al.  Hyperthermic  injury  to  adipocyte 
cells  by  selective  heating  of  subcutaneous  fat  with 
a  novel  radiofrequency  device:  feasibility  studies. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2010;42(5):361–70.

  99.  Sadick NS, Makino Y. Selective electro-thermolysis 
in  aesthetic  medicine:  a  review.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2004;34(2):91–7.

 100.  Zelickson  BD,  Kist  D,  Bernstein  E,  et  al. 
Histological  and  ultrastructural  evaluation  of  the 
effects  of  a  radiofrequency-based 
 nonablative 
 dermal  remodeling  device:  a  pilot  study.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2004;140:204–9.

1 Laser-Tissue Interactions



36

 101.  Duck F. Physical properties of tissue. A comprehen-
sive reference book, edited by Francis A. Duck. Med 
Phys. 1991;18(4):173–834.

 102.  Carruthers  J,  Fabi  S,  Weiss  R.  Monopolar  radio-
frequency  for  skin 
tightening:  our  experience 
and  a  review  of  the  literature.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2014;40(Suppl 12):S168–73.

 103.  Weiss  R,  et  al.  Operator  independent  focused  high 
frequency  ISM  band  for  fat  reduction:  porcine 
model. Lasers Surg Med. 2013;45(4):235–9.

 104.  Fajkosova K, et al. Selective radiofrequency therapy 
as  a  non-invasive  approach  for  contactless  body 

contouring  and  circumferential  reduction.  J  Drugs 
Dermatol. 2014;13(3):291–6.

 105.  White  WM,  Makin  IR,  Slayton  MH,  Barthe  PG, 
Gliklich  R.  Selective  transcutaneous  delivery  of 
energy to porcine soft tissues using Intense Ultrasound 
(IUS). Lasers Surg Med. 2008;40(2):67–75.

 106.  White  WM,  Makin  IR,  Barthe  PG,  Slayton  MH, 
Gliklich  RE.  Selective  creation  of  thermal  injury 
zones in the superficial musculoaponeurotic system 
using  intense  ultrasound  therapy:  a  new  target  for 
noninvasive  facial  rejuvenation.  Arch  Facial  Plast 
Surg. 2007;9(1):22–9.

A. A. Lloyd et al.



Laser Safety: Regulations, 
Standards and Practice Guidelines

2

Brienne D. Cressey, Ashley Keyes, 
and Murad Alam

 Laser Safety

The use of lasers is routine in many medical spe-
cialties.  In  some  cases,  the  particular  benefit  of 
lasers has made them desirable alternatives to con-
ventional  surgical  instruments  such  as  scalpels, 
electrosurgical units, cryosurgery probes, or micro-
wave  devices.  The  American  Society  for  Laser 
Medicine  and  Surgery  (ASLMS)  outlines  several 
advantages of laser use in clinical practice [1]:

Lasers allow the surgeon to accomplish more com-
plex tasks, reduce blood loss, decrease postopera-
tive  discomfort,  reduce  the  chance  of  wound 
infection,  decrease  the  spread  of  some  cancers, 
minimize the extent of surgery in selected circum-
stances and result in better wound healing, if used 
appropriately  by  a  skilled  and  properly  trained 
surgeon.

Despite  these  benefits,  when  misused,  lasers 
can injure both patients and operator. To ensure 
safety and quality care, guidelines for laser safety 
have been developed.

Abstract
The use of lasers is routine in many medical 
specialties. In some cases, the particular ben-
efit of lasers has made them desirable alterna-
tives  to  conventional  surgical  instruments 
such  as  scalpels,  electrosurgical  units,  cryo-
surgery probes, or microwave devices.

Keywords
Laser · Laser safety · Laser regulations   
Laser standards · Laser guidelines   
Dermatologic lasers · Medical lasers

B. D. Cressey 
Department of Dermatology, New York Presbyterian- 
Weill Cornell Hospital, New York, NY, USA 

A. Keyes (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medicine, 
Lincoln Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA
e-mail: Ashley.keyes@nychhc.org 

M. Alam 
Section of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery, 
Department of Dermatology, Otolaryngology-Head 
and Neck Surgery, and Surgery, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University,  
Chicago, IL, USA
e-mail: m-alam@northwestern.edu

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_2

37





38

 Governing Bodies and Professional 
Organizations

Many  regulatory  and  professional  organi-
zations  provide 
recommendations  and 
guidelines  for  laser  safety.  While  the 
American  National  Standards  Institute 
(ANSI)  publishes  consensus  standards 
considered  to  be  the  standard  in  laser 
safety,  these  standards  are  recommended 
practices  only.  The  positions  of  profes-
sional  organizations  are  important  to  con-
sider in addition to those of ANSI to ensure 
comprehensive  safety  standards  for  laser 
use are practiced.

A  number  of  regulatory  and  professional 
organizations  have  promulgated  and  dissemi-
nated  recommendations  for  safe  laser  use. 
Though there is considerable agreement among 
regulatory 
professional  organizations  and 
agencies  regarding  laser  safety  guidelines, 
variation  among  patients,  facilities,  and  state 
laws  ultimately  affects  how  these  rules  are 
implemented.

The  American  National  Standards  Institute 
(ANSI)  creates  and  publishes  consensus  stan-
dards  for  the  conduct  of  business  in  almost  all 
sectors,  including  medicine.  This  chapter  will 
refer to the ANSI Z 136.3, the American National 
Standard for Safe Use of Lasers in Health Care 
Facilities, with specific attention to control mea-
sures, as it is widely regarded as the standard for 
laser use. It is important to clarify that these stan-
dards  are  recommended  practices  rather  than 
rules subject to enforcement, and compliance is 
both voluntary and dependent on individual orga-
nization’s specifications.

In addition to the standards set forth by ANSI, 
medical organizations also set professional stan-
dards  for  their  membership.  The  American 
Society 
for  Laser  Medicine  and  Surgery 
(ASLMS),  with  its  multidisciplinary  member-
ship, including physicians and surgeons, nurses, 

and  other  health  professionals,  is  an  umbrella 
organization  for  all  specialties  whose  clinical 
care  involves  lasers.  In  addition  to  formulating 
standards  and  guidelines  for  implementing  safe 
and effective laser practices, ASLMS also makes 
recommendations  to  medical  laser  training  pro-
grams regarding procedural skills for individuals 
operating lasers.

The  American  Academy  of  Dermatology 
(AAD), the primary professional organization for 
practicing  dermatologists  in  the  United  States, 
encourages  the  safe  practice  of  medicine  and 
acknowledges  that  medical  laser  is  subsumed 
under  the  practice  of  medicine.  “The Academy 
endorses the concept that use of properly trained 
non-physician office personnel under appropriate 
supervision allows certain procedures to be per-
formed safely and effectively” [2].

The  American  Society  for  Dermatologic 
Surgery (ASDS), the main professional organiza-
tion  within  dermatology  for  proceduralists,  is 
committed  to  the  development  of  safe  in-office 
procedures.  The  ASDS  maintains  that  medical 
laser use constitutes the practice of medicine, and 
that non-physicians should use lasers only when 
delegated do so by physicians who are appropri-
ately supervising them.

Medical laser use is also subject to regulation 
by  the  relevant  state  and  by  the  U.S.  Food  and 
Drug Administration (FDA). Laser devices, such 
as  those  used  for  medical  application  require 
clearance  or  premarket  approval  by  the  FDA 
Center  for  Devices  and  Radiological  Health 
(CDRH) prior to distribution for commercial use 
in  the  United  States. The  Radiation  Control  for 
Health and Safety Act (RCHSA), a standard sim-
ilar to that of ANSI, is intended to prevent unnec-
essary or inappropriate access to laser equipment, 
and to minimize exposure to collateral radiation. 
Additionally,  RCHSA  ensures  the  appropriate 
performance features and labels are provided by 
the  manufacturer  [2].  With  respect  to  laser 
devices,  the  FDA  is  responsible  for  classifying 
laser  devices  based  on  levels  of  laser  emission. 
For  medical  use,  lasers  are  defined  as  Class  III 
and IV, which require the highest level of regula-
tion for safe use.

B. D. Cressey et al.



 Practice Guidelines

The first tenet to laser safety is the training 
of  physicians,  healthcare  professionals, 
and  personnel.  The American  Society  for 
Laser  Medicine  and  Surgery  (ASLMS) 
outlines recommendations for training and 
credentialing, which are referenced by the 
ANSI standards

 Procedural Skills

The  ASLMS  outlines  recommendations  for  the 
safe use of laser technology, specifically training 
and credentialing benchmarks, to be used in con-
junction  with  the  ANSI  Z  136.3  guidelines. 
Training and credentialing represent distinct issues 
for  laser  safety,  especially  given  the  escalating 
debate regarding laser use by non-physicians.

The ANSI Z 136.3 refers to the ASLMS pol-
icy “Standards of Training for Physicians for the 
Use of Lasers in Medicine and Surgery”, which 
was approved by the board of directors on April 
3  of  2008,  regarding  the  recommendation  for 
appropriate training for laser privileges. The spe-
cific suggestions for training are as follows [3]:

The  initial  program  should  include  clinical  applica-
tions of various wavelengths in the particular specialty 
field and hands-on practical sessions with lasers and 
their appropriate surgical or therapeutic delivery sys-
tems. A minimum of 8–10 hours is suggested by the 
ANSI standards. A further 40% of the time should be 
allocated  to  the  practical  sessions.  However,  more 
time  may  be  required  to  complete  the  basic  course 
contents.  Usually,  basic  training  is  concentrated  on 
one or more wavelengths. Subsequent programs cov-
ering different wavelengths or substantially different 
applications or delivery instruments may require more 
hours of training of which 50% of the time is allocated 
to hands-on sessions. A small faculty-student ratio in 
the range of 1 to 3-5 is optimal.

It is recommended that an applicant for privi-
leges spend time after the basic training course in a 
clinical setting with an experienced operator (such 
programs are often called “preceptorship” training 
programs or “observation”) when appropriate and 
practical. Several brief visits or a more prolonged 
period suffices provided that a variety of cases is 

39

observed. It is valuable for the novice to perform 
the laser procedures with supervision by the expert, 
however, for a variety of reasons, such as hospital 
privileges, status of patients and insurance cover-
age of physicians, this is not always possible.

In  addition  to  training  recommendations  for 
physicians, ANSI also suggests standards for gen-
eral laser safety and training programs, with specific 
attention to nurses and other non- medical person-
nel. The following summarizes this position [3]:

Laser safety training for perioperative nursing and 
support  personnel  must  be  compatible  with  that 
taught to physicians. A smoothly functioning laser 
team  depends  on  this,  and  every  effort  must  be 
made  to  eliminate  any  discrepancies  in  training 
materials.  Content  of  this  program  should  stress 
overall  understanding  of  operation  characteristics 
of equipment, biologic and physical properties of 
the laser tissue interaction, potential hazards asso-
ciated  with  laser  use,  and  procedures  and  equip-
ment required to ensure a safe laser environment.

ANSI  maintains  that  training  in  laser  safety 
practices  for  physicians  and  non-physicians 
should be distinguished from training of methods 
and techniques of laser procedures.

Though the need for operators to be trained 
in laser use is universally accepted, the process 
of credentialing physician and/or non-physician 
operators as competent in laser use is more sub-
ject  to  debate  and  interpretation.  Often  strict 
and  multiple  criteria  must  be  simultaneously 
met  to  satisfy  credentialing  rules.  In  its  paper 
entitled  “Procedural  Skills  for  Using  Lasers  in 
General Surgery,” which was revised on August 
2,  2012  by  the ASLMS  board  of  directors,  the 
criteria for granting laser privileges are summa-
rized [4]:

  A.   The physician (attending) must be a diplo-
mat  of  or  be  admissible  to  a  specialty 
Board  such  as  the  American  Board  of 
Surgery;  Orthopedics;  Otolaryngology; 
Ophthalmology;  Urology;  Dermatology; 
Plastic  Surgery;  Cardiovascular  Surgery; 
Neurosurgery; or other medical specialty.

  B.   The physician must first have been granted 
facility 
appropriate  privileges  by 
through  the  designated  certification  and 
facility  process.  The  physician  must  have 
privileges to perform requested procedures 
in the absence of laser use.

the 

2 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards and Practice Guidelines



40

  C.   The physician must have been trained to use 
laser(s) in a recognized and approved resi-
dency program or must have obtained train-
ing through an appropriate CME course.

  D.   Physicians using a laser adapted to an oper-
ating  microscope  or  other  optical  device 
must demonstrate proficiency in the use of 
the  optical  equipment  in  addition  to  the 
laser 
technology.  The  physician  must 
already have hospital privileges for the use 
of these instruments in the performance of 
procedures with conventional techniques.

  E.   The user of the laser must be cognizant of 
the safety hazards of lasers. This knowledge 
must be obtained either through a residency 
program  or  an  appropriate  CME  course. 
Proof  of  this  training  must  be  supplied  in 
writing  to  the  Laser  Usage  Committee  at 
the time privileges are requested.

F.   Initial approval or use of laser will be provi-
sional until the physician has demonstrated 
the ability to use lasers to a member of the 
Medical  Staff  who  has  been  designated  by 
the facility as being qualified and must have 
achieved  the  required  standards  as  previ-
ously  listed.  The  criteria  for  recertification 
shall be set forth and a yearly review of cases 
and their outcomes shall be performed.
  G.   If the applicant requests the use of the laser 
for  investigational  purposes,  the  request 
must  receive  approval  by  the  facility’s 
Clinical  Investigation  Committee  (IRB/
CIC)  as  is  required  for  all  other  research 
purposes.  An  appropriate  investigational 
protocol  and  informed  consent  process 
must be in place.

  H.   Residents involved in the use of lasers may 
not  perform  procedures  with  these  instru-
ments until such time as they have attended 
an  in-depth  training  program  or  an  appro-
priate  CME  course  recognized  to  be  ade-
quate  by  the  Laser  Usage  Committee.  In 
addition, residents must be supervised by a 
laser-certified  attending  physician  during 
actual utilization of laser technology at all 
times.

Similarly, ASLMS outlines physician qualifica-
tions for proficiency in laser techniques in its policy 
statement entitled “Procedural Skill and Technique 
Proficiency  for  Surgery  and  Other  Energy-Based 
Therapies in Dermatology”. Approved and revised 
on August  2,  2012,  by  the  board  of  directors,  the 
following requirements are relevant to laser use in 
dermatology [5].

•  Possession of an appropriate medical degree or 
its equivalent. Candidates must be a Doctor of 
Medicine (MD) or Doctor of Osteopathy (DO) 
and complete an ACGME accredited residency 
in their specialty areas.

•  Must  possess  primary  specialty  certification 
from the American Board of Dermatology.
•  For  a  specified  period  of  time  (5  years)  there 
will  be  a  practice  category  for  eligibility. 
Specific criteria for qualifying under this cate-
gory  will  be  determined  and  approved  by  an 
independent 
certifying  body.  Suggested 
requirements for this category may include the 
following:

 a)  Completion of at least 150 hours of Category 1 
CME including laser safety and physics. At least 
20 hours of the 150 hours must entail hands on 
workshops proctored by an experienced physi-
cian in laser medicine and surgery and a mini-
mum of 50 hours in programming approved by 
the American  Society  for  Laser  Medicine  and 
Surgery  (ASLMS),  American  Academy  of 
Dermatology  (AAD)  or  the American  Society 
for Dermatological Surgery (ASDS).

 b)  Submission of 100 cases with a minimum of 
15  sets  of  before  and  after  photos  or  video-
tapes representative of at least 4 of the 9 man-
agement areas.

 c)  Mastery  of  Standards  of  Training  must  be 
demonstrated by obtaining a passing grade on 
an  examination  the  content  of  which  will  be 
determined by an independent certifying body.
 d)  Letters of recommendation attesting to char-
acter from at least three practicing physicians 
in the same specialty.

It is the widely accepted belief of the aforemen-
tioned organizations that a necessary precondition for 
patient safety is the proper training and credentialing 
of healthcare professionals. As such, despite differ-
ences in details, there is minimal, significant varia-
tion in the standards by which physicians are assessed 
with  regard  to  their  competence  to  utilize  medical 
laser devices. Discrepancies arise when considering 
credentialing  of  alternative  allied  health  providers, 
which will be addressed later in this chapter in the 
section on delegation and regulation by the state.

B. D. Cressey et al. 




 Administrative Controls

Administrative  controls  are  essential  for 
the safe operation of lasers within a health-
care facility. These control measures mini-
mize  the  potential  for  hazards  to  operator 
and patient during laser use. A Laser Safety 
Officer  (LSO)  is  appointed  to  ensure  the 
appropriate standards are followed.

The ANSI Z 136.3 is accepted as the standard 
for  guidelines  regarding  the  safe  use  of  laser  in 
health care facilities. Specifically, this document 
details control measures to minimize the poten-
tial hazards of laser use. Though each facility and 
patient  engenders  unique  safety  considerations, 
the following guidelines address unintended haz-
ards to both patients and personnel.

To  ensure  administrative  control  within  the 
health care facility, a Laser Safety Officer (LSO) 
is  appointed  to  implement  the  following  stan-
dards [3].

4.2.1 Policies and Procedures (Class 3B and Class 4). 
The health care facility (HCF) shall establish policies 
and procedures (P&Ps). The P&Ps should include, for 
example, perioperative checklists for use by operating 
personnel.  The  LSO  shall  require  approved  written 
operating  and  maintenance  P&Ps  for  Class  3B  and 
Class 4 Hospital Care Laser Systems (HCLS). These 
operating and maintenance P&Ps shall be maintained 
and  readily  available.  The  LSO  shall  require  that 
safety SOPs exist for servicing of the HCLS.
4.2.3 Authorized Personnel-Laser Users. Class 3B 
and Class 4 HCLSs shall be operated by facility- 
authorized  personnel  appropriately  trained  in  the 
safe use of the HCLS.
4.2.5 Procedural Controls. Procedural controls, as 
determined, by the LSO, shall be used where pos-
sible  to  avoid  potential  hazards  associated  with 
Class 3B and Class 4 HCLSs. These include con-
trols such as:

 (1)  Adhering to written P&Ps
 (2)  Assigning a dedicated person to operate the controls, 
if applicable, when appropriate for the procedure and 
practice setting.

41

 (3)  Maintaining a list of authorized laser users and Health 

Care Personnel (HCP)

 (4)  Requiring storage or disabling (removal of key) of the 
HCLS where unauthorized operation is of concern.
 (5)  Assuring that operators know the location and opera-
tion of the emergency stop control provided with each 
HCLS.

 (6)  Assuring that the ready function is enabled only when 

the user is ready to treat the target tissue.

 (7)  Using  of  only  diffuse  reflective  materials  or  instru-
ments with low reflectance in or near the beam path, 
where feasible.

 (8)  Taking steps to avoid confusion encountered during 
surgical  procedures  when  operating  with  more  than 
one floor pedal.

The  specific  administrative  controls  imple-
mented in a health care facility may vary. It is 
the LSO’s responsibility to ensure the appropri-
ate  safety  measures  are  in  place  to  accommo-
date  the  specific  needs  of  the  patient  and 
facility.

Figure 2.1 illustrates an overview of practice 

guidelines and to whom they are relevant.

 Protective Equipment

Protective  equipment  includes  warning 
signs  and  labels,  eye  and  skin  protection, 
and  smoke  evacuation  systems  to  reduce 
non-beam  hazards.  Used  properly  during 
laser  procedures,  protective  equipment 
reduces  the  risk  of  injury  to  operator  and 
patient,  as  well  as  increases  the  overall 
safety of healthcare facilities in which laser 
equipment resides.

 Warning Signs and Labels

The Nominal Hazard Zone (NHZ) is the physical 
space  in  which  levels  of  radiation,  direct, 
reflected,  or  scattered,  exceed  the  Maximum 
Permissible  Exposure  (MPE),  which  may  be 
determined  by  the  safety  information  provided 

2 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards and Practice Guidelines



42

Fig. 2.1  Three key 
components of a laser 
safety program include 
understanding of 
administrative controls, 
knowledge of laser 
function and use, and 
guidelines for 
perioperative safety. 
Despite variation in 
responsibilities among 
physicians, healthcare 
professionals and the 
LSO, consensus among 
practice guidelines is 
essential to the safe use 
of medical lasers

Administrative Controls

The Laser

Perioperative Safety

Training Program

Physician

Allied
Health Professional

LSO

Responsible
for the safe
and effective
performance
of laser
procedures

Responsible
for 
understanding
the standards
and
administrative
infrastructure

Responsible
for the laser
safety
program in
the health
care facility

by  the manufacturer. While a Class III or Class 
IV  laser  is  in  operation,  appropriate  warning 
signs and labels, as well as protective equipment 
is  administratively  required  for  all  individuals 
within  the  NHZ.  Warning  signs  and  labels  are 
provided by the ANSI Z 136.3 in accordance with 
the Federal Laser Product Performance Standard, 
including the following [3]:

4.7.1  Display  of  Warning  Signs.  Warning  signs 
shall  be  conspicuously  displayed  on  all  doors 
entering  the  Laser  Treatment  Controlled  Area 
(LTCA),  so  as  to  warn  those  entering  the  area  of 
laser  use.  Warning  signs  should  be  covered  or 
removed when the laser is not in use.
4.7.3 Inclusion of Pertinent Information. Signs and 
Labels 
following 
shall 
specifications.
4.7.3.1  The  appropriate  signal  word  (Caution  or 
Danger) shall be located in the upper panel.
4.7.3.2 Adequate  space  shall  be  left  on  all  signs 
and labels to allow the inclusion of pertinent infor-
mation. Such information may be included during 
the  printing  of  the  sign  or  label  or  may  be  hand-
written in a legible manner, and shall include the 
following.

conform 

the 

to 

 a.  For Class 2 lasers and laser systems, “Laser 

Radiation—Do Not Stare into Beam”

 b.  For Class 3 lasers and laser systems where 
the  accessible  irradiance  does  not  exceed 
the  appropriate  MPE  based  on  a  0.25  s 
exposure, “Laser Radiation—Do Not Stare 
into Beam or View with Optical Instruments”
 c.  For all other Class 3R lasers and laser sys-
tems,  “Laser  Radiation—Avoid  Direct 
Exposure to Beam”

 d.  For all Class 3B lasers and laser systems, 
“Laser Radiation—Avoid Direct Exposure 
to Beam”

 e.  For Class 4 laser and laser systems, “Laser 
Radiation—Avoid Eye or Skin Exposure to 
Direct or Scattered Radiation”

 (2)  At position 1 above the tail of the sunburst, special pre-
cautionary  instructions  or  protective  action  such  as: 
“Laser Surgery in Process—Eye Protection Required”
 (3)  At position 2 below the tail of the sunburst, type of 
laser (Nd: YAG, CO2, etc.) or the emitted wavelength, 
pulse  duration  (if  appropriate),  and  maximum 
output.

 (4)  At position 3, the class of the laser or laser system.

 (1)  At  position  1  above  the  tail  of  the  sunburst,  special 
precautionary  instructions  or  protection  action  such 
as  “Laser  Surgery 
in  Process—Eye  Protection 
Required”

Figure 2.2 shows the appropriate warning signs 

for (a) Class 2 lasers and (b) Class 3 and 4 lasers.

B. D. Cressey et al.



43

POSITION 1
BOLD BLACK LETTERING

POSITION 2
BOLD BLACK LETTERING

POSITION 1
BOLD BLACK LETTERING

POSITION 2
BOLD BLACK LETTERING

a

POSITION 3
BLACK LETTERING

b

POSITION 3
BLACK LETTERING

Fig. 2.2  The distinction between appropriate laser warning signs for (a) Class 2 and (b) Class 3 and 4 lasers

 Eye and Skin Protection

Additional protective measures must be followed 
to ensure the safety of patients, staff, and opera-
tor while in the NHZ. The following recommen-
dations are relevant to eye and skin safety [3]:

4.6.2  Laser  Protective  Eyewear  (Class  3B  and 
Class 4). Laser protective eyewear may include but 
not be limited to goggles, face shields, spectacles 
or prescription eyewear using special filter materi-
als  or  reflective  coatings  (or  a  combination  of 
both),  which  are  selected  to  reduce  the  potential 
ocular  exposure  below  the  applicable  MPE  level. 
Eyewear  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  following 
information:

 (1)  Optical density at appropriate wavelengths.
 (2)  Manufacturer’s  recommendations  on  shelf  life, 
storage  conditions,  and  appropriate  cleaning 
methods.

4.6.2.4 Cleaning and Inspection. Periodic cleaning 
and inspection of protective eyewear shall be made 
to ensure the maintenance of satisfactory condition. 
The  lenses  should  be  cleaned  carefully  to  avoid 
damage  to  the  absorbing  and  reflecting  surfaces. 
This shall include:

 (1)  Inspection  of  the  attenuation  material  for  pitting, 

crazing, cracking, discoloration, etc.

 (2)  Inspection of the frame for mechanical integrity.
 (3)  Inspection  of  straps  or  other  retaining  devices  to 
ensure  that  they  are  not  excessively  worn  or 
damaged.

 (4)  Inspection  for  light  leaks  and  coating  damage  that 

would permit hazardous intrabeam viewing.

4.6.3 Laser Protective Barriers and Curtains (Class 
3B and Class 4). Facility windows (exterior or inte-
rior) or entry ways that are located within the NHZ 
of a Class 3B or Class 4 laser system, shall be pro-
vided  with  an  appropriate  filter  or  barrier  which 
reduces any transmissible radiation to levels below 
the applicable MPE level.
4.6.3.1  Drapes.  Use  only  wet  or  nonflammable 
drapes in the operative field.
4.6.4 Skin Protection (Class 3B and Class 4). The 
manufacturer of the HCLS or the LSO shall spec-
ify the appropriate laser protective equipment by 
make  and  model  or  performance  specifications 
and  the  locations  and  conditions  for  use  of  the 
skin protective equipment. Skin protection shall 
be  used  whenever  there  is  a  potential  hazard  to 
HCP.

Though  protective  equipment  is  required  for 
all individuals within the NHZ, depending on the 
nature of the procedure, the protocol for patient 
eye protection may be different for operator and 
staff protection. The following specifications are 
important to consider, especially for procedures 
performed on the face:

4.4.4  Patient  Eye  Protection.  When  the  patient’s 
eyes are potentially within the NHZ, they shall be 
protected from inadvertent exposure by a method 
approved by the LSO. The suitability of patient eye 
protection methods and equipment shall be deter-
mined  based  on  the  intended  procedure,  target 
 tissue site, wavelength and delivery system of the 
HCLS,  positioning  of  the  patient,  and  type  of 
anesthesia.

When facial areas, particularly around the eyes 
are being treated, e.g., for port wine stains or neo-
plasia,  protective  glasses  may  not  be  appropriate 

2 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards and Practice Guidelines



44

for shielding the eyes. For treatments on or near the 
eyelids,  appropriate  corneal  shields  are  usually 
required,  and  the  shield  shall  have  appropriate 
optical  properties  to  reduce  exposure  below  the 
applicable MPE. Additionally, patient eye protec-
tion is not intended to restrict or limit in any way 
the  use  of  laser  radiation  intentionally  adminis-
tered for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes.

There  is  a  consensus  among  professional 
organizations  that  laser  protective  equipment 
should  not  only  be  in  good  working  order,  but 
also meet both local and ANSI standards for pro-
tective equipment. Figure 2.3 shows a variety of 
eye protection for both patient and operator.

 Non-beam Hazards

Besides direct hazards to the eyes and skin due to 
laser  beam  exposure,  concerns  associated  with 
non-beam  hazards  present  unique  laser  safety 
considerations. According to a publication by the 
National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and 
Health  (NIOSH),  the  plume  (smoke  byproduct) 
produced  by  thermal  destruction  of  tissue  can 
contain toxic gases or vapors, dead or living cel-
lular material, or even viruses. As a result, control 
of smoke is essential to minimize health risks to 
health care personnel, as well as visual interfer-
ence to the individual performing the procedure. 
NIOSH recommends the two following methods 
of  ventilation  for  the  management  of  airborne 
contaminants [6]:

Smoke evacuators contain a suction unit (vacuum 
pump), filter, hose, and an inlet nozzle. The smoke 
evacuator should have high efficiency in airborne 
particle  reduction  and  should  be  used  in  accor-
dance  with  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations 
to achieve maximum efficiency. A capture velocity 

of  about  100  to  150  feet  per  minute  at  the  inlet 
nozzle is generally recommended. It is also impor-
tant to choose a filter that is effective in collecting 
the  contaminants.  A  High  Efficiency  Particulate 
Air  (HEPA)  filter  or  equivalent  is  recommended 
for  trapping  particulates.  Various  filtering  and 
cleaning  processes  also  exist  which  remove  or 
inactivate airborne gases and vapors. The various 
filters  and  absorbers  used  in  smoke  evacuators 
require  monitoring  and  replacement  on  a  regular 
basis  and  are  considered  a  possible  biohazard 
requiring proper disposal.

Room suction systems can pull at a much lower 
rate and were designed primarily to capture liquids 
rather  than  particulate  or  gases.  If  these  systems 
are  used  to  capture  generated  smoke,  users  must 
install appropriate filters in the line, ensure that the 
line is cleared, and that filters are disposed prop-
erly. Generally speaking, the use of smoke evacua-
tors is more effective than room suction systems to 
control the generated smoke from nonendoscopic 
laser/electric surgical procedures.

In  a  statement  entitled  “Smoking  Guns”, 
approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the 
ASLMS,  the  aforementioned  NIOSH  guidelines 
are referenced; however, the statement highlights 
that these guidelines stop short of requiring per-
sonal respirators for personnel within the operat-
ing room. The ANSI Z 136.3 states that currently 
a  suitable  half-mask  respirator  (fitting  over  the 
nose  and  mouth)  to  exclude  laser-generated 
plume does not exist. As such, the recommenda-
tion is that health care facilities rely on appropri-
ate ventilation techniques to protect against laser 
generated  airborne  contaminants  [3].  It  is  the 
unanimous  opinion  of 
the  aforementioned 
 regulatory organizations that a smoke evacuation 
apparatus  be  utilized  to  protect  patient  and  per-
sonnel and to control smoke levels in the operat-
ing room.

Fig. 2.3  A selection of 
eyewear suitable for 
patient and operator 
safety. Care should be 
taken to select the 
appropriate lenses to 
protect against various 
levels of laser emission

B. D. Cressey et al.



 Delegation of Use of Lasers

Non-physician use of lasers has been sub-
ject  to  debate  in  recent  years  leading  to 
calls  for  increased  regulation  regarding 
delegation  of  medical  procedures  to  alter-
native healthcare professionals. While pro-
fessional organizations maintain their own 
positions  on  delegation  of  medical  proce-
dures,  state  legislature  plays  a  significant 
this  determination  as  well. 
role 
Regardless  of  the  differences  between 
organizations  and  states,  the  consensus  is 
that the physician is ultimately responsible 
for patient safety.

in 

In recent years, there has been increasing con-
cern regarding frequency and severity of reported 
adverse events associated with the use of lasers 
by  non-physicians.  This  has  led  to  calls  for 
increased  regulation  regarding  delegation  of 
medical procedures to non-physicians. Guidelines 
have been created by professional organizations 
as well as state medical boards and legislature to 
delineate who is qualified to safely practice med-
icine involving lasers.

The ASDS and AAD maintain the position that 
only active and properly licensed doctors of medi-
cine and osteopathy shall conduct the practice of 
medicine.  But,  a  physician  may  delegate  certain 
medical procedures to certified or licensed allied 
health professionals under the appropriate circum-
stances. The ASDS Board of Directors approved 
the following statement in May of 2008 [7].

The  physician  must  directly  supervise  the  allied 
health  professionals  to  protect  the  best  interests 
and welfare of each patient. The supervising physi-
cian  shall  be  physically  present  on-site,  immedi-
ately  available,  and  able  to  respond  promptly  to 
any question or problem that may occur while the 
procedure is being performed. It is the responsible 
physician’s obligation to ensure that, with respect 
to each procedure performed, the allied health pro-
fessionals possess knowledge of cutaneous medi-
cine,  documented  training  in  the  procedure,  the 
indications  for  the  procedure,  and  the  pre-  and 
post-operative care involved.

45

In  a  position  statement  approved  by  the 
Board  of  Directors  on  February  22,  2002,  the 
AAD  expressed  a  similar  opinion  regarding 
medical  laser  use  by  non-physicians  with  an 
additional  requirement:  “The  non-physician 
office  personnel  should  also  be  appropriately 
trained by the delegating physician in cutaneous 
medicine” [2].

Though the positions of the ASDS and AAD 
appear  clear,  delegation  remains  a  controver-
sial issue, especially due to the potential ambi-
guity  that  arises  from  differences  in  state 
legislation.

In  addition  to  adhering  to  the  standards  set 
forth  by  their  professional  organization,  physi-
cians must comply with state laws regarding laser 
use.  In  this  chapter,  legislation  in  California, 
Florida,  Illinois,  New  York,  and  Texas  will  be 
addressed.  The  Federation  of  State  Medical 
Boards  last  summarized  the  following  regula-
tions for each state in May 2012.

In  California, 

regulation  adheres 
laser 
closely to the position of the ASDS, with addi-
tional  stipulations  regarding  written  documen-
tation of supervision protocols and procedures. 
California  also  defines  which  non-physician 
health  professionals  may  perform  laser  hair 
removal [8]:

The  Business  and  Professions  Code  includes  the 
use of laser devices in the definition of the practice 
of  medicine.  Only  physicians,  dentists,  physician 
assistants and nurses may use laser devices, includ-
ing  intense  pulse  light  devices,  with  physician 
supervision  within  their  legal  scope  of  practice. 
The law requires written protocols and procedures 
relating to supervision. Laser hair removal may be 
performed  only  by  a  nurse  physician  or,  when 
working with a physician, registered nurse or phy-
sician assistants.

In  Florida,  however,  specifications  requiring 
registration of laser systems with the Department 
of Health set an additional standard for safety [8].

The Board of medicine considers the use of high- 
powered lasers (all Class IIIa, IIIb, and IV lasers as 
designated by the FDA) to be the practice of medi-
cine. These may be used only by physicians, or by 
those exempt from the Medical Practice Act (such 
as nurses) while acting under the direct supervision 
of  a  physician.  Florida  also  requires  all  high- 
powered  laser  systems  to  be  registered  with  the 

2 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards and Practice Guidelines



46

Department  of  Health.  Failure  to  do  so  may  be 
grounds for disciplinary action against a physician 
and may result in a criminal penalty.

Additionally,  Florida  mandates  specialty- 
specific requirements relating to supervision [8].

In office setting where supervision not onsite, pri-
mary health practitioners limited to supervising 4 
offices  in  addition  to  the  primary  office  location; 
specialty practitioners limited to 2; dermatologists 
limited to 1.

In Illinois, the state legislature issued the fol-
lowing statement regarding the use of lasers for 
non-physician users:

“Laser  equipment,  which  affects  living  layers  of 
skin,  is  a  medical  device  and  must  only  be  used 
with the direct supervision by a physician. While 
the  physician  may  delegate  performance  of  laser 
procedures to appropriately educated, trained, and 
experienced nurses or other personnel, the physi-
cian  must  provide  proper  supervision,  including 
initial assessment, on-site availability and ultimate 
responsibility.”

The Board of Medicine in New York regulates 
the  use  of  lasers  for  hair  removal  in  a  similar 
manner as California and Illinois [8]:

In August 2002, the NY State Board of Medicine 
passed a resolution recommending that the use of 
lasers and intense pulsed light for hair removal to 
be considered the practice of medicine and thus be 
performed by a physician or under direct physician 
supervision.

To ensure compliance with these regulations, 
the New York Education Law defines the follow-
ing two statutes as professional misconduct [8]:

24) Practicing beyond the scope of practice permit-
ted  by  state  law  and  performing  professional 
responsibilities  a  licensee  knows  he/she  is  not 
competent to perform.
25)  Delegating  professional  responsibilities  to  a 
person when the licensee delegating such responsi-
bilities knows or has reason to know that such per-
son is not qualified, by training, experience or by 
licensure to perform.

Though  New  York  law  does  not  address  new 
issues, it strengthens the responsibility of the phy-
sician  by  including  regulations  on  delegation 
prominently  within 
its  code  of  professional 
misconduct.

In  Texas,  the  State  Board  provides  a  few 
detailed clarifications the previous states do not. 

In the position statements on laser regulation, on- 
site supervision is defined as continuous supervi-
sion with the individual in the same building [8]. 
Further,  the  State  Board  explicitly  distinguishes 
practice guidelines for ablative and non-ablative 
procedures [8]:

(2)  The  use  of  lasers/pulsed  light  devices  for 
non-ablative  procedures  cannot  be  dele-
gated  to  nonphysicians  delegates,  other 
than  an  advanced  health  care  practitioner 
without  the  delegating  physician  being  on 
site and immediately available.

(3)  The  use  of  lasers/pulsed  light  devices  for 
ablative procedures may only be performed 
by a physician.

In the latest 2012 publication, the Texas Board 
has updated its position on the delegation of medi-
cal services from 2008. As of 2012, “a physician has 
the authority to delegate a medical act to qualified 
and properly trained persons if the physician deter-
mines that the act can be properly and safely per-
formed by that person and such delegation does not 
violate any other statute. The delegating physician 
remains responsible for delegated medical acts.”

A 2011 survey study of state medical boards 
showed  a  wide  variability  in  the  regulation  of 
how  responsibilities  related  to  minimally  inva-
sive  cosmetic  procedures  are  regulated  [9]. 
Despite  this  variability,  the  consensus  remains 
that  ultimate  responsibility  for  performing  any 
medical procedure resides with the physician.

 Conclusion
Guidelines and regulations for medical lasers 
are essential for their safe and effective use. 
As previously noted, there is no single, finite 
standard  of  practice,  therefore  consultation 
with  the  appropriate  governing  bodies  and 
professional  organizations  is  necessary  to 
ensure  the  quality  of  care  provided  and  the 
safety  of 
laser  patient,  staff  and 
operator.

the 

References

  1.  The laser revolution – laser skin surgery. Approved by 
the  Board  of  Directors, American  Society  for  Laser 
Medicine and Surgery, Inc., October 1, 2007.

B. D. Cressey et al. 
 




47

  2.  The  use  of  lasers,  pulsed  light,  radio  frequency, 
and  microwave  devices.  American  Academy  of 
Dermatology,  Approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors, 
February 22, 2002.

  3.  American  National  Standards  Institute.  American 
National Standard for Safe use of lasers in health care 
facilities: ANSI Z 136.3. Orlando, FL: Laser Institute 
of America; 2011.

  4.  Lanzafame  RJ.  Procedural  skills  for  using  lasers  in 
general surgery. American Society for Laser Medicine 
and  Surgery,  Approved  by  the  Board  Directors, 
August 2, 2012.

Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery, Inc., August 
2, 2012.

  6.  Control  of  smoke  from  laser/electric  surgical  pro-
cedures.  Hazards  controls.  HC  11.  DHHS  (NIOSH) 
Publication 96–128, 1996.

  7.  Position  statement  on  non-physician  practice  of 
medicine  and  use  of  non-physician  office  person-
nel. Approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors, American 
Society for Dermatologic Surgery, May 2008.

  8.  Use  of  lasers/delegation  of  medical  functions  regu-
lation  by  state.  Federation  of  State  Medical  Boards, 
May 2012.

  5. Procedural  skill  and  technique  proficiency  for  sur-
gery  and  other  energy-based  therapies  in  dermatol-
ogy. Approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors, American 

  9.  Choudhry S, et al. State medical board regulation of 
minimally invasive cosmetic procedures. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2012;66:86.

2 Laser Safety: Regulations, Standards and Practice Guidelines



Lasers for Treatment of Vascular 
Lesions

3

Jayne Joo, Daniel Michael, and Suzanne Kilmer

Abstract
Lasers for the treatment of vascular lesions are 
continually improving using the principles of 
selective photothermolysis.

Important variables to consider in the treat-
ment  of  vascular  lesions  are  size,  depth,  and 
composition.

Effective  treatment  of  vascular  lesions 
requires  tailoring  the  light  wavelength,  flu-
ence, and pulse duration to the specifics of the 
targeted lesion.

Keywords
Lasers · Vascular lesions · Selective  
photothermolysis · Pulse duration · Epidermal 
temperature control · Frequency-doubled 

J. Joo 
Department of Dermatology, University of California, 
Davis, CA, USA

Sacramento VA Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, USA
e-mail: jsjoo@ucdavis.edu 

D. Michael 
Department of Mohs Surgery, Kaiser Permanente,  
Walnut Creek, CA, USA
e-mail: daniel.x.michael@kp.org 

S. Kilmer (*) 
Department of Dermatology, University of California, 
Davis, CA, USA

Laser and Skin Surgery Center of Northern 
California, Sacramento, CA, USA
e-mail: skilmer@skinlasers.com

Nd:YAG (Potassium-Titanyl-Phosphate 
[KTP]) · Pulsed dye lasers (PDL)  
Alexandrite laser · Neodymium:Yttrium–
Aluminum–Garnet (Nd:YAG)   
Dual wavelength combination lasers

 Introduction

A  large  number  of  lasers  and  intense  non- 
coherent pulsed light devices are available for the 
treatment of vascular lesions. New devices have 
been developed, and existing devices are continu-
ally  being  improved  to  increase  their  ability  to 
specifically  target  vessels  while  decreasing  risk 
of potential complication such as scarring. Here 
we  review  lasers  that  are  utilized  for  the  treat-
ment of commonly encountered vascular lesions.

 Principles of Laser Treatment 
for Vascular Lasers

 Selective Photothermolysis

In 1983, Richard Rox Anderson and John Parrish 
proposed the theory of selective photothermoly-
sis,  whereby  laser  energy  can  be  used  to  create 
targeted  damage  to  cutaneous  structures  while 
minimizing  damage  to  surrounding  tissue  [1]. 
The selective destruction of vascular lesions with 
light is based on the following tenets:

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_3

49





50

•  The wavelength of light has to penetrate to at 

least the depth of the target

•  The energy is absorbed selectively by the target
•  The heated target must cool quickly enough so 
that  it  does  not  cause  thermal  damage  to  the 
surrounding tissue.

The  target  (chromophore)  for  vascular  lasers 
is  hemoglobin.  Choosing  the  appropriate  laser 
involves selecting a wavelength with deep enough 
penetration that is primarily absorbed by the vas-
cular  target.  There  are  commercially  available 
lasers ranging from 532 to 1064 nm for the treat-
ment  of  vascular  lesions  with  non-coherent 
pulsed  light  sources  spanning  an  even  broader 
spectrum. Within this range, shorter wavelengths 
scatter  more  quickly  and  penetrate  less  deeply 
than longer wavelengths which can reach several 
millimeters into the dermis before scattering ren-
ders it useless.

The  wavelength  of  light  that  is  preferentially 
absorbed depends on whether it is bound to oxy-
gen. Oxygenated hemoglobin (oxyhemoglobin) is 
normally the most abundant form of hemoglobin 
and has three peaks of absorption (418, 542 and 
577 nm) with decreasing absorption in the near-
infrared  range  [1].  Deoxygenated  hemoglobin 
(deoxyhemoglobin)  has  an  absorption  peak  of 
755 nm that is well targeted by the 755 nm wave-
length  alexandrite  laser.  The  absorption  of  light 
energy by intravascular oxyhemoglobin results in 
healing and destruction of vascular lesion.

The  major  chromophores  competing  for 
absorption in the skin are melanin, water, and fat. 
Melanin is primarily present in the epidermis and 
may absorb incident laser light. This may reduce 
the effective energy delivered to the vascular tar-
get and possibly cause direct thermal damage to 
the  epidermis.  Melanin  absorption  spectrum 
decreases with longer wavelengths from ultravio-
let (<400 nm) through the visible (400–760 nm) 
spectrum  (Fig.  3.1).  Longer  visible  and  near 
infrared wavelengths are absorbed less by epider-
mal melanin and penetrate deeper into the dermis 
than  the  shorter  visible  and  ultraviolet  wave-
lengths [2].

 Pulse Duration

Based on the principle of selective photothermol-
ysis described by Anderson and Parrish, the size 
of  the  chromophore  determines  optimal  pulse 
duration. The thermal relaxation time is defined as 
the time it takes for a target structure to dissipate 
50% of the absorbed energy into surrounding tis-
sue. This  can  be  approximated  by  the  square  of 
the diameter of the target structure. The ideal set-
ting would have high enough fluences with pulse 
durations that are short enough to limit diffusion 
of heat from target vessels while still causing pho-
tocoagulation  [3].  Excessively  long  pulse  dura-
tions that exceed the thermal relaxation time can 
lead to diffusion of heat to surrounding tissue and 

20,000
10,000

1000

100

10

1

0.1

200

)

1
-

m
c
(
e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
A

a

Tabulated molar extinction coefficient for hemoglobin in water

hbo2 cm-1/m

hb cm-1/m

Hb

HbO2

Water

Melanin

1,000,000

100,000

10,000

1000

100

1000

Wavelength (nm)

5000

250

350

450

550

650

750

850

950

b

Wavelength nm

Fig. 3.1  Absorption curve for (a) hemoglobin, melanin, and water, and (b) oxygenated (red) and deoxygenated (blue) 
hemoglobin

J. Joo et al. 




thermal  damage.  In  contrast,  excessively  short 
durations  can  cause  focal  boiling  of  the  blood 
which may lead to cavitation- induced vessel dis-
ruption which in turn can produce excessive pur-
pura  without  necessarily  causing  elimination  of 
the vessel.

 Epidermal Temperature Control

Heat transfer to the epidermis during laser ther-
apy can cause untoward thermal damage. This 
can  occur  by  several  mechanisms:  direct 
absorption of light energy, back scatter of light 
from deeper tissue, and conduction of heat pro-
duced  in  the  dermis.  Selective  cooling  of  the 
epidermis  is  therefore  very  important  before, 
during,  and  after  treatment  and  allows  for 
higher temperatures to occur in the target struc-
tures without damage to the epidermis. Current 
methods  for  epidermal  cooling  include:  direct 
contact  (conduction),  forced  cold  air  (convec-
tion),  and  cryogen  spray  (conduction  and 
evaporation).

 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular 
Lesions

51

 Pulsed Dye Lasers (PDL)

The flash lamp-pumped pulsed dye laser (PDL) 
was the first laser developed for selective photo-
thermolysis of vascular lesions [1, 4]. It was ini-
tially  designed  to  produce  577  nm  light  to 
correspond with one of the oxyhemoglobin peaks 
[5] (Fig. 3.1). The wavelength was increased to 
585  nm  to  increase  the  depth  of  penetration, 
improving  efficacy  for  the  treatment  of  deeper 
vessels. The original pulsed dye lasers had short 
pulse widths of 0.45 ms, whereas the next gener-
ation  of  PDLs  could  deliver  high  frequency 
pulses that could be combined into longer com-
bined  pulse  widths  of  1.5  ms. The  longer  pulse 
widths allow treatment of larger vessels with less 
extravasation of blood and therefore less purpura. 
Although longer wavelengths allow deeper pen-
etration,  hemoglobin  absorption  begins  to  drop 
off rapidly as the wavelength increases. The next 
generation of PDLs is also able to produce light 
with  wavelengths  of  585,  590,  595,  or  600  nm. 
The  most  recent  versions  of  pulsed  dye  lasers 
have only the 595 nm wavelength but have adjust-
able pulse widths ranging from 0.45 to 40 ms to 
provide optimal treatment parameters for various 
vessel sizes.

 Frequency-Doubled Nd:YAG 
(Potassium-Titanyl-Phosphate [KTP])

 Alexandrite Laser

(Nd:YAG) 

neodymium:yttrium- 
Frequency-doubled 
aluminum- garnet 
use 
lasers 
potassium- titanyl-phosphate  (KTP)  crystals  to 
double  the  frequency,  which  halves  the  wave-
length  from  1064  to  532  nm.  Oxyhemoglobin 
absorbs the light of this wavelength about as well 
as  it  absorbs  the  light  of  585  nm  wavelength 
(Fig. 3.1). This shorter wavelength is effective for 
destruction  of  more  superficial  vessels  whereas 
longer wavelengths penetrate deeper and are bet-
ter suited for vessels that are located deeper in the 
skin. Melanin also absorbs this wavelength well. 
Therefore,  efficient  epidermal  cooling  is  neces-
sary  when  using  these  devices,  especially  in 
darker skin types that have higher epidermal mel-
anin content.

Bluish vascular lesions often extend deeper and 
contain  more  deoxyhemoglobin.  PDLs  are  not 
very effective against these lesions because their 
wavelengths  often  do  not  penetrate  deeply 
enough and are not absorbed by deoxyhemoglo-
bin  as  well  as  they  are  by  oxyhemoglobin. 
Initially,  the  long  pulsed  alexandrite  laser  was 
used for hair removal, but was found to be effec-
tive  against  violaceous  deeper  vascular  lesions. 
The  long  pulsed  alexandrite  laser  utilizes  the 
deoxyhemoglobin absorption peak at 755 nm to 
target certain vascular lesions [6]. In addition to 
being  well  absorbed  by  deoxyhemoglobin,  the 
longer wavelength of the long pulsed alexandrite 
lasers produced over longer pulse widths allows 
the light energy to penetrate deeper into the der-
mis and to target larger vessels.

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



52

 Neodymium:Yttrium–Aluminum–
Garnet (Nd:YAG)

Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) 
lasers produce light at 1064 nm which penetrates 
deeper  than  shorter  wavelengths.  However,  at 
this  wavelength,  oxyhemoglobin  no 
longer 
absorbs  the  energy  better  than  the  surrounding 
dermis. These lasers can be effective, but the risk 
of scarring is significant at fluences high enough 
to effect vascular damage, so these lasers are less 
often used [7]. Fluences and pulse width used at 
this  wavelength  are  dependent  on  vessel  size, 
location,  and  the  oxygenation  of  hemoglobin. 
Vessels  with  larger  diameters  require  longer 
pulse  widths  (Fig.  3.2).  Conversely,  small  ves-
sels need shorter pulse widths but require higher 
fluences as there is less chromophore (i.e., hemo-
globin) present.

 Dual Wavelength Combination Lasers

Methemoglobin is hemoglobin in which the fer-
rous iron of the heme group has oxidized to ferric 
iron. Unlike oxyhemoglobin and melanin, methe-
moglobin has higher absorption with increasing 
wavelength from 700 to 1000 nm [8] and can be 
targeted  by  Nd:YAG  laser  light.  It  has  been 
shown  that  pulsed  dye  lasers  are  able  to  induce 
the  transformation  of  oxyhemoglobin  to  methe-
moglobin resulting in a more selective target for 

an  Nd:YAG  laser  [9].  In  addition,  the  thrombus 
that can be formed by PDL energy also is a better 
target for the 1064 nm light [9, 10]. Because of 
the increased absorption of 1064  nm by  methe-
moglobin  and  thrombus,  lower  fluences  of  the 
Nd:YAG  can  produce  vessel  specific  damage 
while decreasing risk of thermal damage to sur-
rounding tissue.

PDL  light  only  penetrates  approximately 
0.75  mm  into  the  skin.  For  lesions  with  deeper 
components,  it  is  necessary  to  allow  the  PDL 
formed  products  time  to  flow  deeper  into  the 
lesion before illumination with the deeper pene-
trating  Nd:YAG  laser.  The  combination  PDL/
Nd:YAG  therapy  works  best  for  superficial  dis-
crete  telangiectasias  with  vessels  in  the  0.2–
1.2 mm diameter range. Although PDL remains 
the treatment of choice for vascular birthmarks, 
the dual wavelength combination KTP/Nd:YAG 
and  PDL/Nd:YAG  lasers  may  be  helpful  for 
lesions that resistant to PDL alone [11, 12].

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)

Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) devices produce high- 
energy, non-coherent light. Their output covers a 
broad  range  of  the  light  spectrum,  often  ranging 
from near 500 nm to around 1200 nm with pulse 
widths of several milliseconds. Cut-off filters are 
used to limit the spectrum of the incident light to 
the desired wavelengths. For treatment of vascular 

a

b

Fig. 3.2  Blue facial veins (a) before and (b) after treatment with long-pulsed Nd:YAG 1064 nm laser [Excel V (5 mm, 
110 J/cm2, 40 ms, 5 °C cooling with sapphire tip)]

J. Joo et al.



lesions, wavelengths shorter than 580–590 nm are 
generally filtered out [13]. Newer devices filter out 
the longer infrared wavelengths, reducing many of 
the adverse effects of earlier devices [13]. These 
devices usually have larger application tips which 
cover  larger  surface  areas  and  are  well  suited  to 
broader treatment areas.

Output varies by wavelength and by device, so 
parameters tend to be device-specific. IPL devices 
can be effective against capillary malformations, 
telangiectasias,  and  small  cherry  angiomas  [14]. 
Adverse effects include postinflammatory hyper- 
or hypopigmentation, blistering, and scarring.

 Vascular Lesions and Laser 
Treatment Options

 Capillary Malformations (e.g., Port 
Wine Stains or Nevus Flammeus)

Capillary malformations are the most common 
type of vascular malformation. Port wine stains 
(PWS), also called nevus flammeus, are congen-
ital developmental malformations of the superfi-
cial dermal capillaries. They are present at birth, 
grow  as  the  child  grows,  and  do  not  involute. 
Treatment  of  PWSs  was  initially  performed 
with  the  continuous  wave  488–514  nm  argon 
laser  [15,  16].  One  of  the  main  problems  with 
the  argon  laser  was  that  the  pulse  width  could 
not  be  controlled.  This  often  led  to  scarring 
from excess heat deposition. A laser with a lon-
ger  wavelength  and  a  controllable  pulse  width 
was  needed.  To  overcome  the  inadequacies  of 
the argon laser for treating these lesions, Richard 
Rox Anderson  and  John  Parrish  developed  the 
theory of selective photothermolysis. This led to 
the  PDL  becoming  the  treatment  of  choice  for 
these lesions. PDL selectively targets hemoglo-
bin and the pulse width more closely matches to 
the thermal relaxation time of the target vessels 
in PWSs [17].

Most  PWSs  start  as  pink  macules  with  tiny 
vessels,  but  with  time  these  lesions  become 
larger,  thicker,  and  tortuous  [18].  In  addition, 
more  of  the  hemoglobin  in  larger,  older  lesions 
tend to be deoxygenated and are not targeted as 

53

well by PDLs. For these reasons, PWSs are gen-
erally best treated with PDLs earlier in the pink 
macular  stage,  as  often  seen  in  infants.  More 
mature  hypertrophic  bluish  PWSs  often  require 
longer pulse widths and even longer wavelengths 
[19].  Successful  treatment  generally  requires 
repeated treatments, especially for larger lesions 
and those on the distal extremities. As discussed 
above, longer wavelengths can treat deeper ves-
sels in the lesion and may show improved rates of 
clearance, although the decreased absorption by 
hemoglobin  necessitates  higher  fluences  which 
may be more likely to produce post-inflammatory 
pigment changes.

Most patients see significant improvement but 
complete clearance of the lesion is often not pos-
sible. Lesions in newborns tend to respond faster 
and more completely than those in older patients. 
There is much less melanin in neonatal skin com-
peting as a chromophore for the absorption of the 
laser, and the lesions tend to be smaller and thinner 
than in adults. All of these features render earlier 
lesions more responsive to PDL than later lesions.
Pink  macular  PWSs  are  best  treated  using 
585–595  nm  wavelengths  with  a  short  pulse 
width  in  the  0.45–1.5  ms  range  (Fig.  3.3).  The 
best  spot  size  and  energy  used  is  dependent  on 
the specific PDL used, but for 10 mm spot size, 
7.5 J/cm2 is often effective and for 12 mm spot 
size, 7 J/cm2 is often needed, which may be the 
maximum  output  available.  For  more  resistant 
PWSs,  when  higher  energies  are  needed,  we 
found that the 7 mm spot size may be needed to 
deliver  8–10  J/cm2. As  higher  energy  levels  are 
used, the risk of purpura or ulceration increases 
and  these  settings  should  be  used  with  caution. 
For  PWS  composed  of  larger  vessels,  the  pulse 
width  may  need  to  be  lengthened.  With  longer 
pulse  widths,  it  becomes  very  important  not  to 
exceed  the  ability  of  the  cooling  to  protect  the 
epidermis. As with all lasers, appropriate cooling 
is important to protect the epidermis while deliv-
ering  sufficient  heat  to  effectively  destroy  the 
target.

Frequency-doubled  Nd:YAG  (Nd:YAG/KTP) 
lasers  produce  sequential  nanosecond  length 
pulses at a high frequency (>20,000 Hz) to pro-
duce  semi-continuous  pulses  in  the  2–20  ms 

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



54

a

b

Fig. 3.3  Young boy with pink macular PWS (a) before and (b) after ten PDL treatments

range. The 532 nm wavelength does not penetrate 
deeply but has been shown to be effective against 
the superficial components of PWSs [20–22].

a 10–12 mm spot size and 3 ms pulse width have 
to 
in 
improved  resolution 
previous treatments.

those  recalcitrant 

For hypertrophic PWSs, the PDL can be used 
at  595  nm  with  similar  settings  as  above;  how-
ever,  increasing  the  pulse  width  may  improve 
outcome. In addition, hypertrophic bluish PWSs 
have  more  tortuous  dilated  vessels  and  slower 
blood  flow  resulting  in  more  deoxygenated 
hemoglobin.  Therefore,  they  may  be  better  tar-
geted  by  the  755  nm  wavelength  of  alexandrite 
lasers,  which  utilizes  the  absorption  peak  of 
deoxyhemoglobin  near  755  nm  (Fig.  3.4).  We 
often  find  settings  of  35–40  J/cm2  with  12  mm 
spot  size  and  3  ms  pulse  width  with  50  ms  of 
spray  cooling  safe  and  effective.  Care  must  be 
taken to not overlap these pulses.

against 

Nd:YAG  lasers  have  also  been  shown  to  be 
effective 
capillary  malformations. 
However,  because  this  laser  has  a  greater  risk  of 
scarring, we rarely use this laser in infants or young 
children. In a more mature PWS, 60–70 J/cm2 with 

More  recently,  the  595  nm  wavelengths  has 
been  used  in  combination  with  the  1064  nm 
wavelength  to  take  advantage  of  the  improved 
absorption of 1064 nm by methylated hemoglo-
bin so that less energy at 1064 nm is needed mak-
ing it safer. PDL and Nd:YAG lasers, when used 
in  combination,  are  generally  set  lower  than 
either would be if used alone. Fluences generally 
used  range between 6 and 10 J/cm2 for the PDL 
and  between  40  and  80  J/cm2 
the 
Nd:YAG.  However,  appropriate  sample  starting 
settings for PDL is 7–8 J/cm2 and 10 ms, and for 
Nd:YAG is 40 J/cm2 and 15 ms.

for 

Multiple factors influence the effectiveness of 
treatment,  including  thickness,  patient  age,  and 
location  of 
lesion.  Treatment  response 
decreases  with  age  and  thickness  of  the  lesion 
[23]. The earlier these lesions are treated, the bet-
ter  the  results  [24–26].  Not  only  do  they  clear 

the 

J. Joo et al.



a

b

55

Fig. 3.4  Middle aged Hispanic women with mixed (mac-
ular and hypertrophic) PWS (a) before and (b) after three 
treatments with PDL (7.5 J/cm2, 1.5 ms, 10 mm spot size) 

and alexandrite 755 nm laser (40 J/cm2, 3 ms, 12 mm spot 
size)

in  dramatic 

better, but the treatments are better tolerated. It is 
often  possible  to  achieve  effective  treatment 
before 6 months of age. Treatment intervals are 
typically  4–6  weeks  apart  though  there  is  little 
documentation establishing the optimal interval. 
In fact, for resistant PWSs, 2 week intervals have 
resulted 
improvement  without 
increasing complication rates [27]. This may be 
because  more  frequent  treatments  may  prevent 
neovascularization  that  would  otherwise  occur 
before  the  next  treatment.  In  addition,  lesions 
involving V2 distribution of the trigeminal nerve 
as  well  as  those  in  the V1  distribution  over  the 
nose  respond  less  well  than  those  superior  or 
inferior to these regions [28, 29].

The  most  common  adverse  effect  of  PDL 
treatment is purpura, though this is becoming less 
common with newer lasers. It used to be thought 
that production of purpura is necessary for suc-
cessful treatment. and therefore the lowest energy 
settings  that  produce  purpura  were  used.  More 
recently,  we  and  others  have  found  that  these 
lesions can be successfully treated without induc-
ing purpura [26].

 Hemangiomas

In  contrast  to  vascular  malformations,  infantile 
hemangiomas (IH) are true neoplasms composed 
of  endothelial  cells.  They  usually  develop  soon 
after birth, but almost a third are present at birth 
[30].  They  are  more  common  in  Caucasians 
(~10%  of  births)  and  are  more  likely  in  infants 
that  are  premature,  of  very  low  birth  weight 
(<1.5  kg),  born  to  mothers  who  had  chorionic 
 villus sampling, or those with a first-degree rela-
tive who have a vascular anomaly [31].

Although  IHs  can  undergo  a  proliferative 
phase  during  which  they  grow  rapidly  in  size, 
many  involute  as  suggested  by  the  mnemonic 
often  taught  medical  students,  “50%  resolve  by 
5 years, 70% resolve by 7 years, 90% resolve by 
9 years.” However, end-stage or involuted hem-
angiomas often have residual superficial telangi-
ectasias with saggy, atrophic skin.

When IHs as located in cosmetically sensitive 
areas or impinge on normal form and function, it 
necessitates early intervention before permanent 
damage  results.  For  example,  periocular  lesions 

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



56

may obstruct vision and can impair visual cortex 
development  leading  to  permanent  blindness. 
Perioral lesions may frequently hemorrhage and 
impair feeding ability, possibly leading to failure- 
to- thrive. Perineal lesions often ulcerate and can 
be very painful. Until recently, problematic IHs 
were  treated  with  systemic  corticosteroids  with 
variable  response  [32,  33].  In  2008,  Léauté- 
Labréze et al. made the serendipitous discovery 
that  propranolol  given  to  infants  with  IHs  for 
treatment  of  cardiac  problems  also  resulted  in 
dramatic regression of their IHs [34]. Propranolol 
is now widely regarded as first line treatment for 
problematic  IHs  [35].  Recently,  topical  timolol 
has shown promise for the treatment of superfi-
cial IHs [36]. Timolol is hydrophilic and does not 
permeate  skin  easily.  Fractional  CO2  laser-
assisted  transdermal  delivery  of  topical  timolol 
has shown promising results for deep IHs [37].

Both PDL and Nd:YAG lasers have been suc-
cessfully used to treat IHs [38, 39]. Hemangiomas 
frequently have a stronger response to laser treat-
ment  and  need  to  be  handled  more  carefully  to 
avoid iatrogenic ulceration. Though deep compo-
nents of the hemangioma will not be treated by 
the 595 nm lasers (which have a limited depth of 
penetration up to 1.2 mm), selective elimination 
of the more superficial component of the heman-
gioma will preserve superficial skin architecture. 
Because the Nd:YAG lasers can penetrate up to 
6 mm, it has been proposed that sequential dual 
wavelength  modality  of  treatment  is  ideal  for 
mixed  hemangiomas  that  have  a  superficial  and 
deep component [40]. In comparison to treatment 
of PWSs, we typically start more conservatively 
using  settings  approximately  1  J/cm2  lower  and 
then  evaluate  the  response.  In  addition,  these 
lesions  require  more  frequent  monitoring  with 
shorter  treatment  intervals  and  careful  adjust-
ments made to treatment settings based on evalu-
ation of the response from the previous visits.

Systemic and topical treatment options may be 
combined with laser therapy to improve results. In 
fact, when the IH has deep dermal  vessels, lasers 
may  provide  better  results  than  topical  timolol 
alone because of a better depth of penetration [40]. 
Laser treatment can accelerate re- epithelialization, 
prevent  hemorrhage,  and  restore  skin  integrity 
and comfort (Fig. 3.5). Once the deep component 

a

b

c

Fig. 3.5  Ulcerated congenital hemangioma (a) at presen-
tation, (b) after PDL treatment, and (c) resolved lesion

regresses, a more normal appearing epidermis is 
more likely to remain (Fig. 3.6).

 Spider Angiomas

Spider  angiomas  consist  of  a  central  arteriole 
directly supplying a radiating network of dilated 
superficial capillaries. Spider angiomas are com-
mon among people with lighter skin and are often 
localized  to  areas  of  sun  exposure,  such  as  the 
face, neck, and upper chest. They are also associ-

J. Joo et al.



a

b

57

Fig. 3.6  Scrotal hemangioma (a) at presentation and (b) after six treatments with PDL

ated  with  portal  hypertension  and  hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) [18]. PDLs are 
the  laser  of  choice  for  the  treatment  of  spider 
angiomas. Treatment is aimed at the destruction 
of the central “feeder” vessel which can then be 
followed by destruction of the peripheral capillar-
ies. Diascopy can be used to target the feeder ves-
sel by blanching the draining capillaries. Fluences 
of  7–10  J/cm2  using  a  5–10  mm  spot  size  are 
often effective after just one or two treatments.

 Telangiectasias

Facial telangiectasias are one of the most com-
mon  complaints  encountered  by  the  cosmetic 
dermatologist. They are more common in peo-
ple  with  lighter  skin  types  and  are  associated 
with  a  history  of  sun  exposure  and  rosacea. 
They represent dilated capillaries and post-cap-
illary  venules  with  thickened  walls.  They  are 
superficial  (200–250  μm  deep)  and  have  small 
cross-sections (200–500 μm in diameter) [41].

PDL  continues  to  be  the  most  effective  treat-
ment option. This laser used to be associated with 
high rates of purpura [41]. However current  opinion 
is  that  telangiectasias  can  be  treated  with  longer 
pulse widths in the 6–10 ms range utilizing pulse 
stacking  where  two  to  four  pulses  are  “stacked” 
immediately  one  on  top  of  the  other  until  vessel 
clearing is noted without inducing purpura [42, 43] 
(Fig. 3.7). In fact, even longer pulse widths in the 
20–40 ms range may be effective. Treatment using 
fluences between 7 and 10 J/cm2 and spot sizes of 
5–10  mm  are  often  effective  with  pulse  widths 
ranging from 6 to 10 ms (Fig. 3.8). For the com-
bined  Cynosure  Cynergy  device,  the  PDL  at 
7–8 J/cm2 with a pulse width of 10–20 ms and with 
a short or medium delay followed by Nd:YAG at 
30–40 ms with pulse width of 15 ms is often effec-
tive (Fig. 3.9). Immediate coagulation/graying that 
quickly clears is the desired endpoint. Purpura may 
be more likely to develop in patients taking anti- 
coagulants (e.g., ASA, Coumadin, vitamin E, etc.).
IPLs  have  also  been  shown  to  be  effective 
induce  mild 

telangiectasias.  They 

against 

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



58

a

b

Fig. 3.7  Fifty-two year old woman with rosacea (a) before and (b) after two PDL treatments (7.5 J/cm2, 6 ms, and 
10 mm spot size)

a

b

c

d

Fig. 3.8  Facial and nasal telangiectasias (a, b) before and (c, d) after two treatments with PDL (7.5 J/cm2, 6 ms, and 
10 mm spot size)

a

b

Fig. 3.9  Sixty-one year old woman with facial telangiec-
tasias  (a)  before  and  (b)  after  treatment  with  PDL 
(3 × 10 mm spot size, 17 J/cm2, 40 ms over linear, discrete 

telangiectasias,  followed  by  a  second  pass  with  10  mm 
spot size, 7.5 J/cm2, 6 ms)

J. Joo et al.



erythema and have a lower risk of inducing pur-
pura. Effective fluences range from 32 to 40 J/cm2 
with  pulse  widths  of  around  20  ms  [41]. While 
PDLs continue to be the treatment of choice for 
focal telangiectasias, IPLs may be more tolerable 
for 
 matted 
telangiectasias  and  the  diffuse  erythema  associ-
ated with rosacea.

patients  with 

larger 

some 

59

the  longer  pulse  widths  which  makes  post-laser 
cooling an important consideration.

The aim with a PDL is to produce mild pur-
pura and edema. With diode and Nd:YAG lasers, 
the  goal  is  reduction  in  lesion  thickness  and 
clearance of the ectatic vessel. For the larger and 
deeper lesions, Nd:YAG with a spot size of 3 mm, 
pulse widths of 30–100 ms, and fluences of up to 
150 J/cm2 may be needed [41] (Fig. 3.10).

 Venous Lakes

Venous  lakes  are  vascular  ectasias  that  usually 
develop after the age of 50 and may enlarge over 
time [18]. Their size and depth can vary greatly. 
As  with  most  vascular  lesions,  laser  therapy  is 
often  effective  and  needs  to  be  tailored  to  the 
depth of the target. PDL is usually effective for 
superficial  venous  lakes  but  longer  wavelength 
lasers, such as the diode (800–900 nm), alexan-
drite (755 nm), or Nd:YAG (1064 nm), are neces-
sary  for  thicker  or  deeper  lesions.  Fluences  of 
80 J/cm2, pulse durations of 60 ms or longer, and 
10–12 mm spot sizes are often required; however, 
such  settings  may  put  the  epidermis  at  risk  of 
being thermally damaged. Therefore, appropriate 
cooling is very important. In addition, there can 
be  significant  heat  return  to  the  epidermis  with 

 Other Vascular Anomalies

In  addition  to  the  above  mentioned  vascular 
lesions, there are a variety of other less common 
vascular anomalies for which surgery used to be 
the  mainstay  of  treatment.  These  lesions  can 
now  be  treated  successfully  with  laser  therapy. 
For  example,  the  lesions  of  blue  rubber  bleb 
nevus syndrome, which are typically cutaneous 
venous  malformations  of  varying  sizes  that 
enlarge  with  age,  respond  well  to  long  pulse 
alexandrite laser with a fluence of 40 J/cm2, spot 
size of 12 mm, and efficient cooling (Fig. 3.11). 
The  long  pulse  Nd:YAG  laser  can  also  be  uti-
lized with settings starting at 80 J/cm2 at 60 ms. 
Again, appropriate cooling is extremely impor-
tant to minimize epidermal injury and scarring. 

a

b

Fig. 3.10  Venous lake (a) before and (b) after single pulse with Nd:YAG 1064 nm laser (110 J/cm2, 30 ms, 5 mm spot 
size)

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



60

a

b

Fig. 3.11  Blue rubber bleb nevus of the tongue (a) before 
and  (b)  after  treatment  with  alexandrite  755  nm  laser 
(40 J/cm2, 3 ms, 12 mm spot, 50 ms cryogen spray cool-

ing). Care must be taken to assure proper cooling and to 
not over-treat as this may cause tongue swelling and air-
way occlusion

Lymphangioma can also be targeted by vascular 
lasers if the concentration of hemoglobin is high 
enough  to  provide  a  sufficient  target  for  these 
vascular lasers [44]. More violaceous lesions are 
best treated with either long pulsed alexandrite 
or Nd:YAG.

 Conclusion
The introduction of lasers in cutaneous medi-
cine  and  the  development  of  the  theory  of 
selective thermolysis have provided clinicians 
with  effective  therapies  for  the  treatment  of 
vascular  lesions.  Understanding  the  tissue-
light interaction and the risks associated with 
these therapies has allowed for improved end 
results. The diverse range of devices available 
require  a  more  in- depth  understanding  of 
these  lasers  and  broad  band  light  devices  to 
provide  patients  with  the  most  effective  and 
appropriate options.

References

  1.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.
  2.  Dai T, Pikkula BM, Wang LV, Anvari B. Comparison 
of human skin opto-thermal response to near-infrared 
and visible laser irradiations: a theoretical investiga-
tion. Phys Med Biol. 2004;49(21):4861–77.

  3.  Kimel S, Svaasand LO, Cao D, Hammer-Wilson MJ, 
Nelson JS. Vascular response to laser photothermoly-
sis  as  a  function  of  pulse  duration,  vessel  type,  and 

diameter: implications for port wine stain laser ther-
apy. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30(2):160–9.

  4.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Microvasculature  can  be 
selectively damaged using dye lasers: a basic theory 
and  experimental  evidence  in  human  skin.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 1981;1(3):263–76.

  5.  Glassberg  E,  Lask  GP,  Tan  EM,  Uitto  J.  The 
flashlamp- pumped 577-nm pulsed tunable dye laser: 
clinical efficacy and in vitro studies. J Dermatol Surg 
Oncol. 1988;14(11):1200–8.

  6.  Li  L,  Kono  T,  Groff  WF,  Chan  HH,  Kitazawa  Y, 
Nozaki M. Comparison study of a long-pulse pulsed 
dye  laser  and  a  long-pulse  pulsed  alexandrite  laser 
in the treatment of port wine stains. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther. 2008;10(1):12–5.

  7.  Eremia S, Li CY. Treatment of face veins with a cryo-
gen  spray  variable  pulse  width  1064  nm  Nd:YAG 
Laser:  a  prospective  study  of  17  patients.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2002;28(3):244–7.

  8.  Lee J, El-Abaddi N, Duke A, Cerussi AE, Brenner M, 
Tromberg BJ. Noninvasive in vivo monitoring of met-
hemoglobin formation and reduction with broadband 
diffuse  optical  spectroscopy.  J Appl  Physiol  (1985). 
2006;100(2):615–22.

  9.  Randeberg LL, Bonesronning JH, Dalaker M, Nelson 
JS,  Svaasand  LO.  Methemoglobin  formation  dur-
ing  laser  induced  photothermolysis  of  vascular  skin 
lesions. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34(5):414–9.

 10.  Barton  JK,  Frangineas  G,  Pummer  H,  Black 
JF.  Cooperative  phenomena  in  two-pulse,  two-color 
laser  photocoagulation  of  cutaneous  blood  vessels. 
Photochem Photobiol. 2001;73(6):642–50.

 11.  Ahcan  U,  Zorman  P,  Recek  D,  Ralca  S,  Majaron 
B. Port wine stain treatment with a dual-wavelength 
Nd:Yag laser and cryogen spray cooling: a pilot study. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34(2):164–7.

 12.  Jasim  ZF,  Handley  JM.  Treatment  of  pulsed  dye 
laser-resistant port wine stain birthmarks. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2007;57(4):677–82.

 13.  Bahmer  F,  Drosner  M,  Hohenleutner  U,  et  al. 
Recommendation  for  laser  and  intense  pulsed  light 

J. Joo et al.



(IPL) therapy in dermatology. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 
2007;5(11):1036–42.

 14.  Bjerring P, Christiansen K, Troilius A. Intense pulsed 
light  source  for  treatment  of  facial  telangiectasias.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2001;3(4):169–73.

 15.  Dixon JA, Rotering RH, Huether SE. Patient's evalua-
tion of argon laser therapy of port wine stain, decora-
tive  tattoo,  and  essential  telangiectasia.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 1984;4(2):181–90.

 16.  Silver L. Argon laser photocoagulation of port wine 
stain hemangiomas. Lasers Surg Med. 1986;6(1):24–
8. 52–5.

 17.  Dierickx  CC,  Casparian  JM,  Venugopalan  V, 
Farinelli  WA,  Anderson  RR.  Thermal  relaxation 
of  port-wine  stain  vessels  probed  in  vivo:  the  need 
for  1-10- millisecond  laser  pulse  treatment.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 1995;105(5):709–14.

 18.  Bolognia 

J, 

JV,  Duncan  KO, 
Ko  CJ.  Dermatology  essentials.  Oxford:  Saunders/
Elsevier; 2014.

Schaffer 

 19.  Tierney  EP,  Hanke  CW.  Alexandrite  laser  for  the 
treatment of port wine stains refractory to pulsed dye 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2011;37(9):1268–78.

 20.  Adrian RM, Tanghetti EA. Long pulse 532-nm laser 
treatment  of  facial  telangiectasia.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1998;24(1):71–4.

 21.  Apfelberg  DB,  Bailin  P,  Rosenberg  H.  Preliminary 
investigation  of  KTP/532  laser  light  in  the  treat-
ment of hemangiomas and tattoos. Lasers Surg Med. 
1986;6(1):38–42. 56–7.

 23.  Yohn 

JJ,  Huff 

 22.  Dummer  R,  Graf  P,  Greif  C,  Burg  G.  Treatment  of 
vascular  lesions  using  the VersaPulse  variable  pulse 
width  frequency  doubled  neodymium:YAG  laser. 
Dermatology. 1998;197(2):158–61.
JL,  Walsh  P, 
JC,  Aeling 
Morelli JG. Lesion size is a factor for determining the 
rate of port-wine stain clearing following pulsed dye 
laser treatment in adults. Cutis. 1997;59(5):267–70.
 24.  Kohout  MP,  Hansen  M,  Pribaz  JJ,  Mulliken 
JB.  Arteriovenous  malformations  of  the  head  and 
neck: natural history and management. Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 1998;102(3):643–54.

 25.  Morelli JG, Tan OT, Weston WL. Treatment of ulcer-
ated hemangiomas with the pulsed tunable dye laser. 
Am J Dis Child. 1991;145(9):1062–4.

 26.  Thajudheen CP, Jyothy K, Priyadarshini A. Treatment 
of  port-wine  stains  with  flash  lamp  pumped  pulsed 
dye  laser  on  Indian  skin:  a  six  year  study.  J  Cutan 
Aesthet Surg. 2014;7(1):32–6.

 27.  Tomson  N,  Lim  SP,  Abdullah  A,  Lanigan  SW.  The 
treatment  of  port-wine  stains  with  the  pulsed-dye 
laser at 2-week and 6-week intervals: a comparative 
study. Br J Dermatol. 2006;154(4):676–9.

 28.  Orten  SS,  Waner  M,  Flock  S,  Roberson  PK, 
Kincannon  J.  Port-wine  stains.  An  assessment  of  5 
years  of  treatment.  Arch  Otolaryngol  Head  Neck 
Surg. 1996;122(11):1174–9.

 29. Renfro  L,  Geronemus  RG.  Anatomical  differ-
ences  of  port-wine  stains  in  response  to  treat-
ment  with  the  pulsed  dye  laser.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1993;129(2):182–8.

61

 30.  Fishman SJ, Mulliken JB. Hemangiomas and vascular 
malformations of infancy and childhood. Pediatr Clin 
North Am. 1993;40(6):1177–200.

 31.  Hemangioma Investigator G, Haggstrom AN, Drolet 
BA,  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  infantile  hemangio-
mas: demographic, prenatal, and perinatal character-
istics. J Pediatr. 2007;150(3):291–4.

 32.  Pope E, Krafchik BR, Macarthur C, et al. Oral versus 
high-dose pulse corticosteroids for problematic infan-
tile  hemangiomas:  a  randomized,  controlled  trial. 
Pediatrics. 2007;119(6):e1239–47.

 33.  Bennett  ML,  Fleischer AB  Jr,  Chamlin  SL,  Frieden 
IJ.  Oral  corticosteroid  use  is  effective  for  cutaneous 
hemangiomas:  an  evidence-based  evaluation.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2001;137(9):1208–13.

 34.  Leaute-Labreze  C,  Dumas  de  la  Roque  E,  Hubiche 
T,  Boralevi  F,  Thambo  JB,  Taieb  A.  Propranolol 
for  severe  hemangiomas  of  infancy.  N  Engl  J  Med. 
2008;358(24):2649–51.

 35.  Hermans DJ, Bauland CG, Zweegers J, van Beynum 
IM, van der Vleuten CJ. Propranolol in a case series 
of  174  patients  with  complicated  infantile  haeman-
gioma: indications, safety and future directions. Br J 
Dermatol. 2013;168(4):837–43.

 36. Chakkittakandiyil  A,  Phillips  R,  Frieden  IJ,  et  al. 
Timolol maleate 0.5% or 0.1% gel-forming  solution for 
infantile  hemangiomas:  a  retrospective,  multicenter, 
cohort study. Pediatr Dermatol. 2012;29(1):28–31.
 37.  Ma G, Wu P, Lin X, et al. Fractional carbon dioxide 
laser-assisted  drug  delivery  of  topical  timolol  solu-
tion for the treatment of deep infantile hemangioma: a 
pilot study. Pediatr Dermatol. 2014;31(3):286–91.
 38.  Poetke M, Philipp C, Berlien HP. Flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed  dye  laser  for  hemangiomas  in  infancy:  treat-
ment  of  superficial  vs  mixed  hemangiomas.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2000;136(5):628–32.

 39.  Alcantara-Gonzalez  J,  Boixeda  P,  Truchuelo-Diez 
MT, Perez-Garcia B, Alonso-Castro L, Jaen Olasolo 
P. Infantile hemangiomas treated by sequential appli-
cation  of  pulsed  dye  laser  and  Nd:YAG  laser  radia-
tion:  a  retrospective  study.  Actas  Dermosifiliogr. 
2013;104(6):504–11.

 40.  Tawfik  AA,  Alsharnoubi  J.  Topical  timolol  solu-
tion  versus  laser  in  treatment  of  infantile  heman-
gioma:  a  comparative  study.  Pediatr  Dermatol. 
2015;32(3):369–76.

 41.  Astner  S,  Anderson  RR.  Treating  vascular  lesions. 

Dermatol Ther. 2005;18(3):267–81.

 42.  Rohrer TE, Chatrath V, Iyengar V. Does pulse stack-
ing  improve  the  results  of  treatment  with  variable- 
pulse pulsed-dye lasers? Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(2 Pt 
1):163–7. discussion 167.

 43.  Alam M, Dover JS, Arndt KA. Treatment of facial tel-
angiectasia  with  variable-pulse  high-fluence  pulsed- 
dye  laser:  comparison  of  efficacy  with  fluences 
immediately above and below the purpura threshold. 
Dermatol Surg. 2003;29(7):681–4. discussion 685.
 44.  Railan  D,  Parlette  EC,  Uebelhoer  NS,  Rohrer 
lesions.  Clin 
treatment  of  vascular 

TE.  Laser 
Dermatol. 2006;24(1):8–15.

3 Lasers for Treatment of Vascular Lesions



Laser for Scars

Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Shalu S. Patel, 
and Keyvan Nouri

4

Abstract
Introduction of scar pathogenesis, epidemiol-
ogy, and classifications.

Indications and contraindications for laser 

scar treatment.

Appropriate management of scars, includ-

ing pre- and post-operative techniques.

Keywords
Scar pathogenesis · Scar epidemiology · Scar 
classification · Scar treatment · Atrophic scars

 Outline

•  Introduction  of  scar  pathogenesis, 

epidemiology, and classifications

•  Indications and contraindications for 

laser scar treatment

•  Appropriate  management  of  scars, 
including  pre-  and  post-operative 
techniques

•  Potential adverse side effects of laser 

scar treatment

•  The use of laser therapy for atrophic 
scars, including ablative, nonablative 
and fractional resurfacing

•  Future directions of laser scar therapy

V. Vejjabhinanta, MD (*) 
Dermatologic Surgery and Lasers Unit, Department 
of Medical Services Ministry of Public Health, 
Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand 

S. S. Patel, MD 
The Permanente Medical Group, Redwood City,  
CA, USA 
e-mail: spatel@med.miami.edu 

K. Nouri 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 
e-mail: knouri@med.miami.edu

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_4

63





64

 Introduction

•  The  skin’s  normal  wound  healing 
process  involves  coagulation,  inflam-
mation, 
and 
remodeling.

proliferation 

•  Hypertrophic scars and keloids occur 
when  the  skin’s  normal  wound  heal-
ing  process  goes  awry.  Further,  they 
more commonly occur in ethnic skin.
•  There are multiple techniques used to 
treat these scars, and recent advances 
in  laser  therapy  have  made  lasers  a 
practical alternative.

The skin is a primary barrier for protection and is 
often submitted to damage from surgical proce-
dures,  burns,  trauma  or  inflammation.  The  skin 
has  an  incredible  capacity  to  renew  and  repair 
itself through a process called wound healing, in 
which  a  cascade  of  mechanisms  result  in 
scarring.

The  normal  wound  healing  process,  which 
results in a flat and flexible scar, can be divided 
into  four  stages:  coagulation,  inflammation, 
proliferation, and remodeling. Once the injury 
occurs,  the  inflammation  phase  begins  after 
activating  the  clotting  and  complement  cas-
cade.  Chemotactic  factors  such  as  prostaglan-
dins, complement factors, and interleukins (i.e. 
IL-1)  stimulate  the  migration  of  inflammatory 
cells such as neutrophils and monocytes/macro-
phages.  These  cells  help  wound  debridement. 
Macrophages  also  release  specific  growth  fac-
tors  such  as  transforming  growth  factor  Beta 
(TGF-β)  and  platelet-derived  growth  factors 
(PDGF),  which  initiate  the  formation  of  the 
provisional  wound  matrix.  The  proliferation 
phase  involves  the  migration  of  fibroblasts, 
increased endothelial cells and keratinocytes to 
the  site  of  injury.  Fibroblasts  are  especially 
important  in  forming  the  extracellular  matrix, 
which is made of collagens I and III, fibronec-
tin,  elastin,  and  proteoglycans.  The  keratino-
cytes start the re-epithelialization process with 
reconstruction of the disrupted basement mem-

brane.  Revascularization  occurs  with  endothe-
lial  cells  and  angiogenic  factors  such  as 
fibroblast  growth  factor  (FGF). As  maturation 
ensues, the collagen network and proteoglycans 
are also remodeled. While both collagen types I 
and  III  increase  during  the  beginning  of  the 
wound healing process, the contribution of col-
lagen  type  III  decreases  as  remodeling  takes 
place.

An abnormal response to the wound healing 
process results in hypertrophic scars (Fig. 4.1) 
and  keloids  (Fig.  4.2).  These  are  essentially 
excess  scar  tissues  that  form  at  the  site  of 
injury.  Fibroblasts  from  keloids  abnormally 
respond by producing high levels of collagen, 
particularly type I. In contrast, fibroblasts from 
hypertrophic  scars  respond  normally,  with  a 
slight increase in collagen. The collagen fibers 
in  hypertrophic  scars  are  more  organized, 
while those in keloids are arranged in whorled, 

Fig. 4.1  A  pink,  smooth,  shiny,  well-circumscribed  linear 
hypertrophic scar at the lower abdomen after trans-abdominal 
hysterectomy

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



Fig. 4.2  Multiple keloids at the right 
arm, shoulder and chest wall of an 
African American woman

65

hyalinized  bundles.  Further,  while  angiogene-
sis  diminishes  during  normal  remodeling,  but 
persists during the development of keloids and 
hypertrophic scars.

These can occur in all races, although they are 
more  frequently  found  in  ethnic  skin,  ranging 
from a 3 to 18 times higher incidence when com-
pared  with  Caucasians.  The  incidence  has  been 
reported  to  be  between  4.5%  and  16%  within 
African-Americans,  Chinese,  and  Hispanics. 
Patients in their second to third decade of life are 
more  commonly  affected,  with  the  same  preva-
lence in both sexes [1–3].

Hypertrophic  scars  are  red,  raised,  and  firm, 
and  usually  appear  within  1  month  at  the  injury 
site,  especially  sites  under  pressure  or  frequent 
movement. Keloids, which can often be disfigur-
ing,  are  purple/red  nodules  that  are  often  found 
beyond  the  original  injury  site.  Unlike  hypertro-
phic scars, these appear within weeks or even years 
from the initial injury. Keloids frequently are found 
on the earlobes, anterior chest, shoulders and upper 
back. Common processes that may lead to keloid 

formation  are  ear  piercings,  tattoos,  infections, 
vaccination, burns, and inflammatory acne.

The  treatment  of  hypertrophic  scars  and 
keloids  is  challenging  due  to  high  recurrence 
rates and adverse side effects. Previous methods 
for treatment have included surgery, cryotherapy, 
electrocautery  and  desiccation,  dermabrasion, 
intralesional  corticosteroids,  5-fluorouracil,  and 
radiation.  In  terms  of  lasers,  Ablative  CO2  and 
Erbium: YAG lasers were used for hypertrophic 
scars but then discontinued. The pulsed dye laser 
(PDL) is currently the laser of choice for hyper-
trophic scars, which have yielded more success-
ful results compared to keloids. It works via the 
principle of selective photothermolysis, in which 
the laser targets blood vessels, with the 585 nm 
wavelength specifically absorbed by hemoglobin. 
It is suggested that the microvascular destruction 
causes  subsequent  ischemia  and  reduction  of 
scarring.

To appropriately treat hypertrophic scars and 
keloids,  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  pro-
cesses by which they form is essential.

4 Laser for Scars



66

 Indications and Contraindications

•  Indications for treatment include side 
effects,  functional  impairment,  and 
aesthetics.

•  It  is  important  to  take  into  account 
the patient’s skin type and lesion type 
prior to therapy.

functional 

Patients typically seek medical help due to cos-
metic  issues  or  associated  symptoms.  Thus, 
indications for treatment of hypertrophic scars 
cosmetic 
include 
appearance, and pruritis and dysesthesias. The 
typical outcome of laser treatment is reduction 
of the redness and height of the scar, improve-
ment  of  pliability,  and  symptomatic  relief  of 
pruritis.

impairment, 

a

b

lesion 

Factors  that  need  to  be  taken  into  consider-
ation  before  treatment  include  patient  skin  type 
individuals 
type.  Fair  skinned 
and 
(Fitzpatrick skin types I to III) tend to have a bet-
ter response and fewer side effects to treatment. 
Patients with Fitzpatrick skin types IV to VI have 
an increased risk of laser light absorption by epi-
dermal melanin, therefore less effective targeting 
of  the  skin  and  increased  risk  of  postoperative 
hypo- or hyperpigmentation. It is suggested that 
in these patients, a test spot is done to predict any 
potential  side  effects.  Lesion  type  also  plays  a 
role in the success of laser treatment. Lesions that 
have formed in less than a year and those that are 
red and raised have proved to be ideal for laser 
therapy.

Lasers have been found to be useful as a pre-
ventative measure as well. The 585 nm PDL was 
found to be effective in preventing the formation 
of  hypertrophic  scars  in  burn  wounds.  Further, 
treating  surgical  scars  starting  on  the  day  of 
suture  removal  has  yielded  optimal  results 
(Figs. 4.3a, b).

Fig.  4.3  (a)  A  linear  surgical  scar  on  the  anterior  mid 
upper chest. The right section received 585 nm PDL with 
pulse duration of 450 μs, the middle remained as a con-
trol, and the left section received 585 nm PDL with pulse 
duration  of  1.5  ms.  (b)  One  month  after  the  third  PDL 
treatment.  There  was  a  significant  clinical  difference 
between treated and untreated sites

 Techniques

•  Pre-operative  management 

includes 
obtaining  a  detailed  history  and  exam 
of the patient’s scars, and if any prior 
therapy  has  been  done.  The  area  of 
treatment should be cleaned thoroughly 
and topical anesthetic may be used for 
comfort.  It  is  important  to  take  a  pic-
ture of the scar before therapy to track 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



its  progress  and  note  any  side  effects 
that may occur.

•  Laser therapy involves appropriately 
calibrating  and  setting  the 
laser 
parameters.  It  may  be  used  alone  or 
in  conjunction  with 
intralesional 
medical therapy. Multiple treatments 
are needed to obtain better results.
•  Post-operatively,  the  patient  should 
avoid the sun and keep the treatment 
area clean and protected.

 Pre-operative Management

It is important to get a good patient history before 
laser treatment. The history of the scar or keloid 
in  terms  of  age,  evolution,  and  previous  treat-
ments  is  helpful  in  determining  treatment  prog-
nosis. It is ideal to treat hypertrophic scars early, 
possibly  within  the  first  few  months  of  appear-
ance. This is because of the numerous blood ves-
sels  present  at  this  time.  Previous  treatments, 
such as cryotherapy, may cause increased fibro-
sis, and thus adjustments of laser parameters and 
treatment sessions may need to be made. Location 
of  the  scar  is  also  important  to  note.  Dierickx 
et al. have found that facial scars respond better 
to treatment [4]. Nouri et al. agree and have found 
that facial, shoulder, and arm scars respond better 
than those on the anterior chest wall [5]. However, 
Alster and Nanni found no relation between scar 
location and response to treatment [6].

The PDL treatment for hypertrophic scars and 
keloids  is  an  outpatient  procedure.  It  typically 
does  not  require  anesthesia  unless  requested  by 
the patient. If so, a topical anesthetic cream may 
be  applied  30–60  min  before  the  procedure. 
Make-up any other creams must be removed from 
the treatment area with soap and water. In assess-
ing the lesion, the physician should note its size, 
color, height, pliability, and associated symptoms. 
Vancouver  Scar  Scale  or  Miami  Scar  Scale,  for 
example,  may  be  used  to  ensure  consistency. A 
picture  should  be  taken  prior  to  treatment  for 

67

comparative purposes. It should be taken with the 
same camera, lighting, and distance. The patient 
and physician should be wearing eye protection at 
all times during the procedure.

 Description of the Technique

The  physician  must  first  calibrate  the  laser  and 
set  parameters  to  be  used.  The  ideal  setting  is 
585  nm  PDL  at  450  μs  pulse  duration,  using  a 
spot size of 7–10 mm, with the fluence ranging 
from 3.5 to 7.5 J/cm2. When using a smaller spot 
size,  the  fluence  should  be  increased;  however 
initial  treatments  should  all  begin  with  a  lower 
fluence.  In  ethnic  skin,  we  prefer  using  a  lower 
fluence (3–3.5 J/cm2 with a 10 mm spot size) in 
order  to  reduce  any  complications  from  this 
procedure.

Once set, the physician should place the hand-
piece over one end of the scar and start applying 
the laser pulses over the entire scar surface in a 
continuous  pattern  until  reaching  the  opposite 
end. A 10% overlap is generally accepted.

Laser treatment may be used alone or in com-
bination  therapy  with  intralesional  corticoste-
roids  or  5-FU. Alster  compared  PDL  treatment 
alone  with  laser  therapy  combined  with  intrale-
sional  corticosteroid  treatment  and  found  that 
both were similarly effective with no significant 
difference [7]. It is important to remember, how-
ever,  that  if  using  intralesional  corticosteroids, 
the injections should be done following the laser 
procedure. If done before, blanching of the lesion 
occurs and there is substantial risk of losing the 
laser target. An average of 10–40 mg/mL imme-
diately after laser treatment can be used.

 Post-operative Management

Post-operative  management  includes  strict  sun 
avoidance to avoid pigmentation alterations. The 
treated  area  should  be  cleansed  as  normal  with 
soap  and  water.  Trauma  to  the  site  should  be 
avoided.  Subsequent  treatments  may  be  done 
within 4–6 weeks.

4 Laser for Scars



68

 Side Effects/Complications and Their 
Management and Prevention

A typical complaint from laser treatment is pain 
similar to that of a rubber band snapping against 
one’s skin. A burning or itching sensation in the 
treated  area  is  common  as  well,  but  subsides 
within a couple days if not sooner. Purpura is the 
most commonly expected side effect, appearing 
immediately  after  the  procedure  and  lasting 
7–10  days.  Pigmentation  alteration  may  also 
occur. If hyperpigmentation occurs, a bleaching 
cream may be used. Also, subsequent treatments 
may need to be deferred to ensure effective laser 
targeting of the scar.

Rare  complications  include  crusting,  oozing, 
and vesiculation of the lesion. In these cases, the 
area should be kept moist with ointment and may 
be  covered  with  nonocclusive  dressing  to  avoid 
contact.  Subsequent  treatments  must  be  post-
poned until complete healing of the site. Also, the 
physician  must  reconsider  the  settings  used  to 
prevent further complications.

 Laser for Atrophic Scar

•  Atrophic  scars  resulting  from  acne, 
chicken  pox,  trauma,  or  even  striae 
can be treated with laser therapy. The 
three  main  categories  of  therapy 
include  ablative  resurfacing,  nonab-
lative  resurfacing,  and 
fractional 
resurfacing.

•  Ablative  resurfacing  offers  effective 
therapy,  but  side  effects  and  adverse 
events post-operatively limit its use.
•  Nonablative resurfacing is considered 
safe,  but  may  not  be  as  effective  as 
ablative resurfacing.

•  Fractional  resurfacing  offers 

the 
effectiveness  of  ablative  resurfacing 
and the safety of nonablative resurfac-
ing.  Studies  have  achieved  improved 
results  with  this  method,  though  a 
small  percentage  of  patients  experi-
enced side effects.

Atrophic  scarring  (such  as  those  from  acne, 
chicken pox, or even striae) is depression of the 
skin due to the destruction of normal dermal or 
subcutaneous  tissue  architecture  by  inflamma-
tion, infection, or trauma.

There are many treatment modalities for this 
condition including topical vitamin A acid appli-
cation,  focal  or  regional  chemical  peeling,  sub-
cission,  punch  grafting,  injection  of  fillers, 
dermabrasion, and laser resurfacing.

Nowadays, laser resurfacing for acne scar can 

be classified into three main categories:

 1.  Ablative resurfacing
 2.  Non-ablative resurfacing
 3.  Fractional resurfacing

 Ablative Laser Resurfacing

The  most  common  devices  used  for  this  tech-
nique  are  the  carbon  dioxide  laser  and  Erbium 
YAG laser. Both of them are considered the gold 
standard treatment for acne scars and offer prom-
ising  results  after  treatment.  However,  this 
method  can  be  quite  complicated  and  can  have 
multiple drawbacks including:

•  The  need  for  antibiotic  prophylaxis  for 
bacterial- viral-fungal superimposed infections.
•  The need for adequate anesthesia and sedation 
(some  are  systemic  administration  in  combi-
nation with local anesthesia injection).

•  The need for complicated post-operative care 
such  as  analgesia  and  dressing,  along  with 
post-operative antibiotic coverage.

•  The  risk  for  post-operative  bleeding  when 
using Erbium YAG laser because it has a high 
water  absorption  and  thus  cannot  penetrate 
deeply  (compared  with  the  CO2  laser),  pre-
venting enough heat production to ligate blood 
vessels.

•  A high tendency for post-operative erythema 
or pigmentary alteration, which may prolong 
downtime,  especially  for  individuals  with 
skin of color who experience post-inflamma-
tory  hyperpigmentation  and/or  permanent 
hypopigmentation.

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



In an effort to reduce these drawbacks, some 
modalities  that  have  been  introduced  are  pre- 
operative  bleaching  agents,  combination  topi-
cal  anesthesia  with  regional  nerve  block,  and 
oral analgesic and sedation. Further, the follow-
ing  devices  were 
to  decrease 
complications:

introduced 

•  The high energy-short pulsed CO2 laser, which 
offers low tissue damage when compared with 
the conventional continuous mode CO2 laser.
•  The  variable  pulsed  or  dual-mode  Erbium 
YAG  laser,  because  the  long  pulse  duration 
allows  it  to  penetrate  deeper  than  the  short 
pulse duration alone, resulting in an optimal 
reaction  for  stimulating  skin  regeneration 
and  ligation  of  blood  vessels  to  diminish 
bleeding [8, 9].

•  The combined-mode Erbium YAG/CO2 laser 
system, which offers the dual benefit of hav-
ing  the  ablative  effect  of  the  Erbium  YAG 
laser  and  the  coagulation  effect  of  the  CO2 
laser [10].

 Nonablative Laser Resurfacing

This is another modality that was quite popular at 
the turn of the century due to low complication 
rates and very low to almost no downtime when 
compared  with  ablative  resurfacing,  chemical 
peeling or dermabrasion. Some laser devices that 
demonstrated improvement of acne scars include:

•  The 1064 nm Q-switched Nd: YAG Laser [11]
•  The 1064 nm Long pulse Nd: YAG Laser [12, 

13]

•  The 1320 Nd: YAG Laser [14, 15]
•  The 1450 nm diode Laser [16]
•  The  1540-nm  erbium-doped  phosphate  glass 

Laser [17]

•  The  585  nm  flashlamp-pumped  pulsed  dye 
laser and Intense pulse light system also show 
benefit for post acne erythema [18, 19]

These  lasers  are  alternatives  for  people  who 
may desire a less aggressive form of treatment; 
however, patients must  be  informed  of the cost 

69

of treatment, that they may require multiple ses-
sions, and to hold realistic expectations of their 
outcome.

 Fractional Devices

Both  physicians  and  patients  have  tolerated  the 
high complication rate of ablative laser resurfac-
ing and low efficacy of non-ablative laser resur-
facing,  but  fractional  resurfacing  is  a  recently 
introduced  alternative  that  may  be  the  best  of 
both  devices.  It  particularly  excels  in  offering 
promising 
rejuvenation, 
for 
melasma,  and  acne  scars.  This  system  uses  the 
concept of fractional photothermolysis by creat-
ing numerous microscopic thermal injury zones 
of  controlled  width,  depth  and  density  that  are 
surrounded by normal skin which serves as a res-
ervoir for rapid tissue healing [20].

results 

facial 

The benefits of this system are less downtime 
and  side  effects  than  the  conventional  ablative 
laser  has,  and  an  increased  efficacy  of  tissue 
regeneration than the nonablative method offers. 
There are many devices launched in the  market 
now, the most popular being the Erbium-doped, 
Erbium YAG, CO2, radiofrequency, Xenon lights.
There  are  many  studies  that  have  demon-
strated the efficacy of the 1550 laser system for 
acne scar treatment. Alster et al. used the 1550 nm 
erbium-doped fiber, with fluences of 8–16 J/cm2 
at a density of 125–250 MTZ/cm2 in 8–10 passes 
on 53 patients (Fitzpatrick skin types I–IV) with 
atrophic acne scars. They found that nearly 90% 
of  patients  achieved  clinical  improvement  aver-
aging  51–75%;  however,  multiple  treatments 
were necessary [21]. Lee et al. treated 27 Asian 
patients (Fitzpatrick skin types IV-V) with mod-
erate  to  severe  facial  acne  scars.  Each  patient 
received three to five sessions of 3–4 weeks apart. 
At  3  months  after  the  final  treatment,  eight 
patients  (30%)  assessed  themselves  as  having 
improvement,  16  patients 
excellent 
(59%) 
themselves  as  having  significant 
assessed 
improvement, and the final three patients (11%) 
assessed themselves as having moderate improve-
ment.  Adverse  events  were  limited  to  transient 
pain,  erythema  and  edema  [22].  Emmy  at  el 

4 Laser for Scars



70

reviewed  961  patients  who  were  treated  with 
1550 nm erbium doped laser. They found that 73 
(7.6%)  patients  developed  complications.  The 
most  frequent  complications  were  acneiform 
eruptions (1.87%) and herpes simplex virus out-
breaks (1.77%). Other rare complications include 
erosions,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation, 
prolonged erythema, prolonged edema, dermati-
tis, impetigo, and purpura [23].

Other fractional laser systems such as the frac-
tional CO2 laser and fractional Erbium YAG laser 
are,  by  theory,  more  ablative  than  the  1550 
erbium-doped laser. However, the optimal treat-
ment parameters for achieving a successful acne 
scar treatment with minimal side effects need to 
be studied. Interestingly, Vejjabhinanta et al. per-
formed a study of acne scar treatment by using a 
fractional  radiofrequency  microneedle  system. 
They found that this system was safe and effec-
tive with minimal side effects in Asians [24].

 Future Directions

•  Future  directions  in  scar  management 
include  attempting  to  prevent  scar  for-
mation  at  the  start  by  using  PDL  or 
intralesional medical therapy.

their  own 

•  These  methods,  however,  do  not  come 
without 
effects. 
Combination  lasers  may  provide  opti-
mal results for laser scar therapy in the 
future.

side 

the 

the  quality  of 

until  resolution.  5-FU  (45–50  mg/mL)  may  be 
injected a few times per week to once per month 
depending  on 
lesion. 
Corticosteroids  work  by  inhibiting  migration  of 
inflammatory cells, vasoconstriction, and inhibi-
tion  of  fibroblast  and  keratinocyte  proliferation. 
The  mechanism  of  5-FU  is  primarily  inhibition 
of fibroblast proliferation. Both of these methods, 
though effective, can cause pain at the injection 
site and side effects such as pruritis and purpura. 
Studies combining these with PDL treatment are 
promising.

Further  studies,  possibly  combining  various 
lasers  such  as  short-pulse  and  long-pulse,  may 
offer  interesting  results  and  a  potential  frontier 
for scar treatment.

 Conclusion
The  mechanisms  of  hypertrophic  scar  and 
keloid formation are interesting and important 
in  identifying  optimal  treatments.  Various 
treatment options are available, and lasers pro-
vide a novel and efficacious approach to ther-
apy. While the 585–595 nm PDL seems to be 
the  optimal  laser,  recent  results  of  the  frac-
tional 
promising. 
Abnormalities  in  wound  healing  remain  a 
challenging topic. Patients suffer physical and 
emotional  consequences.  Addressing  and 
managing  these  factors  with  minimal  side 
effects  in  all  patients  should  be  the  goal  of 
future studies.

resurfacings 

laser 

References

Prevention  of  surgical  scar  formation  is  impor-
tant. An  effective  way  to  do  this  is  to  use  PDL 
routinely  after  suture  removal.  For  new,  red, 
hypertrophic  scars,  combination  therapy  with 
intralesional  corticosteroids  and  5-FU  may  be 
effective.  However,  for  older  scars  that  are  not 
red, PDL treatment may not be warranted. These 
lesions may be treated with intralesional steroids 
and/or 5-FU. Triamcinolone (TAC) is one of the 
most  commonly  used  steroids  for  intralesional 
injection of keloids and hypertrophic scars. It can 
be administered (10–40 mg/mL) every 4–6 weeks 

  1.  Taylor SC. Epidemiology of skin diseases in people of 

color. Cutis. 2003;71(4):271–5.

  2.  Alhady  SM,  Sivanantharajah  K.  Keloids  in  various 
races.  A  review  of  175  cases.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1969;44(6):564–6.

  3.  Oluwasanmi  JO.  Keloids  in  the  African.  Clin  Plast 

Surg. 1974;1(1):179–95.

  4.  Dierickx  C,  Goldman  MP,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  Laser 
treatment  of  erythematous/hypertrophic  and  pig-
mented  scars  in  26  patients.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1995;95(1):84–90.

  5.  Nouri  K,  Jimenez  GP,  Harrison-Balestra  C,  et  al. 
585 nm pulsed dye laser in the treatment of surgical 
scars  starting  on  the  suture  removal  day.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2003;29:65–73.

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



71

  6.  Alster  TS,  Nanni  CA.  Pulsed  dye  laser  treatment 
of  hypertrophic  burn  scars.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1998;102(6):2190–5.

  7.  Alster T. Laser scar revision: comparison study of 585- 
nm  pulsed  dye  laser  with  and  without  intralesional 
corticosteroids. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29(1):25–9.
  8.  Pozner  JM,  Goldberg  DJ.  Histologic  effect  of  a 
laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 

variable  pulsed  Er:YAG 
2000;26(8):733–6.

  9.  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. Treatment of atrophic facial acne 
scars with a dual-mode Er:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 
2002;28(7):551–5.

 10.  Goldman MP, Marchell N, Fitzpatrick RE. Laser skin 
resurfacing of the face with a combined CO2/Er:YAG 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26(2):102–4.

 11.  Friedman  PM,  Jih  MH,  Skover  GR,  Payonk  GS, 
Kimyai-Asadi A, Geronemus RG. Treatment of atro-
phic facial acne scars with the 1064-nm Q-switched 
Nd:YAG  laser:  six-month  follow-up  study.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2004;140(11):1337–41.

 12.  Keller  R,  Belda  Júnior  W,  Valente  NY,  Rodrigues 
CJ.  Nonablative  1,064-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  for  treat-
ing atrophic facial acne scars: histologic and clinical 
analysis. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(12):1470–6.

 13.  Yaghmai  D,  Garden  JM,  Bakus  AD,  Massa 
MC. Comparison of a 1,064 nm laser and a 1,320 nm 
laser  for  the  nonablative  treatment  of  acne  scars. 
Dermatol Surg. 2005;31(8 Pt 1):903–9.

 14.  Rogachefsky AS, Hussain M, Goldberg DJ. Atrophic 
and  a  mixed  pattern  of  acne  scars 
improved 
with  a  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2003;29(9):904–8.

 15.  Sadick  NS,  Schecter  AK.  A  preliminary  study 
of  utilization  of  the  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  for 

the  treatment  of  acne  scarring.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2004;30(7):995–1000.

 16.  Chua  SH,  Ang  P,  Khoo  LS,  Goh  CL.  Nonablative 
1450-nm  diode  laser  in  the  treatment  of  facial  atro-
phic acne scars in type IV to V Asian skin. Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30(10):1287–91.

 17.  Lupton  JR,  Williams  CM,  Alster  TS.  Nonablative 
laser skin resurfacing using a 1540 nm erbium glass 
laser:  a  clinical  and  histologic  analysis.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2002;28(9):833–5.

 18.  Alster  TS,  McMeekin  TO.  Improvement  of  facial 
acne  scars  by  the  585  nm  flashlamp-pumped  pulsed 
dye laser. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;35(1):79–81.
 19.  Cartier H. Use of intense pulsed light in the treatment 

of scars. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2005;4(1):34–40.

 20.  Jih MH, Kimyai-Asadi A. Fractional photothermoly-
sis:  a  review  and  update.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2008;27(1):63–71.

 21.  Alster TS, Tanzi EL, Lazarus M. The use of fractional 
laser  photothermolysis  for  the  treatment  of  atrophic 
scars. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(3):295–9.

 22.  Lee HS, Lee JH, Ahn GY, Lee DH, Shin JW, Kim DH, 
Chung JH. Fractional photothermolysis for the treat-
ment of acne scars: a report of 27 Korean patients. J 
Dermatolog Treat. 2008;19(1):45–9.

 23.  Graber  EM,  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Side  effects  and 
complications  of  fractional  laser  photothermoly-
sis:  experience  with  961  treatments.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2008;34(3):301–5.

 24.  Vejjabhinanta V, Wanitphakdeedecha R, Limtanyakul 
P, Manuskiatti W. The efficacy in treatment of facial 
atrophic acne scars in Asians with a fractional radio-
frequency microneedle system. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2014;28(9):1219–25.

4 Laser for Scars



Laser Treatment of Leg Veins

Julie K. Karen and Shields Callahan

5

Abstract
Damaged venous valves result in varicose or 
spider  vein  formation.  Commonly,  venous 
obstruction is caused by increased pressure of 
reverse  blood  flow  within  the  superficial 
venous valve or from direct traumatic injury to 
the vein.

Keywords
Leg veins · Spider veins · Sclerotherapy  
Venous insufficiency · Endovenous ablation  
Laser

 Introduction/Background

Visible  leg  veins  are  a  common  concern  among 
dermatology patients. It is estimated that half of 
the adult population is affected with venous dis-
ease and approximately 20% of women have vis-
ible  varicosities  [1].  The  prevalence  of  varicose 
veins is higher in women than men and it increases 
with age in both sexes. Elderly women carry the 

J. K. Karen (*) 
Department of Dermatology, CompleteSkinMD, 
NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: drkaren@completeskinmd.com 

S. Callahan 
Department of Dermatology, Virginia Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA
e-mail: shields.w.callahan@vcuhealth.org

greatest  burden  of  disease,  with  54%  of  women 
over the age of 65 affected by visible leg veins [2]. 
In  addition  to  advanced  age  and  female  gender, 
family  history,  standing  occupation,  history  of 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pregnancy and hor-
monal  therapy  are  additional  risk  factors  for 
venous disease [3]. Surgical stripping of the veins 
remained  the  standard  of  treatment  for  varicosi-
ties for over 100 years but these procedures were 
associated  with  high  rates  of  serious  complica-
tions, long post-operative recovery periods and an 
unacceptably high risk of varicose recurrence [4]. 
Newer  therapies  and  minimally  invasive  proce-
dures, including lasers and sclerotherapy, circum-
vent  many  of  the  pitfalls  associated  with  the 
previous vein treatments and have replaced tradi-
tional surgical techniques as the gold standard in 
the  treatment  of  leg  veins.  There  are  numerous 
laser and light therapies that are currently avail-
able to treat leg veins and they play a crucial role 
in specific patient populations.

 Basic Anatomy

The lower extremity venous system is comprised 
of interconnected veins that function in a coordi-
nated effort to return blood flow to the heart. Leg 
veins are classified as superficial, deep or perforat-
ing.  The  superficial  venous  system  is  a  largely 
redundant network of thin walled vessels located in 
the dermis and subcutaneous tissue. The superficial 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_5

73





74

veins feed into the deep veins at various points by 
way  of  the  perforating  veins. The  deep  veins  are 
located  within  the  muscular  fascia  where  they 
travel  alongside  major  arteries  before  ultimately 
merging with the femoral vein.

Chief among the superficial leg veins are the 
great saphenous vein (GSV), the small saphenous 
vein  (SSV)  and  the  lateral  venous  system.  The 
GSV,  formerly  known  as  the  greater  saphenous 
vein, drains the majority of blood from the lower 
leg. It originates at the medial aspect of the foot, 
courses  anteriorly  to  the  medial  malleolus  and 
travels up the medial aspect of the calf and thigh 
before  merging  with  the  femoral  vein  at  the 
saphenofemoral junction, which is located in the 
inguinal region.

The  SSV  is  responsible  for  returning  blood 
collected from the posterior aspect of the lower 
leg.  The  SSV  originates  in  the  lateral  aspect  of 
the  foot.  It  traverses  the  posterior  calf  between 
the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle and typi-
cally merges with the popliteal vein at the level of 
the knee. In some individuals, an intersaphenous 
connection known as the Giacomini vein allows 
for direct communication between the SSV to the 
GSV. Instead of draining into the popliteal vein, 
the  SSV  merges  with  the  Giacomini  vein  and 
travels medially before draining into the GSV.

The lateral venous system or Albanese system 
is  an  embryologic  venous  remnant  commonly 
found in a subset of the population. Reflux may 
occur in these aberrant veins even in patients with 
no other clinically significant evidence of venous 
disease.

 Venous Structure and Function

The venous system differs from the arterial sys-
tem in several ways. Firstly, veins are under rela-
tively  lower  pressure  and  therefore  require 
neighboring  muscle  contractions  to  “pump”  the 
blood  uphill  against  gravity.  To  that  end,  veins 
also feature one-way valves to prevent backflow. 
Lastly, vein walls are less elastic and less muscu-
lar than their arterial counterparts, which accounts 
for their increased recoil and distension. In com-
bination, these features comprise a “muscle-vein 

pump” that facilitate the return of blood flow to 
the heart.

Effective return of lower extremity blood to the 
heart relies on a properly functioning venous sys-
tem  characterized  by  functioning  valves  and  an 
unobstructed path. The absence of one or both of 
these components impedes the blood flow upward 
and  out  of  the  legs  and  results  in  a  congested, 
high-pressure system and dilated, leg veins.

In response to prolonged periods of high pres-
sure, the veins become dilated, thicker and tortu-
ous. The appearance of these abnormal vessels is 
distressing  to  many  patients  prompting  them  to 
seek cosmetic treatment. Later stages of chronic 
venous  disease 
larger 
veins, dyspigmentation, edema, lipodermatoscle-
rosis  and  ulceration  which  correspond  to  more 
severe venous disease [5].

include  progressively 

Dilated vessels are further classified based on 
their  size.  Telangiectasias  are  collections  of 
dilated  venules  that  appear  as  red  to  purple, 
thread-like vessels that measure <1 mm in diam-
eter.  Reticular  veins  are  slightly  larger,  bluish 
vessels  which  measure  between  1  and  3  mm. 
Telangiectasias  and  reticular  veins  are  collec-
tively referred to as “spider veins.” Varicose veins 
are larger (>3 mm), bluish tortuous vessels that 
commonly represent tributaries of the saphenous 
veins (GSV and SSV).

 Evaluation

All  patients  who  present  for  leg  vein  treatment 
require a thorough history and exam, including a 
comprehensive, circumferential evaluation of the 
legs with photographic documentation. Imaging 
is recommended for patients with venous bulging 
at  the  zones  of  influence  of  the  saphenous  sys-
tem,  a  history  of  prior  venous  surgery  or  inter-
vention, a strong family history of venous disease, 
poor  prior  response  to  venous  treatments,  or 
symptoms  of  chronic  venous  disease,  which 
include: heaviness, swelling, pain, pruritus, burn-
ing,  cramping,  or  restless  leg  syndrome  (RLS). 
Duplex  imaging  is  the  modality  of  choice  for 
assessing the pattern and extent of venous disease 
and informing interventional approaches [6].

J. K. Karen and S. Callahan



 Contraindications

The majority of varicosities arise in the setting 
of  valvular  insufficiency  and  chronic  reflux. 
However, treatment of leg veins in patients with 
venous outflow obstruction (including a DVT) is 
contraindicated, as the varicosities represent cru-
cial bypass routes that allow blood to circumvent 
the obstruction.

 Current Therapy Strategies

The  current  treatment  approaches  available  for 
leg veins include:

 1)  Surgical open technique
 2)  Minimally invasive procedures (Sclerotherapy, 

Laser and Light Sources)

 3)  Endovascular  Ablation  (Endovenous  Laser 

Ablation and Radiofrequency Ablation)

the 

Irrespective  of 

treatment  approach 
important, 
selected,  compression  plays  an 
adjunctive role. Compression therapy in the form 
of graduated, medical-grade compression stock-
ings has been shown to improve the efficacy of 
vein  treatments  and  decrease  post-procedural 
complications [7]. Although the ideal duration of 
compression  remains  disputed,  we  recommend 
strict  compliance  for  at  least  2–4  weeks  post- 
procedurally [7–9].

 Laser Technology

75

Laser therapy represents an appropriate ther-
apy or adjunctive therapy for the treatment of leg 
veins in the following clinical settings:

 1)  Needle-phobic patients
 2)  Poor prior response to sclerotherapy or scle-

rosant allergy

 3)  Treatment  of  matted  telangiectasia  induced 

by prior sclerotherapy

 4)  Tiny  vessels  that  may  not  be  amenable  to 

sclerotherapy

There  are  several  challenges  associated  with 
treating  leg  veins  with  laser  therapy.  Leg  veins 
are  less  responsive  than  facial  vessels  to  laser 
therapy  owing  to  their  heterogeneous  size  and 
diameter,  deeper  depth  in  the  dermis,  elevated 
hydrostatic pressure and higher content of deoxy-
genated  blood.  However,  over  the  past  several 
years, several advances in the field have allowed 
for safer treatment and more reliable outcomes. 
Improved  epidermal  cooling  modalities,  deeper 
penetrating  wavelengths  and  variable,  millisec-
ond pulse widths have contributed to more pre-
dictable and better-tolerated outcomes.

Laser  treatment  is  based  on  the  principle  of 
selective  photothermolysis.  Selective  photother-
molysis  is  the  process  of  destroying  a  targeted, 
microscopic  biological  structure  (chromophore) 
through the delivery of a specific wavelength of 
light. The aim of selective photothermolysis is to 
deliver  adequate  energy  to  destroy  the  selected 
chromophore without causing damage to the sur-
rounding  tissue  [11].  Three  fundamental  con-
cepts 
selective 
photothermolysis:

foundation  of 

form 

the 

Although  sclerotherapy  remains  the  gold  stan-
dard  for  the  treatment  of  leg  veins,  lasers  and 
light sources are increasingly utilized in the man-
agement  of  cosmetic  and  medically  significant 
venous disease. Patients may seek laser therapy 
in  an  effort  to  avoid  the  discomfort  associated 
with sclerotherapy injections, due to an inability 
to  comply  with  compression,  or  due  to  a  poor 
prior  experience  with  sclerotherapy.  In  some 
instances,  patients  mistakenly  assume  that  laser 
treatment will be less painful than sclerotherapy 
injections [10].

 1)  Wavelength should be preferentially absorbed 

by the target

 2)  Pulse  duration  must  not  exceed  the  thermal 
relaxation time (TRT) of the target in order to 
minimize the transference of heat to surround-
ing structures

 3)  Fluence must be high enough to produce ade-
quate thermal damage to the intended target

As the target chromophore in vascular lesions 
is  oxyhemoglobin,  the  three  major  absorption 

5 Laser Treatment of Leg Veins



76

peaks  in  the  visible  spectrum  are  418,  542  and 
577 nm. In addition, there is a broad, less selec-
tive  absorption  peak  in  the  near-infrared  (750–
1100)  region.  Accordingly,  there  is  excellent 
absorption by the visible light lasers and intense 
pulsed light. However, these shorter wavelengths 
do not penetrate sufficiently and so may only heat 
the  anterior  vessel  wall  leading  to  incomplete 
thrombosis. Though less selective, longer wave-
length devices penetrate deeper and achieve more 
efficient vessel closure by heating the entire ves-
sel circumference. However, due to lesser speci-
ficity, higher fluences are needed when employing 
near-infrared lasers translating into a greater risk 
of  collateral  damage.  The  following  lasers  may 
be employed for the treatment of leg veins:

 1)  Potassium Titanyl Phosphate (KTP): 532 nm
 2)  Pulsed Dye Lasers (PDL): 585–595 nm
 3)  Intense  Pulsed  Light  Devices 

(IPL): 

500–1200 nm

 4)  Alexandrite: 755 nm
 5)  Diodes: 800–983 nm
 6)  Neodymium:  yttrium 
(Nd:YAG): 1064 nm

aluminum  garnet 

Pulse duration, defined as the span of time that 
the  laser  interacts  with  the  target,  should  be 
selected based on the size of the target vessel. In 
general,  longer  pulse  durations  are  required  to 
effectively  treat  leg  veins  relative  to  those  used 
for  the  treatment  of  port  wine  stains  or  smaller 
caliber  facial  telangiectases.  Leg  veins  are  non- 
uniform  targets  with  both  a  strongly  absorbing 
portion  (blood)  and  weakly  absorbing  portion 
(endothelial cells within vessel wall). Altshuler’s 
extended  theory  of  selective  photothermolysis 
dictates  that  a  pulse  duration  that  exceeds  one- 
half of the calculated TRT is necessary to achieve 
effective  vessel  closure.  Mathematical  models 
have  demonstrated  that  intravascular  tempera-
tures  are  fairly  similar  within  a  wide  range  of 
pulse durations [12]. However, clinical observa-
tions  have  shown  that  20–60  ms  pulses  outper-
form  3  ms  pulses  for  the  treatment  of  a  broad 
range  of  vessels  [12].  It  is  theorized  that  these 
longer  pulse  durations  cause  more  collagen 
shrinkage  within  the  vein  walls,  which  in  turns 

leads  to  more  complete  vessel  collapse  [12]. 
Furthermore,  longer  pulse  durations  (≥20  ms) 
are less likely to cause vessel rupture and associ-
ated  purpura  and  post-inflammatory  hyperpig-
mentation  [13].  In  practice,  pulse  durations  of 
10–100 ms are employed.

Vessel  heating  results  in  the  conversion  of 
hemoglobin to met-hemoglobin (met-Hb), which 
demonstrates  altered  absorption  properties. 
Specifically,  met-Hb  has  an  absorbance  4.75 
times  that  of  Hb-O2  and  20  times  that  of  Hb. 
Absorption  therefore  improves  with  subsequent 
pulses  delivered  sequentially  due  to  this  early 
conversion to met-Hb, allowing for sub-threshold 
fluences to be used. Similarly, longer pulse dura-
tions  may  be  effective  at  lower  fluences  due  to 
this early conversion.

Selection  of  spot  size,  like  pulse  duration,  is 
based  on  the  size  of  the  target  vessel. Although 
scattering is not directly affected by spot size, the 
probability  that  a  scattered  photon  will  remain 
within the collimated beam, thereby contributing 
to the overall energy, is proportional to spot size 
[14]. In short, there is a greater chance that a scat-
tered photon will stay “in the fold” if the spot size 
is  larger.  Therefore,  a  larger  spot  size  loses  less 
energy  through  scattered  photons  and  can  effec-
tively deliver more overall energy to the intended 
target than a smaller spot size of the same wave-
length [14]. Caution must be exercised when using 
larger spot sizes in order to avoid causing thermal 
damage to surrounding tissue. Smaller spot sizes 
are adequate and safe for more deeply penetrating, 
longer wavelength lasers. In practice, a spot size 
that  approximates  (or  is  slightly  larger  than)  the 
target vessel diameter is thought to achieve opti-
mal results and minimal side effects [15].

Fluence is selected to ensure that the tempera-
ture inside the vessel target reach at least 70 °C; 
the temperature at which point the blood coagu-
lates and the vessel closes [16]. Thermal damage 
to  surrounding  tissue  may  be  lessened  with  the 
use  of  epidermal  cooling  modalities,  which 
reduce  epidermal  temperature  while  allowing 
peak  temperatures  to  be  achieved  within  target 
vessels.  The  most  commonly  used  devices 
include  contact  cooling,  convection  air-cooling, 
cryogen spray cooling, and cold gels.

J. K. Karen and S. Callahan



 Specific Lasers for Leg Vein 
Treatment

 Potassium Titanyl Phosphate Laser 
(KTP)

lesions.  However, 

The KTP laser, with its 532-nm wavelength, cor-
responds to the second absorption peak of hemo-
globin  (542  nm)  and  is  an  obvious  choice  for 
vascular 
this  hemoglobin 
absorption peak overlaps with melanin absorption 
and accounts for the high rates of associated dys-
pigmentation. One study of 56 patients with telan-
giectasia who underwent three treatments with a 
KTP  demonstrated  only  modest  results;  27%  of 
treated patients with telangiectasia ≤0.6 mm did 
not have any benefit [17]. And none of the patients 
with  telangectias  measuring  between  0.7  and 
1.0  mm  improved  at  all  [17],  consistent  with  a 
maximum penetration depth of 0.75 mm for this 
wavelength  Furthermore,  23%  of  all  patients 
developed hyperpigmentation [17]. For these rea-
sons, KTP should be reserved for the treatment of 
isolated,  small  caliber  vessels  (<0.7  cm)  in 
patients at low risk for dyspigmentation. Superior 
results have been achieved with larger spot sizes 
(3–5 mm), longer pulse durations (10–50 ms) and 
higher fluences (14–20 J/cm2).

 Long Pulsed Dye Laser (PDL)

The first generation PDL (585-nm) showed lim-
ited  success  in  the  treatment  of  telangiectasias 
because  it  could  not  deliver  adequate  fluence 
with its relatively short pulse duration. The sec-
ond  generation  PDL,  with  its  longer  595-nm 
wavelength,  and  modified  pulse  width,  was 
designed  to  allow  for  deeper  penetration  and 
higher  energy  delivery.  The  595-nm  PDL  has 
been shown to effectively treat small, linear tel-
angiectasia at fluences of 10–20 J/cm2 and pulse 
durations  ranging  from  1.5  to  40  ms  [18]. 
However,  commonly  observed  side  effects 
include  purpura,  edema  and  hyperpigmentation 
[19]. Hyperpigmentation, which may persist for 
weeks, has been observed at rates as high as 58% 
of  treated  sites  [18]. Therefore,  the  long  pulsed 

77

types  and 

PDL  must  be  used  cautiously  in  patients  with 
darker  skin 
those  at  risk  for 
 hyperpigmentation.  Like  the  KTP,  the  long 
pulsed PDL is an acceptable choice for the treat-
ment of small caliber vessels (<1 mm) in lighter 
skin  patients  who  are  at  low  risk  for  hyperpig-
mentation.  There  may  be  a  role  for  combining 
sclerotherapy  with  PDL  (or  another  laser)  in  a 
single  treatment  session  to  enhance  treatment 
efficiency,  although  optimal  treatment  parame-
ters have yet to be defined (Fig. 5.1).

a

b

c

Fig.  5.1  (a)  Patient  1  immediate  before  leg  vein  treat-
ment  (b)  Patient  1  immediately  after  treatment  with 
foamed  sclerotherapy  of  the  reticular  veins  and  PDL  of 
the telangiectasia (c) Patient 1 1 week after treatment

5 Laser Treatment of Leg Veins



78

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)

IPL devices deliver high intensity, non-coherent 
light  over  a  range  of  wavelengths  ranging  from 
500  to  1200  nm,  thereby  distinguishing  them 
from lasers. Filters may be applied to narrow the 
emitted spectrum and to allow for more specific 
targeting of select chromophores. The theoretical 
benefit  of  these  devices  is  their  ability  to  target 
both  oxygenated  and  deoxygenated  Hb  within 
vessels at multiple depths. A 550- or 570-nm fil-
ter is typically used, delivering primarily yellow 
and red light with a minimal component of near- 
infrared  light.  Relatively  longer  filters  may  be 
used in patients with darker skin types to lessen 
pigmentary adverse effects.

In 1996, Goldman et al. demonstrated encour-
aging results with an IPL device in the treatment 
of leg telangiectasias [20]. In a large, multicenter 
trial, 79% of the 159 subjects with leg telangiec-
tasia ranging in size from 0.4 to 1 mm achieved 
clearances  of  75–100%  after  a  series  of  treat-
ments  [20].  There  were  minimal  adverse  side 
effects reported; the most common of which was 
dyspigmentation, which was seen in only 7% of 
treatments [20].

However,  another  study  in  1998  comprising 
120 subjects with either facial or leg telangiecta-
sia, did not yield the same promising results [21]. 
Although  there  was  >80%  clearance  achieved 
after  one  treatment  with  a  filter  wavelength  of 
either  570  or  590  nm,  there  were  several  study 
limitations [21]. All of the 40 patients with leg tel-
angiectasia underwent either selective surgery or 
sclerotherapy prior to the IPL treatment, thereby 
confounding  the  results  [21].  In  addition,  there 
was a high rate of adverse side effects: approxi-
mately 50% of patients developed hyperpigmen-
tation,  and  two  patients  development  blistering 
[21]. The high rate of side effects observed in this 
study are likely due to the small therapeutic win-
dow and the difficulty of handling the device. The 
discrepancy between these two studies also speaks 
to the high degree of inter- operator variability.

In  general,  like  the  visible  light  lasers,  IPL 
should be reserved for use by experienced opera-
tors for the treatment of fair skinned individuals 
with small (<1 mm), superficial vessels.

 Long Pulsed 755 nm Alexandrite 
Laser

With  its  755-nm  wavelength,  the  long  pulsed 
alexandrite (LPA) laser can reach larger diameter 
vessels situated deeper in the dermis than either 
the KTP or PDL lasers. However, the absorption 
coefficient  of  hemoglobin  is  much  less  at  this 
longer wavelength. In 1999, a study of 28 patients 
with leg veins treated with the LPA outlined the 
optimal treatment parameters as a fluence of 20 J/
cm2  and  pulse  duration  of  20  ms  [22].  A  48% 
clearance of vessels sized 0.4–1 mm cleared after 
three  sessions,  but  smaller  caliber  vessels 
responded poorly [22].

More  recently,  higher  fluences  have  been 
shown to be safe when combined with skin cool-
ing  modalities,  as  demonstrated  by  Kauvar  and 
Lou in 2000 [23]. In their study of 20 female sub-
jects  with  leg  veins  ranging  in  size  from  0.3  to 
2  mm,  they  demonstrated  marked  clearance  of 
telangiectasia and reticular veins following a sin-
gle  treatment  utilizing  fluences  of  60–80  J/cm2. 
Side  effects  included  high  rates  of  purpura  and 
pigmentation [23].

Despite relatively low absorption by hemoglo-
bin, the LPA may have some utility for the treat-
ment of vessels sized 0.4–3 mm. The introduction 
of  skin  cooling  devices  has  allowed  for  higher 
fluences  to  be  safely  employed.  Side  effects, 
including  high  rates  of  purpura,  telangiectatic 
matting and pigmentation limit the utility of this 
device [24].

 Diode

The diode laser is characterized by near-infrared 
wavelengths ranging from 800 to 983 nm, which 
allow  for  deeper  penetration  into  the  dermis 
where they can target slightly larger veins. This 
wavelength corresponds to the tertiary hemoglo-
bin  peak  and  explains  its  efficacy  in  targeting 
vessels. And  because  this  wavelength  is  poorly 
absorbed  by  melanin,  it  is  associated  with  less 
risk of hyperpigmentation.

The 800-nm diode laser (DL) has been shown 
to  be  effective  in  the  treatment  of  leg  vessels 

J. K. Karen and S. Callahan



measuring 3–4 mm in diameter [20]. In a small 
study of ten women with skin types II-IV, the DL 
was used to treat leg veins at 2 month intervals 
for  a  maximum  of  three  treatments  [20].  After 
6  months,  over  half  of  the  patients  experienced 
clearance  [20].  Blue  veins  measuring  3–4  mm 
located on the thigh responded best [20]. There 
was an overall high degree of patient satisfaction, 
minimal discomfort, and no long-term complica-
tions reported [20].

A combination of the diode laser with a radio-
frequency (RF) current may also have a place in 
the treatment of leg veins. A study of 40 patients, 
skin  types  II-IV,  who  underwent  a  combination 
of diode 900-nm with RF for a maximum of three 
treatments, at 2 week intervals, showed encour-
aging  results;  82%  of  patients  had  over  50% 
clearance  at  the  6  month  assessment  [21]. 
Treatments were well tolerated and there were no 
significant side effects reported [21].

intravenous 

More  recently, 

injections  of 
indocyanine- green  (ICG)  have  been  shown  to 
enhance the efficacy of diode laser treatments for 
leg  telangiectasia  [25].  ICG,  a  green  pigment, 
strongly absorbs near infrared radiation and con-
verts >90% of radiation into thermal heat energy 
[25]. This dye can be injected into vessels imme-
diately prior to laser therapy (ICG + DL) where 
the exogenous pigment acts as a transient, easily 
targeted  chromophore  thereby  enhancing  vessel 
coagulation.  In  a  2013  study,  29  subjects  with 
bilateral  leg  telangiectasia  were  treated  with 
Nd:YAG  laser  and  ICG  +  DL  in  a  side-by-side 
comparison  with  one  single  treatment  [25]. 
Clearance  rates  were  significantly  higher  in  the 
ICG  +  DL  treated  legs  relative  to  the  Nd:YAG 
[25].  Further  studies  are  needed  to  outline  its 
clinical  utility  and  define  its  safety  parameters 
but the initial results are promising.

 Nd:YAG

The Nd:YAG laser emits a 1064 nm wavelength 
of  light.  Compared  to  other  lasers  that  target 
hemoglobin, the Nd:YAG has the lowest absorp-
tion of melanin, which accounts for its improved 
safety profile in patients with darker skin types. 

79

The  longer  wavelength  also  allows  for  deeper 
penetration  in  the  dermis  and  it  can  effectively 
treat  larger  leg  veins,  up  to  3  mm  in  diameter. 
However,  hemoglobin  has  a  lower  absorption 
coefficient at this wavelength, which necessitates 
higher energies be used to achieve adequate ves-
sel heating. These higher energies account for the 
increased  pain  associated  with  treatments.  Skin 
cooling modalities are of critical importance and 
local  anesthesia  may  be  required.  Furthermore, 
vigilance to avoid overlap is essential and sequen-
tial  pulses  should  be  spaced  more  than  1  mm 
apart to avoid bulk heating.

A  2006  study  investigated  the  optimal  pulse 
durations of the Nd:YAG for treating leg telangi-
ectasias. The results of 18 women with leg telan-
giectasias  ranging  in  size  from  0.1  to  1.6  mm 
treated with the Nd:YAG demonstrated that lon-
ger  pulse  durations  outperformed  shorter  dura-
tions  with  respect  to  both  vessel  clearance  and 
adverse  side  effects  [14].  Short  pulse  durations 
(3–20  ms)  were  associated  with  higher  rates  of 
post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  and  pur-
pura as compared to longer pulse durations (40–
60  ms)  [14].  The  authors  recommend  selecting 
the  smallest  fluence  and  smallest  spot  size  to 
achieve optimal vessel clearance with pulse dura-
tion of 20–60 ms. Their study also uncovered dif-
ferences in skin cooling modalities; patient pain 
was noticeably improved with the refrigerated air 
device (Zimmerman Elektromedizin, Irvine, CA) 
as compared to the cryogen spray (DCD Candela 
Corporation,  Wayland  MA)  prompting  a  mid- 
study  transition  to  using  refrigerated  air  for  all 
the  subsequent  study  participants  [14].  When 
cryogen  cooling  is  employed,  care  should  be 
taken to avoid excessive cooling, which can lead 
to cryogen burns.

In  general,  when  treating  smaller  vessels, 
shorter  pulse  durations,  smaller  spot  sizes  and 
higher  fluences  of  250–400  J/cm2  are  required, 
whereas longer pulse durations, larger spot sizes 
and more moderate fluences (100–200 J/cm2) are 
employed  when  treating  larger  vessels  (which 
contain  more  target  chromophore)  [26].  As 
always, laser safety precautions, including appro-
priate protective eyewear for the patient and cli-
nician  are  essential  to  avoid  devastating  ocular 

5 Laser Treatment of Leg Veins



80

a

b

a

b

Fig.  5.2  (a)  Patient  2  before  leg  vein  treatment  (b) 
Patient 1 after leg vein treatment with 1064 nm Nd:YAG 
laser

Fig.  5.3  (a)  Patient  3  before  leg  vein  treatment  (b) 
Patient 3 after leg vein treatment with 1064 nm Nd:YAG 
laser

injury, which can occur with this deeply penetrat-
ing wavelength.

Of important note, the Nd:YAG is the only laser 
to date that has been shown to demonstrate results 
similar to sclerotherapy for the treatment of leg tel-
angiectasias up to 3 mm in diameter. Several stud-
ies have demonstrated nearly equivocal outcomes 
with the Nd:YAG 1064 nm as compared to sclero-
therapy,  although  laser  is  typically  perceived  as 
more painful [10, 27–29] (Figs. 5.2 and 5.3).

 Post-operative End Points

The  procedure  end  point  of  laser  and  light 
source  treatments  on  leg  veins  includes  either 
vessel  disappearance  (which  corresponds  to 

complete  contraction)  or  vessel  darkening 
(which  corresponds  with  coagulation)  with  or 
without surrounding tissue erythema. Urtication 
and  blurring  of  the  vessel  margins  typically 
occurs  within  10  min  of  treatment.  Blanching 
may  portend  epidermal  injury  and  should  be 
avoided. Sequential passes should be spaced at 
least  1  mm  apart  when  utilizing  the  1064  nm 
laser  which  carries  a  risk  for  bulk  heating  and 
collateral  damage.  A  multiple  (up  to  3)  pass 
approach  is  acceptable  and  sometimes  neces-
sary  with  the  other  devices.  Purpura  should  be 
avoided  as  it  portends  a  higher  risk  of  post-
inflammatory  hyperpigmentation.  Strict  sun 
avoidance  is  essential  both  prior  to  and  for 
4  weeks  following  treatment  to  further  mini-
mize pigmentary alteration.

J. K. Karen and S. Callahan



 Side Effects/Complications

ings, may improve the efficacy of vein treatments 
and minimize adverse side effects.

81

Side effects following laser treatment for visible 
leg  veins  are  typically  mild  and  transient.  The 
most commonly reported adverse effects include 
pain, purpura, and post-inflammatory hyperpig-
mentation  (or  less  commonly  hypopigmenta-
tion)  (Fig.  5.4).  The  incidence  of  pigmentation 
increases with the size of the treated vessel and 
with  darker  skin  types.  In  more  severe  cases, 
thermal  injury,  ulceration,  blistering,  persistent 
dyspigmentation  and  scarring  may  occur. 
Furthermore,  the  risk  that  the  patient  may  not 
achieve  an  appreciable  improvement  in  the 
appearance  of  their  leg  veins  should  also  be 
addressed.  Lastly,  patients  should  be  counseled 
about  the  possible  need  for  multiple  treatment 
sessions.

The  most  feared  consequences  associated 
with  the  treatment  of  visible  leg  veins  is  not 
unique  to  lasers;  elimination  of  enlarged  leg 
veins  in  the  setting  of  venous  outflow  obstruc-
tion removes the crucial bypasses of the venous 
system.  Obliterating  these  vessels  with  any 
modality  (laser,  sclerotherapy,  surgery  etc.) 
could prove catastrophic, and the significance of 
a  thorough  pre-treatment  evaluation  cannot  be 
overstated.

Diligent  sunscreen  and  compression  hose,  in 
the  form  of  medical-grade  compression  stock-

 Conclusion
Although sclerotherapy remains the gold stan-
dard for the treatment of leg veins, laser ther-
apy  represents  an  effective  alternative  or 
adjunctive  treatment  for  the  elimination  of 
small  vessels  measuring  <3  mm.  Lasers 
should  be  considered  for  those  patients  with 
tremendous fear of needles, sclerosant allergy, 
telangiectatic  matting  from  prior  sclerother-
apy  and  for  vessels  refractory  to  prior 
sclerotherapy.

Current  lasers  employed  for  leg  veins 
include: Nd:YAG, PDL, diode, LPA, IPL and 
KTP.  Selection  of  the  appropriate  laser  is 
based on the size and location of the vessels in 
addition to the patient’s skin type. The single 
most useful laser for leg telangiectasias is the 
Nd:YAG 1064, which can yield results similar 
to  sclerotherapy  and  is  safe  for  darker  skin 
types.

Often  times,  a  combination  of  different 
lasers may provide the most benefit owing to 
the various size vessels that comprise most leg 
disease. Common adverse effects include pur-
pura, post- inflammatory dyspigmentation and 
pain;  the  latter  can  be  mitigated  with  skin 
cooling devices employed intra-procedurally.

a

b

Fig.  5.4  (a)  Widespread  hyperpigmented  patches 
4  months  following  inappropriate  use  of  PDL  in  dark 
skinned individual with unwanted leg veins. (b) Mottled 

hypopigmentation in an actinically damaged patient more 
than 10 years following KTP treatment for telangiectasia 
of the medial ankle

5 Laser Treatment of Leg Veins



82

References

  1.  Callam  MJ.  Epidemiology  of  varicose  veins.  Br  J 

Surg. 1994;81:167–73.

  2.  Abramson JH, Hopp C, Epstein LM. The epidemiol-
ogy of varicose veins. A survey in western Jerusalem. 
J Epidemiol Community Health. 1981;35:213–7.
  3.  Segiet  OA,  Brzozowa-Zasada  M,  Piecuch A,  Dudek 
D,  Reichman-Warmusz  E, Wojnicz  R.  Biomolecular 
mechanisms in varicose veins development. Ann Vasc 
Surg. 2015;29:377–84.

  4.  Woźniak  W,  Mlosek  RK,  Ciostek  P.  Assessment 
of  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  steam  vein  sclerosis  as 
compared to classic surgery in lower extremity vari-
cose  vein  management.  Wideochir  Inne  Tech  Malo 
Inwazyjne. 2015;10:15–24.

  5.  Kakkos SK, Rivera MA, Matsagas MI, et al. Validation 
of the new venous severity scoring system in varicose 
vein surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38:224–8.

  6.  De  Maeseneer  M,  Pichot  O,  Cavezzi  A,  et  al. 
Duplex  ultrasound  investigation  of  the  veins  of  the 
lower  limbs  after  treatment  for  varicose  veins  -  UIP 
consensus  document.  Eur  J  Vasc  Endovasc  Surg. 
2011;42:89–102.

  7.  Weiss RA, Sadick NS, Goldman MP, Weiss MA. Post- 
sclerotherapy  compression:  controlled  comparative 
study  of  duration  of  compression  and  its  effects  on 
clinical outcome. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:105–8.
  8.  Biswas  S,  Clark  A,  Shields  DA.  Randomised  clini-
cal trial of the duration of compression therapy after 
varicose  vein  surgery.  Eur  J  Vasc  Endovasc  Surg. 
2007;33:631–7.

  9.  Weiss RA, Duffy D. Clinical benefits of lightweight 
compression:  reduction  of  venous-related  symptoms 
by  ready-to-wear  lightweight  gradient  compression 
hosiery. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:701–4.

 10.  Coles  CM, Werner  RS,  Zelickson  BD.  Comparative 
pilot study evaluating the treatment of leg veins with 
a long pulse ND:YAG laser and sclerotherapy. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2002;30:154–9.

 11.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

 12.  Ross  EV,  Domankevitz  Y.  Laser  treatment  of  leg 
veins: Physical mechanisms and theoretical consider-
ations. Lasers Surg Med. 2005;36:105–16.

 13.  Altshuler GB, Anderson RR, Manstein D, Zenzie HH, 
Smirnov MZ. Extended theory of selective photother-
molysis. Lasers Surg Med. 2001;29:416–32.

 14.  Parlette  EC,  Groff  WF,  Kinshella  MJ,  Domankevitz 
Y, O'Neill J, Ross EV. Optimal pulse durations for the 
treatment  of  leg  telangiectasias  with  a  neodymium 
YAG laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:98–105.

 15.  Black JF, Wade N, Barton JK. Mechanistic compari-
son of blood undergoing laser photocoagulation at 532 
and 1,064 nm. Lasers Surg Med. 2005;36:155–65.
 16.  Ross EV, Ladin Z, Kreindel M, Dierickx C. Theoretical 
considerations  in  laser  hair  removal.  Dermatol  Clin. 
1999;17:333–55. viii.

 17.  Kauvar AN,  Khrom T.  Laser  treatment  of  leg  veins. 

Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2005;24:184–92.

 18.  Kunishige  JH,  Goldberg  LH,  Friedman  PM.  Laser 
therapy for leg veins. Clin Dermatol. 2007;25:454–61.
 19.  Spendel S, Prandl EC, Schintler MV, et al. Treatment 
of spider leg veins with the KTP (532 nm) laser--a pro-
spective study. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;31:194–201.
 20.  Trelles MA, Allones I, Alvarez J, et al. The 800-nm 
diode laser in the treatment of leg veins: assessment at 
6 months. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54:282–9.
 21.  Trelles MA, Martín-Vázquez M, Trelles OR, Mordon 
SR.  Treatment  effects  of  combined  radio-frequency 
current and a 900 nm diode laser on leg blood vessels. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:185–95.

 22.  McDaniel DH, Ash K, Lord J, Newman J, Adrian RM, 
Zukowski M. Laser therapy of spider leg veins: clini-
cal evaluation of a new long pulsed alexandrite laser. 
Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:52–8.

 23.  Kauvar  AN,  Lou  WW.  Pulsed  alexandrite  laser  for 
the treatment of leg telangiectasia and reticular veins. 
Arch Dermatol. 2000;136:1371–5.

 24.  Eremia S, Li C, Umar SH. A side-by-side compara-
tive  study  of  1064  nm  Nd:YAG,  810  nm  diode  and 
755 nm alexandrite lasers for treatment of 0.3-3 mm 
leg veins. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:224–30.

 25.  Klein  A,  Buschmann  M,  Babilas  P,  Landthaler  M, 
Bäumler  W.  Indocyanine  green-augmented  diode 
laser therapy vs. long-pulsed Nd:YAG (1064 nm) laser 
treatment  of  telangiectatic  leg  veins:  a  randomized 
controlled trial. Br J Dermatol. 2013;169:365–73.
 26.  Lupton  JR, Alster  TS,  Romero  P.  Clinical  compari-
son  of  sclerotherapy  versus  long-pulsed  Nd:YAG 
laser  treatment  for  lower  extremity  telangiectases. 
Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:694–7.

 27. Munia  MA,  Wolosker  N,  Munia  CG,  Chao  WS, 
Puech-Leão  P.  Comparison  of  laser  versus  sclero-
therapy  in  the  treatment  of  lower  extremity  tel-
angiectases:  a  prospective  study.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2012;38:635–9.

 28.  Levy JL, Elbahr C, Jouve E, Mordon S. Comparison 
and sequential study of long pulsed Nd:YAG 1,064 nm 
laser  and  sclerotherapy  in  leg  telangiectasias  treat-
ment. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:273–6.

 29.  Parlar B, Blazek C, Cazzaniga S, et al. Treatment of 
lower  extremity  telangiectasias  in  women  by  foam 
sclerotherapy vs. Nd:YAG laser: a prospective, com-
parative,  randomized,  open-label  trial.  J  Eur  Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29:549–54.

J. K. Karen and S. Callahan



Lasers and Lights for Treating 
Pigmented Lesions

6

Emmy M. Graber and Jeffrey S. Dover

Abstract
•  Pigmented  lesions  were  initially  treated 

with destructive non-selective lasers.

•  Now  pigment  selective  Q-switched  lasers 

used.

•  Pigmented  skin  lesions  are  exceedingly 

common.

•  Selective destruction of pigmented lesions 
selective 

theory  of 

relies  on 
the 
photothermolysis.

shorter than the thermal relaxation time of 
melanin.

Keywords
Pigmented lesions · Tattoo removal · Q switched 
lasers · Solar lentigo · Selective photothermoly-
sis · Picosecond lasers  Melanin · Nevus of Ota · 
Melasma  Hyperpigmentation

•  Melanin  has  a  broad  absorption  spectrum 
with  absorption  steadily  decreasing  with 
increasing wavelength.

•  Several  Q-switched  lasers  fall  within  the 
melanin absorption spectrum. Their nano-
second pulse duration is effective since it is 

Initially  Modified  from:  Kaminer,  M.S.,  Dover,  J.S.,  
and  Arndt,  K.A.  Atlas  of  Cosmetic  Surgery.  2002. 
W.B. Saunders Company.

E. M. Graber (*) 
Dermatology Institute of Boston, PC,  
Boston, MA, USA
e-mail: egraber@dermboston.com 

J. S. Dover 
Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
Chestnut Hill, MA, USA 

Surgery, Dartmouth Medical School,  
Hanover, NH, USA 

Dermatology, Brown Medical School,  
Providence, RI, USA
e-mail: jdover@skincarephysicians.net

 Outline

Introduction
History

•  Pigmented lesions were initially treated 
with destructive non-selective lasers.
•  Now pigment selective Q-switched and 
long pulsed green light lasers as well as 
Intense Pulsed Light devices are used.

Epidemiology

•  Pigmented skin lesions are exceedingly 

common.

Basic Science

•  Selective  destruction  of  pigmented 
lesions relies on the theory of selective 
photothermolysis.

•  Melanin  has  a  broad  absorption  spec-
trum  with  absorption  steadily  decreas-
ing with increasing wavelength.

•  Several  Q-switched  and  millisecond 
domain  lasers  fall  within  the  melanin 
absorption  spectrum.  The  nanosecond 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_6

83





84

or picosecond pulse durations are effec-
tive since they are shorter than the ther-
mal  relaxation  time  of  melanosomes. 
Millisecond  domain  pulses  which  are 
shorter than the thermal relaxation time 
of  melanocytes  and  pigmented  epider-
mal cells.

•  Intense  pulsed  light  and  non-selective 
fractional  non  ablative  lasers  are  also 
effective

Adverse Events

Side Effects/Complications

•  Post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation, 
an  inadequate  response  and  recurrence 
of the lesion are the most common side 
effects.

Prevention  and  Treatment  of  Side  Effects/

Complications
•  Using the appropriate laser and fluence 

can reduce side effects.

Indications and Contraindications
Epidermal Pigmented Lesions

•  Lentigines,  Café  au  lait  macules,  and 
ephelides  are  common  epidermal  pig-
mented  lesions  that  respond  to  laser 
treatment.

•  Shorter laser wavelengths may suffice as 
deep tissue penetration is not necessary.
•  Multiple treatments are often needed for 

complete removal.

Dermal Pigmented Lesions

•  Melanocytic  nevi,  nevus  of  Ota, 
melasma,  post-inflammatory  hyperpig-
mentation, and drug induced pigmenta-
tion  are  dermal  pigmented  lesions  that 
can be treated with lasers.

•  Longer  wavelengths  may  be  needed  to 

reach the pigment.

•  Multiple treatments are necessary.
•  Anesthesia is not usually needed.

Techniques

Pre-operative Management

•  It is important to obtain a medical his-
tory  prior  to  treatment  and  to  educate 
patients about the potential outcomes.
•  Topical  anesthesia  may  be  needed  for 
some larger or dermal pigmented lesions.
•  Appropriate  protective  eyewear  should 

be on all persons in the room.

Description of Technique

•  Laser parameters depend on the particu-
lar  laser,  the  patient’s  skin  phototype, 
and the type of lesion.

•  Adequate  fluence  should  result  in  an 
immediate uniform ash white color.

Post-operative Management

•  An occlusive ointment should be applied 
and patients should be educated on the 
healing process.

•  Educating  patients  so  that  there  are 
realistic  expectations  can  also  help  to 
reduce 
and 
complications.

frustration 

patient 

Future Directions

•  Pico second (10−12) domain lasers that are 
used for tattoo removal appear to be effec-
tive in other pigmented lesions.

Conclusions

 Introduction

•  Pigmented lesions were initially treated with 

destructive non-selective lasers.

•  Now  pigment  selective  Q-switched  nanosec-
ond  and  picosecond  domain  and  millisecond 
domain lasers used.

•  Intense  pulsed  light  and  non-selective  frac-
tional non ablative lasers are also effective

•  Pigmented  skin 

lesions  are  exceedingly 

common.

•  Selective  destruction  of  pigmented  lesions 
selective 

theory 

on 

of 

relies 
the 
photothermolysis.

•  Melanin has a broad absorption spectrum with 
absorption steadily decreasing with increasing 
wavelength.

•  Several Q-switched lasers fall within the mel-
anin  absorption  spectrum.  Their  nanosecond 
or  picosecond  pulse  durations  are  effective 
since they are shorter than the thermal relax-
ation time of melanocytes.

•  Millisecond domain pulses which are shorter 
than  the  thermal  relaxation  time  of  melano-
cytes and pigmented epidermal cells.

•  Intense  pulsed  light  and  non-selective  frac-
tional non ablative lasers are also effective.

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



 Abstract

•  Pigmented lesions were initially treated with 

destructive non-selective lasers.

•  Now  pigment  selective  Q-switched  lasers 

used.

•  Pigmented  skin 

lesions  are  exceedingly 

common.

•  Selective destruction of pigmented lesions relies 
on the theory of selective photothermolysis.
•  Melanin has a broad absorption spectrum with 
absorption steadily decreasing with increasing 
wavelength.

•  Several Q-switched lasers fall within the mel-
anin  absorption  spectrum.  Their  nanosecond 
pulse  duration  is  effective  since  it  is  shorter 
than the thermal relaxation time of melanin.

 Keywords

Pigmented lesions
Tattoo removal
Q switched lasers
Solar lentigo
Selective photothermolysis
Picosecond lasers
Melanin
Nevus of Ota
Melasma
Hyperpigmentation

 History

The  application  of  lasers  for  pigmented  lesions 
began  in  1963  when  Leon  Goldman  and  col-
leagues  found  that  0.5  ms  pulses  of  ruby  laser 
radiation was selectively absorbed by pigmented 
skin [1]. These investigators also discovered that 
the  threshold  radiant  exposure  for  epidermal 
damage  was  10–100  times  lower  for  a  quality 
switched (Q-switched) ruby laser (QSRL) with a 
pulse  duration  of  50  ns  [2].  Despite  these  early 
findings,  the  ability  of  the  QSRL  to  selectively 
target  pigment  was  not  initially  appreciated. 
Instead, for many years, pigmented lesions were 
treated  with  nonselective  continuous  wave 

85

sources such as the argon [3] and carbon dioxide 
lasers [4]. After using these more tissue destruc-
tive  devices,  the  selective  Q-switched  lasers  at 
wavelengths  other  than  694  nm  were  found  to 
target melanin. In the late 1980s Anderson et al. 
demonstrated  that  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser 
pulses  at  1064,  532,  and  355  nm  selectively 
diminished melanin. This group also showed that 
the  longer  wavelengths  (which  are  less  well- 
absorbed  by  melanin)  required  a  higher  energy 
fluence  to  be  effective.  Over  the  last  20  years, 
after  further  investigation,  pulsed  lasers  and 
intense  pulsed  light  sources  have  become  the 
treatment  of  choice  for  epidermal,  and  pulsed 
lasers  the  choice  for  dermal  pigmented  lesions 
and tattoos.

 Epidemiology

Pigmented skin lesions are exceedingly common 
in all races. Some pigmented lesions are congeni-
tal while many are acquired. With increasing sun 
exposure, pigmented lesions become more preva-
lent.  In  a  quest  to  reverse  photoaging,  there  are 
countless  patients  that  desire  lightening  or 
removal of these lesions. For some patients, there 
appears to also be a cultural influence to correct 
dyspigmentation.

 Basic Science

 Laser-Tissue Interactions in Pigmented 
Skin
The ability of laser and light sources to diminish 
pigmented  lesions  is  based  on  the  principle  of 
selective  photothermolysis.  (3)  Described  in 
1983  by Anderson  and  Parrish,  selective  photo-
thermolysis  predicts  that  there  can  be  selective 
thermal  damage  to  an  absorbing  target  using 
appropriate laser parameters and pulse character-
istics.  This  principle  requires:  1)  the  use  of  a 
wavelength that is well absorbed by the target, 2) 
a pulse duration that is shorter than the thermal 
relaxation  time  (the  time  required  for  a  heated 
target  to  cool  by  50%),  3)  a  sufficiently  high 
energy  density  to  achieve  the  desired  tissue 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



86

effect. Selective photothermolysis was originally 
applied to the treatment of vascular lesions with 
oxyhemoglobin  as 
target  chromophore. 
the 
selective  photothermolysis  was 
Thereafter 
applied to pigmented lesions by targeting endog-
enous melanin and exogenous carbon particles as 
target chromophores.

increasing  wavelength 

As a target chromophore, melanin has a broad 
absorption  spectrum  within  the  ultraviolet,  visi-
ble  and  near-infrared  light  range  (Fig.  6.1). 
However,  light  absorption  in  melanin  decreases 
[5]. 
steadily  with 
Melanocytes  contain  intracytoplasmic  organ-
elles, melanosomes, which are the sites of mela-
nin biosynthesis (Fig. 6.2). After formation in the 
melanocytes, melanosomes and their melanin are 
transferred  to  surrounding  keratinocytes.  These 
melanin  containing  melanosomes  are  1  μm  in 
diameter  and  are  predicted  to  have  a  thermal 

e
t
i
r
d
n
a
x
e
A

l

e
d
o
D

i

G
A
Y
:
d
N

L
D
P

y
b
u
R

l

)
e
a
c
s

g
o
l
(

n
o

i
t

p
r
o
s
b
A

Melanin
Oxyhemoglobin
Water

300

500

700

1000
Wavelength (nm)

2000

Fig. 6.1  Absorption  curves  of  melanin,  oxyhemoglobin 
and water (From Hirsch RJ, Anderson RR. Principles of 
Laser-Skin  Interactions.  In  chapter  136,  page  2148  in: 
Dermatology  (ed.)  Bolognia  JL,  Jorizzo  JL,  and  Rapini 
RP. 1st edition, 2003)

relaxation  time  between  50  and  500  ns  [5,  6]. 
Based on the principle of selective photothermol-
ysis,  for  this  short  thermal  relaxation  time,  an 
extremely short pulse duration should be used to 
effectively  target  melanosomes. The  delivery  of 
an  extremely  high  energy  laser  pulse  within  a 
very  short  time  span  results  in  rapid  heating  of 
the  target  melanosome  (estimated  at  10  mil-
lion °C per second), causing it to explode [7].

While  electron  microscopy  has  confirmed 
highly  selective  destruction  of  melanosomes 
within  melanocytes  and  melanized  keratino-
cytes, it is not know precisely how the pigment- 
containing  cells  are  destroyed.  It  is  believed 
that destruction of melanocytes and melanized 
keratinocytes  are  destroyed  due  to  mechanical 
damage from acoustic waves that emanate from 
the  absorbing  melanosome  [8,  9].  Damage  to 
these cells results in vacuolization and deposi-
tion of pigment and nuclear material at the cel-
lular  periphery.  In  addition,  subepidermal 
vesiculation may occur at the level of the lam-
ina  lucida.  Following  damage,  repigmentation 
results from migration of residual melanocytes 
from either adnexal structures or adjacent unir-
radiated skin.

When treating pigmented lesions, Q-switched 
lasers  generate  an  immediate  ash-white  color  at 
the site of impact. The cause of this tissue response 
is due to heat induced steam cavities in melano-
somes  which  cause  a  scattering  of  visible  light, 
producing  a  white  color  [10].  Well  demarcated, 
circular,  highly  reflective  structures  of  1–30  μm 
within melanosomes have been identified by con-
focal microscopy, electron microscopy, and opti-
cal  coherence  tomography  (Fig.  6.3).  These 
circular structures are presumed to be gas bubbles 
and gradually disappear over 20 min, correlating 
to  the  disappearance  of  the  clinical  ash-white 
color over the same period of time [11]. The exact 
content of the gas bubbles is not known, but may 
be water vapor, nitrogen, or other gases. The ade-
quate laser exposure dose for melanosome dam-
age correlates well with the clinical threshold for 
immediate skin whitening. In other words, if the 
clinical  ash-white  color  is  not  visible,  the  laser 
exposure dose is not sufficient. Darker skin has a 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover 
 




Fig. 6.2  Melanocyte residing 
within the epidermis. 
Melanosomes extend throughout 
the dendritic processes and are 
transferred to neighboring 
keratinocytes (Modified from 
www.freethought-forum.com)

Melanocyte
dendritic processes

Melanosomes

Melanocyte nucleus

Dermal-epidermal junction

87

i

s
m
r
e
d
p
E

i

i

s
m
r
e
D

lower threshold for whitening due to a higher epi-
dermal  melanin  content  [11].  With  increasing 
wavelengths,  melanin  absorption  decreases,  and 
the  required 
laser  exposure  dose 
increases [12, 13]. Subthreshold fluences appear 
to  actually  stimulate  melanogenesis  because  of 
activation  of  epidermal  melanocytes  after  non-
lethal injury [14] (Fig. 6.4).

threshold 

 Q-switched and Pulsed Lasers 
and Light Sources
Selective damage to melanosomes in human skin 
was  first  demonstrated  with  a  351  nm  XeF 
excimer  laser  delivering  20  ns  pulses  [15]. 
Although  light  at  351  nm  is  well  absorbed  by 
melanin,  this  short  wavelength  only  penetrates 
<100 μm into the skin due to light scattering [16]. 
It was subsequently found that selective melano-
some  damage  could  be  produced  by  also  the 
pulsed  tunable  dye  laser  [12,  17]  (wavelength 
435–750  nm,  pulse  width  300–750  ns), 
Q-switched  ruby  laser  [6]  (wavelength  694  nm, 
the  Q-switched 
pulse  width  40  ns)  and 
neodymium:YAG  laser  [13]  (wavelength  355, 
532, and 1064 nm, pulse width 10–12 ns). While 
shorter wavelengths, such as 351 nm are better at 
absorbing melanin, longer wavelengths penetrate 
deeper  into  the  skin,  increasing  their  ability  to 
reach deeper melanosomes (Fig. 6.5).

Several lasers can be used today to treat pig-
mented  skin  lesions  (Table  6.1).  These  include 
lasers that are: 1) pigment nonselective, 2) highly 
pigment selective, 3) and those that are somewhat 
pigment selective.

 Pigment Non selective Lasers
The carbon dioxide [4, 18] (10,600 nm), erbium- 
YAG (2940 nm) and Erbium glass (1540 nm) and 
yttrium  scandium  gallium  garnet 
(YSGG) 
(2790 nm) lasers are pigment nonselective lasers 
that remove epidermal pigment because of their 
ability  to  target  water  and  ablate  the  entire  epi-
dermis,  including  melanocytes  and  melanized 
removed  a 
keratinocytes.  Earlier  devices 
 relatively  uniform  layer  of  the  epidermis  and 
with the epidermis went the associated pigment. 
Depending on the amount of energy delivered a 
thinner or thicker layer of the epidermis and adja-
cent  dermis  is  affected  by  the  treatment.  Over 
24–48 h the epidermis is shed, including melano-
cytes  and  pigment  laden  keratinocytes,  and  is 
then regenerated, leaving behind a new epidermis 
with less unwanted sun induced pigment. Newer 
fractionated laser technologies damage columns 
of the epidermis and dermis while leaving inter-
spersed areas unaffected. In this manner, there is 
faster  healing  as  the  surrounding  normal  tissue 
heals  each  light  column  of  damage  (Fig.  6.6). 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



88

Fig. 6.3  Electron 
micrograph obtained 
immediately after 
Q-switched ruby laser 
irradiation. The targeted 
melanosome shows 
membrane disruption 
with disorganization of 
its internal contents (a) 
prior to irradiation; (b) 
immediately after 
irradiation showing 
early melanosome 
disruption; (c) more 
disruption; (d) almost 
complete disruption of a 
melanosome 
immediately after 
irradiation (From Arndt 
KA, Dover JS, Olbricht 
SM. Lasers in 
Cutaneous and Aesthetic 
Surgery. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott-Raven; 
1997.)

a

c

b

d

and 

fractionated  CO2 

fractionated 
The 
erbium:YAG lasers work in the same manner as 
their  non- fractionated  counterparts  but  deliver 
the  light  in  many  small  columns.  Because  only 
fractions of the pigmented epidermis are affected, 
it  stands  to  reason  that  a  series  of  treatments  is 
necessary  to  achieve  the  desired  result  and  at 

least  some  of  the  original  pigmented  epidermal 
lesion would remain even after a series of treat-
ments resulting in incomplete lesion removal.

The fractionated technology is also employed 
with the 1927 nm thulium laser. Although a non- 
ablative  laser,  it  targets  waters  and  has  a  water 
absorption coefficient that is 10 times that of the 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



a

b

89

Fig. 6.4  Histologic appearance of black guinea pig skin 
immediately  after  irradiation  with  the  Q-switched  ruby 
laser. (a) Characteristic “ring cell” formation in the basal 
lamina, representing melanocytes and keratinocytes with 

condensed nuclear and pigment material at their peripher-
ies. (b) Similar changes in a hair follicle (From Arndt KA, 
Dover JS, Olbricht SM. Lasers in Cutaneous and Aesthetic 
Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1997.)

Excimer
193nm

Nd:YAG
2940nm

CO2
10,600nm

Argon
488-514nm

KTP
532nm

PDL
585-600nm

Ruby
694nm

Alexandrite
755nm

Diode
800nm

Nd:YAG
1064nm

Stratum comeum

Epidermis

Dermis

Dermal vessels

Subcutaneous fat

Fig. 6.5  Laser depth of penetration. Depth of penetration 
for lasers of varying wavelengths. For lasers in the visible 
and near infrared ranges, the depth of penetration increases 

as  the  wavelength  increases  (From  Bolognia,  et  al. 
Dermatology. 2003)

1550  and  1540  nm  non-ablative  infrared  lasers. 
The  1927  nm  thulium  laser  induces  damage  in 
the epidermis and the upper dermis thereby non 
selectively  diminishing  pigmented  epidermal 
lesions [19].

 Highly Pigment Selective Lasers
Older  technologies,  such  as  continuous  wave 
(CW) and quasi-CW visible light lasers, including 
the argon laser (488, 514 nm), copper vapor laser 
(511 nm), and krypton laser (521, 530 nm), can be 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



Comments
Large spot size 
promotes deeper 
penetration
Long pulse mode 
available for hair 
removal
Long pulse mode 
available for hair 
removal
Fiberoptic delivery 
system
Four lasers within 
one box

Handpiece 
converts l–585 and 
650 nm

90

Table 6.1  Lasers in the treatment of pigmented lesion

Manufacturer Laser type
QS Ruby
Palomar

Wavelength 
(nm)
694

Pulse 
duration
28 ns

Spot 
size 
(mm)
5, 6.5

Maximum 
repetition 
rate(Hz)
0.8

Device
Spectrum 
RD-1200

EpiTouch

Lumenis

QS Ruby

694

25 ns

5

0.8

Sinon

Wavelight

QS Ruby

694

15–40 ns

3–9

20

AlexLAZR

Candela

VersaPulse 
VPC

Lumenis

Medlite C6

HOYA

ConBio

Alex

Candela

TriVantage

SkinClear

Sybaritic

Naturalase

Focus

Medical

QS 
alexandrite
FD Nd: 
YAG
QS FD Nd: 
YAG
QS Nd: 
YAG
QS 
alexandrite
QS FD Nd: 
YAG

QS Nd : 
YAG
QS FD Nd: 
YAG
QS 
alexandrite
QS Nd: 
YAG
QS FD Nd: 
YAG
QS Nd: 
YAG
QS FD Nd: 
YAG
QS Nd: 
YAG

QS Q-switched, FD frequency doubled

755

532

532

1064

755

532

532

755

1064

532

1064

532

1064

50 ns

2, 3, 4

2–50 ms

2–10

4 ns

5 ns

45 ns

5–20 ns

50 ns

5

6

10

10

10

10

10

5

5

5

2–6

2–6

2–6

2, 3, 4, 
6

3, 4, 6, 
8
2, 3, 5

2, 3, 4

2, 3, 5

10 ns

1, 2, 3

10 ns

1, 2, 3

10–20 ns

10–20 ns

7

7

1064

5–20 ns

used to selectively remove epidermal pigmented 
lesions. However, spatial thermal injury confine-
ment is not possible and unaffected adjacent skin 
may  also  be  damaged.  The  risk/benefit  ratio  is 
higher with these CW and quasi-CW devices.

There  are  three  short-pulsed,  pigment  selec-
tive  lasers  that  are  widely  used  today:  1)  the 
Q-switched  ruby  laser  (QSRL)  (694  nm),  2)  
the Q-switched alexandrite laser (755 nm), and 3) 
the Q-switched neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG and 

KTP)  laser  (1064,  532  nm). These  lasers  selec-
tively target melanin by delivering high-intensity, 
short-pulsed  radiation  at  varying  wavelengths. 
“Q-switched”  is  an  abbreviation  for  “quality- 
switched”  and  refers  to  lasers  which  release  an 
extremely  high  powered  pulse  (109  W)  with  an 
ultra-short pulse duration. Through the use of an 
optical shutter, these lasers store large amounts of 
energy  in  the  laser  cavity  and  then  release  the 
stored energy when the laser fires.

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



91

impregnated handpieces can convert the 532 nm 
wavelength to either 585 nm (yellow) or 650 nm 
(red). An  articulated  arm  delivers  pulses  with  a 
spot  size  to  1.5–8  mm,  a  pulse  duration  of 
5–10 ns, and a repetition rate up to 10 Hz.

There  are  newer  Q-switched  lasers  that  emit 
even  shorter  pulse  durations,  in  the  picosecond 
range, as opposed to the nanosecond pulse dura-
tions  of  most  Q-switched  lasers.  Picosecond 
lasers were originally studied for tattoo removal 
but more recently their effectiveness in the treat-
ment of epidermal and dermal pigmented lesions 
has been demonstrated [20, 21].

Long-pulsed  (millisecond  rather  than  nano-
second  domain)  532  nm  (KTP)  Nd:YAG  lasers 
and  595  nm  pulsed-dye  lasers,  which  are  tradi-
tionally used to treat vascular lesions, can also be 
used  to  treat  superficial  pigmented  lesions. 
However, the long pulse width of these lasers is 
close to the thermal relaxation time of the entire 
epidermis (about 10 ms) [22] and therefore does 
not allow for selective damage to melanosomes. 
Because of their longer pulse width, millisecond 
domain lasers produce a purely thermal effect on 
their target, unlike the photomechanical effect of 
Q-switched lasers. The target in this case may in 
fact  be  melanocytes  rather  than  melanosomes. 
Regardless, these longer pulse duration devices, 
just  like  intense  pulsed  light  devices  are  highly 
effective  in  removing  unwanted  epidermal  pig-
ment.  These  lasers  are  not  suitable  for  treating 
dermal pigmented lesions because of the limited 
penetration depth [23] Although no longer manu-
factured,  a  pigmented  lesion  pulsed  dye  laser 
(non-Q-switched)  used  a  xenon  flashlamp  to 
pump  a  coumarin-containing  dye  that  expelled 
pulses  of  green  light  at  510  nm.  Although  this 
laser was useful for epidermal lesions, its shallow 
penetration made it much less effective on dermal 
lesions.

The Q-switched ruby, alexandrite and Nd:YAG 
lasers also have long-pulsed counterparts with the 
same wavelengths that operate in a normal (non-
Q-switched) mode. These normal mode lasers are 
often  used  for  laser  hair  removal  because  their 
higher fluences and longer pulse durations target 
large pigmented structures such as hair follicles or 
nests of cells rather than individual melanosomes 

Fig.  6.6  Fractionated  erbium  glass  laser  causing  tissue 
coagulation  in  a  narrow  microthermal  zone  of  injury 
(From Vikramaditya P, Bedi MS, et al. The effects of pulse 
energy variations on the dimensions of microscopic ther-
mal treatment zones in nonablative fractional resurfacing. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39: 145–155, with permission of 
John Wiley and Sons.)

The QSRL emits red light at a wavelength of 
694  nm  and  a  pulse  duration  of  28–40  ns 
(Table 6.1). Light is delivered through a mirrored 
articulated arm at a spot size of 5 or 6.5 mm and 
a repetition rate of 2 Hz. The Q-switched alexan-
drite  laser  has  a  near  infrared  wavelength  of 
755 nm, pulse duration of 50–100 ns, spot size of 
2–4  mm,  and  a  repetition  rate  up  to  10  Hz. 
Depending on the exact device, light is delivered 
either  through  an  articulated  arm  or  through  a 
semi-flexible  fiber  optic  cable.  The  Q-switched 
Nd:YAG  laser  emits  infrared  light  at  1064  nm. 
The  wavelength  can  be  halved  by  placing  a 
frequency- doubling  KTP 
(potassium-titanyl- 
phosphate) crystal in the laser beam’s path. Dye- 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



92

or pigmented cells [24] Normal mode lasers have 
been shown to be effective in the removal of epi-
dermal  pigmented  lesions  but  are  not  ideal 
because damage may be imparted on surrounding 
tissue.

Non-coherent  light  sources  (intense  pulsed 
light  or  IPL)  can  also  be  used  for  pigment 
removal. Polychromatic light is emitted ranging 
from 515 to 1200 nm (visible to infrared) and fil-
ters are used to cut off the light above or below 
predetermined  wavelengths.  Since  melanin 
exhibits a broad absorption spectrum, monochro-
matic  laser  devices  are  not  necessary  to  target 
superficial  melanin.  The  shorter  wavelengths 
emitted  by  IPL  devices  are  highly  absorbed  by 
melanin. IPL devices release light as a series of 
single,  double,  or  triple  pulses  (millisecond 
domain). Like the millisecond domain lasers, the 
millisecond pulse width of IPL devices approxi-
mates the thermal relaxation time of the epider-
mis  (10  ms)  and  produces  a  photothermal,  not 
photomechanical  effect,  on  its  target.  To  avoid 
damage  to  normal  surrounding  epidermis,  most 
IPL  devices  have  skin  cooling  during  treatment 
to protect the epidermis from excessive thermal 
injury.  The  IPL  devices  should  not  be  used  for 
dermal pigmented lesions.

 Indications and Contraindications

•  Ephelides,  lentigines,  and  café  au  lait  mac-
ules,  are  common  epidermal  pigmented 
lesions  that  respond  to  laser  and  light 
treatment.

•  Melanocytic  nevi,  nevus  of  Ota  and  other 
dermal  melanocytoses,  melasma,  post- 
inflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  and  drug 
induced  pigmentation  are  dermal  pigmented 
lesions  that  can  be  treated  with  lasers.  Of 
these,  only  nevus  of  Ota  and  other  dermal 
melanocytoses 
respond  predictably  and 
favorably.

•  Shorter laser wavelengths may suffice for epi-
dermal  lesions  as  deep  tissue  penetration  is 
not necessary.

•  Long  wavelengths  are  required  for  dermal 

pigmented lesions.

•  Multiple treatments are often needed for com-

plete removal.

•  Anesthesia  may  be  needed  for  larger  or  der-

mal lesions.

 Epidermal Pigmented Lesions

Many  clinical  studies  have  proven  the  efficacy 
and safety of Q-switched lasers [25–27] and the 
510 nm pulsed dye laser [28] in the treatment of 
various epidermal pigmented lesions, including: 
ephelides, lentigines, Café au lait macules, sebor-
rheic  keratoses,  nevi  spilus,  and  Becker’s  nevi. 
Since  pigment  in  epidermal  lesions  is  found 
superficially,  shorter-wavelength  devices  can  be 
used  successfully  despite  their  limited  penetra-
tion depth. For example, the 510 nm wavelength 
of  the  pigmented  lesion  pulsed  dye  laser  and 
532 nm pulsed lasers are highly absorbed by mel-
anin  but  penetrates  only  about  250  μm  into  the 
skin  [16]  The  Q-switched  ruby  and  alexandrite 
lasers effectively treat both epidermal and dermal 
pigmented  lesions  since  their  wavelengths  are 
still within the melanin absorption spectrum and 
they  penetrate  deeply  into  the  dermis.  The 
Nd:YAG (1064 nm) laser penetrates deeply but is 
poorly absorbed by melanin, making the 532 nm 
wavelength  preferable  for  epidermal  lesions. 
When using the 510 nm and 532 nm wavelengths, 
hemoglobin  competes  with  melanin  for  absorp-
tion  of  light.  Nanosecond  pulses  at  these  wave-
lengths  causes  rupture  of  superficial  blood 
vessels, manifesting clinically as purpura [12].

 Lentigines
Lentigines  are  extremely  common  hyperpig-
mented  macules  that  are  most  often  due  to 
chronic sun exposure and are then referred to as 
solar  lentigines.  On  pathology  lentigines  dis-
play  increased  single  melanocytes  along  the 
basal layer with elongation of club-shaped rete 
ridges. In addition to solar lentigines, there are 
lentigines  associated  with  a  syndrome  (e.g. 
Peutz-Jeghers)  and  labial  melanotic  macules 
(labial  lentigines). All  three  Q-switched  lasers 
are highly effective for treating all types of len-
tigines  [29,  30]  Both  35%  trichloroacetic  acid 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



93

peels and cryotherapy are inferior to Q-switched 
lasers  in  the  treatment  of  lentigines  [31,  32]. 
With one treatment using a Q-switched laser, at 
least 50% clearing of lentigines is expected, and 
additional treatments may be utilized to remove 
remaining pigment (Figs. 6.7 and 6.8). Although 
less  selective,  non  Q-switched  (millisecond 
domain) KTP, 595 nm pulsed-dye, ruby, alexan-
drite, and diode lasers may also be used to treat 
lentigines. A  study  of Asian  patients  with  len-
tigines found a long-pulsed KTP (532 nm) laser 
(without  skin  cooling)  to  be  as  effective  as  a 
532 nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser, and with less 
risk  of  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation. 
Additionally, a study using a 595 nm pulsed-dye 
laser  on  lentigines  in Asian  patients  showed  a 
mean  of  82%  improvement  in  lentigines  by 
reflectance  spectrometry  [23].  Several  studies 
have  also  demonstrated  the  effectiveness  of 
broad band light sources (Intense Pulsed Light) 
in clearing lentigines. Adjunctive use of 5-ami-
nolevulinic  acid  (5-ALA)  with  IPL  provides 
greater improvement of epidermal pigment than 
with IPL alone [33–35].

The fractional 1927 nm thulium laser is highly 
effective in treating lentigines and is safe for both 
facial and non-facial sites. One study showed an 
average of over 50% improvement of lentigines 
after three treatments with a 1927 nm laser [36]. 

Its  benefit  is  homogeneous  improvement  of  the 
entire  treated  area  making  it  ideal  for  treating 
dyspigmentation  associated  with  photoaging  of 
the face, neck, chest and extremities.

 Café au Lait Macules
Café au lait macules (CALMs) are well circum-
scribed,  homogenous  light  brown  macules  that 
occur  as  isolated  lesions  in  the  general  popula-
tion. Their prevalence varies amongst ethnicities 
but ranges from 0.2% to 18% [37]. Café au lait 
macules may also be found as multiple lesions in 
association with a syndrome (e.g. neurofibroma-
tosis, Noonan syndrome). Histologically, there is 
an increase in melanocytes along the basal layer, 
hypermelanosis  of  melanocytes  and  keratino-
cytes, and giant melanin granules. Treatment of 
CALMs with lasers is minimally successful and 
often  unpredictable  [38].  Temporary  lightening 
or clearing can be achieved after multiple treat-
ments (Fig. 6.9). However, recurrences are seen 
in up to 50% of treated lesions, even when clear-
ing 
initially  achieved.  Post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation  is  frequent  following  laser 
treatment of CALMs, especially in patients with 
darker skin types. Alster demonstrated complete 
elimination of most CALMs after an average of 
8.4  treatment  sessions  with  the  510  nm  pulsed 
dye laser, indicating that multiple treatments are 

is 

a

b

Fig. 6.7  (a) A woman in her early 40 s with significant 
photoaging  and  numerous  lentigines  prior  to  treatment. 
(b) Six weeks after one single treatment with a Q-switched 

ruby laser. There is about 70% improvement of the lesion. 
No further treatments were requested by the patient

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



94

needed for complete resolution [39, 40]. Er:YAG 
resurfacing  has  also  been  shown  to  eliminate 
CALMs [40].

 Other Epidermal Lesions
Ephelides  (freckles)  are  hyperpigmented  small 
macules  located  on  sun-exposed  skin  and 
become darker in the summer and lighter in the 

Fig. 6.8  A patient’s right hand with copious solar lentigi-
nes  and  the  patient’s  left  hand  with  significantly  fewer 
two  Q-switched  alexandrite 
solar 
treatments

lentigines  after 

winter.  There  is  no  increase  in  the  number  of 
melanocytes  on  pathology,  but  there  is  an 
increase in melanin. Ephelides respond well to 
Q-switched  laser  treatment.  Another  common 
lesion,  seborrheic  keratoses,  may  respond  to 
laser  treatment.  In  general,  thinner  seborrheic 
keratoses respond better to laser treatment than 
thick  lesions  [28].  Cryotherapy  or  cryotherapy 
in combination with laser treatment is preferred 
to laser treatment alone for thick seborrheic ker-
atoses.  A  nevus  spilus  (speckled  lentiginous 
nevus)  consists  of  a  background  CALM  and 
scattered nests of nevi cells. Successful clearing 
of the darker nevocellular component has been 
reported with the QSRL, but the CALM compo-
nent tends to recur [25]. A Becker’s nevus is a 
hyperpigmented,  hair- bearing  plaque  that  most 
commonly occurs on the upper trunk or shoul-
der of males. These lesions may also be associ-
ated with a dermal smooth muscle hamartoma. 
The  hyperpigmented  component  of  Becker’s 
nevi  respond  similarly  to  laser  treatment  as 
CALMs,  having  frequent  recurrences  (within 
6–12 months) and post- inflammatory hyperpig-
mentation [41].

a

b

Fig. 6.9  (a) A young Asian patient with a café au lait macule on her right cheek. (b) After a series of treatments with 
the Q-switched laser, the café au lait macule has cleared markedly

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



 Dermal Pigmented Lesions

Q-switched  lasers  have  revolutionized  the  treat-
ment  of  dermal  pigmented  lesions  including: 
melanocytic  nevi,  nevus  of  Ota,  and  melasma. 
Prior  to  the  advent  of  Q-switched  lasers,  these 
lesions were treated with nonspecific destructive 
means  such  as  excision  [42,  43],  dermabrasion 
[44],  salabrasion  [45],  cryotherapy  [46],  solid 
carbon dioxide ice [47], or continuous wave laser 
ablation [48]. These older methods were ineffec-
tive  and  often  caused  scarring  or  dyspigmenta-
tion.  By  selectively  targeting  dermal  melanin, 
Q-switched lasers provide effective treatment of 
these lesions without risking textural or pigment 
alteration. The Q-switched ruby, alexandrite and 
1064 nm Nd:YAG are the most commonly used 
lasers.  All  of  these  lasers  are  still  within  the 
absorption  spectrum  of  melanin  yet  also  have 
wavelengths  that  are  long  enough  to  penetrate 
into the dermis. Broad band light sources (such 
as IPL) lack wavelength specificity and have lon-
ger  (millisecond  range  rather  than  nanosecond 
range)  pulse  durations,  making  them  unsuitable 
for treating dermal pigmented lesions.

 Melanocytic Nevi
Laser treatment of melanocytic nevi is controver-
sial  since  it  is  unclear  whether  laser  irradiation 
has any potential to induce malignant change in 
nevus  cells.  In  vitro  studies  of  melanoma  cells 
treated  with  Q-switched  lasers  have  found 
changes in cell surface integrin expression, with 
subsequent  alteration  of  cell  migration  [49]. 
Another in vitro study found a significant increase 
in p16INK4a in p16 positive cell lines following 
irradiation  with  Q-switched  laser  light  and  sug-
gested that sub-lethal laser damage may increase 
DNA  damage  leading  to  an  increase  in  p16 
expression  [50].  In  clinical  practice,  benign 
appearing nevi that tend to recur following laser 
treatment may show newfound clinical and histo-
logic  atypia,  referred  to  as  pseudomelanoma 
[51]. Despite this, there has never been a report of 
true  malignant  transformation  of  a  benign  pig-
mented  lesion  following  laser  treatment  [52]. 
Theoretically,  laser  treatment  of  melanocytic 
lesions may decrease the risk of malignant trans-

95

formation  of  a  benign  pigmented  lesion  simply 
by reducing the population of existing potentially 
premalignant  cells.  One  study  reported  that  no 
significant malignant markers (such as prolifera-
tion  cell  nuclear  antigen,  pyrimidine  dimers, 
8-OhdG,  and  p53)  were  found  following  treat-
ment of nevi with Q-switched lasers [53]. While 
these  findings  are  notable,  additional  study  is 
needed to assess the outcome of Q-switched laser 
treatment of nevi. Until more is known, it is pru-
dent to perform a biopsy prior to laser treatment 
to confirm the benign nature of the nevus. Laser 
treatment  should  not  be  performed  on  nevi  in 
patients  with  a  personal  or  family  history  of 
malignant melanoma.
The  Q-switched 

ruby,  alexandrite,  and 
1064 nm Nd:YAG lasers all have some efficacy in 
removing  flat  or  slightly  raised  acquired  nevi 
[54–56].  Lighter  nevi  respond  best  to  shorter 
wavelengths  that  maximize  melanin  absorption, 
while darker nevi typically respond to any wave-
length  within  the  melanin  absorption  spectrum. 
Multiple treatments are frequently necessary for 
optimal  lightening.  Clinical  lightening  is  also 
associated  with  the  development  of  a  subtle 
microscopic scar up to 1 mm thick that obscures 
residual nevus cells. It is often unfeasible to attain 
complete resolution of nevi [56], and recurrence 
after  laser  treatment  is  common.  There  may  be 
persistence  of  nevus  cells  containing  little  pig-
ment  located  in  the  deeper  dermis  that  are 
shielded  from  laser  radiation  by  the  more  pig-
mented  superficial  cells  [54].  Q-switched  laser 
radiation does not penetrate sufficiently to effec-
tively  treat  thicker  papillated  or  dome-shaped 
dermal nevi. The short pulsed erbium:YAG laser 
has been reported to be quite effective in remov-
ing  flat  or  slightly  palpable  melanocytic  nevi. 
Single pulses of 5.2–14 J/cm2 were found to clear 
27  of  28  nevi  on  follow-up  and  histological 
examination [57]. The QSRL has been reported 
to successfully eliminate flat blue nevi [58].

Although  Q-switched  lasers  may  effectively 
lighten congenital nevi, there is frequently repig-
mentation due to persistence of nevus cells within 
the  deeper  reticular  dermis  and  within  adnexae 
[52,  59].  In  a  split  nevus  study  on  15  patients, 
Kono et al. showed greater clearing with combined 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



96

Q-switched and normal-mode ruby laser (NMRL) 
than in NMRL alone. They also showed a marked 
decrease  in  nevus  nests  at  the  dermal- epidermal 
junction, papillary and reticular dermis. In theory, 
millisecond-domain  pulses  are  more  appropriate 
than Q-switched pulses for treating thick lesions 
such as congenital nevi because they produce less 
selective thermal damage, destroying entire nests 
of  cells  rather  than  individual  pigmented  cells. 
Japanese  investigators  have  reported  impressive 
long-term clearing of congenital nevi treated with 
the  millisecond- domain  normal-mode  ruby  laser 
[24,  60].  However,  other  investigators  have 
reported poor results treating congenital nevi with 
both  Q-switched  and  normal  mode  ruby  lasers 
[61]. Long-pulse ruby lasers also offer the poten-
tial to reduce the amount of hair within congenital 
nevi. In Japanese studies, no histological or clini-
cal  evidence  of  malignancy  has  been  demon-
strated up to 8 years after normal-mode ruby laser 
treatment  [24,  60].  However,  since  congenital 
nevi  have  the  potential  to  transform  into  malig-
nant melanoma, and residual nevus cells persist in 
the  dermis  after  laser  treatment,  cautious  long-
term  follow-up  of  nevi  treated  with  lasers  is 
required.

Both continuous wave lasers [62, 63] and the 
QSRL  [64]  have  been  used  to  treat  lentigo 
maligna. Nonetheless, there are several reports of 
lentigo  maligna  recurring  following  laser  treat-
ment, probably due to persistence of melanocytes 
within deeper adnexal structures [65, 66]. Laser 
treatment of lentigo maligna should be reserved 
for extreme situations where surgical excision is 
not  feasible  due  to  large  lesion  size,  advanced 
patient  age,  or  underlying  medical  condition. 
Close follow-up to detect any early recurrence is 
critical.

 Nevus of Ota
Nevus of Ota (also known as oculodermal mela-
noma  or  nevus  fuscoceruleus  ophthalmomaxil-
laris)  is  a  mottled,  blue-grey  macule  that  is 
usually  located  unilaterally  within  the  distribu-
tion  of  the  first  and  second  branches  of  the  tri-
geminal  nerve.  Lesions  usually  occur  in  a  5:1 
female to male ratio. Asians are most commonly 
affected, with an incidence of 1 in 500 reported in 

Japan [67]. Nevus of Ota is congenital in about 
50% of cases, with others appearing by the sec-
ond  decade  of  life.  Nevus  of  Ota  may  affect 
mucosal  surfaces  such  as  cornea,  sclera,  nasal 
and  buccal  mucosa,  and  tympanic  membrane. 
Histologically,  elongated  dendritic  melanocytes 
are scattered within the upper dermis. The occur-
rence of melanoma within nevus of Ota has been 
reported [68] but is rare.

Q-switched  lasers  are  extremely  helpful  in 
treating Nevus of Ota. The degree of lightening is 
usually  directly  proportional  to  the  number  of 
treatments  performed.  Lightening  of  70%  or 
more has been reported in the majority of patients 
treated  four  or  five  times  with  the  QSRL  [69] 
(Fig.  6.10).  Post-treatment  dyspigmentation 
occurs occasionally, although textural change has 
not  been  reported.  Post-treatment  biopsies  have 
revealed  disintegration  of  melanocytes  up  to  a 
depth  of  1.5  mm  from  the  skin  surface  [69]. 
While the QSRL has been most widely used [69–
73], the Q-switched alexandrite [74] and Nd:YAG 
[26] 
lasers  seem  as  effective.  Large-scale 
 comparative trials between these lasers have not 
been performed.

in 

later 

Acquired  nevus  of  Ota-like  macules  (also 
known  as  Hori’s  nevus)  differ  from  the  classic 
nevus  of  Ota  in  that  they  are  bilateral,  spare 
mucosa,  and  occur 
life.  Various 
Q-switched lasers have been reported effective in 
treating  nevus  of  Ota-like  macules  [75–77]. 
Mauskiatti et al. demonstrated greater clearing of 
bilateral nevus of Ota like macules with a combi-
nation  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  and  Q-switched 
ruby  laser  (QSRL)  treatment  than  with  QSRL 
alone  [76].  Laser  treatment  of  any  pigmented 
lesion is often complicated by post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation. A recent study of Q-switched 
Nd:YAG treatment for acquired nevus of Ota-like 
macules suggests that epidermal cooling may be 
associated  with  an  increased  risk  of  post- 
inflammatory hyperpigmentation [78].

 Melasma and Post-inflammatory 
Hyperpigmentation
Melasma is a common acquired hyperpigmenta-
tion, most often affecting adult females with skin 
type III or higher. It occurs as brown to blue-grey 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



a

b

97

Fig. 6.10  (a) A patient with a dark nevus of Ota extend-
ing over a significant portion of the face prior to treatment. 
(b) After a series of treatments with the Q-switched ruby 

laser, there is impressive lightening of the lesion with no 
textural change

macules most frequently on the cheeks, forehead, 
upper lip, nose, and chin. It is associated with sun 
exposure, pregnancy, and use of oral contracep-
tives,  although  it  can  also  be  seen  in  patients 
without  any  predisposing  factor.  Melasma  can 
have  increased  melanin  in  either  the  epidermis, 
dermis  or  both.  Initial  management  consists  of 
discontinuing  any  oral  contraceptives  or  hor-
monal  replacement,  and  strict  sun  avoidance. 
Hydroquinone alone or in combination with topi-
cal corticosteroids or retinoids is the mainstay of 
treatment. Azeleic  acid,  kojic  acid,  and  superfi-
cial  chemical  peels  also  provide  some  benefit. 
Melasma with dermal melanin is the most diffi-
cult  to  treat.  Post  inflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion  has  a  similar  clinical  and  histology 
morphology as melasma, but develops following 
cutaneous 
inflammatory  process. 
Studies  have  shown  that  Q-switched  lasers  are 
largely  ineffective  in  the  treatment  of  melasma 
and  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  [26, 
79].  Q-switched  laser  treatment  may  actually 
cause  an  increase  in  dermal  melanophages  and 
worsening of hyperpigmentation. Carbon dioxide 
or  erbium:YAG  [80]  laser  resurfacing  provides 
an  alternative  treatment  modality  for  melasma, 
but  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
is 
extremely  frequent  in  the  postoperative  period 

injury  or 

and as a result these treatment modalities are not 
recommended. Some of the newer laser technolo-
gies,  such  as  the  fractionated  erbium  fiber  laser 
(Fraxel), can be useful in treating melasma [81, 
82].  A  study  of  ten  patients  showed  75–100% 
clearing  of  melasma  in  60%  of  patients  treated 
with the fractionated erbium fiber laser (Fraxel) 
[83]. These patients were treated at a low fluence 
but  a  high  density  of  microthermal  zones. 
Fractionated laser treatment may work by expel-
ling  columns  of  microscopic  epidermal  debris 
that contains melanin.

The 1927 nm thulium laser can also be used 
for  melasma  with  studies  demonstrating  varied 
success.  In  one  study,  over  half  of  the  subjects 
with melasma had at least a 50% improvement. 
However, a significant number of patients experi-
enced  rebound  of  their  melasma  in  the  months 
after their treatment [84].

Infraorbital  hyperpigmentation  (dark  circles) 
may result from a variety of causes, including der-
mal melanin deposition, post-inflammatory hyper-
pigmentation  from  atopic  or  allergic  contact 
dermatitis,  prominent  superficial  blood  vessels, 
and  shadowing  from  skin  laxity  and  infraorbital 
swelling  [74].  The  QSRL  has  been  reported  to 
effectively  treat  infraorbital  hyperpigmentation 
when  due  to  deposition  of  dermal  melanin  [85]. 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



98

lasers,  especially 

The  other  Q-switched 
the 
Q-switched  alexandrite  laser,  are  also  effective 
treatments. Improvement of this condition has also 
been reported following carbon dioxide laser resur-
facing [86] and the combination of carbon dioxide 
laser followed by Q-switched Alexandrite laser. In 
one study, a striking 75–100% clearing of perior-
bital  hyperpigmentation  was  noted  using  a  com-
bined  CO2  resurfacing  followed  immediately  by 
Q-switched  alexandrite 
treatment  [87]. 
Blepharoplasty may be indicated when infraorbital 
darkening is due to excessive skin laxity. Soft tissue 
augmentation with fillers may be beneficial if there 
is shadowing due to a hollow in the tear trough.

laser 

 Drug Induced Pigmentation
Minocycline therapy may cause localized or dif-
fuse mucocutaneous pigmentation. Minocycline- 
induced  pigmentation  occurs  in  approximately 
5% of acne vulgaris patients treated with the drug 
after  prolonged  use  [88]. Three  patterns  of  pig-
mentation  have  been  reported.  In  type  I,  focal 
blue-gray  pigmentation  occurs  in  inflamed  or 
scarred skin, often in acne scars. Histologic stud-
ies  show  pigment  within  dermal  macrophages 
that  stains  positively  for  melanin  and  iron  [89]. 
Types II and III consist of blue to brown discol-
oration  that  is  more  prominent  on  the  anterior 
shins  and  sun-exposed  areas, 
respectively. 
Histologically, epidermal and superficial dermal 
pigment  is  present  that  stains  for  both  melanin 
and iron in type II only for melanin [89] in type 

III.  Pigmentation  will  gradually  fade  after  dis-
continuation of minocycline, but may take years. 
The Q-switched ruby laser is effective in treating 
minocycline-induced pigmentation, with clearing 
occurring  after  one  to  four  treatment  sessions 
[90–92].  Successful  treatment  has  also  been 
reported with the Q-switched 532 nm, Q-switched 
alexandrite  [93]  (Fig.  6.11),  and  1064  nm 
Nd:YAG laser [94, 95], although the latter wave-
length has not proved effective in several reports 
[92,  94].  Amiodarone  (an  antiarrhythmic)  and 
imipramine  (an  antidepressant)  can  also  induce 
hyperpigmentation  and  have  been  treated  effec-
tively with the Q-switched ruby laser [96, 97]. In 
order  to  prevent  recurrences,  laser  treatment  of 
these  conditions  should  be  deferred  until  the 
offending medication has been discontinued and 
sufficient time has elapsed to allow most of the 
pigmentation to resolve spontaneously.

Q-switched  laser  treatment  may  induce  para-
doxical  hyperpigmentation  in  patients  receiving 
certain medications. In one report, localized chrysi-
asis developed in a patient on parenteral gold ther-
apy  who  underwent  treatment  with  a  Q-switched 
ruby  laser  for  post  inflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion  [98].  This  phenomenon  is  due  to  a  laser-
induced alteration in the physiochemical properties 
of dermal gold deposits. In the reported case, it was 
found that the induction of this change in pigmen-
tation  is  irradiance- dependent,  i.e.  related  to  the 
power delivered per unit area (W/cm2) rather than 
fluence-dependent.  It  was  concluded  that  any 

a

b

Fig. 6.11  (a) Minocycline pigmentation on the cheeks, upper lip, and chin. (b) Removal of pigmentation was achieved 
after four Q-switched alexandrite laser treatments (From Alster et al. [101], with permission of Wolters Kluwer.)

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



millisecond  laser  emitting  between  550  and 
850 nm should clear this pigment, and subsequent 
treatment  with  a  normal  mode  (3  ms)  ruby  laser 
resulted in substantial clearing [99].

 Techniques

•  It  is  important  to  obtain  a  medical  history 
prior  to  treatment  and  to  educate  patients 
about the potential outcomes.

•  Anesthesia  may  be  needed  for  larger  or  der-

mal pigmented lesions.

•  Appropriate protective eyewear should be on 

all persons in the room.

•  Laser  parameters  depend  on  the  particular 
laser,  the  patient’s  skin  phototype,  and  the 
type of lesion.

•  Adequate fluence will result in an immediate 

uniform ash white color.

•  Appropriate wound care is essential to ensur-
ing  good  outcomes.  An  occlusive  ointment 
should be applied and patients should be edu-
cated on the healing process.

 Pre-operative Management

 Patient Evaluation
A  general  medical  history  should  be  obtained 
prior to treatment, including medication history, 
information on wound healing (specifically a his-
tory  of  keloids),  any  bleeding  diatheses,  or  his-
tory of infectious diseases, particularly hepatitis 
and HIV infection. Patients with a recent history 
of isotretinoin use or a history of hypertrophic or 
keloidal scarring should be treated with caution 
because they may have a higher risk of scarring 
after laser treatment.

Before  treating  any  pigmented  lesion,  it  is 
imperative  to  correctly  diagnose  the  lesion  in 
question. A pre-treatment biopsy should be per-
formed  if  there  is  any  possibility  of  atypia  in  a 
pigmented  lesion  or  if  the  diagnosis  is  at  all  in 
question.  Once  the  correct  diagnosis  has  been 
established, the appropriate laser can be selected 
based on the probable depth and type of pigment 
in the skin and on the patient’s skin phototype.

99

Many  patients  are  ill  informed  and  harbour 
unrealistic expectations about the capabilities of 
laser  surgery.  Patients  should  be  fully  informed 
of  what  to  expect  from  each  treatment  and  the 
potential  side  effects.  It  is  vital  that  patients 
understand that it will most likely take multiple 
treatments  and  that  the  lesion  may  not  clear 
entirely. Pre-treatment photographs are essential 
to document lesions prior to treatment.

 Anesthesia
The need for anesthesia when treating pigmented 
lesions depends on the location, size and depth of 
the  lesion  as  well  as  the  pain  threshold  of  the 
patient. The sensation of a laser pulse at the low 
fluences which are used for epidermal pigmented 
lesions  such  as  lentigines  has  been  likened  to  a 
rubber  band  snapping  against  the  skin  surface. 
The higher fluences used in the treatment of der-
mal pigmented lesions such as nevus of Ota pro-
duce  more  discomfort  and  are  more  likely  to 
require  some  type  of  anesthesia.  When  limited 
areas  are  treated,  such  as  scattered  lentigines, 
many patients require no anesthesia at all. For the 
treatment  of  larger  pigmented  lesions,  one  or 
more of the following anesthetic techniques may 
be  required:  topical  anesthesia  (e.g.,  LMX-5 
cream),  local  infiltration  of  lidocaine  with  or 
without epinephrine, regional nerve block, or oral 
or intramuscular sedation. In many children and 
rarely in adults, intravenous sedation or general 
anesthesia may be necessary.

 Safety
Laser  safety  concerns  can  be  divided  into  beam 
hazards, which are related to direct beam impact, 
and  non-beam  hazards,  such  as  plume  hazards. 
Beam hazards can include fire, thermal burns, and 
ocular damage. The room should be designed in 
such  a  way  that  all  reflective  surfaces  and  win-
dows  are  covered,  the  door  is  locked  from  the 
inside, appropriate signs are posted, and no flam-
mable  materials  or  anesthetics  are  present. 
Flammability can occur when the laser is used in 
the  presence  of  oxygen  (e.g.  nasal  cannula). 
Drapes, towels and sponges may also be flamma-
ble and to avoid this wet or non-flammable mate-
rial should be used. A nonflammable, water- based 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



100

lubricant such as Surgilube or K-Y Jelly should be 
applied to the eyebrows to avoid singeing the hair.
Ocular risks may be encountered when the eye 
is exposed directly in the laser beam’s path or indi-
rectly  by  a  reflected  beam.  Recalling  basic  geo-
metric optics, a parallel beam of light (i.e. a laser) 
that enters a convex element, such as the cornea, 
will be focused down to a smaller geometric point. 
This  of  course  concentrates  all  the  power  in  the 
beam into a much smaller spot, and results in an 
infinite  irradiance  causing  more  damage.  Laser 
light in the visible to near infrared spectrum (i.e., 
400–1400 nm) can cause damage to the retina that 
is  painless  at  the  time  of  injury.  For  this  reason, 
this spectrum of light is also known as the “retinal 
hazard region”. Without eye protection, observing 
a  laser  beam  in  the  visible  spectrum  of  light  is 
detected  as  a  bright  color  flash  of  the  emitted 
wavelength and an after- image of its complemen-
tary color (e.g., a green 532 nm laser light would 
produce  a  green  flash  followed  by  a  red  after-
image). When the retina is affected, there may be 
difficulty in detecting blue or green colors second-
ary to cone damage, and pigmentation of the retina 
may  be  detected.  Exposure  to  the  Q-switched 
Nd:YAG laser beam (1064 nm) is especially haz-
ardous  and  may  initially  go  undetected  because 
the  beam  is  invisible  (in  the  near-infrared  spec-
trum)  and  the  retina  lacks  pain  sensory  nerves. 
Photoacoustic  retinal  damage  may  be  associated 
with  an  audible  “pop”  at  the  time  of  exposure. 
Visual  disorientation  due  to  retinal  damage  may 
not be apparent to the operator until considerable 
thermal damage has occurred. Laser light in the far 
infrared  (1400–10,600  nm)  spectrum  can  cause 
damage to the cornea and/or to the lens because of 
its  preferential  absorption  of  water.  Exposure  to 
the 
laser  beam 
(10,600 nm) can be detected by a burning pain at 
the site of exposure on the cornea or sclera.

invisible  carbon  dioxide 

All  persons  in  the  room  should  wear  protec-
tive goggles with the correct optical density for 
the specific laser wavelength. When treating the 
face, the patient should wear snug metal goggles. 
If the immediate periocular area is to be treated, 
protective  metal  eye  shields  should  be  inserted 
over the conjunctiva after application of a topical 
ophthalmic anesthetic agent.

Q-switched  laser  pulses  may  produce  a  sig-
nificant amount of blood and tissue splatter, espe-
cially  the  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser.  This  is  not 
really  an  issue  when  treating  epidermal  pig-
mented lesions but is of more significance treat-
ing dermal lesions. Use of universal precautions 
is  mandatory,  including  use  of  gloves,  goggles, 
and laser masks. The protective plastic cone pro-
vided with most Q-switched lasers should always 
be attached to the handpiece before use to mini-
mize tissue splatter and keep tissue debris off the 
handpiece lens. The plastic cone must be placed 
in direct contact with the skin to efficiently trap 
tissue debris. To minimize tissue splatter, pulses 
may be delivered through a clear hydrogel dress-
ing (e.g., Tegaderm, Second Skin) placed on the 
skin, although this reduces transmission of light 
into the skin and raises the risk of ocular injury 
from reflection of light off the dressing surface. 
Vacuum  suction  is  useless  at  capturing  tissue 
splatter because it leaves the surface of the skin 
far too rapidly—faster than the speed of sound. 
Although there have been no cases of transmis-
sion, the presence of HIV proviral DNA has been 
demonstrated  in  the  laser  plume  generated  by 
carbon dioxide laser irradiation of HIV-infected 
tissue culture [100].

All makeup and sunscreen should be removed 
from the area to be treated, as these products will 
prevent transmission of light to the skin surface. 
Furthermore,  many  of  these  products  contain 
metal-based  salts  and  oxides  (such  as  titanium 
dioxide)  that  may  ignite  following  exposure  to 
Q-switched laser pulses.

 Description of the Technique

Q-switched  lasers  should  always  be  calibrated 
prior  to  treatment  and  should  be  placed  in 
standby  mode  until  ready  for  use.  The  laser 
handpiece  should  be  held  perpendicular  to  the 
skin with the attached plastic cone or guide rest-
ing on the skin to ensure that the laser beam is 
focused on the area to be treated. Exact param-
eters vary depending on the particular laser, the 
patient’s  Fitzpatrick  skin  type,  and  the  type  of 
lesion  (Table  6.2).  In  general,  lower  fluence  is 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



101

used for dark lesions that contain larger amounts 
of absorbing chromophore.

One or two laser pulses should be fired at the 
lesion to ensure that a threshold response occurs, 
which is defined as immediate whitening of the 
lesion.  The  optimal  tissue  end  point  is  uniform 
but faint immediate whitening without epidermal 
disruption. The lowest fluence required to invoke 
this response should be used. When the fluence is 
too low, the whitening will be barely noticeable. 
If using subthreshold fluences, post- inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation due to stimulation of melano-
genesis can result. If the fluence is too high, whit-
ening is a confluent bright white, and epidermal 
damage with bleeding may occur. This may result 
in tissue sloughing, prolonged healing, and also a 
greater  likelihood  of  post-inflammatory  hyper-
pigmentation  or  hypopigmentation  or  textural 
changes. After the optimal fluence is determined, 
pulses  can  be  delivered  rapidly  (up  to  10  Hz, 
depending  on  the  laser),  with  overlapping  of 
about 10% to ensure confluent whitening.

In  most  cases,  additional  treatment  sessions 
may be safely performed 6 weeks after the original 

treatment.  While  some  pigmented  lesions  (e.g., 
lentigines) may require only one to two treatments, 
other lesions (e.g., Café au lait macules) may need 
multiple  treatments.  Another  approach  to  tattoo 
removal  is  to  perform  several  treatments  on  the 
same day at intervals of 20 min. This is referred to 
as the R20 method. With this method, the typical 
immediate whitening reaction will occur with the 
first laser pass, but there will be little or no whiten-
ing with subsequent passes. There is more epider-
mal  damage  utilizing  the  R20  method  than  with 
the  traditional  single  pass  method. This  theoreti-
cally  increases  the  risk  of  scarring  with  the  R20 
method but scarring has not been observed in clin-
ical trials. One study demonstrated that 3 months 
after  treatment  with  the  R20  method,  the  R20 
method  was  more  efficacious  than  the  conven-
tional single-pass laser treatment [101].

Unlike  dermal  pigmented  lesions,  epidermal 
pigmented lesions can be treated with millisecond 
domain  lasers  and  intense  pulsed  light  devices. 
The  clinical  endpoint  of  treatment  with  these 
devices  is  significantly  different  from  that  seen 
after  Q-switched  laser  treatment.  Immediately 

Table 6.2  Standard treatment parameters for pigmented lesions

Lesion
Lentigines

Café au lait macules

Becker’s nevus

Nevus spilus

Nevus of Ota

QS Q-switched

Laser
QS ruby
QS Nd:YAG (532 nm)
QS alexandrite
Pulsed dye (510 nm)
QS ruby
QS Nd:YAG (532 nm)
QS alexandrite
Pulsed dye (510 nm)
QS ruby
QS Nd:YAG (532 nm)
QS Nd:YAG 
(1,064 nm)
QS alexandrite
QS ruby
QS Nd:YAG (532 nm)
QS Nd:YAG 
(1,064 nm)
QS alexandrite
QS ruby
QS Nd:YAG 
(1,064 nm)
QS alexandrite

4–8 weeks

Spot size (mm) Fluence (J/cm2) Retreatment interval (weeks)
6.5
3
4
3
6.5
3
4
5
6.5
3
3

2.0–4.0
0.7–1.0
3.5–5.5
2.5
3.0–4.5
1.0–1.5
2.5–4.5
2.0–3.5
3.0–4.5
1.5–1.8
4.0–5.0

4–8 weeks

4–8 weeks

4
6.5
3
3

3
6.5
3

3

3.5–5.0
3.0–4.5
1.5–2.0
4.0–4.4

5.0–6.0
5.0–6.0
4.0–7.0

5.5–6.5

4–8 weeks

6–12 weeks

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



102

after treatment there is a slight darkening of len-
tigines,  although  lighter  lentigines  may  remain 
unchanged.  A  faint  erythema  may  also  be 
observed  at  the  periphery  of  darker  lentigines. 
After  treatment,  pigmented  lesions  develop  a 
slight dark scale, which flakes away in a few days. 
Active skin cooling is used during treatment with 
most  IPL  devices  to  protect  the  epidermis  from 
excessive thermal injury. Multiple treatment ses-
sions with IPL are required for optimal clearing of 
epidermal  pigmented  lesions.  Lighter  lentigines, 
which contain less of the melanin chromophore, 
may be more resistant to IPL treatment and may 
respond better to Q-switched laser treatment.

In general, dermal lesions require higher flu-
ences  than  epidermal  lesions.  Larger  spot  sizes 
have a greater depth of penetration, and are pre-
ferred to smaller ones. To achieve the same effect 
in the dermis, a larger spot size will require lower 
energy and therefore be gentler on the epidermis 
and dermal-epidermal junction.

Lower  fluences  should  be  used  in  the  treat-
ment of patients with darker skin types, since the 
threshold  response  will  likely  occur  at  a  lower 
fluence. When  treating  both  epidermal  and  der-
mal pigmented lesions, patients with darker skin 
are at greater risk for postoperative hyperpigmen-
tation or hypopigmentation. It may be preferable 
to  use  a  longer  wavelength  device,  such  as  the 
1064 nm Nd:YAG laser, since longer wavelengths 
penetrate more deeply than shorter wavelengths 
and produce relatively less epidermal damage for 
the  same  dermal  effect.  Patients  with  “suntans” 
should not be treated because they are at risk of 
spotty  hypopigmentation,  which  can  last  for 
weeks to months after treatment.

Topical  anesthesia  is  required  for  fractional 
non-ablative treatments. The 1927 Thulium laser 
is best suited for w epidermal pigmented lesions. 
Topical  anesthesia  usually  left  on  for  an  hour 
prior  to  treatment. Air  cooling  during  treatment 
makes  the  procedure  far  better  tolerated.  After 
treatment ice is applied for an hour to reduce dis-
comfort which lasts about an hour and then dis-
sipated completely. Redness and swelling last an 
average of 3 days. Bronzing starts on day 2 and 
lasts 3–5 days, longer after the first treatment.

 Post-operative Management

The  white  tissue  reaction  that  occurs  immedi-
ately  after  Q-switched  laser  treatment  fades 
within  20  min.  An  urticarial  reaction,  causing 
erythema,  edema,  itching,  and  stinging,  may 
develop in and around the treated area. This may 
last for several hours and can be treated, but not 
prevented, by taking an antihistamine preopera-
tively.  In  all  patients,  the  treated  lesions  appear 
darker for several days then develop a thin crust 
that flakes off in 7–10 days. The amount of crust-
ing that occurs depends on the aggressiveness of 
treatment.  Overly  aggressive  treatment  may 
result in vesiculation or frank blistering. The risk 
of blistering is highest when shorter wavelength 
devices  (e.g.,  QSRL)  are  used  to  treat  patients 
with  dark  skin  phototypes.  Following  treatment 
with  the  Q-switched  532  nm  Nd:YAG,  purpura 
usually develops after skin whitening has faded. 
This occurs because these wavelengths are well 
absorbed by both melanin and hemoglobin, caus-
ing  rupture  of  blood  vessels.  Purpura  lasts  for 
5–10 days, and is a notable disadvantage of treat-
ment  with  the  above  devices.  Purpura  can  be 
minimized  by  treating  through  a  microscope 
slide  held  firmly  against  the  skin  to  compress 
blood  vessels  and  remove  hemoglobin  as  a 
target.

Postoperative discomfort may be treated with 
application  of  cold  water-soaked  gauze,  ice 
packs,  or  a  hydroocclusive  dressing  such  as 
Second  Skin  or Vigilon. Analgesics  are  usually 
not  needed. Antihistamines  may  be  given  if  the 
patient has an urticarial reaction. Patients should 
be instructed to gently wash the treated area with 
mild soap and apply an occlusive ointment (e.g., 
petrolatum or Aquaphor Healing Ointment) twice 
a day. Any crusting should be allowed to slough 
spontaneously. To minimize the risk of hyperpig-
mentation and recurrence, patients should avoid 
excessive sun exposure and use a broad-spectrum 
sunscreen of SPF 30 or higher for several months 
after treatment.

Because  dermal  lesions  typically  require  the 
use of higher fluences, postoperative changes are 
more  apparent.  In  addition  to  the  whitening 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



response, erythema and swelling are usually seen 
in the immediate postoperative period, especially 
in the periorbital region.

 Adverse Events

•  Post-inflammatory 

hyperpigmentation, 
hypopigmentation,  an  inadequate  response 
and recurrence of the lesion are the most com-
mon side effects.

•  Using  the  appropriate  laser  and  fluence  can 

reduce side effects.

•  Educating patients regarding realistic expecta-
tions can help to reduce patient frustration and 
complications.

103

respectively. For many reasons, it is important to 
take  quality  pre-treatment  photographs  from 
multiple  angles.  Photographs  can  be  used  to 
judge improvement, document baseline findings, 
and  may  have  medico  legal  importance.  It  is 
important  for  patients 
to  have  a  realistic 
 understanding  of  potential  outcomes  prior  to 
beginning laser treatment. Potential laser candi-
dates should be educated regarding the need for 
multiple treatments and should be made aware of 
possible  side  effects.  This  patient  education 
should be documented in the patient chart. Side 
effects and expectations should be reinforced in 
writing on the consent form.

 Future Directions

 Side Effects/Complications

•  Femtosecond (10−15) domain lasers are being 

Post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  is  not  a 
rare side effect when treating pigmented lesions, 
and is especially common in treating darker skin 
types. Subthreshold fluences can stimulate mela-
nogenesis  in  dark  skinned  patients. While  post- 
inflammatory hyperpigmentation is benign, it can 
last several months and can be cosmetically both-
ersome. Topical hydroquinone containing creams 
are  usually 
the 
hyperpigmentation.

lightening 

effective 

in 

Although less common than post- inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation,  hypopigmentation  can  also 
occur, particularly when treating tanned patients. 
For  this  reason,  tanned  patients  should  not  be 
treated.

A  sub-optimal  response  to  laser  treatment  is 
another  unwelcome  outcome.  Most  pigmented 
lesions require multiple treatments and some are 
prone to recurrence.

 Prevention and Treatment of Side 
Effects/Complications

Hyperpigmentation  and  hypopigmentation  can 
be  avoided  by  treating  with  appropriately  high 
fluences  and  by  not  treating  tanned  patients, 

developed.

•  Pico  second  (10−12)  domain  lasers  currently 
used for tattoo removal are being investigated 
for pigmented lesion removal.

•  Enhanced effectiveness with less side effects 
in treating pigmented disorders in patients of 
color

Manufacturers  and  scientists  continue  to 
refine and optimize the current laser systems to 
enhance  outcomes  with  fewer  side  effects.  By 
adding  cooling  to  many  treatments  systems  the 
risk of problems of pigmentation after treatment 
have  decreased.  Encouraging  work  is  presently 
being  done  on  lasers  with  even  shorter  pulse 
durations  than  typical  Q-switched  lasers.  Pulse 
durations  in  the  pico  (10−12)  and  femtosecond 
(10−15) domains may be more effective in disrupt-
ing pigment in resistant tattoos than the typically 
used shorter pulse durations.

 Conclusions
Pigmented  lesions  are  an  exceedingly  com-
mon  occurrence,  and  often  are  cosmetically 
disturbing  to  the  patient.  Topical  treatment 
options are ineffective for almost all of these 
conditions  and  surgical  treatment  options 
often produce unacceptable results. Laser and 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



104

light therapy is often the preferred manner to 
diminish  a  variety  of  pigmented  lesions  and 
disorders of pigmentation. In order to obtain 
the optimal outcome,  the  physician  needs to 
select  the  proper  light  source,  the  correct 
patient  and  skin  characteristics  and  provide 
appropriate  wound  care  to  achieve  optimal 
results. Thought should be given to the depth 
of the lesion, the patient’s skin phototype, and 
the  laser  or  light  device  parameters.  Despite 
the efficacy of laser and light treatments, they 
are  not  without  potential  side  effects  and 
complications.  Prior  to  beginning  treatment, 
both the physician and the patient should be 
well  aware  of  the  limitations  and  disadvan-
tages  of  laser  therapy.  Nevertheless,  with  a 
thoughtful 
treatment  plan  and  adequate 
patient education, treating pigmented lesions 
with  laser  therapy  can  result  in  a  successful 
outcome.

References

  1.  Goldman  L,  Blaney  DJ,  Kindel  DJ,  Franke 
EK. Effect of the laser beam on the skin: preliminary 
report. J Invest Dermatol. 1963;40:121–2.

  2.  Goldman  L,  Wilson  RG,  Hornby  P,  Meyer 
RG.  Radiation  from  a  Q-switched  ruby  laser: 
effect  of  repeated  impacts  of  power  output  of  10 
megawatts  on  a  tattoo  of  man.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
1965;44:69–71.

  3.  Ohshiro  T,  Maruyama  Y.  The  ruby  and  argon 
lasers  in  the  treatment  of  naevi.  Ann  Acad  Med. 
1983;12:388–95.

  4.  Dover JS, Smoller BR, Stein RS, et al. Low-fluence 
carbon  dioxide  laser  irradiation  of  lentigines. Arch 
Dermatol. 1988;124:1219–24.

  5.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermoly-
sis: precise microsurgery by selective absorption of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

  6.  Polla LL, Margolis RJ, Dover JS, et al. Melanosomes 
are  a  primary  target  of  Q-switched  ruby  laser  irra-
diation  in  guinea  pig  skin.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
1987;89:281–6.

  7.  Levins PC, Anderson RR. Q-switched ruby laser for 
the treatment of pigmented lesions and tattoos. Clin 
Dermatol. 1995;13:75–9.

  8.  Taylor  CR, Anderson  RR,  Gange  RW,  et  al.  Light 
and electron microscopic analysis of tattoos treated 
by  Q-switched  ruby  laser.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
1991;97:131–6.

  9.  Ara G, Anderson RR, Mandel KG, et al. Irradiation 
of  pigmented  melanoma  cells  with  high  intensity 

pulsed radiation generates acoustic waves and kills 
cells. Lasers Surg Med. 1990;10:52–9.

  10.  Dover  JS,  Margolis  RJ,  Polla  LL,  et  al.  Pigmented 
guinea  pig  skin  irradiated  with  Q-switched  ruby 
laser pulses. Arch Dermatol. 1989;125:43–9.

  11.  Kossida T, Farinelli W, Flotte T, et al. Mechanism of 
immediate whitening during tattoo Removal. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2006;18:70.

  12.  Margolis RJ, Dover JS, Polla LL, et al. Visible action 
spectrum  for  melanin-specific  selective  photother-
molysis. Lasers Surg Med. 1989;9:389–97.

  13.  Anderson  RR,  Margolis  RJ,  Watenabe  S,  et  al. 
Selective  photothermolysis  of  cutaneous  pigmenta-
tion  by  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  pulses  at  1064, 
532, and 355 nm. J Invest Dermatol. 1989;93:28–32.
  14.  Hruza  GJ,  Dover  JS,  Flotte  TJ,  et  al.  Q-switched 
ruby  laser  irradiation  of  normal  human  skin. Arch 
Dermatol. 1991;127:1799–805.

  15.  Murphy GF, Shepard RS, Paul BS, et al. Organelle- 
specific 
in 
human skin by pulsed laser irradiation. Lab Invest. 
1983;49:680–5.

to  melanin-containing  cells 

injury 

  16.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. The optics of human skin. 

J Invest Dermatol. 1981;77:13–9.

  17.  Sherwood KA, Murray S, Kurban AK, Tan OT. Effect 
of  wavelength  on  cutaneous  pigment  using  pulsed 
irradiation. J Invest Dermatol. 1989;92:717–20.
  18.  Nakamura Y,  Hossain  M,  Hirayama  K,  Matsumoto 
K. A clinical study on the removal of gingival mela-
nin  pigmentation  with  the  CO2  laser.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 1999;25:140–7.

  19.  Polder KD, Bruce S. Treatment of melasma using a 
novel 1,927-nm fractional thulium fiber laser: a pilot 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2012;38:199–206.

  20.  Saedi  N,  Metelitsa A,  Petrell  K, Arndt  KA,  Dover 
JS.  Treatment  of  Tattoos  With  a  Picosecond 
Alexandrite  Laser:  A  Prospective  Trial.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2012;148(12):1360–3.

  21.  Brauer  JA,  Reddy  KK, Anolik  R,  et  al.  Successful 
and  rapid  treatment  of  blue  and  green  tattoo  pig-
ment with a novel picosecond laser. Arch Dermatol. 
2012;148(7):820–3.

  22.  Ross  EV,  Ladin  Z,  Kreindel  M,  Dierickx 
C. Theoretical considerations in laser hair removal. 
Dermatol Clin. 1999;17:333–55.

  23.  Kono  T,  Manstein  D,  Chan  HH.  Q-switched  ruby 
versus  long-pulsed  dye  laser  delivered  with  com-
pression for treatment of facial lentigines in Asians. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38(2):94–7.

  24.  Ueda  S,  Imayama  S.  Normal-mode  ruby  laser 
treating  congenital  nevi.  Arch  Dermatol. 

for 
1997;133:355–9.

  25.  Taylor CR, Anderson RR. Treatment of benign pig-
mented epidermal lesions by Q-switched ruby laser. 
Int J Dermatol. 1993;32:908–12.

  26.  Tse  Y,  Levine  VJ,  McClain  SA,  Ashinoff  R.  The 
removal  of  cutaneous  pigmented 
lesions  with 
the  Q-switched  ruby  laser  and  the  Q-switched 
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet 
J 
Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1994;20:795–800.

laser. 

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



  27.  Kilmer SL, Wheeland RG, Goldberg DJ, Anderson 
RR. Treatment of epidermal pigmented lesions with 
the  frequency-doubled  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser. 
Arch Dermatol. 1994;130:1515–9.

  28.  Fitzpatrick RE, Goldman MP, Ruiz-Esparza J. Laser 
treatment  of  benign  pigmented  epidermal  lesions 
using a 300 nsecond pulse and 510 nm wavelength. J 
Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1993;18:341–7.

  29.  Ashinoff R, Geronemus RG. Q-switched ruby laser 
treatment  of  labial  lentigos.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
1992;27:809–11.

  30.  Gupta  G,  MacKay  IR,  MacKie  RM.  Q-switched 
ruby laser in the treatment of labial melanotic mac-
ules. Lasers Surg Med. 1999;25:219–22.

  31.  Yung-Tsai  L,  Kao-Chia  Y.  Comparison  of  the 
frequency- doubled  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  and 
35%  trichloroacetic  acid  for  the  treatment  of  face 
lentigines. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:202–4.

  32.  Todd  M,  Rallis  T,  Hata  T.  A  comparison  of  three 
lasers  and  liquid  nitrogen  in  the  treatment  of  solar 
lentigines:  a  randomized,  controlled,  comparative 
trial. Arch Dermatol. 2000;50:536–40.

  33.  Alster TS, Tanzi EL, Welsh EC. Photorejuvenation 
of  facial  skin  with  topical  20%  5-aminolevu-
linic  acid  and  intense  pulsed  light  treatment:  a 
split-face  comparison  study.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2005;4:35–8.

  34.  Dover J, Arndt K, Bhatia A, Stewart B. Adjunctive 
use  of  topical  aminolevulinic  acid  with  intense 
pulsed  light  in  the  treatment  of  photoaging.  J  Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2005;52:795–803.

  35.  Gold MH, Bradshaw VL, Boring MM, Bridges TM, 
Biron  JA.  Split-face  comparison  of  photodynamic 
therapy  with  5-aminolevulinic  acid  and  intense 
pulsed  light  versus  intense  pulsed  light  alone  for 
photodamage. Dermatol Surg. 2006;32(6):795–801.
  36.  Polder KD, Harrison A, Eubanks LE, Bruce S. 1,927- 
nm  fractional  thulium  fiber  laser  for  the  treatment 
of  nonfacial  photodamage:  a  pilot  study.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2011;37:342–8.

  37.  Tekin  M,  Bodurtha  JN,  Riccardi VM.  Café  au  lait 
spots:  the  pediatrician’s  perspective.  Pediatr  Rev. 
2001;22:82–90.

  38.  Grossman  MC,  Anderson  RR,  Farinelli  W,  et  al. 
Treatment  of  cafe  au  lait  macules  with  lasers:  a 
clinicopathologic  correlation.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1995;131:1416–20.

  39.  Alster  TS.  Complete  elimination  of  large  cafe-au- 
lait birthmarks by the 510-nm pulsed dye laser. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1995;96:1660.

  40.  Alora  MB,  Arndt  KA.  Successful  treatment  of  a 
cafe-au-lait macule with the erbium:YAG laser. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2000;45:566.

  41.  Goldberg DJ. Benign pigmented lesions of the skin. 

J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1993;19:376–9.

  42.  Rosio  TJ.  Techniques  for  tattoo  removal.  In: 
surgery. 

Wheeland  RG, 
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1994. p. 982–97.
  43.  Kobayashi  T.  Microsurgical  treatment  of  nevus  of 
Ota. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1991;17:936–41.

editor.  Cutaneous 

105

  44.  Clabaugh WA. Tattoo removal by superficial derm-
abrasion: five year experience. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1975;55:401–5.

  45.  Koerber  WA,  Price  NM.  Salabrasion  of  tattoos:  a 
correlation  of  the  clinical  and  histological  results. 
Arch Dermatol. 1978;114:884–8.

  46.  Dvir  E,  Hirshowitz  B.  Tattoo  removal  by  cryosur-

gery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1980;66:373–8.

  47.  Cosman B, Apfelberg DB, Drucker D. An effective 
cosmetic treatment for Ota’s nevus. Ann Plast Surg. 
1989;22:36–42.

  48.  Reid R, Muller S. Tattoo removal by CO2 laser derm-
abrasion. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1980;65:717–28.
  49.  van  Leeuwen  RL,  Dekker  SW,  Byers  HR,  et  al. 
Modulation  of  α4β1  and  α5β1  integrin  expression: 
heterogenous effects of Q-switched ruby, Nd:YAG, 
and  alexandrite  lasers  on  melanoma  cells  in  vitro. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1996;18:63–71.

  50.  Chan  HH,  Xiang  K.  L,  Leung  et  al.  In  vitro  study 
examining the effect of sub-lethal QS 755 nm lasers 
on  the  expression  of  p161nk4a  on  melanoma  cell 
lines. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32(2):88–93.

  51.  Dummer  R,  Kempf W,  Burg  G.  Pseudo-melanoma 
after laser therapy. Dermatology. 1998;197:71–3.
  52.  Grevelink  JM,  van  Leeuwen  RL,  Anderson  RR, 
Byers  R.  Clinical  and  histological  responses  of 
congenital  melanocytic  nevi  after  single  treat-
ment  with  Q-switched  lasers.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1997;133:349–53.

  53.  Goldberg  DJ,  Zeichner  JA,  Hodulik  SG,  et  al. 
Q-switched laser irradiation of pigmented nevi: anal-
ysis of markers for malignant transformation. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2006;18:18.

  54.  Vibhagool C, Byers R, Grevelink JM. Treatment of 
small nevomelanocytic nevi with a Q-switched ruby 
laser. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36:738–41.
  55.  Rosenbach A, Williams CM, Alster TS. Comparison 
of 
the  Q-switched  alexandrite  (755  nm)  and 
Q-switched Nd:YAG (1064 nm) lasers in the treat-
ment  of  benign  melanocytic  nevi.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1997;23:239–45.

  56.  Duke  D,  Byers  R,  Sober  AJ,  et  al.  Treatment 
of  benign  and  atypical  nevi  with  the  normal-
mode  ruby  laser  and  the  Q-switched  ruby  laser: 
clinical  improvement  but  failure  to  completely 
eliminate  nevomelanocytes.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1999;135:290–6.

  57.  Baba  M,  Bal  N.  Efficacy  and  safety  of  the  short- 
pulse  erbium:YAG  laser  in  the  treatment  of 
acquired  melanocytic  nevi.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2006;32:256–60.

  58.  Milgraum SS, Cohen ME, Auletta MJ. Treatment of 
blue nevi with the Q-switched ruby laser. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 1995;32:307–10.

  59.  Waldorf  HA,  Kauvar  ANB,  Geronemus 
RG.  Treatment  of  small  and  medium  congenital 
nevi with the Q-switched ruby laser. Arch Dermatol. 
1996;132:301–4.

  60.  Imayama  S,  Ueda  S.  Long-  and  short-term  his-
tological  observations  of  congenital  nevi  treated 

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



106

with  the  normal-mode  ruby  laser.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1999;135:1211–8.

bilateral nevus of Ota-like macules. Arch Dermatol. 
2007;143(9):1139–43.

  61.  Helsing P, Mork G, Sveen B. Ruby laser treatment 
of congenital melanocytic nevi – a pessimistic view. 
Acta Derm Venereol. 2006;86(3):235–7.

  62.  Arndt KA. Argon laser treatment of lentigo maligna. 

J Am Acad Dermatol. 1984;10:953–7.

  63.  Kopera  D.  Treatment  of  lentigo  maligna  with 
laser.  Arch  Dermatol. 

the  carbon  dioxide 
1995;131:735–6.

  64.  Thissen  M,  Westerhof  W.  Lentigo  maligna  treated 

with ruby laser. Acta Derm Venereol. 1997;77:163.

  65.  Arndt  KA.  New  pigmented  macule  appearing  4 
years after argon laser treatment of lentigo maligna. 
J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;14:1092.

  66.  Lee PK, Rosenberg CN, Tsao H, Sober AJ. Failure 
of  Q-switched  ruby  laser  to  eradicate  atypical- 
appearing  solar  lentigo:  report  of  two  cases.  J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1998;38:314–7.

  67.  Hidano A, Kajama H, Ikeda S, et al. Natural history 
of nevus of Ota. Arch Dermatol. 1967;95:187–95.
  68.  Jay  B.  Malignant  melanoma  of  the  orbit  in  a  case 
of  oculodermal  melanocytosis  (nevus  of  Ota).  Br  J 
Ophthalmol. 1965;49:359.

  69.  Watanabe  S,  Takahashi  H.  Treatment  of  nevus  of 
Ota with the Q-switched ruby laser. N Engl J Med. 
1994;331:1745–50.

  70.  Geronemus  RG.  Q-switched  ruby  laser  therapy  of 
nevus of Ota. Arch Dermatol. 1992;128:1618–22.
  71.  Lowe  NJ,  Wieder  JM,  Sawcer  D,  et  al.  Nevus  of 
Ota:  treatment  with  high  energy  fluences  of  the 
Q-switched  ruby  laser.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1993;29:997–1001.

  72.  Taylor  CR,  Flotte  TJ,  Gange  W,  Anderson 
RR. Treatment of nevus of Ota by Q-switched ruby 
laser. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;30:743–51.
  73.  Chang CJ, Nelson JS, Achauer BM. Q-switched ruby 
laser treatment of oculodermal melanosis (nevus of 
Ota). Plast Reconstr Surg. 1996;98:784–90.

  74.  Alster TS, Williams CM. Treatment of nevus of Ota 
by the Q-switched alexandrite laser. Dermatol Surg. 
1995;21:592–6.

  75.  Lam  AY,  Wong  DSY,  Lam  LK,  Ho  WS,  Chan 
HHL.  A  retrospective  study  on  the  efficacy  and 
complications  of  Q-switched  alexandrite  laser  in 
the treatment of acquired bilateral nevus of Ota-like 
macules. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(11):937–42.
  76.  Manuskiatti  W,  Sivayathorn  A,  Leelaudomlipi  P, 
Fitzpatrick RE. Treatment of acquired bilateral nevus 
of  Ota-like  macules  (Hori’s  nevus)  using  a  combi-
nation  of  scanned  carbon  dioxide  laser  followed 
by  Q-switched  ruby  laser.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2003;48(4):584–91.

  77.  Polnikorn  N,  Tanrattanakorn  S,  Goldberg 
DJ. Treatment of Hori’s nevus with the Q-switched 
Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26(5):477–80.

  78.  Manuskiatti  W,  Eimpunth  S,  Wanitphakdeedecha 
R.  Effect  of  cold  air  cooling  on  the  incidence 
of  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
after 
Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  treatment  of  acquired 

  79.  Taylor  CR, Anderson  RR.  Ineffective  treatment  of 
refractory  melasma  and  postinflammatory  hyper-
pigmentation by Q-switched ruby laser. J Dermatol 
Surg Oncol. 1994;20:592–7.

  80.  Manaloto  RMP, Alster T.  Erbium:YAG  laser  resur-
facing  for  refractory  melasma.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1999;25:121–3.

  81.  Narurkar  VA.  Skin  rejuvenation  with  microther-
mal  fractional  photothermolysis.  Dermatol  Ther. 
2007;20:S10–3.

  82.  Tannous  Z, Astner  S.  Utilizing  fractional  resurfac-
ing in the treatment of therapy resistant melasma. J 
Cosm Laser Ther. 2005;7:39–43.

  83.  Rokhsar  CK,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  The  treatment  of 
melasma  with  fractional  photothermolysis:  a  pilot 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2005;32:1645–50.

  84.  Massaki  ABM,  Eimpunth  S,  Fabi  S,  et  al.  Lasers 

Surg Med. 2013;45(2):95–101.

  85.  Lowe  NJ,  Wieder  JM,  Shorr  N,  et  al.  Infraorbital 
pigmented  skin:  preliminary  observations  of  laser 
therapy. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:767–70.

  86.  West  TB,  Alster  TS.  Improvement  of  infraorbital 
hyperpigmentation  following  carbon  dioxide  laser 
resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1998;24:615–6.

  87.  Manuskiatti W,  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Goldman  MP.  Red 
ink  tattoo  reactions:  successful  treatment  with  the 
Q-switched 532 nm Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 
2000;26(2):113–20.

  88.  Dwyer CM, Cuddihy AM, Kerr REI, et al. Skin pig-
mentation  due  to  minocycline  treatment  of  facial 
dermatoses. Br J Dermatol. 1993;129:158–62.
  89.  Argenyi  ZB,  Finelli  L,  Bergfeld  WF,  et  al. 
Minocycline-related 
cutaneous  hyperpigmenta-
tion  as  demonstrated  by  light  microscopy,  electron 
microscopy and X-ray energy spectroscopy. J Cutan 
Pathol. 1987;14:176–80.

  90.  Collins P, Cotterill JA. Minocycline-induced pigmen-
tation  resolves  after  treatment  with  the  Q-switched 
ruby laser. Br J Dermatol. 1996;135:317–9.

  91.  Knoell KA, Milgraum SS, Kutenplon M. Q-switched 
ruby 
treatment  of  minocycline-induced 
cutaneous  hyperpigmentation.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1996;132:1251–3.

laser 

  92.  Tsao  H,  Dover  JS.  Treatment  of  minocycline- 
induced  hyperpigmentation  with  the  Q-switched 
ruby laser. Arch Dermatol. 1996;132:1250–1.
  93.  Kossida  T,  Rigopoulos  D,  Katsambas A, Anderson 
RR. Optimal tattoo removal in a single laser session 
based  on  the  method  of  repeated  exposures.  J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(2):271.

  94.  Wilde  JL,  English  JC,  Finley  EM.  Minocycline- 
treatment  with 
laser.  Arch  Dermatol. 

hyperpigmentation: 

induced 
the  neodymium:YAG 
1997;133:1344–6.

  95.  Greve B, Schonermark MP, Raulin C. Minocycline- 
induced  hyperpigmentation:  treatment  with  the 
Q-switched  Nd:YAG 
laser.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1998;22:223–7.

E. M. Graber and J. S. Dover



107

  96.  Karrer S, Hohenleutner U, Szeimies RM, Landthaler 
M.  Amiodarone-induced  pigmentation  resolves 
after treatment with the Q-switched ruby laser. Arch 
Dermatol. 1999;135:251–3.

  97.  Atkins  DH,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  Laser  treatment  of 
imipramine-induced hyperpigmentation. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2000;43(1):77–80.

  98.  Trotter  MJ,  Tron  VA,  Hollingdale  J,  Rivers 
JK.  Localized  chrysiasis  induced  by  laser  therapy. 
Arch Dermatol. 1995;131:1411–4.

  99.  Yun PK, Arndt KA, Anderson RR. Q-switched laser- 
induced  chrysiasis  treated  with  long-pulsed  laser. 
Arch Dermatol. 2002;138:1012–4.

 100.  Baggish  MS,  Poiesz  BJ,  Joret  D,  et  al.  Presence 
of  human  immunodeficiency  virus  DNA  in  laser 
smoke. Lasers Surg Med. 1991;11:197–203.

 101. Alster  TS,  Gupta  SN.  Minocycline-induced 
hyperpigmentation 
treated  with  a  755-nm 
Q-switched  alexandrite  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2004;30(9):1201–4.

6 Lasers and Lights for Treating Pigmented Lesions



Laser Treatment of Tattoos

Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Caroline V. Caperton, 
Christopher Wong, Rawat Charoensawad, 
and Keyvan Nouri

7

Abstract
Tattoos  are  a  long-standing  part  of  human 
culture.

Techniques used in tattooing have evolved 

over the centuries.

Although  24%  of Americans  between  the 
ages of 18–50 years have at least one tattoo, 

28% of people who get tattoos regret the deci-
sion within the first month.

Keywords
Tattoo  removal  ·  Q-switched  Nd  laser  · YAG 
laser  ·  Q-switched  Ruby  laser  ·  Q-switched 
Alexandrite laser

V. Vejjabhinanta (*) 
Dermatologic Surgery and Lasers Unit, Department 
of Medical Services, Ministry of Public Health, 
Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand 

C. V. Caperton 
WK Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology Center, 
Willis-Knighton Health System,  
Shreveport, LA, USA
e-mail: ccaperton@med.miami.edu 

C. Wong 
Orthopaedic Associates of South Broward, 
Hollywood, FL, USA
e-mail: cwong@med.miami.edu 

R. Charoensawad 
Rawat Clinic, Bangkok, Thailand 

Biophile Training Center, Bangkok, Thailand 

K. Nouri 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 
e-mail: knouri@med.miami.edu

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_7

109





110

Box 1 Overview
•  Tattoos  are  a  long-standing  part  of 

human culture.
•  Techniques  used 

in 

tattooing  have 

evolved over the centuries.

•  Although  24%  of  Americans  between 
the ages of 18–50 years have at least one 
tattoo,  28%  of  people  who  get  tattoos 
regret  the  decision  within  the  first 
month.

•  The  three  lasers  most  commonly  used 
are the Q-switched Nd: YAG, Q-switched 
Ruby, and Q-switched Alexandrite.
•  Potential  side  effects  of  using  lasers  in 
the removal of tattoos include discolor-
ation,  redness,  scarring,  and  rarely, 
stimulating allergic reactions.

 Introduction

A tattoo is a mark created by pigments that per-
manently reside in the dermal layer of the skin. 
The  word  tattoo  has  roots  from  the  Polynesian 
word  “ta”  which  means  “to  strike”  and  the 
Tahitian  word  “tatau”  which  means  “to  mark.” 
The  techniques  of  tattooing  have  changed  over 
the  years,  but  the  basic  principle  remains  the 
same. Dyes are manually applied through breaks 
in the skin. By embedding the various pigments 
below the epidermis, the pigments resist slough-
ing  due  to  the  natural  growth  cycle  of  the  skin, 
thus offering permanence. In the older methods, 
dye-tipped needles were gently struck by stones 
and hammers to introduce the dye into the skin. 
Today,  electrical  tattoo  machines  utilize  high- 
speed  needle  injections  that  minimize  time  and 
pain.

In  the  United  States,  an  estimated  7–20  mil-
lion people have at least one tattoo [1]. In a recent 
study, the prevalence of tattoos among Americans 
aged 18–50 years old was found to be 24% [2]. 
Reasons  for  tattoo  application  include:  fashion, 
peer  pressure,  rebelliousness,  and  romance.  For 
some individuals, regret appears as quickly as the 

initial  decision  to  get  a  tattoo.  Approximately 
28% of people who get tattoos regret the decision 
within the first month. While the minimum age to 
obtain  a  tattoo  is  18  years  old,  71%  of  people 
requesting  tattoo  removal  have  had  the  ink 
applied when they were under the minimum age. 
The most common reason to seek tattoo removal 
was  to  further  enhance  self-esteem  by  freeing 
oneself from the stigmatizing lesion that was the 
source of many years of regret. In addition, tattoo 
owners  felt  their  marks  were  socially  discredit-
ing,  perceived  pressure  by  family  members  to 
remove  them,  and  believed  improvement  in 
employment  opportunities  would  result  after 
removal  [3].  On  average,  actual  tattoo  removal 
occurred 14 years later. Much of the delay can be 
attributed to perceived high financial costs, phys-
ical  pain,  and  risk  of  permanent  disfigurement 
associated  with  removal.  Also,  many  potential 
patients  admit  that  they  were  unaware  of  the 
availability of treatment options to remove their 
tattoo [4].

 Historical Perspectives

As  evidenced  by  “Ötzi  the  Ice  Man”,  a 
5000-year- old  man  bearing  57  tattoos  whose 
body was discovered in 1991, tattoos have been 
a  part  of  human  culture  for  a  very  long  time. 
Some anthropologists even speculate that the art 
of tattooing began as early as 12,000 B.C. The 
purpose  of  tattoos  has  varied  from  perceived 
therapeutic benefits and religious or tribal iden-
tification symbols to self-expressions of unique-
ness  and  impulse.  Regardless  of  their  age  or 
purpose, tattoos are a large part of human cul-
ture  today  and  are  becoming  more  and  more 
popular.

The first tattoos from thousands of years ago 
were created roughly. During bereavement cer-
emonies as signs of grief, primitive humans of 
the Stone Age (12,000 B.C.) slashed their skin 
and rubbed ash into the wounds [5]. It is highly 
unlikely that the detail of the designs resembled 
that  we  see 
anything  near 

tattoos 

the 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



today—although  a  few  amateurs  come  close. 
The  discovery  of  crude  needles  and  pigment 
bowls  in  caves  in  France,  Spain,  and  Portugal 
provide circumstantial evidence that decorative 
tattooing can be traced back to the Bronze Age 
(8000 B.C.). More well known older techniques 
were practiced elsewhere in the Ancient world. 
The  Japanese  utilized  a  hand-based  tattooing 
technique that involved elaborate needle-tipped 
bamboo handles. Samoans, among many other 
Pacific  cultures,  used  wooden  hand  tools  such 
as a bone- tipped rake and a striking stick. The 
ancient  Thai  employed  a  tool  that  closely 
resembles  the  electric  tattoo  devices  of  today. 
They  used  a  long  brass  tube  with  a  sliding 
pointed rod that ran down the center.

Thomas Alva  Edison,  the  famous  inventor 
of the light bulb, played an unexpected role in 
the development of the tattoo. In 1891, Samuel 
O’Reilly  modified  Edison’s  autographic 
printer to become the electric tattoo machine 
of today. It was a steel instrument that utilized 
needles that traveled in a vertical direction to 
pierce the skin at a rate up to 3000 times per 
minute.

 Techniques of Tattooing

111

Box 2 Summary
•  In order for a tattoo to be permanent, the 
dye must be placed at a certain location 
within the dermis – too superficial and it 
will  be  sloughed  off  in  the  epidermis; 
too  deep  and  it  will  be  taken  up  by 
lymphatics.

•  Risks  of  unsterile  tattooing  techniques 
include transmission of bacteria, hepati-
tis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and HIV.

The tattoo is actually the appearance through the 
epidermis of the ink located in the dermis. During 
the  tattoo  process,  needles  are  dipped  in  various 
inks. The electric tattoo device injects ink particles 
from  the  epidermis  to  a  constant  depth  (usually 
1  mm)  below  the  dermal-epidermal  junction 
(Fig.  7.1).  As  part  of  the  skin’s  natural  growth 
cycle, the epidermis is continually sloughed off. In 
the  layers  of  the  dermis,  macrophages  recognize 
the dye particles as foreign and attempt to remove 

Epidermis

Dermis

Hair follicle

Fat

Fig. 7.1  Placement of 
tattoo ink within the 
dermis

Tattoo

Nerves

Blood vessels

Sweat gland

7 Laser Treatment of Tattoos



112

the molecules. However, most of the dye is cap-
tured  or  ignored  and  remains  in  the  dermis. 
Therefore, it is essential that the dye reaches the 
dermis in order to become a permanent mark.

In addition, it is important that the dye not be 
injected  too  deeply  into  the  dermis.  More 
 commonly  reached  by  amateur-level  tattoo  art-
ists, these greater depths will increase the likeli-
hood of the dye being carried away by body fluids 
or for the tattoo to be accompanied by scarring. 
This can lead to blurring of the tattoo and reduc-
tion of its visualization.

Obtaining  a  tattoo  carries  with  it  inherent 
risks. There have been reports that non-sterile tat-
tooing  practices  have  led  to  the  transmission  of 
infectious  organisms  such  as  bacteria,  syphilis 
and  hepatitis  B;  furthermore,  there  is  also  the 
potential  for  transmission  of  other  blood-borne 
pathogens such as HIV and hepatitis C [6].

 Allergenicity

Box 4 Summary
•  The  most  common  medical  techniques 
currently  used  for  tattoo  removal  are 
laser  surgery,  surgical  excision,  and 
dermabrasion.
•  Complications  of 

these  procedures, 
include  discoloration, 
scarring,  or 

removal, 

rare, 

though 
incomplete 
infection.

•  Topical  products  that  lighten  naturally 
pigmented skin are generally not meant 
for  tattoo  removal,  although  current 
research is ongoing.

Some  patients  have  allergic  reactions  to  either 
the pigments in the tattoo or to the additives that 
can be mixed in with the dye. Even though 2001 
marked  the  first  report  of  an  adverse  reaction 
following  the  application  of  a  ‘black’  henna 
tattoo  darkened  with  paraphenylenediamine 

(PPD)-based  chemicals,  the  notoriety  of  PPD 
had  been  previously  established.  In  the  1930s, 
the  practice  of  tinting  the  eyelashes  and  eye-
brows  with  PPD  dye  was  common.  Many 
adverse reactions to PPD became apparent, with 
some  women  suffering  serious  blistering  reac-
tions, blindness, and even death, most notably to 
the  product  “Lash  Lure.”  Since  there  were  no 
laws  in  place  to  regulate  these  products,  cos-
metic companies were not liable. By 1938, the 
Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic  Act  was  initiated 
with  the  first  mandate:  to  remove  “Lash  Lure” 
from  the American  market  and  ban  the  use  of 
PPD on the skin [7].

Other allergic reactions associated with tat-
toos can be linked to the specific color of pig-
ment  that  was  injected  into  the  skin.  There 
have  been  numerous  reports  of  patients  with 
known  allergies  to  mercury  or  cobalt  experi-
encing  type  IV  hypersensitivity  allergic  reac-
tions in areas tattooed with red or blue pigment, 
respectively  [8].  There  are  many  common 
allergenic substances included in common tat-
too dyes (Table 7.1).

It  is  important  to  note  that  tattoo  pigments 
have not FDA approved for intradermal injection. 
Nevertheless, there have been dramatic advances 
in the industry of body art, including the develop-
ment  of  a  biodegradable  and  bioabsorbable 
organic  dye  encapsulated  in  synthetic  polymer. 
The tattoo is permanent; yet, when targeted with 
a laser, the beads disintegrate, exposing the ink to 
be  resorbed  into  the  body,  thereby  completely 
removing the tattoo [9].

Table  7.1  Tattoo  pigments 
ingredients

and 

their 

common 

Dye color
Black
Red
Blue
Brown
Green
Lilac
White
Yellow

Dye content
Carbon
Mercury sulfide
Cobalt aluminate
Hydrate of iron oxide
Chromium oxide
Magnesium
Titanium oxide
Cadmium sulfide

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



 Methods of Removal

Box 3 Summary
•  Additives  such  as  PPD  can  be  mixed 
with  tattoo  dye,  causing  allergic  reac-
tions in patients.

•  Allergic  or  pruritic  reactions  to  tattoos 
can  be  linked  to  certain  colors  used  in 
the design.

•  No  dye  used  in  tattooing  is  FDA 
the 

for  deposition 

into 

approved 
dermis.

113

Each tattoo is unique; so must each removal 
technique match the demands of each individ-
ual  situation.  Tattoos  that  are  professionally 
applied  tend  to  penetrate  the  deeper  layers  of 
the  skin  at  uniform  levels.  This  uniformity 
allows dermal surgeons to use techniques that 
remove broader areas of inked skin at the same 
depth.

Figure 7.2 shows tattoo granules present in the 

dermis prior to treatment.

Currently,  the  most  common  tattoo  removal 
techniques  employed  by  dermatological  profes-
sionals  are  laser  surgery,  surgical  excision,  and 
dermabrasion.

Prior to current medical technologies, there was 
not  much  available  to  the  patient  requesting 
removal  of  their  tattoo. The  patient  was  offered 
the choice of harsh exfoliation techniques, chem-
ical peels, thermal means, cryosurgery, or surgi-
cal resection. In lieu of medical treatment, many 
patients today still opt for covering up the tattoo 
with  concealing  makeup,  or  even  voluntarily 
obtaining more tattoos in an attempt to modify or 
camouflage  the  original  tattoo  into  a  new,  often 
larger design.

 Laser Surgery

The  tattoo  is  treated  by  targeting  selective  pig-
ments with a high-intensity laser beam. The type 
of laser used generally depends upon the colors 
to  be  removed.  This  modality  offers  a  highly 
effective  approach  with  minimal  side  effects, 
although  frequently  necessitates  several  treat-
ments for complete removal.

Fig. 7.2  Tattoo granules 
present in the dermis 
prior to treatment

7 Laser Treatment of Tattoos



114

 Surgical Excision

The tattoo is cut out and either sutured or allowed 
to  heal,  depending  on  size. The  efficacy  of  this 
technique is highly dependent upon the  individual 
surgeon,  the  size  of  the  area  to  be  resected,  the 
tension of the skin in the area, and the individu-
al’s  tendencies  toward  scarring  or  developing  a 
keloid.

 Dermabrasion

The tattoo is gradually removed via exfoliation 
of the surface and middle layers of pigment by 
machines, laser or salt. The upper layer of skin 
is abraded or “sanded,” and the underlying lay-
ers of skin replace the damaged layers, allowing 
the pigment to leach out of the skin. Side effects 
and  complications  of  this  procedure  are  skin 
discoloration  (hyperpigmentation  or  hypopig-
mentation) at the treatment site, infection of the 
tattoo  site,  incomplete  pigment  removal,  or 
scarring,  even  3–6  months  after  the  tattoo  is 
removed [10].

It is important to make the distinction between 
residual tattoo and post inflammatory hyperpig-
mentation. Post inflammatory hyperpigmentation 
is  different  from  tattooing  in  that  it  is  mainly  a 
result  of  melanocyte  stimulation  and  is  exacer-
bated  by  exposure  to  ultra-violet  radiation. 
Tattoos,  on  the  other  hand,  are  not  associated 
with melanocytes, but are rather made up of dyes, 
which in contrast often fade with sun exposure as 
the  pigment  is  oxidized  and  always  confined 
within the previous tattoo position.

There  are  products  available  on  the  market 
that purport to lighten skin. Products containing 
hydroquinone  are  used  to  treat  hyperpigmenta-
tion  of  the  skin  by  reversibly  depigmenting  the 
skin. This is accomplished by inhibiting the oxi-
dation of tyrosine to 3,4-dihydroxyphenyalanine 
(DOPA)  and  other  melanocyte  metabolic 
processes.

Recent data from Solis et al. demonstrated a 
significant  reduction  of  tattoo  pigment  in  a 
guinea pig model. Researchers treated the ani-
mals’  recent  tattoos  with  imiquimod.  After 

1  week,  the  tattoos  were  no  longer  detectible 
either  clinically  or  histopathologically  [11]. 
Although no human models have demonstrated 
these results, imiquimod remains an attractive 
non-invasive  therapy  for  the  treatment  of  tat-
toos.  Ricotti  and  colleagues 
investigated 
whether  imiquimod  in  conjunction  with  laser 
therapy  would  be  more  efficacious  in  tattoo 
removal  than  laser  alone.  The  authors  con-
cluded that, in addition to having more adverse 
reactions  than  placebo,  imiquimod  was  not 
an  ineffective  adjunct  to  laser  treatment  of 
tattoos [12].

 Lasers

Box 5 Summary
•  Lasers  are  commonly  used  in  various 
medical  and  cosmetic  procedures, 
including treatment of vascular lesions, 
scars, dermal remodeling, hair removal, 
and removal of pigmented lesions.

•  Potential  side  effects  of  using  lasers  in 
the removal of tattoos include discolor-
ation,  redness,  scarring,  and  rarely, 
allergic reactions. These should be dis-
cussed  with  the  patient  so  that  an 
informed decision may be made.

•  Specific lasers and wavelengths are bet-
ter suited for targeted removal of certain 
colors of pigment than others.

•  The Q-switched lasers with pulse dura-
tions in nanosecond range are the main-
stay devices for tattoo removal.

•  Q-switched Ruby (694 nm) is generally 
used  in  the  removal  of  black,  blue  and 
green  tattoos  in  individuals  with  fair 
skin.

•  Q-switched  Alexandrite  (755  nm)  is 

best for removing the green ink

•  Q-switched Nd: YAG (1064 nm) is use-
ful  for  treatment  black  and  blue  ink  in 
individuals with darkly pigmented skin.
•  Q-switched Nd: YAG (532 nm) is useful 

for treatment red and orange ink.

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



Laser is an acronym for Light Amplification by 
Stimulated  Emission  of  Radiation.  The  first 
patient  for  the  laser  was  obtained  by  Gordon 
Gould in 1977, although his work on light lasers 
dated back to 1958. The first medical application 
of  a  laser  was  in  1987,  when  ophthalmologist 
Steven Trokel performed refractive surgery on a 
patient’s  eyes.  Originally  designed  to  precisely 
cut glass and metal, lasers have revolutionalized 
the field of medicine with its numerous applica-
tions and possibilities.

There  are  many  dermatologic  uses  of  lasers, 
including treatment of vascular lesions, hypertro-
phic  or  keloid  scars,  striae,  acne,  hair  removal, 
removal  of  pigmented  lesions,  and  nonablative 
dermal  remodeling,  to  name  a  few.  Lasers  have 
become widespread for use in the field for both 
medical and cosmetic applications.

Due  to  the  ability  by  some  lasers  to  produce 
pressure waves significant enough to penetrate the 
stratum  corneum,  lasers  have  become  attractive 
new methods for transdermal drug delivery [13].
The first use of lasers for the treatment of tat-
toos  was  in  the  1970s  [14,  15].  Carbon  dioxide 
lasers, which emit a wavelength of 10,600 nm and 
target  water  in  the  skin,  and  argon  lasers,  which 
emit  a  continuous  wavelength  of  either  488  or 
514 nm, were used non-selectively in an attempt to 
remove tattoo pigment from the dermis. The CO2 
laser ablates the top layer of skin and often results 
in scarring when used at a depth necessary for tat-
too removal. The argon lasers, due to their contin-
uous energy emitted, transmit heat to other tissue 
areas,  also  resulting  in  hyperpigmented  skin, 
incomplete removal of the pigment, and scarring.

Modern lasers have become paramount in the 
treatment  and  removal  of  tattoos.  By  selective 
photothermolysis, lasers allow dermatologists to 
selectively  remove 
target  pigments  without 
destroying  the  surrounding  skin  or  tissue  archi-
tecture  dramatically.  The  short-pulse  (nanosec-
ond or picosecond) lasers are optimal for tattoo 
removal  without  significant  scarring.  The  most 
commonly  used  lasers  for  this  purpose  include 
the  Q-switched  neodymium:yttrium-aluminum- 
garnet  (Nd:YAG),  alexandrite,  and  ruby  lasers 
[16].  Q-switching  refers  to  a  switch  that  allows 
the release of energy in one pulse such that the 

115

target  is  heated  so  quickly  (within  nanoseconds 
or picoseconds [17]) that it shatters, allowing for 
selective photothermolysis.

Depending on the wavelength used, the laser is 
able to target the tattoo pigment while sparing other 
chromophores in the skin, such as melanin. Due to 
its primary purpose of absorbing damaging ultravi-
olet rays, melanin absorbs light, which can be detri-
mental  when  attempting  to  use  light  to  remove  a 
tattoo.  Nevertheless,  this  absorptive  property  of 
melanin decreases with longer wavelengths, allow-
ing targeted removal of pigment by lasers without 
interference or refraction. The biophysics underly-
ing the mechanism by which lasers are able to dis-
solve tattoos is not well understood, but the accepted 
theory is that the pulse of light from the laser breaks 
up the tattoo pigment into smaller components to be 
digested  by  macrophages,  taken  up  by  scavenger 
cells, or eliminated transepidermally [18].

How  efficacious  the  laser  treatment  is  in  the 
complete removal of the tattoo depends on mul-
tiple factors, including size, length of time since 
application,  depth  of  pigment,  colors  used,  and 
patient’s skin type. Laser removal of pigment is 
highly color dependent, since the lasers used emit 
certain wavelengths that are better able to target 
certain colors.

The three lasers most commonly used are the 
Q-switched  Ruby,  Q-switched  Alexandrite,  and 
Q-switched Nd: YAG.

•  Q-switched Ruby (694 nm)
  Light  from  this  laser  is  red.  Because  light  is 
absorbed by its opposite color and reflected by 
its  same  color,  this  laser  removes  most  ink 
 colors well, except red. It is generally used in 
the  removal  of  blue  and  black  tattoos.  It  is 
especially effective in the removal of amateur 
and traumatic tattoos. This was the first laser 
to be used in the treatment of tattoos and pig-
mented lesions [19, 20].

•  Q-switched Alexandrite (755 nm)
  This laser emits a purple/red light and is there-
fore best for removing blue, black, and green 
ink. This laser offers an advantage over older 
models in that is reliable, with faster repetition 
rates, and is the laser of choice in the removal 
of green pigment.

7 Laser Treatment of Tattoos



removes red and orange ink. This wavelength 
is  absorbed  by  hemoglobin  and  thus,  may 
result 
laser 
in 
treatment.

temporary  purpura  after 

Amateur tattoos are generally easier to remove 
since they usually contain only black or blue ink 
and more superficial. Unfortunately, some ama-
teurs may tattoo too deeply, making the pigment 
deposition 
target. 
irregular  and  difficult 
Professional tattoo artists often mix colors for a 
gradation  effect,  which  is  also  more  difficult  to 

to 

b

116

•  Q-switched Nd:YAG (1064 nm)
  This laser emits light in the infrared range. It 
removes black and blue ink best. Because this 
wavelength  is  not  well  absorbed  by  melano-
cytes,  it  is  useful  for  treatment  in  individuals 
with darkly pigmented skin (Figs. 7.3 and 7.4).

•  Q-switched Nd:YAG (532 nm)
  This is an alteration of the 1064 nm Nd: YAG 
laser  made  possible  by  using  a  potassium- 
titanyl- phosphate  crystal  to  double  the  fre-
quency, 
to 
532  nm.  This  laser  emits  a  green  light  and 

the  wavelength 

thus  halving 

a

c

Fig. 7.3  Laser tattoo removal at the right wrist with Q-switches 1064 nm Nd: YAG; Amateur tattoo (a) Before treat-
ment (b) Two month after the first treatment (c) After three treatments

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



a

b

117

Fig. 7.4  Laser tattoo removal at the upper leg; professional tattoo (a) Before treatment and (b) the result after seven 
treatments with Q-Switched 1064 nm Nd: YAG laser

Table 7.2  Choice of laser for removal of tattoo by ink color

Laser
Nd:YAG 532 nm
Ruby
694 nm
Alexandrite 755 nm
Nd:YAG 1064 nm

Black

Blue

Green

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

XX

Brown
X (Light)
X (Dark)

X (Dark)
X (Dark)

Yellow
X

Purple
X

Red
X

Adapted  from  Mariwalla  K,  Dover  JS.  The  use  of  lasers  for  decorative  tattoo  removal.  Skin  Therapy  Lett.  2006 
Jun;11(5):8–11 [22], with permission of SkinCareGuide

remove, but will tattoo no deeper than the dermis 
and at a consistent depth throughout the tattoo.

A  minimum  interval  of  4  weeks  is  generally 
required between laser sessions to allow the treat-
ment area adequate time to heal and the immune 
system  a  sufficient  period  for  macrophages  to 
phagocytize the broken pigment molecules [21]. 
An  average  tattoo  with  a  surface  area  of  two 
square inches requires 6–7 months to be removed, 
on  average,  with  sessions  scheduled  every 
6–8 weeks [16].

The  absorption  spectrum  of 

is 
unknown,  with  some  colors  responding  better 
than  others. As  a  result,  a  combination  of  laser 
systems may be used in stages for a single tattoo 
(Table 7.2).

tattoos 

Although Q-switched lasers are now the main-
stay of treatment for the removal of tattoos, it is 
important  to  note  that  there  may  be  unwanted 
complications associated with the practice. Most 
commonly, patients experience hyper- or hypopig-
mentation reactions or immediate erythema at the 

7 Laser Treatment of Tattoos



118

treatment site that generally subsides within min-
utes of treatment [23]. Some patients may experi-
ence  scarring.  Some  patients,  however,  may 
experience  hypersensitivity  reactions,  especially 
if they had previously experienced allergic reac-
tions upon application of the tattoo pigment [24]. 
A rare and controversial topic of debate is whether 
or not laser removal of certain pigments may be 
associated with the generation of carcinogenic or 
hazardous compounds [25].

There  are  significant  costs  associated  with 
laser  treatments  of  tattoos,  which  are  not  often 
covered by health insurance companies. Most tat-
toos  require  multiple  sessions  for  reasonably 
anticipated  pigment  removal,  which  should  be 
communicated  with  the  patient  beforehand  to 
ensure  the  patient  possesses  adequate  expecta-
tions  about  the  outcome  of  the  treatment.  More 
than  half  of  all  patients  experience  a  75–95% 
reduction of tattoo pigment with a conventional 
series of three to four laser treatments [16]. These 
issues  should  be  discussed  with  the  patient  in 
order for an informed decision to be made about 
his  or  her  treatment  and  to  ensure  that  realistic 
expectations are set.

 Conclusion
The  information  presented  herein  presents  a 
background  on  the  history  of  tattooing,  the 
methods of removal currently available, and a 
scientifically- based  rationale  for  why  photo-
thermolysis via laser has become implemented 
into mainstream treatment. Tattoos are widely 
varied  based  on  the  individual  patient,  the 
method used in injecting the pigment into the 
skin, size of tattoo, spectrum of colors used in 
the design, the duration of time that the patient 
has had the tattoo, as well as any underlying 
conditions  the  patient  may  have  that  could 
affect healing or immune response to therapy. 
All of these conditions must be taken into con-
sideration  when  selecting  an  individualized 
treatment tailored to not only each patient, but 
also  to  each  patient’s  specific  tattoo  that  has 
been  selected  for  removal.  Recently  devel-
oped  Freedom-2  ink  technology  uses  micro-
encapsulated polymer beads of biodegradable 
ink to allow complete clearance with just one 

laser  treatment.  Whether  or  not  the  tattoo  is 
being removed out of necessity (employment 
requirements, social situations, familial pres-
sures, etc.), it is important for the physician to 
have  an  appreciation  that  the  patient  may 
 experience  some  degree  of  anxiety  about 
becoming  detached  from  a  personal  symbol 
which was undoubtedly expected to be embed-
ded  within  him  or  her  indefinitely.  On  the 
other hand, it is a paramount achievement for 
medicine  that  we  are  now  able  to  safely 
remove  tattoos  and  skin  markings  that  hold 
negative connotations, that are regarded with 
regret, or which have become irrelevant in the 
patient’s current life setting.

References

  1.  Anderson RR. Tattooing should be regulated. N Engl 

J Med. 1992;326(3):207.

  2.  Laumann AE, Derick AJ. Tattoos and body piercings 
in the United States: a national data set. J Am Acad 
Derm. 2006;55(3):413–21.

  3.  Armstrong  ML,  Stuppy  DJ,  Gabriel  DC,  et  al. 
tattoo  removal.  Arch  Dermatol. 

Motivation  for 
1996;132(4):412–6.

  4.  Varma  S,  Lanigan  SW.  Reasons  for  requesting 
laser  removal  of  unwanted  tattoos.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
1999;140(3):483–5.

  5.  Kilmer SL, Fitzpatrick RE, Goldman MP. Treatment 
of tattoos. In: Goldman MP, Fitzpatrick RE, editors. 
Cutaneous laser surgery. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Inc.; 
1999. p. 213–52.

  6.  American Academy  of  Dermatology.  Position  state-
ment on tattooing. Approved by the Board of Directors 
October 24. Schaumburg, IL: AAD; 1998.

  7.  Jacob  SE,  Caperton  CV.  Allergen  Focus:  Focus  on 
T.R.U.E.  Test Allergen  #16:  black  rubber  mix.  Skin 
Aging. 2006;13(6):20–4.

  8.  Kazandjieva  J,  Tsankov  N.  Tattoos:  dermatological 
complications. Clin Dermatol. 2007;25(4):375–82.
  9.  Schmidt  RM,  Armstrong  ML.  Tattooing  and  body 
piercing.  In:  Rose  BD,  editor.  UpToDate.  Waltham, 
MA: UpToDate; 2007.

 10.  American  Society 

Accessible 
TattooRemovalInformation.aspx.

online: 

for  Dermatologic  Surgery. 
http://www.asds.net/

 11.  Solis  RR,  Diven  DG,  Colome-Grimmer  MI,  Snyder 
N IV, Wagner RF Jr. Experimental nonsurgical tattoo 
removal in a guinea pig model with topical imiquimod 
and  tretinoin.  Dermatol  Surg.  2002;28(1):83–6.  dis-
cussion 86-7

 12.  Ricotti  CA,  Colaco  SM,  Shamma  HN,  Trevino  J, 
Palmer  G,  Heaphy  MR  Jr.  Laser-assisted  tattoo 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



119

removal with topical 5% imiquimod cream. Dermatol 
Surg. 2007;33(9):1082–91.

 13.  Fox  LP,  Merk  HF,  Bickers  DR.  Dermatological 
pharmacology.  In:  Brunton  LL,  editor.  Goodman  & 
Gilman’s  the  pharmacological  basis  of  therapeutics. 
11th  ed.  New  York,  NY:  McGraw-Hill  Companies, 
Inc.; 2006. p. 1679–704.

 14. Apfelberg DB, Maser MR, Lash H. Argon laser treatment 
of decorative tattoos. Br J Plast Surg. 1979;32:141–4.
 15.  Brady  SC,  Blokmanis  A,  Jewett  L.  Tattoo  removal 
with  the  carbon  dioxide  laser.  Ann  Plast  Surg. 
1978;2:482–90.

 16.  Bernstein EF. Laser treatment of tattoos. Clin Derm. 

 19.  Goldman  L,  Blaney  DJ,  Kindel  Jr  DJ,  Richfield  D, 
Franke EK. Pathology of the effect of the laser beam 
on the skin. Nature. 1965;197:912.

 20.  Goldman  L,  Wilson  RG,  Hormby  P,  Meyer 
RG. Radiation from a Q-switched ruby laser. Effect of 
repeated impacts of power output of 10 megawatts on 
a tattoo of man. J Invest Dermatol. 1965;44:69–71.
 21.  Pfirrmann  G,  Karsai  S,  Roos  S,  Hammes  S,  Raulin 
C. Tattoo removal—state of the art. J Dtsch Dermatol 
Ges. 2007;5(10):889–97.

 22.  Mariwalla K, Dover JS. The use of lasers for decorative 
tattoo removal. Skin Therapy Lett. 2006;11(5):8–11.
 23.  Burris  K,  Kim  K.  Tattoo  removal.  Clin  Dermatol. 

2006;24:43–55.

2007;25:388–92.

OA, 

 17.  Ibrahimi 

FH,  Anderson 
Sakamoto 
RR.  Picosecond  laser  pulses  for  tattoo  removal:  a 
good, old idea. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(2):241.
 18.  Ho  DD,  London  R,  Zimmerman  GB,  Young 
DA. Laser-tattoo removal—a study of the mechanism 
and the optimal treatment strategy via computer simu-
lations. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:389.

 24.  Ashinoff R, Levine VJ, Soter NA. Allergic reactions 
to tattoo pigment after laser treatment. Dermatol Surg. 
1995;21:291.

 25.  Vasold  R,  Naarmann  N,  Ulrich  H,  et  al. Tattoo  pig-
ments  are  cleaved  by  laser  light  –  the  chemical 
analysis in vitro provide evidence for hazardous com-
pounds. Photochem Photobiol. 2004;80:185.

7 Laser Treatment of Tattoos



Laser for Hair Removal

Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Keyvan Nouri, 
Anita Singh, Ran Huo, Rawat Charoensawad, 
Isabella Camacho, and Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi

8

Abstract
Lasers  for  hair  removal  are  a  fast-growing 
area in cosmetic dermatology. Selective pho-
tothermolysis allows for targeting of specific 
chromophores  while  minimizing  cutaneous 
damage.  Treatment  of  individuals  should  be 
individualized based on anatomical area, skin 
and hair color, by varying the wavelength, flu-
ence,  pulse  duration,  spot  size,  and  cooling 
technique of the laser.

Keywords
Lasers · Hair removal · Cosmetic dermatology  
Photothermolysis · Chromophores

•  Lasers  for  hair  removal  are  a  fast-growing 

area in cosmetic dermatology.

•  Selective  photothermolysis  allows  for  target-
ing of specific chromophores while minimiz-
ing cutaneous damage.

•  For best results, treatment should be individu-
alized based on anatomical area, skin and hair 
color,  by  varying  the  wavelength,  fluence, 
pulse  duration,  spot  size,  and  cooling  tech-
nique of the laser.

•  Adverse  events  to  laser  hair  removal  include 
post-treatment  erythema,  edema,  blistering, 
hypo/hyperpigmentation,  scarring,  and  skin 
infections.

•  Further  standardized,  well-controlled,  and 
long- term studies are needed to establish the 
optimal  treatment  parameters  for  each  laser 
for each patient demographic.

V. Vejjabhinanta 
Department of Dermatology, Siriraj Hospital, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand 

K. Nouri · A. Rajabi-Estarabadi (*) 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 
e-mail: knouri@med.miami.edu;  
arajabi@med.miami.edu 

A. Singh 
Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA 

R. Huo 
Broward Dermatology Clinic,  
Pembroke Pines, FL, USA 

R. Charoensawad 
Biophile Training Center, Bangkok, Thailand 

I. Camacho 
Georgetown University, School of Medicine, 
Washington, DC, USA
e-mail: ivc5@georgetown.edu 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_8

121





122

 Introduction

•  Laser hair removal is the third most common 
nonsurgical procedure performed in the U.S.
•  Patients and physicians need to have realistic 
expectations of results for laser hair removal. 
The  level  of  hair  reduction  may  vary  widely 
amongst individuals.

•  Lasers are advantageous because they are fast, 
safe, and effective when used appropriately.
•  Hair  removal  with  lasers  or  pulsed  light  are 
more advantageous than previous hair removal 
methods such as shaving and waxing.

•  The mechanism of selective photothermolysis 
allows lasers to target specific cutaneous chro-
mophores while protecting the outer tissue.
•  Active  cooling  devices,  such  as  cryogen 
sprays  and  contact  cooling  devices  help  to 
minimize  injury  by  protecting  the  epidermal 
melanin, preventing adverse side effects.

The use of lasers for hair removal, or photo-
epilation,  is  becoming  an  increasingly  popular 
trend  in  the  arena  of  cosmetic  dermatology. 
According to the American Society for Aesthetic 
Plastic  Surgery  (ASAPS),  1,035,783  laser  hair 
removal procedures were performed in 2016 [1]. 
Laser hair removal is the top third most popular 
nonsurgical procedure among Americans accord-
ing to ASAPS’s list of the top five most popular 
nonsurgical  procedures.  There  was  a  37.2% 
increase  in  hair  removal,  with  laser  or  pulsed 
light,  from  2014  to  2015  [2,  3].  Interestingly, 
even  though  there  was  a  7.3%  increase  in  total 
nonsurgical  procedures  from  2015  to  2016,  the 
number of laser or pulsed light hair removal pro-
cedures  decreased  8.9%. Women  had  more  hair 
removal  procedures  in  2016  compared  to  men, 
however, hair removal still ranked top third non-
surgical procedure in both men and women. Men 
accounted  for  about  12%  of  the  total  laser  hair 
removal  procedures 
that  were  performed. 
Furthermore, individuals 35–50 years of age had 
the  most  number  of  laser  or  pulsed  light  hair 
removal procedures in 2016, followed by patients 
between 19 and 34 years of age.

Hair  removal  has  historically  been  of  great 
interest because excess hair, especially in patients 

with hypertrichosis or hirsutism, can be troubling 
both  socially  and  psychologically  [4].  Past  and 
present  options  for  hair  removal  have  included 
shaving,  epilation,  depilatories,  electrolysis  and 
now  most  currently,  lasers  [5]. All  methods  for 
hair  removal  have  side  effects,  but  lasers  are 
advantageous  because  they  are  fast,  safe,  and 
effective  when  used  appropriately.  With  the 
increased desire for and availability of laser hair 
reduction  around  the  world,  it  is  necessary  to 
evaluate the current indications and potential side 
effects of each laser.

The  concept  of  hair  removal  was  defined  in 
1998  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug Administration 
(FDA),  which  allowed  some  manufacturers  of 
hair removal lasers and flash lamps used for hair 
removal to use the term “permanent hair reduc-
tion.” The agency defined permanent hair reduc-
tion  as,  “The  long-term,  stable  reduction  in  the 
number  of  hairs  regrowing  after  a  treatment 
regime. The number of hairs regrowing must be 
stable over a time greater than the duration of the 
complete  growth  cycle  of  hair  follicles,  which 
varies  from  4  to  12  months  according  to  body 
location. Permanent hair reduction does not nec-
essarily imply the elimination of all hairs in the 
treatment area.” [6]. In addition, there needs to be 
a distinction made between permanent and com-
plete hair loss. Complete hair loss is defined as a 
lack of regrowing hairs, but may be either tempo-
rary or permanent. Permanent hair loss is defined 
as  a  lack  of  regrowing  hairs  indefinitely.  Hair 
removal  with  lasers  usually  produces  complete 
but temporary hair loss for 1–3 months. After this 
time  period,  there  is  usually  partial  but  perma-
nent hair loss [7].

The  theory  of  selective  photothermolysis 
dictates  the  process  of  laser  hair  removal.  By 
varying specific parameters (wavelength, pulse 
duration, and fluence), specific cutaneous chro-
mophores may be targeted while protecting the 
outer  lying  tissue  [8,  9]. Applying  this  theory 
to laser hair removal, the wavelength should be 
the same as the target chromophore, the pulse 
duration should be less than the chromophore’s 
thermal relaxation time (TRT), and the fluence 
must  be  great  enough  to  sufficiently  destroy 
the chromophore.

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



In laser hair removal, the specific target is the 
endogenous  chromophore  melanin.  Melanin  is 
found in the bulb, bulge, and hair shaft of anagen 
hair. Lasers for hair removal must emit light within 
the absorption spectrum of melanin, 250–1200 nm, 
to be effective [10]. In addition, vascular reduction 
has also been proposed as a mechanism for long-
term  epilation  [11].  One  obstacle  to  laser  hair 
removal is that melanin resides in the epidermis as 
well. This is a twofold problem because epidermal 
melanin not only interferes with the laser’s treat-
ment capabilities by detracting some of the laser’s 
energy, but can also cause damage to the epider-
mis.  Because  pigmentation  of  the  hair  and  skin 
vary to such a great extent among patients, this is a 
difficult problem to resolve.

Active cooling is an excellent method to mini-
mize injury to the epidermis. Many lasers today 
are equipped with cooling devices such as cryo-
gen sprays or contact cooling devices. For exam-
ple,  the  long-pulsed  694  nm  ruby  lasers  have  a 
cooling  hand  piece  that  is  applied  during  treat-
ment  to  lower  the  temperature  of  the  skin  and 
spare  it  from  injury.  This  integrated  cooling 
device  pre-cools  the  skin  prior  to  laser  pulse 
delivery.  The  long-pulsed  755  nm  alexandrite 
lasers  utilize  a  variety  of  cooling  mechanisms. 
These mechanisms include a cooling hand piece 
that allows a continuous flow of chilled air to the 
treatment area, and a dynamic cooling device that 
uses  short  (5–100  ms)  cryogen  spurts  that  is 
delivered to the skin surface through an electroni-
cally con- trolled valve. The 800 nm diode lasers 
use a sapphire-cooled handpiece that is placed in 
direct contact with the skin to cool the area. The 
1064 nm Nd:YAG lasers uses a variety of cooling 
mechanisms and is based on the laser used; cur-
rently available options include a chill tip cooling 
device, pulsed cryogen delivery to the skin, con-
tact pre-cooling and air cooling. Finally, intense 
pulsed  light  uses  a  chilled  handpiece  that  cools 
the skin and a transparent gel that provides opti-
cal coupling, as well as additional cooling [7]. In 
addition  to  these  methods,  ice  and  refrigerated 
gels can also provide relief [12].

A new technology called pneumatic skin flat-
tening  (PSF)  has  been  recently  implemented  to 
reduce  pain  in  hair  removal  with  high  energy 

123

density lasers and intense pulsed light treatments. 
PSF reduces post-treatment erythema and edema 
via the use of the vacuum assisted treatment that 
flattens the skin against the window. Treatment is 
also faster, as it is not interrupted by acute pain 
during the treatment [13]. A study demonstrated 
that when using high energy Nd:YAG lasers, this 
new  technology  also  reduced  pain  without  side 
effects  on  darker  skinned  individuals,  mainly 
skin  types  IV–V  [14].  In  this  study  that  used 
Nd:YAG lasers, it is explained that PSF relieves 
pain  through  the  gate  theory  of  pain  transmis-
sion; it activates the pressure skin receptors right 
before  the  laser  is  activated,  blocking  the  pain 
from the laser from being transmitted to the brain. 
All  28  patients  experienced  less  pain,  and  also 
showed less erythema after treatment. Since hair 
removal efficacy was found to be the same with 
and  without  PSF,  this  new  technology  could  be 
very  beneficial  to  patients  by  reducing  pain  of 
laser treatments.

Another way to limit thermal injury to the epi-
dermis,  in  keeping  with  the  theory  of  selective 
photothermolysis,  is  to  use  a  pulse  duration 
between the TRT of the epidermis (3–10 ms) and 
that  of  the  hair  follicle  (10–100  ms)  [5,  12]. 
However, studies have sparked a reconsideration 
of the original theory suggesting a modification 
whereby the target isn’t destroyed by direct heat-
ing,  but  by  diffusion  from  the  pigmented  area 
[12,  15].  This  requires  long  pulses  upwards  of 
100 ms known as superpulses. These superpulses 
would also damage other crucial targets, such as 
stem cells, which may be another factor for per-
manent hair reduction [10].

The current market for laser hair reduction is 
growing so rapidly that the FDA has not main-
tained an up-to-date listing of all approved laser 
devices. Although new types of lasers are being 
introduced into cosmetic dermatology, the com-
monly  used  lasers  fall  into  one  of  four  catego-
ries:  the  long-pulsed  ruby  laser  (694  nm),  the 
long-pulsed alexandrite laser (755 nm), the long-
pulsed semiconductor diode laser (800–810 nm), 
and  the  long-pulsed  Nd:YAG  laser  (1064  nm). 
Additionally, the Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) sys-
tem  (500–1200  nm)  is  approved  as  a  safe  and 
effective method for hair reduction (Table 8.1).

8 Laser for Hair Removal



124

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
8
7
–
4
7

m
r
e
t

g
n
o
L

r
i
a
h

e
n
i
F

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

e
s
r
a
o
c

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
9
4
–
8
3

m
r
e
t

g
n
o
L

r
i
a
h

e
n
i
F

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

e
s
r
a
o
c

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
d
i
S

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
e
t
e
m
a
i
d

r
i
a
H

r
i
a
h

f
o

e
p
y
T

r
i
a
H

o
t

k
r
a
D

n
w
o
r
b

t
h
g
i
l

r
i
a
H

r
o
l
o
c

n
i
k
S

e
p
y
t

I
I
I
–
I

n
w
o
r
b

t
h
g
i
l

o
t

k
r
a
D

V
I
–
I

n
o
n
i
S
r
a
t
S
y
b
u
R
y
b
u
R
h
c
u
o
t
i
p
E

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

s
r
e
s
a
l

y
b
u
R

)

m
n

4
9
6
(

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

r
o
f

s
m
e
t
s
y
s

t
h
g
i
l

d
e
s
l
u
p

e
s
n
e
t
n
i

d
n
a

r
e
s
a
L

.

1
8
e
l
b
a
T

e
l
p
m
a
x
E

0
0
0
2
E

r
i
a
h

f
o

d
o
h
t
e

M

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
e
s
a
L

l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
P

d
e
s
l
u
p
-
g
n
o
L

X
E
L
A
h
c
u
o
t
i
p
E
e
s
a
l
e
t
n
e
G

e
r
a
c
i
p
E
I
I
I
/
I
I

e
v
a
w
a
r
t
l

U

n
o
i
r

A

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

e
t
i
r
d
n
a
x
e
l
a

)

m
n

5
5
7
(

s
r
e
s
a
l

e
e
g
o
p
A

l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
P

d
e
s
l
u
p
-
g
n
o
L

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
4
8
–
0
7

m
r
e
t

g
n
o
L

e
s
r
a
o
C

o
t

k
r
a
D

V
I
–
I

r
e
e
h
S
t
h
g
i
L

l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
P

e
d
o
i
d

d
e
s
l
u
P

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

r
i
a
h

n
w
o
r
b

t
h
g
i
l

r
e
s
a
L
e
d
o
i
D
1
F

r
a
t
S
o
i
d
e
M

0
0
0
1
P
L
S
0
0
8
-
x
e
p
A

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

)

m
n

0
0
8
(

r
e
s
a
l

r
i
a
h

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
3
5
–
9
2

m
r
e
t

g
n
o
L

e
s
r
a
o
C

k
r
a
D

I

V
–
I

e
d
i
l

G
l
o
o
C

l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
P

d
e
s
l
u
p

g
n
o
L

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

a
r
y
L

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

s
r
e
s
a
l

G
A
Y
:
d
N

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
g
n
i
t
s
u
r
c

,
g
n
i
r
e
t
s
i
l
b

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

s
i
t
i
l
u
c
i
l
l
o
f

,
a
r
u
p
r
u
p

,
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

r
i
a
h

n
w
o
r
b

t
h
g
i
l

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
0
9
–
9
4

m
r
e
t

g
n
o
L

e
s
r
a
o
C

o
t

k
r
a
D

I

V
–
I

,
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

,
n
i
a
p

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

%
6
6
–
0
5

y
r
a
r
o
p
m
e
T

r
i
a
h

e
n
i
F

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
h

,
a
m
e
d
e

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l
a
v
o
m
e
r

r
i
a
h

e
s
r
a
o
c

n
w
o
r
b

t
h
g
i
l

o
t

k
r
a
D

I

V
–
I

0
0
0
7
m
i
a
l
c
c
A
a
i
r
a
V
g
a
Y
e
l
t
n
e
G

s
o
h
t
A

I
I
I
/
I
I
/
I

e
v
a
w
a
r
t
l

U

e
l
fi
o
r
P
e
t
i
l

E

t
h
g
i
l
u
c
s
a
V

s
i
l
a
u
D

I
I

l
i
p
e
t
r
a
m
S

t
h
g
i
L
i
p
E

n
o
d
y
M

l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
P

d
e
s
l
u
p

e
s
n
e
t
n
I

)

m
n

4
6
0
1
(

h
c
u
o
t
a
p
S
e
t
i

L
o
r
P
x
u
l
e
t
s
E

e
s
l
u
P
a
r
t
c
e
p
S
4
Q
a
r
d
a
u
Q

t
h
g
i
L
o
t
o
h
P
e
s
p
i
l
l

E
R
H
m
u
t
n
a
u
Q

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

)

m
n

0
0
2
1
–
0
0
5
(

e
c
r
u
o
s

t
h
g
i
l

t
h
g
i
l
t
f
o
S

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
o
t
o
h
P

d
e
h
c
t
i

w
s
-
Q

6
C
e
t
i

L
d
e
M

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
d

G
A
Y
:
d
N

s
r
e
s
a
l

V. Vejjabhinanta et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




125

 Indications/Contraindications

 Techniques

•  Unwanted  hair  is  a  very  common  problem 
affecting individuals from all demographics.
•  The ideal candidate for laser hair removal is a 
person with fair skin and dark terminal hair.
•  Some contraindications include active cutane-
ous infections, history of keloid or hypertrophic 
scar-ring,  history  of  recurrent  infections,  and 
active vitiligo and psoriasis in targeted areas.

 Indications

Excess  hair  is  an  extremely  common  problem 
affecting both men and women, of all ages, and 
can  have  deep  social  and  psychological  impact 
on  the  patient.  Some  scenarios  associated  with 
unwanted hair include patients with hirsutism or 
hypertrichosis,  procedures  that  involve  grafted 
donor sites, and transsexual transformations from 
male to female. The patient must have a realistic 
expectation of the results, as the level of reduc-
tion in hair varies from individual to individual. 
The ideal candidate for laser hair reduction is a 
person with fair skin and dark terminal hair.

 Contraindications

Patients  with  active  cutaneous  inflammation, 
infection, or active sunburn should not be treated 
until the area has resolved. A history of keloids 
and  hypertrophic  scarring  is  not  an  absolute 
contraindication,  but  these  patients  should  be 
treated less aggressively. Patients with a history 
of recurrent infections (e.g., herpes simplex and 
staphylococcal)  should  be  started  on  prophy-
laxis to prevent outbreaks. Patients who are on 
hormonal therapy should be advised on the limi-
tations of hair removal treatment. Also, people 
with certain skin conditions such as vitiligo and 
psoriasis  should  avoid  laser  hair  removal  in 
affected areas, as it may lead to koebnerization. 
Finally, patients taking minoxidil, or who have 
spouses  taking  this  medication,  should  be 
warned  that  hair  removal  may  be  disrupted  by 
the stimulating effects of this drug [7].

•  The lasers used in hair reduction include the 
694  nm  ruby  laser,  the  755  nm  alexandrite 
laser, the 800 nm diode laser, and the 1064 nm 
Nd:YAG  laser.  The  intense  pulsed  light  sys-
tem is also used in hair removal.

•  Home-use laser hair removal devices, includ-
ing  diode  and  IPL  home-use  devices,  have 
become 
its 
increasingly  popular  due 
convenience.

to 

•  Some  of  the  parameters  that  must  be  opti-
mized for each patient include the wavelength, 
pulse  duration,  cooling  technique,  and  spot 
size of the laser.

•  Dark skinned individuals generally have more 

side effects from laser hair removal.

•  Patients must be notified at least 6 weeks prior 
to treatment that they must not pluck, wax, or 
use electrolysis in the targeted areas.

 Pre-operative Management

 Laser Treatment Approach
Obtaining  an  accurate  patient  history  is  very 
important  when  interviewing  a  patient  who  is 
considering laser hair removal. It is imperative 
to clarify the patient’s expectations, what med-
ications they are currently taking, their history 
of  scarring,  whether  or  not  there  is  a  local 
infection  in  the  targeted  area,  whether  or  not 
they have tried other hair removal strategies in 
the past, their endocrine status, and the amount 
of  sun  exposure  they  have  had  recently. 
Physical examination is also crucial and should 
involve  evaluation  of  the  patient’s  skin  color, 
skin  condition,  hair  color,  hair  diameter,  and 
hair density.

Once a patient is determined to be a good can-
didate  for  hair  removal,  certain  pre-operative 
counseling  must  be  done.  The  patient  must  be 
notified  that  at  least  6  weeks  prior  to  the  laser 
treatment they must not pluck or use electrolysis 
in the areas that they would like to undergo treat-
ment.  They  may,  however,  shave  or  use  depila-
tory creams. It has been shown that greater hair 
loss occurs at shaven rather than epilated sites. In 

8 Laser for Hair Removal



126

Fig. 8.1  Pretreatment of right axillary area 2 days after 
shaving, only anagen hairs present

addition, the treatment area should not be exposed 
to the sun [7].

A  few  days  prior  to  the  laser  treatment,  the 
patient  should  be  instructed  to  shave  or  use  a 
depilatory cream on the treatment site (Fig. 8.1). 
They  should  also  be  advised  to  start  the  use  of 
prophylactic antiviral agents, if there is a history 
of  recurrent  HSV.  On  the  day  of  treatment,  the 
area must be cleaned and free of make-up. A topi-
cal  anesthetic  may  be  applied  1–2  h  before  the 
procedure [7].

 Description of Techniques

 Long-Pulsed 694 nm Ruby Laser
The ruby laser has the shortest wavelength of the 
lasers available for hair reduction. Emitting light 
at 694 nm, it has the best absorption by melanin 
but the shortest penetration depth. Theoretically, 
this would imply that the ruby laser should be the 
most  effective  at  hair  reduction  under  the  right 
conditions, but it also means that there is a greater 
potential  for  epidermal  injury  [16].  A  cooling 
hand piece is concomitantly applied during treat-
ment  to  lower  the  temperature  of  the  skin  and 
spare it from injury.

Campos et al. reported very favorable results 
for  long-term  hair  reduction  using  higher  flu-
ences  of  this  laser  system,  with  an  average  fol-
low-up  time  of  about  8  months  after  the  last 
treatment [17]. Study patients who had received 
treatment with a higher mean fluence of around 
46 J/cm2 displayed sparse regrowth, as compared 

with  moderate  regrowth  in  patients  who  had 
received a lower mean fluence of around 39 J/cm 
[3]. While an increase in fluence may contribute 
to overall efficacy, it also increases the frequency 
of side effects, which may include post-treatment 
erythema,  crusting,  blistering,  hypopigmenta-
tion, hyperpigmentation, and scarring [16]. These 
side effects, especially pigmentary alteration and 
scarring,  were  much  more  commonly  seen  in 
darker  skin,  specifically  skin  types  IV–VI  [18]. 
This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  shorter  wave-length 
leads  to  greater  absorbance  of  the  laser  by  skin 
melanin, which is more abundant in darker skin 
types.  Consequently,  studies  with  this  laser  pri-
marily involve lighter skin patients [16]. It should 
also be noted that using a ruby laser with a pulse 
duration  of  1  ms  (as  compared  to  20  ms)  has 
proven  to  cause  greater  epidermal  damage  in 
patients with darker skin [19, 20].

Overall,  most  studies  performed  with  the 
694  nm  ruby  laser  have  shown  it  to  be  a  safe 
and  effective  method  for  non-permanent  hair 
reduction  [16–18,  21,  22].  When  comparing 
three treatments using the ruby laser with three 
treatments  of  waxing  or  electrolysis,  it  was 
found  that  the  laser  provided  a  38–49%  hair 
reduction  while  the  alternatives  provided  no 
significant change [19, 21]. Increasing the num-
ber  of  treatments  appeared  to  correlate  with  a 
decrease in overall hair count [19, 21–24]. Most 
of these studies have also noted better results in 
patients  with  light  skin  and  dark  hair  [16,  18, 
19].  These  patients  respond  well  to  the  laser 
and experience fewer side effects because they 
have the ideal combination of profuse deposits 
of  melanin  in  the  hair  with  lesser  amounts  in 
the epidermis [17].

 Long-Pulsed 755 nm Alexandrite Laser
The  long-pulsed  alexandrite  laser  has  a  wave-
length  of  755  nm.  This  slightly  longer  wave-
length allows a deeper penetration of the dermis 
with less absorption by epidermal melanin, theo-
retically  making  adverse  side  effects  less  of  a 
concern for darker skin patients as compared to 
the  ruby  laser.  However,  studies  indicate  that 
blistering,  hypopigmentation  and  hyperpigmen-
tation  were  still  reported  occurred  in  some 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



patients with darker skin types [16, 18]. Results 
have consistently shown good clearance rates for 
hair reduction.

Lloyd  and  Mirkov  reported  a  78%  clearance 
of hair 1 year following five treatments (parame-
ters  were  10  mm  spot  size,  20  J,  20-ms  pulse 
duration, and 3 week intervals) for their patients 
[25]. Similarly, Eremia et al. noted an average of 
74% hair reduction in all patients following three 
treatments  with  the  laser  [26].  Patients  with 
lighter  skin  showed  above  average  clearance 
whereas  those  with  darker  skin  showed  below 
average results, the latter of which may be due to 
a  lower  fluence  used  for  these  patients.  The 
authors  attribute  their  success  partly  to  a  larger 
spot size which, at a given fluence, they believe 
would  deliver  more  energy  per  pulse  with  less 
scatter and deeper penetration. Results of a study 
by Nouri et al., supported their postulation, con-
cluding  that  a  larger  spot  size  is  more  effective 
for laser hair reduction [27]. Three studies com-
paring various pulse durations of 2–20 ms found 
no  significant  differences  in  hair  reduction  [16, 
19, 28, 29].

As with the ruby laser, there is a positive cor-
relation  between  the  number  of  treatments  and 
the overall efficacy of treatment with the alexan-
drite  laser,  in  one  study  reaching  a  55%  hair 
reduction  in  patients  with  skin  types  III–V  [19, 
30].  Also,  when  comparing  three  treatments 
using the laser with four treatments of electroly-
sis, it was found that the alexandrite laser was not 
only more effective (a 74% vs. 35% average hair 
reduction), but also less painful [31].

In a meta-analysis of hair removal laser trials, 
the hair reduction for the diode, Nd:YAG, alexan-
drite, and ruby lasers were 57.5%, 42.3%, 54.7%, 
and  52.8%,  respectively,  at  least  6  months  after 
the last treatment of at least three sessions. The 
authors concluded that the diode laser is superior 
for lighter skin, while the alexandrite laser is the 
best choice for darker skin types [32].

 800 nm Diode Laser
The  800  nm  diode  laser  is  comparable  to  the 
755 nm alexandrite, and has become more popu-
lar  along  with  the  Nd:YAG  laser  for  treating 
patients  with  darker  skin  types.  Both  the  diode 

127

laser and the alexandrite laser produce light in the 
middle of the spectrum and are well absorbed by 
follicular melanin. Eremia et al. compared results 
after 1 year using the alexandrite and diode lasers 
and concluded that both were excellent (85% and 
84%  respectively)  for  long-term  hair  reduction 
with  no  statistical  difference  between  the  two 
laser  systems  [19,  33].  Furthermore,  Bouzari 
et  al.  compared  the  alexandrite,  diode  and 
Nd:YAG and found that the alexandrite and diode 
lasers have similar efficacy [34].

The  authors  partially  attribute  the  success  of 
their results to the use of relatively high fluences, 
which they were able to use by carefully select-
ing  patients  who  were  untanned.  Tanning 
increases  the  chance  of  epidermal  damage  and 
also  lowers  the  laser’s  effectiveness.  Another 
study  found  similar  results  between  three  treat-
ments  of  either  the  alexandrite  laser  or  diode 
laser.  However,  in  this  study,  the  hair  reduction 
was  about  37–46%  for  the  two  lasers.  Patients 
from the study reported that the diode laser was 
more painful and had greater side effects, partic-
ularly hyperpigmentation and blistering, as com-
pared with the alexandrite laser [19, 35].

A study comparing various spot sizes (8, 10, 
and 14 mm) found that after three treatments and 
at a 3 month follow-up, there was not a signifi-
cant  difference  in  hair  reduction  [19,  36]. 
However, as with the ruby laser and the alexan-
drite  laser,  two  treatments  with  the  diode  laser 
resulted  in  a  greater  hair  reduction  (35–53%) 
than  one  treatment  (28–33%)  after  an  average 
2-month follow-up. Also in this study, the diode 
laser lead to a significant hair reduction as com-
pared to shaving (13–36% vs −7%) [19, 37].

Shifting  away  from  the  standard,  a  recent 
study  suggests  that  low-fluence  (5–15  J/cm2) 
810 nm diode lasers has comparable hair reduc-
tion and less discomfort than high-fluence diode 
lasers in phototype V skin type and tan patients 
[38]. The study results showed that using a low-
fluence  diode  laser  and  high  repetition  rate  was 
safe  and  effective.  Another  study  agrees  with 
these  results,  stating  that  a  810  nm  diode  laser 
with 10 Hz at low-fluence has a high patient sat-
isfaction  and  efficacy.  Data  was  collected  from 
368  body  areas  epilated  in  patients  with  skin 

8 Laser for Hair Removal



128

types III–V after five treatments in a 6-month fol-
low up [39]. When combining treatment plans, it 
was  not  found  to  be  more  beneficial  to  treat 
patients  with  skin  types  I  to  IV  with  the  diode 
followed  by  the  alexandrite  laser,  as  it  did  not 
produce  greater  hair  reduction  than  the  same 
number of treatments using only the alexandrite 
laser. Using the diode followed by the alexandrite 
laser  actually  showed  an  increase  in  folliculitis 
and blistering in patients [40].

 1064 nm Nd:YAG Laser
The  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  has  the  longest  wave-
length  and  deepest  penetration  amongst  the 
aforementioned laser systems available. It is not 
very well absorbed by melanin, but is sufficient 
in achieving selective photothermolysis and has 
superior penetration [41]. The Nd:YAG is able to 
penetrate the skin 5–7 mm, a depth at which most 
of the target structures lay. Furthermore, the com-
bination  of  a  low  melanin  absorption  and  deep 
penetration leads to less collateral damage to the 
melanin-containing  epidermis  (Fig.  8.2a,  b). 
These characteristics make this system the safest 
choice for tanned or darker skinned patients [10, 
41]. Long pulsed Nd:YAG has been shown to be 
a safe and effective tool for hair reduction in skin 
types  IV  and  V,  with  long  term  hair  reduction 
after  multiple  sessions.  Because  skin  types  IV 
and V have higher probability of post inflamma-
tory hyperpigmentation, adequate cooling is nec-
essary,  hence  the  use  of  Nd:YAG  laser  with 
sapphire tip cooling [42]. In general, lasers with 

longer  wavelengths  such  as  the  diode  and 
Nd:YAG  laser  have  fewer  potential  negative 
effects than lasers with shorter wavelengths [43].
While  the  Nd:YAG  laser  may  be  the  safest 
method to treat all skin types, it is not necessarily 
the most effective. Bouzari et al. compared hair 
reduction  by  the  long-pulsed  Nd:YAG,  alexan-
drite,  and  diode  lasers  and  found  that  after 
3 months, the Nd:YAG was the least effective of 
the three [36]. An interesting aspect of their study 
was that the best results were seen in five patients 
who  underwent  combination  laser  therapy  that 
included  treatment  with  all  three  systems. They 
hypothesize that using a variety of wavelengths, 
they are able to damage hairs at different ranges 
in  the  skin;  longer  wavelengths  would  damage 
the  deeper  hairs  and  the  shorter  wavelengths 
would damage the more superficial hairs. This is 
analogous to laser tattoo removal, which incorpo-
rates a combination of lasers to remove the mul-
titude of pigments found in a given tattoo.

A study determining the safety and efficacy of 
the long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser for all skin types 
found  that  the  treatments  were  more  successful 
(46–53%  depending  on  location)  in  darker  skin 
patients (types V–VI). At 6 months, patients with 
skin types I–II obtained a 41–43% hair reduction, 
depending  on  location,  while  patients  with  skin 
types  III–IV  obtained  a  44–48%  hair  reduction 
[44].  Another  study  comparing  fluence  levels 
found similar hair reductions for fluences of 50, 
80, and 100 J/cm2 (29%, 29%, and 27% respec-
tively) in patients with skin types II–IV [45].

a

b

Fig. 8.2  (a) Pretreatment of right axillary area with coarse hair. (b) Only fine hair exist after 3 months and five treat-
ments with 1064 Nd:YAG laser

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



129

 Intense Pulsed Light
The  Intense  Pulsed  Light  (IPL)  system  is  not 
technically a laser, but has recently entered the 
hair removal arena as a competent contender. 
In fact, it has been used for virtually all of the 
same  indications  as  laser  systems  (Fig.  8.3a, 
b).  Unlike  lasers  which  emit  monochromatic 
light,  IPL  systems  have  flash  lamps  which 
produce non-coherent light beams in the 500–
1200  nm  spectrum  [43].  IPL  systems  work 
very similarly to lasers and rely on the princi-
ple  of  selective  photothermolysis.  The  IPL 
systems generally use millisecond pulse dura-
tion  that  is  lower  than  the  thermal  relaxation 
times  of  the  targeted  chromophores.  IPL  sys-
tems  uses  polychromatic  light,  which  irradi-
ates  multiple  chromophores  with  both  major 
and  minor  absorption  peaks,  allowing  for 

greater selective energy absorption [7]. Today, 
IPL is being used to cosmetically treat vascu-
lar  and  pigmented  lesions  in  addition  to 
removing unwanted hair [46].

Results using this system have been compara-
ble  to  the  more  conventional  lasers  mentioned 
(Fig.  8.4a,  b).  Similarly  to  lasers,  dark-haired 
patients  responded  better  to  IPL  treatment  than 
did  blonde  or  gray-haired  patients,  who  also 
required more treatment sessions [47]. IPL is not 
capable of achieving permanent hair removal, but 
long-term hair reduction with few side effects is 
possible [48].

A  randomized  controlled  trial  on  hirsute 
women,  with  normalized  testosterone  levels, 
reported that IPL and long-pulse diode laser both 
obtained similar hair removal efficacies, with IPL 
having a 77% to 40% hair reduction and the long 

a

b

Fig. 8.3  (a) Pretreatment of perioral area. (b) Immediately after treatment with IPL system, with perifollicular ery-
thema and edema, as well as burning of hair shaft

a

b

Fig. 8.4  (a) Pretreatment of right axillary area. (b) Three months after three treatments with IPL system patient has fine 
hair and delaying of hair growth

8 Laser for Hair Removal



130

pulse diode laser having 68% to 34% hair reduc-
tion. Although the efficacy declined in both treat-
ments  after  6  months,  it  was  still  reduced  from 
baseline. Patient satisfaction scores were similar 
at the 6-month follow up [49].

In a prospective randomized intrapatient com-
parison between Nd:YAG laser and IPL system, 
it  was  concluded  that  in  skin  phototype  II–III 
individuals,  IPL  is  a  better  choice  than  long 
pulsed  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  [50].  IPL  had  a 
statistically lower pain score and number of side 
effects,  leading  to  a  higher  patient  satisfaction 
score.  In  contrast,  Nd:YAG-treated  patients  sta-
tistically  showed  higher  side  effects  including 
erythema,  edema,  and  burning.  With  each 
Nd:YAG-treatment,  there  was  significant  hair 
reduction compared to IPL, which only showed 
significant  hair  reduction  after  the  third  treat-
ment. Eight months after the last treatment, both 
Nd:YAG and IPL treatments showed significant 
hair  reduction.  Because  IPL  is  shown  to  treat 
larger areas at the same time with a lower cost, 
IPL  is  beneficial.  However,  another  study  con-
cluded  that  in  darker  skinned  individuals,  the 
long-pulse  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  had  higher 
levels of satisfaction and increased hair reduction 
than IPL treatment [51].

A  non-randomized  controlled  trial  which 
compared  three  treatments  of  IPL  with  three 
treatments using a ruby laser found that in skin 
types II–IV, 94% of patients obtained an average 
49%  hair  reduction  using  the  IPL  system  at 
6-month follow-up, as compared with only 55% 
of  patients  obtaining  an  average  of  21%  hair 
reduction with the ruby laser [19, 52]. In a split-
face comparison of facial hair removal with the 
IPL system and long pulsed alexandrite laser, 30 
patients received six treatment sessions and data 
was assessed at 1, 3, and 6 sessions. In compari-
son  with  the  alexandrite  laser,  the  IPL  system 
showed longer median hair-free intervals, larger 
hair count reduction at the three sessions that data 
was  recorded,  and  a  higher  patient  satisfaction 
[53]. However, in a previous retrospective review 
of long- and short-pulsed alexandrite lasers and 
IPL,  individuals  needed  a  higher  number  of 
 treatments with the IPL device for the same ben-
efit [48].

 Home-Use Devices
Home-use  devices  have  recently  become  very 
popular  due  to  their  low  cost  and  convenience. 
Home-use devices use a lower fluence than stan-
dard  10–60  J/cm2  used  in  professional  offices 
[54]. As  a  result,  there  have  been  questions  on 
whether  they  only  produce  temporary  growth 
delay for several months rather than permanent 
follicle  destruction.  Hession  et  al.  described  a 
few of the FDA-approved home-use hair removal 
devices including diode lasers of 810 nm wave-
length with high, medium, and low fluence set-
tings  (7,  12,  20  J/cm2)  as  well  as  a  diode  with 
808 nm wavelength that could treat up to 60 and 
20 hairs per pulse with a fluence below 5 J/cm2. 
IPL  home-use  devices  include  treatment  with 
475–1200 nm wavelength, delivering up to 5 J/
cm2.  Other  available  IPL  devices  emit  similar 
wavelengths  of  400–1200  nm  or  530–1100  nm 
with  a  fluence  up  to  10  J/cm2  or  up  to  7–10  J/
cm2, respectively. Professional hair removal sys-
tems can vary widely in wavelengths; however, 
the  home-use  hair  removal  systems  are  more 
limited. For instance, the diode lasers have 800–
810  nm  wavelength,  and  the  IPL  home-use 
devices  have  a  wavelength  range  mostly  from 
475 to 1200 nm.

The home- use diode laser, (Tria Beauty, Inc., 
Dublin CA), was found to be safe and effective 
for hair reduction in individuals with Fitzpatrick 
skin type I–IV after 8 monthly treatments [55]. 
Although the study sample size was 13 individu-
als, 546 active sites and 182 controlled sites were 
analyzed. Low, medium, and high fluence (7, 12, 
20  J/cm2)  treatments  demonstrated  47%,  55%, 
and  73%  mean  hair  count  reduction  1  month 
after  the  eighth  treatment.  At  12  months  post 
treatment, count hair reduction remained stable 
at  44%,  49%,  and  65%  for  low,  medium,  and 
high  fluences  respectively.  The  only  observed 
side  effects  were  mild  transient  erythema  and 
edema,  more  often  seen  in  the  higher  fluence 
sites. In another previous study, Wheeland con-
firmed that the 810 nm portable diode laser was 
very effective at removing hair with a 33% mean 
hair  reduction  12  months  after  the  third  treat-
ment in 77 patients [56]. In addition, a random-
ized  controlled  trial  with  32  women  with  skin 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



phototypes I–IV treated with an 810 nm home-
use laser at 5.0–6.4 J/cm2 had a stable hair count 
reduction  and  thickness  during  treatment  [57]. 
After three treatments, hair reduction increased 
to 38%, and with sustained usage reached a pla-
teau  up  to  59%  hair  reduction.  However,  hair 
growth gradually returned to baseline 3 months 
after the final treatment, regrowing beyond base-
line levels by 29% after treatment cessation.

An  FDA-approved  home-use  IPL  device  for 
hair removal, commercially known as IPL (Silk’n 
device,  home  Skinovations,  Kfar  Saba,  Israel), 
uses a wavelength ranging from 475 to 1200 nm 
and low fluences up to 5 J/cm2. A recent clinical 
trial  including  15  patients  that  received  six 
biweekly treatments with the home-pulsed light 
device, concluded that this device is effective for 
facial hair removal in skin types I–IV, indicating 
a 78.1% mean percent hair count reduction at the 
3 month follow up with no adverse effects [58]. 
Another study concluded that a novel low-energy 
pulsed  light  device  can  effectively  remove 
unwanted  non-facial  dark  terminal  hair  in  indi-
viduals with skin type I–IV [59]. In 20 women, 
after  three  treatments  at  2-week  intervals  using 
the  handheld  IPL  device,  hair  counts  reduced 
37.8%  to  53.6%  6  months  after  the  three  treat-
ments.  Only  25%  of  the  patients  experienced 
mild erythema, with no other side effects.

Side Effects
It is vital to provide education to patients on these 
home-use  devices  in  order  to  prevent  injury. 
Since home-use devices have brought safety con-
cerns,  devices  need  to  be  easy  to  use  and  have 
safety  mechanisms  built  in.  Because  a  potential 
complication  may  be  ocular  damage  due  to  the 
laser or IPL emission, several home-use laser and 
IPL  packaging  will  provide  protective  eyewear 
although it is not guaranteed that consumers will 
use  them  [60].  Other  safety  mechanisms  to 
reduce  the  risk  of  ocular  exposure  include  skin 
contact sensors that do not allow the activation of 
the laser unless in contact with the skin. It is nec-
essary  to  take  precautionary  measures  to  avoid 
injury to retina and iris that may cause blind spots 
or  glaucoma.  Since  wavelengths  above  750  nm 
and below 400 nm can cause lens cataract or cor-

131

nea  injury,  many  home-use  devices  will  have 
built  in  filters  that  do  not  enable  them  to  emir 
wavelengths below 450 nm [61].

Similar to standard professional laser devices, 
darker skinned individuals need to be very care-
ful with home-use devices, because their greater 
epidermal  melanin  content  may  increase  their 
risk  for  thermal  burns.  Some  new  models  of 
home-use IPL devices actually have a skin color 
sensor, preventing the treatment of skin types V–
VI [43]. Since many studies of home- use devices 
include skin types I–IV, more studies need to be 
done with individuals of skin types V–VI in order 
to better assess the risks of home-use laser hair 
removal devices.

Overall, home-use devices within the scope of 
hair removal continues to evolve and the increas-
ing  popularity  of  home-use  laser  hair  removal 
devices due to their low cost, speed, and conve-
nience is important to consider in cosmetic der-
matology.  In  the  future,  optimizing  their  safety 
and  efficacy  will  probably  have  longer-lasting 
treatment  results  while  minimizing  untoward 
side effects.

 Radiofrequency Combinations

Radiofrequency  devices  have  been  combined 
with both IPL and diode lasers to provide optimal 
hair removal treatments to a wider range of skin 
types. The combinations are considered safe for 
patients with darker skin types because the radio-
frequency energy is not absorbed by melanin in 
the  epidermis.  This  technology,  termed  electro-
optical synergy, or ELOS, has a dual mechanism 
of heating the hair follicle with electrical energy 
(namely  radiofrequency)  and  heating  the  hair 
shaft with optical energy.

A  new  evolution  in  photoepilation  involves 
removing  nonpigmented  hairs  such  as  “peach 
fuzz” which the previous lasers fail to remove. A 
combination  of  radiofrequency  (RF)  and  lasers 
have been used for white or blonde hair, but with 
low  efficacy.  Studies  have  shown  that  the  com-
bined use of RF and optical energy has been found 
to be successful, though various mechanisms have 
been  proposed  to  explain  the  success  [62–65]. 

8 Laser for Hair Removal



132

Some  claims  of  widespread  safety  have  been 
made because RF energy is not readily absorbed 
by the melanin abundantly found in the epidermis 
of darker skin types, theoretically sparing it from 
damage. However, a low efficacy of this new tech-
nology has been reported so far. Results have indi-
cated  that  the  majority  of  subjects  achieved  less 
than  50%  hair  reduction  after  3  months  [63].  In 
two other studies, average clearances of 48% [64] 
and 75% [65] were seen at 18-months follow-up. 
Because this is a relatively new technology, more 
studies are clearly necessary to provide more reli-
able results for those with nonpigmented hair or 
with darker skin types.

 Other Removal Methods 
for Nonpigmented Hair

Meladine,  a  topical  melanin  chromophore,  has 
been  studied  in  Europe  with  interesting  results. 
The liposome solution dye, which is sprayed on, 
is selectively absorbed by the hair follicle and not 
the  skin.  This  gives  the  follicles  a  temporary 
boost of melanin to optimize laser hair removal 
treatments. Clinical studies in Europe have shown 
vast  permanent  hair  reduction  in  patients  who 
used Meladine prior to treatment. However, other 
studies have found Meladine to only offer a delay 
of  hair  growth  as  opposed  to  permanent  hair 
reduction  [7].  Sand  et  al.  used  a  similar  topical 
liposomal  melanin  compound  in  a  randomized, 
controlled,  double-blind  study  with  blond  and 
white hair patients, and found that the substance 
made almost no difference in treatment outcomes 
for the patients [66].

Photodynamic  therapy  may  be  an  effective 
option  for  those  with  nonpigmented  or  light-col-
ored hair. Because of the lack or diminished amount 
of a natural chromophore in the hair follicle, a topi-
cal photosensitizer 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) 
is  used.  Light  exposure  activates  5-ALA,  which 
subsequently  creates  reactive  oxygen  and  allows 
for destruction of the hair follicle [7].

 Post-operative Management
Post-operatively, ice packs can be used to reduce 
pain and minimize edema. Analgesics are rarely 

needed. Mild topical steroid creams may be given 
to  the  patient  to  decrease  post-treatment  ery-
thema and edema. If any epidermal injury occurs 
during the procedure, a topical anti-biotic can be 
given to the patient. The patient should be noti-
fied that they must use sun block and avoid direct 
sun exposure [7].

 Adverse Events
•  Some  of  the  reported  adverse  events  have 
included  post-treatment  erythema,  edema, 
crusting,  blistering,  paradoxical  hair  growth, 
hypo/hyperpigmentation,  scarring,  and  skin 
infections.

•  Methods to decrease the risk of adverse events 
include  effective  epidermal  cooling,  long 
pulse  duration,  longer  wavelength  lasers,  ice 
packs, analgesics, steroid creams, topical anti-
biotics, and avoidance of sun exposure

 Side Effects/Complications
Patients should be warned before the laser pro-
cedure that they might experience some discom-
fort  during  and  after  the  procedure.  Reported 
adverse  events  have  included  post-treatment 
erythema, edema, crusting, blistering, hypopig-
mentation,  hyperpigmentation,  and  scarring 
(Fig. 8.5a, b). Other complications include her-
pes simplex outbreaks in patients with a previ-
ous history of outbreaks, folliculitis in patients 
who  sweat  excessively  or  swim,  transient  and 
permanent  pigmentary  changes,  temporary  or 
permanent leucotrichia, loss of freckles or light-
ening of tattoos, livedo reticularis, intense pruri-
tus, and urticaria [7].

In  some  cases,  laser  treatment  has  actually 
been  reported  to  induce  hair  growth,  particu-
larly on the face and neck. For example, in one 
study,  this  was  noted  in  young  females  of 
Mediterranean and Middle Eastern descent and 
with  darker  skin  types  (III  or  IV)  [67].  The 
induction of hair growth occurred regardless of 
the  fluency  or  type  of  laser  used  for  both 
intense  pulsed  light  and  long-pulsed  alexan-
drite  laser.  Because  neo-genesis  of  hair  folli-
cles after birth does not occur, it is likely that 
the  mechanism  behind 
laser-induced  hair 
growth is that local vellus hair follicles trans-

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



a

b

133

Fig. 8.5  (a) Blister formation, a complication of IPL treatment 3 days after treatment. (b) Residual hyperpigmentation 
is still noticed 9 months after blister formation

form  into  terminal  pigmented  hair  follicles 
[67]. Another  theory  is  that  the  laser  induces 
synchronization of hair growth cycles by direct 
light stimulation [68].

 Prevention and Treatment of Side 
Effects/Complications
Dark-skinned  patients  are  more  prone  to  the 
adverse  effects  aforementioned.  Several  factors 
may  assist  in  minimizing  these  side  effects. 
Effective  epidermal  cooling  can  reduce  epider-
mal  damage  from  the  laser  treatment.  A  long 
pulse  duration  allows  the  hair  follicle  to  be 
heated effectively while the effect of epidermal 
cooling is at its peak. In addition, longer wave-
length lasers are associated with a lower degree 
of epidermal damage. Ice packs, analgesics, and 
mild  topical  steroid  creams  can  be  used  post-
operatively  to  reduce  pain  and  minimize  ery-
thema and edema. In cases of epidermal injury, a 
topical antibiotic can be given to the patient. The 
patient should be advised to avoid sun exposure 
after the procedure.

In  a  prospective,  randomized,  placebo-con-
trolled study, Akinturk et al. showed that piroxi-
cam gel provided adequate pain relief and lowered 
inflammation after Nd:YAG laser hair removal in 
patients as compared to placebo control [69].

 Future Directions

•  The  FDA  has  approved  lasers  for  permanent 

hair reduction.

•  Strong  data  from  standardized,  well-con-
trolled, long-term studies are needed to estab-
lish the optimal treatment parameters for each 
laser.

Currently, the FDA has not approved lasers to 
be marketed as a permanent hair removal option, 
although  manufacturers  have  been  allowed  to 
claim  permanent  hair  reduction  based  on  safety 
and  efficacy.  Permanent  hair  reduction  involves 
the stable reduction in the total amount of hair in a 
given area over the long-term. To achieve the title 
of permanent hair removal, future studies should 
be concerned with the long-term efficacy of these 
lasers. In general, the ruby laser can be used for 
skin types I and II, although the alexandrite laser 
and  the  diode  laser  are  generally  safer  with  less 
side  effects  for  skin  types  III–IV.  The  Nd:YAG 
laser is ideal for tanned skin and skin types IV, V 
and  VI,  but  has  a  lower  efficacy  in  lighter  skin 
types. Current studies are beginning to investigate 
the safety and efficacy of specific and newer lasers 
for various skin types. This is important because as 
the popularity of photoepilation continues to grow, 
so will the population of patients interested in this 

8 Laser for Hair Removal



134

procedure. The challenge ahead lies in gathering 
strong data from standardized, long- term studies 
so  that  optimal  parameters  can  be  established.  It 
must be noted that current trends in laser treatment 
choice and research have moved away from ruby 
lasers and to the longer wavelength systems such 
as  the  Alexandrite,  diode  and  Nd:YAG  lasers, 
which allow for deeper penetration to the level of 
hair bulbs [70].

 Conclusion
Excess  hair  is  an  extremely  common  condi-
tion  affecting  both  men  and  women  of  all 
ages. Many of the previous options for people 
seeking  to  remove  or  lessen  the  presence  of 
hair have been painful or have only resulted in 
short-term  effects.  With  the  advent  of  laser 
technology,  the  new  generation  nonablative 
lasers and light systems have become some of 
the most popular procedures in all of cosmetic 
dermatology.  Although  lasers  are  not  yet  a 
permanent solution for hair removal, they are 
able  to  provide  a  safe,  fast,  and  effective 
method for hair reduction.

References

 1.  The American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery. 
ASAPS  2016  Cosmetic  Surgery  National  Data 
Bank  statistics.  2016.  https://www.surgery.org/sites/
default/files/ASAPS-Stats2016.pdf. Accessed 5 July 
2017.

 2.  The American  Society  for Aesthetic  Plastic  Surgery. 
ASAPS  2014  Cosmetic  Surgery  National  Data  Bank 
statistics. 2014. https://www.surgery.org/sites/default/
files/2014-Stats.pdf. Accessed 5 July 2017.

 3.  The American  Society  for Aesthetic  Plastic  Surgery. 
ASAPS  2012  Cosmetic  Surgery  National  Data  Bank 
statistics. 2012. https://www.surgery.org/sites/default/
files/ASAPS-2012-Stats.pdf. Accessed 5 July 2017.
 4.  Nouri K, Trent JT. Lasers. In: Nouri K, Leal-Khouri S, 
editors. Techniques  in  dermatologic  surgery,  vol.  29. 
St. Louis: Mosby; 2003. p. 245–58.

 5.  Olsen  EA.  Methods  of  hair  removal.  J  Am  Acad 

Dermatol. 1999;40:143–55.

 6.  FDA  Docket  K980517.  July  21,  1998.  Summary  of 
safety and effectiveness for the epilaser normal mode 
ruby  laser.  www.access-data.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf/
K980517.pdf. Accessed 31 Jan 2011.

 7.  Dierickx  C,  Grossman  M.  Laser  hair  removal.  In: 
Goldberg  DJ,  editor.  Laser  and  lights,  vol.  2.  China: 
Elsevier Saunders; 2005. p. 61–76.

 8.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermolysis: 
precise microsurgery by selective absorption of pulsed 
radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

 9.  Dierickx  C,  Alora  MB,  Dover  JS.  A  clinical  over-
view  of  hair  removal  using  lasers  and  light  sources. 
Dermatol Clin. 1999;17:357–66.

 10.  Battle EF, Hobbs LM. Laser-assisted hair removal for 
darker skin types. Dermatol Ther. 2004;17:177–83.
 11.  Adrian  RM.  Vascular  mechanisms  in  laser  hair 

removal. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2(1):49–50.

 12.  Tanzi EL, Lupton JR, Alster TS. Lasers in dermatol-
ogy: four decades of progress. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2003;49:1–31.

 13.  Lask G, Friedman D, Elman M, Fournier N, Shavit R, 
Slatkine M. Pneumatic skin flattening (PSF): a novel 
technology for marked pain reduction in hair removal 
with  high  energy  density  lasers  and  IPLs.  J  Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2006;8(2):76–81.

 14.  Fournier  N.  Hair  removal  on  dark-skinned  patients 
with  pneumatic  skin  flattening  (PSF)  and  a  high-
laser.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
energy  Nd:YAG 
2008;10(4):210–2.

 15.  Rogachefsky AS, Silapunt S, Goldberg DJ. Evaluation 
of  a  new  super-long-pulsed  810  nm  diode  laser  for 
the removal of unwanted hair: the concept of thermal 
damage time. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:410–4.

 16. Nanni  CA,  Alster  TS.  Laser-assisted  hair  removal: 
side  effects  of  Q-switched  Nd:YAG,  long-pulsed 
ruby,  and  alexandrite  lasers.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1999;41:165–71.

 17.  Campos  VB,  Dierickx  CC,  Farinelli  WA,  Lin  TY, 
Manuskiatti  W,  Anderson  RR.  Ruby  laser  hair 
removal:  evaluation  of  long-term  efficacy  and  side 
effects. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;26:177–85.

 18.  Lanigan SW. Incidence of side effects after laser hair 

removal. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2003;49:882–6.

 19.  Haedersdal  M,  Wulf  HC.  Evidence-based  review  of 
hair  removal  using  lasers  and  light  sources.  J  Eur 
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2006;20:9–20.

 20.  Elman M, Klein A, Slatkine M. Dark skin tissue reac-
tion  in  laser  assisted  hair  removal  with  a  long-pulse 
ruby laser. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;26:240–3.

 21.  Polderman MC, Pavel S, Le Cessie S, Grevelink JM, 
van  Leeuwen  RL.  Efficacy,  tolerability,  and  safety 
of a long-pulsed ruby laser system in the removal of 
unwanted hair. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:240–3.

 22. Wimmershoff MB, Scherer K, Lorenz S, Landthaler 
M,  Hohenleutner  U.  Hair  removal  using  a  5-msec 
long-pulsed  ruby  laser.  Dermatol  Surg.  2000;26: 
205–9.

 23. Allison  KP,  Kiernan  MN,  Waters  RA,  Clement 
RM.  Evaluation  of  the  ruby  694  chromos  for  hair 
removal  in  various  skin  sites.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2003;18:165–70.

 24.  Sommer  S,  Render  C,  Sheehan-Dare  RA.  Facial 
hirsutism  treated  with  the  normal-mode  ruby  laser: 
results  of  a  12-month  follow-up  study.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 1999;41:974–9.

 25.  Lloyd  JR,  Mirkov  M.  Long-term  evaluation  of  the 
long-pulsed alexandrite laser for the removal of bikini 

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



hair at shortened treatment intervals. Dermatol Surg. 
2000;26:633–7.

 26.  Eremia  S,  Li  CY,  Umar  SH,  Newman  N.  Laser  hair 
removal: long-term results with a 755 nm alexandrite 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:920–4.

 27.  Nouri K, Chen H, Saghari S, Ricotti CA. Comparing 
18-versus  12-mm  spot  size  in  hair  removal  using  a 
Gentlease  755-nm  alexandrite  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2004;30:494–7.

 28.  Boss  WK,  Usal  H,  Thompson  RC,  Fiorillo  MA.  A 
comparison  of  the  long-pulse  and  short-pulse  alex-
andrite  laser  hair  removal  systems. Ann  Plast  Surg. 
1999;42:381–4.

 29.  Goldberg DJ, Akhami R. Evaluation comparing mul-
tiple  treatments  with  a  2-msec  and  10-msec  alex-
andrite  laser  for  hair  removal.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1999;25:223–8.

 30.  Hussain M, Polnikorn N, Goldberg DJ. Laser-assisted 
hair  removal  in Asian  skin:  efficacy,  complications, 
and  the  effect  of  single  versus  multiple  treatments. 
Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:249–7.

 31.  Görgü M, Aslan G, Aköz T, Erdogan B. Comparison 
of alexandrite laser and electrolysis for hair removal. 
Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:37–41.

 32.  Sadighha  A,  Zahed  MG.  Meta-analysis  of  hair 
removal laser trials. Lasers Med Sci. 2007;24(1):21–
5. [Epub November 20, 2007].

 33. Eremia S, Li C, Newman N. Laser hair removal with 
alexandrite versus diode laser using four treatment ses-
sions: 1-year results. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:925–30.
 34.  Bouzari N, Tabatabai H, Abbasi Z, Firooz A, Dowlati 
Y.  Laser  hair  removal:  comparison  of  long-pulsed 
Nd:YAG,  long-pulsed  alexandrite,  and  long-pulsed 
diode lasers. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:498–502.

 35.  Handrick  C,  Alster  TS.  Comparison  of  long-pulsed 
diode  and  long-pulsed  alexandrite  lasers  for  hair 
removal:  a  long-term  clinical  and  histologic  study. 
Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:622–6.

 36. Bäumler W,  Scherer  K, Abels  C,  et  al. The  effect  of 
different  spot  sizes  on  the  efficacy  of  hair  removal 
using  a  long-pulse  diode  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2002;28:118–21.

 37.  Lou  WW,  Quintana  AP,  Geronemus  RG,  Grossman 
MC.  Prospective  study  of  hair  reduction  by  diode 
laser  (800  nm)  with  long-term  follow-up.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2000;26:428–34.

 38.  Barolet  D.  Low  fluence-high  repetition  rate  diode 
laser hair removal 12-month evaluation: reducing pain 
and risks while keeping clinical efficacy. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2012;44:277–81.

 39.  Royo J, Urdiales F, Moreno J, Al-Zarouni M, Cornejo 
P, Trelles MA. Six-month follow-up multicenter pro-
spective study of 368 patients, phototypes III to V, on 
epilation efficacy using an 810-nm diode laser at low 
fluence. Lasers Med Sci. 2011;26(2):247–55.

 40.  Nilforouschzadeh  MA,  Naieni  FF,  Siadat  AH,  Rad 
L. Comparison between sequentional treatment with 
diode  and  alexandrite  lasers  versus  alexandrite  laser 
alone in the treatment of hirsuitism. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2011;10:1255–9.

135

 41.  Lorenz S, Brunnberg S, Landthaler M, Hohenleutner 
U. Hair removal with the long pulsed Nd:YAG laser: 
a  prospective  study  with  one  year  follow-up.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2002;30:127–34.

 42.  Nanda S, Bansal S. Long pulsed Nd:YAG laser with 
inbuilt  cool  sapphire  tip  for  long  term  hair  reduc-
tion  on  type-IV  and  V  skin:  a  prospective  analysis 
of  200  patients.  Indian  J  Dermatol Venereol  Leprol. 
2010;76(6):677–81.

 43.  Gan  SD,  Graber  EM.  Laser  hair  removal:  a  review. 

Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(6):823–38.

 44.  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. Long-pulsed 1064-nm Nd:YAG 
laser-assisted hair removal in all skin types. Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30:13–7.

 45.  Goldberg DJ, Silapunt S. Hair removal using a long-
pulsed Nd:YAG laser: comparison at fluences of 50, 
80, and 100 J/cm2. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:434–6.
 46.  Goldberg DJ. Current trends in intense pulsed light. J 

Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2012;5(6):45–53.

 47.  Schroeter CA, Groenewegen JS, Reineke T, Neumann 
HA. Hair reduction using intense pulsed light source. 
Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:168–73.

 48.  Marayiannis  KB,  Vlachos  SP,  Savva  MP,  Kontoes 
PP. Efficacy of long- and short pulse alexandrite lasers 
compared with an intense pulsed light source for epi-
lation: a study on 532 sites in 389 patients. J Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2003;5:140–5.

 49. Haak CS, Nymann P, Pedersen AT, et al. Hair removal 
in  hirsute  women  with  normal  testosterone  lev-
els:  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of  long-pulsed 
diode  laser  vs.  intense  pulsed  light.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2010;163(5):1007–13.

 50.  Szima  GZ,  Janka  EA,  Kovacs A,  et  al.  Comparison 
removal  efficacy  and  side  effect  of 
of  hair 
neodymium:Yttrium-aluminum-garnet 
and 
intense pulsed light systems (18-month follow-up). J 
Cosmet Dermatol. 2017;16(2):193–8.

laser 

 51.  Ismail  SA.  Long-pulsed  Nd:YAG  laser  vs.  intense 
pulsed light for hair removal in dark skin: a random-
ized controlled trial. Br J Dermatol. 2012;166:317–21.
 52.  Bjerring P, Cramers M, Egekvist H, Christiansen K, 
Troilius A. Hair reduction using a new intense pulsed 
light irradiator and a normal mode ruby laser. J Cutan 
Laser Ther. 2000;2:63–71.

 53.  Al-Dhalimi  MA,  Kadhum  MJ.  A  split-face  com-
parison  of  facial  hair  removal  with  the  long-pulsed 
alexandrite  laser  and  intense  pulsed  light  system.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2015;17(5):267–72.

 54.  Hession  MT,  Markova  A,  Graber  EM.  A  review  of 
hand-held, home-use cosmetic laser and light devices. 
Dermatol Surg. 2015;41(3):307–20.

 55.  Wheeland RG. Permanent hair reduction with a home-
use diode laser: safety and effectiveness 1 year after 
eight treatments. Lasers Surg Med. 2012;44(7):550–7.
 56.  Wheeland RG. Simulated consumer use of a battery-
powered, hand-held, portable diode laser (810 nm) for 
hair removal: a safety, efficacy and ease-of-use study. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(6):476–93.

 57.  Thaysen-Petersen  D,  Barbet-Pfeilsticker  M, 
Beerwerth F, et al. Quantitative assessment of grow-

8 Laser for Hair Removal



136

ing  hair  counts,  thickness  and  colour  during  and 
after  treatments  with  a  low-fluence,  home-device 
laser:  a  randomized  controlled  trial.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2015;172(1):151–9.

 58.  Gold MH, Biron JA, Thompson B. Clinical evaluation 
of a novel intense pulsed light source for facial skin 
hair removal for home use. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 
2015;8(7):30–5.

 59.  Alster  TS,  Tanzi  EL.  Effect  of  a  novel  low-energy 
pulsed-light  device  for  home-use  hair  removal. 
Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(3):483–9.

 60.  Town  G,  Ash  C,  Dierickx  C,  Fritz  K,  Bjerring  P, 
Haedersdal M. Guidelines on the safety of light-based 
home-use  hair  removal  devices  from  the  European 
Society for Laser Dermatology. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2012;26(7):799–811.

 61.  Thaysen-Petersen  D,  Bjerring  P,  Dierickx  C,  Nash 
JF,  Town  G,  Haedersdal  M.  A  systematic  review  of 
light-based  home-use  devices  for  hair  removal  and 
considerations on human safety. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2012;26(5):545–53.

 62.  Goldberg DJ, Marmur ES, Hussain M. Treatment of 
terminal and vellus non-pigmented hairs with an opti-
cal/bipolar  radiofrequency  energy  source—with  and 
without  pre-treatment  using  topical  aminolevulinic 
acid. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:25–8.

 63.  Yaghmai  D,  Garden  JM,  Bakus  AD,  Spenceri  EA, 
Hruza GJ, Kilmer SL. Hair removal using a combina-

tion radio-frequency and intense pulsed light source. J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2004;6:201–7.

 64.  Sadick  NS,  Laughlin  SA.  Effective  epilation  of 
white and blond hair using combined radiofrequency 
and  optical  energy.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther.  2004;6: 
27–31.

 65.  Sadick NS, Shaoul J. Hair removal using a combina-
tion  of  conducted  radiofrequency  and  optical  ener-
gies—an 18-month follow-up. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2004;6:21–6.

 66.  Sand M, Bechara FG, Sand D, Altmeyer P, Hoffmann 
K. A randomized, controlled, double-blind study eval-
uating melanin-encapsulated liposomes as a chromo-
phore for laser hair removal of blond, white, and gray 
hair. Ann Plast Surg. 2007;58(5):551–4.

 67.  Kontoes  P,  Vlachos  S,  Konstantinos  M,  Anastasia 
L,  Myrto  S.  Hair  induction  after  laser-assisted  hair 
removal  and  its  treatment.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2006;54(1):64–7. [Epub December 2, 2005].

 68.  Lolis  MS,  Marmur  ES.  Paradoxical  effects  of  hair 
removal  systems:  a  review.  J  Cosmet  Dermatol. 
2006;5(4):274–6.

 69.  Gold MH. Lasers and light sources for the removal of 
unwanted hair. Clin Dermatol. 2007;25:443–53.
 70.  Akinturk  S,  Eroglu  A.  Effect  of  piroxicam  gel  for 
pain  control  and  inflammation  in  Nd:YAG  1064-nm 
laser  hair  removal.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol  Venereol. 
2007;21(3):380–3.

V. Vejjabhinanta et al.



Lasers for Resurfacing

Rungsima Wanitphakdeedecha and Tina S. Alster

9

Abstract
Many  signs  of  cutaneous  photodamage  are 
amenable to treatment with a variety of abla-
tive and non-ablative lasers, light sources, and 
fractional  photothermolysis.  Ablative  laser 
skin  resurfacing  offers  the  most  substantial 
clinical  improvement,  but  is  associated  with 
several weeks of postoperative recovery.

Keywords
Lasers  ·  Resurfacing  · Ablative  lasers  ·  Non-
ablative lasers · Fractional lasers

Outline
•  Many  signs  of  cutaneous  photodamage  are 
amenable to treatment with a variety of abla-
tive and non-ablative lasers, light sources, and 
fractional photothermolysis.

•  Ablative laser skin resurfacing offers the most 
substantial clinical improvement, but is asso-

R. Wanitphakdeedecha (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University,  
Bangkok, Thailand
e-mail: rungsima.wan@mahidol.ac.th 

T. S. Alster 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington 
Institute of Dermatologic Laser Surgery,  
Washington, DC, USA
e-mail: talster@skinlaser.com

ciated  with  several  weeks  of  postoperative 
recovery

•  Severe side effects and complications after abla-
tive laser skin resurfacing can be minimized by 
careful  patient  selection,  proper  surgical  tech-
nique, and meticulous postoperative care

•  Non-ablative laser skin remodeling is a good 
alternative  for  patients  who  desire  modest 
improvement  of  photodamaged  skin  without 
significant post-treatment recovery

•  The  noninvasive  nature  of  fractional  photo-
thermolysis treatment, coupled with an excel-
lent side effect profile, makes it an attractive 
alternative to ablative laser techniques.

•  Good candidates for non-ablative laser and light-
source  treatments  are  patients  with  cutaneous 
photodamage and realistic clinical expectations
•  With ongoing advancements in laser technol-
ogy  and 
improved  clinical 
 outcomes with minimal postoperative recovery 
will be realized

techniques, 

 Introduction

Summary Box
•  A wide variety of lasers and light-based 
sources  is  available  to  treat  cutaneous 
photodamage  including  ablative  and 
non-ablative  lasers,  light  sources,  and 
fractional photothermolysis

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_9

137





138

Years of damaging ultraviolet (UV) light expo-
sure manifests clinically as a sallow complexion 
with  roughened  surface  texture  and  variable 
telangiectasias, 
degrees  of  dyspigmentation, 
wrinkling, and skin laxity [1, 2]. Histologically, 
these extrinsic aging effects are usually limited 
to the epidermis and upper papillary dermis and 
are therefore amenable to treatment with a vari-
ety of ablative and non-ablative lasers and light-
sources [3].

 History of Procedures

Summary Box
•  Selective  photothermolysis  theory  of 
laser-tissue interaction is used to create 
thermal destruction of target tissue with-
out unwanted conduction of heat to sur-
rounding  structures  by  selecting  the 
appropriate  laser  wavelength  and  pulse 
duration.

•  The  first  system  specifically  developed 
for cutaneous laser resurfacing was the 
pulsed carbon dioxide (CO2) laser.
•  The  short-pulsed  erbium:yttrium–alu-
minum–garnet (Er:YAG) laser was sub-
sequently  used  as  an  alternative  to  the 
CO2  laser  to  minimize  the  recovery 
period and limit side effects while main-
taining clinical benefit.

Although dermatologic laser surgery is nearly 
five decades old, the field was revolutionized in 
1983  when  Anderson  and  Parrish  elucidated 
the  principles  of  selective  photothermolysis 
[4]. This basic theory of laser-tissue interaction 
explains  how  selective  tissue  destruction  is 
possible.  In  order  to  effect  precise  thermal 
destruction  of  target  tissue  without  unwanted 
conduction  of  heat  to  surrounding  structures, 
the  proper  laser  wavelength  must  be  selected 
for  preferential  absorption  by  the  intended 

tissue  chromophore.  Furthermore,  the  pulse 
duration of laser emission must be shorter than 
the thermal relaxation time of the target–ther-
mal  relaxation  time  (TR)  being  defined  as  the 
amount  of  time  necessary  for  the  targeted 
structure  to  cool  to  one-half  of  its  peak  tem-
perature  immediately  after  laser  irradiation. 
The  delivered  fluence  (energy  density)  must 
also  be  sufficiently  high  to  cause  the  desired 
degree of thermal injury to the skin. Thus, the 
laser  wavelength,  pulse  duration,  and  fluence 
each must be carefully chosen to achieve maxi-
mal target ablation while minimizing surround-
ing tissue damage.

The  first  system  specifically  developed  for 
cutaneous  laser  resurfacing  was  the  pulsed  car-
bon dioxide (CO2) laser, which was approved by 
the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  in 
1996. Earlier CO2 systems were continuous-wave 
(CW)  lasers  which  were  effective  for  gross 
lesional  destruction  [5,  6],  but  were  unable  to 
reliably  ablate  fine  layers  of  tissue  because  of 
excessive  tissue  heating  which  produced  unac-
ceptably  high  rates  of  scarring  and  pigmentary 
alteration [7–9]. The unpredictable nature of the 
CW  lasers  prevented  their  widespread  use  in 
facial  resurfacing  procedures.  With  the  subse-
quent development of high-energy, pulsed lasers 
it became possible to safely apply higher energy 
densities  with  exposure  times  that  were  shorter 
than  the  thermal  relaxation  time  of  water- 
containing tissue, thus lowering the risk of ther-
mal injury to surrounding non-targeted structures 
[3, 10].

The  short-pulsed  erbium:yttrium–aluminum–
garnet  (Er:YAG)  laser  was  subsequently  FDA- 
approved  for  cutaneous  resurfacing  as  an 
alternative to the CO2 laser in an attempt to mini-
mize  the  recovery  period  and  limit  side  effects 
while maintaining clinical benefit.

In  response  to  growing  public  interest  in 
minimally- invasive  treatment  modalities,  non- 
ablative  laser  and  light  source  technology  was 
later developed. Rapid advances in non-ablative 
technology  have  produced  several  lasers  and 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



Table 9.1  Lasers and light sources for skin resurfacing

Ablative

Non- 
ablative

Fractional

Laser type
CO2 (pulsed)
Er:YAG (pulsed)
Pulsed dye
Nd:YAG, Q-switched
Nd:YAG, long-pulsed
Diode, long-pulsed
Er:glass, long-pulsed
Intense pulsed light 
source
Er-doped fiber

Wavelength (nm)
10,600
2940
585–595
1064
1320
1450
1540
515–1200

1550

Er erbium, Nd neodymium, Q-switched quality-switched, 
YAG yttrium-aluminum-garnet

light-based  sources  capable  of  improving  fine 
facial rhytides, dyspigmentation, and telangiec-
tasia associated with cutaneous photodamage.

is 

The armamentarium of lasers and light-based 
sources  currently  available  to  treat  cutaneous 
than  ever  before 
larger 
photodamage 
(Table  9.1).  The  most  appropriate  technique 
depends  upon  the  severity  of  photodamage  and 
rhytides,  the  expertise  of  the  laser  surgeon,  and 
the  expectations  and  lifestyle  of  the  individual 
patient.

 Ablative Laser Skin Resurfacing

 Indications and Contraindications

Summary Box
•  Indications

 – Mild-to-moderate rhytides, preferably 
in non-movement-associated areas
 – Other  signs  of  photodamage  (e.g., 

dyspigmentation and keratoses)

 – Shallow atrophic scars
 – Superficial skin lesions

•  Contraindications

 – Patients 

with 

unrealistic 

expectations

 – Patients with perpetual sun exposure

139

 – Active  bacterial,  viral,  fungal  infec-
tion or inflammatory skin conditions 
involving the skin areas to be treated
 – Patients  with  prior  lower  blepharo-
plasties  using  an  external  approach 
are at greater risk of ectropion forma-
tion  after  infraorbital  ablative  laser 
treatment

 – Patients  with  darker  skin 

tones 
(skin  phototype  IV–VI)  have  a 
high 
incidence  of  postoperative 
hyperpigmentation

 – Concomitant  isotretinoin  use  could 
potentially  lead  to  an  increased  risk 
of hypertrophic scarring

 – Patients with a propensity to scar will 
be  at  greater  risk  for  postoperative 
scarring

The ideal patient for ablative laser skin resur-
facing has a fair complexion (skin phototype I 
or II), exhibits cutaneous lesions that are ame-
nable  to  treatment,  and  has  realistic  expecta-
tions  of  the  resurfacing  procedure.  Adequate 
preoperative  patient  evaluation  and  education 
are  absolute  essentials  to  avoid  pitfalls  and 
optimize  the  clinical  outcome  (Table  9.2). 
Proper patient selection is paramount as abla-
tive laser resurfacing can be complicated by a 
prolonged  postoperative   recovery,  pigmentary 
alteration, or unexpected scarring. The patient’s 
emotional  ability  to  tolerate  an  extended  con-
valescence is an important factor in determin-
ing  the  most  appropriate  choice  of  laser. 
Although  CO2  and  modulated  Er:YAG  lasers 
often  produce  the  most  dramatic  clinical 
results, some patients may be unable to tolerate 
the  intensive  recovery  period.  For  patients 
unable  or  unwilling  to  withstand  extended 
postoperative  healing,  a  short-pulsed  Er:YAG 
laser  or  application  of  a  non-ablative  or  frac-
tional laser procedure may be a more suitable 
choice.

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



140

Table 9.2  Ablative laser resurfacing: patient selection, risks, and precautions

Preoperative patient evaluation
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Are the lesions amenable to ablative laser skin resurfacing? All suspicious lesions require biopsy before 
treatment.
 Has the patient ever had the areas treated before? Ablative laser resurfacing can unmask hypopigmentation or 
fibrosis produced by prior dermabrasion, cryosurgery, or phenol peels. Patients with prior lower blepharoplasties 
using an external approach are at greater risk of ectropion formation after infraorbital ablative laser treatment.
 What is the patient’s skin phototype? Patients with paler skin tones (skin phototype I or II) have a lower 
incidence of postoperative hyperpigmentation than do patients with darker skin tones.
 Does the patient have a history of herpes labialis? All patients should be treated with prophylactic antiviral 
medication before perioral treatment, because reactivation and/or dissemination of prior herpes simplex 
infection can occur. The de-epithelialized skin is also particularly susceptible to primary inoculation by herpes 
simplex virus.
 Does the patient have an autoimmune disease or other immunologic deficiency? Intact immunologic function 
and collagen repair mechanisms are necessary to optimize the tissue- healing response due to the prolonged 
recovery associated with ablative resurfacing.
 Is the patient taking any medications that are contraindicated? Concomitant isotretinoin use could potentially 
lead to an increased risk of postoperative hypertrophic scar formation due to its detrimental effect on wound 
healing and collagenesis. A safe interval between the use of oral retinoids and ablative laser skin resurfacing is 
difficult to determine; however, most advocate a delay in treatment for at least 6 months after discontinuation of 
the drug.
 Does the patient have a tendency to form hypertrophic scars or keloids? Patients with a propensity to scar will 
be at greater risk of scar formation after treatment, independent of the laser’s selectivity and the operator’s 
expertise.
 Does the patient have realistic expectations of the procedure and adhere to postoperative instructions? Patients 
who can not physically or emotionally handle the prolonged postoperative course should be dissuaded from 
pursuing ablative laser skin treatment.

 Techniques

 Preoperative Management

Summary Box
•  Adequate  preoperative  patient  evalua-

tion and education

•  Oral antibiotic prophylaxis as indicated

There  is  no  consensus  among  laser  experts 
regarding the most appropriate preoperative regi-
men for ablative laser skin resurfacing. The use 
of  topical  retinoic  acid  compounds,  hydroqui-
none  bleaching  agents,  or  α-hydroxy  acids  for 
several  weeks  before  laser  treatment  has  been 
touted  as  a  means  of  speeding  recovery  and 
decreasing  the  incidence  of  postinflammatory 
tretinoin 
hyperpigmentation 
enhances  penetration  of  chemicals  through  the 
skin and has been shown to accelerate postopera-
tive  re-epithelialization  after  dermabrasion  or 
deep  chemical  peels  [12].  However,  because 

[11].  Topical 

ablative  laser-induced  wounds  are  intrinsically 
different  from 
those  created  by  physically 
destructive methods, laser skin penetration is not 
typically  affected  by  the  topical  application  of 
any of these medications. In addition, being that 
postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
is  rela-
tively  common  after  ablative  cutaneous  laser 
laser  surgeons  originally 
resurfacing,  many 
believed  that  the  prophylactic  use  of  topical 
bleaching agents would reduce the incidence of 
this  side  effect,  but  investigators  subsequently 
demonstrated that the preoperative use of topical 
tretinoin, hydroquinone, or glycolic acid had no 
effect  on  the  incidence  of  postablative  laser 
hyperpigmentation [13].

Due  to  the  moist,  de-epithelialized  state  of 
ablative laser-resurfaced skin and the possibility 
of bacterial contamination and overgrowth, many 
laser  surgeons  advocate  oral  antibiotic  prophy-
laxis;  however,  this  practice  remains  controver-
sial due to the results of a controlled study that 
demonstrated no significant change in post-laser 
resurfacing infection rate in patients treated with 
prophylactic antibiotics [14]. The most common 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



infectious complication is a reactivation of labial 
herpes simplex virus (HSV), most likely caused 
by  the  thermal  tissue  injury  and  epidermal  dis-
ruption  produced  by  the  laser  [15,  16].  Any 
patient  undergoing  full-face  or  perioral  ablative 
resurfacing  should  receive  antiviral  prophylaxis 
even  when  a  history  of  HSV  is  denied.  It  is 
impossible  to  predict  who  will  develop  HSV 
reactivation, because a negative cold sore history 
is  an  unreliable  method  to  determine  risk  and 
many  patients  do  not  remember  having  had  an 
outbreak or are asymptomatic HSV carriers. Oral 
antiviral  agents,  such  as  acyclovir,  famciclovir, 
and valacyclovir are effective agents against HSV 
infection,  although  severe  (disseminated)  cases 
may require intravenous therapy. Patients should 
begin prophylaxis by the day of surgery and con-
tinue for 7–10 days postoperatively.

 Description of the Technique

 Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Laser

Summary Box
•  Areas  with  thinner  skin  (e.g.,  perior-

bital) require fewer laser passes

•  Non-facial  (e.g.,  neck,  chest)  areas 
should  be  avoided  due  to  paucity  of 
pilosebaceous  units  with  diminished 
capacity for re-epithelialization.

•  Avoidance of pulse stacking in order to 

decrease risk of scarring

The  Ultrapulse  (Lumenis  Corp, Yokeam,  Israel), 
one of the first high-energy, pulsed CO2 laser sys-
tems  developed,  emits  individual  high  energy 
pulses (peak energy densities of 500 mJ in 600 μs 
to  1  ms).  Its  earliest  competitor,  the  SilkTouch 
(Lumenis Corp, Yokeam, Israel), was a continuous- 
wave CO2 system with a microprocessor scanner 
that  continuously  moved  the  laser  beam  so  that 
light did not dwell on any one area for more than 
1  ms.  The  peak  fluences  delivered  per  pulse  or 
scan  ranged  from  4  to  5  J/cm2,  which  were  the 
energy  densities  determined  to  be  necessary  for 

141

complete  tissue  vaporization  [7,  17–19].  Studies 
with these and other pulsed or scanned CO2 laser 
systems showed that after a typical skin resurfac-
ing procedure, water-containing tissue was vapor-
ized  to  a  depth  of  approximately  20–60  μm, 
producing  a  zone  of  thermal  damage  ranging 
20–150 μm [7, 18, 20–22].

The depth of ablation correlates directly with 
the  number  of  passes  performed  and  usually  is 
confined  to  the  epidermis  and  upper  papillary 
dermis;  however,  stacking  of  laser  pulses  by 
treating an area with multiple passes in rapid suc-
cession  or  by  using  a  high  overlap  setting  on  a 
scanning  device  can  lead  to  excessive  thermal 
injury with subsequent increased risk of scarring 
[15, 23, 24]. An ablative plateau is reached with 
less effective tissue ablation and accumulation of 
thermal injury. This effect is most likely caused 
by reduced tissue water content after initial desic-
cation,  resulting  in  less  selective  absorption  of 
energy [24]. The avoidance of pulse stacking and 
incomplete removal of partially desiccated tissue 
is paramount to prevention of excessive thermal 
accumulation with any laser system.

The objective of ablative laser skin resurfac-
ing is to vaporize tissue to the papillary dermis. 
Limiting the depth of penetration decreases the 
risk  for  scarring  and  permanent  pigmentary 
alteration.  When  choosing  treatment  parame-
ters, the surgeon must consider factors such as 
the anatomic location to be resurfaced, the skin 
phototype  of  the  patient,  and  previous  treat-
ments delivered to the area [17, 25]. In general, 
areas with thinner skin (e.g., periorbital) require 
fewer  laser  passes  and  non-facial  (e.g.,  neck, 
chest) laser resurfacing should be avoided due 
to the relative paucity of pilosebaceous units in 
these areas [25]. To reduce the risk of excessive 
thermal 
tissue 
injury,  partially  desiccated 
should  be  removed  manually  with  wet  gauze 
after  each  laser  pass  to  expose  the  underlying 
dermis [24].

The clinical and histologic benefits of cutane-
ous laser resurfacing are numerous. With the CO2 
laser,  most  studies  have  shown  at  least  a  50% 
improvement  over  baseline  in  overall  skin  tone 
and  wrinkle  severity  (Fig.  9.1a,  b)  [10,  26–30]. 
The biggest advantages associated with CO2 laser 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



142

a

b

Fig. 9.1  CO2 laser resurfacing (a) before and (b) after

skin resurfacing are the excellent tissue contrac-
tion, hemostasis, prolonged neocollagenesis and 
collagen remodeling that it provides. Histologic 
examination  of  laser-treated  skin  demonstrates 
replacement  of  epidermal  cellular  atypia  and 
dyplasia  with  normal,  healthy  epidermal  cells 
from  adjacent  follicular  adnexal  structures  [7, 
21]. The most profound effects occur in the papil-
lary  dermis,  where  coagulation  of  disorganized 
masses  of  actinically-induced  elastotic  material 
are replaced with normal compact collagen bun-
dles arranged in parallel to the skin’s surface [31, 
32].  Immediately  after  CO2  laser  treatment,  a 
normal  inflammatory  response  is  initiated,  with 
granulation tissue formation, neovascularization, 
and  increased  production  of  macrophages  and 
fibroblasts [21].

Persistent  collagen  shrinkage  and  dermal 
remodeling  are  responsible  for  much  of  the 
continued  clinical  benefits  observed  after  CO2 
resurfacing  and  are  influenced  by  several  fac-
tors  [33,  34].  Thermal  effects  of  laser  irradia-
tion of skin produce collagen fiber contraction 
at  temperatures  ranging  from  55  °C  to  62  °C 
through disruption of interpeptide bonds result-
ing  in  a  conformational  change  to  the  colla-
gen’s basic triple helical structure [35, 36]. The 
collagen  molecule  is  thereby  shortened  to 
approximately  one  third  of  its  normal  length. 
The laser-induced shrinkage of collagen fibers 
may  act  as  the  contracted  scaffold  for  neocol-
lagenesis, leading to subsequent production of 
the  newly  shortened  form.  In  turn,  fibroblasts 

that migrate into laser wounds after resurfacing 
may  up-regulate  the  expression  of  immune 
modulating  factors  that  serve  to  enhance  con-
tinued collagen shrinkage [37].

The CO2 resurfacing laser is a most effective 
tool for improving photo-induced facial rhytides; 
however,  dynamic  rhytides  are  not  as  amenable 
to  laser  treatment.  Many  patients  experience 
recurrence  of  movement-associated  rhytides 
(particularly  in  the  glabellar  region)  within 
6–12  months  postoperatively.  Thus,  cosmetic 
denervation with intramuscular injections of bot-
ulinum toxin type A is often used concomitantly 
with laser resurfacing to provide prolonged clini-
cal improvement [38].

Absolute  contraindications  to  CO2  laser  skin 
resurfacing include active bacterial, viral, or fun-
gal  infection  or  an  inflammatory  skin  condition 
involving the skin areas to be treated. Isotretinoin 
use within the preceding 6-month period or his-
tory of keloids also are considered contraindica-
tions  to  CO2  laser  treatment  because  of  the 
unpredictable tissue healing response and greater 
risk for scarring [39, 40].

In an attempt to address many of the difficul-
ties associated with the use of multiple-pass CO2 
laser  skin  resurfacing,  refinements  in  surgical 
technique were subsequently developed. Single- 
pass  CO2  laser  treatment  was  shown  to  effect 
faster  re-epithelialization  and  an  improved  side 
effect profile [41]. Rather than remove partially 
desiccated  tissue  (as  was  typical  with  multiple- 
pass procedures), the lased skin was left intact to 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



serve  as  a  biologic  wound  dressing. Additional 
laser passes could then be applied focally in areas 
with more severe photodamage in order to limit 
unnecessary  thermal  and  mechanical  trauma  to 
uninvolved  skin.  Subsequent  reports  have  sub-
stantiated the improved side effect profile of this 
less aggressive procedure [42–44].

 Erbium: Yttrium–Aluminum–Garnet 
(Er:YAG) Laser

Summary Box
•  Typical  fluences  range  from  5  to  15  J/
cm2, depending on the degree of photo-
damage and anatomic location

•  When  lower  fluences  are  applied,  it  is 
often  necessary  to  perform  multiple 
passes to ablate the entire epidermis
•  Shorter pulse durations are used for tis-
sue ablation and longer pulses are used 
to effect coagulation and expand zones 
of thermal injury

The  Er:YAG  laser  is  a  more  ablative  tool  that 
emits light at 2940 nm, corresponding well to the 
3000 nm absorption peak of water. The absorp-
tion  coefficient  of  the  Er:YAG  is  12,800  cm−1 
(compared  with  800  cm−1  for  the  CO2  laser), 
making it 12–18 times more efficiently absorbed 
by water-containing tissue than is the CO2 laser 
[45].  The  pulse  duration  (averaging  250  μs)  is 
also  much  shorter  than  that  of  the  CO2  laser, 
resulting  in  decreased  thermal  diffusion,  less 
effective  hemostasis,  and  increased  intraopera-
tive  bleeding  which  can  hamper  deeper  dermal 
treatment. Because of limited thermal skin injury, 
the  amount  of  collagen  contraction  is  also 
reduced  with  Er:YAG  treatment  (1–4%)  com-
pared to that observed with CO2 laser irradiation 
[11, 46].

The erbium’s efficient rate of absorption, short 
exposure  duration,  and  direct 
relationship 
between  fluence  delivered  and  amount  of  tissue 
ablated leads to 2–4 μm of tissue vaporization per 
J/cm2,  producing  a  shallow  level  of  tissue  abla-
tion.  Much  narrower  zones  of  thermal  necrosis, 

143

averaging only 20–50 μm, are therefore produced 
[45, 47–49]. Laser-induced ejection of desiccated 
tissue  from  the  target  site  typically  produces  a 
distinctive  popping  sound.  Thermal  energy  is 
confined to the selected tissue, with minimal col-
lateral  thermal  damage.  Because  little  tissue 
necrosis is produced with each pass of the laser, 
manual  removal  of  desiccated  tissue  is  often 
unnecessary.

The  short-pulsed  erbium  laser  fluences  used 
most often range from 5 to 15 J/cm2, depending 
on  the  degree  of  photodamage  and  anatomic 
location. When lower fluences are used, it is often 
necessary  to  perform  multiple  passes  to  ablate 
the entire epidermis. The ablation depth with the 
short-pulsed Er:YAG does not diminish with suc-
cessive  passes,  because  the  amount  of  thermal 
necrosis is minimal with each pass. It takes three 
to  four  times  as  many  passes  with  the  short- 
pulsed Er:YAG laser to achieve similar depths of 
penetration as with one pass of the CO2 laser at 
typical  treatment  parameters  [3,  11].  To  ablate 
the  entire  epidermis  with 
the  short-pulsed 
Er:YAG  laser  at  5  J/cm2,  at  least  two  or  three 
passes must be used which increases the possibil-
ity  of  uneven  tissue  penetration.  Deeper  dermal 
lesions or areas of the face with extreme photo-
damage  and  extensive  dermal  elastosis  may 
require  up  to  nine  or  ten  passes  of  the  short- 
pulsed  Er:YAG  laser,  whereas  the  CO2  laser 
would  effect  similar  levels  of  tissue  ablation  in 
two or three passes [7, 18, 45].

Pinpoint  bleeding  caused  by 

inadequate 
hemostasis and tissue color change with multiple 
Er:YAG  passes  can  impede  adequate  clinical 
assessment  of  wound  depth.  Irradiated  areas 
whiten  immediately  after  treatment  and  then 
quickly fade. These factors render it far more dif-
ficult for the surgeon to determine treatment end-
points and thus requires extensive knowledge of 
laser–tissue interaction.

Conditions amenable to short-pulsed Er:YAG 
laser resurfacing include superficial epidermal or 
dermal  lesions,  mild  photodamage  and  subtle 
dyspigmentation. The major advantage of short- 
pulsed  Er:YAG  laser  treatment  is  its  shorter 
recovery  period.  Re-epithelialization  is  com-
pleted within an average of 5.5 days, compared 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



144

with 8.5 days for multiple-pass CO2 procedures 
[18, 47]. Postoperative pain and duration of ery-
thema  are  reduced  after  short-pulsed  Er:YAG 
laser  resurfacing,  with  postoperative  erythema 
resolving within 3–4 weeks. Because there is less 
thermal injury and trauma to the skin, the risk of 
pigmentary  disturbance  is  also  decreased,  mak-
ing the short-pulsed Er:YAG laser a good alterna-
tive  in  patients  with  darker  skin  phototypes  [3, 
50]. The major disadvantages of the short-pulsed 
Er:YAG laser are its limited ability to effect sig-
nificant  collagen  shrinkage  and  its  failure  to 
induce  new  and  continued  collagen  formation 
postoperatively  [3,  47,  51].  The  final  clinical 
result  is  typically  less  impressive  than  that  pro-
duced  by  CO2  laser  skin  resurfacing  for  deeper 
rhytides.  However,  for  mild  photodamage, 
improvement  of  approximately  50%  is  typical 
(Fig.  9.2a,  b).  Although  clinical  and  histologic 
effects  are  less  impressive  than  those  produced 
with  the  CO2  laser,  short-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser 
skin  resurfacing  still  affords  modest  improve-
ment of photodamaged skin with a shorter recov-
ery time [17, 47].

To address the limitations of the short-pulsed 
Er:YAG laser, modulated Er:YAG lasers systems 
were  developed  to  improve  hemostasis  and 
increase  the  amount  of  collagen  shrinkage  and 
remodeling  effected.  The  Er:YAG-CO2  hybrid 
laser  system  delivers  both  ablative  Er:YAG  and 

coagulative CO2 laser pulses. The Er:YAG com-
ponent generates fluences up to 28 J/cm2 with a 
350 μs pulse duration, while excellent hemostasis 
is provided by the CO2 component which can be 
programmed  to  deliver  1–100  ms  pulses  at 
1–10 W power. Zones of thermal necrosis mea-
suring  as  much  as  50  μm  have  been  observed 
depending on the treatment parameters used and 
significant  increase  in  collagen  thickness  has 
been noted 3 months after four passes with this 
hybrid  technology  [52].  Another  modulated 
Er:YAG device is a dual-mode Er:YAG laser that 
emits a combination of short (200–300 μs) pulses 
and  long  coagulative  pulses  to  achieve  tissue 
ablation  depths  of  up  to  200  μm  per  pass.  The 
output from the two Er:YAG laser heads are com-
bined  into  a  single  stream  in  a  process  called 
optical  multiplexing  [53].  The  desired  depth  of 
ablation and coagulation can be programmed by 
the  laser  surgeon  into  the  touch-screen  control 
panel. Several investigators have studied the his-
tologic effects of dual-mode Er:YAG laser resur-
facing and found a close correlation between the 
programmed and actual measured depths of abla-
tion [54, 55]. The actual zones of thermal injury 
correlate  well  to  the  first  pass  with  decreasing 
coagulative efficiency on subsequent passes. The 
variable-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser  system  delivers 
pulse durations ranging 500 μs to 10 ms. Shorter 
pulse  durations  are  used  for  tissue  ablation  and 

a

b

Fig. 9.2  Erbium:YAG laser resurfacing (a) before and (b) after

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



longer pulses are used to effect coagulation and 
zones of thermal injury similar to the CO2 laser 
[53, 56].

laser 

system 

Since  the  modulated  Er:YAG  lasers  were 
developed to produce a greater thermal effect and 
tissue contraction than their short-pulsed prede-
cessors, investigators compared collagen tighten-
ing  induced  by  the  CO2  laser  with  that  of  the 
CO2–Er:YAG  hybrid 
[57]. 
Intraoperative contraction of approximately 43% 
was produced after three passes of the CO2 laser, 
compared  with  12%  contraction  following 
Er:YAG  irradiation.  At  4  weeks;  however,  the 
CO2  and  Er:YAG  laser  treated  sites  were  con-
tracted to the same degree, highlighting the dif-
ferent mechanisms of tissue tightening observed 
after laser treatment. Immediate thermal-induced 
collagen tightening was the predominant response 
seen  after  CO2  irradiation,  whereas  modulated 
Er:YAG laser resurfacing did not produce imme-
diate 
instead 
intraoperative  contraction  but 
induced slow collagen tightening [53, 57].

145

regarding the optimal dressing for the laser- ablated 
wound.  The  ‘open’  technique  involves  frequent 
application of a thick healing ointment to the de-
epithelialized  skin  surface;  whereas  occlusive  or 
semi-occlusive dressings are placed directly on the 
lased skin in the ‘closed’ technique. While the open 
technique facilitates easy wound visualization, the 
closed technique requires less patient involvement 
and may also decrease postoperative pain. Proposed 
advantages of a closed wound care regimen include 
increased patient comfort, decreased erythema and 
edema,  increased  rate  of  re-epithelialization,  and 
decreased  patient  involvement  in  wound  manage-
ment [58, 59]. On the other hand, additional expense 
and a higher risk of infection have been associated 
with the use of these dressings [3, 60, 61].

In  addition  to  postoperative  wound  care,  ice 
pack  application  and  anti-inflammatory  medica-
tions  should  be  prescribed  during  this  time. 
is  particularly 
Furthermore,  pain  medication 
important for ablative laser-resurfaced patients dur-
ing the first few postoperative days.

 Postoperative Management

 Adverse Events

Summary Box
•  During  the  re-epithelialization  process, 
an open- or closed-wound technique can 
be used

•  Ice pack application, anti- inflammatories 
should  be 

and  pain  medications 
prescribed

•  Early recognition and treatment of side 
effects  (e.g.,  topical  bleaching  creams 
for hyperpigmentation)

Wound  care  during  the  immediate  postoperative 
period is vital to the successful recovery of ablative 
laser-resurfaced skin. During the re- epithelialization 
process, an open- or closed-wound technique can 
be prescribed. Partial-thickness cutaneous wounds 
heal  more  efficiently  and  with  a  reduced  risk  of 
scarring when maintained in a moist environment 
because the presence of a dry crust or scab impedes 
keratinocyte migration [58]. Although there is con-
sensus  on  this  principle,  disagreement  exists 

Summary Box
•  Side Effects/Complications

 – Mild:  Prolonged  erythema,  milia, 

acne, contact dermatitis

 – Moderate: Infection (bacterial, viral, 

fungal), hyperpigmentation

 – Severe:  Hypopigmentation,  hyper-

trophic scarring, ectropion

•  Prevention and Treatment

 – Adequate preoperative patient evalu-
ation  and  education  are  absolute 
essentials  to  avoid  pitfalls  and  opti-
mize clinical outcomes

 – Preoperative  examination  to  deter-
mine  eyelid  skin  laxity/elasticity  to 
prevent ectropion

 – Avoidance  of  pulse  stacking,  scan 
overlapping, and incomplete removal 
of  partially  desiccated  tissue  to  pre-
vent hypertrophic scarring

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



146

fragrance-containing 

 – Topical  agents  such  as  retinoic  acid 
derivatives,  glycolic  acid,  salicylic 
or 
acid, 
chemical- containing  cosmetics  and 
sunscreens should be strictly avoided 
in the early postoperative period until 
substantial healing has occurred

 – Oral  antibiotics  may  be  prescribed 
for acne flares that do not respond to 
topical preparations

 – Any  patient  undergoing  full-face  or 
perioral  ablative  resurfacing  should 
receive antiviral prophylaxis, even if 
a history of HSV is denied

 – Postinflammatory 

hyperpigmenta-
tion can be hastened with the postop-
erative  use  of  a  variety  of  topical 
agents, including hydroquinone, reti-
noic, azeleic, and glycolic acid.

 – Regular  sunscreen  use  is  important 
during the healing process to prevent 
further skin darkening.

Side  effects  associated  with  ablative  laser  skin 
resurfacing vary and are related to the expertise of 
the  laser  surgeon,  the  body  area  treated,  and  the 
skin phototype of the patient (Table 9.3). Certain 
tissue reactions, such as erythema and edema, are 
expected  in  the  immediate  postoperative  period 
and  are  not  considered  adverse  events.  Erythema 
can be intense and may persist for several months 
after the procedure. The degree of erythema corre-
lates  directly  with  the  depth  of  ablation  and  the 
number of laser passes performed [3, 16]. It may 
also  be  aggravated  by  underlying  rosacea  or  der-
matitis. Postoperative erythema resolves spontane-
ously  but  can  be  reduced  with  the  application  of 
topical ascorbic acid which may serve to decrease 

the degree of inflammation [62, 63]. Its use should 
be reserved for at least 4 weeks after the proce-
dure in order to avoid irritation. Similarly, other 
topical  agents  such  as  retinoic  acid  derivatives, 
glycolic acid, fragrance-containing or chemical-
containing  cosmetics  and  sunscreens  should  be 
strictly avoided in the early postoperative period 
until  substantial  healing  has  occurred  [16]. 
Adequate  preoperative  patient  evaluation  and 
education are absolute essentials to avoid pitfalls 
and to optimize clinical outcomes.

Mild side effects of laser resurfacing include 
milia  formation  and  acne  exacerbation  which 
may be caused by the use of occlusive dressings 
and  ointments  during  the  postoperative  period, 
particularly in patients who are prone to acne [15, 
16, 25, 60]. Milia and acne usually resolve spon-
taneously as healing progresses and the applica-
tion  of  thick  emollient  creams  and  occlusive 
dressings  ceases.  Oral  antibiotics  may  be  pre-
scribed for acne flares that do not respond to topi-
cal  preparations  [16,  30,  60].  Contact  allergies, 
irritant or allergic, can also develop from various 
topical medications, soaps, and moisturizers used 
postoperatively. Most of these reactions are irri-
tant in nature due to decreased barrier function of 
the newly resurfaced skin [16, 64].

resurfacing 

Wound  infections  associated  with  ablative 
Staphylococcus, 
laser 
include 
Pseudomonas,  or  cutaneous  candidiasis  and 
should be treated aggressively with an appropriate 
systemic antibiotic or antifungal agent [61]. The 
use of prophylactic antibiotics remains controver-
sial  [14].  After  CO2  resurfacing,  approximately 
7%  of  patients  develop  a  localized  or  dissemi-
nated form of HSV [16]. These infections develop 
within the first postoperative week and can pres-
ent as erosions without intact vesicles because of 
the denuded condition of newly lased skin. Even 
with appropriate prophylaxis, a herpetic outbreak 

Table 9.3  Side effects and complications of ablative laser skin resurfacing

Expected side effects
Erythema
Edema
Pruritus

Complications
Mild
Prolonged erythema
Milia
Acne
Dermatitis

Moderate
Infection (bacterial, viral, fungal)
Transient hyperpigmentation

Severe
Permanent hypopigmentation
Hypertrophic scarring
Ectropion

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



still can occur in up to 10% of patients and must 
be  treated  aggressively  [17].  In  order  to  prevent 
this complication, patients should begin prophy-
laxis  by  the  day  of  surgery  and  continue  for 
7–10 days postoperatively.

The  most  severe  complications  associated 
with ablative cutaneous laser resurfacing include 
hypertrophic  scar  and  ectropion  formation  [15, 
16]. Although the risk of scarring has been sig-
nificantly  reduced  with  pulsed  laser  technology 
(compared  to  the  continuous  wave  systems), 
inadvertent  pulse  stacking  or  scan  overlapping, 
as well as incomplete removal of desiccated tis-
sue  between  laser  passes  can  cause  excessive 
thermal  injury  that  could  increase  the  develop-
ment of fibrosis. Focal areas of bright erythema, 
with  pruritus,  particularly  along  the  mandible, 
may  signal  impending  scar  formation  [25,  65]. 
Ultrapotent (class I) topical corticosteroid prepa-
rations should be applied to decrease the inflam-
matory response. A pulsed dye laser also can be 
used to improve the appearance and symptoms of 
laser-induced burn scars [65].

Ectropion of the lower eyelid after periorbital 
laser  skin  resurfacing  is  rarely  seen,  but  if 
encountered, usually requires surgical correction 
[25].  It  is  more  likely  to  occur  in  patients  who 
have had previous lower blepharoplasty or other 
surgical  manipulation  of  the  periorbital  region. 
Preoperative  examination  is  essential  to  deter-
mine eyelid laxity and skin elasticity. If the infra-
orbital skin does not return briskly to its normal 
resting  position  after  a  manual  downward  pull 
(snap test), then ablative laser treatment near the 
lower  eyelid  margin  should  be  avoided.  In  gen-
eral, lower fluences and fewer laser passes should 
be applied in the periorbital area to decrease the 
risk of lid eversion.

Hyperpigmentation  is  one  of  the  more  com-
mon  side  effects  of  cutaneous  laser  resurfacing 
and  occurs  to  some  degree  in  all  patients  with 
darker skin tones (Fig. 9.3) [16, 25]. The reaction 
is  transient,  but  its  resolution  can  be  hastened 
with the postoperative use of a variety of topical 
agents, including hydroquinone, retinoic, azeleic, 
and glycolic acid. Regular sunscreen use is also 
important  during  the  healing  process  to  prevent 
further  skin  darkening.  The  prophylactic  use  of 

147

Fig.  9.3  Postinflammatory  hyperpigmention  following 
ablative laser resurfacing

these  products  preoperatively,  however,  has  not 
been  shown  to  decrease  the  incidence  of  post- 
treatment hyperpigmentation [13]. Postoperative 
hypopigmentation, on the other hand, is often not 
observed for several months and is particularly 
difficult because of its tendency to be intractable 
to treatment. The use of an excimer laser or topi-
cal  photochemotherapy  to  stimulate  repigmen-
tation  has  proven  successful  in  some  patients 
[66, 67].

Side  effects  and  complications  following 
Er:YAG  laser  irradiation  are  similar  to  those 
observed after CO2 laser treatment, but they dif-
fer in respect to duration, incidence, and severity 
[50, 68, 69]. Although greater postoperative ery-
thema  is  seen  after  modulated  Er:YAG  laser 
treatment than is usually produced with a short- 
pulsed Er:YAG system, the side effect profile and 
recovery  period  after  modulated  Er:YAG  laser 
irradiation  remain  more  favorable  than  after 
multiple- pass CO2 laser treatment. In an extended 
evaluation  of  50  patients,  investigators  reported 
complete  re-epithelialization  in  an  average  of 
5 days after dual-mode Er:YAG laser skin resur-
facing with only three patients having prolonged 
erythema  beyond  4  weeks  [68].  In  a  split-face 
comparison of 16 patients after pulsed CO2 and 
variable-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser  skin  resurfacing, 
other investigators reported decreased erythema, 
less  edema,  and  faster  healing  on  the  Er:YAG 
laser-treated facial half [70].

Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  is  not 
uncommon  after  any  cutaneous  laser  resurfac-
ing  procedure.  While  hyperpigmentation  fol-
lowing modulated Er:YAG laser skin resurfacing 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



148

(mean,  10.4  weeks)  can  last  longer  than  after 
treatment with a short-pulsed Er:YAG laser, it is 
not as persistent as that observed after multiple-
pass  CO2  laser  resurfacing  (mean,  16  weeks) 
[69].  However,  when  comparing  the  most  cur-
rent trends in ablative cutaneous laser resurfac-
ing—single-pass  CO2  versus  multiple-pass, 
long- ulsed  Er:YAG  laser  skin  resurfacing—
postoperative  healing  times  and  complication 
profiles  are  comparable,  even  in  patients  with 
darker skin phototypes. In a retrospective review 
and analysis of 100 consecutive patients, Tanzi 
and Alster [44] showed average time to re-epi-
thelialization was 5.5 days with single-pass CO2 
and  5.1  days  with  long-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser 
erythema  was 
resurfacing.  Postoperative 
observed  in  all  patients,  lasting  an  average  of 
4.5 weeks after single-pass CO2 laser treatment 
and  3.6  weeks  after  long-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser 
treatment. Hyperpigmentation was seen in 46% 
of  patients  treated  with  single-pass  CO2  and 
42%  of  patients  treated  with  the  long-pulsed 
Er:YAG laser  (average duration 12.7 weeks and 
11.4  weeks,  respectively).  Delayed-onset  per-
manent hypopigmentation—a serious complica-
tion that has been observed several months after 
multiple- pass  CO2  laser  skin  resurfacing—has 
not  yet  been  reported  following  single-pass 
treatment. To date, only three cases of hypopig-
mentation  after  modulated  Er:YAG  laser  skin 
resurfacing have been reported [71, 72]. Since it 
is possible for hypopigmentation to present sev-
eral  years  postoperatively,  clinical  studies  are 
ongoing to determine its true incidence follow-
ing either single- pass CO2 or modulated Er:YAG 
laser skin resurfacing.

 Non-ablative Laser Skin 
Resurfacing

 Indications and Contraindications

Summary Box
•  Indications

 – Mild  facial  rhytides,  atrophic  scars, 

and photodamage

•  Contraindications

 – Patients 

with 

unrealistic 

expectations

 – Patients  with  darker  skin 

tones 
(skin  phototype  IV–VI)  have  a  high 
incidence 
postoperative 
of 
hyperpigmentation

 – Patients with perpetual sun exposure
 – Patients with history of herpes labia-
lis  may  require  prophylactic  oral 
antiviral medications.

Proper patient selection is critical to the success 
of  non-ablative  laser  skin  remodeling.  Patients 
with  mild-to-moderate  facial  photodamage  or 
atrophic scars with realistic expectations of treat-
ment are the best candidates for non-ablative pro-
cedures. Patients seeking immediate improvement 
in photodamaged skin or those who desire a dra-
matic  result  may  be  less  than  satisfied  with  the 
overall clinical outcome.

 Techniques

 Preoperative Management

Summary Box
•  Adequate  preoperative  patient  evalua-

tion and education

•  Oral  antiviral  prophylaxis  in  patients 

with history of herpes labialis

Adequate  preoperative  patient  evaluation  and 
education are absolute essentials (Table 9.4). For 
patients with a strong history of herpes labialis, 
prophylactic oral antiviral medications should be 
considered  when  treating  the  perioral  skin. 
Reactivation  of  prior  herpes  simplex  infection 
can occur after non-ablative laser treatment due 
to the intense heat produced by the laser or light 
source.

Prior  to  non-ablative  laser  procedures,  sun 
exposure  should  be  avoided,  particularly  when 
using  shorter-wavelength  systems  such  as  the 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



Table 9.4  Non-ablative laser resurfacing: patient selec-
tion, risks, and precautions

Preoperative patient evaluation
• 

• 

• 

• 

 Is the amount of photodamage amenable to 
non-ablative laser skin remodeling? Patients with 
mild-to-moderate facial photodamage are the best 
candidates for non-ablative procedures. Patients 
with severe rhytides and skin laxity may be 
disappointed with the overall clinical outcome.
 Does the patient have a history of herpes labialis? 
Reactivation of prior herpes simplex infection can 
occur with perioral non-ablative laser skin 
modeling due to the intense heat produced by the 
laser. Patients with a strong history of herpes 
simplex labialis may require prophylactic oral 
antiviral medication to avoid a postoperative 
outbreak.
 What is the patient’s skin phototype? Although the 
majority of current non-ablative systems used are 
within the mid-infrared range of the 
electromagnetic spectrum and not avidly absorbed 
by epidermal melanin, patients with darker skin 
phototypes may develop postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation after non-ablative treatment. 
This temporary reaction may develop due to 
inflammation created by concomitant cryogen 
spray epidermal cooling.
 Does the patient have realistic expectations? 
Patients seeking immediate gratification after a 
single non-ablative treatment are not good 
candidates as clinical improvement typically occurs 
after multiple sequential treatments (usually three 
to five) and is often delayed 3–6 months after the 
final session. Moreover, patients seeking dramatic 
results following non-ablative laser skin techniques 
should be dissuaded from treatment as clinical 
improvement may be subtle.

149

Most of the non-ablative laser systems emit light 
within the infrared portion of the electromagnetic 
spectrum (1000–1500 nm). At these wavelengths, 
absorption by superficial water-containing tissue 
is relatively weak, thereby effecting deeper tissue 
penetration  [73].  Since  non-ablative  remodeling 
involves creation of a dermal wound without epi-
dermal injury, all of these laser systems employ 
unique methods to ensure epidermal preservation 
during 
typically 
treatment.  These  methods 
include  contact  cooling  handpieces  or  dynamic 
cryogen  devices  capable  of  delivering  variable 
duration spray cooling spurts either before, dur-
ing,  and/or  after  laser  irradiation.  Since  laser 
beam penetration and dermal wounding must be 
targeted to the relatively superficial portion of the 
dermis, contact cooling devices that theoretically 
lead to excessive dermal cooling may affect the 
level or degree of energy deposition in the skin. 
As such, there remains no general consensus con-
cerning which method of cooling is most effica-
cious during treatment.

In  general,  treatment  of  facial  photodamage 
with  non-ablative  technology  does  not  produce 
results comparable to those of ablative CO2 and 
Er:YAG lasers; however, many patients are will-
ing  to  accept  modest  clinical  improvement  in 
exchange  for  fewer  associated  risks  and  shorter 
recovery times.

 Pulsed Dye Laser (PDL)

pulsed  dye  laser  or  intense  pulsed-light  source. 
Unwanted absorption of irradiation by activated 
epidermal  melanocytes  can  increase  the  risk  of 
side  effects,  including  crusting,  blistering,  and 
dyspigmentation.

 Description of the Technique

Summary Box
•  585  nm  and  595  nm  pulsed  dye  laser 
(PDL)  can  reduce  mild  facial  rhytides 
with few side effects

•  Side  effects  include  mild  edema,  pur-
pura,  and  transient  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation

Summary Box
•  Infrared light (1000–1500 nm) creates a 
dermal wound without epidermal injury
•  Epidermis is preserved during treatment 

by tissue cooling

Clinical studies have demonstrated the ability of 
585  nm  and  595  nm  pulsed  dye  laser  (PDL)  to 
reduce mild facial rhytides with few side effects 
[74]. The most common side effects of PDL treat-
ment include mild edema, purpura, and transient 
postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation.  Although 
increased extracellular matrix proteins and types I 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



150

and  III  collagen  and  procollagen  have  been 
detected  after  PDL  treatment,  the  exact  mecha-
nism  whereby  wrinkle  improvement  is  effected 
remains unknown [75]. One theory states that vas-
cular  endothelial  cells  damaged  by  the  yellow 
laser light release mediators that stimulate fibro-
blasts to produce new collagen fibers [76].

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) Source

Summary Box
•  The IPL source emits a broad, continu-
ous  spectrum  of  light  in  the  range  of 
515–1200 nm

•  Cut-off  filters  are  used  to  eliminate 
shorter  wavelengths  depending  on  the 
clinical  application,  with  shorter  filters 
favoring  heating  of  melanin  and 
hemoglobin.

•  Treatment is delivered by using the flu-

ences of 30–50 40 J/cm2.

Several investigators have shown successful reju-
venation  of  photodamaged  skin  after  intense 
pulsed  light  (IPL)  treatment  [77,  78].  The  IPL 
source emits a broad, continuous spectrum of light 
in  the  range  of  515–1200  nm.  Cut-off  filters  are 
used to eliminate shorter wavelengths depending 
on  the  clinical  application,  with  shorter  filters 
favoring  heating  of  melanin  and  hemoglobin. 
Bitter  [78]  showed  improvement  in  wrinkling, 
skin coarseness, irregular pigmentation, pore size, 
and  telangiectasia  in  the  majority  of  49  patients 
treated  with  a  series  of  IPL  treatments  (fluences 
30–50  J/cm2).  In  a  retrospective  review  of  80 
patients with skin phototypes I–IV, Weiss and col-
leagues [79] reported signs of photoaging, includ-
ing  telangiectasias  and  mottled  pigmentation  of 
the face, neck, and chest, improved by a series of 
IPL treatments. While substantial clinical improve-
ment of dyspigmentation and telangiectasia asso-
ciated with cutaneous photodamage is often seen, 
neocollagenesis  and  dermal  collagen  remodeling 
with subsequent improvement in rhytides follow-
ing IPL treatment has been minimal. The effect on 
dermal collagen is thought to be induced by heat 
diffusion  from  the  vasculature  with  subsequent 

release  of  inflammatory  mediators  stimulated  by 
vessel heating [80].

 1064 nm Q-Switched (QS) Neodymium: 
YAG (Nd: YAG) Laser

Summary Box
•  Although absorption of energy by tissue 
water is relatively weak at the 1064 nm 
wavelength,  it  was  possible  to  achieve 
dermal  penetrative  depths  that  could 
potentially induce neocollagenesis.

•  The nanosecond range pulse duration of 
the  QS  Nd:YAG  laser  was  also  deter-
mined to limit significant thermal diffu-
sion  to  surrounding  structures,  thereby 
making  it  suitable  for  non-ablative 
rejuvenation.

•  Treatment is delivered by using the flu-
ences  of  2–6  J/cm2  with  3–7  mm  spot 
size and pulse duration, ranging 6–20 ns.

nm 

1064 

quality-switched 

The 
(QS) 
neodymium:YAG  (Nd:YAG)  laser  was  the  first 
mid-infrared  laser  system  used  for  non-ablative 
cutaneous  remodeling.  Although  absorption  of 
energy  by  tissue  water  is  relatively  weak  at  the 
1064 nm wavelength, it was possible to achieve 
dermal  penetrative  depths  that  could  potentially 
induce  neocollagenesis.  The  nanosecond  range 
pulse duration of the QS Nd:YAG laser was also 
determined to limit significant thermal diffusion 
to surrounding structures, thereby making it suit-
able for non-ablative rejuvenation.

In 1997, Goldberg and Whitworth [81] pub-
lished  their  experience  using  a  1064  nm 
Nd:YAG  laser  for  facial  rhytide  reduction. 
Eleven patients (skin phototypes I, II) with mild 
to  moderate  periorbital  or  perioral  rhytides 
underwent  treatment  on  one  side  of  the  face 
with a QS Nd:YAG laser at a fluence of 5.5 J/
cm2 (3 mm spot size) and CO2 laser ablation on 
the contralateral side for comparison purposes. 
Pinpoint bleeding was used as the clinical end-
point of QS Nd:YAG treatment. Not unexpect-
edly,  all  of  the  CO2-laser  irradiated  sites 
demonstrated significant rhytide improvement, 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



whereas  only  three  QS  Nd:YAG  laser-treated 
patients  demonstrated 
improvement.  These 
patients  also  developed  prolonged  post- 
treatment  erythema  (lasting  up  to  one  month), 
suggesting that the amount of dermal wounding 
(with  subsequent  collagen  remodeling)  was 
directly  related  to  the  degree  of  cutaneous 
injury.  Another  study  using  the  QS  Nd:YAG 
laser  for  rhytide  reduction  in  61  patients  (242 
sites)  was  conducted  using  a  topical  carbon 
solution for improved optical penetration of the 
1064 nm light [82]. Patients underwent a series 
of  three  monthly  QS  Nd:YAG  laser  treatment 
sessions  at  a  fluence  of  2.5  J/cm2,  7  mm  spot 
size,  and  pulse  durations,  ranging  6–20  ns. At 
least  slight  improvement  was  seen  in  97%  of 
class I rhytides and 86% of the class II rhytides. 
Side effects of treatment were mild and limited, 
including  transient  erythema,  purpura,  and 
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser treatment has more 
recently  been  advocated  for  skin  photorejuvena-
tion. Lee [83] evaluated a combination technique 
using a long-pulsed 1064 Nd:YAG laser and long-
pulsed 532 nm potassium-titanyl- phosphate (KTP) 
laser, both separately and combined, for non-inva-
sive  photorejuvenation  in  150  patients  with  skin 
phototypes  I  through V.  Patients  treated  with  the 
combined  laser  approach  showed  at  least  70% 
improvement  in  erythema  and  pigmentation  and 
30–40%  improvement  in  fine  rhytides.  In  the 
patient  groups  treated  with  monotherapy,  patient 
satisfaction was greater with KTP laser treatment 
than  with  the  Nd:YAG  laser  primarily  due  to  a 
reduction in dyspigmentation and telangiectasias.

 1320 nm Nd: YAG Laser

Summary Box
•  The  1320  nm  wavelength  is  associated 
with  a  high  scattering  coefficient  that 
allows for dispersion of laser irradiation 
throughout the dermis.

•  A thermal feedback sensor should be used 
intraoperatively to select appropriate treat-
ment fluences delivered to the individual 
patient’s  cutaneous  temperature,  thereby 

151

maximizing  dermal  temperatures  that 
effectively lead to collagen reformation.
•  In  order  to  prevent  unwanted  sequelae 
(e.g.,  blistering)  from  excessive  heat 
production,  it  is  imperative  that  epider-
mal  temperatures  be  kept  lower  than 
50 °C.

A  long-pulsed  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  was  the 
first  commercially  available  system  marketed 
solely for the purpose of non-ablative laser skin 
remodeling. The 1320 nm wavelength is associ-
ated with a high scattering coefficient that allows 
for dispersion of laser irradiation throughout the 
dermis.  Later  models  are  capable  of  delivering 
energy densities up to 24 J/cm2 with a pulse dura-
tion of 350 μs through a 10-mm handpiece. The 
1320 nm Nd:YAG laser handpiece contains three 
portals: the laser beam itself, a thermal feedback 
sensor  that  registers  skin  surface  temperature, 
and a dynamic cryogen spray apparatus used for 
epidermal  cooling. When  skin  surface  tempera-
tures  are  maintained  at  40–45  °C,  dermal  tem-
peratures reach 60–65 °C during laser irradiation, 
thereby  effecting  collagen  contraction  and  neo-
collagenesis.  In  order  to  prevent  unwanted 
sequelae  (e.g.,  blistering)  from  excessive  heat 
production,  it  is  imperative  that  epidermal  tem-
peratures be kept lower than 50 °C. A series of 
three or more treatment sessions are scheduled at 
regular  intervals  (typically  once  a  month)  for 
optimal  mitigation  of  fine  rhytides  [73].  Side 
effects  of  treatment  are  generally  mild  and 
include transient erythema and edema.

Menaker et al. [84] reported effective rhytide 
reduction  in  an  early  study  using  a  prototype 
1320 nm Nd:YAG laser. Ten patients with  peri-
ocular  rhytides  received  three  consecutive  laser 
treatments  at  bi-weekly  intervals. Triple  300  μs 
pulses  were  delivered  at  100  Hz  and  fluence  of 
32 J/cm2 with a 5 mm handpiece. Epidermal pro-
tection was achieved with application of a 20 ms 
cooling spray after a 10 ms preset delay. Patients 
were evaluated at 1 and 3 months post-treatment. 
Although four of the ten patients showed clinical 
improvement  in  rhytide  severity  by  end-study, 
these  findings  were  not  statistically  significant. 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



152

Similarly, the slight homogenization of collagen 
noted on histology at 1 and 3 months following 
treatment  was  not  statistically  significant  and 
inconsistent with the clinical findings.

In  another  study,  Kelly  et  al.  [85]  treated  35 
patients with mild, moderate, and severe rhytides 
using a 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser. Three treatments 
were delivered at 2-week intervals using fluences 
ranging  28–36  J/cm2  with  a  5  mm  spot  size. 
Cryogen spray cooling was applied in 20–40 ms 
spurts with 10 ms delays. Patients were evaluated 
at 12 and 24 weeks following treatment with sta-
tistically  significant  improvement  noted  in  all 
clinical  grades  after  12  weeks.  Only  the  most 
severe  rhytides;  however,  showed  persistent 
improvement 24 weeks following treatment.

dermal 

temperatures 

Goldberg devised two similar studies to exam-
ine the effectiveness of the 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser 
for  the  treatment  of  facial  rhytides.  In  the  first 
study, ten patients with skin types I–II and class I–
II  rhytides  in  the  periorbital,  perioral,  and  cheek 
areas  were  treated  [86].  Four  treatments  were 
administered over a 16-week period using fluences 
of  28–38  J/cm2  with  a  30%  overlap  and  a  5  mm 
spot size. One or two laser passes were applied to 
achieve the treatment endpoint of mild erythema. 
Skin surface temperatures were limited to 40–48 °C 
using the aforementioned dynamic cooling spray in 
order  to  provide  epidermal  protection,  whilst 
effecting 
ranging 
60–70 °C. Six months after treatment, two patients 
showed  no  clinical  improvement,  six  showed 
‘some’ improvement, and two showed ‘substantial’ 
improvement. This study emphasized several key 
points  in  non- ablative  laser  resurfacing.  It  sug-
gested a thermal feedback sensor is best used intra-
operatively  with  this  technology  in  order  for 
appropriate treatment fluences to be selected based 
upon  the  individual  patient’s  cutaneous  tempera-
ture, thereby maximizing dermal temperatures that 
effectively 
reformation. 
Furthermore, longer follow-up periods are usually 
required to fully appreciate the effect of serial treat-
ment  sessions  on  dermal  collagen  stimulation.  In 
the second study, ten patients underwent full-face 
treatments  with  the  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  at 
3–4  week  intervals  [87]. As  with  the  first  study, 
treatment results were inconsistent—four patients 
showed  no  improvement,  four  showed  some 

collagen 

lead 

to 

improvement, and two showed substantial improve-
ment in facial rhytides and overall skin tone.

Others also studied the 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser 
for treatment of facial rhytides in ten women [88]. 
Full-face  treatment  was  administered  to  three 
patients,  whereas  two  patients  had  periorbital 
treatment,  and  five  patients  received  perioral 
treatment.  Laser  fluences  of  30–35  J/cm2  were 
delivered in triple 300 μs pulses at a repetition rate 
of 100 Hz. Dynamic cryogen spray cooling was 
used with a 30 ms spurt and a 40 ms delay between 
cryogen delivery and laser irradiation. A thermal 
sensor  was  also  used  to  maintain  peak  surface 
temperatures in the range of 42–45 °C in order to 
avoid  excessive  tissue  heating.  Treatments  were 
administered  twice  a  week  over  a  period  of 
4  weeks  for  a  total  of  eight  treatment  sessions. 
Only two out of ten patients expressed satisfaction 
with their final result despite clinician evaluations 
showing  significant  improvement  in  five  of  ten 
patients  and  fair  improvements  in  another  three. 
Moreover, there was no correlation between his-
tologic changes and the degree of subjective clini-
cal improvement as judged by the patients.

A  more  recent  study  by  Fatemi  et  al.  [89] 
demonstrated  that  the  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser 
produced  mild  subclinical  epidermal  injury  that 
could  potentially  lead  to  enhanced  skin  texture 
and new papillary collagen synthesis by stimula-
tion of cytokines and other inflammatory media-
tors. Thus, the long-term histologic improvement 
seen  in  photodamaged  skin  may  not  be  based 
solely  on  direct  laser  heating  of  collagen,  but 
through stimulation of cytokine release by heat-
ing  the  superficial  vasculature.  In  addition,  the 
histologic findings suggested that multiple passes 
with  fluence  and  cooling  adjusted  to  a  Tmax  of 
45–48 °C can yield improved clinical results, as 
compared to those specimens in which epidermal 
temperatures above 45 °C were not achieved.

 1450 nm Diode Laser

Summary Box
•  The  fluences  ranging  10–20  J/cm2 
should  be  applied  in  a  single  nonover-
lapping pass with 6-mm spot size.

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



153

The  1450  nm  mid-infrared  wavelength  diode 
laser targets dermal water and penetrates the skin 
to  an  approximate  depth  of  500  μm.  This  low- 
power laser system achieves peak powers in the 
10–15 W range with relatively long pulse dura-
tions of 150–250 ms. Because of these long expo-
sure times, epidermal cooling must be delivered 
in sequence during the application of laser energy 
in  order  to  avoid  excessive  thermal  buildup 
within the superficial layers of the skin.

Goldberg  et  al.  [90]  reported  on  the  effects  of 
1450 nm diode laser irradiation in 20 patients with 
class I–II rhytides. Two to four treatment sessions 
were delivered with 6-month follow-up evaluation. 
Patients were treated with laser and cryogen spray 
cooling on one facial half and cryogen spray cool-
ing  alone  on  the  contralateral  side.  On  the  laser-
treated facial halves, seven did not demonstrate any 
improvement, ten showed mild improvement, and 
three had moderate improvement. None of the sites 
treated  with  cryogen  alone  showed  any  improve-
ment after 6 months. Side effects of treatment were 
mild  and  included  transient  erythema,  edematous 
papules, and one case of postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation persisting for 6 months. The authors 
concluded that the 1450 nm diode laser was effec-
tive for treatment of mild to moderate facial rhytides 
with  minimal  morbidity. Additionally,  their  study 
demonstrated  that  non-ablative  laser  treatment 
alone was responsible for the clinical improvements 

and that the non-specific injury induced by cryogen 
spray cooling could not effect the changes seen.

Hardaway  and  colleagues  [91]  demonstrated 
statistically  significant  mean  wrinkle  improve-
ment  of  2.3  (range  0–4,  with  four  representing 
severe wrinkling) at baseline to 1.8 at 6 months 
following a series of three 1450 nm diode laser 
treatments.  They  concluded  that  although  the 
1450 nm diode laser is capable of targeting der-
mal  collagen  and  stimulating  fibrosis,  clinical 
improvement  of  rhytides  was  mild  and  did  not 
correlate  well  with  the  degree  of  histologic 
change noted in previous studies.

In  a  controlled  clinical  and  histologic  study, 
Tanzi  and Alster  [92]  demonstrated  improvement 
in mild to moderate perioral or periorbital rhytides 
in  25  patients  treated  with  four  consecutive 
1450  nm  diode  laser  treatments  using  fluences 
ranging 15–20 J/cm2 with a 4 mm spot size. Peak 
clinical improvement was seen 6 months after the 
series of laser treatments. The periorbital area was 
more responsive to laser treatment than the perioral 
area—a  finding  consistent  with  results  obtained 
using  other  non-ablative  laser  systems  (Fig.  9.4a, 
b). Side effects were limited to transient erythema, 
edema, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. 
In  a  separate  controlled  study  performed  by  the 
same group, 20 patients with transverse neck lines 
received  three  consecutive  monthly  treatments 
using  a  long-pulsed  1450  nm  diode  laser  [93]. 

a

b

Fig. 9.4  1450 nm 
long-pulsed diode laser 
(a) before and (b) after

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



154

Modest improvements in appearance and texture of 
the transverse neck lines was reported, as measured 
by blinded clinical assessments and through three-
dimensional  in  vivo  microtopography  (PRIMOS 
Imaging System; GFM, Germany). Mean fluences 
of 11.6 J/cm2 were used with a 6 mm spot size and 
50 ms total cryogen.

Due  to  the  marked  dermal  remodeling  effect 
of the long-pulsed 1320-nm Nd:YAG and 1450- 
nm  diode  lasers, Tanzi  and Alster  [94]  reported 
the  long-term  clinical  and  histologic  results  of 
these systems on atrophic facial acne scars in 20 
patients. Facial halves were randomly assigned to 
received  three  consecutive  monthly  treatments 
with  a  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  (CoolTouch; 
CoolTouch Corp., Auburn, CA) on one side and a 
1450-nm  diode  (SmoothBeam;  Candela  Corp., 
Wayland, MA) on the contralateral. The 1450-nm 
diode laser was used at fluences ranging 9–14 J/
cm2  (average  11.8  J/cm2,  6-mm  spot  size)  in  a 
single  nonoverlapping  pass;  whereas,  the  1320- 
nm Nd:YAG laser was used of fluences ranging 
12–17  J/cm2  (average  14.8  J/cm2,  10-mm  spot 
size)  in  two  passes.  Mild  to  moderate  clinical 
improvement  was  observed  in  the  majority  of 
patients.  Patient  satisfaction  scores  and  in  vivo 
microtopography  measurements  paralleled  the 
photographic  and  histopathologic  changes  seen 
without significant side effects or complications. 
The 1450-nm diode laser showed greater clinical 
scar response at the parameters studied.

 1540 nm Erbium: Glass Laser

Summary Box
•  The treatment should be performed on a 
monthly basis for three to five sessions 
using  a  4  mm  spot  size,  10  J/cm2  flu-
ence, and 3.5 ms pulse duration.

•  Epidermal protection was achieved with 
concomitant  application  of  a  contact 
sapphire lens cooled to 5 °C.

The  1540  nm  erbium-doped  phosphate  glass 
laser is another mid-infrared range laser that has 

been used for amelioration of fine facial rhytides 
and atrophic facial scars. Similar to other infrared 
laser systems, the erbium:glass laser targets intra-
cellular water and penetrates tissue to a depth of 
0.4–2 mm [73]. The 1540 nm wavelength exerts 
less  effect  on  epidermal  melanin  as  do  the 
1320 nm and 1450 nm lasers—a potential advan-
tage  of  this  system  when  treating  tanned  or 
darker-skinned patients. Mordon et al. [95] stud-
ied the 1540 nm erbium:glass laser on hairless rat 
abdominal skin with pulse train irradiation (1.1 J, 
3  Hz,  30  pulses)  and  varying  cooling  tempera-
tures  (+5  °C,  0  °C,  −5  °C).  Biopsies  obtained 
after 1, 3, and 7 days following treatment dem-
onstrated fibroblast proliferation and new colla-
gen  synthesis  as  early  as  the  third  day.  The 
authors concluded that the erbium glass system 
held promise for treating facial rhytides because 
of  its  high  water  absorption  and  reduced  tissue 
scattering effect that limits energy deposition to 
the  upper  dermis  where  most  solar  elastosis  is 
evident.

Ross  et  al.  [96]  studied  the  effect  of  the 
1540 nm erbium:glass laser with a sapphire cool-
ing  handpiece  on  the  preauricular  skin  of  nine 
patients. A  5  mm  collimated  beam  was  used  to 
deliver fluences of 400–1200 mJ/cm2. Epidermal 
necrosis  and  scar  formation  were  noted  at  the 
highest  pulse  energies.  Several  key  points  were 
illustrated by this study; namely, that denatured 
collagen  located  deep  in  the  dermis  (more  than 
600 μm) is associated with granuloma formation 
and  that  the  peaks  of  heating  and  cooling  with 
non-ablative  laser  remodeling  are  in  proximity, 
by  necessity,  since  maximum  wrinkle  reduction 
may  be  achieved  by  a  zone  of  thermal  injury 
100–400 μm beneath the skin surface.

Lupton  et  al.  [97]  reported  their  use  of  a 
1540  nm  erbium:glass  laser  to  treat  24  patients 
with  fine  periorbital  and  perioral  rhytides. 
Patients underwent a series of three treatments on 
a monthly basis using a 4 mm spot size, 10 J/cm2 
fluence,  and  3.5  ms  pulse  duration.  Epidermal 
protection was achieved with concomitant appli-
cation  of  a  contact  sapphire  lens  cooled  to 
5  °C.  Histologic  specimens  demonstrated 
increased dermal fibroplasia at 6 months after the 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



series of laser treatments. Average clinical scores 
were improved at 1 and 6 months following the 
third treatment session with slightly better results 
observed  in  the  periorbital  regions.  Side  effects 
of  treatment  were  mild  and  included  transient 
erythema and edema.

Fournier  and  colleagues  [98]  subsequently 
treated  42  patients  (skin  phototypes  I–IV)  with 
five consecutive 1540 nm diode laser treatments 
at 6-week intervals. Patients were evaluated using 
clinical data, patient satisfaction surveys, digital 
photography, ultrasound imaging, and profilom-
etry data from silicone imprints. The majority of 
patients  demonstrated  modest  improvement  in 
objective  and  subjective  measurements  which 
remained stable throughout the 14-month evalua-
tion period.

 Radiofrequency (RF) Device

Summary Box
•  The treatment should be delivered at the 
fluences ranging 90–150 J/cm3 in a sin-
gle, nonoverlapping pass.

•  When  combining  treatment  with  other 
lasers  or  light  sources,  the  fluences  of 
RF can be reduced.

A monopolar radiofrequency device (ThermaCool 
TC; Thermage Inc., Hayward, CA) has also been 
studied for deep dermal heating with subsequent 
tightening of photodamaged skin. Unlike a laser 
in which light energy is converted into heat, the 
radiofrequency device generates electric current 
which  produces  heat  through  dermal  resistance. 
The energy is delivered to the skin through a spe-
cialized treatment tip with a capacitive coupling 
membrane which allows for uniform delivery of 
heat  over  the  entire  treatment  area.  Epidermal 
protection  is  provided  by  simultaneous  cryogen 
cooling  within  the  contact  treatment  tip.  Using 
this technique, a reverse thermal gradient is gen-
erated.  The  depth  of  heat  penetration  is  depen-
dent upon the size and specifics of the detachable 

155

treatment tip and can be changed according to the 
clinical  application.  Preliminary  animal  studies 
demonstrated selective dermal heating at the lev-
els of the papillary dermis and as deep as the sub-
cutaneous fat [80]. Ruiz-Esparza and Gomez [99] 
reported  facial  tissue  tightening  in  14  of  15 
patients  3  months  after  a  single  radiofrequency 
treatment with minimal side effects.

Alster  and  Tanzi  [100]  demonstrated  signifi-
cant improvement in cheek and neck skin laxity 
in  50  patients  received  one  treatment  with  a 
radiofrequency  device  (ThermaCool;  Thermage 
Corp.,  Hayward,  CA)  at  fluences  ranging 
97–144 J/cm3 (level of 13.6–16; average of 130 J/
cm2)  on  the  cheeks  and  74–134  J/cm3  (average 
110 J/cm3) on the neck in a single, nonoverlap-
ping  pass.  Patient  satisfaction  scores  paralleled 
the  clinical  improvement  observed  with  side 
effects limited to transient erythema, edema, and 
rare dysesthesia. The tightening continued to be 
evident 6 months after a single treatment.

Another  RF  device,  Polaris  WR™  (Syneron 
Medical Ltd., Israel), which combines bipolar RF 
and diode laser energies has been developed in an 
attempt  to  address  both  facial  rhytides  and  skin 
laxity. Doshi and Alster [101] demonstrated mod-
est  clinical  improvement  of  facial  rhytides  and 
skin laxity in 20 patients by using optical ener-
gies of 32–40 J/cm2 (mean 36.4 J/cm2) and radio-
frequencies of 50–85 J/cm3 (mean 67.4 J/cm3) for 
three treatments at 3-week intervals. Side effects 
were mild and limited to transient erythema and 
edema. No scarring or pigmentary alteration was 
seen.

 Postoperative Management

Summary Box
•  Minimal 
avoidance

to  no  care  except  sun 

Since  the  epidermis  remains  intact  following 
non-ablative laser skin remodeling, postoperative 
care  is  minimal.  Some  patients  experience  mild 
erythema and edema lasting less than 24 h.

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



156

 Adverse Events

Summary Box
•  Side Effects/Complications

 – Transient  postinflammatory  hyper-
pigmentation in patients with darker 
skin phototypes or tans
•  Prevention and Treatment

 – Topical  bleaching  agents  and  light 
glycolic  acid  peels  can  hasten  the 
resolution 
postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.

of 

Rarely,  postoperative  hyperpigmentation  can 
develop  several  weeks  after  non-ablative  skin 
remodeling and is more likely to be experienced 
by patients with darker skin tones and/or tans. In 
some cases, investigators demonstrated an asso-
ciation of post-treatment hyperpigmentation with 
excess intraoperative epidermal cryogen cooling 
[92]. Although  always  transient,  topical  bleach-
ing agents and light glycolic acid peels can has-
ten 
postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.

resolution 

the 

of 

In the weeks following a series of non-ablative 
laser procedures, in-office visits can help identify 
patient concerns and increase the overall satisfac-
tion with treatment. Clinical improvements after 
a  series  of  non-ablative  laser  procedures  may 
take  weeks  to  realize,  thus  reassurance  by  the 
laser surgeon regarding the patient’s progress can 
be particularly important.

 Fractional Laser Skin Resurfacing

 Indications and Contraindications

Summary Box
•  Indications

 – Mild to moderate facial rhytides and 

photodamage
 – Atrophic scars
 – Superficial epidermal/dermal lesions
 – Melasma

•  Contraindications

 – Patients with unrealistic expectations
 – Patients with darker skin tones (skin 
phototype  IV–VI)  at  greater  risk  of 
postoperative hyperpigmentation
 – Patients with perpetual sun exposure
 – Patients  with  active  bacterial,  viral, 
inflammatory 
fungal 
skin  conditions  involving  treatment 
areas

infection  or 

 – Patients with history of herpes labia-
lis  may  require  prophylactic  oral 
antiviral medications.

 – Concomitant  isotretinoin  use  could 
potentially  lead  to  an  increased  risk 
of hypertrophic scarring.

Over the past decade, a novel approach in skin 
resurfacing  termed  fractional  photothermolysis 
has been developed to address the shortcomings 
associated  with  skin  rejuvenation  using  pulsed 
and  scanned  ablative  and  non-ablative  lasers 
and light sources [102]. Although dramatic clin-
ical  improvement  can  be  achieved  with  these 
ablative lasers, patients are often hesitant to pur-
sue this treatment option because of the extended 
postoperative recovery period and inherent risks 
of  the  procedure.  Non-ablative  lasers  and  light 
sources,  on  the  other  hand,  have  demonstrated 
modest efficacy in the non-invasive treatment of 
mild  facial  rhytides  and  atrophic  scarring  with 
minimal side effects, but require multiple treat-
ments with delayed and often inconsistent clini-
cal  results.  Due  to  a  need  for  more  noticeable 
clinical improvement than these latter nonabla-
tive  systems  could  provide,  fractional  photo-
thermolysis  was 
the  skin 
resurfacing  market  to  treat  patients  with  rhyt-
ides, dyspigmentation, and atrophic scars [103–
108]  (see  Chap.  10).  Currently,  a  variety  of 
ablative  and  nonablative  fractionated  lasers 
have been developed and are being used to treat 
a  wide  range  of  conditions.  Fractionated  tech-
nology  has  virtually  replaced  pulsed  and 
scanned ablative and nonablative systems due in 
large part to their excellent clinical effects and 
low risk profiles [109].

introduced 

into 

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



157

 Nonalative Fractional Skin Resurfacing
Nonablative fractional skin resurfacing (NAFR), 
typically involves the use of mid-infrared wave-
lengths (1440 nm, 1550 nm, 1927 nm) emitted 
by a variety of laser sources (e.g., erbium, thu-
lium) to create microscopic non-contiguous col-
umns of thermal injury in the dermis (referred to 
as microscopic thermal zones or MTZ) at depths 
of  200–500  μm  surrounded  by  zones  of  viable 
tissue  at  200-  to  300  μm  intervals  [102].  The 
spatially precise columns of thermal injury pro-
duce localized epidermal necrosis and collagen 
denaturation  at  125  or  250  MTZ/cm2  [110]. 
Because  the  tissue  surrounding  each  MTZ  is 
intact, residual epidermal and dermal cells con-
tribute to rapid healing. Maintenance of the stra-
tum  corneum  ensures  continued  epidermal 
barrier  function.  Histologic  evaluation  of  the 
MTZ demonstrates  homogenization of the der-
mal  matrix  and  the  presence  of  epidermal 
necrotic debris (MEND), representing the extru-
sion  of  damaged  epidermal  keratinocytes  by 
viable keratinocytes at the lateral margin of the 
MTZ  [102].  Microscopic  epidermal  necrotic 
debris exfoliates over the next several days, pro-
ducing  a  bronzed  appearance  to  the  skin.  The 
wound  healing  response  differs  from  that  after 
ablative laser techniques because the epidermal 
tissue that is spared between thermal zones con-
tains  viable  transient  amplifying  cells  capable 
of 
re-epithelialization.  Furthermore, 
because  the  stratum  corneum  has  a  low  water 
content,  it  remains  intact  immediately  after 

rapid 

treatment.  Therefore,  the  wound  created  by 
fractional  resurfacing  is  unique—not  simply 
that of an ablative laser used to make “holes” in 
the skin. In addition, fractional resurfacing can 
provide  an  advantage  over  purely  non-ablative 
laser treatments due to the gradual exfoliation of 
the  epidermis  with  resultant  improvement  in 
superficial  dyspigmentation  (Fig.  9.5a,  b). 
Because  only  a  fraction  of  the  skin  is  treated 
during  a  single  session,  a  series  of  fractional 
resurfacing  treatments  is  required  to  achieve 
optimal clinical improvement.

 Ablative Fractional Skin Resurfacing
Although the NAFR system is patient-friendly 
and  is  associated  with  minimal  recovery,  its 
clinical  outcomes  in  the  treatment  of  rhytides 
and  scars  are  often  less  impressive  than  that 
achieved  after  ablative  fractional  resurfacing 
(AFR) [109, 111, 112]. AFR systems, including 
carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  [113],  erbium-doped 
yttrium  aluminum  garnet  (Er:YAG)  [114],  and 
erbium-doped yttrium scandium gallium garnet 
lasers  [115],  were  developed  in  an  attempt  to 
achieve  the  clinical  results  provided  with  full-
field  ablative  resurfacing  lasers  with  greater 
safety  profiles.  These  devices  cause  micro-
scopic  treatment  zones  (MTZs)  of  complete 
epidermal  ablation  with  variable  amounts  of 
dermal  coagulation.  As  with  the  NAFR  sys-
tems,  fractional  delivery  of  an  ablative  laser 
source  results  in  a  microscopic  pattern  with 
spatial  separation  of  columns  of  thermally 

a

b

Fig. 9.5  Fractional photothermolysis (a) before and (b) after

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



158

affected epidermal and dermal tissue. Although 
the results are not as effective as with full-field 
(pulsed/scanned) ablative laser resurfacing, sig-
nificant  improvement  in  rhytides,  atrophic 
scars,  and  laxity  of  the  skin  has  been  demon-
strated  after  one  or  two  treatments  with  the 
fractional ablative lasers [116–118].

 Techniques

 Preoperative Management

Summary Box
•  Adequate  preoperative  patient  evalua-

tion and education

•  Oral  antiviral  prophylaxis  in  patients 

with history of herpes labialis

•  Topical  anesthetic  cream  application 

(60 min) prior to NAFL

•  Additional anesthesia (e.g., oral analge-
sics, IV or IM medications) for AFL

Adequate  preoperative  patient  evaluation  and 
education are essential. Sun exposure should be 
avoided  prior  to  treatment  in  order  to  decrease 
risk  of  postoperative  dyspigmentation.  For 
patients with a history of herpes labialis, prophy-
lactic  oral  antiviral  medications  should  be  con-
sidered when treating perioral skin. Reactivation 
of  prior  herpes  simplex  infection  can  occur 
despite absence of an external wound due to the 
intense dermal heat produced by the laser.

 Description of the Techniques

Summary Box
Description of the techniques: NAFR

•  Laser  treatment  is  delivered  with  con-
comitant forced air cooling. Energy set-
tings  of  25–70  mJ  at  densities  of 
125–250 MTZ/cm2 are applied to treat-
ment areas in 8–10 passes (total energy 
applied per session: 2–6 kJ)

Description of the techniques: AFR

•  Fractional  CO2  laser  with  950  μs  pulse 
duration and 12.5 mJ energy creates aver-
age  depths  of  vaporization  and  coagula-
tion of 160 and 350 μm, respectively
•  Fractional  Er:YAG  laser  with  350  μs 
pulsed duration and 14 mJ energy pro-
duces  average  depths  of  vaporization 
and  coagulation  of  65  and  100  μm, 
respectively

The  treatment  areas  should  be  cleansed  free  of 
debris  (including  dirt,  makeup,  and  powder) 
using a mild cleanser and 70% alcohol. A topical 
anesthetic cream is often applied to the treatment 
sites for 60 min before treatment. While the first 
generation  NAFL  device  required  that  a  water- 
soluble  blue  tinted  tracking  dye  solution  be 
applied  to  the  skin  during  treatment,  current 
NAFL systems do not. NAFL treatment is deliv-
ered  with  concomitant  forced  air  cooling  at 
energy settings ranging 25–70 mJ. Total energies 
of 2–6 kJ are typically applied for full face treat-
ment.  Re-treatments  with  gradually  higher  flu-
ences  should  be  performed  at  4  week  intervals 
until patients are satisfied with clinical outcomes 
(typically three to five sessions are necessary to 
produce  substantial  clinical  improvement).  For 
AFR,  the  fractional  CO2  laser  is  typically  used 
with a 950 μs pulse duration and 12.5 mJ energy, 
creating  average  vaporization  and  coagulation 
depths of 160 and 350 μm, respectively. The frac-
tional Er:YAG laser is often applied at a 350 μs 
pulsed  duration  and  14  mJ  energy,  producing 
average  vaporization  and  coagulation  depths  of 
65 and 100 μm, respectively. Retreatment using 
identical  treatment  techniques  and  parameters 
can be performed at 6–8 week intervals as needed.

 Postoperative Management

Summary Box
•  Mild cleanser, thermal spring water spray 
mist, and moisturizer several times daily 
for the first few postoperative days

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



Patients  are  instructed  to  use  a  mild  cleanser, 
thermal spring water spray mist, and moisturizer 
several  times  daily  for  the  first  few  days  after 
each  treatment  session  (or  as  long  as  bronzing/
xerosis is apparent).

 Adverse Events

Summary Box
•  Side Effects/Complications

 – Erythema, periocular edema, xerosis, 
and  slight  darkening  of  the  skin 
(bronzing)

 – Post-inflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion in patients with darker skin tones

•  Prevention and Treatment

 – Ice pack application for first 48 h
 – Keep skin well-hydrated/moisturized 
for  48–72  h  (or  until  xeroxis/bronz-
ing disappears).

 – Strict ultraviolet light avoidance and 

daily use of sunscreen

Side effects of fractional resurfacing are typically 
mild and transient, including erythema, periocu-
lar  edema,  xerosis,  and  slight  darkening  of  the 
skin  (bronzing)  during  desquamation  of  the 
microscopic  epidermal  necrotic  debris  [112, 
113]. Erosions are uncommon and can be man-
aged by liberal application of a healing ointment 
or  plain  petrolatum  with  cool  wet  compresses 
every 2–3 h. While permanent pigmentary altera-
tion  and  scarring  have  not  been  reported  after 
NAFR treatment, use of an aggressive treatment 
protocol  with  high  density  microscopic  thermal 
zones  increases  the  risk  of  visible  epidermal 
ablation and its associated side effects.

In clinical practice, the factors in choosing a 
particular  treatment  are  based  not  only  on  the 
anticipated  treatment  efficacy,  but  also  on  the 
risk of adverse effects, recovery time, and pain 
acceptability.  A  clinical  study  of  patients  with 
darker skin [118] demonstrated that fractionated 
Er:YAG  laser  treatment  produced  one-third  the 
coagulation  depth  of  fractionated  CO2  laser 
treatment,  but  provided  equivalent  clinical  out-
comes  and  healing  processes.  In  addition,  the 

159

fractionated CO2 laser was associated with more 
pain during treatment. Although non-significant 
differences  in  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation  (PIH)  rates  were  seen  between  the  two 
systems,  there  was  a  trend  toward  higher  PIH 
risk  with  the  fractionated  CO2  laser.  Taking  all 
risks and benefits into account, the fractionated 
Er:YAG laser is often reported as a better treat-
ment  choice  for Asian  patients. The  prevention 
of PIH includes the application of topical bleach-
ing  agents  before  and  after  laser  treatment,  the 
use of a cooling device during treatment to pro-
tect the epidermis from laser heat, and the dili-
gent  application  of  sunscreen  after  treatment 
[119,  120].  Additional  research  is  ongoing  to 
determine optimal treatment parameters and the 
long-term  benefits  and  sequelae  of  fractionated 
laser  resurfacing  in  a  variety  of  conditions  and 
skin phototypes.

 Conclusion
Ablative laser skin resurfacing has revolution-
ized  the  approach  to  photodamaged  facial 
skin. Technology  and  techniques  continue  to 
evolve, further enhancing the ability to achieve 
substantial  clinical  improvement  of  rhytides, 
scars, and dyspigmentation with reduced post-
operative  morbidity.  Utilizing  proper  tech-
nique  and  treatment  parameters,  excellent 
clinical results can be obtained with any one 
or combination of CO2 and Er:YAG laser sys-
tems  available. Therefore,  the  best  choice  of 
laser  ultimately  depends  on  the  operator’s 
expertise,  clinical  indication,  and  individual 
patient characteristics. Regardless of the type 
of ablative resurfacing laser used, the impor-
tance of careful postoperative follow-up can-
not be overemphasized.

For those patients who desire a less aggres-
sive approach to photorejuvenation than abla-
tive 
laser  skin  resurfacing,  non-ablative 
dermal  remodeling  or  fractional  laser  photo-
thermolysis  represent  viable  alternatives  for 
patients  willing  to  accept  modest  clinical 
improvement  in  exchange  for  ease  of  treat-
ment  and  a  favorable  side-effect  profile. 
Treatments are typically delivered at monthly 
intervals  with  progressive  clinical  improve-
ment  observed  after  each  session.  Recent 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



160

advances in fractional laser technology, in par-
ticular, have resulted in clinical effects approx-
imating  those  of  ablative  laser  treatment 
without its associated complications and risks.

References

  1.  Taylor  CR,  Stern  RS,  Leyden  JJ,  Gilchrest 
BA. Photoaging/photodamage and photoprotection. 
J Am Acad Dermatol. 1990;22:1–15.

  2. Lavker  RM.  Cutaneous  aging:  chronological  versus 
photoaging.  In:  Gilchrest  BA,  editor.  Photodamage. 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science; 1995. p. 123–35.
  3.  Alster  TS.  Cutaneous  resurfacing  with  CO2  and 
erbium:YAG lasers: preoperative, intraoperative, and 
postoperative  considerations.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1999;103:619–32.

  4.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermoly-
sis: precise microsurgery by selective absorption of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;22:524–7.

  5.  Shapshay  SM,  Strong  MS, Anastasi  GW, Vaughan 
CW.  Removal  of  rhinophyma  with 
the  CO2 
laser.  A  preliminary  report.  Arch  Otolaryngol. 
1980;106:257–9.

  6.  Dufresne RG, Garrett AB, Bailin PL, et al. CO2 laser 
treatment  of  chronic  actinic  cheilitis.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 1988;19:876–8.

  7.  Alster TS, Kauvar ANB, Geronemus RG. Histology 
of high-energy pulsed CO2 laser resurfacing. Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 1996;15:189–93.

  8.  Tanzi EL, Lupton JR, Alster TS. Review of lasers in 
dermatology: four decades of progress. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2003;49:1–31.

  9.  Lanzafame  RJ,  Naim  JO,  Rogers  DW,  Hinshaw 
JR.  Comparisons  of  continuous-wave,  chop  wave, 
and  superpulsed  laser  wounds.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1988;8:119–24.

  10.  Alster TS, Garg S. Treatment of facial rhytides with 
a high-energy pulsed CO2 laser. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1996;98:791–4.

  11.  Alster  TS.  Preoperative  preparation  for  CO2  laser 
resurfacing. In: Coleman WP, Lawrence N, editors. 
Skin  resurfacing.  Baltimore:  Williams  &  Wilkins; 
1998. p. 171–9.

  12.  Hevia O, Nemeth AJ, Taylor JR. Tretinoin acceler-
ates healing after trichloroacetic acid chemical peel. 
Arch Dermatol. 1991;127:678–82.

  13.  West  TB, Alster  TS.  Effect  of  pretreatment  on  the 
incidence  of  hyperpigmentation  following  cuta-
neous  CO2 
laser  resurfacing.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1999;25:15–7.

  14.  Walia S, Alster TS. Cutaneous CO2 laser resurfacing 
infection rate with and without prophylactic antibi-
otics. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:857–61.

  15.  Bernstein  LJ,  Kauvar  ANB,  Grossman  MC,  et  al. 
The short- and long-term side effects of CO2 laser 
resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:519–25.

  16.  Alster TS, West TB. Effect of topical vitamin C on 
postoperative  CO2  resurfacing  erythema.  Dermatol 
Surg. 1998;24:331–4.

  17.  Alster  TS,  Lupton  JR.  An  overview  of  cutaneous 
laser resurfacing. Clin Plast Surg. 2001;28:37–52.
  18.  Alster TS, Nanni CA, Williams CM. Comparison of 
four CO2 resurfacing lasers: a clinical and histopath-
ologic evaluation. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:153–9.

  19.  Walsh JT, Deutsch TF. Pulsed CO2 laser tissue abla-
tion: measurement of the ablation rate. Lasers Surg 
Med. 1988;8:264–75.

  20.  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Ruiz-Esparza  J,  Goldman  MP.  The 
depth  of  thermal  necrosis  using  the  CO2  laser:  a 
comparison  of  the  superpulsed  mode  and  conven-
tional mode. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1991;17:340–4.
  21.  Stuzin  JM,  Baker  TJ,  Baker  TM,  et  al.  Histologic 
effects  of  the  high-energy  pulsed  CO2  laser  on 
photo-aged 
facial  skin.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1997;99:2036–50.

  22.  Walsh  JT,  Flotte  TJ,  Anderson  RR,  et  al.  Pulsed 
CO2  laser  tissue  ablation:  effect  of  tissue  type  and 
pulse duration on thermal damage. Lasers Surg Med. 
1988;8:108–18.

  23.  Rubach  BW,  Schoenrock  LD.  Histological  and 
clinical evaluation of facial resurfacing using a CO2 
laser  with  the  computer  pattern  generator.  Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1997;123:929–34.
  24.  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Smith  SR,  Sriprachya-anunt 
S.  Depth  of  vaporization  and  the  effect  of  pulse 
stacking with a high-energy, pulsed CO2 laser. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1999;40:615–22.

  25.  Alster TS,  Lupton  JR.  Prevention  and  treatment  of 
side  effects  and  complications  of  cutaneous  laser 
resurfacing. Plast Reconst Surg. 2002;109:308–16.

  26.  Lowe NJ, Lask G, Griffin ME, et al. Skin resurfacing 
with the ultrapulse CO2 laser: observations on 100 
patients. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:1025–9.

  27.  Alster  TS.  Comparison  of  two  high-energy,  pulsed 
CO2  lasers  in  the  treatment  of  periorbital  rhytides. 
Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:541–5.

  28.  Apfelberg  DB.  Ultrapulse  CO2  laser  with  CPG 
scanner  for  full-face  resurfacing  of  rhytides,  pho-
toaging,  and  acne  scars.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1997;99:1817–25.

  29.  Lask G, Keller G, Lowe NJ, et al. Laser skin resur-
facing  with  the  SilkTouch  flashscanner  for  facial 
rhytides. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:1021–4.

  30.  Waldorf  HA,  Kauvar  ANB,  Geronemus  RG.  Skin 
resurfacing  of  fine  to  deep  rhytides  using  a  char- 
free  CO2  laser  in  47  patients.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1995;21:940–6.

  31.  Ratner  D, Viron A,  Puvion-Dutilleul  F,  et  al.  Pilot 
ultrastructural evaluation of human preauricular skin 
before and after high-energy pulsed CO2 laser treat-
ment. Arch Dermatol. 1998;134:582–7.

  32.  Ratner D, Tse Y, Marchell N, et al. Cutaneous laser 
resurfacing. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1999;41:365–89.
  33.  Fulton  JE,  Barnes T.  Collagen  shrinkage  (selective 
dermoplasty) with the high-energy pulsed CO2 laser. 
Dermatol Surg. 1998;24:37–41.

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



  34.  Ross E, Naseef G, Skrobal M, et al. In vivo dermal 
collagen  shrinkage  and  remodeling  following  CO2 
laser resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med. 1996;18:38.
  35.  Flor PJ, Spurr OK. Melting equilibrium for collagen 
fibers under stress: elasticity in the amorphous state. 
J Amer Chem Soc. 1960;83:1308.

  36.  Flor  PJ,  Weaver  ES.  Helix  coil  transition  in  dilute 
aqueous  collagen  solutions.  J  Am  Chem  Soc. 
1989;82:4518.

  37.  Alster TS. Commentary on: Increased smooth mus-
cle actin, factor XIII a, and vimentin-positive cells in 
the papillary dermis of CO2 laser-debrided porcine 
skin. Dermatol Surg. 1998;24:155.

  38.  West TB, Alster TS. Effect of botulinum toxin type 
A on movement-associated rhytides following CO2 
laser resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:259–61.

  39.  Katz  BE,  MacFarlane  DF.  Atypical  facial  scarring 
after isotretinoin therapy in a patient with a previous 
dermabrasion. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;30:852–3.
  40.  Roegnik  HH,  Pinski  JB,  Robinson  K,  et  al. Acne, 
retinoids, and dermabrasion. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 
1985;11:396–8.

  41.  David  L,  Ruiz-Esparza  J.  Fast  healing  after  laser 
skin  resurfacing:  the  minimal  mechanical  trauma 
technique. Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:359–61.

  42.  Ruiz-Esparza J, Gomez JMB. Long-term effects of 
one  general  pass  laser  resurfacing:  a  look  at  der-
mal  tightening  and  skin  quality.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1999;25:169–74.

  43.  Alster  TS,  Hirsch  RJ.  Single-pass  CO2  laser  skin 
resurfacing  of  light  and  dark  skin:  extended  expe-
rience  with  52  patients.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
2003;5:39–42.

  44.  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Single-pass  CO2  versus 
multiple- pass Er:YAG laser skin resurfacing: a com-
parison  of  postoperative  wound  healing  and  side- 
effect rates. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:80–4.

  45.  Walsh  JT,  Flotte  TJ,  Deutsch  TF.  Er:YAG  laser 
ablation  of  tissue:  effect  of  pulse  duration  and  tis-
sue  type  on  thermal  damage.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1989;9:327–37.

  46.  Ross  EV,  Anderson  RR.  The  erbium  laser  in  skin 
resurfacing.  In:  Alster  TS,  Apfelberg  DB,  editors. 
Cosmetic  laser  surgery.  2nd  ed.  New  York:  John 
Wiley; 1999. p. 57–84.

  47.  Alster  TS.  Clinical  and  histologic  evaluation  of 
six  erbium:YAG  lasers  for  cutaneous  resurfacing. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1999;24:87–92.

  48.  Hibst R, Kaufmann R. Effects of laser parameters on 
pulsed Er:YAG laser ablation. Lasers Med Science. 
1991;6:391–7.

  49.  Hohenleutner U, Hohenleutner S, Baumler W, et al. 
Fast  and  effective  skin  ablation  with  an  Er:YAG 
laser:  determination  of  ablation  rates  and  thermal 
damage zones. Lasers Surg Med. 1997;20:242–7.
  50.  Alster TS, Lupton JR. Erbium:YAG cutaneous laser 
resurfacing. Dermatol Clin. 2001;19:453–66.
  51.  Khatri KA, Ross EV, Grevelink JM, et al. Comparison 
of  erbium:YAG  and  CO2  lasers  in  resurfacing  of 
facial rhytides. Arch Dermatol. 1999;135:391–7.

161

  52.  Goldman  MP,  Marchell  N,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  Laser 
skin resurfacing of the face with a combined CO2/
Er:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:102–4.
  53.  Sapijaszko  MJA,  Zachary  CB.  Er:YAG  laser  skin 

resurfacing. Dermatol Clin. 2002;20:87–96.

  54. Pozner JM, Goldberg DJ. Histologic effect of a variable 
pulsed Er:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:733–6.
  55.  Ross  EV,  McKinlay  JR,  Sajben  FP,  et  al.  Use  of  a 
novel erbium laser in a Yucatan minipig: a study of 
residual thermal damage (RTD), ablation, and wound 
healing as a function of pulse duration. Lasers Surg 
Med. 1999;15:17.

  56.  Newman  JB,  Lord  JL, Ash  K,  et  al. Variable  pulse 
erbium:YAG laser skin resurfacing of perioral rhyt-
ides  and  side-by-side  comparison  with  CO2  laser. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1998;24:1303–7.

  57.  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Rostan  EF,  Marchell  N.  Collagen 
tightening induced by CO2 laser versus erbium:YAG 
laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;27:395–403.

  58.  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Effect  of  a  semiocclusive 
silicone- based dressing after ablative laser resurfac-
ing of facial skin. Cosmetic Dermatol. 2003;16:13–6.
  59.  Batra RS, Ort RJ, Jacob C, et al. Evaluation of a sili-
cone occlusive dressing after laser skin resurfacing. 
Arch Dermatol. 2001;137:1317–21.

  60.  Nanni  CA, Alster  TS.  Complications  of  CO2  laser 
resurfacing: an evaluation of 500 patients. Dermatol 
Surg. 1998;24:315–20.

  61.  Sriprachya-anunt  S,  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Goldman  MP, 
et  al.  Infections  complicating  pulsed  CO2  laser 
resurfacing  for  photo-aged  facial  skin.  Dermatol 
Surg. 1997;23:527–36.

  62.  McDaniel  DH,  Ash  K,  Lord  J,  et  al.  Accelerated 
laser resurfacing wound healing using a triad of topi-
cal antioxidants. Dermatol Surg. 1998;24:661–4.
  63.  Horton  S,  Alster  TS.  Preoperative  and  postopera-
tive  considerations  for  cutaneous  laser  resurfacing. 
Cutis. 1999;64:399–406.

  64.  Fisher AA. Lasers and allergic contact dermatitis to 
topical antibiotics, with particular reference to baci-
tracin. Cutis. 1996;58:252–4.

  65.  Alster  TS,  Nanni  CA.  Pulsed-dye  laser  treatment 
of  hypertrophic  burn  scars.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1998;102:2190–5.

  66.  Friedman PM, Geronemus RG. Use of the 308-nm 
excimer laser for postresurfacing leukoderma. Arch 
Dermatol. 2001;137:824–5.

  67.  Grimes PE, Bhawan J, Kim J, et al. Laser resurfacing- 
induced hypopigmentation: histologic alteration and 
repigmentation  with  topical  photochemotherapy. 
Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:515–20.

  68.  Rohrer  TE.  Erbium:YAG 

resurfacing- 
experience of the first 200 cases. Aesthet Dermatol 
Cosmet Surg. 1999;1:19–30.

laser 

  69.  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. Side effects and complications 
of  variable-pulsed  erbium:yttrium–aluminum–gar-
net laser skin resurfacing: extended experience with 
50 patients. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2003;111:1524–9.

  70.  Rostan  EF,  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Goldman  MP.  Laser 
resurfacing  with  a  long  pulse  erbium:YAG  laser 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



162

compared  to  the  950  ms  pulsed  CO2  laser.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2001;29:136–41.

  71.  Ross VE, Miller C, Meehan K, et al. One-pass CO2 
versus  multiple-pass  Er:YAG  laser  resurfacing  in 
the treatment of rhytides: a comparison side-by-side 
study of pulsed CO2 and Er:YAG lasers. Dermatol 
Surg. 2001;27:709–15.

  72.  Zachary  CB.  Modulating  the  Er:YAG  laser.  Lasers 

Surg Med. 2002;26:223–6.

  73.  Alster TS, Lupton JR. Are all infrared lasers equally 
effective in skin rejuvenation. Sem Cutan Med Surg. 
2002;21:274–9.

  74.  Zelickson  B,  Kilmer  S,  Bernstein  E,  et  al.  Pulsed 
dye laser therapy for sun damaged skin. Lasers Surg 
Med. 1999;25:229–36.

  75.  Zelickson  B,  Kist  D.  Effect  of  pulse  dye  laser  and 
intense pulsed light source on the dermal extracellu-
lar matrix remodeling. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;12:68.
  76.  Bjerring  P,  Clement  M,  Heickendorff  L,  et  al. 
Selective non-ablative wrinkle reduction by laser. J 
Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2:9–15.

  77.  Goldberg DJ, Cutler KB. Non-ablative treatment of 
rhytides with intense pulsed light. Lasers Surg Med. 
2000;26:196–200.

  78.  Bitter PH. Non-invasive rejuvenation of photodam-
aged skin using serial, full-face intense pulsed light 
treatments. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:835–43.

  79.  Weiss RA, Weiss MA, Beasley KL. Rejuvenation of 
photoaged skin: 5 years results with intense pulsed 
light  of  the  face,  neck,  and  chest.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2002;28:1115–9.

  80.  Hardaway  CA,  Ross  EV.  Non-ablative  laser  skin 
remodeling. Dermatol Clin. 2002;20:97–111.
  81.  Goldberg  DJ,  Whitworth  J.  Laser  skin  resurfacing 
with the Q-switched Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 
1997;23:903–7.

  82.  Goldberg DJ, Metzler C. Skin resurfacing utilizing 
a  low-fluence  Nd:YAG  laser.  J  Cutan  Laser  Ther. 
1999;1:23–7.

  83.  Lee  MW.  Combination  visible  and  infrared  lasers 
for  skin  rejuvenation.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2002;21:288–300.

  84.  Menaker  GM,  Wrone  DA,  Williams  RM,  et  al. 
Treatment  of  facial  rhytids  with  a  non-ablative 
laser: a clinical and histologic study. Dermatol Surg. 
1999;25:440–4.

  85.  Kelly  KM,  Nelson  S,  Lask  GP,  et  al.  Cryogen 
spray  cooling  in  combination  with  non-ablative 
laser  treatment  of  facial  rhytides.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1999;135:691–4.

  86.  Goldberg  DJ.  Non-ablative  subsurface  remodel-
ing: clinical and histologic evaluation of a 1320 nm 
Nd:YAG laser. J Cutan Laser Ther. 1999;1:153–7.

  87.  Goldberg DJ. Full-face non-ablative dermal remod-
eling with a 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 
2000;26:915–8.

  88.  Trelles MA, Allones I, Luna R. Facial rejuvenation 
with a non-ablative 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser. A pre-
liminary clinical and histologic evaluation. Dermatol 
Surg. 2001;27:111–6.

  89.  Fatemi A, Weiss MA, Weiss RA. Short-term histo-
logic effects of non-ablative resurfacing: results with 
a dynamically cooled millisecond-domain 1320 nm 
Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:172–6.
  90.  Goldberg  DJ,  Rogachefsky  AS,  Silapunt  S.  Non- 
ablative laser treatment of facial rhytides: a compari-
son of 1450 nm diode laser treatment with dynamic 
cooling as opposed to treatment with dynamic cool-
ing alone. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:79–81.

  91.  Hardaway  CA,  Ross  EV,  Paithankar  DY.  Non- 
ablative  cutaneous  remodeling  with  a  1.45  micron 
mid-infrared  diode  laser:  phase  II.  J  Cosmet  Laser 
Ther. 2002;4:9–14.

  92.  Tanzi  EL,  Williams  CM,  Alster  TS.  Treatment  of 
facial  rhytides  with  a  non-ablative  1450-nm  diode 
laser:  a  controlled  clinical  and  histologic  study. 
Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:124–9.

  93.  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  The  treatment  of  transverse 
neck lines with a 1450-nm diode laser. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2002;14(Suppl):33.

  94.  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. Comparison of a 1450-nm diode 
laser and a 1320-nm Nd:YAG laser in the treatment 
of  atrophic  facial  scars:  a  prospective  clinical  and 
histologic study. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:152–7.
  95.  Mordon S, Capon A, Creusy C, et al. In vivo experi-
mental  evaluation  of  non-ablative  skin  remodeling 
using  a  1.54  μm  laser  with  surface  cooling.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2000;27:1–9.

  96.  Ross EV, Sajben FP, Hsia J, et al. Non-ablative skin 
remodeling:  selective  dermal  heating  with  a  mid- 
infrared  laser  and  contact  cooling  combination. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2000;26:186–95.

  97.  Lupton  JR,  Williams  CM, Alster  TS.  Non-ablative 
laser skin resurfacing using a 1540 nm erbium:glass 
laser:  a  clinical  and  histologic  analysis.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2002;28:833–5.

  98.  Fournier N, Dahan S, Barneon G, et al. Non-ablative 
remodeling: a 14-month clinical ultrasound imaging 
and profilometric evaluation of a 1540 nm Er:glass 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:926–31.

  99.  Ruiz-Esparza J, Gomez JB. The medical face lift: a 
non-invasive, non-surgical approach to tissue tight-
ening  in  facial  skin  using  non-ablative  radiofre-
quency. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:325–32.

 100.  Alster TS, Tanzi EL. Improvement of neck and cheek 
laxity  with  a  nonablative  radiofrequency  device:  a 
lifting experience. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:305–7.

 101.  Doshi  SN, Alster  TS.  Combination  radiofrequency 
and diode laser for treatment of facial rhytides and 
skin laxity. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:11–5.
 102.  Manstein D, Herron GS, Sink RK, et al. Fractional 
photothermolysis:  a  new  concept  for  cutaneous 
remodeling  using  microscopic  patterns  of  thermal 
injury. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:426–38.

 103.  Tannous ZS, Astner S. Utilizing fractional resurfac-
ing in the treatment of therapy-resistant melasma. J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:39–43.

 104.  Rokhsar  CK,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  The  treatment  of 
melasma  with  fractional  photothermolysis:  a  pilot 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:1645–50.

R. Wanitphakdeedecha and T. S. Alster



 105.  Geronemus  RG.  Fractional  photothermolysis:  cur-
rent  and  future  applications.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2006;38:169–76.

 106.  Alster  TS,  Tanzi  EL,  Lazarus  M.  The  use  of  frac-
tional  laser  photothermolysis  for  the  treatment  of 
atrophic scars. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:295–9.
 107.  Wanner  M, Tanzi  EL, Alster TS.  Fractional  photo-
thermolysis: treatment of facial and nonfacial cuta-
neous photodamage with a 1,550-nm erbium-doped 
fiber laser. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:23–8.

 108.  Wanitphakdeedecha R, Keoprasom N, Eimpunth S, 
Manuskiatti W.  The  efficacy  in  melasma  treatment 
using a 1410 nm fractional photothermolysis laser. J 
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28:293–7.
 109.  Aslam A, Alster  TS.  Evolution  of  laser  skin  resur-
facing:  from  scanning  to  fractional  technology. 
Dermatol Surg. 2014;40:1163–72.

 110.  Laubach  HJ,  Tannous  Z,  Anderson  RR,  Manstein 
D.  Skin  responses  to  fractional  photothermolysis. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:142–9.

 111.  Graber  E,  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Side  effects  and 
complications  of  fractional  laser  photothermolysis: 
experience  with  961  treatments.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2008;34:301–5.

 112.  Metelitsa  AI,  Alster  TS.  Fractionated  laser  skin 
treatment  complications:  a  review. 

resurfacing 
Dermatol Surg. 2010;36:299–306.

 113.  Sherling  M,  Friedman  PM,  Adrian  R,  Burns  AJ, 
et al. Consensus recommendations on the use of an 
erbium-doped  1,550-nm  fractionated  laser  and  its 

163

applications in dermatologic laser surgery. Dermatol 
Surg. 2010;36:461–9.

 114.  Manuskiatti  W,  Triwongwaranat  D,  Varothai  S, 
Eimpunth S, et al. Efficacy and safety of a carbon- 
dioxide  ablative  fractional  resurfacing  device  for 
treatment  of  atrophic  acne  scars  in  Asians.  J  Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2010;63:274–83.

 115.  Hu  S,  Hsiao  WC,  Chen  MC,  Huang  YL,  et  al. 
Ablative fractional erbium-doped yttrium aluminum 
garnet laser with coagulation mode for the treatment 
of atrophic acne scars in Asian skin. Dermatol Surg. 
2011;37:939–44.

 116.  Dierickx  CC,  Khatri  KA,  Tannous  ZS,  Childs  JJ, 
et al. Microfractional ablative skin resurfacing with 
two  novel  erbium  laser  systems.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2008;40:113–23.

 117.  Saedi  N,  Petelin  A,  Zachary  C.  Fractionation: 
a  new  era  in  laser  resurfacing.  Clin  Plast  Surg. 
2011;38:449–61. vii.

 118.  Manuskiatti  W,  Iamphonrat  T,  Wanitphakdeedecha 
R, Eimpunth S. Dermatol Surg. 2013;39:111–20.
 119.  Chan  HH,  Manstein  D,  Yu  CS,  Shek  S,  Kono 
T,  Wei  WI.  The  prevalence  and  risk  factors  of 
post- inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  after  frac-
tional  resurfacing  in  Asians.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(5):381–5.

 120.  Wanitphakdeedecha 

R, 
R, 
Manuskiatti W. The use of sunscreen starting on the 
first day after ablative fractional skin resurfacing. J 
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28:1522–8.

Phuardchantuk 

9 Lasers for Resurfacing



Fractional Photothermolysis

Dieter Manstein, Hans-Joachim Laubac, 
Sofia Iglesia, Alaleh Dormishian,  
Ali Rajabi- Estarabadi, and Keyvan Nouri

10

Abstract
Traditional  Resurfacing  techniques  are  well 
established  treatments  for  modifying  appear-
ances and characteristics of the skin, but their 
drawbacks 
include  prolonged  procedural 
downtime, scarring risk and long-lasting hyper-
pigmentation.  Fractional  Photothermolysis 
(FP)  overcomes  these  drawbacks  through  the 
generation of patterns of microscopic treatment 
zones  (MTZs),  while  leaving  the  surrounding 
skin  undamaged,  allowing  for  quick  healing 
and  limits  the  development  of  inflammation 
and fibrosis. The ability of delivering multiple 
FP treatments and with the manipulation of the 
laser parameters allows the physician to choose 
between the two types of FP and customize the 
treatment regime that is best fit for the patients’ 
needs  and  expectations.  Non- Ablative  gener-

D. Manstein (*) 
Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,  
Boston, MA, USA 
e-mail: dmanstein@partners.org

H.-J. Laubac 
Dermatologische Abteilung, Universitäre Krankenhäuser 
von Gen, Genf, Schweiz 

S. Iglesia · A. Dormishian · A. Rajabi-Estarabadi  
K. Nouri
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 

ates  MTZs  by  thermal  coagulation  while 
Ablative  FP  generates  MTZs  by  vaporizing 
microscopic  zones  of  tissue  which  results  in 
immediate tissue loss and a surrounding zone 
of  coagulated  tissue.  FP  techniques  include  a 
wide spectrum of dermatological diseases that 
could be treated through the facilitation of drug 
and cell delivery into the skin. FP demonstrates 
to  be  an  effective  home-use  product  for  self-
treating wrinkles, 87% of patients have reported 
improvement in the appearance of wrinkles in a 
1–3  months  period.  The  future  for  FP  may 
include specialties beyond dermatology.

Keywords
Fractional Photothermolysis · Microscopic 
Treatment Zones · Ablative Fractional 
Photothermolysis · Non-Ablative Fractional 
Photothermolysis · Dermatological Laser 
Therapy · Fractional resurfacing · 
Microdermal Treatment Zones · Optical 
penetration depth · Thermal coagulation · 
Vaporizing microscopic zones

Abbreviations

Fractional photothermolysis
Fractional resurfacing

FP 
FR 
MEND  Microscopic epidermal-necrotic-debris
Microthermal treatment zone
MTZ 
Optical penetration depth
OPD 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_10

165





166

 Introduction and Background

•  Traditional  resurfacing  techniques  have  their 

drawbacks

Traditional  ablative  resurfacing  techniques 
and  non-ablative  laser  and  light  procedures  are 
well-established  treatment  modalities  for  modi-
fying the appearance and characteristics of skin 
[1–3]. However, patients have become hesitant to 
accept the side effects and risks associated with 
traditional ablative techniques [4]. The main con-
cerns of ablative resurfacing are prolonged pro-
cedural  downtime,  risk  of  scarring,  and  the 
incidence of delayed, long-lasting hypopigmen-
tation,  also  known  as  ‘alabaster  skin’  [5,  6]. 
Further,  traditional  non-ablative  techniques  for 
collagen  remodeling  have  shown  inconsistent 
and often unpredictable results, frequently lead-
ing to unsatisfied patients and treating physicians 
[7]. For a detailed description of the advantages 
and disadvantages of traditional resurfacing tech-
niques, see Chaps. 9, 12, and 13 of this volume.

•  Fractional  photothermolysis’  (FP)  is  a  rela-
tively  new  concept  introduced  by  Manstein 
et al. in 2004.

•  FP is based on generating patterns of micro-
scopically  small  lesions,  also  called  ‘micro-
scopic treatment zones’ (MTZs).

•  FP  has  become  an  established  treatment—
technique in dermatological laser therapy.

To  overcome  the  drawbacks  of  these  tradi-
tional  resurfacing  approaches,  fractional  photo-
thermolysis  (FP)  was  developed  by  Manstein 
et  al.  [8].  In  contrast  to  traditional  laser  tech-
niques, which provide laser exposure to the entire 
skin surface, FP creates a pattern of microscopi-
treatment  zones 
cally  small,  3-dimensional 
(microscopic  treatment  zones  or  MTZs)  while 
leaving the skin surrounding each of these MTZs 
substantially  undamaged  (Fig.  10.1).  The  term 
“fractional  photothermolysis”  was  selected  to 
express that only a fraction (lat: frangere, to break 
into pieces) of the skin is exposed to light (photo) 
to  thermally  damage  or  destroy  (thermolysis) 
small treatment zones. FP procedures have been 
demonstrated to successfully treat a wide variety 

Fig.  10.1  Concept  of  fractional  photothermolysis.  An 
array of microscopically small zones of thermal injury, so 
called MTZs (microscopic treatment zones, gray arrows), 
is generated by multiple, focused laser pulses. Each of the 
MTZ is surrounded by undamaged skin (orange, circular 
arrow), allowing for fast repair (Laubach and Manstein [9])

of  aesthetic  and  dermatological  indications. 
There is a broad range of possible treatment set-
tings that may be used to generate the resulting 
wound healing response. FP can be delivered in 
multiple treatments, each providing incremental 
improvement  within  the  limits  of  individual 
patient’s tolerance for downtime and side effects. 
Therefore,  FP  gives  the  physician  additional 
options to provide a customized treatment regime 
that is suited to fit their patient’s needs and expec-
tations. FP procedures have become increasingly 
popular over the past few years and have become 
an  established  concept  in  dermatological  laser 
therapy. The rapid proliferation of publications in 
the  dermatological  literature  related  to  FP  is  an 
indication  of  the  significant  impact  that  FP  had 
on the field (Fig. 10.2). The success of FP is also 
documented by the wide variety of commercially 
available FP devices; virtually all dermatological 
laser  device  companies  currently  have  at  least 
one FP device in their product portfolio (Tables 
10.1 and 10.2).

D. Manstein et al.



Citations of Selective and Fractional photothermolysis

167

350

300

250

200

150

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

C

l

a
u
n
n

100A

50

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

2005

2010

2015

2020

Sum of SP Citations Per Year

Sum of FP Citations Per Year

Fig. 10.2  Annual citations of the original article for frac-
tional photothermolysis (FP) and selective photothermol-
ysis (SP). Data obtained from ‘ISI Web of Knowledge™’, 
Thompson Reuters. The rapid proliferation of FP related 
publications indicates an increasing impact of this concept 
in  the  field  of  dermatology.  The  annual  citations  of  FP 
have  already  reached  a  level  comparable  to  that  of 

SP. Further analysis reveals that recently SP citations are 
increasingly  for  non-dermatological  indications,  e.g.,  in 
ophthalmology  or  otorhinolaryngology.  In  contrast,  FP 
citations  are  so  far  generally  limited  to  dermatological 
indications (SP: Anderson and Parrish [10]; FP: Manstein 
et al. [8])

Table  10.1  Characteristics  of  selected,  commercially  available  non-ablative  fractional  photothermolysis  (nFP) 
devices, including manufacturer, device name, laser type, emitted wavelength, nominal spot size and range of energy/
MTZ. This table is not comprehensive, the pulse duration listed device parameters were obtained by manufacturer sur-
vey and are also subject to change

Company Device
Cynosure Affirm
Lutronic Mosaic

Laser type
Nd:YAG
Erbium

Palomar

Lux1540

Erbium

Wavelength 
[nm]
Delivery
1440 ± 1320 Stamping
Scanned
1550
Stamping
Stamping

1540

Spot size [μm/
MTZ]
100–150
240 mJ

Energy [mJ/
MTZ]
up to 4.1
4–40

Pulse duration 
[ms]
1, 1.5, 2
0.5–4.5

70 mJ per 
microbeam

312–1000

up to 100

5, 10

2–240
up to 20
1–30

0.25–5
4–14
0.5

4–70

5–20

1440
1540
1550

1410

Stamping
Scanned
Stamping
Rolling

1550/1927

Rolling

135/up to 600

4–70, 5–20

0.015–3

1440

Palomar
Quanta
Sellas

Solta

Solta

Erbium

Lux 1440 Nd:YAG
Er:Glass
Matisse
Erbium
Sellas 
1550
Fraxel 
re:fine
Fraxel
re:store 
(Former 
SR 1550)
Clear+ 
Brilliant
DUAL

Er:Glass
Erbium

Diode

Erbium+ 
thulium

•  Individual  MTZs  are  typically  so  small  that 
they  induce  neither  extended  inflammation 
nor fibrosis.

section and the presence of adjacent unharmed 
tissue.

•  MTZs can extend down to the deep reticular 

•  MTZs  heal  quickly  due  to  their  small  cross 

dermis for certain laser parameters.

10 Fractional Photothermolysis 




0
0
3
–
0
5

p
/
J
m
0
0
5
2

0
5
2

0
7

,
0
4

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

]
s
m

[

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

e
s
l
u
P

]
Z
T
M

/
J
m

[

y
g
r
e
n
E

/

m
μ
[

e
z
i
s

t
o
p
S

]
Z
T
M

)

W

(

r
e
w
o
P

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
D

]

m
n
[

h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
W

168

d
e
t
t
i

m
e

,
e
p
y
t

r
e
s
a
l

,
e
m
a
n

e
c
i
v
e
d

,
r
e
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
s
e
c
i
v
e
d

)
P
F
(

s
i
s
y
l
o
m
r
e
h
t
o
t
o
h
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

e
v
i
t
a
l
b
a

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

y
l
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
c

,
d
e
t
c
e
l
e
s

f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
C

.

2
0
1
e
l
b
a
T

e
r
e
w
s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

e
c
i
v
e
d

d
e
t
s
i
l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

e
s
l
u
p

e
h
t

,
e
v
i
s
n
e
h
e
r
p
m
o
c

t
o
n

s
i

e
l
b
a
t

s
i
h
T

.

Z
T
M
/
y
g
r
e
n
e

f
o

e
g
n
a
r

d
n
a

e
z
i
s

t
o
p
s

l
a
n
i
m
o
n

,
r
e
w
o
p

n
o
i
s
s
i
m
e

l
a
c
i
t
p
o

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

,
h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
w

e
g
n
a
h
c

o
t

t
c
e
j
b
u
s

o
s
l
a

e
r
a

d
n
a

y
e
v
r
u
s

r
e
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m
y
b

d
e
n
i
a
t
b
o

0
2
–
2
.
0

0
0
6

0
8
–
2
.
0

7
–
5

0
5
3

5
.
1
–
1
.
0

5
.
1
–
1
.
0

6
1
–
5
.
2

0
0
0
1
–
0
1

2
.
0
–
4
0
.
0

2
–
4
0
.
0

s
m
1
<

0
0
3
–
1
.
0

2

m
c
/
J

0
0
6

o
t

p
U

0
0
2
–
5

2

m
c
/
J

0
0
4

o
t

p
U

0
8
–
5
3

0
8
–
5
3

J
m
0
0
0
3

o
t

p
U

J
m
0
0
0
1

o
t

p
U

0
0
3

,
0
8
1

0
3
–
5
.
0

5
–
1
.
0

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

J
m
5
2
2
–
1

5
2
2
–
5

0
5
–
5

0
0
3
1

0
2
1

–

0
2
1
–
4

0
0
3

,
0
8
1

,
0
2
1

0
6

0
6

–

0
3

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

0
0
6
,
0
1

2

O
C

0
2
3
–
0
6

0
0
2

0
0
3

0
0
3

0
3

0
2

0
3

0
5

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

5
1
–
5

0
0
5

5
1
–
1
.
0

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

0
0
6
,
0
1

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

0
4
9
2

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
9
7
2

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

G
A
Y

:
r
E

)
0
4
9
2
(

y
n
o
m
r
a
H

r
e
s
a
L

2

O
C

2
O
C

l
e
x
i
P

e
c
i
v
e
D

2

2

O
C

O
C

2

O
C

G
G
S
Y

2

O
C

2

O
C

t
fi
i
n
m
O

l
e
x
i
P

l
l
e
C
h
c
u
o
T

e
s
a
L
a
r
d
a
u
Q

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F
l
r
a
e
P

n
i
k
S
t
r
a
m
S

2
O
C
m
r
fi
f
A

e
d
i
X

t
r
a
m
S

P
H
T
O
D

a
i
v
u
J

y
n
a
p
m
o
C

a
m
A

l

a
l
e
d
n
a
C

a
r
e
t
u
C

T
M
A

e
r
u
s
o
n
y
C

a
k
e
D

e
s
p
i
l
l

E

/
J

4
2

o
t

p
U
0
4
9
2

0
4
9
2
/
4
6
0
1

2
m
c

0
4
9
2
/
4
6
0
1

0
4
9
2

0
4
9
2

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

G
A
Y

:
r
E

2
O
C

/

G
A
Y

:
d
N

G
A
Y

:
r
E

/

G
A
Y

:
d
N

G
A
Y

:
r
E

G
A
Y

:
r
E

G
A
Y

:
r
E

e
d
o
i
D

2

O
C

2

O
C

r
E
e
s
a
L
l
a
r
u
t
a
N

l
a
c
i
d
e
M

s
u
c
o
F

e
s
l
u
P
P
S

a
n
o
t
o
F

i

o
t
X
M
5
S
e
r
u
l
e
V

s
i
l
a
u
D
P
S

s
i
l
a
u
D
S
X

s
i
l
e
d
i
F
S
X

X
S
o
t
x
i
M

X
F
e
v
i
t
c
A

X
V

X
F
p
e
e
D

X
F
l
a
t
o
T

2

O
C
e

A
S
U
g
n
i
r
e
s
a
L

s
i
n
e
m
u
L

c
i
n
o
r
t
u
L

D. Manstein et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




169

0
5
2
–
5
3
.
0

0
2
–
5
0
.
0

0
0
1
–
1

0
0
1

3
–
5
1
.
0

J

5
7
1

o
t

p
u

J

2

o
t

p
U

2
3
–
7
.
0

0
7
–
4

0
7
–
5

]
s
m

[

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

e
s
l
u
P

]
Z
T
M

/
J
m

[

y
g
r
e
n
E

/

m
μ
[

e
z
i
s

t
o
p
S

]
Z
T
M

)

W

(

r
e
w
o
P

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
D

]

m
n
[

h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
W

5
2

o
t

p
u

5
2
1
–
0
8

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
S

0
0
6

,
6
3
1

0
4

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

0
0
6
,
0
1

2

O
C

r
i
a
p
:
e
r

l
e
x
a
r
F

0
5
1

0
5
3

0
5
2

0
3

0
3

0
4

5
2

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

g
n
i
p
m
a
t
s

d
e
n
n
a
c
S

0
4
9
2

0
4
5
1

0
5
3
1
–
0
5
8

0
4
9
2

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

0
0
6
,
0
1

G
A
Y

:
r
E

r
e
s
a
L

d
e
r
a
r
f
n
I

t
h
g
i
l

2

O
C

G
A
Y

:
r
E

s
r
e
s
a
l

2

O
C

2

2

O
C

O
C

0
4
9
2

G
A
Y

:
r
E

0
4
9
2
x
u
L

0
4
5
1
x
u
L

e
c
i
v
e
D

R
I
p
e
e
D
x
u
L

2

O
C

r
e
s
a
l
u
o
y

X
F
e
n
a
r
u
B

2

O
L
E
X
E

5
2
-
S
L
x
i
r
t
a

M

S
F
-
e
n
i
F
a
r
t
l

U

r
e
n
n
a
c
S

l
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F
o
r
P

™
o
l
a
H

y
n
a
p
m
o
C

r
a
m
o
l
a
P

s
e
i
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

e
n
o
t
s
d
n
a
S

l
a
c
i
d
e
M

n
o
t
i
c
S

a
t
l
o
S

a
t
n
a
u
Q

l
e
t
n
a
u
Q

10 Fractional Photothermolysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




170

One  of  the  key  concepts  of  FP  is  that  the 
individual damaged tissue regions (MTZs) are 
so small in at least one dimension that the dam-
aged  or  destroyed  tissue  is  rapidly  repaired 
without  any  significance,  the  close  proximity 
of  surrounding  viable  tissue  facilitates  the 
wound healing. Although the individual MTZs 
induce  a  guaranteed  wound  healing  response, 
the extent of inflammation is limited and con-
fined  to  their  close  proximity.  The  overall 
wound  healing  response  is  primarily  deter-
mined  by  the  shape  of  individual  MTZs  and 
their distribution (density) within the treatment 
area. This “fractional” approach contrasts with 
thermal wounds having larger dimensions and 
longer  healing  times,  which  are  typically 
generated  using  conventional  resurfacing  pro-
cedures or the like. Another advantage of gen-
erating  lesions  on  a  microscopic  scale  is  that 
the  individual  lesions  are  so  small  that  typi-
cally  they  cannot  be  resolved  with  the  naked 
eye under clinical conditions, thereby ensuring 
a homogenous appearance of the treated area. 
MTZs  heal  quickly  due  to  their  small  cross 
section  and  the  presence  of  unharmed  tissue. 
They  can  extend  down  to  the  deep  reticular 
dermis  and  still  be  well-tolerated  in  terms  of 
rapid healing. Such deep tissue destruction has 
to  be  carefully  avoided  with  traditional  abla-

tive resurfacing techniques, as confluent dam-
age  to  such  depth  levels  would  impair  the 
skin’s  ability  to  regenerate,  and  would  most 
likely result in scarring similar to that seen in 
third-degree burns [11–13].

•  Two  distinct  types  of  FP  exist:  non-ablative 

FP (nFP) and ablative FP (aFP).

•  Non-ablative FP (nFP) generates MTZs char-

acterized by thermal coagulation.

•  Ablative FP (aFP) generates MTZs exhibiting 
some  degree  of  immediate  tissue  removal 
(vaporization)  and  a  surrounding  zone  of 
coagulated tissue.

•  A  distinction  between  superficial,  medium 
and deep FP procedures may facilitate descrip-
tion  of  the  procedure,  but  is  somewhat 
arbitrary.

At  present,  two  distinct  types  of  FP  exist—
non-ablative  FP  (nFP)  and  ablative  FP  (aFP) 
(Fig.  10.3).  Non-ablative  FP  (nFP)  generates 
MTZs having a small-diameter zone of thermally 
damaged epidermis and dermis extending down 
to a particular depth. The shape of such MTZs is 
either  an  inverted  cone  or  a  tapered  column 
extending into the dermis. The degree of thermal 
damage within an MTZ is typically sufficient to 
cause  cell  necrosis  and  to  coagulate  collagen. 

a

traditional
ablative

b

superficial
fractional

c

non-ablative
fractional

d

ablative
fractional

ablative

non-ablative

Fig. 10.3  Schematics of different resurfacing modalities. 
Traditional ablative procedures generate a confluent layer 
of  tissue  removal  and  with  thermal  coagulation  to  the 
adjacent remaining tissue (a). Mainly, two distinct types 
of  FP  procedures  exist,  ablative  (aFP)  and  non-ablative 
(nFP)  photothermolysis.  nFP  creates  multiple  micro-
scopic treatment zones (MTZs) consisting of coagulated 

tissue. Despite of the thermal damage, the physical integ-
rity  of  the  skin  remains  intact  (c). AFP  vaporizes  some 
tissue, creating multiple MTZs which consist of a cavity 
lined by a thin layer of eschar and surrounded by a cuff of 
coagulated tissue (d). Further differentiation of FP proce-
dures according to the depth of individual MTZ is possi-
ble, e.g., superficial FP, but somehow arbitrary (b)

D. Manstein et al.



The physical integrity of the skin remains intact, 
in spite of the marked localized thermal damage 
[8]. Ablative FP (aFP), on the other hand, creates 
MTZs by vaporizing microscopic zones of tissue 
up to a particular depth. This depth is primarily 
dependent  on  pulse  energy  and  may  extent  into 
the  deep  reticular  dermis. The  resulting  tapered 
cavity is lined by a thin layer of eschar and sur-
rounded by a cuff of thermal denaturation, which 
is sufficient to destroy cells and coagulate colla-
gen. Ablative FP results in immediate tissue loss 
due  to  the  physical  removal  of  portions  of  the 
skin  by  vaporization,  and  the  physical  integrity 
and barrier function of the skin is locally compro-
mised [14]. As the depth of MTZ can vary greatly, 
it  appears  reasonable  to  further  distinguish 
between FP procedures generating MTZs of dif-
ferent depths, e.g., superficial, medium and deep. 
While  such  a  classification  may  serve  to  better 
describe a FP process, classification by damage 
depth is somewhat arbitrary [15].

•  The laser wavelength determines primarily if 
an FP procedure is ablative or non-ablative.
•  Ablative  FP  procedures  are  performed  with 
lasers emitting at wavelengths corresponding 
to strong absorption bands of water.

•  The depth of an MTZ for nFP is limited by the 
optical  penetration  of  the  particular  wave-
length into skin tissue.

FP procedures generate a 3-dimensional pat-
tern of MTZs in the skin and the wound healing 
response is primarily determined by the charac-
teristics of individual MTZs and their spatial dis-
tribution.  The  laser  tissue  effects  generated 
within  individual  MTZs  depend  primarily  on 
applied wavelength, pulse energy, focused beam 
diameter  and  pulse  duration.  The  laser  wave-
length plays an important role in the characteris-
tics  and  results  of  an  FP  procedure.  The  main 
chromophore  absorbing  the  laser  energy,  either 
for  nFP  or  aFP,  is  water.  Wavelengths  that  are 
very strongly absorbed can result in local volu-
metric energy densities sufficient to vaporize tis-
sue [16]. Therefore aFP procedures are performed 
with lasers emitting at wavelengths correspond-
ing  to  strong  absorption  bands  of  water.  The 
approximate optical penetration depth (OPD) in 
water for such lasers is minimal, e.g., 1 μm for 

171

the Er:YAG laser(λ = 2940 nm) and 10 μm for the 
laser  (λ  =  10,600  nm)  [17].  High  volumetric 
energy  densities  are  reached  virtually  instanta-
neously within the focus of the laser beam, and 
therefore such lasers can quickly advance a cav-
ity deep into the tissue during the pulse. Due to 
this process, it is possible that the resulting depth 
of  an  MTZ  can  greatly  exceed  the  optical 
 penetration  depth  of  any  particular  laser  wave-
length. Once the local energy density exceeds the 
vaporization threshold, the depth of the laser cre-
ated cavity is primarily related to the total energy 
delivered  for  a  given  spot  size,  and  relatively 
independent of the applied wavelength. It should 
be noted, that the Er:YAG typically produces less 
thermal  damage  in  the  residual  tissue  as  com-
pared to the CO2 laser due to the stronger absorp-
tion  by  water.  As  nFP  procedures  do  not 
physically remove tissue, the maximum depth of 
MTZs in nFP procedures is limited by the optical 
penetration  depth  of  any  particular  laser  wave-
length.  Variation  of  the  applied  laser  energy 
allows  some  adjustment  of  the  thermal  injury 
depth  within  this  physically  imposed  limit. 
However,  several  points  should  be  considered 
when  applying  this  concept  to  real  procedures. 
The  optical  penetration  depths  provided  are 
approximations of the penetration depth in water 
provided by Hall [17]. The water content of tis-
sue can vary substantially and is approximately 
30%  for  the  epidermis  and  70%  for  the  dermis 
[18]. As the optical properties of water are also 
temperature dependent, it has been reported that 
the rapid change of tissue temperature during a 
laser pulse can dynamically alter the penetration 
depth substantially [19]. Also, other factors such 
as  scattering,  phase  transitions  (e.g.,  collagen 
denaturation), and non-linear phenomena should 
be  taken  into  consideration  for  a  more  detailed 
analysis of the wavelength dependent effects on 
the shape of MTZs. The following are examples 
of lasers that can be used for nFP, together with 
their respective wavelengths (λ) and approximate 
optical  penetration  depth  (OPD)  :  Er:YAG 
(λ  =  1440  nm,  OPD  ≈  300  μm)  Er:Glass 
(λ = 1540 and 1550 nm, OPD ≈ 1000 μm), and 
Thulium  fiber 
(λ  =  1927  nm, 
OPD  ≈  100  μm).  These  differences  in  optical 
penetration  lengths  indicate  why  the  Thulium 
laser, with a relatively shallow penetration depth, 

laser 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



172

is often used to treat superficial lesions within the 
epidermis  and  papillary  dermis,  and  why  the 
Er:Glass  laser  with  a  relatively  larger  optical 
penetration depth can generate MTZs extending 
down  into  the  mid  to  deep  reticular  dermis. 
Because  these  provided  numbers  are  estimates 
that  which  can  be  affected  by  various  factors, 
they  should  serve  only  as  a  general  guideline, 
and not as a specific reference.

•  The pulse duration and temporal pulse profile 
can  affect  the  amount  of  thermal  damage  in 
the surrounding tissue.

The pulse duration for  FP systems is typically 
in the range of up to a few milliseconds, but var-
ies with the preset energy applied per MTZ. The 
MTZ  energy  is  controlled  for  most  FP  systems 
by adjustment of the pulse duration used to create 
individual MTZs. In a first approximation, such 
short  pulse  durations  are  within  the  thermal 
relaxation  time  of  individual  MTZs  and  minor 
variation  of  pulse  duration  should  have  limited 
effects  on  lesion  shape.  However,  variation  of 
pulse  duration  over  an  extended  range  of  pulse 
profiles will affect the MTZ shape, e.g., ablation 
depth and/or extent of residual thermal damage. 
Tissue  effects  related  to  pulse  duration  and/or 
temporal pulse profile have not yet been charac-
terized in detail, but these parameters are likely 
to  be  the  focus  of  future  studies  for  optimizing 
FP  procedures.  The  available  average  power  of 
an FP laser system is a critical factor that limits 
the  maximum  overall  coverage  rate.  For  exam-
ple, a laser that delivers a higher average optical 
power can be capable of faster treatment of larger 
areas.

•  Coverage of a treatment area can be achieved 

by the ‘stamping’ or ‘rolling’ technique.

•  Typically,  multiple  passes  are  necessary  to 

provide sufficient treatment coverage.

•  Variation  of  the  number  of  passes  and  expo-
sure settings in different areas can be used to 
adjust  the  clinical  outcome  in  specific  loca-
tions,  e.g.,  ‘feathering’  at  the  edges  of  the 
treatment area.

•  Excessively  high  treatment  densities  should 
be  avoided  as  they  can  result  in  undesirable 
side effects.

There  are  two  general  techniques  currently 
available  for  generating  the  desired  density  of 
MTZs  (number  per  unit  area)  within  the  treat-
ment area: the ‘stamping’ technique and the ‘roll-
ing’  technique.  The  ‘stamping’  technique  is 
performed by forming a preset pattern of multiple 
MTZs  on  a  skin  region  within  a  well-defined 
exposure  area  of  the  fixed  handpiece,  and  then 
moving the handpiece to another skin region and 
repeating  until  the  entire  treatment  area  is  cov-
ered. The density of MTZs at the end of a treat-
ment session depends on the preset density within 
the exposure area of the handpiece and the num-
ber of passes performed over each skin region. A 
pass is defined as the coverage resulting from a 
single application of the hand-piece to a particu-
lar area of the skin. The ‘rolling’ technique is per-
formed  by  continuously  rolling  the  handpiece 
across the entire treatment area. It is also referred 
as ‘brushing’ technique, because the movements 
of the operator are similar to using a paint brush. 
As  the  velocity  of  the  handpiece  relative  to  the 
skin varies during treatment, the delivery rate is 
adjusted  automatically  in  order  to  maintain  a 
defined, preset MTZ density per pass. The total 
density of MTZs at the end of a treatment session 
can be estimated as the density of MTZs per pass 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  passes  performed. 
However, this presents only an estimate as with 
each pass the remaining undamaged skin surface 
decreases  and  therefore  the  effective  amount  of 
tissue  that  is  newly  damaged  with  each  subse-
quent  pass  decreases.  Some  MTZs  formed  on 
subsequent passes may overlap or coincide with 
MTZs  already  formed  during  prior  passes.  A 
more detailed description of the determination of 
coverage  in  terms  to  number  of  passes  is  pro-
vided by Manstein et al. [20]. There appears to be 
no single best technique for delivering the desired 
density  of  MTZs.  The  ‘rolling’  technique  can 
facilitate  treatment  of  larger  areas,  while  the 
‘stamping’  technique  can  facilitate  the  precise 
treatment  of  smaller  areas,  in  particular  areas 
having an irregular surface profile. It is the opin-
ion of the authors that a reasonably well-defined 
MTZ  density  can  be  achieved  with  both  tech-
niques,  and  the  choice  between  stamping  and 
brushing  ultimately  comes  down  to  a  personal 
preference of the operator. FP systems generally 
allow  the  operator  to  adjust  both  MTZ  density 

D. Manstein et al.



and  MTZ  characteristics  independently  within 
the  treatment  area.  The  MTZ  density  can  be 
adjusted by varying the preset number of pulses 
per  area  and/or  number  of  passes,  while  the 
dimensions of individual MTZs can be modified 
by adjustment of the MTZ energy, energy beam 
focal characteristics, etc. Such control allows, for 
example, formation of a decreased MTZ density 
at  the  periphery  of  a  treatment  area  to  avoid 
demarcation lines between treated and untreated 
areas (feathering), or an increased MTZ density 
or applied energy density within particular areas 
that can benefit from an enhanced treatment out-
come.  The  overall  extent  of  the  wound  healing 
response,  and  thus  the  extent  of  both  clinical 
improvement and side-effects appear to be related 
to  the  total  amount  of  thermal  injury  or  total 
energy  delivered  per  treatment  area.  Treatment 
densities  that  result  in  confluent  thermal  injury 
can result in blistering or even scarring.

•  Bulk heating is the temperature rise of the tis-
sue between individual MTZs by thermal con-
duction  as  each  MTZ  acts  as  a  local  heat 
source.

•  Limited bulk heating may be desirable in FP 

procedures.

•  Excessive bulk heating can result in confluent 
tissue damage and severe side effects includ-
ing scarring.

•  Excessive bulk heating can be avoided by lim-
iting MTZ densities, extending the time inter-
val  between  passes  and  application  of 
cooling.

•  Changes in tissue temperature effect the shape 

of individual MTZs.

While  FP  procedures  are  designed  to  deliver 
localized thermal injury within individual MTZs, 
it  should  be  taken  in  consideration  that  energy 
deposited  into  the  tissue  may  accumulate  under 
certain  conditions.  The  temperature  gradient 
tends to be very high within a single MTZ, often 
resulting  in  a  very  sharp  demarcation  between 
collagen. 
coagulated 
However,  each  MTZ  represents  a  small  heat 
source within the surrounding tissue. This heat-
ing effect has two principal consequences. First, 
although there is typically a very sharp demarca-
tion at the perimeter of an individual MTZ, ther-

non-coagulated 

and 

173

mal effects on the tissue immediately surrounding 
an MTZ have been observed. For example, apop-
totic  cell  death  and  induction  of  various  heat 
shock  proteins  can  be  seen  close  to  individual 
MTZs. Although the effects of such events on the 
clinical outcome have to be further investigated, 
it can be speculated, that up to a certain extent, 
these local heating effects around the MTZs may 
enhance wound healing and clinical outcome.

Second,  as  each  of  the  MTZs  acts  as  a  local 
heat source, forming many MTZs within a short 
time period can lead to an increase in the average 
tissue  temperature  of  the  treated  region  due  to 
heat conduction. Such tissue heating is described 
by  the  term  ‘bulk  tissue  heating.’  Bulk  tissue 
heating can become a significant problem when 
the local average tissue temperature rises above a 
critical temperature such that confluent areas of 
tissue are damaged or destroyed, rather than lim-
iting such damage to discrete small microscopic 
zones. Such gross thermal injury mimics that of a 
third degree burn, which can lead to substantial 
side effects including scarring.

The  following  precautions  should  be  taken 
into  consideration  in  order  to  avoid  excessive 
bulk heating during FP procedures:

 (a)  For  higher  individual  MTZ  formation  ener-
gies, the spatial density of MTZs formed in 
the treatment region should be decreased.
 (b)  When  multiple  passes  are  performed  on  a 
treatment  region,  the  time  interval  between 
passes  should  be  long  enough  to  allow  the 
tissue  to  cool  down  between  consecutive 
passes.

 (c)  External cooling, e.g., forced air cooling, can 
be used to remove some heat from the tissue 
region being treated.

Changes  in  tissue  temperature  have  been 
shown  to  affect  the  geometry  of  individual 
lesions.  Reduction  of  MTZ  dimension  due  to 
decrease of tissue temperature have been shown 
to be more marked for nFP [21] as compared to 
aFP [22]. Skin cooling before, during and/or after 
FP  treatments  is  often  desirable  because  it  can 
alleviate  pain  during  treatment  and  also  reduce 
the risk of bulk heating. Because skin cooling can 
also decrease the MTZ lesion size resulting from 
particular  system  settings  during  an  nFP 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



174

procedure, it is important to perform such proce-
dures  under  standardized  cooling  conditions  to 
control  the  thermal  damage  within  individual 
MTZs. It should be noted that during aFP proce-
dures,  a  substantial  part  of  the  laser  energy  is 
removed from the tissue with the hot laser plume. 
This is in contrast to nFP procedures, and there-
fore it is reasonable to conclude that for the same 
applied  energy  per  MTZ  energy  and  MTZ  den-
sity, the overall (bulk) heating of tissue is greater 
for nFP as compared to aFP. Although, no studies 
have been carried out to either confirm or quan-
tify  this  effect,  the  operator  should  be  aware  of 
such potential interrelated effects that are based 
on principles of laser tissue interaction.

•  FP procedures are typically performed as mul-

tiple treatments.

•  Treatment outcome is typically incrementally 

enhanced after additional FP treatments.

•  Typically, a series of approximately 3–5 nFP 

or 1–3 aFP treatments are performed.

•  There is some controversies regarding whether 
the  clinical  improvement  of  an  aggressive 
treatment can be achieved by repetition of less 
aggressive treatments.

•  FP  treatments  allow  distribution  of  the  ther-
mal  wounding  resulting  from 
individual 
MTZs at different densities and over distinct 
treatment sessions.

FP treatment of a particular skin region can be 
delivered in single or multiple treatment sessions. 
Typically, 3–5 nFP or 1–3 aFP treatment sessions 
are performed, but the number of treatments can 
vary within a wider range depending on indica-
tions, treatment settings and patient response.

Each  treatment  is  customized  to  a  patient’s 
individual condition to best manage side effects 
and  downtime.  The  treatment  is  repeated  until 
either the desired outcome is achieved or no fur-
ther  relevant  improvement  can  be  achieved.  It 
should be remembered that some of the effects, 
e.g.,  collagen  remodeling,  can  progress  over  a 
period  of  weeks  or  months  after  a  treatment. 
Multiple  treatments  are  generally  performed  at 
intervals of approximately 4–8 weeks. However, 
there  are  no  studies  currently  known  that  com-
pare the outcomes achieved based on variation in 

treatment intervals. The current intervals of sev-
eral weeks are generally preferred because they 
allow  sufficient  time  for  side  effects  to  subside 
and also arguably because such intervals are con-
venient  for  the  appointment  scheduling  of  most 
offices  and  patients.  There  is  some  controversy 
regarding  the  effect  of  multiple  treatments  ses-
sions  on  enhancement  of  treatment  outcomes. 
While it is generally accepted that multiple treat-
ments sessions can improve the overall outcome, 
it  is  not  clear  exactly  how  the  number  of  treat-
ments sessions is related to the overall improve-
ment. Also, it is still not known whether multiple 
treatments  performed  at  well-tolerated  settings 
can mimic the outcome of fewer or single treat-
ments sessions performed with more aggressive 
settings that are associated with a marked wound 
healing  response  and  prolonged  downtime.  FP 
treatments  provide  the  possibility  of  obtaining 
particular  degree  of  thermal  wounding  within 
individual MTZs and varying just the density of 
such MTZs and/or adjusting the number of ses-
sions.  In  contrast,  conventional  treatments  that 
cover  the  entire  treatment  area  continuously  do 
not  allow  for  this  freedom.  These  full  surface 
procedures only allow for adjustment of the treat-
ment level by varying the fluence applied over the 
entire area.

•  Several factors beyond the laser parameter set-

tings can affect the thermal damage.

•  Mechanical manipulation of the skin such as 
compression,  stretching  and  contraction  can 
affect the shape and density of MTZs.

A  variety  of  factors  beyond  an  FP  system’s 
preset MTZ exposure/energy and density settings 
can  affect  the  thermal  injury  of  the  tissue.  The 
operator should be aware of such factors, as they 
can impact the wound healing response, clinical 
outcome,  and  side  effects  experienced  by  the 
patient. For example, mechanical factors such as 
tissue stretching, contraction, or compression can 
affect MTZ lesion dimension and MTZ density. 
Stretching of the skin during exposure can lead to 
an increased actual density of MTZs. The density 
per  pass  is  typically  preset  by  the  system  for  a 
fixed  exposure  area,  but  skin  stretching  during 
the  exposure  can  actually  result  in  relatively 

D. Manstein et al.



higher MTZ density. This can occur because  as 
the  skin  is  able  to  retract  after  the  stretching  is 
relieved,  any  number  of  delivered  pulses  is 
located within a relatively smaller area. MTZs of 
smaller cross section can also result from stretch-
ing  of  the  skin  prior  to  treatment,  as  the  MTZs 
that are formed in the stretched skin may shrink 
in size when the skin is allowed to retract. Point 
compression  can  distort  the  skin  dimensions 
locally  during  exposure,  and  relatively  deeper 
MTZs with smaller cross sections can result from 
tissue  manipulation.  Also, 
such  mechanical 
because skin may contract as a result of localized 
thermal injury to the collagen, the dimensions of 
the skin can change during the delivery of a series 
of  passes  to  generate  individual  MTZ  patterns. 
Ablative  FP  procedures  performed,  particularly 
when performed with higher MTZ energies, tend 
to  exhibit  such  shrinkage  of  the  tissue  during 
multiple  FP  passes  over  a  particular  treatment 
area.

•  In  addition  to  the  shape  and  density  of  indi-
vidual  MTZs,  the  number  of  treatment  ses-
sions  and  intervals  can  be  chosen  by  the 
operator.

•  The  broad  variety  of  possible  combinations 
allows tailoring patient treatment protocols to 
specific needs.

•  The multivariate complexity of FP procedures 
represents  a  challenge  to  obtain  comparative 
clinical data.

•  Most FP treatments result in varying degrees 
improvement  for  appropriate 

of  clinical 
indications.

•  The three basic rules of any FP treatment are:
 – Individual  MTZs  should  induce  wound 

healing but not fibrosis.

 – Confluent damage and bulk heating should 

be avoided.

 – The  cumulative  MTZ  density  should  be 
sufficiently  high 
in  clinical 
improvement  after  the  completion  of  a 
treatment course.

to  result 

As  discussed  herein,  many  factors  can  affect 
thermal  damage  patterns  generated  in  the  skin 
and  subsequent  wound  healing  responses.  Such 
factors  include  laser  exposure  parameters  (e.g., 

175

energy per MTZ and focal spot size), the number 
of  passes  and  time  interval  between  them, 
mechanical tissue manipulation, use of skin cool-
ing procedures, and others. The treatment inter-
val  between  individual  passes  within  a  single 
treatment session and the number of sessions can 
also be varied. This virtually unlimited number of 
possible  treatment  combinations  provides  the 
possibility  of  tailoring  patient  treatment  proto-
cols  to  specific  needs.  However,  this  flexibility 
also  leads  to  some  complexity  and  uncertainty 
associated with the choice and control of all pos-
sible  parameters  and  factors.  The  multivariate 
complexity of FP procedures explains in part the 
current  lack  of  clinical  studies  comparing  the 
effect of many specific FP parameters on patient 
outcomes. In spite of this complexity, it turns out 
that  most  FP  treatment  regimes  result  in  some 
kind  of  clinical  improvement  for  appropriate 
indications. Also,  the  fundamental  principles  of 
FP that guide the selection of treatment parame-
ters are relatively simple and can be summarized 
by three basic rules. First, the dimensions of indi-
vidual  MTZs  should  not  exceed  certain  dimen-
sions,  such  that  the  induced  wound  healing 
results in tissue repair rather than inducing fibro-
sis. Second, the overall density of MTZs should 
not  be  excessively  high  to  maintain  sufficient 
undamaged tissue between the MTZs and facili-
tate tissue repair. In particular, thermal damage to 
confluent  tissue  via  bulk  heating  should  be 
avoided. Third, the cumulative density of MTZs 
should  be  sufficiently  high  to  induce  sufficient 
clinical improvement after a completed course of 
FP treatments.

When  the  concept  of  FP  was  first  intro-
duced, the laser was used as the energy source 
to generate fractional damage to the skin. The 
laser  is  still  the  most  common  energy  source 
used  in  FP  procedures.  Its  ability  to  quickly 
deliver  energy  in  the  form  of  focused  optical 
radiation  with  high  precision  into  small  con-
fined  zones  makes  the  laser  a  modality  well 
suited  for  FP.  Recently,  other  energy  sources 
have  emerged  for  generating  fractional  dam-
age  patterns.  For  example,  radiofrequency 
(RF) and ultrasound devices are now commer-
cially available that generate a pattern of small 
and  confined  thermal  damage  zones  in  skin 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



176

tissue.  The  shape  and  anatomical  location  of 
MTZs  generated  using  such  modalities  typi-
cally  differ  from  those  induced  by  focused 
optical radiation because of a different energy 
distribution  within  the  tissue.  As  RF  energy 
quickly diverges with increasing distance from 
the delivering electrode, it is possible to gener-
ate  a  spatially  confined  RF  generated  thermal 
injury  only  within  the  tissue  directly  adjacent 
to the tip of a needle electrode. Depending on 
the  location  of  the  tip  of  such  RF  electrode, 
damage can be generated either at the skin sur-
face [23], or virtually at any depth by inserting 
needle electrodes into the skin [24], The use of 
stamping  techniques  with  arrays  or  linear 
arrangements  of  multiple  needle  electrodes 
allows for coverage of a treatment area within 
a  reasonable  time.  Focused  ultrasound  non-
invasive generation of confined lesions [25], in 
skin layers such as, e.g., the deep reticular der-
mis or even the superficial musculoaponeurotic 
system  (SMAS)  without  causing  any  surface 
damage [26]. The MTZ cross section of RF or 
ultrasound generated MTZs is typically larger 
than  that  of  laser  generated  MTZs  because 
laser radiation can be more focused. However, 
the ability to focus optical radiation decreases 
with  increasing  skin  depth  due  to  scattering 
and  absorption  of  optical  radiation.  Further 
investigations  are  needed  to  investigate  how 
the size and location of thermal lesions gener-
ated using RF and ultrasound sources affect the 
clinical  outcome  as  compared  to  laser-gener-
ated MTZs.

•  aFP and nFP can treat a wide variety of clini-
cal conditions including some that have been 
traditionally  the  domain  of  selective  photo-
thermolysis (SP).

•  The  relative  benefits  and  disadvantages  of 
ablative  and  non-ablative  FP  approach  are 
being investigated.

Both  aFP  and  nFP  target  water-containing 
tissue  and,  unlike  selective  photothermolysis 
procedures [10], there is no significant selectiv-
ity of specific components because virtually all 
cells  of  the  skin  are  composed  primarily  of 
water. Nevertheless, FP can be used to treat cer-

tain  conditions  that  traditionally  have  been  a 
domain  of  selective  photothermolysis,  includ-
ing 
treatment  of  pigmented  and  vascular 
lesions. FP targets aqueous tissue that contains 
such  target  lesions  and  therefore  can  affect  a 
variety of lesions. Both, aFP and nFP have been 
applied  successfully  to  a  variety  of  clinical 
indications, including collagen remodeling and 
treatment  of  vascular  and  pigmented  lesions. 
Further  details  of  indications  and  the  wound 
healing  process  are  described  in  the  following 
sections. The balance between improved clini-
cal  efficacy  of  aFP  for  selected  indications  as 
compared  to  nFP  and  the  additional  risks  and 
side  effects  of  aFP  associated  with  a  impaired 
epidermal  barrier  function  and  removal  of 
entire  columns  of  tissue  in  aFP  is  still  being 
explored.

 Non-ablative Fractional 
Photothermolysis (nFP)

•  A variety of nFP devices are available in the 

marketplace.

•  Principal  treatment  parameters  for  nFP  are 
applied energy per MTZ and density of MTZs 
(number per square centimeter).

•  To  keep  the  areal  fraction  of  damaged  skin 
surface constant the MTZs density should be 
decreased  when  higher  MTZ  energies  are 
applied.

An  overview  of  certain  systems  currently 
available  commercial  systems  for  nFP  proce-
dures is presented in Table 10.1. These systems 
use various lasers emitting in the near IR range. 
Spot  sizes  in  these  systems  are  all  in  the  sub- 
millimeter range, and the depth of the generated 
MTZs  is  mainly  wavelength  dependent,  varies 
widely,  and  can  extend  into  the  deep  reticular 
dermis for some systems. The depth and diameter 
of individual MTZs is positively correlated with 
energy [27].

Variation of the focusing optics can also affect 
MTZ  shape  [28]. An  example  of  the  effects  of 
different  energies  on  the  thermal  damage  and 
shape of MTZs is exhibited in Fig. 10.4. Primary 
treatment parameters for nFP include the energy 

D. Manstein et al.



a

b

177

Fig.  10.4  Skin  histology  resulting  from  a  nFP  device  at 
different  energy  levels.  NitroBlueTetrazolium  stain  was 
used to monitor for thermal damage. Lack of blue staining 
indicates thermal cell injury. Lesions were produced with 
Fraxel re:store, Solta, λ = 1550 nm within excised human 

skin. The depth and diameter of the MTZs vary with energy, 
40 mJ (a) vs. 100 mJ (b). Note, the unstained part of the 
lesion consist of thermally damaged tissue rather than a cav-
ity. Also, the commercial version of this laser is limited to a 
maximum energy of 70 mJ/MTZ (Thongsima et al. [28])

applied per MTZ and the areal density of MTZs 
(e.g.,  the  number  per  square  centimeter).  It  is 
therefore  necessary  to  decrease  the  MTZ  areal 
density if higher energies are applied per MTZ to 
keep the areal fraction of damaged skin surface 
constant.

•  Histologically,  a  column  of  necrotic,  coagu-
lated  tissue  is  generally  observed  within  the 
skin after formation of a MTZ via nFP.

•  The  skin  barrier  is  preserved  in  nFP  and  the 
dam- aged epidermis is quickly replaced.
•  Oval balls of microscopic epidermal necrotic 
debris (MEND) on the skin surface are often 
observed within 24 h of an nFP treatment.
•  The  ‘MENDs  shuttle’  allows  for  controlled 
removal  of  epidermal  and  dermal  content, 
e.g., melanin and elastin.

•  nFP is well-suited for treatment of ‘low con-

trast’ superficial pigmented lesions.

•  The  remodeling  of  the  damaged  dermis  can 
take several weeks and occurs without forma-
tion of fibrosis.

Histological  analysis  immediately  after  nFP 
treatment shows a column of thermally denatured 
dermis  and  epidermis  that  constitutes  a  micro-
scopic  treatment  zone  (MTZ)  (Fig.  10.5a).  In 
addition, subepidermal clefting may be observed 
in  the  area  of  the  MTZ.  This  destruction  of  the 
dermal-epidermal (DE) junction corresponds to a 
microscopic  blister,  the  size  of  which  generally 
increases  with  the  energy  per  MTZ.  The  tissue 
surrounding  the  MTZs  appears  microscopically 
undamaged.  Further,  the  stratum  corneum  over-
lying the MTZ often appears unaltered, thus, pre-
serving  an  intact  skin  barrier  is  preserved  after 
nFP 
consistent  with 
the  early  studies  of  Manstein  et  al.  [8]  who 
reported an absence of any significant change in 

treatment.  This 

is 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



178

a

b

Fig.  10.5  Skin  histology  at  different  time  points  after 
nFP treatment. H&E stain, 200×. Lesions were produced 
with  Solta  prototype,  λ  =  1500  nm,  5  mJ/MTZ.  (a)  1  h 
after  treatment  a  column  of  denaturated  collagen  (black 
arrow) can be seen within the MTZ (black outline). The 
entire  stratum  corneum  remains  intact,  even  above  the 
MTZ. There is no inflammatory infiltrate around the MTZ 
yet.  (b)  Day  1  after  nFP.  MTZs  (black  outline)  contain 
microscopic  epidermal  necrotic  debris  (MENDs,  black 

arrows),  which  represent  the  elimination  of  thermally 
damaged keratinocytes. MENDs are loaded with melanin. 
Subepidermal  clefting  is  evident  from  1  h  after  FP  and 
lasts  up  to  5  days  (stars). The  dermal  part  of  the  MTZs 
appears the same as immediately post treatment and shows 
thermally altered collagen and a lack of nuclear staining. 
Subtle perivascular inflammatory infiltrate begins to form 
in the dermis (white arrow) (Laubach et al. [29])

to 

tissue 

surrounding 

the  damaged  areas  from 

trans- epidermal water loss after nFP. Due to the 
typically small (sub-millimeter) cross section of 
the MTZ, a rapid repair of the thermally damaged 
epidermis is generally observed. Within 24 h fol-
lowing  an  nFP  procedure,  necrotic  cells  in  the 
epidermis  are  replaced  by  viable  keratinocytes 
the 
migrating 
unharmed 
the  MTZ 
(Fig.  10.5b)  pushing  the  cellular  debris  of 
necrotic cells upwards towards the skin surface. 
Due to the excretion of the necrotic debris via the 
upper  portion  of  the  MTZs,  oval  balls  of  tissue 
may  appear  within  about  24  h  after  nFP  treat-
ment.  This  tissue  is  referred  to  as  microscopic 
epidermal necrotic debris (MEND) [8]. Immuno- 
histochemical staining has revealed that MEND 
is  mainly  composed  of  necrotic  epidermal  tis- 
sue  (including,  e.g.,  melanin)  but  may  also 
include  portions  originating  from  of  dermal  tis-
sue (e.g., elastin) [30]. In the days following an 
FP procedure, MEND migrates through the stra-
tum  corneum  and  can  produce  a  small  flaked 
shedding.  The  term  ‘MEND  shuttle’  describes 
the  release  of  dermal  and  epidermal  material 
through  the  MEND  migration  and  shedding. 
During  the  migrational  period  of  the  MEND 

through the epidermis and stratum corneum, the 
number  of  dyskeratotic  cells  is  reduced  within 
the epidermis. About 1 week after the nFP treat-
ment,  the  epidermis  usually  appears  normal 
again.  The  MEND  shuttle  primarily  facilitates 
controlled elimination of epidermal pigment, but 
it also allows for the removal of dermal content. 
The  removal  of  pigment  and  dermal  content  by 
the  MEND  shuttle  can  be  well-controlled  by 
selection of the overall MTZ density formed dur-
ing an nFP procedure. In contrast to laser proce-
dures that utilize selective photothermolysis, the 
relative  amount  of  pigment  removed  by  the 
MEND  shuttle  is  independent  of  the  pigmenta-
tion of the treated tissue, because the wavelengths 
utilized to form the MTZs are primarily absorbed 
by water.

This  feature  allows  for  a  gradual  removal  of 
pigment of all skin colors by adjusting the den-
sity of MTZs. The pigment is also laterally redis-
tributed  during  the  MEND  shuttle  process,  so 
that  a  relative  homogeneous  removal  of  epider-
mal  pigment  can  be  achieved.  As  this  process 
does  not  rely  on  the  chromophore  properties  of 
melanin, all skin types can be effectively treated 
by  the  nFP  process.  Therefore,  nFP  is  a  proce-

D. Manstein et al.



179

dure  of  choice  for  removing  pigment  that  pres-
ents  as  a  ‘low  contrast  lesion’,  i.e.,  where  the 
difference  in  pigmentation  levels  between  the 
lesion  and  the  surrounding  skin  are  relatively 
small. While the epidermal damage produced by 
nFP is quickly repaired, the dermal (deeper) por-
tion of the MTZs is still well distinguishable for 
several  weeks  as  a  column  of  thermally  coagu-
lated collagen surrounded by minor perivascular, 
inflammatory  infiltrate.  Histological  analyses 
performed  3  months  after  an  nFP  procedure 
 indicate that the dermal portions of the MTZs are 
no longer distinguishable by standard H&E stain-
ing.  However,  overall  dermal  remodeling  and 
restoration of a more undulated DE junction have 
been reported after nFP procedures [8].

•  nFP  can  also  affect  fine  vessels,  particularly 

beneficial  effect  on  small  vascular  lesions. This 
vascular  effect  generally  requires  application  of 
higher  nFP  energies  to  reach  the  tissue  depth 
where the vascular targets are present. The clear-
ance of vascular targets in the treatment region by 
using  an  nFP  treatment  with  a  high  energy 
applied  per  MTZ  was  achieved  (Fig.  10.7a,  b), 
whereas a similar region of the same patient that 
was  treated  with  the  same  total  energy  applied 
per unit area of the treatment region—but using a 
lower  energy  per  MTZ  formed—did  not  show 
any  significant  clearance  of  vascular  lesions 
(Fig. 10.7c, d). The authors are not aware of any 
published  clinical  studies  that  have  been  per-
formed  to  date  on  the  treatment  of  vascular 
lesions  with  nFP,  and  further  research  is  war-
ranted in this area.

for higher MTZ energies.

•  The  risk  of  bulk  heating  can  be  reduced  by 

The effects of nFP are not limited to removal 
of  epidermal  pigment  (Fig.  10.6a)  and  collagen 
remodeling (Fig. 10.6b). It has been shown both 
histologically  and  clinically  that  nFP  can  also 
affect  small  vessels  (Fig.  10.6c)  [29]. Although 
there  is  no  significant  selective  absorption  of 
energy by vascular targets in nFP procedures, it 
has been shown that small vessels having cross- 
section  areas  comparable  to  those  of  the  MTZ 
lesions can be coagulated in a statistical manner, 
e.g., based on random intersection of the MTZs 
and  vascular  lesions. While  selective  photother-
molysis  remains  the  technique  of  choice  for 
removal of vascular lesions, nFP can also have a 

con- current use of cooling.

•  Cooling may alter the MTZ shape.

Forming relatively deep MTZs can be benefi-
cial due to an increase in the local volume of ther-
mally altered or destroyed tissue within the skin. 
However,  increasing  the  diameter  of  the  MTZs 
and/or  the  areal  MTZ  density  ultimately  results 
in  unwanted  side  effects  arising  from  increased 
damage  to  the  dermoepidermal  junction  (DEJ) 
and a stronger wound healing response. Although 
the optimal diameter and depth of MTZs formed 
during nFP to produce the greatest clinical effi-
cacy and fewest side effects are yet to be deter-
mined,  some  limitations  on  these  parameters 

a

b

c

Fig.  10.6  Histological  summary  of  the  main  effects  of 
nFP procedures. (a) Pigment removal (arrow) by MENDs 
shuttle  process    (Fontana  Masson  stain).  (b)  Dermal 
remodeling  as  evidenced  by  positive  colla  gen  type  III 

engulfing MTZs (arrow). (c) Coagulation of small blood 
vessels  by  statistical  co-location  of  the  MTZ  and  vessel 
(arrow)

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



180

a

c

b

d

Fig. 10.7  Energy dependent response of telangiectasias 
to nFP treatment. A study patient with rosacea and acne 
scars  had  similar  distribution  of  fine  telangiectasias  in 
contra-lateral areas of the face. 3 nFP treatments were per-
formed  at  1  month  intervals  with  Fraxel  re:store, 
λ = 1550 nm. A similar Fluence (average energy per area) 
was  delivered  at  each  side  per  treatment  (approximately 

13 J/cm2) and outcome assessed 1 month after last treat-
ment. The side treated with a lower MTZ energy (6 mJ/
MTZ,  ≈2200  MTZ/cm2)  did  not  show  any  reduction  of 
telangiectasias  (a)  and  (b). The  side  treated  with  higher 
MTZ energy (70 mJ/MTZ, ≈200 MTZ/cm2) showed sig-
nificant reduction of telangiectasias (c) and (d)

have already been established. For example, it is 
well  known  that  too  much  thermal  damage  per 
unit  area  of  skin  tissue  (e.g.,  resulting  from  a 
large  number  of  MTZs  formed  per  unit  area  of 
tissue)  can  result  in  a  loss  of  dermoepidermal 
integrity and generation of severe unwanted side 
effects, such as blistering. Furthermore, creating 
too  many  MTZs  within  a  region  of  skin  in  too 

short a time period can inhibit thermal relaxation 
of the tissue in between passes and result in bulk 
heating of the entire treatment area. The thermal 
energy in such nFP procedures is no longer con-
fined  to  the  MTZs  but  instead  diffuses  into  the 
surrounding tissue, leading to a thermal alteration 
of the entire tissue rather than limiting such ther-
mal  effects  to  the  well-defined  MTZ  volumes. 

D. Manstein et al.



This spreading of the thermal energy ultimately 
may  lead  to  unwanted  side  effects,  including 
scarring of the treatment area. The combination 
of  areal  density  of  MTZs,  energy  used  to  form 
each  MTZ,  and  the  time  interval  in  which  they 
are  created  that  can  generate  beneficial  effects 
without  introducing  significant  bulk  heating  to 
the treatment area remains an area in which more 
studies are needed. Several techniques for reduc-
ing  the  risk  or  extent  of  unwanted  bulk  tissue 
heating are described above. In particular, the use 
of  skin  cooling  (e.g.,  forced-air  cooling)  and/or 
allowing  sufficient  time  between  consecutive 
nFP treatment passes can facilitate cooling of the 
treatment region. A decrease in skin temperature 
also tends to decrease the epidermal MTZ diam-
eter for a particular set of applied energy param-
eters  [21].  Therefore,  tissue  cooling  effects 
should be considered when planning or compar-
ing nFP treatments.

•  About 3–5 nFP treatment sessions are generally 
recommended;  the  exact  number  depends  on 
the particular indication and desired end result.
•  Other  side  effects  associated  with  nFP  treat-
ment  include  a  moderate  erythema  and/or 
edema developing immediately after the treat-
ment and lasting up to 5 days; the severity of 
these side effects exhibit a positive correlation 
with MTZ energies and densities.

FP  is  based  upon  the  concept  of  restricting 
thermal  damage  or  alteration  to  well-defined 
microscopic  zones  within  of  the  skin,  whereby 
the  surrounding  healthy  tissue  can  facilitate  a 
rapid wound healing of the small damaged tissue 
volumes.  Typically,  about  10–30%  of  the  skin 
surface is thermally damaged or destroyed using 
focused laser beams in an nFP procedure. About 
3–5 nFP sessions are generally recommended for 
treating  a  particular  region  of  skin;  the  exact 
number of sessions can depend on the indication 
and desired end result. Although patient satisfac-
tion (an indicator of treatment efficacy) generally 
improves with the number of treatment sessions, 
the improvement in satisfaction between the third 
and the fourth treatment appears to be only mar-
ginal [31]. The optimal number of nFP treatment 
sessions  needed  for  greater  patient  satisfaction 

181

and clinical improvement is not generally known, 
and depend at least in part on the particular nFP 
parameters used and the condition being treated. 
The optimal time interval(s) between successive 
nFP  treatment  sessions  for  achieving  optimal 
efficacy  and  a  minimum  of  side  effects  also 
remains  to  be  determined.  In  one  particular 
example, it has been proposed that longer inter-
vals between nFP treatment sessions, e.g., up to 
2 months, are preferable when treating Fitzpatrick 
skin type IV–VI to reduce the risk of post inflam-
matory hyperpigmentation (PIH) [32].

•  Discomfort  during  nFP  treatment  increases 
significantly with the energy applied per MTZ 
and the MTZ density per pass.

•  Different  approaches  such  as  prior  and/or 
simultaneous  skin  cooling,  local  application 
of  a  topical  anesthetic,  etc.  can  be  used  to 
reduce or eliminate perceived pain.

One  of  the  side  effects  of  nFP  treatment  is 
patient  discomfort  during  the  treatment  itself. 
This discomfort increases mainly with the energy 
applied per MTZ, but also with the MTZ density 
per  pass  [32].  Several  different  approaches  are 
currently  used  to  decrease  discomfort  during 
treatment. Concomitant skin cooling during laser 
treatments  not  only  reduces  undesirable  side 
effects such as bulk heating, but also reduces dis-
comfort  associated  with  nFP  laser  treatments 
[33]. Providers of various nFP systems often rec-
ommend either contact or air convection cooling. 
Some nFP laser system providers recommend the 
use  of  anesthetic  cream  prior  to  the  nFP  treat-
ment, while others do not recommend the use of 
additional anesthetics. Because of a lack of com-
parative trials, it is currently not well investigated 
whether there is a significant difference in patient 
pain perception with different nFP systems.

•  Bronzing  due  to  the  MENDs  formation  and 
migration through the epidermis and stratum 
corneum  can  be  observed  3–7  days  after  an 
nFP procedure.

Other  side  effects  associated  with  nFP  treat-
ment  include  a  moderate  erythema  and  edema 
developing  immediately  after  the  treatment  and 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



182

typically  lasting  for  up  to  about  1  week.  The 
severity of these side effects show a positive cor-
relation with MTZ energies; MTZ areal densities 
are not only associated with an increase in ery-
thema  and  edema,  but  also  correlate  with 
observed  post  inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
(PIH) [32]. Although a reduction in efficacy has 
been observed for nFP skin rejuvenation proce-
dures  with  lower  energy  settings,  lower  applied 
energies  are  also  correlated  with  a  reduction  in 
the duration and severity of side effects like ery-
thema and edema [32]. A patient’s downtime cor-
responds  to  the  duration  and  the  severity  of  the 
post-treatment erythema and edema, and is typi-
cally  on  the  order  of  a  few  days.  The  authors’ 
experience  suggests  that  the  consistent  use  of 
cooling pads during the first 24 h after nFP treat-
ment further reduces the severity of erythema and 
edema. During the third to seventh days after an 
nFP  procedure,  the  treated  skin  often  shows  a 
slight bronzing due to the MEND formation and 
migration through the epidermis and stratum cor-
neum as noted above. This bronzing effect tends 
to be evenly distributed over the treated area, and 
most patients describe this effect as cosmetically 
not unpleasant and feeling slightly “suntanned.” 
Such bronzing effect can contribute to the epider-
mal  elimination  of  melanin. As  this  bronzing  is 
related to trans- epidermal melanin elimination, it 
is  generally  more  accentuated  for  darker  skin 
types  and  within  treatment  areas  of  enhanced 
melanin density.

The 1927 nm Thulium laser has been recently 
introduced  in  an  nFP  system  and  promoted 
among other indications the removal of superfi-
cial  pigment,  including  for  non-facial  areas. 
Published details or studies of this system are not 
available  as  of  the  publication  date  of  this  vol-
ume.  This  system  can  produce  a  larger  MTZ 
diameter  of  up  to  approximately  600  μm.  Its 
wavelength 
is  more  superficially  absorbed 
(OPD  ≈  100  μm)  as  compared,  for  example,  to 
nFP systems based on the 1540 nm or 1550 nm 
lasers (OPD ≈ 1000 μm) but less absorbed than 
aFP systems based on CO2 lasers (OPD ≈ 10 μm). 
Thus it is designed to generate thermal injury in 
relatively superficially tissue without significant 
disruption of the epidermal barrier. A representa-
tive example of the clinical course after treatment 

with the Thulium laser is shown in Fig. 10.8. For 
post-nFP  aftercare,  a  hydrating,  non-greasy 
moisturizer  is  generally  recommended  because 
patients  commonly  report  a  sensation  of  rough 
and dry skin, most likely due to the MEND shed-
ding that commonly occurs several days after the 
procedure.  Furthermore,  there  is  an  increased 
risk of the formation of acne-like lesions, espe-
cially with the use of higher treatment energies. 
Using  a  non-occlusive  aftercare  product  may 
reduce this risk. Patients with a positive history 
of facial herpes simplex should take oral antiviral 
medication prior to nFP treatment to prevent or 
inhibit  viral  reactivation.  The  effectiveness  of 
systemic  or  topical  corticosteroids  in  reducing 
side effects such as edema and erythema without 
compromising  treatment  efficacy  is  yet  to  be 
determined.

•  The  risk  of  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation in patients having darker skin types can 
be  decreased  significantly  by  reducing  the 
density  of  MTZs,  and  by  simultaneous  skin 
cooling.

that 

a  mild-to-moderate 

Non-ablative FP procedures can be associated 
with  minor  petechial  bleeding,  especially  if 
patients continue to traumatize the skin during the 
first few days after the treatment (e.g., by wearing 
tight wristbands, necklaces, etc.). Chan et al. [34] 
observed 
post- 
inflammatory  hyper-  pigmentation  (PIH)  occurs 
in  about  7.1–17.1%  of  Asians  undergoing  nFP 
treatment;  the  likelihood  of  this  side  effect 
depends  on  the  laser  settings  and  evaluation 
method.  The  risk  of  PIH,  especially  for  darker 
skin type patients, can be reduced significantly by 
decreasing the extent (including the overall area) 
of dermo-epidermal junction destruction, e.g., by 
reducing total MTZ densities and using simulta-
neous skin cooling [32, 34, 35]. Furthermore, pro-
tection from sunlight during the weeks after nFP 
treatment should be emphasized to the patient to 
further reduce the likelihood of unwanted PIH. It 
remains to be determined whether lengthening the 
time intervals between successive nFP treatments 
can  help  to  reduce  the  occurrence  of  PIH. 
Currently available data suggests that nFP treat-
ments can be customized to the patients’ desires 

D. Manstein et al.



183

a

c

b

d

Fig.  10.8  Clinical  course  of  after  single  treatment  with 
Thulium laser. Treatment was performed with Fraxel Dual 
(Solta), λ = 1927 nm, 10 mJ/MTZ, ≈800 MTZ/cm2, treat-
ment level 7, 50% density. Clinical appearance at baseline 
(a),  2  days  (b),  6  months  (c)  and  10  months  (d).  After 

significant improvement of the dyschromia at 1 and 6 months, 
there is partial recurrence of dyschromia at the 10 months fol-
low up. This is likely due to continued sun exposure as the 
patient  participated  in  frequent  outdoor  sports  without 
proper UV protection (Courtesy of Steven Struck, M.D.)

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



184

to  balance  the  aggressiveness  of  treatments  to 
achieve  a  higher  efficacy  with  the  likelihood  of 
causing undesirable side effects.

•  The main indications for nFP are treatment of 
photoaging,  various  kinds  of  scars  and  treat-
ment of dyschromia.

•  Improvement of deep rhytides and skin tight-

ening is limited.

•  Melasma has a high risk of recurrence.

Non-ablative FP has been shown to be effec-
tive  on  a  wide  variety  of  conditions  [36–40], 
including but not limited to a variety of indica-
tions related to collagen remodeling, e.g., treat-

ment of photoaging including fine and moderate 
rhytides  (Fig.  10.9),  treatment  of  traumatic 
(Fig.  10.10),  surgical,    burn  (Fig.  10.11)  and 
acne scarring, striae distensae, and treatment of 
dyschromia  e.g.,  superficial  pigmented  lesions 
like solar lentigines. The authors would like to 
 highlight the ability of nFP to improve various 
kinds of scars including textural skin alterations 
after  involution  of  hemangiomas  (Fig.  10.12), 
as  for  these  indications  remarkable  improve-
ment was reported that was previously difficult 
to  obtain.  Although,  nFP  has  the  ability  to 
improve the appearance of rhytides, by increase 
epidermal thickness, papillary dermal collagen 
and  increase  the  number  of  fibroblasts,  [41] 

a

b

Fig.  10.9  Clinical  improvement  of  fine  and  moderate 
(dynamic) rhytides. A series of 3 nFP treatments was per-
formed with Fraxel re:store (Solta), λ = 1550 nm, 70 mJ/
MTZ, approx. 200 MTZ/cm2. (a) Baseline. (b) 6 months 

after  last  treatment.  Note:  Treatment  was  performed  as 
part  of  a  clinical  study,  and  the  use  of  neurotoxins  (not 
applied to this patient) would likely have provided similar 
results

a

b

Fig. 10.10  Clinical improvement of a traumatic scar. A 
traumatic scar that was persistent for more than 10 years 
received a series of 3 nFP treatments with Fraxel re:store 
(Solta), λ = 1550 nm, MTZ energy 70 mJ, ≈200 MTZ/cm2. 

The scar virtually disappeared after the completion of the 
series of treatments. (a) Baseline. (b) 6 months after last 
treatment

D. Manstein et al.



a

b

185

Fig. 10.11  Clinical improvement of a burn scar. A burn 
scar which occurred 30 years ago, obtained a series of 5 
nFP treatments with Fraxel re:store (Solta), λ = 1550 nm, 
MTZ energy 40 mJ, ≈450 MTZ/cm2, 23% density, treat-

ment level 8. Significant improvement of texture and pig-
mentation is observed. (a) Baseline. (b) 5 months after the 
last treatment (Courtesy of Steven Struck, M.D.)

a

b

Fig. 10.12  Clinical improvement of scarring. Skin alter-
ations mimicking dermal scarring had developed after the 
involution  of  an  early  childhood  hemangioma  and  were 
stable for approximately 13 years prior to FP treatment. A 

series of 5 nFP treatments achieved a significant smooth-
ening  of  skin  surface  (Solta,  re:store,  λ  =  1550  nm, 
≈40  mJ/MTZ,  treatment  level  8).  (a):  Baseline.  (b): 
1 month after last treatment

abltaive FP hold superior clinical outcomes due 
to reaching deeper dermal ablation and coagu-
lation [42].

Treatment of melasma with nFP is an option 
but it should be used with caution, because of the 
relative  high  rate  of  repigmentation  and  some-
times even an increase in pigmentation after nFP 
treatments [43].

•  Many novel indications for nFP are emerging.
•  Determination of optimal nFP parameters for 
par- ticular indications is an area of ongoing 
study

Other indications that have shown some prom-
ise for treatment using nFP in small case studies 
are minocycline-induced hyperpigmentation [44], 

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



186

granuloma anulare [45], striae rubra [46], Nevus 
of Ota [47], alopecia areata [48], and Poikiloderma 
of Civatte [49]. While results of these case reports 
suggest promising results, further clinical studies 
are  needed  before  nFP  can  be  established  as  a 
standard of care for such indications. Nevertheless, 
it is encouraging to see that nFP may be an option 
for  treating  such  clinical  problems.  Although  a 
wide variety of nFP systems, treatment parame-
ters,  and  regimens  have  been  shown  to  provide 
measurable clinical improvement for various der-
matological indications, determination of optimal 
parameters  and  conditions  for  particular  indica-
tions remains an area of ongoing study.

 Ablative Fractional 
Photothermolysis (aFP)

•  A  variety  of  different  aFP  laser  systems  are 
available, and most of them are based on CO2 
and Er:YAG lasers.

Ablative FP systems utilize wavelengths that 
are strongly absorbed within tissue as compared 
to wavelengths used in nFP systems. The result-
ing high energy densities lead to vaporization of 
tissue. An overview of selected aFP systems cur-
rently  available  commercially  is  provided  in 
Table 10.2.

•  Ablative Fractional Photothermolysis (aFP) is 
a  procedure  characterized  by  formation  of 
microscopically  small  zones  of  removed 
(ablated) tissue surrounded by a small cuff of 
thermally damaged tissue embedded in viable 
tissue.

Vaporization of tissue within an MTZ gener-
ated in an aFP procedure forms a tapered cavity 
lined by a thin layer of eschar [14]. The thin layer 
of  eschar  is  surrounded  by  an  annular  coagula-
tion zone containing denatured collagen and cell 
necrosis. While the zones of denatured collagen 
and cell necrosis substantially overlap, the extent 
of the zone of cell necrosis is slightly larger due 
to  the  lower  thermal  damage  threshold  for  cell 
necrosis  as  compared  to  that  for  collagen  dena-

turation. A varying degree of thermal damage in 
the  residual  tissue  immediately  adjacent  to  the 
evaporated  tissue  of  aFP  procedures  has  been 
observed, similar to that resulting from conven-
tional ablative resurfacing techniques. The ther-
mal  coagulation  zone  around  the  laser  cavity 
typically varies with the type of laser and pulse 
duration used. For example, the CO2 laser used in 
conventional  resurfacing  procedures  produces 
typically more residual thermal damage as com-
pared  to  the  Er:YAG  laser  [50],  and  thermal 
effects generated by a laser tend to increase with 
longer pulse duration [51].

•  The pulse duration and temporal pulse shape 

affect residual thermal damage.

•  Mechanical  factors  applied  during  the  post 
treatment  regime  might  affect  clinical  skin 
tightening.

Analogous  to  traditional  ablative  procedures, 
the amount of residual thermal injury in aFP pro-
cedures may also be affected by the temporal pro-
file  of  the  laser  pulse.  Typical  temporal  profiles 
for  energy  delivery  include  continuous  wave 
(CW),  superpulsed  [52],  and  ultrapulsed  [53] 
mode. Although  such  dependency  of  thermal  in 
jury on pulse profile appears reasonable, there is 
currently  no  investigational  data  available  that 
specifically relates the extent of thermal damage 
for aFP procedures to the temporal pulse profiles. 
The amount of immediate skin shrinkage result-
ing  from  an  aFP  treatment  (with  CO2  laser)  is 
typically greater than that observed in nFP proce-
dures.  However,  histological  analysis  indicates 
that  nFP  procedures  may  even  exhibit  a  greater 
total volume of denatured collagen, as compared 
to an aFP process performed with similar energy 
per MTZ (comparison of data from Hantash et al. 
[14]  and  Thongsima  et  al.  [28]).  This  seems  to 
contradict the general observation that the extent 
of skin shrinkage is related to the total amount of 
denaturated  collagen.  The  authors  hypothesize 
that as collagen denaturation and skin shrinkage 
occur  at  virtually  the  same  time  while  the  laser 
cavity  is  being  formed,  that  part  of  the  denatur-
ated collagen is removed during the cavity form-
ing  process.  Histology  reveals  a  static  image  of 

D. Manstein et al.



187

the amount of denaturated collagen after the com-
pletion of the MTZ formation. Further research is 
indicated to investigate the dynamics of the vari-
ous processes occurring within the short time of 
the  formation  of  ablative  MTZs.  In  general, 
immediate  tissue  contraction  during  aFP  due  to 
collagen  shrinkage  is  an  indicator  of  anticipated 
skin tightening. However, the role of wound heal-
ing  on  the  clinically  relevant  skin  tightening 
should also taken into consideration. Animal stud-
ies  have  demonstrated  that  the  skin  tightening, 
including the direction of contraction can also be 
significantly affected by factors that were applied 
during the wound healing process after the com-
pletion of an aFP procedure. In particular, direc-
tion of mechanical forces (e.g., gravity or elastic 
wound  dressings)  applied  during  the  initial  sev-
eral days have been shown to affect significantly 
the  outcome  [54].  These  observations  should 
stimulate further research before specific clinical 
recommendations  on  a  modified  post  treatment 
regime can be made.

•  Ablative FP impairs the epidermal barrier and 
can facilitate enhanced drug delivery but also 
bacterial infections.

•  The use of antibiotic prophylaxis is typically 
indicated for aFP procedures of a larger areas.
•  Impairment of epidermal barrier results in tem-
porary serous oozing and punctuate bleeding.

The  depth  and  diameter  of  MTZs  formed 
using a particular aFP system is primarily depen-
dent on the energy applied to the tissue to form 

each  MTZ.  Figure  10.13  illustrates  the  increase 
of  depth  and  diameter  of  an  ablated  MTZ  with 
increasing energy. Furthermore, because the stra-
tum  corneum  is  also  evaporated  in  the  core  of 
MTZs formed during aFP, there is an actual dis-
ruption  of  the  physical  epidermal  barrier  that  is 
proportional  to  the  size  and  density  of  MTZs. 
Accordingly,  aFP  leads  to  more  significant 
impairment of the protective and barrier function 
of the epidermis as compared with non- ablative 
techniques. This aspect presents opportunities for 
the concurrent delivery of drugs to the tissue but 
also imposes additional risks, such as an increased 
risk  of  bacterial  infection  following  aFP  proce-
dures. Therefore, the use of antibiotic  prophylaxis 
is typically indicated for aFP procedures of larger 
areas.  The  physical  disruption  of  the  epidermal 
barrier  is  also  evidenced  by  serous  oozing  and 
punctuate  bleeding  following  aFP  procedures. 
However, such side effects related to the disrup-
tion  of  the  epidermal  barrier  resolve  typically 
within about 12–24 h after the disruption occurs 
[55]. Although ablated MTZs can reach a depth 
in  excess  of  1  mm,  they  heal  relatively  fast. A 
representative time line of the histological wound 
healing  for  an  aFP  procedure  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  10.14. Analysis  of  in-vivo  histology  at  dif-
ferent times after an aFP treatment revealed that 
re-epithelialization has taken place within 48 h of 
the  treatment.  The  basement  membrane  was 
restored  within  7  days,  and  a  coagulation  zone 
could be observed up to approximately 1 month 
after the procedure. A representative time line of 
the clinical course after an aFP procedure is pre-

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

Fig. 10.13  Skin histology resulting from aFP at different 
energy  levels.  H&E  staining.  Lesions  were  produced 
within  excised  skin  with  Fraxel 
(Solta), 
λ = 10,600 nm. MTZ diameter and depth increases with 

re:pair 

energy.  (a)  10  mJ,  (b)  20  mJ,  (c)  30  mJ,  (d)  40  mJ,  (e) 
50 mJ, (f) 60 mJ, (g) 70 mJ (Courtesy of Solta Medical, 
Biomedical Research Team)

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



188

a

b

c

d

e

Fig. 10.14  Wound healing resulting from aFP at differ-
ent  time  points.  H&E  staining.  Skin  lesions  were  pro-
duced with Fraxel re:pair (Solta), λ = 10,600 nm at 20 mJ/
MTZ. Analysis of in-vivo histology at different times after 
an  aFP  treatment  revealed  that  re-epithelialization  has 
taken  place  within  48  h  of  the  treatment. The  basement 

membrane was restored within 7 days, and a dermal coag-
ulation  zone  could  be  observed  up  to  approximately 
1 month after the procedure. At 3 months the lesions were 
resolved  without  evidence  of  fibrosis.  (a)  0  day,  (b) 
2 days, (c) 7 days, (d) 30 days, (e) 90 days (Hantash et al. 
[56])

sented in Fig. 10.15. The duration of wound heal-
ing from aFP is shorter as compared to traditional 
ablative  CO2  resurfacing  procedures,  but  is 
 considered  longer  than  that  observed  in  nFP 
procedures.

•  Currently aFP is primarily used for dermato-
that  require  collagen 

indications 

logical 
remodeling.

Figures 10.16 and 10.17 illustrate cases of clin-
ical  improvement  of  photoaging  with  concur-
rent respectively moderate and severe rhytides. 
Although decreased patient downtime is desir-
able,  traditional  ablative  resurfacing  proce-
dures—with generally long downtime periods— 
are  still  the  gold  standard  of  treatment  for 
marked photodamage.

•  The relative efficacy of aFP and nFP for vari-
ous indications remains to be determined.

•  Options for anesthesia are similar to conven-

tional ablative resurfacing techniques.

Almost  all  dermatological  indications  that 
have been treated by nFP procedures have also 
been  treated  by  aFP  procedures  [56–58].  The 
authors are not aware of any extensive clinical 
studies  performed  to  date  that  the  authors  are 
aware  of  comparing  the  outcomes  of  nFP  and 
aFP  procedures  for  the  same  conditions.  It  is 
important  for  the  clinician  to  have  more  com-
parative data available to better assess whether 
the  typically  enhanced  profile  of  side  effects 
associated  with  aFP  procedures  is  justified  by 
improved  clinical  outcomes.  Generally,  aFP 
procedures  are  observed  to  provide  enhanced 
collagen  remodeling, e.g., for indications such 
as skin tightening [59], treatment of skin laxity, 
and  treatment  of  moderate  to  severe  rhytides 
[60],  and  overall  produces  satisfactory  results 
for  these  collagen- sensitive  responses  with 
acceptable  post-treatment  patient  downtime. 

Anesthesia  for  aFP  treatments  can  be  pro-
vided  by  topical  agents,  local  infiltration,  cool-
ing,  and/or  nerve  blocks.  The  level  of  patient 
pain  tolerance,  the  laser  parameters  used  (e.g., 
pulse  energies  and  durations),  and  treatment 
location are all factors to be considered for indi-
vidual  pain  management.  The  use  of  systemic 
agents, including narcotics, sedation or intrave-
nous  anesthesia,  may  be  warranted  for  some 
patients,  particularly  when  treatment  of  larger 
areas 
is  performed  on  sensitive  patients. 
Postoperative management is aimed to alleviate 
edema, exudates, and postoperative. Discomfort. 
Elevation of the treatment area, cool compresses, 
and application of petrolatum ointment are typi-
cally  used  in  postoperative  care. When  marked 
edema  and/  or  erythema  occur  following  aFP 
treatment, a short term course of oral corticoste-
roids may be prescribed.

D. Manstein et al.



189

a

d

b

e

c

f

Fig. 10.15  Clinical course after aFP treatment. A single 
aFP  treatment  was  performed  with  device  Fraxel  re:pair 
(Solta), 135 μm handpiece, λ = 10,600 nm, 70 mJ/MTZ, 
≈300  MTZ/cm2,  treatment  level  8,  30%  nominal  cover-

age.  Photographs  represent  baseline  (a),  immediately 
after treatment (b), 3 days (c), 1 week (d), 1 month (e) and 
6 months (f) (Courtesy of Steven Struck, M.D.)

 Adverse Events and Clinical Pitfalls 
of FP

skin  cooling,  lowering  MTZ  areal  densities, 
and providing sufficient time between passes 
to allow cooling of the treated tissue.

•  Excessive  bulk  heating  (confluent  thermal 

damage) must be avoided.

•  Treatment  of  small  areas  can  be  particularly 

prone to bulk heating.

•  In order to minimize the risk of bulk heating, 
the following strategies should be considered: 

Although  fractional  photothermolysis  is  gen-
erally considered to be safer than traditional abla-
tive  techniques  that  damage  a  confluent  tissue 
layer, there are some clinical pitfalls that should 
be  avoided.  Following  are  several  important  

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



190

Fig. 10.16  Clinical 
improvement of 
moderate rhytides. A 
single aFP treatment was 
performed with Active 
FX (80 mJ/MTZ, 
density 4) and Deep FX 
(15 mJ, 15% density) 
(Lumenis, 
λ = 10,600 nm). The 
images exhibit baseline 
(left) and 3 months after 
a single treatment (right) 
(Courtesy of Kevin 
Duplechain, M.D.)

Fig. 10.17  Clinical 
improvement of severe 
rhytides. A single aFP 
treatment was performed 
with Active FX (80 mJ/
MTZ, density 4) and 
Deep FX (15 mJ, 15% 
density) (Lumenis, 
λ = 10,600 nm). The 
images exhibit baseline 
(left) and 3 months after 
a single treatment (right) 
(Courtesy of Kevin 
Duplechain, M.D.)

considerations and cautions that should be recog-
nized and addressed when performing FP proce-
dures.  One  major  concern  for  FP  treatments  is 
generation  of  bulk  heating  in  the  treated  tissue. 
Bulk  heating  can  facilitate  undesirable  effects 
such  as  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
(which  is  more  commonly  observed  in  Asian 
patients) or even result in scarring (Fig. 10.18). To 
reduce  the  risk  or  extent  of  such  side  effects, 
proper  evaluation  of  the  condition  being  treated 
should be performed (e.g., acne scars, melasma, 

rhytides,  etc.).  An  appropriate  density  of  MTZ 
formation  should  also  be  selected  based  on  the 
patient’s  skin  type  to  produce  effective  results 
while  minimizing  the  risk  of  side  effects  due  to 
bulk heating. Furthermore, it is important to cool 
the tissue in the treatment region during FP proce-
dures. For example, a dynamic air cooling device 
(such as the one produced by Zimmer, Inc.) has 
been  used  simultaneously  with  many  FP  treat-
ments. It is also recommended to allow sometime 
between  successive  treatment  passes  over  a 

D. Manstein et al.



191

•  Particular caution should be exercised at areas 
of thin skin and low density of skin appendages.

For  patients  seeking  FP  treatment  of  non- 
facial (e.g., poikiloderma of the neck, periorbital 
rhytides), the physician should also be aware of 
the  lower  density  of  appendageal  units  in  such 
areas. This lower density may slow tissue healing 
and  leave  the  treated  area  more  susceptible  to 
infection  and  scarring.  Adequate  selection  of 
MTZ  density  becomes  very  important  when 
treating such areas of the body to avoid unwanted 
side effects.

•  The use of antiviral prophylaxis is not clearly 
established for FP; a history of herpes simplex 
virus (HSV), ablative treatments (aFP), and/or 
treatment  of  large  areas  are  factors  favoring 
anti-viral prophylaxis.

Complications of FP treatment can be caused 
by local infections, particularly when performing 
aFP procedures that disrupt the stratum corneum. 
A  universal  prophylactic  regimen  has  not  yet 
been  established  for  such  procedures.  Patients 
with a history of herpes simplex virus affecting 
the lips or any facial area are generally advised to 
undergo  a  1-  or  2-day  course  of  oral  antivirals 
concurrent  with  the  FP  procedure. A  consensus 
for  appropriate  antibacterial  antibiotic  prophy-
laxis  in  conjunction  with  FP  procedures  is  not 
clearly established, either. Antibiotic prophylaxis 
is  typically  indicated  when  treating  large  areas 
using ablative modalities.

•  Pre-operative sun avoidance and discontinua-
tion of retinoids are important factors for min-
imizing side effects.

Pre-operative  and  post-operative  consider-
ations must be discussed and addressed with the 
patient  prior  to  initiating  a  course  of  FP  treat-
ments.  During  the  pre-operative  interview  and 
physical examination, it is important to confirm 
the absence of sun burns and sun tanning, which 
should be strictly observed for at least 2–4 weeks 
prior  to  the  procedure  and,  ideally,  for  the  
same  length  of  time  after  the  treatment.  This 

Fig.  10.18  Scar  on  the  upper  lip  several  months  after 
nFP  treatment  delivered  without  adequate  skin  cooling. 
Bulk tissue heating has occurred due to delivery of multi-
ple  passes  within  small  areas  in  relatively  short  time. 
Note: The lesion resolved over 6 months after intralesional 
steroid injections and the patient requested additional FP 
treatments  because  of  otherwise  excellent  cosmetic 
improvement

specific  body  area.  However,  treatment  of  small 
face or body areas may not allow sufficient time 
for skin cooling between passes, which can lead 
to bulk heating and scarring. Some observations 
of  neck  and  periorbital  area  scarring,  likely 
caused by local bulk heating, have been reported 
[61].

•  For  highly-focused  laser  beams,  a  precise 

positioning of the handpiece is needed.

•  Minor  positional  deviations  from  the  focal 
plane could cause significant alteration of spot 
size and fill factor.

Operator  technique  is  particularly  important 
when  using  ablative  FP  (aFP)  systems.  The 
highly-focused  laser  beams  generated  by  these 
ablative  systems  are  configured  to  deliver  a 
small  spot  size.  Therefore,  precise  positioning 
of  the  handpiece  is  relative  to  the  tissue  being 
treated is extremely important. Any minor devi-
ation  of  the  laser  beam  focal  point  from  the 
desired focal plane can cause significant altera-
tion of the spot size and fill factor because of the 
convergent geometry of the focused beam. This 
can  lead  to  bulk  heating  in  specific  areas,  fol-
lowed  by  potential  scarring  and  pigmentation 
changes.

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



192

is important in order to reduce the risk of post- 
inflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  and  may  be 
most relevant to patients living in the tropics and 
with a history of sun tanning. Similarly, patients 
with solar lentigos and melasma may be given a 
choice to first attempt chemical bleaching, fol-
lowed by FP in order to remove remaining pig-
mentation  and  address  textural  and  rhytides 
concerns. On the other hand, late-onset hypopig-
mentation is virtually never observed as result-
ing from FP treatments, in contrast to traditional 
resurfacing modalities. During the pre-operative 
period for FP, it is also important to address any 
prior use of retinoids, either alone or in combi-
nation with other topicals. The patient must be 
instructed to stop the use of topical retinoids for 
at least 1 week prior to each FP procedure. Use 
of  oral  retinoid  therapy  (isotretinoin)  should 
preferably be discontinued for a period of a few 
months prior to performing an FP procedure.

•  Post-operatively,  sun  avoidance,  compliance 
with  medication  and  proper  recognition  and 
management of complications are key.

Post-operatively,  patients must be instructed 
on  proper  skin  care  and  strict  sun  avoidance  in 
order  to  prevent  side  effects  and  complications, 
including pigment alteration. Appropriate antivi-
ral  or  antibiotic  prophylaxis,  if  recommended, 
must be followed by the patient in order to avoid 
skin 
infection  and/  or  potential  scarring. 
Complications  should  be  recognized  early  and 
without any delay appropriately managed.

 Future Directions

a strong wound healing reaction and induces HSP 
production,  FP  procedures  may  be  developed  to 
affect  tissue  regeneration,  immune  regulation, 
nerve  fiber  density,  etc.  Further  investigation  of 
these effects and others are warranted. FP appears 
to be an important tool that is capable of affecting 
many different biological pathways, and therefore 
it  can  be  expected  that  more  indications  treatable 
using FP techniques, including a wide spectrum of 
dermatological diseases, will continue to emerge.

•  Ablative  FP  can  serve  to  facilitate  drug  and 

cell delivery into the skin.

Another  important  area  of  further  develop-
ment is the use of aFP for enhanced delivery of 
drugs and (stem) cells into different layers of the 
skin. It has been demonstrated that transcutane-
ous delivery of a photosensitizer can be enhanced 
using a low-density aFP procedure [62, 63]. The 
delivery  of  drugs  or  other  substances  that  typi-
cally do not pass through the epidermis can thus 
be  facilitated  in  a  controlled  manner  over  large 
areas using aFP treatment. aFP may make it pos-
sible to achieve topical delivery of a plethora of 
effective agents into the skin. For example, entire 
cell populations could be delivered through gate-
ways formed by ablated MTZs and open up new 
strategies  for  controlled  distribution  of  targeted 
(stem) cells into different layers of the skin. FP 
may potentially be used, not only for the delivery 
of (stem) cells, but also to simultaneously induce 
an  appropriate  and  controlled  wound  healing 
response within the recipient tissue. Such wound 
healing response may create a microenvironment 
that  facilitates  growth  and  differentiation  of 
delivered and/or resident stem cells.

•  New indications treatable by FP will continue 

to be identified.

•  The channels created by aFP could be used for 
delivery of focused optical radiation of virtu-
ally any wavelength to deeper skin layers.

Fractional  photothermolysis  (FP)  has  been 
established as a treatment modality for various indi-
cations. To date, these indications are mostly aes-
thetic in nature. The beneficial effects of FP are not 
limited  to  collagen  remodeling,  pigment  removal 
and closure of small vessels. Because FP can induce 

The  microscopic  ablated  MTZ  channels  cre-
ated by aFP could also be used as a gateway for 
delivery  of  focused  optical  radiation  to  deeper 
layers  of  the  skin. The  delivered  optical  energy 
could be virtually of any wavelength as the opti-

D. Manstein et al.



cal  barriers  of  tissue  absorption  and  scattering 
may  be  avoided  when  the  radiation  is  directed 
through these small channels. Spatial and tempo-
ral alignment of ablative and delivered radiation 
sources is critical for forming such microscopic 
gateways and directing further radiation through 
the newly-formed gateways.

•  FP is also performed with a home-use product.

Home-use  dermatology  devices  represent  an 
area of growing interest and recent developments. 
The ability for the patient/consumer to perform a 
treatment  conveniently  at  home  and  the  huge 
commercial market potential are just two of the 
many factors driving the market for such devices. 
A  primary  concern  when  using  a  home-use 
device is guaranteed safety. This presents a chal-
lenge  as  the  consumer,  typically  possesses  only 
very limited skill with respect to medical device 
procedures.  In  particular,  the  ability  to  set  the 
treatment parameters sufficiently high, to treat a 
wide  range  of  skin  types  without  completely 
jeopardizing  efficacy,  is  a  prime  challenge  for 
home-use laser applications. FP offers three key 
characteristics  that  could  facilitate  the  develop-
ment of  FP-based home use products. First, the 
tissue effects of FP are not skin type dependent, 
as  not  melanin  but  water  is  the  main  chromo-
phore.  Second,  although  each  individual  MTZ 
induces a guaranteed wound healing response on 
a microscopic scale, the density needed to achieve 
a  clinical  improvement  can  be  distributed  over 
many  treatments,  e.g.,  using  a  daily  application 
of low densities over a period of weeks. Such a 
treatment  regime,  which  could  be  easily  per-
formed in an at home environment, could result 
in  safe,  minimal  incremental  effects  but  signifi-
cant  overall  improvement  after  completion  of  a 
treatment  course.  And  third,  as  relatively  low 
energy is required to generate individual MTZs, 
the energy source (laser) could be produced rela-
tively inexpensively and be battery operated. The 
first  FDA-approved  home-use  FP  laser  device 
was commercially released, (the PaloVia device 
from  Palomar  Medical,  MA.)  This  device  is  a 
rechargeable,  handheld,  non-ablative  fractional 

193

photothermolysis laser that can be used for self- 
treatment  of  wrinkles.  The  parameters  of  the 
laser  were  altered  to  increase  the  safety  profile 
for daily or multiple uses per week; operating at 
a low wavelength to eliminate the potential of eye 
damage,  reducing  skin  coverage  percent  and 
implements  a  contact  sensor  that  ensure  laser 
emittance only when full contact around the opti-
cal window is achieved. Side effects of mild ery-
thema  and  trace  edema  are  observed,  while  no 
severe  side  effects  were  reported.  This  device 
demonstrated effectiveness at self-treating wrin-
kles  at  home  with  87%  of  patients  reporting  an 
improvement  in  wrinkle  appearance  after  1  and 
3 months of treatment [64].

•  FP can potentially be applied to other organs 

besides skin.

Although the focus of FP procedures to date 
has been on treating skin tissue (skin is the most 
accessible organ of the body), the concepts and 
effects associated with FP treatment of skin tis-
sue will likely be applicable to other biological 
organs and structures. For example, as we learn 
how to improve scars within the skin by FP, this 
could become a successful modality to improve 
fibrosis or degeneration in other organs. Virtually 
any organ system is plagued by diseases or con-
ditions caused by such processes. FP procedures 
may become a novel treatment option to improve 
or restore the functionality of an affected organ. 
Potential  examples  of  future  non-dermatologi-
cal indications treated with FP are scars (fibro-
sis) of the vocal cord or the heart. Obviously, the 
delivery systems for such FP procedures would 
have  to  be  modified  to  be  compatible  with  the 
specific anatomy, and further research has to be 
performed to investigate the effects of FP on dif-
ferent organ systems. Overall, it appears likely 
that in the future FP will also be utilized by spe-
cialties other than dermatology.

•  FP treatments show great future promise, but 
alternative  concepts,  such  as  conventional 
laser  resurfacing  and  peeling 
techniques 
should still be considered.

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



194

Despite the efficacy and current popularity of 
FP procedures, the conventional resurfacing tech-
niques  including  chemical  peeling  procedures 
should not be forgotten and will maintain a clini-
cal role, in particularly when cost effectiveness is 
a  consideration.  Fractional  treatments  are  not  a 
universal  solution  to  all  types  of  dermatological 
conditions, but they certainly provide the clinician 
and patient additional options to achieve a desired 
clinical outcome. Further research is still needed 
to  provide  data  that  facilitates  the  selection  of 
optimal  parameters  for  FP  treatment  of  various 
conditions.

 Conclusion
Fractional Photothermolysis (FP) exploits the 
concept  that  ‘size  matters’  with  respect  to 
laser- induced  damage  of  biological  tissue. 
Three- dimensional  patterns  of  microscopic 
treatment zones (MTZs) promote tissue regen-
eration with fast wound healing in the absence 
of fibrosis. FP can be applied as a non-ablative 
(thermal damage) or ablative (tissue removal) 
modality.  FP  is  currently  used  primarily  to 
treat fine and moderate rhytides, scars of vari-
ous types, pigmentary disorders, and to repair 
photodamaged  skin.  Novel  indications  treat-
able using FP continue to emerge. Due to the 
recognized efficacy of FP procedures, a prolif-
eration  of  FP  systems  employing  different 
wavelengths  and  exposure  parameters  have 
been introduced into the marketplace and FP 
procedures  are  offered  by  a  large  number  of 
clinicians. Despite the significant progress in 
developing  effective  FP  procedures  to  date, 
the search for ideal treatment parameters and 
conditions  for  the  many  indications  is  still 
ongoing.  There  is  ample  space  for  future 
developments  of  FP,  including  identification 
of  additional  treatable  indications,  adjuvant 
treatment  modalities  to  modify  the  wound 
healing  response,  and  improved  delivery  of 
drugs and/or (stem)cells in combination with 
aFP treatments. In the future, FP might not be 
limited to treatment of skin, but may become 
an effective technique for treating and regen-
erating different organ systems.

References

  1.  Hruza  GJ,  Dover  JS.  Laser  skin  resurfacing.  Arch 

Dermatol. 1996;132(4):451–5.

  2.  Waldorf  HA,  Kauvar  AN,  Geronemus  RG.  Skin 
resurfacing of fine to deep rhytides using a char-free 
carbon  dioxide  laser  in  47  patients.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1995;21(11):940–6.

  3.  Williams  EF  III,  Dahiya  R.  Review  of  nonablative 
laser  resurfacing  modalities.  Facial  Plast  Surg  Clin 
North Am. 2004;12(3):305–10. v.

  4.  Bernstein LJ, Kauvar AN, Grossman MC, Geronemus 
RG.  The  short-  and  long-term  side  effects  of  car-
bon  dioxide 
laser  resurfacing.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1997;23(7):519–25.

  5.  Helm TN, Shatkin S Jr. Alabaster skin after CO laser 
resurfacing:  evidence  for  suppressed  melanogen-
esis  rather  than  just  melanocyte  destruction.  Cutis. 
2006;77(1):15–7.

  6.  Laws  RA,  Finley  EM,  McCollough  ML,  Grabski 
WJ.  Alabaster  skin  after  carbon  dioxide  laser  resur-
facing  with  histologic  correlation.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1998;24(6):633–6.

  7.  Hohenleutner  S,  Koellner  K,  Lorenz  S,  Landthaler 
M,  Hohenleutner  U.  Results  of  nonablative  wrinkle 
reduction with a 1,450-nm diode laser: difficulties in 
the assessment of “subtle changes”. Lasers Surg Med. 
2005;37(1):14–8.

  8.  Manstein D, Herron GS, Sink RK, Tanner H, Anderson 
RR.  Fractional  photothermolysis:  a  new  concept  for 
cutaneous  remodeling  using  microscopic  patterns  of 
thermal injury. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34(5):426–38.
  9.  Laubach HJ, Manstein D. Fractional photothermoly-

sis. Hautarzt. 2007;58(3):216–8. 220–223.

 10.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.
 11.  Xia  Jiang  HG,  Zhou  C,  Chai  X,  Deng  H.  The  role 
of  transforming  growth  factor  β1  in  fractional  laser 
resurfacing  with  a  carbon  dioxide  laser.  Lasers  Med 
Sci. 2014;29:681–7.

 12.  Wind  BS,  Meesters  AA,  Kroon  MW,  Beek  JF,  van 
der Veen JP, van der Wal AC, Bos JD, Wolkerstorfer 
A.  Formation  of  fibrosis  after  nonablative  and 
ablative  fractional  laser  therapy.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2012;38(3):437–42.

 13.  Grossman AR, Majidian AM, Grossman PH. Thermal 
injuries  as  aresult  of  CO2  laser  resurfacing.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1998;102(4):1247–52.

 14.  Hantash  BM,  Bedi  VP,  Chan  KF,  Zachary  CB.  Ex 
vivo  histological  characterization  of  a  novel  abla-
tive  fractional  resurfacing  device.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(2):87–95.

 15.  Alexiades-Armenakas  MR,  Dover 

JS,  Arndt 
KA.  Fractional  laser  skin  resurfacing.  J  Drugs 
Dermatol. 2012;11(11):1274–87.

 16.  Walsh JT Jr, Deutsch TF. Pulsed CO2 laser tissue abla-
tion:  measurement  of  the  ablation  rate.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 1988;8(3):264–75.

D. Manstein et al.



 17.  Hale GM, Querry MR. Optical constants of water in 
the 200-nm to 200-microm wavelength region. Appl 
Opt. 1973;12(3):555–63.

 18.  Warner  DW,  Morgan  NE,  Eby  TA,  Myers  MC, 
Taylor  DA.  Water  measurement  in  biological  tissue. 
In:  Romig  AD,  Chambers  WF,  editors.  Microbeam 
analysis. 21st ed. San Francisco: San Francisco Press; 
1987. p. 238–40.

 19.  Walsh  JT  Jr,  Cummings  JP.  Effect  of  the  dynamic 
optical properties of water on midinfrared laser abla-
tion. Lasers Surg Med. 1994;15(3):295–305.

 20.  Manstein D, Zurakowski D, Thongsima S, Laubach H, 
Chan HH. The effects of multiple passes on the epider-
mal thermal damage pattern in nonablative fractional 
resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med. 2009;41(2):149–53.
 21.  Laubach  H,  Chan  HH,  Rius  F,  Anderson  RR, 
Manstein  D.  Effects  of  skin  temperature  on  lesion 
size in fractional photothermolysis. Lasers Surg Med. 
2007;39(1):14–8.

 22.  Kositratna G, Manstein D. Skin freezing during abla-
tive fractional resurfacing: in-vitro effects on thermal 
lesion size. Lasers Surg Med. 2009;(Suppl 21).

 23.  Brightman L, Goldman MP, Taub AF. Sublative reju-
venation:  experience  with  a  new  fractional  radiofre-
quency  system  for  skin  rejuvenation  and  repair.  J 
Drugs Dermatol. 2009;8(11 Suppl):s9–s13.

 24.  Hantash  BM,  Ubeid AA,  Chang  H,  Kafi  R,  Renton 
B.  Bipolar 
treatment 
induces neoelastogenesis and neocollagenesis. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2009;41(1):1–9.

radiofrequency 

fractional 

 25.  Laubach  HJ,  Makin  IR,  Barthe  PG,  Slayton  MH, 
Manstein D. Intense focused ultrasound: evaluation of 
a new treatment modality for precise microcoagulation 
within the skin. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(5):727–34.
 26.  Gliklich  RE,  White  WM,  Slayton  MH,  Barthe  PG, 
Makin  IR.  Clinical  pilot  study  of  intense  ultrasound 
therapy to deep dermal facial skin and subcutaneous 
tissues. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2007;9(2):88–95.
 27.  Bedi VP, Chan KF, Sink RK, et al. The effects of pulse 
energy  variations  on  the  dimensions  of  microscopic 
thermal  treatment  zones  in  nonablative  fractional 
resurfacing. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(2):145–55.
 28.  Thongsima S, Zurakowski D, Manstein D. Histological 
comparison of two different fractional photothermol-
ysis devices operating at 1,550 nm. Lasers Surg Med. 
2010;42(1):32–7.

 29.  Laubach  HJ,  Tannous  Z,  Anderson  RR,  Manstein 
D.  Skin  responses  to  fractional  photothermolysis. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38(2):142–9.

 30.  Hantash  BM,  Bedi  VP,  Sudireddy  V,  Struck  SK, 
Herron  GS,  Chan  KF.  Laser-induced  transepidermal 
elimination of dermal content by fractional photother-
molysis. J Biomed Opt. 2006;11(4):041115.

 31.  Alster TS, Tanzi EL, Lazarus M. The use of fractional 
laser photo-thermolysis for the treatment of atrophic 
scars. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(3):295–9.

 32.  Kono T, Chan HH, Groff WF, et al. Prospective direct 
comparison study of fractional resurfacing using dif-
ferent fluences and densities for skin rejuvenation in 
Asians. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(4):311–4.

195

 33.  Fisher  GH,  Kim  KH,  Bernstein  LJ,  Geronemus 
RG.  Concurrent  use  of  a  handheld  forced  cold  air 
device  minimizes  patient  discomfort  during  frac-
tional photothermolysis. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31(9 Pt 
2):1242–3. discussion 1244

 34.  Chan  HH,  Manstein  D,  Yu  CS,  Shek  S,  Kono 
T,  Wei  WI.  The  prevalence  and  risk  factors  of 
post- inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  after 
frac-
tional  resurfacing  in  Asians.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(5):381–5.

 35.  Lin JY, Chan HH. Pigmentary disorders in Asian skin: 
treatment with laser and intense pulsed light sources. 
Skin Therapy Lett. 2006;11(8):8–11.

 36.  Bak  H,  Kim  BJ,  Lee  WJ,  et  al.  Treatment  of  striae 
distensae with fractional photothermolysis. Dermatol 
Surg. 2009;35(8):1215–20.

 37.  Tierney  EP,  Kouba  DJ,  Hanke  CW.  Review  of  frac-
tional  photothermolysis:  treatment  indications  and 
efficacy. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(10):1445–61.
 38.  Cohen  SR,  Henssler  C,  Johnston  J.  Fractional  pho-
tothermolysis  for  skin  rejuvenation.  Plast  Reconstr 
Surg. 2009;124(1):281–90.

 39.  Haedersdal  M,  Moreau  KE,  Beyer  DM,  Nymann  P, 
Alsbjorn  B.  Fractional  nonablative  1540  nm  laser 
resurfacing for thermal burn scars: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Lasers Surg Med. 2009;41(3):189–95.
 40.  Laubach  HJ,  Anderson  RR,  Luger  T,  Manstein 
D. Fractional photo-thermolysis for involuted infantile 
hemangioma. Arch Dermatol. 2009;145(7):748–50.
 41.  Friedmann  DP,  Tzu  JE,  Kauvar  AN,  Goldman 
MP.  Treatment  of  facial  photodamage  and  rhytides 
using a novel 1,565 nm non-ablative fractional erbium- 
doped fiber laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2016;48:174–80.
 42.  Hwang  YJ,  Lee  YN,  Lee  YW,  Choe  YB,  Ahn 
KJ.  Treatment  of  acne  scars  and  wrinkles  in  asian 
patients  using  carbon-dioxide  fractionl  laser  resur-
facing:  its  effects  on  skin  biophysical  profiles.  Ann 
Dermatol. 2013;25(4):445–53.

 43.  Karsai  S,  Raulin  C.  Fractional  photothermoly-
sis:  a  new  option  for  treating  melasma?  Hautarzt. 
2008;59(2):92–100.

 44.  Izikson L, Anderson RR. Resolution of blue minocy-
cline pigmentation of the face after fractional photo-
thermolysis. Lasers Surg Med. 2008;40(6):399–401.
 45.  Karsai S, Hammes S, Rutten A, Raulin C. Fractional 
treatment  of  granu-
the 
photothermolysis 
loma  annulare:  a  case  report.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2008;40(5):319–22.

for 

 46.  Katz TM, Goldberg LH, Friedman PM. Nonablative 
fractional photothermolysis for the treatment of striae 
rubra. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(9):1430–3.

 47. Kouba DJ, Fincher EF, Moy RL. Nevus of Ota suc-
cessfully 
treated  by  fractional  photothermolysis 
using  a  fractionated  1440-nm  Nd:YAG  laser.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2008;144(2):156–8.

 48.  Yoo KH, Kim MN, Kim BJ, Kim CW. Treatment of 
alopecia areata with fractional photothermolysis laser. 
Int J Dermatol. 2010;49(7):845–7.

 49.  Behroozan  DS,  Goldberg  LH,  Glaich  AS,  Dai  T, 
Friedman PM. Fractional photothermolysis for treat-

10 Fractional Photothermolysis



196

ment  of  poikiloderma  of  civatte.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2006;32(2):298–301.

 50.  Khatri  KA,  Ross  V,  Grevelink  JM,  Magro  CM, 
Anderson  RR.  Comparison  of  erbium:YAG  and  car-
bon  dioxide  lasers  in  resurfacing  of  facial  rhytides. 
Arch Dermatol. 1999;135(4):391–7.

 51.  Walsh  JT  Jr,  Flotte  TJ,  Anderson  RR,  Deutsch 
TF.  Pulsed  CO  laser  tissue  ablation:  effect  of  tissue 
type  and  pulse  duration  on  thermal  damage.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 1988;8(2):108–18.

 52.  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Ruiz-Esparza  J,  Goldman  MP.  The 
depth of thermal necrosis using the CO laser: a com-
parison  of  the  superpulsed  mode  and  conventional 
mode. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1991;17(4):340–4.
 53. Fitzpatrick  RE,  Goldman  MP,  Satur  NM,  Tope 
WD. Pulsed carbon dioxide laser  resurfacing of photo-
aged facial skin. Arch Dermatol. 1996;132(4):395–402.
 54. Wanner M, Farinelli W, Manstein D. Ablative fractional 
resurfacing evaluation of different exposure parameters 
in a pig model. Lasers Surg Med. 2008;20(Suppl):28.
 55.  Hantash BM, Bedi VP, Kapadia B, et al. In vivo histo-
logical evaluation of a novel ablative fractional resur-
facing device. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(2):96–107.

 56.  Hunzeker CM, Weiss ET, Geronemus RG. Fractionated 
CO2 laser resurfacing: our experience with more than 
2000 treatments. Aesthet Surg J. 2009;29(4):317–22.

 57.  Chapas AM, Brightman L, Sukal S, et al. Successful 
treatment  of  acneiform  scarring  with  CO2  abla-

fractional 

tive 
2008;40(6):381–6.

resurfacing.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 

 58.  Waibel J, Beer K. Ablative fractional laser resurfac-
ing for the treatment of a third-degree burn. J Drugs 
Dermatol. 2009;8(3):294–7.

 59.  Rahman Z, MacFalls H, Jiang K, et al. Fractional deep 
dermal ablation induces tissue tightening. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2009;41(2):78–86.

 60.  Dierickx  CC,  Khatri  KA,  Tannous  ZS,  et  al. 
Micro-fractional  ablative  skin 
resurfacing  with 
two  novel  erbium  laser  systems.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2008;40(2):113–23.

 61.  Avram MM, Tope WD, Yu T, Szachowicz E, Nelson 
JS. Hypertrophic scarring of the neck following abla-
tive fractional carbon dioxide laser resurfacing. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2009;41(3):185–8.

 62.  Haedersdal M, Sakamoto FH, Farinelli WA, Doukas 
AG,  Tam  J,  Anderson  RR.  Fractional  CO(2) 
laser-assisted  drug  delivery.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2010;42(2):113–22.

 63.  Erlendsson AM, Anderson  RR,  Manstein  D, Waibel 
JS.  Developing 
fractional 
lasers enhance topical drug delivery. Dermatol Surg. 
2014;(Suppl 12):S142–6.

technology:  ablative 

 64.  James Leyden TJS, Herndon JH Jr. Multicenter clini-
cal  trial  of  a  home-use  nonablative  fractional  laser 
device  for  wrinkle  reduction.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2012;67(5):975–84.

D. Manstein et al.



Sub-surfacing Lasers

Michael Howard Gold

11

Abstract
Sub-surfacing  lasers  consist  of  a  variety  of 
medical devices.
KTP lasers.
Pulsed dye lasers.

Keywords
Sub-surfacing  lasers  ·  Non-ablative  lasers  · 
Photorejuvenation  ·  Laser  toning  ·  Fine  lines 
and wrinkles · Skin dyschromias

 Outline and Introduction

 1.  Sub-surfacing  lasers  consist  of  a  variety  of 

medical devices
 (a)  KTP lasers
 (b)  Pulsed dye lasers
 (c)  1064 nm Q-Switched Nd: YAG lasers
 (d)  1064 nm Long Pulsed Nd: YAG lasers
 (e)  1319/1320 nm Nd: YAG lasers
 (f)  1450 nm Diode lasers
 (g)  1540 Erbium Glass lasers
 (h)  Intense Pulsed Light Sources

M. H. Gold  
Gold Skin Care Center and Tennessee Clinical 
Research Center, Nashville, TN, USA 
e-mail: goldskin@goldskincare.com

 2.  Developed  to  meet  need  of  efficacy  in 
rejuvenation without associated downtime
 (a)  Erbium  and  CO 

resurfacing 

laser 

standards

 (b)  Adverse events, too much downtime
 (c)  New devices to effect collagen in dermis, 

minimal downtime

 (d)  Epidermal cooling required for treatment 

to be safe and effective

 (e)  All  have  clinical 

studies 

showing 

effectiveness

 (f)  All have a rejuvenation effect
 (g)  All  have  potential  for  adverse  events 
including  blistering,  burns,  pigmentary 
concerns, scars

Indications 

and  Contraindications—
Clinical information regarding these devices with 
published evidence of safety and efficacy.

•  Ablative  laser  resurfacing  has  been  the 
gold standard throughout the 1980s and 
1990s for improving skin texture by ren-
ovating photo damaged and aging skin.
•  Although  excellent  results  have  been 
obtained  with  the  use  of  ablative  laser 
devices, the use of non-ablative laser sys-
tems have been increasingly popular as an 
alternative to obtaining the same results.

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_11

197





198

•  The  mechanism  of  ablative 

laser 
resurfacing involves the removal of the 
epidermis  and  the  dermis,  causing  a 
wound to develop which may take up to 
several months to heal.

•  The  use  of  non-ablative  laser  systems 
have  minimal  side-effects  by  causing 
direct  thermal  damage  to  the  dermis, 
while  sparing 
the  epidermis,  and 
re-during  the  risk  of  post-treatment 
adverse effects and downtime.

 Introduction

The  field  of  sub-surfacing  lasers  is  also  known 
commonly by the terms non-ablative laser resur-
facing,  photorejuvenation,  and  laser  toning.  A 
variety  of  lasers  and  light  sources  have  been 
developed and utilized for sub-surfacing and will 
be the subject of this review.

Included  in  the  overall  category  of  sub-
surfacing lasers are a diverse range of technologies 
which  include  the  KTP  lasers  at  532  nm;  the 
pulsed  dye  lasers  at  585–595  nm;  the  Nd:YAG 
lasers which encompass the 1064 nm long pulsed 
systems, the 1064 nm Q-switched laser systems, 
and the 1319/1320 nm laser systems; the 1450 nm 
diode laser systems; the erbium glass laser  sys-
tems  at  1540  nm;  as  well  as  the  spectrum  of 
intense pulsed light (IPL) systems at wavelength 
range  of  500–1200  nm.  All  of  these  medical 
devices have proven successful for non-ablative 
laser/light source resurfacing, photorejuvenation, 
and the improvement of acne scars [1, 2].

These  devices  were  developed,  from  a 
historical point of view, to rival the ablative laser 
resurfacing  systems  which  enjoyed  much 
popularity in the 1980s and 1990s. The ablative 
laser  systems,  predominantly  identified  by  the 
erbium laser systems at 2940 nm and the carbon 
dioxide  resurfacing  lasers  with  a  wavelength  of 
10,600  nm,  were  and  are  the  mainstays  of  the 
ablative  laser  resurfacing  systems.  The  ablative 
laser  resurfacing  systems  are  the  gold  standard 
for  skin  resurfacing  and  still  to  this  day  are  the 
standards to which all other laser or light sources 
for rejuvenation of the skin are judged as to their 
safety and efficacy. The ablative laser resurfacing 
systems work by removing the entire epidermis 
and  portions  of  the  dermis  which  results  in  a 
wound that, upon healing, gives a desired rejuve-
nation  effect. These  devices  have  been  used  for 
many years and have proven effective in improv-
ing skin roughness, fine lines and wrinkles, and 
skin dyschromias which are common manifesta-
tions associated with skin aging and photodam-
age. These ablative laser resurfacing devices can 
produce very nice and long-lasting results, as evi-
denced  in  Figs.  11.1  and  11.2.  However,  when 
performing  these  types  of  laser  procedures, 
patients  must  understand  that  there  will  be  sig-
nificant downtime with these treatments, lasting 
upwards of 1 week or more before full reepitheli-
zation  will  occur,  and  then  several  more  weeks 
where the skin is still pink until complete healing 
has  occurred. As  well,  some  patients  have  pro-
longed  erythema,  as  seen  in  Fig.  11.3,  which 
requires appropriate and thoughtful intervention 
from qualified clinicians to help minimize. And, 
as  a  long  term  sequelae  to  many  of  these 

a

b

c

Fig. 11.1  (a–c) Clinical examples of ablative laser resurfacing with long-lasting results

M. H. Gold



a

b

199

Fig. 11.2  (a, b) Clinical examples of ablative laser resurfacing with long-lasting results

a

b

Fig. 11.3  (a, b) Clinical example of prolonged erythema after ablative laser resurfacing

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



200

Fig. 11.4  Clinical example of long-term sequelae after ablative laser resurfacing

procedures,  a  significant  number  (reported  any-
where from 10 to 20%) may develop a post-treat-
ment  hypopigmentation,  which  may  not  be 
evident for several months to years following the 
initial  procedure,  as  depicted  in  Fig.  11.4. 
However, these ablative laser resurfacing devices 
still remain the gold standard for skin resurfacing 
but other devices were developed in an attempt to 
reproduce  these  kinds  of  results,  with  minimal 
downtime,  predictable  results,  and  less  chances 
for adverse or long term results [3–5].

The  purpose  of  the  development  of  the  non-
ablative laser resurfacing is to affect changes in 
the skin similar to what the ablative laser resur-
facing  devices  achieve.  These  devices  were 
developed  to  improve  the  skin’s  texture,  to 
improve  facial  lines  and  wrinkles  and  surface 
irregularities  including  facial  scars.  In  addition, 
some  of  these  devices  also  address  pigmentary 
dyschromias  and  vascular  changes  in  the  skin 
associated  with  photodamage  and  actinically 
damaged skin. The non-ablative lasers and light 
sources  work  via  thermal  injury  to  the  dermis, 
with  epidermal  sparing,  thereby  reducing  the 
potential  for  any  associated  with  these  proce-
dures. These medical devices have been demon-

strated to work over a period of time and through 
a series of treatments, usually in the realm of five 
to six treatments given at 3–4 week intervals [3].
Maintenance therapy, although not addressed 
in many accounts of sub-surfacing lasers, is usu-
ally required at certain time intervals, as well as 
proper  skin  care  to  maintain  the  rejuvenation 
effect one is attempting to achieve. In contrast to 
the amount of literature which the ablative laser 
resurfacing devices have enjoyed in the medical 
literature, these sub-surfacing lasers have not had 
an overwhelming scientific base in the literature 
but have had descriptive coverage of the various 
devices and their effects.

Various classifications of these sub-surfacing 
lasers  have  been  used  over  the  past  several 
years—we  will  classify  them  as  shown  in 
Table 11.1. Table 11.1 shows that these medical 
devices  can  be  classified  into  (1)  vascular 
lasers,  (2)  mid-infrared  lasers  and  (3)  intense 
pulsed  light  sources.  The  remainder  of  this 
chapter will review the literature of the vascular 
lasers,  the  mid-infrared  lasers,  and  the  IPLs. 
This chapter will not review the realm of frac-
tional lasers, which include non-ablative lasers, 
ablative fractional lasers, radiofrequency based 

M. H. Gold



Table 11.1  Sub-surfacing lasers

Device type
1.  Vascular lasers
KTP laser

Pulsed dye lasers

2.  Mid-infrared lasers
Q-switched 1064 nm

Long-pulsed 1064 nm

1319/1320 nm

1450 nm
1510 nm

3.  Intense pulsed light sources

201

Device name

Manufacturer

Excel V™
The RevLite SI
Veam perfecta
Cynergy
NLite

Cutera http://www.cutera.com
Cynosure http://www.cynosure.com/
Syneron http://www.syneron-candela.com/na
Cynosure http://www.cynosure.com/
ICN Pharmaceuticals http://www.yestheyrefake.net/
NLite.htm

Medlite C6
RevLite
YAG 5
Gentle YAG
Apogee Elite
Profile 1064 nm
CoolTouch® C3
Profile 1319
SmoothBeam
Aramis
Lumenis one™/M 22
BBL
Harnony
PPX/isolaz
Ellipse flex

Cynosure http://www.cynosure.com/

Cynosure http://www.cynosure.com/
Syneron http://www.syneron-candela.com/na
Cynosure http://www.cynosure.com/
Sciton http://www.sciton.com/
Syneron http://www.syneron-candela.com/na
Sciton http://www.sciton.com/
Syneron http://www.syneron-candela.com/na
Quantel http://www.quantelmedical.com/
Lumenis http://www.lumenis.com/
Sciton http://www.sciton.com/
Alma lasers http://www.almalasers.com/
Solta http://www.solta.com/
DDD http://www.ellipse.org/

fractional  lasers,  or  the  microneedling  frac-
tional lasers. They will be reviewed elsewhere 
in this textbook.

 Vascular Lasers

 KTP Lasers

•  Studies  have  shown  that  KTP  lasers 
have  better  collagen  formation  results 
when compared to 1064 nm lasers in the 
treatment of skin photo-rejuvenation.
•  Pulsed dye lasers (PDL) function best in 
the  treatment  of  vascular  lesions  (i.e., 
port wine stains and hemangiomas) with 
significant  production  of  procollagen 
type I and type III.

•  Increased activity of dermal fibroblasts 
and mucin, as well as the thickening of 
the stratum spinosum in the dermis, has 
been noticed in the restoration of degen-
erated skin.

•  The  use  of  modern  PDL  systems  for 
skin rejuvenation provides non-ablative 
results  by  minimizing  side-effects  and 
reducing purpura.

The KTP lasers have traditionally been utilized to 
treat  small  caliber  facial  telangiectasias  on  the 
face  and  there  is  little  in  the  medical  literature 
which  can  be  attributed  to  the  use  of  the  KTP 
lasers in rejuvenation of the skin. In a study by 
Lee [6], 150 patients were treated with the KTP 
laser  and  the  1064  nm  laser  separately  and 
together  for  non-ablative  facial  rejuvenation. 
Patients in this series received three to six treat-
ments of both the KTP laser alone, the 1064 nm 
laser alone, and the combination of both devices. 
Skin biopsies looking at histologic effects in the 
skin were performed at 1, 2, 3, and 6 months fol-
lowing the last treatment. The results showed that 
the KTP laser was superior to the 1064 nm laser 
in  improving  the  parameters  of  photorejuvena-
tion  of  the  skin  but  that  the  combination  of 
devices was superior to either one of the devices 
used alone. Post-therapy skin biopsies confirmed 
the presence of new collagen formation as well as 

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



202

in 

a result of these lasers systems. Others, including 
Goldberg  [7]  found  similar  results 
ten 
patients—again  treated  with  a  millisecond  Nd: 
YAG laser and a millisecond KTP laser showed 
greater  effects  on  tissue  rejuvenation. Tan  et  al. 
[8]  also  demonstrated  this  synergistic  effect  of 
these  two  laser  systems—25%  more  improve-
ment with the combined systems at 1 month for 
more  than  one  third  of  the  patients  which 
increased to 40% at the end of 4 months.

 Pulsed Dye Lasers

Pulsed  dye  laser,  also  known  commonly  as 
flashlamp-pumped  pulsed  dye  lasers,  are  the 
 prototype  medical  devices  that  were  developed 
which  adhere  to  the  principle  of  selective 
 photothermolysis [9]. Selective photothermolysis 
is  a  principle  which  states  that  a  specific  wave-
length of light can specifically destroy a chromo-
phore  within  the  skin,  which  in  the  case  of  the 
pulsed dye lasers is hemoglobin. The pulsed dye 
laser systems have improved in many facets over 
the years, especially in their methods of epider-
mal  cooling  and  in  that  they  have  longer  pulse 
durations  than  their  predecessor  devices,  which 
reduces the incidences for purpura as a result of 
the therapy, considered one of the necessities of 
the  early  pulsed  dye  lasers  but  also  one  of  the 
drawbacks  from  the  treatment.  These  devices 
have been routinely used to treat vascular lesions 
(facial telangectasia, diffuse erythema, and other 
superficial  vascular  lesions)  and  their  successes 
in the treatment of port wine stains and heman-
giomas have been well reviewed in the medical 
literature [10–12]. Pulsed dye lasers have shown 
to be useful in reducing the erythema and improv-
ing stretch marks [13] and these devices have and 
these devices have also been used successfully to 
treat  hypertrophic  scars  and  keloidal  lesions, 
especially  being  able  to  reduce  the  associated 
erythema  sometimes  associated  with 
these 
lesions  [14,  15].  In  the  process,  many  of  these 
scars  have  shown  dermal  remodeling  and  an 
associated shrinkage of the scar itself. The exact 
mechanism of pulsed dye induced collagen for-
mation is not clear but it has been proposed that 

thermal induced damage to vascular endothelium 
may produce cytokines leading to dermal remod-
eling and thus the improvement of fine lines and 
wrinkles [3].

Several  clinical  evaluations  have  been 
performed  which  support  the  use  of  the  pulsed 
dye lasers for a non-ablative rejuvenation effect. 
Rostan et al. [16] utilized a long pulsed 595 nm 
laser in evaluating wrinkles of the cheeks. Fifteen 
patients  received  a  series  of  four  treatments  at 
monthly intervals, either with the laser on or with 
cryogen only in the control group. The group per-
formed skin biopsies prior to the pulsed dye laser 
treatments  and  at  4–6  weeks  following  the  last 
laser treatment, as well as 3 months following the 
last  laser  treatment.  They  specifically  looked  at 
routine  histology,  procollagen  I  production  and 
the activity of dermal fibroblasts. They found that 
the Grenz zone was moderately thicker in 50% of 
patients in both groups treated, but the degree of 
thickening  was  greater  in  the  treatment  groups 
than the controls. Similar findings were also seen 
at 3 months following the laser treatments, when 
an increase in dermal collagen was also observed 
in  the  treatment  sites. A  statistically  significant 
improvement  in  the  clinical  grading  scale  for 
photodamage was also noted in the study.

Zelickson  et  al.  [12]  evaluated  ten  patients 
with  mild  to  moderate  facial  lines  and  wrinkles 
and  ten  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  facial 
lines and wrinkles that were treated with a single 
laser  treatment  with  a  585  nm  pulsed  dye  laser 
with a 450 μm pulse duration. Clinically nine out 
of  ten  patients  in  the  mild  to  moderate  wrinkle 
group  showed  50%  or  more  improvement  with 
3/10 showing 75% or more improvement. All of 
the  patients  maintained  their  improvements  for 
6 months following their last laser treatment. In 
contrast,  only  3/10  patients  in  the  moderate  to 
severe wrinkle group improved during the study. 
Skin biopsies from those patients in the mild to 
moderate  group  were  performed  at  6  and 
12  weeks  following  the  laser  treatment.  The 
biopsy  specimens  showed  a  thickened  stratum 
spinosum  and  a  thickened  collagen  layer  in  the 
superficial dermis as well as increased mucin in 
the superficial dermis. They also performed ultra-
structural  evaluations  which  demonstrated  an 

M. H. Gold



increase in collagen fibers and an increase in the 
number  of  fibroblasts  in  the  treated  skin.  They 
also  noted  that  there  was  an  increase  in  normal 
appearing  elastic  fibers  and  a  decrease  in  the 
clumping of degenerated elastic fibers in the skin. 
Zelickson  and  Kist  [17,  18]  have  also  reported 
results  from  skin  biopsies  performed  after  two 
periorbital 585 nm pulsed dye treatments or IPL 
treatments (6 week apart) in which in-situ hybrid-
ization  mRNA  probe  studies  were  performed 
6 weeks after the second treatment.

the  pulsed  dye 

These studies showed an 18% increase in type 
I  collagen  production  after  the  IPL  treatments 
compared  to  a  23%  increase  in  type  I  collagen 
production  after 
therapy. 
Collagenase  transcriptase  activity  was  32%  for 
the  IPL  and  40%  for  the  pulsed  dye  laser.  The 
authors concluded that the observed increases in 
mRNA in fibroblasts indicated that through this 
non-ablative  light,  extracellular  matrix  protein 
production  by  dermal  fibroblasts  is  increased, 
thus resulting in the effects seen.

Others  have  also  looked  at  the  pulsed  dye 
lasers for its potential in rejuvenation of the skin. 
Bjerring et al. [19] utilized a 585 nm pulsed dye 
laser  with  a  350  um  pulse  duration  and  studied 
suction blisters which had been treated with the 
pulse  dye  laser.  Using  special  markers  for  the 
production of type III procollagen they were able 
to  demonstrate  significant  increases  in  type  III 
procollagen  levels  after  a  single  treatment  with 
the pulsed dye laser, but also demonstrated a drop 
in type III procollagen levels after a retreatment. 
Goldberg et al. [20] also performed skin biopsies 
with a similar pulsed dye laser looking at facial 
lines and wrinkles. In this study, patients received 
two  pulsed  dye  laser  treatments.  Pre-treatment 
and  6  month  post-treatment  clinical  evaluations 
and skin biopsies were analyzed. Forty percent of 
the individuals noted mild improvement in their 
wrinkle  appearance.  Ultrastructural  analyses 
showed  increases  in  type  I  and  III  collagen  in 
those treated with the pulsed dye lasers. A second 
study  by  these  authors  [21]  evaluated  clinical, 
histologic, and ultrastructural changes after non-
ablative  treatments  utilizing  varying  settings  in 
the  same  subject. Ten  patients  were  included  in 
this  clinical  trial.  The  patients  were  randomly 

203

divided into two groups of five. All of the patients 
received  595  nm  pulsed  dye  laser  treatments  to 
the periorbital areas. The first group was treated 
once, while the second group was treated twice at 
a  1  month  interval.  Each  side  of  the  face  was 
treated  with  distinctly  different  laser  settings. 
Seventy  percent  of  the  patients  noted  mild  to 
moderate improvement clinically after treatment 
at  6  months  following  the  last  treatment. There 
was no difference between receiving one or two 
treatments in this study. Histologic and electron 
microscopy improvement was noted in all of the 
patients.

The major side effect of pulsed dye lasers in 
the  past  was  purpura,  which  has  virtually  been 
today’s  more  sophisticated 
eliminated  with 
machines,  with  longer  pulse  durations  and 
improved  epidermal  cooling.  However,  purpura 
is  a  side  effect  still  sometimes  seen,  and  blister 
formation,  pigmentary  dyschromias,  as  well  as 
scarring  have  been  noted  with  the  pulsed  dye 
lasers.

deep 

•  Q-switched  1064  nm  laser  systems 
collagen 
stimulate 
dermal 
to  cause 
stimulation  have  shown 
than  carbon 
re-epithelization 
dioxide  systems.  Further  studies  have 
shown that Q-switched

faster 

•  1064  nm  laser  devices  significantly 
decrease  solar  elastosis  and  thicken 
upper  papillary  dermal  zones  of 
collagen.

•  1064  nm  Nd: YAG  laser  devices  have 
useful  skin  tightening  mechanisms  for 
skin rejuvenation.

•  With  the  use  of  epidermal  cooling 
devices, such as cryogen, 1319/1320 nm 
laser  devices  have  provided  optimal 
results in the formation of new collagen, 
reduction  of  lines  and  wrinkles.  These 
non-ablative laser systems leave the epi-
dermis  intact  and  provide  great  results 
in all skin rejuvenating procedures.
•  1450  nm  mid  infrared  diode  laser 
systems have functioned successfully in 

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



204

the  treatment  of  active  inflammatory 
acne  vulgaris,  acne  scars  on  the  face, 
fine  lines  and  wrinkles.  This  laser 
system  targets  dermal  water,  creates  a 
wound  in  the  dermis  and  triggers  the 
regeneration process of collagen.

•  1540  nm  Erbium  Glass  laser  devices 
have clinically proven dermal remodel-
ing  by  treating  fine  lines  and  wrinkles, 
acne vulgaris and acne scars, and atro-
phic scars on the face. These lasers use a 
sapphire lens cooling device throughout 
the treatment process.

result of this adjuvant care, patients had improve-
ments in skin texture and skin elasticity. Goldberg 
and  Silapunt  [24]  evaluated  skin  biopsies  from 
infraauricular skin treated with two passes of the 
Q-switched laser before and after 3 months fol-
lowing  the  last  treatment  in  eight  patients. 
Clinically,  six  of  the  eight  patients  in  the  trial 
showed improvement by an independent observer.
Four  of  the  six  biopsy  specimens  evaluated 
showed  decreases  in  solar  elastosis  and  a  mildly 
thickened upper papillary dermal zone of collagen. 
More organization of the collagen bundles was also 
seen in this clinical study. Cisneros et al. [25] eval-
uated 22 patients who were treated twice with the 
Q-switched laser system—all with improvement.

 Mid-Infrared Lasers

 1064 nm Nd:YAG Lasers

 Q-Switched, 1064 nm Nd: YAG Lasers

Several investigations have evaluated the effects 
of the Q-switched 1064 nm laser system for the 
treatment  of  facial  lines  and  wrinkles.  These 
Q-switched 
laser  systems  were  originally 
designed for the treatment of densely pigmented 
blue-black tattoos but have also been found to be 
potentially useful in the rejuvenation of the skin, 
due  to  its  deep  penetration  into  the  skin  and 
thereby  stimulating  dermal  collagen.  Goldberg 
and  Whitworth  [22]  evaluated  the  Q-switched 
1064 nm laser in a comparative study to carbon 
dioxide  laser  systems.  Eleven  subjects  were 
included  in  this  evaluation.  All  of  the  patients 
treated  with  the  carbon  dioxide  laser  systems 
improved in this clinical study. Nine of the eleven 
patients improved with the Q-switched 1064 nm 
laser.  Complete  reepithelization  occurred  faster 
(3–6 days earlier) in the patients treated with the 
Q-switched laser as compared to the carbon diox-
ide  systems.  The  authors  concluded  that  the 
Q-switched 1064 nm laser may play a role in the 
treatment of rhytids. Goldberg and Metzler [23] 
utilized a 1064 nm Q-switched laser and a topical 
carbon  solution  in  an  attempt  to  potentiate  the 
laser effects. Two hundred forty two solar dam-
aged sites were treated with three treatments on 
61  patients.  The  investigators  found  that  as  a 

Very little literature exists as far as the efficacy of 
utilizing the 1064 nm long pulsed Nd: YAG laser 
in the treatment of fine lines and wrinkles. In a 
recent  study  by  Taylor  [26],  a  comparison  was 
made  to  the  skin  tightening  ability  of  the  long 
pulsed 1064 nm laser in comparison to the mono-
polar  radiofrequency  device.  In  this  particular 
clinical trial the results showed that the 1064 nm 
was as useful in skin tightening as the radiofre-
quency  device.  Clinical  examples  are  shown  in 
Figs. 11.5 and 11.6.

 1319/1320 nm Laser Systems

These mid-infrared laser systems have had a lot 
of  play  in  the  non-ablative,  sub-surfacing  laser 
field of rejuvenation. The 1320 nm laser system, 
known  as  CoolTouch®,  from  the  CoolTouch® 
Corporation  (Roseville,  CA),  now  owned  by 
Syneron Candela was the original sub-surfacing 
device developed specifically for the treatment of 
facial lines and wrinkles utilizing the non-ablative 
technique.

Subsequently,  a  1319  nm  laser  system  from 
Sciton (Palo Alto, CA) has also been introduced 
to this realm of sub-surfacing lasers.

The  goal  of  these  laser  systems  has  always 
been to create a dermal wound resulting in the 

M. H. Gold



205

Fig. 11.5  Clinical example of skin tightening using 1064 nm

Fig. 11.6  Clinical example of skin tightening using 1064 nm

formation of new collagen, a reduction in lines 
and wrinkles, and to leave the epidermis intact. 
This  has  been  achieved  very  well  through  the 
use of these devices and appropriate epidermal 
cooling.  Clinical  examples  are  shown 
in 
Figs. 11.7 and 11.8.

Utilizing unique delivery systems for cryogen 
spray delivery to the skin and with thermal sen-
sors, the CoolTouch device was and is the proto-
type  of  the  1319/1320  nm  laser  systems  on  the 
market.  It  has  had  extensive  clinical  investiga-
tions performed using it over the years. Clinical 

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



206

Fig. 11.7  Clinical example of 1319/1320 nm treatment

Fig. 11.8  Clinical example of 1319/1320 nm treatment

assessment and skin biopsy clinical studies have 
been carried out by Goldberg [27], Trelles et al. 
[28] and Levy et al. [29]. In all of these clinical 
evaluations, skin biopsies performed at the end of 
the treatments showed evidence of new collagen 
formation. All of the patients had solar elastosis 
prior  to  treatment  and  demonstrated  improve-
ment  clinically  and  histologically  following  the 
treatments.  Goldberg  [30]  also  evaluated  ten 
patients  with  facial  lines  and  wrinkles  who 
received treatment five times with the CoolTouch 
device over 3–4 week intervals. At 6 months fol-
lowing  the  last  treatment,  all  of  the  patients 

reported a subjective improvement in the quality 
of their skin; only six of the ten were felt to be 
clinically improved by the investigator. All of the 
subjects  showed  evidence  of  new  collagen  for-
mation at 6 months in skin biopsies.

Fatemi  et  al.  [31]  showed  that  with  the 
1320 nm laser system that three passes from the 
device are better than a single pass in causing the 
early 
laser-induced  histologic  changes  seen 
which noted included vascular damage, apopto-
sis, 
the 
 inflammatory mediator cascade required for col-
lagen formation to occur.

edema—the  beginning  of 

and 

M. H. Gold



207

(fluences  from  9  to  14  J/cm2).  The  same  group 
also have investigated the 1450 nm laser for the 
treatment 
rhytids 
improved  more  so  than  transverse  neck  lines 
[33].

rhytids—periorbital 

of 

laser  has 

Acne  vulgaris  treatment  with  the  1450  nm 
diode 
received  much  attention. 
Paithankar et al. [34] treated patients with acne to 
their  entire  back  area  affected  with  acne  and 
found  that  when  treating  four  times  at  3  week 
intervals,  a  statistical  and  clinical  decrease  in 
acne lesions was noted. Friedman et al. [35] also 
studied the effects of the 1450 nm diode laser on 
sebaceous glands on the back and noted damage 
to the glands following therapy.

The SmoothBeam laser has shown quite a bit 
of efficacy over the years. Even with its sophisti-
cated cryogen cooling, significant pain has been 
noted to occur in many patients, which has lim-
ited  this  machines  ultimate  further  widespread 
use. A clinical example is shown in Fig. 11.9.

 1540 nm Erbium Glass Laser

The 1540 nm erbium glass laser has seen extensive 
study in Europe for the treatment of fine lines and 
wrinkles,  acne  scars,  and  for  the  treatment  of 

 1450 nm Diode Lasers

The  1450  nm  mid  infrared  diode  laser  system, 
the  SmoothBeam  from  Syneron 
known  as 
Candela  Corporation  (Wayland,  MA),  has  been 
used as a treatment for active inflammatory acne 
vulgaris and for the treatment of acne scars on the 
face. It can also be used in a non-ablative fashion 
for  the  treatment  of  fine  lines  and  wrinkles  as 
well.  This  laser  system  works  similarly  to  the 
1320 nm laser systems in that its wavelength tar-
gets dermal water, creates a wound in the dermis, 
and  in  the  regeneration  process  forms  new  der-
mal collagen resulting in the desired effect.

In  a  study  by  Tanzi  and  Alster  [32],  they 
compared the 1450 nm diode laser to the 1320 nm 
Nd:YAG laser in the treatment of atrophic facial 
scars.  Twenty  patients  with  mild  to  moderate 
atrophic facial acne scars received three monthly 
treatments with the 1450 nm laser to one half of 
the face and the 1320 nm laser to the other half of 
the  face.  Clinical  evaluations  and  skin  biopsy 
specimens were performed at various time inter-
vals,  including  up  to  1  year  post  the  last  treat-
ment.  Mild  to  moderate  clinical  improvement 
was observed clinically in the majority of patients 
studied. The 1450 nm diode laser showed greater 
clinical  scar  response  at  the  parameters  studied 

Fig. 11.9  Clinical example of 1450 nm treatment

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



208

Fig. 11.10  Clinical example of 1540 nm treatment

atrophic scars on the face. It has also been used 
successfully  to  treat  active  inflammatory  acne 
vulgaris. Less clinical work appears to have been 
done  on  this  device  in  the  United  States.  This 
device  utilizes  a  sapphire  lens  cooling  device 
which delivers its contact cooling. Clinical evalu-
ations with the device include Fournier et al. [36] 
in  which  patients  treated  with  this  device  had  a 
40% reduction in wrinkles and a 17% increase in 
epidermal  thickness  at  6  weeks  following  the 
fourth treatment. The study evaluated 42 patients 
over a 14 month period of time. Lupton and Alster, 
looking at histologic effects from the erbium glass 
laser, demonstrated significant dermal remodeling 
and clinical satisfaction in 24 individuals 6 months 
after  their  final  treatment  (four  treatments  at 
1 month intervals). In another study, Lupton et al. 
[37] evaluated the use of the 1540 nm Er: Glass 
laser in 24 patients’ facial wrinkles. Mild to mod-
erate  improvement  in  facial  lines  and  wrinkles 
were  seen  in  all  of  the  study  subjects;  dermal 
fibroplasia  was  noted 
the  skin  biopsy 
specimens.

in 

All of the mid infrared devices have shown 
safety and efficacy. As noted with the 1450 nm 
diode  laser,  pain  is  its  most  common  adverse 
event. All of the mid infrared laser systems can 
cause  significant  discomfort  without  proper 
epidermal  cooling.  As  well,  most  of  these 
devices will result in some erythema and edema 
which,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  will  resolve 
within 24–48 h. As with all laser systems, other 
adverse events can be seen with these devices, 

including  pigmentary  alterations  and  scarring 
of  the  skin.  A  clinical  example  is  shown  in 
Fig. 11.10.

•  Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) devices emit 
polychromatic  light  in  broad  ranges  of 
wavelengths,  selectively  filtered  to  tar-
get specific chromophores, between 500 
and 1200 nm.

•  IPLs treat vascular lesions, pigmentation, 
and have shown to have an effect in the 
production of collagen and elastic fibers 
in  the  dermis.  Studies  have  shown  that 
IPL 
treatments 
using cooling apparatuses considerably 
thickness,  and 
increase  epidermal 
improve skin texture.

photo-rejuvenation 

•  The  necessary  cooling  devices  are 
required  in  all  non-ablative  devices  to 
avoid the adverse effects relating to skin 
damaged.  Blisters  and  pigmentary 
lesions  can  occur  without  the  proper 
handling of cooling devices.

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) Sources

IPLs have been around since the early 1990s and 
have  withstood  the  test  of  time  and  criticism  to 
become the most widely used medical devices in 
the  world  for  photo-rejuvenation.  The  first  of 

M. H. Gold



these light sources was a high-intensity flashlamp 
medical devices were initially developed for the 
treatment of vascular anomalies of the skin, spe-
cifically  leg  veins  and  telangectasias  [38].  IPLs 
are  pulsed  light  sources  which  emit  polychro-
matic  light  in  a  broad  wavelength  of  the  light 
spectrum,  usually  between  500  and  1200  nm. 
Many  different  variations  on  the  IPL  theme  are 
now  available,  some  with  smaller  absorption 
ranges,  others  with  radiofrequency  included  to 
potentiate the effect of the broadband light, and 
still others with a vacuum apparatus included to 
bring the light in a colder relationship to the light 
itself.  IPL  devices  of  today  are  much  more 
sophisticated than their predecessors but always 
are cautioned that not all IPLs are the same. In a 
recent well performed study by Town et al. [39] 
various  IPLs  were  evaluated  to  determine  their 
true pulse width (in an independent means) and 
to evaluate their true output in joules per centime-
ter squared over the time of the pulse. Differences 
were  observed  between  devices  and  even  based 
on  some  of  the  manufacturers’  claims.  These 
devices are very popular in today’s culture; one 
must be aware of the company developing it and 
what clinical work rests behind it.

Although  not  true  lasers,  these  devices  also 
follows the principles of selective photothermol-
ysis [9] in that with varying filters, or cut-off fil-
ters,  one  can  use  the  IPL  to  selectively  target  a 
specific chromophore in the skin to cause a select 
affect  upon  that  structure.  It  has  been  clearly 
demonstrated  that  the  IPLs  can  treat  vascular 
lesions, pigmentary concerns, and does have an 
effect on the collagen and elastic fibers in the der-
mal tissues [40]. These photorejuvenation effects 
of the IPL will now be reviewed.
in 
The  first  major  study 

the  field  of 
photorejuvenation associated with a series of IPL 
treatments was published by Biter in 2000 [41]. 
In  this  trial,  49  individuals  received  a  series  of 
treatments with an IPL device, with a minimum 
of  four  treatments  given  at  3  week  intervals.  In 
his study, he found that all of the parameters of 
photodamaged skin were improved in over 90% 
of  those  entered  into  this  clinical  trial.  These 
included skin wrinkling, skin coarseness, irregu-
lar pigmentation, large pore size, and skin telan-

209

gectasias. Skin biopsies taken from the forehead 
and 4 weeks after the last IPL treatment showed 
new collagen in both the papillary and reticular 
dermis as well as a resolution of any superficial 
dermal infiltrates.

Other  studies  utilizing  an  IPL  demonstrating 
non-invasive  resurfacing  have  also  been  per-
formed. In his study, Hernandez-Perez et al. [42] 
evaluated  five  patients  with  five  treatment  ses-
sions  with  an  IPL.  Moderate  to  very  good 
improvement in the signs of photodamage were 
observed. Skin biopsy specimens were obtained 
at baseline and at 1 week following the final (5th) 
treatment.  These  biopsy  specimens  showed  an 
increase in epidermal thickness, and an improve-
ment  in  dermal  concerns—specifically  dermal 
elastosis,  edema  of  the  dermis,  telangectasias 
present,  as  well  as  any  dermal  infiltrate.  In 
another  investigation,  Negishi  et  al.  [43]  evalu-
ated 73 individuals with an IPL. The patients in 
this clinical evaluation received at least five treat-
ment sessions with the IPL. Clinical results noted 
a greater than 60% improvement in skin texture, 
in  reduction  of  telangectasias,  and  in  reducing 
pigmentary  concerns  in  more  than  80%  of  the 
patients who participated in the trial. Skin biop-
sies obtained at baseline and at 3 weeks follow-
ing the final therapy showed an increase in types 
I and III collagen, as demonstrated by immunos-
taining.  Goldberg,  in  several  clinical  trials, 
looked  at  rhytids  following  IPL  therapy  and 
clearly  demonstrated  an  improvement  in  skin 
wrinkles  which  were  also  demonstrated  histo-
logically [44, 45]. Prieto et al. [46] in their evalu-
ation  of  IPL  induced  rejuvenation  effects  found 
similar  collagen  changes  as  compared  to  other 
authors but also found, through routine histology 
and  electron  microscope  analyses,  that  after 
1 week following therapy, there was no perifol-
licular  infiltrate  evident.  Furthermore,  at  3  and 
12 months, demodex and an associated lymphoid 
infiltrate  were  observed. The  authors  postulated 
that because of the transient therapeutic effect of 
the coagulative necrosis of demodex organisms, a 
nonablative effect can occur. A long term evalua-
tion by Weiss et al. [47] demonstrates that once 
the rejuvenation has had its effect, it can last for 
up to 5 years—83% of patients followed contin-

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



210

ued  improvement  in  skin  texture;  telangectasias 
improvement of 82%; and pigmentation remained 
improved in 79%.

Examples of photorejuvenation as a result of 

IPLs are shown in Figs. 11.11 and 11.12.

As  noted,  IPLs  have  much  play  in  today’s 
laser world. Because they are more sophisticated 

than ever before, most with exceptional cooling 
apparatus’ to increase the safety of the devices, 
more and more physicians and others are utiliz-
ing  them  on  a  daily  basis  all  over  the  world. 
Remember,  these  are  medical  devices  that  can 
damage the skin and cause horrific effects, as can 
all of the devices described in this report.

a

Before

b

After 4 Treatments

Fig. 11.11  (a, b) Clinical example of photorejuvenation with IPL

a

b

Fig. 11.12  (a, b) Clinical example of photorejuvenation with IPL

M. H. Gold



 Techniques/Devices

Table 11.1 lists the names and manufacturers of 
the  most  commonly  used  lasers/light  sources  in 
each  category  along  with  the  web  address  of 
those  companies  where  further  information  to 
specifics may be obtained.

 Adverse Events

All of the sub-surfacing devices have the potential 
to do harm. Because their mechanism of actions 
requires  dermal  injury  with  sparing  of  the 
epidermis,  skin  cooling  becomes  of  paramount 
importance.  Without  proper  epidermal  cooling, 
which these machines do have, skin burning and 
blisters can occur. As a result, all of these devices 
have  the  potential  to  cause  pigmentary  changes 
and/or scars. These can be minimized by proper 
understanding and usage of the devices.

 Future Directions

Personal opinion: The sub-surfacing devices have 
given  us  a  good  head  start  into  the  non-ablative 
laser  world.  I  do  believe  other  technology,  more 
sophisticated  and  yielding  even  better  results 
(safely) have been developed, namely the fractional 
lasers  and  RF  fractional  devices.  I  think  that  the 
IPLs have been an incredible addition to our reju-
venation efforts and I think they, in particular, will 
continue to be utilized, either alone or in combina-
tion, for the treatment of photo-damage. I think that 
the  newer  fractional  resurfacing  devices  offer 
increased efficacy over the sub-surfacing devices, 
and even in the fractionated realm it appears that 
the newer devices being developed are more abla-
tive in nature than non-ablative. There will always 
be a role for the non-ablative resurfacing concept—
positive  results  with  none  to  minimal  downtime. 
Hopefully,  more  devices  of  these  kinds  will  be 
developed, benefiting physicians and patients alike.

 Conclusions
Sub-surfacing, or non-invasive resurfacing, or 
photorejuvenation,  have  been  a  very  popular 
part of the laser culture these past 15 years or 

211

so. Many of the devices described have shown 
a  great  deal  of  clinical  efficacy,  although  at 
times, it has been difficult to document due to 
these changes being, at times, subtle. But our 
patients  have  been  the  ones  who  have  bene-
fited  from  these  devices  as  they  have  always 
known the changes to be real, all with minimal 
to  no  downtime,  one  of  the  most  important 
concepts of modern day lasers. Many of these 
procedures  are  now  being  replaced  with  the 
fractionated  laser  systems,  which  is  covered 
elsewhere  in  this  text.  Sub-surfacing  devices 
can provide you and your patients with much 
satisfaction.

References

  1.  Nelson JS, Majaron B, Kelly KM. What is nonablative 
photorejuvenation of human skin? Semin Cutan Med 
Surg. 2002;21:238–50.

  2.  Kelly  KM,  Kristen  M,  Majaron  B,  Nelson 
JS.  Nonablative  laser  and  light  rejuvenation.  The 
newest approach to photodamaged skin. Arch Facial 
Plast Surg. 2001;3:230–5.

  3.  Alam  M,  Hsu  T-S,  Dover  JS,  Wrone  DA,  Arndt 
KA. Nonablative laser and light treatments: histology 
and  tissue  effects—a  review.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2003;33:30–9.

  4.  Papadavaid E, Katsambas A. Laser resurfacing review. 

Int J Dermatol. 2003;42:480–7.

  5.  Fitzpatrick RE. Laser resurfacing of rhytids. Dermatol 

Clin. 1997;15:431–47.

  6.  Lee MC. Combination aura 532 nm and lyra 1064 nm 
lasers for non-invasive skin rejuvenation and toning. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:32.

  7.  Goldberg  DJ.  Non-ablative  dermal  remodeling: 
comparing  3  different  wavelengths:  does  it  make  a 
difference? Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:31.

  8.  Tan  MH,  Dover  JS,  Hsu  TS,  Arndt  KA,  Stewart 
B.  Clinical  evaluation  of  enhanced  nonablative  skin 
rejuvenation using a combination of 532- and 1064-
nm laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:439–45.

  9.  Anderson RR, Parrish RR. Selective photothermolysis: 
precise microsurgery by selective absorption of pulsed 
radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

 10.  Alster  TS,  Kurban  AK,  Grove  GL,  Grove  MJ,  Tan 
OT.  Alteration  of  argon  laser  induced  scars  by  the 
pulsed dye laser. Lasers Surg Med. 1993;13:368–73.
 11.  Ashinoff  R,  Geronemus  RG.  Flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed  dye  laser  for  port  wine  stains  in  infancy: 
earlier  versus  later  treatment.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
1991;24:467–72.

 12.  Zelickson BD, Kilmer SK, Bernstein E, et al. Pulsed 
dye laser therapy for sun damaged skin. Lasers Surg 
Med. 1999;25:229–36.

11 Sub-surfacing Lasers



212

 13.  McDaniel  DH,  Ash  K,  Zukowski  M.  Treatment  of 
stretch  marks  with  the  585  nm  flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed dye laser. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:332–7.
 14.  Alster  TS.  Improvement  of  erythematous  and 
hypertrophic scars by the 585 nm flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed dye laser. Ann Plast Surg. 1994;32:186–90.
 15.  Alster  TS,  Williams  CM.  Treatment  of  keloid 
sternotomy scars with 585 nm flashlamp-pulsed dye 
laser. Lancet. 1995;345:1198–2000.

 16.  Rostan E, Bowes LE, Iyer S, Fitzpatrick RE. A double-
blind,  side  by  side  comparison  study  of  low  fluence 
long pulse dye laser to coolant treatment for wrinkling 
of the cheeks. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2001;3:129–36.
 17.  Zelickson  BD,  Kist  DA.  Pulsed  dye  laser  and 
photoderm  treatment  stimulated  production  of  type 
I  collagen  and  collagenase  transcriptase  in  papillary 
dermis fibroblasts. Lasers Surg Med. 2001;13:31.
 18.  Zelickson BD, Kist DA. Effect of pulsed dye laser and 
intense pulsed light source on the dermal extracellular 
matrix remodeling. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;12:17.
 19.  Bjerring P, Clement M, Heikendorff L. Selective non-
ablative  wrinkle  reduction  by  laser.  J  Cutan  Laser 
Ther. 2000;2:9–15.

 20.  Goldberg  D,  Tan  M,  Sarradet  MD.  Non-ablative 
dermal remodeling with a 585 nm, 350 um flashlamp 
pulsed dye laser: clinical and ultrastructural analysis. 
Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:162–4.

 21.  Goldberg  DJ,  Sarradet  MD,  Hussain  M,  Krishtul A, 
Phelps  R.  Clinical,  histologic,  and  ultrastructural 
changes  after  nonablative  treatment  with  a  595-nm 
flashlamp-pumped  pulsed  dye  laser:  comparison  of 
varying settings. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:979–82.
 22.  Goldberg  DJ,  Whitworth  J.  Laser  skin  resurfacing 
with the Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers. Dermatol Surg. 
1997;23:903–6.

 23.  Goldberg  DJ,  Meltzer  C.  Skin  resurfacing  utilizing 
a  low-fluence  Nd:YAG  laser.  J  Cutan  Laser  Ther. 
1999;1:23–7.

 24.  Goldberg  DJ,  Silapunt  S.  Q-switched  Nd:  YAG 
laser:  rhytid  improvement  by  nonablative  dermal 
remodeling. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2:157–60.
 25.  Cisneros  JL,  Del  Rio  R,  Palau  M.  The  Q-switched 
neodymium  (Nd)  laser  with  quadruple  frequency. 
Dermatol Surg. 1998;23:345–50.

 26.  Taylor  MB,  Prokopenko  I.  Split-face  comparison  of 
radiofrequency versus long-pulse Nd-YAG treatment 
of facial laxity. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2006;8(1):17–22.
 27.  Goldberg  DJ.  Non-ablative  subsurface  remodeling: 
clinical  and  histologic  evaluation  of  a  1,320  nm 
Nd:YAG laser. J Cutan Laser Ther. 1999;1:153–7.
 28.  Trelles  MA, Allones  I,  Luna  R.  Facial  rejuvenation 
with  a  nonablative  1,320  nm  Nd:  YAG  laser:  a 
preliminary  clinical  and  histologic  evaluation. 
Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:111–6.

 29.  Levy  JL,  Trelles  MA,  Lagarde  JM,  Borrel  MT, 
Mordon  S.  Treatment  of  wrinkles  with  the  non-
ablative  1,320  nm  Nd:  YAG  laser.  Ann  Plast  Surg. 
2001;47:482–8.

 30.  Goldberg  DJ.  Full-face 

dermal 
remodeling with a 1320 nm Nd: YAG laser. Dermatol 
Surg. 2000;26:915–8.

nonablative 

 31.  Fatemi  A,  Weiss  MA,  Weiss  RA.  Short-term 
histological effects of nonablative resurfacing: results 
with  a  dynamically  cooled  millisecond-domain 
1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser.  Dermatol  Surg.  2002;28: 
172–6.

 32.  Tanzi EL, Alster TS. Comparison of a 1450-nm diode 
laser and a 1320-nm Nd: YAG laser in the treatment 
of  atrophic  facial  scars:  a  prospective  clinical  and 
histologic study. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:152–7.
 33.  Alster  TS,  Tanzi  EL.  Treatment  of  transverse  neck 
lines with a 1,450 nm diode laser. Lasers Surg Med. 
2002;14:33.

 34.  Paithankar DY, Ross EV, Saleh BA, Blair MA, Graham 
BS.  Acne  treatment  with  a  1,450  nm  wavelength 
laser  and  cryogen  spray  cooling.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2002;31:106–14.

 35.  Friedman  PM,  Jih  MH,  Kimyai-Asadi  A,  Goldberg 
LH.  Treatment  of  inflammatory  facial  acne  vulgaris 
with the 1450 nm diode laser: a pilot study. Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30:147–51.

 36.  Fournier N, Dahan S, Barneon G, et al. Nonablative 
remodeling:  a  14  month  clinical  ultrastructural 
imaging  and  profilometric  evaluation  of  a  1540  nm 
ER: Glass laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:926–31.
 37.  Lupton  JR,  Williams  CM,  Alster  TS.  Nonablative 
laser skin resurfacing using a 1540 nm erbium glass 
laser:  a  clinical  and  histologic  analysis.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2002;28:833–5.

 38.  Goldman MP, Eckhouse S. Photothermal sclerosis of 

leg veins. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:323–30.

 39.  Town G, Ash C, Eadie E, Moseley H. Measuring key 
parameters  of  intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  devices.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2007;9(3):148–60.

 40.  Raulin  C,  Greve  B,  Grema  H.  IPL  technology:  a 

review. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32:78–87.

 41.  Bitter PH. Noninvasive rejuvenation of photodamaged 
skin  using  serial,  full-face  intense  pulsed  light 
treatments. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:835–43.

 42.  Hernandez-Perez E, Ibiett EV. Gross and microscopic 
findings in patients submitted to nonablative full face 
resurfacing using intense pulsed light: a preliminary 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:651–5.

 43.  Negishi  K,  Wakamatsu  S,  Kushikata  N,  Tezuka  Y, 
Kotani  Y,  Shiba  K.  Full  face  photorejuvenation  of 
photodamaged  skin  by  intense  pulsed  light  with 
integrated  contact  cooling:  initial  experiences  in 
Asian skin. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:298–305.
 44.  Goldberg  DJ,  Cutler  KB.  Nonablative  treatment  of 
rhytids  with  intense  pulsed  light.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2000;26:196–200.

 45.  Goldberg  DJ,  Samady  JA.  Intense  pulsed  light  and 
Nd:  YAG  laser.  Nonablative  treatment  of  facial 
rhytids. Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28:141–4.

 46.  Prieto VG,  Sadick  NS,  Lloreta  J,  Nicholson  J,  Shea 
CR.  Effects  of  intense  pulsed  light  on  sun-damaged 
human  skin.  Routine  and  ultrastructural  analysis. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30:82–5.

 47.  Weiss  RA, Weiss  MA,  Beasley  KI.  Rejuvenation  of 
photoaged  skin:  5  year  results  with  intense  pulsed 
light  of  the  face,  neck,  and  chest.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2002;28:1115–9.

M. H. Gold



Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin 
Tightening: Light-Based Devices

12

Marina Perper, John Tsatalis, Ariel E. Eber, 
and Keyvan Nouri

Abstract
The  popularity  of  non-invasive  cosmetic 
improvement  of  the  skin  has  continued  to 
grow amongst patients and practitioners alike.
Cost and pain remain the principal limiting 

factors for patients.

Keywords
Non-invasive · Epidermal treatment · Skin 
rejuvenation · Skin tightening · Photoaging · 
Light-based devices

The safety of epidermal treatment in dark 

skin types has remained a challenge.

 Introduction

Today, non-invasive treatment of photoag-
ing can be achieved with light devices. A com-
bination  treatment  which  in  my  experience 
has proven to be safe and painless is described 
here.

M. Perper · J. Tsatalis · A. E. Eber · K. Nouri (*)
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: m.perper@umiami.edu; jxt252@miami.edu; 
a.eber@med.miami.edu; knouri@med.miami.edu

•  The  popularity  of  non-invasive  cosmetic 
improvement  of  the  skin  has  continued  to 
grow amongst patients and practitioners alike.
•  Cost  and  pain  remain  the  principal  limiting 

factors for patients.

•  The safety of epidermal treatment in dark skin 

types remains a challenge.

•  Today,  non-invasive  treatment  of  photoaging 
can be achieved with light devices. A combina-
tion  treatment  which  in  my  experience  has 
proven to be safe and painless is described here.

A  place  in  modern  aesthetic  procedures  for 
non-invasive  modalities  is  now  well  earned. 
The  appeal  of  such  procedures  in  the  eyes  of 
prospective  patients  is  understandable.  As  for 
doctors, the possibility of improving someone’s 
appearance without having to resort to drastic, 
painful and potentially risky procedures rapidly 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_12

213





214

became  the  choice  of  many.  It  is  to  be  under-
stood that the changes induced are not as dra-
matic  as 
those  obtained  by  aggressive 
modalities,  but  they  are  not  as  drastic  or  irre-
versible  either,  thereby  becoming  a  plus  not  a 
minus.  Good  candidates  for  these  procedures 
are the ones who can live with the idea of grad-
ual, subtle changes that, on the other hand, will 
not  draw  unnecessary  stares,  such  as  after  an 
invasive Plastic Surgery correction. In addition, 
non-invasive procedures can now be directed at 
specific elements of photoaging, to specifically 
correct them. In such manner, the skin may be 
divided  in  three  basic  strata:  Deep,  being  the 
reticular  dermis;  mid,  being  the  papillary  der-
mis  and  superficial  being  the  epidermis.  Each 
of these strata exhibit distinct changes attribut-
able  to  premature  aging,  namely:  flaccidity, 
thinning or loss of substance, and brown (pig-
mentary) and red (vascular) dyschromias on the 
surface of the skin.

However,  two  are  the  limiting  factors  that 

need to be considered:

 1.  Cost: Being that multiple repeated procedures 

are needed to effect a change and

 2.  Pain: The  interest  of  patients  in  these  proce-
dures is, in general, inversely proportional to 
the pain inflicted by them and therefore it is in 
the  interest  of  the  practitioner  to  be  able  to 
provide his patients with procedures that can 
be performed with as little pain as possible.

The procedures described here can be carried out 
without  pain  and  without  anesthesia  whatsoever. 
They are safe for all skin types and promote easy 
patient’s  acceptance  because  of  lack  of  discom-
fort during and after treatment as well as carefree 
post operative time. As mentioned before, patients 
should understand that a series of treatments may be 
necessary to achieve the desired change. They are to 
understand as well, that the changes obtained after 
these procedures are subtle and may not be noticed 
after each individual session, but through comple-
tion  of  a  series  and  or,  upon  photographic  com-
parison of before and after pictures. Improvement 
however,  can  be  noticed  after  only  one  treatment 
session (Figs. 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 and 12.5) and 
improves after multiple or combined multiple ses-
sions (Figs. 12.6, 12.7, 12.8 and 12.9). If the patient 
desires dramatic changes he or she is probably not a 
good candidate for these procedures.

Pre

6 months

Fig. 12.1  Six months post one Titan treatment

M. Perper et al.



215

Fig. 12.2  Six months post one Titan treatment

Fig. 12.3  Eight months post one Titan treatment

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



216

Pre

2 months

Fig. 12.4  82 year old woman before and 1 month post a single Titan treatment

Before

After

Fig. 12.5  One month post one Titan treatment

M. Perper et al.



217

a

b

Fig. 12.6  (a) Three months post one Titan 3 Nd:YAG showing better skin quality and (b) in lateral view

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



218

Fig. 12.7  Pre and 6 month post combination treatment Titan plus Nd:YAG

Fig. 12.8  Pre and post one Titan and 5 Nd:YAG

M. Perper et al.



219

Fig. 12.9  Seven days after combination treatment of one Titan, 3 Nd:YAG and 5 IPL

On the other hand, we have gradually improved 
our  understanding  of  how  skin  tightening  takes 
place  and  how  it  can  be  induced  painlessly  and 
immediately using light. A long way has passed 
since we were trying to elicit a change using flash 
intense  heating  with  radiofrequency.  In  a  simi-
lar  manner,  when  we  use  the  Nd:YAG  laser  as 
later  described,  a  change  in  skin  quality  is  first 
noticeable after only a few days when treating the 
mid layer with laser, and there is even a change 
that is noticed immediately: pore size reduction. 
Dyschromias will also improve within a matter of 
days, again using light, intense pulsed light. So, 
all  in  all,  these  change  account  for  an  excellent 
acceptance level for the vast majority of patients 
who undergo these treatments, provided we have 
outlaid a plan of treatment and of expected level 
of improvement in all detail prior to starting the 
series and never a posteriori.

 Photoaging in the Deep Stratum 
of the Skin Causing Skin Laxity  
Can Be Treated with Light

•  Skin tightening can best be induced using long, 
gradual, sustained multi second pulses of heat

•  If the tissue is heated in this manner, it can be 

done painlessly

•  Immediate skin tightening is observed in nearly 

all patients regardless of age or skin type

For  the  purpose  of  this  writing  we  will  limit 
ourselves to the mid and lower thirds of the face 
and neck. Unwanted skin flaccidity starts at vari-
able  degrees  for  individual  patients  during  the 
third  decade  of  life.  Jowls,  loss  of  sharpness  in 
the mandibular lines, laxity of cheeks and deepen-
ing of the nasallabial fold individually or collec-
tively may appear. The traditional approach years 
ago, was that of a rhytidectomy or face lift. The 
problem  was  that  this  procedure,  alone,  corrects 
by  pulling  the  lax  skin  following  one  vector  of 
movement,  causing  in  some  cases,  distortion  of 
landmarks of the face such as the corners of the 
mouth.  Inducing  skin  contraction  by  delivering 
deep, sustained heat to the deep dermis, aims to 
cause a minute global shrinking, that will revert 
the  skin  to  its  original  position  to  some  degree. 
Achieving that with light, requires a source of heat 
that can be on for extended periods of time and 
that does not cause pain on contact with the skin. 
In other words, a long pulse of light, and cooling 
of the treatment surface of the device, the one that 

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



220

gets in contact with the surface of the skin while 
the light is on. The light must have a wavelength 
which  allows  for  penetration  to  the  level  of  the 
target, i.e.,: the deep reticular dermis. The closest 
to such a device is Titan by Cutera, Inc.

Titan is an infrared light device emitting light at 
1100–1800  nm  in  multi  second  cycles.  At  these 
wavelengths,  there  is  a  moderate  level  of  water 
absorption and therefore it can thoroughly heat the 
dermis over a period of seconds. It differs from other 
infrared  devices  in  that  they  usually  have  much 
smaller  spot  sizes  and  also  have  very  short  pulse 
durations (milliseconds) as well as a very high water 
absorption which results in shallow heating only. It 
has a spot area of 1 cm × 1.5 cm. Although it is an 
infrared  lamp,  it  is  not  a  flashlamp.  “Flashlamps” 
produce  light  at  lower  wavelengths  (more  visible 
light) and are usually pulsed at short (millisecond) 
durations.  This  is  a  broadband  infrared  lamp  that 
emits  longer  wavelengths  and  is  better  suited  for 
 multi- second  pulse  durations.  Heat  penetration 
depth  from  this  device  is  estimated  to  be  about 
1–2 mm, but some heating does occur down to about 
5 mm. These calculations were done using dermal 
scattering coefficients and water penetration depths 
for near infrared wavelengths to estimate an “effec-
tive penetration depth” for a particular wavelength. 
The total intensity was then calculated by adding up 
the contribution from individual wavelengths. These 
models were then confirmed by actual thermal mea-
surements of ex- vivo tissue samples and an appro-
priate filter design was selected based on the desired 
thermal profile obtained by the manufacturer.

Technique: Both, physician and patient should 
wear appropriate protection goggles. This author 
uses now a technique that differs from the tradi-
tional  one  for  this  device.  It  is  a  gliding  tech-
nique, in which the treatment window is glided in 
vertical  lines  on  the  cheeks  and  neck.  The 
machine is then set to emit the highest possible 
pulse which also has the longest possible pulse, 
lasting several seconds. The fluence is set at 65 J/
cm2. But since the device is engineered to emit a 
pre-cooling  pulse  of  cold,  as  well  as  a  trans- 
cooling  and  post  cooling  pulse,  care  is  taken  to 
avoid the pre and post-cooling because they are 
unnecessary in this particular technique. So, the 
device is made to begin contact with the skin sur-
face immediately after the blue light indicator of 
cold emission is followed by the yellow light of 

infrared  light  emission.  Then  the  handpiece  is 
glided in a vertical fashion until the yellow light 
stops. When the blue light alone continues, at the 
end of each pulse, care should be taken to with-
draw  the  handpiece  from  skin  contact.  This 
avoids unpleasant cold sensation for the patient. 
As mentioned above, I use the “S” handpiece at a 
setting of 65 J/cm, with pulses of 9.2 s duration. I 
find the “V” and “XL” handpieces less adequate 
for the glide technique due to their sharp edges.

At  the  beginning  heat  is  almost  impercep-
tible  for  the  patient.  The  strokes  are  then 
repeated, over and over with some overlapping 
to produce the desired goal: incremental, sus-
tained  heating  that  because  it  is  not  sudden 
and  intense,  it  is  painless.  Many  strokes  are 
necessary  to  elicit  visible  contraction,  in  my 
experience from 40 to 60 in each area, consid-
ering each cheek one area, and each side of the 
neck one area as well. Gliding is facilitated by 
the use of a hydrophilic gel such as K-Y Jelly. 
(Johnson  and  Johnson).  Contraction  can  be 
seen with the patient lying down but it becomes 
more  apparent  when  the  patient  sits  up.  The 
contrast  with  the  untreated  side  demonstrates 
the  contraction  to  the  patient  (Figs.  12.10, 
12.11,  and  12.12)  with  the  simple  use  of  a  

Fig. 12.10  Immediate skin contraction after Titan on left 
cheek

M. Perper et al.



Fig. 12.11  (a) 
Immediate skin 
contraction on treated 
cheek and (b) in close up

a

221

b

Treated side

Untreated side

mirror. As mentioned, this technique, properly 
performed is painless even in the beard area in 
men, in which the traditional “stamping” tech-
nique  usually  hurts.  The  following  principle 
must be understood: The skin will contract by 
applying  heat  slowly,  steadily,  progressively 
and  sustainably.  Overlapping  strokes  is  per-
mitted  and  desirable  always  guided  by  pain 

sensation.  No  pain  is  necessary  to  elicit  con-
traction,  with  gentle  heat  applied  for  enough 
time, thus 40–60 gliding strokes of the hand-
piece  are  needed.  Intense  heat  applied  by  the 
conventional  “stamping  technique”  hurts  and 
may not be the best for the patient. An animal 
hide will contract if put in a dryer with enough 
heat for enough time (Figs. 12.12 and 12.13). 

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



222

a

b

A Most Impressive Case of Tissue
Contraction: Animal hide subjected to
sustained slow heat for enough time

Pre

Immediate Post

A Most Impressive Case of Tissue
Contraction: Animal hide subjected to
sustained slow heat for enough time

Pre

Immediate Post

Fig. 12.12  (a, b) Animal hide contraction with slow sustained heat

Appropriate heating was applied to
elicit contraction

A Flame (intense brief heat) would have
burned the hide, not contracted it

Fig. 12.13  Slow and low heating can bring about appro-
priate contraction

Sudden  intense  heat  in  brief  pulses  (such  as 
that produced by a flame) will fail to contract 
the  hide.  Similar  intense  pulses  in  patients, 
whether originated by radiofrequency or light, 
will not offer the best contraction possible in 
clinical practice.

No  post-operative  care  is  required.  Post- 
operative  pain,  swelling  or  bruising  do  not 
occur.

These treatment sessions can be repeated to 
improve  results.  Usually  at  monthly  intervals 
until  the  desired  level  of  improvement  is 
achieved. I also recommend maintenance treat-
ments  every  year  for  patients  under  50  and 
every  6  months  for  patients  over  50  years  of 
age. Genetics, skin type, degree of sun protec-
tion and outdoor lifestyles will necessitate dif-
ferent maintenance schedules.

M. Perper et al.



 A 1064 nm Nd:YAG Laser Is Used 
to Treat the Mid Stratum of the Skin

•  The  Nd:YAG  laser  can  be  used  to  improve 

skin quality.

•  We use a repetition rate of 10 Hz at 15 J/cm, in 

300 ms pulses.

•  An airbrush technique about 1–2 cm from the 

skin surface is used.

•  We use five sessions of 5000 pulses each.
•  Improvement can be observed within a month 

from each procedure.

•  When adequately performed, the procedure is 

painless for most patients.

With  this  modality,  an  improvement  in  the 
quality of the skin is sought for. Improvement 
will  start  to  be  perceived  by  the  patient  usu-
ally  after  1  week  and  will  be  at  a  peak  after 
1 month. An improvement in skin texture, soft-
ening of very fine static rhytids, a reduction of 
pore size, a diminution of actinic bronzing and 
an improvement in skin clarity and glow may 
result. Again, this technique is safe in all skin 
types.

Because  of  its  wavelength,  this  laser  can  be 
used  to  reach  the  level  of  the  papillary  dermis. 
When  engineered  to  deliver  15  J,  in  300  ms 
pulses with a spot size of 5 mm, it can be deliv-
ered painlessly even at a repetition rate of 10 Hz.
Technique: Again, both, physician and patient 

should wear appropriate protection goggles.

First,  we  must  understand  the  following 

principles:

 1.  The degree and speed of heating will be pro-
portional  to  the  speed  of  the  hand  of  the 
 operator  as  well  as  the  distance  between  the 
handpiece and the skin.

 2.  Small areas heat up faster than larger ones. A 

repeated air brush movement is needed.

 3.  The  face  must  be  divided  in  relatively  small 
areas rather than attempting to treat the entire 
face at the same time. In this manner, the fore-
head is considered one area, each cheek with 
the  corresponding  side  of  the  nose  will  be 
another, and the perioral area and chin another 
area.

223

 4.  The  operator  will  move  to  the  next  area  in 
circles.  Each  will  be  treated  generally  with 
five consecutive passes.

 5.  Pain or immediate redness are NOT treatment 

goals or endpoints.

 6.  The machine counts pulses automatically. The 
number  of  pulses  will  vary.  Typically,  5000 
pulses for 5 monthly sessions. Lately, I have 
found that more pulses in a single session are 
more  rewarding  and  safe.  We  now  deliver 
15,000–25,000 in a single treatment session.

 Improvement of the Superficial 
Stratum of the Skin Using Light

•  Intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  can  be  used  to 
improve some epidermal signs of photoaging.
•  Pigmented  or  vascular  dyschromias  are 
exceedingly common and are ideal targets for 
this procedure.

•  The  procedure  can  be  safely  applied  in  dark 
skin types in the following manner: The pro-
cedure is done at daily intervals for 5 days.
•  We use the “Limelight” device by Cutera, Inc.
•  We  start  at  8  J/cm,  “C”  mode  for  skin  types 

III–V and “B” for skin types I–II.
•  We use increments of 2 J/cm daily.
•  Mild  burning  sensation  during  each  pulse  is 

expected. No pain afterwards.

•  The cooled tip is kept in situ after each pulse 
long  enough  for  the  burning  sensation  to 
disappear.

Intense pulsed light (IPL) has been used for a 
number of years and an abundant body of litera-
ture has been published on the subject. We will 
deal in this chapter with the means to make this 
procedure safe for all skin types and to minimize 
discomfort  and  post-operative  the  undesirable 
treatment effects that we usually see when a con-
ventional technique is used.

The  device  that  we  use  (“Limelight”  by 
Cutera,  Inc.)  emits  light  between  520  and 
1100  nm.  It  has  a  cooled  sapphire  handpiece. 
Three distinct factory-set programs are available 
labeled A, B and C. A delivers the shortest wave-
length  and  pulse  duration  and  is  aimed  to  treat 

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



224

skin  types  I–II  mainly  with  vascular  dyschro-
mias.  B  has  a  longer  wavelength  emission  and 
correspondingly shorter cooling times. It is used 
in  pigmented  and  vascular  dyschromias  in  skin 
type I–III. The C program is the safest for darker 
skin  types  and  emits  in  the  longest  wavelength 
range  available  for  the  machine.  It  also  has  the 
longest  pulse  duration.  A  so-called  “Pigment 
mode”  is  available.  This  has  a  shorter  cooling 
time and appears to be more effective in pigmen-
tary targets. We use this mode carefully in darker 
types.

The  initial  fluence  used  for  treatments  will 
vary from 8 J/cm2 for skin types II–IV to 12 J/
cm2 for skin type I–II. We do daily treatments for 
1 week with increments in fluence of 2 J/cm2 per 
day if tolerated. Two passes are the routine, per 
session. We take the time to cool the skin leaving 
the  cool  handpiece  in  situ  for  a  few  seconds  or 
after  the  burning  sensation  from  the  light  pulse 
disappears, after the emission of the light pulse. 
This aids significantly to decrease the level of the 
discomfort  produced  by  these  treatments,  espe-
cially in dark skin types. We do not apply pre-or 
post-treatment cooling pads. Daily sessions will 
turn  the  chromophore  in  the  skin  darker  by  the 
day, augmenting the ultimate effect on pigmented 
lesions. On the other hand, gradual increments in 
fluence permit to reach higher levels safely. This 
is crucial in dark skin tones or suntanned skin.

Patients  can  expect  darkening  of  the  pig-
mented target lesions after 48 h and spontaneous 
sloughing of the lesions within 1 week. By doing 
daily  treatments  we  curtail  erythema  post  treat-
ment and are able to deliver ultimately higher flu-
ences, which, we feel aids in the final result. In 
this manner for example we are able to deliver up 
to 16 J/cm2 in skin type IV by the fifth day.

 Low-Level Light Therapy (LLLT) 
for Skin Rejuvenation

Low level laser therapy, phototherapy or photo-
biomedulation,  is  an  upcoming,  non-invasive 
treatment modality for improve the appearance of 
wrinkles,  dyspigmentation,  telangiectasia,  and 
loss  of  elasticity  occurring  hand  in  hand  with 

aging. The therapy exposes tissue to low-levels of 
red and near infrared (NIR light) and stimulates 
or inhibits a variety of cellular processes using a 
lesser degree of energy or power than more tradi-
tional  treatments  such  as  ablation,  cutting,  and 
thermally  coagulating  tissue.  Unlike  traumatic 
ablative (e.g., laser resurfacing) and non-ablative 
(e.g., intense pulsed light [IPL]), treatments that 
produce  secondary  tissue  repair  through  con-
trolled damage to either the epidermis or the der-
mis, Significant variation in dosimetry parameters 
between different LLLTs, including wavelength, 
irradiance  or  power  density,  pulse  structure, 
coherence,  polarization,  energy  fluence,  irradia-
tion  time,  contact  vs.  non-contact  application, 
and  repetition  regimen,  warrants  additional 
assessment of the devices. For our purposes, we 
will  describe  the  use  of  LED  (light-emitting 
diode) therapy, a type of LLLT which facilitates 
non-thermal,  non-ablative  skin  rejuvenation,  in 
improving  wrinkles  and  skin  laxity.  Because 
LED light sources have dot-shaped (punctiform) 
emission  characteristics  and  narrow  spectral 
bandwidths, it is recommended to apply a poly-
chromatic  spectrum  covering  a  broader  spectral 
region for skin rejuvenation and skin repair.

Although  varying  parameters  may  be 
employed  during  LED  treatment,  treatments 
applied  on  the  face  most  typically  involve  633, 
and 830 nm at fluences of 126 and 66 J/cm2. We 
focus  on 
treatment  procedures 
described  by  Bhat  et  al.  using  the  Omnilux 
Revive LED lamp for facial skin rejuvenation.

successful 

While  using  the  Omnilux  Revive  LED  lamp 
for rejuvenation, patients are first seated comfort-
ably in a chair and are pre-cleansed with a cleans-
ing lotion. The patient then receives non-coherent 
red light at a wavelength of 630(±3) nm and an 
intensity  of  80  mW/cm2  at  a  dose  of  96  J/cm2. 
Patients  are  treated  three  times  weekly  for  3 
weeks for a total of nine treatments. Each session 
lasts 20 min.

Results using this method have proved prom-
ising,  with  substantial  patient  satisfaction  indi-
cated just 5 weeks after treatment. Reduction in 
fine lines and wrinkles, smoother and firmer skin, 
and perception of softer skin have been noted as 
beneficial effects of the treatment. Further, unlike 

M. Perper et al.



more  invasive  methods  including  ablative  and 
non-ablative laser treatments, no pain or adverse 
effects have been noted from the LED treatment. 
Limitations  of  this  treatment  modality  include 
little 
in  skin  elasticity  and 
hydration.

improvement 

 Photodynamic Therapy (PDT) 
for Skin Rejuvenation

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a treatment that 
can be performed using both laser and nonlaser 
light.  Mechanistically,  PDT  uses  oxygen  and 
light  in  combination  with  a  photosensitizing 
agent to selectively target cells. Photosensitizing 
agents  are  drugs  that  only  activate  when  struck 
with a specific wavelength of light. PDT can be 
used to treat a variety of skin issues such as acne 
and unwanted ageing, although it has been tradi-
tionally used for the treatment of superficial basal 
cell carcinoma and actinic keratosis. Other uses 
for PDT are still being investigated.

The most common complication of this treat-
ment  is  the  “PDT  effect”.  The  “PDT  effect”  is 
expressed as redness, peeling, and crusting of the 
skin. Exposure to sunlight during a 48-h period 
after  treatment  can  make  the  reaction  worse. 
Oftentimes, though, those with the most dramatic 
reactions have superior results.

While  PDT  is  not  commonly  used  for  facial 
rejuvenation, it is a less-invasive alternative that 
has gained traction with clinicians. When used in 
combination  with  intense  pulsed  light  (standing 
in as the photosensitizing agent), PDT is an effec-
tive treatment. This combination is used to treat 
vascular erythema, fine rhytides, epidermal dys-
chromia, and photodamage. In treatment of pho-
toaging, PDT-IPL therapy has the added benefit 
of  treating  premalignant  lesions.  Additionally, 
healing times are brief. Unfortunately, PDT-IPL 
therapy is unable to resurface the skin and cannot 
penetrate  deep  enough  to  treat  other  unwanted 
skin  lesions.  Other  techniques  involve  using  a 
pulse-dye laser in conjunction with PDT.

There are three stages in photodynamic ther-
apy.  The  first,  involves  the  practitioner  thor-
oughly cleaning the skin and gently scraping the 

225

skin to increase absorption of the photosensitiz-
ing agent. Three to six hours are allowed for the 
drug to be fully absorbed. The second stage lasts 
from 5 to 45 min and consists of the light being 
directed  at  the  treatment  area.  The  third  stage 
involves skin sensitivity following the treatment 
for  up  to  2  weeks.  In  one  study,  PDT  was  per-
formed  twice  at  1-month  intervals,  and  results 
were evaluated 1 month after the final treatment. 
Lesions were treated with noncoherent red light 
of  emission  wavelength  580–740  nm,  dose  of 
100  J/cm2,  and  fluence  rate  of  100  mW/cm2. 
Parameters  vary  per  clinician  and  should  be 
based  on  prior  success,  however.  Recomm-
endations for PDT for different lesions have been 
published.

Bibliography

  1.  Alexiades-Armenakas  M.  Assessment  of  the  mobile 
delivery of infrared light (1100-1800 nm) for the treat-
ment of facial and neck skin laxity. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2009;8(3):221–6.

  2.  Avci P, et al. Low-level laser (light) therapy (LLLT) 
in skin: stimulating, healing, restoring. Semin Cutan 
Med Surg. 2013;32(1):41–52.

  3.  Dang Y,  Ren  Q,  Hoecker  S,  Liu  H,  Ma  J,  Zhang  J.   
Biophysical,  histological  and  biochemical  changes 
after  non-ablative  treatments  with  the  595  and 
1320 nm lasers: a comparative study. Photodermatol 
Photoimmunol Photomed. 2005;21(4):204–9.

  4.  Dang  YY,  Ren  QS,  Liu  HX,  Ma  JB,  Zhang  JS.   
Comparison of histologic, biochemical, and mechani-
cal  properties  of  murine  skin  treated  with  the  1064-
nm  and  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  lasers.  Exp  Dermatol. 
2005;14(12):876–82.  Institute  for  Laser  Medicine 
and  Biophotonics,  Shanghai  Jiaotong  University  of 
Shanghai, China.

  5.  Goldberg  DJ.  Non-ablative  subsurface  remodel-
ing:  clinical  and  histologic  evaluation  of  a  1320-nm 
Nd:YAG laser. J Cutan Laser Ther. 1999;1(3):153–7.

  6.  Goldberg  DJ,  Samady  JA.  Intense  pulsed  light  and 
Nd:YAG laser nonablative treatment of facial rhytids. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28(2):141–4.

  7.  Goldberg DJ, Silapunt S. Q-switched Nd:YAG laser: 
rhytid improvement by non-ablative dermal remodel-
ing. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2(3):157–60.

  8.  Hassan KM, Benedetto AV. Facial skin rejuvenation: 
Ablative  laser  resurfacing,  chemical  peels,  or  pho-
todynamic  therapy?  Facts  and  controversies.  Clin 
Dermatol. 2013;31(6):737–40.

  9.  Min-Wei  CL.  Novel  3-in  1  wavelength  light  source 
for photorejuvenation. J Drugs Dermatol. 2009;7(4): 
335–9.

12 Non-invasive Rejuvenation/Skin Tightening: Light-Based Devices



226

 10.  Morton CA, McKenna KE, Rhodes LE. Guidelines for 
topical photodynamic therapy: update. Br J Dermatol. 
2008;159(6):1245–66.

 11.  Negishi K, et al. An objective evaluation on the effects 
of  non-ablative  skin  tightening  with  a  broadband 
infrared  light  device.  Presented  at  the  26th  annual 
meeting of the American Society of Laser Medicine 
and Surgery; Apr 2006; Boston, MA.

 12.  Prieto  VG,  Diwan  AH,  Shea  CR,  Zhang  P,  Sadick 
NS. Effects of intense pulsed light and the 1,064 nm 
Nd:YAG  laser  on  sun-damaged  human  skin:  histo-
logic  and  immunohistochemical  analysis.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2005;31(5):522–5.

 13.  Ruiz-Esparza  J.  Immediate  skin  contraction  induced 
by  near  painless,  low  fluence  irradiation  by  a  new 
infrared  device.  A  report  of  25  patients  treated 
with this novel non-invasive, non-ablative method. 
Dermatol Surg. 2006;32(5):601–10.

 14. Ruiz-Rodriguez R, Lopez-Rodriguez L. Nonablative 
skin resurfacing: the role of PDT. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2006;5(8):756–62.

 15.  Schmults  CD,  et  al.  Nonablative  facial  remodeling 
erythema  reduction  and  histologic  evidence  of  new 
collagen  formation  using  a  300-microsecond  1064- 
nm Nd:YAG laser. Arch Dermatol. 2004;140:1373–6.

 16.  Sze-Hon  C,  et  al.  Nonablative  infrared  skin  tighten-
ing in type IV to V Asian skin: a prospective clinical 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:146–51.

 17.  Tan  MH,  Dover  JS,  Hsu  TS,  Arndt  KA,  Stewart 
B.  Clinical  evaluation  of  enhanced  nonablative  skin 
rejuvenation  using  a  combination  of  a  532  and  a 
1,064 nm laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34(5):439–45.
 18.  Taub AF, et al. Multicenter clinical perspectives on a 
broadband infrared light device for skin tightening. J 
Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5(8):771–8.

 19.  Trelles M, Allones I, Velez M, Mordon SJ. Nd:YAG 
laser combined with IPL treatment improves clinical 
results  in  non-ablative  photorejuvenation.  J  Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2004;6(2):69–78.

 20.  Wunsch A, Matuschka K. A controlled trial to deter-
mine  the  efficacy  of  red  and  near-infrared  light 
treatment  in  patient  satisfaction,  reduction  of  fine 
lines,  wrinkles,  skin  roughness,  and  intradermal 
collagen  density  increase.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2014;32(2):93–100.

 21.  Zelickson  B,  et  al.  Ultrastructural  effects  of  titan 
infrared  handpiece  on  forehead  and  abdominal  skin. 
Presented  and  published  in  the  meeting  abstracts  of 
the 25th annual meeting of the American Society for 
Laser Medicine and Surgery; Apr 2005; Orlando, FL.

M. Perper et al.



Laser and Light Therapies for Acne

13

Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi, Ariel E. Eber, 
and Keyvan Nouri

Abstract
•  Acne vulgaris is a very common cutaneous 
disorder which can cause permanent scar-
ring and disfigurement.

•  Acne is a multifactorial disorder of pilose-
baceous units and affects the areas of skin 
with  the  greatest  concentration  of  seba-
ceous follicles such as the face, neck, chest, 
and back.

•  Common  therapies  for  acne  treatment 
include  retinoids,  keratolytic  agents,  anti-
microbials, and anti-inflammatory agents.
•  The  need  for  an  alternative  treatment  has 
led to the investigation of lasers and light 
sources as a new treatment.

•  The 1450 nm diode laser, 585- and 595-nm 
pulsed  dye  lasers  (PDLs),  near  infrared 
diode  lasers,  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser, 
532 nm potassium titanyl phosphate laser, 
1064  nm 
laser, 
1540 nm Erbium (Er):Glass Laser, and the 
1550  nm  Er:Glass  fractional  laser  are 

long-pulsed  Nd:YAG 

among  the  most  common  lasers  used  to 
treat acne and acne scarring.

•  1540  nm  Erbium  (Er):Glass  Laser,  and  the 
1550 nm Er:Glass fractional laser are among 
the most common lasers used to treat acne and 
acne scarring.

•  These lasers target the underlying causes of acne 
including the colonization of Priopionibacterium 
acnes, high levels of sebum production, altered 
keratinization, inflammation, and bacterial col-
onization of hair follicles on the face, neck, and 
back.

Keywords
Acne vulgaris · Acne scarring · 1450 nm 
diode laser · 585- and 595-nm pulsed dye 
lasers (PDLs) · Near infrared diode lasers · 
1320 nm Nd:YAG laser · 532 nm potassium 
titanyl phosphate laser · 1064 nm long-pulsed 
Nd:YAG laser · 1540 nm Erbium (Er):Glass 
Laser · 1550 nm Er:Glass fractional laser

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi (*) · A. E. Eber · K. Nouri
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: arajabi@med.miami.edu;  
a.eber@med.miami.edu; knouri@med.miami.edu 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_13

227





228

 Introduction

Acne vulgaris is the most common skin disorder. It 
affects approximately 35–90% of adolescents and 
continues to be a common problem in those over the 
age of 20 [1–3]. In fact, in the U.S., it is estimated 
that approximately 9.6 million individuals visited a 
doctor for acne treatment in 2010, and over 60% of 
these patients were over the age of 18 [4].

This  common  cutaneous  disorder  can  cause 
permanent scarring and disfigurement, which may 
lead to severe consequences in psychological and 
personality  development.  In  fact,  it  is  associated 
with a high prevalence of depression and skin dis-
ease  related  suicide  [5,  6].  For  these  reasons, 
effective  management  of  acne  can  improve  self-
esteem, body image and other life quality issues 
[7, 8].

Acne is a multifactorial disorder of the piloseba-
ceous  unit  and  affects  areas  of  the  body  with  the 
greatest concentration of sebaceous follicles includ-
ing  the  face,  chest,  neck  and  back.  There  are  key 
components  that  are  thought  to  contribute  to  the 
development of acne and include: Hypercornification 
combined with excess sebum production provoking 
clogging of the pores, Propionobacterium acnes (P. 
acnes) proliferation in this environment causing an 
increase  in  inflammatory  cytokine  production  and 
free  fatty  acids,  and  finally,  further  irritation  from 
inflammatory  factors  and  free  fatty  acids.  Studies 
also  suggest  genetic,  neuroendocrine,  and  dietary 
factors may contribute to the multifactorial process 
of acne vulgaris pathogenesis [9–11].

Currently, no acne grading or classifying sys-
tem  can  be  recommended.  However,  clinicians 
may  find  it  useful  to  determine  the  severity  of 
acne  according  to  certain  specifications.  Such 
systems can assist in more specific classification 
of  disease,  determining  appropriate  treatment 
options,  and  monitoring  improvement  during 
a  treatment  course.  There  are  several  accepted 
tools that take into account type of acne, sever-
ity of acne, number of acne lesions (comedomes, 
papules,  pustules  etc.),  anatomical  location/
extent  of  acne,  quality  of  life  and  other  psy-
chosocial  metrics,  and  scarring  among  others. 

Although most patients will improve with time, 
some do not and have serious long term effects 
from acne. These include redness, hyperpigmen-
tation, and permanent scars (atrophic, hypertro-
phic and keloids) [12].

Common  therapies  used  for  the  treatment  of 
acne vulgaris include keratolytic agents, antimi-
crobials,  anti-inflammatories,  retinoids,  hor-
monal 
treatments,  microdermabrasion,  and 
chemical peels [12, 13]. The need for an alterna-
tive treatment has led to the investigation of lasers 
and  light  sources  as  a  potential  treatment.  The 
mechanism  of  action  relies  upon  the  fact  that 
lasers  can  emit  wavelengths  that  cause  direct 
destruction of P. acnes or photo-thermal damage 
to the sebaceous glands.

 Laser-Based Therapies

Lasers  release  coherent  light  that  can  provide 
very  high  radiance  by  focusing  on  a  small  tar-
geted  area  of  tissue.  The  mechanisms  of  action 
are  that  lasers  can  emit  wavelengths  which  are 
selectively  absorbed  by  oxyhemoglobin  of  the 
dilated vasculature within inflamed acne, activate 
bacterial porphyrins resulting in self destruction 
of  P.  acnes,  or  decrease  sebum  production  by 
photothermal  damage  to  the  sebaceous  glands. 
Lasers  offer  alternative  options  for  acne  treat-
ment which may have the benefit of rapid action, 
low systemic adverse effects, and do not require 
everyday  treatment.  Laser  treatments  of  acne 
include  the  1450-nm  diode,  585-nm  pulsed  dye 
laser,  1320  Neodymium:  Yttrium  and  1540 
Erbium (ER): Glass Laser.

 585-nm Pulsed Dye Lasers

The 585-nm and 595-nm pulsed-dye lasers (PDL) 
directly target P. acnes. The mode of action of the 
PDL is based on the principle of selective photo-
thermolysis,  a  targeted  damaging  of  specific 
structures in the skin without damaging the sur-
rounding area [14].

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi et al.



It is traditionally useful for the treatment of vas-
cular  lesions  as  well  as  hemangiomas,  port-wine 
stains, and facial telangiectasia [15]. However, the 
pulsed dye laser can also activate bacterial porphy-
rins and thereby produce selective photothermoly-
sis of the dilated vasculature within inflamed acne 
[16–18].

Seaton  et  al.  did  a  randomized  double-blind 
study in 41 patients with mild to moderate facial 
acne. They randomly assigned patients to PDL or 
sham treatment. Twelve weeks after a single PDL 
treatment,  with  two  different  fluences  given  at 
each  side  of  the  midline,  they  reported  reduced 
inflammatory acne lesions by 49% on both sides 
of the face [19].

Orringer  et  al.  conducted  a  randomized  con-
trolled  study  in  split-face  of  26  patients.  After 
12  weeks  lesion  count  did  not  significantly 
change  in  comparison  with  non-treated  sites; 
however,  a  trend  of  improvement  in  inflamma-
tory acne was described [20].

Leheta compared treatment outcomes of PDL 
treatment with two regular acne treatments. One 
group of 15 patients was treated with PDL, and 
compared with two other groups which received 
regular  topical  treatments  (topical  vitamin  A 
acid,  benzoyl  peroxide)  or  chemical  peels  (tri-
chloroacetic  acid  25%).  Significant  decrease  in 
all  three  groups  was  seen;  although,  in  the  fol-
low-up period remission was significantly higher 
in the PDL group [21].

Jasim  et  al.  did  a  split-face  study  in  ten 
patients,  in  which  half  of  the  face  was  treated 
with PDL and the untreated site served as a con-
trol  side.  They  showed  visible  improvement  of 
acne  lesions  on  the  treated  site  in  50%  of  the 
patients. PDL seems to be an effective treatment 
for acne vulgaris [22].

 Potassium Titanyl Phosphate  
(KTP) Laser

229

shown  to  be  effective  for  the  treatment  of  acne 
[23]. It uses a broad spectrum green light which 
is  thought  to  photoactivate  bacterial  porphyrins 
and produce limited non-specific thermal injury 
to sebaceous glands [24].

In a split face study of 26 patients after four 
treatments with a KTP laser, a 34.9% and 20.7% 
reduction in acne severity was shown at 1 week 
and 4 weeks, respectively [25]. In another study, 
25 patients who were treated with the KTP laser 
at  fluences  ranging  from  6  to  12  J/cm2achieved 
60–70% clearing after six treatments [26]. Bowes 
et al. conducted a split-face study whereby they 
treated  one-half  of  the  face  of  11  patients  with 
mild to moderate acne with the KTP laser. They 
reported a 35.9% decrease in acne after 1 month, 
while the control half had a 1.8% increase. They 
noted  that  there  was  decreased  sebum  produc-
tion, but there was a minimal effect on P. acnes 
[24].

Yilmaz et al. also evaluated efficacy and safety 
of 532-nm KTP laser and compared the effect of 
once  and  twice  weekly  application  in  the  treat-
ment  of  mild  to  moderate  acne  vulgaris  in  two 
groups  of  38  patients,  group  1  applying  once 
weekly  and  group  two,  twice  weekly.  They 
reported  statistically  significant  improvement  at 
second control session (p = 0.005) in group I, and 
at first (p = 0.004), and second (p < 0.001) control 
sessions in group II for treated sides [27].

 1450-nm Diode Laser

The  1450-nm  laser  with  a  dynamic  cooling 
device has received Food and Drug Administration 
approval for the treatment of acne. The 1450-nm 
diode laser is a longer wavelength laser that pen-
etrates to the level of the sebaceous gland within 
the  mid-dermis.  This  wavelength  is  primarily 
absorbed  by  water,  so  it  does  not  greatly  affect 
the  epidermis  but  does  thermally  ablate  sebo-
cytes, along with P. acnes [28, 29].

The potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser has 
generally been used for the treatment of telangi-
ectasia  and  rosacea  but  has  also  recently  been 

In  a  multicenter,  blinded  study,  61  patients 
were  treated  every  month  for  4  consecutive 
months  using  the  1450-nm  diode.  There  was  a 

13 Laser and Light Therapies for Acne



230

26% drop out rate, but the remaining 45 patients 
had 65% improvement 1 month following treat-
ment, and at 6 months five patients required no 
additional acne therapy [30].

Friedman  et  al.  used  three  irradiation  ses-
sions  of  the  1450-nm  diode  laser  to  treat  19 
patients  with  inflammatory  facial  acne  at  4-  to 
6-week intervals. After one treatment, the aver-
age lesion count decreased by 37% (P < 0.01). 
Mean lesion counts improved by 58% (P < 0.01) 
after 
irradiation  and  by  83% 
(P  <  0.01)  after  the  third  session.  They  also 
experienced erythema and edema for up to 24 h 
after laser treatment [29].

the  second 

In another study, Alam et al. performed a trial 
in  a  split-face  of  25  patients  and  compared  the 
1450-nm diode laser with the 595 nm PDL. They 
reported that the 1450-nm diode laser produced 
similar acne reduction with longer remissions (up 
to 3 months) when compared to the 595 nm PDL 
after 4 monthly treatments [31].

Astner  et  al.  applied  1450-nm  diode  laser 
twice  in  in  the  management  of  refractory  acne 
vulgaris in 13 patients. This study demonstrated 
that  mean  total  lesion  and  inflammatory  lesion 
counts  decreased  from  66  ±  14  and  23  ±  5  at 
baseline to 34 ± 12.9 and 14 ± 7 at 3-month fol-
low-up (p < 0.05). Side effects were mild, includ-
ing transient erythema [32].

In another study, 11 patients were treated with 
a  1450-nm  diode  laser  in  a  split-face  bilateral 
paired  trial,  every  3  weeks  for  a  total  of  three 
treatments. One-half of the faces received a sin-
gle-pass consisting of stacked double pulses. The 
other  side  received  a  double-pass  treatment  of 
single  pulses.  The  mean  acne  severity  scores 
decreased from 3.3 at baseline to 2.1 and 2.2 for 
the stacked-pulse and double-pass sides, respec-
tively. One subject’s acne severity increased dur-
ing the study from Grade 3 to Grade 5 [33].

Perez-Maldonado  et  al.  conducted  study  on 
eight  patients  with  a  history  of  acne  and  used 
1450-nm diode laser on the right side of the nose 
over  a  6-week  period,  for  a  total  of  three  treat-
ments and left the other side of the nose untreated. 

They observed a maximum of 18% reduction in 
sebum output after three treatments [34].

A  study  recruited  patients  with  moderate  to 
severe  acne  vulgaris.  A  split-face  format  was 
used: the side of the face to be treated was ran-
domized with the other side serving as a within-
patient control. They performed three treatments 
monthly  using  1450  diode  laser  with  a  double-
pass technique. On average, the lesion count and 
acne grade reduced by the same amount on both 
sides  of  the  face.  Twelve  months  after  the  last 
treatment  the  change  in  lesion  count  and  grade 
between  the  treated  and  control  sides  remained 
similar. They reported improvement of both side 
of  the  face  and  they  suggested  a  possible  sys-
temic effect of laser [35].

 1320 Neodymium: Yttrium Aluminum 
Garnet Laser (Nd:YAG)

The 1320 neodymium: yttrium aluminum garnet 
laser (Nd:YAG) is a deep-penetrating, long wave-
length, mid-infrared laser that has been shown to 
have  thermolytic  effect  upon  sebaceous  glands. 
In one study the 1320 Nd: YAG laser was used to 
treat 50 patients with moderate to severe acne (6 
weekly  treatments). The  patients  were  followed 
for  1  year  thereafter.  Eighty  percent  of  patients 
felt  they  had  75–100%  improvement  after  the 
fourth of these six treatments. However, 72% of 
the  patients  felt  that  the  benefit  seemed  to  fade 
beyond  3  months.  82%  of  the  patients  that  had 
acne scarring had ‘noticeable’ improvement. The 
one major complication reported was one patient 
developing a pitted scar from the treatment [36].
Orringer et al. conducted a randomized, con-
trolled, single-blind, split-face clinical trial in 46 
patients  with  facial  acne.  Patients  received  a 
series of three nonablative laser treatments using 
1320-nm Nd:YAG laser to half of the face. The 
authors 
reported  no  significant  differences 
between treated and control sides of the face in 
terms  of  changes  in  mean  papule  or  pustule 
counts [37].

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi et al.



 1540 Erbium (ER): Glass Laser

Similar  to  the  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  system, 
the 1540-nm erbium glass laser is a novel, mid-
infrared  range  laser  that  targets  intracellular 
water to a depth of 0.4–2 mm. Minimal absorp-
tion by melanin makes the laser essentially safe 
for the treatment of dark-skinned or tanned indi-
viduals [38]. Also, this laser was shown to pro-
vide  deep  dermal  penetration  and  subsequent 
alteration  of  sebaceous  activity  through  thermal 
coagulation.

A  study  found  that  there  was  a  78%  lesion 
reduction  in  25  patients  with  facial  and  truncal 
acne  after  4  monthly  treatments  with  the  1540-
nm laser [39]. Also, another study used this laser 
in  20  patients  with  facial  inflammatory  acne  in 
combination  with  an  active  contact-cooling 
device  over  the  patient’s  entire  face.  Patients 
underwent  four  sessions  at  2-week  intervals. 
Investigators reported a lesion count reduction of 
70%  after  3  months.  No  side  effects  were 
observed  after  any  treatment  with  the  Er:glass 
laser [40].

Bogle et al. evaluated the use of the 1540-nm 
erbium:glass laser to treat patients with moderate 
to  severe  acne  four  times  at  2-week  intervals. 
Patients rated improvement as 68%, and the mean 
investigator  improvement  assessment  was  78% 
after 6-month follow-up [41].

 1550-nm Fractionated Erbium Glass
The wavelength of 1550 nm fractionated Er:glass 
is  absorbed  primarily  by  water,  targeting  the 
sebaceous glands and surrounding dermal matrix.
In a randomized controlled split-face study, 24 
patients  with  active  acne  lesions  were  treated 
using 1550-nm fractionated erbium:glass laser on 
one  side  of  the  face  for  four  sessions  with  a 
2-week interval. This study showed a significant 
reduction  (p  <  0.0001)  in  the  mean  count  of 
lesions  and  the  size  of  sebaceous  glands  after 
treatment.  Also,  the  authors  reported  complete 
clearance of all lesions after treatment and during 
the follow-up in 17 (70.8%) patients [42].

231

Liu  et  al.  evaluated  the  short-term  and  long-
term  effects  of  the  1550-nm  erbium:glass  frac-
tionated laser in the treatment of 45 patients with 
facial  acne  vulgaris.  Nine  male  and  36  female 
acne  patients  were  treated  four  times  at  4-week 
intervals. After  four  treatments,  all  patients  had 
an  obvious  reduction  of  lesion  counts  and  IGA 
score, with the peak lesion counts decreasing to 
67.7%. Eight patients had follow-up for 2 years, 
27  patients  for  1  year,  and  all  patients  for 
6  months.  The  mean  percentage  reduction  was 
72% at the half-year follow-up, 79% at the 1-year 
follow-up,  and  75%  at  the  2-year  follow-up. 
Three  patients  observed  a  significant  improve-
ment  in  preexisting  hyper-pigmentation  after 
treatments.  All  patients  reported  that  their  skin 
was less prone to oiliness [43].

 Light Based Therapies

•  The most commonly used light based devices 
are the blue light, red light, and intense pulsed 
light system.

•  Propionibacterium  acnes  produces  endoge-
nous porphyrins, which absorb light to form a 
highly  reactive  singlet  oxygen  which  can 
cause self-destruction of P. acnes.

 Blue Light

P. acnes containing fluorescent porphyrins can be 
killed  by  a  blue  light-induced  photodynamic 
effect. Activation of protoporphyrin IX, found in 
P.  acnes,  in  the  presence  of  oxygen  produces  a 
metastable  intermediate  that  destroys  the  bacte-
rium. Protoporphyrin IX absorption peaks occurs 
at  wavelengths  found  in  the  visible  light  spec-
trum [43–48].

Thirty  patients  with  mild  to  moderate  acne 
lesions  on  the  face  and/or  the  back  and/or  the 
chest participated in this study by Kawada et al. 
The patients were irradiated with high-intensity, 
narrow-band,  blue  light  twice  a  week  up  to 

13 Laser and Light Therapies for Acne



232

5  weeks.  This  study  showed  64%  reduction  of 
acne lesions [49].

Elman  et  al.,  treated  46  acne  patients  with 
420 nm UV-free blue light for eight treatments of 
8–15 min. 80% of patients showed a significant 
reduction  of  59–67%  of  inflammatory  acne 
lesions  after  eight  treatments.  The  reduction  in 
lesions was steady in the follow-up, at 8 weeks 
after the end of therapy [50].

In a split face study, 28 patients with symmet-
rical facial acne received blue light on one side of 
the  face  twice  weekly  for  4  consecutive  weeks. 
The  authors  reported  that  the  mean  percentage 
improvement  was  52%  after  eight  sessions  and 
first significant improvement happened after four 
sessions  of  irradiation  (P  ≤  0.009). After  eight 
sessions of blue light irradiation acne exacerba-
tion was found in four patients [51].

Tremblay et al. treated 45 patients with pure 
blue  light  (415  nm)  for  two  treatments  of 
20 min per week for a period of 4–8 weeks. The 
mean improvement score of the acne lesions was 
3.14 at 4 weeks and 2.90 at 8 weeks, after which 
lesions of nine patients were cleared completely. 
They reported that 50% of patients were highly 
satisfied with the treatment and no adverse event 
occurred [52].

In a study, Omi et al. investigated the use of 
high-intensity,  narrow-band,  blue  light  on  28 
patients  with  facial  acne.  The  study  showed 
64.7%  improvement  in  acne  lesions  after  eight 
serial biweekly 15-min treatment sessions [53].

Morton et al. evaluated the effect of narrow-
band blue light in the reduction of inflammatory 
and non-inflammatory lesions in 30 patients with 
mild  to  moderate  acne.  The  patients  received 
eight  treatment  sessions  (each  session  10  or 
20-minute) over 4 weeks. This study concluded 
that the aforementioned modality was effective in 
reducing the number of inflamed lesions in sub-
jects with mild to moderate acne. They reported a 
statistically  significant  decrease  in  inflamed 
counts  at  8  weeks  assessments  and  no  adverse 
events [54].

In a study by De Arruda et al. the efficacy of 
blue light treatment was evaluated in comparison 
with topical benzoyl peroxide 5% formulation in 
60 patients with facial acne grades II and III. 30 

patients were irradiated by using blue light for 8 
times twice a week, and 30 patients were treated 
with  topical  Benzoyl  Peroxide  5%  formulation, 
auto-applied twice a day, every day. The authors 
reported the same improvement result by the blue 
light and benzoyl peroxide (p > 0.05) and the side 
effects  were  less  frequent  in  the  group  treated 
with blue light [55].

 Blue/Red Light Combinations

Although  by  theory  porphyrins  should  respond 
well to blue light, it is a shorter wavelength, and 
therefore  does  not  penetrate  well  into  the  skin 
[56].

Longer  wavelengths  with  Q-bands,  such  as 
red  light,  has  been  combined  with  blue  light  in 
acne therapy. Red light (wavelength 600–650 nm) 
penetrates deeper into the skin than blue light. In 
fact, 635 nm light may penetrate through the skin 
up to 6 mm compared with 1–2 mm for light at 
400–500 nm. Red light has also been shown to be 
effective in acne treatment by activating porphy-
rins in the Q band and decreases inflammation by 
controlling  cytokine  release  from  macrophages 
[57–61].

In  a  randomized,  controlled,  single-blind 
study, Papageorgiou et al. compared mixed blue 
and red light (415 nm and 660 nm, respectively) 
phototherapy with blue (415 nm) or 5% benzoyl 
peroxide  in  140  patients  with  mild-to-moderate 
acne. With the use of the combined blue-red light 
radiation, a final improvement of 76% in inflam-
matory  lesions  was  noted  with  follow-up  of 
12  weeks,  which  was  significantly  superior  to 
those achieved by blue light or benzoyl peroxide. 
Also, the final mean improvement in comedones 
by using blue–red light was 58%, which was bet-
ter than the result of other active treatments; how-
ever, 
the  differences  was  not  statistically 
significant [57].

Goldberg  and  Russel  evaluated  22  patients 
with  mild  to  severe  symmetric  facial  acne  vul-
garis  with  a  combination  of  blue  and  red  light. 
They  were  treated  over  eight  sessions,  two  per 
week 3 days apart, alternating between blue light 
(20 min/session) and red light (20 min/session). 

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi et al.



Patients  received  a  mild  microdermabrasion 
before each session. Acne was assessed at base-
line and at weeks 2, 4, 8 and 12. At the 4-week 
follow-up, the mean lesion count reduction was 
significant  at  46%  (p  =  0.001). At  the  12-week 
follow-up, the mean lesion count reduction was 
also significant at 81% (p = 0.001). Severe acne 
showed  a  marginally  better  response  than  mild 
acne.  Comedones  did  not  respond  as  well  as 
inflammatory lesions [61].

In a study performed by Lee et al., 24 patients 
with mild to moderately severe facial acne were 
treated  with  quasimonochromatic  LED  devices, 
alternating  blue  and  red  light  twice  a  week  for 
4  weeks.  8  weeks  after  the  final  treatment  the 
mean  percentage  improvements  in  non-inflam-
matory  and  inflammatory  lesions  were  34.28% 
and  77.93%,  respectively.  None  of  the  patients 
reported any adverse reaction related to the treat-
ment [60].

 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)
Intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  uses  a  flash  lamp  to 
deliver wide spectrum, non-coherent visible light 
(green,  yellow,  and  red)  to  near-infrared  wave-
lengths. Treatment  of  acne  with  IPL  has  shown 
some  very  promising  results.  In  a  study  by 
Gregory and co-workers, 50 patients with mild to 
severe acne were treated with IPL for 1 month. 
These patients showed a 60% lesion reduction at 
the  1-month  follow-up,  versus  32%  increase  in 
controls [62]. In a study done by Elman and co-
workers  of  19  patients  with  acne,  they  showed 
that  the  IPL  produced  an  85%  clearance  of 
inflammatory lesions and 87% clearance of non-
inflammatory lesions in 2 months [63].

They also conducted a study to test the role of 
pulsed light and heat energy in acne clearance. A 
system with light pulses and heat was used in bi-
weekly treatments for 4 weeks with wavelengths 
between  430  and  1100  nm.  This  study  showed 
approximately a 75% clearance of the inflamma-
tory lesions 1 month after the last treatment [64].
Wat  et  al.  evaluated  efficacy  of  IPL  in  treat-
ment  of  acne  vulgaris  in  a  systematic  review. 
They  identified  twenty-one  studies  (2  random-
ized  controlled  trials,  7  prospective  right–left 
comparison trials, 11 uncontrolled open-label tri-

233

als, and 1 retrospective observational study) for a 
total of 544 patients. They categorized the studies 
into two groups of IPL alone and IPL in combi-
nation with PDT. The authors reported that effi-
cacy  of  IPL  in  treatment  of  acne  ranged  from 
34%  to  88.3%  (depending  on  the  type  of  acne 
lesion:  inflammatory  or  noninflammatory),  with 
most  of  the  studies  showing  an  improvement 
between 40% and 60%. Also, this review stated 
that although IPL monotherapy showed benefit in 
the treatment of acne vulgaris, but the evidence 
supports greater efficacy for treatment with IPL 
in combination with PDT [65].

Ianosi et al. compared the effectiveness of IPL 
and  vacuum  versus  IPL  with  placebo  in  180 
patients  with  mild  to  moderate  comedonal  and 
inflammatory acne (group A—60 patients treated 
with  vacuum  and  IPL,  group  V—60  patients 
treated with IPL, and control group—60 patients 
treated  with  Sebium  H2O  Micellaire  Solution). 
They reported a significant reduction in the num-
ber  of  papules,  pustules,  and  comedones  in 
groups A and V compared with those in the con-
trol group (p < 0.001) with decrease of the pap-
ules in group A being rapider than group V. Also, 
patients  belonging  to  group A  were  more  satis-
fied compared with those in group V (p = 0.004) 
and  significantly  more  satisfied  compared  with 
those of the control group (p < 0.001) [66].

In a study, the investigators compared the clin-
ical efficacy of IPL with benzoyl peroxide 5% in 
the treatment of inflammatory acne in 50 patients 
with  mild-to-severe  acne.  The  study  showed 
treatment  with  both  benzoyl  peroxide  and  IPL 
resulted in improvement of the acne after 5 weeks 
of  treatment.  Benzoyl  peroxide  showed  better 
results  than  IPL  which  was  statistically  signifi-
cant  at  the  midpoint  of  the  study  (after  the  3rd 
week of treatment). However, this difference was 
insignificant at the end of study [67].

Mohamad  et  al.  performed  controlled,  sin-
gle-blind, split-face clinical trial to compare the 
clinical  efficacy  of  IPL  with  1064-nm  long-
pulsed Nd:YAG in treatment of 74 patients with 
facial  acne  vulgaris.  All  participants  received 
three sessions of IPL on the right side of the face 
and  1064-nm  Nd:YAG  on  the  left  side  of  the 
face at 4-week intervals. The inflammatory acne 

13 Laser and Light Therapies for Acne



234

lesions  were  reduced  on  the  IPL  and  1064-nm 
Nd:YAG  treated  sides  by  67.1%  and  70.2%, 
respectively (p < 0.05), while non inflammatory 
acne lesions were reduced by 18.3% and 19.3%, 
respectively (p > 0.05). Also, the authors stated 
no  significant  difference  in  the  efficacy  of  the 
two  modalities  in  reducing  both  types  of  acne 
lesions (p > 0.05) [68].

A study by Barakat et al., accursed 24 patients 
with acne vulgaris to evaluate efficacy of IPL in 
six treatment sessions. They showed a significant 
reduction of all acne lesions especially inflamma-
tory type at 2 weeks and 3 months after end of the 
treatment (p < 0.05) [69].

 Conclusion
The treatment of acne is a difficult process due 
to  its  multifarious  pathogenesis.  Using  laser 
and  light  sources  alone  or  combination  ther-
apy have been shown to be an effective treat-
ment  for  mild  to  severe  inflammatory  and 
cystic  acne,  in  various  skin  types.  However, 
further investigation is necessary to determine 
safety and long-term efficacy, and to establish 
the optimal parameters to maximize the effec-
tiveness of this evolving treatment modality.

References

  1.  Perper M, Tsatalis J, Eber AE, Cervantes J, Nouri K.  
Lasers  in  the  treatment  of  acne.  G  Ital  Dermatol 
Venereol. 2017;152(4):360–72.

  2.  Collier CN, Harper JC, Cafardi JA, et al. The preva-
lence of acne in adults 20 years and older. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2008;58(1):56–9.

  3.  Stathakis V, Kilkenny M, Marks R. Descriptive epide-
miology of acne vulgaris in the community. Australas 
J Dermatol. 1997;38(3):115–23.

  4.  Yentzer  BA,  Hick  J,  Reese  EL,  Uhas  A,  Feldman 
SR,  Balkrishnan  R.  Acne  vulgaris  in  the  United 
States: a descriptive epidemiology. Cutis. 2010;86(2): 
94–9.

  5.  Dalgard F, Gieler U, Holm JO, Bjertness E, Hauser S.  

Self-esteem and body satisfaction among late adoles-
cents  with  acne:  results  from  a  population  survey.  J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;59(5):746–51.

  6.  Cotterill  JA,  Cunliffe WJ.  Suicide  in  dermatological 

patients. Br J Dermatol. 1997;137(2):246–50.

  7.  Cunliffe WJ. Acne and unemployment. Br J Dermatol. 

1986;115(3):386.

  8.  St. Sauver JL, Warner DO, Yawn BP, et al. Why patients  
visit their doctors: assessing the most prevalent con-

ditions in a defined American population. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 2013;88(1):56–67.

  9.  Muizzuddin N, Giacomoni P, Maes D. Acne—a mul-
tifaceted  problem.  Drug  Discov  Today  Dis  Mech. 
2008;5(2):e183–8.

 10.  Toyoda M, Morohashi M. Pathogenesis of acne. Med 

Electron Microsc. 2001;34(1):29–40.

 11.  Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al. Guide-
lines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945–73. e933

 12.  Leyden JJ. Therapy for acne vulgaris. N Engl J Med. 

1997;336(16):1156–62.

 13.  Keri  J,  Shiman  M.  An  update  on  the  management 
of  acne  vulgaris.  Clin  Cosmet  Investig  Dermatol. 
2009;2:105–10.

 14. Erceg A, de Jong EM, van de Kerkhof PC, Seyger MM.  
The  efficacy  of  pulsed  dye  laser  treatment  for  inflam-
matory  skin  diseases:  a  systematic  review.  J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2013;69(4):609–15.

 15.  Nouri  K,  Ballard  CJ.  Laser  therapy  for  acne.  Clin 

Dermatol. 2006 Jan-Feb;24(1):26–32.

 16.  Bjerring P, Clement M, Heickendorff L, Lybecker H, 
Kiernan  M.  Dermal  collagen  production  following 
irradiation by dye laser and broadband light source. J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2002;4:39–43.

 17.  Patel N, Clement M. Selective nonablative treatment 
of  acne  scarring  with  585  nm  flashlamp  pulsed  dye 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:942–5.

 18.  Tan OT, Sherwood K, Gilchrest BA. Treatment of chil-
dren with port-wine stains using the flashlamp pulsed 
tunable dye laser. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:416–21.
 19.  Seaton  ED,  Charakida  A,  Mouser  PE,  Grace  I, 
Clement RM, Chu AC. Pulsed-dye laser treatment for 
inflammatory  acne  vulgaris:  randomized  controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2003;362:1347–52.

 20.  Orringer  JS,  Kang  S,  Hamilton  T,  Schumacher  W, 
Cho S, Hammerberg C, et al. Treatment of acne vul-
garis with a pulsed dye laser: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA. 2004;291:2834–9.

 21.  Leheta  TM.  Role  of  the  585-nm  pulsed  dye  laser 
in  the  treatment  of  acne  in  comparison  with  other 
topical therapeutic modalities. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2009;11:118–24.

 22.  Jasim ZF, Al-Qarqaz F, Handley JM. Effect of single 
pulsed  dye  laser  treatment  on  acne  vulgaris  [letter]. 
Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:1483.

 23.  Jih  MH,  Kimyai-Asadi  A.  Laser  treatment  of  acne 
vulgaris. Semin Plast Surg. 2007;21(3):167–74.

 24.  Bowes  LE,  Manstein  D,  Anderson  RR.  Effects  of 
532  nm  KTP  laser  exposure  on  acne  and  sebaceous 
glands. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;18:S6–7.

 25.  Baugh  W,  Kucaba  W.  Nonablative  phototherapy  for 
acne vulgaris using the KTP 532 nm laser. Dermatol 
Surg. 2005;31:1290–6.

 26.  Lee MC. Aura 532 nm laser for acne vulgaris—3-year 
experience.  New  Orleans,  LA:  Presented  at:  2003 
ASDS-ACMMSCO  Combined  Annual  Meeting; 
October 9–12, 2003.

 27.  Yilmaz O, Senturk N, Yuksel EP, Aydin F, Ozden MG, 
Canturk  T,  Turanli  A.  Evaluation  of  532-nm  KTP 
laser  treatment  efficacy  on  acne  vulgaris  with  once 

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi et al.



235

and twice weekly applications. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2011;13(6):303–7.

 28.  Paithankar  DY,  Ross  EV,  Saleh  BA,  Blair  MA, 
Graham  BS.  Acne  treatment  with  a  1450  nm  wave-
length  laser  and  cryogen  spray  cooling.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2002;31:106–14.

 29.  Friedman PM, Jih MH, Kimyai-Asadi A, Goldberg LH.  
Treatment of inflammatory facial acne vulgaris with 
the 1450-nm diode laser: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 
2004;30:147–51.

 30.  Mazer JM. Treatment of facial acne with a 1450 nm 
diode  laser:  a  comparative  study.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2004;34:S67.

 31.  Alam  M,  Peterson  SR,  Silapunt  S,  Chopra  K, 
Friedman  PM,  Goldberg  LH.  Comparison  of  the 
1450 nm diode laser for the treatment of facial acne: a 
left–right randomized trial of the efficacy and adverse 
effects. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32:S30.

 32.  Astner S, Tsao SS. Clinical evaluation of a 1,450-nm 
diode laser as adjunctive treatment for refractory facial 
acne vulgaris. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(8):1054–61.
 33.  Uebelhoer  NS,  Bogle  MA,  Dover  JS,  Arndt  KA, 
Rohrer  TE.  Comparison  of  stacked  pulses  versus 
double-pass treatments of facial acne with a 1,450-nm 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(5):552–9.

 34.  Perez-Maldonado  A,  Rünger  TM,  Krejci-Papa  N.   

The 1,450-nm diode laser reduces sebum production 
in facial skin: a possible mode of action of its effec-
tiveness  for  the  treatment  of  acne  vulgaris.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2007;39(2):189–92.

 35.  Darne S, Hiscutt EL, Seukeran DC. Evaluation of the 
clinical  efficacy  of  the  1,450  nm  laser  in  acne  vul-
garis:  a  randomized  split-face,  investigator-blinded 
clinical trial. Br J Dermatol. 2011;165(6):1256–62.
 36. Chernoff G. The utilization of 1320 nm Nd:YAG energy  
for  the  treatment  of  active  acne  vulgaris.  Cooltouch 
Inc: White Paper; 2004.

 37. Orringer JS, Kang S, Maier L, Johnson TM, Sachs DL,  
Karimipour DJ, Helfrich YR, Hamilton T, Voorhees JJ.  
A  randomized,  controlled,  split-face  clinical  trial  of 
1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  therapy  in  the  treatment  of 
acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56(3):432–8.
 38.  Lupton JR, Williams CM, Alster TS. Nonablative laser 
skin resurfacing using a 1540 nm erbium glass laser: 
a  clinical  and  histologic  analysis.  Dermatol  Surg.  
2002;28(9):833–5.

 39.  Boineau D, Angel S, Nicole A, Dahan S, Mordon S.  
Treatment of active acne with an Er:glass (1.54 um) 
laser. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:S55.

 40.  Kassir M, Newton D, Maris M, Euwer R, Servell P.  
Er:glass  (1.54  mm)  laser  for  the  treatment  of  facial 
acne vulgaris. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34:S65.

 41.  Bogle MA, Dover JS, Arndt KA, Mordon S. Evaluation 
of the 1,540-nm Erbium:Glass laser in the treatment 
of  inflammatory  facial  acne.  Dermatol  Surg.  2007; 
33(7):810–7.

 42.  Moneib  H,  Tawfik  AA,  Youssef  SS,  Fawzy  MM.   

Randomized split-face controlled study to evaluate 
1550-nm  fractionated  erbium  glass  laser  for  treat-
ment of acne vulgaris—an image analysis evaluation. 
Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(11):1191–200.

 43.  Liu Y, Zeng W, Hu D, Jha S, Ge Q, Geng S, Xiao S,  
Hu  G,  Wang  X.  The  long-term  effect  of  1550  nm 
erbium:glass fractional laser in acne vulgaris. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2016;31(3):453–7.

 44.  Lee  W,  Shalita  A,  Poh-Fitzpatrick  M.  Comparative 
studies of porphyrin production in Propionibacterium 
acnes and Propionibacterium granulosum. J Bacteriol. 
1978;133:811–5.

 45.  Weishaupt  K,  Gomer  C,  Dougherty T.  Identification 
of  singlet  oxygen  as  the  cytotoxic  agent  in  photoin-
activation  of  a  murine  tumor.  Cancer  Res.  1976;36: 
2326–9.

 46.  Niedre  M, Yu  C,  Patterson  M,  et  al.  Singlet  oxygen 
luminescence  as  an  in  vivo  photodynamic  therapy 
dose  metric:  validation  in  normal  mouse  skin  with 
topical  amino-levulinic  acid.  Br  J  Cancer.  2005;92: 
298–304.

 47.  Taub  AF.  Photodynamic  therapy  in  dermatology: 
history  and  horizons.  J  Drugs  Dermatol.  2004;3(1 
Suppl):S8–S25.

 48.  Arakane  K,  Ryu  A,  Hayashi  C,  Masunaga  T, 
Shinmoto K, Mashiko S, et al. Singlet oxygen (1Dg) 
generation from coproporphyrin in Propionibacterium 
acnes  on  irradiation.  Biochem  Biophys  Res  Com. 
1996;223:578–82.

 49.  Kawada  A,  Aragane  Y,  Kameyama  H,  Sangen  Y, 
Tezuka  T.  Acne  phototherapy  with  a  high-intensity, 
enhanced,  narrow-band,  blue  light  source:  an  open 
study  and  in  vitro  investigation.  J  Dermatol  Sci. 
2002;30(2):129–35.

 50.  Elman M, et al. The effective treatment of acne vul-
garis  by  a  highintensity,  narrow  band  405–420  nm 
light source. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2003;5(2):111–7.
 51.  Tzung  TY,  et  al.  Blue  light  phototherapy  in  the 
treatment  of  acne.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol 
Photomed. 2004;20(5):266–9.

 52.  Tremblay  JF,  Sire  DJ,  Lowe  NJ,  Moy  RL.  Light-
emitting  diode  415  nm  in  the  treatment  of  inflam-
matory  acne:  an  open-label,  multicentric,  pilot 
investigation. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2006;8(1):31–3.

 53.  Omi T, Bjerring P, Sato S, et al. 420 nm intense con-
tinuous light therapy for acne. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2004;6(3):156–62.

 54.  Morton  CA,  Scholefield  RD,  Whitehurst  C,  Birch 
J.  An  open  study  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  blue 
light  in  the  treatment  of  mild  to  moderate  acne.  J 
Dermatol Treat. 2005;16(4):219–23.

 55.  de Arruda  LH,  Kodani  V,  Bastos  Filho A,  Mazzaro 
C.  A  prospective,  randomized,  open  and  compara-
tive study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of blue 
light treatment versus a topical benzoyl peroxide 5% 
formulation in patients with acne grade II and III. An 
Bras Dermatol. 2009;84(5):463–8.

 56.  Kjelstad B, Johnson A. An action spectrum for blue 
and near ultraviolet inactivation of Propionibacterium 
acnes; with emphasis on a possible porphyrins photo-
sensitization. Photochem Photobiol. 1986;43:67–70.
 57.  Papageorgiou P, Katsambas A, Chu A. Phototherapy 
with  blue  (415  nm)  and  red  (660  nm)  light  in  the 
treatment  of  acne  vulgaris.  Br  J  Dermatol.  2000; 
973-978(22):142.

13 Laser and Light Therapies for Acne



236

 58.  Cunliffe WJ, Goulden V. Phototherapy and acne vul-

garis. Br J Dermatol. 2000;142:853–6.

 59.  Young  S,  et  al.  Macrophage  responsiveness  to  light 

therapy. Lasers Surg Med. 1989;9:497–505.

 60.  Lee  SY,  et  al.  Blue  and  red  light  combination  LED 
phototherapy  for  acne  vulgaris  in  patients  with  skin 
phototype IV. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(2):180–8.
 61.  Goldberg  DJ,  Russell  BA.  Combination  blue  (415 
nm) and red (633 nm) LED phototherapy in the treat-
ment of mild to severe acne vulgaris. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther. 2006;8(2):71–5.

 62.  Gregory AN, Thornfeld CR, Leibowitz KR, Lane M.  
A study  on the use of a  novel light and  heat  energy 
system to treat acne vulgaris. Cosmet Dermatol. 2004; 
17:287–91.

 63.  Elman  M,  Lebzelter  J.  Evaluating  pulsed  light  and 
heat energy in acne clearance radiancy. White Paper; 
2002.

 64.  Elman M, Lask G. The role of pulsed light and heat 
energy (LHE (TM)) in acne clearance. J Cosmet Laser 
Ther. 2004;6:91–5.

 65.  Wat  H,  Wu  DC,  Rao  J,  Goldman  MP.  Application 
of  intense  pulsed  light  in  the  treatment  of  dermato-

logic  disease:  a  systematic  review.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2014;40(4):359–77.

 66.  Ianosi S, Neagoe D, Calbureanu M, Ianosi G. Investi-
gator-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized compar-
ative study on combined vacuum and intense pulsed 
light versus intense pulsed light devices in both com-
edonal and papulopustular acne. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2013;15(5):248–54.

 67.  El-Latif  AA,  Hassan  FA,  Elshahed  AR,  Mohamed 
AG,  Elsaie  ML.  Intense  pulsed  light  versus  benzoyl 
peroxide 5% gel in treatment of acne vulgaris. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2014;29(3):1009–15.

 68.  Mohamed  EE,  Tawfik  K,  Elsaie  M.  Intense  pulsed 
light versus 1,064 long-pulsed neodymium: yttrium-
aluminum- garnet laser in the treatment of facial acne 
vulgaris. J Clin Diagn Res. 2016;10(7):WC01–3.
 69. Barakat  MT,  Moftah  NH,  El  Khayyat  MA, 
Abdelhakim  ZA.  Significant  reduction  of  inflam-
mation  and  sebaceous  glands  size  in  acne  vul-
garis  lesions  after  intense  pulsed  light  treatment. 
Dermatol Ther. 2017;30(1).

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi et al.



Lasers for Psoriasis 
and Hypopigmentation

Laura Jordan, Summer Moon, 
and James M. Spencer

14

Abstract
Psoriasis and pigmentary disorders have a pro-
found impact on the quality of life of affected 
patients. Despite multiple medical therapies for 
psoriasis, certain clinical scenarios present ther-
apeutic dilemmas. The excimer laser has been 
found  to  be  efficacious  not  only  for  patients 
suffering from psoriasis but also for several dis-
orders of hypopigmentation including vitiligo, 
linear scleroderma, pityriasis alba, and chemi-
cal, punctate, and post-resurfacing leucoderma. 
Additionally, due to the excimer laser’s reduced 
cumulative dose and number of treatment ses-
sions,  it  offers  several  potential  advantages 
over whole-body phototherapy, including low-
ered carcinogenicity, phototoxicity, and cost of 
treatment. This  paper  considers  the  variety  of 
applications for the excimer laser on psoriasis 
and  hypopigmentation  and  reviews  its  associ-
ated indications, contraindications, techniques, 
adverse events, and future directions.

L. Jordan (*) 
Kansas City University Consortium,  
Tri-County Dermatology Residency Program, 
Cuyahoga Falls, OH, USA 

S. Moon 
Dermatology Specialists of West Florida, FL, USA 

J. M. Spencer 
Spencer Dermatology and Skin Surgery Center, 
Spencer Dermatology, Carillon Outpatient Center,  
St. Petersburg, FL, USA
e-mail: james.spencer@spencerdermatology.com

Keywords
Excimer laser · Psoriasis · Vitiligo · Pigmentary 
disorders · Hypopigmentation · Leucoderma · 
Scleroderma  ·  Pityriasis  alba  ·  Psoralen  and 
ultraviolet  A  (PUVA)  ·  Minimal  erythema 
dose (MED) · Light therapy · Tacrolimus

 Introduction

•  Psoriasis and vitiligo have been found to ben-
efit  from  light  therapy  in  the  UVB  range 
(290–320 nm).

•  The  308  nm  xenon-chloride  excimer  laser  is 
now utilized for select patients with psoriasis 
and vitiligo.

•  The efficacy and safety of the excimer laser is 

well documented.

•  Striae, linear scleroderma, pityriasis alba, and 
chemical, punctate, and post-resurfacing leu-
coderma  have  been  found  to  respond  to  the 
308 nm excimer laser.

One of the most recent advancements in pho-
totherapy is the development of localized deliv-
ery systems. One such device is the excimer laser. 
The use of the excimer laser was first reported in 
dermatology by Bónis et al. in 1997 for psoria-
sis treatment [1]. Psoriasis has been reported to 
respond best to light at a wavelength of 313 nm 
[2].  Since  the  excimer  laser  emits  light  at  a 
wavelength of 308 nm, it was a logical choice for 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_14

237





238

investigation.  Further,  these  lasers,  as  with  UV 
light  in  general,  offer  a  selective  immunosup-
pressant action which provides a safe treatment 
for chronic skin manifestations [3]. The excimer 
laser  has  been  found  to  be  efficacious  not  only 
for patients suffering from psoriasis but also for 
several disorders of hypopigmentation including 
vitiligo. Additionally, due to the excimer laser’s 
reduced  cumulative  dose  and  number  of  treat-
ment sessions, it offers several potential advan-
tages  over  whole-body  phototherapy,  including 
lowered carcinogenicity, phototoxicity, and cost 
of  treatment  [4]. This  chapter  serves  to  discuss 
the use of the excimer laser for psoriasis and dis-
eases of hypopigmentation.

Excimer  lasers  are  a  group  of  lasers  utilized 
in  a  variety  of  medical  specialties,  most  notably 
ophthalmology. There are several types of excimer 
lasers, all of which operate in the ultraviolet spec-
trum. Excimer refers to the formation of “excited 
dimers”  via  an  inducible  mixture  of  a  halogen 
and noble gas. Electric current is delivered to the 
gas  producing  unstable,  high-energy  dimers  that 
quickly  dissociate  giving  off  laser  light  [5].  The 
laser light is delivered to its target via a fiber optic 
cable.  The  mechanism  of  physiologic  response 
is poorly understood but does not appear to be a 
thermal  mechanism. Thus,  the  excimer  lasers  do 
not  operate  under  the  theory  of  selective  photo-
thermolysis.  Excimer  lasers  are  capable  of  “cold 
ablation,”  which  is  precise  tissue  ablation  with 
minimal surrounding thermal effects. This unique 
property enables the laser to be used in precision 
surgeries such as corneal reshaping. It is theorized 
that the energy of the photons from excimer lasers 
exceeds the energy of many chemical bonds which 
keep  organic  material  together.  This  principle 
forms the theory termed “ablative decomposition,” 
under which excimer lasers are thought to operate.

 Excimer Lasers

 Psoriasis

•  Total cumulative dose is lower than traditional 

light therapy.

•  Uninvolved skin is spared.
•  Psoriatic plaques can tolerate several times the 

minimal erythema dose (MED).

The  benefits  of  using  the  308  nm  excimer 
laser for psoriasis were fully elucidated in the late 
1990s. Bónis et al. showed that psoriatic lesions 
treated with the excimer laser cleared with fewer 
treatments  than  narrow  band  UVB  therapy  [1]. 
Utilization  of  the  laser  also  spared  the  unin-
volved skin from UV exposure, reducing the risk 
of carcinogenicity and photoaging. Kemény et al. 
also found that remissions for up to 2 years were 
seen in some patients [6]. Laser therapy demon-
strated efficacy at lower cumulative doses when 
compared  to  conventional  light  therapy.  It  was 
also noted that psoriatic plaques can tolerate sev-
eral times the minimal erythema dose (MED) of 
normal skin without burning. Exposure of three 
to  four  times  the  MED  has  demonstrated  early 
clearance  and  long  remissions.  Doses  greater 
than six times the MED, however, have shown to 
be  complicated  by  blistering,  pain,  and  reduced 
compliance.  In  2002,  Feldman  et  al.  reported 
that  80  patients  treated  with  lower  multipli-
ers  of  the  MED  given  twice  weekly  achieved 
75%  or  greater  clearance  in  72%  of  subjects  in 
an average of 6.2 treatments [7]. The pulse dye 
laser  (PDL)  has  also  been  studied  for  the  treat-
ment  of  psoriasis.  The  basis  for  using  the  PDL 
is  selective  photothermolysis  of  the  exagger-
ated  vascular  network  within  psoriatic  plaques. 
Small  studies  have  revealed  its  possible  benefit 
[8–10]. Additionally, Al-Mutairi et al. studied 42 
patients, finding PDL to be more beneficial than 
the  excimer  laser  in  treating  nail  psoriasis  [11]. 
Nonetheless,  stronger  data  exists  to  support  the 
use of the 308 nm excimer laser for the treatment 
of psoriasis [7].

The use of excimer lasers is a source of research 
in  the  field  of  psoriasis  treatment.  Kagen  et  al. 
determined  that  a  single  10  MED   administration 
of  lesion-limited  high-dose  (TURBO)  ultraviolet 
B  light  using  the  excimer  laser  was  sufficient  in 
clearing  a  psoriatic  plaque.  The  study  hypoth-
esizes that this success is likely due to the laser’s 
focus on the pathogenic T cell mechanisms which 
are  active  in  psoriasis  [12].  Additionally,  com-
bination  therapy  using  excimer  lasers  has  been 
investigated. Tang  et  al.  studied  the  combination 
of  the  excimer  laser  with  topical  Calcipotriene 
and  Dong  et  al.  with  topical  flumetasone  on  the 
treatment of psoriasis vulgaris. Both studies found 
that  combination  therapy  potentially  improved 

L. Jordan et al.



long-term  treatment  goals  for  psoriasis  vulgaris 
and reduced the number of laser doses and adverse 
effects [13, 14]. Rogalski et al. compared the effi-
cacy of combination therapy between calcipotriol 
and  dithanrol  with  the  excimer  laser,  concluding 
that the most success arose from combination with 
dithranol [15].

 Vitiligo

•  The excimer laser is as effective as oral PUVA, 

but with less associated risk.

•  Over  25%  of  treated  patients  achieve  100% 

repigmentation.

The  308  nm  excimer  laser  has  also  been 
shown to treat hypopigmentation of various eti-
ologies.  Vitiligo,  which  affects  1–2%  of  the 
population,  is  well  known  to  be  recalcitrant  to 
most  medical  therapies.  The  disease  has  been 
treated  with  multiple  forms  of  light  therapy; 
however,  treatment  requires  many  months  of 
therapy exposing large areas of unaffected skin 
to  ultraviolet  radiation.  Therapy  is  aimed  at 
stimulating adjacent melanocytes to migrate and 
repopulate  the  affected  skin.  The  use  of  the 
excimer laser for vitiligo was based on the find-
ing that narrowband UVB therapy was as effec-
tive as oral Psoralen and Ultraviolet A (PUVA) 
with  less  associated  risk.  Hadi  et  al.  demon-
strated 50.6% of 221 vitiligo patients had 75% 
or greater repigmentation after an average of 23 
sessions. Also noteworthy is the fact that 25.5% 
of the patients achieved 100% repigmentation of 
the treated lesions. Two year follow-up did not 
reveal  any  loss  of  new  pigmentation.  Some 
patients  even  had  continued  repigmentation 
after treatment was completed [16]. These stud-
ies  support  the  notion  that  the  excimer  laser 
works  as  well  as  Narrow  Band  Ultraviolet  B 
(NB-UVB)  or  PUVA  for  vitiligo  but  in  much 
less  time.  Further,  Cheng  et  al.  found  that 
excimer lasers are effective in treating both seg-
mental and non-segmental vitiligo even in recal-
citrant  cases.  However,  they  discovered  that 
scalp lesions in particular may require a higher 
number  of  treatment  sessions  in  order  to  pro-
duce  initial  pigmentation,  citing  the  need  for 
combination therapy research [17].

239

Similarly  to  psoriasis  treatment,  combination 
therapy  has  been  explored  in  vitiligo  treatment 
using  the  excimer  laser.  Kawalek  et  al.  showed 
that the addition of tacrolimus 0.1% ointment in 
combination with the excimer laser induced faster 
and  perhaps  greater  response  to  treatment,  and 
Nisticò  et  al.  also  found  this  combination  treat-
ment was effective, safe, and well-tolerated  [18, 
19].  Hui-Lan  et  al.  illustrated  that  the  combina-
tion of picrolimus with the laser in the treatment 
of childhood vitiligo was statistically better than 
excimer  laser  monotherapy  [20].  Ebadi  et  al. 
studied  the  efficacy  of  combining  melanocytes-
keratinocytes  transplantation  (MKT),  a  graft-
ing  treatment  specified  for  stable  vitiligo,  with 
excimer  laser  and  found  that  the  combination 
therapy  was  more  beneficial  than  monotherapy 
[21]. Excimer laser treatment of vitiligo can also 
improve social aspects in vitiligo patients as dem-
onstrated  in  the  Al-Shobaili  et  al.  study  of  134 
vitiligo  patients  which  applied  the  Dermatology 
Life  Quality  Index  to  assess  patients’  quality  of 
life [22].

 Other Forms of Hypopigmentation

•  Striae and post-resurfacing leucoderma can be 
safely treated with the excimer laser. However, 
results  are  not  sustained;  striae  associated 
atrophy remains unchanged after therapy; and 
the  possible  side  effect  of  splaying  the  pig-
ment may occur.

•  Linear  scleroderma,  pityriasis  alba,  chemi-
cal  leucoderma,  and  punctate  leucoderma 
have  been  found  to  respond  to  the  308  nm 
excimer.

Leucoderma is a generic term defined as, “defi-
ciency  of  pigmentation  of  the  skin.”  [23].  Some 
authors  have  used  this  term  more  specifically  to 
describe  post-resurfacing  hypopigmenation.  These 
hypopigmented  macules  and  patches  are  known 
complications  of  carbon  dioxide  laser  resurfacing. 
In 2001, Friedman and Geronemus reported using 
the  308  nm  excimer  laser  for  post  carbon  dioxide 
resurfacing leucoderma [24]. Two patients demon-
strated 50–75% improvement with eight to ten treat-
ments. This therapy stimulates residual melanocytes 
while limiting cumulative UV-B exposure. In 2004, 

14 Lasers for Psoriasis and Hypopigmentation



240

Alexiades-Armenakas  et  al.  studied  the  response 
of  hypopigmented  scars,  including  striae  alba,  to 
the  excimer  laser.  Thirty-one  patients  received  up 
to ten treatments starting at 1 MED minus 50 mJ/
cm2. Visual analysis found 61% and 68% increase 
in pigmentation for leucoderma and striae, respec-
tively,  compared  to  control  after  nine  treatments. 
However,  the  treated  areas  slowly  depigmented 
back to baseline within 6 months of treatment ces-
sation  [25].  In  addition,  Goldberg  demonstrated 
76%  or  greater  darkening  of  striae  after  an  aver-
age of eight treatments [26]. Nevertheless, atrophy 
remained unchanged, and the pigmentary improve-
ments were not sustained. Ostovari et al. evaluated 
the efficacy of the excimer laser in treating ten sub-
jects with striae alba, finding that the laser displayed 
a weakly positive effect in repigmenting the striae 
alba. Additionally, the treatment produced the major 
side effect of splaying the pigment [27]. For patients 
with  mature  hypopigmented  striae  and  hypopig-
mented scars, the 308 nm excimer laser presents a 
safe  option  for  a  common  cosmetic  concern  with 
few other effective treatments, but patients should be 
aware of the longevity of the treatment and possible 
side effects.

Chemical leucoderma, a skin disease which 
presents  with  depigmentation  due  to  contact 
with specific chemicals, has also been success-
fully treated with excimer laser. Ghazi et al. pre-
sented a case of chemical leucoderma caused by 
hair dye which was completely resolved using 
an  excimer  laser  [28].  Similarly,  Vine  et  al. 
described the case of an HIV patient who expe-
rienced  chemical  leucoderma  in  the  nasal  and 
perioral areas after spilling liquid amyl nitrite, 
a recreational drug, on his face. The patient was 
treated  with  excimer  laser  and  attained  90% 
repigmentation [29]. Kim et al. presented a case 
of a patient exhibiting punctate leucoderma and 
melasma who was managed successfully using 
combination therapy of a low-fluence 1064-nm 
Q-switched 
neodymium:yttrium-aluminium-
garnet  (QSNY)  laser  and  a  308-nm  excimer 
laser. As it is common practice in Asian coun-
tries to utilize the QSNY laser to treat melasma, 
and such treatment can result in complications 

like punctate leucoderma, combination therapy 
was pursued to achieve a better outcome [30].

The excimer laser has also illustrated success in 
treatment of linear scleroderma and pityriasis alba. 
Hanson  et  al.  described  a  pediatric  patient  with 
refractory localized scleroderma on her left flank. 
The patient was initially treated with topical calci-
potriene and steroid injections. Due to progression 
of  the  lesion,  the  calcipotriene  was  ceased,  and 
methotrexate was added. However, after 6 months 
of  methotrexate  treatment  without  remission, 
the  excimer  laser  was  added  twice  weekly  for 
7  months.  The  combination  therapy  of  metho-
trexate  and  the  excimer  laser  resulted  in  com-
plete  remission  of  the  disease  [31]. Additionally, 
Al-Mutairi and Hadad studied the efficacy of the 
excimer laser in treating 12 patients with pityria-
sis alba, finding that near-complete resolution was 
achieved after 3 months of treatment [32].

 Indications and Contraindications

 Psoriasis

Indications

•  Patients  with  localized  plaques  that  involve 

less than 10% of the body surface area.

•  Patients with lesions in non-exposed sites and 

resistant sites.

•  Mild to moderate psoriasis.

Contraindications

•  Patients that report worsening of their lesions 

upon light exposure.

The excimer laser is indicated for mild to mod-
erate psoriasis, for localized plaques, and for resis-
tant sites. Patients who have lesions in non-exposed 
sites such as in the groin and axilla also respond 
well  to  the  excimer  laser  [33,  34].  These  areas  
are notoriously difficult to treat with traditional 
NB-UVB. The excimer laser also works well for 
recalcitrant  psoriatic  lesions  in  areas  such  as  the 

L. Jordan et al.



scalp [35]. The most difficult areas to treat are the 
palms  and  soles,  and  the  excimer  laser  has  dis-
played success in these areas [4]. However, Sevrain 
et al. investigated the efficacy of excimer lasers in 
the  treatment  of  palmoplantar  pustular  psoriasis 
(PPPP)  and  discovered  that  outcome  measures 
varied  according  to  the  studies,  concluding  that 
treatment for PPPP needed further evaluation [36]. 
The excimer laser may also be used in conjunction 
with  other  systemic  treatments  for  recalcitrant 
lesions.

The  excimer  laser  may  be  used  in  all  skin 
types; however, skin types II, III, and IV appear 
to respond the best. Very fair skin may burn more 
easily, and care must be taken when treating these 
patients  [37].  Further,  patients  being  treated  in 
combination  with  acitretin  should  have  their 
laser exposure times managed closely as acitretin 
therapy may increase the patient’s susceptibility 
to erythema. Patients who have darker skin types 
with  very  thick  lesions  may  benefit  more  from 
PUVA photochemotherapy as UVA offers supe-
rior penetration over the UVB from the excimer 
laser [34]. Additionally, excimer laser treatment 
is  more  beneficial  for  mild  to  moderate  psoria-
sis.  Schaarschmidt  et  al.  studied  the  treatment 
satisfaction  of  200  psoriatic  patients  who  had 
moderate to severe psoriasis using the Treatment 
Satisfaction  Questionnaire  for  Medication.  The 
study found that patients who received biologi-
cals  and  traditional  systemic  medications  had 
significantly greater satisfaction than those who 
received  phototherapy  or  topical  agents  [38]. 
Additionally,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  excimer 
laser is not as beneficial as PDL in the treatment 
of nail psoriasis [11]. Nevertheless, appreciating 
these proper indications, the only true contrain-
dication is the rare psoriatic patient that reports 
worsening of lesions upon exposure to light.

A suitable patient is one who is able to commit 
to  multiple  treatments  per  week  for  potentially 
several  weeks.  Thus,  compliance  is  usually  the 
limiting factor for improvement. Increasing insur-
ance  copayments  is  also  a  substantial  obstacle. 
Insurance coverage varies, and documentation of 
prior  treatment  failure  is  usually  required  for 
approval. The ideal candidate lives or works near 
the  unit  location,  has  skin  type  II–IV,  and  has  

241

disease limited to the scalp or flexural areas. Most 
importantly, the patient must be committed to the 
course of treatment (Figs. 14.1, 14.2, and 14.3).

Fig. 14.1  21 y/o female with scalp psoriasis

Fig. 14.2  After 12 treatments excimer laser

Fig. 14.3  One year follow up, still clear

14 Lasers for Psoriasis and Hypopigmentation



242

 Vitiligo

Indications

which  experienced  a  peak  MI  at  7  days. 
Ultimately,  the  study  found  that  pigmentation 
caused  by  UVB  varied  based  on  skin  color  and 
body site [41].

•  Patients who have vitiligo with less than 20% 

involvement.

•  Patients with locally distributed lesions.

 Psoriasis

Contraindications

•  Patients who are light sensitive.

The excimer laser is indicated in both pediat-
ric and adult populations and in all skin types for 
the  treatment  of  limited  or  localized  lesions  of 
vitiligo. However, similarly to the excimer laser 
treatment  of  psoriasis,  very  fair  skin  may  burn 
more easily, so care must be taken when treating 
these  patients  [37,  39].  Anatomic  location  is  a 
major predictor of response rate when evaluating 
a vitiligo patient for possible excimer laser ther-
apy. The most to least responsive areas are: face, 
scalp/neck,  genitals,  trunk,  extremities,  hands 
and feet, including bony prominences [40]. Skin 
type  is  also  important,  with  Fitzpatrick  III  or 
higher  skin  types  responding  the  best,  while 
smaller lesions respond more quickly. Age, gen-
der, and duration of lesions do not appear to be a 
factor. It is not practical to treat large lesions due 
to the small spot size of the laser unit.

The ideal candidate has Type III skin or darker 
with disease limited to the head, neck, or trunk. The 
only  contraindication  is  a  photosensitive  patient, 
and patients taking medications that increase pho-
tosensitivity  should  be  treated  with  caution.  The 
inconvenience of multiple office visits and poten-
tial  cost  of  therapy  are  significant  hurdles  when 
treating patients with psoriasis or vitiligo.

 Techniques

Shin  et  al.  studied  the  melanin  index  (MI)  to 
UVB in different skin colors and body sites. The 
study noted that following the first day of UVB 
exposure, MIs lowered, especially in fairer skin. 
However,  the  MIs  increased  in  the  light-skin 
group from day 3–21 versus the dark-skin group 

•  Preparation.
•  Determine skin type and/or MED.
•  Treat two to three times per week on non-con-

secutive days.

•  Start at 3 MED and increase every other ses-

sion unless burning occurs.

Initial  evaluation  of  potential  candidates 
should include extent, distribution, and past treat-
ments of psoriatic lesions. The patient should be 
interviewed  regarding  any  history  of  worsening 
psoriatic lesions upon light exposure. Risks and 
benefits  should  be  discussed  including  the  fre-
quent and potentially long term visits for therapy. 
The cost of therapy including copayments should 
be  addressed,  and  informed  consent  should  be 
reviewed and obtained. Pretreatment photographs 
may also be useful, and the skin should be free of 
any  topical  agents.  Eye  protection  should  be 
worn by all persons in the treatment room, and it 
is also commonly recommended to apply a small 
amount  of  mineral  oil  to  thick  scaly  plaques  to 
help reduce light scatter.

Initial  dosing  can  be  chosen  by  skin  type  or 
determination of the MED. The MED is the mini-
mal fluence required to induce pink erythema of 
unexposed skin, which is commonly tested on the 
lower back or gluteal area. A template is marked 
for  orientation  on  a  sun-protected  area.  Usually, 
doses of 100 mJ/cm2 through 350 mJ/cm2 are used 
in 50 mJ/cm2 increments. Therefore, six test doses 
are  usually  given.  The  patient  avoids  additional 
UV radiation to the area and returns for evaluation 
24 h after test dosing. The lowest dose that induces 
detectable erythema is the MED [42].

However, most manufacturers have treatment 
protocols for psoriasis based on plaque thickness 
and skin type. These guidelines avoid the incon-
venience  of  determining  the  MED.  Treatment 
guidelines  usually  consist  of  an  initial  dosing 

L. Jordan et al.



table followed by a protocol for subsequent treat-
ments  based  on  response.  These  guidelines  are 
based  on  the  following  principles  (see  Tables 
14.1 and 14.2). Treatments should begin two to 
three times per week on non-consecutive days for 
up to a month or longer if needed. Treatment ses-
sions may take longer than typical light therapy 
due to the small spot size; however, it should be 
emphasized  that  less  treatments  are  required 
(approximately 10 treatments versus 25 for con-
ventional light therapy). Treatment should start at 
3 MED and increase every session, or every other 
session unless burning occurs. Dosage should be 
maintained to induce slight erythema within 24 h 
of treatment. The erythema should not last greater 
than 24 h and should not cause pain. If excessive 
erythema or pain occurs, decrease the subsequent 
dose by 25%. Most patients will continue topical 
therapy throughout the treatment. Typically, ses-
sions  are  performed  two  to  three  times  a  week 
while maintaining at least 48 h in between treat-
ments for 3–6 weeks [4].

Debbaneh et al. offer a new method of dosime-
try called Plaque-based Sub-blistering Dosimetry, 
which  is  a  more  aggressive  protocol  in  which 
8–16 multiples of MED is administered to psori-
atic plaques with the goal of achieving an earlier 
and  longer  remission  than  traditional  dosimetry. 
The  authors  present  a  patient  who  achieved  a 
PASI score of 75 after only two treatments with an 
excimer laser [43].

Table  14.1  First  dose  determination  for  psoriasis 
Fitzpatrick skin type. Adapted from Vitiligo treatment 
guidelines, 12-95362-01 Rev. A

Plaque 
thickness
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe

Induration 
score
0
1
2
3

1–3 (mJ/
cm2)

4–6 (mJ/
cm2)

300
500
700

400
600
900

243

 Vitiligo

•  Preparation and evaluation.
•  Starting dose is 100–150 mJ/cm2 on the head 

and neck.

•  Dose is increased by 50 mJ/cm2 per treatment 

until redness develops.

•  Treatment is two to three times per week for 

up to 36 weeks.

•  Consider  combination  therapy  with  tacroli-

mus 0.1%.

Initial evaluation of potential candidates with vit-
iligo  should  include  extent,  distribution,  and  past 
treatments of hypopigmented lesions. A Wood’s light 
may  be  used  to  enhance  any  pigmentary  changes. 
Risks and benefits should be discussed including the 
frequent and potentially long term visits for therapy. 
The cost of therapy including copayments should be 
addressed, and informed consent should be reviewed 
and obtained. Pretreatment photographs may also be 
useful,  and  the  skin  should  be  free  of  any  topical 
agents. Eye protection should be worn by all persons 
in the treatment room, and the patient should be pro-
tected from natural light between treatments.

Determination  of  MED  is  not  necessary  for 
vitiligo  patients  as  the  calculated  MED  for  the 
surrounding normal skin is not indicative for the 
skin  affected  by  vitiligo.  Other  factors  such  as 
location, duration, and size are more important in 
determining response to laser therapy. The start-
ing dose is 100–150 mJ/cm2 on the head and neck. 
This dose is increased by 50 mJ/cm2 per treatment 
until  redness  develops.  If  a  severe  burn  occurs, 
reduce the dose by half or skip the following treat-
ment. Avoid treatments on consecutive days [44]. 
Similar to the excimer treatment protocol for pso-
riasis, vitiligo treatment typically consists of ses-
sions performed two to three times a week while 
keeping a minimum of 48 h in between treatments 
for  4–36  weeks  [37,  39].  Much  like  psoriasis,  a 

Table 14.2  Subsequent  dose  determination  for  psoriasis. Adapted  from Vitiligo  treatment  guidelines,  12-95362-01 
Rev. A

Clinical 
observation
Typical dosing 
change

No effect

Minimal effect

Good effect

Increase dose 
by 25%

Increase dose  
by 15%

Maintain 
dose

Considerable 
improvement
Maintain dose or reduce 
dose by 15%

Moderate/severe 
erythema
Reduce dose by 
25%

14 Lasers for Psoriasis and Hypopigmentation



244

table and protocol for subsequent treatments are 
provided  by  the  laser  manufacturer  (see  Tables 
14.3 and 14.4). Note the variability in initial dos-
ing for various anatomical sites.

 Adverse Events

•  Erythema.
•  Rarely bullae and pain.

Erythema is common and is the goal of treatment 
in vitiligo [45]. Patients may perceive slight warmth 
upon laser application; however, most feel no sensa-
tion. Very few patients report transient stinging, blis-
ters, or perilesional pigmentation [46]. Rare possible 
adverse  events  include  sunburn  reaction,  corneal 
burn,  freckling,  irregular  pigmentation,  increased 
risk of skin cancer, and accelerated aging. Eye pro-
tection and limiting treatment to the affected areas is 
recommended to minimize these risks.

 Future Directions

•  Psoriasis

 – Advances in medical therapy.

•  Vitiligo

Table 14.3  First dose determination for vitiligo. Adapted 
from Vitiligo treatment guidelines, 12-95362-01 Rev. A

Vitiligo location
Periocular
Face, scalp, ear, neck, axilla, 
bikini
Arm, leg, trunk
Wrist
Elbow
Knee
Hands, feet
Fingers, toes

Initial dose (mJ/cm2)
100
150

200
250
300
350
400
600

 – Advances  in  surgical  techniques,  grafting 
techniques,  and  combined  photodynamic 
therapy.

There has been great progress in understand-
ing the nature of pigmentary and psoriatic dis-
ease. Advances in understanding the molecular 
pathogenesis of psoriasis has led to the devel-
opment  of  the  revolutionary  class  of  medica-
tions known as the biologics. Currently, there 
are 25 oral, topical, and injectable medications 
in phase II trials and 15 in phase III trials for 
psoriasis  or  psoriatic  arthritis  [47].  Despite 
the  great  advances  in  medical  treatments  for 
psoriasis, light therapy will likely continue to 
play a role for a large number of patients who 
may  not  be  candidates  for  systemic  therapy 
or  may  require  systemic  and  localized  light 
therapy for recalcitrant lesions. Several recent 
combination therapy studies with the excimer 
laser  have  proven  successful  including  com-
bination  with  topical  Calcipotriene  and  with 
topical  flumetasone  [13,  14].  Other  forms  of 
treatment  that  are  currently  being  researched 
include  a  purified  gel  form  of  adrenocortico-
tripic hormone, calcitriol ointment in pediatric 
patients,  newer  retinoids,  and  photodynamic 
therapies [48].

Vitiligo  patients  that  fail  multiple  medical 
therapies including topical and light therapy may 
be  candidates  for  surgical  techniques.  Various 
grafting techniques such as mini-punch or blister 
grafts may be tried. Tattooing has also been used. 
Another  new  and  important  treatment  includes 
the  autologous  melanocyte-keratinocyte  trans-
plant [21]. In this treatment, healthy skin is sam-
pled, the melanocytes are grown in culture, and 
then they are transferred to the diseased skin. In 
addition  to  surgical  therapy,  research  in  gene 
therapy will shed more light on new and promis-
ing treatments.

Table 14.4  Subsequent  dose  determination  for  vitiligo. Adapted  from Vitiligo Treatment  Guidelines,  12-95362-01 
Rev. A

Clinical 
observation
Typical dosing 
change

No effect

Good effect

Moderate erythema

Severe erythema

Increase dose by 
50 mJ/cm2

Maintain dose

Decrease dose by 
50 mJ/cm2

Postpone treatment or reduce 
dose by 100 mJ/cm2

L. Jordan et al.



Other forms of treatment for vitiligo currently 
being  researched  include  the  effect  of  antioxi-
dants  on  vitiligo,  biologics,  and  combination 
therapy  of  betamethasone  oral  mini-pulse  ther-
apy and oral azathioprine. Several therapies com-
bining  NB-UVB  are  also  being  investigated, 
including  NB-UVB  and  fluticasone  propionate 
0.05%, lipoic acid tablets, and oral ginkgo biloba. 
Additionally, Photocil, a topical cream that selec-
tively  delivers  NB-UVB  therapy  upon  sunlight 
exposure is also being researched [49].

 Conclusion
Psoriasis and pigmentary disorders have a pro-
found impact on the quality of life of affected 
patients. Despite multiple medical therapies for 
psoriasis,  certain  clinical  scenarios  present 
therapeutic dilemmas. The 308 nm xenon chlo-
ride laser provides another option that is both 
safe  and  effective  for  psoriatic  and  hypopig-
mented  lesions  such  as  vitiligo,  linear  sclero-
derma, pityriasis alba, and chemical, punctate, 
and post-resurfacing leucoderma. Combination 
therapy,  including  tacrolimus  0.1%  and  the 
308 nm excimer laser, is likely the most effec-
tive  and  safest  option  for  patients  suffering 
from vitiligo [18, 19].

References

  1.  Bónis  B,  Kemény  L,  Dobozy  A,  Bor  Z,  Szabó  G, 
Ignácz  F.  308  nm  UVB  excimer  laser  for  psoriasis. 
Lancet. 1997;350:1522.

  2.  Parrish  JA,  Jaenicke  KF.  Action  spectrum  for  pho-
totherapy  of  psoriasis.  J  Invest  Dermatol.  1981;76: 
359–62.

  3.  Specchio  F,  Carboni  I,  Cannarozzo  G,  Tamburi  F, 
Dattola  E,  Nisticò  S.  Excimer  UV  radiation  in  der-
matology.  Int  J  Immunopathol  Pharmacol.  2014; 
27(2):287–9.

  4.  Mudigonda T, Dabade TS, Feldman SR. A review of 
targeted ultraviolet B phototherapy for psoriasis. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(4):664–72.

  5.  Spencer  JM,  Hadi  SM.  The  excimer  lasers.  J  Drugs 

Dermatol. 2004;3:522–5.

  6.  Kemény  L,  Bónis  B,  Dobozy  A,  Bor  Z,  Szabó  G, 
Ignácz F. 308-nm excimer laser therapy for psoriasis. 
Arch Dermatol. 2001;137:95–6.

  7.  Feldman SR, Mellen BG, Housman TS, Fitzpatrick RE,  
Geronemus  RG,  Friedman  PM,  et  al.  Efficacy  of 
the 308 nm excimer laser for treatment of psoriasis: 

245

results of a multicenter study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2002;46:900–6.

  8.  Erceg A, Bovenschen HJ, van de Kerkhof PC, Seyger 
MM. Efficacy of the pulsed dye laser in the treatment 
of localized recalcitrant plaque psoriasis: a compara-
tive study. Br J Dermatol. 2006;155:110–4.

  9.  Ilknur  T, Akarsu  S, Aktan  S,  Ozkan  S.  Comparison 
of the effects of pulsed dye laser, pulsed dye laser + 
salicylic acid, and clobetasole propionate + salicylic 
acid  on  psoriatic  plaques.  Dermatol  Surg.  2006;32: 
49–55.

 10.  Bovenschen HJ, Erceg A, Van Vlijmen-Willems I, Van 
De Kerkhof PC, Seyger MM. Pulsed dye laser versus 
treatment  with  calcipotriol/betamethasone  dipropio-
nate for localized refractory plaque psoriasis: effects 
on  T-cell  infiltration,  epidermal  proliferation  and 
keratinization. J Dermatol Treat. 2007;18:32–9.

 11.  Al-Mutairi N, Noor T, Al-Haddad A. Single blinded 
left-to-right comparison study of excimer laser versus 
pulsed  dye  laser  for  the  treatment  of  nail  psoriasis. 
Dermatol  Ther  (Heidelb).  2014;4(2):197–205.  Epub 
2014 Jul 3.

 12.  Kagen M, Cao LY, Oyetakin-White P, Tacastacas JD, 
Yan  C,  McCormick  TS,  et  al.  Single  administration 
of  lesion-limited  high-dose  (TURBO)  ultraviolet  B  
using  the  excimer  laser:  clinical  clearing  in  associa-
tion  with  apoptosis  of  epidermal  and  dermal  T  cell 
subsets  in  psoriasis.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol 
Photomed. 2012;28(6):293–8.

 13.  Tang YJ, Xu WW, Liu XM, Zhang RZ, Xu CX, Xu B,  
et  al.  Self-control  study  of  combination  treatment 
of  308  nm  excimer  laser  and  calcipotriene  ointment 
on  stable  psoriasis  vulgaris.  Int  J  Clin  Exp  Med. 
2014;7(9):2844–50. eCollection 2014.

 14.  Dong  J,  He Y,  Zhang  X,  Wang Y,  Tian Y,  Wang  J.   
Clinical efficacy of flumetasone/salicylic acid ointment 
combined  with  308-nm  excimer  laser  for  treatment 
of  psoriasis  vulgaris.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  
Photomed. 2012;28(3):133–6.

 15.  Rogalski C, Grunewald S, Schetschorke M, Bodendorf 
MO, Kauer F, Simon JC, et al. Treatment of plaque-
type psoriasis with the 308 nm excimer laser in com-
bination with dithranol or calcipotriol. Int J Hyperth. 
2012;28(2):184–90.

 16. Hadi S, Tinio P, Al-Ghaithi K, Al-Qari H, Al-Helalat M,  
Lebwohl  M,  et  al.  Treatment  of  vitiligo  using  the  
308-nm  excimer  laser.  Photomed  Laser  Surg.  2006; 
24:354–7.

 17. Cheng YP,  Chiu  HY,  Jee  SH,  Tsai  TF.  Excimer  light 
photototherapy of segmental and non-segmental vitiligo: 
experience  in  Taiwan.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol 
Photomed. 2012;28(1):6–11.

 18.  Kawalek  AZ,  Spencer  JM,  Phelps  RG.  Combined 
excimer  laser  and  topical  tacrolimus  for  the  treat-
ment of vitiligo: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2004; 
30:130–5.

 19.  Nisticò  S,  Chiricozzi  A,  Saraceno  R,  Schipani  C, 
Chimenti  S.  Vitiligo  treatment  with  monochromatic 
excimer light and tacrolimus: results of an open ran-
domized  controlled  study.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 

14 Lasers for Psoriasis and Hypopigmentation



246

2012;30(1):26–30.  https://doi.org/10.1089/pho.2011. 
3029. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

 20.  Hui-Lan Y, Xiaio-Yan H, Jian-Yong F, Zong-Rong L.  

Combination of the 308-nm excimer laser with topi-
cal picrolimus for the treatment of childhood vitiligo. 
Pediatr Dermatol. 2009;26:354–6.

 21.  Ebadi  A,  Rad  MM,  Nazari  S,  Fesharaki  RJ, 
Ghalamkarpour F, Younespour S. The additive effect of 
excimer laser on non-cultured melanocyte-keratinocyte 
transplantation for the treatment of vitiligo: a clinical 
trial  in  an  Iranian  population.  J  Eur Acad  Dermatol 
Venereol.  2014.  https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.12674.  
[Epub ahead of print].

 22.  Al-Shobaili  HA.  Treatment  of  vitiligo  patients  by 
excimer  laser  improves  patients’  quality  of  life.  J 
Cutan Med Surg. 2014;18(5):1–7.

 23.  Thomas  C.  Taber’s  cyclopedic  medical  dictionary. 
17th ed. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Co; 1993. p. 1102.
 24.  Friedman  PM,  Geronemus  RG.  Use  of  the  308-nm 
excimer laser for post resurfacing leukoderma. Arch 
Dermatol. 2001;137:824–5.

 25.  Alexiades-Armenakas  MR,  Bernstein  LJ,  Friedman 
PM,  Geronemus  RG.  The  safety  and  efficacy  of 
the  308-nm  excimer  laser  for  pigment  correction  of 
hypopigmented scars and striae alba. Arch Dermatol. 
2004;140:955–60.

 26.  Goldberg  DJ,  Sarradet  D,  Hussain  M.  308-nm 
excimer  laser  treatment  of  mature  hypopigmented 
striae. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:596–9.

 27. Ostovari  N,  Saadat  N,  Nasiri  S,  Moravvej  H, 
Toossi  P.  The  308-nm  excimer  laser  in  the  darken-
ing  of  the  white  lines  of  striae  alba.  J  Dermatolog 
Treat.  2010;21(4):229–31.  https://doi.org/10.3109/ 
09546631003592044.

 28.  Ghazi E, Ragi J, Milgraum S. Treatment of chemical 
leukoderma using a 308-nm excimer laser. Dermatol 
Surg.  2012;38(8):1407–9.  https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1524-4725.2012.02443.x. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

 29.  Vine K, Meulener M, Shieh S, Silverberg NB. Vitiligi-
nous lesions induced by amyl nitrite exposure. Cutis. 
2013;91(3):129–36.

 30. Kim  HS,  Jung  HD,  Kim  HO,  Lee  JY,  Park  YM.   

Punctate  leucoderma  after  low-fluence  1,064-nm 
quality-switched  neodymium-doped  yttrium  alu-
minum  garnet  laser  therapy  successfully  managed 
using  a  308-nm  excimer  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2012;38(5):821–3.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-
4725.2012.02397.x. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

 31.  Hanson  AH,  Fivenson  DP,  Schapiro  B.  Linear 
scleroderma  in  an  adolescent  woman  treated  with 
methotrexate  and  excimer  laser.  Dermatol  Ther. 
2014;27(4):203–5. https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.12117. 
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

 32.  Al-Mutairi N, Hadad AA. Efficacy of 308-nm xenon 
chloride excimer laser in pityriasis alba. Dermatol Surg. 
2012;38(4):604–9.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524- 
4725.2011.02223.x. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

 33.  Lapolla  W,  Yentzer  BA,  Bagel  J,  Halvorson  CR, 
Feldman SR. A review of phototherapy protocols for 
psoriasis treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(5): 
936–49.

 34.  Menter  A,  Korman  NJ,  Elmets  CA,  Feldman  SR, 
Gelfand  JM,  Gordon  KB,  et  al.  Guidelines  of  care 
for the management of psoriasis and psoriatic arthri-
tis: section 5. Guidelines of care for the treatment of 
psoriasis with phototherapy and photochemotherapy. 
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;62(1):114–35.

 35.  Wong JW, Kamangar F, Nguyen TV, Koo JY. Excimer 
laser  therapy  for  hairline  psoriasis:  a  useful  addi-
tion  to  the  scalp  psoriasis  treatment  algorithm.  Skin 
Therapy Lett. 2012;17(5):6–9.

 36.  Sevrain  M,  Richard  MA,  Barnetche  T,  Rouzaud  M, 
Villani AP,  Paul  C,  et  al.  Treatment  for  palmoplan-
tar  pustular  psoriasis:  systematic  literature  review, 
evidence-based  recommendations  and  expert  opin-
ion.  J  Eur Acad  Dermatol Venereol.  2014;  28  Suppl 
5:13–16.

 37.  Totonchy MB, Chiu MW. UV-based therapy. Dermatol 

Clin. 2014;32(3):399–413.

 38.  Schaarschmidt  ML,  Kromer  C,  Herr  R,  Schmieder 
A,  Goerdt  S,  Peitsch WK.  Treatment  satisfaction  of 
patients  with  psoriasis.  Acta  Derm  Venerol.  2014. 
https://doi.org/10.2340/00015555-2011. [Epub ahead 
of print].

 39.  Park  KK,  Liao  W,  Murase  JE.  A  review  of  mono-
chromatic  excimer  light  in  vitiligo.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2012;167(3):468–78.

 40.  Ortonne JP, Passeron T. Melanin pigmentary disorders: 
treatment update. Dermatol Clin. 2005;23:209–26.
 41.  Shin  JW,  Yoon  SW,  Jeong  JB,  Park  KC.  Different 
responses of the melanin index to ultraviolet irradiation 
in relation to skin color and body site. Photodermatol 
Photoimmunol Photomed. 2014;30(6):308–15.

 42.  Asawanonda  P, Anderson  RR,  Chang Y,  Taylor  CR.  
308 nm excimer laser for the treatment of psoriasis: 
a  dose-response  study.  Arch  Dermatol.  2000;136: 
619–24.

 43.  Debbaneh MG, Levin E, Sanchez Rodriguez R, Leon 
A, Koo J, Rosenblum MD. Plaque-based sub-blister-
ing dosimetry: reaching PASI-75 after two treatments 
with 308-nm excimer laser in a generalized psoriasis 
patient. J Dermatolog Treat. 2014;20

 44.  Choi KH, Park JH, Ro YS. Treatment of vitiligo with 
308-nm  xenon-chloride  excimer  laser:  therapeutic 
efficacy  of  different  initial  doses  according  to  treat-
ment areas. J Dermatol. 2004;31(4):284–92.

 45.  Taneja A, Trehan M, Taylor CR. 308-nm excimer laser 
for the treatment of localized vitiligo. Int J Dermatol. 
2003;42(8):658–62.

 46.  Alhowaish  AK,  Dietrich  N,  Onder  M,  Fritz  K.   
Effectiveness of a 308-nm excimer laser in treatment 
of  vitiligo:  a  review.  Lasers  Med  Sci.  2013;28(3): 
1035–41.

 47.  National  Psoriasis  Foundation,  Drug  pipeline.  [cited 
2014 Dec 18]. Available from: http://services.psoria-
sis.org/drug-pipeline/index.php.

 48.  National Psoriasis Foundation, Clinical Trials. [cited 
2014  Dec  18]. Available  from:  http://www.psoriasis.
org/research/drugs-in-development/clinical-trials.
 49.  NHS Choices, Vitiligo Clinical Trials. [cited 2014 Dec 
18].  Available  from:  http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/
Vitiligo/Pages/clinical-trial.aspx.

L. Jordan et al.



Lasers for Adipose Tissue and 
Cellulite

15

Molly Wanner and Mathew M. Avram

Abstract

The  use  of  lasers  and  light  devices  for  the 
removal of adipose tissue and cellulite repre-
sents a new and exciting frontier in the laser 
field.  To  date,  there  are  few  non-invasive 
devices in the laser field all of which can only 
claim  limited  efficacy.  This  chapter  will 
review  the  laser,  light  sources,  as  well  as 
devices  with  radiofrequency  and  ultrasound 
devices that currently purport to treat cellulite 
or adipose tissue.

Keywords
Adipose tissue · Cellulite · Laser · 
Radiofrequency · Ultrasound · Coolsculpting

The use of lasers and light devices for the removal 
of  adipose  tissue  and  cellulite  represents  a  new 
frontier in the laser field. This chapter will review 
the laser, light sources, radiofrequency and ultra-
sound  devices  that  treat  cellulite  or  adipose 
tissue.

M. Wanner (*) · M. M. Avram
Department of Dermatology,  
Massachusetts General Hospital,  
Harvard Medical School,  
Boston, MA, USA
e-mail: mwanner@partners.org 

 Noninvasive and Invasive 
Treatments for Adipose Tissue

Removal of adipose tissue can be accomplished 
non-invasively  and  invasively.  Non  invasive  fat 
removal is accomplished using an external hand 
piece or device in combination with ultrasound, 
cooling, radiofrequency, laser or light. Invasive, 
also  called  “minimally  invasive,”  devices  use 
laser and light in combination with a fiber that is 
inserted under the skin or ultrasound in combina-
tion with liposuction.

 Non Invasive Fat Removal

It’s  important  to  emphasize  that  non  invasive  fat 
removal is primarily meant to be a body sculpting 
procedure. These are not treatments for weight loss. 
The body does not excrete fat after these procedures. 
These  devices  remove  fat  non-invasively  from  a 
localized  area,  not  the  entire  body. Adipose  tissue 
stores  triglycerides.  Unlike  cholesterol,  which  can 
be  excreted,  triglycerides  are  not  excreted  by  the 
body. Rather, the triglycerides are metabolized for 
energy, stored, or redistributed to the liver for further 
processing to be used for such molecules as plasma 
lipoproteins  [1].  Studies  of  serum  lipid  levels  and 
liver  function  tests  suggest  that  non  invasive  fat 
removal  devices  do  not  negatively  impact  these 
markers.

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_15

247





248

Table 15.1  Mechanism of non invasive fat removal

Approach
Cryolipolysis
High intensity high 
frequency focused 
ultrasound
Low frequency focused 
ultrasound
Low level laser

Field radiofrequency
Monopolar radiofrequency

Mechanism
Cooling
Thermal damage

Mechanical damage

Unclear—pore in 
adipocyte may cause 
leakage
Thermal damage
Thermal damage

Non  invasive  options  include  focused  ultra-
sound,  high  frequency  ultrasound,  radiofre-
quency,  laser,  and  light  (see  Table  15.1).  Non 
invasive laser and light options are the focus of 
this  chapter;  however,  a  description  of  other 
energy devices will be included.

 Cryolipolysis
Adipose tissue is sensitive to cool temperatures. 
Cryolipolysis  harnesses  this  fact  and  utilizes  an 
external  and  non  invasive  device  to  cool  and 
selectively destroy the fat, while avoiding injury 
of  the  overlying  skin  [2,  3].  Cryolipolysis  is 
thought to induce apoptosis, inflammation of the 
fat, and subsequent clearing of the fat by macro-
phages  in  a  process  that  takes  3–4  months.  On 
average, this device removes approximately 20% 
of fat in the treated area after 4 months [4–6]. It 
has not been associated with statistically signifi-
cant changes in liver function tests or lipid panel 
(cholesterol,  triglycerides,  LDL  or  VLDL)  [7]. 
Although cryolipolysis has been FDA cleared for 
the waist, it has been used on other areas such as 
the inner thigh and back.

The ideal patient for cryolipolysis has a bulge 
in the area of concern (Fig. 15.1). Evaluation of 
the  patient  should  include  a  history  of  cold 
induced  disorders,  coagulation  disorders,  sys-
temic disease, hernia, impaired sensation or cir-
culation in the area. Patients with hernias should 
not be treated as the device is a vacuum device. 
Skin should be evaluated for laxity which would 
not  be  expected  to  improve  and  for  skin  condi-
tions  that  koebnerize  and  may  worsen  with  the 
treatment.  Patients  should  expect  at  least  two 
treatments  for  best  results,  although  subsequent 

Fig. 15.1  Bulge in lower abdomen

treatments in the same area may have less effect 
[6, 8]. Treatments can be scheduled 1–2 months 
apart,  although  the  results  will  not  be  see  until 
4 months after the final treatment.

Prior to treatment, the patient is weighed, and 
photographs  should  be  taken.  The  treatment 
begins  with  surgical  marking  of  the  area. A  gel 
pad is applied, and then the device is attached to 
the  skin.  The  device  is  a  vacuum  suction  that 
pulls the area to be treated between two cooling 
plates. The physician can set the strength of the 
vacuum  during  the  treatment,  but  the  degree  of 
cooling, known as the “Cooling Intensity Factor” 
is fixed. The treatment is 60 min. The device is 
handsfree  and  does  not  require  the  physician  to 
be present in the room. Post treatment, the device 
is removed, and the area is massaged. Post treat-
ment  massage  was  shown  to  improved  efficacy 
by 68% in one study [9].

Post treatment, the area is red and swollen (see 
Fig. 15.2). The erythema resolves in 24 h; edema 
and tenderness can last several days. Bruising can 
result. Approximately 40% of patients will experi-
ence numbness and tingling that can last 8 weeks, 
but  typically  resolves  in  3–4  weeks  [10].  Less 
common  side  effects  include  transient  blanching 
of the skin and persistent erythema and edema.

Rare side effects include severe pain, paradox-
ical hyperplasia, post inflammatory discoloration 
of  the  skin,  subcutaneous  induration,  treatment 
area  demarcation.  Severe  shooting  or  stabbing 
pain can develop in the first week after treatment, 
lasts 2 weeks on average and may require oral or 
topical  pain  medication  [11].  The  incidence  of 
severe  pain  was  reported  to  be  approximately 
0.03%  [12]. The  abdomen  is  the  most  common 
area, and larger applicators are more likely than 
smaller  applicators  to  be  associated  with  this 
adverse  event.  Severe  Paradoxical  hyperplasia 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



249

culation or sensation in the area of treatment. The 
patient should also be examined for laxity, as this 
condition would not be expected to improve with 
this treatment.

Prior  to  treatment,  the  area  is  marked,  the 
patient  is  weighed,  photographs  are  taken,  and 
measurements of the area to be treated are taken. 
Areas close to the bone should not be treated. The 
HIFU  treatment  typically  lasts  an  hour  if  the 
entire  abdomen  is  treated.  Although  protocols 
vary, typically 3–5 pulses per site are completed 
at fluences of 30–60 J/cm2 to reach a goal of 140–
180 J/cm2. Patients should expect, on average, a 
decrease of an inch after 2–3 months.

The  treatment  can  be  painful,  although  most 
patients can complete the treatment using distrac-
tion with forced cool air, ice packs, cold spray, or 
a  vibrating  massager.  Other  pain  medications 
such  as  benzodiazepines,  opioid,  NSAIDs,  or 
acetominophen can be tried.

Common side effects include erythema, swell-
ing,  and  tenderness.  Bruising  can  arise  in  two 
thirds of patients. Rare side effects include pro-
longed erythema, prolonged tenderness, and hard 
lumps  under  the  skin.  Superficial  burns  were 
reported  in  association  with  the  original  proto-
type [15, 17].

 Low Frequency Focused Ultrasound
The Ultrashape™ System (Ultrashape Ltd, Israel) 
is a focused ultrasound system that destroys adi-
pose  tissue  by  mechanical  means.  It  is  used  in 
combination  with  radiofrequency  pre  and  post 
treatment.  This  system  delivers  focused  ultra-
sound  waves  at  a  precise  depths  of  7,  10,  and 
15 mm. Typically, three treatments are completed 
[18, 19]. Most of the fat reduction occurs in the 
first  14  days,  and  response  to  treatment  can  be 
assessed  rapidly  ([19]-Teitlebaum).  The  proce-
dure  is  35–60  min  per  treatment,  depending  on 
the size of the area treated.

Fig. 15.2  Before, Immediately after, results S/P 1 treatment

has a reported incidence of 0.0051% [13]. It can 
develop anywhere from 2–3 months to 6 months 
after  treatment.  There  is  no  spontaneous  remis-
sion. Surgical intervention, such as liposuction, is 
curative.

 High Intensity High Frequency 
Ultrasound
There are two types of focused ultrasound: high 
intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) and low fre-
quency  ultrasound.  HIFU  utilizes  high  frequen-
cies to create thermal damage and fat necrosis at 
a  specific  focal  point  in  the  fat.  Low  frequency 
ultrasound uses low frequencies to cause mechan-
ical damage and fat lysis.

HIFU (Liposonix, Solta, CA) is FDA cleared 
for treatment of the waist, although other areas 
such as the leg have been treated. The efficacy 
of  this  treatment  was  established  in  a  random-
ized sham controlled trial of 180 subjects [14]. 
At  3  month  follow  up,  subjects  were  found  to 
have a 2.44 cm decrease in adipose tissue in the 
group treated with three passes of 59 J/cm2 for a 
treatment  total  of  177  J/cm2  compared  to  a 
1.43 cm decrease in the sham group. There was 
a  slightly  smaller  decrease  of  2.1  cm  in  the 
group treated with three passes of 47 J/cm2 for a 
treatment  total  of  141  J/cm2.  These  findings 
were statistically significant. A histologic study 
is  complete  at 
found 
8–14  weeks,  and 
take 
2–3  months  for  patients  to  notice  results  [15]. 
HIFU does not appear to cause changes in liver 
tests or lipid panel [16].

that  most  healing 

therefore, 

it  will 

The device has a fixed focal depth of 1.3 cm, 
and  therefore,  in  order  to  use  HIFU,  patients 
much  have  at  least  an  inch  of  pinchable  fat  in 
the  area.  Other  patient  considerations  include 
a  history  of  coagulation  disorders  which  would 
increase  the  risk  of  bruising;  pregnancy;  meta-
bolic disease; or hernia, surgery or impaired cir-

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



250

In a large prospective trial of 164 subjects with 
27 controls, subjects were treated once on the abdo-
men, thighs, or flanks [19]. At 3 month follow up, 
a statistically significant mean reduction of 1.9 cm 
was reported after one treatment, in the setting of 
weight maintenance, compared to baseline, control 
group, and internal control for patients treated on 
the thigh. Liver ultrasound at 14 and 28 days and 
serial laboratory evaluations showed no clinically 
significant  treatment  associated  changes,  with 
no  elevations  in  serum  lipids  or  lipoproteins.  No 
systemic  adverse  effects  were  noted,  and  cutane-
ous  adverse  effects  were  rare  and  included  a  tin-
gling  sensation,  erythema,  purpura,  and  blisters. 
Ninety-two percent of patients reported minimal to 
no  discomfort  after  90  min  of  topical  anesthesia. 
In a study of 30 patients, after three treatments, a 
statistically significant decrease of 2.3 cm in local 
deposits  was  found.  These  patients  maintained 
constant weight during the treatment period [18]. 
Several  additional  studies  have  found  a  decrease 
in  circumference  [20,  21];  one  study  found  an 
increase in circumference [22].

Pain  is  minimal  with  the  device.  Redness, 
blisters, and rarely bruising have been reported, 
but are uncommon [18–22].

 Low Level Laser Therapy
Low level laser therapy has been used with and 
without  ultrasound  for  fat  removal.  It  is  FDA 
cleared  for  the  hips,  waist,  thighs,  and  upper 
arms.  Low  level  laser  activates  cytochrome  C 
oxidase in mitochondria, upregulates ATP, and 
induces transcription factors [23]. The mecha-
nism of fat removal is unclear. It is postulated 
that low level laser creates a pore in the adipo-
cyte  membrane,  causing  leakage  of  lipid  into 
the interstitial space [24]. An ex vivo study of 
12 tissue samples and found that after 6 min of 
low  level  laser,  fat  was  completely  removed 
from the cell [25]. A change in the consistency 
of fat with MRI evaluation has been reported as 
well  [26].  One  histologic  study  did  not  find  a 
change in treated and untreated adipocytes [27]. 
Histologic  analysis  of  the  effects  of  low-level 
laser  of  adipose  tissue  in  rats  found  enlarge-
ment  and  fusion  of  the  brown,  but  not  yellow 
fatty tissue [28].

A  double  blind  randomized  controlled  trial 
with a sham of 67 subjects found a decrease in cir-
cumference  after  six  treatments  [29].  A  double 
blind, randomized controlled trial with sham of 40 
subjects found a decrease in total arm circumfer-
ence [30]. The decrease in arm circumference was 
measured  at  three  different  points  and  added 
together  for  a  total  decreased  of  3.7  cm  versus 
0.2  cm  in  the  control  group.  Two  retrospective 
studies of low level laser plus nutritional supple-
mentation  found  a  statistically  significant  reduc-
tion in circumference [31, 32]. One small study of 
five subjects found an increase in circumference in 
three subjects [33].

The  procedure  utilizes  a  handsfree  device 
(Zerona,  Erchonia,  Texas)  that  emits  635  nm 
laser at 17 mW. The device is positioned above 
the  patient.  There  is  no  contact  between  the 
patient  and  the  device.  Typically  six  treatments 
are completed, three times a week for 2 weeks. 
The treatment takes 40 min.

 Radiofrequency
Radiofrequency has been used for tissue tighten-
ing, skin laxity, and cellulite; only more recently 
has radiofrequency been applied to non invasive 
fat removal. Radiofrequency devices utilize cur-
rent  to  create  heat.  Radiofrequency  has  been 
found  to  induce  fat  atrophy  [34].  The  radiofre-
quency devices used for non invasive fat removal 
include  monopolar  radiofrequnecy  and  focused 
field  radiofrequency.  Bipolar  radiofrequency, 
which  penetrates  superficially  is  typically  used 
for cellulite treatment.

Field radiofrequency (Vanquish, BTL Industries, 
CR)  is  accomplished  with  a  device  that  is  posi-
tioned over the patient. There is no contact between 
the patient and the device. The device is designed 
to have a focal point approximately 10 mm below 
the  surface  and  to  heat  the  area  to  43–45  °C.  A 
small  porcine  study  demonstrated  a  reduction  in 
adipocytes after four 30 min treatments [35]. A non 
randomized,  uncontrolled  study  of  field  radiofre-
quency evaluated 40 subjects after four treatments. 
Thirty-five subjects were included for analysis, and 
of  these  subjects,  32  had  an  average  decrease  in 
circumference  of  4.93  cm. Three  subjects  did  not 
respond. BMI decreased on average across subjects 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



0.263  kg/m2  [36].  The  treatment  was  reported  to 
cause mild erythema that resolved. 90.5% of sub-
jects did not feel pain during the procedure. Patients 
are monitored during the treatment.

A monopolar radiofrequency device with cool-
ing has been studied (Exilis, BTL industries, CR). 
This device uses a handpiece that is continuously 
circled  on  the  patient  to  achieve  a  goal  surface 
temperature of 42–43 °C. Each 5 × 7 cm2 area is 
treated for 6–8 min. An abdomen can be treated in 
30 min. Four treatments, spaced 1 week apart are 
performed.  The  device  penetrates  0.4–2.5  cm 
beneath the skin, and the depth of penetration is 
controlled  by  cooling.  In  a  trial  of  60  subjects, 
subjects  received  4–5  treatments  [37].  Fat  was 
reduced by ultrasound measurements 0.04 cm on 
the thighs to 0.06 cm on the abdomen/flank areas.

 1210 nm Laser
Selective photothermolysis of adipose tissue has 
been reported at 1210 and 1720 nm wavelengths 
and  may  offer  another  non  invasive  option  for 
treatment of adipose tissue, but a clinical device 
is not yet available [38].

 Invasive Fat Removal

 1064 nm Laser with and Without 
Liposuction
The Nd:YAG laser has been used alone or in com-
bination with suction liposuction. SmartLipo™ 
(Cynosure,  USA),  a  300  μm  1064  nm  fiber 
encased  in  a  micro-cannula,  is  an  example  of 
this type of device. The cannula is inserted sub-
cutaneously  to  destroy  lipid  membranes  and 
release  lipids.  Adipocytes  appear  to  swell  at 
lower energies and lyse at higher energies [39]. 
The  laser  also  heat  coagulates  collagen  fibers. 
This process is termed “laser lipolysis” [40]. It 
is worth noting that the term “lipolysis” appears 
to be misused in this context. Strictly speaking, 
“lipolysis”  is  defined  not  as  destruction  of  the 
adipocyte membrane, but rather as shrinkage of 
the fat cell due to the use of lipid for energy at 
the cellular level.

The Nd:YAG laser has been extensively stud-
ied [6, 41–46]. There appears to be minimal cos-

251

metic advantage to this procedure compared with 
traditional  liposuction,  although  patients  may 
have less post operative pain with laser-assisted 
lipoplasty. The procedure may be helpful for the 
surgeon, requiring less effort, particularly in dif-
ficult to treat areas [11], but it can be more time 
consuming [13].

An illustrative example is a prospective, dou-
ble blind, controlled trial of 25 patients and 110 
areas of treatment with patients serving as their 
own control with suction lipoplasty on one half 
and laser-assisted lipoplasty on the other with a 
2  mm  1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser  fiber  follow  by 
suction with a 3 mm cannula [9]. No clinical dif-
ference  in  cosmetic  result  was  found,  although 
postoperative  pain  was  higher  in  the  suction-
assisted side versus the laser-assisted side at the 
first follow up visit only.

Without liposuction, the Nd:YAG may have a 
role in the removal of local deposits of fat. The 
use of a 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser with a 300 μm 
fiber  encased  in  a  1  mm  microcannula,  without 
combining  it  with  liposuction  was  studied  in  a 
randomized  study  of  30  female  patients  with 
focal areas of fat less than 100 cm3 on the arm, 
submental  area,  thigh,  and  abdomen  [12].  An 
average 17% reduction in fat volume (p < 0.01) 
was seen on MRI. Bruising, swelling, and tender-
ness  were  seen,  and  uncommonly,  transient  tin-
gling,  hyperpigmentation,  and  a  subcutaneous 
nodule  were  reported.  As  with  non  invasive 
approaches,  use  of  this  device  without  liposuc-
tion may be best suited to small collections of fat.

 635 nm Laser and Liposuction
Low level laser has been used in combination with 
liposuction. Neira has combined low level 635 nm 
laser  and  liposuction  in  a  technique  labeled  the 
“Neira  4L  technique”  [47].  Patients  are  irradi-
ated  with  a  low-level  635  nm  laser  after  tumes-
cent anesthesia. Following irradiation, removal of 
fat is accomplished with a cannula or other tech-
nique. Neira reported a case series of 700 patients 
of whom 95% were satisfied with results [15]. A 
well  designed  randomized,  controlled,  blinded 
study found a statistically significant decrease in 
pain and swelling post operatively after treatment 
with low level laser [48]. Investigators reported a 

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



252

greater ease of fat extraction after low level laser 
therapy,  also  statistically  significant.  Based  on 
these  studies,  low  level  therapy  may  influence 
healing, but the histologic effects and the effect on 
cosmesis remain unclear.

 External Ultrasound and Liposuction
External  ultrasound  and  liposuction  have  been 
combined  to  remove  adipose  tissue  [49–51]. 
External  ultrasound  is  theorized  to  relax  the 
bonds between cells, affecting the septa, enhanc-
ing skin contraction after liposuction and allow-
ing for the use of thin cannulas [52]. Fat cells can 
be used for grafting [53]. The typical procedure 
involves  application  of  a  2–3  W/cm  ultrasound 
device for 5–15 min.

Several studies have found external ultrasound 
to be beneficial [25, 54–56], although one double 
blind study casts doubt on the utility of this pro-
cedure [57]. In most of the studies, there appears 
to be a slight advantage of the ultrasound assisted 
approach in terms of physician fatigue (50–70% 
preferred  the  ultrasound  treated  side).  Patients 
had less bruising (40–70% of patients), swelling 
(40–70%  of  patients),  and  discomfort  (50–80% 
of  patients)  on  the  ultrasound  treated  side  [26–
28].  The  cosmetic  result  appears  to  be  similar 
[26–28].  One  of  the  studies  reported  increased 
skin  retraction  of  30%  on  the  side  treated  with 
ultrasound [27]. These studies were randomized 
and  controlled,  but  statistical  significance  was 
not tested. The surgeon was blinded in one of the 
trials [26]. The number of patients in these stud-
ies ranged from 10 to 30. Adverse effects includ-
ing  erythema,  mild  warmth,  burns,  blisters,  and 
seroma were reported during the procedure [22, 
24, 25, 28].

A larger study of 59 patients comparing exter-
nal  ultrasound  assisted  to  standard  liposuction 
also reported that patients had less bruising and 
discomfort  [25].  A  faster  recovery  time  was 
reported,  but  patients  receiving  external  ultra-
sound  were  given  different  instructions  about 
reduction of physical activity, leading to a poten-
tial bias in recovery time. Skin shrinkage as evi-
denced by a smoothness of the skin was apparent 
on the ultrasound side at 30 days and on the stan-
dard liposuction side at 6 months; however, this 

smoothness was not quantitatively defined and no 
statistical evaluation was done.

These studies contrast with a double blinded 
study  of  19  patients  who  served  as  their  own 
control 
to  evaluate  external  ultrasound-
assisted  liposuction  [29].  The  treatment  side 
received ultrasound at 2–3 W/cm2 for 10 min 
and  the  control  side  received  0.2–0.3  W/cm2. 
Fat was sampled in two patients. There was no 
difference  between  resistance  to  removal  and 
the  rate  of  fat  removal  in  14  of  19  patients. 
Patients  assessed  the  treatment  as  well,  and 
only  4  of  19  reported  a  better  operative  and 
post operative course with external ultrasound. 
Statistical  significance  was  tested  for  physi-
cian and patient assessments, and no benefit to 
using external ultrasound with liposuction was 
found. Histologic evaluation showed no differ-
ence  between  the  experimental  and  control 
side.  Although  the  study  was  limited  by  the 
small  number  of  patients,  the  double  blind, 
controlled framework provides strong support 
that  the  use  of  external  ultrasound  may  not 
yield significant benefit.

loss, 

 Internal Ultrasound and Liposuction
Liposuction  in  combination  with  internal  ultra-
sound  was  pioneered  by  Zocchi  [58].  Several 
studies  reported  large  series  of  patients  treated 
with ultrasound assisted lipoplasty [59–63], and 
the purported benefits of this technology include 
less  surgeon  fatigue,  and 
less  blood 
improved  skin  retraction  [64,  65].  Ultrasound 
assisted  liposuction  has  been  found  to  be  more 
selective  for  adipocyte  removal;  however,  this 
selectivity may not yield superior results [32]. In 
studies that compare standard versus ultrasound-
assisted 
the  ultrasound-assisted 
approach  has  not  had  better  cosmetic  outcome 
[32,  34,  66].  It  may  be  that  ultrasound-assisted 
lipoplasty is better for certain indications such as 
fibrous areas [67].

lipoplasty, 

A  well  designed  study  of  63  patients  who 
received  both  traditional  and  ultrasound-assisted 
lipoplasty provides an example [34]. Patients were 
blinded to the procedure in this trial. In addition to 
the evaluations by patient and surgeon, an indepen-
dent  panel  evaluated  ten  randomly  selective 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



patients.  Ultrasound-assisted  lipoplasty  was  not 
found to be superior to traditional lipoplasty with 
no difference in sensory, pigment change, surface 
irregularity, skin contraction, bruising, or swelling. 
Similarly, a randomized, controlled study of ultra-
sound-assisted  liposuction  compared  with  tradi-
tional liposuction in 28 patients found no significant 
difference  in  cosmetic  result  and  adverse  effects 
[38]. Physicians reported less fatigue.

Skin necrosis, burn, fat necrosis and fibrosis, 
sensory alteration, infection, lower limb edema, 
and  seromas  have  been  reported  [31–33,  38, 
39,  68,  69].  Skin  necrosis  is  a  particularly  con-
cerning  adverse  effect.  It  is  thought  to  be  due 
to   destruction  of  deep  dermal  vessels  despite 
higher  perfusion  with  ultrasound-assisted  lipo-
suction  compared  with  suction  liposuction  [70, 
71].  Postoperative  sensory  changes  occur  in 
both traditional and ultrasound-assisted liposuc-
tion;  immediately  after  surgery,  these  changes 
may be more prominent in those patients treated 
with ultrasound [72, 73]. Surgeon experience and 
surgical technique may play a role in ultrasound 
assisted complications [31].

With respect to invasive options for fat removal, 
internal or external ultrasound and laser assisted 
lipoplasty  appear  to  offer  minimal  advantages 
over traditional lipoplasty. Nearly all blinded and 
controlled  studies  have  failed  to  show  improved 
cosmetic outcome with these devices.

 Cellulite Treatments

There  are  several  devices  that  have  been  used 
for  noninvasive  treatment  of  cellulite  including 
devices  that  incorporate  laser  or  light  sources 
(see  Table  15.2).  Most  of  these  devices  have 
temporary  or  limited  efficacy  or  have  been 

Table 15.2  Laser and light based treatments for cellulite

Non invasive
Intense pulsed light
660–950 nm LED
1064 nm laser
810 nm laser with suction massage
650 nm light source and 915 nm 
laser with suction massage

Invasive
1440 nm side 
firing laser

253

poorly  studied,  casting  doubt  on  their  efficacy. 
In  this  section,  these  devices  will  be  reviewed 
as well as those that incorporate radiofrequency. 
Radiofrequency devices represent the best stud-
ied devices in the cellulite market. There is only 
one  energy  based  invasive  or  “minimally  inva-
sive”  device  available.  This  device  incorporates 
laser and will be reviewed.

Theoretically,  those  devices  that  best  treat 
cellulite should be the devices that affect some 
aspect of the pathogenesis of cellulite. There are 
multiple theories to explain cellulite, but those 
with the most evidence suggest that cellulite is 
caused by sex specific differences in skin struc-
ture  and  hormonal  milieu  [74–80].  Cellulite  is 
present  in  the  large  majority  of  women  and 
rarely in men, except in cases of androgen defi-
ciency  [46].  Unlike  in  men,  the  subcutaneous 
tissue in women is loosely reinforced, and her-
niations of the superficial fat are more likely to 
develop.  Therefore,  therapies  that  remove  the 
fat herniations and alter the septated connective 
tissue  reinforcements  would  be  expected  to 
improve cellulite.

 Lasers and Light Sources

 Intense Pulsed Light
Intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  has  been  shown  to 
stimulate collagen production, and it is used in 
the  treatment  of  cellulite  with  the  purpose  of 
thickening  the  dermis  to  diminish  the  appear-
ance  of  cellulite  [81,  82].  The  theory  is  that  a 
thicker dermis will hide the fat herniations bet-
ter. A  12  week  trial  of  20  women  of  whom  8 
received IPL alone and 12 received IPL in com-
bination with retinyl based cream for a total of 
9–12  treatments  found  that  the  majority  of 
patients  with  improvement  used  the  cream  in 
combination  with  IPL  [83].  Nine  patients 
reported  improvement  greater  than  or  equal  to 
50%, and seven maintained this improvement at 
8  months.  This  study  was  limited  as  only  15 
patients completed the study, and no statistical 
analysis  was  done.  The  use  of  IPL  alone  as  a 
treatment  for  cellulite  does  not  appear  to  be 
indicated.

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



254

 Light Emitting Diode
A light emitting diode at 660 and 950 nm has been 
used in combination with a cellulite gel comprised 
of several active ingredients (bupleurum falcarum, 
caffeine,  coenzyme A,  and  phosphatidylcholine). 
A randomized, double blind controlled study eval-
uated nine patients who received an active gel on 
one thigh and placebo controlled gel on the control 
thigh in combination with light [84]. Cellulite was 
improved  in  eight  of  nine  patients  on  the  active 
thigh and no patients on the control side, suggest-
ing that the light emitting diode had little effect.

 1064 nm Laser
Thickening the dermis to mask fat herniations is 
the rationale behind a 1064 nm laser for cellulite. 
This  device  was  studied  in  12  subjects.  Three 
months  after  the  third  treatment,  a  statistically 
significant  reduction  in  dermal  thickness  and 
increase  echogenic  density  on  ultrasound  was 
noted. Subjects were “a little to somewhat satis-
fied”. Erythema was the main side effect [85].

twice weekly for 6 weeks with the TriActive™ or 
VelaSmooth™,  a  radiofrequency  device,  found 
similar  results  [90].  In  this  study,  photographs 
were evaluated by blinded investigators and sig-
nificance was tested. The average improvement in 
cellulite was 7% and 25% for the VelaSmooth™ 
and the TriActive™, respectively. VelaSmooth™ 
and  TriActive™  also  yielded  a  28–56%  and  a 
30–37%  improvement  in  the  thigh  circumfer-
ence,  respectively.  The  difference  between  the 
two devices was not significant. Adverse effects 
included bruising seen in 10 of 20 patients with 
VelaSmooth™ and 4 of 20 with TriActive™.

SmoothShapes  has  been  evaluated  in  several 
studies [91–93]. Two of these studies focused on 
fat  reduction,  finding  a  statistically  significant 
decrease in fat thickness of 1.19 cm2 on MRI and 
a  statistically  significant  reduction  in  thigh  cir-
cumference.  Another  study  assessed  cellulite 
more  closely:  3D  Imaging  revealed  a  2.3  mm 
change in surface elevation and a 4.9 mm change 
in flattening 6 months after treatment.

 Light Sources and Massage

 Radiofrequency

A few devices incorporate massage with light to 
treat  cellulite.  Massage  is  included  in  the  treat-
ments  based  on  the  idea  that  vascular  and  lym-
phatic  alterations  promote  cellulite,  although 
there  is  limited  evidence  to  support  this  the-
ory  [86–88].  Examples  include  TriActive™ 
(Cynosure™, USA), a low fluence 810 nm diode 
laser  with  vacuum  massage;  Synergie Aesthetic 
Massage  System™  (Dynatronics,  USA),  a  vac-
uum  massage  with  or  without  a  660–880  nm 
probe or 880 nm light pad; and SmoothShapes® 
(Elemé  Medical,  USA),  a  915  nm  laser  and 
650 nm light source combined with vacuum and 
mechanical massage.

The  TriActive™  appears  to  yield  a  transient 
21–25%  improvement  in  cellulite  after  mul-
tiple  treatments.  In  an  uncontrolled  study  of  16 
patients  who  received  twice  weekly  treatments 
of TriActive™  for  6  weeks,  photographs  evalu-
ated by blinded investigators showed a 21% aver-
age  improvement  that  was  not  present  1  month 
after  the  last  treatment  [89].  Significance  was 
not  tested. A  comparison  of  20  patients  treated 

Radiofrequency represents the best studied treat-
ment for cellulite. Radiofrequency can be mono-
polar  in  which  the  current  is  delivered  from  an 
electrode  to  a  grounding  pad;  bipolar  in  which 
the  current  is  delivered  between  two  electrodes 
and  unipolar  in  which  the  energy  is  delivered 
without  grounding.  Multiple  electrode  radiofre-
quency in which the energy is delivered between 
three  probes,  one  positive  and  two  negative  has 
also been reported [94, 95].

The  VelaSmooth™  is  a  bipolar  radiofre-
quency, infrared heat, and suction device that is 
FDA  cleared  for  the  treatment  of  cellulite.  The 
VelaSmooth™  has  been  evaluated  more  exten-
sively than any of the other devices for cellulite; 
however, many studies are flawed, without a con-
trol group or without statistical evaluation. Most 
studies  report  a  decreased  circumference  of  the 
treated  area  and  an  improvement  in  cellulite  of 
25–50% in most subjects [96–100]. The duration 
of benefit is unclear, and one investigator noted a 
diminution of effect at 6 months [64]. Bruising is 
a  common  side  effect  noted  in  up  to  10–31% 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



[63–65].  Crusting  and  burn  have  rarely  been 
reported [62, 65].

One  of  the  better  and  illustrative  studies  of 
the  VelaSmooth™  is  a  controlled  trial  of  20 
patients  [63].  Of  the  20  enrolled  patients,  16 
were treated twice weekly for 6 weeks on one 
leg, while the other leg served as control. A sta-
tistically  significant  decrease  of  thigh  circum-
ference  (0.44–0.53  cm)  was  seen  at  4  weeks, 
but  not  immediately  or  at  8  weeks.  A  greater 
than 51% improvement was seen in 25–31% of 
patients  at  8  weeks  after  the  last  treatment. 
There was no histologic evidence of structural 
change,  however.  Lipid,  hormone,  and  liver 
function  tests  were  tested  in  five  patients  and 
showed  no  change.  Thirty-one  percent  of 
patients had bruising.

The Alma Accent RF System (Alma Lasers™, 
Buffalo  Grove  IL)  utilizes  unipolar  and  bipolar 
radiofrequency.  The  Alma  Accent  RF  System 
was  evaluated  in  an  uncontrolled  study  of  26 
patients [101]. In this study, the patients received 
two treatments on the thigh and buttock. Patients 
were evaluated by ultrasound for a change in dis-
tance from the dermis to the first line of fibrous 
tissue (Camper’s fascia) and the dermis to mus-
cle. The majority of patients (64–72%) showed a 
15.49–27.8%  decrease  in  these  measures.  On 
average, there was a 6.8–11.55% decrease in the 
measurements among all patients, although some 
of the patients showed an increase in the distance. 
Findings were not uniformly significant, and this 
study  is  limited  by  the  lack  of  a  control  group. 
The authors evaluated ultrasound for qualitative 
changes in the skin structure and found improve-
ment in 50–57% of patients. Adverse effects were 
rare with small blisters developing in two patients 
and bruising in three patients.

Unipolar  radiofrequency  was  evaluated  in  a 
study  of  30  subjects  that  was  neither  controlled 
nor blinded nor randomized. In this study, graded 
improvement  of  cellulite  was  found  to  be  2.9 
on  a  scale  of  1–4  after  six  treatments  [102].  In 
a  randomized,  controlled,  blinded  study  of  ten 
subjects treated six times with unipolar radiofre-
quency, dimples improved 8%. This finding was 
not statistically significant [103].

Of the available devices on the market, those 
with radiofrequency seem to have the most evi-

255

dence  for  effect,  albeit  marginal. These  devices 
generally  yield  a  25–50%  improvement  after 
multiple treatments. This effect seems to dimin-
ish over time.

 1440 nm Nd:YAG Laser

A 1440 nm side firing laser fiber represents the 
only invasive energy based device treatment for 
cellulite  (CelluLaze,  Cynosure  Inc,  MA).  The 
concept  behind  this  laser  is  that  the  treatment 
melts the fat herniations associated with cellulite 
as well as shearing septae that contribute to these 
herniations and the dimples associated with cel-
lulite. The 1440 nm wavelength is absorbed more 
by adipose tissue than by water.

The  treatment  uses  a  laser  fiber  associated 
with a cannula that is inserted under the skin. The 
laser has a temperature sensor. The fiber is passed 
under  the  skin  in  three  positions:  pointed  up, 
sideways, and down. After treatment, pressure is 
used to remove the fat from the cannula insertion 
points.  The  treatment  requires  tumescent  anes-
thesia.  Compression  garments  are  worn  after 
treatment.  Side  effects  of  the  treatment  include 
bruising,  swelling,  pain,  numbness  and  itching. 
Prolonged  discomfort,  bruising,  swelling,  and 
numbness was reported and found to be resolve 
by 3 months.

A preliminary study of ten subjects found an 
improvement  of  cellulite  that  persisted  1  year 
after  a  single  treatment  [104].  A  multicenter 
study of 57 subjects and 87 sites compared cel-
lulite 6 months after treatment to baseline [105]. 
Ninety-one  percent  of  treated  areas  improved  1 
point on a 5 point scale. On average, the 81 treat-
ment  sites  evaluated  at  6  months  improved  2.7 
points on a 5 point scale.

 Conclusion
The  currently  available  options  for  laser  or 
light  based  removal  of  adipose  tissue  or  cel-
lulite are limited. The 635 nm laser is the only 
clinically available device that has been well 
studied for non invasive removal. In fact, the 
best  studied  devices  for  non  invasive  fat 
removal, do not rely on light or laser. Cooling 
and  ultrasound  devices  may  offer  superior 

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



256

results for non invasive fat removal. Although 
SmartLipo™ may have a role for removal of 
small collections of adipose tissue, it has not 
been shown to be cosmetically advantageous 
as compared with traditional lipoplasty.

With respect to cellulite treatment, non inva-
sive laser and light devices have either not been 
studied  or  have  been  proven  to  have  modest, 
temporary effect. The best studied non-invasive 
approach  is  radiofrequency;  however,  this  too 
offers results that are generally mild and tempo-
rary. CelluLaze is a newer, minimally invasive 
treatment  that  may  provide  better  and  longer 
term results, but is associated with a greater pain 
requiring tumescent anesthesia and greater risks 
compared with non invasive devices.

References

  1.  Harvey RA, Champe PC. Fatty acid and triacyglyc-
erol  metabolism.  Lippincott’s  illustrated  reviews: 
biochemisty.  2nd  ed.  Philadelphia:  JB  Lippincott 
Company; 1994.

  2.  Manstein  D,  et  al.  Selective  Cryolipolysis:  a  novel 
method  of  non-invasive  fat  removal.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2008;40:595–604.

  3.  Zelickson  B,  et  al.  Cryolipolysis  for  non  invasive 
cell destruction: results from a pig model. Dermatol 
Surg. 2009;35:1462–70.

  4.  Dover  J,  Burns  J,  Coleman  S  et  al.  A  prospective 
clinical study of noninvasive cryolipolysis for subcu-
taneous fat reduction-Interim report of available sub-
ject data. Presented at ASLMS, April 2009, National 
Harbor, MD.

  5.  Avram  M,  Harry  RS.  Cryolipolysis  for  subcu-
taneous  fat  layer  reduction.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2009;41:703–8.

  6.  Shek SY, Chan NPY, Chan HH. Non-invasive cryo-
lipolysis  for  body  contouring  in  Chinese  –  a  first 
commercial  experience.  Lasers  Surg  Med.  2012; 
44:125–30.

  7.  Klein KB, et al. Non-invasive cryolipolysis for subcu-
taneous fat does not affect serum lipid levels or liver 
function tests. Lasers Surg Med. 2009;41:785–90.
  8.  Brightman L, Geronemus R. Can second treatment 
enhance  clinical  results  in  cryolipolysis?  Cosmet 
Dermatol. 2011;24:85–8.

  9.  Boey G, Wasilenchuk J, Preciado J. Effect of post-
treatment  manual  massage  on  efficacy  following  a 
cryolipolysis procedure. Presented at ASLMS 2012.
  10.  Coleman SR, et al. Clinical efficacy of noninvasive 
cryolipolysis  and  its  effects  on  peripheral  nerves. 
Aesthet Plast Surg. 2009;33:482–8.

  11.  Dover  J,  Saedi  N,  Kaminer  M,  Zachary  C.  Side 
effects and risks associated with cryolipolysis. Lasers  
Surg Med. 2011;43:928.

  12.  Post marketing information from company through 

12/31/2012.

  13.  Jalian  HR,  Avram  MM,  Garibyan  L,  Mihm  MC, 
Anderson RR. Paradxoical hyperplasia after cyroli-
polysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150:317–9.

  14.  Jewell  ML,  et  al.  Randomized  sham-controlled 
trial  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  a 
high-intensity  focused  ultrasound  device  for  non-
invasive  body  sculpting.  Plast  Recontr  Surg.  2011; 
128:253–62.

  15.  Fatemi A.  High-intensity  focused  ultrasound  effec-
tively  reduces  adipose  tissue.  Semin  Cutan  Med 
Surg. 2009;28(4):257–62.

  16.  Gadsen E, et al. Evaluation of a novel high intensity 
focused  ultrasound  device  for  ablating  subcutane-
ous adipose tissue for noninvasive body contouring 
safety studies in human volunteers. Aesthet Surg J. 
2011;31:401–10.

  17.  Fatemi A, Kane MAC. High intensity focused ultra-
sound  effectively  reduces  waist  circumference  by 
ablating adipose tissue from the abdomen and flanks. 
Aesthet Plast Surg. 2010;34:577–82.

  18.  Moreno-Moraga J, Valero-Altes T, Martinez Riquelme  
A, et al. Body contouring by non-invasive transder-
mal  focused  ultrasound.  Lasers  Surg  Med.  2007; 
39:315–23.

  19.  Teitelbaum  SA,  Burns  JL,  Kubota  J,  et  al.  Non-
invasive  body  contouring  by  focused  ultrasound: 
safety and efficacy of the contour I device in a multi-
center, controlled, clinical trial. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2007;120:779–89.

  20.  Hotta TA. Nonsurgical body contouring with focused 
ultrasound. Plast Surg Nursing. 2010;30:77–82.
  21.  Ascher B. Safety and efficacy of UltraShape Contour 
I  treatments  to  improve  the  appearance  of  body 
contours:  multiple  treatments  in  shorter  intervals. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2010;30:217–24.

  22.  Shek S, et al. The use of focused ultrasound for non-
invasive  body  contouring  in  Asians.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2009;41:751–9.

  23.  Chung  H,  Dai  T,  Sharma  SK,  Huang YY,  Carroll 
JD,  Hamblin  HR.  The  nuts  and  bolts  of  low-level 
laser  (light)  therapy.  Ann  Biomed  Eng.  2011;2: 
516–33.

  24.  Neira R, Toledo L, Arroyave J, et al. Low-level laser-
assisted  liposuction:  the  Neira  4L  Technique.  Clin 
Plast Surg. 2005;33:117–27.

  25.  Neira R, Arroyave J, Ramirez H, et al. Fat liquefac-
tion: effect of low-level laser energy on adipose tis-
sue. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2002;110:912–22.

  26.  Neira  R,  Jackson  R,  Dedo  D,  Ortiz  CL,  Arroyave 
JA.  Low-level  laser-assisted  lipoplasty  appearance 
of  fat  demonstrated  by  MRI  on  abdominal  tissue. 
Am J Cosmet Surg. 2001;18:133–40.

  27.  Brown  SA,  Rohrich  RJ,  Kenkel  J,  et  al.  Effect  of 
low-level  laser  therapy  on  abdominal  adipocytes 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



257

before  lipoplasty  procedures.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
2004;113:1796–804.

  28.  Medrano AP, Trindade E, Reis SRA, et al. Action of 
the  low-level  laser  therapy  on  living  fatty  tissue  of 
rats. Lasers Med Sci. 2006;21:19–23.

  29.  Jackson RF, et al. Low level laser therapy as a non 
invasive  approach  for  body  contouring:  a  random-
ized,  controlled  study.  Lasers  Surg  Med.  2009;41: 
799–809.

  30.  Nestor  M,  et  al.  Effect  of  635  nm  low  level  laser 
therapy on upper arm circumference: a double-blind, 
randomized,  sham-controlled  trial.  J  Clin  Aesthet 
Dermatol. 2012;5:42–8.

  31.  Jackson RF, et al. Application of low level laser ther-
apy  for  noninvasive  body  contouring.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2012;44:211–7.

  32.  McRae  E,  Boris  J.  Independent  evaluation  of 
LLLT  at  635  nm  for  non-invasive  body  contuor-
ing  of  waist,  hips,  and  thighs.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2013;45:1–7.

  33.  Elm CML, et al. Efficacy of a multiple diode laser 
system for body contouring. Lasers Surg Med. 2011; 
43:114–21.

  34.  De  Felipe  I,  et  al. Animal  model  to  explain  fat  atro-
phy using nonablative radiofrequency. Dermatol Surg.  
2007;33:141–5.

  35.  Weiss R, Weiss M, Beasley K, et al. Operator inde-
pendent  focused  high  frequency  ISM  band  for 
fat  reduction:  porcine  model.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2013;45:235–9.

  36.  Fajkosova  K,  Machovcova  A,  Onder  A,  Fritz  K.   

Selective  radiofrequency  therapy  as  a  non  invasive 
approach  for  contactless  body  contouring  and  cir-
cumferential  reduction.  J  Drugs  Dermatol.  2014; 
13:291–6.

  37.  Berankovaa B, Simotova P. Evaluation of non inva-
sive body sculpting method based on novel efficient 
application of high frequency energy administered to 
human adipose tissue. J Czecho-Slovak Assoc Anti-
Aging Med. 2009;2:21.

  38.  Anderson  RR,  Farinelli  W,  Laubach  H,  et  al. 
Selective  photothermolysis  of  lipid-rich  tissues: 
a  free  electron  laser  study.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2006;38(10):913–9.

  39.  Badin  AEZD,  Gondek  LBE,  Garcia  MJ,  et  al. 
Analysis  of  laser  lipolysis  effects  on  human  tissue 
samples  obtained  from  liposuction.  Aesthet  Plast 
Surg. 2005;29:281–6.

  40.  Ichikawa K, Miyasaka M, Tanaka R, et al. Histologic 
evaluation  of  the  pulsed  Nd:YAG  laser  for  laser 
lipolysis. Lasers Surg Med. 2005;36:43–6.

  41.  Prado A, Andrades P, Danilla S, et al. A prospective, 
randomized,  double-blind,  controlled  clinical  trial 
comparing  laser-assisted  lipoplasty  with  suction-
assisted  lipoplasty.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg.  2006;118: 
1032–45.

  42.  Apfelberg  DB.  Results  of  multicenter  study  of 
laser-assisted liposuction. Clin Plast Surg. 1996;23: 
713–9.

  43.  Goldman A, Schavelzon DE, Blugerman GS. Laser-
lipolysis: liposuction using Nd-YAG laser. Rev Soc 
Bras Cir Plást. 2002;17:17–26.

  44.  Kim  KH,  Geronemus  RG.  Laser  lipolysis  using  a 
novel 1,064 nm Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2006; 
32:241–8.

  45.  Badin  AZD,  Moraes  LM,  Gondek  L,  et  al.  Laser 
lipolysis:  flaccidity  under  control.  Aesthet  Plast 
Surg. 2002;26:335–9.

  46.  Goldman A. Submental Nd:YAG laser-assisted lipo-

suction. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:181–4.

  47.  Neira  R,  Ortiz  C.  Low  level  laser  assisted  liposcu-
lpture: clinical report of 700 cases. Aesthet Surg J. 
2002;22:451–5.

  48.  Jackson  RF,  Roche  G,  Butterwick  KJ,  Dedo  DD, 
Slattery KT. Low lever laser-assisted liposuction: a 
2004  clinical  study  of  its  effectiveness  for  enhanc-
ing  ease  of  liposuction  procedures  and  facilitating 
the recovery process for patients undergoing thigh, 
hip,  and  stomach  contouring.  Am  J  Cosmet  Surg. 
2004;21:191–8.

  49.  Silberg  B.  The  technique  of  external  ultrasound-
assisted  lipoplasty.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg.  1998; 
101:552.

  50.  Silberg B. The use of external ultrasound assist with 

liposuction. Aesthet Surg J. 1998;18:284–5.

  51.  Kinney  B.  Body  contouring  with  external  ultra-
sound. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1999;103:728–9.
  52.  Rosenberg GJ, Cabrera RC. External ultrasonic lipo-
plasty: an effective method of fat removal and skin 
shrinkage. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:785–91.

  53.  Wilkinson  TS.  External  ultrasound-assisted  lipo-

plasty. Aesthet Surg J. 1999;19:124–9.

  54.  Cook  WR.  Utilizing  external  ultrasonic  energy  to 
improve  the  results  of  tumescent  liposculpture. 
Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:1207–11.

  55.  Havoonjian HH, Luftman DB, Menaker GM, Moy RL.  
External  ultrasonic  tumescent  liposuction.  Dermatol 
Surg. 1997;23:1201–6.

  56.  Mendes  FH.  External  ultrasound-assisted  lipoplasty 
from  our  own  experience.  Aesthet  Plast  Surg.  2000; 
24:270–4.

  57.  Lawrence N, Cox SE. The efficacy of external ultra-
sound-assisted liposuction: a randomized controlled 
trial. Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:329–32.

  58.  Zocchi M. Ultrasonic liposculpturing. Aesthet Plast 

Surg. 1992;16:287–98.

  59.  Tebbets JB. Minimizing complications of ultrasound-
assisted  lipoplasty:  an  initial  experience  with  no 
related complications. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;102: 
1690–7.

  60.  Scuderi N, Paolini G, Grippaudo FR, et al. Compa-
rative  evaluation  of  traditional,  ultrasonic,  and 
pneumatic assisted lipoplasty: analysis of local and 
systemic effects, efficacy, and costs of these methods.  
Aesthet Plast Surg. 2000;24:395–400.

  61.  Maxwell PG, Gingrass MK. Ultrasound-assisted lipo-
plasty: a clinical study of 250 consecutive patients.  
Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;101:189–202.

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



258

  62.  Fodor PB, Watson J. Personal experience with ultra-
sound-assisted  lipoplasty:  a  pilot  study  comparing 
ultrasound-assisted  lipoplasty  with  traditional  lipo-
plasty. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;101:1103–16.
  63.  Kloehn  RA.  Liposuction  with  “sonic  sculpture”: 
six  years  experience  with  more  than  600  patients. 
Aesthet Surg Q. 1996;16:123–8.

  64.  Adamo C, Mazzocchi M, Rossi A, et al. Ultrasonic 
liposculpturing: extrapolations from the analysis of 
in vivo sonicated adipose tissue. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1997;100:220–6.

  65.  Kenkel  J,  Robinson  JB,  Beran  SJ,  et  al.  The  tis-
sue  effects  of  ultrasound-assisted  lipoplasty.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:213–20.

  66.  Igra  H,  Satur  NM.  Tumescent  liposuction  versus 
internal  ultrasonic-assisted  tumescent  liposuction. 
Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:1213–8.

  67.  Rohrich RJ, Beran SJ, Kenkel JM, et al. Extending 
the  role  of  liposuction  in  body  contouring  with 
ultrasound-assisted liposuction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
1998;101:1090–102.

  68.  Cedidi CC, Berger A. Severe abdominal wall necro-
sis  after  ultrasound-assisted  liposuction.  Aesthet 
Plast Surg. 2002;26:20–2.

  69.  Scheflan  M,  Tazi  H.  Ultrasonically  assisted  body 
contouring. Aesthet Surg Q. 1996;16:117–22.
  70.  Gupta SC, Khiabani KT, Stephenson LL, et al. Effect 
of liposuction on skin perfusion. Plast Reconstr Surg.  
2002;110:1748–51.

  71.  Ablaza  VJ,  Gingrass  MK,  Perry  LC,  et  al.  Tissue 
temperatures  during  ultrasound-assisted  lipoplasty. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:534–42.

  72.  Trott  SA,  Rohrich  RJ,  Beran  SJ,  et  al.  Sensory 
changes  after  traditional  and  ultrasound-assisted 
liposuction  using  computer-assisted  analysis.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1999;103:2016–25.

  73.  Howard BK, Beran SJ, Kenkel JM, et al. The effects 
of  ultrasonic  energy  on  peripheral  nerves:  impli-
cations  for  ultrasound-assisted  liposuction.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1999;103:984–9.

  74.  Avram MM. Cellulite: a review of its physiology and 
treatment. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2004;7:181–5.
  75.  Curri  SB.  Cellulite  and  fatty  tissue  microculation. 

Cosmet Toiletries. 1993;108:51–8.

  76.  van Vliet M, Ortiz A, Avram MM, et al. An assess-
ment of traditional and novel therapies for cellulite. 
J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7(1):7–10.

  77.  Draelos  ZD.  The  disease  of  cellulite.  J  Cosmet 

Dermatol. 2005;4:221–2.

  78.  Nurnberger  F,  Muller  G.  So  called  cellulite:  an 
invented  disease.  J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol.  1978;4: 
221–9.

  79.  Rossi ABR, Vergnanini AL. Cellulite: a review. J Eur 

Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2000;14:251–62.

  80.  Kligman AM.  Cellulite:  facts  and  fiction.  J  Geriatr 

Dermatol. 1997;5:136–9.

  81.  Iyer  S,  Carranza  D,  Kolodney  M,  et  al.  Evaluation 
of procollagen I deposition after intense pulsed light 
treatments at varying parameters in a porcine model. 
J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2007;9:75–8.

  82.  Goldberg DJ. New collagen formation after dermal 
remodeling  with  an  intense  pulsed  light  source.  J 
Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2:59–61.

  83.  Fink  JS,  Mermelstein  H,  Thomas A,  et  al.  Use  of 
intense  pulsed  light  and  a  retinyl-based  cream  as 
a  potential  treatment  for  cellulite:  a  pilot  study.  J 
Cosmet Dermatol. 2006;5:254–62.

  84.  Sasaki GH, Oberg K, Tucker B, et al. The effective-
ness and safety of topical PhotoActif phosphatidyl-
choline  based  anti-cellulite  gel  and  LED  (red  and 
near-infrared) light on Grade II–III high cellulite: a 
randomized,  double-blinded  study.  J  Cosmet  Laser 
Ther. 2007;9:87–96.

  85.  Bousquet-Rouaud  R,  et  al.  High  frequency  ultra-
sound evaluation of cellulite treated with the 1064 nm  
Nd:YAG  laser.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther.  2009;11: 
34–44.

  86.  Rosenbaum  M,  Prieto  V,  Johan  H,  Boschmann 
M,  Krueger  J,  Leibel  R,  Ship  A.  An  exploratory 
investigation  of  the  morphology  and  biochem-
istry  of  cellulite.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg.  1998;101: 
1934–9.

  87.  Pierard  G,  Nizet  JL,  Claudine  P-F.  Cellulite:  from 
standing fat herniation to hypodermal stretch marks. 
Am J Dermatopathol. 2000;22:34–7.

  88.  Curri  SB,  Bombardelli  E.  Proposed  etiology  and 
therapeutic management of local lipodystrophy and 
districtual microcirculation. Cosmet Toiletries. 1994; 
109:51–65.

  89.  Boyce S, Pabby A, Chuchaltkaren P, et al. Clinical 
evaluation of a device for the treatment of cellulite: 
Triactive. Am J Cosmet Surg. 2005;22:233–7.
  90.  Nootheti  PK,  Magpantay  A, Yosowitz  G,  et  al.  A 
single center, randomized, comparative, prospective 
clinical study to determine efficacy of the Velasmooth 
system versus the Triactive system for the treatment 
of cellulite. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38:908–12.
  91.  Lach E. Reduction of subcutaneous fat and improve-
ment  in  cellulite  appearance  by  dual-wavelength, 
low-level  laser  energy  combined  with  vacuum  and 
massage. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2008;10(4):202–9.

  92.  Kulick MI. Evaluation of a noninvasive, dual-wave-
length  laser-suction  and  massage  device  for  the 
regional treatment of cellulite. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2010;125(6):1788–96.

  93.  Gold  MH,  et  al.  Reduction  in  thigh  circumference 
and improvement in the appearance of cellulite with 
dual-wavelength,  low-level  laser  energy.  J  Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2011;13:13–20.

  94.  Manuskiatti W,  et  al.  Circumference  reduction  and 
cellulite  treatment  with  Tripollar  radiofrequency 
device: a pilot study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2009;23:820–7.

  95.  Mlosek RK, Woźniak W, Malinowska S, Lewandowski  
M, Nowicki A. The effectiveness of anticellulite treat-
ment  using  tripolar  radiofrequency  monitored  by 
classic  and  high-frequency  ultrasound.  J  Eur  Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2012;26(6):696–703.

  96.  Sadick  NS,  Mulholland  RS.  A  prospective  clinical 
study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of cellulite 

M. Wanner and M. M. Avram



259

treatment  using  the  combination  of  optical  and  RF 
energies  for  subcutaneous  tissue  heating.  J  Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2004;6(4):187–90.

  97.  Sadick NS, Magro C. A study evaluating the safety 
and  efficacy  of  the  Velasmooth™system  in  the 
treatment  of  cellulite.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther.  2007; 
9:15–20.

  98.  Alster  TS,  Tanzi  EL.  Cellulite  treatment  using  a 
novel combination readiofrequency, infrared light, 
and mechanical tissue manipulation device. J Cosmet  
Laser Ther. 2005;7:81–5.

  99.  Kulick  M.  Evaluation  of  the  combination  of  radio 
frequency,  infrared  energy  and  mechanical  roll-
ers with suction to improve skin surface irregulari-
ties (cellulite) in a limited treatment area. J Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2006;8:185–90.

 100.  Waniphakdeedecha R, Manuskiatti W. Treatment of 
cellulite with a bipolar radiofrequency, infrared heat, 
and  pulsatile  suction  device.  J  Cosmet  Dermatol. 
2006;5:284–8.

 101.  Pino  ME,  Rosado  RH,  Azuela  A,  et  al.  Effect  of 
controlled  volumetric  tissue  heating  with  radiofre-
quency  on  cellulite  and  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of 
the buttocks and thighs. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5: 
714–22.

 102.  Goldberg  D,  et  al.  Clinical,  laboratory,  and  MRI 
analysis  of  cellulite  treatment  with  unipolar  radio-
frequency device. Dermatol Surg. 2007;34:204–9.

 103.  Alexiaders-Armenakas  M,  et  al.  Unipolar  radiofre-
quency treatment to improve the appearance of cel-
lulite. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2008;10:148–53.
 104.  DiBernardo BE. Treatment of Cellulite using a 1440-
nm  pulsed  laser  with  one  year  follow  up.  Aesthet 
Surg J. 2011;31:328–41.

 105.  DiBernardo  B,  Sasaki  G,  Katz  BE,  Hunstad  JP, 
Petti  C,  Burns  AJ.  A  multicenter  study  for  a  sin-
gle,  three-step  laser  treatment  for  cellulite  using  a 
1440-nm  Nd:YAG  laser,  a  novel  side-firing  fiber, 
and a temperature-sensing cannula. Aesthet Surg J. 
2013;33(4):576–84.

15 Lasers for Adipose Tissue and Cellulite



Photodynamic Therapy

Ariel E. Eber, Marina Perper, Sebastian H. Verne, 
Robert Magno, Ibrahim Abdullah Omair ALOmair, 
Mana ALHarbi, and Keyvan Nouri

16

Abstract
Photodynamic  therapy  with  ALA  or  MAL  
is an excellent treatment for multiple actinic 
keratoses.

Large  field  photodynamic  therapy  can 
eradicate  multiple  actinic  keratoses  with  a 
shorter  downtime  than  5-fluorouracil  or 
imiquimod.

Multiple large field photodynamic therapy 
sessions  can  delay  the  appearance  of  actinic 
keratosis.

Keywords
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) · 
Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) · Methyl 
aminolevulinate (MAL) · Actinic keratosis

A. E. Eber · M. Perper · S. H. Verne · R. Magno ·  
K. Nouri (*) 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 
e-mail: knouri@med.miami.edu 

I. A. O. ALOmair · M. ALHarbi 
Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine,  
Al Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University 
(IMSIU), Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 

 Introduction

It was a medical student, Oscar Raab, who first 
discovered photodynamic therapy (PDT) at the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  [1].  PDT 
 combines  the  administration  of  a  photosensi-
tizer or photosensitizer precursor with its activa-
tion by light of appropriate wavelength. Reactive 
oxygen  species  (ROS),  which  can  be  used  to 
destroy a target cell, are created in the presence 
of oxygen. The concept, however, that a mole-
cule activated by light could be used to destruct 
pre-malignant and malignant cells, did not enter 
wide practice until the 1990s. Since then,  uses 
for PDT have been expanded to treat a variety of 
dermatologic  ailments  including  sun-damaged 
skin and acne [1].

Kennedy  and  Pottier  were  the  first  to  dis-
cover  the  application  of  Aminolevulinic  Acid 
(ALA)  [2]  for  treating  skin  disorders  and  the 
first  to  successfully  treat  them  [3].  ALA  has 
been  approved  for  dermatologic  indications  by 
the  Food  and  Drug  administration  (FDA)  for 
many years. PDT utilizes the heme biosynthetic 
pathway  to  produce  endogenous  porphyrins, 
particularly protoporphyrin IX, which is an effec-
tive  photosensitizer.  Protoporphyrin  IX  has  two 
important  spectral  peaks,  404–420  nm  and 
635 nm in the blue and red wavelengths, respec-

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_16

261





262

tively.  In  order  to  achieve  optimal  therapeutic 
effect, the light source used in PDT should cor-
respond to the excitation peaks of the photosen-
sitizer [1].

Biochemically,  heme  is  normally  synthe-
sized from glycine and succinyl CoA. The rate-
limiting step in the pathway is the conversion of 
glycine  and  succinyl  CoA  to  ALA,  which  is 
under  negative  feedback  control  by  heme. 
Excess  exogenous  ALA,  however,  can  bypass 
this feedback mechanism and produce an accu-
mulation of porphyrins that, when activated by 
visible  light,  generate  the  photosensitizing 
effect  of  PDT  [4].  Methyl  aminolevulinate 
(MAL) is another photosensitizer approved by 
the FDA. MAL theoretically works in the same 
manner as ALA because it is converted to ALA 
in the cytosol of cells, however it have a slower 
onset of action.

Since the approval of ALA and MAL in the 
United States for actinic keratosis, PDT is now a 
well-established  procedure.  Furthermore,  these 
drugs are approved in several other countries for 
the  treatment  of  non-melanoma  skin  cancers 
and they are used for other indications as well.

 Indications and Contraindications

 Indications

Aminolevulinic  acid  is  approved  in  the  US, 
Canada,  and  Brazil  for  the  treatment  of  mini-
mally  to  moderately  thick  actinic  keratosis  of 
the  face  and  scalp  in  combination  with  the 
Blu-U  unit  (Fig.  16.1).  It  was  originally 
approved for nonhypertrophic actinic keratoses, 
but  is  now  indicated  for  minimally  to  moder-
ately thick AK at the FDA’s request. In practice, 
this wording is similar and refers to the fact that 
PDT is not approved for thick and hypertrophic 
AKs. There are two issues related to treatment 
of hypertrophic AKs with PDT. The first is inad-
equate  penetration  of ALA  through  the  hyper-
keratotic portion of the lesion and the second is 
the possibility that some of the more hypertro-

phic lesions might be micro-invasive squamous 
cell carcinomas (SCCs). The current approval is 
based  on  phase  III  studies  where  ALA  was 
applied to visible lesions for 14–18 h followed 
by 10 J/cm2 of blue light from a Blu-U unit [4]. 
However,  in  practice  very  few  physicians  use 
ALA-PDT with a 14–18 h incubation. Most will 
use a shorter incubation of 45 minutes (min) to 
2  h. This  off  label  use  is  supported  by  a  small 
pilot  study  which  showed  that  incubation  of 
1–3  h  in  patients  with  extensive  sun  exposure 
leads to AK lesion cure rates that are similar to 
what has been shown with longer incubations in 
phase III studies [5].

Complete  responses  on  basal  cell  carcino-
mas  (BCCs)  have  been  reported  following 
ALA-PDT  [6];  however,  the  efficacy  of ALA-
PDT for the treatment of BCC has never been 
studied  in  multicenter  phase  III  trials  and  the 
long  term  recurrence  rates  have  not  been  well 
studied.  MAL  is  currently  FDA-approved  for 
the treatment of non-hypertrophic actinic kera-
toses of the face and scalp in immunocompetent 
patients  when  used  in  conjunction  with  lesion 
preparation  and  when  other  therapies  are  con-
sidered medically less appropriate. Use of PDT 
has evolved from its application as a monother-
apy  to  an  adjunct  with  other  treatments.  The 
value  of  sequential  treatment  with  MAL-PDT 
and  imiquimod  was  investigated  in  a  random-
ized trial (n = 105). Better response rates were 
seen for combination treatment than for either 
monotherapy;  however, 
in 
response  was  statistically  significant  only  for 
the  comparison  between  combination  therapy 
and  MAL-PDT  monotherapy  [5,  6].  AK  cure 
rates  following  either  a  single  MAL- PDT  ses-
sion  repeated  at  3  months  if  necessary  or  two 
MAL-PDT  sessions  performed  7  days  apart 
have  been  reported  to  be  around  90%  [7,  8]. 
Studies presented at meetings suggest that mul-
tiple large surface ALA or MAL PDT sessions 
can delay the appearance of new actinic kerato-
ses  in  organ  transplant  patients.  This  suggests 
that large surface PDT may be able to prevent 
skin cancer. Combination therapy with sequen-

the  difference 

A. E. Eber et al.



Fig. 16.1  Blu-U device. 
This non-coherent light 
source is approved for 
the treatment of actinic 
keratosis with ALA

263

tial MAL-PDT and imiquimod has also shown 
effectiveness in the treatment of AKs.

Several countries have also granted approval 
of MAL-PDT for the treatment of various non- 
melanoma  skin  cancers.  The  indications  vary 
from  one  country  to  another,  but  in  general 
most  countries  approved  MAL-PDT  for  the 
treatment  of  Bowen’s  disease  and  superficial 
BCC when other therapies such as surgery were 
considered inappropriate [9–11]. The complete 
response  rate  of  superficial  BCC  (sBCC)  fol-
lowing  MAL-PDT  has  been  shown  to  be  97% 
and  the  48-month  long-term  recurrence  rate 

was  22%  [12,  13].  The  main  advantage  of 
PDT  for  the  treatment  of  sBCC  and  Bowen’s 
disease  are  the  excellent   cosmetic  outcome  as 
compared to surgery, cryotherapy or electrodes-
sication,  and  curettage  [6,  9].  Some  countries 
have also approved MAL-PDT for thin nodular 
BCC,  but  because  the  cure  rate  is  lower  than 
for sBCC, many countries have restricted their 
approval  to  sBCC.  Recurrences  with  superfi-
cial BCCs, nodular BCCs and Bowen’s disease 
usually  occur  during  the  first  2–3  years  after 
therapy with no increase in recurrence between 
the third and the fifth year. PDT demonstrated 

16 Photodynamic Therapy



264

superior efficacy and less scarring in the treat-
ment of SCC in situ when compared with cryo-
therapy or 5-fluorouracil in a Cochrane review 
(n  =  363).  In  particular,  ALA-PDT  appeared 
to have greater efficacy than 5- fluorouracil but 
MAL-PDT  was  not  demonstrated  to  be  supe-
rior over 5-fluorouracil. Also, there was no dif-
ference  in  recurrence  rates  at  12  months  with 
either MAL-PDT or ALA-PDT when compared 
with 5-fluorouracil [6, 7]. A consensus group in 
Canada  and  Europe  analyzed  nine  studies  and 
reported that use of MAL-PDT can be consid-
ered as a safe and effective treatment for BCC 
in patients with Gorlin syndrome, with an effi-
cacy level being proportionate to the thickness 
of  the  lesion.  PDT  has  been  observed  to  have 
chemopreventive effects in patients with Gorlin 
syndrome  [8].  MAL  is  not  yet  commercially 
available in the US because the FDA approved 
MAL  only  in  combination  with  the  Curelight 
device,  an  earlier  LED  light  source  that  is 
rather cumbersome. In most countries MAL is 
approved with the Aktilite (Fig. 16.2), a smaller 
and more convenient device. Studies comparing 
the efficacy of the Curelight and the Aktilite in 
the  treatment  of AK  are  currently  being  com-
pleted in the US, and should ultimately lead to 
FDA  approval  of  MAL-PDT  performed  with 
the  Aktilite  device.  Initial  studies  conducted 
with  PDT  for  skin  diseases  often  used  lasers. 
However, the current off-label trend with ALA-
PDT  is  to  use  broad  area  application ALA  or 
MAL  in  order  to  treat  non-visible  lesions, 
improve  photoaging,  and  eventually  prevent 
the  appearance  of  new  lesions.  This  trend, 
combined with the cost and limited availability 
of  lasers  in  the  400–450  nm  and  630–640  nm 
ranges, has limited the use of lasers for PDT in 
dermatology. When  physicians  are  using ALA 
with a non-approved light source, they tend to 
favor  LEDs  or  intense  pulsed  light.  However, 
the  pulsed  dye  laser  at  595  nm  has  also  been 
used for the treatment of actinic keratoses and 
acne  [14].  PDT  has  been  widely  used  in  the 
treatment  of  mycosis  fungoides,  an  indolent 
subtype of cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Most of 

Fig.  16.2  Aktilite  device.  This  LED  light  source  is 
approved in several countries for the treatment of AK and/
or Bowen’s disease and/or superficial basal cell carcinoma 
with MAL

these  report  efficacy  of  MAL-PDT  and ALA- 
PDT  in  the  treatment  of  plaque-type  (stage 
I)  mycosis  fungoides,  but  decreased  efficacy 
against  tumor-type  (stage  II)  mycosis  fun-
goides,  and  there  has  been  a  single  report  of 
erosive  mycosis  fungoides  on  the  face  treated 
successfully  with  ALA-PDT  using  red  light 
[9]. One prospective study (n = 29) reported an 
objective response in 75% of plaque or patchy 
lesions after monthly treatments for 6 months. 
However,  a  recent  study  observed  two  of  five 
patients who appeared to have had a complete 
response  initially,  but  relapsed  at  follow-up 
(10.0 ± 10.5 months). MAL-PDT was success-
ful  in  treatment- refractory  mycosis  fungoides 
(four patients with complete remission and one 
with  partial  remission).  In  conclusion,  several 
consecutive  treatments  of  PDT  can  be  consid-
ered as an adjunct for treatment of mycosis fun-
goides, particularly for patch and plaque-stage 

A. E. Eber et al.



265

mycosis fungoides, with good cosmetic results 
in sensitive skin areas [10].

ALA and MAL have been reported to success-
fully treat various non oncologic skin conditions 
in  small  pilot  studies  or  in  single  case  reports. 
These include acne, rosacea, sebaceous hyperpla-
sia,  hidradenitis  suppurativa,  photoaging,  and 
other  cutaneous  infections  [14–19].  MAL  and 
ALA  are  both  in  phase  II  for  the  treatment  of 
acne  [14,  15,  20,  21]. This  is  in  part  due  to  the 
intense accumulation of porphyrin in sebaceous 
glands following topical application of ALA and 
MAL  (Fig.  16.3).  Light  exposure  could  induce 
partial  necrosis  of  sebaceous  glands  and  reduce 
sebum  excretion  thus  reducing  acne  lesions. 
Preliminary findings with ALA suggest that this 
is  one  of  the  mechanisms  of  ALA-PDT  when 
used for the treatment of acne [22]. Studies per-
formed with PDT in acne are complicated by the 
fact that blue or red light alone can improve acne 
by  elimination  of  Propionibacterium  acnes  as 
these  bacteria  naturally  accumulate  porphyrins. 
Studies have also shown that blue light with and 
without ALA is more effective than red light. In 
vitro  studies  comparing ALA  followed  by  blue 
light, 415 nm, or red light, 635 nm, and examin-
ing the bactericidal effects on P. acnes, found that 
red light phototherapy was less effective for the 
eradication of P. acnes than blue light photother-
apy with or without ALA. Therefore, there may 

still  be  a  role  for  combined  blue  and  red  light 
activation of ALA in the treatment of acne [11]. 
Most controlled studies which have shown good 
efficacy  report  a  strong  post  PDT  phototoxic 
reaction. Clinical photographs published in some 
of the articles which used MAL under occlusion 
for 3 h show moderate to severe erythema with 
crusting 1 day post-PDT. These publications also 
report severe pain in many patients during light 
exposure [15, 21]. Such a strong phototoxic reac-
tion is probably not needed to see improvement 
in  acne.  However,  it  is  possible  that  prolonged 
remission requires a certain degree of phototoxic 
reaction  as  necrosis  of  sebaceous  gland  tissue 
might  be  necessary.  The  current  literature  sug-
gests  that  PDT  for  acne  is  more  efficacious  for 
patients  with  moderate  to  severe  inflammatory 
acne,  although  the  best  treatment  parameters 
remain unknown. The use of ALA-PDT in rosa-
cea is primarily anecdotal, with few randomized 
controlled studies published thus far. MAL-PDT 
with  red  light  has  been  shown  to  improve  the 
appearance of rosacea, in particular papulopustu-
lar lesions, when compared with the erythemato-
telangiectatic types [12]. Evidence for the use of 
PDT  in  treating  rosacea  is  minimal,  but  MAL- 
PDT  with  red  light  has  resulted  in  rosacea 
improvement. Touma and colleagues have dem-
onstrated that the use of ALA-PDT with a 1–3 h 
incubation  followed  by  blue  light  exposure  in 

a

b

Fig. 16.3  (a) Porphyrin fluorescence in sebaceous glands 3 h after application of MAL. (b) Same section stained with 
hematoxylin

16 Photodynamic Therapy



266

patients  with  multiple  actinic  keratoses  can 
improve  photoaging  [5].  Small  wrinkles,  pig-
mentation,  and  sallowness  parameters  best 
improved with ALA-PDT. ALA-PDT performed 
with IPL has also been shown to improve photo-
aging  [18,  24].  Small  studies  have  also  shown 
complete response in AKs treated with ALA and 
IPL [24, 25]. There is currently a very wide vari-
ety  of  devices  approved  and  used  for  the  treat-
ment of photoaging. Most physicians using ALA 
or  MAL-PDT  for  photoaging  either  combine 
PDT with other devices and treatments or favor 
ALA or MAL-PDT for patients with actinic kera-
toses who would also like to have improvement 
in photoaging.

PDT has been used to treat different types of 
infections.  ALA-PDT  has  been  shown  to  suc-
cessfully treat cutaneous warts caused by human 
papilloma viruses without significant side effects 
and excellent cosmetic results in several studies. 
Reported clearance rates are as high as 88%. The 
clearance rate seems proportionate to the size of 
the  warts,  and  mean  treatment  time. ALA-PDT 
with white light (halogen lamp; 250 W Osram; 
delivered  via  slide  projector)  was  found  to  be 
more efficacious than red or blue light and stan-
dard cryotherapy [13,  14]. Several studies have 
showed  that  PDT  is  an  effective  modality  in 
treating  onychomycosis.  One  clinical 
trial 
(n = 30) used chemical avulsion (occlusion with 
urea for ten consecutive nights prior to PDT) and 
20% ALA-PDT (3-h incubation) followed by red 
light  therapy,  and  demonstrated  a  43.3%  cure 
rate  at  12-month  follow-up,  which  dropped  to 
36.6%  at  18-month  follow-up  [15].  Two  other 
case series reported complete resolution of fun-
gal infection with PDT. One case demonstrated 
successful treatment of subungual onychomyco-
sis after occlusion with urea for 7 days followed 
by  MAL- PDT  with  broadband  red  light  (37  J/
cm2). This was repeated every 2 weeks for a total 
of  three  treatments.  In  this  case,  Trichophyton 
rubrum  was  the  causative  organism  and  it  has 
been previously demonstrated to be sensitive to 
PDT in vitro. Nondermatophyte molds have also 
been cleared with MAL-PDT and red light [16, 
17].  Cutaneous  leishmaniasis,  erythrasma,  and 

Candida  albicans  intertrigo  have  been  treated 
successfully  using  PDT  [2,  18–20].  Treating 
warts  caused  by  human  papilloma  virus, ALA- 
PDT has been used with clearance rates as high 
as 88%. ALA-PDT with white light was shown 
to be more effective than red or blue light PDT 
or  cryotherapy.  One  study  used  chemical  avul-
sion to treat onychomycosis with urea followed 
by  ALA-PDT  with  red  light  with  a  cure  rate 
of  36.6%  at  18  months.  Other  studies  demon-
strated  complete  resolution  using  urea  and 
MAL-PDT  or  PDT  alone.  Both  dermatophyte 
and  nondermatophyte  molds  have  been  cleared 
with PDT; cutaneous leishmaniasis, erythrasma, 
and Candida albicans intertrigo have also been 
treated with PDT.

 Contraindications

It may be obvious but, ALA and MAL are contra-
indicated in patients sensitive to visible light cor-
responding  to  the  spectral  output  of  the  light 
source  used  (400–450  nm  for  Blu-U  and  630–
640 nm for Aktilite). Patients with porphyria and 
those with solar urticaria, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, and other photosensitive dermatoses are 
also sensitive to the visible light of PDT [1]. PDT 
has not been thoroughly studied on patients using 
concomitant photo-sensitizing drugs such as phe-
nothiazines, tetracyclines, thiazides and sulphon-
amides.  Theoretically,  this  could  increase  the 
phototoxic reaction seen after PDT. Additionally, 
current use of topical or systemic retinoids such 
as  tretinoin,  adapalene,  acitretin  or  isotretinoin 
could  also  increase  the  phototoxic  reaction. 
Interestingly MAL contains peanut oil. It should 
not  contain  the  protein  allergen  present  in  pea-
nuts,  but  many  physicians  refrain  from  using 
MAL-PDT in patients allergic to peanuts. Further, 
histologic variants of BCCs at high risk of recur-
rence such as morpheaform BCC, are a contrain-
dication to PDT with MAL. Pigmented basal cell 
carcinoma  is  usually  considered  a  contraindica-
tion to PDT as well as pigment limits light pene-
tration.  Despite  this,  several  physicians  have 
reported complete responses of pigmented BCCs 

A. E. Eber et al.



with  PDT.  Also,  recurrent  lesions  and  large 
lesions may be better treated with other modali-
ties [21].

 Techniques

Pre-operative management

•  Informed consent with emphasis on difficulty 

to predict phototoxic response

•  Thorough  examination  of  skin  areas  to  be 

exposed to detect malignant lesions
•  Consider herpes simplex prophylaxis

Description of the technique

•  Skin preparation to enhance penetration
•  Photosensitizer application
•  Interval to allow porphyrin build-up
•  Light exposure

Post-operative management

•  Sun avoidance
•  Ferrous oxide containing sunscreen
•  Moisturizer

 Pre-operative Management

A complete skin examination of the areas to be 
treated is necessary. This is of the utmost impor-
tance  when  performing  large  surface  PDT.  The 
examination should focus on the identification of 
malignancies such as basal cell carcinoma, squa-
mous cell carcinoma and melanoma. Sub-optimal 
treatment of these malignant lesions could lead to 
later,  deeper  recurrences. Any  suspicious  lesion 
should be biopsied. If PDT is performed to treat a 
malignant  lesion  such  as  BCC  or  Bowen’s  dis-
ease, a pre-treatment biopsy is recommended. A 
complete medical history including the existence 
of  visible  light  sensitivity  diseases  such  as  por-
phyria  or  solar  urticaria  should  be  recorded. 
Patients should be asked about current use of any 
topical product on the areas to be treated. Products 

267

that can alter the stratum corneum such as topical 
retinoids can increase ALA and MAL penetration 
and create a more severe phototoxic reaction fol-
lowing PDT. The use of systemic treatments that 
increase visible light sensitivity such as St-John’s 
wort should be avoided.

Patients  should  be  well  informed  about  the 
procedure  including  difficulty  in  predicting  the 
phototoxic reaction generated by PDT. If only a 
few AKs or a single BCC are treated, the photo-
toxic reaction is usually not a problem. However, 
a full-face treatment can lead to erythema associ-
ated  with  tenderness  and  sometimes  with  focal 
areas of crusting. It is suggested to obtain a writ-
ten informed consent that mentions this informa-
tion  as  well  as  potential  complications  like 
hyperpigmentation,  hypopigmentation,  scarring 
(mostly when treating basal cell carcinoma), sun 
and  visible  light  sensitivity,  and  prolonged  ery-
thema. Patients should be advised to bring a hat 
(when treating the face) or other pieces of cloth-
ing to cover the treated area.

The  risks  of  triggering  light  sensitive  recur-
rences of herpes labialis following PDT are cur-
rently  unknown.  For  patients  who  experience 
recurrences  following  sun  exposure,  antiviral 
prophylaxis should be discussed. Light exposure 
during  PDT  sometimes  leads  to  an  urticarial 
reaction  immediately  after  PDT.  This  is  more 
intense when red light is used and when large sur-
faces are exposed. This phenomenon has recently 
been attributed to histamine release by mast cells 
and  could  be  prevented  by  pre-treatment  with 
antihistamines such as cetirizine.

 Description of the Technique

 Treatment of Actinic Keratoses 
with ALA

A gentle curettage of keratotic AKs should be per-
formed  prior  to ALA  application.  This  is  not 
included in the current product monograph but the 
author finds that this increases the clinical response 
of individual lesions, probably by increasing drug 
penetration.  Skin  preparation  is  suggested  when 

16 Photodynamic Therapy



268

performing short ALA incubations. The face can 
be washed vigorously with acetone or treated with 
microdermabrasion. These techniques are believed 
to  increase ALA  penetration  through  degreasing 
and/or partially removing the stratum corneum.

Microdermabrasion  can  significantly  reduce 
ALA incubation time [27]. Care should be taken 
to  use  the  same  technique  with  the  same  pre- 
treatment method by the same person when treat-
ing a patient at different sessions as differences in 
skin preparation can have a dramatic impact on 
porphyrin build-up and therefore on the extent of 
the post-PDT phototoxic reaction.

ALA (Levulan) is available in the form of two 
glass vials inserted in a plastic tube that is cov-
ered  by  cardboard  (Fig.  16.4).  The  two  vials 
should  be  crushed  with  fingers  and  the  stick 
shaken for about 3 min to ensure proper mixing 
of ALA powder and hydroalcoholic vehicle. ALA 
should be applied on all AKs present in the treat-
ment area. Most physicians will also apply ALA 
on  the  entire  face  in  order  to  treat  non-visible 
lesions  and  prevent  new AKs.  Broad  area ALA 
application also has the advantage of improving 
signs of photoaging [5]. Care should be taken to 
avoid applying ALA too close to the eyes as the 
solution  will  sting  if  it  inadvertently  gets  into 
them. Facial zones with more sebaceous glands, 
such as the nose and chin, often display a more 
pronounced  phototoxic  reaction  than  the  rest  of 
the face when performing PDT. This is probably 
due to more intense accumulation of porphyrins 
in  the  sebaceous  glands.  If  ALA  or  MAL  is 
applied  on  these  zones  during  a  full-face  treat-
ment, patients should be told to expect a strong 
phototoxic reaction the day following light expo-
sure.  A  delay  of  45  min  to  2  h  is  suggested 
between  ALA  application  and  light  exposure 
when ALA-PDT  is  used  on  large  skin  surfaces 

for  the  treatment  of  AKs.  The  intensity  of  the 
phototoxic reaction generated by ALA-PDT var-
ies  greatly  from  one  patient  to  another  and  is 
highly  dependent  on  the  type  of  pre-treatment 
used.  For  patients  with  extensive  photodamage 
and numerous ill-defined AKs, a 45–60 min incu-
bation period is usually sufficient, and this dura-
tion  time  can  even  lead  to  a  severe  phototoxic 
reaction  post-PDT.  Some  physicians  prefer  to 
perform  the  first  treatment  with  a  30–45  min 
incubation time in these patients. The incubation 
time  can  be  adjusted  at  subsequent  treatments 
based on the phototoxic reaction and the clinical 
response observed.

After  a  proper  incubation  time,  patients  are 
placed inside the Blue-U device with appropriate 
eyeshields to protect their eyes. As the U-shaped 
unit rotates, treatments can be performed with the 
patient sitting or lying down. The current product 
monograph recommends a light dose of 10 J/cm2 
of  blue  light  that  corresponds  to  an  incubation 
time  of  16  min  and  40  s.  This  was  the  fluence 
used in phase III, but a lower fluence is probably 
enough  in  most  patients  to  completely  photo- 
bleach porphyrins present in lesions. Many phy-
sicians  use  a  shorter  incubation  time,  but  the 
efficacy of shorter incubation times has not been 
thoroughly studied in clinical trials.

Blue  light  exposure  after  ALA  applica-
tion  generates  a  burning  sensation  that  gradu-
ally  increases  until  it  reaches  a  plateau  around 
3–8 min, which is  then  followed  by  a  gradual 
decrease.  This  decrease  in  burning  sensation 
intensity  corresponds  to  photo-inactivation  of 
porphyrins  present  in  skin  lesions.  Blue  light 
exposure  is  usually  well  tolerated  by  most 
patients if they have been properly warned about 
the sensation to expect during light exposure. An 
assistant  should  be  present  in  the  room   during 

Fig. 16.4  ALA 
(LEVULAN Kerastick). 
The cardboard has been 
removed to show the 
two glass vials. Areas 
where pressure needs to 
be applied to crush the 
two glass vials are 
identified in red

A. E. Eber et al.



PDT,  especially  for  the  first  PDT  session,  to 
reassure  patients  and  to  monitor  the  burning 
 sensation.  The  assistant  can  use  cool  air,  spray 
cool  water  or  even  temporarily  interrupt  light 
exposure if the pain is too intense.

 Treatment of BCC with MAL

A  biopsy  is  suggested  before  treating  a  BCC 
with  MAL-PDT.  The  biopsy  serves  to  confirm 
the diagnosis and exclude histological subtypes, 
such  as  morpheaform  BCCs,  for  which  PDT  is 
contraindicated. Gentle curettage of the lesion is 
mandatory  before  MAL  application  as  5-year 
cure rates have been established for MAL-PDT 
with pre-treatment curettage. Figure 16.5 shows 
a patient with multiple BCCs before and imme-
diately  after  lesion  preparation.  MAL  is  pro-
vided in 2 g tubes. Once opened, the cream must 
be used within 7 days. This allows for treatment 
of more than one patient with the same tube or 
treatment  of  the  same  patient  7  days  later  with 
the  same  tube.  MAL  should  be  applied  on  the 
entire lesion including a 1-cm margin and should 
be  occluded.  Three  hours  after  application,  the 
occlusion is removed, the cream is wiped out of 
the  treatment  field,  and  the  device  (Aktilite)  is 
positioned  at  5–8  cm  from  the  skin. There  is  a 
risk  of  unsatisfactory  treatment  if  the  device  is 
positioned  beyond  8  cm.  The  irradiance  varies 
according to the distance between skin and light 
source. The  area  where  MAL  has  been  applied 

269

should be exposed to 37 J/cm2 (Aktilite device) 
of red light, which corresponds to approximately 
7 min and 30 s.

 Post-operative Management

Excess ALA  and  MAL  should  be  removed  by 
thoroughly  washing  the  skin  with  tap  water 
to  prevent  further  porphyrin  synthesis.  This  is 
especially  important  when  ALA  or  MAL  has 
been  applied  to  large  areas  such  as  the  entire 
face.  Since  patients  are  mostly  sensitive  to  the 
visible  part  of  the  electromagnetic  spectrum, 
the use of high SPF sunscreens does not provide 
adequate  sun  protection  in  the  days  following 
PDT.  Patients  can  use  a  sunscreen  containing 
inorganic  sunscreening  agents,  such  as  Avene 
50 Compact which provides some, although not 
complete, protection [28]. Patients should avoid 
sun exposure or exposure to intense visible light 
such as surgical lighting or a high power dentist 
lamp for 2 days after PDT. Patients should also 
avoid  driving  or  walking  under  the  sun  on  the 
day PDT is performed. They should be reminded 
that  there  is  significant  visible  light  exposure 
even on cloudy days and through window glass. 
There  is  no  visible  light  sensitivity  beyond 
2 days after PDT with ALA or MAL. However, 
patients should use a high SPF sunscreen which 
provides  adequate  UVA  protection  to  prevent 
hyperpigmentation.  The  use  of  Avene  thermal 
water,  a  low  mineral  content  water,  after  PDT 

a

b

Fig. 16.5  Patient with multiple BCCs (Gorlin’s syndrome) on the back before lesion preparation (a) and immediately 
after lesion preparation but before MAL application (b)

16 Photodynamic Therapy



270

has been shown to be superior to a higher min-
eral content water  comparatively for decreasing 
post-treatment  pruritus  [29].  Crusting  and  ero-
sions over AKs and BCCs is expected and desir-
able  when  treating  malignant  or  pre-malignant 
lesions  with  PDT.  Simple  occlusion  combined 
with the use of petrolatum jelly or an antibiotic 
ointment  is  usually  all  that  is  required  to  pro-
mote healing and decrease pain. The regular use 
of a bland moisturizer is recommended. Patients 
should  avoid  any  topical  products  containing 
urea, retinoic acid or other alpha hydroxyl acids, 
alcohol or propylene glycol in the weeks follow-
ing PDT. Patients should also be advised to call 
their physician if the reaction increases beyond 
2  days,  as  this  may  be  suggestive  of  bacterial 
infection  or  reactivation  of  extensive  herpes 
simplex.

 Adverse Events

Expected

•  Erythema
•  Burning sensation during light exposure
•  Crusting on AKs and BCCs possible
•  Pain after light exposure
•  Hyperpigmentation
•  Hypopigmentation
•  Scarring  by  loss  of  substance  (e.g.,  nodular 

basal cell carcinoma)

•  Urticarial reaction on exposed area
•  Prolonged erythema
•  Cellulitis, impetigo
•  Reactivation of herpes simplex

Rare

•  Allergic contact dermatitis
•  Keratoacanthoma
•  Squamous cell carcinoma
•  Erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp
•  Koebner phenomenon
•  Leg ulceration
•  Peripheral facial palsy
•  Amnesia
•  Hypertension

 Side Effects/Complications

Most  patients  will  report  a  burning  sensation, 
pain, or pruritus during light exposure. This is 
usually  well  tolerated.  All  patients  should 
expect  a  phototoxic  reaction  after  PDT.  The 
absence of a phototoxic reaction on pre-malig-
nant  or  malignant  lesions  following  PDT  is 
usually a sign that the treatment will not be effi-
cacious.  The  phototoxic  reaction  manifests 
itself primarily by mild to severe erythema on 
exposed  sites.  This  is  usually  associated  with 
crusting  on  areas  were AKs  were  present  and 
sometimes  associated  with  vesicles,  pustules, 
and/or erosions.

Erythema  and  edema  are  often  more  severe 
when  the  lesion  to  be  treated  is  located  on  the 
nose. This is probably related to the abundance of 
sebaceous glands on the nose. Tenderness is usu-
ally present for a few days after PDT. Whole face 
treatments are often associated with pain and ten-
derness that are exacerbated with pressure (con-
tact with pillow when sleeping for example) and 
followed by desquamation.

Bacterial infections such as impetigo and/or 
cellulitis  or  reactivation  of  herpes  simplex  are 
possible  but  very  rarely  seen  with  ALA  and 
MAL-PDT. PDT can induce hyperpigmentation 
on treated areas. This is rarely seen in patients 
with  phototype  I  or  II.  Hypopigmentation  is 
possible but rare. Scarring by loss of substance 
can  be  seen  after  treatment  of  lesions  that 
invade  the  dermis  such  as  nodular  basal  cell 
carcinoma. A few cases of prolonged erythema 
have been reported following PDT on the face 
[22].  This  phenomenon  can  sometimes  last 
many months. In the author’s experience, this is 
more frequent in patients with rosacea and usu-
ally fades over time.

Allergic contact dermatitis to MAL has been 
reported  and  documented  by  patch  testing.  One 
case of contact dermatitis was occupational as the 
patient was working as a nurse in the dermatol-
ogy department [23, 24]. Clinicians should think 
about this possibility in patients who have under-
gone  several  MAL-PDT  treatments  and  present 
with  a  dermatitis  type  of  reaction  that  was  not 
present at previous treatments.

A. E. Eber et al.



Recently,  a  small  number  of  patients  were 
reported to develop keratoacanthomas after treat-
ment  with  PDT  and  some  of  these  were  self- 
limited  [25–28].  Additionally,  squamous  cell 
carcinoma has also occurred post treatment with 
PDT  [29,  30].  Other  anecdotal  situations  have 
been reported including a Koebner phenomenon 
in one patient, resulting in re-activation of inac-
tive  psoriasis  [31].  Although  uncommon,  an 
elderly  patient  with  peripheral  vascular  disease 
and Bowen’s disease on her leg was treated with 
PDT  and  resulted  in  leg  ulcer  [32].  Other  rare 
complications include erosive pustular dermato-
sis  of  the  scalp,  peripheral  facial  palsy  (bell’s 
palsy), amnesia, and elevation of blood pressure 
requiring immediate treatment [33–36].

 Prevention and Treatment of Side 
Effects/Complications

Pain during the treatment session is a common side 
effect  that  might  cause  discomfort  for  patients. 
When  large  surfaces  are  treated  with  MAL  or 
ALA, the use of water spray, ice packs, fan or cold 
air  (such  as  from  a  Zimmer  device),  can  allevi-
ate this sensation [37]. Temporary interruption of 
light exposure is another alternative as the burning 
sensation  subsides  rapidly  when  the  light  device 
is  turned  off.  If  the  pain  is  severe  enough,  other 
methods such as subcutaneous infiltration anesthe-
sia or even nerve block can be considered [38, 39]. 
Topical  anesthetic  creams  such  as  eutectic  mix-
tures  of  local  anesthetics  (EMLA  cream)  do  not 
seem to be effective [40]. Super-potent topical cor-
ticosteroids  can  decrease  inflammation  and  ery-
thema  associated  with  PDT  if  used  immediately 
before or after the treatment session without com-
promising  the  therapeutic  outcome  [41].  Careful 
history taking for other diseases such as psoriasis 
or  peripheral  vascular  diseases  and  hypertension 
may decrease unwanted side effects.

As discussed in the “Post-operative Manage-
ment” section, application of petrolatum jelly, a 
bland  moisturizer  or  an  antibiotic  ointment  will 
make  the  phototoxic  reaction  more  tolerable. 
Furthermore,  removal  of  MAL  and  ALA  after 
treatment  is  important  in  order  to  reduce  the  

271

continuous  synthesis  of  porphyrin,  which 
increases  post-treatment  sensitivity  to  visible 
light. Patients should thoroughly wash their face 
with  soap  and  water  after  light  exposure.  In  a 
small  pilot  study  where  MAL  was  applied  for 
3 h under occlusion, porphyrin fluorescence was 
maximum  at  1  h  after  cream  removal  but  there 
was enough porphyrin present in the skin at 24 h 
after  MAL  application  to  induce  a  phototoxic 
reaction following light exposure in 6 out of 16 
subjects  [42].  Patients  must  be  warned  to  avoid 
sun  exposure  for  2  days  after  PDT.  The  use  of 
a  sunscreen  containing  a  physical  sunscreening 
agent  is  recommended  during  the  first  2  days. 
Sun  protection  with  a  high  SPF  sunscreen  and 
good  UVA  protection  is  also  important  during 
the  weeks  following  PDT  in  order  to  prevent 
hyperpigmentation.

 Future Directions

•  Treatment of Acne
•  Hidradenitis Suppurativa
•  Daylight PDT
•  Personalized Medicine
•  Sonodynamic PDT

PDT has been available for over a century and 
will  most  likely  continue  to  be  used  as  a  stand- 
alone treatment or in combination with other ther-
apies for various medical and cosmetic purposes. 
It has been implicated with aminolevuninic acid 
(ALA)  and  methylaminolevulinate  (MAL)  for 
treating  acne,  possibly  through  the  decrease  of 
sebaceous gland activity from light activation of 
the  photosensitizer  [43].  While  PDT  is  not  the 
standard of care for treating hidradenitis suppura-
tiva, it may be a beneficial adjuvant to treatments 
such as rifampin and clindamycin [44]. Moreover, 
although  cancer  was  the  main  target  for  PDT 
research from the 1970s to 2010, PDT is now also 
being explored for its antimicrobial properties, for 
there is currently a dangerously high rise of multi-
drug-resistance among pathogenic microbes [45]. 
Daylight PDT is also becoming increasingly pop-
ular, especially in European nations, for treating 
actinic  keratoses.  Instead  of  performing  therapy 

16 Photodynamic Therapy



272

with  a  conventional  light  source,  daylight  PDT 
harnesses daylight exposure to continuously acti-
vate protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) 30 min after MAL 
application,  when  the  protoporphyrin  begins 
forming  in  the  skin.  Daylight  PDT  facilitates 
treatment to much larger areas of skin than con-
ventional  PDT  and  also  has  the  advantage  of 
inducing  fewer  adverse  effects  [46].  Additional 
prospective  uses  for  PDT  and  future  directions 
include  photochemical  internalization,  theranos-
tics,  genetically  coded  protein  photosensitizers, 
sonodynamic therapy using ultrasound, and two- 
photon absorption PDT [45]. Lastly, combination 
therapy  with  PDT  is  on  the  horizon.  In  fact,  a 
study recently demonstrated that sequential appli-
cation of PDT and imiquimod provides a signifi-
cantly  better  clinical  and  histologic  response  in 
the  treatment  of  AK’s  than  PDT  or  imiquimod 
alone [5].

 Conclusion
To  conclude,  photodynamic  therapy  is  a 
unique modality currently widely used as field 
therapy for the treatment of actinic keratosis, 
in  situ  squamous  cell  carcinomas  (Bowen’s 
disease),  and  superficial  basal  cell  carcino-
mas.  For  multiple  AK’s,  PDT  treatment  is 
associated with less downtime than other full-
face or large surface treatments like 5-fluoro-
uracil  or  imiquimod  alone.  Further,  PDT  in 
dermatology  is  being  used  to  treat  acne  vul-
garis,  combat  microbial  disease,  and  other 
skin conditions. Daylight PDT is gaining pop-
ularity  and  so  is  the  use  of  other  vehicles, 
delivery  methods,  and  combination  therapy. 
Currently,  PDT  is  still  more  widely  used  in 
Europe  most  likely  due  poor  reimbursement 
rates  for  PDT  in  the  US.  Strong  studies  are 
needed to show the efficacy of PDT in order to 
justify  its  use,  and  hopefully  insurance  com-
panies will follow suit.

References

  1.  Wan MT, Lin JY. Current evidence and applications of 
photodynamic  therapy  in  dermatology.  Clin  Cosmet 
Investig Dermatol. 2014;7:145–63.

  2.  Calzavara-Pinton  PG,  Venturini  M,  Capezzera  R, 
Sala  R,  Zane  C.  Photodynamic  therapy  of  interdigi-

tal  mycoses  of  the  feet  with  topical  application  of 
5-aminolevulinic acid. Photodermatol Photoimmunol 
Photomed. 2004;20:144–7.

  3.  Kennedy  JC,  Pottier  RH,  Pross  DC.  Photodynamic 
therapy  with  endogenous  protoporphyrin  IX:  basic 
principles and present clinical experience. J Photochem  
Photobiol B Biol. 1990;6:143–8.

  4.  Peng Q, Berg K, Moan J, Kongshaug M, Nesland JM. 
5-Aminolevulinic  acid-based  photodynamic  therapy: 
principles  and  experimental  research.  Photochem 
Photobiol. 1997;65:235–51.

  5.  Serra-Guillen C, Nagore E, Hueso L, et al. A random-
ized  pilot  comparative  study  of  topical  methyl  ami-
nolevulinate photodynamic therapy versus imiquimod 
5%  versus  sequential  application  of  both  therapies 
in  immunocompetent  patients  with  actinic  kerato-
sis:  clinical  and  histologic  outcomes.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 2012;66:e131–7.

  6.  Bath-Hextall FJ, Matin RN, Wilkinson D, Leonardi- 
Bee  J.  Interventions  for  cutaneous  Bowen’s  disease. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:Cd007281.

  7.  Salim A, Leman JA, McColl JH, Chapman R, Morton 
CA. Randomized comparison of photodynamic ther-
apy with topical 5-fluorouracil in Bowen’s disease. Br 
J Dermatol. 2003;148:539–43.

  8.  Basset-Seguin  N,  Bissonnette  R,  Girard  C,  et  al. 
Consensus  recommendations  for  the  treatment  of 
basal cell carcinomas in Gorlin syndrome with topical 
methylaminolaevulinate-photodynamic therapy. J Eur 
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28:626–32.

  9.  Coors EA, von den Driesch P. Topical photodynamic 
therapy for patients with therapy-resistant lesions of 
cutaneous  T-cell  lymphoma.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2004;50:363–7.

 10.  Quereux  G,  Brocard  A,  Saint-Jean  M,  et  al. 
Photodynamic  therapy  with  methyl-aminolevulinic 
acid for paucilesional mycosis fungoides: a prospec-
tive  open  study  and  review  of  the  literature.  J  Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2013;69:890–7.

 11. Choi  MS,  Yun  SJ,  Beom  HJ,  Park  HR,  Lee  JB.   

Comparative  study  of  the  bactericidal  effects  of 
5-aminolevulinic  acid  with  blue  and  red  light  on 
Propionibacterium acnes. J Dermatol. 2011;38:661–6.
 12.  Bryld  LE,  Jemec  GB.  Photodynamic  therapy  in 
a  series  of  rosacea  patients.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol 
Venereol. 2007;21:1199–202.

 13.  Stender IM, Lock-Andersen J, Wulf HC. Recalcitrant 
hand and foot warts successfully treated with photo-
dynamic therapy with topical 5-aminolaevulinic acid: 
a pilot study. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1999;24:154–9.
 14.  Schroeter  CA,  Pleunis  J,  van  Nispen  tot  Pannerden 
C, Reineke T, Neumann HA. Photodynamic therapy: 
new  treatment  for  therapy-resistant  plantar  warts. 
Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:71–5.

 15.  Sotiriou  E,  Koussidou-Eremonti  T,  Chaidemenos  G, 
Apalla  Z,  Ioannides  D.  Photodynamic  therapy  for 
distal  and  lateral  subungual  toenail  onychomycosis 
caused  by Trichophyton  rubrum:  preliminary  results 
of  a  single-centre  open  trial.  Acta  Derm  Venereol. 
2010;90:216–7.

 16. Gilaberte  Y,  Aspiroz  C,  Martes  MP,  Alcalde  V, 
Espinel- Ingroff A, Rezusta A. Treatment of refractory 

A. E. Eber et al.



fingernail onychomycosis caused by nondermatophyte 
molds  with  methylaminolevulinate  photodynamic 
therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65:669–71.

 17.  Watanabe  D,  Kawamura  C,  Masuda  Y,  Akita  Y, 
Tamada Y, Matsumoto Y. Successful treatment of toe-
nail onychomycosis with photodynamic therapy. Arch 
Dermatol. 2008;144:19–21.

 18.  Gardlo K, Horska Z, Enk CD, et al. Treatment of cuta-
neous leishmaniasis by photodynamic therapy. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2003;48(6):893.

 19.  Gonzalez U, Pinart M, Reveiz L, Alvar J. Interventions 
for  Old  World  cutaneous  leishmaniasis.  Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2008:Cd005067.

 20. Darras-Vercambre  S,  Carpentier  O,  Vincent  P, 
Bonnevalle A, Thomas P. Photodynamic action of red 
light for treatment of erythrasma: preliminary results. 
Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  Photomed.  2006; 
22:153–6.

 21.  Lucena  SR,  Salazar  N,  Gracia-Cazana  T,  et  al. 
Combined treatments with photodynamic therapy for 
non-melanoma  skin  cancer.  Int  J  Mol  Sci.  2015;16: 
25912–33.

 22.  Misra  A,  Maybury  K,  Eltigani  TA.  Late  erythema 
after photodynamic therapy to the face. Plast Reconstr 
Surg. 2006;117:2522–3.

 23.  Harries  MJ,  Street  G,  Gilmour  E,  Rhodes  LE,  Beck 
MH.  Allergic  contact  dermatitis  to  methyl  ami-
nolevulinate  (Metvix)  cream  used  in  photodynamic  
therapy.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  Photomed. 
2007;23:35–6.

 24.  Pastor-Nieto  MA,  Jimenez-Blazquez  E,  Sanchez- 
Herreros  C,  Belmar-Flores  P.  Allergic  contact  der-
matitis  caused  by  methyl  aminolevulinate.  Actas 
Dermo-sifiliograficas. 2013;104:168–70.

 25.  Gogia  R,  Grekin  RC,  Shinkai  K.  Eruptive  self- 
resolving  keratoacanthomas  developing  after  treatment 
with  photodynamic  therapy  and  microderma brasion. 
Dermatol Surg. 2013;39:1717–20.

 26.  Gold  MH.  Commentary  on  eruptive  keratoacantho-
mas  after  photodynamic  therapy.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2015;41:1430–1.

 27.  Maydan E, Nootheti PK, Goldman MP. Development 
of a keratoacanthoma after topical photodynamic ther-
apy  with  5-aminolevulinic  acid.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2006;5:804–6.

 28.  Ramirez  M,  Groff  S,  Kowalewski  C.  Eruptive  kera-
toacanthomas  after  photodynamic  therapy.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2015;41:1426–9.

 29.  Calista D. Development of squamous cell carcinoma 
after photodynamic therapy with methyl aminoleuvu-
linate. Br J Dermatol. 2014;171:905–8.

 30.  Ratour-Bigot C, Chemidling M, Montlahuc C, et al. 
Squamous  cell  carcinoma  following  photodynamic 
therapy  for  cutaneous  Bowen’s  disease  in  a  series 
of  105  patients.  Acta  Derm  Venereol.  2016;96: 
658–63.

 31. Stender IM, Wulf HC. Kobner reaction induced by 
photodynamic  therapy  using  delta- aminolevulinic 
acid. A case report. Acta Derm Venereol. 1996;76: 
392–3.

273

 32.  Strauss  RM,  Ogden  S,  Sheehan-Dare  RA,  Goulden 
V.  Leg  ulceration  after  aminolaevulinic  acid  pho-
todynamic  therapy  in  a  patient  with  peripheral  vas-
cular  disease.  Dermatology  (Basel,  Switzerland). 
2003;207:85.

 33.  Borroni  RG,  Carugno  A,  Rivetti  N,  Arbustini  E, 
Brazzelli  V.  Risk  of  acute  postoperative  hyperten-
sion  after  topical  photodynamic  therapy  for  non- 
melanoma skin cancer. Photodermatol Photoimmunol 
Photomed. 2013;29:73–7.

 34.  Schmutz JL, Barbaud A, Trechot P. Erosive pustulo-
sis on the scalp following dynamic phototherapy. Ann 
Dermatol Venereol. 2010;137:86.

 35.  Gemigniani F, Bodet D, Gonzalez-Llavona B, Garcia- 
Patos V. Peripheral facial palsy after topical photody-
namic therapy for facial actinic keratoses. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2014;71:e90–2.

 36.  Reinholz M, Heppt MV, Hoffmann FS, et al. Transient 
memory  impairment  and  transient  global  amnesia 
induced  by  photodynamic  therapy.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2015;173:1258–62.

 37.  Wiegell  SR,  Haedersdal  M,  Wulf  HC.  Cold  water 
and pauses in illumination reduces pain during pho-
todynamic therapy: a randomized clinical study. Acta 
Derm Venereol. 2009;89:145–9.

 38.  Borelli C, Herzinger T, Merk K, et al. Effect of sub-
cutaneous infiltration anesthesia on pain in photody-
namic therapy: a controlled open pilot trial. Dermatol 
Surg. 2007;33:314–8.

 39.  Paoli J, Halldin C, Ericson MB, Wennberg AM. Nerve 
blocks  provide  effective  pain  relief  during  topical 
photodynamic  therapy  for  extensive  facial  actinic 
keratoses. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2008;33:559–64.
 40.  Langan  SM,  Collins  P.  Randomized,  double-blind, 
placebo-controlled  prospective  study  of  the  effi-
cacy  of  topical  anaesthesia  with  a  eutetic  mixture 
of  lignocaine  2.5%  and  prilocaine  2.5%  for  topi-
cal  5-aminolaevulinic  acid-photodynamic  therapy 
for extensive scalp actinic keratoses. Br J Dermatol. 
2006;154:146–9.

 41.  Wiegell  SR,  Petersen  B,  Wulf  HC.  Topical  cortico-
steroid  reduces  inflammation  without  compromis-
ing the efficacy of photodynamic therapy for actinic 
keratoses: a randomized clinical trial. Br J Dermatol. 
2014;171:1487–92.

 42.  Angell-Petersen E, Christensen C, Muller CR, Warloe 
T. Phototoxic reaction and porphyrin fluorescence in 
skin  after  topical  application  of  methyl  aminolaevu-
linate. Br J Dermatol. 2007;156:301–7.

 43. Bissonnette  R.  Treatment  of  acne  with  photody-
namic therapy. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2011;146: 
445–56.

 44.  Scheinfeld  N.  The  use  of  photodynamic  therapy  to 
treat  hidradenitis  suppurativa  a  review  and  critical 
analysis. Dermatol Online J. 2015;21

 45. Abrahamse H, Hamblin MR. New photosensitizers 
for  photodynamic  therapy.  Biochem  J.  2016;473: 
347–64.

 46.  Wulf  HC.  Photodynamic  therapy  in  daylight  for 

actinic keratoses. JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152:631–2.

16 Photodynamic Therapy



Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)

Sanjana Iyengar, Keyvan Nouri, Peter Bjerring, 
Kåre Christiansen, Robert A. Weiss, 
Girish S. Munavalli, Sonal Choudhary, 
and Angel Leiva

17

Abstract
Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) is a light-emitting 
system  that  is  capable  of  emitting  filtered 
polychromatic  broad  bandwidth  wavelengths 
between 515 and 1200 nm.

The  emission  of  wavelengths  is  con-
trolled by both an internal filter that blocks 
undesired  wavelengths  from  being  emitted 
and a “heat- sink” effect that allows the con-

trolled  transfer  of  thermal  energy  from  an 
object  at  high  temperature  to  an  object  at 
lower temperature.

Keywords
Intense pulsed light · Leg vein treatment · 
Telangiectasias · Hemangiomas · 
Poikiloderma of Civatte · Pigmentation  · 
Photorejuvenation · Scarring · Hair removal · 
Acne · Seborrheic keratosis · Sarcoidosis · 
Hidradenitis suppurativa · Nail psoriasis

S. Iyengar 
Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School  
of Medicine, Northwestern University,  
Chicago, IL, USA 

K. Nouri 
Dermatology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Ophthalmology, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Otolaryngology, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Dermatologic Surgery, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Medical Group,  
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

Dermatology Services at Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of Miami Hospital  
and Clinics, Miami, FL, USA 

MOHS, Dermatologic and Laser Surgery,  
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Surgical Training, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA

P. Bjerring 
Department of Dermatology, Swansea University, 
Swansea, Wales, UK 

K. Christiansen 
Molholm Research, Molholm Hospital,  
Vejle, Denmark 

R. A. Weiss (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Maryland Dermatology 
Laser Skin and Vein Institute, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Hunt Valley, MD, USA
e-mail: rweiss@mdlsv.com 

G. S. Munavalli 
Dermatology, Laser, and Vein Specialists of the 
Carolinas, Charlotte, NC, USA 

S. Choudhary · A. Leiva 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, FL, USA 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_17

275





276

 Introduction

Intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  treatments  are  based 
on  selective  photothermolysis  where  a  specific 
target is selectively heated up by a light pulse and 
heat damaged, without destroying the surround-
ing tissue components [1].

The  IPL  technology  was  clinically  intro-
duced in 1994 and Photoderm™ (ESC/Sharplan, 
Norwood, MA, now Lumenis, Santa Clara, CA) 
received as the first FDA clearance for the treat-
ment of lower extremity telangiectasias in 1995 
[2]. The IPL technology has evolved a great deal 
since  its  introduction  20  years  ago  [3].  Today 
there are more than a dozen companies produc-
ing IPL systems FDA-cleared for several differ-
ent dermatologic treatment procedures, including 
vascular  and  pigment  lesions,  hair  removal, 
photo-rejuvenation,  acne,  and  PDT  treatments. 
Recently, small and still relatively effective IPL 
devices for at-home-use have entered the market, 
allowing  patients  to  treat  themselves  in  the  pri-
vacy of their homes [2].

On  the  high-end  clinical  IPL  devices,  the 
emitted band of wavelengths, the pulse duration 
(or train of pulses), and energy per pulse can be 
set individually [3]. All IPL systems on the mar-
ket today are based on pulsed xenon-flash lamps 
emitting non-coherent, polychromatic light with 
wavelengths  ranging  from  400  to  1200  nm. 
Different optical filters restrict the emitted band 
of  wavelengths  reaching  the  skin  surface  to  fit 
with the absorption spectrum of a specific skin 
chromophore  and  hence  the  treatment  proce-
dure.  This  flexibility  gives  IPL  system  the 
advantage of being able to perform several clini-
cal procedures using a single system compared 
to lasers where a separate laser is often needed 
for each treatment indication. Laser light is by 
nature  coherent,  but  due  to  the  high  scattering 
coefficient in human skin, the laser light will be 
in-coherent after few tens of μm penetration of 
the skin. Therefore for practical purposes, there 

is no clinical difference between selective pho-
tothermolysis treatments with coherent (lasers) 
and incoherent light (IPLs).

Medical  lasers  intended  for  vascular  treat-
ments  deliver  sub-millisecond  light  pulses  with 
high energy for the treatment of very thin vessels 
in portwine stains and hemangiomas [2]. IPL sys-
tems have until now not been able to produce suf-
ficiently  high  energy  levels  at  pulse  durations 
shorter than approximately 2.5 ms. However, in 
2015  the  first  real  sub-millisecond  IPL  system 
was introduced (Nordlys, Ellipse A/S, Hoersholm, 
Denmark), making IPL a genuine competitor to 
pulse dye laser [4].

 The IPL Device

In the IPL, the xenon flash lamp is located inside 
a handheld applicator where a sapphire or quartz 
crystal guides the light from the flashlamp to the 
skin  surface  [3].  A  water-filled  gel  is  normally 
used  as  an  optical  matching  layer  between  the 
crystal light guide and the skin surface. The light 
guide  may  be  actively  cooled  to  lower  the  skin 
temperature  for  patient  comfort  and  to  protect 
the  skin  surface.  As  the  xenon  lamp  produces 
light  with  wavelengths  ranging  from  the  UV  to 
the infrared region, one or more filters are placed 
in  the  light  path  to  restrict  the  band  of  wave-
lengths reaching the skin. Commonly used low- 
wavelength cut-off filters are 515, 550, 560, 570, 
590, 615, 645, 690, 755 nm. The longer infrared 
wavelengths are blocked from reaching the skin 
surface by the use of an infrared glass filter or by 
passing the light through a water chamber which 
acts an infrared light filter.

 Wavelengths

The  band  of  wavelengths  has  to  be  selected 
according to the absorption of light in the tar-

S. Iyengar et al.



get  chromophores.  For  blood  containing  tar-
gets,  these  chromophores  may  be  reduced 
hemoglobin,  oxyhemoglobin,  and  methemo-
globin;  for  pigment  and  hair  treatment,  the 
chromophore  is  eumelanin  and  pheomelanin 
located inside the hair or in the epidermis [5]. 
If the optical target is located deeper in the der-
mis,  longer  wavelengths  will  be  chosen  as 
these  penetrate  deeper  with  less  absorption  in 
the upper skin layers.

 Pulse Duration

The IPL pulse duration can be adjusted according 
to  the  target  type  and  size.  The  duration  of  the 
light  pulse  is  selected  so  that  only  minimal 
amounts of heat is conducted to the surrounding 
tissue. The optimal pulse duration can be calcu-
lated according to the theory of selective photo-
thermolysis  and  will  approximately  be  equal  to 
the thermal relaxation time (TRT) for the target. 
TRT is the time taken for the target to dissipate 
about 63% of the incident thermal energy. A large 
volume target will have a longer TRT and hence 
requires  longer  IPL  pulse  durations  to  reach  a 
destructive target temperature than a target with a 
smaller volume.

277

phore  (e.g.  melanosomes)  as  well  as  the  entire 
target (e.g. a hair). In clinical practice, the TDT is 
often the TRT multiplied with a factor 2–5.

 Energy

The correct energy level is obtained when enough 
heat is delivered to lethally damage the target by 
reaching a tissue temperature of 70° for at least 
1 ms.

 Spot Size

The  IPL  light  spot  size,  similar  to  the  wave-
length  band,  is  important  for  light  penetration 
depth. The smaller the spot size, the relatively 
more  lateral  light  scattering  occurs  and  less 
energy will reach the deeper skin layer. The lat-
eral  scattering  is  relatively  less  in  larger  spot 
sizes  resulting  in  deeper  penetration.  Clinical 
practice  as  well  as  computer  simulations  of 
light  penetration  have  shown  that  a  spot  size 
greater than 10 mm does not add further to the 
penetration depth [5].

The TRT for a target with a diameter d can be 

 Clinical Treatment Indications

calculated by [1]:

TRT d

=

2

/

16

×

k

where

k

=

1 3 10
×

.

7
-

m

2

.

However, according to the extended theory of 
photothermolyisis,  the  IPL  light  pulse  duration 
for treatment of non-uniformly pigmented struc-
tures  in  biological  tissues  (thicker  vessels  and 
hairs) can be calculated according to the “Thermal 
Damage  Time”  (TDT),  which  is  significantly 
longer than the TRT. TDT is defined as the time 
required  for  the  entire  target,  including  the  pri-
mary  chromophore  and  the  surrounding  target 
(hair follicle, vessel wall etc.), to cool by about 
63%. It includes cooling of the primary chromo-

•  Leg Vein Treatment
•  Telangiectasias
•  Hemangiomas
•  Poikiloderma of Civatte
•  Pigmentation
•  Photorejuvenation
•  Scarring
•  Hair Removal
•  Acne
•  Seborrheic Keratosis
•  Sarcoidosis
•  Hidradenitis Suppurativa
•  Nail Psoriasis

17 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL) 
 




278

 Reticular Leg Veins with Associated 
Telangiectasias

Leg telangiectasias are visible dermal arterioles, 
capillaries, or veins with a diameter of 0.1–2 mm. 
The  primary  chromophores  for  vascular  lesions 
are hemoglobin and its derivatives: oxyhemoglo-
bin,  deoxyhemoglobin,  and  methemoglobin. 
Oxyhemoglobin  absorbs  up  to  630  nm,  while 
deoxyhemoglobin absorbs up to 750 nm. Multiple 
closely spaced light pulses (train of single pulses) 
convert oxygenated hemoglobin to deoxygenated 
hemoglobin  in  the  early  part  of  the  light  pulse 
making  the  procedure  more  effective.  Hence, 
blue  telangiectasias,  which  are  more  deoxygen-
ated,  are  treated  with  light  pulses  between  530 
and 750 nm. Shorter wavelength bands are more 
effective  in  treating  superficial,  oxygenized  red 
vessels but not deeper blue veins. Longer wave-
lengths may also be used to treat larger diameter 
blue venulectasia and smaller veins due to better 
penetration of these wavelengths [6–8].

The  IPL  device  can  be  adjusted  to  provide 
optimal  fluence,  pulse,  wavelength  band,  and 
pulse duration based on the vessel characteristics. 
Spot size can be altered to provide more or less 
light  penetration  [5].  Longer  pulse  durations, 
higher low wavelength cut-off filters, and cooling 
mechanisms  allow  IPLs  to  minimize  epidermal 
injury while effectively treating the lower extrem-
ity telangiectasias.

 Facial Telangiectasias

Facial telangiectasias can be classified as linear, 
arborizing, spider, and punctiform. Sun exposure, 
steroids,  and  hormone  replacement  may  play  a 
role  in  the  development.  IPL  can  be  used  to 
improve these telangiectasias. Until recently, the 
pulsed dye laser (PDL) with 0.5 ms pulse dura-
tion was the preferred treatment, but often lead to 
intracutaneous hematomas and purpura. IPL sys-
tems have less side effects and are the patients’ 
choice  for  telangiectasia  treatment.  A  study  by 
Angermeier showed clearance rates of 75–100% 
in treating over 100 patients with essential telan-
giectasias.  Clearance  rates  of  90–95%  was 

achieved using IPL in another study by Schroeter 
et al. in 45 patients with telangiectasias and spi-
der nevi [9–15].

Erythematotelangiectatic  (ET)  rosacea  mani-
fests  as  facial  telangiectasias,  persistent  ery-
thema,  and  flushing  involving  the  central  face. 
PDL with wavelengths of 585 and 595 nm have 
previously been widely used and are considered 
effective  [16,  17].  In  a  study  published  by 
Schroeter et al., the effect of IPL on 60 patients 
resulted in 77.8% clearance of facial telangiecta-
sias with the forehead showing the best clearance 
of 87% [18]. Out of all the areas, the nose required 
the  highest  number  of  treatment  sessions  for 
lesions to disappear.

Compared to lasers, IPLs offer several advan-
tages.  IPL  emits  non-coherent  broad  spectrum 
light  which  allows  deeper  penetration  into  the 
skin via wide wavelength bands that incorporate 
longer wavelengths. The IPL also treats a larger 
surface area in a single shot (>5 cm2) compared 
to the small spot size of a PDL (80 mm2). In addi-
tion,  through  the  use  of  multiple  pulses,  IPL 
allows  the  skin  to  cool  between  the  individual 
pulses  in  the  pulse  train  and  thus  minimize  the 
risk of epidermal damage.

 Hemangiomas

Hemangiomas  are  proliferative  tumors  which 
slowly  regress  overtime.  Lesions  persist  in 
35–50% of children with 15% of children having 
residual discoloration [19]. Ulceration is a com-
plication  of  infantile  hemangiomas.  While  sys-
temic  beta-blocker  therapy  is  now  the  mainstay 
of hemangioma treatment, the IPL is often used 
to  treat  residual  hemangioma  after  the  primary 
involution.

 Poikiloderma of Civatte

Poikiloderma  of  Civatte  (POC)  is  a  condition 
resulting from photodamage and hence, is found 
on sun exposed areas such as the neck, forehead, 
and upper chest. Skin appears erythematous, pig-
mented and wrinkled in appearance. IPL can be 

S. Iyengar et al.



used  to  treat  POC  as  the  515  nm  filter  allows 
absorption by both the melanin and hemoglobin. 
Higher  low  wavelength  cut-off  filters  up  to 
590 nm filters may be necessary initially in more 
severe cases to reduce excessive light absorption 
and hence side effects. Studies have shown that 
IPL has a clearance of more than 75% of telangi-
ectasias  and  hyperpigmentation  with  only  5% 
developing pigmentation side effects [20].

 Pigmented Lesions

Pigmented lesions, such as solar lentigines, con-
genital  nevi,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion,  and  café-au-lait  macules,  can  be  treated 
with  an  IPL  device. A  study  by  Bjerring  et  al. 
examined  the  use  of  IPL  device  on  96  patients 
with solar lentigines and melanocytic nevi [21]. 
The  IPL  device  had  a  dual  filter  configuration 
with a low wavelength cut-off filter, water filter, 
and water chamber, which absorbed all infrared 
light and produced the desired spectrum of light 
when  combined.  Results  from  one  session 
revealed  a  96%  reduction  in  pigment,  74.2% 
clearance for solar lentigines, and 66.3% decrease 
in  melanocytic  nevi.  Similarly,  IPL  has  been 
examined  in  treating  melasma.  A  study  by  Li 
et al. reported a 51–100% improvement in 77.5% 
of  patients  after  four  IPL  treatments  at  3  week 
intervals [22]. According to the authors, epider-
mal  melasma  seemed  to  respond  better  to  the 
treatment compared to the mixed type.

 Photorejuvenation

IPL is commonly used to improve signs of photo-
aging.  Structural  components  of  the  skin  are 
altered due to the accumulation of UV damage. In 
addition, the loss of elasticity due to normal aging 
can be seen on the skin. Photorejuvenation through 
the use of the IPL device has been described as a 
dynamic non-ablative process used to smooth the 
skin  surface,  reduce  visible  vessels,  and  reduce 
mottled pigmentation [23]. Thermal damage from 
the IPL device induces the formation of type 1 and 
3 collagen fibers and reorganizes elastic fibers to 

279

improve the skin’s appearance [3]. Brief thermal 
damage  to  capillaries  in  the  skin  may  induce  or 
release growth factors leading to neocollagenesis. 
Wavelength  bands  utilized  range  from  515  to 
1000 nm with longer wavelengths stimulating col-
lagen synthesis and shorter wavelengths targeting 
pigmentation  and  telangiectasias.  In  two  studies 
by Zelickson, IPL treatments appeared to be suc-
cessful in increasing skin collagen [24, 25]. One 
study showed IPL had an 81% increase in collagen 
type  1  transcripts  compared  to  the  23%  increase 
seen with PDL treatment. Collagen I, III, elastin, 
and collagenase increased in 85–100% of patients 
and procollagen increased in 50–70% of patients. 
A study conducted by Negishi et al. examined IPL 
for  pigmentation  and  telangiectasias  [26].  A 
550 nm filter for pigment and 570 nm cut-off filter 
for  telangiectasia  were  used  on  97  Japanese 
patients. Subjects were treated three to six times at 
2–3  week  intervals  with  IPL  28–32  J/cm2,  2.5–
4.0/4.0–5.0 ms, and 20–40 ms delay without topi-
cal  anesthesia.  Results  showed  49%  of  patients 
had greater than 75% improvement in pigmenta-
tion with 33% having greater than 75% improve-
ment  in  telangiectasia  and  13%  having  greater 
than  75%  improvement  in  skin  texture. Another 
study  by  this  group  examined  the  effect  of 
Quantum  IPL  every  3–4  weeks  on  73  Japanese 
patients. Quantum IPL has a cooling system which 
cools the epidermis to 40C compared to 65C with-
out cooling. In 80% of patients, a greater than 60% 
improvement  in  pigmentation  and  erythema  was 
noted.  Similarly,  the  use  of  IPL  as  a  therapeutic 
device for freckling has been examined. A study 
by Huang et al. using 550–590 nm filters (25–35 J/
cm2, 4 ms single or double pulse, 20–40 ms delay 
time) for one to three treatments at 4 week inter-
vals received 91.7% satisfaction [27].

Combination  procedures,  such  as  the  use  of 
IPL with 1064 and 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser treat-
ments [28, 29], microdermabrasion [30], and the 
use of botulinum toxin A [31], may enhance pho-
torejuvenation.  Higher  wavelengths  from  the 
Nd:YAG  laser  can  stimulate  collagen  formation 
by  significantly  altering  the  dermis.  IPL  treat-
ment followed immediately by a tri-chloro-acetic 
acid  (TCA)  peel  is  especially  effective  for  the 
treatment of pigment disturbances.

17 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)



280

 Photodynamic Therapy (PDT)

PDT  uses  IPL  as  a  light  source  which  stimu-
lates  severely  photodamaged  skin  (as  in  pho-
torejuvenation)  and  destroys  pre-malignant 
cells  in  actinic  keratosis  and  basal  cell  carci-
nomas  via  activation  of  a  photosensizer  [32]. 
Topical  administration of 5-aminolevulinic acid 
[5-ALA] or its methyl ester induces formation 
of  protoporphyrin  IX  which  photosensitizes 
the target area prior to IPL irradiation. The IPL 
light  leads  to  the  production  of  activated  oxy-
gen species within photodamaged cells, result-
ing in their destruction. The  photosensitizer is 
applied  between  30  min  and  3  h  prior  to  IPL 
irradiation.  Indications  for  PDT  include  pho-
torejuvenation,  precancer  and  nonmelanoma 
skin  cancer,  such  as  actinic  keratosis,  superfi-
cial basal cell carcinoma, and Bowen’s disease. 
Side  effects  include  pain  during  irradiation, 
erythema, edema, and crusting for up to a week, 
and  subsequent  hyperpigmentation,  especially 
in darker skin types. Depending on the photo-
sensitizer used, treatment size, and lesion type, 
side effects may be more or less severe. In gen-
eral, PDT is well tolerated and can be used to 
treat multiple areas simultaneously.

 Scars

There have been few studies examining the use of 
IPL in the treatment of hypertrophic scarring. It 
is hypothesized that IPL works by targeting mel-
anin and vascular pigments which promote col-
lagen  overgrowth  [33].  Bellew  et  al.  compared 
the  efficacy  of  long  PDL  pulses  with  IPL  on 
hypertrophic surgical scars [34]. Two treatments 
were performed 2 months apart. It was concluded 
both treatments were equally effective in terms of 
appearance, but there was less risk of developing 
purpura with IPL. Subjects reported IPL as more 
painful  than  PDL.  Another  study  by  Erol  et  al. 
reported  a  92.5%  improvement  in  the  clinical 
appearance of hypertrophic or keloid scars after 
utilizing  IPL  in  109  patients  [35].  There  was  a 
reduction  in  the  height,  erythema,  and  hardness 
of the scars.

Similarly, IPL has been used to treat striae dis-
tensae,  a  type  of  scar  characterized  by  linear 
bands of atrophic skin. In a study by Hernandez- 
Perez  et  al.,  there  was  a  statistically  significant 
improvement using IPL to treat abdominal striae 
in  15  patients  [36].  While  there  is  no  classical 
treatment for improving the appearance of stretch 
marks, the authors suggest IPL could be a prom-
ising therapy.

 Hair Removal

Studies have shown IPL has very good results in 
removing unwanted hair. Gold et al. reported an 
average of 60% hair removal after one treatment 
session  and  3  month  follow-up  in  31  patients 
with  hypertrichosis  [37].  Sadick  et  al.  reported 
76%  hair  removal  using  a  filtered  IPL  system 
after a mean of 3.7 treatments in 34 patients with 
excess body hair [38]. From the study, 14 patients 
followed up for more than 12 months and reported 
83% hair removal in the end. Efficacy and hence 
patients’ satisfaction of IPL hair removal varies 
according to the hair type, hair color, skin color, 
number  of  treatments,  treatment  settings,  and 
operator.  Black  hairs  on  fair  skin  have  the  best 
hair removal clearance with IPL [5, 39]. However 
with increasing Fitzpatrick skin type, more side 
effects such as redness, crusting, and pigmenta-
tion changes may be seen [39–41]. Yellow discol-
oration of the terminal hairs and paradoxical hair 
growth in adjacent areas to the treated sites have 
been  noted  as  side  effects  of  the  IPL  treatment 
[42]. Effective home-treatment IPL devices have 
recently  been  developed  for  hair  management, 
and a major part of optical hair treatments may 
soon be carried out with these devices.

 Acne

The use of light therapy for the treatment of acne 
is increasing due to its safety and relative efficacy 
[43]. Acne is a chronic inflammatory disorder of 
the  pilosebaceous  unit  and  is  prevalent  in  more 
than 85% of adolescents. Bacterial proliferation 
of  Propionibacterium  and  rupture  of  the  come-

S. Iyengar et al.



done  provide  the  inflammatory  appearance  of 
acne.  While  traditional  therapies  include  sys-
temic  and  topical  antibiotics,  keratolytics  and 
retinoids,  the  issue  of  antibiotic  resistance  and 
adverse  side  effects  may  result  in  under  treat-
ment,  loss  of  patient  compliance  and  undesired 
results.  It  has  been  hypothesized  that  light 
decreases the amount of Propionibacterium and 
reduces the size of the pilosebaceous apparatus. 
More  specifically,  light  causes  photo-excitation 
of porphyrins present inside the bacteria, leading 
to the release of free oxygen radicals which are 
bactericidal to Propionibacterium.

Intense pulse light devices for acne treatment 
release  400–1000  nm  polychromatic  high- 
intensity pulsed light that activates the porphyrin 
destruction of Propionibacterium [43]. The light 
also  stimulates  endogenous  chromophores  to 
indirectly  reduce  sebaceous  gland  activity  by 
damaging blood vessels supplying the gland. It is 
postulated  that  IPL  may  also  exert  an  anti- 
inflammatory  effect  by  downregulating  tumor 
necrosis  factor  alpha  (TNF-α)  and  upregulating 
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-β).

 Seborrheic Keratosis

Seborrheic keratosis is a benign skin lesion of the 
epidermis which appears yellow-brown or dark- 
brown in color [44]. The use of IPL in ten patients 
with  multiple  seborrheic  keratosis  was  studied. 
Results showed superficial and small seborrheic 
keratosis  responded  well  to  IPL  compared  to 
larger  and  thicker  lesions.  Dermoscopy  con-
firmed  the  heat-induced  change  in  lesion  color 
from brown to grey immediately after treatment. 
IPL filters with short cut-off wavelengths (400–
900 nm) should be chosen in order to act prefer-
entially  on  the  epidermis  and  only  treat  the 
superficial lesion [3].

 Sarcoidosis

Sarcoidosis is a multi-organ systemic disease of 
unknown  origin  characterized  by  non-caseous 
granulomas  [44].  Skin  involvement  occurs  in 

281

25% of cases. Few studies have surfaced which 
examine the effect of IPL on the cutaneous mani-
festation  of  sarcoidosis.  A  study  by  Hasegawa 
et  al.  treated  a  60  year  old  female  with  facial 
plaques  using  topical  ALA  with  IPL  and  later 
PDT [45]. Patients completed five sessions and at 
6 months had no signs of recurrence. Similarly, 
Rosende  et  al.  reports  a  case  of  a  54  year  old 
female  with  manifestations  on  the  extremities 
and nose [46]. IPL treatment on the nose with a 
590 nm cutoff filter and double pulse (initial total 
dose 37 J/cm2) was delivered with a 20 ms delay 
between pulses. Sessions were conducted over 2 
years  with  an  increase  in  fluence  at  each  visit. 
Two year later, the patient was asymptomatic. It 
is postulated that the mechanism of action could 
be due to the destruction of abnormal blood ves-
sels,  which  are  an  important  component  of 
inflammatory  dermatoses  by  delivering  pro- 
inflammatory cytokines to the skin [3].

 Hidradenitis Suppurativa

Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic and suppu-
rative  inflammation  of  apocrine  glands,  most 
commonly  found  in  the  axilla,  inguinal  folds, 
perineum, genitalia, and periareolar region [44]. 
Follicles are plugged by keratin leading to inflam-
mation,  abscess,  and  fistula  formation.  Factors 
such as obesity and hormone abnormalities have 
been  linked  to  this  condition.  Highton  et  al. 
examined  IPL  treatment  in  18  patients  with 
hidradenitis  suppurativa  over  4  weeks  with  ses-
sions two times per week [47]. At the end of the 
study, patients reported a high degree of patient 
satisfaction.  More  studies  are  needed  to  further 
examine the therapeutic efficacy of IPL in treat-
ing hidradenitis suppurativa.

 Nail Psoriasis

Nails are a common manifestation found in up to 
50% of patients with psoriasis [48]. Nails appear 
with  “oil  drop”  discoloration,  splinter  hemor-
rhages, and onycholysis. While pulsed dye laser 
has been used to successfully treat nail psoriasis, 

17 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)



282

a study by Tawfik examined the effect of IPL as 
an additional treatment option for this condition. 
Twenty  patients  were  treated  with  IPL  every 
2 weeks for a maximum of 6 months. At the end 
of  the  study,  the  nail  bed  showed  a  71.2% 
improvement  while  the  nail  matrix  improved 
32.2%.  The  Nail  Psoriasis  Severity  Index 
(NAPSI) score also showed significant improve-
ment  post-treatment.  IPL  serves  as  a  potential 
promising  treatment  for  nail  psoriasis.  More 
studies,  however,  need  to  be  performed  to  fully 
examine this relationship.

 Conclusion
Intense Pulsed Light is a non-coherent source 
of  pulsed  light  with  a  bandwidth  ranging 
from 400 to 1200 nm. Indications for its use 
include  treatment  of  leg  vein  telangiectasias, 
hair removal, scarring, pigmentary alterations, 
photorejuvenation,  and  vascular  lesions.  The 
advantages  of  IPL  are  its  versatility,  large 
treatment  areas  and  non- ablative  nature.  As 
the wavelength, spot size, and pulse duration 
can be widely adjusted, IPL targets skin chro-
mophores specific to the condition. Some sys-
tems require addition of cooling mechanisms 
to  avoid  epidermal  damage  while  treating 
deeper chromophores.

Several studies have demonstrated the effi-
cacy  of  IPL  in  treating  various  conditions. 
Various  trials  have  confirmed  the  efficacy  of 
the  new  generation  IPLs  compared  to  laser 
systems;  however,  more  randomized  con-
trolled  studies  with  longer  follow-ups  are 
needed to fully compare the IPLs to each type 
of laser and for each indication.

References

  1.  Parrish JA, Anderson RR, Harrist T, Paul B, Murphy 
GF.  Selective  thermal  effects  with  pulsed  irradia-
tion  from  lasers:  from  organ  to  organelle.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 1983;80(1 Suppl):75s–80s.

  2.  Goldberg DJ. Current trends in intense pulsed light. J 

Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2012;5(6):45–53.

  3.  González-Rodríguez  AJ,  Lorente-Gual  R.  Current 
indications  and  new  applications  of  intense  pulsed 
light. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2015;106(5):350–64.

  4.  US Food and Drug Administration DoHaHS. K150907 
Trade/Device Name: Ellipse Nordlys Pre-market noti-
fication letter. 2015.

  5.  Lask  G,  Eckhouse  S,  Slatkine  M,  Waldman  A, 
Kreindel M, Gottfried V. The role of laser and intense 
light sources in photo-epilation: a comparative evalu-
ation. J Cutan Laser Ther. 1999;1(1):3–13.

  6.  Goldman MP, Bennett RG. Treatment of telangiecta-
sia: a review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1987;17(2 Pt 1): 
167–82.

  7.  Sommer  A,  Van  Mierlo  PL,  Neumann  HA,  Kessels 
AG. Red and blue telangiectasias. Differences in oxy-
genation? Dermatol Surg. 1997;23(1):55–9.

  8.  Dover  JS,  Sadick  NS,  Goldman  MP.  The  role  of 
lasers  and  light  sources  in  the  treatment  of  leg 
veins.  Dermatol  Surg.  1999;25(4):328–35.  discus-
sion 335–336

  9.  Redisch W, Pelzer RH. Localized vascular dilatations 
of the human skin, capillary microscopy and related 
studies. Am Heart J. 1949;37(1):106–13.

 10. Raulin C, Greve B, editors. Laser und IOL- Technologie 
in  der  Dermatologie  and Aesthetischen  Medizin.  1st 
ed. Schattauer Stuttgart: New York; 2001.

 11.  Ruiz-Esparza J, Goldman MP, Fitzpatrick RE, Lowe 
NJ,  Behr  KL.  Flash  lamp-pumped  dye  laser  treat-
ment  of  telangiectasia.  J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol. 
1993;19(11):1000–3.

 12.  Podmore  P.  Treatment  of  widespread  generalized 
congenital  aberrant  telangiectasia  with  a  flashlight 
source. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2(2):79–80.

 13. Raulin C, Schroeter C, Maushagen-Schnaas E. Treatment 
possibilities  with  a  high-energy  pulsed  light  source 
(PhotoDerm VL). Hautarzt. 1997;48(12):886–93.

 14.  Angermeier MC. Treatment of facial vascular lesions 
with intense pulsed light. J Cutan Laser Ther. 1999; 
1(2):95–100.

 15.  Schroeter CA, Neumann HA. An intense light source. 
The  photoderm  VL-flashlamp  as  a  new  treatment 
possibility  for  vascular  skin  lesions.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1998;24(7):743–8.

 16.  Clark SM, Lanigan SW, Marks R. Laser treatment of 
erythema and telangiectasia associated with rosacea. 
Lasers Med Sci. 2002;17(1):26–33.

 17.  Tan SR, Tope WD. Pulsed dye laser treatment of rosa-
cea improves erythema, symptomatology, and quality 
of life. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51(4):592–9.

 18. Schroeter  CA,  Haaf-von  Below  S,  Neumann  HA.   
Effective  treatment  of  rosacea  using  intense  pulsed 
light systems. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31(10):1285–9.
 19.  Poetke M, Philipp C, Berlien HP. Flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed  dye  laser  for  hemangiomas  in  infancy:  treat-
ment  of  superficial  vs  mixed  hemangiomas.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2000;136(5):628–32.

 20. Weiss RA, Goldman MP, Weiss MA. Treatment of poi-
kiloderma of Civatte with an intense pulsed light source. 
Dermatol Surg. 2000;26(9):823–27; discussion 828.
 21.  Bjerring P, Christiansen K, Troilius A. Intense pulsed 
light source for the treatment of dye laser resistant port- 
wine stains. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2003;5(1):7–13.

S. Iyengar et al.



283

 22.  Li YH,  Chen  JZ, Wei  HC,  et  al.  Efficacy  and  safety 
of  intense  pulsed  light  in  treatment  of  melasma  in 
Chinese  patients.  Dermatol  Surg.  2008;34(5):693–
700; discussion 700–691.

 23.  Bitter  PH.  Noninvasive  rejuvenation  of  photodam-
aged  skin  using  serial,  full-face  intense  pulsed  light 
treatments.  Dermatol  Surg.  2000;26(9):835–42;  dis-
cussion 843.

 24.  Zelickson  B,  Kist  D.  Effect  of  pulse  dye  laser  and 
intense pulsed light source on the dermal extracellular 
matrix remodeling [abstract]. Lasers Surg Med Abstr 
Suppl. 2000;12(17)

 25.  Zelickson B, Kist D. Pulsed dye laser and photoderm 
treatment  stimulates  production  of  type-1  collagen 
and collagenase transcripts in papillary dermis fibro-
blasts. Lasers Surg Med Abstr Suppl. 2001;13(33)
 26.  Negishi  K,  Tezuka  Y,  Kushikata  N,  Wakamatsu  S.   
Photorejuvenation  for  Asian  skin  by  intense  pulsed 
light. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(7):627–31; discussion 
632.

 27.  Huang  YL,  Liao  YL,  Lee  SH,  Hong  HS.  Intense 
pulsed  light  for  the  treatment  of  facial  freckles  in 
Asian  skin.  Dermatol  Surg.  2002;28(11):1007–12; 
discussion 1012.

 28.  Goldberg  DJ,  Whitworth  J.  Laser  skin  resurfacing 
with  the  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1997;23(10):903–6; discussion 906–907.

 29.  Fatemi  A,  Weiss  MA,  Weiss  RA.  Short-term  histo-
logic  effects  of  nonablative  resurfacing:  results  with 
a  dynamically  cooled  millisecond-domain  1320  nm 
Nd:YAG laser. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(2):172–6.
 30.  Tan MH, Spencer JM, Pires LM, Ajmeri J, Skover G.  

The evaluation of aluminum oxide crystal microderm-
abrasion  for  photodamage.  Dermatol  Surg.  2001; 
27(11):943–9.

 31.  Fagien  S,  Brandt  FS.  Primary  and  adjunctive  use  of 
botulinum  toxin  type  A  (Botox)  in  facial  aesthetic 
surgery:  beyond  the  glabella.  Clin  Plast  Surg.  2001; 
28(1):127–48.

 32.  Ruiz-Rodriguez R, Sanz-Sánchez T, Córdoba S. Pho-
todynamic  photorejuvenation.  Dermatol  Surg.  2002; 
28(8):742–44; discussion 744.

 33. Hedelund L, Due E, Bjerring P, Wulf HC, Haedersdal M.  
Skin rejuvenation using intense pulsed light: a ran-
domized  controlled  split-face  trial  with  blinded 
response  evaluation. Arch  Dermatol.  2006;142(8): 
985–90.

 34.  Bellew  SG,  Weiss  MA,  Weiss  RA.  Comparison  of 
intense pulsed light to 595-nm long-pulsed pulsed dye 

laser  for  treatment  of  hypertrophic  surgical  scars:  a 
pilot study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2005;4(4):448–52.
 35.  Erol OO, Gurlek A, Agaoglu G, Topcuoglu E, Oz H.  
Treatment  of  hypertrophic  scars  and  keloids  using 
intense pulsed light (IPL). Aesthet Plast Surg. 2008; 
32(6):902–9.

 36.  Hernández-Pérez  E,  Colombo-Charrier  E,  Valencia- 
Ibiett E. Intense pulsed light in the treatment of striae 
distensae. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(12):1124–30.
 37.  Gold MH, Bell MW, Foster TD, Street S. Long-term 
epilation using the EpiLight broad band, intense pulsed 
light hair removal system. Dermatol Surg. 1997;23(10): 
909–13.

 38.  Sadick NS, Weiss RA, Shea CR, Nagel H, Nicholson J,  
Prieto VG.  Long-term  photoepilation  using  a  broad- 
spectrum intense pulsed light source. Arch Dermatol. 
2000;136(11):1336–40.

 39.  Fodor L, Menachem M, Ramon Y, et al. Hair removal 
using intense pulsed light (EpiLight): patient satisfac-
tion, our experience, and literature review. Ann Plast 
Surg. 2005;54(1):8–14.

 40.  Raulin  C,  Greve  B,  Grema  H.  IPL  technology:  a 

review. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32(2):78–87.

 41. Moreno-Arias GA, Castelo-Branco C, Ferrando J. Side- 
effects  after  IPL  photodepilation.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2002;28(12):1131–4.

 42.  Radmanesh  M.  Temporary  hair  color  change  from 
black to blond after intense pulsed light hair removal 
therapy. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(12 Pt 2):1521.
 43.  Pei S, Inamadar AC, Adya KA, Tsoukas MM. Light- 
based  therapies  in  acne  treatment.  Indian  Dermatol 
Online J. 2015;6(3):145–57.

 44.  Piccolo  D,  Di  Marcantonio  D,  Crisman  G,  et  al. 
Unconventional  use  of  intense  pulsed  light.  Biomed 
Res Int. 2014;2014:618206.

 45.  Hasegawa T, Suga Y, Mizuno Y, Haruna K, Ikeda S.  
Photodynamic  therapy  using  intense  pulsed  light 
for cutaneous sarcoidosis. J Dermatol. 2012;39(6): 
564–5.

 46.  Rosende L, del Pozo J, de Andrés A, Pérez Varela L.  
Intense  pulsed  light  therapy  for  lupus  pernio. Actas 
Dermosifiliogr. 2012;103(1):71–3.

 47.  Highton L, Chan WY, Khwaja N, Laitung JK. Treat-
ment of hidradenitis suppurativa with intense pulsed 
light: a prospective study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011; 
128(2):459–65.

 48.  Tawfik  AA.  Novel  treatment  of  nail  psoriasis  using 
the intense pulsed light: a one-year follow-up study. 
Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(7):763–8.

17 Intense Pulsed Light (IPL)



Current Status of Light-Emitting 
Diode Phototherapy 
in Dermatological Practice

18

R. Glen Calderhead

Abstract
Phototherapy in its broadest sense means any 
kind  of  treatment  (from  the  Greek  therapeia 
‘curing,  healing,’  from  therapeuein  ‘to  cure, 
treat.’) with any kind of light (from the Greek 
phos,  photos  ‘light’).  The  modern  accepted 
definition  of  phototherapy,  however,  has 
become accepted as: “the use of low incident 
levels  of  light  energy  to  achieve  an  athermal 
and atraumatic, but clinically useful, effect in 
tissue”.  Under  its  basic  original  definition, 
phototherapy is an ancient art because the old-
est  light  source  in  the  world  is  the  sun,  and 
therapy  with  sunlight,  or  heliotherapy,  has 
been in use for over 4000 years with the earli-
est recorded use being by the Ancient Egyptians 
(Giese, Living with our Sun’s ultraviolet rays, 
Springer, New York, 1976). They would treat 
what  was  probably  vitiligo  by  rubbing  the 
affected  area  with  a  crushed  herb  similar  to 
parsley,  then  expose  the  treated  area  to  sun-
light.  The  photosensitizing  properties  of  the 
parsley caused an intense photoreaction in the 
skin leading to a very nasty sunburn, which in 
turn hopefully led to the appearance of postin-
flammatory  secondary  hyperpigmentation,  or 
‘suntan’  thereby  repigmenting  the  depig-
mented area. In their turn the Ancient Greeks 

R. G. Calderhead  
Research Division, VP Medicoscientific Affairs, 
Clinique L, Goyang-shi, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea
e-mail: docrgc@cc9.ne.jp

and Romans used the healing power of the sun, 
and it was still being actively used in Europe in 
the eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth 
century,  particularly  red  light  therapy  carried 
out with the patient placed in a room with red-
tinted windows. One famous patient was King 
George  III  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern 
Ireland  who  ruled  from  1760  to  1801,  popu-
larly though erroneously known as ‘Mad King 
George’. We now strongly suspect that he was 
actually suffering from the blood disease por-
phyria, so being shut in a room with red-draped 
walls  and  red  tinted  windows  to  treat  his 
depression probably only served to make him 
even more mad, since porphyria is often asso-
ciated  with  severe  photosensitivity!  Entities 
treated  this  way  included  the  eruptive  skin 
lesions of rubella and rubeola, and even ‘mel-
ancholia’,  as  was  the  case  with  King  George 
III,  now  recognised  as  clinical  depression. 
Hippocrates, the Father of Medicine, certainly 
concurred with the latter application some two 
millennia  before  King  George:  Hippocrates 
prescribed sunlight for depressive patients and 
believed that the Greeks were more naturally 
cheerier than their northern neighbors because 
of the greater exposure to the sun.

Keywords
LED-LLLT · Photobiomodulation · Collagenesis 
· Elastinogenesis · Wound healing · Adenosine 
triphosphate · Mitochondrion

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_18

285





286

Box 18.1
•  Phototherapy is not new! It was being 

used more than 4000 years ago

•  Light-emitting  diodes  (LEDs)  have 
attracted  great  interest  as  a  photo-
therapeutic source

•  An  LED  is  not  a  laser,  so  although 
LED  energy  is  noncoherent  it  is 
quasimonochromatic

•  LEDs are solid state and robust
•  LEDs are comparatively inexpensive

 Introduction

 History of Phototherapy

Phototherapy  in  its  broadest  sense  means  any 
kind of treatment (from the Greek therapeia ‘cur-
ing,  healing,’  from  therapeuein  ‘to  cure,  treat.’) 
with any kind of light (from the Greek phos, pho-
tos  ‘light’).  The  modern  accepted  definition  of 
phototherapy, however, has become accepted as: 
“the use of low incident levels of light energy to 
achieve an athermal and atraumatic, but clinically 
useful, effect in tissue”. Under its basic original 
definition, phototherapy is an ancient art because 
the oldest light source in the world is the sun, and 
therapy with sunlight, or heliotherapy, has been 
in  use  for  over  4000  years  with  the  earliest 
recorded use being by the Ancient Egyptians [1]. 
They would treat what was probably vitiligo by 
rubbing  the  affected  area  with  a  crushed  herb 
similar to parsley, then expose the treated area to 
sunlight.  The  photosensitizing  properties  of  the 
parsley  caused  an  intense  photoreaction  in  the 
skin  leading  to  a  very  nasty  sunburn,  which  in 
turn  hopefully  led  to  the  appearance  of  postin-
flammatory  secondary  hyperpigmentation,  or 
‘suntan’  thereby  repigmenting  the  depigmented 
area. In their turn the Ancient Greeks and Romans 
used the healing power of the sun, and it was still 
being actively used in Europe in the eighteenth, 
nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  century,  particu-
larly red light therapy carried out with the patient 
placed in a room with red-tinted windows.  One 

famous  patient  was  King  George  III  of  Great 
Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  who  ruled  from 
1760  to  1801,  popularly  though  erroneously 
known as ‘Mad King George’. We now strongly 
suspect  that  he  was  actually  suffering  from  the 
blood  disease  porphyria  [2],  so  being  shut  in  a 
room with red-draped walls and red tinted win-
dows to treat his depression probably only served 
to make him even more mad, since porphyria is 
often  associated  with  severe  photosensitivity! 
Entities  treated  this  way  included  the  eruptive 
skin  lesions  of  rubella  and  rubeola,  and  even 
‘melancholia’, as was the case with King George 
III,  now  recognised  as  clinical  depression. 
Hippocrates,  the  Father  of  Medicine,  certainly 
concurred  with  the  latter  application  some  two 
millennia before King George: Hippocrates pre-
scribed  sunlight  for  depressive  patients  and 
believed  that  the  Greeks  were  more  naturally 
cheerier than their northern neighbors because of 
the greater exposure to the sun.

In the field of wavelength-specific photother-
apy research, red light therapy was examined at a 
cellular  level  under  the  newly-invented  micro-
scope by Fubini and colleagues in the late eigh-
teenth  century  [3],  who  were  able  to  show  that 
visible  red  light,  provided  via  lenses  and  filters 
from  sunlight,  selectively  activated  the  respira-
tory  component  of  cellular  mitochondria. There 
is nothing new under the sun. However, the sun is 
a  fickle  medical  tool,  particularly  in  northern 
Europe, and modern phototherapy as we know it 
started  around  the  turn  of  the  last  century  with 
Finsen’s  electric  arc  lamp-based  system,  giving 
phototherapy at the turn of a switch, independent 
of  the  sun  [4].  However,  apart  from  the  use  of 
blue  light  therapy  for  neonatal  bilirubinemia 
which continues to the present day, phototherapy 
was, in the majority of its applications, overtaken 
in the first part of the twentieth century by better 
medication or improved treatment techniques.

The development of the first laser systems, a 
race  which  was  narrowly  won  by  Theodore 
Maiman  in  1960  with  his  flashlamp-pumped 
ruby-based 
laser,  next  gave  clinicians  and 
researchers  a  completely  different  and  unique 
light source to play with. In the 4 years between 
1960  and  1964,  the  ruby  laser  was  followed  by 

R. G. Calderhead



the  argon,  helium-neon  (HeNe),  neodymium: 
yttrium-aluminum-garnet  (Nd:YAG),  solid  state 
semiconductor  laser  (diode  laser)  and  carbon 
dioxide (CO2) lasers all of which have remained 
as workhorses in the medical field, and the HeNe 
laser (632.8 nm) has in fact provided a large bulk 
of the phototherapy literature over the last three 
decades. As for light-emitting diodes (LEDs), the 
first light from a semiconductor was produced in 
1907  by  the  British  experimenter  H.  J.  Round. 
Independently  in  the  mid  1920s,  noncoherent 
infrared light was produced from a semiconduc-
tor (diode) by O-V Losev in Russia. These stud-
ies  were  published  in  Russia,  Germany  and  the 
UK, but their work was completely ignored in the 
USA [5]. It was not till 1962 that the first practi-
cal and commercially-available visible-spectrum 
(633 nm, red) LED was developed in the USA by 
Holonyak,  regarded  as  the  ‘Father  of  the  LED’ 
the  General  Electric 
while  working  with 
Company. In the next few years, LEDs delivering 
other  visible  wavelengths  were  produced,  with 
powers  ten  times  or  more  that  of  Holonyak’s 
original  LED.  For  reasons  which  will  be  dis-
cussed later, these LEDs were really inappropri-
ate  as  therapeutic  sources,  although  they  were 
extremely bright and very cheap compared with 
laser diodes, and it was not till the late 1990s that 
a  new  generation  of  extremely  powerful,  qua-
simonochromatic  LEDs  was  developed  by 
Whelan  and  colleagues  as  a  spin-off  from  the 
National  Aeronautic  and  Space  Administration 
(NASA)  Space  Medicine  Program  [6].  Unlike 
their  cheap  and  cheerful  predecessors,  the  so- 
called  ‘NASA  LEDs’  finally  offered  clinicians 
and researchers a new and truly practical thera-
peutic tool [7].

 The What and Why of LEDs

 What Is an LED?
Light-emitting  diodes  belong  to  the  solid  state 
device  family  known  as  semiconductors.  These 
are  devices  which  fall  somewhere  between  an 
electrical  conductor  and  an  insulator,  although 
when  no  electrical  current  is  applied  to  a  semi-
conductor, it has almost the same properties as an 

287

insulator. Simply explained, light-emitting semi-
conductors or diodes consist of negative (N-type) 
and positive (P-type) materials, which are ‘doped’ 
with  specific  impurities  to  produce  the  desired 
wavelength.  The  n-area  contains  electrons  in 
their ground or resting state, and the p-area con-
tains  positively  charged  ‘holes’,  both  of  which 
remain  more  or  less  stationary  (Fig.  18.1a–c). 
When a direct current electric potential with the 
correct  polarity  is  applied  to  an  LED,  the  elec-
trons in the N-area are boosted to a higher energy 
state, and they and the holes in the P-area start to 
move towards each other (Fig. 18.1d), meeting at 
the  N/P  junction  where  the  negatively-charged 
electrons are attracted into the positively-charged 
holes.  The  electrons  then  return  to  their  resting 
energy  state  and,  in  doing  so,  emit  their  stored 
energy in the form of a photon, a particle of light 
energy  (Fig.  18.1e).  The  wavelength  emitted  is 
noncoherent,  ideally  very  narrow-band,  and 
depends  on  both  the  materials  from  which  the 
LED  is  constructed,  the  substrates,  and  the  p-n 
junction gap. Table 18.1 shows a list of the main 
substrates  and  associated  colors.  LEDs  fall  into 
two  shapes:  there  is  the  older  dome-type  LED, 
and  the  more  recent,  and  currently  more  often 
used,  “on  board  chip”  (OBC)  which  is  much 
more compact and less expensive than the older 
dome 
type.  They  are  also  more  efficient. 
Figure 18.2 shows the anatomy of both types of 
LED. The dome types can be mounted on printed 
circuit boards (PCBs) at regular and precise dis-
tances from each other to provide an LED array, 
whereas the OBC type is already part of the PCB, 
in  other  words,  LED  system  manufacturers  can 
purchase preloaded PCBs in whatever configura-
tion and size are available. Figure 18.3 shows an 
example of both types from an actual array.

The surface of the PCB is very often coated to 
reflect the wavelength of the LEDs mounted on 
it.  Some  of  the  light  energy  emitted  from  the 
LED array will be reflected back off the stratum 
corneum, or horny layer, of the skin, and a por-
tion  of  the  incident  light  which  enters  the  skin 
will be scattered backwards out of the skin. The 
reflective coating on the PCB captures these pho-
tons, the energy of which would otherwise be lost 
into the air or could be absorbed by the PCB and 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



288

a

Direction of motion

Direction of motion

b

Electrons
(– charge)

Electrode

Electrode

N-type material

Holes
(+ charge)

Direction of motion

Direction of motion

d

Current flows through
this N/P junction

P-type material
DEPLETION
ZONE

c

e

Electron is attracted to
positively-charged hole:
drops back to normal
energy level:
releases stored energy
as a photon (light energy)

Direction of motion

Electrons reach
higher energy level

Direction of motion

–

+

DC power
source

Fig. 18.1  What is an LED and how can it produce light? 
(a) An LED is basically composed of two materials, the 
N-type  or  negative  material  and  the  P-type  or  positive 
material.  The  N-material  contains  negatively  charged 
electrons which move as shown, and the P-material con-
tains positively charged holes, which move in the opposite 
direction. When the materials are apart and not connected 
to any power source, movement continues, so both materi-
als are conductors. (b) When the materials are sandwiched 
together, however, without any power applied to the elec-
trodes  attached  to  opposite  ends,  the  negatively  charged 
electrons  in  the  center  of  the  chip  are  attracted  to  the 
holes, and form an area called the depletion layer as seen 
in  (c)  and  all  movement  ceases  in  both  the  N-  and 
P-materials:  the  chip  is  now  an  insulator.  (d)  Power  is 
applied  to  the  electrodes,  with  the  positive  electrode  or 
anode at the origin of movement of the holes and the nega-
tive electrode or cathode at the origin of movement of the 
electrons.  Observing  the  polarity  when  connecting  a 
direct current (DC) power source is extremely important. 
Power flows through the junction between the materials, 

called the N/P junction, and movement of both electrons 
and  holes  starts  again,  but  with  power  applied  the  elec-
trons move to a higher energy level from their ground or 
resting  state.  (e)  As  in  b  above,  the  N-electrons  are 
attracted to the P-holes, but in moving down through the 
N/P junction they must return to their ground energy level, 
and lose their extra stored energy in the form of a photon, 
the smallest packet of light energy. Unlike the situation in 
b, however, when power is applied this action continues 
endlessly  and  no  depletion  layer  is  formed. The  N-  and 
P-materials are ‘doped’ with other materials which deter-
mine  the  distance  of  the  ‘fall’  between  electrons  and 
holes: the greater the distance the electrons have to fall, 
the  higher  is  the  energy  level  of  the  photons  emitted. 
Photons with high energy levels have shorter wavelengths 
than those with lower energy levels, thus the wavelengths 
of the emitted light are determined by the substrate mate-
rials  and  their  doping.  High  quality  N-  and  P-materials 
and  pure  doping  substances  will  give  photons  of  very 
nearly  the  same  wavelength,  i.e.,  quasimonochromatic 
light

R. G. Calderhead



Table  18.1  Most  common  substrate  combinations  and 
the colors they are capable of producing

289

Substrates
Aluminum 
gallium 
arsenide
Aluminum 
gallium 
phosphide
Aluminum 
gallium 
indium 
phosphide
Gallium 
arsenide 
phosphide
Gallium 
phosphide
Gallium 
nitride

Formula
(AlGaAs)

Colors produced
Red, infrared

(AlGaP)

Green

(AlGaInP) Green, yellow, orange, 

orange-red (all 
high-intensity)

(GaAsP)

Yellow, orange, 
orange-red, red

(GaP)

Green, yellow, red

(GaN)

Blue, green, pure green 
(emerald green): also 
white (if it has an AlGaN 
Quantum Barrier, 
so-called ‘white light’ 
LED)
Near ultraviolet, blue, 
bluish-green

(InGaN)

Indium 
gallium 
nitride

produce unwanted heat, and recycles them back 
into the skin. This can significantly increase the 
efficiency of an LED panel. The bodies of the lat-
est  generation  of  LEDs  are  designed  to  recycle 
the photons the LEDs emit, thereby adding even 
more efficiency. As LED phototherapy uses low 
incident levels of power, even a small loss of that 
incident power could negatively affect the desired 
clinical  result:  higher  efficiency  of  the  LED 
panel, i.e. more light out for less electrical energy 
in, is therefore the ideal.

 What Is the Difference Between LEDs 
and Lasers or IPLs?
The  laser  is  a  unique  form  of  light  energy,  pos-
sessing  the  three  qualities  of  monochromaticity, 
collimation and phase which make up the overall 
property  of 
‘coherence’.  Monochromaticity 
means  all  the  photons  are  of  exactly  the  same 
wavelength or color; collimation means the built-
 in parallel quality of the beam superimposed by 
the  conditions  of  the  laser  resonator  or  by 

Fig. 18.2  Anatomy of the older high-quality dome-type 
LED and the newer on board chip (OBC) type (inset box). 
In the case of the dome type, the cathode is always shorter 
than the anode and there is a flat surface in the base of the 
LED  by  the  cathode  so  polarity  is  clearly  determined 
when connecting to a DC power source or mounting on a 
printed  circuit  board  (PCB).  On  top  of  the  cathode  post 
and forming part of the negative electrode of the LED chip 
is a parabolic reflector in which the chip itself is mounted 
thus  ensuring  as  much  light  as  possible  is  directed  for-
wards, with a consistent angle of divergence, typically 60° 
steradian  or  less  depending  on  the  specifications  of  the 
LED.  A  fine  wire  connects  the  positive  electrode  of  the 
chip  to  the  anode  post,  thus  completing  the  circuit. The 
entire assembly is encapsulated in an optical quality clear 
plastic  envelope,  giving  the  final  assembly  its  robust 
nature. In the OBC type, the chip comes premounted to 
the PCB, but shares more or less the same anatomy as the 
dome-type LED, with the chip mounted above the para-
bolic reflector. The OBC tye LEDs are much more com-
pact than the dome type

collimating optics; and phase means that all of the 
photons march along together exactly equidistant 
from each other in time and in space. Laser diodes 
do not have inherent collimation, but because they 
are still true lasers, and therefore a so-called point 
source, the light can be gathered and optically col-
limated: the humble but ubiquitous laser pointer 
works on this principle. Intense pulsed light is, on 
the  other  hand,  totally  noncoherent,  with  a  very 
large  range  of  polychromatic  (multiwavelength) 
light from near infrared all the way down to blue; 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



290

Fig.  18.3  Close-up  view  of  LEDs  mounted  on  PCBs 
from actual therapeutic systems, dome type in the upper 
part of the figure and OBC type in the lower part. In both 
types, Note the precise x-y spacing of the LEDs, and the 
reflective backing into which they are mounted. The pur-
pose  of  the  reflective  backing  of  the  array  is  to  capture 
these photons and reflect them back into the skin, known 
as ‘photon recycling’

has  no  possibility  of  collimation  with  extreme 
divergence;  and  has  its  vast  variety  of  photons 
totally out of phase. The new generation of LEDs, 
on the other hand, has an output plus or minus a 
few  nanometers  of  the  rated  wavelength,  and  so 
these  LEDs  are  classed  as  quasimonochromatic; 
some form of optical collimation can be imposed 
on  the  photons  which  are  divergent  but  do  have 
some directionality; however they are not in phase 

and  so  can  never  be  focused  to  a  small  point. 
Laser  energy  can  easily  produce  high  photon 
intensity per unit area, IPLs much less so, but pro-
vided LEDs are correctly arrayed, they are capa-
ble  of  almost  laser-like  incident  intensities. 
Figure  18.4  schematically  illustrates  the  differ-
ences  between  lasers,  IPLs  and  LEDs.  In  short, 
LEDs  for  therapeutic  applications  must  be  qua-
simonochromatic,  be  capable  of  targeting  wave-
length-specific  cells  or  materials,  have  stable 
output,  and  be  able  to  deliver  clinically  useful 
photon intensities.

 Why Use LEDs?
There  are  many  excellent  laser  and  intense 
pulsed light (IPL) systems available to the der-
matologist. Why should LEDs be considered as 
a viable alternative phototherapy source? If the 
author  had  been  asked  this  question  before  the 
end of the 1990s, he would have been enjoying a 
quiet chuckle. Up until Prof Harry Whelan and 
his  NASA  colleagues  in  the  Space  Medicine 
Laboratory  developed  the  “NASA  LED”  in 
1998, LEDs were cheap, bright and cheerful, but 
not  really  suitable  for  clinical  applications 
because  in  addition  to  being  highly  divergent, 
they  had  a  waveband,  rather  than  a  wavelength 
and therefore had extremely poor chromophore 
selectivity. As discussed above, the NASA LED 
offered quasichromaticity, i.e., the vast majority 
of the photons were at the same wavelength, and 
output  powers  some  5  orders  of  magnitude 
higher  than  the  previous  generation  of  LEDs. 
This made LEDs for the first time a suitable pho-
totherapeutic  light  source  (see  Figs.  18.2  and 
18.4  above).  In  addition  to  their  output  powers 
and  narrow-band  output,  the  other  reasons  for 
using  LEDs  in  clinical  practice  are  efficiency 
and price.

The  electricity-light  conversion  ratio  of  a 
typical laser is very low, requiring hundreds or 
even thousands of watts in to give an output of 
a few watts. The same applies to IPL systems, 
where  the  flashlamp  has  to  be  pumped  with 
enormous amounts of energy to provide poly-
chromatic light, which may however be filtered 
(cut-on  or  cut-off).  Even  when  filtered,  IPL 
energy  is   delivered  over  a  waveband  rather 

R. G. Calderhead



a

laser (e.g., HeNe)

b

laser diode

c

IPL

d

LED

10

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

5

0

400

700
Wavelength (nm)

291

a & b

10

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

5

0

c

400

700
Wavelength (nm)

1000

d

1000
10

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

5

0

400

700
Wavelength (nm)

1000

Fig. 18.4  Comparison among the output characteristics 
of a laser, laser diode, intense pulsed light system and a 
new generation LED. (a) A laser emits all of its energy at 
one precise wavelength, in a coherent beam, i.e., mono-
chromatic,  collimated  and  with  the  photons  all  in  phase 
both  temporally  and  spatially.  If  a  ‘special  magnifying 
glass’ could view the beam, it would show the situation as 
seen in the figure. All of the energy is delivered at a pre-
cise wavelength, as illustrated in the spectrogram, so the 
relative  intensity  of  the  beam  is  extremely  high.  (b)  A 
laser diode has all the characteristics of a laser, except that 
the  beam  is  divergent,  without  collimation.  However, 
because  it  is  a  point  source  the  beam  can  be  collimated 
with condensing optics. The magnified view of the beam 
shows a lower photon intensity than the laser, but the rela-
tive intensity is still very high. (c) An IPL system emits a 

pulse of broad-band polychromatic noncoherent light, so 
the ‘magnifying glass’ would show a plethora of widely 
divergent photons of many different wavelengths, but with 
the majority in the near infrared as seen from the spectro-
gram.  Because  of  the  very  broad  waveband,  the  relative 
intensity at any given wavelength is low to very low. (d) 
The LED is somewhat similar to the laser diode, but the 
light  is  noncoherent,  highly  divergent  and  quasimono-
chromatic. The ‘magnifying glass’ shows plenty of pho-
tons,  mostly  the  same  color  (wavelength),  with  some 
degree of directionality but without any of the phase and 
potential collimation associated with the laser diode. The 
relative intensity is still very high, however, because the 
vast  majority  of  the  photons  are  being  delivered  at  the 
nominal wavelength with a very narrow waveband of plus 
or minus a very few nanometers

than  at  a  specific  wavelength  (cf.  IPL  output 
with laser or LED output in Fig. 18.4). In the 
case of LEDs, which are quasimonochromatic 
and  therefore  require  no  filtering,  the  conver-
sion  efficiency  is  very  high  so  that  very  few 
watts of electrical current at a low voltage are 
required to produce a clinically useful output. 

LEDs are much less expensive than even laser 
diodes. Depending on quality and wavelength, 
anywhere from 200 new-generation LEDs can 
be  purchased  for  the  cost  of  a  single  laser 
diode.

The cost of laser and IPL systems is very high, 
so a much cheaper LED-based system offers the 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice 
 
 




292

possibility  to  halt  the  ever-upward  spiralling 
costs  of  health  care  for  both  the  clinicians  and 
their  patients.  A  further  advantage  is  the  solid 
state nature of LEDs. There are no filaments to be 
heated up, and no flashlamps are required to pro-
duce  light  or  to  pump  the  laser  medium:  LEDs 
thus run much cooler than their extremely higher- 
powered cousins, so less is required in the way of 
dedicated  cooling  systems,  again  helping  to 
reduce the cost. However, some cooling of LEDs 
is still required, especially when LEDs of the new 
OBC  type  are  mounted  in  multiple  arrays, 
because  the  driver  circuits  of  the  new  type  of 
LED generate heat, rather than the LEDs them-
selves, and the temperature of the PCBs increases: 
this is transferred to the OBC LEDs by conduc-
tion,  and  as 
temperature  of  an  LED 
increases,  its  output  will  move  away  from  the 
rated  wavelength.  When  wavelength  cell-  or 
target- specificity  is  required,  this  could  be  a 
major problem.

the 

The  solid  state  nature  of  LEDs  also  makes 
them much more robust than either lasers or IPL 
systems, so they tend to be able to take the some-
times  not-so-gentle  handling  which  is  part  of  a 
busy clinical practice without causing either out-
put power loss or alignment problems. LEDs can 
be  mounted  in  flat  panel  arrays,  which  may  in 
turn  be  joined  together  in  a  treatment  head  that 
can  be  adjustable  to  fit  the  contour  of  the  large 
area of tissue being treated, whether it is the face, 
an arm, the chest or back, or a leg. Compare this 
potentially  very  large  treatment  area  of  some 
hundreds  of  square  centimeters  with  that  of  a 
laser, usually a very few millimeters in diameter, 
or  that  of  an  IPL  treatment  head,  typically 
1 cm × 3 cm, and the clinician-intensive nature of 
the latter two is quickly evident when large areas 
are to be treated such as the entire face. Multiple 
shots  are  required,  and  the  handpiece  has  to  be 
manually applied and controlled by the user. The 
LED-based treatment head can be attached to an 
articulated  arm  to  make  individual  adjustment 
even easier.

Finally, if multiple wavelength-specific targets 
are to be treated, LED arrays with different wave-
lengths can be designed to be easily interchange-
able,  controlled  by  the  same  base  unit.  With 

‘set-it-and-forget-it’  microprocessor- controlled 
technology, the clinician or their assistant simply 
sets the head up over the area to be treated fol-
lowing  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations, 
turns the system on, and he or she can then leave 
the  patient  for  the  requisite  treatment  time  and 
attend  to  other  patients  or  tasks.  Moreover,  in 
most  cases  a  suitably  trained  nurse  or  therapist 
can carry out the treatment once the clinician has 
prescribed  it,  because  LED  systems  are  much 
more inherently safe for the patient than lasers or 
IPLs. Figure 18.5 shows an example of one of the 
new generation of well-designed, robust but ele-
gant,  mobile  and  very  versatile  LED  photother-
apy systems.

Fig. 18.5  Example of a state-of-the-art FDA-cleared new 
generation LED phototherapy system which offers a vari-
ety  of  wavelengths  (830,  633  and  415  nm,  alone  or  in 
dual-wavelength  combinations)  with  a  flexible  put-and- 
stay  hinged  treatment  array  to  match  any  body  contour 
from flat (back or décolleté) to extremely curved (arm or 
leg), and friction hinges in the arm allowing easy exten-
sion  and  positioning  of  the  treatment  head  without  the 
need for locking nuts. (HEALITE II, Lutronic Corporation, 
Goyang, South Korea, and Freemont, CA, USA)

R. G. Calderhead



 Basics of Light-Tissue Interaction

Box 18.2
•  Light-emitting  diodes  deliver  ather-
cellular 

atraumatic 

and 

mal 
photoactivation

•  “All light is absorbed in the first mil-

limeter of tissue”—FALSE!

•  LEDs are a viable and valuable pho-

totherapeutic tool

•  LEDs are capable of interesting light- 
tissue  interactions,  provided  certain 
criteria are met. The most important 
criteria are:
 – Wavelength.

Determines  both  the  target  and  the 
depth  at  which  the  target  can  be 
reached

Quasimonochromaticity is essential
Wavelengths should be applied sepa-
rately  and  not  combined  at  the 
same time

 – Irradiance (power density).

Gives  suitably  high  intensity  at  all 
levels of target cells or materials
Ensures  sufficient  athermal  energy 
transfer  to  raise  targets’  action 
potentials

 – Dosimetry.

Provided  the  wavelength  and  power 
density  are  appropriate,  correct 
dosage obtains the optimum effect 
with the shortest irradiation time

 – Temporal beam profile.

Continuous wave would appear to be 
more efficient for most cell types 
in  vivo,  compared  with  ‘pulsed’ 
(frequency modulated) light
•  Usually, cells should be targeted with 
only one LED wavelength at a time
•  “Watts  a  joule”—the  parameters 

must be appropriate

The  main  purpose  of  using  phototherapy  is  to 
achieve some kind of clinical effect in the target 
tissue  through  the  use  of  light  energy,  such  as 

293

wound  healing  or  pain  relief.  If  the  incident 
power is too high, heat will be the end product as 
with the surgical laser. If a too-low photon inten-
sity  is  delivered,  there  will  be  very  little  or  no 
reaction.  The  trick  in  LED  phototherapy  is  to 
deliver just the right amount of photon intensity 
to  achieve  the  desired  clinical  effect  but  in  an 
athermal and atraumatic manner.

 Photothermal and Athermal 
Reactions

Despite their very different output powers, lasers, 
IPLs  and  LEDs  all  depend  on  the  ‘L’  which  is 
found  in  all  their  names,  standing  for  ‘light’.  It 
could be said that they are all different facets of 
the  same  coin,  but  even  in  photosurgery,  photo-
therapy  plays  a  very  important  role.  If  we  con-
sider  the  typical  beam  pattern  of  a  surgical  CO2 
laser in tissue, we see the range of temperature- 
dependent  bioeffects  as  illustrated  schematically 
in  Fig.  18.6,  ranging  from  carbonization  above 
200 °C, vaporization above 100 °C, through coag-
ulation  around  60–85  °C,  all  the  way  down  to 
photobiomodulation, which occurs atraumatically 
when there is no appreciable rise in the tissue tem-
perature at the very perimeter of the treated area. 
These  effects  occur  virtually  simultaneously  as 
the light energy propagates into the target tissue 
with photon intensity decreasing with depth, and 
can be divided as shown into varying degrees of 
photosurgical  destruction  and  reversible  photo-
damage, and athermal, atraumatic photobiomodu-
lation. The photothermal and athermal zones are 
also shown in a typical CO2 laser specimen stained 
with hematoxylin and eosin (Fig. 18.6).

Photophysics  tells  us  that  each  photon  is  a 
weightless packet of pure energy, with the energy 
measurable in electron volts (eV). Photobiology 
tells  us  that  the  photobiomodulation  zone  com-
prises  cells  which  have  absorbed  the  incident 
photons,  directly  or  indirectly  transferred  the 
photon energy to the cells’ own energy stores in 
an  athermal  and  atraumatic  manner,  and  have 
become  photoactivated.  Photoactivated  cells  are 
associated  with  three  reactions,  one,  two  or  all 
three of which may occur in photoactivated cells:

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



294

Phototherapy

TARGET TISSUE

Photothermal NSR

y
r
e
g
r
u
s

r
e
s
a
L

Carbonization & Burn-off
(>200°C)

Vaporization (>100°C)

Coagulation (>60°C)

Protein Degradation (>55°C)
Protein Denaturation (>40°C)

ATHERMAL CELLULAR
PHOTOBIOACTIVATION

Fig. 18.6  Range of photothermal and athermal photobio-
reactions  in  tissue  following  a  typical  surgical  laser 
impact, e.g., a CO2 laser. A hematoxylin and eosin stained 
specimen of actual CO2 laser treated skin is also included 
to show the typical histopathological changes for each of 
the bioreactions: the epidermis has been totally vaporized 
leaving a layer of carbon char above the coagulated der-
mis.  The  outermost  layer,  the  photobioactivation  layer, 

shows normal tissue architecture, even though some pho-
tons  will  have  reached  this  layer  and  transferred  their 
energy to the cells in an athermal and atraumatic manner. 
Laser  surgery 
levels  of  bioreactions. 
Photothermal nonablative skin rejuvenation (NSR) deliv-
ers controlled coagulative photothermal damage, with all 
the subsequent layers, whereas phototherapy only delivers 
athermal and atraumatic photobioactivation

involves  all 

• 

• 

• 

if the cells are damaged or compromised, they 
will repair themselves, or be repaired
if the cells have a function, they will perform 
it more efficiently
if more of the cells are required for either of 
the  above,  the  cells  will  proliferate,  or  more 
will  be  recruited  into  the  area  through 
photochemotaxis

Laser 

surgery  usually  creates  all 

the 
photothermally- mediated  zones  mentioned,  but 
the  importance  of  the  photoactivation  zone 
 cannot be stressed enough. It is the existence of 
this zone which sets laser surgery apart from any 
other  thermally-dependent  treatment,  such  as 
electrosurgery, or even athermal incision with the 
conventional scalpel, and it is the photoactivated 
cells in this zone which provided the results that 
interested the early adopters of the surgical laser 
compared with the cold scalpel or electrosurgery, 
namely equally good healing but with less inflam-
mation  and  much 
less  postoperative  pain. 
Figure 18.7 demonstrates this in action, courtesy 
of  Toshio  Ohshiro  MD  PhD,  a  pioneer  of  laser 
surgery  in  Japan  and  worldwide.  In  the  late 
1970s,  Ohshiro  started  using  lasers  in  the  treat-
ment  of  vascular  and  melanin  group  anomaly 

nevi: all that was available then to him was a 1 ms 
pulsed  ruby  laser  and  a  C/W  argon  laser.  In 
Fig.  18.7a  can  be  seen  a  case  of  hemangioma 
simplex (port wine stain) that had been somewhat 
unsuccessfully  treated  previously  with  needle 
electrolysis: the abnormal color was not removed, 
and  the  site  of  each  needle  application  was 
marked with a small raised white scar. The argon 
laser  was  used  in  Ohshiro’s  zebra  technique, 
whereby  linear  areas  2  mm  wide  were  treated 
leaving a 2 mm area of untreated tissue between 
them [8]. As can be seen in Fig. 18.7b, not only 
did  the  argon  laser  treatment  remove  the  port 
wine stain color, it also treated the abnormal con-
figuration in the form of the pinpoint scarring left 
by  the  previous  electrolysis  treatment.  Four  to 
6  weeks  later,  when  the  treated  areas  had  com-
pletely healed, the untreated areas were then irra-
diated  to  complete  the  treatment.  This  was  the 
power  of  the  “L”  component  of  laser,  the  light, 
aided by the photobioactivation zone, referred to 
by Ohshiro as “simultaneous LLLT” [8].

IPL  systems,  and  the  so-called  nonablative 
lasers, produce areas of deliberate but controlled 
coagulative damage beneath a cooled and intact 
epidermis (Fig. 18.8), however they also produce 
the  zone  of  simultaneous  LLLT  to  help  achieve 

R. G. Calderhead 




a

b

295

Fig.  18.7  Illustration  of  how  the  “L”  in  laser,  “light”, 
made  it  different  from  other  surgical  systems.  (a)  This 
example  of  a  hemangioma  simplex  lesion  (port-wine 
stain) had been treated previously with needle electroly-
sis.  The  abnormal  color  of  the  lesion  has  not  been 
removed, and small white hypertrophic scars can be seen 
where the needle was inserted. Heat only (electrothermal 
damage) was not successful in treating this lesion. (b) The 

lesion  was  treated  with  Ohshiro’s  zebra  method  (large 
open  arrow  shows  the  treated  linear  area).  Normal  skin 
color  can  be  seen.  In  areas  where  hypertrophy  existed, 
these  too  have  been  treated  successfully  with  heat  plus 
light.  The  area  between  the  black  arrows  shows  an 
untreated  zone  where  the  hypertrophic  spots  are  clearly 
seen.  (Courtesy  of  Prof Toshio  Ohshiro  MD  PhD—Ref. 
[8], used with permission)

the desired effect of neocollagenesis and neoelas-
tinogenesis through the wound healing process in 
the  dermal  extracellular  matrix  (ECM).  LED- 
based  phototherapy  systems,  on  the  other  hand, 
athermally and atraumatically induce only cellu-
lar photobioactivation, but are still capable of ini-
tiating  the  wound  healing  process  almost  as 
efficiently as IPLs and nonablative lasers, as will 
be shown in detail in a later section.

 Wavelength and Its Importance

The  first  law  of  photobiology,  the  Grotthuss- 
Draper  Law,  states  that  only  energy  which  is 
absorbed in a target can produce a photochemical 

or  photophysical  reaction.  However,  any  such 
reaction  is  not  an  automatic  consequence  of 
energy  absorption.  It  may  be  converted  swiftly 
into  heat,  as  in  the  surgical  and  non-ablative 
lasers or IPL systems, or re-emitted at a different 
wavelength  (fluorescence).  The  prime  arbitrator 
of this ‘no absorption-no reaction’ precept is not 
the  output  power  of  the  incident  light,  but  the 
wavelength of the photons making up the beam, 
and this comprises two important considerations: 
wavelength specificity of the target, or the target 
chromophore; and the depth of the target. Based 
on these two considerations, the wavelength must 
not only be appropriate for the chosen chromo-
phore, but it must also penetrate deeply enough to 
reach enough of the target chromophores with a 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



296

Fig. 18.9  Photospectrogram of a human hand in vivo. The 
generator, delivering uniform ‘white light’ at the waveband 
shown on the x-axis, was placed above the hand and the sen-
sor below the hand. Optical density on the y-axis is shown in 
logarithmic  units.  Penetration  is  shown  on  the  right-hand 
axis. The further down the curve reaches, the better the pen-
etration  at  that  wavelength  into  living  human  tissue. 
(Adapted  from  Smith  KC:  The  Science  of  Photobiology. 
1977. Plenum Press, New York, USA—Ref. [9])

millimeter  of  tissue’. Anyone  who  has  shone  a 
red laser pointer through their finger, transillumi-
nating the entire fingertip and completely visible 
on  the  other  side,  has  already  disproved  that 
statement. A totally different finding is seen with 
green or yellow laser pointers, however, because 
of their poor scattering and penetration character-
istics. Figure 18.9 is based on a transmission pho-
tospectrogram of a human hand captured in vivo 
over  the  waveband  from  500  nm  (visible  blue/
green) to 1100 nm in the near infrared [9]. The 
photospectrometer  generator  was  positioned 
above  the  hand,  delivering  a  ‘flat  spectrum’  of 
‘white light’, and the recorder placed beneath it. 
The  wavelength  is  shown  along  the  x-axis,  and 
the  calculated  optical  density  (OD)  is  on  the 
y-axis, from lower ODs to higher. The higher the 
OD, the greater is the absorption of incident light, 
and hence the lower the transmission, or penetra-
tion depth into the tissue. It must also be remem-
bered  that  the  OD  is  not  an  arithmetic  but  a 
logarithmic  progression,  so  that  the  difference 
between an OD of 3 and one of 8 is not simply 5, 
but 5 orders of magnitude, i.e. a factor of 10,000.
From  500  to  595  nm  (blue-green  to  yellow), 
the  OD  was  from  8.2  to  approximately  7.6, 
respectively,  resulting  in  poor  penetration.  At 

Fig.  18.8  Theory  behind  photothermal  nonablative  skin 
rejuvenation:  the  laser  energy  passes  through  the  cooled 
epidermis without harming it, and delivers a controlled area 
of coagulation in the typically elastotic dermis associated 
with  photoaged  skin.  However,  the  photons  do  not  stop 
there, and there are zones of protein denaturation and, most 
importantly  for  the  good  result,  athermal  and  atraumatic 
photoactivation around and beyond the controlled thermal 
damage. The photoactivated cells in the last of these three 
zones will assist with the wound healing process

high enough photon density to induce the desired 
reaction. In theory, a single photon can activate a 
cell,  but  in  actual  practice  multiple  photon 
absorption  is  required  to  achieve  the  desired 
degree of reaction.

Phototherapy  is  athermal  and  atraumatic, 
hence achieving selective photothermolysis is of 
no  concern  as  it  would  be  for  surgical  or  other 
photothermal  applications.  The  penetration  of 
light  into  living  tissue  is,  however,  extremely 
important  in  phototherapy,  and  very  frequently 
displays  characteristics  which  are  often  in  dis-
cord  with  results  produced  by  mathematical 
models,  a  point  frequently  totally  ignored  by 
some  researchers. A  favorite,  but  photobiologi-
cally false, axiom beloved of phototherapy oppo-
nents, is that ‘all light is absorbed within the first 

R. G. Calderhead



633 nm, the approximate wavelength of the HeNe 
laser,  the  photobiological  efficacy  of  which  is 
well recorded, the OD was approximately 4.5. In 
other words, red light at 633 nm penetrated living 
human  tissue  by  3  orders  of  magnitude  better 
than yellow at 595 nm, because of the pigment- 
specific  absorption  characteristics  of  the  2 
 wavelengths. Visible yellow at 595 nm is at the 
peak  of  the  oxyhaemoglobin  absorption  curve, 
and is also much more highly absorbed in epider-
mal melanin than 633 nm, which is why the yel-
low light in the spectrogram did not transmit at 
all well into the tissue due to the competing chro-
mophores  of  epidermal  melanin  and  superficial 
dermal blood. Accordingly, cellular and other tar-
gets in the mid to deep reticular dermis are inac-
cessible  to  yellow  light  with  sufficient  photon 
intensities to achieve multiple photon absorption 
in the target cells. On the other hand, epidermal 
cellular targets such as the mother keratinocytes 
in the stratum basale, or basal layer, are definitely 
accessible to 595 nm yellow light.

The  deepest  penetration  in  this  experiment 
was achieved at 820–840 nm in the near infrared. 
At this waveband, pigment is not a primary chro-
mophore with the cell membrane, and flavonoids 
in  it,  as  the  major  chromophore,  and  this  820–
830 nm waveband coincides with the bottom of 
the water absorption curve. The most successful 
of the laser diode systems used in laser therapy as 
distinct to laser surgery, delivered a wavelength 
of  830  nm  for  this  very  reason  [10],  and  was 
shown to penetrate living hands, and even bone, 
very  successfully  [11].  After  around  1000  nm, 
water absorption once again starts to play a sig-
nificant role, and in the curve in Fig. 18.9 the OD 
was seen to increase thereafter. In general, shorter 
visible  wavelengths  penetrate  less  than  longer 
visible  and  near  IR  wavelengths,  up  to  a  given 
absorbing 
waveband,  depending  on 
chromophore.

the 

Following these findings, it made a great deal 
of  sense  to  source  LEDs  for  LED-based  photo-
therapy  systems  at  wavelengths  already  tried, 
tested and proven in the more than three decades 
of 
therapy  application  and  research. 
Furthermore, Karu has clearly shown that there is 
a  “tissue  window”  for  phototherapy  between 

laser 

297

around  610  nm  visible  orange-red  and  860  nm 
near-infrared  [12].  LED  systems  delivering 
633  nm  or  thereabout  in  the  visible  red  and 
830 nm in the near infrared, and at high enough 
photon  densities  were  therefore  developed,  and 
have  been  reported  as  having  significant  effects 
on their target tissues at a good range of depths 
well into the mid and deep reticular dermis, and 
even into the muscle and bone. The usefulness of 
visible  red  and  near  IR  LED  phototherapy  has 
already been reported in a wide range of medical 
specialties,  including  dermatology. Yellow  light 
at  590–595  nm  has  also  attracted  attention,  but 
the penetration properties of yellow light must be 
carefully  considered,  as  illustrated  in  vivo  in 
Fig. 18.9. From the standpoint of photobiological 
theory, yellow light has very good potential spec-
ificity in a number of subcellular targets such as 
cytochrome-c  oxidase,  and  superficial  vascular- 
related targets, however its very poor penetration 
into  the  intermediate  and  deeper  dermis,  where 
cellular targets such as fibroblasts lie, limits the 
practical efficacy of yellow light for these deeper 
targets.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  interesting 
targets in and around the basal layer of the epi-
dermis  which  do  react  well  to  visible  yellow 
light, such as the mother keratinocytes, melano-
cytes and the epidermal Merkel cells, all of which 
are  rich  in  mitochondria  and  therefore  contain 
cytochrome-c oxidase, a major chromophore for 
visible yellow light, and the source of intra- and 
intercellular  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  and 
enhanced levels of cell-cell signaling compounds 
such as Ca2+ ions.

Blue light at around 415 nm has very interest-
ing  properties  regarding  the  eradication  of  the 
bacterium  Propionibacterium  acnes  (P.  acnes) 
through  endogenous  photodynamic 
therapy 
(PDT)  although  the  photoreaction  is  different 
from photoactivation and will be discussed later 
in the chapter. LED energy at 1072 nm has pro-
vided a convenient and easy-to-use LED irradia-
tor  for  effective  treatment  of  herpes  simplex 
labialis  in  the  home  [13].  LED  systems  with 
many  other  wavelengths  have  been  produced, 
gaily  flashing  or  not,  but  basically  these  other 
wavelengths have very little or no published work 
to back up the claims of the manufacturers, and a 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



298

careful consideration of the wavelength/penetra-
tion ratio will rule out many of the shorter visible 
light wavelengths. “Any old LED will not do” is 
an  axiom  which  must  be  borne  in  mind  by  the 
dermatologist wishing to incorporate LED photo-
therapy into his or her practice.

Finally, the different wavebands, visible light 
and  invisible  infrared  light,  have  different  pri-
mary  mechanisms  even  though  the  therapeutic 
endpoint  may  be  similar.  Absorption  of  visible 
light photons at appropriate levels induces a pho-
tochemical reaction, and a primary photochemi-
cal cascade occurs within the cell induced mainly 
by  cytochrome-c  oxidase,  the  end  enzyme  of 
respiratory  chain  of  the  mitochondria  which,  as 
mentioned above, are the adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)-producing  power-houses  of  the  cell  [14]. 
ATP  is  not  just  required  to  fuel  cells,  but  the 
energy  of  the  entire  organism  is  based  on  ade-
quate levels of ATP. Infrared photons, unlike vis-
ible light, are primarily involved in photophysical 
reactions  which  occur  mostly  in  the  cellular 
membrane,  changing  the  rotational  and  vibra-
tional characteristics of the membrane molecules. 
Through  subsequent  activation  of  the  various 
membrane-located  transport  mechanisms,  such 
as  Na+/K+-ATPase  (better  known  as  the  Na+/K+ 
pump) and Ca+-ATPase (Ca+ pump) the cell per-
meability is altered allowing in- and excellulation 
of  compounds.  The  chemical  and  osmotic  bal-
ance  in  the  cytosol  are  swiftly  altered  in  turn 
increasing  the  energy  requirements  of  the  cell 
and energy in the form of ATP is demanded from 
the  mitochondria.  This  finally  results  in  the 
induction  of  a  secondary  chemical  ATP- 
producing cascade which gives more or less the 
same  endpoint  as  the  visible  light  photons, 
namely  cellular  activation  or  proliferation  [15]. 
These  photoreactions  are  illustrated  schemati-
cally in Fig. 18.10.

To  sum  up,  the  wavelength  of  a  therapeutic 
source therefore has a double importance, namely 
to  ensure  absorption  of  the  incident  photons  by 
the target chromophores, and to be able to do so 
at the depths at which these chromophores exist. 
The  waveband  in  which  the  wavelength  of  the 
incident  photons  is  located  determines  not  only 
which  part  of  the  cell  is  the  target,  but  also  the 

primary photoaction i.e., photochemical or pho-
tophysical. Wavelength is thus probably the sin-
gle  most 
in  LED 
important  consideration 
phototherapy,  because  without  absorption,  there 
can be no reaction.

 Irradiance (Photon Intensity)

Light energy travels in the form of photons. It is 
obvious that the more photons which are incident 
per  unit  area  of  tissue,  the  greater  will  be  the 
bioeffect as the energy is transferred to the target 
cells and the tissues. This incident photon inten-
sity is called the power density, or irradiance, of a 
beam  of  light.  The  power  density  (PD)  is  an 
extremely  important  factor  in  laser  surgery  and 
medicine, but taking second place to wavelength, 
and is calculated using the following formula:

PD

=

OP
TA

(

/
W cm

2

)

where OP is the output power incident on the tar-
get  in  watts  (W)  and TA  is  the  irradiated  target 
area  in  square  centimeters  (cm2).  PD  is  usually 
expressed in watts per square centimeter (W/cm2) 
or milliwatts (mW)/cm2. It is the power density of 
a  beam  that  will  determine  more  than  anything 
else  (apart  from  wavelength)  the  magnitude  of 
the  bioeffect  in  the  target  tissue.  Consider 
Table 18.2, where a laser with a constant incident 
output power of 2 W targets tissue with a range of 
spot sizes from 100 μm to 1 cm. Simply changing 
the  spot  size,  and  thus  the  power  density,  can 
have  dramatically  different  effects  on  the  target 
tissue. Because the power density is worked out 
per  unit  area,  calculated  by  the  formula  πr2, 
where  π  is  the  constant  pi,  3.142,  and  r  is  the 
radius (half the diameter) of the irradiated area, 
we  have  to  remember  that  there  is  an  inverse 
square ratio between spot size and power density 
for  a  constant  output  power.  Doubling  the  spot 
size will not cut the power density by one-half, 
but by one quarter: increasing the spot size by a 
factor  of  10  will  cut  the  power  density  by  one- 
hundredth, and vice-versa.

In LED phototherapy, it is therefore necessary 
to achieve a high enough incident photon intensity 

R. G. Calderhead 
 




PHOTORECEPTION
a
Visible red light

BASIC REACTION

SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
AND AMPLIFICATION

Cell
membrane

3

Cytoplasm

1

2

4

Mitochondrion

Nucleus

5

299

PHOTORESPONSE

b

Invisible near infrared light

1

4

2

3

5

6

7

Same end result

Cell proliferation enhanced

Cell function upregulated

Repair of injured/compromised cell

Fig. 18.10  Schematic depicting photoreception (absorp-
tion)  of  light  in  a  cell,  and  the  subsequent  wavelength- 
specific response. The basic reaction as defined by Karu is 
absorption, which is followed by signal transduction and 
amplification within the cytosol, and leads to the photore-
sponse  involving  the  nucleus  and  membrane  transport 
mechanisms.  (a)  (1) Visible  red  light  induces  a  primary 
photochemical cascade initiated in the mitochondrion, the 
energy  factory  and  cell  power  house,  which  results  in 
increased  levels  of  nicotinamide  adenine  dinucleotide 
(NAD)  extremely  important  in  a  wide  range  of  redox 
(reduction-oxidation)  reactions,  one  of  the  results  of 
which is the generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
which is the ‘gasoline’ for the cell. (2) The increased lev-
els  of  cytoplasmic  ATP  fuel  the  membrane  transport 
pumps, the Na2+K2+ and Ca2+K2+ pumps (3) which induce 
extra- and intracellulation of messenger Ca2+ ions and pro-
tons (H+) which are elementary particles carrying a posi-
tive electric charge, the flow of which is used to generate 
energy from ATP via ATPase. Cytoplasmic levels of Ca2+ 

ions and H+ dramatically increase. (4) This in turn upregu-
lates intracellular signaling including mRNA production 
from ribosomes on the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and 
finally (5) nuclear activity is also up regulated. (b) In the 
case  of  near  infrared  light,  the  primary  mechanism  of 
absorption is completely different (1) resulting in a photo-
physical reaction which changes the energy levels of the 
cell membrane, in which near IR energy is absorbed. This 
kick-starts  the  Na2+K2+  and  Ca2+K2+  pumps  so  that  cyto-
plasmic  levels  of  Ca2+  and  H+  dramatically  increase  (2) 
and  (4),  prompting  the  mitochondrion  to  manufacture 
more ATP  to  fuel  the  increased  energy  requirement  (3), 
thereby raising cytoplasmic levels of ATP (4) which again 
impacts on the transport mechanisms of the membrane not 
affected by the near IR light. Despite the totally different 
pathways, the end result is however the same as in the case 
of  visible  light,  namely  further  cyclic  increased  energy 
levels  in  the  cytoplasm  (6)  and  upregulation  of  nuclear 
activity (6)

to achieve the desired degree of multiple absorp-
tion in the target cells, but not so high as to cause 
any  degree  of  photothermally-mediated  changes 
in  the  tissue  architecture,  in  other  words  ideal 
LED  phototherapy  should  achieve  athermal  and 
atraumatic photoactivation of the target cells. The 
Arndt-Schultz  law,  first  appearing  in  the  mid-
nineteenth century, states that weak stimuli excite 
biologic behavior, stronger ones favor it, powerful 
ones  arrest  it  and  very  powerful  ones  retard  it. 

This was adapted by Ohshiro and Calderhead in 
1988 into the Arndt-Schultz curve to explain the 
efficacy of LLLT (Fig. 18.11) [10, 16] from which 
it is clear that photon intensity should not be too 
weak  (no  reaction)  or  too  strong  (retardation  or 
cell death) but must be adjusted to achieve maxi-
mum optimum photobiomodulation of the target 
cells or materials.

A  final  note  on  intensity:  one  single  LED, 
even one of the new generation of LEDs, when 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



300

Table 18.2  Illustration of the importance of altering the 
power density to achieve a complete range of bioeffects 
from incision to photobiomodulation with a constant inci-
dent output power

Incident 
power 
(W)
2
2

Spot size 
(∅, units 
as given)
100 μm
200 μm

Power 
density 
(W/cm2) Bioeffect
25,000
6250

2

2

1 mm

250

1 cm

2.5

Incision; excision
Vaporization; deep 
coagulation
Mild coagulation; 
protein denaturation
Athermal, atraumatic 
photobiomodulation

Fig.  18.11  Ohshiro  and  Calderhead’s  Arndt-Schultz 
curve (1988) [10], based on the Arnd-Schultz law. From 
stimulus strength A to B, no reaction occurs: the stimulus 
is too weak. From B to C there is a sharp rise in bioeffect, 
plateauing at C–D. This curve is based mostly on incident 
power density (photon intensity), but the ideal combina-
tion of intensity and dose in phototherapy must therefore 
be  attained  to  reach  the  effect  shown  by  the  dark  green 
shaded  area,  preferably  as  much  as  possible  at  the  C–D 
effect plateau. From point D onwards there is a sharp drop 
in the effect, although it is still higher than normal until 
point E. Strength B–E corresponds to the zone of athermal 
photobioactivation in Fig. 18.5 above. At stimulus strength 
E–F the bioeffect is gradually retarded, corresponding to 
the  protein  denaturation/degradation  zones  in  Fig.  18.5, 
and target death results from strength F–G corresponding 
to the coagulation and vaporization zones in Fig. 18.5

used on its own, will not achieve anywhere near 
a clinically useful photon intensity in the target 
tissue  (Fig.  18.12a).  When  multiple  LEDs  are 
mounted  close  together  in  a  planar  array,  how-

(Fig. 

ever, as in the examples shown in Fig. 18.3, and 
precisely  positioned  according  to  the  angle  of 
divergence  of  the  beam,  the  interaction  where 
the  beams  impact  with  each  other  gives  an 
extremely intense photon density due to the phe-
nomenon  of  photon  interference.  When  this  is 
combined  with  the  excellent  physical  forward-, 
lateral-  and  backward  scattering  characteristics 
of  red  and  near  IR  light,  the  result  is  that  the 
highest photon intensity is beneath the surface of 
the  skin,  exactly  where  it  should  be  to  achieve 
the optimum therapeutic effect (Fig. 18.12b). If 
the distance between the LEDs is too great, how-
ever, then the intensity will drop off dramatically 
because  of  the  lack  of  interaction  between  the 
18.12c). 
beams 
individual  LED 
Furthermore,  some  LED  system  manufacturers 
combine  LEDs  of  different  wavelengths,  e.g., 
red and yellow, and then claim they are deliver-
ing  ‘orange’  light  (Fig.  18.12d)  …  incorrect! 
The skin cells will not ‘see’ orange from a mix-
ture of red and yellow light as our eyes do, but 
will react separately to the incident red photons 
and  yellow  photons.  Karu  has  pointed  out  that 
there are many pairs of wavelengths which actu-
ally inhibit cellular activity when used together, 
yet  enhance  activity  when  applied  separately 
[12].  Light  energy  represents  information  for 
cells,  and  then  they  act  on  that  information. 
Imagine  a  cell  receives  receiving  conflicting 
information from two different wavelengths: one 
tells the cell to “turn right” and the other to “turn 
left”. At  best  the  cell  will  be  confused  and  do 
nothing. At worst, it will shut down partially or 
completely.  Unless  there  is  a  specific  reason 
based on photobiological knowledge, one wave-
length at a time should be the order of the day in 
LED phototherapy.

As noted above, LEDs emit energy in a diver-
gent  manner  thereby  causing  an  exponential 
drop in the available photon intensity the further 
the  target  is  from  the  LED  array.  It  is  possible 
using optics to maximize the output of an LED 
array, and one manufacturer of an FDA-cleared 
LED system has overcome this by adding what 
they  term  Optical  Lens  Array  Technology,  or 
OLAT™.  An  optically  clear  sheet  embodying 
precisely- placed mini-collimating lenses is fixed 

R. G. Calderhead



301

a

b

c

d

Fig. 18.12  Arrays of precisely spaced multiple LEDs are 
required  to  achieve  clinically  useful  photon  densities  in 
tissue.  This  illustration  is  modeled  on  the  actual  LED 
array seen in Fig. 18.3 above, and is to scale. The distance 
from LEDs to the tissue is approximately 2.5 cm. (a) A 
single  LED  has  insufficient  photon  intensity  to  achieve 
any recordable clinical effect. (b) On the other hand, when 
LEDs  with  similar  output  characteristics  are  mounted  a 
precise distance apart to make use of the 60° divergence, 
the beams will interact where they cross each other to pro-
duce an extremely high photon intensity due to the phe-

nomenon  of  photon  interference.  When  this  is  coupled 
with  the  very  strong  forward  and  backward  scattering 
characteristics of red light, which is even stronger for near 
IR  energy,  a  zone  of  extremely  high  photon  density, 
greater even than the intensity at the LEDs themselves, is 
created under the surface of the target tissue. (c) If LEDs 
are spaced too far apart, the photon intensity is sacrificed 
and is not clinically useful. (d) This is the case in treat-
ment  heads  with  individual  LEDs  of  different  wave-
lengths,  e.g.,  red  and  yellow,  claimed  as  delivering 
“orange” light … but not so!

a

b

c

Fig.  18.13  One  example  of  how  a  manufacturer  has 
enhanced the beam intensity without increasing the output 
power of the LEDs. (a) An optically clear sheet incorpo-
rating  precisely  placed  semi-collimating  lenses  (optical 
lens array technology, OLAT™) is placed under the same 
schematic LED array as seen in  Fig. 18.12b above. The 
divergence of each LED is decreased, thereby increasing 
the  photon  intensity  within  each  beam.  (b)  A  near-IR 
array (830 nm, 100 mW/cm2) is captured with an IR cam-

era: note the loss of energy delivered to the target through 
lateral  scattering.  (c)  The  same  LED  array  at  the  same 
LED irradiance but fitted with the optical lens array which 
can be seen on top of the LED array. A much higher pho-
ton  intensity  is  concentrated  and  delivered  to  the  target 
with  significantly  less  energy  lost  to  lateral  scatter. 
(Photography  courtesy  of  Medicoscientific  Affairs, 
Lutronic Corporation, Goyang, South Korea: LED array 
from HEALITE II 830 nm LED phototherapy system)

in  front  of  the  LED  arrays,  each  lens  being  in 
front  of  an  LED  in  the  array.  The  output  from 
each  LED  is  therefore  partially  collimated  to 
reduce  the  angle  of  divergence  by  some  30%. 
This means that there are still intersecting beams 
to  make  use  of  the  photon  interference  phe-

nomenon,  but  the  photon  intensity  is  now  30% 
higher at any given plane in the LED beam pat-
tern. Therefore, for the same irradiance, the pho-
ton intensity at the target has been increased to 
allow for a more efficient irradiation of the target 
tissue (Fig. 18.13).

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



302

 Dosimetry

Up to this point in the section, the time for which 
light  of  a  given  irradiance  or  power  density  is 
incident  on  a  target  has  not  been  mentioned. 
When treatment time comes into the therapeutic 
equation it quantifies the dose of light delivered. 
When 1 W of power is incident on target tissue 
for  1  s,  the  energy  delivered  is  1  joule  (J). The 
joule in itself is a particularly useless therapeutic 
parameter  since  it  expresses  only  power  over 
time, and does not take into account the unit area 
of  tissue  being  treated.  The  most  important 
parameter for the therapeutic dose in LED photo-
therapy is the energy density (ED). ED is calcu-
lated as follows:

ED

=

OP

t
´ (
TA

/
J cm

2

)

where OP is the output power incident on the tar-
get in watts, t is the time in seconds and TA is the 
irradiated area in cm2. ED is expressed in joules/
cm2 (J/cm2). However, too much is often made of 
the dose as the most important parameter in pho-
totherapy,  and  criticism  has  been  leveled  at  an 
LED system that ‘the dose is too high’. In fact, as 
stated in the previous subsection, it is the power 
density,  rather  than  the  energy  density,  which 
more than anything else determines the bioreac-
tion, and this is illustrated in Table 18.3 where a 
constant  dose  of  approximately  25  J/cm2  can 
achieve the entire gamut of bioeffects from pure 
athermal photobiomodulation to severe photode-
struction.  The  total  uselessness  of  joules  as  a 
meaningful  parameter  is  also  illustrated:  the 

greatest  amount  of  energy  in  the  table,  2000  J, 
produced a phototherapeutic effect, whereas the 
smallest, 8 mJ (0.008 J), produced a photosurgi-
cal  effect  [17].  In  an  experiment  performed 
20  years  ago  by  the  author  of  this  chapter,  the 
exposed  rat  knee  joint,  both  encapsulated  and 
unencapsulated,  was  irradiated  with  a  GaAlAs 
diode  laser  giving  an  incident  power  density  of 
1  W/cm2.  A  range  of  doses  was  applied  from 
20 J/cm2 (20 s exposure) up to 1800 J/cm2 (30 min 
exposure). Tissue was examined macroscopically 
and  microscopically  immediately  after  irradia-
tion  for  any  signs  of  damage:  none  was  found. 
The wounds were closed and followed up at dif-
ferent time points over 2 weeks. No differences 
were seen in coded specimens from each group at 
all time points regarding morphological changes 
compared  with  the  unirradiated  control  speci-
mens [18]. In pharmaceutical science, the medi-
cine must be correct before adjusting the dosage. 
In phototherapy, the power density is analogous 
with the medicine, and the energy density is the 
dose. If the medicine is incorrect, i.e., a photon 
intensity which is too low (no effect) or too high 
(photothermal  damage),  no  amount  of  playing 
around  with  the  dose  will  achieve  the  optimum 
result [17].

 Temporal Profile of the Beam

The temporal profile of a beam of light energy sim-
ply  means  the  output  mode  in  which  the  light  is 
delivered to the target. There are two modes, con-
tinuous wave (CW) and pulsed, with Q-switching 

Table 18.3  This illustrates a variety of bioeffects (Δα) achieved with the same approximate energy density, or dose, of 
25 J/cm2

P
100 W
50 W
10 W
1 W
75 mW

S ∅
10.0 cm
3.5 mm
1.0 mm
200 μm
3.0 mm

[a] (cm2)
78.6
0.1
0.0008
0.0003
0.07

PD (W/cm2)
1.3

500
1250
3180

1.1

t
20 s
100 ms
20 ms
8 ms
23 s

e
2000 J
5 J
0.2 J
8 mJ
1.725 J

ED (J/cm2)
25
25
25
25
25

Δα
−
+
++
+++

−

As can be seen from the table, the power density (PD) is the most important determinant of the bioeffect and the energy 
density given alone is therefore not a real determinant of effect
Key to table: P: Incident power (units as shown), S∅: spot size diameter (units as shown), [a]: irradiated area, PD: power 
densityt: exposure time (units as shown), E: energy (units as shown), ED: energy densityΔα: graded bioeffects (+++, 
severe photodestruction; ++, medium photodestruction; +, mild and/or reversible photodestruction; −, bioactivation)

R. G. Calderhead 
 




303

of a pulsed beam technology dramatically shorten-
ing the pulse width and increasing the peak power 
of  pulsed  beams.  In  CW,  as  the  name  suggests, 
when the light source is activated the power reaches 
its maximum level, from mW up to 100 W or so, 
and  stays  there  till  the  system  is  switched  off 
(Fig.  18.14a,  left  panel). An  alternative  to  CW  is 
when  the  beam  is  ‘gated’  to  produce  a  train  of 
square waves: this is often incorrectly referred to as 
‘pulsed’ light (Fig. 18.14a, right panel). Gating can 
be  accomplished  by  a  mechanical  shutter,  or  be 
achieved  by  simply  switching  the  light  source  on 
and off. The correct name for this process is ‘fre-
quency  modulation’,  because  an  exogenous  fre-
quency (the on-off sequence) is being superimposed 
on the inherent frequency of the beam which is pre-
determined  by  the  wavelength,  each  wavelength 
having a fixed frequency. For example, near infra-
red at 830 nm, visible red at 633 nm and visible blue 
at  415  nm  have  ‘built  in’  frequencies  of  approxi-
mately  3.6  ×  108,  4.7  ×  108,  and  7.2  ×  108  MHz, 
respectively.  From  this  it  can  be  seen  that  as  the 

wavelength  decreases,  the  frequency  increases. 
Increased  frequency  is  also  positively  associated 
with an increase in energy of the individual photons, 
expressed as electron volts (ev), and for the previous 
three  wavelengths  the  respective  photon  energies 
are  approximately  1.49,  1.96  and  2.99  ev.  Photon 
energy determines the type of interaction between 
the  incident  light  and  skin  cells.  For  830  nm,  as 
explained  already,  photophysical  rotational  and 
vibrational changes occur in the electrons making 
up  the  cell  membrane,  whereas  for  visible  light 
there is a direct induction of an intracellular photo-
chemical cascade. At very high ev values, such as 
those  associated  with  ultrashort  wavelengths, 
namely  X-  and  γ-radiation,  the  very  large  photon 
energies result in molecular disassociation of cells 
with sufficient exposure, in other words the cells are 
literally blown apart or “ionized”. These ultrashort 
wavelengths  are  classed  as  ionizing  radiation  and 
are  inherently  extremely  harmful  to  living  tissue 
with a strong carcinogenic potential. LED-LLLT is 
very much nonionizing radiation.

a

80

)

W
m

(

r
e
w
o
p
t
u
p
t
u
O

0

C/W beam

Frequency modulated C/W beam
(50% duty cycle)

on

off

b

15

)

W
G

(

r
e
w
o
p
t
u
p
t
u
O

0

Peak power
15 GW

Interpulse interval (in ms)

Average power (in W)

Pulse width (in ns)

Time (s)

Time (units as shown)

Fig. 18.14  Temporal profile of a beam of light. There are 
two  basic  profiles,  continuous  wave  (CW)  (a)  or  pulsed 
(b). In CW (a, left panel), the system is switched on, the 
light very rapidly reaches its maximum, and remains there 
till  the  system  is  switched  off.  This  CW  beam  can  be 
‘gated’ mechanically or electrically, i.e. rapidly switched 
on  and  off  (a,  right  panel),  which  is  often  incorrectly 
referred  to  a  ‘pulsing’.  The  correct  name  is  frequency 
modulation. This gives a series of rectangular waveforms: 

a 50% duty cycle is illustrated. When a laser beam is truly 
pulsed,  a  tremendously  high  peak  power,  measured  as 
high as gigawatts (GW) is released in an ultrashort pulse 
interval, measured in nanoseconds (ns) (b, left panel). If a 
train of these pulses is emitted with a comparatively long 
interpulse  interval  of  milliseconds  (ms)  (b,  right  panel), 
then the target tissue ‘sees’ only the average power of the 
beam,  measured  in  watts.  This  is  called  quasi-CW,  also 
known as ‘superpulsing’ the beam

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice 
 
 
 




304

In a true pulsed beam, from a high-powered or 
Q-switched laser, an extremely high peak power is 
reached in a spike-like waveform, with a very short 
pulsewidth,  1  ms  or  less  or  in  the   nanosecond 
domain  for  the  Q-switched  systems.  The  peak 
power  may  be  in  mega-  or  even  gigawatts 
(Fig.  18.14b,  left  panel).  If  a  train  of  such  true 
pulses  is  delivered  with  a  set  interpulse  interval 
often  orders  of  magnitude  longer  than  the  pulse 
width, then the target tissue ‘sees’ only the average 
power  of  the  beam,  usually  at  CW  output  levels. 
This is also referred to as ‘superpulsing’, or more 
correctly, quasi-CW (Fig. 18.14b, right panel). No 
current therapeutic LED system is capable of deliv-
ering  a  true  pulsed  beam,  although  LED-LLLT 
devices are available in which the LEDs are turned 
on and off to give flashes of energy in a range of 
frequencies  which  are  superimposed  on  the  fre-
quency inherent to the wavelength of the emitted 
light.  This  is  frequency  modulation,  but  is  often 
incorrectly referred to as “pulsing” the LEDs.

Box 18.3
•  LEDs are ideal for cellular photobio-
modulation  (low  level  light  therapy, 
LLLT),  an  atraumatic  and  athermal 
direct exchange of energy raising the 
target’s action potential

•  LEDs can be successfully used in pho-

todynamic therapy (PDT)
PDT 
 – Exogenous 

with 
5- aminolevulinic  acid  (5-ALA)  for 
treatment  of  non-melanoma  skin 
cancers and severe photodamage.
 – -  Endogenous  PDT  in  porphyrins 
to  Propionibacterium 
endogenous 
acnes, for example, in the treatment 
of acne.

 LED Phototherapy: Mechanisms 
of Action

When light energy is incident on a target, the reac-
tion in the target following absorption is known as 
the  mechanism  of  action.  In  LED  phototherapy, 

there are two main mechanisms of action: photody-
namic therapy (PDT) and athermal and atraumatic 
photobiomodulation,  which  are  totally  different 
mechanisms of action.

 Photodynamic Therapy (PDT)

PDT can be exogenous or endogenous, the better 
known form of which is exogenous.

 Exogenous PDT
Exogenous  PDT  is  typically  defined  as:  “The 
use of a chemical, given orally, intravenously or 
topically (directly to the skin), that can be acti-
vated  or  energized  by  light  to  destroy  a  target 
tissue  in  which  the  chemical  or  substance  has 
preferentially  located.  This  activation  causes 
the formation of new molecules and free radi-
cals  such  as  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS) 
which  may  also  form  other  chemicals  that,  in 
turn,  may  destroy  the  targeted  material  to  a 
varying extent, such as through ROS-mediated 
apoptosis of the photosensitized cells or closure 
of blood vessels feeding the target tissue.” PDT 
is  another  arm  of  phototherapy,  and  whilst 
exogenous  PDT  is  thus  still  an  athermal  reac-
tion, it is not atraumatic as deliberate induction 
of  apoptotic  cell  death  is  the  main  goal.  The 
first main application for photodynamic therapy 
was  in  the  treatment  of  certain  cancers,  with 
such  photosensitizers  as  hematoporphyrin 
derivatives activated with low incident levels of 
laser  light,  particularly  with  visible  red  light 
such as from the HeNe laser due to this wave-
length’s better penetration than the shorter vis-
ible  wavelengths  in  living  human  tissue  [19]. 
This activated an oxygen-dependent phototoxic 
cytocidal action within the cells containing the 
agent, and the free radical singlet oxygen (1O2), 
a short-lived product from the reaction between 
an  excited  sensitizer  molecule  and  oxygen, 
played a very important part in the induction of 
cell  death  (apoptosis)  and  destruction  of  the 
microvasculature feeding the tumor.

One of the first applications for LED photo-
therapy was in fact PDT for non-melanoma skin 
cancers (NMSCs), such as basal cell carcinomas 

R. G. Calderhead



305

a

b

c

d

Fig. 18.15  Nonselective en bloc infiltration of skin by Pp 
IX and Cp III of 5-ALA origin illustrated schematically. 
(a)  Target  lesion  in  superficial  dermis.  (b)  5-ALA  oint-
ment applied topically to epidermis. (c) As 5-ALA pene-
trates en bloc into skin cells, it is transformed into Cp III 
and  Pp  IX,  photosensitizing  porphyrins.  (d)  Light  at  an 

appropriate  wavelength  activates  the  porphyrins  to  pro-
duce powerful but very short-acting reactive oxygen spe-
cies, such as singlet oxygen, and the affected skin cells die 
through oxidative-stress mediated apoptosis (induced cel-
lular destruction)

is  converted  as  part  of 

and  superficial  squamous  cell  carcinomas,  or 
severe sun damage such as actinic keratosis with 
the  use  of  another  exogenously-applied  com-
pound,  5-aminolevulinic  acid  or  5-ALA  in  any 
of  its  forms.  This  application  continues  to  the 
present with good success and robust long-last-
ing results [20, 21]. The topically applied 5-ALA 
penetrates  into  the  dermis  under  an  occlusive 
wrap,  and 
the 
mitochondrial- based heme cycle into copropor-
phyrin  III  (Cp  III),  a  member  of  the  powerful 
porphyrin  photosensitizing  family.  When  the 
maximum amount of Cp III has been converted, 
the  remainder  of  the  5-ALA  is  converted  into 
another  porphyrin,  protoporphyrin  IX  (Pp  IX). 
These  two  porphyrins  become  the  specific  tar-
gets of the LED energy at specific wavelengths, 
and,  following  photoactivation,  nonselectively 
damage  all  of  the  superficial  dermal  tissue  in 
which they exist, as illustrated schematically in 
Fig. 18.15.

When  a  photoreaction  is  desired  such  as  in 
5-ALA PDT for any purpose, an action spectrum 
has to be run to investigate the action potential of 
a range of wavelengths in the target compound. 
Figure 18.16 shows the absorption spectra of Pp 
IX  and  Cp  III.  There  is  a  very  large  peak  at 
415 nm in the visible blue Soret band, but as will 
be  remembered  from  the  previous  section  on 
wavelength, blue light has very poor penetrative 
capability  into  the  dermis,  and  so  it  would  not 
cause  deep  enough  damage  to  treat  NMSCs 

Fig.  18.16  Action  spectra  for  coproporphyrin  III  and 
protoporphyrin  IX.  Note  the  extremely  high  peak  at 
415 nm, and the minor peak at 633 nm, visible red, par-
ticularly in Pp IX, which suggests the red wavelength for 
deeper  activation  of  5-ALA-induced  porphyrins  in  PDT 
for cutaneous lesions

successfully.  Another  series  of  much  smaller 
peaks is however seen from the yellow to the red 
waveband  (the  Q-band),  the  latter  occurring  at 
around 633 nm, which was used in the early days 
of  hematoporphyrin  derivative  PDT  for  other 
cancer types as a much better-penetrating wave-
length, thus giving a much deeper zone of por-
phyrin  activation  and  hence  a  deeper  zone  and 
greater volume of controlled photodamage. Red 
633 nm LED-activated 5-ALA has been success-
fully  used  for  NMLCs  and  actinic  keratoses, 
photorejuvenation  and  inflammatory  acne  vul-
garis.  These  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



306

in the appropriate subsection on LED photother-
apy in clinical practice.

 Endogenous PDT
Exogenous PDT as discussed above depends on 
an  external  photosensitizer,  such  as  5-ALA.  In 
endogenous PDT, the photosensitizer, or photo-
sensitizing  substances,  can  be  found  occurring 
naturally  within  the  target  cells  or  tissue.  The 
exogenous  application  of  5-ALA  induces  the 
synthesis  of  the  porphyrins  Pp  IX  and  CP  III 
nonselectively  in  the  tissues  of  the  epidermis 
and  dermis  under  the  area  of  application  as 
already  explained  above.  However,  in  the  case 
of acne vulgaris the inflammatory acne lesions 
are  associated  with  the  presence  of  their  caus-
ative  bacterium,  Propionibacterium  acnes  (P. 
acnes). It has been well demonstrated that both 
Pp  IX  and  Cp  III  are  endogenous  to  active  P. 
acnes, and the more active is the bacterium, the 
higher  the  porphyrin  concentration  [22–24]. 
Referring again to Fig. 18.16, maximum photo-
activation  of  both  Pp  IX  and  Cp  III  occurs  at 
around 415 nm. Light at that wavelength, with a 
high  enough  photon  intensity,  could  therefore 
achieve activation of the porphyrins within the 
P.  acnes,  thereby  selectively  destroying  or  at 
least  severely  damaging  the  P.  acnes  through 
oxidative  stress-induced  apoptosis  [25],  but 
without  harming  the  surrounding  skin  cells. 
Endogenous PDT could therefore be applied in 
the  light-only  treatment  of  inflammatory  P. 
acnes  lesions  without  the  need  for  any  exoge-
nous  5-ALA.  This  will  be  discussed  in  more 
detail  in  the  appropriate  part  of  the  following 
section.

 Photobiomodulation

Basically the majority of the information in sec-
tions “Introduction” and “Basics of Light-Tissue 
Interaction”  has  been  based  on  the  concept  of 
photobiomodulation,  also  known  as  photoacti-
vation  therapy,  and  this  approach  completely 

fulfills  the  definition  of  phototherapy,  namely 
direct  cellular  activation  in  an  athermal  and 
atraumatic manner which has been the umbrella 
mechanism of action long-associated with LLLT 
(low  level  light  therapy)  over  its  30-year-plus 
history, whether with laser or non-laser sources. 
Atraumatic  and  athermal  LLLT  thus  differs 
from  PDT  which  actively  seeks  to  damage  the 
target  cells  and  tissues,  although  still  in  an 
athermal manner. As has already been discussed 
in section “Wavelength and Its Importance” on 
wavelength, near infrared and visible light have 
different absorption targets (cell membrane and 
subcellular organelles, respectively) but the end 
result  is  the  same,  and  the  energy  level  of  the 
cell is raised by both near IR and visible light of 
appropriate wavelengths through direct absorp-
tion  of  the  incoming  photon  energy,  which  is 
then transferred to the receptor cell with no loss 
through heat or luminescence. The main mecha-
nism of action is connected with increased ade-
nosine 
triphosphate  (ATP)  production  and 
increased  Ca2+  ion  intra-  and  intercellular  sig-
naling [26].

Under photoactivation, three things can hap-
pen to the energized cell: if it is compromised 
or  in  some  way  damaged,  the  cell  will  heal 
much faster; if the cell is designed to perform 
some  specific  function,  such  as  fibroblast  col-
lagenesis  and  elastinogenesis,  then  the  LLLT-
treated cell will perform these functions better 
and faster; finally, if the cell is designed to rep-
licate,  then  it  will  replicate  faster  [14].  These 
may happen singly, or in combination, and form 
the basis of the three decades of LLLT literature 
in which some, but not all, of the mechanisms 
under the umbrella of photobiomodulation have 
already been at least partly elucidated as sum-
marized in Table 18.4 and at a molecular level 
in Table 18.5. In addition, in the past decade in 
particular, a good number of solid clinical and 
basic science papers have corroborated the pre-
vious basic and clinical findings for LED pho-
totherapy,  and  some  exciting  new  science  on 
LED-LLLT  has  been  appearing  in  the  last 

R. G. Calderhead



Table 18.4  Summary of the major mechanisms associated with photobioactivation and LLLT

307

Bioenergetic
↑ Rotational and 
vibrational changes to 
membrane molecule 
electrons
(Primary for near-IR)
↑ Stimulation of 
acupuncture meridian 
points
↑ Increased 
biophotonic activity

Bioelectric
↑ Electromotive action on 
membrane bound ion transport 
mechanisms

↑ Intracellular extra-cellular ion 
gradient changes

↑ Depolarization of synaptic 
cleft → closure of synaptic 
gate—pain control
↑ Activation of the dorsal horn 
gate control mechanism → pain 
transmission slowed, pain control 
increased

Mild thermal 
(<40 °C)
↑ Nerve 
conduction

↑ Capillary 
dilatation

Biochemical (primary for visible 
light)
(Mitochondrial events)
↑ ATP production
↑ Release of nitric oxide (NO)
↑ Very low levels of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS)
↑ Fibroblast 
proliferation → Collagen and elastin 
synthesis
↑ Mast cell degranulation: cytokine, 
chemokine and trophic factor release

↑ Macrophage activity (chemotaxis 
and internalization) → release of 
FGF

↑ Keratinocyte activity → cytokine 
release in epidermis and dermis
↑ Opiate and nonopiate pain control 
(endorphins, dynorphins and 
enkephalins)
↑ RNA/DNA synthesis
↑ Enzyme production
↑ Superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
production (mast cells)

Table 18.5  Molecular level activation by LLLT with appropriate LEDs (based on data from Gao X, Xing D. Molecular 
mechanisms of cell proliferation induced by low power laser irradiation. J Biomedical Science. 2009 16:4 http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2644974/)

Classification
Growth factors

Molecules
BNF, GDNF, FGF, bFGF, IGF-1, KGF, PDGF, 
TGF-β, VEGF

Interleukins

IL-1α IL-2, IL-4,IL-6, IL-8

Inflammatory 
cytokines
Small molecules

PGE2, COX2, IL1β, TNF-α

ATP, cGMP, ROS, CA2+, NO, H+

LLLT-associated biological effects
Proliferation
Differentiation
Bone nodule formation
Proliferation
Migration
Immunological activation
Acceleration/inhibition of inflammation

Normalization of cell function
Pain relief
Wound healing
Mediation of cellular activities
Migration
Angiogenesis

5 years. LED-LLLT can be used in combination 
with  other  conventional  modalities  to  improve 
results  and  hasten  healing  time,  and  can  also 
offer a very interesting combination with either 

exogenous or endogenous PDT in the treatment 
of  inflammatory  acne  vulgaris.  Once  again,  a 
detailed discussion will be found in the follow-
ing section.

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



308

Box 18.4
•  LED-LLLT  in  the  adjunctive  combi-
nation approach is the key to clinical 
efficacy.

•  LED-LLLT is not magic … it cannot 
target everything as monotherapy.
•  Based on the published peer-reviewed 
literature,  certain  wavelengths  can 
accomplish  different  things  in  effec-
tive LED-LLLT.
 – 633 nm has proved effective in 5-ALA 
PDT for non-melanoma skin cancers, 
and has found applications in hair res-
toration and baldness prevention.
 – Blue 415 nm endogenous PDT com-
bined with red 633 or 830 nm LED- 
LLLT  applied  sequentially  has  been 
reported as a very effective light-only 
therapy  for  moderate  to  severe  acne 
vulgaris.

 – Combined  near  infrared  833  and 
633  nm  red  LED-LLLT,  applied 
sequentially,  was  reported  as  very 
effective in skin rejuvenation and all 
aspects  of  wound  healing,  but  more 
recent literature suggests that 830 nm 
on  its  own  is  the  key  wavelength  in 
these indications.
 – Visible  yellow 

(590  nm, 
595  nm)  has  shown  efficacy  in  the 
treatment  of  superficial  conditions, 
e.g., in the treatment of rosacea.

light 

 – Adjunctive  LED  phototherapy  will 
complement any and all existing con-
ventional  modalities  which  alter  in 
any way the architecture of the skin 
to achieve the desired clinical result.

 LED Phototherapy in Clinical 
Practice

Good basic science is of course extremely impor-
tant to understand how LED-LLLT can be applied 
in current dermatological practice, to help bolster 
up  evidence-based  medicine  from  the  practical 

clinical arena. However, a thorough understand-
ings  of  the  true  capabilities,  and  indeed  limita-
tions, of LED phototherapy in clinical practice is 
even  more  essential  to  go  about  amassing  the 
required  evidence-based  medicine  in  the  most 
efficient manner. A large number of LED-based 
systems  is  commercially  available  now  in  the 
USA  and  world-wide,  but  a  very,  very  small 
number  has  actually  made  it  into  the  peer- 
reviewed literature with the vast majority of man-
ufacturers content to ride on the coat-tails of the 
companies who have done the actual work, both 
basic science and controlled clinical trials, even 
though the science of these bandwagon-jumping 
systems  is  sketchy  at  best,  and  nonexistent  or 
even  erroneous  at  worst.  Of  particular  concern 
are  the  ‘look-alikes’  of  far-east  origin,  particu-
larly  China,  based  on  proven  systems  but  with 
inferior  quality  LEDs  which  give  neither  the 
rated wavelength, nor sufficient and stable output 
power.  Some  of  these  systems  mimic  the  free- 
standing planar LED-based units, and others are 
small  hand-held  devices  with  a  mesmerizing 
array  of  pretty  flashing  multicolored  LEDs, 
designed for the home-use market. These groups 
of ‘toy’ systems are doing more harm than good 
to the reputation of LED phototherapy, although 
one hopes that they are not visiting actual harm 
on  patients  with  ‘no  effect’  hopefully  being  the 
worst that they achieve. The negative impact on 
‘good’ LED phototherapy has been and remains, 
however, very large. Hopefully this entire chapter 
will  go  some  way  to  redressing  that.  Another 
important point for anyone considering purchas-
ing  an  LED  phototherapy  system  is  that  some 
LED system manufacturers claim that their LEDs 
are ‘NASA technology’. This is totally mislead-
ing.  Although  the  new  generation  of  LEDs  is 
based  on  the  ‘NASA  LED’,  they  are  not  actual 
NASA  technology,  and  some  of  the  LEDs  thus 
described  are  still  of  the  previous  generation: 
caveat  emptor! The  reader  must  always  bear  in 
mind that with LED phototherapy, ‘any old LED 
will NOT do’.

The  treatment  categories  dealt  with  in  this 
very important section are based on published lit-
erature, not so-called ‘white papers’, and so the 
reader can obtain the original articles from online 

R. G. Calderhead



indexing  sources  such  as  PubMed,  and  see  in 
detail what has, and what has not, been scientifi-
cally  proven  and  clinically  corroborated.  The 
author would like to point out that any suggested 
treatment protocols are inserted only for example 
and guidance, and must not be taken as concrete. 
Manufacturer’s  recommendations  are  also  only 
recommendations, and the reader should look to 
the  published  literature  or  presentations  from 
leaders in the field at leading national and inter-
national congresses for more detailed and accu-
rate  treatment  protocols.  It  is  the  hope  of  the 
author that the reader will see the true possibili-
ties of LED phototherapy to enhance his or her 
clinical  practice,  and  will  moreover  choose  an 
LED  system  based  on  the  criteria  which  will 
appear  throughout  the  section,  rather  than  on 
hype, pretty flashing colors and pseudo-science. 
If  the  actual  systems  referenced  seem  to  be 
extremely  limited,  that  is  because  they  are  the 
only ones which have been published in the lit-
erature,  and  the  author  offers  no  apologies  for 
this. He can only demonstrate and present to the 
reader what has been published on systems which 
have met or exceeded the required criteria by the 
relevant regulatory bodies.

 Non-melanoma Skin Cancers (NMSCs) 
and Actinic Keratosis

NMSCs,  including  Bowen’s  disease  and  basal 
cell carcinoma, were the first entity to be treated 
with  LED  PDT  using  specifically-designed 
633  nm  LED-based  system  to  activate  5-ALA, 
the  pioneering  company  was  Photo 
and 
Therapeutics  (Fazeley  UK  and  Carlsbad,  CA) 
their  Omnilux®  PDT™  system.  The 
with 
Omnilux brand is currently owned by Radiency 
Ltd.,  Hod  Hasheron,  Israel  (parent  company). 
Having  established  that  an  effective  activation 
peak  for  the  relevant  porphyrins  created  from 
exogenous PDT existed at around 633 nm, a UK 
company  in  1996,  working  in  tandem  with  the 
British Cancer Research Council, developed the 
Paterson  Lamp,  a  filtered  xenon-powered  lamp 
which  delivered  most  of  its  light  energy  at 
633 nm, to be used with exogenous 5-ALA PDT 

309

in the treatment of NMSCs [27]. The lamp was 
the brainchild of Dr. Colin Whitehurst, and it was 
he who saw the potential for using the new gen-
eration of LEDs which became available in 2000 
following Whelan’s work with the NASA Space 
Medicine  program  referenced  earlier.  The  new 
generation  of  LEDs  emits  quasimonochromatic 
light and does not require filtering, plus the LEDs 
can be mounted in planar arrays to irradiate large 
areas at the same time, such as the entire face. Dr 
Whitehurst then helped found Photo Therapeutics, 
who built the first large-array 633 nm LED ther-
apy  source  for  LED  PDT  for  the  treatment  on 
NMSCs  with  input  from  Prof  Whelan.  Large- 
scale  clinical  trials  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  in 
Europe gave excellent results [28].

The  basic  protocol  which  has  evolved  for 
633  nm  LED  PDT  for  NMSCs  is  as  follows: 
please note that differences in LED systems and 
photosensitizer do not make this an absolute pro-
tocol, and the recommendations of the manufac-
turer of both the LED system being used and the 
photosensitizer  being  applied  must  always  be 
studied  and  carefully  followed.  Following  thor-
ough  cleaning  of  the  treatment  area,  5-ALA  of 
the appropriate strength (usually 20%) is applied, 
and occluded with sterile cling film for the rec-
ommended  incubation  period  (up  to  several 
hours, depending on the lesion being treated). At 
the  end  of  incubation,  the  occlusive  dressing  is 
removed  and  any  excess  5-ALA  wiped  off. 
Activation of the porphyrins induced in the target 
tissue is then achieved with 633 nm light, with a 
dose  usually  around  45–90  J/cm2.  This  can  be 
extremely  painful,  and  some  kind  of  forced  air 
cooling  may  be  applied  during  this  phase  for 
patient comfort. Following activation, the wound 
is dressed, and the patient returns after 24 h for 
dressing  removal  and  the  situation  is  then  fol-
lowed  for  4–6  weeks.  In  a  large  percentage  of 
lesions,  recurrence  is  not  a  problem.  Persistent 
lesions  are  retreated  till  no  recurrence  is  seen. 
Figure  18.17  shows  a  typical  example  of  the 
results of 633 nm LED PDT for an NMSC.

In the case of actinic keratoses (AKs), which 
are much more superficial than NMSCs, a much 
lower  concentration  of  5-ALA  is  applied  with  a 
shorter incubation time. The protocol is otherwise 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



310

a

b

Fig. 18.17  A basal cell carcinoma before (a) and 4 weeks 
after 633 nm 5-ALA PDT (b) (20% 5-ALA, 5 h incuba-
tion, 20 min activation at approximately 96 J/cm2. System 

used,  Omnilux®  PDT™,  photographs  courtesy  of  Colin 
Morton MD, Falkirk, Scotland)

a

b

Fig.  18.18  Actinic  keratosis  on  the  décolleté  of  a 
45 year-old female before (a) and just over 6 weeks after 
633 nm 5-ALA PDT (b) (10% 5-ALA, 30 min incubation, 

20 min activation at approximately 96 J/cm2. Same system 
as  in  Fig.  18.14,  photographs  courtesy  of  Colin  Morton 
MD, Falkirk, Scotland)

the  same  and  the  activation  dose  is  still  recom-
mended  to  be  around  96  J/cm2.  Figure  18.18 
shows  AK  on  the  upper  sternum  of  a  female 
patient before and after 633 nm LED PDT. One 
treatment usually suffices for AKs.

 Acne Vulgaris

Acne vulgaris still represents a major problem for 
the practicing dermatologist, despite advances in 
clinical  and  medical  therapy.  Many  approaches 
have been tried with varying degrees of success, 
but  results  are  inconsistent,  even  in  the  same 
regimen  with  the  same  patient.  If  untreated,  or 
treated  improperly,  active  ace  almost  always 
leads  to  unsightly  acne  scarring,  as  disfiguring 

and psychosomatically troublesome as the active 
lesions,  but  more  difficult  to  treat.  It  therefore 
made sense to attack and eradicate acne while at 
the active stage, before scarring was an issue. In 
addition  to  the  conventional  approaches,  LED 
exogenous  5-ALA  PDT  with  633  nm  and  nar-
rowband blue light LED and non-LED sources at 
around 410–425 nm attracted attention with good 
results, but with some downtime and pain associ-
ated with the activation stage of the photosensi-
tizer [29–31]. The recurrence rate was, however, 
still rather high. The development of quasimono-
chromatic  LEDs  at  the  peak  wavelength  of 
415  nm  offered  a  new  approach,  given  the 
extremely high peak in the activation spectra of 
Pp IX and Cp III, both of which porphyrins are 
to  active  P.  acnes  as  already 
endogenous 

R. G. Calderhead



discussed  above.  With  a  high  enough  photon 
intensity  at  415  nm  it  would  therefore  theoreti-
cally be possible to activate the endogenous por-
phyrins in P. acnes selectively, thereby disabling 
or eradicating the P. acnes [32, 33]. On the other 
hand,  trying  to  activate  porphyrins  from  exoge-
nously-applied  5-ALA  PDT  with  narrow  band 
415  nm  LED  energy  should  be  attempted  with 
extreme caution, as the activation process will be 
both extremely painful and rather shallow owing 
to  the  physical  characteristics  of  415  nm  light, 
with a prolonged downtime owing to the serious 
damage to the irradiated tissues.

In order to understand why the blue light ther-
apy  on  its  own  was  achieving  good  results  but 
with a still unacceptably high recurrence rate, the 
etiology  of  acne  must  be  considered.  Acne  is 
often  considered  as  an  inflammatory  disorder, 
full  stop,  with  colonization  of  blocked  follicles 
by  P.  acnes  as  the  main  culprit.  In  fact,  acne  is 
multifactorial  with  major  influences  other  than 
merely  inflammation,  such  as  hormonal  and 
 autoimmunological imbalances [34]. Acne is the 
result of the establishment of a vicious circle set 
up between P. acnes and some t-cells originally 
homing into the site to help the defence system, 
but ultimately converted by P. acnes to the black 
side as ‘rogue t-cells’. Whereas 415 nm will pre-
cisely target the P. acnes via the endogenous por-
phyrins  and  thereby  remove  one  of  the  major 
causes of the inflammation, the rogue t-cells and 
any hormonal imbalance remain untreated by the 
415  nm  light,  thus  leaving  the  vicious  circle 
unbroken  and  paving  the  way  for  recurrence  at 
some stage in the near future. If light-only ther-
apy for acne were to work well and with robust 
results,  it  would  therefore  be  necessary  to  find 
another  approach  whereby  the  targets  not  dealt 
with  by  the  blue  light  could  be  attacked  with 
another  wavelength.  A  very  interesting  paper 
appeared  from  Papageorgiou  and  colleagues  in 
which  they  achieved  excellent  and  long-lasting 
results  in  acne  treatment  with  a  combination  of 
filtered blue (415 nm) and red (660 nm) non-LED 
light  applied  simultaneously  [35].  It  was  then 
suggested  that  sequential  rather  than  simultane-
ous application of blue and red light might have 
an  even  better  effect  through  selective  targeting 

311

the  different  cellular  and 

of 
subcellular 
wavelength- specific targets, and the quasimono-
chromatic nature of LED therapy would assist in 
precise  targeting.  In  addition,  applying  the  blue 
and  red  components  together  might  actually  go 
some way to defeating the object of the exercise, 
as one of the effects of the red light is to try and 
repair damaged cells, including the P. acnes tar-
geted by the blue light.

Two  clinical  papers  were  published  in  2007 
using  this  sequential  approach  of  415  nm  LED 
light-only therapy followed by 633 nm red LED 
treatment,  repeated  over  a  4-week  period.  One 
patient  group  was  Caucasian  [36]  and  the  other 
Asian  [37],  and  both  groups  had  a  meaningful 
number of patients (>25) with a good selection of 
Burton  grades  3–5,  representing  moderate  to 
severe  inflammatory  acne.  The  system  used  in 
both studies was the Omnilux (Radiancy, Israel) 
with the blue™ (415 nm) and revive™ (633 nm) 
heads,  and  the  same  protocol  was  followed  in 
both  the  USA  and  Korea  study  centers. A  two- 
week  washout  was  imposed  for  anyone  on  oral 
medication, and no other form of topical or ther-
apy was allowed during the study and followup 
period.  A  comedonal  scrub  was  recommended 
before each treatment session. The blue head was 
applied  first  for  20  min,  followed  at  least  48  h 
later  by  the  red  head.  This  was  repeated  for 
4  weeks.  Assessments  were  performed  at  pre-
treatment baseline, at each of the 4 weeks during 
treatment, and then at 4, 8 and 12 weeks after the 
final treatment session.

The most interesting point in both studies was 
that  the  improvement  obtained  after  the  final 
treatment  session,  which  ranged  from  50%  to 
60%  clearance  of  inflammatory  lesions,  contin-
ued  to  improve  up  to  12  weeks  after  the  final 
treatment with no other therapeutic intervention, 
reaching  from  83%  to  90%  clearance,  and  if 
extrapolated beyond the trial period would have 
in many patients reached 100%, which from per-
sonal  communication  with  the  authors  of  both 
papers,  it  in  fact  did.  Figure  18.19  is  a  graphic 
representation  of  the  inflamed  lesion  reduction 
curves of the two referenced papers.

No secondary hyperpigmentation was seen in 
any patients in both studies, which is of particular 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



312

0

20

40

60

80

100

)
s
n
o
i
s
e
l

f
o
%

(

s
e
t
a
r

e
c
n
a
r
a
e
l
C

Goldberg & Russell (29)

Lee et al (30)

Extrapolated clearance

0

12

3

4

4

8

12

Treatment weeks

Follow-up weeks

Fig.  18.19  Inflammatory  lesion  clearance  rates  follow-
ing the blue/red combination LED phototherapy for acne 
adapted  from  the  studies  by  Goldberg  and  Russell  [29] 
and  Lee  et  al.  [30]. The  Goldberg  study  had  a  12-week 
follow-up  after  the  final  treatment,  i.e.  16  weeks  from 
baseline, whereas the Lee study had an 8-week follow-up 

(12 weeks from baseline). However, by extrapolating the 
clearance rates in both studies, which were clearly linear 
in nature, the continued improvement is evident. No other 
therapy was used in either study. System used: Omnilux®, 
Radiancy, Israel

interest in the Asian skin type. In addition, over-
all  skin  condition  was  subjectively  assessed  to 
have improved, and in the case of the Asian popu-
lation,  skin  lightening  was  objectively  shown 
across the population with an instrumental assay. 
Figure  18.20  shows  examples  of  the  treatment 
efficacy courtesy of the authors of the papers. At 
6  months  after  the  final  session,  recurrences  in 
both trial centers were extremely few and mild, 
easily treated with another regimen of the blue/
red LED therapy (David Goldberg and Celine SY 
Lee, personal communication).

As  with  all  approaches  not  involving  exci-
sional surgery, there will always be a small per-
centage  of  patients  in  whom  light-only  LED 
phototherapy  for  acne  vulgaris  will  have  disap-
pointing  results,  but  from  the  above  studies  the 
overall efficacy is high enough to warrant apply-
ing  this  approach  as  the  primary  treatment  of 
choice. Sequential combination LED photother-
apy for acne can be combined with other topical 
approaches with even better results and improved 
maintenance,  provided  none  of  these  involves 
any kind of photosensitizing agents, any of which 
have the potential to create painful and possibly 

severe  side  effects. The  validity  of  the  substitu-
tion  of  another  LED  wavelength  to  the  current 
protocol, namely near infrared at 830 nm with its 
own unique cellular and tissue targets, in place of 
the  633  nm  visible  red  approach,  is  currently 
being assessed in ongoing clinical studies world-
wide,  and  the  results  are  extremely  promising 
probably  owing  to  the  specific  cellular  entities 
targeted by 830 nm compared with those affected 
by 633 nm.

 Skin Rejuvenation

Skin  rejuvenation  and  antiageing  have  become 
very  ‘hot’  topics.  Excessive  skin  exposure  to 
solar UVA and UVB brings about damaging mor-
phological and metabolic changes in the epider-
mis  and  dermal  extracellular  matrix  (ECM), 
combining  with  and  accelerating  the  effects  of 
chronological ageing and resulting in the lax, dull 
and wrinkled appearance of ‘old’ skin. Oxidative 
stressors such as singlet oxygen are photochemi-
cally generated following absorption of UV radi-
ation in the ECM and damage the matrix integrity 

R. G. Calderhead 
 
 
 




313

a

c

b

d

Fig. 18.20  Representative examples from the Goldberg 
and Lee studies on light-only combination blue/red LED 
phototherapy  for  inflammatory  acne.  (a)  Cystic  acne  at 
baseline in a 21-year-old female, skin phototype II, from 
the Goldberg and Russell series. (b) Six weeks after the 
treatment  session  (10  weeks  from  baseline). 
final 
Excellent clearance and very good cosmesis. Photographs 
courtesy of Bruce Russell MD. (c) Inflammatory acne on 

the  cheek  and  jaw  line  of  a  19-year-old  Korean  male 
patient from the Lee series, skin type IV. (d) Eight weeks 
after the final treatment session (12 weeks from baseline). 
Good clearance with no secondary hyperpigmentation, a 
major  problem  in  the  Asian  skin.  The  remaining  small 
areas of redness will fade with time. Photographs courtesy 
of SY Celine Lee MD

with elevated levels of the matrix metalloprotein-
ases (MMPs) 1 and 2, formerly known as colla-
genase  and  gelatinase;  elastotic  damage  to  the 
underlying  connective  tissue  occurs,  with  inter-
stitial  spaces  appearing  in  a  poorly-organized 

substance 

matrix;  the  viscosity  and  quality  of  the  ECM 
ground 
is 
reduced;  and  a  chronic  inflammatory  infiltrate 
can  be  identified. As  this  damage  is  caused  by 
light, an elegant concept to use the power of light 

glycosaminoglycans 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



314

to  reverse  the  damage  led  to  the  application  of 
lasers,  usually  the  CO2  or/and  the  Er:YAG,  in 
what became known as ablative laser resurfacing. 
Although still regarded as the ‘gold standard’ in 
the  rejuvenation  of  severely  photoaged  skin  in 
general and deep wrinkles in particular, the usu-
ally  severe  side  effects  and  a  prolonged  patient 
downtime  of  up  to  several  months  associated 
with 
its 
this  approach  drastically  reduced 
popularity.

To  attempt  to  overcome  these  problems,  so- 
called  nonablative  resurfacing  was  developed 
using  specially  adapted  laser  or  intense  pulse 
light  sources. The  theory  was  to  deliver  a  con-
trolled zone of deliberate photothermal damage 
beneath an intact epidermis, so that the wound- 
healing  processes,  including  collagenesis  and 
remodeling,  could  occur  under  the  undamaged 
epidermis, thereby obtaining rejuvenation of the 
skin without any patient downtime and was pop-
ularized  as  the  ‘lunch-break  rejuvenation’.  The 
theory was good, but in clinical practice patient 
satisfaction  was  very  low,  [38,  39]  because  the 
good  dermal  neocollagenesis  seen  in  post- 
treatment histological analysis was not reflected 
in a ‘younger’ epidermis [40]. In an attempt to 
bridge this gap between ablative and pure nonab-
lative  rejuvenation,  so-called  fractionated  or 
fractional  technology  was  developed  whereby 
many spots of almost grossly invisible epidermal 
and dermal ‘microdamage’ were delivered via a 
scanner or ‘stamp-type’ head, all surrounded by 
normal  epidermis  and  dermis  to  obtain  swift 
reepithelialization  and  dermal  wound  healing 
[41].  Unfortunately,  once  again  the  clinical 
results of the first generation of nonablative frac-
tional lasers were not satisfactory to the majority 
of  patients,  with  good  dermal  neocollagenesis 
not  being  echoed  in  the  epidermis.  In  both  the 
nonablative laser/IPL and the first generation of 
fractional  nonablative  technologies,  the  big 
problem was that what the patient first sees when 
looking in a mirror is the epidermis, not the der-
mis.  It  does  not  matter  to  the  patient  (or  her 
friends)  that  her  dermis  is  wonderfully  better 
organized  if  her  epidermis  remains  unchanged, 
what the author refers to as the SOE syndrome—
‘same  old  epidermis’.  Recognizing  this,  manu-

facturers of the more recent second generation of 
fractional systems have returned to the original 
ablative wavelengths, the CO2 and the Er:YAG, 
in  addition  to  increasing  the  parameters  of  the 
nonablative  fractional  Er:glass  systems, 
to 
deliver  fractionated  microbeams  that  visibly 
damage  the  both  the  epidermis  and  the  dermis 
with  a  recognizable  amount  of  erythema  and 
some edema post-treatment.

This in some way takes us back towards our 
gold  standard  of  ablative  resurfacing,  as  once 
again heat deposition, combined with controlled 
epidermal  damage,  becomes  a  pivotal  consider-
ation to achieve the ideal rejuvenation results on 
a patient-by-patient basis [42]. This approach has 
been much more successful from the patient sat-
isfaction criterion, although at the cost of a little 
downtime, because it is involving the epidermis 
more than the previous nonablative and fractional 
approaches.

In  the  meantime,  other  clinical  researchers 
were wondering if there was a role for LED pho-
totherapy  in  skin  rejuvenation,  and  the  first 
approach was to use a lower strength of topically- 
applied 
low-strength  5-ALA  activated  with 
633 nm LED in LED-PDT [43]. The results were 
good,  but  begged  the  question  as  to  why  more 
damage,  and  indeed  some  pain,  should  be 
inflicted  to  treat  what  was  essentially  compara-
tively  mild  skin  damage. Another  approach  has 
been to deliver the 5-ALA at very low concentra-
tions (<2%) via liposomes and activate the target 
tissue using intense pulsed light, achieving com-
plete quenching of the porphyrins and thus avoid-
ing  the  side  effect  of  residual  photosensitivity 
[44, 45]. Because of its totally noninvasive, ather-
mal and atraumatic nature, light-only LED pho-
totherapy for skin rejuvenation has also attracted 
attention first with a single wavelength system in 
the visible yellow [46], but once again a sequen-
tial  combination  technique,  initially  at  least, 
proved more effective than the single wavelength 
just as was the case with LED phototherapy for 
acne  [47,  48].  The  wavelengths  used  for  LED 
skin rejuvenation in the published literature were 
originally  near  IR  at  830  nm  applied  first,  fol-
lowed  by  633  nm  72  h  later,  repeated  over 
4  weeks.  The  rationale  for  using  these  wave-

R. G. Calderhead



315

lengths and the order in which they are  applied 
are  photobiologically  based  on  the  precepts  of 
the wound healing cycle, and will be covered in 
some  detail  in  the  next  subsection  dedicated  to 
wound  healing.  Both  of  these  wavelengths 
involve  the  mother  keratinocytes  in  the  basal 
layer of the epidermis, however, in addition to the 
target dermal cells, with beneficial effects to both 
the cellularity and organization of the epidermis, 
but with no heat and no damage.

Lee  and  colleagues,  in  the  first  and  really 
detailed  controlled  study  in  the  peer-reviewed 
literature,  which  was  published  in  the  very 
prestigious  Journal  of  Photochemistry  and 
Photobiology  (B),  [49]  compared  LED  skin 
rejuvenation in a total of 76 patients randomly 
assigned to four groups: 830 nm LED therapy 
on its own, 633 nm LED therapy on its own, the 
combination therapy with 830 and 633 nm and 
a  sham  irradiated  group.  All  patients  were 
treated  hemifacially,  so  there  was  intrapatient 
as  well  as  intergroup  controls.  In  addition  to 

improvement  existed  between 

clinical  photography  and  subjective  patient 
assessment, Dr Lee tested the results with pro-
filometry  and  instrumental  measurement  of 
skin melanin and elasticity. She also carried out 
histological,  immunohistochemical  and  bio-
chemical  assays.  Dr  Lee  found  that  wrinkles 
and  skin  elasticity  were  best  improved  in  the 
830  nm-treated  groups  and  a  statistically  sig-
nificant 
the 
treated and occluded sides in all of the experi-
mental  groups,  but  not  in  the  sham  irradiated 
group.  Subjective  patient  satisfaction  showed 
statistical  significance  between  all  the  treated 
groups  and  the  sham-irradiated  group,  but  it 
was clear that a strong tend was shown in favor 
of  the  830  nm  group  compared  with  the 
830/633 nm and 633 nm groups. Figure 18.21 
compares the subjective patient “excellent” rat-
ings among the 633 nm, 830 nm + 633 nm and 
830  nm  groups  from  the  final  treatment  ses-
sions  through  the  12-week  assessment  period. 
For  all  groups,  and  interesting  and  clear 

Fig. 18.21  Graphical comparison of only the “excellent’ 
result ratings by the LED rejuvenation trial subjects in the 
630 nm, 830 nm plus 633 nm and 830 nm groups based on 
data from the cited paper by Lee et al. [49]. Ratings start 
from immediately after the final treatment session, then at 
4, 8 and 12 weeks thereafter with no further treatment. An 

interesting  increase  in  satisfaction  levels  is  seen  during 
this  12-week  period  for  all  groups  corresponding  to  the 
ongoing remodeling stage of the wound healing process. 
The patients who noted the greatest satisfaction, soonest, 
were in the 830 nm group

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



316

that  12-week  period: 

improvement  was  echoed  in  the  patient  satis-
faction  during 
that 
phenomenon can be explained by the remodel-
ling process, continuing  long  after the  final  of 
the eight treatment sessions. However, based on 
a closer examination of the study data, the best 
results  were  achieved  not  in  the  combination 
group  but  in  the  830  nm  group,  and  were 
achieved fastest among the three groups.

The  clinical  photography  was  backed  up  by 
the  histological  findings  for  both  collagenesis 
and elastinogenesis, both of which were shown 
to  take  place  in  all  dermal  layers  down  to  the 
deep  reticular  dermis.  No  MMP  activity  was 
noted,  and  on  the  contrary  the  levels  of  tissue 
inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs) 1 and 2 were sig-
nificantly  elevated  in  all  treatment  groups,  but 
with a strong but nonsignificant trend noted for 
the 830 nm group over the others, suggesting a 

photoprotective effect against degradation of the 
newly- formed extracellular matrix.

This was an excellent and thorough study, and 
the author recommends the reader to get hold of 
it and read it, all 17 pages of it. It will go a long 
way to convincing even the most skeptical of the 
real  efficacy  of  LED-LLLT  for  light-only  skin 
rejuvenation,  backed  up  with  real  science. 
Figure 18.22 shows examples of the efficacy of 
light-only  combination  LED  skin  rejuvenation, 
including  histological  findings  from  the  Lee 
study  demonstrating  photorejuvenation  of  both 
the  dermis  and  epidermis  at  only  2  weeks  after 
the  final  treatment  session:  as  remodeling  pro-
gressed,  these  histological  results  would  have 
become  even  better  in  conjunction  with  the 
steady improvement in patient satisfaction in the 
12-week follow-up after the final treatment ses-
sion, as noted above.

a

e

b

c

f

g

d

h

Fig. 18.22  Representative examples of combination near 
IR/red  light-only  LED  skin  rejuvenation.  (a) A  29-year- 
old female, skin type II, at baseline: note the mild rosacea 
on her cheek. (b) The result at 6 weeks after the final treat-
ment session (10 weeks from baseline). Smoothing of the 
periocular wrinkles can be seen, with overall better skin 
tone. The rosacea has almost gone. Photographs courtesy 
of  Bruce  Russell  MD  [40].  (c)  Baseline  findings  in  a 
26-year-old  Korean  female,  skin  type  IV.  (d)  Result 
12  weeks  after  the  final  treatment  session.  Excellent 
removal  of  the  fine  ‘crow’s  feet’  wrinkles  and  overall 
improvement  and  lightening  of  the  skin  tone.  (e) 
Histological findings at baseline, showing a typical elas-
totic dermis under a thinned epidermis with a highly dis-

organized stratum corneum. (f) Histology at only 2 weeks 
after  the  final  treatment  session.  Note  the  much  better- 
organized  dermal  collagen,  extending  down  into  the 
deeper reticular dermis, and the highly visible Grenz layer 
running under and attached to the basement membrane at 
the  dermoepidermal  junction.  The  epidermis  is  much 
thicker  with  good  cellularity  and  a  very  well-delineated 
stratum corneum. (Hematoxylin and eosin, original mag-
nification ×100). The same improvement could be seen in 
the elastin content comparing baseline (g) with the find-
ings  2  weeks  after  the  final  treatment  (h)  (Verhoeff  van 
Giesen,  original  magnification  ×200).  Photographs  and 
photomicrographs  courtesy  of  SY  Celine  Lee  MD  [42]. 
System used: Omnilux®, Radiancy, Israel

R. G. Calderhead



The  important  point  to  be  taken  from  these 
findings  is  the  that  epidermis  also  showed 
improved  morphology  and  not  just  the  dermis, 
thus avoiding the SOE (same old epidermis) syn-
drome which was the major problem with photo-
thermal  nonablative  skin  rejuvenation.  As  with 
LED phototherapy for acne, adjunctive comple-
mentary  treatment  and  maintenance  techniques 
with high quality creams and sera will certainly 
improve the good results consistently shown for 
light-only  LED  skin  rejuvenation  in  these  stud-
ies. The role of protective daily maintenance with 
a UVA/B sunblock of at least SPF 50 should also 
be considered.

More discussion on the 830 nm/633 nm LED 
combination  has  appeared  in  Viewpoint  3 
(Trelles, Mordon and Calderhead) and Comment 
3  (Goldberg) 
in  an  article  on  redressing 
UV-mediated  skin  damage  in  Volume  17  of 
Experimental  Dermatology 
[50].  However, 
although Lee concluded that the combination of 
the  830  and  633  nm  was  optimum,  if  we  read 
between  the  lines  of  the  study  it  is  clear  that 
830  nm  on  its  own  was  extremely  interesting 
(Fig.  18.21),  which  was  backed  up  by  a  2011 
article by Kim and Calderhead on the efficacy of 
LED-LLLT [51], and by a 2013 wound-healing 
study by Min and Goo [52]. Although LED pho-
totherapy has a well-proven role in stand-alone 
indications,  especially 
for  wound  healing 
whether  traumatic,  delayed  or  iatrogenic,  the 
adjunctive role of LED phototherapy is perhaps 
even more exciting and is the way of the future. 
Adjunctive LED low level light therapy (LED-
LLLT) for the aesthetic dermatologist and plas-
tic surgeon, especially at 830 nm, has been well 
argued  recently  in  articles  appearing  in  2015 
and  2016,  respectively,  in  Laser  Therapy  [53] 
and Clinics in Plastic Surgery [54].

The  wavelengths  and  systems  that  have  been 
reported in the six studies cited above are 595 nm 
(Gentlewaves®, Light Bioscience, VA, USA) [39], 
the  830  nm/633  nm  combination  (Omnilux® 
plus™ and revive™, respectively: formerly Photo 
Therapeutics, Fazeley, UK & Carlsbad, CA, USA, 
currently  Radiancy,  Ltd,  Israel)  [40–43]  and  the 
new  generation  830  nm  HEALITE  II  (Lutronic 
Corporation, Goyang South Korea) [51–54].

317

 Wound Healing

Wound healing underpins all applications of LED 
phototherapy  involving  photoactivation  therapy 
(PaT), and plays a major role in obtaining good 
cosmetic  results  in  combination  LED  PDT/PaT 
for the treatment of acne, and in LED skin rejuve-
nation, in addition to the treatment of traumatic 
or  post-surgical  wounds  themselves.  A  brief 
overview of the wound healing process is there-
fore warranted. Three distinct phases make up the 
wound  healing  process,  namely  inflammation, 
proliferation and remodeling, and although they 
are  distinguished  by  their  timing  and  cellular 
components,  there  is  always  some  degree  of 
overlap between them.

 The Three Stages of Wound Healing
Inflammation is often regarded as a major prob-
lem, but in the wound healing process it is abso-
lutely  essential  that  inflammation  occurs  before 
proceeding 
the  proliferative  phase. 
Inflammation only becomes a problem when it is 
out  of  control,  such  as  the  end  product  of  the 
vicious  circle  instigated  by  P.  acnes  and  rogue 
t-cells in acne vulgaris.

into 

In  the  inflammatory  phase,  from  wounding 
until about day 3–5, mast cells (already present 
or  recruited  through  chemotaxis),  macrophages 
(already present, recruited or differentiated from 
monocytes  or  pericytes)  and  neutrophils 
(recruited  or  differentiated  from  hematopoietic 
stem  cells)  peak  in  the  wound  and  surrounding 
tissue.  The  macrophages  ensure  that  all  debris 
and detritus from the wound are removed through 
engulfment  and  internalization,  and  the  leuko-
cytes are the first line of defence of the autoim-
mune system against invading pathogens. When 
they  are  at  work,  the  macrophages  release  an 
important trophic factor, fibroblast growth factor 
(FGF), and leukocytes are associated with TGFα 
and  β 
factor). 
(transformational  growth 
Connective  tissue  mast  cells  are  granule-filled 
cells  differentiated  from  CD34-expressing  bone 
marrow  precursors  which  circulate  in  the  ECM 
till  they  mature  in  situ,  found  normally  around 
capillaries  and  arterioles.  In  fact,  the  mast  cell 
was  first  described  and  named  by  the  German 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



318

physiologist Paul Ehrilch in the latter part of the 
1800s. Mistakenly believing that the purpose of 
the granules was to nourish the ECM, he called 
the  cells  ‘mastzellen’,  (German  for  ‘feeding 
cells’),  giving  us  our Anglicized  version.  Their 
part  in  the  wound  healing  process  is  to  release 
their granules into the ECM. Although the gran-
ules released first are proinflammatory, the later 
granules  contain  antiinflammatory  chemokines 
and  cytokines,  chemotactic  factors  to  recruit 
more wound-healing cells to the area, and a mix 
of trophic factors. In the final degranulation, the 
most  powerful  antioxidant  endogenous  to  our 
bodies,  superoxide  dismutase  (SOD),  is  depos-
ited into the ECM to help protect against future 
UV exposure-related oxidative stress. The com-
bined efforts of all the inflammatory stage cells 
with  their  different  but  interlocking  functions 
thus leave the ECM in an ideal and favorable con-
dition for the proliferative stage cells.

In the proliferative stage, from around day 4 to 
day 21, the inflammatory stage cells decrease in 
number and fibroblasts and endotheliocytes peak. 
Fibroblasts, (already in the area or differentiated 
from pericytes), are an extremely important mul-
tifunctional cell. They are not only responsible for 
synthesizing  collagen  to  replace  damaged  ECM 
collagen fibers, but they also produce new elastin 
to  form  elastic  fibers  and  additionally  manufac-
ture  the  ground  substance,  the  glycoproteinous 
viscous  gel-like  liquid  which  lubricates  and 
hydrates  the  ECM,  and  which  also  facilitates 
intercellular  signaling  and  oxygen  transport  to 
ECM  components  from  arteries.  It  is  also  the 
fibroblasts’ task to maintain ECM morphological 
integrity through constantly monitoring the state 
of  the  collagen  and  elastic  fibers,  lying  along 
which they can often be seen. In this respect, the 
quality of both proliferative wound repair and the 
final wound appearance rests firmly on the back 
of the fibroblast. Endotheliocytes (already present 
in  the  wound  or  differentiated  from  endothelial 
progenitor cells), clump together to start the neo-
vasculogenesis process, culminating in the repair 
of damaged blood vessels and production of new 
blood  vessels  to  oxygenate  the  newly- forming 
ECM and provide essential nutrients. From a peak 
at  around  day  12–18,  the  increased  number  of 

fibroblasts and endotheliocytes gradually returns 
by day 20–22 to the pre-wound baseline, leaving 
the ECM in a regenerated state with newly formed 
but  somewhat  haphazardly  arranged  clumps  of 
collagen and elastin fibers, a fresh supply of gly-
cosaminoglycans and well-vascularized.

In  the  final  and  much  longer  stage  of  the 
wound healing process, remodeling, which starts 
around  day  19–23,  these  new  fibers  and  struc-
tures  gradually  mature  and  are  slowly  reorga-
nized  into  better  alignment  to  give  a  strong, 
flexible  and  plump  ECM  under  an  epidermis 
firmed and tightened by the Grenz layer of colla-
gen fibers running under and attached to the der-
moepidermal 
junction  basement  membrane. 
After the proliferative phase there are too many 
fibroblasts in the ECM. One method by which the 
body reduces the number is through transforma-
tion of some of the fibroblasts to a cell of great 
importance, namely the myofibroblast, which is 
simply a fibroblast that has grown smooth mus-
cles  (myo,  Greek  for  muscle)  at  each  end  of  its 
longitudinal axes. These tufts of muscles are fit-
ted with small barbs which hook onto the newly- 
formed collagen fibres and exert force on them to 
bring the fibers into good linear alignment. Once 
their  task  is  completed,  myofibroblasts  go  into 
apoptosis,  programmed  cell  death.  If  there  are 
still  too  many  fibroblasts,  some  more  will  be 
induced  to  dedifferentiate  into  quiescent  fibro-
cytes,  a  kind  of  unipotent  stem  cell,  which  join 
the stem cell pool in the dermis to replace fibro-
blasts  as  they  age.  The  remodeling  process  can 
take up to 6 months, or even longer, to complete, 
and  this  is  important  when  thinking  of  patient 
education regarding when they can anticipate the 
final  optimal  appearance  of  their  treated  tissue, 
taking the findings of Fig. 18.22 above into con-
sideration.  Figure  18.23  illustrates  in  schematic 
form the time course of the wound healing pro-
cess,  showing  the  peaks  and  lows  of  the  cells 
associated with each of the three phases.

 The Influence of Different Wavelengths 
of Light on the Wound Healing Cells
When we consider LED phototherapy, it is very 
tempting  to  go  ahead  and  invent  ‘new’  wave-
lengths for ‘new’ photoprocesses. It must never 

R. G. Calderhead



319

Inflammation

Proliferation

Remodelling

Macrophage

Mast
cell

Fibroblast

Myofibroblast

Leukocyte

Endotheliocyte

Fibrocyte

Monocyte

0

3

20

100

Approximate time (days)

s

l
l

e
c

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

l

a
t
o
t
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

Fig. 18.23  Schematic illustration of the cell cycles and 
numbers  during  the  three  phases  of  wound  healing. 
During inflammation, which occurs from day zero to day 
3–5,  the  inflammatory  cells  (leukocytes,  mast  cells  and 
macrophages) increase in number, peak and then return to 
baseline 
the  collagen- 
producing cells, fibroblasts, and neovascularization cells, 

levels.  During  proliferation, 

endotheliocytes, increase in number, and then as remodel-
ing  starts,  gradually  decrease.  In  the  case  of  fibroblasts, 
some remain as active fibroblasts, but some transform into 
myofibroblasts, literally fibroblasts with muscles, whose 
task is to ensure good linear alignment of the new colla-
gen fibres. It should be noted that the phases overlap, with 
no clear border between each

be  forgotten  that  the  original  LLLT,  low  level 
laser  therapy,  has  a  rich  and  well-documented 
history which extends back over almost the last 
four decades, so by examining this wealth of pub-
lished literature it should be possible not to have 
to  reinvent  the  wheel  all  over  again.  Sadly, 
because  the  US  Food  and  Drug Administration 
did not grant 510(k) approval to a laser therapy 
system  in  the  process  erroneously  called  ‘bios-
timulation’  until  2002,  there  is  not  a  lot  to  be 
found  in  the  US  literature  until  more  recently. 
However, those early US papers which are there, 
have been quietly forgotten, probably on the prin-
ciple that if one doesn’t understand it, one simply 
ignores it.

A great deal of literature exists on red light- cell 
reactions, because the mainstay light source of the 
early pre-LED investigators was the HeNe laser, 
delivering  632.8  nm,  basically  the  same  as  the 
633 nm of current array-based LED systems, also 
in continuous wave (C/W) rather than frequency 
modulated as discussed already. As mentioned in 

the  unirradiated  controls 

the Introduction, the effect of red light specifically 
on  subcellular  organelles  was  first  published  by 
Fubini and colleagues in the late eighteenth cen-
tury!  [3].  The  last  three  decades,  however,  have 
added tremendously to the knowledge regarding 
red  light  and  skin  cells.  It  was  reported  that 
632.8 nm red light from the HeNe laser induced 
fibroblast monosheet formation in vitro faster and 
with  much  better  alignment,  almost  double  the 
speed  of 
[55]. 
Furthermore, in the same study, a ‘wound’ created 
in the monosheet was repaired much faster in the 
HeNe-irradiated groups. More recent in vivo work 
with 633 nm LED energy in human subjects dem-
onstrated  dramatic  fibroplasic  changes  in  speci-
mens  from  irradiated  subjects  compared  with 
unirradiated  controls  [56].  Tiina  Karu,  probably 
the  most  well-known  living  photobiologist,  has 
produced  an  enormous  amount  of  work  in  her 
lifetime  on  the  effects  of  low  incident  levels  of 
light on cells and their organelles. She confirmed 
the much earlier work by Fubini and further iden-

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice 
 
 
 




320

tified  the  specific  target  for  633  nm  light  as  the 
cytochrome-c  oxidase  resident  at  the  end  of  the 
mitochondrial  respiratory  chain  [57].  She  also 
showed  that  coherent  light  was  not  essential  to 
achieve effects in vivo, provided the photon inten-
sity at the target was high enough.

Mast cells have been stimulated in vitro and in 
vivo to degranulate when irradiated with 633 nm 
light,  and  much  faster  than  when  unirradiated: 
stimulation with 830 nm speeds up degranulation 
even  more  [58,  59].  The  author  and  colleagues 
have  shown  that,  48  h  after  a  single  irradiation 
with 830 nm LED energy, mast cells in the fore-
arms  of  healthy  human  subjects  had  40–60% 
degranulated  compared  with  specimens  from 
unirradiated  controls,  where  no  degranulation 
was seen at all [60]. In the same study, indepen-
dently  performed  cell  counts  per  field  averaged 
over many samples showed a significant increase 
in the mast cells, macrophages and even neutro-
phils recruited into the irradiated area, compared 
with  baseline  and  the  unirradiated  control  arm 
(Table 18.6). Near IR energy at 830 nm has been 
demonstrated to induce macrophages to perform 
their  chemotactic,  phagocytic  and  internalizing 
functions better and faster, while releasing almost 
30-fold  the  amount  of  fibroblast  growth  factor 
(FGF) compared with unirradiated controls [61], 
and the same is true for the attack and phagocytic 
functions of neutrophils [62, 63].

The epidermal basal layer keratinocyte is too 
often forgotten in LED phototherapy, but research 
has shown that 590, 633 and 830 nm noncoherent 
light  both  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  can  activate  the 

keratinocytes to release a large amount of cyto-
kines which drop down into the dermis to assist 
with  the  dermal  wound  healing  processes,  so 
much so that keratinocytes have been nicknamed 
‘cytocytes’ [64]. Additionally, the photoactivated 
keratinocytes  can  improve  the  cellularity  and 
organization of the epidermal strata through rais-
ing the levels of extracellular ATP and the signal-
ing elements Ca2+ and H+, and obtaining a better 
organized stratum corneum [64].

If the wound healing cells, including epidermal 
keratinocytes,  are  examined  for  increased  wave-
length-specific  action  potential  based  on  the  last 
30 years of both LLLT and non-laser light source 
literature,  the  wavelengths  which  have  the  most 
verified and published results at a  cellular and sub-
cellular  level  are  633  and  830  nm  in  the  near 
IR. Near IR at 830 has excellent results in activat-
ing  the  activity  levels  of  the  inflammatory  stage 
cells,  mast  cells,  macrophages  and  neutrophils, 
fibroblasts and in addition to epidermal keratino-
cytes. On the other hand, red light at 633 nm com-
pared  with  595  nm  yellow  is  excellent  for 
photoactivating fibroblasts in vivo, due to its supe-
rior penetrating powers, in addition to epidermal 
keratinocytes. With athermal and atraumatic LED-
LLLT  at  these  wavelengths,  especially  830  nm, 
there is no physical wound, but exactly the same 
clinical  response  is  achieved  as  seen  after  any 
examples  of  the  nonablative  or  even  ablative 
approach involving frank photothermal damage.

Why is the 830 nm effective for skin rejuve-
nation as monotherapy, as seen in the Lee et al. 
study [49]? Though this indication is not wound 

Table 18.6  Numbers of mast cells, macrophages and neutrophils averaged per field (TEM, ×50,000) showing the aver-
aged value of at least eight fields per subject. (Based on data from Ref. [58])

Patient No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Mast cells
Pre
1.5
1.5
1.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1.25
0.5

Post
5.5
6.75
7.0
4.75
8.0
7.25
7.0
6.25

Control
1.25
1.5
1.25
0.5
1.0
1.5
1.5
0.5

Macrophages
Pre
0
0
0.5
0.25
0.75
1.0
0.5
0.75

Post
6.0
8.25
6.75
5.0
7.75
7.0
7.5
6.5

Control
0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.75
0.5

Leukocytes
Pre
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Post
3.35
4.0
4.5
4.0
4.25
4.5
3.75
4.0

Control
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

The bold text indicates the significant cell count increase in the specimens from the treated arm compared with baseline 
and the control arm

R. G. Calderhead



321

healing  per  se,  it  depends  on  inducing  the 
wound  healing  process  to  clear  wrinkles  and 
tighten  up  skin.  The  830  nm  energy  degranu-
lates  the  mast  cells,  dumping  a  load  of  proin-
flammatory substances into normal tissue, such 
as  heparin,  trypsin,  histamine  and  bradykinin. 
This gives the tissue the impression that it has 
been ‘wounded’, even though there is actually 
no  wound  because  of  the  athermal  and  atrau-
matic action of LED phototherapy. Macrophages 
are also photoactivated, helping to give a clean 
ECM  ‘seeded’  with  FGF,  with  some  TGF 
released  from  neutrophils  recruited  into  the 
area  by  the  degranulating  mast  cells.  Because 
the  inflammatory  stage  has  been  established 
especially  by  this  mast  cell-mediated  ‘quasi-
wounding’, the tissue has no option but to pro-
ceed  into  the  next  stages  of  the  wound  repair 
process,  starting  with  proliferation. When  this 
830 nm irradiation is repeated over eight times 
over 4 weeks, separated each week by 2–3 days, 
the dermal cells (and epidermal keratinocytes) 
are  upregulated  in  a  step-wise  manner  and 
maintained  in  the  inflammatory/proliferative 
stages.  After  the  final  treatment  session  the 
remodeling is allowed to start, and this explains 
why the best results are not seen at this immedi-
ately  post- treatment  stage,  but  later  on  at  4,  8 
and 12 weeks or more after the final treatment 

(see Fig. 18.21) [49], as was also the case in the 
acne studies already mentioned [36, 37].

The  same  principle  for  LED-LLLT  with 
830 nm applies to frank wound healing, whether 
it is accidental or iatrogenic trauma. Burns, for 
example, are an ideal injury for LED photother-
apy,  because  of  the  noncontact  and  hands-free 
application,  and  the  large  area  of  the  treatment 
heads.  In  a  recent  study,  the  830  nm/633  nm 
combination produced excellent results in large 
area  burns,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  18.24  [65]. As 
mentioned  already  above,  ablative  laser  resur-
facing lost popularity due to the potential of seri-
ous side effects, especially edema and prolonged 
erythema,  leading  to  prolonged  patient  down-
time.  The  wound  left  following  laser  ablative 
resurfacing  is  simply  a  full  facial  burn.  In  a 
recent  publication  Trelles  and  co-workers  used 
830 nm LED therapy following laser ablation of 
the face with a combined Er:YAG/CO2 laser sys-
tem  [66].  There  were  two  groups  of  patients, 
30  in  each  group.  The  experimental  group 
received  the  LED  therapy  following  laser  abla-
tive  treatment,  and  the  control  group  received 
sham  treatment  from  the  standby  setting  of  the 
system. The average healing times (full reepithe-
lization and resolution of erythema) for the con-
trol and experimental groups were 13 weeks and 
6 weeks respectively. The extent of post-procedure 

a

b

Fig.  18.24  A  39-year-old  male  patient  with  severe  full 
facial electric spark burn injury before (a) and (b) three 
months  after  the  final  treatment  with  combination 
830 nm/633 nm LED phototherapy. One full 4 week ses-
sion was performed with the wavelengths being sequen-

tially  applied  as  usual,  a  resting  period  of  4  weeks,  and 
then  another  4-week  regimen.  Photographs  courtesy  of 
Prof  Jin-wang  Kim  MD  PhD,  Burns  Center,  Haelym 
University  School  of  Medicine,  Seoul,  Korea.  System 
used: Omnilux®, Radiancy, Israel

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



322

Fig. 18.25  Results of a controlled study on LED photo-
therapy after full face ablative Er:YAG/CO2 resurfacing, 
30 patients per group. Healing was better than one half of 
the time compared with the controls, and sequelae were 

pain,  bruising  and  erythema  was  significantly 
less  for  the  LED- treated  group  (Fig.  18.25), 
whereas improvement in the skin condition was 
much  more  clearly  seen  in  the  LED-treated 
group,  with  a  satisfaction  index  (SI)  of  89% 
compared  with  51%  for  the  control  group. The 
SI was calculated by adding only the number of 
‘excellent’ and ‘very good’ scores from a stan-
dardized 5-element scoring system, and express-
ing  the  result  as  a  percentage  of  the  total 
population.  Healing  following  upper  blepharo-
plasty and periocular laser resurfacing in a hemi-
facial study was reported to be cut by one- half to 
one-third following LED therapy at 633 nm, and 
the improvement was subjectively rated as two- 
to fourfold better compared with the unirradiated 
side  [67].  LED-LLLT  following  Er:YAG  laser 
ablation  of  deep  and  extensive  plantar  warts 
roughly halved the healing time, cut the postop-
erative  pain  by  at  least  one-tenth  and  gave  less 
than 6% recurrence rate in 121 cases [68]. The 
study by Min and Goo already mentioned above 
using  830  nm  LED-LLLT  showed  excellent 
healing  of  a  variety  of  difficult  wounds,  some 
of  which  were  compromised  with  bacterial  or 
viral  infection  (Fig.  18.26)  [52].  As  for  more 
difficult  targets,  LED-LLLT  has  shown  excel-
lent and lasting results in treating psoriasis [69], 

all  significantly  reduced  in  the  group  which  received 
830 nm LED phototherapy (based on data from Ref. [64]) 
System used: Omnilux®, Radiancy, Israel

and  acute  herpes  zoster  ophthalmicus  [70]. 
Additionally, 830 nm LED treatment has cleared 
irritant contact dermatitis and dissecting follicu-
litis of the scalp [51].

Long-term  nonhealing  ulcers  which  healed 
following low incident levels of red light (HeNe 
laser, 633 nm) comprised the first topic to appear 
in the literature from the Godfather of photother-
apy, the late Prof. Endre Mester of Semmelweis 
University,  Budapest,  Hungary,  with  a  patient 
population of over 1000, and started all the con-
troversy  surrounding  LLLT  in  the  early  1970s 
[71].  Very  interestingly,  Mester  reported  that 
ulcers on the limb contralateral to the one treated 
also  eventually  healed,  although  more  slowly 
than  the  irradiated  wounds.  This  was  the  first 
report  on  the  systemic  theory  in  phototherapy, 
whereby photoproducts created in the irradiated 
tissue were carried systemically through the body 
to have an effect wherever they were required. A 
2012  study  has  shown  the  systemic  effect  in 
mouse  and  rat  models,  whereby  standardized 
dorsal wounds were created with a fractional CO2 
laser.  Only  the  abdomens  of  the  animals  were 
irradiated  with  830  nm  LED-LLLT,  and  at  the 
6-day assessment point the indirectly LED- LLLT 
treated  wounds  were  significantly  better  healed 
than the unirradiated controls [72]. A study with 

R. G. Calderhead



a

c

b

d

e

g

f

h

323

Fig. 18.26  830 nm LED-LLLT in the control of inflam-
mation  and  infection.  (a)  Fifty-two  y.o.  male  with  post- 
filler  ischemic  ulcerative  tissue  necrosis,  inflammation 
and severe pain. (b) Two weeks post escharotomy without 
flap  and  LED-LLLT  sessions  every  other  day.  Pain  was 
controlled post 3 Tx. (c) Findings at 3 weeks post base-
line. Wound closure continues with good granulation tis-
sue formation. (d) Final condition 6 weeks post-baseline 
and 1 week after the final Tx. Further improvement can be 
expected. (e) Fifty-four-year-old female with swollen lips, 
fever,  severe  pain,  herpes  simplex  (HS)  and  bacterial 
infection  following  an  illegal  lip  tattoo,  unsuccessfully 

treated  elsewhere.  Numbness  and  slight  palsy  also 
reported. (f) Improved condition after 1 week of five daily 
830  nm  LED-LLLT  sessions.  HS  lesions  are  resolving 
with  significant  reduction  in  swelling  and  removal  of 
palsy with return of sensation. Pain has been totally con-
trolled. (g) Almost complete improvement, including HS 
infection,  at  2  weeks  post-baseline,  treating  every  other 
day. (h) Final excellent result 3 weeks post-baseline with 
no HS recurrence in a 3-month follow-up. Clinical pho-
tography courtesy PK Min MD. System used: HEALITE 
II 830 nm, Lutronic, South Korea

830  nm  on  recalcitrant  crural  ulcers  showed 
accelerated  healing  [73].  Near  IR  830  nm  does 
not only work in soft tissue wounds, but also in 
bone where it accelerates the union of fractures, 
even in the case of delayed union healing, replac-
ing the usual poorly-organized callus with better-
quality bone so that the remodeling stage is much 
shorter [74, 75].

Some of the mechanisms behind the efficacy 
of LED phototherapy-accelerated wound healing 
have already been at least partly elucidated, such 
as the wavelength-specific activation of the der-
mal and epidermal cells associated with the three 
phases of wound healing. in a chapter of her lat-
est book (Ten Lectures on Basic Science of Laser 
Phototherapy. 
2007,  Prima  Books  AB, 
Grängesberg, Sweden), Karu has suggested that 
the  latency  effect  of  phototherapy  in  cells  actu-
ally  continues  in  subsequent  generations  of  the 
irradiated  cells  which  is  an  important  consider-
ation  in  skin  rejuvenation  [76]. Another  impor-
tant  mechanism  involves  improvement  of  blood 
flow following irradiation with 830 nm, and this 
has been shown to positively impact on flap sur-
vival in the rat model [77]. Improved blood flow 

not  only  brings  in  oxygen  and  nutrients,  but 
establishes a higher oxygen tension in the treated 
area  which  can  establish  gradients  between  the 
wound at the surrounding tissue, used as ‘super- 
highways’ by the reparative cells [78]. In the case 
of  bony  tissues,  830  nm  has  been  shown  to 
increase the metabolism of osteoblasts [79], and 
to upregulate some of the genetic pathways lead-
ing to better differentiation of new, active osteo-
blasts from mesenchymal cells [80].

In conclusion, the application of LED-LLLT, 
either  830  nm  followed  by  633  nm,  or  particu-
larly more recently, 830 nm on its own, has been 
shown to enhance all aspects of wound healing, 
always  provided  the  incident  irradiance  (power 
density, photon intensity) is sufficiently high and 
an  appropriate  dose  is  given.  In  addition  to  the 
excellent and growing reputation of LED photo-
therapy  as  a  stand-alone  light-only  therapy,  this 
means that LED-LLLT has proved to be an ideal 
adjunctive  therapy  to  any  of  the  conventional 
approaches  seen  in  dermatological  practice  and 
this is perhaps the most exciting aspect of LED 
phototherapy  in  the  future  [53,  54].  No  matter 
how  the  aesthetic  and  cosmetic  dermatologist 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



324

alters the epidermal or dermal morphology of his 
or her patient, be it through microdermabrasion, 
ablative and nonablative skin rejuvenation, frac-
tional  technology  or  conventional  surgery,  the 
addition  of  an  appropriate  LED  phototherapy 
regimen will help to improve already good results 
but at a very reasonable cost, thus improving the 
satisfaction  rates  of  both  the  clinician  and  the 
patient.  Many  clinics  in  Australia  now  buy  an 
830 nm LED system and add 830 nm LED-LLLT 
as an adjunct to anything done to their patients, 
but  at  no  cost  to  the  patient.  This  value-added 
treatment has resulted in excellent results, happy 
patients and an ever-increasing number of patient 
referrals, hence happy clinicians as well.

cerebral  trauma  [81–83].  With  these  reports, 
taken  together  with  the  already  well-proven 
effect of 830 nm on improving blood flow and its 
ability  to  pass  through  the  skull  and  measure 
blood flow and cerebral  activity in vivo in a non-
invasive manner [84, 85], the indication of LED-
LLLT transcranially for the treatment of simple 
senile  dementia,  but  not  Alzheimer’s,  merits 
some  deep  thought.  The  more  we  can  find  for 
LED-LLLT to do, the more ideas will appear.

Box 18.5
•  LED-LLLT is intrinsically safe
•  Eye  protection  sometimes  required 

against potential optical hazards

•  LED-LLLT  is  essentially  side  effect 

 Other Clinical Indications

free

The  indications  already  discussed  have  been 
well-researched,  and  are  being  reported  in  the 
literature.  Some  other  applications  exist  which 
are  very  much  at  the  experimental  stage,  but 
which should be mentioned to prepare the reader 
for  what’s  coming  in  the  not-too-distant  future 
and for which LED phototherapy is proving very 
interesting.  At  this  stage  the  author  cannot  go 
into  details,  because  of  the  early  stage  of  the 
clinical  and  related  basic  science  experiments, 
but  the  reader  should  watch  for  articles  on  the 
potential use of LED phototherapy in combina-
tion with platelet-rich plasma (PRP) for wound 
healing and for skin rejuvenation. PRP is well- 
established as a valid method in wound healing 
to speed up the process and give good cosmesis 
or  in  recalcitrant  healing  situations.  Knowing 
how cell- specific certain LED wavelengths are, 
the obvious step is to combine the two approaches 
to achieve even better results, even faster. Some 
studies  are  currently  well  underway  in  Tokyo, 
and the results in a split-face study with 830 nm 
vs. unirradiated indicate that this will be a field 
to  watch  closely  (Junichiro  Kubota  MD  PhD, 
personal communication and as yet unpublished 
data). Another emerging field is the transcranial 
indication of LED-LLLT, usually at 830 nm or a 
similar  near- IR  wavelength,  for  post-stroke 
patients,  and  those  who  have  suffered  severe 

•  Few  contraindications  exist,  but  sen-
sible precautions should be taken
 – Patient  history  must  be  checked  for 
any photosensitivity-related diseases 
or conditions.

 – Drugs,  ointments  and  even  cosmetics 
being  used  by  the  patient  must  be 
checked for photosensitizing elements.

 Safety with LEDs

Surgical lasers and even intense pulsed light sys-
tems are by their very nature designed to create 
thermal damage and are thus subject to stringent 
safety codes to prevent accidental irradiation of 
tissue,  other  than  the  planned  target  tissues. 
Because LEDs are incapable of creating photo-
thermal  damage  in  tissues,  the  same  stringent 
codes  regarding  accidental  irradiation  of  tissue 
do not apply. However, as all of the LED systems 
discussed above operate in the visible and near 
infrared waveband, there is a potential for opti-
cal  damage,  as  the  eye  is  capable  of  gathering 
this  waveband  and  focusing  the  light  onto  the 
retina  at  the  back  of  the  eye,  particularly  the 
macula and fovea, the area responsible for visual 
acuity.  This  will  be  looked  at  in  a  little  more 
detail below.

R. G. Calderhead



325

Most LED phototherapy systems are run from 
conventional  mains  electricity,  and  so  present 
potential hazards in common with any other such 
mains-driven  equipment  as,  for  example,  DVD 
players  and  television  sets.  Common  sense  dic-
tates  the  safe  handling  of  this  group  of  equip-
ment, leading to the following guidelines:

DO  NOT  connect  or  disconnect  the  mains  plug 

with wet or damp hands

DO  NOT  pull  the  plug  from  the  mains  socket 

using the power cable

DO  NOT  place  any  containers  with  liquid  in 
them on top of the unit (e.g., coffee mugs) to 
prevent  damage  from  accidental  spillage.  If 
such  spillage  should  occur  immediately  turn 
off  the  system  and  have  it  serviced  before 
using it again.

DO  NOT  attempt  to  perform  and  unauthorized 
servicing of the system which involves open-
the  case  and/or  defeating  any 
ing  up 
interlocks.

DO connect the mains cable to the system before 

plugging the mains plug into the socket

DO check that the power to the wall socket is off 

before inserting the mains cable plug

DO  switch  off  the  wall  socket  before  removing 

the mains plug

Apart from these rather obvious points, common 
sense should prevent any electrical-related dam-
age to therapist or patient.

 Optical Hazards with LED 
Phototherapy

As  already  mentioned  above,  any  LED  system 
operating  in  the  visible  to  near-infrared  wave-
band emits light which the human eye can gather, 
and focus onto the back of the retina as illustrated 
in  Fig.  18.27.  If  the  incident  power  density  is 
great  enough,  permanent  damage  to  the  fovea 
could  occur  leading  to  uncorrectable  loss  of 
visual  acuity.  For  example,  an  incident  power 
density from a laser source of as low as 75 mW 
focused to a 50 μm spot produces a power density 
of over 3800 W/cm2, perfectly capable of severely 
damaging target biological tissue. However, a set 
of values has been established for the maximum 
permissible exposure, or MPE, to light at a range 
of wavelengths, and these values are significantly 
lower  for  LEDs  compared  with  laser  sources, 
because  lasers  emit  coherent  light,  and  LEDs 
emit a divergent beam of noncoherent light. If an 
LED  phototherapy  system  has  been  indepen-
dently tested to deliver light below the MPE for 
its  nominal  wavelength,  then  even  prolonged 
direct viewing of the beam is theoretically safe.

In clinical practice, however, visible light LED 
arrays are extremely bright, even when below the 
MPE for their wavelength, so some form of eye 
protection is usually a good idea if only for patient 
comfort.  Small,  opaque  eye  cups  held  in  place 
with  an  elasticated  cord  are  popular,  which  will 
still allow the light to reach the periocular region 

Focused spot at fovea = 50 mm dia.
Power density at fovea ≈ 3,820 W/cm2

λ = 670 nm ∼ 904 nm

75 mW, pupillary opening 1 cm
Power Density at cornea:
approx. 590 mW/cm2

Fig. 18.27  Schematic illustration of how a low incident 
power of 75 mW from a laser beam is capable of being 
focused  by  the  unaccommodated  eye  into  a  very  small 
spot, with damaging power densities, right in the center of 

the fovea. Although noncoherent and uncollimated LEDs 
are significantly more intrinsically safe, the importance of 
appropriate protective eyewear should always be consid-
ered. Common sense should be applied

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



326

in the case of LED phototherapy for skin rejuve-
nation.  However,  if  the  system  delivers  light 
which is over the MPE, then protective eyewear 
becomes mandatory for the patient, and also for 
any ancillary staff spending any length of time in 
the  treatment  room  to  help  protect  their  eyes 
against  diffuse  reflection  from  the  target  tissue. 
For shorter visible wavelengths such as the blue 
waveband, the inherent photon energy of the light 
is approximately one-third as high again as visible 
red light even though the incident power density 
is the same, as discussed above, and so has greater 
potential  for  optical  damage.  Appropriate  eye-
wear is necessary in this case.

The ‘blink reflex’ is nature’s way of helping us 
protect our own eyes against an over-bright visi-
ble  light  source,  but  near-IR  light  cannot  be 
‘seen’ by the human eye and so the blink reflex is 
not  triggered  by  energy  in  this  invisible  wave-
band. Near-IR is still gathered and focused by the 
unaccommodated eye just as visible light is, how-
ever, so suitable protective eyewear is thus man-
datory for LED systems delivering energy in the 
near-IR  waveband  above  the  rated  MPE  for  the 
wavelength being used.

Clinician goggles or glasses are obviously not 
opaque,  so  they  have  to  be  specifically  sourced 
with an appropriate optical density for the wave-
length  of  the  system.  Eyewear  designed  for  red 
light will not protect adequately against IR or vis-
ible  blue  light,  for  example.  The  eyes  of  the 
patient, and indeed anyone with the patient in the 
treatment  room  during  LED  therapy,  must  be 
assiduously  protected  even  though  LEDs  are 
often  discounted  as  inherently  ‘safe’,  compared 
with a surgical laser or IPL. It is better to err on 
the side of caution!

Finally, national and federal regulatory agen-
cies, such as the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA),  issue  approvals  of  systems  for  specific 
applications  for  which  they  have  been  proved 
‘safe and effective’. Although some manufactur-
ers  have  received  such  approvals,  they  are  few 
and far between. Some less than truthful manu-
factures  will  claim  FDA  approval,  when  in  fact 
all  they  hold  is  a  letter  from  FDA  recognizing 
that  their  LED  system  is  a  nonsignificant  risk 
device, or NSRD. This is NOT the same as a sys-

tem’s  having  gone  through  the  due  regulatory 
process  to  obtain  what  is  known  as  a  510(k) 
approval  showing  significant  equivalence  to 
another  system  with  prior  approval  based  on 
which,  and  only  on  which,  can  that  device  be 
legally  sold  in  the  USA  for  clinical  use.  510(k) 
approvals  for  existing  LED  systems  can  be 
searched for on the FDA website (www.fda.gov/
cdrh/510khome.html),  and  the  systems  already 
mentioned by name earlier in this chapter all hold 
such clearance.

 Side Effects

Once again, the inherently ‘safe’ output of LED 
systems helps to keep unwanted side effects to a 
minimum,  but  with  any  kind  of  phototherapy 
there  is  always  the  outside  chance  of  triggering 
such  a  side  effect.  These  are  almost  100% 
photosensitivity- related,  so  a  careful  history  of 
the patient must always be taken to identify the 
existence of pre-existing photosensitivity issues. 
For  example,  if  a  patient  reports  that  he  or  she 
regularly  comes  out  in  an  itchy  rash  when 
exposed  to  terrestrial  sunlight,  LED  photother-
apy,  especially  in  the  visible  light  waveband, 
should not be given. Some skin types, such as the 
Asian skin, are incredibly sensitive to epidermal 
inflammation  caused  by  other  wavelengths 
despite being very resilient to UV skin damage. 
Particularly in the Asian skin, secondary hyper-
pigmentation (PIH) can occur without any appar-
ent physical insult, and a carefully-taken history 
will show if the patient is predisposed to this very 
upsetting side effect. A very small proportion of 
patients treated with LED therapy have reported 
post-treatment headaches of varying magnitudes, 
all  of  which  have  resolved  spontaneously.  No 
reason has been elucidated for this, and treatment 
with mild analgesics has been found to speed up 
the  resolution  of  the  headache.  Almost  all  of 
those  so  afflicted  have  been  undergoing  LED 
phototherapy  for  facial  skin  rejuvenation,  but 
interestingly  only  a  very  few  have  actually 
stopped turning up for their treatments. The main 
point  is  to  take  a  very  careful  and  thorough 
patient  history  to  identify  the  potential  of  any 

R. G. Calderhead



LED therapy-related problems, but they are very 
much extremely few and far between. For longer 
sessions  of  LED  phototherapy,  for  example  in 
facial skin rejuvenation, the main “side effect” is 
that  the  patients  tend  to  fall  asleep  during  the 
treatment and ‘wake up’ feeling great!

 Contraindications

Leading  on  from  the  previous  subsection,  any 
kind of endogenous or exogenous photosensitiv-
ity  is  a  contraindication  to  LED  phototherapy. 
Patients with any form of porphyria, for example, 
should never be treated with LEDs. Those whose 
history  includes  solar-mediated  eruptions  are 
likewise  not  good  subjects.  The  careful  derma-
tologist  should  also  ascertain  what  the  patients 
are putting on their skins prior to an LED therapy 
session. Ointments or creams containing known 
photosensitizers such as coumarins or porphyrins 
must be discontinued at least 2 weeks before any 
LED  treatment.  Some  oral  drugs,  e.g.,  amioda-
rone  for  cardiac  arrhythmia  sufferers,  strongly 
photosensitize  patients  to  UV  and  visible  light: 
LED phototherapy in such patients is contraindi-
cated.  Even  some  perfumes  contain  recognized 
photosensitizers. The application or ingestion of 
photosensitizing  drugs  including  systemic  reti-
noids and the recent use of topical retinoic acid 
should  also  be  carefully  considered,  and  some 
acne  treatments  such  as  Roaccutane®  (isotreti-
noin) are all contraindications.

Other  potential,  possibly  more  ‘emotional’ 
contraindications include patients who are preg-
nant or lactating, although these are not as abso-
lute  as  the  in  the  previous  paragraph  and  if  the 
LED  therapy  is  not  being  delivered  over  the 
womb  as  in  the  case  of  facial  skin  rejuvenation 
for example, then it can be given at the discretion 
of  the  treating  clinician,  and  with  the  informed 
consent  of  the  patient.  In  fact,  possible  benefits 
may  well  accrue  to  both  the  mother  and  fetus 
from the systemic nature of blood-borne benefi-
cial photoproducts.

The  most  emotional  contraindication  is  for 
patients with some form of cancer. It is true that 
cancer  cells  irradiated  with  visible/near-IR 

327

energy in a favorable in vitro environment will 
replicate at a much faster rate than control cells. 
However the in vitro environment is totally dif-
ferent to the living body, where the cancer cell 
is seen as an out-and-out enemy by the autoim-
mune system, and is in a very unfavorable envi-
ronment surrounded by potential killer cells. As 
mentioned  above,  the  very  first  application  of 
red  LED  PDT  phototherapy  was  in  the  treat-
ment  of  skin  cancers,  and  application  of  low 
incident  levels  of  light  have  been  shown  to 
cause  regression  or  even  complete  removal  of 
aggressive  tumors  in  animal  models  [86],  and 
induce significantly prolonged survival times in 
terminally-ill cancer patients [87]. Furthermore, 
low  incident  levels  of  light  energy  have  been 
shown  to  boost  the  autoimmune  system.  Once 
again, however, discretion should be used in the 
case  of  a  patient  with  a  cancerous  condition 
who  is  seeking  LED  phototherapy  for  some-
thing else at a site distant from the cancer, such 
as skin rejuvenation. As a final note, in the more 
than four decades since the laser and other light 
sources  have  been  used  in  medicine  and  sur-
gery, not one case of iatrogenic, phototherapy- 
linked  cancer  has  been  reported 
the 
literature.

in 

In  short,  LED  phototherapy  systems  from 
reputable  manufacturers  are  inherently  safe, 
provided they are used according to the manu-
facturer’s  recommendations  regarding  eye  pro-
treatment  protocols. 
tection,  and  approved 
LED-LLLT  systems  are  basically  side-effect 
free, apart from the beneficial side effects, and 
will  give  continue  to  deliver  side-effect  free 
therapy  provided  the  list  of  contraindications 
discussed  above,  and  always  provided  by 
responsible manufacturers, is carefully applied, 
in addition to the taking of a careful patient his-
tory. However, as already said, not any old LED 
system  will  do,  and  the  careful  dermatologist 
must  ensure  that  the  system  has  appropriate 
quasimonochromatic  wavelengths,  appropriate 
photon intensities over a sufficiently large area, 
has a proven track record in the published litera-
ture and has marketing approval from regulatory 
bodies  such  as  CE  marking  and  US  FDA 
clearance.

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



328

Box 18.6
•  ‘New’  LED  wavelengths  not  likely, 

but possible

•  Further 

technical  advances  may 

increase the scope of LED-LLLT

•  Potential for LED-LLLT in the home 

and OTC market

•  LED-LLLT  is  safe,  effective,  easily 
applied,  side  effect-free  and  well- 
tolerated by all patients.

•  Effective  as  a  stand-alone  light  ther-
apy, LED-LLLT will also prove even 
more  invaluable  in  adjunctive  ther-
apy to complement all existing modal-
ities in dermatological practice.

 LED Phototherapy: Quo Vadis?

There  is  no  doubt  that  LED  phototherapy  has 
come a very long way in less than two decades, 
with the ‘NASA LED’ being introduced in 1998. 
The  big  question  now  is,  where  can  it  go?  I 
believe the answer depends on three main areas: 
wavelength;  other  technical  developments;  and 
applications.

 New Wavelengths

It is possible that a ‘new’ (and useful) wavelength 
will  be  ‘discovered’,  but  unlikely.  Having  said 
that, at the time of writing 1072 nm LED photo-
therapy has attracted a great deal of attention in 
the treatment of herpes simplex labialis, or cold 
sores as mentioned above. Apart from that, The 
current main wavelengths are:

•  Soret band short wavelength visible blue light, 
with the optimum peak at 415 nm, the peak of 
the action spectrum of the porphyrins endog-
enous to P. acnes and created in skin treated 
with 5-ALA.

•  Visible yellow at 590–595 nm, at a peak of the 
action  spectrum  of  cytochrome  c  oxidase  in 
the  mitochondrial  redox  chain  to  instigate 

ATP production, although in practical clinical 
application  this  waveband  is  extremely  lim-
ited by its poor penetration into the dermis due 
to absorption in the biological pigments mela-
nin and hemoglobin, which are its preferential 
chromophores.  However,  this  waveband  also 
has potential in the treatment of inflammatory 
rosacea and other very superficial entities. In 
addition,  the  epidermal  keratinocytes  and 
Merkel cells also present an interesting target 
as a form of dermal preconditioning when vis-
ible yellow treatment is followed by 830 nm.
  One  FDA-cleared  LED  system  (HEALITE 
II™,  Lutronic,  Goyang,  South  Korea  and 
Freemont, CA, USA) uses the combination of 
a period of irradiation with 595 nm-only ultra- 
low- level light therapy followed by the appro-
priate  dose  of  830  nm  near-IR  energy  as  the 
main  treatment  beam.  The  advantage  of  this 
lies in the fact that the yellow component con-
tinues  to  operate  while  the  830  nm  beam  is 
active. Although there is no longer a clinical 
utility, the visible yellow light shows that the 
system  is  operating,  a  real  benefit  for  the 
patient as they can see that something is hap-
pening, not the case where the invisible near-
 IR at 830 nm is used on its own.

•  Visible red light from 620 to 680 nm, with a 
‘best  case’  at  633  nm  because  of  the  minor 
absorption peak in the action spectrum of the 
porphyrins associated with exogenous 5-ALA 
PDT,  the  major  peak  in  the  absorption  spec-
trum  of  cytochrome  c  oxidase,  and  its  deep 
penetration  into  living  skin.  633  nm  is  an 
excellent wavelength to activate fibroblasts in 
vivo  even  in  the  deeper  dermis.  It  is  also 
attracting attention in hair loss and hair resto-
ration. This wavelength also has a tremendous 
published database, because it is the same as 
the HeNe laser (632.8 nm).

•  Near  infrared  at  830  nm,  because  it  has  the 
deepest penetration of any wavelength due to 
its being at the bottom of the water absorption 
curve,  and  has  a  well-proven  track  record  as 
the  most  useful  laser  therapy  wavelength  in 
near infrared diode laser therapy for musculo-
skeletal and neurogenic pain, enhancement of 
local  blood  and  lymphatic  flow,  and  wound 

R. G. Calderhead



healing.  This  wavelength  as  delivered  by 
LEDs now has a good body of literature show-
ing  preferential  effects  in  degranulation  of 
mast cells, photoactivation of neutrophils and 
macrophage  cells  with  associated  release  of 
trophic  factors,  and  enhanced  remodeling  in 
the wound healing process.

There  are  now  many  LED  devices  currently 
available that have wavelengths the same or very 
near to those given above, but we have to remem-
ber that in many cases an action spectrum peak 
has  very  narrow  shoulders,  so  a  difference  of 
even 5 nm from the peak can in some cases dra-
matically  lower  the  action  potential.  There  are 
other wavelengths which have been proved use-
ful  in  the  laser  therapy  literature,  in  particular 
780 nm for neurological applications and 904 nm 
for dental and other hard tissues, including bone. 
In  the  case  of  neurological  indications,  such  as 
repairing transected or crushed nerves, the punc-
tal nature of laser energy with its extremely high 
photon intensity delivered within the very small 
treatment area is essential to the treatment tech-
nique: it is impossible to concentrate LED energy 
from an array onto such a small spot, so LED sys-
tems  at  this  wavelength  would  simply  not  have 
the same effect as a laser diode-based handpiece 
(coherent  LD-LLLT  vs.  noncoherent  LED- 
LLLT). In the case of 904 nm in hard tissue, the 
laser  systems  used  were  based  on  a  GaAs  (gal-
lium arsenide) laser diode. GaAs laser diodes are 
capable of generating peak power outputs in the 
range of 15–45 W, but cannot be operated in con-
tinuous  wave  because  of  the  tremendous  heat 
they generate and the need to provide a dedicated 
cooling  system.  The  GaAs  laser  diode  is  there-
fore operated in a true pulsed mode, with pulse 
widths in nanoseconds and interpulse intervals of 
milliseconds,  so  the  average  power  seen  by  the 
tissue is in milliwatts, usually 3 orders of magni-
tude less than the peak power: a 15 W peak power 
would this give an average power at the tissue of 
15 mW. However, these ultrashort pulses create 
effects in tissue other than photoabsorption, such 
as  photoosmotic  and  photoacoustic  effects.  In 
hard  tissues  such  as  bone,  it  was  therefore  pro-
posed that a physical resonance was set up which 

329

acted  in  coordination  with  the  photoabsorption 
effects to give excellent bone healing, even in the 
case of slow union fractures [74]. No LED photo-
therapy  system  is  capable  of  delivering  a  true 
pulsed beam, and simply modulating a continu-
ous wave beam of tens or even hundreds of mil-
liwatts per square centimeter will not produce the 
same effect as the very tightly delivered, narrow 
pulse-width true pulsed diode laser beam, so this 
wavelength is also not an appropriate one for an 
LED system, given that one of the main advan-
tages  of  LED  arrays  is  the  ability  to  irradiate  a 
large area of tissue rather than a very small treat-
ment  target.  In  all  of  the  wavelengths  bulleted 
above,  and  in  their  clinical  application,  the  tar-
gets are not precise points, and the ability to irra-
diate a large tissue mass is an advantage. Despite 
the  present  and  future  claims,  I  do  not  believe 
that  we  will  see  a  ‘new’  and  clinically  proven 
wavelength  for  light-only  LED  phototherapy  in 
the near future.

 New Technical Developments

LED technology is constantly evolving, as seen in 
the current transition from the individually board-
mounted dome-type LED to the latest generation 
of ‘on-board’ chips which are actually part of the 
circuit  board.  There  has  been  speculation  about 
developing  whole-body  LED  arrays,  particularly 
in  the  sports  medicine  and  sports  clinic  environ-
ment, so that athletes could have a complete LED 
‘photobath’ after a strenuous workout to help relax 
overused  muscles  and  dissipate  lactic  acidosis, 
thereby enabling total retention of tonus in a delib-
erate overtraining program to reach absolute peak 
power and stamina. The application of such whole-
body arrays in the spa and beauty market would 
also  be  very  interesting.  Some  systems  already 
exist. The problem with such large arrays of good 
quality LEDs is heat. LEDs do not in themselves 
generate a lot of heat because they are solid state, 
but when mounted in arrays they require on-board 
driver  circuitry,  and  this  does  generate  a  fair 
amount  of  heat  which  must  be  dissipated  other-
wise overheating of the LEDs will result in move-
ment away from their rated wavelength, in addition 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



330

to shortening of their useful life. Efficient cooling 
of the circuit boards is thus essential and this is not 
an easy matter even with the current size of arrays, 
to the extent that the method of cooling has actu-
ally  been  patented  in  some  systems.  In  order  to 
cool the number of large arrays which would be 
necessary for a whole-body LED generator would 
require a dedicated and powerful cooling system, 
and this raises the dual problem of developing an 
appropriate method of extracting heat, whether it 
was  based  on  air-  or  water-based  cooling,  and 
where  the  heat  extracted  from  the  LED  arrays 
would  go.  In  a  small  treatment  room,  the  heat 
build-up could be very noticeable, as was the case 
in the first generation of large surgical laser sys-
tems.  The  development  of  on-board  chips  has 
gone some way to solving this problem, and the 
emergence of electrostatic cooling systems which 
could be built directly into or onto the LED boards 
is  very  interesting.  This  is  a  field  which  will  be 
very interesting to watch.

Another area for development may well be in 
the  optics  of  the  LEDs  themselves.  Currently 
LEDs deliver a divergent beam, typically in the 
region of 60°–120° steradian. It is the deliberate 
overlapping of these divergent beams that causes 
the  phenomenon  of  photon  interference,  which, 
coupled  with  scattering  of  light  in  target  tissue, 
allows LED arrays to deliver very useful photon 
intensities  over  large  areas  of  tissue.  As  men-
tioned already, corrective collimating optics have 
already  been  used  in  one  system  to  reduce  the 
angle of divergence of LEDS in an array, thereby 
giving a higher photon intensity for the same irra-
diance  at  the  LED.  However,  LEDs  are  nonco-
herent, so it is extremely challenging to collimate 
the beam of light from an LED completely, unlike 
the case of the laser diode in the ubiquitous laser 
pointer.  Likewise,  focusing  an  LED  to  a  very 
small  point,  as  can  be  achieved  with  a  laser 
source,  is  impossible,  and  the  most  efficient 
focusing lens would produce simply a very small 
inverted  image  of  the  LED.  Semi-collimation 
would appear to be the limit for altering the beam 
of energy from an LED, unless there are advances 
in chip technology.

The final area is the home market, which is tied 
into  the  previous  subsections  as  far  as  appropri-

and 

intensities 

ately  selected  LEDs  are  concerned.  There  are 
already  a  large  number  of  very  pretty  colored, 
happily  twinkling  LED-based  systems  being 
touted as suitable for home use, however the vast 
majority  of  them  are  mere  toys,  especially  the 
ones with multicolored LEDs, and the poor user 
might  as  well  stand  in  front  of  their  christmas 
tree  lights  as  use  these  systems.  This  does  not 
mean  that  responsible  manufacturers  have  not 
been researching correct combinations of appro-
in 
priate  wavelengths 
self-con-
ergonomically- designed  hand-held 
tained units which will be safe and effective for 
home  use:  some  indeed  have. These  units  have 
become available in a number of ways: for pre-
scription by a dermatologist or other specialist as 
a  maintenance  program  for  their  in-office  LED 
treatment regimen; as an over-the-counter prod-
uct from chemists or pharmacists with product-
related  training;  or  from  reputable  self-health 
mail-order  companies.  The  author  is  aware  of 
one  company  who  has  two  such  self-contained 
hand-held  products,  one  blue/red  for  treatment 
of acne, and one infrared/red for skin rejuvena-
tion,  which  have  achieved  FDA  510(k)  clear-
ance. Despite their size, they have the same high 
quality  LEDs  delivering  the  same  intensity  in 
mW/cm2 as the medical versions of the systems 
based on LED arrays. When used for the recom-
mended  time  they  will  thus  deliver  exactly  the 
same dose as their much larger cousins. Naturally 
they  cover  a  very  much  smaller  area  than  the 
full-sized  planar  arrays,  but  because  of  their 
lightweight nature, it is anticipated that the user 
will be able to watch TV or listen to music while 
irradiating the target area one bit at a time, and 
they will be absolutely ideal for a maintenance 
program  following  office  or  clinic  treatment 
with  the  full-sized  systems.  Home  use  LED-
LLLT is therefore yet another area to be watched 
with great interest.

 Applications: Combination Is Key

The  applications  for  light-only  LED  photother-
apy continue to grow in a pan-speciality manner, 
so that a large range of clinicians is finding useful 

R. G. Calderhead



applications for LED phototherapy of appropri-
ate  wavelength  and  incident  photon  intensity. 
However, as with lasers, a saturation point will 
be  reached.  This  can  be  combatted  by  using 
LED  phototherapy  in  combination  with  exist-
ing  conventional  surgical  and  nonsurgical 
approaches to achieve even better results. A per-
fect example where this is happening is full face 
laser  ablative  resurfacing.  Initially  hailed  as  a 
superb approach to rejuvenating severely photo-
aged  skin,  in  recent  years  it  has  declined  dra-
matically in popularity because of potential side 
effects  such  as  scarring,  unpleasant-looking 
sequelae  and  a  very  long  downtime  before  the 
patient can once again return to work or to soci-
ety. However, everyone agrees it is still the ‘gold 
standard’,  particularly  for  deep  wrinkles  and 
severe  photodamage.  Some  reports  have  now 
appeared  on  the  use  of  LED  phototherapy 
together  with  ablative  laser  resurfacing.  The 
controlled  study  already  discussed  above  by 
Trelles  et  al.  is  an  excellent  example  which 
compared two groups of full-face ablative resur-
facing patients [56]: one group was also treated 
with  LED  phototherapy,  and  the  control  group 
was  not,  but  otherwise  the  resurfacing  and 
wound  care  regimens  were  exactly  the  same. 
The healing time in the LED-treated group was 
cut  by  more  than  one-half,  postoperative  pain 
was  cut  by  more  than  70%  and  the  erythema 
cleared in less than 7 weeks compared with up 
to 4–6 months.

LED  phototherapy  can  and  does  offer  even 
better results in any case where the dermatologist 
has in some way altered the epidermal and der-
mal architecture of his or her patient, whether it is 
as  mild  as  an  epidermal  powder  peel,  through 
chemical  peels  to  nonablative  resurfacing  with 
lasers  or  IPL  systems,  fractional  laser  and  non- 
laser  approaches,  like  microneedling  radiofre-
quency,  and  full-face  ablative  resurfacing.  The 
adjunctive application of LED phototherapy will, 
I believe, drive its acceptance even more strongly 
than  its  use  as  a  stand-alone  modality,  and  the 
major  advantage  of  LED-based  systems  is  their 
very competitive pricing in addition to their por-
tability  and  versatility.  Combination  therapy  is 
the key [53, 54].

331

Box 18.7
•  LED phototherapy is here to stay!
•  ‘Any old LED’ will NOT fit the bill!
•  When  considering  buying  an  LED 

system, ask the right questions!
•  Combination treatment is the key!

 Conclusions (And Questions 
You Should Ask)

LED  phototherapy  is  certainly  here  to  stay,  but 
unfortunately  the  medicoscientific  waters  are 
being  muddied  by  a  number  of  manufacturers 
who have jumped on the LED bandwagon, mak-
ing extravagant claims and barefacedly using the 
data amassed by those companies who have been 
responsible  enough  to  go  through  regulatory 
approvals, such as FDA 510(k) clearances, as if 
the data were their own. Statements such as ‘…. 
uses  NASA  technology  ….’  are  common,  but 
totally  misleading.  The  current  generation  of 
LEDs actually exceeds the 1990s NASA technol-
ogy as far as output power and quasimonochro-
maticity  are  concerned,  and 
in  fact  have 
absolutely nothing to do with NASA! Even worse 
than  these  manufacturers  are  the  companies 
which  import  ‘lookalikes’  from  the  Eastern 
block. They may be cheap, but they are certainly 
not cheerful, and the heart of an LED system is 
the quality and pedigree of the LEDs used in its 
arrays: you get what you pay for. To make sure 
you get what you actually want, i.e., an LED pho-
totherapy system that will actually do something 
that  you  want  it  to  do,  and  make  you  and  your 
patients  happy,  please  see  the  following,  which 
will  not  only  summarize  the  main  points  of  the 
chapter but will also reinforce my favorite maxim 
which is; ‘Any old LED will NOT do’.

 Caveat Emptor (Let the Buyer 
Beware!)

When  considering  purchasing  an  LED-based 
phototherapy system for his or her practice, the 
wise dermatologist should always ask the manu-

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



332

facturer  or  salesperson  the  following  questions 
(and take a written note of verified or verifiable 
answers!).

 What Regulatory Approvals Does 
the System Have?
This means appropriate FDA 510(k) approvals in 
the USA (no LED system has yet got full premar-
keting  approval,  PMA),  Health  Canada 
in 
Canada,  TGA  in  Australia,  Ministry  of  Health, 
Labour  and  Welfare  (Kohseishou)  in  Japan, 
appropriate  CE  marking  for  medical  devices  in 
Europe,  and  so  on.  It  does  not  mean  having 
‘NASA technology LED’s’ or ‘Approved by the 
FDA’, the latter of which usually simply means a 
letter from FDA recognizing that the system is a 
nonsignificant risk device (NSR) or minimal risk 
device (MSR). This is not an approval to market, 
but is simply a guide based on which the institu-
tional  review  board  (IRB)  of  a  research  center 
can classify the system when it does take part in 
a properly structured study.

 What Is (Are) the Wavelength(s)?
As has been said many times, wavelength is the 
most important single factor when attempting to 
achieve a photoreaction: no absorption, no reac-
tion. Some targets can respond to a fairly broad 
waveband of 30–100 nm or so, but most of the 
targets  in  LED  phototherapy  are  much  more 
specific.  Ask  what  the  nominal  wavelength  of 
the  system  is,  and  what  is  the  deviation  either 
side.  For  example,  the  Omnilux  revive™  and 
HEALITE II mentioned elsewhere in this chap-
ter have LED arrays with a nominal wavelength, 
with  the  range  of  ±5–7  nm.  That  means  that 
93–95%  of  the  photons  are  at  the  rated  wave-
length  and  will  therefore  optimally  target 
wavelength- specific chromophores at that wave-
length  such  as  633  nm  for  cytochrome  c  oxi-
dase, and 415 nm for the porphyrins Cp III and 
Pp  IX  endogenous  to  P.  acnes.  Visible  red  at 
670 nm, for example, will still have some effect 
on  cytochrome  c  oxidase,  but  that  wavelength 
just misses the boat as far as peak efficiency of 
exogenous porphyrin activation is concerned for 
ALA PDT, where 633 nm is the wavelength of 
choice.

While  on  the  subject  of  wavelength,  some 
manufacturers offer all the colors of the rainbow 
in  the  one  system,  in  one  particular  system 
mounted in a semicircular bar which scans over 
the face with the claim that ‘blue is for serenity, 
green is for inner peace, yellow is for well-being, 
and red is for relaxation’. In fact, this manufac-
turer is not offering phototherapy, but ‘chromo-
therapy’ also known as ‘colorology’ which is an 
alternative medical approach based on ‘chakras’ 
and their associated colors to achieve balance in 
an unbalanced system [88]. As with reflexology, 
the origin of the approach is Russian, as is a great 
deal  of  the  literature,  but  chromotherapy  has  a 
large  following.  The  methods  and  English  lan-
guage studies used to prove that it works, how-
ever,  have  been  severely  criticized  [89].  In 
addition,  as  Karu  and  colleagues  have  well- 
demonstrated,  the  intermingling  of  wavelengths 
way well include some which cancel each other 
out thus having no effect, or indeed downregulate 
cellular  activity  compared  to  the  wavelengths 
applied individually [12]. The fact that the light is 
scanned  over  the  face  should  sound  another 
warning  bell,  since  this  dramatically  lowers  the 
dose,  even  if  the  photon  intensity  were  high 
enough  (which  it  is  not).  The  answer?  Keep  to 
well-proven  wavelengths,  applied  singly  and 
with a suitable period (48–72 h) allowed between 
applications to allow the targeted cells to respond 
to the information they have received.

 What Is the Intensity?
You are looking for an answer here in mW/cm2 
(milliwatts  per  square  centimeter)  of  the  entire 
array, not the ‘lumens’ of an individual LED or 
indeed  the  whole  array,  nor  should  you  be  told 
that the system is “very bright”. If in doubt about 
this  parameter  and  its  paramount  importance, 
next  to  wavelength,  please  re-review  section 
“Irradiance (Photon Intensity)” above on photon 
density,  another  way  of  saying  ‘intensity’.  A 
good range, depending on wavelength, would be 
anywhere from 40 mW/cm2 up to 150 mW/cm2, 
although the higher the intensity, the more prob-
lems  will  exist  in  keeping  the  LED  array  cool 
enough to avoid discomfort to the patient and a 
drift away from the LED nominal wavelength. If 

R. G. Calderhead



this range seems low compared with a diode laser 
therapy system, for example, always bear in mind 
that the better LED systems cover a large area of 
tissue,  for  example  some  offer  an  active  array 
area of 220 cm2, unlike the laser therapy system 
which usually irradiates a spot of only a few mm 
in diameter per ‘shot’.

If you get an answer in joules, ignore it … bet-
ter  still,  laugh  loudly.  If  you  get  an  answer  in 
joules per square centimeter (J/cm2), that’s better, 
but it is actually the answer to the next question! 
The  incident  intensity  or  power  density  is 
extremely  important,  because  a  higher  power 
density enables a shorter irradiation time, and it 
has been reported for a continuous wave system 
that shorter irradiation times with a higher inten-
sity got significantly better results in first passage 
human  gingival  fibroblast  proliferation  in  vitro 
compared with longer irradiation times at a lower 
intensity, even though the dose (in J/cm2) was the 
same  [90].  Of  course,  the  Arndt-Schultz  curve 
must always be remembered (section “Irradiance 
(Photon Intensity)” above), and the upper limit of 
photoactivation must never be exceeded or a pho-
tothermal reaction will occur.

 What Is the Recommended Dose?
This is where the J/cm2 unit should be the correct 
answer, but NOT the dreaded joule. If you see a 
joule running around an LED system, kill it. As 
discussed  above,  the  joule  is  simply  a  unit  of 
energy  and  has  no  significance  whatever  on  the 
clinical effect in a prescribed area of target tissue. 
Correlate the dose with the recommended irradi-
ation time. As a matter of interest, if you cannot 
find out the intensity from the manufacturer, by 
dividing the dose (J/cm2) by the irradiation time 
(in seconds), you will end up with the intensity in 
W/cm2 (or mW/cm2).

For this category, there is no ‘correct’ dose for 
an  LED-LLLT  system,  although  it  should  cer-
tainly  be  no  lower  than  20  J/cm2  depending  on 
the wavelength. If the intensity or power density 
is  correct,  then  it  is  almost  impossible  to  over-
dose. Overdosing is not recommended, however, 
simply because it wastes time and will not often 
produce  dramatically  better  results  than  the 
the  responsible 
recommended  dose,  which 

333

manufacturer will have arrived at by conducting 
dose-ranging response-related studies. If the rec-
ommended dose is, for example, 120 J/cm2 over 
20  min,  increasing  the  irradiation  time  by 
10–30 min will not get a 50% better effect, but on 
the other hand, cutting the time down by half to 
10 min may well give a result well below 50% of 
that  achieved  at  the  recommended  time.  If  an 
LED-LLLT system supports arrays with different 
wavelengths,  the  manufacturer  may  well  have 
standardized  the  treatment  time  to  the  same  for 
each of the heads, but the dose will almost always 
be different for each wavelength, simply because 
of  a  combination  of  LED  characteristics,  wave-
length/tissue interactions and the individual pho-
ton energy associated with each wavelength.

to  cellular 

 How Should the LED Energy 
Be Delivered?
The answer here will be ‘in continuous wave (or 
CW)’, which is good; or ‘frequency modulated 
(also known as photomodulated)’ which is not so 
good; or ‘pulsed’, which is actually the incorrect 
way of saying the second answer and is totally 
wrong! Light at a given wavelength already con-
tains its own frequency, as discussed in section 
“Temporal Profile of the Beam” above, and light 
targets. 
represents  ‘information’ 
Imposing a secondary frequency on that primary 
frequency can not only disrupt the flow of infor-
mation, it also cuts down on the dose since there 
is no light incident on the target cells when the 
source is switched off. It is true that cells have a 
‘dark reaction’ time as shown by Karu [91], but 
it  occurs  well  after  irradiation,  and  not  in  the 
short off-duty interval in a frequency modulated 
beam  cycle.  Figure  18.28  is  by  an  independent 
research  group, Almeida-Lopes  and  colleagues 
at  the  University  of  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  who 
reported the data on power density in Ref. [90] 
above, and shows the growth pattern of first pas-
sage human gingival fibroblasts exposed in vitro 
to 640 nm at several frequencies and continuous 
wave  (CW),  with  constant  incident  power  den-
sity  and  dose  as  ascertained  in  earlier  studies. 
There was a significant difference seen between 
the  group  of  frequencies  and  the  unirradiated 
controls  (p  >  0.01  for  all),  with  the  higher 

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



334

70

60

50

40

30

0
0
0
1
x

t
n
u
o
c
l
l
e

20C

Incident radiant flux (dose): 2.25 J/cm2
Incident power: 56 mW
λ = 640 nm

Continuous wave
180 Hz
120 Hz
60 Hz
10 Hz
Control

‡

10

0

0

2

4

6

Time (Days)

Fig. 18.28  An in vitro experiment to assess the effects of 
various frequencies in frequency modulated beams com-
pared with a continuous wave beam and an unirradiated 
control  on  the  cell  proliferation  of  first  passage  pooled 
human gingival fibroblasts. The dose was kept constant at 
2.25 J/cm2. All of the frequencies were statistically signifi-
cantly  better  at  increasing  proliferation  (§,  p  <  0.01  for 
all). The CW beam, however, was significantly more effi-
cient than both the control and the frequency modulated 
beams  (‡,  p  <  0.001  and  §,  p  <  0.01,  respectively). The 
results  represent  the  averaged  data  from  ten  repeated 
experiments.  (Used  with  the  permission  of  Pra.  Luciana 
Almeida-Lopes,  personal  communication,  data  as  yet 
unpublished)

frequencies  inducing  better  cell  proliferation, 
but the continuous wave beam induced greatest 
and most significant proliferation compared with 
both the unirradiated controls (p < 0.001) and the 
frequency  modulated  beams  (p  <  0.01).  The 
experiment  was  repeated  ten  times  and  the 
results  averaged.  (Data  and  graph  reproduced 
with  the  permission  of  Pra.  Luciana  Almeida-
Lopes,  as  yet  unpublished  data).  Cells,  espe-
cially  first  passage  human  gingival  fibroblasts, 
seem  to  prefer  CW  to  frequency  modulated 
energy.

 What Has Been Published 
on the System/Technology?
What you are looking for here are papers by rep-
utable authors published in the indexed and peer- 
reviewed literature, or at least in well-established 
and peer-reviewed journals (15 or more volumes) 
which  have  not  yet  been  indexed  by  MedLine 
and/or PubMed but which do none-the-less have 
scientific  credence.  An  alternative  source  is 
appropriate  chapters  in  books  from  reputable 
publishers. What you are NOT looking for are so- 
called  ‘white  papers’  which  any  manufacturer 

can  produce  to  look  like  a  genuine  publication, 
although they may actually contain good data, or 
articles from the commercially-oriented medical 
press  unless  they  are  also  in  turn  backed  up  by 
‘real’ papers. All of the referenced works in this 
chapter  are  either  from  peer-reviewed  PubMed 
listed journals, or books from reputable publish-
ers. Also, make very sure that the articles offered 
by  the  manufacturer/salesperson  are  on  their 
 specific  system  and  wavelength(s).  Very  often 
articles  on  approved  systems  by  another  manu-
facturer will be cited as ‘proof’ that their (unap-
proved)  system  works,  even  though  sometimes 
the intensity, dose or even wavelength is not the 
same as in the published articles.

 Finally ….

Despite the moaning of the sceptics, LED photo-
therapy has definitely arrived, has been proven to 
work  in  many  areas,  and  is  finding  a  rapidly 
increasing  number  of  applications  both  within 
and  outside  dermatology.  LED-LLLT  systems 
are comparatively inexpensive and robust, LED- 
LLLT itself is easy to administer, safe, effective, 
pain  free  (in  fact  it  can  be  used  to  treat  pain), 
side-effect free, well-tolerated by patients of all 
ages from infants to centenarians, and minimally 
contraindicated.  It  offers  the  possibility  of  a 
stand-alone  noninvasive  phototherapy  method, 
but when used together with any of the methods 
currently used by the dermatologist to alter his or 
her  patient’s  skin,  already  good  results  can  be 
expected to become even better. LED photother-
apy will not turn a poor dermatologist into a good 
one,  but  it  will  help  the  good  dermatologist  to 
become  even  better,  with  happier  patients. And 
finally,  please  remember,  above  all,  not  any  old 
LED will do the job!

References

 1.  Giese  AC.  Living  with  our  Sun’s  Ultraviolet  Rays. 

New York: Springer; 1976.

 2.  Cox TM, Jack N, Lofthouse S, Watling J, et al. King 
George III and porphyria: an elemental hypothesis and 
investigation. Lancet. 2005;366:332–5.

R. G. Calderhead 
 
 




  3.  Fubini  S.  Influenza  della  luce  sulla  respirazione  del 
tessuto  nervoso.  Annali  Universali  di  Medicina  e 
Chirurgia; 1897. Serie 1, 250: Fascicolo 7.

  4.  Finsen  NR.  Om  de  kemiske  Straales  skadelige 
Virkning paa den dyriske Organisme. Behandlung af 
Kopper  med  Udestaengning  af  de  kemiske  Straaler. 
Copenhagen: Hospitalstidende; 1893.

  5.  Zheludev N. The life and times of the LED - a 100- 

year history. Nat Photonics. 2007;1:189–92.

  6.  Whelan HT, Houle JM, Whelan NT, et al. The NASA 
light-emitting  diode  medical  program  -  progress 
in  space  flight  and  terrestrial  applications.  Space 
Technol Appl Int Forum. 2000;504:37–43.

  7. Whelan HT, Smits RL, Buchmann EV, et al. Effect of 
NASA light-emitting diode (LED) irradiation on wound 
healing. J Clin Laser Med Surg. 2001;19:305–14.
  8.  Ohshiro T. New classification for single-system light 

treatment. Laser Ther. 2011;20:11–5.

  9.  Smith  KC.  The  science  of  photobiology.  Plenum 

Press: New York; 1977.

 10.  Ohshiro T, Calderhead RG. Low level laser therapy: a 

practical introduction. Chichester: Wiley; 1988.

 11.  Asagai Y,  Ueno  R,  Miura Y,  Ohshiro T.  Application 
of low reactive-level laser therapy (LLLT) in patients 
with cerebral palsy of the adult tension athetosis type. 
Laser Ther. 1995;7:113–8.

 12.  Karu TI,  Kolyakov  SF.  Exact  action  spectra  for  cel-
lular  responses  relevant  to  phototherapy.  Photomed 
Laser Surg. 2005;23:355–61.

 13.  Hargate G. A randomised double-blind study compar-
ing  the  effect  of  1072-nm  light  against  placebo  for 
the  treatment  of  herpes  labialis.  Clin  Exp  Dermatol. 
2006;31:638–41.

 14.  Karu T. Primary and secondary mechanisms of action 
of visible to near-IR radiation on cells. J Photochem 
Photobiol B. 1999;49:1–17.

 15.  Smith  KC.  The  photobiological  basis  of  low  level 
laser radiation therapy. Laser Ther. 1991;3:19–24.
 16.  Kudo C, Inomata K, Okajima K, Motegi M, Ohshiro 
T.  Low  level  laser  therapy  pain  attenuation  mecha-
nisms,  1:  Histochemical  and  biochemical  effects  of 
830 nm gallium aluminium arsenide laser radiation on 
rat saphenous nerve Na-K-atpase activity. Laser Ther. 
1988;Pilot Issue:3–6.

 17.  Calderhead RG. Watts a joule revisited: guest edito-

rial. Laser Ther. 1995;7:147–9.

 18.  Calderhead RG, Inomata K. A study on the possible 
haemorrhagic  effects  of  extended  infrared  diode 
laser  irradiation  on  encapsulated  and  exposed  syno-
vial membrane articular tissue in the rat. Laser Ther. 
1992;4:65–8.

 20.  Garcia-Zuazaga 

 19.  Dougherty TJ. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) of malig-
nant tumors. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1984;2:83–116.
Baron 
ED.  Photodynamic  therapy  in  dermatology:  current 
concepts in the treatment of skin cancer. Expert Rev 
Anticancer Ther. 2005;5:791–800.

Cooper 

KD, 

J, 

 21.  Gold MH, Goldman MP. 5-Aminolevulinic acid pho-
todynamic  therapy:  where  we  have  been  and  where 
we are going. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:1077–83.

335

 22.  Charakida  A,  Seaton  ED,  Charakida  M,  Mouser  P, 
et al. Phototherapy in the treatment of acne vulgaris: 
what is its role? Am J Clin Dermatol. 2004;5:211–6.
 23.  Kjeldstad B, Johnsson A. An action spectrum for blue 
and near ultraviolet inactivation of Propionibacterium 
acnes; with emphasis on a possible porphyrin photo-
sensitization. Photochem Photobiol. 1986;43:67–70.

 24.  Sigurdsson  V,  Knulst  AC, 

van  Weelden 
H.  Phototherapy  of  acne  vulgaris  with  visible  light. 
Dermatology. 1997;194:256–60.

 25.  Arakane  K,  Ryu  A,  Hayashi  C,  Masunaga  T,  et  al. 
Singlet  oxygen  (1  delta  g)  generation  from  copro-
porphyrin in Propionibacterium acnes on irradiation. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996;223:578–82.
 26.  Lavi  R,  Shainberg  A,  Friedmann  H,  Shneyvays  V, 
et al. Low energy visible light induces reactive oxy-
gen species generation and stimulates an increase of 
intracellular calcium concentration in cardiac cells. J 
Biol Chem. 2003;278:40917–22.

 27.  Morton  CA,  Whitehurst  C,  Moseley  H,  et  al. 
Development  of  an  alternative  light  source  to  lasers 
for photodynamic therapy. Clinical evaluation in the 
treatment  of  pre-malignant  non-melanoma  skin  can-
cer. Lasers Med Sci. 1995;10:165–71.

 28.  Babilas  P,  Kohl  E,  Maisch  T,  Backer  B,  et  al.  In 
vitro  and  in  vivo  comparison  of  two  different  light 
sources for topical photodynamic therapy. Br J Derm. 
2006;154:712–8.

 29.  Pollock  B,  Turner  D,  Stringer  M,  Bojar  RA,  et  al. 
Topical  aminolaevulinic  acid-photodynamic  therapy 
for  the  treatment  of  acne  vulgaris:  a  study  of  clini-
cal efficacy and mechanism of action. Br J Dermatol. 
2004;151:616–22.

 30. Hong  SB,  Lee  MH.  Topical  aminolevulinic  acid- 
photodynamic  therapy  for  the  treatment  of  acne 
vulgaris.  Photodermatol  Photoimmunol  Photomed. 
2005;21:322–5.

 31.  Omi T, Bjerring P, Sato S, Kawada S, et al. 420 nm 
intense  continuous  light  therapy  for  acne.  J  Cosmet 
Laser Ther. 2004;6:156–62.

 32.  Webber J, Luo Y, Crilly R, Fromm D, Kessel D. An 
apoptotic  response  to  photodynamic  therapy  with 
endogenous  protoporphyrin  in  vivo.  J  Photochem 
Photobiol B. 1996;35:209–11.

 33.  Nitzan Y,  Kauffman  M.  Endogenous  porphyrin  pro-
duction in bacteria by δ-aminolevulinic acid and sub-
sequent  bacterial  photoeradication.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
1999;14:269–77.

 34.  Zouboulis  CC.  Acne  as  a  chronic  systemic  disease. 

Clin Dermatol. 2014;32:389–96.

 35.  Papageorgiou P, Katsambas A, Chu A. Phototherapy 
with blue (415 nm) and red (660 nm) light in the treat-
ment of acne vulgaris. Br J Dermatol. 2000;142:973–8.
 36. Goldberg DG, Russell B. Combination blue (415 nm) 
and red (633 nm) LED phototherapy in the treatment 
of mild to severe acne vulgaris. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 
2004;8:71–5.

 37. Lee SY, You CE, Park MY. Blue and red light combina-
tion LED phototherapy for acne vulgaris in patients with 
skin phototype IV. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:180–8.

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



336

 38.  Trelles  MA, Allones  I,  Luna  R.  Facial  rejuvenation 
with  a  nonablative  1320  nm  Nd:YAG  laser:  a  pre-
liminary clinical and histologic evaluation. Dermatol 
Surg. 2001;27:111–6.

 39.  Nikolaou  VA,  Stratigos  AJ,  Dover  JS.  Nonablative 
skin rejuvenation. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2005;4:301–7.
 40.  Orringer  JS, Voorhees  JJ,  Hamilton  T,  Hammerberg 
C, et al. Dermal matrix remodeling after nonablative 
laser therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53:775–82.
 41.  Rahman Z, Alam M, Dover JS. Fractional laser treat-
ment for pigmentation and texture improvement. Skin 
Therapy Lett. 2006;11:7–11.

 42.  Wanner  M,  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Fractional  photo-
thermolysis  of  facial  and  nonfacial  cutaneous  pho-
todamage with a 1,550-nm erbium-doped fiber laser. 
Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:23–8.

 43.  Lowe NJ, Lowe P. Pilot study to determine the efficacy 
of ALA-PDT photo-rejuvenation for the treatment of 
facial ageing. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:159–62.
 44.  Alster  TS,  Surin-Lord  SS.  Photodynamic  therapy: 
practical  cosmetic  applications.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2006;5:764–8.

 45. Christiansen K, Peter Bjerring P, Troilius A. 5-ALA 
for  photodynamic  photorejuvenation  -  optimiza-
tion  of  treatment  regime  based  on  normal-skin 
fluorescence  measurements.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39:302–10.

 46.  Weiss  RA,  Weiss  MA,  Geronemus  RG,  McDaniel 
DH. A novel non-thermal non-ablative full panel LED 
photomodulation  device  for  reversal  of  photoaging: 
digital microscopic and clinical results in various skin 
types. J Drugs Dermatol. 2004;3:605–10.

 47.  Russell  BA,  Kellett  N,  Reilly  LR.  A  study  to  deter-
mine the efficacy of combination LED light therapy 
(633  nm  and  830  nm)  in  facial  skin  rejuvenation.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:196–200.

 48.  Goldberg  DJ, Amin  S,  Russell  BA,  Phelps  R,  et  al. 
Combined 633-nm and 830-nm led treatment of pho-
toaging skin. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5:748–53.
 49.  Lee SY, Park KH, Choi JW, Kwon JK, et al. A prospec-
tive, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded, 
and  split-face  clinical  study  on  LED  phototherapy 
for  skin  rejuvenation:  clinical,  profilometric,  histo-
logic,  ultrastructural,  and  biochemical  evaluations 
and comparison of three different treatment settings. J 
Photochem Photobiol B. 2007;88:51–67.

 50.  Trelles  M,  Mordon  S,  Calderhead  RG,  Goldberg  D. 
(Viewpoint 3 and comment 3) How best to halt and/
or revert UV-induced skin ageing: strategies, facts and 
fiction. Exp Dermatol. 2008;17:228–40.

 51.  Kim WS, Calderhead RG. Is light-emitting diode pho-
totherapy  (LED-LLLT)  really  effective?  Laser  Ther. 
2011;20:206–15.

 52.  Min PK, Goo BCL. 830 nm light-emitting diode low 
level light therapy (LED-LLLT) enhances wound heal-
ing: a preliminary study. Laser Ther. 2013;22:43–9.
 53.  Calderhead  RG,  Kim  WS,  Ohshiro  T,  Trelles  MA, 
Vasily  DB.  Adjunctive  830  nm  light-emitting  diode 
therapy  can  improve  the  results  following  aesthetic 
procedures. Laser Ther. 2015;24:277–89.

 54.  Calderhead  RG, Vasily  DB.  Low  level  light  therapy 
with  light-emitting  diodes  for  the  aging  face.  Clin 
Plast Surg. 2016;43:541–50.

 55.  Rigau  J,  Trelles  MA,  Calderhead  RG,  Mayayo 
E. Changes in fibroblast proliferation and metabolism 
following in vitro helium-neon laser irradiation. Laser 
Ther. 1991;3:25–34.

 56.  Takezaki S, Omi T, Sato S, Kawana S. Ultrastructural 
observations of human skin following irradiation with 
visible  red  light-emitting  diodes  (LEDs):  a  prelimi-
nary in vivo report. Laser Ther. 2005;14:153–60.
 57.  Karu  T.  Identification  of  the  photoreceptors.  In:  
Ten  lectures  on  basic  science  of  laser  phototherapy. 
Grangesberg, Sweden: Prima Books AB; 2007.

 58.  Trelles MA, Rigau J, Velez M. LLLT in vivo effects 
on mast cells. In: Simunovic Z, editor. Lasers in medi-
cine and dentistry (Part 1). Switzerland: LaserMedico; 
2002. p. 169–86.

 59.  Trelles MA. Phototherapy in anti-aging and its photo-
biologic basics: a new approach to skin rejuvenation. 
J Cosmet Dermatol. 2006;5:87–91.

 60. Calderhead RG, Kubota J, Trelles MA, Ohshiro T. One 
mechanism behind LED phototherapy for wound heal-
ing  and  skin  rejuvenation:  key  role  of  the  mast  cell. 
Laser Ther. https://doi.org/10.5978/islsm.17.141.
 61.  Young  S,  Bolton  P,  Dyson  M,  Harvey  W, 
Diamantopoulos  C.  Macrophage  responsiveness  to 
light therapy. Lasers Surg Med. 1989;9:497–505.
 62. Osanai  T,  Shiroto  C,  Mikami  Y,  Kudou  E,  et  al. 
Measurement  of  GaAlAs  diode  laser  action  on 
phagocytic  activity  of  human  neutrophils  as  a  pos-
sible  therapeutic  dosimetry  determinant.  Laser  Ther. 
1990;2:123–34.

 63.  Dima  VF,  Suzuki  K,  Liu  Q,  Koie  T,  et  al.  Laser 
and  neutrophil  serum  opsonic  activity.  Roum  Arch 
Microbiol Immunol. 1996;55(4):277–83.

 64.  Samoilova  KA,  Bogacheva  ON,  Obolenskaya  KD, 
Blinova MI, et al. Enhancement of the blood growth 
promoting activity after exposure of volunteers to vis-
ible and infrared polarized light. Part I: Stimulation of 
human keratinocyte proliferation in vitro. Photochem 
Photobiol Sci. 2004;3(1):96–101.

 65.  Kim  JW,  Lee  JO.  Low  level  laser  therapy  and  pho-
totherapy  assisted  hydrogel  dressing  in  burn  wound 
healing:  light  guided  epithelial  stem  cell  biomodu-
lation.  In:  Eisenmann-Klein  M,  Neuhann-Lorenz  C, 
editors.  Innovations  in  plastic  and  aesthetic  surgery. 
Berlin: Springer; 2007. p. 36–42.

 66.  Trelles  MA,  Allones  I,  Mayo  E.  Combined  visible 
light and infrared light-emitting diode (LED) therapy 
enhances wound healing after laser ablative resurfac-
ing  of  photodamaged  facial  skin.  Med  Laser  App. 
2006;21:165–75.

 67.  Trelles  MA,  Allones  I.  Red  light-emitting  diode 
(LED)  therapy  accelerates  wound  healing  post- 
blepharoplasty and periocular laser ablative resurfac-
ing. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2006;8:39–42.

 68.  Trelles MA, Allones I, Mayo E. Er:YAG laser ablation 
of  plantar  verrucae  with  red  LED  therapy-assisted 
healing. Photomed Laser Surg. 2006;24:494–8.

R. G. Calderhead



337

 69.  Ablon  G.  Combination  830-nm  and  633-nm  light- 
emitting  diode  phototherapy  shows  promise  in  the 
treatment  of  recalcitrant  psoriasis:  preliminary  find-
ings. Photomed Laser Surg. 2010;28:141–6.

 70.  Park  KY,  Han  TY,  Kim  IS, Yeo  IK,  Kim  BJ,  Kim 
MN.  The  effects  of  830  nm  light-emitting  diode 
therapy on acute herpes zoster ophthalmicus: a pilot 
study. Ann Dermatol. 2013;25:163–7.

 71.  Mester  E,  Szende  B,  Spiry  T,  Scher A.  Stimulation 
of  wound  healing  by  laser  rays. Acta  Chir Acad  Sci 
Hung. 1972;13:315–24.

 72.  Lee  GY,  Kim  WS.  The  systemic  effect  of  830-nm 
LED phototherapy on the wound healing of burn inju-
ries:  a  controlled  study  in  mouse  and  rat  models.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2012;14:107–10.

 73.  Kubota J. Defocused diode laser therapy (830 nm) in 
the treatment of unresponsive skin ulcers: a prelimi-
nary trial. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2004;6:96–102.
 74.  Glinkowski  W.  Delayed  union  healing  with  diode 
laser  therapy  (LLLT).  Case  report  and  review  of  lit-
erature. Laser Ther. 1990;2:107–10.

 75.  Pretel  H,  Lizarelli  RF,  Ramalho  LT.  Effect  of  low- 
level laser therapy on bone repair: histological study 
in rats. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(10):788–96.

 76.  Karu T. Irradiation effects are detectable in the cells 
of subsequent generations. In:  Ten lectures on basic 
science of laser phototherapy. Grangesberg, Sweden: 
Prima Books AB; 2007.

 77.  Kubota J. Effects of diode laser therapy on blood flow 
in axial pattern flaps in the rat model. Lasers Med Sci. 
2002;17:146–53.

 78.  Niinikoski J. Current concepts of the role of oxygen 
in wound healing. Ann Chir Gynaecol. 2001;90(Suppl 
215):9–11.

 79.  Kim YD, Kim SS, Hwang DS, Kim SG, et al. Effect 
of low-level laser treatment after installation of den-
tal  titanium  implant-immunohistochemical  study  of 
RANKL, RANK, OPG: an experimental study in rats. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:441–50.

 80.  Nagasawa A, Kato K, Negishi A. Bone regeneration 
effect of low level lasers. Laser Ther. 1991;3:59–62.
 81.  Naeser  MA,  Saltmarche  A,  Krengel  MH,  Hamblin 
MR,  Knight  JA.  Improved  cognitive  function  after 

in 
light-emitting  diode 
transcranial, 
chronic,  traumatic  brain  injury:  two  case  reports. 
Photomed Laser Surg. 2011;29:351–8.

treatments 

 82.  Nawashiro  H,  Wada  K,  Nakai  K,  Sato  S.  Focal 
increase  in  cerebral  blood  flow  after  treatment  with 
near-infrared  light  to  the  forehead  in  a  patient  in  a 
persistent  vegetative  state.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2012;30:231–3. Review

 83.  Naeser  MA,  Zafonte  R,  Krengel  MH,  Martin  PI, 
Frazier J, et al. Significant improvements in cognitive 
performance post-transcranial, red/near-infrared light- 
emitting diode treatments in chronic, mild traumatic 
brain  injury:  open-protocol  study.  J  Neurotrauma. 
2014;31:1008–17.

 84.  Gratton  E,  Toronov  V,  Wolf  U,  Wolf  M,  Webb 
A.  Measurement  of  brain  activity  by  near-infrared 
light. J Biomed Opt. 2005;10:1100–8.

 85.  Yu  G,  Durduran  T,  Furuya  D,  Greenberg  JH, Yodh 
AG.  Frequency-domain  multiplexing  system  for 
in  vivo  diffuse  light  measurements  of  rapid  cerebral 
hemodynamics. Appl Opt. 2003;42:2931–9.

 86.  Dima  VF,  Ionescu  MD.  Ultrastructural  changes 
induced in Walker carcinosarcoma by treatment with 
dihematoporphyrin  ester  and  light  in  animals  with 
diabetes  mellitus.  Roum  Arch  Microbiol  Immunol. 
2000;59:119–30.

 87.  Skobelkin  OK,  Michailov  VA, 

Zakharov 
SD.  Preoperative  activation  of  the  immune  system 
by  low  reactive  level  laser  therapy  (LLLT)  in  onco-
logic  patients:  a  preliminary  report.  Laser  Ther. 
1991;3:169–76.

 88.  Simpson S. Chakras for starters. 2nd ed. Nevada City, 

CA: Crystal Clarity; 2002.

 89.  Carey  SC.  A  beginner’s  guide  to  scientific  method. 
2nd ed. London: Wadsworth Publishing Inc; 2004.
 90.  Almeida-Lopes  L,  Rigau  J,  Zângaro  RA,  Guidugli- 
Neto J, Jaeger MM. Comparison of the low level laser 
therapy effects on cultured human gingival fibroblasts 
proliferation using different irradiance and same flu-
ence. Lasers Surg Med. 2001;29:179–84.

 91. Karu T. Ten lectures on basic science of laser pho-
totherapy.  Grangesberg,  Sweden:  Prima  Books 
AB; 2007.

18 Current Status of Light-Emitting Diode Phototherapy in Dermatological Practice



Laser and Light for Wound Healing 
Stimulation

19

Ehsan Azimi, Navid Bouzari, and Keyvan Nouri

Abstract
Understanding  wound  healing  is  critical  for 
health  care  professionals  mainly  because  of 
the  enormous  burden  of  chronic  wounds  on 
society. In addition, in many medical special-
ties, creating wounds for diagnostic and thera-
peutic purposes is part of a physician’s daily 
practice.

Acute  wounds  are  usually  closed  using 
sutures,  staples,  or  other  methods  of  wound 
closure.  Conventional  modalities 
include 
maintenance of a moist wound bed, and pre-
vention of infection. Although acute wounds 
are  not  challenging  in  most  settings,  they 
may  influence  the  hospital  stay  or  expenses 
to  medical  procedures.  Chronic 
related 

wounds however, are more challenging. The 
incidence  of  chronic  wounds  in  the  United 
States is approximately five to seven million 
per  year  (Sen  et  al.,  Wound  Repair  Regen 
17(6):763–771,  2009)  and  the  annual  costs 
for  management  of  these  wounds  is  greater 
than $20 billion.

Keywords
Wound  healing  ·  Chronic  wounds  ·  Tissue 
welding  ·  Tissue  soldering  ·  Helium-neon 
lasers  ·  Gallium-arsenide  (GaAs)  lasers  · 
Gallium-aluminum-arsenide  (GaAlAs)  lasers 
·  Nd:YAG  lasers  ·  Carbon  dioxide  lasers  · 
Ruby lasers · Krypton lasers · Argon dye lasers

E. Azimi 
Department of Dermatology, Cutaneous Biology 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, MA, USA  

N. Bouzari 
South Shore Skin Center, Plymouth, MA, USA
e-mail: nbouzari2@med.miami.edu 

K. Nouri (*) 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 
e-mail: knouri@med.miami.edu

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_19

339





340

Summary Box
•  Cutaneous  wound  healing  is  divided 
into  three  phases:  the  inflammatory 
phase,  the  proliferative  phase,  and  the 
remodeling phase

•  The  wound  healing  process  can  be 
applied  to  both  acute  and  chronic 
wounds.  Acute  wounds  are  generally 
less than 8 weeks, and usually result in a 
sustained  restoration  of  anatomic  and 
functional integrity. Chronic wounds are 
defined  as  wounds  that  have  failed  to 
proceed  through  the  usual  stepwise 
fashion.  Lasers  are  used  for  healing  of 
both acute and chronic wounds.

•  The  main  techniques  of  laser-assisted 
wound  closure  of  acute  wounds  are: 
simple tissue welding, tissue soldering, 
dye-enhanced tissue welding, and addi-
tion of growth factors.

•  The  potential  advantages  of 

include 

laser-
assisted  tissue  bonding  over  conven-
tional  methods 
increased 
immediate  wound  strength,  fluid-tight 
closure, decreased operative repair time, 
reduced  probability  of  infection  and 
bleeding, 
cosmetic 
results. However, lasers have disadvan-
tages  such  as  their  high  cost,  risk  of 
dehiscence, risk of thermal damage, and 
inconsistency of the results.

improved 

and 

•  The exact mechanism involved in laser-
assisted  wound  closure  is  not  com-
pletely  understood.  The  heat  produced 
by laser energy in the tissue causes col-
lagen  fibers  to  loose  their  triple  helix 
structure and become fused, intertwined, 
swollen, and dissolved.

•  Different  lasers  for  treating  chronic 
wounds  include  helium-neon,  gallium-
arsenide  (GaAs),  gallium-aluminum-
arsenide  (GaAlAs),  Nd:YAG,  carbon 
dioxide,  ruby,  krypton,  and  argon  dye 
lasers

•  The  exact  mechanism  of  action  of  low 
intensity  laser  therapy  is  not  known. 

Current  hypotheses  are:  stimulation  of 
Ca  influx  and  mitosis  rate,  increased 
expression of Heat-Shock-Proteins (e.g. 
HSP70  and  HSP47),  increased  expres-
sion  of  growth  factors  such  as  TGF-β, 
alteration of mitochondrial activity and 
increased  ATP  synthesis,  augmented 
formation of mRNA and protein secre-
tion,  enhancement  of  fibroblast  and 
keratinocyte  proliferation  and  migra-
tion,  angiogenesis, 
improvement  of 
phagocytosis,  and  increased  rate  of 
transformation  of  fibroblasts 
into 
myofibroblasts.

 Introduction

Understanding  the  wound  healing  is  critical  for 
health  care  professionals  mainly  because  of  the 
enormous burden of chronic wounds on society. 
In addition, in many medical specialties, creating 
wounds for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes 
is part of physician daily practice.

Acute wounds are usually closed using sutures, 
staples,  or  other  methods  of  wound  closure. 
Conventional modalities include maintenance of a 
moist  wound  bed,  and  prevention  of  infection. 
Although  acute  wounds  are  not  challenging  in 
most settings, they may influence the hospital stay 
or expenses related to medical procedures. Chronic 
wounds however, are more challenging. The inci-
dence  of  chronic  wounds  in  the  United  States  is 
approximately  five  to  seven  million  per  year  [1] 
and  the  annual  costs  for  management  of  these 
wounds is greater than $20 billion [2, 3]. Accurate 
diagnosis is the key, and can be clinically made in 
less than 75% of cases [4]. Treatment usually con-
sists  of  debridement  of  necrotic  tissue,  mainte-
nance  of  a  moist  wound  bed,  and  control  of 
infection. Unfortunately, despite many progresses, 
treating chronic wounds is still challenging.

Laser  and  light  based  technologies  have 
recently  emerged  as  alternative  therapies  for 
wound  healing.  A  variety  of  lasers  and  light 
sources  have  been  introduced  as  a  non-invasive 

E. Azimi et al.



341

tool  for  chronic  wound  healing  as  well  as  an 
alternative method of closure of surgical wounds. 
This  chapter  will  discuss  the  role  of  this  new 
technology in wound healing.

observed, which mediates tissue repair and even-
tually the reestablishment of the barrier function 
of  the  skin.  Tissue  repair  is  divided  into  three 
phases: the inflammatory phase, the proliferative 
phase, and the remodeling phase [5] (Fig. 19.1).

 Wound Healing

 Inflammatory Phase

Understanding  the  process  of  wound  repair  is  a 
prerequisite 
to  maximizing  our  knowledge 
regarding  the  use  of  lasers  for  wound  healing. 
Cutaneous wound healing involves the complex 
interaction  of  several  types  of  cells,  their  cyto-
kines or mediators, and the extracellular matrix. 
After  cutaneous  injury  a  cascade  of  events  is 

The initial event in tissue injury is the damage to 
endothelial  cells  and  blood  vessels. This  causes 
extravasation of blood into the wound and colla-
gen  exposure  which  leads  to  blood  clotting, 
platelet  aggregation  and  activation,  as  well  as 
migration  of  neutrophils  and  monocytes  (and 

Tissue injury

Blood extravasation

PDGF
EGF
TGF-β
IGF-1
Serotonin
Fibrinogen
ADP
TXA2

Phagocytose bacteria
and matrix proteins

PDGF
FGF
TGF-β
TGF-α
VEGF

Platelet

Neutrophil

Macrophage

Epithelial cell

Fibroblast

Inflammatory phase

Angiogenesis

IL-1
TGF-β

Activin
TGF-α

IL-6
PDGF
GM-CSF

KGF
HB-EGF

Migration and proliferation

Migration and proliferation

Proliferative phase

Collagenase,
hyaluronidase

Collagen III degradation

0

Minutes to hours

Day 1

Day 7

Collagen remodeling

Collagen I synthesis

Remodeling phase

Day 14

Months

Fig.  19.1  Phases  of  wound  healing:  The  inflammatory 
phase starts within minutes after tissue injury with extrav-
asation of blood followed by activation of platelets, mono-
cytes  and  macrophages,  release  of  mediators  and 
cytokines. These cytokines induce the proliferative phase 
by activating keratinocyte and fibroblast proliferation and 
migration, as well as release of a variety of growth factors 
involve in angiogenesis and granulation tissue formation. 
The last phase of wound healing is remodeling via replac-

ing collagen III by collagen I. IL interleukin, KGF kerati-
nocyte growth factor, FGF fibroblast growth factor, VEGF 
vascular endothelial growth factor, PDGF platelet-derived 
growth  factor,  EGF  epidermal  growth  factor,  HB-EGF 
heparin binding EGF, TGF-α transforming growth factor-
alfa, TGF-β transforming growth factor-beta, IGF-1 insu-
lin-like growth factor-1, GM-CSF granulocyte-macrophage 
colony  stimulating  factor,  ADP  adenosine  diphosphate, 
TXA2 thromboxane A2

19 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation



342

subsequently macrophages) to the site of injury. 
Activated platelets release a variety of mediators 
(Fig. 19.1) which initiate the wound healing cas-
cade  by  attracting  and  activating  fibroblasts, 
endothelial cells and macrophages. Neutrophils, 
once  in  the  wound  environment,  phagocytose 
bacteria and matrix proteins. Later in the inflam-
matory  phase,  monocytes  and  macrophages 
become the dominant figures, and release a vari-
ety  of  cytokines,  inducing  epithelial  cell  migra-
tion and proliferation as well as matrix production 
[5, 6].

 Proliferative Phase

EGF, 

This phase involves the creation of a permeability 
barrier as well as the establishment of an appro-
priate  blood  supply  and  reinforcement  of  the 
injured tissue. Keratinocytes and fibroblasts pro-
liferate and migrate to the wound bed. Fibroblast 
proliferation  and  migration  are  modulated  by 
PDGF, 
and 
TGF-α, 
FGF.  Macrophages  play  a  key  role  in  initiating 
fibroblast proliferation and migration. When the 
number  of  macrophages  begins  to  diminish, 
fibroblasts and keratinocytes are the main source 
of the growth factors. The interplay of keratino-
cytes with fibroblasts gradually shifts the micro-
environment  away  from  an  inflammatory  to  a 
synthesis-driven granulation tissue.

TGF-β 

In  the  granulation  tissue,  mesenchymal  cells 
are  maximally  activated,  cells  proliferate,  and 
synthesize huge amounts of extracellular matrix 
which  supports  the  developing  capillary  loops. 
Keratinocytes  proliferate  and  migrate  over  the 
provisional matrix of the underlying granulation 
tissue, eventually closing the defect [5, 7, 8].

 Remodeling Phase

In this phase, remodeling of the collagen into a 
more  organized  structure  occurs  in  order  to 
increase  the  wound’s  tensile  strength.  The  type 
III collagen of the granulation tissue is replaced 
by  type  I  collagen  through  a  tightly  controlled 
synthesis  of  new  collagen  and  lysis  of  old  until 

the normal skin ratio of 4:1 for type I collagen to 
type III collagen is present. In addition, the com-
position  of  other  matrix  material  such  as  water, 
fibronectin,  hyaluronic  acid,  and  proteoglycans 
changes over the period of a year or more [5, 9].

 Acute vs. Chronic Ulcers

The  wound  healing  process  can  be  applied  to 
both  acute  and  chronic  wounds.  Acute  wounds 
are generally less than 8 weeks, and usually result 
in a sustained restoration of anatomic and func-
tional  integrity.  Chronic  wounds  are  defined  as 
wounds  that  have  failed  to  proceed  through  the 
usual  stepwise  fashion. As  a  result,  the  healing 
process is prolonged and incomplete, with lack of 
restoration  of  integrity  [10]. A  large  number  of 
factors can impede wound healing and may pre-
dispose a patient to the development of chronic 
wound. These include both local factors (wound 
infection,  tissue  hypoxia,  repeated  trauma,  the 
presence of debris and necrotic tissue), and sys-
temic  causes  (diabetes  mellitus,  malnutrition, 
immunodeficiency, and the use of certain medi-
cations) [11–13].

 Lasers for Wound Healing

The  use  of  laser  energy  for  wound  healing  was 
proposed more than 35 years ago [14]. It was first 
suggested for bonding skin incisions, and termed 
“laser welding”. Interest in the efficacy of lasers 
as a noninvasive tool for treatment of all types of 
wounds soon grew among researchers in both ani-
mal models [15, 16] and clinical studies [17, 18]. 
The concept that surgeons can replace their scal-
pels and tedious suturing techniques with a sim-
ple,  non-operator-dependent,  safe,  and  rapid 
technique,  has  inspired  many  investigators  to 
experiment  on  different  laser  systems  [19].  The 
areas  of  research  can  be  divided  in  two  major 
groups:  lasers  to  augment  the  healing  of  acute 
wounds (tissue welding, tissue soldering, etc. see 
below),  and  lasers  for  chronic  wound  (e.g.  low 
intensity laser devices, see below). Although these 
two groups of lasers share many similarities, there 

E. Azimi et al.



are differences in their mechanism of action, laser 
systems, laser parameters, etc. which will be dis-
cussed in this chapter.

 Lasers for Acute Wounds

Interest  for  tissue  welding  for  closure  of  acute 
wounds first came out of early experiences with 
the use of electrocautery energy [20]. Later, laser 
energy was introduced for vascular anastomosis 
and then for other type of acute wounds. After the 
introduction  of  laser-assisted  wound  closure,  it 
was rapidly evident that welding of skin was dif-
ficult.  In  fact,  the  initial  tensile  strength  of  the 
wound  was  weak  compared  with  conventional 
sutures in the first few days post incision [15, 21, 
22].  However,  the  wound  healing  process  was 
generally accelerated, and the cosmetic aspect of 
the  scar  was  improved.  In  order  to  enhance  the 
tensile  strength  and  minimize  the  thermal  dam-
age, various improvements have been suggested. 
The main techniques are simple tissue welding, 
tissue  soldering,  dye-enhanced  tissue  welding, 
and addition of growth factors (Table 19.1).

Tissue  Welding:  The  first  method  introduced 
for  laser-assisted  wound  closure  was  “tissue 
welding”.  The  principle  of  laser-assisted  tissue 
welding  is  based  on  the  heat  produced  by  the 
laser  irradiation.  The  increased  temperature  in 
the  skin  causes  collagen  denaturation  and  the 
crosslinking  of  fibrils  [23].  It  is  crucial  to  esti-
mate  the  optimal  photonic  energy  that  is  to  be 
delivered  to  tissue.  In  this  respect,  major  deter-
mining  factors  are  laser  wavelength,  power, 
exposure time, and mode of operations (continu-
ous  wave  or  pulsed).  For  this  reason,  various 
types  of 
investigated 
laser  systems  were 
(Table 19.1) [15, 24–26]. The first successful use 
of  a  laser  in  tissue  welding  was  in  1979  when 
ND:YAG  was  used  to  repair  incisions  made  in 
blood vessels of a rat [27]. Later, tissue welding 
was  successfully  performed  for  skin  closure  as 
well  as  for  anastomosis  of  other  tissues  [15]. 
Despite progresses made in tissue welding, sur-
geons still do not embrace this new laser technol-
ogy.  The  main  reasons  can  be  summarized  in 
three main drawbacks of laser welding: (1) low 

343

Table  19.1  Lasers  commonly  used  in  acute  wound 
healing

Technique
Tissue welding

Laser System + Solder/dye
CO2
Argon
Nd:YAG
Diode
Tissue soldering Diode + Albumin-genipin

Diode + Methylene blue
Diode + albumin
Diode + fibrinogen
CO2 + Albumin
Nd:YAG + albumin
Argon + fibrinogen
Alexandrite + indocyanine green
Argon + fluorescein isothiocyanate
Diode + indocyanine green
Diode + gold nanoshells

Dye-enhanced

tensile  strength  during  the  first  few  days;  (2) 
noticeable thermal damage; (3) inconsistency of 
the results [19].

Tissue Soldering: Laser-assisted tissue solder-
ing  uses  an  additional  component  known  as  a 
“solder”  for  better  wound  closure.  The  solder 
(bovine  albumin,  human  albumin,  blood  etc.) 
absorbs  the  laser  energy,  coagulates,  and  as  a 
result,  enhances the tensile strength while mini-
mizing  the  thermal  damage  of  the  surrounding 
tissue  [19,  28].  Laser-assisted  tissue  soldering 
has  been  carried  out  using  two  types  of  lasers: 
lasers such as Nd:YAG and GaAs, whose radia-
tion  penetrates  deep  into  tissue  [29];  and  lasers 
such as CO2, whose radiation is highly absorbed 
by surface tissue [21]. A variety of solders have 
also  been  studied  (Table  19.1).  Albumin  as  a 
 solder, was introduced in 1988, and showed to be 
promising  in  the  following  studies  with  CO2, 
diode and Nd:YAG lasers [15, 30–32]. Other sol-
ders  such  as  fibrinogen  [33],  Albumin-genipin 
[34],  and  methylene  blue  [35]  have  also  been 
suggested.  Again,  the  major  drawback  of  this 
technique  was  the  weak  tensile  strength  of  the 
repairs due to the decreased solubility of the par-
tially  denatured  solder.  To  overcome  this  prob-
lem,  “2-layer”  soldering  was  developed.  In 
“2-layer” soldering, the layer in contact with tis-
sue  absorbs  the  laser  and  bonds  to  tissue  while 
the second layer provides cohesive strength and 

19 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation



344

flexibility. The main limitation of this method is 
lack of flexibility of bonded tissue [36].

Dye-enhanced tissue welding: The concept of 
using  a  topical  tissue-staining  dye  to  facilitate 
selective delivery of laser energy by the target tis-
sue has been postulated to improve tissue weld-
ing. A nontoxic dye that is strongly absorbed by a 
specific  laser  wavelength  can  serve  to  confine 
photon  absorption  and  the  resultant  thermal 
energy to the weld site. A variety of combinations 
of  dyes  and  lasers  have  been  studied  with  vari-
able success rates [17, 33, 37, 38]. It seems that 
combination  of  indocyanine  green  with  either 
pulsed alexandrite or pulsed diode laser is supe-
rior  to  other  dye-enhanced  tissue  welding  tech-
niques. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that very 
limited clinical data have been available yet that 
confirm the clinical value of dye-enhanced tissue 
welding.

Nanoshells  are  a  new  class  of  nanoparticles 
consisting  of  a  dielectric  core  surrounded  by  a 
thin metal shell. Use of gold nanoshells in con-
junction  with  near  Infrared  light  has  recently 
been suggested as a means of dye-enhanced tis-
sue welding. Application of lasers at wavelengths 
within  the  near  infrared,  the  region  between 
approximately  650  and  900  nm,  where  tissue 
components have minimal absorption, decreases 
the  chance  of  widespread  thermal  damage  and 
improves  penetration  depth  [39].  The  use  of 
nanoshells has several advantages over indocya-
nine  green.  For  example,  the  small  size  of 
nanoshells  reduces  diffusion  from  the  site  of 
treatment  and  concentrates  heating  at  the  inter-
face to be welded. Also they are less photosensi-
tive  hydrolytically  sensitive  and  susceptible  to 
photobleaching in the presence of light compar-
ing to indocyanine green.

Addition  of  Growth  factors:  Attempts  have 
been made to use recombinant growth factors, as 
an  adjunct  to  laser-assisted  tissue  soldering  to 
accelerate  wound  healing.  A  variety  of  growth 
factors such as HB-EGF, FGF, TGF-β, etc. have 
been  studied.  The  result  of  an  animal  study  by 
Poppas  and  colleagues  showed  that  addition  of 
TGF-β  to  the  solder  (albumin  in  their  study) 
increases  the  tensile  strength  of  the  wound  by 
more than 50%. Using this technique, it is imper-

ative to maintain a predetermined tissue tempera-
ture  in  order  to  prevent  thermal  degradation  of 
growth factors [40].

 Lasers vs. Conventional Methods 
of Acute Wound Closure

techniques  for 

Conventional 
tissue  bonding 
(sutures, staples, and adhesives) are highly reliable 
procedures that have proven themselves over the 
years  to  be  good  clinical  practice.  Sutures  have 
been  successfully  used  for  centuries.  They  are 
inexpensive,  flexible,  reliable,  and  readily  avail-
able [15]. However, they are not the perfect tech-
nique  due  to  several  reasons  (Table  19.2).  Since 
sutures  cause  trauma  to  the  skin,  and   introduce 
foreign  body,  they  can  result  in  inflammation, 
granuloma formation, and scarring. Many techni-
cal  factors  such  as  position  on  the  needle  in  the 
holder, the slope of the tissue at needle entrance, 
suture spacing, knot tension, and choice of suture 
material can affect wound healing [25, 41]. Staples 
are  another  mean  of  wound  closure  which  share 
many  common  characteristics  with  sutures. 
However,  they  are  faster  and  more  uniform  than 
sutures. Their main disadvantage is that they come 
in predetermined size which precludes their use in 
some  anatomical  sites. Adhesives  are  clean,  fast, 
non-operator-dependant,  painless  method  of 
wound closure. They are an excellent “no needle” 
alternative in pediatric patients. However, for most 
applications,  they  have  not  been  able  to  provide 
adequate strength [15, 42, 43].

As  shown  in  detail  in  this  chapter,  laser-
assisted tissue bonding can transcend the limita-
tions  of  conventional  methods  in  many  aspects. 
Their  potential  advantages  over  conventional 
methods  include  increased  immediate  wound 
strength, fluid-tight closure, decreased operative 
repair time, reduced probability of infection and 
bleeding,  and 
results. 
However,  there  have  been  several  obstacles 
which  prevented  physicians  from  using  laser 
welding clinically. These included collateral ther-
mal  injuries,  inconsistency  of  the  results,  and  a 
lack of understanding of the exact mechanism by 
which laser irradiation induces tissue bonding. In 

improved  cosmetic 

E. Azimi et al.



Table 19.2  Advantages and disadvantages of different methods of wound closure

345

Suture

Staple

Adhesive

Laser

Advantage
Reliable
Flexible
Inexpensive
Available

Reliable
Available
Relatively quick
Not operator dependant

Immediate watertight closure
Painless
No trauma to tissue
“No needle” procedure
Less risk of infection
No need for removal
Fast
Immediate watertight closure
Better scar
“No needle” procedure
Less risk of infection
No need for removal
Fast
Dynamic effects (may increase growth 
factors)

Disadvantage
Cause trauma to the tissue
Time consuming
Operator dependant
Introduce foreign body
No immediate watertight closure
Risk of needle-stick
Risk of infection (due to lack of sealing)
Need suture removal
Cause trauma to the tissue
Inflexible (predetermined size)
Introduce foreign body
No immediate watertight closure
Risk of needle-stick
Risk of infection (due to lack of sealing)
Need staple removal
Expensive (controversial)
Does not provide hemostasis
Introduce foreign body
(Possible) need for subcutaneous sutures
Risk of tissue reactivity
Not flexible (comparing to sutures)

Expensive
Not readily available
Foreign body (Soldering, dye-enhanced)
Risk of dehiscence
Complicated (many parameters to consider)
Risk of thermal damage
Inconsistent results

addition, there are many parameters that need to 
be  optimized  in  the  welding  process.  These 
parameters  include  wavelength,  fluence,  pulse 
duration,  repetition  rate,  irradiation  time,  spot 
size, and solder selection. Indeed, the parameter 
window  for  optimum  tissue  bonding  is  very 
small. All parameters should be chosen appropri-
ately to provide enough heat for denaturation and 
crosslinking  of  collagen  fibers,  but  not  to  the 
level of tissue necrosis and sloughing of wound 
edges.  What  makes  the  use  of  laser  even  more 
complicated  is  the  fact  that  energy  levels  and 
exposure times that may work very well with cer-
tain  tissues  may  not  be  the  best  for  other  situa-
tions [15, 19]. As we discuss later in this chapter, 
several thermal feedback systems have been sug-
gested to overcome the above limitations.

 Mechanism of Laser-Assisted Wound 
Bonding

The  exact  mechanism  involved  in  laser-assisted 
wound  closure  is  not  completely  understood. 
Nonetheless, what is commonly believed is that 
tissue bonding occurs mainly due to the thermal 
effect of laser. The heat produced by laser energy 
in the tissue causes collagen fibers to loose their 
triple  helix  structure  and  become  fused,  inter-
twined, swollen, and dissolved. This generates a 
coagulum that serves both as a coating for sealing 
the wound and as a sophisticated scaffold for re-
colonization of cells, as in the case of re-epitheli-
alization  [26,  44,  45].  Other  theories  have  been 
postulated, as to say Helmsworth and colleagues 
believe that welding effect is the result of reorga-

19 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation



346

nization  of  intramolecular  disulfide  bonds  of 
laminin,  type  IV  collagen,  and  entactin  rather 
than  covalent  bonds  of  type  I  collagen  [46]. 
Despite the controversies, it seems that collagen 
plays  a  major  role  although  bonding  is  most 
likely dependant on extracellular proteins rather 
than collagen alone.

 Laser Systems and Parameters 
for Optimal Wound Bonding

In order to achieve a reliable tensile strength, it 
is  crucial  to  estimate  the  optimal  photonic 
energy that is to be delivered to tissue. In this 
respect,  major  determining  factors  are  laser 
wavelength, power, exposure time, and mode of 
operations  (continuous  wave  or  pulsed).  For 
this reason, various types of laser systems were 
investigated [15,  25]. CO2 was one of the first 
lasers employed for wound bonding because of 
its availability. However, it is a poor choice of 
wavelength and unlikely to yield a reliable high 
strength  bonds.  Due  to  the  high  absorption  at 
the  surface,  the  outermost  tissue  layers  are 
“overcooked,”  whereas  the  deeper  layers  are 
hardly  affected  at  all.  Therefore,  the  tempera-
ture in dermis is not high enough for collagen 
alteration and fusion. If the energy is increased 
to  achieve  the  suitable  temperature  in  dermis, 
the surface will burn. Increasing the pulse dura-
tion will also result in producing a large zone of 
thermal damage. Like CO2 laser, holmium:YAG 
(Ho:YAG)  has  a  high  absorption  by  water, 
hence  causes  thermal  injury  at  the  surface. To 
overcome this problem, these lasers need to be 
used  under  a  temperature-controlled  system. 
Near  Infrared  lasers  (650–900  nm)  such  as 
diode lasers are also becoming more popular in 
the  wavelengths 
welding 
between 780 and 850 nm have the advantage of 
less  absorption  by  water,  their  relatively  high 
absorption  by  melanin  prevents  their  deeper 
penetration  [47,  48].  Recently,  980-nm  diode 
was suggested as a better wavelength for wound 
closure due to its better absorption by water and 
less absorption by melanin comparing to other 
infrared  lasers  [48].  In  general,  although  near 
infrared lasers would allow deeper penetration 

studies.  While 

of the light, their absorption by  tissue compo-
nents  is  minimal;  hence,  they  may  need  to  be 
used  in  conjunction  with  exogenous  absorbers 
to induce welding. Due to its water and melanin 
absorption  coefficient  values  [47],  Nd:YAG 
(1064 nm) is another infrared laser used in tis-
sue  welding.  Like  many  of  the  near  infrared 
lasers, Nd:YAG laser needs to be used with sol-
ders  for  optimal  welding.  It  should  be  noted 
that  most  of  our  knowledge  about  lasers  used 
for wound bonding is on either in-vitro or ani-
mal  studies.  Therefore,  the  optimal  laser  sys-
tems and parameters for human wound closure 
yet to be determined.

 Lasers for Chronic Wounds

Laser  irradiation  was  introduced  as  a  noninva-
sive  therapeutic  modality  for  acceleration  of 
wound healing in the  late 1960s, and  has since 
been  used  for  the  treatment  of  a  variety  of 
chronic ulcers [49]. Different laser systems such 
as  helium-neon,  gallium-arsenide  (GaAs),  gal-
lium-aluminum-arsenide  (GaAlAs),  Nd:YAG, 
carbon  dioxide,  ruby,  krypton,  and  argon  dye 
lasers have been studied [50, 51]. Despite differ-
ences in wavelengths, the common characteristic 
of  all  these  lasers  is  that  they  all  employ  low 
energy for wound healing. This method of ther-
apy has been known as low-intensity, low-power, 
or low-level laser therapy. It has been suggested 
to increase the speed, quality and tensile strength 
of  tissue  repair,  resolve  inflammation  and  pro-
vide  pain  relief.  The  use  of  low  intensity  laser 
therapy  is  not  limited  to  wound  healing;  and  it 
has  been  used  in  odontological,  rehabilitative, 
and other medical specialties. The basic princi-
ple  of  laser  therapy  is  that  low  intensity  laser 
radiation  has  the  capability  to  alter  cellular 
behavior  in  the  absence  of  significant  heating. 
Previous  works  have  been  focused  on  three 
areas: in-vitro studies on molecular and cellular 
function,  animal  studies,  and  human  trials. 
Unfortunately,  the  clinical  data  is  mostly  anec-
dotal, poorly controlled, and more variable than 
might be desired. The in-vitro and animal studies 
are less arguable, and provide most of the scien-
tific rationale of laser therapy.

E. Azimi et al.



Table 19.3  Commonly used lasers for different types of 
chronic ulcers

Type of 
chronic 
ulcer
Venous

Pressure

Diabetic

Laser type and 
wavelength
810 nm 
GaA1As
660–950 nm 
GaA1As
904 nm GaAs
632.8 nm 
HeNe
810 nm diode
904 nm GaAs
830 nm diode
670 nm diode

632.8 nm 
HeNe

904 nm GaAs
830 nm diode

Energy (J/
cm2)
4.0

Resulta
Not effective

12.0

Effective

1.0
4.0

Effective
Effective

Effective
Effective
Effective

4.0
1.0
5.0
18 and 36 Not effective 
with 36 J/cm2
Effective with 
all except 
16 J/cm2

1.0, 4.0, 
4.8, 5.0, 
10.0, and 
16.0
1.0
5.0

Effective
Effective

aThe results given are based on authors’ conclusion. Not 
all the studies are well controlled randomized trials

Lasers have been used for healing of a variety 
of  chronic  wounds  such  as  pressure  ulcers, 
venous  ulcers,  and  diabetic  ulcers  [Table  19.3]. 
The first implication of lasers for pressure ulcers 
was  to  use  them  as  a  surgical  tool  for  debride-
ment. Controlled trials on CO2 laser versus con-
ventional debridement showed less bleeding, less 
infection, and shorter hospital stay with the use 
of CO2 laser [52, 53]. Later, low intensity lasers 
such as diode and GaAs were attempted. While 
some  reports  found  impressive  wound  healing 
outcomes,  some  others  showed  no  advantages 
[54–56]. There is insufficient evidence to suggest 
a  benefit  of  treating  venous  ulcers  with  low-
intensity laser therapy. Most of the data are anec-
dotal,  and  there  is  only  one  small  randomized 
controlled trial suggesting the therapeutic benefit 
of  laser  therapy  for  venous  ulcers  [57].  Low 
intensity laser therapy has been shown by various 
studies to be effective in the treatment of diabetic 
wound  healing  [58].  Some  of  the  suggested 
advantages  of  this  method  are  increased  micro-
circulation, increased speed of healing, improved 
wound  epithelialization,  increased  granulation 
tissue formation, and increased collagen deposi-
tion [59–61]. However, some authors emphasize 

347

that depending on the applied dose, wavelength, 
irradiation  time,  and  also  the  conditions  of  the 
treated tissue, different positive and negative bio-
logical answers can be achieved.

 Mechanism of Laser-Assisted 
Wound Healing

therapy 

The  exact  mechanism  of  action  of  low  intensity 
laser 
is  not  completely  understood. 
Currently there is no accepted theory to explain the 
mechanism of low-intensity lasers, and this lack of 
knowledge complicates the evaluation of conflict-
ing  reports  in  the  literature. Another  limitation  is 
the lack of ideal models of chronic wounds. Most 
of  the  studies  have  been  conducted  on  surgically 
excised skin. These wound models excluded com-
mon  problems  associated  with  delayed  healing, 
such  as  ischemia,  infection,  and  necrotic  debris. 
What makes the data even more confusing is that a 
variety of laser parameters such as wavelength, flu-
ence, and time of treatment onset can influence the 
biologic effects of low intensity lasers.

The suggested mechanisms at molecular level 
are  stimulation  of  Ca  influx  and  mitosis  rate, 
increased  expression  of  Heat-Shock-Proteins 
(HSP70  is  overexpressed  in  the  laser-induced 
thermal  damage  zone  and  HSP47  is  expressed 
during the recovery phase [62]), increased expres-
sion of growth factors such as TGF-β, alteration 
of mitochondrial activity and increased ATP syn-
thesis, augmented formation of mRNA and pro-
tein secretion. On the cellular level laser-induced 
changes are enhancement of fibroblast and kerati-
nocyte proliferation and migration, angiogenesis, 
improvement of phagocytosis, and increased rate 
of  transformation  of  fibroblasts  into  myofibro-
blasts  (Fig.  19.2)  [62–70].  Some  of  the  animal 
studies  on  laser-assisted  wound  healing  are  in 
accordance  of  molecular  and  cellular  studies, 
showing 
period, 
increased  collagen  and  granulation  tissue  in  the 
wound bed, increased tensile strength, and faster 
epithelialization [55, 71, 72]. However, repeated 
experiments  on  many  of  the  above  in-vitro  and 
animal models have failed to verify these benefits. 
These conflicting reports may partly be explained 
by considering discordance among the laser types 

inflammatory 

decreased 

19 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation



348

Tissue injury

Blood extravasation

PDGF
EGF
TGF-β
IGF-1
Serotonin
Fibrinogen
ADP
TXA2

Phagocytose bacteria
and matrix proteins

PDGF
FGF
TGF-β
TGF-α
VEGF

Platelet

Neutrophil

Macrophage

Epithelial cell

Fibroblast

Inflammatory phase

Laser

Angiogenesis

IL-1
TGF-β

Activin
TGF-α

IL-6
PDGF
GM-CSF

KGF
HB-EGF

Migration and proliferation

Migration and proliferation

Proliferative phase

Collagenase,
hyaluronidase

Collagen III degradation

0

Minutes to hours

Day 1

Day 7

Collagen remodeling

Collagen I synthesis

Remodeling phase

Day 14

Months

Fig.  19.2  The  molecular  and  cellular  effects  of  low 
intensity lasers on chronic wounds: Lasers mainly affect 
inflammatory and proliferative phases of wound healing. 
At  cellular  level,  lasers  improve  phagocytosis,  enhance 
angiogenesis, and increase proliferation of fibroblasts and 

keratinocytes.  At  molecular  level,  they  increase  FGF, 
TGF-β,  VEGF,  IL-6,  and  PDGF.  IL  interleukin,  FGF 
fibroblast  growth  factor,  VEGF  vascular  endothelial 
growth factor, PDGF platelet-derived growth factor, TGF-
β transforming growth factor-beta

used,  the  parameters  selected,  and  the  wound 
models chosen. In summary, to better understand 
the  role  of  low  intensity  lasers  in  healing  of 
chronic wounds, well-controlled studies that cor-
relate cellular effects [55] and biologic processes 
are needed. In the absence of such studies, the lit-
erature does not appear to support widespread use 
of lasers in wound healing at this time.

References

 1.  Sen  CK,  Gordillo  GM,  Roy  S,  Kirsner  R,  Lambert 
L, Hunt TK, et al. Human skin wounds: a major and 
snowballing threat to public health and the economy. 
Wound Repair Regen. 2009;17(6):763–71.

 2.  Harding  KG,  Morris  HL,  Patel  GK.  Science,  medi-
cine  and  the  future:  healing  chronic  wounds.  BMJ. 
2002;324(7330):160–3.

 3.  Frykberg  RG,  Zgonis  T, Armstrong  DG,  Driver VR, 
Giurini JM, Kravitz SR, et al. Diabetic foot disorders. 

A  clinical  practice  guideline  (2006  revision).  J  Foot 
Ankle Surg. 2006;45(5 Suppl):S1–66.

  4.  de  Araujo  T,  Valencia  I,  Federman  DG,  Kirsner 
RS.  Managing  the  patient  with  venous  ulcers.  Ann 
Intern Med. 2003;138(4):326–34.

  5.  Bolognia  J,  Jorizzo  JL,  Rapini  RP.  Dermatology. 

London: Mosby; 2003.

  6.  Clark  RA,  Ghosh  K,  Tonnesen  MG.  Tissue  engi-
neering  for  cutaneous  wounds.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
2007;127(5):1018–29.

  7.  Werner S, Krieg T, Smola H. Keratinocyte-fibroblast 
interactions  in  wound  healing.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
2007;127(5):998–1008.

  8.  Mast  BA,  Schultz  GS.  Interactions  of  cytokines, 
growth  factors,  and  proteases  in  acute  and  chronic 
wounds. Wound Repair Regen. 1996;4(4):411–20.
  9.  Booth BA, Polak KL, Uitto J. Collagen biosynthesis by 
human skin fibroblasts. I. Optimization of the culture 
conditions for synthesis of type I and type III procol-
lagens. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1980;607(1):145–60.

 10.  Lazarus GS, Cooper DM, Knighton DR, Margolis DJ, 
Pecoraro  RE,  Rodeheaver  G,  et  al.  Definitions  and 
guidelines  for  assessment  of  wounds  and  evaluation 
of healing. Arch Dermatol. 1994;130(4):489–93.

E. Azimi et al.



 11.  Steed DL, Hill DP, Woodske ME, Payne WG, Robson 
MC.  Wound-healing  trajectories  as  outcome  mea-
sures  of  venous  stasis  ulcer  treatment.  Int Wound  J. 
2006;3(1):40–7.

 12.  Williams JZ, Barbul A. Nutrition and wound healing. 

Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83(3):571–96.

 13.  Crowe MJ, Doetschman T, Greenhalgh DG. Delayed 
wound  healing  in  immunodeficient  TGF-beta  1 
knockout mice. J Invest Dermatol. 2000;115(1):3–11.
 14.  Mester E, Spiry T, Szende B, Tota JG. Effect of laser 
rays on wound healing. Am J Surg. 1971;122(4):532–5.
 15.  Bass LS, Treat MR. Laser tissue welding: a compre-
hensive review of current and future clinical applica-
tions. Lasers Surg Med. 1995;17(4):315–49.

 16.  Fried  NM, Walsh  JT  Jr.  Laser  skin  welding:  in  vivo 
tensile  strength  and  wound  healing  results.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2000;27(1):55–65.

 17.  Kirsch AJ, Cooper CS, Gatti J, Scherz HC, Canning 
DA,  Zderic  SA,  et  al.  Laser  tissue  soldering  for 
 hypospadias repair: results of a controlled prospective 
clinical trial. J Urol. 2001;165(2):574–7.

 18.  Kaviani A,  Djavid  GE, Ataie-Fashtami  L,  Fateh  M, 
Ghodsi  M,  Salami  M,  et  al.  A  randomized  clinical 
trial on the effect of low-level laser therapy on chronic 
diabetic  foot  wound  healing:  a  preliminary  report. 
Photomed Laser Surg. 2011;29(2):109–14.

 19.  Simhon D, Halpern M, Brosh T, Vasilyev T, Ravid A, 
Tennenbaum T, et al. Immediate tight sealing of skin 
incisions  using  an  innovative  temperature-controlled 
laser soldering device: in vivo study in porcine skin. 
Ann Surg. 2007;245(2):206–13.

 20.  Sigel B, Acevedo FJ. Vein anastomosis by electroco-

aptive union. Surg Forum. 1962;13:233–5.

 21.  Garden JM, Robinson JK, Taute PM, Lautenschlager 
EP,  Leibovich  SJ,  Hartz  RS.  The  low-output  carbon 
dioxide  laser  for  cutaneous  wound  closure  of  scal-
pel incisions: comparative tensile strength studies of 
the laser to the suture and staple for wound closure. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1986;6(1):67–71.

 22. Abergel RP, Lyons RF, White RA, Lask G, Matsuoka 
LY, Dwyer RM, et al. Skin closure by Nd:YAG laser 
welding. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;14(5 Pt 1):810–4.
 23.  Wang  S,  Grubbs  PE  Jr,  Basu  S,  Robertazzi  RR, 
Thomsen S, Rose DM, et al. Effect of blood bonding 
on  bursting  strength  of  laser-assisted  microvascular 
anastomoses. Microsurgery. 1988;9(1):10–3.
 24.  McKennan  KX.  “Tissue  welding”  with 

the 
argon  laser  in  middle  ear  surgery.  Laryngoscope. 
1990;100(11):1143–5.

 25.  Talmor  M,  Bleustein  CB,  Poppas  DP.  Laser  tissue 
welding:  a  biotechnological  advance  for  the  future. 
Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2001;3(3):207–13.

 26.  Tang 

J,  Godlewski  G,  Rouy  S,  Delacretaz 
G.  Morphologic  changes  in  collagen  fibers  after 
830  nm  diode  laser  welding.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1997;21(5):438–43.

 27.  Jain  KK,  Gorisch  W.  Repair  of  small  blood  vessels 
with the neodymium-YAG laser: a preliminary report. 
Surgery. 1979;85(6):684–8.

 28.  Capon A, Mordon S. Can thermal lasers promote skin 
wound healing? Am J Clin Dermatol. 2003;4(1):1–12.

349

 29.  Abergel  RP,  Lyons  R,  Dwyer  R,  White  RR,  Uitto 
J.  Use  of  lasers  for  closure  of  cutaneous  wounds: 
experience  with  Nd:YAG,  argon  and  CO2  lasers.  J 
Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1986;12(11):1181–5.

 30.  Massicotte  JM,  Stewart  RB,  Poppas  DP.  Effects  of 
endogenous  absorption  in  human  albumin  solder 
for  acute  laser  wound  closure.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1998;23(1):18–24.

 31.  Lauto A. Repair strength dependence on solder pro-
tein  concentration:  a  study  in  laser  tissue-welding. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1998;22(2):120–5.

 32.  Levanon  D,  Katzir  A,  Ravid  A.  A  scanning  elec-
tron  microscopy  study  of  CO2  laser-albumin  sol-
dering  in  the  rabbit  model.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2004;22(6):461–9.

 33.  Wider TM, Libutti SK, Greenwald DP, Oz MC, Yager 
JS, Treat MR, et al. Skin closure with dye-enhanced 
laser  welding  and  fibrinogen.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1991;88(6):1018–25.

 34.  Lauto A, Foster LJ, Ferris L, Avolio A, Zwaneveld N, 
Poole-Warren  LA.  Albumin-genipin  solder  for  laser 
tissue repair. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;35(2):140–5.
 35.  Birch  JF,  Mandley  DJ,  Williams  SL,  Worrall  DR, 
Trotter  PJ,  Wilkinson  F,  et  al.  Methylene  blue 
based  protein  solder  for  vascular  anastomoses:  an 
in  vitro  burst  pressure  study.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2000;26(3):323–9.

 36.  Lauto A, Kerman I, Ohebshalon M, Felsen D, Poppas 
DP.  Two-layer  film  as  a  laser  soldering  biomaterial. 
Lasers Surg Med. 1999;25(3):250–6.

 37.  DeCoste SD, Farinelli W, Flotte T, Anderson RR. Dye-
enhanced laser welding for skin closure. Lasers Surg 
Med. 1992;12(1):25–32.

 38.  Small W IV, Heredia NJ, Maitland DJ, Da Silva LB, 
Matthews  DL.  Dye-enhanced  protein  solders  and 
patches in laser-assisted tissue welding. J Clin Laser 
Med Surg. 1997;15(5):205–8.

 39.  Gobin  AM,  O’Neal  DP,  Watkins  DM,  Halas  NJ, 
Drezek RA, West JL. Near infrared laser-tissue weld-
ing using nanoshells as an exogenous absorber. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2005;37(2):123–9.

 40.  Poppas DP, Massicotte JM, Stewart RB, Roberts AB, 
Atala A, Retik AB, et al. Human albumin solder sup-
plemented  with  TGF-beta  1  accelerates  healing  fol-
lowing laser welded wound closure. Lasers Surg Med. 
1996;19(3):360–8.

 41.  Seki  S.  Techniques  for  better  suturing.  Br  J  Surg. 

1988;75(12):1181–4.

 42.  Gennari  R,  Rotmensz  N,  Ballardini  B,  Scevola  S, 
Perego E, Zanini V, et al. A prospective, randomized, 
controlled clinical trial of tissue adhesive (2-octylcya-
noacrylate)  versus  standard  wound  closure  in  breast 
surgery. Surgery. 2004;136(3):593–9.

 43.  Ong CC, Jacobsen AS, Joseph VT. Comparing wound 
closure  using  tissue  glue  versus  subcuticular  suture 
for  pediatric  surgical  incisions:  a  prospective,  ran-
domised trial. Pediatr Surg Int. 2002;18(5–6):553–5.
 44.  Schober  R,  Ulrich  F,  Sander  T,  Durselen  H,  Hessel 
S.  Laser-induced  alteration  of  collagen  substruc-
ture  allows  microsurgical  tissue  welding.  Science. 
1986;232(4756):1421–2.

19 Laser and Light for Wound Healing Stimulation



350

 45.  Simhon D, Brosh T, Halpern M, Ravid A, Vasilyev T, 
Kariv N, et al. Closure of skin incisions in rabbits by 
laser soldering: I: Wound healing pattern. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2004;35(1):1–11.

 46.  Helmsworth TF, Wright CB, Scheffter SM, Schlemm 
DJ,  Keller  SJ.  Molecular  surgery  of  the  basement 
membrane  by  the  argon  laser.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1990;10(6):576–83.

 47.  Peavy  GM.  Lasers  and  laser-tissue  interaction.  Vet 
Clin  North Am  Small Anim  Pract.  2002;32(3):517–
34, v–vi.

 48.  Gulsoy  M,  Dereli  Z,  Tabakoglu  HO,  Bozkulak 
O.  Closure  of  skin  incisions  by  980-nm  diode  laser 
welding. Lasers Med Sci. 2006;21(1):5–10.

 49.  Mester  E,  Mester  AF,  Mester  A.  The  biomedi-
cal  effects  of  laser  application.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1985;5(1):31–9.

 50.  Wheeland  RG.  Lasers  for  the  stimulation  or  inhi-
bition  of  wound  healing.  J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol. 
1993;19(8):747–52.

 51.  Kawalec  JS,  Hetherington  VJ,  Pfennigwerth  TC, 
Dockery  DS,  Dolce  M.  Effect  of  a  diode  laser  on 
wound  healing  by  using  diabetic  and  nondiabetic 
mice. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2004;43(4):214–20.

 52.  Dixon  JA.  Current  laser  applications  in  general  sur-

gery. Ann Surg. 1988;207(4):355–72.

 53.  Juri H, Palma JA. CO2 laser in decubitus ulcers: a com-
parative study. Lasers Surg Med. 1987;7(4):296–9.
 54.  Schindl  A,  Schindl  M,  Schindl  L.  Successful  treat-
ment of a persistent radiation ulcer by low power laser 
therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;37(4):646–8.
 55.  Allendorf JD, Bessler M, Huang J, Kayton ML, Laird 
D, Nowygrod R, et al. Helium-neon laser irradiation 
at  fluences  of  1,  2,  and  4  J/cm2  failed  to  acceler-
ate  wound  healing  as  assessed  by  both  wound  con-
tracture  rate  and  tensile  strength.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1997;20(3):340–5.

 56.  Basford  JR.  Low-energy  laser  therapy:  controver-
sies  and  new  research  findings.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1989;9(1):1–5.

 57.  Flemming KA, Cullum NA, Nelson EA. A systematic 
review of laser therapy for venous leg ulcers. J Wound 
Care. 1999;8(3):111–4.

 58.  Beckmann  KH,  Meyer-Hamme  G,  Schroder  S.  Low 
level  laser  therapy  for  the  treatment  of  diabetic  foot 
ulcers:  a  critical  survey.  Evid  Based  Complement 
Alternat Med. 2014;2014:626127.

 59.  Schindl  A,  Heinze  G,  Schindl  M,  Pernerstorfer-
Schon H, Schindl L. Systemic effects of low-intensity 
laser  irradiation  on  skin  microcirculation  in  patients 
with  diabetic  microangiopathy.  Microvasc  Res. 
2002;64(2):240–6.

 60.  Reddy  GK,  Stehno-Bittel  L,  Enwemeka  CS.  Laser 
photostimulation  accelerates  wound  healing  in  dia-
betic rats. Wound Repair Regen. 2001;9(3):248–55.
 61.  Yu  W,  Naim  JO,  Lanzafame  RJ.  Effects  of  photo-
stimulation on wound healing in diabetic mice. Lasers 
Surg Med. 1997;20(1):56–63.

 62.  Sajjadi  AY,  Mitra  K,  Grace  M.  Expression  of  heat 
shock proteins 70 and 47 in tissues following short-
pulse laser irradiation: assessment of thermal damage 
and healing. Med Eng Phys. 2013;35(10):1406–14.
 63.  Abergel  RP,  Meeker  CA,  Lam  TS,  Dwyer  RM, 
Lesavoy  MA,  Uitto  J.  Control  of  connective  tissue 
metabolism by lasers: recent developments and future 
prospects. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1984;11(6):1142–50.
 64.  Pourreau-Schneider  N,  Ahmed  A,  Soudry  M, 
Jacquemier  J,  Kopp  F,  Franquin  JC,  et  al.  Helium-
neon laser treatment transforms fibroblasts into myo-
fibroblasts. Am J Pathol. 1990;137(1):171–8.

 65. Posten W, Wrone DA, Dover JS, Arndt KA, Silapunt 
S,  Alam  M.  Low-level  laser  therapy  for  wound 
healing:  mechanism  and  efficacy.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2005;31(3):334–40.

 66.  Pereira  AN,  Eduardo  Cde  P,  Matson  E,  Marques 
MM.  Effect  of  low-power  laser  irradiation  on  cell 
growth  and  procollagen  synthesis  of  cultured  fibro-
blasts. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;31(4):263–7.

 67.  Medrado  AR,  Pugliese  LS,  Reis  SR,  Andrade 
ZA.  Influence  of  low  level  laser  therapy  on  wound 
healing and its biological action upon myofibroblasts. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32(3):239–44.

 68.  Schindl  A,  Merwald  H,  Schindl  L,  Kaun  C,  Wojta 
J.  Direct  stimulatory  effect  of  low-intensity  670  nm 
laser irradiation on human endothelial cell prolifera-
tion. Br J Dermatol. 2003;148(2):334–6.

 69.  Ogita  M,  Tsuchida  S,  Aoki  A,  Satoh  M,  Kado  S, 
Sawabe  M,  et  al.  Increased  cell  proliferation  and 
differential  protein  expression  induced  by  low-
level  Er:YAG  laser  irradiation  in  human  gingival 
fibroblasts:  proteomic  analysis.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2015;30(7):1855–66.

 70.  Dungel P, Hartinger J, Chaudary S, Slezak P, Hofmann 
A, Hausner T, et al. Low level light therapy by LED 
of  different  wavelength  induces  angiogenesis  and 
improves ischemic wound healing. Lasers Surg Med. 
2014;46(10):773–80.

 71. Lyons RF, Abergel RP, White RA, Dwyer RM, Castel 
JC, Uitto J. Biostimulation of wound healing in vivo by 
a helium-neon laser. Ann Plast Surg. 1987;18(1):47–50.
 72.  Stadler I, Lanzafame RJ, Evans R, Narayan V, Dailey 
B, Buehner N, et al. 830-nm irradiation increases the 
wound  tensile  strength  in  a  diabetic  murine  model. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28(3):220–6.

E. Azimi et al.



Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair 
Transplantation

20

Nicole E. Rogers, Marc R. Avram, 
Isabella Camacho, and Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi

Abstract
Results  from  hair  transplantation  are  consis-
tently natural.

•  Results  from  hair  transplantation  are  consis-

tently natural

•  Demand  for  the  procedure  has  increased 

Demand  for  the  procedure  has  increased 

significantly

significantly.

Lasers have been implemented in the field 
of hair transplantation to create recipient sites 
and enhance hair growth.

•  Lasers have been implemented in the field of 
hair  transplantation  to  create  recipient  sites 
and enhance hair growth

Keywords
Hair growth · Hair transplantation · Lasers

 Introduction

Lasers have been an exciting new technology in 
the  field  of  hair  loss  and  hair  transplantation. 
Since  the  theory  of  selective  photothermolysis 
was introduced in 1983 by Anderson and Parrish 
[1],  there  has  been  a  virtual  explosion  of  laser 
applications, ranging from hair removal to facial 
rejuvenation to treatment of unwanted blood ves-
sels. One area that is still early in its development 
is  lasers  for  hair  loss  and  hair  transplantation. 
This  is  especially  exciting  because  a  relatively 
limited  number  of  treatment  options  exist  for 
treating  hair  loss.  FDA-approved  medical  treat-
ments for hair loss include topical minoxidil and 
oral  finasteride.  The  minoxidil  5%  foam  was 
recently approved for once daily use in women. 
Some women can benefit from birth control pills, 
oral  spironolactone  or  finasteride  (off-label  in 
pre-menopausal  women  due 
risks  of 
teratogenicity).

to 

The  field  of  hair  transplantation  has  under-
gone  a  significant  transformation  during  the 

N. E. Rogers (*) 
Hair Restoration of the South, Metairie, LA, USA 

M. R. Avram 
Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA 

I. Camacho 
School of Medicine, Georgetown University, 
Washington, DC, USA 

A. Rajabi-Estarabadi 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,  
Miami, FL, USA

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_20

351





352

Fig. 20.1  Patient 1: before hair transplantation

Fig. 20.3  Patient 2: before hair transplantation

Fig. 20.4  Patient 2: after 900 grafts

were treated in 2014 worldwide for hair resto-
ration.  In  the  United  States,  112,409  surgical 
hair  restoration  procedures  were  performed  in 
2014, compared to 88,304 surgical hair restora-
tion procedures performed in 2012, showing a 
27% increase [2].

This chapter will focus on the two major laser 
applications affecting the hair: (1) laser-assisted 
creation of recipient sites in hair transplantation, 
and  (2)  the  use  of  low-level-laser  therapy  to 
increase  hair  growth.  Both  applications  have 
faced  considerable  controversy  within  the  laser 
and  hair  transplant  community.  We  attempt  to 
provide  a  balanced  perspective  of  each  so  that 
their  roles  may  be  fairly  assessed  and  possibly 
even implemented.

Fig. 20.2  Patient 1: after 1000 grafts

last 10–15 years. With the advent of follicular 
unit transplantation, patients achieve far better 
results than they could with the original unnatu-
ral  punch  grafts  (Figs.  20.1,  20.2,  20.3  and 
20.4). This cosmetic revolution has resulted in 
an  ever- increasing  demand  for  the  procedure. 
According to the International Society of Hair 
Restoration  Surgery,  practice  census  results 
from 2015 estimated that about 358,109 surgi-
cal  patients  and  697,372  non- surgical  patients 

N. E. Rogers et al.



 Hair Transplantation

In addition to medical therapy, hair transplanta-
tion can provide even more dramatic and perma-
nent results. The field of hair transplantation has 
evolved considerably over the last few decades as 
large  ‘pluggy’  punch  grafts  have  been  replaced 
with tiny 1–4 hair follicular unit grafts. Nowadays 
patients  can  expect  very  natural-looking  results 
(Fig.  20.5a,  b).  Hairs  are  harvested  from  the 
occipital  donor  area  either  as  an  elliptical  strip, 
and  then  separated  into  individual  grafts  using 
magnification,  or  they  are  manually  or  roboti-
cally  harvested  individually  using  0.8–1  mm 
punches  (follicular  unit  extraction,  Fig.  20.6). 
Then,  the  grafts  are  placed  back  into  pinpoint 
slits created in the areas of thinning. The body’s 
natural clotting factors act as a glue to hold the 
grafts in place. Most hair transplant doctors use 
steel  blades  or  needles  to  create  recipient  sites. 

a

b

Fig. 20.5  (a) Male patient before hair transplant surgery. 
(b)  Same  patient  9  months  after  hair  surgery  (1050  1–4 
hair grafts)

353

Fig.  20.6  Harvesting  of  single  follicular  units  using 
manual extraction process

Over a week’s time small scabs form around the 
grafts, and after 2–6 weeks the grafts will enter a 
resting  telogen  phase  and  shed.  By  6–9  months 
the hairs start growing in and by 12–18 months, 
patients can expect their full results.

In using needles to create recipient sites, phy-
sicians  face  several  challenges.  The  foremost 
among these is hemostasis. As each new recipient 
site  is  created,  bleeding  makes  graft  placement 
difficult and time-consuming. Heavy drinkers or 
patients  on  aspirin  or  blood-thinning  supple-
ments  may  present  even  more  of  a  challenge. 
Grafts  may  pop  out  and  require  replacement. 
This challenge prevents many interested derma-
tologic surgeons from entering the field.

 Lasers in Hair Transplantation

•  Recipient  sites  for  hair  transplantation  are 

usually made with needles

•  Difficulties with hemostasis called for the use 

of CO2 lasers for recipient site creation

•  In  1996,  the  FDA  approved  lasers  for  use  in 

hair transplantation

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



354

The  first  application  of  lasers  in  hair  trans-
plant  surgery  was  for  the  creation  of  recipient 
sites in areas of thinning hair. CO2 lasers of the 
10,600 nm wavelength were developed for abla-
tive resurfacing of the face and skin. They were 
used to create incisions several millimeters deep 
where the hair grafts could be placed. The goal 
was to create recipient sites with better hemosta-
sis  because  the  CO2  laser  would  stop  bleeding 
instantly  [3].  Also  because  the  alopecic  skin 
would be vaporized, there would be less risk of 
graft compression and greater density (hairs per 
square cm) could be achieved [4].

Carbon  dioxide  lasers  were  introduced  in  the 
mid-1960s. They were popularized in the 1970s in 
dermatologic  surgery  because  of  their  ability  to 
vaporize tissue and seal blood vessels. The prob-
lem with continuous wave carbon dioxide lasers 
was  the  peripheral  non-specific  spread  of  heat, 
resulting in widespread scarring of the skin. In the 
1990s, the concept of selective photothermolysis 
was applied to carbon dioxide lasers. By limiting 
the exposure time of the laser to less than one-half 
of the thermal relaxation time of the surrounding 
tissue, there was a significant reduction in lateral 
thermal  damage.  This  allowed  CO2  lasers  to 
vaporize tissue with excellent hemostasis and no 
scarring.  Pulsed  CO2  lasers  were  introduced  to 
treat dermatoheliosis and acne scarring with dra-
matic results.

The  problems  of  bleeding  and  popping  of 
grafts at recipient sites remained. The investiga-
tion of handpieces for creating recipient sites in 
pulsed CO2 lasers was begun in the mid-1990s to 
over come this problem. High energy pulsed CO2 
lasers would vaporize tissue and seal dermal ves-
sels with excellent hemostasis.

Initial  studies  found  that  average  graft  hair 
counts were greater in laser-created sites in four 
of the ten patients, and looked more natural [3]. 
They also found that there was less bleeding in 
the  laser-created  sites,  and  that  the  associated 
grafts required less handling. Despite extensive 
research  by  highly  experienced  hair  transplant 
surgeons,  the  long-term  implementation  of 
lasers  for  hair  transplant  surgery  was  limited. 
This  was  because  in  some  cases  the  complete 

sealing  off  of  blood  led  to  limited  graft  ‘take’ 
and frequent graft fallout [5]. By adjusting the 
laser’s  energy  down  slightly,  there  was  an 
increase  in  “biological  glue”  that  kept  future 
grafts from falling out.

Subsequent  studies  confirmed  the  ability  to 
make  recipient  sites  with  excellent  hemostasis 
and  growth  of  transplanted  hair  (Figs.  20.7  and 
20.8) [5, 6]. These studies led to FDA approval of 
lasers for hair transplantation in 1996 [7–9]. FDA 
approval resulted in a worldwide interest and use 
of lasers to create recipient sites. Yet, today very 
few  hair  surgeons  use  laser  to  make  recipient 
sites. What happened?

Fig. 20.7  Laser recipient sites versus steel created sites

Fig. 20.8  Physician making CO2 laser assisted recipient 
sites

N. E. Rogers et al.



•  Lasers  have 
transplantation

a  minor 

role 

in  hair 

•  Steel needles can provide closer site creation, 
with  less  lateral  damage,  resulting  in  greater 
density  and  less  post-surgical  hemorrhagic 
crusting

Some  clinicians  and  investigators  reported 
superficial  de-epithelialization  surrounding  the 
sites.  This  led  to  greater  and  longer-lasting 
crusts post-operatively. Delayed hair growth of 
2–6  weeks  was  also  observed  [5].  The  chief 
obstacle over time was density. There was sig-
nificant  collateral  damage  to  the  surrounding 
tissues,  which  affected  the  growth  of  existing 
pigmented  terminal  hair  follicles.  Histologic 
studies of laser- created site showed a minimum 
of 20–50 μm of lateral thermal damage through 
the  dermis  (Fig.  20.9).  Although  lasers  were 
able to create excellent hemostasis and  growth 
of  transplanted  hair,  it  did  not  allow  for  close 
placement of recipient sites among existing hair 
follicles.  Nineteen  gauge  needles  could  more 
safely  create  closely  spaced  sites  than  pulsed 
CO2  lasers.  If  the  recipient  sites  were  created 
too  close  together,  poor  growth,  telogen  efflu-
vium,  or  complete  skin  necrosis  could  occur. 
Add to these problems the expense of the laser 
purchase  and  maintenance,  the  risk  of  damage 
to  water-containing  organs  such  as  the  cornea, 
as well as the associated learning curve, and the 
technique  has  largely  fallen  out  of  favor 
[10–12].

355

To overcome the lateral tissue necrosis associ-
ated with CO2 lasers, clinicians have tried to use 
holmium:YAG  or  erbium:YAG  lasers  instead  of 
traditional CO2 lasers for recipient site creation. 
Histologic studies of the Ho:YAG (λ = 2120 nm) 
demonstrated no advantage over traditional CO2 
[4]. It created jagged, irregular-shaped channels 
with  even  larger  zones  of  thermal  injury.  The 
Er:YAG  (λ  =  2940  nm)  has  shown  promising 
results in creating recipient sites for both andro-
genetic  alopecia  [13]  and  cicatricial  alopecia 
[14].  Its  use  in  a  2-year  clinical  trial  produced 
greater than 95% yield of 1–4-hair follicular units 
with  no  reported  side  effects  [15].  However,  its 
use  has  been  limited  by  the  lack  of  hemostasis 
and the inability to create sites deep enough with 
single pulse (Fig. 20.10).

There have been newer studies showing the ben-
efits  of  using  ablative  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  frac-
tional  laser  therapy.  In  one  of  the  most  recent 
studies,  it  has  been  shown  that  combining  hair 
growth  factors  with  ablative  CO2  fractional  laser 
therapy  is  more  beneficial  than  using  hair  growth 
factor alone for male androgenetic alopecia (MAA). 
After six treatment sessions involving 27 patients in 
a randomized half-split study, 93% of patients in the 
combined group showed improvement compared to 
67%  of  patients  in  the  growth  factor  group. 
Discomfort due to treatment resolved in 2–3 days in 
all patients, with the most common side effect being 
post-treatment erythema [16]. Another study deter-
mined that ablative CO2 fractional lasers induce hair 

Fig. 20.9  Pathology showing CO2 laser assisted recipient 
sites for hair transplantation

Fig. 20.10  CO2 laser and Erbium laser

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



356

growth  by  the  activation  of  the Wnt10b/β-catenin 
pathway  in  vivo,  with  results  indicating  that  the 
10 mJ/spot and 300 spots/cm2 setting was the most 
effective dosage [17]. According to this study, after 
using  an  ablative  CO2  fractional  laser,  the  wound 
healing process results in progression into the ana-
gen phase of the hair follicle cycle, thus, increasing 
hair growth.

Using  lasers  for  hair  transplantation  can  be 
helpful  for  novices  to  the  field,  in  controlling 
bleeding and reducing time to place the grafts. 
However, it may take more time to create sites 
with  an  appropriate  angle  and  spacing. 
Recipient  sites  cannot  be  made  too  close 
together due to the dermal necrosis. If they are 
too  closely  made,  widespread  necrosis  of  the 
scalp  may  occur.  It  is  unclear  whether  the 
vaporization  of  tissue  by  laser  creates  enough 
density 
requirement. 
Ultimately,  one  must  consider  factors  like  the 
cost of the laser and whether this technique is 
superior to current standard of practice. It may 
be hard for an expensive, complex laser to beat 
the ease and economy of using needles or steel 
blades,  especially  when  bleeding  is  not  a  sig-
nificant problem for the experienced hair trans-
plant surgeon.

outweigh 

this 

to 

•  Formation of smoke plume containing possi-

bly infectious disease

•  Potential for igniting a fire with concomitant 

oxygen use with sedation

There are also risks inherent in the CO2 laser 
because  it  targets  water  as  its  primary  chromo-
phore. Laser operators must be aware of the pos-
sibility of damaging organs high in water content, 
such as the cornea. There is also the formation of 
a  smoke  plume,  which  could  contain  bacteria, 
viral DNA, or viable cells. The high voltage of a 
CO2 laser may pose an electrical hazard by ignit-
ing  tissue,  oxygen,  or  volatile  solvents  used  in 
hair products. As seen in (Table 20.1), there are 
as many advantages as there are disadvantages to 
using lasers for hair transplantation.

More recent methods include robotic technol-
ogy that is now being used to harvest individual 
follicular grafts from the back of the scalp, and 
this may soon be applied to the creation of recip-
ient sites as well [23]. Table 20.2 includes a list 
of  different  tools  that  presently  used  most  fre-
quently  for  the  creation  of  recipient  sites 
(Fig. 20.11).

Perhaps novel fractional ablative devices will 
be  able  to  create  recipient  sites  as  close  as  #19 
and #20 gauge needles without the increased risk 
of necrosis. Creating a fractional ablative hand-
piece with a scanner would allow recipient sites 
to  be  created  quicker,  with  better  hemostasis 
leading to reduced operating time for patient and 
physician.

•  CO2  ablative  lasers  have  FDA  approval  for 

hair transplantation.

•  Not used in hair transplants due to density.
•  If  laser  transplant  is  performed,  spacing  too 

close will result in telogen effluvium.

•  Fractional  ablative  lasers  may  allow  greater 

density in the future.

Risks Inherent in CO2 Laser Usage

•  Damage  to  water-containing  organs,  such  as 

the cornea

 Lasers in Hair Growth

•  LLLT  (Low  Level  Light  Therapy)  has  been 
further studied in randomized, controlled tri-
als showing beneficial results

•  Devices  are  sold  without  a  prescription, 

through direct-to-consumer marketing

The  application  of  lasers  for  hair  growth  is 
based on the rare observation of hair growth in 
patients after laser hair removal. This ‘paradoxi-
cal hypertrichosis’ has been reported following 
treatment  with  the  long-pulsed  Nd:Yag  laser 
(755  nm)  [24],  the  diode  laser  (810  nm)  [25], 
and  with  intense  pulsed  light  (650–1200  nm) 
[26–28]. Endre Mester, a Hungarian physician, 
was  the  first  to  observe  in  the  1960s  that  mice 
treated  with  lasers  designed  to  prevent  cancer 
actually regrew hair in half the time of mice not 
exposed to laser treatment [29]. He shaved off 
their  dorsal  hair  and  divided  the  mice  into 

N. E. Rogers et al.



357

Table 20.1  Pros and cons of lasers in hair transplantation

Pros of lasers in hair transplantation
     1. Improved hemostasis because blood vessels are sealed by laser
     2. Reduced time to plant grafts
     3. May be easier for beginner hair transplant doctors, as well as their assistants
     4. Nerve endings, like blood vessels, are sealed with theoretical reduction in pain [3]
     5. May achieve higher density because tissue is vaporized, not just pushed apart [4]
     6. Less graft compression, again because alopecic skin measuring 1–2 mm wide is vaporized [3]
     7. Less handling of the graft itself, because the laser-prepared sites are wider (1–2 mm) than scalpel created sites.
     8. Don’t have to constantly sharpen 1–2 mm trephines [3]
     9.  Less risk of cobblestoning (from graft elevation) or pitting (from graft depression) because there is a constant 

depth of laser-created site [3]
   10. Use of less epinephrine [10]
   11. Shorter operative time, which translates to less patient discomfort and less staff frustration [18]
   12. Lower risk of cyst formation as a result of tissue left behind [19]
Cons of lasers in hair transplantation
     1. Expense of laser, required office space, and maintenance [20, 21]
     2. May fray epithelial edges and cause superficial de-epithelialization [5]
     3. Greater postoperative crusting [4, 22]
     4. Delayed (2–6 weeks) regrowth of transplanted follicles [5]
     5. Risk of telogen effluvium from heat of laser—may thin sites with existing hair
     6. Increased risk of secondary infection [5]
     7. Risk of injury to adjacent hair follicles in recipient area [5]
     8. May achieve lower density because cannot place so close as to risk necrosis [20, 21]
     9. Longer operating time, because of difficulty creating site at the appropriate angle [5]
   10. Persistent erythema [22]
   11. Learning curve associated with using laser [5]
   12. Plume may contain noxious and carcinogenic chemicals

Table 20.2  Traditional tools for recipient site creation

Traditional needles: 17 g (4 hair FU’s), 18 g (3 hair 
FU’s), 19 g (2 hair FU’s) or 20 g (1 hair FU’s)
Chisel blades (custom cut)
Spear point blade
Minde blade
No-core needles

Fig. 20.11  Instruments presently used to create recipient 
sites

control and treatment groups, the latter receiv-
ing a low-powered ruby laser therapy (694 nm). 
He found no evidence of cancer in the mice, but 
did  observe  that  the  laser-treated  group  had 
faster hair regrowth. This was the origin of “bio-
stimulation”  using  “cold  laser”  or  “soft  laser” 
therapy  administered  at 
lower  powers  of 
1–500  mW.  Higher  powered  lasers,  emitting 
1–10  W,  are  used  to  clear  blood  vessels  or 
hyperpigmentation.

Several  other  parameters  are  involved  in 
administering  LLLT.  Wavelengths  of  600–
700 nm are used to treat superficial tissues, while 
780–950 nm wavelengths are used for deeper tis-
sues. There is a biphasic dose response curve, in 
which the central distribution, 700–770 nm is not 
considered to have as much activity. The dose of 
energy  is  comparable  to  regular  laser  use, 
between 1 and 20 J, but it is delivered in a much 
slower way (Power = J/s = watts).

Basic Science of LLLT

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



358

•  Stimulates the mitochondrial transport chain
•  Enhances ATP production
•  Stimulates wound healing
•  Reduces inflammation
•  Improves  neurologic  damage,  such  as  with 

stroke

•  Improves musculoskeletal and joint pain

The use of LLLT is based on several scientific 
papers showing that it can increase ATP levels in 
tissues by stimulating the mitochondrial transport 
system [30–32]. To fully understand this we must 
briefly  review  the  structure  and  mechanisms  of 
ATP synthesis in mitochondria. These intracellu-
lar  organelles  are  considered  to  be  the  power-
houses of the cell. They have an outer membrane 
and  an  inner  membrane,  which  has  numerous 
infoldings  or  cristae.  Between  these  two  mem-
branes  there  is  an  intramembranous  space.  The 
very  center  of  the  mitochondria  is  called  the 
matrix (Fig. 20.12).

The  respiratory  chain  has  five  major  com-
plexes that shuttle electrons from the intramem-
branous  space  into  the  matrix.  These  include 
NADH dehydrogenase (Complex I), ATP succi-
nate dehydrogenase (Complex II), cytochrome c 
reductase  (Complex  III),  cytochrome  c  oxidase 
(Complex  IV), ATP  synthase  (Complex V)  and 
two  freely  diffusible  molecules  ubiquinone  and 
cytochrome  c  that  shuttle  electrons  from  one 
complex  to  the  next  [33].  By  transferring  elec-
trons centrally, a proton gradient is built up in the 

Outer membrane

Intramembranous space

Inner membrane

Matrix

Cristae

*

*

Fig. 20.12  Structure of mitochondria

intermembranous  space.  These  protons  enter 
back into the mitochondrial matrix through chan-
nels in the ATP synthase enzyme complex. This 
entry is coupled to ATP synthesis from ADP and 
phosphate (Pi) (Fig. 20.13).

LLLT has been found to increase the activity 
of Complex II and Complex IV in particular [34]. 
This  was  demonstrated  in  a  controlled  study  of 
wounds  treated  with  AsGa  (gallium  arsenate, 
904 nm) low-level laser. This study also showed 
a clinical improvement in the rate of wound heal-
ing  after  LLLT.  Another  study  using  the  same 
laser  but  at  a  slightly  different  wavelength 
(808 nm) showed enhancement of ATP  production 
in human neuronal cells in culture [30]. This sup-
ports the observation that LLLT can help in the 
setting  of  neurologic  damage  following  strokes 
[35, 36]. Its ability to repair neurologically dam-
aged tissue may be a function of inhibiting nitric 
oxide  synthase  and  upregulating  the  expression 
of transforming growth factor-beta 1 [37].

It  appears  that  low-level-lasers  can  help  not 
only with neurologic damage but also with neu-
rogenic  pain  and  musculoskeletal  complaints. 
Peer-reviewed studies found it helpful in treating 
low back pain [38], temporomandibular joint dis-
orders  [39],  and  rheumatoid  arthritis  patients 
with  carpal  tunnel  syndrome  [40].  In  fact,  the 
MicroLight  830  is  a  low  level  laser,  which 
received  510K  medical  device  clearance  by  the 
FDA  in  2002  for  the  treatment  of  carpal  tunnel 
syndrome. Some chiropractors and practitioners 
of  holistic  medicine  attest  to  its  usefulness  in 
treating patients with other chronic disorders like 
fibromyalgia [41, 42]. They liken it to acupunc-
ture, in providing a noninvasive treatment where 
other  options  have  failed. As  mentioned  above, 
LLLT can improve wound healing.

One study showed that the helium neon laser, 
at a wavelength of 633 nm, was effective in stim-
ulating the cellular responses of wounded fibro-
blasts and promoting cell migration [43]. Another 
study looking at LLLT for wound healing in dia-
betic  rats  found  faster  healing  in  the  treatment 
group,  again  with  an  optimum  wavelength  of 
633 nm [44].

Perhaps  most  important  is  the  evidence  that 
LLLT  can  reduce  levels  of  inflammation  in  the 

N. E. Rogers et al.



4H+

Intermembrane
space

4H+

2H+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Cyto

C2+

+

+

+

+

+

+

H+

359

e

I

e

II

QH2

Q

III

e

IV

NADH2

Succinate

NAD-

Fumarate

Cyto

C3+

1/2O2+2e-

Mitochondrial
matrix

H2O

ATP

ADP+Pi

Fig. 20.13  Structure of the mitochondrial transport chain (Reprinted from Hamblin MR, Demidova TN. Mechanisms 
of low level light therapy. Proc SPIE. 2006;6140:614001 [33], with permission from the SPIE)

tissues. It was found to reduce the levels of TNF- 
alpha  in  rats  treated  with  a  650  nm  Ga-Al-As 
laser [45]. It has also been found to reduce levels 
of serum prostaglandin E2 in rats with zymosan- 
induced  arthritis  that  underwent  illumination 
with 810 nm laser [46]. The authors also observed 
a reduction in joint swelling that was comparable 
to treatment with dexamethasone. Finally, levels 
of COX-2 mRNA expression are also reduced in 
patients treated with LLLT [47].

These results suggest that LLLT may be use-
ful  in  treating  autoimmune  and  other  disorders 
based  on  inflammation,  where  primary  treat-
ments have failed. Hair disorders such as lichen 
planopilaris and alopecia areata may even bene-
fit.  Androgenetic  alopecia,  which  is  not  an 
inflammatory  process,  may  improve  more  from 
increased  energy  and ATP  created  by  the  laser. 
Studies are lacking to directly link the production 
of  ATP  with  the  enhancement  of  hair  growth. 
However,  there  are  many  drugs  whose  mecha-
nism of action is still unclear. It would be a shame 
to  omit  a  helpful  treatment  from  our  armamen-
tarium simply because we do not yet understand 
it. Hopefully more studies will soon bring this to 
light.

One possible explanation for the effect of light 
on  hair  follicles  is  photo-relaxation,  a  concept 
proposed  by  Dr.  Robert  Furchgott  in  the  1950s 

[48].  He  observed  that  strips  of  smooth  muscle 
from intestinal tissue would alternately contract 
and relax as he cast a shadow or allowed UV light 
to shine on it, respectively. Years later he won the 
Nobel  prize  for  identifying  that  UV  light  acti-
vates  the  release  of  nitric  oxide  from  vascular 
smooth  muscle  cells  [49].  This  photo-activated 
vasodilation may allow increased blood supply to 
nearby hair follicles. If so, this would be similar 
to minoxidil’s proposed effect of vasodilation on 
the follicles.

 LLLT Products

The application of low-level light therapy (LLLT) 
for male and female hair loss began shortly after 
the  turn  of  the  century  with  only  manufacturer 
data. A  laser  comb  delivery  of  LLLT  was  FDA 
cleared for treatment of male pattern hair loss in 
2007, but with mixed reviews among physicians 
[22, 50]. The devices were marketed directly to 
consumers via the internet, television, and other 
print  advertisements.  Soon,  however,  hair  loss 
specialists  began  to  offer  chair-type  devices  in 
their offices and sold helmets, hats, and brushes 
and  combs  that  contained  the  low-level  light 
technology. In 2011 the same laser comb device 
was cleared for treatment of female pattern hair 

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



360

Table 20.3  Low-level light therapy devices

Hairmax LaserComb™
Sunetics® Laser Hair Brush and Clinical unit
Revage® 670 laser (chair unit)
Spencer Forrest X5 (Handheld) Hair Laser™
LaserCap® (via physicians only)
iGrow® Hair laser System
Capillus® (via physicians only)

loss  as  well  [51].  Since  the  last  edition  of  this 
book,  there  has  been  a  further  increase  in  the 
number of commercially available LLLT devices 
(Table 20.3).

The Hairmax Lasercomb™ has been one of 
the most publicized products on the market. It 
was  developed  and  patented  by  Lexington 
International  in  2000.  Although  the  exact 
wavelength and other parameters are kept con-
fidential,  the  manufacturers  do  reveal  that  it 
uses a diode laser operating in the red portion 
of the visible color spectrum [52]. It gives off a 
monochromatic,  collimated  laser  energy.  It  is 
indicated to promote hair growth in males with 
androgenetic  alopecia  who  have  Norwood 
Hamilton  Classifications  of  Ia  to  V  and 
Fitzpatrick  skin  types  I  to  IV.  Reports  of  the 
data  they  submitted  to  the  FDA  are  positive, 
showing  increased  hair  counts  among  almost 
all  patients  in  their  four-site  study.  However, 
they  have  chosen  to  keep  the  specifics  of  this 
data  proprietary. And  although  the  trials  were 
done  only  in  men,  they  market  the  product  to 
women  as  well.  The  FDA  approved  it  in 
January 2007 after the company filed a 510(k) 
notice,  requesting  that  it  be  registered  as  a 
medical device.

One  caveat  is  that  FDA  approval  of  medical 
devices is far less rigorous than it is for standard 
pharmaceutical  drugs.  This  labeling  indicates 
that the FDA has reviewed the product and found 
it  to  be  safe  and  ‘substantially  equivalent’  to 
predicate  devices  already  on  the  market.  The 
most similar predicate device is the TerraQuant, a 
handheld LLLT device emitting 60–90 W within 
the  600–900  nm  wavelength  for  treatment  of 
musculoskeletal  pain  [53].  Other  such  devices 
include the Violet Ray device, which was manu-
factured  in  the  1950s  as  a  treatment  for  nearly 

everything but later its makers were charged with 
libel and misbranding [54].

Some other names in the industry of LLLT for 
hair  growth  are  Sunetics®  International,  located 
in Las Vegas, NV [55] and the Revage 670® laser 
[56].  The  Sunetics  product  comes  either  as  a 
brush  ($200–400)  or  as  a  freestanding  machine 
for  total  scalp  treatments  ($39,900).  It  uses  a 
650  nm  wavelength  at  a  fluence  of  5  mW.  It  is 
marketed especially among hair transplant offices 
to increase the quality/quantity of the donor area, 
to  reduce  the  pain  and  to  speed  wound  healing 
after transplant, and to prevent or reduce hair loss 
from post-transplant shock. It also is sold as an 
option for men and women who do not want to 
undergo a hair transplant procedure and haven’t 
improved  with  minoxidil  or  finasteride.  The 
Revage 670® is a chair-based laser that uses rota-
tional  phototherapy  containing  30  diodes  that 
rotate  180°  around  the  scalp.  It  is  given  as  in- 
office treatments 2×/week for 6 weeks then once 
weekly for 16 weeks. Each treatment session is 
30 min each.

The  first  study  investigating  low-level  light 
therapy for hair loss was published in 2003 in a 
non-peer-reviewed  journal  [57].  It  was  sup-
ported  by 
the  manufacturers  of  HairMax 
LaserComb™.  It  enrolled  35  patients  with 
androgenetic  alopecia  (AGA).  Twenty-eight 
males and seven females were given a handheld 
laser  comb  to  use  at  home  for  6  full  months, 
combing the hair for 5–10 min daily. They found 
that  overall,  for  men  and  women  there  was  a 
93.5% increase in hair counts in both temporal 
and  vertex  sites.  Tensile  strength  of  individual 
hairs also increased by 78.9%.

Another independent study was performed by 
the authors in 2008 using the Sunetics® clinical 
unit (hood) device. Participants received 20-min 
treatment sessions twice weekly for 3–6 months. 
Trichoscopy showed a decrease in the number of 
vellus  hairs,  increase  in  the  number  of  terminal 
hairs, and an increase in shaft diameter, however 
the study was limited by a small patient popula-
tion (n = 7) and the results were not statistically 
significant [58].

In 2009, the first of several randomized con-
trolled trials was published. It was supported by 

N. E. Rogers et al.



the  manufacturers  of  HairMax  LaserComb™. 
This  was  a  multi-center  sham-device  controlled 
study that did demonstrate statistically significant 
improvements in hair growth in men over a sham 
device [59].

In 2013, several more randomized, controlled 
trials were published. One study tested the Oaze, 
a helmet-type device emitting LEDs with wave-
lengths  of  630,  650  and  660  nm.  Forty  Korean 
subjects  with  AGA  were  enrolled  and  received 
either an active or sham device to use at home for 
18 min daily. A tattoo was used to mark the area 
of  study  within  the  frontal  or  vertex  area,  and 
phototrichogram analysis was performed at base-
line, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks. After 24 weeks of 
treatment,  the  active  group  showed  statistically 
significantly greater hair density than the sham- 
device group.
Another 

randomized,  placebo-controlled 
trial was performed in 2013 also using a helmet-
type  device  called  the  “TOPHAT655”  (investi-
gational version of the iGrow [60]). It contained 
twenty- one 5 mW lasers (655 ± 5 nm), and 30 
LEDs  (655  ±  20  nm).  Forty-four  males  (age 
18–48)  with  androgenetic  alopecia  were 
enrolled and 41 completed the study (22 active, 
19 placebo). Areas of thinning were trimmed to 
3 mm, tattooed, and photographed. The control 
group was given an identical device with incan-
descent  lights  that  were  painted  red.  Patients 
used the devices at home for 25 min per treat-
ment on alternating days for 16 weeks (total of 
60 treatments). Statistical analysis was blinded. 
After deleting one outlier (placebo group) data 
point, the investigators found a 35% increase in 
the number of hairs in the treatment group com-
pared with the sham-device group (P = 0.003). 
No distinction was made between vellus and ter-
minal  hairs,  and  the  diameter  of  the  hairs  was 
not measured. No females were included in the 
study, but according to the author a second man-
uscript showing similar results for women is in 
press [61].

A very recent study was a second multi-cen-
ter, randomized, sham-device controlled double- 
blind  study  using  the  HairMax  Lasercomb™ 
included  well-respected 
[62].  The  authors 
loss  at  major  academic 
experts 

in  hair 

361

institutions. All  trials  were  registered  at  www.
clinicaltrials.gov  as  well  as  the  Institutional 
Review Boards for each participating author. A 
total of 128 male and 141 female subjects with 
AGA were randomized to receive either a laser 
comb (1 of 3 models) or a sham device (emitting 
white  light),  to  apply  to  the  scalp  three  times 
weekly  for  26  weeks.  The  subjects  and  site 
investigators remained blinded as to the type of 
device  and  the  analysis  of  the  digital  photo-
graphs was also blinded.

Overall,  103  males  and  122  females  com-
pleted  the  study.  The  female  patients  had  an 
increase in mean terminal hair count from base-
line of 20.2, 20.6, and 18.4 hairs per cm2 in the 
9-beam,  12-beam,  7-beam  devices  compared 
with  2.9  (p  <  0.0001),  3.0  (p  <  0.0001),  1.6 
(p = 0.0017) hairs/cm2 in sham-treated patients. 
Among  male  patients,  the  mean  terminal  hair 
count increased by 20.9 and 25.7 hairs per cm2 
for the 9- and 12-beam devices compared with 
9.4 (p = 0.0249) and 9.4 (p = 0.0028) hairs per 
cm2 with the sham-devices. Also, a higher per-
centage  of  the  patients  in  the  active  treatment 
group reported improvement in overall hair loss 
condition, 
in  self- 
thickness,  and  fullness 
assessment than did the sham-treated individu-
als (Figs. 20.14 and 20.15).

 LLLT Mechanisms of Action for Hair 
Growth in Nutshell

Originally,  LLLT  was  hypothesized  to  grow 
hair  by  increasing  mitochondrial  signaling  to 
ultimately  increase  ATP  levels  in  tissues  [32, 
33,  63]. Since then, it has been suggested that 
LLLT  has  similar  (but  not  clearly  delineated) 
effects  as  minoxidil  on  the  hair  follicle  [64]. 
These  mechanistic  overlaps  may  include  a 
release of nitric oxide, [65] localized vasodila-
tion [66], or the opening of potassium channels 
[67]. LLLT may also work by activating NF-kB 
signaling with subsequent anti-apoptotic effects 
[68]. There  is  fairly  good  evidence  that  LLLT 
can  increase  levels  of  vascular  endothelial 
growth  factor  (VEGF)  resulting  in  more  rapid 
angiogenesis  [69–71].  It  appears  to  do  so  via 

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



362

Fig.  20.14  Clinical  results  before  and  26  weeks  after  treatment  with  HairMax  Lasercomb™  (photos  courtesy  of 
Lexington International, LLC)

the  ERK/Sp1  signally  pathway  [72].  Whether 
this  has  more  of  an  effect  on  hair  growth  or 
wound healing is uncertain.

Recently,  the  role  of  LLLT  in  hair  growth 
was evaluated in C3H/HeJ mice, leading to the 
conclusion that LLLT induces the anagen phase 
of  hair  follicles,  thus  promoting  hair  regrowth 
by  initiating  the  Wnt10b/β-catenin  pathway 
[73]. In this study, the LLLT group expressed a 
significantly  higher 
level  of  Wnt10b  and 
β-catenin  on  the  second  day  than  the  control 
group  according  to  both  the  western  blot  and 
PCR results. Wnt signaling, especially Wnt10b 
expression, is necessary for hair follicle devel-
opment  by  activating  bulge  stem  cells  towards 
hair  formation  [74,  75].  Activation  of  the 
Wnt10b/β-catenin  pathway  has  been  seen  to 
result  in  regeneration  of  hair  follicles  [76]. 
Based  on  a  recent  evidence-based  review  on 
LLLT devices for treating alopecia, it was found 
that  FDA-cleared  devices  are  effective  for 
patients  with  pattern  hair  loss,  with  low  inci-
dence of adverse effects [77].

Fig.  20.15  Microscopic  results  before  and  26  weeks 
after treatment with HairMax Lasercomb™ (photos cour-
tesy of Lexington International, LLC)

N. E. Rogers et al.



 Lasers for Wound Healing

There have been a significant number of publica-
tions investigating the role of LLLT for treating 
wounds. Most of it has been limited to in vitro or 
mouse models, and do not thoroughly differenti-
ate  between  photothermal,  photochemical,  or 
photomechanical  effects  [78].  A  635  nm  laser 
was found to stimulate wound contraction in sus-
ceptible  mouse  strains  [79].  It  was  found  to 
increase  levels  of  basic  fibroblast  growth  factor 
(bFGF) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) 
with greater statistical significance than was seen 
in  control  groups  [80].  Based  on  these  studies, 
LLLT  may  have  a  role  in  the  post-operative 
transplantation.  Most 
period  following  hair 
patients  experience  scabbing  over  the  grafted 
area  that  can  last  for  1–2  weeks  after  surgery. 
They may also have discomfort in the donor area 
for  1–3  days  after  surgery. The  use  of  LLLT  in 
treating the grafted and/or donor areas after hair 
transplantation  may  be  an  area  of  future  study. 
More human clinical trials are needed.

363

then it may not be enough to warrant its wide-
spread use. Presently, the authors recommend 
using  laser  therapy  as  an  adjunct  to  medical 
therapy  if  optimal  results  are  not  happening 
with minoxidil and/or finasteride.

No matter how we implement lasers to treat 
patients with hair loss, we must first identify 
the  etiology.  Frequently  conditions  such  as 
lichen  planopilaris  or  alopecia  areata  may 
present in a way that mimics androgenetic alo-
pecia.  We  should  be  sure  that  the  patients 
undergo medical evaluation and biopsy where 
necessary.  This  crucial  step  may  be  left  out 
when  treatments  such  as  LLLT  are  available 
directly  to  the  public  without  a  prescription. 
Consumers  should  be  protected  from  buying 
expensive items that may not be applicable or 
aggressive enough for their type of hair loss. 
Likewise,  physicians  should  be  open  to  the 
use of such devices where other options have 
failed,  so  long  as  reproducible  studies  can 
demonstrate their safety and efficacy.

 Conclusion
•  The use of lasers in hair growth and trans-

References

plantation remains controversial

•  Needles  remain  the  standard  of  treatment 
for  transplant  site  creation,  due  to  effi-
ciency, economy, and improved density
•  FDA  approval  of  lasers  for  hair  growth 

suggests that they are safe

•  More  well-designed  clinical  trials  are 

needed to assess their efficacy

While the use of lasers to create recipient 
sites in hair transplantation has largely fallen 
out  of  favor,  lasers  may  still  have  a  role  in 
medical  therapy  for  hair  loss,  as  well  as 
improving post- operative wound healing. The 
volume  of  medical  literature  supporting  the 
role of LLLT for both is still increasing, and 
with more evidence of statistically significant 
results,  the  implementation  of  lasers  may 
become more prevalent. That being said, con-
sumers can purchase a lot of topical minoxidil 
or oral finasteride for the pricey cost of these 
lasers. And,  many  argue  that  if  the  improve-
ment  can  only  be  detected  microscopically 

  1.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220:524–7.

  2.  http://ishrs.org/sites/default/files/users/user3/

report_2015_practice_census_final_v2.pdf

  3.  Unger  WP,  David  LM.  Laser  hair  transplantation.  J 

Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1994;20:515–21.

  4.  Chu  EA,  Rabinov  CR,  Wong  BJF,  Krugman 
ME.  Laser-assisted  hair 
transplantation:  histo-
logic  comparison  between  CO2  and  Ho:YAG  lasers. 
Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:335–42.

  5.  Unger  WP.  Laser  hair  transplantation  II.  Dermatol 

Surg. 1995;21:759–65.

  6.  Unger  WP.  Laser  hair  transplantation  III.  Dermatol 

Surg. 1995;21:1047–55.

  7.  Grevelink  JM,  Brennick  JB.  Hair  transplantation 
facilitated  by  flashscanner-enhanced  carbon  dioxide 
laser. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1994;5:278–80.
  8.  Grevelink  JM.  Laser  hair  transplantation.  Dermatol 

Clin. 1997;15:479–86.

  9.  Villnow M. 2300 grafts/laser session. Hair Transplant 

Forum. 1994;4:6–7.

 10. Grevelink JM, Farinelli W, Bua D, et al. Hair trans-
plantation  aided  by  CO2  lasers.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1995;7:47.

 11. Smithdeal CD. Carbon dioxide laser-assisted hair trans-
plantation: the effects of laser parameters on scalp tis-
sue – a histologic study. Dermatol Surg. 1997;23:835–40.

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



364

 12.  Kauvar AN,  Waldorf  HA,  Geronemus  RG.  A  histo-
pathological comparison of “char-free” carbon diox-
ide lasers. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:343–8.

 13.  Neidel FG, Fuchs M, Krahl D. Laser-assisted autolo-
gous  hair  transplantation  with  the  Er:YAG  laser.  J 
Cutan Laser Ther. 1999;1:229–31.

 14.  Podda  M,  Spieth  K,  Kaufmann  R.  Er:YAG  laser- 
assisted  hair  transplantation  in  cicatricial  alopecia. 
Dermatol Surg. 2000;26:1010–4.

 15.  Uebel C. The use of erbium:YAG laser in hair micro- 

transplant surgery. Clin Appl Notes. 1999;7:1.

 16. Huang Y, Zhuo F, Li L. Enhancing hair growth in male 
androgenetic alopecia by a combination of fractional 
CO2 laser therapy and hair growth factors. Lasers Med 
Sci. 2017;32:1711.

 17.  Bae JM, Jung HM, Goo B, Park YM. Hair regrowth 
through  wound  healing  process  after  ablative  frac-
tional laser treatment in a murine model. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2015;47(5):433–40.

 18.  Ho  C,  Nguyen  Q,  Lask  G,  Lowe  N.  Mini-slit  hair 
transplantation  using  the  Ultrapulse  carbon  dioxide 
laser handpiece. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:1056–9.
 19.  Unger WP. What’s new in hair replacement surgery. 

Dermatol Clin. 1996;14:783–802.

 20.  Avram  MR.  Laser-assisted  hair  transplantation  –  a 
status report in the 21st century. J Cosmet Dermatol. 
2005;4:135–9.

 21.  Avram MR, Leonard RT Jr, Epstein ES, Williams JL, 
Bauman AJ. The current role of laser/light sources in 
the treatment of male and female pattern hair loss. J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2007;9:27–8.

 22. Fitzpatrick RE. Laser hair transplantation. Tissue effects 
of laser parameters. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:1042–6.
 23.  Rose  PT,  Nusbaum  B.  Robotic  hair  restoration. 

Dermatol Clin. 2014;32:97–107.

 24.  Alajlan A, Shapiro J, Rivers JK, MacDonal N, Wiggin 
J, Lui H. Paradoxical hypertrichosis after laser epila-
tion. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53:85–8.

 25.  Bernstein  EF.  Hair  growth  induced  by  diode  laser 

treatment. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:584–6.

 26.  Willey A, Torrontegui J, Azpiazu J, et al. Hair stimu-
lation following laser and intense pulsed light photo- 
epilation: review of 543 cases and ways to manage it. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:297–301.

 27.  Moreno-Arias  G,  Castelo-Branco  C,  Ferrando 
J.  Paradoxical  effect  after  IPL  photoepilation. 
Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:1013–6.

 28.  Radmanesh M. Paradoxical hypertrichosis and termi-
nal hair change after intense pulsed light hair removal 
therapy. J Dermatol Treat. 2009;20:52–4.

 29.  Mester  E,  Szende  B,  Gartner  P.  The  effect  of  laser 
beams  on  the  growth  of  hair  in  mice.  Radiobiol 
Radiother (Berl). 1968;9:621–6.

 30.  Oron  U,  Ilic  S,  De  Taboada  L,  Streeter  J.  Ga-As 
(808  nm)  laser  irradiation  enhances ATP  production 
in  human  neuronal  cells  in  culture.  Photomed  Laser 
Surg. 2007;25:180–2.

 31.  Gavish L, Asher Y, Becker Y, Kleinman Y. Low level 
laser  irradiation  stimulates  mitochondrial  membrane 
potential and disperses subnuclear promyelocytic leu-
kemia protein. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;35:369–76.

 32.  Yu W, Naim JO, McGowan M, Ippolito K, Lanzafame 
RJ.  Photomodulation  of  oxidative  metabolism  and 
electron  chain  enzymes  in  rat  liver  mitochondria. 
Photochem Photobiol. 1997;66:866–71.

 33.  Hamblin  MR,  Demidova  TN.  Mechanisms  of  low 
level light therapy. Proc SPIE. 2006;6140:614001.
 34.  Silveira PC, Streck EL, Pinho RA. Evaluation of mito-
chondrial respiratory chain activity in wound healing 
by low-level laser therapy. J Photochem Photobiol B. 
2007;86:279–82.

 35.  Oron A, Oron U, Chen J, et al. Low-level laser therapy 
applied transcranially to rats after induction of stroke 
significantly reduces long-term neurological deficits. 
Stroke. 2006;37:2620–4.

 36.  Lampl  Y,  Zivin  JA,  Fisher  M,  et  al.  Infrared  laser 
therapy for ischemic stroke: a new treatment strategy: 
results  of  the  NeuroThera  Effectiveness  and  Safety 
Trial-1 (NEST-1). Stroke. 2007;38:1843–9.

 37.  Leung  MC,  Lo  SC,  Siu  FK,  So  KF.  Treatment  of 
experimentally  induced  transient  cerebral  ischemia 
with  low  energy  laser  inhibits  nitric  oxide  synthase 
activity  and  up-regulates  the  expression  of  trans-
forming  growth  factor-beta  1.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2002;31:283–8.

 38.  Djavid  GE,  Mahrdad  R,  Ghasemi  M,  Hasan-Zadeh 
H,  Sotoodeh-Manesh A,  Pouryaghoub  G.  In  chronic 
low back pain, low level laser therapy combined with 
exercise  is  more  beneficial  than  exercise  along  in 
the long term: a randomized trial. Aust J Physiother. 
2007;53:155–60.

 39.  Fikackova  H,  Dostalova  T,  Navratil  L,  Klaschka 
J.  Effectiveness  of  low-level  laser  therapy  in  tem-
poromandibular joint disorders: a placebo-controlled 
study. Photomed Laser Surg. 2007;25:297–303.

 40.  Ekim  A,  Armagan  O,  Tascioglu  F,  Oner  C,  Colak 
M.  Effect  of  low  level  laser  therapy  in  rheumatoid 
arthritis patients with carpal tunnel syndrome. Swiss 
Med Wkly. 2007;137:347–52.

 41.  www.laser-therapeutics.net/articles.htm
 42.  www.healing.org/only-7.html
 43.  Hawkins  D,  Abrahamse  H.  Effect  of  multiple 
exposures  of  low-level  laser  therapy  on  the  cellu-
lar  responses  of  wounded  human  skin  fibroblasts. 
Photomed Laser Surg. 2006;24:705–14.

 44.  Al-Watban  FA,  Zhang  XY,  Andres  BL.  Low-level 
laser  therapy  enhances  wound  healing  in  diabetic 
rats: a comparison of different lasers. Photomed Laser 
Surg. 2007;25:72–7.

 45.  Aimbire F, Albertini R, Pacheco MT, et al. Low-level 
laser  therapy  induces  dose-dependent  reduction  of 
TNF-alpha  levels  in  acute  inflammation.  Photomed 
Laser Surg. 2006;24:33–7.

 46.  Castano  AP,  Dai  T, Yaroslavsky  I,  et  al.  Low-level 
laser  therapy  for  zymosan-induced  arthritis  in  rats: 
importance  of  illumination  time.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39:543–50.

 47.  Albertini  R, Aimbire  F,  Villaverde AB,  Silva  JA  Jr, 
Costa  MS.  COX-2  mRNA  expression  decreases 
in  the  subplantar  muscle  of  rat  paw  subjected  to 
carrageenan- induced  inflammation  after  low-level 
laser therapy. Inflamm Res. 2007;56:228–9.

N. E. Rogers et al.



 48.  Ehrreich SJ, Furchgott RF. Relaxation of mammalian 
smooth  muscles  by  visible  and  ultraviolet  radiation. 
Nature. 1968;218:682–4.

 49.  Furchgott  RF, 

Jothianandan  D.  Endothelium- 
dependent  and  independent  vasodilation  involving 
cyclic GMP: relaxation induced by nitric oxide, carbon 
monoxide, and light. Blood Vessels. 1991;28:52–61.
 50.  Woolston C. Does Lasercomb stop hair loss? The evi-

dence is thin. Los Angeles Times. January 12, 2009;
 51. Website: www.hairmax.com/clinical-studies-approvals/ 

fda-clearance/
 52.  www.hairmax.com
 53.  www.coldlasertherapies.com.
 54.  www.museumofquackery.com/devices/ut.htm
 55.  www.sunetics.com.
 56.  www.laserhaircare.com
 57.  Satino  JL,  Markou  M.  Hair  regrowth  and  increased 
hair  tensile  strength  using  the  HairMax  LaserComb 
for low-level laser therapy. Int J Cosmet Surg Aesthet 
Dermatol. 2003;5:113–7.

 58.  Avram  MR,  Rogers  NE.  The  use  of  low-level 
light  for  hair  growth:  part  I.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
2009;11:110–7.

 59.  Leavitt  M,  Charles  G,  Heyman  E,  Michaels 
D.  HairMax  LaserComb  Laser  Phototherapy  device 
in the treatment of male androgenetic alopecia. Clin 
Drug Invest. 2009;29:283–92.

 60.  Lanzafame RJ, Blanche RR, Bodian AB, Chiacchierini 
RP, Fernandez-Obregon A, Kazmirek ER. The growth 
of  human  scalp  hair  mediated  by  visible  red  light 
laser  and  LED  sources  in  males.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2013;45:487–95.

 61.  Personal  email  communication  with  Dr.  Raymond 

Lanzafame on August 7, 2014.

 62.  Jimenez  JJ,  Wikramanayake  TC,  Bergfeld  W,  et  al. 
Efficacy and safety of a low-level laser device in the 
treatment of male and female pattern hair loss: a mul-
ticenter, randomized, sham device-controlled, double- 
blind study. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2014;15(2):115–27.
 63.  Karu TI. Mitochondrial signaling in mammalian cells 
activated  by  red  and  near-IR  radiation.  Photochem 
Photobiol. 2008;84:1091–9.

 64.  Avci  P,  Gupta  GK,  Clark  J,  Wikonkal  N,  Hamblin 
MR. Low-level laser (light) therapy (LLLT) for treat-
ment of hair loss. Lasers Surg Med. 2014;46:144–51.
 65.  Karu TI, Pyatibrat LV, Afanasyeva NI. Cellular effects 
of low power laser therapy can be mediated by nitric 
oxide. Lasers Surg Med. 2005;36:307–14.

 66.  Proctor PH. Endothelium-derived relaxing factor and 
minoxidil:  active  mechanisms  in  hair  growth.  Arch 
Dermatol. 1989;125:1146.

 67.  Rossi  A,  Cantisani  C,  Melis  L,  Iorio  A,  Scali  E, 
Calvieri S. Minoxidil use in dermatology, side effects 
and  recent  patents.  Recent  Patents  Inflamm Allergy 
Drug Discov. 2012;6:130–6.

 68.  Chen  AC,  Arany  PR,  Huang  YY,  Tomkinson  EM, 
Shamra SK, Kharkwal GB, Saleem T, Mooney D, Yull 

365

FE, Blackwell TS, Hamblin MR. Low-level laser ther-
apy activates NF-kB via generation of reactive oxygen 
species  in  mouse  embryonic  fibroblasts.  PLoS  One. 
2011;6:e22453.

 69.  Cury V,  Moretti AI, Assis  L,  Bossini  P,  Crusca  Jde 
S,  Neto  CB,  Fangel  R,  DeSouza  HP,  Hamblin  MR, 
Parizotto  NA.  Low  level  laser  therapy  increases 
angiogenesis in a model of ischemic skin flap in rats 
mediated by VEGF, HIF-1a and MMP-2. J Photochem 
Photobiol B. 2013;125:164–70.

 70.  Zaidi  M,  Krolikowski  JG,  Jones  DW,  Pritchard  KA 
Jr,  Struve  J,  Nandedkar  SD,  Lohr  NL,  Pagel  PS, 
Weihrauch  D.  Transient  repetitive  exposure  to  low 
level  light  therapy  enhances  collateral  blood  ves-
sel growth in the ischemic hindlimb of the tight skin 
mouse. Photochem Photobiol. 2013;89:709–13.

 71.  Prado  RP,  Garcia  SB,  Thomazini  JA,  Piccinato 
CE.  Effects  of  830  and  670  nm  laser  on  viability 
of  random  skin  flap  in  rats.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2012;30:418–24.

 72.  Feng  J,  Zhang Y,  Xing  D.  Low-power  laser  irradia-
tion (LPLI) promotes VEGF expression and vascular 
endothelial cell proliferation through the activation of 
ERK/Sp1 pathway. Cell Signal. 2012;24:1116–25.
 73.  Zhang  T,  Liu  L,  Fan  J,  et  al.  Low-level  laser  treat-
ment stimulates hair growth via upregulating Wnt10b 
and beta-catenin expression in C3H/HeJ mice. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2017;32(5):1189–95.

 74.  Andl  T,  Reddy  ST,  Gaddapara  T,  Millar  SE.  WNT 
signals  are  required  for  the  initiation  of  hair  follicle 
development. Dev Cell. 2002;2(5):643–53.

 75.  Jang SK, Kim ST, Lee DI, et al. Decoction and fer-
mentation  of  selected  medicinal  herbs  promote  hair 
regrowth by inducing hair follicle growth in conjunc-
tion  with  Wnts  signaling.  Evid  Based  Complement 
Alternat Med. 2016;2016:4541580.

 76.  Li Y-H, Zhang K, Yang K, et al. Adenovirus-mediated 
Wnt10b  overexpression  induces  hair  follicle  regen-
eration. J Investig Dermatol. 2013;133(1):42–8.
 77.  Zarei  M,  Wikramanayake  TC,  Falto-Aizpurua  L, 
Schachner  LA,  Jimenez  JJ.  Low  level  laser  therapy 
and hair regrowth: an evidence-based review. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2016;31(2):363–71.

 78.  Posten W, Wrone DA, Dover JS, Arndt KA, Silapunt 
S,  Alam  M.  Low-level  laser  therapy  for  wound 
healing:  mechanism  and  efficacy.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2005;31:334–40.

 79.  Demidova-Rice TN, Salomatina EV, Yaroslavsky AN, 
Herman IM, Hamblin MR. Low-level light stimulates 
excisional wound healing in mice. Lasers Surg Med. 
2007;39:706–15.

 80.  Saygun I, Karacay S, Serdar M, Ural AU, Sencimen 
M, Kurtis B. Effects of laser irradiation on the release 
of  basic  fibroblast  growth  factor  (bFGF),  insulin 
like  growth  factor-1  (IGF-1),  and  receptor  of  IGF-1 
(IGFBP3) from gingival fibroblasts. Lasers Med Sci. 
2008;23:211–5.

20 Lasers in Hair Growth and Hair Transplantation



Photobiomodulation and Hair 
Growth

21

Molly B. Hirt and Ronda S. Farah

Abstract
Since the initial Food and Drug Administration 
clearance  of  the  first  photobiomodulation 
device for androgenetic alopecia in 2007, the 
market for these devices has rapidly expanded. 
Sixteen unique devices are currently available 
to consumers with varying designs, treatment 
durations  and  frequency.  While  the  precise 
mechanism 
for  hair  growth  stimulation 
remains  to  be  elucidated,  current  evidence 
suggests the laser light alters hair cycle dura-
tion  to  promote  the  anagen  growth  phase. 
Photobiomodulation devices have an excellent 
safety  profile  with  pruritus  and  skin  dryness 
reported to be the most common side effects. 
Overall,  research  has  demonstrated  clinical 
efficacy  of  these  devices,  including  random-
ized  controlled  studies.  As  photobiomodula-
tion  continues  to  emerge  as  a  treatment 
modality for androgenetic alopecia, additional 
information  on 
light 
sources,  precise  light  wavelength,  treatment 
schedule,  and  effectiveness  on  various  hair 
diseases is still needed.

the  most  effective 

M. B. Hirt · R. S. Farah (*) 
Department of Dermatology, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
e-mail: mbhirt@iupui.edu, hirtx018@umn.edu; 
rfarah@umn.edu

Keywords
Photobiomodulation (PBM) · Hair growth · 
Alopecia · Androgenetic alopecia (AGA) · 
Laser · Low-level laser therapy (LLLT) · 
Light-emitting diodes

Abbreviations

FDA  Food and Drug Administration
LED  Light-emitting diodes
mW  Milliwatts
Nanometer
nm 
PBM  Photobiomodulation
PRP  Platelet rich plasma
RCT  Randomized control trial
UBM  Ultrasound bio-macroscopic

 Background

Photobiomodulation  (PBM)  involves  the  use  of 
low-level red or near infrared light to stimulate a 
photochemical  reaction. The  treatment  of  tissue 
with low energy light, resulting in a therapeutic 
response is termed PBM therapy [1, 2]. This type 
of therapy has also been referred to as low level 
therapy  or  photobiostimulation 
laser  (light) 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_21

367





368

 therapy and has been recently become widely uti-
lized for the management of androgenetic alope-
cia (AGA) [1, 2]. The initial discovery was made 
by Dr. Endre Mester in 1967 when he serendipi-
tously discovered that mice irradiated with low- 
powered 
increased  hair 
regrowth  [3,  4].  Since  that  time,  the  market  for 
PBM devices for the management of alopecia has 
rapidly expanded.

lasers  experienced 

Many of the available designed PBM devices 
have been focused on AGA, as it is the most com-
mon  of  the  alopecias  in  both  sexes  [5–8]. AGA 
not only results in physical changes and hair thin-
ning of the scalp, it has also been associated with 
psychological  issues  such  as  reduced  quality  of 
life  and  poor  body  image,  making  the  develop-
ment  of  treatment  options  imperative  [9–11]. 
Treatments  for AGA  include  finasteride,  topical 
minoxidil,  and  for  women,  spironolactone  may 
be recommended. These treatments can be effec-
tive, however, they may be associated with local 
or systemic side effects. Hair transplantation may 
be offered, especially for extensive disease, how-
ever, this is often costly and involves downtime. 
More recently, platelet rich plasma (PRP) therapy 
has been proposed as a treatment option, though 
large randomized controlled trials supporting use 
are lacking. To date, none of these devices have 
been  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA) 
cleared  for  the  management  of  other  non- 
cicatricial or cicatricial alopecias.

 Mechanism

remains 

The  exact  mechanism  of  PBM  therapy  is 
unknown  and 
to  be  elucidated. 
However,  preliminary  work  has  found  PBM 
encourages tissue regeneration, alleviates pain, 
and decreases inflammation, making it applica-
ble to medical fields ranging from dentistry and 
pain  to  acupuncture  and  dermatology  [2,  12–
19]. At the cellular level, it has been proposed 
that PBM changes adenosine triphosphate pro-
duction  in  the  mitochondria  [2,  20,  21].  The 
anti-inflammatory  properties  are  postulated  to 
decrease  pro- inflammatory  cytokines  [2,  13, 
22]. PBM is also thought to effect transcription 

factor  induction  and  cell-signaling,  therefore 
modifying  gene  expression  along  with  cell 
migration, proliferation and metabolism [2, 21, 
23–28]. With regards to its use for hair growth, 
it  has  been  hypothesized  to  stimulate  bulge 
stem cells within the hair follicle and aid in the 
transition  of  the  follicles  from  telogen  to  ana-
gen [2, 29]. It is also thought to extend anagen, 
inhibit early transition to catagen, and acceler-
ate hair growth [2, 29].

 Photobiomodulation Device 
Characteristics

PBM  devices  may  contain  exclusively  diode 
lasers  or  lasers  combined  with  light-emitting 
diodes (LEDs). Lasers emit coherent, monochro-
matic  light,  whereas  LEDs  emit  non-coherent 
light with a wider range of wavelengths [2]. The 
continuous  laser  light  has  previously  been 
thought  to  be  imperative  for  PBM  efficacy. 
However,  the  use  of  LEDs  has  challenged  this 
theory,  and  whether  diode  lasers  or  LEDs  are 
more clinically efficacious remains to be deter-
mined  [2].  Wavelengths  of  these  devices  range 
from  500  to  1000  nanometers  (nm)  to  encom-
pass  the  red  or  near-infrared  spectrum  of  light 
[2]. Amongst  the  PBM  devices  currently  avail-
able  on  the  market,  the  total  number  of  lasers 
and/or LEDs ranges from 7 to 272 diodes [30–
45].  The  total  power  for  each  device  ranges 
between  approximately  35  milliwatts  (mW)  to 
1360  mW.  The  iGrow®  and  iRestore®  are  the 
only  devices  currently  incorporating  both  laser 
diodes  and  LEDs  into  their  design.  Marketed 
devices may emit light in a continuous or pulsed 
fashion.  Of  note,  the  most  efficacious  wave-
length, power, treatment time and frequency for 
these devices to stimulate hair growth remains to 
be elucidated.

In 2007, the FDA cleared the first PBM device 
for the treatment of AGA [46]. The affordability, 
non-invasive  nature,  and  convenient  at  home  or 
office-based  treatment  options  have  sparked 
patient interest in use of the PBM devices when 
compared to procedures such as hair transplanta-
tion.  According  to  the  FDA  510(k)  Premarket 

M. B. Hirt and R. S. Farah



Notification  database,  there  are  currently  16 
PBM  devices  marketed  for  home-use  in  the 
United States (Table 21.1) [47]. The cost of each 
device ranges from approximately $295 to $3000, 
often based on the number of diodes and shape of 
the  device  [30–45].  Available  device  shapes 
include  combs,  helmets,  caps,  or  headbands. 
Treatment  time  also  varies  based  on  the  chosen 
device and ranges from 90 seconds three time per 
week to 36 minutes every other day. Response to 
use of these PBM devices may take 3–4 months 
of continued use, and the response is expected to 
continue throughout the first 6–12 months of use 
[30–45,  48].  The  longest  duration  of  treatment 
reported  in  the  literature  is  26  weeks  [48–50]. 
LaserCap® is currently the only device company 
which  limits  sales  to  authorized  physicians. All 
other  device  companies  offer  their  devices 
directly to consumers.

 PBM in the Home and Office

Consumers  may  purchase  most  of  the  available 
PBM  devices  for  home  use.  Two  devices  that 
have  been  available  for  office-based  treatments 
are the Capillus272 Office Pro® and the Sunetics 
Clinical Laser® [30, 31]. Office-based devices are 
desirable for patients that would like to trial the 
device  prior 
to  purchasing  for  home  use. 
Anecdotally,  physicians  have  reported  using 
PBM  after  PRP  in  the  office  setting.  However, 
long-term  studies  on  the  efficacy  of  this  tech-
nique  are  lacking.  More  recently,  PBM  device 
sales  have  been  expanded  from  the  consumers 
and  physicians  to  hair  salons.  The  remaining 
devices on the market are designed for home use 
(Table 21.1).

 Available Data

As PBM continues to emerge as a treatment for 
AGA,  research  within  the  field  continues  to 
expand. In 2016, Zarei et al. reviewed 21 studies 
(2 in vitro, 7 animal, and 12 clinical) to evaluate 
the effectiveness of PBM in treating various types 
of  alopecia  [50].  In  all  but  two  small,  uncon-

369

trolled  trials,  PBM  was  found  to  significantly 
increase hair regrowth [50]. In 2017, Afifi et al. 
completed a systematic review of 11 studies, 5 of 
which  were  randomized  sham-controlled  trials 
[51]. Hair counts or density were used as objec-
tive measurements. Other evaluated items in sev-
eral  studies  included  the  following:  patient 
satisfaction, hair shaft diameter, tensile strength 
and  hair  thickness.  Hair  thickness  and  tensile 
strength  improved  in  two  of  four  studies  evalu-
ated [51].

Published randomized controlled trials (RCT) 
exist for HairMax®, iGrow®, and Capillus® PBM 
devices.  HairMax®  LaserComb  has  conducted 
the largest studies evaluating the effectiveness of 
PBM devices in treating AGA. In 2009, the first 
multicenter,  double-blind  RCT  evaluated  the 
HairMax®  LaserComb  as  compared  to  a  sham 
device in males with AGA [49]. Subjects assigned 
to the HairMax® LaserComb in a 26-week study 
period  demonstrated  a  statistically  significant 
increase in mean hair density when compared to 
controls.  Subsequently  in  2014,  Jimenez  et  al. 
published a multicenter, double-blind RCT com-
the  HairMax® 
paring 
LaserComb to a sham device in the treatment of 
AGA  including  both  men  and  women  [48]. 
Subjects randomized to the HairMax® LaserComb 
device achieved a statistically significant increase 
in density of terminal hair fibers when compared 
to subjects treated with the sham device.

the  effectiveness  of 

In  2013,  Lanzafame  et  al.  evaluated  the  effi-
cacy of the iGrow®, a device with a combination 
of lasers and LEDs, in male subjects with AGA 
and  reported  a  35%  increase  in  post-treatment 
hair counts compared to controls using a sham- 
device  [52].  Subsequently  in  2014,  Lanzafame 
et al. reported a 37% increase in post-treatment 
hair counts in female subjects using the  iGrow® 
device  [53].  The  most  recently  published  study 
was conducted by Friedman et al. in 2017. In this 
study female AGA patients were randomized to 
the Capillus® 272 device or a sham-device treat-
ment. Subjects used the devices every other day 
for  a  total  of  17  weeks.  Subjects  assigned  the 
Capillus®  272  device  demonstrated  a  51% 
increase in hair counts as compared to the sham 
device [54].

21 Photobiomodulation and Hair Growth



370

Table 21.1  Summary of clinical studies evaluating device efficacy for treatment of androgenetic alopecia

Capillus

Studies Study type
Yes 
(1)

HairMax

Yes 
(5)

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled 
multicenter 
RCT
Prospective 
cohort study

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled, 
multicenter 
RCT

Device
Handi-Dome 
Laser (272 
diode model)

Subjects Treatment
44 F

30 min 
Eevery other 
day for 
17 weeks

HairMax 
LaserComb

28 M
7 F

5–10 min 
every other 
day for 
24 weeks

HairMax 
LaserComb

110 M 15 min 

3 days/week 
for 26 weeks

Case report

HairMax 
LaserComb

2 M

Retrospective 
cohort study

11 M
21 F

HairMax 
LaserComb (7, 
9 or 12 diode 
model)

7.5 min 
3 days/week 
for 26 weeks

8, 11 or 
15 min 
3 days/
weekfor 
8–48 weeks

Peer-
reviewed
Yes
Friedman 
et al. [54]

Yes
Satino 
et al. [57]

Yes
Leavitt 
et al. [49]

Yes
Rushton 
et al. [58]

Yes
Munck 
et al. [59]

Results
Statistically 
significant 51% 
increase in 
terminal hair count 
versus sham-
treated group
Total hair counts 
increased by 
93.5% and total 
hair tensile 
strength increased 
by 78.9%
Mean terminal hair 
density increased 
by 19.8 hairs/cm2 
versus 7.6 hairs/
cm2 decrease in 
sham-treated 
group
Device-treated 
patients reported 
overall 
improvement in 
hair health and 
quality versus 
sham-treated 
group
Investigator’s 
subjective global 
assessment of hair 
growth was not 
significantly 
different between 
groups
No significant 
change in hair 
counts (total, 
vellus, anagen, 
telogen) or hair 
thickness
Global 
photographic 
assessment of hair 
growth showed 8 
patients with 
significant 
improvement, 20 
with moderate 
improvement and 
4 with no 
improvement

M. B. Hirt and R. S. Farah



Table 21.1  (continued)

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled, 
multicenter 
RCT

128 M
141 F

HairMax 
LaserComb (7, 
9 or 12 diode 
model)

8, 11 or 
15 min
3 days/week 
for 16 weeks

iGrow

Yes 
(2)

iRestore

LaserCap

Yes 
(1)

Yes 
(2)

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled 
RCT

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled 
RCT

Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled 
RCT
Case series

TOPHAT655 
(iGrow)

41 M 25 min 

TOPHAT655 
(iGrow)

42 F

every other 
day for 
16 weeks

25 min 
every other 
day for 
16 weeks

iRestore

18 M
18 F

25 min 
3 days/week 
for 17 weeks

LaserCap

7 F

30–60 min 
3–4 days/
week
for 
3–6 months
30 min 
every other 
day for 
6 months
N/A

2 days/week 
for 26 weeks

N/A
80 M 20 min 

Case series

LaserCap

1 M
2 F

NutraStim No
Theradome Yes 

(1)

N/A
Theradome™ 
LH80 PRO

N/A
Double blind, 
sham 
device-
controlled 
multicenter 
RCT

371

Yes
Jimenez 
et al. [44, 
48]

Yes
Lanzafame 
et al. [52]

Yes
Lanzafame 
et al. [53]

N/A

No

No

Overall, terminal 
hair density 
increased by 15.27 
hairs/cm2 
compared to 
sham-treated 
group
Higher percentage 
of device-treated 
patients reported 
improvement in 
hair loss, but this 
did not always 
reach statistical 
significance
Statistically 
significant 35% 
increase of in 
terminal hair count 
versus sham-
treated group
Statistically 
significant 37% 
increase of in 
terminal hair count 
versus sham-
treated group
Pending, study in 
progress

Improvement in 
hair volume and 
shine

Improvement in 
hair volume and 
shine

N/A
Pending, study in 
progress

N/A
N/A

RCT randomized-controlled trial, M male, F female, N/A not applicable

In May 2017, Esmat et al. published a study 
comparing  the  efficacy  of  the  iGrow®  device  to 
topical minoxidil 5% as well as the combination 
of both therapies in treatment for female pattern 

hair  loss  [55].  The  outcomes  were  measured 
using folliscope and ultrasound bio-macroscopic 
(UBM)  techniques.  This  preliminary  investiga-
tion  suggested  that  use  of  a  combination  PBM 

21 Photobiomodulation and Hair Growth



372

with  minoxidil  could  accelerate  hair  density 
when  compared  to  either  modality  used  alone. 
Limitations of this study include the use of a fol-
liscope  and  UBM  techniques  for  evaluation  as 
these have not been used frequently for this type 
of assessment in the past [55].

 Safety Profile

One  of  the  benefits  of  the  PBM  devices  for  the 
treatment of AGA is their outstanding safety pro-
file. The most common side effects reported in the 
large  multicenter  study  involving  269  subjects 
were  pruritus  (2.5%)  and  dry  skin  (5.1%)  [48]. 
Other  less  common  side  effects  of  using  these 
devices are irritation, scalp tenderness, mild urti-
caria,  redness,  acne,  and  a  warm  sensation  [48]. 
The primary concern with use of laser devices is 
the risk of retinal damage as a result of laser light 
exposure  [56].  To  the  authors’  knowledge,  no 
reports  of  ocular  damage  from  PBM  devices  are 
reported. As a means to further prevent this risk, 
many of the devices currently on the market con-
tain a built-in safety feature to help prevent acci-
dental eye exposure. Data on use in pregnant and 
lactating patients are lacking.

 Clinical Pearls

Clinical experiences with these devices may lead 
dermatologists  to  find  that  cost  is  a  barrier  for 
their use. In these situations, combs are the least 
expensive  and  may  be  considered.  Other  issues 
encountered  in  clinic  are  varying  hair  thickness, 
texture  and  curl.  Some  clinicians  may  lean 
towards  using  a  device  with  teeth  so  as  to  part 
thick hair  and possibly deliver more light  to the 
target. Anecdotally,  compliance  is  also  an  issue, 
even with extensive counseling from a seasoned 
clinician. In these situations one may consider a 
cap or helmet shaped device which is hands free. 
Patients  with  extensive  hair  loss  may  also  find 
hands free devices helpful. There are dermatolo-
gists in the United States using these devices off- 
label  for  the  treatment  of  other  cicatricial  and 
noncicatricial  alopecias.  Data  for  use  in  other 
types of hair loss is lacking.

 Conclusion and Future Directions

treatment  option 

Evidence suggests that PBM is a safe and effec-
for  patients  with 
tive 
AGA. Therefore, it may be an effective alterna-
tive treatment for patients who are unresponsive 
to medical management or do not wish to undergo 
surgical  procedures  or  take  medications  to  treat 
their disease. Further studies are needed to exam-
ine the effectiveness of PBM devices in the treat-
ment  of  other  types  of  alopecia  (i.e.  telogen 
effluvium,  lichen  planopilaris,  frontal  fibrosing 
alopecia, etc.) and varying types including thick, 
thin, curly and straight hair. Research focused on 
the  development  of  topical  and  oral  treatment 
protocols in conjunction with PBM should con-
tinue to be pursued [55].

There  are  numerous  devices  on  the  market, 
making it difficult for the physician and patient to 
navigate. Currently, it is unknown if one device 
offers more clinical benefit over another. A head- 
to- head  comparison  of  FDA-cleared  PBM 
devices was initiated in 2016 and results have not 
yet been reported. Each device has unique design 
features. In addition, these devices vary in terms 
of cost, total power output, frequency of use, and 
treatment time. Wavelengths of these devices are 
similar, though optimal treatment wavelength is 
unknown. Further research into device specifica-
tions  such  wavelength,  dosimetry,  frequency  of 
use,  duration  of  treatment,  and  optimal  light 
source is needed to determine the most effective 
treatment modality for patients with AGA. Each 
of  these  factors  is  important  for  patients  when 
considering  a  PBM  device.  Physicians  should 
understand PBM and remain informed and armed 
with  information  regarding  devices  on  the  mar-
ket. As this arena continues to expand, questions 
regarding  PBM  will  likely  become  more  com-
monplace in the office setting.

References

  1.  Anders JJ, Lanzafame RJ, Arany PR. Low-level light/
laser  therapy  versus  photobiomodulation  therapy. 
Photomed Laser Surg. 2015;33(4):183–4.

  2.  Chung H, Dai T, Sharma SK, Huang YY, Carroll JD, 
Hamblin  MR.  The  nuts  and  bolts  of  low-level  laser 
(light) therapy. Ann Biomed Eng. 2012;40(2):516–33.

M. B. Hirt and R. S. Farah



  3.  Mester E, Szende B, Tota JG. Effect of laser on hair 
growth in mice. Kiserl Orvostud. 1967;19:628–31.
  4.  Mester  E,  Szende  B,  Gartner  P.  The  effect  of  laser 
beams  on  the  growth  of  hair  in  mice.  Radiobiol 
Radiother (Berl). 1968;9(5):621–6.

  5.  Severi  G,  Sinclair  R,  Hopper  JL,  English  DR, 
McCredie MR, Boyle P, Giles GG. Androgenetic alo-
pecia  in  men  aged  40-69  years:  prevalence  and  risk 
factors. Br J Dermatol. 2003;149(6):1207–13.

  6.  Gan DC, Sinclair RD. Prevalence of male and female 
pattern hair loss in Maryborough. J Investig Dermatol 
Symp Proc. 2005;10(3):184–9.

  7.  Hamilton JB. Patterned loss of hair in man: types and 
incidence. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1951;53(3):708–28.
  8.  Norwood  OT.  Incidence  of  female  androgenetic 
alopecia  (female  pattern  alopecia).  Dermatol  Surg. 
2001;27(1):53–4.

  9.  Han SH, Byun JW, Lee WS, Kang H, Kye YC, Kim 
KH,  Kim  DW,  Kim  MB,  Kim  SJ,  Kim  HO,  Sim 
WY,  Yoon  TY,  Huh  CH,  Hwang  SS,  Ro  BI,  Choi 
GS. Quality of life assessment in male patients with 
androgenetic alopecia: result of a prospective, multi-
center study. Ann Dermatol. 2012;24(3):311–8.
 10.  Cash  TF.  The  psychological  effects  of  andro-
genetic  alopecia  in  men.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1992;26(6):926–31.

 11.  Cash TF, Price VH, Savin RC. Psychological effects 
of  androgenetic  alopecia  on  women:  comparisons 
with balding men and with female control subjects. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 1993;29(4):568–75.

 12.  Kovács IB, Mester E, Görög P. Stimulation of wound 
healing  with  laser  beam  in  the  rat.  Experientia. 
1974;30(11):1275–6.

 13.  Lim  W,  Choi  H,  Kim  J,  Kim  S,  Jeon  S,  Zheng 
H,  Kim  D,  Ko  Y,  Kim  D,  Sohn  H,  Kim  O.  Anti- 
inflammatory effect of 635 nm irradiations on in vitro 
direct/indirect irradiation model. J Oral Pathol Med. 
2015;44(2):94–102.

 14.  Chow  RT,  Johnson  MI,  Lopes-Martins  RA,  Bjordal 
JM.  Efficacy  of  low-level  laser  therapy  in  the  man-
agement of neck pain: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis  of  randomised  placebo  or  active-treatment 
controlled trials. Lancet. 2009;374(9705):1897–908.
 15.  Gigo-Benato D, Geuna S, Rochkind S. Phototherapy 
for enhancing peripheral nerve repair: a review of the 
literature. Muscle Nerve. 2005;31(6):694–701.

 16.  Hashmi  JT,  Huang  YY,  Osmani  BZ,  Sharma  SK, 
Naeser  MA,  Hamblin  MR.  Role  of  low-level  laser 
therapy  in  neurorehabilitation.  PM  R.  2010;2(12 
Suppl):S292–305.

 17. Bjordal  JM,  Johnson  MI,  Iversen  V,  Aimbire  F, 
Lopes- Martins  RA.  Low-level  laser  therapy  in 
acute pain: a systematic review of possible mecha-
nisms  of  action  and  clinical  effects  in  randomized 
placebo-controlled  trials.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2006;24(2):158–68.

 18.  Pandeshwar P, Roa MD, Das R, Shastry SP, Kaul R, 
Srinivasreddy MB. Photobiomodulation in oral medi-
cine: a review. J Investig Clin Dent. 2016;7(2):114–26.
 19.  Avci  P,  Gupta A,  Sadasivam  M, Vecchio  D,  Pam  Z, 
Pam N, Hamblin MR. Low-level laser (light) therapy 

373

(LLLT) in skin: stimulating, healing, restoring. Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2013;32(1):41–52.

 20.  Greco M, Guida G, Perlino E, Marra E, Quagliariello 
E.  Increase  in  RNA  and  protein  synthesis  by  mito-
chondria  irradiated  with  helium-neon  lase.  Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 1989;163:1428–34. [PubMed: 
2476986]

 21.  Karu TI. Primary and secondary mechanisms of action 
of visible to near-IR radiation on cells. J Photochem 
Photobiol B. 1999;49:1–17. [PubMed: 10365442]
 22. Fukuda TY, Tanji MM, Silva SR, Sato MN, Plapler 
H.  Infrared  low-level  diode  laser  on  inflam-
matory  process  modulation  in  mice:  pro-  and 
anti- inflammatory  cytokines.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2013;28(5):1305–13.

 23.  Avci  P,  Gupta  GK,  Clark  J,  et  al.  Low-level  laser 
(light) therapy for treatment of hair loss. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2014;46(2):144–51.

 24.  Farivar  S,  Malekshahabi  T,  Shiari  R.  Biological 
effects of low level laser therapy. J Lasers Med Sci. 
2014;5(2):58–62.

 25.  De  Marchi  T,  Leal  Junior  EC,  Bortoli  C,  Tomazoni 
SS,  Lopes-Martins  RA,  Salvador  M.  Low-level 
laser therapy (LLLT) in human progressive-intensity 
running:  effects  on  exercise  performance,  skeletal 
muscle  status,  and  oxidative  stress.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2012;27(1):231–6.

 26.  Moriyama  Y,  Nguyen  J,  Akens  M,  Moriyama  EH, 
Lilge L. In vivo effects of low level laser therapy on 
inducible  nitric  oxide  synthase.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2009;41(3):227–31.

 27.  Huang  YY,  Nagata  K,  Tedford  CE,  McCarthy  T, 
Hamblin  MR.  Low-level 
therapy  (LLLT) 
reduces  oxidative  stress  in  primary  cortical  neurons 
in vitro. J Biophotonics. 2013;6(10):829–38.

laser 

 28.  Zhang Y, Song S, Fong CC, Tsang CH, Yang Z, Yang 
M. cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression pro-
files in human fibroblast cells irradiated with red light. 
J Invest Dermatol. 2003;120(5):849–57.

 29.  Wikramanayake  TC,  Rodriguez  R,  Choudhary  S, 
et  al.  Effects  of  the  Lexington  lasercomb  on  hair 
regrowth  in  the  C3H/HeJ  mouse  model  of  alopecia 
areata. Lasers Med Sci. 2012;27(2):431–6.

 30.  Capillus272 Pro, Capillus272 OfficePro, Capillus82, 
Capillus202 510(k) Summary. Available from: https://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf16/K160285.
pdf. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 31.  Sunetics  International.  Sunetics  Lasers.  Available 
from: http://www.suneticslasers.com. Accessed 5 Dec 
2016.

 32.  Capillus  LLC.  Available  from:  www.capillus.com. 

Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 33.  HairMax® LaserComb 510k Premarket Application. 
Available 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
cdrh_docs/pdf10/K103368.pdf.  Accessed  1  Dec 
2016.

from: 

 34.  Lexington  International,  LLC.  HairMax.  Available 
from: www.hairmax.com. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.
 35.  igrow-II  Hair  Growth  System  510(k)  Summary. 
Available from: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_
docs/pdf14/k141567.pdf. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

21 Photobiomodulation and Hair Growth



374

 36.  Apira  Science,  Inc.  iGrow®  Hair  Growth  System. 
Available  from:  www.igrowlaser.com.  Accessed  1 
Dec 2016.

 37.  iRestore Hair Growth System (Model ID-500) 510(k) 
Summary.  Available  at:  http://www.accessdata.fda.
gov/cdrh_docs/pdf15/K151662.pdf.  Accessed  1  Dec 
2016.

 38.  Freedom  Laser  Therapy,  Inc.  iRestore  Hair  Growth 
at:  www.irestorelaser.com. 

System.  Available 
Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 39.  Lasercap  510(k)  Summary.  Available  from:  http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/ pdf16/K161875.
pdf. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 40.  Transdermal Cap, Inc. LaserCap. Available at: www.

lasercap.com. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 41.  Nutra Stim Hair Laser Comb Model NSL-6318 510(k) 
Summary.  Available  from:  https://www.accessdata.
fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf14/K141588.pdf.  Accessed  1 
Dec 2016.

 42.  NutraStim, LLC. Available from: www.nutrastimhair.

com. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 43.  Theradome  Laser  Helmet  LH80  PRO  510(k) 
Summary.  Available  from:  https://www.accessdata.
fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf12/K122950.pdf.  Accessed  1 
Dec 2016.

 44.  Theradome,  Inc.  Available  from:  www.theradome.

com. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 45.  EGLOBAL, LLC. Illumiflow. Available from: https://

illumiflow.net. Accessed 5 April 2017.

 46.  FDA Hairmax lasercomb. Available online at: http://
www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/
CDRH/CDRHFOIAElectronicReadingRoom/
UCM203056.pdf

 47.  510(k)  Premarket  Notificaton  Database.  U.S.  Food 
and  Drug  Administration.  Available  at:  http://www.
Accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfPMN/pmn.
cfm. Accessed 1 Dec 2016.

 48.  Jimenez  JJ,  Wikramanayake  TC,  Bergfeld  W, 
Hordinsky M, Hickman JG, Hamblin MR, Schachner 
LA. Efficacy and safety of low-level laser device in the 
treatment of male and female pattern hair loss: a mul-
ticenter, randomized, sham device-controlled, double- 
blind study. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2014;15(2):115–27.
 49.  Leavitt  M,  Charles  G,  Heyman  E,  Michaels 
D.  HairMax  LaserComb  laser  phototherapy  device 
in the treatment of male androgenetic alopecia: a ran-

domized, double-blind, sham device-controlled, mul-
ticenter trial. Clin Drug Investig. 2009;29(5):283–92.
 50.  Zarei  M,  Wikramanayake  TC,  Falto-Aizourua  L, 
Schachner  LA,  Jimenez  JJ.  Low  level  laser  therapy 
and hair regrowth: an evidence-based review. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2016;31(2):363–71.

 51.  Afifi L, Maranda EL, Zarei M, Delcanto GM, Falto- 
Aizpurua  L,  Kluijfhout  WP,  Jimenez  JJ.  Low-level 
laser therapy as a treatment for androgenetic alopecia. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2016;49(1):27–39.

 52.  Lanzafame RJ, Blanch RR, Bodian AB, Chiacchierini 
RP, Fernandez-Obregon A, Kazmirek ER. The growth 
of  human  scalp  hair  mediated  by  visible  red  light 
laser  and  LED  sources  in  males.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2013;45(8):487–95.

 53.  Lanzafame  RJ,  Blanche  RR,  Chiacchierini  RP, 
Kazmirek ER, Sklar JA. The growth of human scalp 
hair in females using visible red light laser and LED 
sources. Lasers Surg Med. 2014;46(8):601–7.

 54.  Friedman  S,  Schnoor  P.  Novel  approach  to  treat-
ing  androgenetic  alopecia  in  females  with  photo-
biomodulation  (low-level  laser  therapy).  Dermatol 
Surg. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/
2017;43:856. 
DSS.0000000000001114.

 55. Esmat S, Hegazy R, Gawdat H, et al. Low-level light 
minoxidil  5%  combination  versus  either  therapeutic 
modality  alone  in  management  of  female  patterned 
hair loss: a randomized controlled study. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2017;49:835. https://doi.org/10.1002/lsm.22684.
 56.  Schulmeister  K,  Jean  M.  The  risk  of  retinal  injury 
from  Class  2  and  visible  Class  3R  lasers,  includ-
ing  medical  laser  aiming  beams.  Med  Laser  Appl. 
2010;25:99–110.

 57.  Satino  JL,  Markou  M.  Hair  regrowth  and  increased 
hair  tensile  strength  using  the  HairMax  LaserComb 
for  low-level  laser  therapy.  Int  J  Cosmetic  Surg 
Aesthetic Dermatol. 2003;5(2):113–7.

 58.  Rushton  DH,  Gilkes  JJH,  Van  Neste  DJJ.  No 
improvement  in  male-pattern  hair  loss  using  laser 
hair-comb  therapy:  a  6-month,  half-head,  assessor- 
blinded investigation in two men. Clin Exp Dermatol. 
2012;37(3):313–5.

 59.  Munck  A,  Gavazzoni  MF,  Trüeb  RM.  Use  of  low- 
level  laser  therapy  as  monotherapy  or  concomitant 
therapy  for  male  and  female  androgenetic  alopecia. 
Int J Trichology. 2014;6(2):45–9.

M. B. Hirt and R. S. Farah



Reflectance Confocal Microscopy 
in Oncological Dermatology

22

Pablo Fernández-Crehuet Serrano, 
Gonzalo Segurado-Miravalles, 
and Salvador González

Abstract
Imaging  techniques  capable  of  non-invasive, 
high-resolution, skin imaging in vivo have been 
the focus of recent attention in the dermatology 
field. These efforts are directed to improve the 
diagnostic  accuracy  of  skin  cancer,  especially 
cutaneous  melanoma.  Reflectance-mode  con-
focal microscopy (RCM) allows real time non-
invasive histological imaging with cytological 
detail comparable to conventional histology of 
the  skin  when  exploring  cutaneous  structures 
between  the  stratum  corneum  and  the  upper 
reticular dermis. RCM consists of a light source 
for illumination of a small spot within translu-
cent  tissue;  and  a  point  detector  that  detects 
back- scattered and reflected light though a pin-
hole.  The  pinhole  prevents  out-of-focus  light 
from reaching the detector; as a result, only the 

P. F.-C. Serrano 
Department of Dermatology,  
Alto Guadalquivir Hospital, Andújar, Jaén, Spain 

G. Segurado-Miravalles 
Department of Dermatology, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, 
Madrid, Spain 

S. González (*) 
Department of Medicine and Medical Specialities, 
Alcalá University, Madrid, Spain 

Dermatology Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Alcala University,  
Madrid, Spain
e-mail: gonzals6@mskcc.org

optical  plane  in  focus  (confocal)  is  detected. 
Similar  to  dermoscopy  images,  real  time 
images obtained by RCM are oriented horizon-
tal to skin surface (optical transversal sections). 
Melanin provides strong contrast because of its 
high  refractive  index  (1.7)  relative  to  the  sur-
rounding  epidermis;  the  melanosome  size, 
 similar to the near-infrared wavelengths (800–
1064  nm),  produces  strong  back  scattering  of 
the beam. Thus, cells containing melanin, such 
as  pigmented  keratinocytes,  melanocytes,  or 
melanophages, appear very bright when illumi-
nated in this manner. Similarly, other organelles 
or cytoplasmic granules provide good contrast 
(albeit less intense than melanin), resulting in 
good imaging of cells containing them, such as 
Langerhans cells, lymphocytes, or cytoplasmic 
granules in keratinocytes at the stratum granu-
losum. Major confocal imaging criteria of pig-
mented  lesions  such  as  benign  and  malignant 
melanocytic  tumors  have  been  established. 
RCM  imaging  criteria  of  other  skin  cancers 
such  as  basal  cell  carcinoma,  squamous  cell 
carcinoma, oral cavity neoplasm, and mycosis 
fungoides  have  also  been  evaluated.  RCM 
shows promise for: (1) guidance during biopsy 
collection; (2) monitoring histological architec-
tural  changes  or  dynamic  process  such  as 
inflammatory  response  or  capillary  flow;  (3) 
histological correlation with dermoscopic fea-
tures; (4) monitoring of the response of a given 
lesion to treatment; and (5) demarcation of the 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_22

375





376

extension of a lesion before proceeding to inva-
sive treatments such as surgical excisions. The 
main  limitation  of  RCM  is  its  relatively  low 
penetration  through  the  dermis;  currently,  a 
maximum  depth  of  250–300  μm  can  be 
achieved,  preventing  imaging  of  structures 
located  in  deep  dermis  and  hypodermis.  The 
main challenge is the interpretation of images. 
Specific photographic atlas, courses and devel-
opment  of  teledermatology  may  solve  this 
problem.

Keywords
Confocal microscopy · Melanoma · Nevi  
Basal cell carcinoma · Actinic keratoses  
Squamous cell carcinoma · Bowen disease

 Introduction

Dermatology  is  a  medical  speciality  in  which 
diagnosis  is  frequently  based  exclusively  on 
clinical examination. Recent advances in imag-
ing  techniques  provide  the  potential  for  non-
invasive  high-resolution  skin  imaging  in  vivo. 
These can overcome some of the disadvantages 
of the conventional biopsy and histologic analy-
sis.  Such  advances  include  dermoscopy  [1], 
optical  coherence  tomography  [2],  high-fre-
quency  ultrasound  [3],  magnetic  resonance 
confocal 
[4],  fluorescence- mode 
imaging 
microscopy [5], and reflectance-mode confocal 
microscopy (RCM). Of these, confocal micros-
copy is the technique with more possible appli-
time  non-invasive 
real 
cations,  offering 
microscopic images with the highest resolution 
imaging comparable to routine histology when 
exploring cutaneous structures between stratum 
corneum and reticular dermis [6–8].

 Principles of Reflectance-Mode 
Confocal Microscopy

The confocal scanning microscope was invented 
by Marvin Minsky while working as postdoctoral 
fellow  at  Harvard  in  1955  [9].  However,  it 

required  the  development  of  light  source  and 
computerization  technologies  to  enable  realiza-
tion  of  tissue  imaging  in  vivo.  Since  the  1980s 
several  research  groups  have  demonstrated  the 
use of tandem scanning confocal microscopy for 
imaging  human  and  animal  tissue  in  vivo  [10–
13].  Confocal  scanning  laser  microscopy  for 
imaging human skin in vivo was first reported in 
1995 [8]. In vivo RCM offers several important 
advantages over conventional histology. Imaging 
is  painless  and  non-invasive,  causing  no  tissue 
damage.  The  skin  is  not  altered  in  any  by  pro-
cessing  (fixation,  sectioning,  and  mounting)  or 
staining, minimizing artifact or disruption of the 
native structure in the tissue. The data, collected 
in real time, is faster than routine histology, and 
the skin site can be repeatedly imaged over time 
to  evaluate  dynamic  changes  such  as  tissue 
growth,  wound  healing,  lesion  progression  or 
response  to  therapy  [14–18].  Conventional  his-
tology  only  demonstrates  tissue  morphology  at 
one time point.

The principle of reflectance confocal micros-
copy involves the use of a point source of light 
that  illuminates  a  small  spot  within  translucent 
tissue.  The  reflected  light  (reflectance)  is  then 
imaged  onto  a  detector  after  passing  through  a 
small pinhole. The pinhole prevents out-of-focus 
light from reaching the detector. This means that 
only  the  region  of  a  specimen  that  is  in  focus 
(confocal) is detected. To create an image of the 
whole  plane  of  the  sample  being  studied,  the 
point source beam is scanned. This enables a vir-
tual  sectioning  of  a  thin  horizontal  tissue  plane 
in  vivo. The  ability  to  optically  section  a  tissue 
enables  intact  tissue  to  be  imaged  without  the 
need to physically section the tissue as is the case 
with conventional histology, allowing the physi-
cal  structure  of  the  tissue  to  be  preserved.  The 
resolution provided by RCM depends on the pin-
hole size, the numerical aperture of the objective 
lens, and the wavelength used. Lasers of different 
wavelengths may be used as the light source for 
RCM. Longer wavelengths penetrate deeper into 
the skin but provide less lateral resolution. Back- 
scattering of light occurs due to local variations 
of the refractive index within the tissue as well as 
when the scattering structure has a size similar to 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



the illuminating wavelength. Near-infrared wave-
lengths  (800–1064  nm)  produce  strong  back- 
scattering  from  melanosomes,  despite  melanin 
absorption at this wavelength, because they have 
a high refractive index relative to the surrounding 
epidermis  and  have  a  size  similar  to  the  illumi-
nating  wavelength  [14].  This  means  that  cells 
containing  melanin,  such  as  basal  keratinocytes 
and melanocytes, image brightly.

New microscopes use a single optical fibre that 
is  common  to  both  the  illumination  optical  path 
and the detection optical path. This single- mode 
optical  fibre  acts  as  a  spatial  filter  which  rejects 
the  out-of-focus  information  collected  by  the 
objective  lens.  This  system  simplifies  the  opto-
mechanical complexity by eliminating the bulky 
optical components and confocal apertures (pin-
holes)  associated  with  conventional  confocal 
implementations.  This  fibre-optic  approach  has 
enabled  miniaturization  of  the  confocal  scanner 
into a hand-held device that provides the flexibil-
ity and mobility necessary for current clinical use.
The commercially available RCM has a wave-
length of 830 nm and 30× objective lens of NA 
0.9, which provides a lateral resolution of approx-
imately  1  μm  and  an  axial  resolution  (section 
thickness) of 3–5 μm [14]. With this system, it is 
possible to image normal skin to a depth of 200–
250 μm [14]. This is sufficient for imaging epi-
dermis  and  upper  dermis  (papillary  dermis  and 
upper  reticular  dermis).  Imaging  deeper  layers 
within  the  skin  can  also  be  achieved  by  using 
greater laser power, but the laser power used in 
the  commercially  available  device  is  less  than 
30  mW  and  causes  no  tissue  damage  or  eye 
injury. Water immersion lenses are used since the 
refractive index of water (1.33) is close to that of 
epidermis  (1.34)  and  this  minimizes  spherical 
aberrations caused when the light passes through 
the tissue-air interface [14]. It is also possible to 
use  water-based  gels  as  immersion  media,  par-
ticularly  if  imaging  a  scaly  or  hyperkeratotic 
lesion since the gel settles between disrupted cor-
neocytes,  reducing  irregularities  in  refraction. 
Gel is also useful if imaging a skin site that is not 
particularly flat, since the gel doesn’t run off of 
the skin in the same way water can. A skin con-
tact device is used to reduce motion artefact and 

377

contain the water or the gel interface when imag-
ing. This  device  consists  of  a  metal  ring  that  is 
fixed  to  the  patient’s  skin  with  adhesive,  and  is 
coupled to the microscope housing with a magnet 
during  imaging.  It  has  a  concave  shape  to  hold 
the immersion medium. By moving the objective 
lens in the “z” stage (vertical) with respect to the 
skin  surface,  it  is  possible  to  image  at  different 
horizontal levels within the tissue since the focal 
plane is progressively moved deeper. Images can 
be grabbed to produce static pictures of horizon-
tal skin sections as well as recorded on videotape 
(20–30  Hz)  to  produce  movies  to  demonstrate 
dynamics events such as blood flow [8, 14–18].

 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy 
Findings of Normal Skin

Confocal microscopy offers a new view of the skin, 
both  in  terms  of  orientation  and  image  content, 
with two principal differences from routine histol-
ogy. First, the image obtained is horizontal or en 
face (horizontal) rather than vertical sections that 
are  normally  obtained  from  routine  histology. 
Second is that this image is in a gray-scale (bright-
scale) similar to radiographs. The field of view with 
RCM varies with different microscopes, but is gen-
erally  250–500  μm  across  [14].  The  level  being 
imaged  can  be  ascertained  by  the  morphologic 
appearance of tissue at a given depth or by measur-
ing  the  depth  of  section,  using  a  micrometer 
attached  to  the  “z”  stage  of  the  objective  lens. 
Image  contrast  is  produced  by  differences  in  the 
refractive  indices  of  the  varying  tissue  and  cell 
structures. Melanin-containing structures (melano-
somes,  melanocytes,  melanophages,  and  pig-
mented  keratinocytes,  among  others)  have  the 
highest refractivity, followed by keratin-containing 
structures, such as the stratum corneum, the infun-
dibulum,  and  the  hair  follicle.  Nuclei,  air,  and 
serum 
[19]. 
Microscopic structures similar in size to the wave-
length  of  the  incident  light  display  the  highest 
refractive  indices.  The  maximum  imaging  depth 
that has been achieved to date with RCM is approx-
imately 300 μm [14] although this may increase as 
the technique continues its development.

exhibit  minimum 

reflectivity 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



378

When  imaging  the  skin  in  real  time  starting 
from  the  surface  and  progressing  deeper,  the 
most superficial images obtained are of the stra-
tum corneum. This produces very bright images 
because the refractive difference at the interface 
between the immersion medium (water  at 1.33) 
and  stratum  corneum  (1.54)  results  in  a  large 
amount of back-scattered light. Low laser fluen-
cies  help  to  minimize  this.  The  morphologic 
appearance is that anucleated polygonal corneo-
cytes measuring 30–40 μm in size, and grouped 
in “islands” separated by skin folds, which appear 
very  dark.  The  next  layer  seen  is  the  stratum 
granulosum  consisting  of  2–4  layers  of  cells 
measuring 25–35 μm in size with a thickness of 
between  3  and  10  cells,  depending  on  the  ana-
tomic  location.  These  cells  have  the  nuclei  as 
dark central ovals within the cell, surrounded by 
bright  grainy  cytoplasm  due  to  the  presence  of 
bright multiple structures (0.1–1.0 μm) that cor-
respond  to  keratohyalin  granules.  The  granulo-
cytes  have  clear  outlines 
the 
characteristic confocal finding known as the hon-
eycomb pattern. The spinous layer has between 5 
to 10 layers of 15–25 μm in size cells, which have 
a dark oval central area (the nucleus) and clearly 
demarcated  outlines  that  together  with  the  stra-
tum  granulosum  form  the  characteristic  honey-
comb pattern. The deepest layer of epidermis, the 
basal  layer,  is  seen  as  a  bright  clusters  of  cells 
measuring about 7–10 μm [20]. The suprapapil-
lary  epidermal  plate  at  the  dermo-epidermal 
junction is apparent as rings of bright basal cells 
surrounding a dark dermal papillae, which often 
show a central area of blood flow consistent with 
papillary  dermal  vascular  loops.  The  papillary 
dermis  can  be  seen  to  consist  of  a  network  of 
reticulated fibers and small blood vessels. We can 
also observe eccrine ducts, with appear as bright 
centrally  hollow  structures  that  spiral  through 
epidermis and dermis, and hair shafts with pilo- 
sebaceous  units.  These  appear  as  whorled  cen-
trally hollow structures with elliptical elongated 
cells at the circumference and a central refractile 
long hair shaft.

form 

that 

The appearance of normal skin varies accord-
ing to the skin site and skin colour being imaged 
[21]. Skin from sun-exposed or darkly pigmented 

sites appears generally brighter because of what 
appears  to  be  more  pigment  at  the  basal  layer. 
Sun-exposed skin also demonstrated thicker and 
more fissured or wrinkled stratum corneum, more 
randomly arranged and irregularly shaped dermal 
papillae, and clumping of the dermal reticulated 
pattern,  consistent  with  collagen  and  elastic 
fibers. Variation in the density of keratinocytes is 
also apparent, with sun-protected sites showing a 
greater density than sun-exposed sites. The palms 
and  soles  of  feet  are  notable  for  having  an 
extremely  thick  stratum  corneum  and  a  greater 
number of eccrine ducts.

 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy 
of Non-melanocytic Neoplastic Skin 
Lesions

RCM characterization of neoplastic lesions is an 
important area for research, with the potential to 
aid  in  the  non-invasive  diagnosis  and  manage-
ment of a variety of skin cancers. With the advent 
of newer, less invasive, or topical therapies, it is 
desirable  to  use  a  non-invasive  diagnostic  tool 
that can allow high resolution, accurate identifi-
cation of tumor subtypes and tumor margins, and 
response to treatment.

 Basal Cell Carcinoma (Fig. 22.1)

Basal Cell Carcinomas (BCC) are the commonest 
skin tumors in man, and RCM characteristics of 
BCC have been well defined [22]. As with histol-
ogy, the different subtypes of BCC share certain 
confocal  patterns  that  make  it  relatively  easy  to 
reach  a  diagnosis.  They  include  the  presence  of 
islands of monomorphic tumor cells (Fig. 22.1b) 
that  are  elongated  in  shape  and  have  nuclei  ori-
ented along the same axis, producing a polarized 
appearance (basaloid nuclei). This polarized cell 
pattern persists through the thickness of the epi-
dermis, with loss of the normal progressive size 
difference of differentiating epidermal cells, loss 
of the normal honeycomb pattern, and loss of der-
mal  papillae  architecture. The  presence  of  pleo-
morphism  and  architectural  disorder  of  the 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



379

overlying epidermis is indicative of actinic dam-
age  or  consequence  of  the  tumor.  In  addition, 
RCM images show numerous dark, round spaces 
or branching (arborizing)  lines, containing mov-
ing cells with different levels of refractivity. This 
phenomenon corresponds to leukocyte trafficking 
[23]. It is also possible to visualize inflammatory 
cell  infiltrate  among  the  tumor  cells.  Imaging  is 
obtained at video-rate (30 frames per s), allowing 
high  temporal  resolution  (33  ms  per  frame)  for 
visualizing  dynamic  process  such  as  leukocyte 
rolling and adhesion on the endothelium. Another 
relatively  common  finding  is  a  dark  area  sur-
rounding aggregates of tumor cells, probably due 
to mucin deposits. This feature corresponds to the 
characteristic  clefting    (separation  of  tumor 
islands from the surrounding stroma) seen on his-
tology  (Fig.  22.1c).  Ulrich  et  al.  presented  13 
cases of BCC (including the three main histologic 
subtypes)  and  found  good  linear  correlation 
between dark areas seen by RCM and peritumoral 
mucin  thickness  [24].  The  stroma  sometimes 
appears brighter than the tumor islands, which are 
darker than usual (hyporeflective) (Fig. 22.1b, d) 
and are referred to as dark silhouettes. This fea-

ture  was  first  described  by  Ravinobitz  and  co-
workers  and  was  described  in  detail  [19].  Small 
bright  structures  corresponding  to  inflammatory 
cells can also be seen in the dermis.

All these observations allow defining a num-
ber of criteria to establish a successful diagnosis 
of BCC using RCM. As the number of criteria is 
higher, the specificity increased. A retrospective, 
multicentric  study  from  152  lesions  [25]  has 
shown that the presence of at least two of these 
criteria has a sensitivity of 100% for the diagno-
sis of BCC. The presence of two or more criteria 
was found to be 100% sensitive and 53.6% spe-
cific for the diagnosis of BCC, while four or more 
RCM  criteria  presented  95.7%  specificity  and 
82.9% of sensitivity.

In a published large prospective study, Guitera 
et  al.  [26]  analyzed  710  consecutive  equivocal 
lesions by RCM. The lesions included 216 mela-
nomas, 266 nevi, 119 BCCs, 67 pigmented facial 
macules,  and  42  lesions  classified  as  other  skin 
tumors. They studied 50% of the lesions (chosen 
randomly) by multivariate analysis and identified 
eight independently significant diagnostic features 
for BCC, with a sensitivity of 97.1% and a speci-

250 mm

100 mm

e

a

b

c

150 mm

d

Fig. 22.1  Basal cell carcinoma. (a) Dermoscopy reveals 
spoke-wheel  areas  and  concentric  blue-gray  structures. 
(b) RCM mosaic (1.5 × 1.5 mm) at the upper dermis level 
revealing tumor nodules (asterisks) of weak to moderate 
refractility. The bright stroma delineates individual tumor 
islands. Red and blue rectangles correspond to magnified 
images labeled c and d. (c) RCM view (0.250 × 0.5 mm) 

shows  a  defined  lobulated  tumor  island  (asterisk)  with 
peripheral  palisading  of  nuclei  (yellow  arrowheads), 
subtle  peritumoral  dark  cleft-like  space,  and  a  refractile 
surrounding  fibrotic  stroma 
(d)  RCM  view 
(0.5 × 0.650 mm) shows a collection of tumoral islands 
(asterisks) surrounded by brigt stroma (s). Small aggre-
gate of melanophages (red arrows) is also noted

(s). 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



380

ficity of 93.4%. Five of the factors were positive: 
polarized  elongated  structures  in  the  superficial 
layer,  linear  telangiectasia-like  horizontal  ves-
sels,  compact  nests  of  hyporeflective  cells, 
peripheral  palisading,  and  a  new  concept  called 
epidermal shadowing, which they described as a 
large dark featureless area disrupting the epider-
mis  due  to  en  face  clefting  of  the  underlying 
tumor nests. The three negative features were the 
atypical honeycomb pattern, nonvisible papillae, 
and cerebriform nests. A recently published sys-
tematic review of diagnostic accuracy of RCM in 
BCC estimated a sensitivity of 97% and a speci-
ficity  of  93%  of  RCM  in  diagnosing  BCC,  this 
supports outcomes of Guitera et al. [26, 27].

RCM has been employed in different studies 
that describe the main features of different histo-
logical  subtypes  of  BCC  which  is  important  in 
order to determine the therapeutics and prognosis 
of the tumor [28]. Infiltrative BCC is visualized 
as  ill-defined  invading  structures  composed  of 
very polarized cells that penetrate and deform the 
dermis, while nodular BCC reveals well-defined 
tumor  islands  with  peripheral  palisading  sur-
rounded by dark areas [29]. In this regard, Longo 
et al. analyzed 88 BCC and correlated confocal 
features  and  BCC  subtype.  Nodular  BCC  was 
more likely if clefting was present and cords con-
nected  to  epidermis  were  absent.  On  the  other 
hand,  infiltrative  BCC  was  the  most  common 
diagnosis if tumor islands, big or small, and cords 

connected to epidermis were absent. Finally, the 
presence of cords connected to epidermis in the 
absence of clefting was associated with a higher 
odds of superficial BCC [30].

 Actinic Keratoses (Fig. 22.2)

surrounded  by 

Actinic keratoses (AK) are keratinocytic dyspla-
sias that can develop into squamous cell carcino-
mas  (SCC).  RCM  features  of  AK  include 
irregular  hyperkeratosis,  and  parakeratosis 
(Fig. 22.2b), architectural disarray (Fig. 22.2c), 
epidermal  cell  nuclear  enlargement  with  pleo-
morphism (Fig. 22.2c), and round vascular loops 
solar  elastosis 
frequently 
(Fig.  22.2d). The  pattern  of  architectural  disar-
ray does not involve the full thickness of the epi-
dermis  [31].  Pellacani  et  al.  found  good 
concordance  between  the  keratinocyte  atypia 
visualized with RCM and histopathology [32]. A 
recently  published  study  stated  that  photodam-
aged  skin  and AK  are  part  of  a  disease  contin-
uum,  due  to  the  almost  constant  presence  of 
keratinocyte  pleomorphism  and  architectural 
disruption  in  RCM  images  of  photodamaged 
skin, although less severe than in AK [33].

Ulrich and co-workers [34] evaluated the sen-
sitivity  of  RCM  in  the  diagnosis  of AKs.  They 
estimate  this  parameter  in  97.7%  (a  total  of  44 
AKs were included in this study).

a

b

se

se

100 mm

c

100 mm

d

100 mm

Fig.  22.2  Actinic  keratosis.  Skin  cancerization.  (a) 
RCM image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) at the level of stratum cor-
neum  with  hyperkeratinization  and  parakeratosis.  (b) 
RCM image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) at the spinous layer with kera-

tinocyte  disarray  (red  dashed  circle).  (c)  RCM  image 
(0.5 × 0.5 mm) of the upper dermis level displaying solar 
elastosis  (se)  and  round  blood  vessels  (dashed  red 
circles)

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



The most important limiting factor of RCM is 
the shallow depth penetration of the illuminating 
wavelength,  which  prevents  accurate  visualiza-
tion of the dermo-epidermal junction in particu-
larly hyperkeratotic lesions. This has traditionally 
limited the capability of RCM to distinguish AK 
from  SCC.  Nevertheless  new  research  in  this 
field  conducted  by  Peppelman  et  al.  states  that 
the presence of architectural disarray in the stra-
tum  spinosum  and  granulosum  in  combination 
with dermal nest-like structures strongly suggests 
a SCC instead of an AK [35].

Pigmented AKs usually constitute a diagnos-
tic challenge, in this way Moscarella et al. [36] 
found the presence of epidermal changes (atypi-
cal  keratinocytes,  parakeratosis  and  scaling), 
increased epidermal thickness, bright and small, 
dermal  papillae  with  enlarged  interpapillary 
space  and  intraepidermal  dendritic  cells  as  the 
main RCM features of pigmented AK.

 Bowen Disease

Bowen disease (BD) is an in situ squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC) histologically characterized by 
proliferation  of  atypical  pleomorphic  keratino-
cytes  throughout  the  epidermis.  Dyskeratosis, 
mitosis,  and  multinucleated  cells  are  very 
 common findings [37]. Clinically, it can be mis-
diagnosed as non-melanoma skin cancer or cer-
tain  inflammatory  skin  conditions,  such  as 
eczema  and  psoriasis  [38].  Ulrich  et  al.  [39] 
recently  published  a  study  of  the  confocal  fea-
tures of ten BD lesions and described their cor-
relation  with  routine  histologic  features.  The 
most common confocal findings were disruption 
of the stratum corneum, an atypical honeycomb 
pattern in the epidermis with a greater degree of 
architectural disorder and cellular atypia than in 
AK, S-shaped blood vessels in the center of the 
dermal  papillae,  and  two  types  of  characteristic 
targetoid  cells.  The  first  type  of  cells  was  mor-
phologically  large  cells  with  a  dark  center,  a 
bright rim, and a dark halo, and the second type 
were large cells with a bright center and a dark 
halo. The cells are thought to correspond to the 
different degrees of dyskeratosis seen by conven-

381

tional  histology.  Other  features  observed  were 
parakeratosis,  multinucleated  cells,  and  solar 
elastosis.

 Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Fig. 22.3)

In 2009, Rishpon et al. [40] published a study of 
the confocal characteristics of 38 clinically sus-
pected SCC lesions that were subsequently con-
firmed by histology. The features identified were 
an atypical honeycomb or disarranged pattern in 
the epidermis (Fig. 22.3d), large round cells with 
nuclear atypia in the stratum spinosum and stra-
tum  granulosum  (Fig.  22.3d),  and  round  and 
polymorphous blood vessels crossing the dermal 
papillae (Fig. 22.3e). RCM images of the stratum 
corneum typically reveal bright amorphous struc-
tures that correspond to the presence of crusts on 
the tumor surface and polygonal nucleated cells 
with  a  bright  rim  around  a  dark  nucleus  (para-
keratosis) (Fig. 22.3c). Hyperkeratosis and acan-
thosis permitting, RCM may also show increased 
dermal vasculature and solar elastosis as well as 
tumor  islands  in  the  case  of  invasive  SCC  [35]. 
As  above  mentioned,  the  presence  of  architec-
tural disarray in stratum spinosum and granulo-
sum  in  conjunction  with  nest-like  structures  in 
dermis is associated with a correct diagnosis of 
SCC  in  88.5%  of  cases  when  discriminating 
between SCC and AK [35].

 Mycosis Fungoides

At  the  patch  stage  of  mycosis  fungoides  (MF), 
changes are often subtle; consequently diagnosis 
at this early phase with confocal microscopy may 
be difficult. The most important confocal features 
include hyporefractivity of dermal papillary rings 
and small, weakly refractive round cells located 
in the spinous layer, which correlate to the inter-
face changes and exocytosis, respectively. In the 
plaque phase of MF, the visualization of typical 
confocal  features  of  MF  may  be  easier.  Some 
small,  lightly  refractive  cells  appear  in  the  spi-
nous  layer  correlating  to  epidermotropism  of 
lymphocytes, which sometimes are grouped and 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



382

a

200 mm

b

c

150 mm

d

150 mm

e

150 mm

Fig. 22.3  Squamous Cell Carcinoma. (a) Dermoscopy 
displays a nodular lesion with irregular and polymophous 
vessels and whitish opaque areas. (b) Slight oblique RCM 
submosaic  (1.5  ×  1.5  mm)  at  dermo  epidermal  junction 
reveals  keratinocyte  disarray,  exocytosis  and  polymor-
phous  vessels  (red  arrowheads).  In  the  upper  portion 
hyperkeratotic  areas  (hk)  may  be  visualized.  (c)  RCM 

image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) shows impetiginized stratum cor-
neum with inflammatory cells (yellow asterisks), atypical 
nucleated  corneocytes  (red  arrow)  and  hyperkeratosis 
(hk). (d) RCM image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) at suprabasal epider-
mal  layer  displays  keratinocyte  disarray  (kd).  (e)  RCM 
image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) at the upper dermis shows the pres-
ence of polymorphous vessels (red arrowheads)

located  inside  dark  spaces  within  the  epidermis 
corresponding to Pautrier microabscesses on his-
topathology. These vesicle-like spaces have to be 
distinguished from those seen in acute eczema by 
the absence of parakeratosis and spongiosis and 
the presence of other MF characteristic confocal 
features.  In  tumor-type  MF,  the  hyporefractive 
papillary rings and the infiltration of small lightly 
refractive  cells  in  the  epidermis  are  frequently 
visualized in confocal images, while the vesicle- 
like  spaces  are  rarely  detected.  Inside  papillary 
dermis, highly refractive cells of small to medium 
size are observed and blood vessels may show a 
well-circumscribed  thickened  wall  [29].  RCM 
may be a real-time guide for optimal biopsy site 
selection  in  patients  with  multiple  lesions  sug-
gestive of MF.

Recently,  a  study  published  by  Mancebo  and 
co-workers [41] showed a very good correlation 
between  RCM  and  histopathology  regarding  the 
presence of epidermal lymphocytes and detection 
of  melanophages  in  the  dermis.  Pautrier  collec-
tion had fair agreement (kappa 0.32), with Pautrier 
collection  more  commonly  visualized  on  RCM 
(76%  vs  59%).  They  also  claimed  that  lesions 
with Pautrier collection identified by RCM were 
significantly more likely to show TCR clonality.

 Pigmented Lesions

Early detection of melanoma is essential, and still 
one of the most challenging problems in clinical 
dermatology.  The  need  for  improved  diagnostic 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



a

b

383

250 mm

c

d

500 mm

250 mm

seborrheic  keratoses. 

Fig.  22.4  Pigmented 
(a) 
Dermoscopy reveals a star-shaped lesion with sharply cir-
cumscribed and moth-eaten edges, also containing a cen-
tral  hyperpigmented  area  with  millium-like  cists.  (b) 
RCM  Mosaic  (3  ×  3  mm)  at  dermo-epidermal  junction 
displays  geographic  dermal  papillae  and  opening  full  of 
keratin material (red asterisks) corresponding to comedo- 

like openings and well-defined, intensely bright, rounded 
areas  (red  arrows)  corresponding  to  millium  cysts.  (c) 
RCM image (0.5 × 0.5 mm) within the mosaic b displays 
irregular  dermal  papillae  in  size  and  shape  with  curved, 
invaginated  borders 
image 
(asterisks). 
(0.5 × 0.5 mm) (red dashed line)

(d)  RCM 

accuracy  in  melanocytic  skin  tumors  with  non- 
invasively  methods  has  led  to  the  development 
and  investigation  of  new  imaging  tools  such  as 
high-resolution  ultrasound,  optical  coherence 
tomography, spectroscopy and RCM. RCM is the 
most  promising  for  non-invasively  examining 
skin structures at a level that allows cellular details 
and, such as dermoscopy, it may be useful for dif-
ferential diagnosis between pigmented lesions.

 Seborrheic Keratosis (Fig. 22.4)
Seborrheic  keratosis  is  a  common  benign  epider-
mal  proliferation.  Sometimes  this  tumor  can  be 
pigmented and then it may be important in the dif-
ferential  diagnosis  with  melanocytic  lesions  such 

as melanoma. On RCM, we can see epidermal pro-
liferation without keratinocytic disarray and long, 
parallel, geographic dermal papillae (Fig. 22.4b, d), 
which  are  well  delimited  by  high  bright  rings  of 
basal keratinocytes (edge papillae). This architec-
ture  pattern  has  interpretation  as  benign  pattern. 
Additionally  comedo-like  openings  filled  with 
keratin (Fig. 22.4c) and millium cists (Fig. 22.4b) 
are visualized. In the case of clonal seborrheic ker-
atosis,  a  clod  pattern  resembling  melanocytic 
lesions may also be visualized [42].

 Dermatofibroma (Fig. 22.5)
Dermatofibroma (DF) is a common benign der-
mal  proliferation  of  histiocytes  that  can  arise  at 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



384

a 

b

Fig.  22.5  Dermatofibroma.  (a)  Dermoscopy  shows  a 
brown, pigmented network with central scar-like área. (b) 
RCM mosaic (5,5 × 5 mm) at dermo-epidermal junction 
demonstrates increased density of bright dermal papillary 

rings  within  the  complete  lesional  área.  Central  portion 
shows  partly  homogeneus  and  dense  collagen  bundles 
(yellow  asterisks). At  the  periphery,  the  lesion  displays 
elongated dermal papillae (red dashed circle)

any  age  and  equally  in  male  and  female,  but  is 
more  typically  seen  in  young  adult  women. 
Darkly pigmented lesions can simulate dysplastic 
nevi  or  melanoma.  Reflectance  confocal  micro-
scopic examination of DF shows the presence of 
a  normal  epidermis  with  homogeneously  bright 
papillary rings and refractile keratinocytes above 
the dermo-epidermal junction (Fig. 22.5b) corre-
sponding  histologically  to  the  pigmentation  of 
the  basal  layer.  Moreover,  the  dermis  presents 
high refractile, thick collagen bundle correspond-
ing 
tumor 
(Fig. 22.5b). We have not specific images on con-

the  sclerotic  stroma  of 

the 

to 

focal  microscopy  examination  of  DF  because 
spindle fibroblast-like cells, histiocytes and scle-
rotic stroma are too deep, in the reticular dermis.  
Although  there  are  not  specific  images  in  DF 
examination  using  reflectance  confocal  micros-
copy,  we  consider  that  this  technique  may  be  a 
useful  tool  in  differential  diagnosis  with  others 
cutaneous tumors, particularly when DF is darkly 
pigmented and it simulates melanocytic lesions.

 Angioma
Angioma  is  a  vascular  tumor  that  consist  in 
numerous and dilated blood vessels. RCM shows 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al. 
 
 




dilated, tortuous blood vessels located at superfi-
cial dermis. As RCM can obtain real time images 
we visualize blood flow in these vessels [17].

 Pigmented Basal Cell Carcinoma
Pigmented BCC is a clinical and histologic vari-
ant of BCC that may at times be difficult to clini-
cally distinguish from benign pigmented lesions 
and melanoma. Agero and co-workers have char-
acterized  pigmented  BCC  with  RCM  [43].  The 
features  include  the  same  characteristics  previ-
ously mentioned for BCC. Melanin pigment was 
not  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  tumor 
cords. The variable amounts of melanin present, 
together with the melanin distribution within the 
tumor nests, determined the variability in bright-
ness 
on 
RCM.  Contributing  to  the  pigmentation  of  the 
tumor  is  melanin  pigment  in  benign  epidermal 
keratinocytes, in tumor cells of BCC, in melano-
cytes interspersed among the tumor cells, and in 
melanophages  in  papillary  dermis.  Melanin  and 
melanosomes  provide  strong  contrast  with  the 
surrounding  edematous  or  mucinous  dermal 
stroma of BCCs under RCM.

visualized 

tumor 

nest 

of 

 Pigmented Mammary Paget Disease
RCM  has  also  been  used  to  study  Paget  disease 
(PD),  probably  because  it  has  proven  to  be  an 
excellent  tool  for  identifying  pagetoid  spread  in 
lentigo maligna melanoma and superficial spread-
ing melanoma [44]. In 2007, Longo and co-work-
ers published a case of pigmented mammary PD 
with RCM findings suggestive of melanoma [45]: 
pagetoid infiltration by large, round atypical cells 
with  a  bright  cytoplasm  and  a  dark  nucleus 
together with numerous large cells with long den-
dritic  branches  in  the  stratum  corneum  and  ill-
defined papillary rings. More recently Guitera and 
colleagues [46] published a series of nine cases of 
extramammary  PD  and  one  case  of  mammary 
PD. All the lesions displayed large Paget cells dis-
tributed  either  individually  or  in  small  nests, 
which is a characteristic finding in PD. The Paget 
cells in the stratum granulosum were visualized as 
dark  or  hyporeflective  structures.  In  four  cases, 
the cells were seen as bright structures with a dark 
halo (targetoid lesion). This halo may correspond 

385

to the cleft-like separation of Paget cells from the 
epidermis that is seen on histology and is possibly 
due to mucin secreted by these cells or to intercel-
lular fluid. While mucin appears hyporeflective in 
RCM  images,  Paget  cells  are  frequently  seen  as 
hyperreflective, probably due to the reflection of 
light from the secretory granules and to the prom-
inent  Golgi  apparatus  and  numerous  free  ribo-
somes  that  these  cells  contain.  An  atypical  or 
disarrayed honeycomb pattern indicating disrup-
tion of the epidermis is seen in many cases. The 
blood vessels are generally abundant, small, and 
vertically oriented, a typical finding for skin in the 
anogenital  region.  Considering  the  non-specific-
ity  of  the  clinical  manifestations  of  PD  and  the 
fact that this disease can mimic a range of inflam-
matory, allergic, and infectious conditions, RCM 
may  facilitate  earlier  diagnosis  and  faster  initia-
tion of appropriate treatment [47]. It can also be 
useful  for  selecting  the  most  appropriate  biopsy 
site  and  for  mapping  out  margins  prior  to  treat-
ment [48, 49].

 Melanocytic Nevi (Figs. 22.6 and 22.7)
RCM is particularly well suited to the imaging of 
melanocytic  lesions,  since  the  large  amount  of 
melanin  they  contain  provides  very  good  con-
trast. Accurate characterization of the features of 
benign  and  malignant  melanocytic  lesions  has 
important 
implications  for  diagnosis  and/or 
screening of pigmented lesions. RCM features of 
common  melanocytic  nevi  have  recently  been 
identified and are characterized by the presence 
of a homogeneous population of small monomor-
phous  round  or  oval  brightly  refractile  cells 
within  which  nuclei  are  centrally  positioned 
(nevomelanocytes) [50, 51]. In benign nevi both 
spinous  and  granular  layers  show  no  alteration, 
with  normal  pattern  consisting  in  homogenous 
and  well-demarcated  keratinocytes.  Dermal 
papillae  are  uniformly  distributed  and  circum-
scribed  by  a  ring  of  refractive  monomorphous 
cells  that  correspond  to  small  melanocytes  and 
basal keratinocytes (melanin-rich cells), without 
any cytologic atypia.

Junctional  nevi  display  abundant  single  cell 
proliferation at the DEJ that results in the pres-
ence of single small bright polygonal cells outlin-

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



386

hf

a

250 µm 

hf

b

c

450 µm

Fig.  22.6  Acquired  nevus.  (a)  Dermoscopy  reveals  a 
network  pattern.  (b)  RCM  image  (0.4  ×  0.6  mm)  corre-
sponds to the red square of the image c. It reveals single 
cell  proliferation  at  the  dermo-epidermal  junction  that 
results  in  the  presence  of  single  small  bright  polygonal 

cells outlining the dermal papillae displaying a ringed pat-
tern.  A  sweat  loop  (red  arrowhead)  may  be  seen.  (c) 
RCM  mosaic  (3  ×  4.5  mm)  showing  a  ringed  pattern. 
Sweat loops (red arrowheads) and hair follicles (hf) are 
seen

ing the dermal papillae, generating the so-called 
“ringed” pattern (Fig. 22.6) on RCM [52]. Some 
junctional nevi also display few nests located at 
the tip of the cristae and this aspect shows up as a 
“meshwork” pattern on RCM that is made by the 
junctional  enlargement  between  the  papillae 
(Fig. 22.6). In these lesions, the presence of cyto-
logic  atypia  is  uncommon.  Intradermal  nevi 
reveal  the  presence  of  the  so-called  “clod”  pat-
tern  where  several  nests  fulfill  completely  the 
dermal  compartment  (Fig.  22.7).  Nests  into  the 
dermis  can  show  up  as  compact  dense  or  as 
“dense & sparse” nests [53, 54], where the aggre-

gates are large and made by large roundish cells 
outlined by epidermal strands.

a 

Moreover, 

combination 

of  mesh-
work + ringed or clod + meshwork + ringed pat-
terns  are  often  found.  Usually  the  presence  of 
clod  pattern  is  apparent  in  the  centre  of  the 
lesion  corresponding  to  the  clinical  palpable 
area  and  to  the  presence  of  variable  sized  der-
mal nests.

RCM  is  particularly  useful  in  discriminating 
these lesions from melanoma since dermoscopy 
can  be  not  enough  specific  thus  leading  to  the 
overlooking of these nevi.

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



387

hf

*

*

d

450 µm 

250 µm

sf

a

sf

b

c

Fig. 22.7  Dermal nevus. (a) Dermoscopy reveals a clod 
pattern. (b) RCM image (0.55 × 0.5 mm) at the upper epi-
dermis showing a typical honeycombed pattern. Poligonal 
keratinocytes  are  seen  between  skin  folds  (sf).  (c)  RCM 
image (0.55 × 0.5 mm) from exactly the same skin area at 

the  dermoepidermal  junction  level  reveals  the  presence 
dense nests (yellow asterisks). (c) RCM image (3 × 4 mm) 
discloses  dense  (yellow  asterisks)  and  sparse  (white 
asterisks) dermal nests, hair follicles (hf) and other annex-
ial structures (red arrows)

Blue nevi appear as a consequence of dermal 
proliferation  of  melanocytes.  Since  the  RCM 
allows the visualization only of the upper dermis, 
these nevi do not represent the best candidate for 
confocal  imaging.  However,  a  few  case  reports 
describe the presence of spindled/dendritic mela-
nocytes as a confocal clue that may be useful for 
the diagnosis of blue nevi [55].

skin, without apparent discrete nests or cell) and 
dense  clusters  expanding  dermal  papillae  are 
confocal features suggestive of congenital mela-
nocytic nevi [56].

 Dysplastic Nevi

RCM  is  useful  in  assessment  small  and 
medium congenital melanocytic nevi. Dark holes 
or fissures, corneal cysts, white papillae (i.e., der-
mal  papillae  with  brighter  content  than  normal 

RCM features of dysplastic nevi are in contrast to 
others  melanocytic  nevi.  As  previously  men-
tioned, common and junctional melanocytic nevi 
preserve the epidermal architecture and they are 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



388

characterised by a symmetrical architectural pat-
tern and homogeneous cytological characteristics. 
On  the  contrary,  dysplastic  nevi  share  features 
with common nevi and melanoma [50]. Dysplastic 
nevi also show a greater variety in nevomelano-
cyte refractivity, size and shape (nevomelanocytic 
population  more  heterogeneous).  However, 
nevomelanocytic cells tend to be round or oval as 
in common nevi, rather than dendritic as in mela-
nomas [50, 51]. Atypia is seen at dermoepidermal 
junction  as  big  isolated,  epithelioid  cells  with 
peripheral  nucleus  [52].  Cell  nests  may  be  less 
demarcated.  Keratinocytes  focally  lose  their 
demarcations at the spinous layer associated with 
dendrites  and  occasionally  “melanin  dust”  (high 
refractive  granular  particles  that  probably  repre-
sent melanin bodies). Especially on the face, atyp-
ical  nevi  may  show 
focal  disruption  at 
dermo-epidermal junction (focal loss of the cell-
cell  keratinocytic  borders),  with  low  homoge-
neous dermal papillae with absence of demarcation 
by refractive cells. Lovatto et al. showed the use-
fulness  of  RCM  in  conjunction  with  digital  fol-
low-up  in  atypical  mole  syndrome  patients, 
increasing  the  accuracy  in  the  assessment  of 
equivocal  lesions  and  decreasing  the  number  of 
benign lesions excised [57].

Spitz/Reed  nevi  are  a  family  of  lesions  that 
vary in terms of clinical-dermoscopic aspect, his-
tologic  features  and  biologic  attitudes.  Confocal 
microscopy allows the analysis of the superficial 
dermis and thus, the exploration of the deeper part 
is not possible, hampering the evaluation of some 
relevant aspects such as maturation [58, 59].

Although  the  confocal  features  of  Spitz  nevi 
are  partially  characteristic,  they  remain  in  most 
cases, indistinguishable from melanoma. A good 
correlation  was  found  for  some  histopathologic 
aspects  and  RCM  features;  some  of  which  are 
considered  characteristic  of  Spitz  nevi,  such  as 
sharp  lateral  demarcation  and  presence  of  spin-
dled cells. Other correlates that are not very spe-
cific include pagetoid infiltration, junctional and 
dermal nests, parakeratosis, trans-epidermal mel-
anin elimination, and inflammatory infiltrate rich 
in melanophages. The frequent presence of fea-
tures  suggestive  of  malignancy  in  Spitz  nevi, 
such  as  pagetoid  and  atypical  cells,  non-edged 

papillae, dishomogeneous nests, and the impos-
sibility  to  explore  the  deeper  parts  of  a  given 
lesion,  hamper  a 
reliable  diagnosis  with 
RCM. According to a study conducted by Guida 
and co-workers [60], RCM may be useful in dif-
ferentiating melanoma from Spitz nevi with star-
burst or globular pattern on dermoscopy. In this 
case, the presence of striking cell pleomorphism 
within the epidermis, widespread atypical cells at 
the  dermoepidermal  junction  and  marked  pleo-
morphism within nests were significantly associ-
ated  with  the  diagnosis  of  melanoma,  while 
spindled cells and peripheral clefting were found 
exclusively in Spitz naevi.

 Malignant Melanoma (Fig. 22.8)

Gerger and co-workers demonstrated the appli-
cation  of  RCM  to  diagnostic  classification  of 
benign and melanocytic skin tumors [61]. They 
consider the images derived from dermo-epider-
mal  junction  more  useful  for  diagnosis.  The 
most useful parameters were melanocytic cyto-
morphology  and  architecture  and  keratinocyte 
cells  edge  assessment,  with  high  inter-observer 
and intra- observer agreement. On the other hand, 
evaluation  of  melanocytic  cell  brightness  and 
dendrite-like structures had less to none diagnos-
tic importance. In this  study,  observers without 
specific dermatopathology experience performed 
better than trained dermatopathologists, indicat-
ing  that  micromorphologic  features  relevant  in 
paraffin  histology  cannot  directly  be  related  to 
RCM images. In their opinion, an unprejudiced 
approach of the observer seems to be more suc-
cessful with respect to diagnostic accuracy. More 
recently,  a  diagnostic  semi-quantitative  algo-
rithm for RCM evaluation of clinically and der-
moscopically equivocal melanocytic lesions has 
been  proposed  by  Pellacani  and  co-workers 
showing a total score ranging from 0 to 8 [62]. 
This  algorithm  has  two  major  and  four  minor 
RCM  criteria  associated  to  malignancy.  Major 
criteria (scored two points in the diagnostic algo-
rithm)  are  the  presence  of  non-edged  papillae 
and  cytological  atypia  (Fig.  22.8b,  c),  whereas 
the minor criteria (scored one point) are the pres-

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



389

a

500 µm

b

c

300 µm

d

100 µm

Fig. 22.8  Melanoma.  (a)  Dermoscopy  reveals  a  struc-
turless,  broken  network  with  thickened  areas  and  a  few 
rosettes. (b) RCM mosaic (6 × 4 mm) at dermoepidermal 
junction  displays  a  multicomponent  architecture  with 
ringed  (blue  dashed  circle)  and  meshwork  (yellow 
dashed circle) patterns. Red rectangle corresponds to the 

magnified image c. (c) RCM submosaic (1.2 × 1.2 mm) of 
obtained from mosaic b denotes the presence of edge and 
non-edge  (red  dashed  circle)  dermal  papillae  with 
numerous  atypical  cells  (red  arrows).  (d)  RCM  image 
(0.5 × 0.5 mm) at the suprabasal level reveals large round-
ish pagetoid cells (red arrowheads)

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



390

the  epidermis  correspond 

ence of round, bright, and nucleated cells within 
the epidermis (Fig. 22.8d), pagetoid cells wide-
spread  throughout  the  lesion,  and  cerebriform 
clusters  and  bright  nucleated  cells  within  the 
dermal papilla. Lesions with a score equal to or 
greater than three were quantified for final scores 
of  97.3%  sensitivity  and  72.3%  specificity. 
Infiltration  of  the  epidermis  by  melanocytes 
(pagetoid  melanocytosis)  is  considered  a  rele-
vant  criterion  for  melanoma  by  pathologists, 
although  sporadically  observable  in  benign 
melanocytic lesions. 35 RCM enables the visual-
ization of superficial layers at cellular-level reso-
lution; pagetoid melanocytosis may be exposed 
by this technique indicating that melanoma diag-
nosis should be considered, whereas it cannot be 
excluded in the absence of pagetoid cells, which 
are absent in at least 10% of malignant lesions 
[63]. Similar results could be obtained in eczem-
atous  lesions,  where  bright  dendritic  cells 
located  at 
to 
Langerhans cells [64]. Thus, although the pres-
ence  of  pagetoid  dissemination  is  relevant, 
observation of round pagetoid cells is more spe-
cific and it can be considered a further criterion 
for melanoma (Fig. 8c). Recently, the validity of 
the algorithm was blindly tested on a larger pop-
ulation of equivocal melanocytic lesions, show-
ing  in  a  reproducible  clinical  setting  a  92% 
sensitivity and 70% specificity [44]. Segura et al. 
developed  a  two-step  method  for  the  diagnosis 
of  melanoma  by  RCM  [65].  In  a  preliminary 
study, they evaluated 154 skin tumors, including 
100  melanocytic  and  54  non-melanocytic 
lesions,  by  RCM  before  their  excision.  They 
observed  four  confocal  features  that  differenti-
ated melanocytic from non-melanocytic lesions: 
cobblestone  pattern  of  epidermal  layers,  paget-
oid  spread,  mesh  appearance  of  the  dermoepi-
dermal  junction,  and  the  presence  of  dermal 
nests. Within melanocytic lesions, the presence 
of roundish suprabasal cells and atypical nucle-
ated cells in the dermis was associated with mel-
anoma, and the presence of edged papillae and 
typical  basal  cells  was  associated  with  nevi. 
Furthermore, a recent study [66] tried to deter-
mine  whether  specific  histological  features  in 
dysplastic nevi had reliable correlates on confo-

cal microscopy and developed an in vivo micro-
scopic  grading  system,  which  consists  in  a 
simplified  algorithm  to  distinguish  dysplastic 
nevi  from  melanoma  and  non-dysplastic  nevi. 
Sixty melanocytic lesions with equivocal derma-
toscopic aspects were analyzed by RCM and his-
topathology,  and  they  found  good  correlation 
between  their  features.  As  observed  by  RCM, 
dysplastic  nevi  were  characterized  by  a  ringed 
pattern, in association with a meshwork pattern 
in a large proportion of cases, along with atypi-
cal junctional cells in the center of the lesion and 
irregular junctional nests with short interconnec-
tions. The simultaneous presence of cytological 
atypia and of atypical junctional nests (irregular, 
with short interconnections, and/or with nonho-
mogeneous cellularity) was consistent with his-
dysplasia,  whereas  widespread 
tological 
pagetoid 
infiltration,  widespread  cytological 
atypia  at  the  junction,  and  non-edged  papillae 
suggested  melanoma  diagnosis.  Interestingly, 
several confocal features for melanoma may be 
also  identified  in  amelanotic  melanomas.  It  is 
possible  to  detect  melanocytes  in  a  clinically 
amelanotic  tumor  due  to  the  presence  of  some 
melanin  inside  the  pre- melanosomes,  which 
have similar size to the wavelength that we use 
for imaging. Considering that amelanotic tumors 
do not present a high refractivity as other heavily 
pigmented  lesions,  they  may  be  more  easily 
diagnosed  with  RCM  than  with  dermoscopy, 
which  suggests  a  better  early  diagnosis  of  cer-
tain clinically difficult pigmented lesions such as 
amelanotic  melanoma  [67].  In  fact,  Losi  et  al. 
described the presence of hyporreflective paget-
oid  cells  as  a  clue  present  in  the  majority  of 
amelanotic melanomas (85%) [68].

 Melanoma Subtypes
In superficial spreading melanomas (SSM) paget-
oid spread is a hallmark and it is characterized by 
the presence of variably shaped bright melanocytes 
with  focal  or  widespread  distribution.  Pagetoid 
spread  is  also  commonly  observed  in  lentigo-
maligna  type  [45, 50],  especially  around  the  hair 
follicles. Conversely, pagetoid cells are quite rare 
in “pure” nodular melanoma whereas ulceration is 
a common finding at the epidermal level [31].

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



RCM  highlights  different  shapes  of  melano-
cytes scattered throughout the epidermis at vari-
ous  levels  in  melanoma.  Pagetoid  cells  usually 
have  a  round  shape  with  bright  granular  cyto-
plasm and hyporefractive nucleus but can display 
a dendritic shape with a barely visible body and 
variably  long  branching  terminal  structures.  A 
clear-cut  distinction  between  dendritic-shaped 
melanocytes  and  Langerhans  cells  has  not  yet 
been established [51].

In  MMs,  especially  in  superficial  spreading 
and lentigo maligna, the DEJ is characterized by 
ringed  and/or  meshwork  architecture  with  large 
and bright pleomorphic (“atypical”) cells in early 
MMs. The cells can show the tendency to form 
nests that can still be compact or can be loosely 
arranged,  depending  on  tumor  progression.  In 
early  lesions  it  is  a  common  finding  to  observe 
alteration  or  abrupt  interruption  of  the  normal 
DEJ architecture due to flattening of rete-ridges 
resulting  in  irregularly  shaped  and  not  well- 
defined papillae (non-edged papillae) [11] or dis-
appearance  of  dermal  papillae  substituted  by 
strands  of  atypical  cells.  In  advanced  stage  of 
SSM,  the  massive  tumor  proliferation  occupies 
the entire junction and can push up into the epi-
dermal layers as loose aggregates of bright, large 
and pleomorphic melanocytes. In nodular mela-
nomas,  RCM  shows  the  presence  of  so-called 
“cerebriform” nests [12, 13] that consist of small 
and  hyporefractive  cells  forming  a  large  tumor 
mass  separated  by  dark  thin  fissures  and  bright 
collagen septae.

Lesions  with  regression  represent  an  impor-
tant  indication  for  RCM.  When  we  deal  with 
lesions that are exclusively characterized by blu-
ish to greyish granules, the differential diagnosis 
includes lichenoid-keratosis or a regressive mela-
noma. RCM is a powerful tool since it permits to 
discriminate between the former, showing only a 
florid inflammatory infiltrate, and the latter con-
stituted by atypical melanocytes.

Besides  its  potential  diagnostic  capability, 
RCM  has  shown  promise  as  a  guide  for  biopsy 
collection in the most relevant lesion area [69]; to 
monitor  the  response  to  treatment  [70];  and  to 
delineate  the  extension  of  a  lesion  before  pro-
ceeding to surgical excision [70, 71]. It may also 

391

serve  to  study  possible  prognostic  features 
depending  on  the  correlation  of  specific  RCM 
features  with  superficial  spreading  or  nodular 
areas  in  malignant  melanoma.  One  of  the  main 
drawbacks of RCM is a certain inability to reach 
deep  tissue  in  the  dermis,  reaching  a  maximum 
depth  of  250  μm  [14]. This  limiting  factor  pre-
vents  imaging  of  structures  located  deep  in  the 
dermis,  especially  in  cases  of  hyperpigmented 
lesions. In these cases, there is strong attenuation 
of  the  contrast  due  to  massive  absorption  and 
light  scattering  going  through  those  structures. 
The presence of inflammatory cells and collagen 
bundles may also diminish contrast and difficult 
melanocyte visualization.

 Other Reflectance Confocal 
Microscopic Applications 
in Dermatological Oncology

 Dermoscopy-RCM Correlation

Precise  dermoscopy-RCM  correlation  of  mela-
nocytic lesions has several potential applications. 
First, it enables the study of the specific dermo-
scopic structures [50]. RCM may have an added 
value in refining the classification of dermoscopic 
structures [72]. On the other hand, RCM may be 
useful  in  differentiation  between  benign  lesions 
and  those  suggestive  of  malignancy  in  areas  of 
equivocal dermoscopic findings [50, 72]. Due to 
close  relationship  between  early  diagnosis  and 
life  prognosis  of  the  patient,  RCM  may  be  par-
ticularly useful in order to increase clinical and 
dermoscopic  sensitivity.  Pellacani  et  al.  [73] 
studied the impact of RCM in the routine mela-
noma  workflow.  They  reported  that  systematic 
application of RCM for equivocal lesions saved 
over  50%  of  benign  lesions  from  unnecessary 
excision. The number of lesions needed to excise 
a  melanoma  was  6.8  with  RCM  examination, 
compared with a hypothetical 14.6 without RCM 
evaluation.

RCM can be used to evaluate tissue architec-
ture and cytomorphological features, such as pag-
etoid  spread 
that  may  evade  dermoscopic 
detection. The level of dermo-epidermal junction 

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



392

is  the  most  useful  for  the  correlation  of  dermo-
scopic global pattern with the RCM mosaic image 
[50]. The  dermoscopic  appearance  of  a  network 
has been correlated to pigmented keratinocytes of 
the  basal  layer  surrounding  dermal  papillae. 
Atypical  pigment  network  can  result  from  an 
architectural  disarray  of  the  basal  layer  around 
papillary dermis. Atypical melanocytes could be 
seen in melanomas. Dermoscopic globules were 
correlated with nest of melanocytes at the dermo-
epidermal junction or the papillary dermis. Each 
globule  on  dermoscopy  could  be  identified  as  a 
cluster of bright cells on RCM. Peripheral streaks 
were  correlated  with  aggregates  of  elongated 
cells, well delineated from the bordering dermis 
and  contiguous  with  the  central  mesh  of  the 
lesion.  Some  aggregates  appeared  to  be  round, 
curving around existing dermal papillae and pro-
ducing  a  pseudopod-like  appearance.  Other 
aggregates  produced  an  arrow- like  arrangement, 
representing more linear streaks [50, 72].

RCM is limited in identifying compact ortho-
keratosis  and  the  pigmented  structures  in  the 
deeper  dermis  reported  in  the  histopathological 
correlation of the dermoscopic blue whitish veil. 
However,  RCM  permits  a  complementary  hori-
zontal overview of the architectural arrangement 
at the dermo-epidermal junction level and clearly 
showed  focal  disruption  of  the  arrangement  of 
the basal cells, with bright, plump cells compati-
bles  with  melanophages  and  of  some  melano-
cytes in the superficial dermis [50].

 Guide to Perform a Biopsy

RCM  can  help  to  guide  clinicians  to  perform  a 
biopsy on a focused area that shows concerning 
confocal findings [22, 23, 25, 74].

 Margin Assessment and Adjunct 
to Surgery

RCM  has  the  potential  to  define  lesion  margins 
before surgical o nonsurgical therapy. This could 
be  particularly  helpful  in  margin  assessment  of 
tumors with radial growth phases, including len-

tigo maligna melanomas [70] or some basal cell 
carcinomas  [75],  or  tumors  that  are  difficult  to 
see  clinically,  such  as  amelanotic  melanomas 
[71]  or  sclerosing  infiltrative  basal  cell  carcino-
mas  [22].  The  main  limiting  factor  to  date  has 
been the limited depth of penetration, which pre-
vents accurate imaging at depths below superfi-
cial  dermis.  Lack  of  contrast  can  also  pose  a 
problem,  which  might  be  solved  by  the  future 
development of exogenous contrast agents [76]. 
Despite present limitations, RCM can help iden-
tify areas that are atypical and need biopsy to pro-
vide histologic confirmation.

RCM  may  aid  in  the  rapid  establishment  of 
tumor margins by examining excised specimens 
during  procedures  such  as  Mohs  micrographic 
surgery [75, 77]. Mohs micrographic surgery is a 
histologically  guided  method  of  removing  skin 
cancers that maximally preserves normal tissue. 
Thin layers of tissues are removed, and the mar-
gins are examined histologically to determine if 
cancerous  cells  remain.  Selective  removal  of 
residual tumor is performed until tumor-free mar-
gins  are  obtained.  This  procedure  can  be  time- 
consuming since each excised specimen must be 
processed  by  frozen  histopathology  requiring 
embedding, sectioning, and staining. With RCM 
of  ex  vivo,  unprocessed  tissue,  it  is  possible  to 
detect  neoplastic  cells  by  using  5%  acetic  acid 
and cross-polarized illumination. This technique 
makes the neoplastic nuclei more bright and sur-
rounding dermis dark. Recently, it has been dem-
onstrated  that  RCM  may  be  useful  to  examine 
nonmelanoma skin cancers in ex vivo tissue dur-
ing  Mohs  micrographic  surgery  without  frozen 
sections [75, 77]. This new use of RCM offers the 
advantage of rapid visualization of margins com-
pared to permanent sectioning and the ability to 
do special stains or permanent stains in areas that 
are  equivocal.  RCM  has  also  been  used  in  vivo 
during Mohs surgery to help to locate tumor and 
rapidly visualize the margins for BCC and mela-
noma. Flores and co-workers used in vivo RCM 
during  BCC  Mohs  surgery  prior  application  of 
aluminum  chloride  for  nuclear  contrast  with 
promising results [78]. In addition, Guitera et al. 
[79] research found RCM useful in delimitating 
lentigo maligna extension.

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



 Use of RCM for Evaluating Response 
to Treatment

The  gold  standard  for  the  treatment  of  several 
types  of  skin  cancer  is  surgical  removal  (exci-
sional biopsy) of the affected area and the adjoin-
ing healthy tissue to prevent the escape of tumor 
cells.  However,  this  is  often  traumatic,  particu-
larly  if  the  affected  area  is  a  cosmetic  hotspot, 
e.g., the face. Excisional biopsy is often preceded 
by  one  or  several  incisional  biopsies  aimed  at 
characterizing  the  tumor,  determining  malig-
nancy, and helping the medical practitioner make 
an  informed  decision  on  the  most  appropriate 
treatment. Furthermore, excisional surgery needs 
to be followed up as well and may require addi-
tional  incisional  surgeries. With  these  problems 
in  mind,  the  development  of  non-invasive  treat-
ment protocols has been important. Major break-
throughs  are  the  uses  of  photodynamic  therapy 
(PDT) and imiquimod application.

 Photodynamic Therapy

RCM Monitoring of the Response of BCC 
to PDT Treatment
MAL-PDT  treatment  has  been  very  successful 
in  clinical  trials  (reviewed  in  [80]).  Different 
histological subtypes of BCC have been treated 
with  PDT.  Several  studies  have  addressed  the 
potential of RCM to follow up the response of 
BCC lesions to PDT using MAL [81]. Venturini 
et  al.  [82]  reported  the  usefulness  of  RCM  in 
detecting early recurrences of BCC after MAL-
PDT and even by means of RCM, dermoscopi-
cal  false  positive  of  BCC  recurrence  after 
MAL-PDT  treatment  may  be  ruled  out.  Gorlin 
syndrome  (GS)  and  xeroderma  pigmentosum 
(XP)  are  congenital  skin  diseases  that  share  a 
genetic  predisposition  to  develop  skin  cancer. 
Patients  suffering  from  these  genodermatoses 
often  develop  BCC.  One  recent  study  used 
MAL-based (Metvix®) PDT in a small group of 
GS and XP patients and followed up tumor cell 
clearance by RCM. Under these conditions, this 
study  reported  excellent  results  in  the  use  of 
RCM to determine the degree of clearance after 
PDT [81].

393

Treatment of Actinic Keratosis with PDT: 
RCM Follow-Up
5-ALA  PDT  is  rapidly  becoming  a  reference 
treatment in the management of actinic kerato-
sis  (AK)  [83].  In  addition  to  close  to  100% 
efficacy,  the  cosmetic  outcome  of  the  proce-
dure  is  vastly  superior  to  that  of  surgery. An 
area  of  particular  interest  is  the  management 
of  skin  cancer,  mainly  SCC,  of  which AK  is 
considered a direct precursor [84] in immuno-
suppressed individuals, e.g., those undergoing 
solid  organ  transplantation.  In  this  context,  a 
recent  study  has  evaluated,  using  RCM,  the 
response  to  5-ALA  PDT  in  organ  transplant 
recipients  (OTR)  that  display  AK.  In  this 
study, RCM proved to be an excellent tool to 
monitor the response to PDT [85]. A recently 
published article reported that RCM was use-
ful in monitoring the efficacy of daylight-PDT 
in AK [86].

 Imiquimod Treatment

RCM Monitoring of the Response of BCC 
to Imiquimod
In 2003, our group reported the use of RCM for 
the  diagnosis  of  BCC  and  for  monitoring  BCC 
clearance following the application of imiquimod 
[87]. In 2004, another study used RCM to deter-
mine the effect of imiquimod treatment on BCC 
prior to Mohs microsurgery [88]. This study sug-
gests  that  RCM  can  be  used  to  monitor  the 
response of a lesion to imiquimod, aiding in the 
patient’s and dermatologist’s decision on whether 
surgery is further needed.

RCM Monitoring of the Response 
of Actinic Keratosis to Imiquimod
The applicability of RCM to evaluate the response 
of AK to imiquimod has been assessed in a small 
group of patients with subclinical features of AK 
[89]. Another study compared vis-a-vis the effect 
of imiquimod (three times/week for 4 weeks) and 
5-ALA  PDT  in  AK  in  organ  transplantation 
patients [85]. This study was used to generate a 
table  of  RCM-visualized  parameters  and  their 
usefulness for diagnosis of AK and for monitor-
ing its response to imiquimod or PDT.

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



394

Treatment of Melanoma with Imiquimod 
and Monitoring by RCM
Although  imiquimod  is  not  the  reference  treat-
ment for melanoma, it has been assayed for the 
treatment  of  amelanotic  or  poorly  melanotic 
melanoma  and 
lentigo  maligna  melanoma 
(LMM). This is particularly important for LMM 
due  to  the  fact  that  these  tumors  are  heteroge-
neous,  display  poorly  defined  margins  and 
appear  in  cosmetically  sensitive  areas,  where 
surgery  has  an  elevated  risk  of  disfigurement 
[90].  In  general,  the  response  of  melanoma  to 
imiquimod  has  been  often  positive  [91],  but 
some  foci  seem  to  be  resistant,  casting  severe 
doubt on this approach for long-term melanoma 
management [92]. RCM has been used to moni-
tor the response of melanoma to imiquimod ther-
apy in several studies [70, 93–95]. These studies 
showed an improvement in sensibility and speci-
ficity  in  detecting  LMM  recurrences  compared 
to  dermoscopy  [94].  In  a  study  carried  out  by 
Alarcon et al. [95] there were no statistically sig-
nificant  difference  between  RCM  and  histopa-
thology  in  evaluating  the  response  of  LMM  to 
imiquimod.

 Cryotherapy and Shave Biopsy
Recent studies have reported the use of RCM to 
monitor the response to two other types of ther-
apy procedures: shave biopsy for AK [96] and 
cryotherapy for BCC [97]. In the AK study, the 
authors performed shave surgery in ten patients 
and  followed  up  the  lesions’  evolution  for 
12 months, identifying two cases of relapse by 
RCM. In the BCC study, the authors used a liq-
uid  nitrogen  cryo-probe  for  burning  the  area 
displaying BCC cells, monitoring the effect of 
the  cryotherapy  immediately  after  treatment 
(5 h). RCM revealed that tumor clearance was 
only proven in those lesions showing damage to 
the  upper  dermis  after  5  h,  thus  postulating 
RCM  as  a  tool  to  determine,  almost  immedi-
ately, the probability of success of cryotherapy. 
Another study reports on the use of cryotherapy 
(three  cycles  separated  by  3–4  weeks)  to  treat 
melanoma  and  determined  its  failure  using 
RCM [90].

 Anti-Inflammatory Treatments
RCM has also been used to diagnose and/or fol-
low  up  the  response  to  other  types  of  therapy, 
e.g.,  NSAIDs.  One  example  is  the  response  of 
actinic  cheilitis  (a  form  of  actinic  keratosis  that 
affects  the  lips)  to  anti-inflammatory  (COX-1/
COX-2  inhibitor)  treatment  [98].  The  patients 
were  diagnosed  with  RCM  and  treatment  with 
3% diclofenac in 2.5% hyaluronic acid followed-
 up using RCM with good sensitivity. In a study 
conducted by Malvehy and co-workers RCM was 
useful in assessing field cancerisation and moni-
toring  response  to  3%  diclofenac  in  2.5%  hyal-
uronic  acid.  RCM  showed  a  statistically 
significant decrease in keratinocyte atypia of the 
honeycomb pattern and scaling [99].

 Visual Guidance During Laser Ablation 
of Basal Cell Carcinoma
In  recent  years  several  studies  have  determined 
the  utility  of  RCM  in  guiding  basal  cell  carci-
noma  treatment  with  ablative  lasers.  Ex  vivo 
research  was  initially  needed  to  solve  technical 
difficulties  [100,  101].  Hibler  et  al.  [102]  used 
RCM in seven patients with eight BCC to delimi-
tate tumour margins prior CO2 laser ablation and 
between  laser  passes  to  detect  absence  or  pres-
ence  of  tumour.  Then  BCCs  were  excised  by 
Mohs  micrographic  surgery  and  histopathology 
and  RCM  findings  were  correlated.  Correlation 
between both techniques in detecting persistence 
of  BCC  was  100%.  These  initial  studies  place 
RCM as a promising tool in this field. Nevertheless 
further research is needed.

 Difficulties and Potential Solutions

Although we think that RCM may be a useful new 
technology for diagnosis and study of skin cancer, 
specially, cutaneous melanoma, we must consider 
its  limitations.  First,  reflectance-mode  confocal 
microscopes  themselves  are  available  in  only  a 
minority of dermatology departments and require 
a learning curve to operate them and interpret the 
images. Interpretation of RCM findings depends 
on the observer and, as such, relies on cumulative 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



to  histopathological 

experience. This observer dependency is not dis-
similar 
interpretation. 
Nowadays  the  development  of  teledermatology 
has  partially  solved  this  problem  because  of  we 
have the chance to contact with RCM experts in 
real-time and send them the images.

Problems  related  to  imaging  include  a  depth 
of penetration limited to the superficial dermis, or 
even less, when a lesion is particularly hyperker-
atotic or hyperpigmented. Considering that thick-
ness  of  melanoma  is  an  important  prognostic 
factor,  improvements  in  the  technique  will  be 
necessary in order to increase RCM potency and 
imaging depth. This might be improved by exper-
imenting  with  different  immersion  media  and 
illumination sources. The use of additional signal 
filtering  techniques  such  as  coherence  gating 
[103]  to  better  isolate  backscattered  light  from 
our focal plane and chemical agents such as glu-
cose and glycerol [104] to improve index match-
ing  at  the  surface  could  improve  penetration 
depth.  Decrease  in  contrast  may  be  solved 
through  development  of  exogenous  contrast 
agents  [105]. The  current  contact  device  is  also 
cumbersome and difficult to use on a non-flat sur-
face such as ears or noses.

Concerning the visual quality of RCM images, 
there  are  three  problem  areas.  The  first  is  that 
there  is  an  uneven  brightness  within  an  image, 
mostly caused by reflection from the skin surface 
or from poorly reflecting structure of the superfi-
cial dermis. Other problem is a lack of contrast, 
where details of certain structures are displayed 
with  a  limited  subset  of  grey  levels.  The  third 
problem  is  a  considerable  degree  of  noise. This 
last feature is immanent to the scanning process 
and  the  in  vivo  situation  in  which  images  are 
taken.  Digital  image  enhancement  corrects  at 
least in part one or more of these problems [106].
Work  is  ongoing  to  facilitate  the  creation  of 
vertical  sections  and  three-dimensional  sections 
[107], which would vastly increase the potential 
of RCM. There is also the possibility of a porta-
ble prototype using fibre optics. This would make 
it  much  more  practical  and  this  might  facilitate 
the  diffusion  of  this  new  technology  for  the 
in vivo diagnosis in dermatology.

395

 Conclusions
RCM potentially represents a new era for skin 
oncology.  In  research,  it  offers  benefits  both 
ex vivo and in vivo. Ex vivo, it enables repeti-
tive tissue sampling and noninvasively evalua-
tion  to  determine  whether  further  testing  is 
necessary. In vivo, RCM can be used to study 
normal  processes  or  pathophysiologic  pro-
cesses noninvasively over time. It can also be 
used to establish the presence or absence of a 
reactive  immunologic  event  and  guide  tissue 
sampling  such  as  fine  needle  aspiration  for 
cells  or  molecular  analysis  (DNA,  RNA  or 
proteins) of a specific immunological response 
against  neoplastic  cells.  RCM  can  also  be 
used to establish timing and dosing responses 
to non-invasive therapies such as criotherapy, 
imiquimod, and photodynamic therapy.

Clinically, RCM has value both ex vivo and 
in  vivo.  Ex  vivo  tissue  can  first  be  evaluated 
with  RCM,  and  when  necessary,  a  specific 
finding  can  be  confirmed  on  the  same  exact 
tissue using appropriate markers or stains. In 
vivo,  the  potential  is  tremendous.  RCM  may 
be useful for the in vivo diagnosis, lesion mar-
gins  assessment,  and  monitoring  response  to 
non-invasive  therapies.  Although  RCM  is  a 
promising technique, we think that it is only in 
its infancy and further investigations are nec-
essary for determine the real role in the future 
management of skin cancer.

Acknowledgements  This  work  has  been  partially  sup-
ported  by  a  grant  from  Ministerio  de  Economía  y 
Competitividad  of  Spain  (Instituto  de  Salud  Carlos  III, 
PI15/00974  financed  jointly  by  the  European  Regional 
Development  Funds,  FEDER).  S.G.  also  plays  a  role  of 
Consultant for Caliber I.D., the manufacturer of the com-
ercial reflectance confocal system.

References

  1.  Carli P, De Giorgi V, Soyer HP, Stante M, Mannone 
F,  Giannotti  B.  Dermatoscopy  in  the  diagnosis  of 
pigmented  skin  lesions:  a  new  semiology  for  the 
dermatologist.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol  Venereol. 
2000;14:353–69.

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



396

  2.  Tearney  GJ,  Brezinski  ME,  Southern  JF,  Bouma 
BE,  Hee  MR,  Fujimoto  JG.  Determination  of  the 
refractive  index  of  highly  scattering  human  tis-
sue  by  optical  coherence  tomography.  Opt  Lett. 
1995;20:2258–60.

  3.  Mansotti  L.  Basic  principles  and  advanced  techni-
cal  aspects  of  ultrasound  imaging.  In:  Guzzardi  R, 
editor. Physics and engineering of medical imaging. 
Boston: Martinus Nijhoff; 1987. p. 263–317.

  4.  Markisz J, Aquilia M. Technical magnetic resonance 

imaging. Stanford: Appleton & Lange; 1996.

  5.  Suihko  C,  Swindle  LD,  Thomas  SG,  Serup 
J.  Fluorescence  fibre-optic  confocal  microscopy  of 
skin in vivo: microscope and fluorophores. Skin Res 
Technol. 2005;11:254–67.

  6.  New KC, Petroll WM, Boyde A, Martin L, Corcuff 
P,  Leveque  JL,  et  al.  In  vivo  imaging  of  human 
teeth and skin using real time confocal microscopy. 
Scanning. 1991;13:369–72.

  7.  Corcuff  P,  Leveque  JL.  In  vivo  vision  of  the 
human  skin  with  the  tandem  scanning  microscope. 
Dermatology. 1993;186:50–4.

  8.  Rajadhyaksha M, Grossman M, Esterowitz D, Webb 
RH, Anderson RR. In vivo confocal scanning laser 
microscopy of human skin: melanin provides strong 
contrast. J Invest Dermatol. 1995;104:946–52.
  9.  Minsky  M.  Microscopy  apparatus.  US  Patent  No. 

3013467, 1957.

  10.  Cavanagh  HD,  Jester  JV,  Essepian  J,  Shields  W, 
Lemp MA. Confocal microscopy of the living eye. 
CLAO J. 1990;16:65–73.

  11.  Jester  JV,  Andrews  PM,  Petroll  WM,  Lemp  MA, 
Cavanagh HD. In vivo, real-time confocal imaging. 
J Electron Microsc Tech. 1991;18(1):50–60.

  12.  Andrews  PM,  Petroll  WM,  Cavanagh  HD,  Jester 
JV. Tandem scanning confocal microscopy (TSCM) 
of normal and ischemic living kidneys. Am J Anat. 
1991;191:95–102.

  13.  Masters  BR,  Thaer  AA.  In  vivo  human  corneal 
confocal  microscopy  of  identical  fields  of  sub-
epithelial  nerve  plexus,  basal  epithelial,  and 
wing  cells  at  different  times.  Microsc  Res  Tech. 
1994;29:350–6.

  14.  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Gonzalez  S,  Zavislan  JM, 
Anderson  RR,  Webb  RH.  In  vivo  confocal  scan-
ning  laser  microscopy  of  human  skin  II:  advances 
in instrumentation and comparison with histology. J 
Invest Dermatol. 1999;113:293–303.

  15.  Gonzalez S, White WM, Rajadhyaksha M, Anderson 
RR,  Gonzalez  E.  Confocal  imaging  of  sebaceous 
gland  hyperplasia  in  vivo  to  assess  efficacy  and 
mechanism  of  pulsed  dye  laser  treatment.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 1999;25:8–12.

  16.  Gonzalez  S,  Sackstein  R,  Anderson  RR, 
Rajadhyaksha  M.  Real-time  evidence  of  in  vivo 
leukocyte  trafficking  in  human  skin  by  reflec-
tance  confocal  microscopy.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
2001;117:384–6.

angiomas  with  in  vivo  confocal  microscopy.  J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2000;43:37–41.

  18.  Aghassi D, Gonzalez E, Anderson RR, Rajadhyaksha 
M,  Gonzalez  S.  Elucidating  the  pulsed-dye  laser 
treatment of sebaceous hyperplasia in vivo with real- 
time confocal scanning laser microscopy. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2000;43:49–53.

  19.  Sánchez  V,  Cuevas  J,  Vañó-Galván  S,  González 
S.  Laser  for 
in  vivo  skin  cancer  diagnosis. 
Reflectance  confocal  microscopy.  Dermatologic 
surgery.  Hoboken,  NJ:  Wiley-Blackwell;  2012. 
p. 368–75.

  20.  González  S,  Sánchez  V,  González-Rodríguez 
A,  Parrado  C,  Ullrich  M.  Patrones  de  microsco-
pia  confocal  para  el  cáncer  cutáneo  no  melanoma 
y  aplicaciones  clínicas.  Actas  Dermosifiliogr. 
2014;105:446–58.

  21.  Huzaira M, Rius F, Rajadhyaksha M, Anderson RR, 
Gonzalez S. Topographic variations in normal skin, 
as  viewed  by  in  vivo  reflectance  confocal  micros-
copy. J Invest Dermatol. 2001;116:846–52.

  22.  Gonzalez  S,  Tannous  Z.  Real-time,  in  vivo  confo-
cal reflectance microscopy of basal cell carcinoma. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47:869–74.

  23.  Gonzalez S, Rajadhyaksha M, Anderson RR. Non- 
invasive (real-time) imaging of histologic margin of 
a proliferative skin lesion in vivo. J Invest Dermatol. 
1998;111:538–9.

  24.  Ulrich M, Lange-Asschenfeldt S, Gonzalez S. In vivo 
reflectance confocal microscopy for early diagnosis 
of nonmelanoma skin cancer. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 
2012;103:784–9.

  25.  Nori  S,  Rius-Diaz  F,  Cuevas  J,  Goldgeier  M,  Jaen 
P,  Torres  A,  et  al.  Sensitivity  and  specificity  of 
reflectance- mode  confocal  microscopy  for  in  vivo 
diagnosis  of  basal  cell  carcinoma:  a  multicenter 
study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51:923–30.
  26.  Guitera  P,  Menzies  SW,  Longo  C,  Cesinaro  AM, 
Scolyer  RA,  Pellacani  G.  In  vivo  confocal  micros-
copy  for  diagnosis  of  melanoma  and  basal  cell 
carcinoma  using  a  two-step  method:  analysis  of 
710 consecutive clinically equivocal cases. J Invest 
Dermatol. 2012;132:2386–94.

  27.  Kadouch DJ, Schram ME, Leeflang MM, Limpens 
J,  Spuls  PI,  de  Rie  MA.  In  vivo  confocal  micros-
copy of basal cell carcinoma: a systematic review of 
diagnostic accuracy. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2015;29(10):1890–7.

  28.  Gonzalez S, Gill M, Halpern A. Reflectance confo-
cal  microscopy  of  cutaneous  tumors:  an  atlas  with 
clinical,  dermoscopic  and  histological  correlations. 
London: Informa Healthcare; 2008.

  29.  Sanchez  V,  Ulrich  M,  Lange-Asschenfeldt  S, 
Gonzalez  S.  Chapter  17:  Reflectance  confocal 
microscopy  in  skin  cancer.  In:  Baldi  A,  Pasquali 
P,  Spugnini  EP,  editors.  Skin  cancer:  a  practical 
approach.  Current  Clinical  Pathology.  New  York: 
Humana Press; 2014.

  17.  Aghassi  D,  Anderson  RR,  Gonzalez  S.  Time- 
sequence histologic imaging of laser-treated cherry 

  30.  Longo  C,  Lallas  A,  Kyrgidis  A,  Rabinovitz  H, 
Moscarella  E,  Ciardo  S,  et  al.  Classifying  distinct 

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



basal  cell  carcinoma  subtype  by  means  of  derma-
toscopy and reflectance confocal microscopy. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(4):716–24.

  31.  Aghassi  D,  Anderson  RR,  Gonzalez  S.  Confocal 
laser  microscopic  imaging  of  actinic  keratoses 
in vivo: a preliminary report. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2000;43:42–8.

  32.  Pellacani G, Ulrich M, Casari A, Prow TW, Cannillo 
F,  Benati,  et  al.  Grading  keratinocyte  atypia  in 
actinic  keratosis:  a  correlation  of  reflectance  con-
focal  microscopy  and  histopathology.  J  Eur  Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(11):2216–21.

  33.  Tan  JM,  Lambie  D,  Sinnya  S,  Sahebian  A,  Soyer 
HP, Prow TW, et al. Histopathology and reflectance 
confocal microscopy features of photodamaged skin 
and actinic keratosis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2016;30(11):1901–11.

  34.  Ulrich  M,  Maltusch A,  Rowert-Huber  J,  Gonzalez 
S,  Sterry  W,  Stockfleth  E,  et  al. Actinic  keratoses: 
non-invasive  diagnosis  for  field  cancerisation.  Br  J 
Dermatol. 2007;156:13–7.

  35.  Astner S, Ullrich M, Cuevas J, Gonzalez S. Squamous 
neoplasias. In: González S, Gill M, Halpern AC, edi-
tors. Reflectance confocal microscopy of cutaneous 
tumors: an atlas with clinical, dermoscopic and his-
tological correlations. London: Informa Healthcare; 
2008.

  36.  Moscarella  E,  Rabinovitz  H,  Zalaudek  I,  Piana 
S,  Stanganelli  I,  Oliviero  MC,  et  al.  Dermoscopy 
and  reflectance  confocal  microscopy  of  pigmented 
actinic keratoses: a morphological study. J Eur Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(2):307–14.

  37.  Sanchez  Yus  E,  Cros  LA.  Bowen’s  disease  and 
erythroplasia  of  Queyrat.  Actas  Dermosifiliogr. 
1980;71:85–8.

  38.  Alfaro-Rubio  A,  Nagore  E,  Serra  C,  Botella  R, 
Sanmartin O, Requena C, et al. Perianal Bowen’s dis-
ease treated with imiquimod. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 
2005;96:468–70.

  39.  Ulrich  M,  Kanitakis  J,  Gonzalez  S,  Lange- 
Asschenfeldt  S,  Stockfleth  E,  Roewert-Huber 
J.  Evaluation  of  Bowen  disease  by  in  vivo  reflec-
tance  confocal  microscopy.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2012;166:451–3.

  40.  Rishpon A, Kim N, Scope A, Porges L, Oliviero 
MC,  Braun  RP,  et  al.  Reflectance  confocal 
microscopy  criteria  for  squamous  cell  carci-
nomas  and  actinic  keratoses.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2009;145:766–72.

  41.  Mancebo  SE,  Cordova  M,  Myskowski  PL,  Flores 
ES,  Busam  K,  Jawed  SI,  et  al.  Reflectance  confo-
cal  microscopy  features  of  mycosis  fungoides  and 
Sézary  syndrome:  correlation  with  histopathologic 
and  T-cell  receptor  rearrangement  studies.  J  Cutan 
Pathol. 2016;43(6):505–15.

  42.  Longo  C,  Zalaudek  I,  Moscarella  E,  Lallas  A, 
Piana  S,  Pellacani  G,  et  al.  Clonal  seborrheic 
keratosis:  dermoscopic  and  confocal  microscopy 
characterization.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol  Venereol. 
2014;28(10):1397–400.

397

  43.  Agero AL, Busam KJ, Benvenuto-Andrade C, Scope 
A, Gill M, Marghoob AA, et al. Reflectance confocal 
microscopy of pigmented basal cell carcinoma. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2006;54(4):638–43.

  44.  Pellacani  G,  Guitera  P,  Longo  C,  Avramidis  M, 
Seidenari  S,  Menzies  S.  The  impact  of  in  vivo 
reflectance  confocal  microscopy  for  the  diagnostic 
accuracy  of  melanoma  and  equivocal  melanocytic 
lesions. J Invest Dermatol. 2007;127:2759–65.
  45.  Longo  C,  Fantini  F,  Cesinaro  AM,  Bassoli  S, 
Seidenari S, Pellacani G. Pigmented mammary Paget 
disease: dermoscopic, in vivo reflectance-mode con-
focal microscopic, and immunohistochemical study 
of a case. Arch Dermatol. 2007;143:752–4.

  46.  Guitera P, Scolyer RA, Gill M, Akita H, Arima M, 
Yokoyama  Y,  et  al.  Reflectance  confocal  micros-
copy for diagnosis of mammary and extramammary 
Paget’s  disease.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol  Venereol. 
2013;27:e24–9.

  47.  Richtig  E,  Ahlgrimm-Siess  V,  Arzberger  E, 
Hofmann-Wellenhof  R.  Noninvasive  differentiation 
between  mamillary  eczema  and  Paget  disease  by 
in vivo reflectance confocal microscopy on the basis 
of two case reports. Br J Dermatol. 2011;165:440–1.
  48.  Pan ZY, Liang J, Zhang QA, Lin JR, Zheng ZZ. In 
vivo  reflectance  confocal  microscopy  of  extra-
mammary  Paget  disease:  diagnostic  evaluation 
and  surgical  management.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2012;66:e47–53.

  49.  Terrier JE, Tiffet O, Raynaud N, Cinotti E. In vivo 
reflectance confocal microscopy combined with the 
“spaghetti” technique: a new procedure for defining 
surgical margins of genital Paget disease. Dermatol 
Surg. 2015;41(7):862–4.

  50.  Langley  RG,  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Dwyer  PJ,  Sober 
AJ,  Flotte  TJ,  Anderson  RR.  Confocal  scanning 
laser  microscopy  of  benign  and  malignant  mela-
nocytic  skin  lesions  in  vivo.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2001;45:365–76.

  51.  Busam  KJ,  Charles  C,  Lee  G,  Halpern 
AC.  Morphologic  features  of  melanocytes,  pig-
mented keratinocytes, and melanophages by in vivo 
confocal  scanning  laser  microscopy.  Mod  Pathol. 
2001;14:862–8.

  52.  Pellacani  G,  Cesinaro  AM,  Longo  C,  Grana  C, 
Seidenari  S.  Microscopic  in  vivo  description  of 
cellular  architecture  of  dermoscopic  pigment  net-
work  in  nevi  and  melanomas.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2005;141:147–54.

  53.  Pellacani  G,  Cesinaro  AM,  Seidenari  S.  In  vivo 
assessment  of  melanocytic  nests  in  nevi  and  mela-
nomas  by  reflectance  confocal  microscopy.  Mod 
Pathol. 2005;18:469–74.

  54.  Pellacani G, Cesinaro AM, Seidenari S. In vivo con-
focal reflectance microscopy for the characterization 
of  melanocytic  nests  and  correlation  with  dermos-
copy and histology. Br J Dermatol. 2005;152:384–6.
  55.  Puig S, Di Giacomo TB, Serra D, Cabrini F, Alos L, 
Palou  J,  et  al.  Reflectance  confocal  microscopy  of 
blue nevus. Eur J Dermatol. 2012;22:552–3.

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



398

  56.  Hoffman-Wellenhof  R,  Pellacani  G,  Malvehy  J, 
Soyer HP. Reflectance confocal microscopy for skin 
diseases. London: Springer; 2012.

  57.  Lovatto  L,  Carrera  C,  Salerni  G, Alós  L,  Malvehy 
J,  Puig  S.  In  vivo  reflectance  confocal  microscopy 
of  equivocal  melanocytic  lesions  detected  by  digi-
tal  dermoscopy  follow-up.  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol 
Venereol. 2015;29(10):1918–25.

  58.  Pellacani G, Cesinaro AM, Grana C, Seidenari S. In 
vivo  confocal  scanning  laser  microscopy  of  pig-
mented  Spitz  nevi:  comparison  of  in  vivo  confocal 
images  with  dermoscopy  and  routine  histopathol-
ogy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51:371–6.

  59.  Pellacani  G,  Longo  C,  Ferrara  G,  Cesinaro  AM, 
Bassoli S, Guitera P, et al. Spitz nevi: in vivo con-
focal  microscopic  features,  dermatoscopic  aspects, 
histopathologic  correlates,  and  diagnostic  signifi-
cance. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:236–47.
  60.  Guida S, Pellacani G, Cesinaro AM, Moscarella E, 
Argenziano  G,  Farnetani  F,  et  al.  Spitz  naevi  and 
melanomas  with  similar  dermoscopic  patterns:  can 
confocal  microscopy  differentiate?  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2016;174(3):610–6.

  61.  Gerger  A,  Koller  S,  Weger  W,  Richtig  E,  Kerl  H, 
Samonigg  H,  et  al.  Sensitivity  and  specificity  of 
confocal  laser-scanning  microscopy  for  in  vivo 
diagnosis  of  malignant  skin 
tumors.  Cancer. 
2006;107:193–200.

  62.  Pellacani G, Cesinaro AM, Seidenari S. Reflectance- 
mode  confocal  microscopy  of  pigmented  skin 
in  melanoma  diagnostic 
lesions—improvement 
specificity. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53:979–85.

  63.  Pellacani G, Cesinaro AM, Seidenari S. Reflectance- 
mode confocal microscopy for the in vivo character-
ization of pagetoid melanocytosis in melanomas and 
nevi. J Investig Dermatol. 2005;125:532–7.

  64.  Gonzalez S, Gonzalez E, White WM, Rajadhyaksha 
M, Anderson RR. Allergic contact dermatitis: corre-
lation of in vivo confocal imaging to routine histol-
ogy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1999;40:708–13.

  65.  Segura  S,  Puig  S,  Carrera  C,  Palou  J,  Malvehy 
J. Development of a two-step method for the diagno-
sis of melanoma by reflectance confocal microscopy. 
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;61:216–29.

  66.  Pellacani  G,  Farnetani  F,  Gonzalez  S,  Longo 
C,  Cesinaro  AM,  Casari  A,  et  al.  In  vivo  confo-
cal  microscopy  for  detection  and  grading  of  dys-
plastic  nevi:  a  pilot  study.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2012;66:e109–21.

  67.  Guitera P, Pellacani G, Crotty KA, Scolyer RA, Li 
LX,  Bassoli  S,  et  al.  The  impact  of  in  vivo  reflec-
tance  confocal  microscopy  on  the  diagnostic  accu-
racy  of  lentigo  maligna  and  equivocal  pigmented 
and  nonpigmented  macules  of  the  face.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 2010;130:2080–91.

  68.  Losi A, Longo C, Cesinaro AM, Benati E, Witkowski 
A, Guitera P, et al. Hyporeflective pagetoid cells: a 
new  clue  for  amelanotic  melanoma  diagnosis  by 

reflectance  confocal  microscopy.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2014;171(1):48–54.

  69.  Scope  A,  Mahmood  U,  Gareau  DS,  Kenkre  M, 
Lieb JA, Nehal KS, et al. In vivo reflectance confo-
cal microscopy of shave biopsy wounds: feasibility 
of  intraoperative  mapping  of  cancer  margins.  Br  J 
Dermatol. 2010;163:1218–28.

  70.  Curiel-Lewandrowski  C,  Williams  CM,  Swindells 
KJ,  Tahan  SR,  Astner  S,  Frankenthaler  RA,  et  al. 
Use  of  in  vivo  confocal  microscopy  in  malignant 
melanoma:  an  aid  in  diagnosis  and  assessment  of 
surgical  and  nonsurgical  therapeutic  approaches. 
Arch Dermatol. 2004;140:1127–32.

  71.  Busam  KJ,  Hester  K,  Charles  C,  Sachs  DL, 
Antonescu  CR,  Gonzalez  S,  et  al.  Detection 
of  clinically  amelanotic  malignant  melanoma 
and  assessment  of  its  margins  by  in  vivo  confo-
cal  scanning  laser  microscopy.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2001;137:923–9.

  72.  Scope A, Gill M, Benveuto-Andrade C, Halpern AC, 
Gonzalez S, Marghoob AA. Correlation of dermos-
copy  with  in  vivo  reflectance  confocal  microscopy 
of  streaks  in  melanocytic  lesions.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2007;143:727–34.

  73.  Pellacani G, Pepe P, Casari A, Longo C. Reflectance 
confocal microscopy as a second-level examination 
in skin oncology improves diagnostic accuracy and 
saves unnecessary excisions: a longitudinal prospec-
tive study. Br J Dermatol. 2014;171(5):1044–51.
  74.  Tannous  Z,  Al-Arashi  M,  Shah  S,  Yaroslavsky 
AN.  Delineating  melanoma  using  multimodal 
polarized 
imaging.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2009;41:10–6.

light 

  75.  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Menaker  G,  Flotte  T,  Dwyer  PJ, 
Gonzalez S. Confocal examination of nonmelanoma 
cancers  in  thick  skin  excisions  to  potentially  guide 
mohs micrographic surgery without frozen histopa-
thology. J Invest Dermatol. 2001;117:1137–43.
  76.  Tannous Z, Torres A, Gonzalez S. In vivo real-time 
confocal  reflectance  microscopy:  a  noninvasive 
guide for Mohs micrographic surgery facilitated by 
aluminum  chloride,  an  excellent  contrast  enhancer. 
Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:839–46.

  77.  Chung VQ, Dwyer PJ, Nehal KS, Rajadhyaksha M, 
Menaker GM, Charles C, et al. Use of ex vivo con-
focal  scanning  laser  microscopy  during  Mohs  sur-
gery for nonmelanoma skin cancers. Dermatol Surg. 
2004;30:1470–8.

  78.  Flores  ES,  Cordova  M,  Kose  K,  Phillips  W,  Rossi 
A,  Nehal  K,  et  al.  Intraoperative  imaging  during 
Mohs  surgery  with  reflectance  confocal  micros-
copy:  initial  clinical  experience.  J  Biomed  Opt. 
2015;20(6):61103.

  79.  Guitera  P,  Moloney  FJ,  Menzies  SW,  Stretch  JR, 
Quinn  MJ,  Hong A,  et  al.  Improving  management 
and  patient  care  in  lentigo  maligna  by  mapping 
with in vivo confocal microscopy. JAMA Dermatol. 
2013;149(6):692–8.

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



  80.  Morton  CA,  McKenna  KE,  Rhodes  LE,  British 
Association  of  Dermatologists  Therapy  G,  Audit 
S,  The  British  Photodermatology  G.  Guidelines 
for  topical  photodynamic  therapy:  update.  Br  J 
Dermatol. 2008;159:1245–66.

  81.  Segura  S,  Puig  S,  Carrera  C,  Lecha  M,  Borges 
V,  Malvehy  J.  Non-invasive  management  of  non- 
melanoma  skin  cancer  in  patients  with  cancer  pre-
disposition  genodermatosis:  a  role  for  confocal 
microscopy and photodynamic therapy. J Eur Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2011;25:819.

  82.  Venturini M, Sala R, Gonzàlez S, Calzavara-Pinton 
PG.  Reflectance  confocal  microscopy  allows 
in vivo real-time noninvasive assessment of the out-
come  of  methyl  aminolaevulinate  photodynamic 
therapy  of  basal  cell  carcinoma.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2013;168(1):99–105.

  83.  Szeimies  RM,  Radny  P,  Sebastian  M,  Borrosch 
F,  Dirschka  T,  Krahn-Senftleben  G,  et  al. 
Photodynamic  therapy  with  BF-200  ALA  for  the 
treatment  of  actinic  keratosis:  results  of  a  prospec-
tive,  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled 
phase III study. Br J Dermatol. 2010;163:386–94.
  84.  Padilla  RS,  Sebastian  S,  Jiang  Z,  Nindl  I,  Larson 
R. Gene expression patterns of normal human skin, 
actinic  keratosis,  and  squamous  cell  carcinoma:  a 
spectrum  of  disease  progression.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2010;146:288–93.

  85.  Astner  S,  Swindells  K,  González  S,  Stockfleth  E, 
Lademann J. Confocal microscopy: innovative diag-
nostic  tools  for  monitoring  of  noninvasive  therapy 
in  cutaneous  malignancies.  Drug  Discov  Today. 
2008;5:e81–91.

  86.  Seyed  Jafari  SM,  Timchik  T,  Hunger  RE.  In  vivo 
confocal microscopy efficacy assessment of daylight 
photodynamic  therapy  in  actinic  keratosis  patients. 
Br J Dermatol. 2016;175(2):375–81.

  87.  Goldgeier  M,  Fox  CA,  Zavislan  JM,  Harris  D, 
Gonzalez  S.  Noninvasive  imaging,  treatment,  and 
microscopic confirmation of clearance of basal cell 
carcinoma. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:205–10.

  88.  Torres  A,  Niemeyer  A,  Berkes  B,  Marra  D, 
Schanbacher  C,  Gonzalez  S,  et  al.  5%  imiquimod 
cream and reflectance-mode confocal microscopy as 
adjunct modalities to Mohs micrographic surgery for 
treatment  of  basal  cell  carcinoma.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2004;30:1462–9.

  89.  Ulrich  M,  Krueger-Corcoran  D,  Roewert-Huber  J, 
Sterry W, Stockfleth E, Astner S. Reflectance confo-
cal microscopy for noninvasive monitoring of ther-
apy  and  detection  of  subclinical  actinic  keratoses. 
Dermatology. 2010;220:15–24.

  90.  Nadiminti  H,  Scope  A,  Marghoob  AA,  Busam  K, 
Nehal  KS.  Use  of  reflectance  confocal  microscopy 
to monitor response of lentigo maligna to nonsurgi-
cal treatment. Dermatol Surg. 2010;36:177–84.
  91.  Garcia MS, Ono Y, Martinez SR, Chen SL, Goodarzi 
H, Phan T, et al. Complete regression of subcutane-

399

ous and cutaneous metastatic melanoma with high- 
dose intralesional interleukin 2 in combination with 
topical  imiquimod  and  retinoid  cream.  Melanoma 
Res. 2011;21:235–43.

  92.  Turza K, Dengel LT, Harris RC, Patterson JW, White 
K,  Grosh  WW,  et  al.  Effectiveness  of  imiquimod 
limited to dermal melanoma metastases, with simul-
taneous  resistance  of  subcutaneous  metastasis.  J 
Cutan Pathol. 2010;37:94–8.

  93.  Ahlgrimm-Siess V,  Hofmann-Wellenhof  R,  Cao  T, 
Oliviero  M,  Scope  A,  Rabinovitz  HS.  Reflectance 
confocal  microscopy  in  the  daily  practice.  Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2009;28:180–9.

  94.  Guitera  P,  Haydu  LE,  Menzies  SW,  Scolyer  RA, 
Hong A,  Fogarty  GB,  et  al.  Surveillance  for  treat-
ment  failure  of  lentigo  maligna  with  dermoscopy 
and  in  vivo  confocal  microscopy:  new  descriptors. 
Br J Dermatol. 2014;170(6):1305–12.

  95.  Alarcon  I,  Carrera  C, Alos  L,  Palou  J,  Malvehy  J, 
Puig  S.  In  vivo  reflectance  confocal  microscopy  to 
monitor the response of lentigo maligna to imiqui-
mod. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(1):49–55.
  96.  Richtig  E, Ahlgrimm-Siess V,  Koller  S,  Gerger A, 
Horn M, Smolle J, et al. Follow-up of actinic kerato-
ses after shave biopsy by in-vivo reflectance confo-
cal microscopy – a pilot study. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2010;24:293–8.

  97.  Ahlgrimm-Siess V,  Horn  M,  Koller  S,  Ludwig  R, 
Gerger  A,  Hofmann-Wellenhof  R.  Monitoring 
efficacy  of  cryotherapy  for  superficial  basal  cell 
carcinomas  with  in  vivo  reflectance  confocal 
microscopy:  a  preliminary  study.  J  Dermatol  Sci. 
2009;53:60–4.

  98.  Ulrich  M,  Gonzalez  S,  Lange-Asschenfeldt  B, 
Roewert-Huber J, Sterry W, Stockfleth E, et al. Non- 
invasive diagnosis and monitoring of actinic cheilitis 
with  reflectance  confocal  microscopy.  J  Eur  Acad 
Dermatol Venereol. 2011;25:276–84.

  99.  Malvehy J, Roldán-Marín R, Iglesias-García P, Díaz 
A, Puig S. Monitoring treatment of field cancerisa-
tion  with  3%  diclofenac  sodium  2.5%  hyaluronic 
acid by reflectance confocal microscopy: a histologic 
correlation. Acta Derm Venereol. 2015;95(1):45–50.
 100.  Sierra  H,  Larson  BA,  Chen  CS,  Rajadhyaksha 
M.  Confocal  microscopy  to  guide  erbium:yttrium 
aluminum  garnet  laser  ablation  of  basal  cell  carci-
noma:  an  ex  vivo  feasibility  study.  J  Biomed  Opt. 
2013;18(9):095001.

 101.  Sierra  H,  Cordova  M,  Chen  CS,  Rajadhyaksha 
M. Confocal imaging-guided laser ablation of basal 
cell carcinomas: an ex vivo study. J Invest Dermatol. 
2015;135(2):612–5.

 102.  Hibler  BP,  Sierra  H,  Cordova  M,  Phillips  W, 
Rajadhyaksha  M,  Nehal  KS,  et  al.  Carbon  dioxide 
laser  ablation  of  basal  cell  carcinoma  with  visual 
guidance  by  reflectance  confocal  microscopy: 
a  proof-of-principle  pilot  study.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2016;174(6):1359–64.

22 Reflectance Confocal Microscopy in Oncological Dermatology



400

 103.  Izatt  JA,  Kulkarni  MD,  Hsing-Wen  W,  Kobayashi 
K, Sivak MV Jr. Optical coherence tomography and 
microscopy  in  gastrointestinal  tissues.  IEEE  J  Sel 
Top Quantum Electron. 1996;2:1017–28.

 104.  Vargas  G,  Chan  KF,  Thomsen  SL,  Welch AJ.  Use 
of osmotically active agents to alter optical proper-
ties  of  tissue:  effects  on  the  detected  fluorescence 
signal  measured  through  skin.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2001;29:213–20.

 105.  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Gonzalez 

Zavislan 
JM.  Detectability  of  contrast  agents  for  confocal 

S, 

reflectance imaging of skin and microcirculation. J 
Biomed Opt. 2004;9:323–31.

 106.  Gruber  MJ,  Wackernagel  A,  Richtig  E,  Koller  S, 
Kerl  H,  Smolle  J.  Digital  image  enhancement  for 
in vivo laser scanning microscopy. Skin Res Technol. 
2005;11:248–53.

 107.  Ono I, Sakemoto A, Ogino J, Kamiya T, Yamashita 
T,  Jimbow  K.  The  real-time,  three-dimensional 
analyses  of  benign  and  malignant  skin  tumors  by 
confocal laser scanning microscopy. J Dermatol Sci. 
2006;43:135–41.

P. F.-C. Serrano et al.



Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls

23

Hana Jeon, Lori A. Brightman, 
and Roy G. Geronemus

Abstract
All  laser  operators  should  be  up-to-date  on 
associated laser risks and standard safety mea-
sures  for  each  laser  that  they  use.  Different 
wavelengths of light are responsible for differ-
ent ocular damage; thus, appropriate eyewear 
should be used with each laser treatment.

Keywords
Laser · Practice pearls · Eyeshield · Safety · 
Tattoo removal · Scars · Acne scar · PFD · 
Perfluorodecalin

 Safety Measures

*All  laser  operators  should  be  up-to-date  on 
associated  laser  risks  and  standard  safety  mea-
sures for each laser that they use.

*Different wavelengths of light are responsi-
ble for different ocular damage; thus, appropriate 
eyewear  should  be  used  with  each 
laser 
treatment.

*Corneal  eye  shield  placement  is  a  safe  and 

effective method of eye protection.

*Surgical  lubricant  can  be  applied  to  protect 
laser 

hair,  eyelashes,  and  eyebrows 
treatments.

from 

*Diligence  must  be 

to  eliminate 
any  combustible  product  in  the  laser  treatment 
field.

taken 

H. Jeon (*) · L. A. Brightman 
Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York,  
New York, NY, USA
e-mail: hjeon@laserskinsurgery.com 

R. G. Geronemus 
Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York,  
New York, NY, USA 

Department of Dermatology, New York University 
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: rgeronemus@laserskinsurgery.com; mail@
laserskinsurgery.com

Here  we  discuss  additional  safety  measures. 
See  Chaps.  1  and  2  for  complete  laser  safety 
discussions.

 Eye Safety

Unprotected eyes are at great risk for injury dur-
ing laser treatments from either direct or indirect 
laser beams. Different wavelengths of laser light 
are  responsible  for  various  ocular  damages, 
which  can  be  permanent. As  the  injury  may  be 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_23

401





402

painless and the laser beam invisible to the eye, 
damage  can  occur 
inconspicuously.  Hence, 
appropriate eye protection should be used at all 
times during any laser treatment.

There are different types of eyewear avail-
able for protection. For the practitioner, there 
are   optically  coated  goggles,  spectacles,  and 
wraps.  Any  eyewear  that  is  used  must  fit 
tightly  on  the  face  and  cover  the  entire 
eyes.    The  chosen  eyewear  should  also  be  of 
appropriate wavelength and optical density for 
the laser being employed. The parameters are 
most  often  written  on  the  frame  of  the  eye-
wear. For the patient, when treating non-facial 
areas, one can use plastic or metal eye shield 
goggles that completely cover the orbit as well 
as partial periorbital area. When treating in the 
facial  area,  one  should  use  metal  corneal  eye 
shields [1, 2].

Corneal eye shield placement begins with a 
thorough  tray  setup  (Fig.  23.1).  Choose  the 
appropriate  size  shield  for  the  patient;  sizes 
range from infant to adult (Fig. 23.2). A topical 
ophthalmic  anesthetic  (e.g.  tetracaine  hydro-
chloride 0.5% ophthalmic solution) is used for 
corneal anesthesia followed by lower lid retrac-
tion,  placing  the  shield  with  slight  pressure 
inferiorly.  This  will  allow  the  upper  lid  to  be 
placed  over  the  shield  simultaneously  with 
ease.  The  reverse  approach  can  also  be  used 
beginning with upper lid retraction (Figs. 23.3 
and 23.4).

 Hair Protection

During  periorbital  laser  treatment,  one  must 
be  certain  to  protect  the  eyelashes  and  eye-
brows,  as  the  laser  beam  can  inadvertently 
singe  these  hairs.  Surgical  lubricant  acts  as  a 
semi-hydrated  coating  medium  that  prevents 
laser penetration.

After  eye  shield  placement,  use  a  cotton  tip 
applicator or tongue depressor to apply surgical 
lubricant to the eyebrows and eyelashes prior to 
commencement of laser treatment (Figs. 23.5 and 
23.6).  One  can  also  use  a  tongue  depressor  to 
cover  the  eyebrows  in  lieu  of  surgical  lubricant 
for hair protection (Fig. 23.7).

 Anesthesia Safety

When  the  laser  beam  of  the  pulsed  dye  laser 
strikes a combustible object such as oxygen or 
nitrous oxide in an endotracheal tube, there is a 
risk  of  spontaneous  fire  eruption.  This  risk  is 
not  only  applicable  to  laser  use  but  also  has 
been  reported  during  electrosurgical  coagula-
tion. Regulatory groups as well as laser manu-
facturers have well documented the items that 
are  at  risk  for  ignition  and  advise  that  these 
items be kept out of the laser field; these items 
include  oxygen,  nitrous  oxide,  hair,  gauze, 
paper  drapes,  clothing,  masks,  cannulas,  air-
way materials, and even flame-retardant paper 

Fig. 23.1  Tray setup for corneal eye shield placement

Fig. 23.2  Various sizes of corneal eye shields

H. Jeon et al.



b

403

a

c

Fig. 23.3  Placement of child corneal eye shield. (a) With 
upper lid retraction, place ophthalmic drops for mucosal 
anesthesia; (b) retract upper lid, place shield with slight 

pressure superiorly; (c) retract lower lid slightly, allowing 
the lower lid to then slide over the eye shield. Eye shield 
is now in place

drapes. Therefore,  all  of  these  potential  ignit-
able  materials  must  be   diligently  kept  away 
from the laser field. Those that must remain in 
the field must be kept wet with saline or water-
based lubricant.

Most cases of pulse dye laser-treated port wine 
stains  are  in-office  procedures  without  sedation 
and its accompanying oxygen supplementation and 
monitoring  equipment. When  the  oxygen  supple-
mentation and monitoring equipment are needed in 

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



b

404

a

c

d

Fig.  23.4  Placement  of  adult  corneal  eye  shield.  (a) 
Ophthalmic  anesthesia  is  placed;  (b)  Retract  upper  lid. 
With  slight  pressure  superiorly,  place  adult-sized  eye 

shield; (c) Retract the upper lid (i), allowing eye shield to 
glide  into  the  superior  sclera  space  (ii);  (d)  Adult  eye 
shield in place

cases of sedation, it is important to choose an air-
way with a lower risk of ignition. Nasal cannulas 
are an open system and can ignite quite easily. Face 
masks are not considered a tight seal and therefore 
can also leak oxygen. Endotracheal tubes used in 

the pediatric population can lead to a greater risk of 
oxygen leak if the cuff is not tight and during posi-
tive pressure ventilation. Colored airways – espe-
cially green – or masks should not be used, as they 
are likely to ignite.

H. Jeon et al.



405

Fig. 23.5  Application of surgical lubricant on eyelashes

Fig. 23.7  Tongue depressor to protect eyebrows

dures,  there  should  always  be  a  basin  of  water 
and a fire extinguisher readily available [3].

 Tattoos

*Cosmetic  tattoos  have  a  higher  likelihood  of 
containing  ferric  oxide  or  titanium  dioxide  pig-
ments  which  darken  with  Q-switched  laser 
treatment.

*Ablative  or  fractional  ablative  laser  treat-
ment allow for cosmetic tattoo removal without 
risk of tattoo pigment darkening.

*Fractional CO2 lasers can be employed when 
treating  dark  skin  patients  with  known  contact 
allergen  to  tattoo  pigment  to  minimize  risk  of 
anaphylaxis.

*Hypopigmentation  secondary  to  laser  treat-
ment for tattoo removal can be treated with frac-
tional CO2 lasers.

 Tattoos

Tattoos  come  in  many  forms  including  amateur, 
professional,  cosmetic,  medicinal  and  traumatic. 
Laser  treatment  is  a  method  of  tattoo  removal 
with  minimal  risk  of  scarring  particularly  when 
compared  with  alternative  tattoo  removal  meth-
ods  such  as  dermabrasion  or  surgical  excision. 
Amateur tattoos are generally easier to treat than 
professional  tattoos  as  the  ink  is  usually  more 
superficial and of less dense particles. Multicolor 

Fig. 23.6  Application of surgical lubricant on eyebrows

Laryngeal  mask  airway  (LMA)  is  a  device 
that  can  be  inserted  into  the  patient’s  pharynx. 
With spontaneous ventilation, the LMA prevents 
oxygen  and  nitrous  oxide  leakage  by  approxi-
mately 95%. Leakage is more likely to occur with 
positive pressure ventilation. In all types of venti-
lation,  one  can  employ  an  oxygen  analyzer  or 
capnograph  to  detect  oxygen  level  at  airway. 
Regardless of the type of airway used, one should 
drape  wet  gauze  around  the  airway,  use  a  non- 
flammable petrolatum over hair bearing areas and 
use  ocular  shields.  When  not  using  the  laser  it 
should be placed in standby mode.

Even with all precautions taken, there is still a 
risk  that  exists  and  it  is  prudent  for  all  staff 
involved in the patient’s care to be up-to-date on 
the American National Standard for the Safe Use 
of Lasers. During all operative room laser proce-

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



406

tattoos will require different lasers in order to treat 
the  various  colors.  Double  treated,  densely  pig-
mented and multi-colored tattoos are more likely 
to be recalcitrant to laser therapy. See Chap. 7 for 
complete discussion of laser tattoo removal.

 Cosmetic Tattoo Removal

Cosmetic  tattoos  are  generally  composed  of  pig-
ments in the beige, white, and red families of which 
most contain ferric oxide or titanium dioxide pig-
ment. When exposed to Q-switched lasers, oxida-
tion  of  the  pigment  to  ferrous  oxide  occurs, 
resulting in an immediate pigment darkening [4, 5].
As there is no standardization of tattoo ink, all 
tattoo pigments should be viewed on an individ-
ual basis. It can be very difficult to predetermine 
which  cosmetic  tattoos  will  be  able  to  undergo 
laser tattoo removal without darkening. One may 
preemptively treat cosmetic tattoos with ablation 
or fractional ablation to avoid this oxidation risk. 
The superficial fractional ablation will allow pig-
ment removal in the sloughing of skin. There is 
minimal risk of scarring or pigmentary changes 
as the zones of untreated skin in between ablative 
zones  act  as  a  resource  for  epithelial  repair 
(Figs.  23.8,  23.9,  23.10,  and  23.11).  In  this 
patient, a fractional CO2 laser was used for eye-
brow tattoo removal. One can appreciate immedi-
ate lessening of tattoo pigment after two passes 

of fractional ablative laser treatment (Figs. 23.11 
and 23.12).

 Use of PFD in Tattoo Removal

Perfluorodecalin  (PFD)-infused  patches  have 
been found to be effective in tattoo treatments by 
resolving immediate whitening reactions that fol-
low  the  usual  tattoo  treatment  and  allowing 
immediate re-treatment of tattoos. This technique 
significantly shortens the time required to treat as 
the  conventional  treatment  involves  waiting 
20  min  for  the  whitening  reactions  to  dissipate 
before  proceeding  with  the  next  pass  [6]. 

Fig. 23.9  Fractional CO2 treatment of cosmetic eyebrow 
tattoo

Fig. 23.8  Fractional CO2 treatment of cosmetic eyebrow 
tattoo

Fig.  23.10  Remove  sloughed  skin  in  between  laser 
passes with wet gauze

H. Jeon et al.



407

 Tattoo Removal in Dark Skin Types

The principal of tattoo removal is destruction of 
unwanted pigment with minimal collateral dam-
age.  This  concept  is  particularly  challenging 
when  treating  darker  skin  types  as  the  melano-
somes act as competing targets with the potential 
to cause epidermal damage. The 1,064-nm wave-
length  has  the  least  absorption  by  melanocytes 
and  is  therefore  the  best  choice  for  laser  tattoo 
removal in darker skin types. There is less risk for 
hypopigmentation,  scarring,  or  textural  change. 
However, the 1,064-nm wavelength will not treat 
all  tattoo  colors.  Therefore,  one  must  employ 
alternate  methods  for  multicolored  or  densely 
colored tattoos in dark skin types [3, 4].

Fractional  ablation  of  tattoos  in  dark  skin 
types will allow extraction of tattoo pigment par-
ticles  with  minimal  risk  of  scarring  or  pigmen-
tary change. This concept is particularly useful in 
dark skin types within a patient that has demon-
strated allergic reaction to the tattoo pigment. For 
instance, red pigment is the most common known 
tattoo allergen and can result in a granulomatous 
reaction.  If  targeted  with  a  532-nm  wavelength 
for  removal,  the  pigment  can  shatter  into  many 
smaller particles followed by uptake systemically 
with the potential for anaphylaxis. To avoid this 

Metabolically inert, perfluorodecalin absorbs gas 
and  helps  to  achieve  optical  clearing  [7].  PFD- 
infused silicone patches also serve as a heat sink 
and  physical  barrier  that  prevents  splattering  of 
the  debris  being  ejected  from  the  skin  during 
treatment (Fig. 23.13).

Fig. 23.11  Right eyebrow after second laser pass

a

b

Fig. 23.12  (a) Before treatment. (b) After treatment

Fig. 23.13  Removal of cosmetic lip tattoo

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



408

Fig.  23.15  Note  repigmentation  of  prior  treated  area, 
accomplished with fractional CO2 laser treatment

Fig.  23.14  Note  depigmentation  after  CO2  laser  treat-
ment for tattoo removal

issue, fractional CO2 laser can be used for slough-
ing  of  the  pigment  through  epidermal  loss  with 
limited systemic elimination. Non-fractional CO2 
laser has limited use in this circumstance as it has 
significant potential to permanently depigment or 
scar the skin (Figs. 23.14 and 23.15) [5, 8–10].

cally unappealing and in the view of the patient, 
sometimes worse than the original tattoo. Again, 
fractional  lasers  can  be  employed  to  stimulate 
repigmentation. This is accomplished via melano-
cyte  stimulation  in  the  zones  of  untreated  skin 
adjacent  to  ablated  zones,  acting  as  a  pigment 
resource [5, 8–11] (Figs. 23.16, 23.17, and 23.18).

 Complications in Laser Tattoo 
Removal

 Scars

Even  in  the  most  experienced  hands,  lasers  can 
induce  scarring,  textural  changes,  or  hypopig-
mentation. When hypopigmentation does occur, it 
is transient majority of the time and will resolve 
over the course of months with appropriate care. 
There is a small percentage of cases in which the 
hypopigmentation is permanent. This is cosmeti-

*Hypertrophic and atrophic scars, whether trau-
matic, surgical, or acne in etiology, can be signifi-
cantly  improved  with  fractional  erbium  doped 
1,550  nm,  1,927  nm,  and  fractional  CO2  laser 
treatments.

*Hypopigmented  scars  can  be  repigmented 
fractional  erbium  doped  1,550  nm, 

with 
1,927 nm, and fractional CO2 laser treatments.

H. Jeon et al.



409

a

b

Fig.  23.18  (a) After  multiple  ruby  laser  treatments  for 
tattoo  removal,  slight  tattoo  pigment  remains  as  well  as 
mild  hyperpigmentation  of  normal  surrounding  skin; 
(b) After four treatments of non-ablative fractional erbium 
treatments, no appreciable tattoo pigment remains 

 Scars

Any  injury  to  the  skin  that  goes  beyond  the 
epidermis  will  result  in  scarring.  Scars  come 
in  many  varieties.  They  can  be  categorized 
according  to  etiology,  such  as  traumatic  scar, 
surgical  scar,  or  acne  scar.  They  can  also  be 
grouped  by  wound  healing  response,  such  as 
hypertrophic  or  keloid  scars  resulting  from 
excessive wound healing. Regardless of etiol-
ogy, there are limited resources for significant 
cosmetic improvement with limited downtime 
or risk. See Chap. 4 for complete discussion of 
scar treated with lasers.

Fig. 23.16  Hypopigmentation in skin type II after ruby 
laser treatment for black tattoo removal

Fig.  23.17  Note  repigmentation  of  previously  treated 
area, accomplished with non-ablative fractional 1,550 nm 
laser

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



410

 Hypertrophic and Atrophic Scars

Past studies have demonstrated mild to moderate 
reduction in scar erythema, thickness, and pruritus 
with PDL treatment. This is theorized to be sec-
ondary  to  reduction  in  vasculature  of  the  scar. 
Ablative  lasers  (erbium  or  CO2)  can  be  used  to 
reduce the excess tissue. However, there is a great 
risk  of  further  scarring  or  dyspigmentation  from 
the laser treatment itself. More recent technology 
such  as  fractional  photothermolysis  can  result  in 
significant cosmetic improvement of scars via col-
lagen remodeling with limited risk of side effects. 
Ablative  fractional  photothermolysis  allows  for 
reduction of excess tissue in a controlled capacity 
within  the  thermal  microzones.  This  leaves  the 
normal  adjacent  tissue  to  act  as  the  resource  for 
repair,  minimizing  risk  of  dyspigmentation  and 
scarring.  The  deep  coagulation  allows  for  scar 

contraction and smoothing of texture that result in 
a  remodeling  of  scar  tissue.  Non-ablative  frac-
tional photothermolysis is also effective in treating 
scars.  The  collagen  remodeling  allows  for 
improvement  in  overall  texture  as  well  as  repig-
mentation of hypopigmented scars. The scars con-
tinue  to  improve  in  pliability,  texture,  and 
pigmentation with each successive treatment. Both 
non-ablative  and  ablative  fractional  resurfacing 
allow  for  scar  improvement  in  all  skin  types  in 
contrast  to  standard  ablative  lasers  (Figs.  23.18, 
23.19, 23.20, 23.21, 23.22, 23.23) [10–15].

 Acne Scars

Facial  acne  scarring    affects  many  patients  of 
all  skin  types.  There  are  multiple  options  for 
treatment, but not all have significant improve-

a

b

Fig. 23.19  (a) 
Post-surgical scar on the 
nasal sidewall. (b) 
Improvement after 
ablative fractional CO2 
laser treatment

H. Jeon et al.



a

b

411

Fig. 23.20  (a) Atrophic 
scars with 
hypopigmentation and 
textural changes in skin 
type III; (b) Significant 
improvement after five 
fractional non-ablative 
1,550 nm erbium-doped 
laser treatments

a

b

c

Fig. 23.21  (a) Infantile hemangioma; (b) Involution of hemangioma with resulting textural and pigmentary changes; 
(c) Significant improvement after three erbium-doped 1,550 nm laser treatment

ment  and  not  all  can  be  used  in  darker  skin 
types. Non- ablative lasers such as Nd:Yag have 
been used for dermal collagen stimulation with 
a  low  risk  profile  and  convenient  treatment 
course but limited results. Fractional photother-

molysis has demonstrated consistent efficacy in 
scar  improvement  with  limited  risk  of  side 
effects.  Importantly,  it  can  be  used  in  all  skin 
types  with  appropriate  parameter  selection 
(Fig. 23.24) [13–18].

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



412

a

b

Fig. 23.22  (a) Linear atrophic scar caused by traumatic injury 18 years prior; (b) Near complete resolution of atrophic 
scar status post fractional CO2 laser treatment (1 month post treatment #1)

a

b

Fig. 23.23  (a) Skin type II patient with moderate acne scarring; (b) After a series of five treatments with fractional 
1,550 nm erbium-doped fiber laser, there is a significant reduction of scar appearance

H. Jeon et al.



a

b

413

Fig. 23.24  (a) Baseline with moderate acne scarring and melasma; (b) After five fractional 1,550 nm laser treatments 
and one fractional CO2 laser treatment with notable resolution of acne scars as well as melasma

References

  1.  Halkiadakis  I,  Skouriotis  S,  Stefanki  C,  et  al.  Iris 
atrophy  and  posterior  synechiae  as  a  complica-
tion  of  eyebrow  epilation.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2007;57(2):S4–5.

  2.  Bader O, Lui H. Laser safety and the eye: hidden haz-
ards and practical pearls. Washington, DC: American 
Academy of Dermatology Annual Meeting; 1996.
  3.  Waldorf  H,  Kauvar A,  Geronemus  R,  et  al.  Remote 
fire with the pulsed dye laser: risk and prevention. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;34:503–6.

  4.  Lapidoth M, Aharonowitz G. Tattoo removal among 
Ethiopian Jews in Israel: tradition faces technology. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51(6):906–9.

  5.  Kuperman-Beade  M,  Levine  VJ,  Ashinoff 
R.  Laser  removal  of  tattoos.  Am  J  Clin  Dermatol. 
2001;2(1):21–5.

  6.  Reddy  KK,  Brauer  JA, Anolik  R,  et  al. Topical  per-
fluorodecalin resolves immediate whitening reactions 
and allows rapid effective multiple pass treatment of 
tattoos. Lasers Surg Med. 2013;45:76–80.

  7.  Biesman  BS,  O’Neil  MP,  Costner  C.  Rapid,  high- 
fluence  multi-pass  q-switched  laser  treatment  of  tat-
toos with a transparent perfluorodecalin-infused patch: 
a pilot study. Lasers Surg Med. 2015;47(8):613–8.

  8.  Manstein D, Herron G, Sink R, et al. Fractional photo-
thermolysis: a new concept for cutaneous remodeling 
using  microscopic  patterns  of  thermal  injury.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2004;34:426–38.

  9.  Geronemus  R.  Fractional  photothermolysis:  cur-
rent  and  future  applications.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2006;38:169–76.

 10.  Hantash B, Mahmood M. Fractional photothermoly-
sis: a novel aesthetic laser surgery modality. Dermatol 
Surg. 2007;33:525–34.

 11.  Laubach  H,  Tannous  Z,  Anderson  R,  et  al.  Skin 
responses to fractional photothermolysis. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2006;38(2):142–9.

 12.  Rahman Z, Alam M, Dover J. Fractional laser treat-
ment for pigmentation and texture improvement. Skin 
Therapy Lett. 2006;32:298–301.

 13.  Alster T, Tanzi  E,  Lazarus  M.  The  use  of  fractional 
photothermolysis for the treatment of atrophic scars. 
Dermatol Surg. 2007;33:295–9.

 14. Glaich A, Rahman Z, Goldberg L, et al. Fractional 
resurfacing 
treatment  of  hypopig-
mented  scars:  a  pilot  study.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2007;33(3):289–94.

the 

for 

 15. Behroozan D, Goldberg L, Dai T, et al. Fractional 
photothermolysis  for  the  treatment  of  surgi-
cal  scars:  a  case  report.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
2006;8:35–8.

23 Laser Clinical and Practice Pearls



414

 16.  Friedman P, Jih M, Skover G, et al. Treatment of atro-
phic facial acne scars with the 1064-nm Q-switched 
Nd:  YAG  laser:  six-month  follow-up  study.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2004;140(11):1337–41.

 17. Tanzi  E, Alster  T.  Comparison  of  a  1450-nm  diode 
laser  and  a  1320-nm  Nd:YAG  laser  in  the  treat-

ment  of  atrophic  facial  scars:  a  prospective  clinical 
and histological study. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(2 pt 
1):152–7.

 18.  Hasegawa T,  Matsukura T,  Mizuno Y,  et  al.  Clinical 
trial of a laser device called fractional photothermoly-
sis system acne scars. J Dermatol. 2006;33(9):623–7.

H. Jeon et al.



The Selection and Education 
of Laser Patients

24

Murad Alam and Meghan Dubina

Abstract
Several measures can affect the likelihood of 
optimal treatment results and patient satisfac-
tion.  First,  a  suitable  candidate  must  be 
selected. As with many cosmetic procedures, 
unreasonable  expectations,  body  dysmorphic 
disorder,  relevant  psychiatric  illness,  and 
chronic  dissatisfaction  with  prior  physicians 
are  concerning  factors.  Additionally,  patient 
dissatisfaction is frequent following treatment 
of  minor  complaints  or  those  for  which  reli-
able, efficacious treatments are not available. 
Tanned patients or patients of color are at risk 
for dyschromia, and treatment may need to be 
delayed or modified accordingly.

Keywords
Adverse  events  ·  Body  dysmorphic  disorder  
Contraindications  ·  Counseling  ·  Dissatis-
faction 
Patient selection · Psychiatric illness

·  Hyperpigmentation   

·  Education 

M. Alam (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Otolaryngology, and 
Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Department of Dermatology, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA
e-mail: m-alam@northwestern.edu 

M. Dubina 
Department of Dermatology, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA

 Outline

•  Basic Considerations in Patient Selection
•  Procedure  Delegation 

to  Non-Physician 

Caregivers

•  Initial Consultation and Patient Education
•  Exclusion Criteria for Laser Treatments
•  Patient  Education  Regarding  Undesired 

Effects

 Introduction

Several  measures  can  affect  the  likelihood  of 
optimal  treatment  results  and  patient  satisfac-
tion. First, a suitable candidate must be selected. 
As  with  many  cosmetic  procedures,  unreason-
able  expectations,  body  dysmorphic  disorder, 
relevant psychiatric illness, and chronic dissatis-
faction with prior physicians are concerning fac-
tors.  Additionally,  patient  dissatisfaction 
is 
frequent  following  treatment  of  minor  com-
plaints  or  those  for  which  reliable,  efficacious 
treatments are not available. Tanned patients or 
patients of color are at risk for dyschromia, and 
treatment  may  need  to  be  delayed  or  modified 
accordingly.

Following patient selection, there is a detailed 
pretreatment  consultation  during  which  patient 
education  occurs.  When  counseling  patients, 
physicians  may  first  listen  to  patient  concerns, 
then  ask  salient  questions  for  clarification,  and 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_24

415





416

finally suggest a range of appropriate options. To 
further  ensure  redundancy  and  clarity,  physi-
cians may involve multiple caregivers in the edu-
cation  process  and  utilize  photographs  and 
brochures.  Some  physicians  are  now  routinely 
using prerecorded videos that patients can watch 
in a clinic room to describe the risks and bene-
fits, likely course, and patient experience associ-
ated with particular procedures; such videos are 
often  just  a  few  minutes  long,  and  are  able  to 
provide  an  engaging  narrative  akin  to  a  short 
documentary [1, 2].

Patients should be informed of the approxi-
mate  number  of  laser  treatments  that  may  be 
necessary, expected downtime after treatment, 
and potential alternatives or combination ther-
apies.  Physicians  may  also  preemptively  dis-
close  that  some  patients  do  not  respond  with 
the  same  success  as  others 
to  certain 
procedures.

Lastly,  patients  should  be  told  of  common 
undesired effects before treatment, and be given 
contact information to encourage prompt report-
ing  of  unexpected  adverse  events  after  treat-
ment. In the event of procedure-related adverse 
events, calm and honest discussion is the guid-
ing principle. Physicians should explain correc-
tive options and assure their commitment to the 
patient. Careful patient selection and education 
will  prove  beneficial  for  both  patient  and 
physician.

 Selecting the Laser Patient

Potential Contraindications in Patient 
Selection

 1.  Unreasonable expectations
 2.  Body dysmorphic disorder
 3.  Unmanaged psychiatric illness
 4.  Complaints  regarding  prior  physicians 

and treatments

 5.  Hard to see, hard to treat problems
 6.  Selection  of  procedures  with  highly 

variable efficacy

 Finding the Reasonable Patient

In discourses on patient selection in cosmetic and 
laser  surgery,  there  is  an  emphasis  on  ensuring 
that the patient has so-called “reasonable expec-
tations.” The difficulty lies in defining this phrase 
and  in  ascertaining  whether  a  particular  patient 
meets the test. Among the useful cues are facial 
expressions  and  the  patient’s  responses  to  the 
physician’s discourse [3]. A patient who nods in 
response  and  asks  appropriate  questions  in  a 
modulated voice of moderate volume is reassur-
ing for the physician. The implication is that the 
patient is a partner in the discussion and is both 
understanding  what  the  physician  is  saying  and 
agreeing  with  the  physician’s  plan.  An  exces-
sively emotional, or alternatively stone-face and 
hostile, patient is cause for concern.

 Body Dysmorphic Disorder

Much has also been written about the unsuitabil-
ity for cosmetic procedures of patients with body 
dysmorphic disorder. The full-blown disorder is 
probably  uncommon  among  patients  seeking 
laser  treatment.  But  less  extreme  variants  are 
seen  often.  In  brief,  the  problem  is  that  some 
patients perceive their own bodies in an unrealis-
tic manner [4]. Minor flaws are seen as major dis-
figurement, and some normal features are viewed 
as problems needing correction. Such patients are 
chronically  dissatisfied  with  their  appearance, 
and there may be no limit to the number of com-
plaints  they  have.  Correcting  a  given  complaint 
with a perfectly executed laser procedure will be 
of  no  value:  either  the  patient  will  immediately 
generate  another  complaint,  or  they  will  deny 
that the first was adequately treated despite objec-
tive evidence to the contrary [5].

Identifying the patient with body dysmorphic 
disorder or a lesser subtype is not always simple. 
Patients may be expert at concealing their pathol-
ogy.  They  may  appear  eminently  reasonable. 
Evidence in support of a diagnosis of body dys-
morphic  disorder  is  a  large  number  of  prior 
 surgeries  or  procedures  to  address  the  same 
problem  [6].  These  may  be  invasive  surgeries 

M. Alam and M. Dubina



like  rhinoplasty  or  rytidectomy  that  are  seldom 
repeated multiple times, and they may have been 
performed by a number of different physicians.

A surgeon who is convinced that a patient has 
body dysmorphic disorder should refer the patient 
for  appropriate  counseling  with  a  mental  health 
professional.  If  there  is  some  doubt  about  the 
diagnosis, it may be appropriate to consult with or 
refer the patient to another cosmetic surgeon for a 
second opinion. If the diagnosis is far from certain 
and the physician thinks the patient is anxious but 
not mentally ill, it may still be preferable to avoid 
any major procedures until the patient has under-
gone  some  minor  nonablative  procedures  and 
evinced a satisfactory post-treatment course.

 Patients with Psychiatric Illness 
and Factitial Dermatoses

Patients  with  depression  and  anxiety  disorders, 
schizophrenia,  and  other  psychiatric  disorders 
may present for laser surgery. Importantly, these 
conditions are not absolute contraindications for 
treatment. Patients who understand their illness, 
are  appropriately  medicated,  and  are  under  the 
care  of  a  physician  who  is  both  managing  their 
mental illness and supportive of their desire for 
laser  surgery  may  in  fact  be  appropriate  laser 
patients. Needless to say, patients with mental ill-
ness who lack insight and whose underlying dis-
ease is not managed are not suitable candidates 
for laser procedures.

One  problem  in  the  post-operative  period  is 
picking and self-mutilation [7]. Picking behaviors 
are often exacerbated by the appearance of what is 
perceived as “damaged” skin, such as the re-epithe-
lializing skin after ablative resurfacing. Since pick-
ing  can  lead  to  prolonged  healing  and  scarring, 
picking  should  be  treated  before  ablative  or  par-
tially ablative laser treatments are commenced.

 Patients Who Have Been Dissatisfied 
with Prior Physicians

Not  uncommonly,  laser  physicians  see  patients 
who  are  unhappy  with  doctors  who  have  treated 

417

them  previously.  On  initial  presentation,  such 
patients  may  convey  delight  at  having  finally 
found the perfect, best qualified physician for their 
needs. They may relate the horrors of prior experi-
ences with different physicians, who were in their 
estimation  incompetent  and  dangerous  quacks. 
These  patients  may  be  effusive  and  smiling,  and 
convey their relief at finally being under the care of 
a master and magician, the physician in question.
While this level of approbation can be intoxi-
cating  for  the  physician  toward  whom  it  is 
directed,  caution  should  be  exercised  in  treating 
patients  who  present  thus.  Often,  dissatisfaction 
with prior physicians is founded not on the incom-
petence of these professionals but rather on unre-
alistic  patient  expectations  that  could  not  have 
been, and hence were not, met [8]. Patients who 
hated their other doctors, may soon come to hate 
their  current  doctor.  In  such  patients,  there  is  a 
pervasive tendency to view physicians as either all 
good, or all bad. Oversimplification of this type is 
incompatible with the more shades-of-grey medi-
cal model, in which good care often results in par-
tial resolution of ill-defined problems.

In working with a patient of this type, it may 
be wise for the physician to communicate force-
fully  early  in  the  consultation  that  he  or  she  is 
quite  certainly  unable  to  help  the  patient  in  the 
manner  they  seek.  Additional  referrals  may  be 
provided to other physicians who may or may not 
be  able  to  assist  the  patient.  Disappointing  the 
patient  early  in  the  process  may,  for  the  physi-
cian,  be  preferable  to  managing  an  unhappy 
patient after treatment.

 Identifying Problems That Are 
Difficult to Treat

Some  patients  have  very  high  standards.  They 
may ask to have removed minute lentigines that 
are difficult to see. Or they may request a further 
scar  revision  for  an  accident-induced  scar  that 
was previously expertly revised and is now a faint 
flat line.

In considering the needs of such patients, it is 
important to maintain a realistic appraisal of what 
is possible. One approach is for the physician to 

24 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients



418

communicate  that  he  or  she  definitely  under-
stands the patient’s concern, but is unsure that he 
or she has the means to resolve it. The physician 
may wish to share that given the subtlety of the 
defect,  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  it  would  be 
improved, unchanged, or even exacerbated after a 
laser  procedure.  Since  no  physician  is  omni-
scient, it is reasonable to concede that some other 
laser  surgeon  may  offer  a  superior  treatment 
strategy  associated  with  a  greater  likelihood  of 
success; it may thus be appropriate for the physi-
cian  to  suggest  a  second  opinion  be  obtained 
from another laser expert in the area. If the initial 
physician chooses to treat the minor defect per-
ceived by the patient as a major one, the physi-
cian should be prepared for a dissatisfied patient 
after  treatment.  To  avoid  this,  the  physician 
should  be  clear  about  the  weak  prospects  for 
improvement, and the likely need for many treat-
ments; a comprehensive oral and written consent 
may be obtained.

 Performing Procedures to Which 
Some Patients Do Not Respond

Some  energy  procedures,  such  as  nonablative 
skin tightening, do not provide all patients with 
similar  benefits.  Perhaps  a  fourth  of  patients 
obtain excellent results, another half have modest 
improvement, and a quarter may have no discern-
ible change from baseline. If there is a reasonable 
likelihood  that  a  laser  procedure  will  be  unsuc-
cessful for a particular patient, it is important to 
communicate  this  before  the  procedure  is  per-
formed.  It  is  more  credible  for  the  physician  to 
predict lack of response than to justify it after it 
has happened. Prediction implies superior knowl-
edge and honesty; justification after the fact sug-
gests lack of competence and the possibility that 
a  mistake  is  being  rationalized.  Of  course,  any 
laser  procedure,  and  any  medical  procedure  in 
general, can be ineffective in a specific case with-
out  any  physician  fault.  But  when  such  an  out-
come  is  probable,  it  behooves  the  physician  to 
clearly communicate this in a pre-emptive man-
ner. In general, it is better to lose a patient than to 
regret  having  performed  a  procedure  on  a  now 

unhappy  patient,  who  feels  mislead  and  whose 
needs have not been met.

 Retreating or Managing 
the Reasonable Patient Who Is 
Dissatisfied

Even when surgery is performed on reasonable, 
emotionally stable patients who have appropriate 
expectations  and  are  not  unduly  critical,  prob-
lems can occur. In these cases, it is appropriate to 
promptly  address  the  issues  and  find  a  solution 
that best meets the patient’s needs. If a prior pro-
cedure has not been as effective as anticipated, an 
additional procedure of the same type, or a differ-
ent  procedure  with  the  same  desired  outcome, 
may be undertaken. If a prior procedure resulted 
in  troublesome  adverse  events,  these  should  be 
addressed first, and all efforts undertaken to mini-
mize the signs and symptoms as quickly as pos-
sible,  and  usually  before 
initiating  further 
treatment. When problems have occurred that are 
unfortunate and unforeseen, it may still be help-
ful  for  the  physician  to  sympathize  and  even 
apologize  for  the  inconvenience.  Reasonable 
patients understand that outcomes are not always 
as  desired,  but  a  failure  to  empathize  with  the 
patient, acknowledge the problem, and convey a 
commitment  to  taking  corrective  steps  can  be 
perceived as evidence of arrogance or lack of car-
ing  on  the  part  of  the  laser  surgeon.  When  the 
patient  is  very  unhappy  despite  the  physician’s 
best efforts to address problems sensitively, it is 
not  unreasonable  for  the  physician  to  help  the 
patient find another doctor. Not all patients may 
leave happy, but efforts should be taken to miti-
gate their unhappiness and redeem their opinion 
of the referring practice to the extent possible.

 Delegating Procedures to Non-
Physician Caregivers

Smaller laser procedures are frequently delegated 
to  nurses,  physician  assistants,  and  other  non-
physician providers. After a consultation with the 
physician, who may recommend a series of laser 

M. Alam and M. Dubina



treatments,  the  patient  may  follow  up  on  a 
monthly basis with a trained non-physician pro-
vider who performs these treatments under phy-
sician  supervision.  Medical  practices  vary  with 
regard to the degree of delegation: on-site versus 
off-site delegation; the types of laser procedures 
that are delegated; and the level of training and 
education  of  the  providers  performing  the  dele-
gated functions. Potential problems with delega-
tion, especially if the non-physician providers are 
not comprehensively trained, include the risk of 
compromising patient safety though the increased 
frequency of preventable adverse events and fail-
ure to efficiently and effectively treat these unde-
sired  outcomes.  Other  potential  pitfalls  include 
inappropriate  or  unnecessary  use  of  lasers  and 
risk of overtreatment [9].

Another variable is patient acceptance of del-
egation.  Some  patients  insist  upon  treatment  by 
the  attending  physician.  Others  may  be  more 
flexible, but may want the attending physician to 
be in-house or to perform at least part of the pro-
cedure. Still others may be indifferent as to who 
provides the service as long as the physician is in 
charge  and  responsible  for  the  outcome.  Before 
delegating a procedure, the physician must make 
sure  that  the  patient  is  accepting  of  this.  If  the 
patient  insists  on  the  physician  performing  the 
procedure, it is appropriate to charge a higher fee, 
which accounts for the additional physician time 
required. When  procedures  are  delegated,  if  the 
patient is dissatisfied with the non-physician pro-
vider,  this  should  be  conveyed  forthwith  to  the 
physician by the provider; the physician can then 
see the patient, address the concerns,  and repair 
the patient-physician relationship.

 Educating Laser Patients Presenting 
for Consultation

 Presenting Complaints in Laser 
and Cosmetic Patients

Patients who present for laser procedures either 
have a specific complaint they wish addressed, or 
have a general interest in laser therapy. In the lat-
ter  case,  they  are  typically  unsure  what  laser 

419

might be able to do for them, but are attracted to 
laser  therapy,  which  they  consider  precise  and 
definitive.

 Counseling Patients Who Know What 
They Want Treated

 Listen to Patient Concerns
If  patients  present  with  a  specific  concern,  say 
excess hair on the upper lip or telangiectasia on 
the  nose,  the  first  step  is  for  the  physician  to 
assess  the  problem.  It  is  best  to  let  the  patient 
speak  for  several  minutes,  as  this  will  help  the 
physician understand the exact concerns as well 
as the degree of emotional overlay. For instance, 
if the patient has telangiectasia over much of her 
face but is only bothered by a large spider angi-
oma on her nasal tip, this is useful information. 
Similarly, it is useful to understand whether the 
patient is only mildly disturbed by a concern or 
whether this subjectively a life-altering problem 
for  which  she  is  willing  to  consider  most  any 
treatment option. As the patient is describing her 
presenting complaint, it is helpful to offer her a 
handheld mirror, so that she can point to the rel-
evant  areas,  and  the  physician  can  see  these 
clearly.

 Ask Questions to Clarify the Extent 
of the Concern, and Prior Treatment 
History
Once  the  patient  has  had  an  opportunity  to 
describe the problem, the physician should ask 
salient questions. If the physician believes that 
the patient may have omitted some concerns or 
not  have  provided  adequate  history,  questions 
may  be  asked  to  elicit  this  information.  For 
example, the physician may ask, “I know the red 
spot on your nose bothers you, but what about 
the blood vessels on your cheek, and the redness 
elsewhere on your head and neck?” The purpose 
here  is  not  to  induce  insecurity  in  the  patient, 
but rather to obtain complete information. If the 
patient comments that other areas of redness are 
not too noticeable and looks to the physician for 
confirmation,  it  behooves  the  physician  to  say 
something  reassuring,  like  “I  see  what  you 

24 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients



420

mean, it’s really only the nose that is a problem 
at this time.” With regard to history, it is impor-
tant to know the genesis of a problem and what 
prior  treatments  may  have  been  undertaken. A 
red,  indented  scar  caused  by  a  motor  vehicle 
accident 2 days ago may be treated with conser-
vative wound therapy, a waiting period, and then 
laser  for  redness  and  scar;  conversely,  a  long-
standing  red  scar  may  be  treated  immediately 
with laser. In the same vein, an angioma previ-
ously  treated  unsuccessfully  three  times  with 
pulsed-dye  laser  may  require  either  higher  flu-
ence  therapy  with  bruising  or  possibly  a  more 
aggressive vascular laser, such as an Nd:YAG; a 
so-called  “virgin”  angioma  may  only  require 
gentle pulsing from a KTP or pulsed-dye laser. 
While  laser  procedures  are  often  elective,  and 
not  reimbursed  by  insurance,  it  is  imperative 
that  the  physician  retain  the  vigilance  usually 
required when confronted with serious medical 
problems.  For  instance,  if  there  is  a  scar  adja-
cent to the presenting complaint that the patient 
has not explained, the doctor should ask about 
it.  If  the  patient  has  complicating  medical  ill-
nesses,  like  lupus  or  scleroderma,  that  may 
inhibit healing, the physician should glean this 
information  from  the  chart  or  ask  the  patient 
directly.

 Communicate to the Patient That 
You Are Carefully Considering Options
Having had the patient describe the problem and 
having  asked  additional  questions  for  clarifica-
tion, the physician should take a moment to think. 
It  is  best  to  be  sitting  down  for  this,  as  studies 
have shown that patients prefer this, and view a 
physician who sits as one who spends more time 
with them [10]. Patients are used to being inter-
rupted hurried by their physicians, so some quiet 
thinking time may give them the correct impres-
sion  that  their  concerns  are  being  evaluated.  A 
furrowed brow, leaning back in a chair, or even 
saying  aloud,  “let  me  consider  what  you  have 
said,”  will  communicate  that  the  physician  is 
hard at work solving the problem. Of course, this 
phase should not last too long to avoid creating 
the impression that the physician is confused or 
unsure.

 Suggest a Range of Appropriate 
Treatment Options
Based on the information provided, the physician 
should  provide  treatment  options  to  the  patient. 
In  some  cases  a  specific  treatment  may  be  sug-
gested.  In  other  cases,  a  range  of  options,  from 
the less costly and minimally invasive to the more 
expensive and more downtime-intensive, can be 
presented.  Whether  one  or  several  options  are 
presented will depend on: (1) the medical issue 
being addressed, and whether multiple therapies 
exist for its management; (2) patient preference, 
with some patients wanting the doctor to decide 
and others wanting to select from a series of well-
described  options  themselves.  Patients  vary  in 
the  degree  of  risk  they  wish  to  assume.  Should 
the physician have a sense of their set point for 
risk,  this  can  be  taken  into  account.  To  wit,  a 
patient who wants something very gentle, like a 
topical  cream,  for  facial  rejuvenation,  may  be 
amenable 
to  microdermabrasion,  superficial 
chemical  peels,  and  nonablative  laser;  another 
equally  photodamaged  person  who  has  previ-
ously  had  a  two  face-lifts  and  a  blepharoplasty 
may not be satisfied with anything less than max-
imal  therapy  with  full  face  laser  resurfacing  or 
fractional carbon dioxide laser treatment.

information  about 

 Involve Other Caregivers, Photographs, 
and Written Materials to Ensure 
Redundancy and Enhance Clarity
therapeutic 
In  providing 
options, it is useful to include other educators and 
visual aids. Due to the inordinate time commit-
ment associated with initial patient consultations, 
mid-level professionals may be asked to partici-
pate.  Nurses,  clinical  nurse  practitioners,  physi-
cian assistants, and residents or fellows in training 
may  join  the  attending  physician  in  the  patient 
room, and they may stay after the physician exits 
to  answer  additional  questions.  Alternatively,  a 
similar  professional  may  be  the  first  to  see  the 
patient, elicit a history, and prepare a possible list 
of therapeutic options before the attending enters 
the room. From the patient perspective, meeting 
with  several  caregivers  sequentially  may  allow 
patients  to  refine  their  thoughts  and  to  have  all 
their  questions  answered.  From  the  perspective 

M. Alam and M. Dubina



of  the  attending  physician,  this  serial  approach 
reduces the amount of attending time to be spent 
with  each  patient  while  ensuring  that  nothing 
salient  is  missed  by  the  treating  team  and  that 
routine  elements  of  the  consultation,  such  as 
description of adverse events, prices, and preop-
erative instructions, are conveyed clearly. While 
some  practitioners  do  not  like  to  provide  repre-
sentative before and after photographs, these can 
be very helpful. A nurse or other caregiver may 
review  a  book  of  such  photographs  with  a  pro-
spective patient, thus creating reasonable expec-
tations, affording the patient a further opportunity 
to ask questions, and providing the patient with 
information that she may need before deciding to 
proceed with the laser therapy. Brochures about 
procedures  and  a  carefully  customized  menu  of 
recommended services with prices are also ben-
eficial for patient information [11]. Patients often 
forget  what  they  have  heard.  Written  materials 
can be used to refresh memories, and perused at 
home  with  a  spouse  or  significant  other.  For 
major  procedures  requiring  some  downtime  ad 
risk, phone numbers of willing patients who have 
previously been satisfied with similar procedures 
may allay patient worries. A designated cosmetic 
coordinator or cosmetic consultant from the phy-
sician practice may contact the patient at home or 
provide a contact number in case the patient has 
further queries. Some practices will permit a free 
or low-cost reconsultation with the physician to 
address lingering issues before a procedure.

 Counseling Patients Who Offer No 
Specific Complaints But Want to Look 
Better

The patient who is unsure about precisely what 
she  wants  but  desires  to  look  better  overall  is 
slightly more challenging in initial consultation. 
Usually,  even  such  relatively  unsophisticated  or 
indecisive patients do have some internal view of 
their  flaws.  Gentle  questioning  can  often  lead 
them to reveal these self-assessments. If adequate 
information  is  thus  obtained,  management  of 
these concerns can proceed as if the patient ini-
tially presented with them. If, on the other hand, 

421

the patient is not providing much guidance even 
after  some  pointed  queries,  the  physician  may 
prompt pursue a systematic approach: Starting on 
the face, the physician can assess color and tex-
tural  irregularities.  The  physician  can  verbally 
list  the  apparent  problems  and  visible  signs  of 
aging, and then suggest the modalities that may 
be  suitable  for  improving  each.  The  physician 
may  also  allude  to  the  approximate  degree  of 
invasiveness, downtime, and cost associated with 
various treatment options. Finally, the physician 
may suggest a step-by-step program for proceed-
ing. High on the list should be procedures that are 
simple, inexpensive, and highly likely to produce 
an appreciable improvement; the successful out-
come of these may help diminish patient anxiety 
and increase patient willingness to undergo more 
invasive or complex procedures in the future.

 Explaining the Laser Treatment 
in the Context of a Larger Treatment 
Plan

One laser treatment will seldom completely cor-
rect  a  patient  complaint.  The  exception  may  be 
full-face laser resurfacing or aggressive fractional 
resurfacing  with  carbon  dioxide  laser.  In  most 
cases, 3–6 or more laser treatments may be needed 
to mostly treat a problem; for instance, a series of 
nonablative  treatments  with  various  lasers  will 
improve  telangiectasia,  diffuse  facial  erythema, 
lentigines,  acne  scars,  and  excess  hair.  Tattoo 
removal may require ten, or more, treatments.

Treatments That Can Be Combined with 
Lasers
•  Injectable fillers
•  Surgical excision
•  Neurotoxins
•  Other  energy  devices  (radiofrequency, 

ultrasound)

Further,  laser  is  not  the  only  treatment  type 
that  may  be  appropriate.  Other  methods,  like 

24 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients



422

injectable  fillers,  surgical  excision,  neurotoxins, 
and other energy devices, may be used in combi-
nation. Such multimodality treatments can maxi-
mize the efficacy and persistence of results while 
maintaining an excellent safety profile. If appro-
priate,  patients  should  be  counseled  during  the 
consultation phase about the utility of other treat-
ments to enhance the effect of laser. Considerations 
of cost and time may intrude, but patients should 
be offered the choice. Also, in raising this issue, 
the  physician  will  clarify  that  complete  resolu-
tion  of  the  target  complaint  is  not  possible  by 
laser alone.

 When Laser Treatments Should 
Be Deferred or Modified

In certain cases, laser treatment may be inappro-
priate or at least need to be postponed. Different 
lasers  may  have  specific  exclusion  criteria.  For 
example, if a Caucasian patient has plucked their 
chin hair recently, they would not be a candidate 
for  laser  hair  removal  until  several  weeks  later 
since the presence of hair roots at the target site is 
essential for the efficacy of this procedure. Some 
cautions are more general, applying to all cutane-
ous laser devices.

 Tanned Patients

Caucasian patients who are intensely tan due to 
tanning  beds,  prolonged  outdoor  exposure,  or  a 
recent  sunny  vacation  should  not  receive  laser 
treatment as they are at risk for brownish discol-
oration. While dyschromia of this type will even-
tually  resolve,  it  can  be  disfiguring  and  take 
months  to  remit.  Patients  about  to  embark  on  a 
vacation where they will be sun-exposed should 
also  defer  laser  treatment.  Athletes  pending  a 
major outdoor sporting event, such as a triathlon, 
or  tennis  or  golf  tournament,  may  wish  to  be 
treated a few weeks after this is over. In general, 
laser treatments should be avoided a few weeks 
before  and  a  few  weeks  after  significant  sun 
exposure.  Tanning  booths  are  considered  sun 
exposure, but artificial tanning solutions are not; 

even so, artificial tanners should be discontinued 
4–5 days prior to laser procedures.

 Patients of Color

Darker  skinned  patients,  especially  those  of 
Fitzpatrick skin types IV–VI, are at greater risk of 
post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  after  laser 
procedures. Ablative and partially ablative lasers 
are  much  more  likely  to  induce  pigmentary 
change in susceptible patients, but all lasers are a 
potential risk. Bruising after pulsed-dye laser pro-
cedures can also culminate in brownish discolor-
ation. In darker skinned patients, including those 
of Indian, Middle Eastern, Far Eastern, and Latino 
origin,  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
may be slow to resolve, and may last many months 
or even years. Higher energy treatments are com-
monly avoided in patients with ethnic skin. More 
numerous lower-energy treatments may be substi-
tuted in lieu of fewer more aggressive treatments.

 Educating Patient About Common 
Undesired Effects

Common Undesired Effects
Before treatment

•  Redness
•  Swelling
•  Bruising
•  Erosions
•  Downtime

After treatment

•  Hives
•  Blisters

 Redness and Swelling

Patients  should  be  told  that  a  certain  degree  of 
redness  and  swelling  are  inevitable  after  most 

M. Alam and M. Dubina



laser  procedures.  Such  sequelae  can  be  covered 
with makeup and will remit in hours, or at most 
1–2 days. In describing these results, it is prefer-
able  to  avoid  using  the  technical  terms  “ery-
thema” and “edema,” as these are not understood 
by most patients. It may be helpful to also explain 
that  there  is  individual  variation,  and  some 
patients may become redder or swell more than 
most. When the upper cheeks and lower forehead 
area are treated, periorbital swelling is extremely 
common.  In  such  cases,  patients  should  be 
apprised that their eyes may almost swell shut for 
a day or two, and that this can occur a day or two 
after  treatment.  Eyelid  swelling  is  a  common 
stimulus for a worried phone call from patients; 
proper  pretreatment  counseling  can  avert  this 
needless  anxiety,  and  inconvenience  to  both 
patient and physician.

 Bruising

Bruising  (ecchymoses)  can  occur  after  some 
laser  treatments,  including  pulsed-dye  laser  and 
some  ablative  resurfacing  lasers.  Bruising  can 
persist for a week or longer, with more protracted 
course periorbitally. In the initial consultation, it 
is  important  to  ascertain  the  degree  to  which 
patients  can  tolerate  bruising.  Some  patients  in 
the  public  eye  may  not  want  even  the  smallest, 
faintest bruise; for them, laser treatment parame-
ters should be adjusted to ensure that bruising is 
entirely  avoided.  Pretreatment  or  posttreatment 
with  oral  arnica  montana  supplementation  can 
also reduce the degree and duration of bruising. 
Many patients have great faith in vitamins, herb-
als, and dietary supplements, and the recommen-
dation  to  acquire  a  supply  of  arnica  may  be 
well-received. Patients should also be advised to 
avoid elective medications and supplements that 
exacerbate bleeding in the days to weeks prior to 
laser treatment.

 Erosions

Even nonablative laser treatments may result in a 
few  pinpoint  or  small  erosions.  These  reddish, 

423

crusted  areas  are  best  treated  with  bland  emol-
lients. Hard crust should not be allowed to form. 
Since patients are often reluctant to disturb crust 
or  scabs,  they  should  be  told  something  like, 
“greasy  wounds  without  crust  heal  better.”  For 
many patients, this is a revelation, and they can 
be useful allies in facilitating wound healing once 
they  know  what  to  do.  Avoidance  of  antibiotic 
ointments  when  infection  is  not  suspected  can 
also  decrease  the  chance  of  developing  contact 
dermatitis at the treatment site.

 Hives and Blisters

Urticaria  and  blisters  occur  infrequently  after 
laser treatment, but can be very striking and wor-
risome  when  they  manifest.  It  is  probably  not 
necessary to educate patients preemptively about 
these  unusual  outcomes.  However,  if  urticaria 
and transient micro-blisters occur, antihistamines 
and topical steroids can be commenced immedi-
ately.  Concurrently,  the  patient  should  be  reas-
sured that these problems look very bad but are 
not  serious  and  easily  treated.  In  addition,  pre-
treatment  with  antibiotics  or  antivirals,  when 
indicated, 
treatment-induced 
prevent 
infections.

can 

 Downtime

After  every  laser  procedure,  there  is  a  recovery 
period.  For  nonablative  lasers  like  Q-switched 
lasers, pulsed-dye lasers, hair removal lasers, and 
nonablative tightening devices, this may be brief. 
No time off from work or social engagements is 
usually necessary after these “lunchtime” proce-
dures. However, some partially ablative and fully 
ablative  modalities  may  be  followed  by  more 
substantial  downtime.  Fractionated  laser  treat-
ments  may  have  3–4  days  of  post-procedure 
downtime,  and  higher  energy  treatments  with 
fractionated carbon dioxide devices may be asso-
ciated  with  downtime  of  7–10  days.  Notably, 
even though traditional full-face laser resurfacing 
with  carbon  dioxide  laser  has  approximately 
equivalent  downtime  in  days,  the  character  of 

24 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients



424

downtime  after  fractionated  carbon  dioxide  is 
better.  Patients  in  the  latter  case  do  not  have 
extreme  crusting  and  scabbing  for  the  duration, 
and they are not as uncomfortable; they still look 
unpresentable  for  many  days,  but  the  degree  of 
disfigurement is less and the associated discom-
fort largely lacking. When counseling patients, it 
is important to understand their limits for down-
time. Some patients are relatively more relaxed, 
and  older  patients  who  are  no  longer  working 
may  be  able  to  remain  at  home  for  a  longer 
period.  Other  patients  may  know  exactly  how 
many days of work they can miss, and the inten-
sity of partially ablative procedures may need to 
be  titrated  to  fit  these  bounds.  That  being  said, 
there  is  a  balance  between  providing  adequate 
information  about  downtime,  and  needlessly 
scaring  patients  to  the  point  where  they  decline 
an otherwise effective, indicated procedure.

 Encouraging Patients to Promptly 
Report Unexpected Adverse Events

Apart from common adverse events, unusual or 
rare undesired events can occur after laser treat-
ments. Providing patients with contact informa-
tion  to  report  such  outcomes  increases  the 
likelihood  that  problems  can  be  corrected  with-
out permanent sequelae. Sometimes, patients will 
forget instructions, and be unable to manage even 
an expected adverse event. If they feel their phy-
sician is approachable, they will be motivated to 
contact the office for help. In this manner, patients 
will  not  only  protect  their  health  but  also  allow 
the physician to avoid the risk that an untreated 
minor problem devolves into a serious treatment-
associated complication.

 Discussing Procedure-Related 
Problems with Patients

Not  every  laser  procedure  is  entirely  successful. 
Problems can occur preoperatively, intraoperatively, 
or postoperatively. Preoperative problems may per-
tain to anesthesia adverse events, device malfunc-
tions, and patient anxiety. Intraoperative problems 

may be excessive pain, inappropriate laser parame-
ters,  cooling  failures,  incorrect  use  of  protective 
eyewear, and the like. Post-operative adverse events 
are discussed elsewhere in this book, but may com-
monly include dyspigmentation, bruising,  infection 
or inflammation, delayed healing, and scar.
In  discussing  procedure-associated 

issues 
with  patients,  the  guiding  principles  are  clarity, 
calmness,  honesty,  and  reassurance.  Full  infor-
mation  should  be  provided  in  a  timely  manner. 
The  physician  should  be  empathetic,  clearly 
showing his or her commitment ensuring the best 
possible  outcome  for  the  patient.  Explanations 
should  be  accurate  and  concise,  not  colored  by 
excessive emotion or rationalization. The physi-
cian should explain what needs to be done now, if 
anything, to correct residual problems. Corrective 
action  should  be  compatible  with  the  patient’s 
schedule;  efforts  should  be  made  to  respect  the 
patient’s time and finances. Finally, the physician 
should state clearly that he or she will do every-
thing in his or her power to resolve the situation, 
and will continue to work closely with the patient 
for the duration.

One excellent strategy is to bring the patient 
back weekly to assess the problem, and the extent 
to which it is responding to treatment. Not only 
does this communicate to the patient that the doc-
tor cares, it also allows the physician to provide 
timely interventions when necessary and to detect 
any new problems as they arise. Regular follow-
up  also  protects  the  physician  from  any  subse-
quent charges of abandoning a patient in need.

References

  1.  Armstrong  AW,  Alikhan  A,  Cheng  LS,  Schupp  C, 
Kurlinkus C, Eisen DB. Portable video media for pre-
senting informed consent and wound care instructions 
for skin biopsies: a randomized controlled trial. Br J 
Dermatol. 2010;163(5):1014–9.

  2.  Migden  M,  Chavez-Frazier  A,  Nguyen  T.  The  use 
of  high  definition  video  modules  for  delivery  of 
informed  consent  and  wound  care  education  in 
the  Mohs  Surgery  Unit.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2008;27(1):89–93.

  3.  Mast  MS.  On  the  importance  of  nonverbal  commu-
nication  in  the  physician-patient  interaction.  Patient 
Educ Couns. 2007;67:315–8.

M. Alam and M. Dubina



  4.  Phillips  KA.  Body  dysmorphic  disorder:  the  dis-
imagine  ugliness.  Am  J  Psychiatry. 

tress  of 
1991;148:1138–49.

  5.  Veale D, Boocock A, Gournay K, et al. Body dysmor-
phic disorder: a survey of fifty cases. Br J Psychiatry. 
1996;169:196–201.

  6.  P  hillips  KA,  Grant  J,  Siniscalchi  J,  Albertini 
RS.  Surgical  and  non-psychiatric  medical  treat-
ment  of  patients  with  body  dysmorphic  disorder. 
Psychosomatics. 2001;42:504–10.

  7.  Stein  DJ,  Hollander  E.  Dermatology  and  conditions 
related to obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 1992;26:237–42.

425

  8.  Ward  CM.  Consenting  and  consulting  for  cosmetic 

surgery. Br J Plast Surg. 1998;51:547–50.

  9.  Alam  M.  Who  is  qualified  to  perform  laser  sur-
in  what  setting?  Semin  Plast  Surg. 

gery  and 
2007;21(3):193–200.

 10.  Renzi C, Abeni D, Picardi A, et al. Factors associated 
with  patient  satisfaction  with  care  among  dermato-
logical outpatients. Br J Dermatol. 2001;145:617–23.
 11.  Ellis DA, Hopkin JM, LEitch AG, Crofton J. ‘Doctors 
Orders’:  controlled  trial  of  supplementary,  written 
information for patients. Br Med J. 1979;1:456.

24 The Selection and Education of Laser Patients



Anesthesia for Laser Surgery

Marina Perper, Ali Rajabi-Estarabadi, Ariel E. Eber, 
Voraphol Vejjabhinanta, Ran Huo, Keyvan Nouri, 
and John Tsatalis

25

Abstract

•  Some of laser procedures such as laser resur-
facing  or  tattoo  removal  are  associated  with 
some discomfort.

Keywords
Topical anesthesia · Regional anesthesia  
Laser surgery

•  Anesthesia provides a reversible loss of sensa-
tion and alleviates most of the discomforts.
•  The techniques most commonly used are topi-
cal anesthesia and regional anesthesia with or 
without 
and/or 
anxiolytics.

analgesics 

systemic 

•  Concomitant cooling, vibration or pinching of 
the area may be utilized to minimize the pain 
perception.

M. Perper · A. Rajabi-Estarabadi · A. E. Eber · K. Nouri
J. Tsatalis
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller school of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: m.perper@umiami.edu;  
arajabi@med.miami.edu; a.eber@med.miami.edu; 
knouri@med.miami.edu 

V. Vejjabhinanta (*) 
Dermatologic Surgery and Lasers Unit, Department 
of Medical Services, Ministry of Public Health, 
Institute of Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand 

R. Huo 
Broward Dermatology Clinic, Pembroke Pines, FL, 
USA

 Introduction

Local anesthesia has been one of the most signifi-
cant  advancements  in  surgery  for  the  past  cen-
tury.  Before  the  advent  of  local  anesthetics, 
patients  had  few  options  for  dealing  with  pain. 
Inebriation  was  a  common,  albeit  ineffective, 
practice.

In the early nineteenth century, it was reported 
that the Peruvian Indians experienced numbness 
of the lips after chewing leaves of the coca plant, 
Erythroxylon  coca.  In  1859, Albert  Niemann,  a 
German  chemist,  first  extracted  and  isolated 
cocaine from the coca plant in a purified form.

Local  anesthetics  were  first  introduced  into 
medical  practice  in  1884  when  ophthalmologist 
Carl  Kollar  used  purified  cocaine  as  a  topical 
agent by applying it to the cornea of animal mod-
els.  In  its  first  clinical  application,  cocaine  was 
used in operation for glaucoma. In the same year, 
Halsted  and  Hall  infused  cocaine  into  the  bra-
chial  vein  of  a  patient  to  achieve  regional 
anesthesia.

Previously, dentists had a practice of dissolv-
ing cocaine hydrochloride pills in water and per-
forming  nerve  infiltrations  and  blocks  after 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_25

427





428

drawing  the  mixture  into  a  syringe. Although  it 
provided  profound  local  anesthesia  that  revolu-
tionized  dentistry  and  medical  practice,  the 
extreme vasoconstrictive action of cocaine often 
leads to tissue necrosis.

By the 1900s, cocaine’s narcotic effects had 
become  well  recognized,  including  its  mood-
altering effects and cardiac and central nervous 
system  stimulation. 
to 
cocaine’s  severe  physical  and  psychological 
dependence,  its  use  for  local  anesthesia  was 
discontinued.

In  addition,  due 

In 1904, Alfred Einhoin synthesized procaine 
(Novocaine),  an  ester  anesthetic,  as  a  safer  and 
less  toxic  alternative.  Novocaine  was  the  main-
stay of care for topical anesthetics for the follow-
ing  40  years,  until  Nils  Lofgren  synthesized 
lidocaine.  Lidocaine  was  the  first  of  the  amide 
group  of  local  anesthetics,  which  exhibited 
greater  potency,  fewer  allergic  reactions,  and  
more rapid onset of action.

Proper  local  anesthesia  is  essential  in  laser 
surgery, as most laser procedures are associated 
with some discomfort, ranging from mild warmth 
to severe burning pain. An understanding of vari-
ous local anesthesia indications, techniques, and 
side effects will provide a basis for the selection 
of the most appropriate anesthetic agent  for the 
given procedure.

 Classification and Mechanism 
of Action

•  Local  anesthetics  share  a  similar  chemical 
structure:  a  hydrophilic  amine  portion,  an 
intermediate chain, and a lipophilic aromatic 
ring.

•  They  are  divided  into  amide  or  ester  groups 
and are classified based on their intermediate 
chain.

•  Anesthetics act by disrupting sodium channel 
activity and blocking electrical impulse trans-
mission at nerve endings.

•  Most  local  anesthetics  except  cocaine  have 

vasodilatory effects.

•  Epinephrine is often added as a vasoconstric-
tive agent and has the added benefit of mini-

mizing  systemic  effects  and  increasing  the 
length of anesthetic effect.

 Topical Anesthesia

•  Topical  anesthetics  are  used  for  superficial 
laser  surgery  and  minor  dermatological 
procedures.

•  Cooling agents are indicated for quick proce-
dures  that  require  only  a  few  seconds  of 
anesthesia.

•  Lidocaine  is  the  most  widely  used  topical 

anesthetic.

•  Occlusion with a plastic wrap enhances anes-
thetic penetration and delivery to the dermis.

•  Methemoglobinemia 

is  a  major  concern 
regarding  the  use  of  EMLA,  particularly  in 
neonates.

Local  anesthetic  agents  are  functionally 
divided  into  the  amino  amide  and  amino  ester 
groups  (Fig.  25.1).  Both  groups  share  a  similar 
chemical  structure  that  contains  three  compo-
nents: a hydrophilic amine portion, an intermedi-
ate  chain,  and  a  lipophilic  aromatic  ring.  The 
intermediate  chain  contains  either  an  ester  or 
amide linkage, which categorizes the agent.

Pain  sensation  is  carried  via  C  fiber  (unmy-
elinated  nerve,  0.5–1  μm)  and  A-delta  fiber 
(2–5 μm). These fibers are more sensitive to the 
actions  of  local  anesthetics  as  compared  with 
large nerve fibers. Consequently, patients may be 
able to feel sensations such as pressure and vibra-
tion while being insensitive to pain.

The effectiveness of a local anesthetic depends 
on  its  ability  to  diffuse  across  the  nerve  cell’s 
membrane (lipophilic properties) and then convert 
to a cationic form which results in better protein 
binding  (hydrophilic  properties).  The  higher  the 
lipid solubility of an agent, the more it can diffuse 
across  a  cell’s  membrane,  leading  to  higher 
potency and a lower concentration needed to pro-
duce the desired result. However, greater protein-
binding ability leads to a longer duration of action 
due to a higher affinity for intracellular receptors.
Most  local  anesthetics,  except  cocaine,  have 
vasodilatory effects, which increase the chances 

M. Perper et al.



Fig. 25.1  Chemical 
structure of local 
anesthetic agents

429

R1

R2

R1

R2

Ester

Amide

O

C

NH

O

R

N

O

C

R

N

Aromatic
group

Intermediate
bond

Tertiary
amine

(Lipophilic)

(Ester or Amide)

(Hydrophilic)

of excessive bleeding during the course of a pro-
cedure.  To  counteract  this,  epinephrine  is  often 
added as a vasoconstrictive agent, which has the 
added benefits of increasing the local sequestra-
tion  of  the  anesthetic,  minimizing  systemic 
effects  and  increasing  the  length  of  anesthetic 
effect.

Topically  applied  anesthetic  agents  are  suit-
able for use in superficial laser surgery and minor 
dermatological  procedures.  Topical  anesthetics 
act  by  disrupting  sodium  channel  activity  and 
blocking electrical impulse transmission at nerve 
endings. They can also be used to permit painless 
needle  insertion  when  infiltrative  anesthesia  is 
required. These agents are usually encountered in 
an oil-in-water base or similar cream compound. 
For  quick  procedures,  cooling  sprays  such  as 
dichlorotetrafluoroethane  or  ethylchloride  may 
be used.

The  skin’s  stratum  corneum  serves  as  a 
mechanical  barrier,  slowing  down  topical  anes-
thesia  penetration.  Thus,  the  vehicle  is  very 
important  in  helping  the  anesthetic  traverse  the 
epidermis. The thickness of the stratum corneum 
varies  with  anatomical  locations,  altering  the 
time  needed  to  achieve  adequate  anesthesia. 
Occlusion  with  a  plastic  wrap  is  one  way  of 
enhancing product penetration and delivery to the 

dermis.  This  method  also  hydrates  the  skin, 
which  may  help  explain  the  lower  incidence  of 
side  effects  seen  after  its  use  in  carbon  dioxide 
resurfacing laser procedures.

The  most  widely  used  topical  anesthetic  is 
EMLA cream, a 5% eutectic mixture of lidocaine 
2.5%  and  prilocaine  2.5%  in  an  oil-in-water 
emulsion. It must be applied under an occlusive 
dermal dressing for 60 min for adequate dermal 
anesthesia.  EMLA  has  been  shown  to  provide 
adequate  anesthesia  for  pulsed  dye  laser  treat-
ments of Port Wine Stains (PWSs) without affect-
ing the laser treatment’s efficacy. It is also used in 
ablative  laser  resurfacing.  The  major  concern 
regarding the use of EMLA relates to the poten-
tial  risk  of  methemoglobinemia,  also  a  known 
side effect of prilocaine. It is more likely in neo-
nates, especially in pre-term infants.

LMX-4  (formerly  called  ELA-Max)  is  4% 
lidocaine  cream  in  a  liposomal  vehicle.  It  only 
requires  15–45  min  of  application  time  without 
the  need  of  an  occlusive  dressing  following  its 
application. LMX-5 is the 5% concentration and 
although it is marketed for anorectal use, it can 
also be applied as a topical anesthetic agent.

Betacaine-LA  ointment  contains  lidocaine, 
prilocaine and a vasoconstrictor in a liquid paraf-
fin  ointment.  It  has  a  recommended  application 

25 Anesthesia for Laser Surgery



430

time of 30–45 min without the requirement of an 
occlusive dressing.

Tetracaine gel is a long-acting ester anesthetic 
composed of 4% tetracaine in a lecithin gel. Its 
application  time  is  30  min  under  an  occlusive 
dressing.

The 7% lidocaine and 7% tetracaine (LT) peel 
is  a  self-occlusive  topical  anesthetic,  presenting 
as  a  1:1  eutectic  mixture  that  is  applied  as  a 
cream.  It  air-dries  to  form  a  flexible  membrane 
that  can  be  peeled  from  the  skin.  The  recom-
mended application time is 30 min. LT peel has 
been  successfully  used  in  a  variety  of  dermato-
logical  procedures  such  as  PDL  therapy,  laser-
assisted  hair  removal,  non-ablative  facial  laser 
resurfacing, laser therapy for leg veins, cutaneous 
laser 
tattoo 
removal.  It  has  shown  to  have  a  superior  anes-
thetic efficacy to ELMA cream in adult patients 
undergoing a variety of cutaneous procedures.

resurfacing  and 

laser-assisted 

Quick procedures that require only a few sec-
onds of anesthesia can utilize cooling refrigerant 
sprays, such as dichlorotetrafluoroethane or ethyl 
chloride. Ice cubes can also be used, especially to 
increase numbness in injections given to children.

 Infiltrative Anesthesia

•  Local infiltration can be performed for proce-
dures associated with increased pain, such as 
ablative laser resurfacing.

•  The  ester-linked  anesthetics  have  a  much 
greater  allergenic  potential  than  the  amide-
linked anesthetics.

•  Cross  reactivity  exists  among  ester-linked 
anesthetics,  PABA,  paraphenylenediamine, 
and sulfonamides.

Infiltrative  anesthesia  is  the  most  commonly 
performed form of skin anesthesia. The concen-
tration  and  selection  of  infiltrative  anesthetics 
depend  on  the  procedure  to  be  performed,    the 
speed  of  onset  desired,  and  duration  of  action 
required.  For  quick  and  simple  procedures,  a 
short-acting  anesthetic  with  rapid  onset  can  be 
chosen.  As  for  larger  procedures,  longer-acting 
agents will be needed.

When  an  extensive  area  of  the  skin  is  to  be 
anesthetized, the anesthetic should be diluted  to 
limit the total amount applied to the tissue and to 
reduce  possible  systemic  adverse  reactions. 
Conversely, higher concentrations can be used in 
smaller quantities for specific nerve blocks.

The  ester-linked  anesthetics  (i.e.  procaine, 
cocaine, tetracaine) have decreased in popularity 
due  to  allergic  and  cross-reactions  with  benzo-
caine,  para-aminobenzoic  acid  (PABA),  para-
phenylenediamine, and sulfonamides.

Most  procedures  are  performed  using  1%  or 
2%  lidocaine  which  provides  quick  onset,  long 
duration (45 min to 3 h without epinephrine), and 
has a low allergic reaction potential. When com-
bined with epinephrine, an even longer anesthetic 
response can be achieved.

Bupivacaine  and  etidocaine  are  first-line 
agents used to achieve longer anesthetic periods, 
such as in the cases of nerve blocks. Etidocaine 
has a short onset of action, a long duration, and 
high potency without excessive increase in toxic-
ity, and is ideal when a long procedure is planned 
and epinephrine is contraindicated. A summary of 
the most commonly used anesthetics, their onset, 
and duration of action are displayed on Table 25.1.
Injections  may  be  placed  subcutaneously  or 
intradermally. Intradermal injection has a faster 
onset and longer duration of action, although it 
is much more painful than a subcutaneous injec-
tion. Distortion of the skin by injection can be 
compensated for in procedures by marking the 
skin  before 
it 
afterwards.

injection  and  massaging 

If amide and ester anesthetics cannot be used 
for a patient, a 1% solution of diphenhydramine 
(an antihistamine) can be used, with an anesthetic 
effect equivalent to that of 1% lidocaine. However, 
the duration of action is shorter and the pain upon 
injection is greater than that of lidocaine.

 Procedures and Anesthesia of Choice

The  specific  laser  procedure  to  be  performed 
impacts the choice of anesthesia. The dermatolo-
gist  has  to  consider  factors  such  as  onset  of 
action,  potency,  potential  vasoactivity,  depth, 

M. Perper et al.



431

Table 25.1  Common anesthetic agents

Anesthetic 
agents
Amides
Lidocaine
Prilocaine
Bupivacaine
Esters
Procaine
Tetracaine

Onset plain 
(min)

Duration plain 
(min)

Duration with 
epinephrine (min)

Max dose plain 
(mg/kg)

Max dose with 
epinephrine (mg/kg)

<2
<2
3–5

<2
<15

30–120
30–120
120–240

15–30
120–40

60–400
60–400
240–480

30–90
240–480

4.5
5.5
2.5

7
1.4

7
8.5
3

8.5
–

length  of  anesthesia  required,  potential  adverse 
events, and host sensitivity.

 Laser Treatment for Tattoos, Pigmented 
Lesions, and Hair Removal
LMX 4–5% is the most practical choice in laser 
treatment of tattoos, pigmented lesions, and hair 
removal.  It  can  be  prescribed  ahead  of  a  clinic 
visit, so that the patient can apply it prior to his or 
her  visit.  Since  the  laser  targets  in  these  proce-
dures are pigment chromophores, the vasoactiv-
ity of the anesthetic agent does not influence the 
outcome of the procedure.

 Non-ablative Rejuvenation
Vasoactive agents,  such as anesthetics, will dimin-
ish  the  target  chromophore  hemoglobin  in  non-
ablative  rejuvenation,  thus  interfering  with  the 
clinical outcome. For this reason, the use of a non-
vasoactive or vasodilating agent is recommended.
Some  non-ablative  treatments  do  not  require 
anesthesia. In order to assess a patient’s discom-
fort level, the practitioner can perform a spot test 
prior  to  the  application  of  the  anesthetic;  the 
patient may be able to tolerate the treatment with-
out anesthetics. If anesthesia is needed, the use of 
LMX 4–5% cream may be applied.

 Tumescent Anesthesia

Jefferey  Klein  introduced  low-concentration  lido-
caine anesthesia (tumescent technique) for cutane-
ous surgery in the late 1980s. It is defined as direct 
infiltration of dilute lidocaine (<1 mg/L), epineph-
rine (<1 mg/L), and sodium bicarbonate (10 mEq/L), 
and  provides  excellent  pain  control  with  minimal 

Table 25.2  Tumescent local anesthesia mixture

0.1% solution (0.1% lidocaine, epinephrine 
1:1,000,000, pH 7.4)
0.9% normal saline
2% lidocaine
Epinephrine 1:10,000
8.45% sodium bicarbonate
0.05% solution (0.05% lidocaine, epinephrine 
1:1,000,000, pH 7.4)
0.9% normal saline
2% lidocaine
Epinephrine 1:10,000
8.45% sodium bicarbonate

1 L
50 ml
1 ml
12.5 ml

1 L
50 ml
1 ml
12.5 ml

adverse  effects.  Initially  used  for  liposuction,  this 
method has been successfully applied to many other 
dermatologic  procedures  such  as  hair  transplanta-
tion,  removal  of  skin  tumors,  localized  phlebec-
tomy, 
laser  surgery,  and  dermabrasion.  This 
approach has the advantage of achieving anesthesia 
in a very large area of skin. The safest maximum 
dose  for  the  tumescent  technique  with  lidocaine 
with  epinephrine  (1:100,000)  in  concentrations  of 
0.05% and 0.1% is between 45 and 50 mg/kg. The 
solution preparation and concentration of the solu-
tions are displayed in Table 25.2.

The use of the tumescent anesthesia technique 
reduces  blood  loss,  bruising,  and  postoperative 
soreness.  It  has  been  reported  that  this  type  of 
local anesthesia has contributed to pain relief for 
up to 18 h after the procedure, therefore minimiz-
ing the need for post-operative narcotics.

 Nerve Blocks

A detailed knowledge of the head and face neuro-
anatomy allows the cosmetic surgeon to perform 

25 Anesthesia for Laser Surgery



432

facial  surgical  procedures  with  minimal  pain  in 
the patient. Skillful administration of the chosen 
anesthesia can also minimize the potential risks 
involved, including nerve laceration, hematoma, 
and paralysis.

A  specific  nerve  block  provides  pain  relief 
without the local distortion sometimes seen with 
local infiltration. The central face allows the use 
of field block anesthesia due to multiple foramina 
and  their  respective  nerve  roots  accessibility. 
With  the  knowledge  of  anatomical  nerve  land-
marks,  the  surgeon  can  perform  nerve  blocks 
according to the area that needs to be anesthetized 
by injecting anesthetic solution in adequate con-
centrations  throughout  the  nerve  foramen  either 
by a percutaneous or intraoral approach. Due to 
the complexity of nerve ramifications, infiltrative 
anesthesia may be added to the nerve block.

Peripheral  nerve  blocks  commonly  used  in 
dermatologic  practice  include  digital  blocks, 
supraorbital  and  supratrochlear/infratrochlear 
blocks (forehead and vertex of the scalp), infraor-
bital  blocks  (nose  except  the  tip,  medial  cheek, 
lower eyelids and upper lip), anterior ethmoidal 
nerve block (tip of the nose), mental blocks (chin, 
lower  cheek  and  lips),  and  inferior  alveolar 
blocks (tongue and lower lip).

Many  of  the  facial  nerves  can  be  easily 
approached either percutaneously or intraorally. 
The  supraorbital  nerve  exits  the  orbit  through 
the  supraorbital  foramen  which  is  palpable  in 
most patients. The supratrochlear nerve exits the 
orbit  through  a  foramen  approximately  17  mm 
from  the  glabellar  midline.  The  infratrochlear 
nerve  exits  the  orbit  through  a  foramen  below 
the  trochlea.  The  infraorbital  nerve  exits  the 
orbit  through  the  infraorbital  foramen  4–7  mm 
below the orbital rim. The mental nerve exits the 
mental foramen on the hemimandible at the base 
of the root of the second pre-molar (Fig. 25.2). 
Injection of 2–4 cc’s of local anesthetic solution, 
about 10 mm inferior to the gum line or 15 mm 
inferior  to  the  top  of  the  crown  of  the  second 
premolar  tooth,  usually  leads  to  a  successful 
nerve block. Alternatively, the mental nerve may 
be blocked with a facial approach aiming for the 
same  target.  After  the  procedure,  the  numbed 
area will extend from the unilateral lip down to 
the  mentolabial  fold.  The  anesthesia  may  also 
reach  other  areas  like  the  anterior  chin  and 

cheek, depending on the patient’s anatomy and 
nerve ramification.

Nerve  damage  is  a  possible  complication  of 
nerve  blocks,  and  care  should  be  employed  to 
avoid direct injection of anesthesia into a nerve or 
foramen.

Digital  nerve  blocks  of  fingers  can  effec-
tively provide anesthesia by injecting the anes-
thetic  solution  (usually  2  ml  of  2%  plain 
lidocaine) on the side of the finger just distal to 
the metacarpophalangeal joint. By directing the 
needle  inferiorly  and  then  superiorly,  both 
inferior  and  superior  digital  nerves  can  be 
anesthetized (Fig. 25.3).

 Adverse Effects of Local Anesthetics

Local  anesthetics  (LA)  are  widely  used  drugs. 
Adverse reactions are rare but may be caused by 
the needle insertion, delayed-type hypersensitiv-
ity  reactions  and  probably  also  immediate-type 
reactions.

Possible  consequences  of  needle  insertion 
include fainting, pain, itching, erythema, ecchy-
mosis,  edema,  infection,  hematoma,  hyperalge-
sia,  nerve  damage,  and  muscle 
trismus. 
Psychogenic reactions may occur due to pain of 
the  injection  or  to  the  patient’s  fear  of  pain  or 
needles, and a vasovagal response involving skin 
pallor, diaphoresis, bradycardia, and hypotension 
may  result.  For  this  reason,  the  patient  should 
always  be 
injections. 
lying  down  during 
Commonly used needles are between 25 and 30 
gauge,  with  smaller  needles  preferred  to  mini-
mize injection pain.

Adverse  events  of  anesthetic  solutions  include 
local and systemic toxicity, allergy and anaphylaxis, 
and  idiosyncratic  responses.  Local  reactions  may 
occur secondary to improper injection of the  conse-
quences may be lethal if the targeted area is a large 
vessel  and  needle  insertion  can  cause  pain,  faint-
ness,  bruising,  infection,  hematoma,  hyperalgesia, 
and muscle trismus.

Vasovagal/Neurogenic/Psychogenic  reactions 
may result from patient perception of fear or pain 
due  to  needles  or  impending  procedure  which 
may result in a vasovagal episode that mimics a 
more  serious  adverse  effect,  such  as  an  allergic 
reaction.

M. Perper et al.



433

Supraorbital
foramen

1cm

Infraorbital
foramen

Mental
foramen

Midpupillary
line

Supraorbital
Notch

1 cm from
Inferior orbital rim

Mid - mandible
below 2nd premolar

Created and designed by: Juan Sebastian Gomez Gutierrez

Fig. 25.2  Landmarks for facial nerve blocks

Two types of allergic reactions to LAs are rec-
ognized: IgE-mediated type 1 reactions and T-cell-
mediated type 4 reactions. As prevalent subtypes of 
ester and amide LAs are available both as topical 
preparations  and  injectable  agents,  both  reaction 
types may be caused by members of both groups.

Immediate type 1 reactions are characterized 
by release of histamine and other mediators from 
mast cells and basophils, following IgE antibody 
bridging by the allergen. A rapid increase in vas-
cular  permeability  as  well  as  contraction  of 
smooth muscles lead to symptoms such  as urti-
caria, angiooedema, bronchospasm, cardiovascu-
lar  depression  and  in  severe  cases  shock.  It 
response  occurs  more  often  with  ester  group 
anesthetics.  Esters  are  metabolized  to  PABA, 
which  is  responsible  for  their  strong  allergenic 
potential.  Preservative-free  lidocaine  should  be 
used for allergic patients; these formulations do 

not  contain  preservatives  that  may  cause  type  I 
reactions. Monitored skin prick testing, intrader-
mal testing, and subcutaneous challenge may be 
defensible in high-risk cases.

Delayed-type 4 hypersensitivity reactions are 
most often induced by skin contact with topical 
preparations  but  localized  edema  may  also 
develop  following  injection  reactions  include 
allergic contact dermatitis. If a patient is reactive 
to one group of anesthetics (amide or ester), the 
other group can be used since the groups do not 
cross-react.

Systemic reactions to anesthetics occur most 
often when the agent is used over the maximum 
recommended  dose  or  when  the  agent  is  acci-
dentally 
intravenously.  Aspirating 
before  injection  can  help  reduce  instances  of 
intravenous  injection.  Central  nervous  system 
toxicity of local anesthetics can lead to tinnitus, 

injected 

25 Anesthesia for Laser Surgery



434

medical history is essential to prevent and man-
age these aforementioned complications. Direct 
injection of anesthesia into a nerve or foramen 
should  be  avoided,  as  it  can  lead  to  nerve 
damage.

 Local Anesthesia in Special Patients

 Anesthesia 
and Pregnancy—Lactation

Due  to  concerns  about  potential  harm  to  the 
mother  or  fetus,  dermatologic  surgeons  are  fre-
quently hesitant to perform cutaneous surgery on 
pregnant patients.

In general, the effects of pregnancy hormones 
may  increase  local  anesthetic  sensitivity,  while 
increasing  cardiac  output  in  pregnancy  can 
increase local anesthetic concentration. Avoidance 
of intravascular injection is key in order to avoid 
maternal and fetal toxicity. Ropivacaine and bupi-
vacaine in this population have an increased risk 
of cardiotoxic effects due to progesterone levels. 
Lidocaine is pregnancy category B and epineph-
rine is pregnancy category C. Their safety in preg-
nancy  is  level  of  evidence  III  while  safety  in 
lactation is level of evidence IV.

Low doses of most local anesthetics with epi-
nephrine as well as nitrous oxide less than 50% 
are safe to use during pregnancy. However, use of 
epinephrine  should  be  avoided  during  labor. 
Sedatives  and  opioids  are  potential  teratogens 
and should be avoided.

 Anesthesia in Pediatric Patients

Local  anesthetic  toxicity  is  rarely  seen  in  infants 
and  young  children.  Lidocaine  has  been  widely 
used in infants and children for topical, regional, 
plexus, epidural, and spinal anesthesia. Prilocaine 
has been linked to methemoglobinemia, and thus 
may  not  be  suitable  for  use  in  infants  and 
children.

Created and designed by:
Juan Sebastian Gomez Gutierrez

Fig. 25.3  Digital nerve block

blurred vision, light-headedness, nausea, hallu-
cinations,  slurred  speech,  tonic-clonic  seizures 
and  respiratory  arrest.  Cardiovascular  effects 
can  lead  to  mild  tachycardia,  tremors,  palpita-
tions,  and  at  higher  doses,  hypotension  and 
arrhythmias. Amide group anesthetics are more 
dependent  on  the  liver  for  metabolism;  for 
patients with liver problems, ester-linked anes-
thetics are recommended.

Pseudo-allergic  Reaction  is  a  category  of 
immediate-type  adverse  reactions  to  local  anes-
thetics has been hypothesized to be due to direct 
neuronal  stimulation  causing  a  reflex  cascade 
that  results  in  a  reaction  similar  to  those  seen 
with  radiocontrast  media  and  nonsteroidal  anti-
inflammatory medications.

Patients  with  have  coagulation  disorders  or 
those  using  anticoagulants  are  more  prone  to 
develop  ecchymosis  and  hematomas.  Patients 
taking  beta  blockers  should  not  be  given  epi-
nephrine,  due  to  paradoxical  hypertension  fol-
lowed  by  reflex  bradycardia  that  can  lead  to 
cardiac arrest or hypertensive stroke. A detailed 

M. Perper et al.



In the neonatal population, the skin is attenu-
ated and result in greater and quicker absorption 
of  anesthetics  especially  in  premature  infants. 
Due  to  decreased  plasma  protein  binding,  free 
local  anesthetic  drug  concentrations  will  be 
higher in the blood.

 Systemic Sedation for Outpatient 
Clinic

Conscious sedation is typically used in conjunc-
tion with local anesthesia and may be preferable 
over general anesthesia in dermatologic surgery 
in  many  cases.  Conscious  sedation  utilizes  a 
combination  of  sedatives,  analgesics,  and  tran-
quilizers to induce a state of amnesia, anxiolysis, 
and analgesia.

Some of the advantages of conscious sedation 

as compared to general anesthesia include

•  Reduced risk of drug-related side effects since 

fewer drugs and smaller doses are used

•  Faster recovery and less postoperative nausea 

and vomiting

•  Absence of complications from airway manip-
ulation since there is no need for intubation
•  Less  expensive  because  general  anesthesia 

equipment is not needed

However,  some  disadvantages  of  conscious 

sedation include

 1.  Measures to control the airway must be pre-

pared in case of over sedation

 2.  Patients who suffer from extreme anxiety may 

benefit more from general anesthesia

 Conclusion
The  advent  of  local  anesthesia  has  dramati-
cally improved patient experience in dermato-
logic  surgery.  Physician  experience  and 
attention to patient history are two of the most 
important  factors  in  choosing  the  right  anes-
thetic.  Appropriate  selection  and  application 

435

of  local  anesthetics  and  knowledge  of  the 
means to prevent potential adverse effects.

Suggested Reading

Amin  SP,  Goldberg  DJ.  Topical  anesthetics  for  cos-
metic  and  laser  dermatology.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2005;4(4):455–61.

Berde  CB.  Toxicity  of  local  anesthetics  in  infants  and 

children. J Pediatr. 1993;122(5 Pt 2):S14–20.

Bhole MV, Manson AL, Seneviratne SL, Misbah SA. IgE-
mediated allergy to local anaesthetics: separating fact 
from  perception:  a  UK  perspective.  Br  J  Anaesth. 
2012;108:903–11.

Butler  DC,  Heller  MM,  Murase  JE.  Safety  of  derma-
tologic  medications  in  pregnancy  and  lactation: 
Part II. Lactation. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:417.
e1–10. quiz 427

Cunningham BB, Gigler V, Wang K, et al. General anes-
thesia for pediatric dermatologic procedures: risks and 
complications. Arch Dermatol. 2005;141(5):573–6.
Eaton  JS,  Grekin  RC.  Regional  anesthesia  of  the  face. 
Dermatol  Surg.  2001;27(12):1006–9.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 2000;43(2 Pt 1):286–98

Friedman  PM,  Mafong  EA,  Friedman  ES,  Geronemus 
RG.  Topical  anesthetics  update:  EMLA  and  beyond. 
Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(12):1019–26.

Huang W, Vidimos A. Topical anesthetics in dermatology. 

J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47(1):158–9.

Isago T, Kono T, Nozaki M, et al. Ambulatory anesthesia 
for  children  undergoing  laser  treatment.  Surg Today. 
2006;36(9):765–8.

Kilmer SL, Chotzen V, Zelickson BD, et al. Full-face laser 
resurfacing  using  a  supplemented  topical  anesthesia 
protocol. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139(10):1279–83.
Koay  J,  Orengo  I.  Application  of  local  anesthetics 
Surg. 

surgery.  Dermatol 

dermatologic 
in 
2002;28(2):143–8.

Moller  RA,  Covino  BG.  Effect  of  progesterone  on  the 
cardiac 
alterations  produced 
by  ropivacaine  and  bupivacaine.  Anesthesiology. 
1992;77:735–41.

electrophysiologic 

Niamtu  J  III.  Local  anesthetic  blocks  of  the  head  and 
neck  for  cosmetic  facial  surgery.  I:  A  review  of 
basic  sensory  neuroanatomy.  Cosmet  Dermatol. 
2004a;17(8):515–22.

Niamtu  J  III.  Local  anesthetic  blocks  of  the  head  and 
neck  for  cosmetic  facial  surgery.  II:  Techniques 
for  the  upper  and  mid  face.  Cosmet  Dermatol. 
2004b;17(9):583–7.

Niamtu J III. Local anesthetic blocks of the head and neck 
for cosmetic facial surgery. III: Techniques for the max-
illary nerve. Cosmet Dermatol. 2004c;17(10):645–7.

25 Anesthesia for Laser Surgery



436

Niamtu J III. Local anesthetic blocks of the head and neck 
for  cosmetic  facial  surgery.  III:  Techniques  for  the 
lower face. Cosmet Dermatol. 2004d;17(11):714–20.
Ramos-Zabala  A,  Pérez-Mencía  MT,  Fernández-García 
R,  Cascales-Núñez  MR.  Anesthesia  technique  for 
outpatient  facial  laser  resurfacing.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2004;34(3):269–72.

Ring  J,  Franz  R,  Brockow  K.  Anaphylactic  reac-
tions  to  local  anesthetics.  Chem  Immunol  Allergy. 
2010;95:190–200.

Roth R. Fundamentals of cutaneous surgery, course 203. 

Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;

Rosenberg  PH, Veering  BT,  Urmey WF.  Maximum  rec-
ommended doses of local anesthetics: a multifactorial 
concept. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2004;29:564–75.
Sweeney SM, Maloney ME. Pregnancy and dermatologic 

surgery. Dermatol Clin. 2006;24:205–14.

M. Perper et al.



Lasers in Skin of Color

Heather Woolery-Lloyd and Nkanyezi Ferguson

26

Abstract
The popularity of cutaneous laser surgery has 
soared, however, the use of lasers in patients 
with  darker  skin  types  has  been  quite  chal-
lenging.  The  main  obstacle  with  cutaneous 
laser surgery in darker skinned patients is epi-
dermal  melanin  absorption  of  laser  energy. 
The  absorption  spectrum  of  melanin  ranges 
from 320 to 1200 nm with the greatest absorp-
tion  observed  in  the  lower  end  of  this  spec-
trum. The  main  objective  in  treating  patients 
with skin of color is to avoid epidermal mela-
nin  absorption  of  laser  energy  and  resultant 
thermal injury. Laser surgery in darker skinned 
patients must be approached carefully to avoid 
this unwanted side effect of post inflammatory 
pigment  alteration.  In  this  chapter,  we  will 
review  the  advances  in  lasers  for  ethnic  skin 
with special emphasis on the treatment of acne 
scars, photorejuvenation, skin tightening, hair 
removal, tattoos, and body contouring.

H. Woolery-Lloyd, M.D. (*) 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA 

N. Ferguson, M.D. 
Department of Dermatology, University of Iowa 
Hospital and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA
e-mail: nkanyezi-ferguson@uiowa.edu

Keywords
Cutaneous laser surgery · Skin of color · 
Epidermal melanin absorption · Acne scars · 
Photorejuvenation · Skin tightening · Hair 
removal · Body contouring · Tattoos

Lasers in skin of color can be challenging due to 
the unique characteristics of patients with darker 
skin types. Increased risk of hyperpigmentation, 
hypopigmentation, and keloid scarring contribute 
to the challenges of achieving a desired cosmetic 
end result with minimal side effects. Lasers and 
light devices have been safely used to treat many 
skin  conditions  in  skin  of  color  including  acne 
scars,  unwanted  hair,  skin  laxity,  tattoos,  and 
some pigmentary disorders. This list continues to 
grow  as  newer  “color  blind”  technologies  are 
introduced each year. There have been significant 
advances  in  lasers  that  can  safely  treat  people 
with  darker  skin  types.  In  this  chapter,  we  will 
review the data on safety and efficacy of the most 
commonly used lasers and light-based devices in 
ethnic skin.

 Key Considerations

Skin of color is defined as Fitzpatrick skin pho-
totypes (SPT) IV–VI. Successful use of lasers in 
these darker skin types involves minimizing the 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_26

437





438

epidermal  thermal  injury  and  an  inflammatory 
response  which  can  both  increase  the  risk  of 
post inflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) and 
hypopigmentation.

In addition to pigmentary concerns, there is an 
increased risk of development of keloid scars in 
darker  racial  ethnic  groups.  This  appears  to  be 
due  a  genetic  predisposition  toward  fibroblast 
reactivity  in  this  patient  population.  Increased 
risk  of  keloid  scars  limits  the  use  of  laser  and 
light devices that cause significant disruption of 
the  dermis.  For  this  reason,  ablative  lasers  are 
often avoided in this patient population.

 Acne Scars

A recent study examining the prevalence of acne 
in  the  general  population  demonstrated  higher 
rates of acne in African American and Hispanic 
subjects. Interestingly, this same study also dem-
onstrated higher rates of atrophic scarring in the 
skin  of  color  population  when  compared  to 
Caucasian  subjects  [1].  Laser  treatment  of  acne 
scars includes ablative lasers, ablative fractional 
lasers,  nonablative  fractional  lasers,  nonablative 
lasers  and  radiofrequency  technology.  Each 
approach will be discussed separately below:

 Ablative

Carbon dioxide (CO2) laser resurfacing has been 
used for the treatment of acne scars. The laser’s 
usefulness has been limited in skin of color due 
to increased risk of hyperpigmentation, hypopig-
mentation,  and  scarring.  For  this  reason,  other 
modalities  have  been  investigated  for  optimal 
acne scar treatment in ethnic skin.

 Ablative Fractional Lasers

Most  of  the  published  studies  of  ablative  frac-
tional  lasers  in  skin  of  color  include  primarily 
Asian  subjects.  One  study  evaluated  20  Korean 
subjects  with  atrophic  acne  scars  treated  with  a 
single  session  of  the  CO2  fractional  Ultrapulse 
Encore  laser  (Lumenis  Inc.,  Santa  Clara,  CA). 

Acne  scars  were  treated  in  the  Deep  FX  mode 
and the entire face was treated using the Active 
FX  mode.  One  subject  had  76–100%  clinical 
improvement.  Nine  subjects  had  51–75% 
improvement.  Seven  subjects  had  26–50% 
improvement, and three subjects had minimal to 
no improvement. Post therapy crusting or scaling 
lasted 6.3 ± 3.0 days and post therapy erythema 
lasted 2.8 ± 4.6 days [2].

Another  study  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  CO2 
ablative fractional resurfacing in 13 Thai subjects 
with SPT IV. Subjects received three sessions on 
an  average  of  7  week  intervals. At  the  6-month 
follow-up, 85% of the subjects were rated as hav-
ing  at  least  25–50%  improvement  of  atrophic 
acne  scars.  Sixty-two  percent  of  subjects  rated 
themselves as having at least 50% improvement 
in  their  scars.  Mild  PIH  was  the  most  common 
adverse effect observed in 92% of the subjects or 
51%  of  treatment  sessions,  and  was  completely 
resolved in an average of 5 weeks [3].

One  retrospective  study  included  82  Saudi 
Arabian  subjects  (SPT  III–V).  The  study  com-
pared  45  patients  treated  with  the  1550  nm 
nonablative fractional laser (NAF) and 37 patients 
treated  with  the  ablative  fractional  (AF)  CO2 
laser.  Thirty-five  percent  and  37%  of  patients 
attained more than 50% improvement with NAF 
1550 nm and AF CO2 lasers, respectively. Patients 
treated with NAF 1550 nm laser had less down 
time. Transient PIH was noted in 17% of patients 
treated  with  NAF  1550  nm  laser  compared  to 
14% with AF CO2. PIH decreased with prophy-
lactic use of bleaching cream [4].

There  are  no  published  studies  of  ablative 
fractional  laser  treatments  including  SPT  VI. 
Ablative  fractional  lasers  should  be  avoided  or 
used  with  caution  in  this  patient  population.  In 
darker  skin  types,  pretreatment  with  bleaching 
agents  may  minimize  the  risk  of  PIH,  however 
patients  should  understand  that  transient  hyper-
pigmentation is a common side effect with these 
lasers.

 Nonablative Fractional Lasers

Non-ablative  fractional  resurfacing  has  been 
studied in all skin phototypes including SPT IV–

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



VI.  In  a  retrospective  review  of  961  treatments 
with  a  1550-nm  erbium-doped  laser  (Fraxel, 
Reliant Technologies  Inc.)  in  all  skin  types,  the 
overall  rate  of  hyperpigmentation  reported  was 
0.73%.  The  incidence  of  hyperpigmentation 
however when compared to SPT II (0.26%) and 
SPT III (2.6%) was found to be overrepresented 
in darker skin types with 11.6% in skin type IV 
(n = 8) and 33% in skin type V (n = 3) [5].

Studies looking at the skin of color population 
suggest that lower treatment densities are associ-
ated  with  lower  rates  of  PIH.  Specifically,  in  a 
retrospective  study  of  37  Chinese  patients,  six 
high-energy, low-density treatments had a lower 
rate of PIH than subjects who received three low-
energy,  high-density  treatments  (6%  vs  18.2%) 
[6].

A  prospective  single  blind  trial  evaluated  15 
American  subjects  with  Fitzpatrick  skin  types 
IV–VI treated with the 1550-nm erbium fraction-
ated laser. Significant improvement was achieved 
in  the  acne  scarring  and  overall  appearance 
(p < 0.001). There was no significant difference 
in efficacy between subjects treated with 10 mJ 
versus 40 mJ and subjects were highly satisfied 
with  the  results.  However,  significant  transient 
post-inflammatory pigment was observed in 6 of 
the 15 subjects and pain was significantly higher 
in the darker skin types [7, 8].

These  studies  suggest  that  non-ablative  frac-
tional resurfacing is effective for the treatment of 
acne scars in darker skin types, but practitioners 
should  utilize  a  series  of  treatments  at  lower 
treatment densities to reduce the risk of PIH. In 
addition, clinicians should be aware of the higher 
incidence  of  pain  and  post-inflammatory  hyper-
pigmentation  in  individuals  with  darker  skin 
types.

 Radiofrequency

Matrix-tunable radiofrequency (RF) technology, 
has been used for the management of acne scars. 
In one study, 30 subjects (SPT IV-VI) with acne 
scars  were  treated  RF  device  (Syneron  Corp. 
Israel) monthly for a maximum of four sessions. 
The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) improvement 
in scars ranged from 10% to 50% at the end of 

439

2 months and ranged from 20% to 70% at the end 
of 6 months. Out of the 30 patients, the cosmetic 
result  was  excellent  (>60%  improvement)  in 
four,  good  (35–60%  improvement)  in  18  and 
moderate to poor (<35% improvement) in eight. 
Reported  side  effects  included  a  burning  sensa-
tion, a mild sunburn-like sensation for about 1 h 
after treatment, and mild erythema for 2–3 days. 
No PIH was observed [9].

A split-face double-blinded randomized con-
trol trial compared high versus moderate energy 
bipolar  fractional  RF  for  the  treatment  of  atro-
phic acne scars in SPT III–IV. Subjects received 
four  monthly  treatment  sessions.  Left  and  right 
sides of the face were randomized to receive high 
energy  (100  mJ/pin)  versus  moderate  energy 
(60  mJ/pin).  At  1  month,  the  high  energy  side 
showed  significant  improvement  of  global  acne 
scarring  scale  (GASS)  when  compared  to  the 
moderate  energy  side.  However  at  3-  and 
6-months  the  efficacy  between  the  two  energy 
levels was comparable. Of note, PIH developed 
in 17.5% of treatment sessions in the high energy 
side compared to 13.3% of sessions in the moder-
ate energy side. PIH was noted to be mild to mod-
erate and resolved within 4 weeks [10].

Sublative rejuvenation provides a coagulative 
(nonablative) effect in the mid-dermis in addition 
to an ablative injury to less than 5% of the epider-
mis. A combination of sublative fractional bipolar 
radiofrequency and bipolar radio frequency com-
bined with diode laser has been studied in a pro-
spective study of 20 subjects (SPT II–V). Subjects 
received  up  to  five  treatments  every  4  weeks. 
Acne  scars  improved  1  month  after  three  treat-
ments and this improvement persisted for at least 
12  weeks  after  the  fifth  treatment.  Improvement 
was  not  affected  by  skin  type.  Adverse  effects 
were  limited  to  transient  erythema  and  edema. 
This technology may offer another option to treat 
acne  scars  in  skin  of  color,  however,  as  in  most 
laser studies, the number of skin of color subjects 
in this study was limited [11].

Overall,  RF  devices  offer  a  safe  treatment 
option in treating skin of color. One of the bene-
fits of devices utilizing RF in skin of color is that 
RF  energy  is  not  absorbed  by  melanin,  which 
may  make  this  modality  safer  in  subjects  with 
darker skin types.

26 Lasers in Skin of Color



440

 Nonablative Lasers

 Photorejuvenation

(Nd:YAG) 

Nonablative lasers offer one of the safest side 
effect  profiles  among  lasers  when  treating 
acne scars in skin of color. Nonablative lasers 
typically  deliver  heat  to  the  dermis  to  induce 
new collagen formation. A small case series of 
nine patients (SPT I-V) examined the efficacy 
of  the  nonablative  1064  nm  neodymium-
yttrium-aluminum- garnet 
laser 
(Laser  Genesis,  Cutera  Inc.)  in  treating  atro-
phic  acne  scars.  Settings  were  14  J/cm2, 
0.3 ms, 5-mm spot size, 7-Hz with 2000 pulses 
per side of face. Subjects were treated every 2 
weeks for eight treatments. Three blinded phy-
sician observers used photographs to rate scar 
severity.  Using  a  grid  overlying  the  pictures, 
observers  counted  scars  at  baseline  and  after 
the  final  treatment.  A  29%  improvement  in 
scar severity score was achieved at the end of 
a series of eight treatments. Eight of the nine 
patients  reported  improvement  in  their  acne 
scars ranging from 10% to 50% improvement 
and  no  treatment  related  adverse  events  were 
observed [12].

In  a  larger  retrospective  analysis  of  22 
Egyptian and Sudanese patients with SPT III–VI 
who received a series of six treatments with the 
same non-ablative Nd:YAG laser, reviewers were 
asked to rank the degree of improvement in scar-
ring, texture, and PIH using a four-point scale (0: 
<25%, 1: 25–50%, 2: 51–75%, 3: 76–100%). The 
results  of  the  blinded  photo  assessments  indi-
cated clinically and statistically median improve-
ment of 2 in scarring, 2.3 in texture, and 2 in PIH 
(P  <  0.001).  It  is  important  to  note  that,  in  this 
series,  patients  had  concomitant  acne  which 
made isolating the improvement of acne scarring 
challenging.  Interestingly,  although  adjunctive 
bleaching agents were not used, an improvement 
in acne-induced PIH was also observed [13].

These studies suggest that non-ablative lasers 
are well tolerated and safe in skin of color, how-
ever,  results  with  non-ablative  lasers  may  be 
variable.  These  lasers  offer  a  safe  treatment 
option  for  atrophic  scars  in  darker  skinned 
patients.

Photoaging  in  skin  of  color  patients  typically 
manifests  as  textural  changes,  large  pores,  pig-
mentary  alteration,  lentigines,  and  seborrheic 
keratoses.  Fine  lines  and  deep  rhytides  are  less 
prominent and occur in later decades. It is impor-
tant  to  note,  most  studies  focusing  on  lasers  for 
photorejuvenation  in  skin  of  color  are  in  Asian 
skin.  The  use  of  fractional  resurfacing  has  been 
well  documented  in  this  particular  skin  of  color 
population.

 Fractionated Diode

A  series  of  low-energy,  low-density  nonablative 
fractional laser treatments using a 1440 nm frac-
tionated  diode  device  (Clear  +  Brilliant,  Solta 
Medical),  has  been  reported  to  be  effective  in 
addressing  photoaging  in  skin  of  color.  Ten 
Chinese subjects (SPT III–V) with visible signs of 
photodamage completed a series of four biweekly 
treatment  sessions.  The  physician  assessment 
demonstrated  an  overall  mean  reduction  in  skin 
roughness,  wrinkles 
dyspigmentation. 
Changes  in  pore  size  and  tissue  laxity  failed  to 
reach statistical significance. Side effects included 
pain and heat sensation during treatments, which 
decreased  with  subsequent  treatments.  Transient 
PIH was noted in one patient that lasted less than 1 
month [14].

and 

In  another  study  of  the  fractionated  diode 
laser,  investigators  specifically  evaluated  pore 
size  and  texture.  Twenty  subjects  (SPT  I–VI) 
completed a series of six biweekly treatments. At 
the  end  of  the  study,  there  was  a  17%  average 
reduction in pore score as measured by VISIA-CR 
(Canfield Scientific Inc., Fairfield, NJ). Physician 
and  subject  assessment  also  reported  improve-
ment in pore appearance and overall appearance 
of the skin. There were no serious or long-term 
side effects [15].

These  studies  suggest  that  the  fractionated 
diode, a very low-density and low-energy frac-
tionated  device,  improves  the  early  signs  of 
photoaging  in  skin  of  color  with  minimal 

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



adverse effects and short recovery. Results are 
mild and a series of treatments are required for 
best results.

 Ablative and Nonablative Fractional 
Lasers

Both  ablative  and  nonablative  fractional  lasers 
have all been reported to be effective in treating 
photoaging  in  certain  skin  of  color  patients. 
Ablative  lasers  target  water  as  a  chromophore 
resulting  in  instant  vaporization  of  columns  of 
tissue including epidermal ablation. Nonablative 
lasers also target water containing tissues but cre-
ate  columns  of  coagulative  damage  within  the 
dermis that are below the ablative threshold [16].
One  study  compared  the  ablative  fractional 
Er:YAG laser and nonablative fractional 1550- nm 
Er:glass laser to treat photoaging in Asian subjects. 
Three monthly sessions were performed. Nineteen 
patients received ablative fractional Er:YAG laser, 
and  15  patients  received  nonablative  fractional 
1550-nm  Er:glass  laser.  Reductions  in  pigmenta-
tion and uneven tone/erythema scores were signifi-
cantly  greater  after  ablative  fractional  Er:YAG, 
while  wrinkle  score  reduction  was  significantly 
greater after nonabalative fractional Er:glass laser. 
Physician  and  patient  assessments  for  the  overall 
features showed greater improvement in the nonab-
lative  fractional  Er:glass  laser.  Treatment-related 
pain  or  adverse  events  were  less  in  the  ablative 
fractional  Er:YAG.  The  authors  concluded  that 
both fractional lasers are effective and safe to treat 
photoaging  in  Asian  skin  [17].  The  findings  are 
consistent with other studies that support the use of 
the  nonablative  fractional  1550-nm  Er:glass  laser 
as  an  effective  treatment  for  photoaging  in Asian 
subjects [18].

The fractionated 1927-nm thulium fiber (Fraxel 
Dual,  Solta  Medical)  has  also  been  reported  to 
treat  photoaging  and  melasma  in Asian  subjects 
(SPT III (n = 23) and IV (n = 2)) and may be useful 
when patients present with diffuse, mottled super-
ficial pigmentation. Three participants in this study 
were  noted  to  develop  PIH  after  treatment  that 
spontaneously resolved within 3 weeks [19].

441

 Intense Pulsed Light

The  use  of  intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  to  address 
the  signs  of  photoaging  is  well  documented  in 
Asian skin. One of the earliest papers reported the 
use of IPL in 97 Japanese subjects (SPT IV–V). 
After a series of 3–6 treatments, a combined rat-
ing  of  “good”  or  “excellent”  was  given  to  more 
than 90% of the patients for pigmentation, more 
than 83% for telangiectasia, and more than 65% 
for skin texture. Three subjects had minor blisters 
that resolved without sequalae [20].

Numerous other papers support the use of IPL 
for  photoaging  in  Asian  patients  [21,  22]. 
Although most studies are in Asian subjects, one 
case  series  in  Latin  subjects  (SPT  II–IV)  also 
found IPL to be effective for various superficial 
melanocytic lesions (e.g. ephelides, Café au lait 
macules, melasma, nevus spilus, nevus of Becker 
and epidermal nevus) [23].

When treating photoaging with IPL in skin of 
color,  it  is  important  to  note  that  IPL-induced 
melasma-like  hyperpigmentation  can  be  an 
unwanted  side  effect  despite  the  appearance  of 
normal skin at baseline. It has been proposed that 
these patients seem to have very subtle epidermal 
melasma not visible to the naked eye at baseline. 
One study examined the use of UV photography 
to  identify these patients and prevent complica-
tions.  Two  hundred  and  twenty-three  Japanese 
women,  30–69  years  old,  were  included  in  the 
study. Very subtle melasma invisible to the naked 
eye  under  normal  light  was  diagnosed  by  UV 
photography  by  two  physicians  in  63  subjects 
(28.3%). These subjects were treated with mild IPL 
parameters  and  did  not  suffer  induced   secondary 
hyperpigmentation. The authors suggested that IPL 
users  should  be  aware  of  the  age  (i.e.  women  in 
their 40s and 50s) and sunscreen- related (i.e. lack 
of regular sunscreen use) incidence of this phe-
nomenon in Asian patients to help avoid compli-
cations after treatment [24].

The use of fractionated lasers and IPL to treat 
photoaging in Asian subjects has been well estab-
lished. It is important to note, however, that since 
the vast majority of these studies were performed 
in Asian  subjects,  one  should  use  caution  when 

26 Lasers in Skin of Color



442

extrapolating  to  other  ethnicities  with  skin  of 
color. Due to the paucity of studies and increased 
risk of side effects, the use of IPL in type V and 
VI skin should be avoided.

 Melasma

IPL has been used for the treatment of melasma 
in patients with skin type IV. IPL treatment com-
plications  may  result  in  IPL-induced  melasma- 
like  hyperpigmentation.  Due  to  the  risk  of  post 
inflammatory hyperpigmentation documented in 
skin type IV, IPL should be used with caution in 
these  patients  and  completely  avoided  in  skin 
types V and VI.

The  fractional  1550  nm  laser  is  an  FDA- 
approved  laser  modality  for  melasma  [25]. 
Although it can be effective, it also carries a risk 
of  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  espe-
cially  in  individuals  that  may  have  hyperactive 
melanocytes. Due to the risk of hyperpigmenta-
tion  with  melasma,  this  laser  should  be  consid-
ered  in  cases  that  have  failed  conventional 
therapies [26].

The response of melasma to irradiation with 
any laser is variable. A lack of response, wors-
ening of the hyperpigmentation, and recurrence 
are frequent outcomes. For these reasons, treat-
ment of melasma with lasers is extremely chal-
lenging  and  should  be  reserved  for  resistant 
cases where conventional topical therapies have 
failed.

 Laser Assisted Hair Reduction

Laser  hair  removal  is  by  far  the  most  common 
cosmetic  procedure  performed  in  all  skin  types 
and unwanted facial hair is a common complaint 
in skin of color. Due to the prevalence of associ-
ated psuedofolliculitis barbae and PIH, unwanted 
facial  hair  is  particularly  disfiguring  in African 
laser  hair 
American  patients.  Fortunately, 
removal  is  one  of  the  safest  laser  procedures  in 
skin  of  color.  When  the  appropriate  device  is 
used,  cosmetic  outcomes  are  excellent  and  life 
changing for many patients.

 Alexandrite

The  Alexandrite  laser  has  been  studied  in  skin 
types IV–VI. One study examined a long pulsed 
755  nm  laser  with  a  40  ms  pulse  width  in  150 
patients with skin types IV–VI. A test site with a 
fluence  of  16  J/cm2  was  first  performed  and 
to 
energy  fluence  was  selected  according 
response. A small complication rate (2.7%) was 
reported,  however,  only  two  patients  with  skin 
type  VI  were  included  in  the  study  and  both 
developed blistering [27]. A smaller study of the 
Alexandrite (755 nm, 3 ms pulse width) included 
four women with Fitzpatrick skin type VI. In this 
study, lower fluences were used (8–14 J/cm2) and 
no side effects were noted [28]. Although treat-
ment  of  skin  types  IV–VI  is  possible  with  the 
Alexandrite,  the  availability  of  safer  options 
make this laser a poor choice in skin of color and 
specifically SPT V and VI.

 Diode

The  Diode  laser  has  been  studied  with  greater 
success  in  the  treatment  of  darker  skinned 
patients.  The  800  nm  diode  laser  was  studied 
with  pulse  widths  of  30  ms  and  100  ms. When 
comparing the two pulse widths, investigators in 
one  study  reported  that  longer  pulse  widths 
(100  ms)  allowed  higher  fluences  to  be  utilized 
with fewer complications [29]. Another study uti-
lized the 810 nm Diode laser to treat eight patients 
with  skin  types V  and VI.  These  patients  were 
treated with a lower fluence of 10 mJ/cm2 and a 
pulse width of 30 ms. Despite the lower fluence, 
transient blistering and pigment alterations were 
noted  in  some  patients  [30].  Overall,  while  the 
diode  laser  offers  increased  safety  over  the 
Alexandrite  laser  in African-American  patients, 
complications may remain an issue SPT VI.

 Nd:YAG

The  long  pulsed  Nd:YAG  is  the  safest  laser  for 
hair  removal  in  darker  skin  types.  This  wave-
length is at the end of the absorption spectrum of 

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



melanin,  and  is  sufficient  to  achieve  significant 
thermal injury in dark coarse hairs while sparing 
epidermal  pigment.  In  addition,  the  adjustable 
pulse width of long pulsed Nd:YAG lasers allow 
the  laser  energy  to  be  delivered  over  an  longer 
period of time allowing for the heat to dissipate 
with sufficient epidermal cooling.

The long pulsed Nd:YAG is the treatment of 
choice for hirsutism and pseudofolliculitis barbae 
in skin of color individuals with SPT V–VI. The 
Nd:YAG  is  particularly  effective  when  treating 
dark coarse hair. In SPT V–VI, it is both safe and 
highly  effective  at  achieving  permanent  hair 
reduction after a series of treatments [31, 32].

Challenges with the long pulsed Nd:YAG in 
darker skin types arise in patients with dark skin 
but fine hair, as is typically seen in patients of 
Southeast Asian descent. In these patients, per-
manent  hair  reduction  is  more  challenging 
because  the  fluence  and  pulse  width  that  are 
required to achieve permanent reduction of fine 
hair  are  risky  in  darker  skin  types.  In  these 
cases,  it  is  important  to  educate  the  patient  on 
the  limitations  of  laser  hair  removal.  Patients 
must have realistic expectations and understand 
that  lasers  can  offer  an  excellent  hair  manage-
ment  program  but  may  not  offer  permanent 
long-term removal of fine hairs. Many patients 
who fall into this category still prefer laser hair 
removal due to the elimination of irritation and 
dyschromia frequently seen with shaving, wax-
ing or threading.

 Laser Tattoo Removal

Tattoo  removal  in  skin  of  color  can  present  a 
challenge  given  the  concern  for  laser-induced 
dyschromia. This  is  especially  true  in  patients 
with SPT V–VI. The goal of treatment is to uti-
lize  the  lowest  fluence  in  order  to  obtain  the 
desired  endpoint  without  causing 
thermal 
injury. Tattoo color and skin type are important 
lasers. 
factors  when  selecting  appropriate 
Q-switched  lasers  (including  the  alexandrite, 
ruby  and  Nd:YAG)  and  picosecond  lasers  be 
used efficaciously and safely to treat tattoos in 
skin of color [7].

443

Q-switched alexandrite laser has been demon-
strated to be safe in treating amateur tattoos in 20 
Arabic females with SPT III-IV. Patients received 
3–6  treatment  sessions  at  6–12  week  intervals 
after spot tests were performed to determine safe 
and  efficacious  treatment  fluences.  Half  of  the 
patients  experienced  76–95%  tattoo  clearance 
while an additional quarter had >95% clearance. 
Except  for  pin  point  bleeding,  no  pigmentary 
changes or scarring was noted. Q-switched alex-
andrite lasers are however not appropriate to use 
in darker skin types given the risk of pigmentary 
changes  and  in  these  cases  alternative  lasers 
should be considered [33].

One study described the use of the Q-switched 
Nd:YAG laser on eight SPT VI patients. A total 
of  15  amateur  tattoos  were  treated  at  8-week 
intervals for an average of 3–4 treatments. Eight 
of  the  15  tattoos  demonstrated  75–90%  clear-
ance,  while  five  showed  50%  clearance  and  the 
remaining  two  showed  25%  clearance.  Two  of 
the treated tattoos were noted to have slight skin 
lightening [34].

Another  study  treated  blue/black  carbon 
based  tattoos  in  404  Ethiopian  Jews  in  Israel 
(SPT  V–VI)  with  either  Q-switched  Nd:YAG 
(380 patients) or Q-switched ruby (24 patients). 
Eight- week treatment intervals were used with a 
total of 3–6 laser treatment sessions. Clearance 
of  75–100%  was  noted  in  92%  of  treated  tat-
toos.  Although 
transient  hyperpigmentation 
lasting 2–4 months was noted in 44% of patients 
and mild textural changes in two patients, there 
was  no 
long-term  scarring  or  pigmentary 
changes [35].

Picosecond  laser  technology  continues  to 
expand with introduction of new wavelengths to 
allow  for  more  targeted  tattoo  removal.  More 
research is needed to determine safety of use for 
tattoo removal in skin of color [36–38].

 Skin Tightening

In contrast to the later presentation of photoaging 
in  skin  of  color,  increasing  skin  laxity  with 
advanced age is equally common among all skin 
types.  Older  patients  commonly  seek  treatment 

26 Lasers in Skin of Color



444

for prominent jowls and nasolabial folds. Younger 
patients  on  the  other  hand,  may  seek  treatment 
for abdominal laxity post pregnancy. Due to the 
significant  risk  of  scarring  and  pigmentary 
changes among patients with skin of color, many 
seek  non-surgical  interventions  to  improve  skin 
laxity.

Non-invasive  skin  tightening  devices  induce 
thermal injury to the dermis and underlying tis-
sue while sparing the epidermis through effective 
epidermal  cooling.  Deep  dermal  heating  is 
thought to promote neocollagenesis and creation 
of  new  elastic  fibers  over  time.  Immediate  skin 
tightening noted after treatment is thought to be 
due  to  contraction  of  existing  collagen  fibers. 
There  are  different  methods  and  a  number  of 
devices  created  for  the  purpose  of  heating  the 
dermis to produce skin tightening. There is ongo-
ing  advancement  in  technology  and  frequent 
addition or new devices to the market. Appropriate 
patient selection is paramount to achieving suc-
cess with these devices. Managing patient expec-
tations and selecting patients who will be satisfied 
with  modest  improvement  is  an  important  step. 
The  ideal  patient  is  one  with  mild  to  moderate 
skin laxity and absence of underlying redundant 
fatty tissue [39–41].

 Radiofrequency (RF)

Radiofrequency  (RF)  is  electromagnetic  radia-
tion in the frequency range of 300 MHz to 3 kHz. 
These  devices  induce  dermal  heating,  collagen 
denaturation  and  subsequent  collagen  remodel-
ing. Wound healing mechanisms promote wound 
contraction, to improve skin laxity. Because RF 
energy  is  not  dependent  on  a  specific  chromo-
phore  interaction,  epidermal  melanin  is  not  tar-
geted and treatment of all skin types is possible. 
One  device 
Inc., 
Hayward, CA, USA) has reported efficacy in the 
treatment of laxity involving the lower face and 
neck [42].

(Thermacool,  Thermage 

Kushikata  et  al.  reported  the  use  of  RF  in  a 
series  of  85  Japanese  patients  (SPT  III–IV)  for 
the treatment of nasolabial folds, marionette lines 
and jowls. The treatment was well tolerated over-

all  with  noted  side  effects  in  seven  patients 
including edema (n = 3), burn (n = 1), blister for-
mation (n = 1) and hyperpigmentation (n = 2). In 
all  of  these  cases  the  complications  were  tran-
sient  and  healed  without  permanent  sequelae. 
Objective physician assessment determined good 
improvement  at  3  months  after  treatment,  and 
even better improvement at 6-months post treat-
ment. RF treatment was concluded to be effective 
for skin tightening in Asian facial skin, offering 
safe and effective treatment of skin laxity [43].

 Infrared Tightening

Delivery of heat to the deep dermis can be facili-
tated  by  the  direct  application  of  infrared  heat. 
This results in thermal induction of collagen con-
traction and subsequent collagen remodeling and 
neocollagenesis.  Titan  (Cutera,  Inc.,  Brisbane, 
CA) is a device that uses infrared light to volu-
metrically heat the dermis. Utilizing a long pulse 
of  infrared  light  with  a  spectrum  from  1100  to 
1800 nm, it specifically targets water as its chro-
mophore.  The  settings  range  from  32–40  J  and 
are determined by patient tolerance. Even lower 
fluences can be used when treating Asian facial 
skin  in  order  to  prevent  complications  such  as 
superficial  blisters.  The  penetration  depth  is 
1–2 mm, which is best for targeting the reticular 
dermis  [44].  Light  is  emitted  in  multisecond 
cycles  in  order  to  sufficiently  heat  the  dermis 
while  providing  appropriate  cooling  of  the 
 epidermis  through  integrated  contact  cooling. 
The procedure is safe to use in skin of color and 
is associated with minimal downtime. Although, 
an immediate tightening effect is seen after treat-
ment;  the  full  effect  is  not  observed  until  6 
months  after  treatment  [45].  Multiple  sessions 
(three to five) are needed for the best results in all 
skin types [46]. Response rates are variable and 
can be influenced by patient selection [47].

In  a  prospective  open  label  trial  in  21  Asian 
patients,  skin  tightening  as  defined  by  lifting  of 
sagging skin folds was observed in 86% of patients 
as  measured  by  three  independent  physician 
observers. This improvement ranged from mild to 
excellent  (mild  29%,  moderate  38%,  excellent 

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



19%).  Complications  were  noted  in  7  of  the  63 
treatments  and  were  characterized  by  superficial 
blistering  and  subsequent  post  inflammatory 
changes. This however resolved in all patients and 
no  residual  scarring  or  dyschromia  was  noted. 
Variable response rates with skin tightening tech-
nologies may be due to the patient selection, ener-
gies used, and overall skin quality [46].

The  SkinTyte  (Sciton,  Inc.,  Palo  Alto,  CA) 
delivers  infrared  light  in  the  range  of  800–
1400 nm. It utilizes uniform, targeted deep der-
tightening. 
mal  heating 
Thermoelectric  sapphire  plates  are  utilized  to 
achieve continuous cooling.

to  achieve 

skin 

The  LuxIR  and  the  LuxDeep  IR  (Palomar 
Medical  Technologies,  Inc.,  Burlington,  MA) 
deliver  infrared  light  in  the  range  of  850–
1350 nm, targeting water as the primary chromo-
phore.  The  LuxDeepIR  Fractional  Infrared 
Handpieces  (Palomar  Medical  Technologies, 
Inc., Burlington, MA) utilizes fractional infrared 
light  to  safely  deliver  heat  to  greater  depths 
extending up to 6 mm into the deep dermis and 
fat  layer  without  damaging  the  epidermis.  The 
energy  is  delivered  through  a  sapphire  crystal 
with contact cooling to prevent epidermal injury. 
Clinical trials have demonstrated improvement in 
treatments  are 
skin 
required [48–50].

tightening  and  several 

Overall, all of the infrared tightening devices 
can be used in all skin types with excellent safety.

 Ultrasound Tightening

Focused  intense  ultrasound  (IUS)  is  an  energy 
that  can  propagate  through  tissue  up  to  several 
millimeters. Ultrasound waves induce a vibration 
in the molecules of a target tissue during propa-
gation. This results in friction between molecules 
leading  to  the  secondary  production  of  heat. 
When the beam is directed in a firm focus of the 
skin  tissue  at  a  certain  depth,  it  produces  local-
ized  thermal  coagulative  injury.  This  type  of 
intense  ultrasound  device  has  been  developed 
specifically for treating facial soft tissues and tar-
geting  the  superficial  musculoaponeurotic  sys-
tem (SMAS) [51–53].

445

One  device  (Ulthera,  Inc.,  Mesa,  AZ)  was 
introduced for use in facial rejuvenation and skin 
tightening.  In  one  study  of  35  subjects  (median 
age of 44 years) the authors found that a single 
ultrasound treatment of the forehead produced an 
average brow height elevation of 1.7–1.9 mm in 
83% of patients, which was sustained at 3-month 
evaluation.  Most  subjects  responded  well,  with 
only transitory mild erythema and edema as side 
effects [54].

Another  study  looked  at  the  efficacy  and 
safety  of  a  single  treatment  of  intense  focused 
ultrasound  to  treat  facial  laxity  in  22  Korean 
patients  (SPT  III–VI).  Two  blinded  clinicians 
assessed  improvement  in  nasolabial  folds  and 
jaw  tightening  and  found  91%  of  patients  with 
improvement of two objective score values. Side 
effects  were  minimal  and  included  mild  ery-
thema, swelling, temporary numbness and linear 
whitish wheals (thought to be due to inadequate 
uncoupling of heat energy to the skin). Skin tight-
ening is generally considered safe in skin of color 
due to the deep target in the dermis. This device 
offers  viable  alternatives  to  surgery  for  patients 
with skin of color [55].

 Body Contouring

Several  options  are  available  for  non-invasive 
body  contouring  including  lasers,  light  devices 
and  cryolipolysis.  Patient  preference  and  selec-
tion is very important in managing expectations. 
More  studies  are  necessary  to  clearly  demon-
strate the safety profile of these treatment modal-
ities in skin of color.

Radiofrequency  devices  create  heat  from 
molecular  friction  and  this  technology  can  be 
used to cause localized heating and reduction of 
adipose tissue [56].

High-intensity  focused  ultrasound  devices 
for  lipolysis  deliver  a  non-invasive  focused 
ultrasound  within  subcutaneous  tissue,  which 
results  in  increased  local  temperature  and  cell 
death  through  coagulative  necrosis  without 
damaging surrounding tissue. The goal of treat-
ment  is  to  reduce  localized  fat  deposits  and 
improve  overall  contour.  An  example  of  this 

26 Lasers in Skin of Color



446

device is the Liposonix® device (Solta Medical 
Inc., Hayward, CA). In a retrospective series of 
85  patients, 
the  waist  circumference  was 
decreased  by  an  average  of  4.6  cm  after 
3 months. No hyperpigmentation was reported, 
however,  skin  phototypes  were  not  specified. 
Due to the deep nature of the treatment pigmen-
tary changes are not likely. This novel treatment 
for unwanted fat may offer patients with skin of 
color  another  option  without  significant  risks. 
[57, 58].

Cryolipolysis works by selectively cooling fat 
resulting in apoptosis without compromising the 
epidermis  or  dermis.  CoolSculpting®  (Zeltiq 
Aesthetics,  Pleasanton,  CA)  utilizes  this  cryoli-
polysis  technology.  Side  effects  include  ery-
thema, bruising, pain and altered sensation [59]. 
In  a  retrospective  analysis  of  396  patients  who 
received this cryolipolysis treatment on the back, 
flank  and/or  abdomen,  patient  satisfaction  was 
attained  via  phone  interview  in  201  subjects. 
Data was compared between FST I–III (n = 122) 
and SPT IV–VI (n = 79) and were comparable. 
Minor  side  effects  reported  included  bruising 
(16%), swelling (20%), both bruising and swell-
ing (4%). No pigmentary changes were noted in 
any subjects. [60].

 Conclusion
With the population steadily becoming more 
diverse, there is an increasing demand for the 
use  of  lasers  and  light-based  therapies  in 
individuals with skin of color. As this demand 
increases,  the  need  for  clinicians  familiar 
with  devices  and  treatment  parameters  that 
are  safe  in  darker  skin  is  essential. There  is 
an  expanding  array  of  efficacious  and  safe 
lasers  and  light-based  devices  available  for 
use  in  this  population  including  laser  hair 
removal, nonablative lasers, skin tightening, 
and laser lipolysis among others. Knowledge 
of the potential for dyschromia and scarring 
in  skin  of  color  is  needed  to  ensure  use  of 
effective  treatment  protocols.  Due  to  these 
risks,  the  treatment  of  pigmentary  disorders 
and  specifically  melasma  with  lasers  still 
remains  a  challenge  and  should  be  pursued 
with caution.

As the laser armamentarium continues to grow, 
it is important that clinicians are well informed on 
risks,  benefits,  technique  and  appropriate  patient 
selection. Device selection is important and their 
use in skin of color should be reserved for those 
devices  that  have  been  studied  and  have  demon-
strated safety in this population. With this approach 
clinicians  can  achieve  the  best  possible  clinical 
outcome  while  avoiding  undesirable  side  effects 
when utilizing lasers in patients with skin of color.

References

  1.  Perkins AC, Cheng CE, Hillebrand GG, Miyamoto K, 
Kimball AB. Comparison of the epidemiology of acne 
vulgaris among Caucasian, Asian, Continental Indian 
and African American women. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2011;25(9):1054–60.

  2.  Cho  SB,  Lee  SJ,  Kang  JM,  Kim  YK,  Chung  WS, 
Oh  SH.  The  efficacy  and  safety  of  10,600-nm  car-
bon  dioxide  fractional  laser  for  acne  scars  in Asian 
patients. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(12):1955–61.

  3.  Manuskiatti  W,  Triwongwaranat  D,  Varothai  S, 
Eimpunth  S,  Wanitphakdeedecha  R.  Efficacy  and 
safety  of  a  carbon-dioxide  ablative  fractional  resur-
facing device for treatment of atrophic acne scars in 
Asians. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;63(2):274–83.
  4.  Alajlan  AM,  Alsuwaidan  SN.  Acne  scars  in  eth-
nic  skin  treated  with  both  non-ablative  fractional 
1,550 nm and ablative fractional CO2 lasers: compara-
tive retrospective analysis with recommended guide-
lines. Lasers Surg Med. 2011;43(8):787–91.

  5.  Graber  EM,  Tanzi  EL,  Alster  TS.  Side  effects  and 
complications  of  fractional  laser  photothermoly-
sis:  experience  with  961  treatments.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2008;34(3):301–7.

  6. Chan  HH,  Manstein  D,  Yu  CS,  Shek  S,  Kono  T, 
Wei  WI.  The  prevalence  and  risk  factors  of  post- 
inflammatory hyperpigmentation after fractional resur-
facing in Asians. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39(5):381–5.
  7.  Alexis  AF.  Lasers  and  light-based  therapies  in  eth-
nic  skin:  treatment  options  and  recommendations 
for  Fitzpatrick  skin  types V  and VI.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2013;169(Suppl 3):91–7.

  8.  Mahmoud BH, Srivastava D, Janiga JJ, et al. Safety 
and efficay of erbium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet 
fractionated laser for treatment of acne scars in type 
IV to VI skin. Dermatol Surg. 2010;36:602–9.

  9.  Ramesh  M,  Gopal  MG,  Kumar  S,  Talwar A.  Novel 
technology in the treatment of acne scars: the matrix- 
tunable  radiofrequency  technology.  J  Cutan Aesthet 
Surg. 2010;3(2):97.

 10.  Phothong W, Wanitphakdeedecha R, Sathaworawong 
A,  Manuskiatti  W.  High  versus  moderate  energy 
use of bipolar fractional radiofrequency in the treat-

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



ment  of  acne  scars:  a  split-face  double-blinded  ran-
domized  control  trial  pilot  study.  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2016;31(2):229–34.

 11.  Taub AF,  Garretson  CB.  Treatment  of  acne  scars  of 
skin types II to V by sublative fractional bipolar radio-
frequency and bipolar radiofrequency combined with 
diode laser. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2011;4(10):18.
 12.  Lipper  GM,  Perez  M.  Nonablative  acne  scar  reduc-
tion  after  a  series  of  treatments  with  a  short-pulsed 
1,064-nm  neodymium:  YAG  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2006;32(8):998–1006.

 13.  Badawi  A,  Tome  MA,  Atteya  A,  Sami  N,  Morsy 
IA. Retrospective analysis of non-ablative scar treat-
ment  in  dark  skin  types  using  the  sub- millisecond 
Nd:  YAG  1,064  nm 
laser.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2011;43(2):130–6.

 14.  Marmon S, Shek SY, Yeung CK, Chan NP, Chan JC, 
Chan  HH.  Evaluating  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  the 
1,440-nm  laser  in  the  treatment  of  photodamage  in 
Asian skin. Lasers Surg Med. 2014;46(5):375–9.
 15.  Saedi  N,  Petrell  K,  Arndt  K,  Dover  J.  Evaluating 
facial pores and skin texture after low-energy nonab-
lative fractional 1440-nm laser treatments. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2013;68(1):113–8.

 16.  Wat H, Wu DC, Chan HH. Fractional resurfacing in 
the Asian patient: current state of the art. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2017;49(1):45–59.

 17.  Moon  HR, Yun  WJ,  Lee YJ,  Lee  MW,  Chang  S.  A 
prospective,  randomized,  double-blind  comparison 
of  an  ablative  fractional  2940-nm  erbium-doped 
yttrium  aluminum  garnet  laser  with  a  nonablative 
fractional 1550-nm erbium-doped glass laser for the 
treatment of photoaged Asian skin. J Dermatol Treat. 
2015;26(6):551–7.

 18.  Kono  T,  Chan  HH,  Groff  WF,  Manstein  D,  Sakurai 
H,  Takeuchi  M,  Yamaki  T,  Soejima  K,  Nozaki 
M. Prospective direct comparison study of fractional 
resurfacing  using  different  fluences  and  densities 
for  skin  rejuvenation  in  Asians.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(4):311–4.

 19.  Lee HM, Haw S, Kim JK, Chang SE, Lee MW. Split- 
face study using a 1,927-nm thulium fiber fractional 
laser to treat photoaging and melasma in Asian skin. 
Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(6):879–88.

 20.  Negishi  K,  Tezuka  Y,  Kushikata  N,  Wakamatsu 
S. Photorejuvenation for Asian skin by intense pulsed 
light. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(7):627–32.

 21.  Feng  YU,  Zhao  J,  Gold  MH.  Skin  rejuvenation  in 
Asian skin: the analysis of clinical effects and basic 
mechanisms of intense pulsed light. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2008;7(3):273–9.

 22.  Negishi  K,  Wakamatsu  S,  Kushikata  N,  Tezuka  Y, 
Kotani  Y,  Shiba  K.  Full-face  photorejuvenation  of 
photodamaged skin by intense pulsed light with inte-
grated  contact  cooling:  initial  experiences  in  Asian 
patients. Lasers Surg Med. 2002;30(4):298–305.
 23.  Arias GA, Ferrando J. Intense pulsed light for mela-
nocytic lesions. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(4):397–400.
 24.  Negishi  K,  Kushikata  N,  Tezuka  Y,  Takeuchi  K, 
Miyamoto  E,  Wakamatsu  S.  Study  of  the  incidence 

447

and  nature  of  “very  subtle  epidermal  melasma”  in 
relation  to  intense  pulsed  light  treatment.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30(6):881–6.

 25.  Rokhsar  CK,  Fitzpatrick  RE.  The  treatment  of 
Melasma  with  fractional  photothermolysis:  a  pilot 
study. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:1645–50.

 26.  Tannous  ZS, Astner  S.  Utilizing  fractional  resurfac-
ing  in  the  treatment  of  therapy-resistant  melasma.  J 
Cosmet Laser Ther. 2005;7:39–43.

 27. Breadon  JY,  Barnes  CA.  Comparison  of  adverse 
events  of  laser  and  light-assisted  hair  removal 
systems  in  skin  types  IV–VI.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2007;6(1):40–6.

 28.  Nouri  K,  Jimenez  G,  Trent  J.  Laser  hair  removal  in 
patients  with  Fitzpatrick  Skin  type  VI.  Cosmetic 
Dermatol. 2002;15(3):15–6.

 29.  Adrian  RM,  Shay  KP.  800  nanometer  diode  laser 
hair  removal 
in  African  American  patients:  a 
clinical  and  histologic  study.  J  Cutan  Laser  Ther. 
2000;2(4):183–90.

 30.  Greppi I. Diode laser hair removal of the black patient. 

Lasers Surg Med. 2001;28(2):150–5.

 31.  Alster  TS,  Bryan  H,  Williams  CM.  Long-pulsed 
Nd:YAG  laser-assisted  hair  removal  in  pigmented 
skin:  a  clinical  and  histological  evaluation.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2001;137(7):885–9.

 32.  Ross EV, Cooke LM, Timko AL, Overstreet KA, et al. 
Treatment  of  pseudofolliculitis  barbae  in  skin  types 
IV, V, and VI with a long-pulsed neodymium:yttrium 
aluminum  garnet 
laser.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2002;47(2):263–7.

 33.  Bukhari  IA.  Removal  of  amateur  blue-black  tat-
toos  in  Arabic  women  of  skin  type  (III–IV)  with 
Q-switched  alexandrite  laser.  J  Cosmet  Dermatol. 
2005;4(2):107–10.

 34. Jones A, Roddey P, Orengo I, Rosen T. The Q-switched 
Nd: YAG laser effectively treats tattoos in darkly pig-
mented skin. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:999–1001.
 35.  Lapidoth M, Aharonowitz G. Tattoo removal among 
Ethiopian Jews in Israel: tradition faces technology. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51:906–9.

 36.  Reiter  O,  Atzmony  L,  Akerman  L,  Levi  A, 
Kershenovich R, Lapidoth M, Mimouni D. Picosecond 
lasers for tattoo removal: a systematic review. Lasers 
Med Sci. 2016;31(7):1397–405.

 37.  Jakus  J,  Kailas  A.  Picosecond  lasers:  a  new  and 
emerging  therapy  for  skin  of  color,  minocycline- 
induced  pigmentation,  and  tattoo  removal.  J  Clin 
Aesthet Dermatol. 2017;10(3):14–5.

 38.  Friedman DJ. Successful treatment of a red and black 
professional tattoo in skin type VI with a picosecond 
dual-wavelength, neodymium-doped yttrium alumin-
ium garnet laser. Dermatol Surg. 2016;42(9):1121–3.
 39.  Zelickson BD, Kist D, Bernstein E, et al. Histological 
and  ultrastructural  evaluation  of  the  effects  of  a 
radiofrequency  based  nonablative  dermal  remod-
eling  device:  a  pilot  study.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2004;140(2):204–9.

 40.  Fitzpatrick  R,  Geronemeus  R,  Goldberg  D,  et  al. 
Multicenter  study  of  noninvasive  radiofrequency 

26 Lasers in Skin of Color



448

for  periorbital  tissue  tightening.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2003;33:232–42.

 41.  Gold MH. Update on tissue tightening. J Clin Aesthet 

Dermatol. 2010;3(5):36–41.

 42. Hsu TS, Kaminer MS. The use of nonablative radiofre-
quency technology to tighten the lower face and neck. 
Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2003;22:115–23. 12877230
 43.  Kushikata  N,  Negishi  K,  Tezuka  Y,  Takeuchi  K, 
Wakamatsu  S.  Non-ablative  skin  tightening  with 
radiofrequency  in  Asian  skin.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2005;36(2):92–7.

 44.  Dierickx  CC.  The  role  of  deep  heating  for  non-
rejuvenation.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 

invasive  skin 
2006;38:799–807.

 45.  Sadick NS. Tissue tightening technology: fact or fic-

tion. Aesthet Surg J. 2008;28(2):180–8.

 46.  Chua  SH,  Ang  P,  Khoo  LS,  Goh  CL.  Nonablative 
infrared  skin  tightening  in  Type  IV  to  V  Asian 
skin:  a  prospective  clinical  study.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2007;33(2):146–51.

 47.  Bunin LS, Carniol BJ. Cervical facial skin tightening 
with an infrared device. Facial Plast Surg Clin North 
Am. 2007;15(2):179–84.

 48.  Dierickx C, Altshuler G, Erofeev A, et al. Skin tight-
ening with Palomar’s StarLux IR deep dermal, frac-
tional heating. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:15–34.
 49.  Weiss  R.  Fractional  infrared  light  for  skin  tighten-
ing:  six  month  prospective  study.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39:15–34.

 50.  Dierickx C, Altshuler G, Childs J, et al. Dermal/hypo-
dermal  junction  as  a  new  target  for  deep  fractional 
thermal treatment. Lasers Surg Med. 2007;39:8.
 51.  Mitz  V,  Peyronie  M.  The  superficial  musculo- 
aponeurotic system (SMAS) in the parotid and cheek 
area. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1976;58:80–8.

 52.  Har-Shai  Y,  Sele  E,  Rubinstien  I,  Lindenbaum  E, 
Mitz  V,  Hirshowitz  B.  Computerized  morphomet-

ric  quantification  of  elastin  and  collagen  in  SMAS 
and  facial  skin  and  the  possible  role  of  fat  cells  in 
SMAS  viscoelastic  properties.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
1998;102:2466–247.

 53.  Kennedy JE, ter Haar GR, Cranston D. High intensity 
focused ultrasound: surgery of the future? Br J Radiol. 
2003;76:590–9.

 54.  Alam  M,  White  LE,  Martin  N,  Witherspoon  J, Yoo 
S, West DP. Ultrasound tightening of facial and neck 
skin:  a  rater-blinded  prospective  cohort  study.  J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2010;62(2):262–9.

 55.  Suh  DH,  Shin  MK,  Lee  SJ,  Rho  JH,  Lee  MH,  Kim 
NI, Song KY. Intense focused ultrasound tightening in 
Asian skin: clinical and pathologic results. Dermatol 
Surg. 2011;37(11):1595–602.

 56.  Weiss RA. Noninvasive radio frequency for skin tight-
ening and body contouring. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 
2013;32(1):9–17. Review

 57.  Moreno-Moraga  J,  Valero-Alte’s  T,  Riquelme  A-M, 
MI  IM,  de  la  Royo  T.  Body  contouring  by  non- 
invasive transdermal focused ultrasound. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2007;39:315–23.

 58.  Fatemi  A,  Kane  M.  High-intensity  focused  ultra-
sound  effectively  reduces  waist  circumference  by 
ablating adipose tissue from the abdomen and flanks: 
a  retrospective  case  series.  Aesthetic  Plast  Surg. 
2010;34:577–82.

 59.  Ingargiola  MJ,  Motakef  S,  Chung  MT,  Vasconez 
HC,  Sasaki  GH.  Cryolipolysis  for  fat  reduction 
and  body  contouring:  safety  and  efficacy  of  cur-
treatment  paradigms.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
rent 
2015;135(6):1581–90.

 60.  Narurkar  VA.  A  multi-center  retrospective  analy-
sis  of  safety  following  a  cryolipolysis  treatment  in 
darker skin types. Presented at: American Society for 
Dermatologic  Surgery  2012  annual  meeting,  11–15 
Oct, Atlanta.

H. Woolery-Lloyd and N. Ferguson



Laser Applications in Children

Jessica Cervantes, Sebastian H. Verne, 
and Mercedes E. Gonzalez

27

Abstract
Lasers can be used to treat a wide variety of 
dermatological  disorders  in  children.  This 
chapter  outlines  the  conditions  amenable  to 
laser  surgery  in  children  (Table  1)  and  dis-
cusses the special issues surrounding parental 
counseling, heightened anxiety and safety pre-
cautions  when  performing  laser  surgery  in 
children.

Keywords
Lasers · Children · Vascular lesions · Port 
wine stains · Infantile hemangioma · 
Potassium Titanyl Phosphate (KTP) · 
Pigmented lesions

 Introduction

Lasers can be used to treat a wide variety of der-
matological  disorders  in  children.  This  chapter 
outlines the conditions amenable to laser surgery 
in children (Table 27.1) and discusses the special 
issues  surrounding  parental  counseling,  height-
ened  anxiety  and  safety  precautions  when  per-
forming laser surgery in children.

J. Cervantes (*) · S. H. Verne · M. E. Gonzalez 
Department of Dermatology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: J.Cervantes1@umiami.edu;  
s.verne@umiami.edu

 Lasers for Vascular Lesions

Oxyhemoglobin, the target chromophore in blood 
vessels,  has  absorption  peaks  at  418,  542  and 
577 nm and thus the best suited lasers for treat-
ment of vascular lesions emit light in this range 
(see Table 27.2). The earliest lasers used to treat 

Table  27.1  Dermatologic  conditions  in  the  pediatric 
population amenable to laser therapy

Vascular lesions

 Port-wine stains
 Superficial hemangiomas
 Telangiectasias
 Spider angiomas
 Pyogenic granulomas
 Facial angiofibromas
 Lymphangiomas
Pigmented lesions
 Café Au Lait
 Small congenital nevi
 Nevus of ota
 Nevus of ito
 Lentigines
 Becker’s nevus
Other conditions
 Viral warts
 Molluscum contagiosum
 Hypertrophic scars
 Morphea
 Hypertrichosis
 Vitiligo
 Acne and acne scarring

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_27

449

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




450

Table 27.2  Vascular lesions

 Port Wine Stains

Lasers used to treat vascular lesions in children
Quasi continuous lasers
Argon pumped tunable dye

Copper bromide
Copper vapor
Krypton
Pulsed lasers
Flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye 
laser (PDL)
Long pulsed dye laser (LPDL)
Potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP)

577–585 nm/
yellow
578 nm/yellow
578 nm/yellow
568 nm/yellow

585 nm/yellow

595 nm/yellow
532 nm/green

vascular lesions in children were the quasi-con-
tinuous lasers such as the Argon pumped tunable 
dye, copper bromide and copper vapor lasers but 
these  have  since  fallen  out  of  favor  due  to  the 
high  risk  of  hypertrophic  scarring  and  textural 
changes  [1].  In  1989,  the  flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed dye laser (PDL) revolutionized the treat-
ment of vascular lesions, and today it is the treat-
ment  of  choice  for  port-wine  stains,  some 
hemangiomas, and telangiectasias in children [2].
The  PDL  uses  a  flashlamp  to  energize  rhoda-
mine  dye  and  generates  a  pulse  of  yellow  light. 
Today, the most commonly used PDL systems emit 
wavelengths of 585 or 595 nm and are used not only 
for vascular lesions but also to target blood vessels 
in  non-vascular  lesions  in  children.  Modern  day 
PDLs have longer wavelengths (595 and 600 nm), 
larger  spot  sizes  (10–12  mm),  longer  pulse  dura-
tions (1.5–40 ms), and higher peak fluence poten-
tial, allowing for more precise treatments according 
to vessel size and depth. As long as the pulse dura-
tion is shorter than or equal to the thermal relaxation 
time of target vessels, the laser can achieve selective 
destruction of target vessels without damage to the 
surrounding   normal  tissue.  Larger  blood  vessels 
have  longer  thermal  relaxation  times  (TRT)  and 
thus longer pulse durations can be used. In addition, 
most all PDL systems have excellent dynamic cool-
ing  devices  which  reduce  epidermal  damage  and 
intraoperative pain [3].

Other lasers such as the 532 nm KTP, 755 nm 
alexandrite, 1064 Nd:Yag or Intense Pulsed light 
(IPL) are occasionally used in combination with 
PDL for resistant lesions.

Port-wine stains (PWS) are benign vascular mal-
formations  composed  of  ectatic  capillary-sized 
blood vessels in the papillary dermis that are usu-
ally present at birth [4]. They occur in 0.3–0.5% 
of  newborns.  Early  in  life,  PWS  are  pink  and 
macular  (see  Fig.  27.1).  After  puberty  some 
become  darker,  resembling  the  color  of  “port 
wine,” and hypertrophy. They are usually unilat-
eral  and  are  commonly  found  on  the  head  and 
neck. Port wine stains have a somatic activating 
mutation in the GNAQ gene (encoding the gua-
nine  nucleotide  binding  protein  G-alpha-q  sub-
unit), which results in dysregulation of angiogenic 
signaling and represents a potential future treat-
ment target [5]. The natural history of port-wine 
stains  is  progressive  growth,  darkening  and 
hypertrophy  of  associated  tissue,  occasionally 
nodules  and  pyogenic  granulomas  may  develop 
within the lesion [4].

The  flashlamp-pumped  PDL  is  the  estab-
lished, gold-standard treatment for PWS in chil-
dren. Treatment with a pulsed dye laser will lead 
to subjective and objective lightening at any age 
[6]. However, the earlier the treatment begins, the 

Fig.  27.1  Post-treatment  purpura  secondary  to  blood 
vessel destruction typically resolves within several days

J. Cervantes et al.



greater the likelihood of complete resolution [7]. 
In  infancy,  the  lesion  size  is  proportionately 
smaller and the thickness of skin is lesser, allow-
ing  deeper  penetration  of  the  light  [8].  Starting 
the treatment early may also require fewer treat-
ments [9, 10]. Numerous studies now show that 
treating PWS before 1 year of age, and treating 
frequently,  at  2–4  week  intervals,  will  result  in 
superior outcomes [11, 12]. Aging PWS thicken 
and develop nodularity, which can lead to asym-
metrical deformity of the face and become more 
difficult to treat.

When  they  are  on  the  face  or  other  cosmeti-
cally  significant  location,  PWS  can  have  a  pro-
found effect on a child’s social and psychosocial 
adjustment.  For  this  reason,  many  physicians 
have suggested that treatment of PWS is a medi-
cal necessity [13, 14]. According to a psychology 
study, children develop their body self-awareness 
around  the  latter  half  of  the  second  year  of  age 
[15]. The development of body self-awareness in 
toddlers  is  the  foundation  of  ego  development 
and self-esteem later in life [16]. Many families 
choose  to  begin  treatment  before  children  start 
school  to  reduce  their  psychosocial  impact. 
Studies have shown that adult patients with PWS 
have lower self-confidence, which increases after 
a treatment PDL treatment [17].

There are no standard recommended settings 
of PDL for treatment of due to the lack of con-
trolled studies with a single parameter difference. 
In  general,  the  ranges  of  parameters  are:  585–
600  nm  wavelength,  7–12  J/cm2  fluence,  0.45–
40 ms pulse duration and 2–12 mm spot size [18]. 
Longer  wavelengths  and  larger  spot  sizes  may 
allow the laser beam to penetrate deeper into the 
lesion  [19].  Pulse  durations  should  be  chosen 
according to the presumed size of the blood ves-
sels within the lesion. In port-wine stains, the tar-
get  vessels  are  10–500  μm  capillaries  and 
post-capillary venules in the papillary and reticu-
lar  dermis.  The  TRT  ranges  from  0.45–10  ms 
[20]. The desired clinical endpoint is a transient 
gray to blue discoloration that evolves into pur-
pura [18]. This represents thermolysis of the tar-
get vessels, histologically there is a neutrophilic 
and  lymphocytic  infiltrate  within  24  h  of  treat-
ment resulting in a decreased number and size of 

451

Fig. 27.2  Hemangioma of infancy involving upper eye-
lid may threaten function and therefore require treatment

blood vessels. Post-treatment purpura secondary 
to this blood vessel destruction, typically resolve 
within  several  5–14  days  (see  Fig.  27.2).  Some 
vessels, if not sufficiently damaged, may recover 
[18].  Topical  rapamycin,  an  anti-angiogenic 
mTOR inhibitor, when used after PDL treatments 
on  the  PWS  can  reduce  angiogenic  signals  and 
has been shown to improve clinical outcomes in 
some studies [ 21].

Many  clinicians  choose  the  initial  fluence 
based on experience and adjust the fluence based 
on  the  PWS  appearance  immediately  after  the 
laser pulse [22]. Some physicians prefer to per-
form a test spot and gauge PDL settings based on 
the patient’s response. Modern day PDL system 
that  have  a  cooling  device  can  help  reduce  epi-
dermal  damage  and  intraoperative  pain.  PDL 
with a cryogen cooling spray device was found to 
enhance  clinical  efficacy  and  safety  because 
higher  fluences  could  be  used  without  an 
increased  risk  of  permanent  scarring  or  dyspig-
mentation  due  to  epidermal  protection  [18].  In 
skin  phototypes  I–III,  excellent  safety  profiles 
have  been  established,  while  in  phototypes  IV 
and V transient hyperpigmentation and hypertro-
phic scarring occur more frequently.

27 Laser Applications in Children



452

Multiple treatment sessions are necessary and 
should  be  scheduled  at  2–4  week  intervals  [12]. 
There  is  no  agreement  on  how  many  treatment 
sessions  required  to  achieve  complete  clearance 
of  the  lesion.  Studies  show  approximately  10% 
improvement per treatment session with an over-
all  50–90%  clearance  [18].  For  facial  PWS,  the 
average number of sessions is between 9 and 12 to 
achieve  ~80%  clearance  [14].  Predictive  factors 
for improvement have been examined by several 
studies. A  study  of  91  children  with  an  average 
age of 4.5 years found that the maximal improve-
ment  is  noted  in  the  first  five  treatments  in  all 
patients regardless of age, location or size of the 
lesion  [11].  The  best  result  of  treatment  was 
observe  when  treating  lesions  over  bony  promi-
nences of the face such as the central fore-head, 
size  less  than  20  cm2  and  those  in  children  less 
than 1 year of age [11]. Lesions of the head and 
neck  require  fewer  treatments  than  those  on  the 
trunk and extremities and those in the V2 derma-
tomal  distribution  of  the  trigeminal  nerve  light-
ened  significantly  less  with  the  same  number  of 
treatments  than  those  in  the V1, V3  and  C2/C3 
regions  [23].  One  study  in  16  children  recom-
mended that using higher fluences (11–12 J/cm2) 
and longer pulse durations (1.5 ms) can achieve 
faster lightening; >75% clearance was attained in 
four treatment sessions [24]. The number of treat-
ments  is  often  determined  by  when  the  patient 
and/or  family  are  cosmetically  pleased  with  the 
result, or decide not to continue the treatment.

Challenging  PWS  with  larger  and  deeper 
blood vessels tend to require more treatment ses-
sions.  Repetitive  treatments,  even  when  greater 
than 20 does not increase the risk of side effects 
and  can  offer  additional  lightening  [25]. About 
20–30%  of  PWSs  are  very  resistant  and  do  not 
respond  to  repetitive  treatments  with  PDL  [18]. 
Combination treatments with longer wavelength 
lasers  such  as  595–600  nm  LPDL,  755  nm 
Alexandrite, 1064 nm Nd:Yag, and 532 nm KTP 
may be required.

IPL produces non-coherent, broadband light of 
380–1200 nm that can be used when non-purpuric 
therapy  with  minimal  side  effects  is  desired,  or 
when 
[18]. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT), although not consid-

is  unavailable 

treatment 

laser 

ered  a  laser  per  se,  is  newer  treatment  option  for 
PWS.  PDT  can  be  used  alone  or  in  combination 
with  other  laser  and  light  therapies.  Studies  have 
suggested superior efficacy of PDT when compared 
to  the  standard  PDL  treatments.  Zhang  et  al. 
reported  preferable  response  to  PDT  treatment 
using hemoporfin and copper laser (25%) in com-
parison with PDL (11%) in children ages 3–10 [26].
It  is  important  to  note  that  redarkening  can 
occur  after  treatment.  In  a  10  year  follow  up 
study of 51 patients who received PDL for PWS, 
35%  reported  re-darkening  of  their  stains  [27]. 
The  further  out  from  last  treatment,  the  more 
likely the patient is to report recurrence [28].

 Infantile Hemangiomas

Infantile  hemangiomas  (IH)  are  the  most  com-
mon benign tumor of infancy and are composed 
of  capillary-sized  blood  vessels,  with  an  esti-
mated incidence of 5% [1, 29]. Their natural his-
tory  is  characterized  by  three  stages:  rapid 
proliferation  (usually  the  first  5–8  months  of 
life),  plateau  and  gradual  involution.  Although 
the vast majority of hemangiomas undergo spon-
taneous  involution  leaving  minimal  residual 
defect; hemangiomas that pose a significant risk 
for cosmetic disfigurement or those that are life 
or  function-threatening,  require  treatment  (see 
Fig.  27.3)  [29].  Ulceration,  the  most  common 
complication that occurs in IH, has been reported 

Fig. 27.3  Deeper hemangiomas may be less amenable to 
treatment with lasers

J. Cervantes et al.



to  occur  in  10–30%  of  hemangiomas  [29]. 
Ulceration  usually  presents  in  the  proliferative 
phase and often results in atrophic scarring. Some 
hemangiomas can leave behind cosmetically sig-
nificant, redundant or fibrofatty tissue and telan-
giectasias.  In  addition,  hemangiomas  in  certain 
locations such as on the upper eyelid or mucosal 
lip  can  interfere  with  normal  functioning  and 
infant development.

With  the  emergence  of  systemic  and  topical 
beta-blockers as a reliable, safe and highly effec-
tive  treatment  for  infantile  hemangiomas,  laser 
treatment, now plays a less prominent role in the 
management of IH. Nonetheless, vascular lasers, 
usually  PDL,  are  still  used,  most  often  in  three 
clinical scenarios: (1) as an adjunctive treatment 
with  topical  or  systemic  beta-blockers;  (2)  for 
treatment of ulcerated hemangiomas; (3) to treat 
residual  telangiectasias  of  involuted  IH.  IH  are 
also  sometimes  used  for  thin  superficial  lesions 
in cosmetically sensitive areas early in the prolif-
erative period to prevent rapid growth; for IH that 
are not beta-blocker candidates or in early recur-
rences  after  discontinuation  of  beta  blocker 
therapy.

A systematic review on lasers for treatment of 
IH  found  significant  variability  in  the  efficacy 
amongst  studies  [30].  Although  studies  have 
shown  that  PDL  treatment  compared  to  active 
non-intervention did not achieve superior clinical 
outcomes [31, 32], PDL is of benefit as an adjunc-
tive modality. In a retrospective study, facial seg-
mental IH that were treated with the combination 
of propranolol and PDL demonstrated more rapid 
clearance and required a lower cumulative dose 
of  propranolol  to  achieve  near-complete  clear-
ance when compared to patients who were treated 
with either propranolol alone or PDL alone [33]. 
In  another  report  that  compared  topical  timolol 
alone with timolol plus PDL in 102 children with 
superficial  IH,  there  was  a  significantly  greater 
improvement  in  the  combination  arm  as  com-
pared to timolol alone [34].

In addition, PDL treatment in ulcerating hem-
angiomas  can  effectively  decrease  pain  and 
improve healing of the affected area [35, 36]. In a 
study of 78 patients with ulcerated hemangiomas, 
91% of patients experienced epithelialization of 

453

the ulceration after an average of two laser treat-
ments.  No  significant  complications  were  noted 
in this study [35].

In  a  retrospective  chart  review  of  therapy  of 
169 ulcerated IH at a tertiary care hospital more 
than 40% were treated with PDL in addition to 
other  measures.  The  authors  concluded  that 
pulsed dye laser was a useful adjunct to promote 
healing and pain relief when a clean pink granu-
lating  base  is  present  but  crusts  should  not  be 
removed with the PDL as this will impair heal-
ing [36].

When treating hemangiomas, it is important to 
recognize how HOI differ from PWS. As opposed 
to  PWS,  IH  are  neoplasms  of  endothelial-like 
cells,  which  can  be  superficial,  deep  or  mixed 
(both  superficial  and  deep  components)  [37]. 
Vessel channels are small early on and thus the 
target  chromophore,  oxyhemoglobin,  may  be 
less. In the proliferative phase both angiogenesis 
and vasculogenesis occurs [37]. In general lower 
fluences and shorter pulse durations (than those 
used for PWS) are recommended. Although there 
is no consensus on the optimal settings of PDL, 
the average parameters used in PDL treatment for 
hemangioma  studies  are:  585–595  nm  wave-
length, 5–10 J/cm2 fluence (5–7 J/cm2 in the pro-
liferative phase and higher energies in involuting 
phase) 0.3–1.5 ms pulse duration and a 3–10 mm 
spot size. PDL should always be performed with 
cryogen  cooling  device  as  this  will  allow  for 
higher fluences and thus lead to fewer treatment 
sessions  needed  and  greater  improvements  in 
volume and texture [38]. Treatment sessions are 
usually repeated every 2–6 weeks.

While the efficacy of PDL is limited to treat-
ing the superficial components of IH; the combi-
nation of PDL and Nd:YAG (1064 nm) lasers can 
reach  the  deeper  components  of  mixed  or  deep 
hemangiomas (see Fig. 27.4) [39]. In a compara-
tive study the use of sequential PDL followed by 
Nd:YAG led to superior clinical outcomes when 
compared  to  treatment  with  timolol  in  mixed 
hemangiomas [40].

Newer  devices  combining  PDL,  Nd:YAG 
and  radiofrequency  are  on  the  horizon  and 
will  penetrate even deeper allowing for better 
treatment  of  mixed  and  deep  hemangiomas. 

27 Laser Applications in Children



454

Fig. 27.4  Overlapping 2 × 2-in. gauzes may be held in 
place over the child’s eyes and may be an alternative to 
standard safety goggles

For post-involution telangiectasias and fibrofatty 
residua  or  scars,  the  combination  of  PDL  and 
ablative  fractional  resurfacing  lasers  or  CO2 
lasers have been used with a great improvement 
[41].

 Other Lesions Amenable to Vascular 
Laser Therapy

In addition to PWS and hemangiomas, spider tel-
angiectasias,  pyogenic  granulomas  and  angiofi-
bromas  can  be  effectively  treated  with  vascular 
lasers [4, 42]. Most of the time, spider telangiec-
tasias  only  require  a  single  treatment  of  PDL 
[42]. PDL tends to be more effective for smaller 
(<5 mm), flatter PGs and angiofibromas [43, 44].
Several studies have shown that PDL is useful 
in treatment of verrucae vulgaris (VV) [45] and 
in molluscum contagiosum [46]. VV, or common 
wart, is estimated to occur in 10–22% of children 
and young adults with a peak incidence between 
12 and 16 years of age [47]. Nearly two-thirds of 
warts  resolve  spontaneously  within  2  years  and 
treatment  options  include  topical  salicylic  acid, 
cryotherapy, intralesional candida or bleomycin. 

PDL, is a more recent addition to the armamen-
tarium  and  is  often  used  as  an  adjunctive  treat-
ment  when  first  line  methods  fail  [48].  The 
mechanism  of  PDL  in  the  treatment  of  warts  is 
still unknown, but thought to through targeting of 
oxyhemoglobin  in  dilated  capillaries  within  the 
lesions, or by inducing apoptosis in the heat sen-
sitive human papilloma virus ladden cells [49].

In a large literature review of 44 studies, PDL 
was found to most effective for simple, anogenital 
and facial warts with palmar plantar warts showing 
a  more  variable  response  [50].  Overall  treatment 
with PDL was well tolerated with few side effects, 
most  commonly  mild  pain  and  erythema.  In  one 
study of 56 children less than 12 years of age, warts 
were  pre-treated  with  EMLA,  then  pared  down 
with  a  razor,  and  treated  with  the  585-nm  flash-
lamp-pumped PDL (5-mm spot size, 7–10 J/cm2, 
double  pulsed  with  a  1  mm  overlap,  2–3  week 
intervals).  The  overall  clearance  rate  was  48.1% 
with an average of three visits needed to achieve 
complete  remission  [49].  The  most  effective  flu-
ences for eradication is between 8.5 and 9.5 J/cm2. 
The authors concluded that PDL is safe, tolerable 
and relatively effective to treat VV in children and 
can be considered a therapy for recalcitrant warts, 
but not as the first line therapy. Expansion of this 
study with treatment of 78 pediatric patients in total 
found  an  overall  clearance  rate  of  50.7%.  Most 
improvement was seen in the treatment of flat warts 
with a clearance rate of 69.2%, followed by periun-
gual  warts  (55.6%),  plantar  warts  (46.0%),  and 
common warts (43.4%) [51].

PDL is also a safe, quick and effective treat-
ment for molluscum contagiosum [52]. Using a 
585 nm PDL with pulse duration of 0.450 ms, a 
7-mm spot size and fluence of 6–7 J/cm2, nearly 
84%  of  children  had  complete  remission  with 
one  treatment  and  the  remainder  responded  by 
the third treatment session. All patients tolerated 
the  treatment  well  [46].  Another  study  used 
585 nm PDL (3-mm spot size, fluence of 8.0 J/
cm2,  300  ms  pulse  duration)  to  treat  resistant 
molluscum contagiosum in 15 children. The cure 
rate  was  99%  [53].  Using  pulse  durations  of 
0.25–0.45  ms,  fluences  of  5–10  J/cm2  for  1–3 
 sessions can also give a successful treatment of 
the lesion [54, 55].

J. Cervantes et al.



PDL has been effective in the early treatment 
of  hypertrophic  scars,  with  scars  on  the  face 
being most responsive [56]. Other pediatric con-
ditions  that  have  been  successfully  treated  by 
using  PDL  include  inflammatory  linear  verru-
cous epidermal nevus, [57] morphea [58], granu-
loma annulare [59] and lymphangiomas [60].

 Potassium Titanyl Phosphate (KTP)

Given  the  efficacy,  safety,  reliability  and  wide 
availability of the PDL, use of the KTP laser is 
typically limited for treatment of vascular lesions 
that  are  either  resistant  to  PDL  treatment  or  in 
cases when PDL treatment is not available. KTP 
laser  has  demonstrated  significant  clinical  effi-
cacy  for  lightening  PDL  treatment-resistant 
PWS.  Over  50%  of  the  patients  showed  >25% 
improvement  and  17%  showed  >50%  response, 
with the best results achieved at fluences ranging 
from  18  to  24  J/cm2  with  pulse  width  9–14  ms 
[61].  Interestingly,  patients  described  less  dis-
comfort during treatment and less post-treatment 
purpura  with  KTP,  as  compared  to  PDL.  In 
another similar study that included children, this 
laser  was  shown  to  be  safe  and  effective  treat-
ment for common superficial cutaneous vascular 
lesions,  specifically  in  patients  with  Fitzpatrick 
skin types I–III [62]. Because of its shorter wave-
length, KTP laser may only be able to effectively 
treat these superficial lesions [63]. Also, the shal-
low penetration of the laser results in an increase 
targeting of epidermal melanin and thus a greater 
risk for non-specific tissue injury in darker skin 
types  [63].  KTP  laser  has  also  been  used  for 
recalcitrant  viral  warts.  In  one  study,  80%  of 
patients responded to therapy with 532-nm KTP 
continuous  wave  laser,  with  complete  clearance 
observed in nearly 50% of the group [64].

 Quasi Continuous Lasers

The  argon  pumped  tunable  dye  (577–585  nm/
yellow),  Copper  bromide  (578  nm/yellow) 
Copper  Vapor  (578  nm/  yellow),  and  Krypton 
(568 nm/yellow) lasers were used in the past for 

455

the treatment of vascular skin lesions. Their use 
has fallen out of favor due to the superior efficacy 
and safety of PDL.

 Pigmented Lesions

Lasers used to treat pigmented lesions in children
Potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP) laser
Q-Switched alexandrite
Q-Switched ruby
Q-Switched Nd:YAG, frequency-doubled
Q-Switched Nd:YAG

532 nm
755 nm
694 nm
532 nm
1064 nm

Lasers used to treat pigmented lesions in children 
are  those  that  selectively  target  melanin  and 
include the short pulse duration Q-switched lasers 
such as the 532 nm frequency doubled Nd:YAG; 
the 694 nm, Ruby, the 755 nm Alexandrite or the 
1064 nm Nd:YAG laser [4]. Melanin has a wide 
to 
absorption  spectrum  ranging  from  300 
1000 nm, and slowly decreasing from the ultravi-
olet to the near infrared. In general, pigment-spe-
cific lasers tend to have very short pulse durations, 
which  minimize  heat  spread  from  the  melano-
some  to  surrounding  tissue,  allowing  for  single 
pigment cell destruction. Based upon the depth of 
the  lesion  being  treated  (epidermal,  dermal  or 
mixed), individual laser systems can be optimally 
selected to treat the target lesion [4]. While treat-
ment efficacy decreases as the wavelength of light 
increases,  longer  wavelength  laser  systems  may 
be  required  for  improved  penetration  and  treat-
ment of deeper lesions [65].

 Indications and Contraindications

•  Indications

 – Epidermal Lesions
Lentigines
Café Au Lait Macules
Nevus Spilus
 – Dermal Lesions

Nevus of Ota or Ito
Traumatic tattoos

 – Mixed Lesions

Congenital Melanocytic Nevi (Still con-

troversial at this time)

27 Laser Applications in Children



456

•  Contraindications

 – Patients with unrealistic expectations.
 – Patients who tend to scar will be at a greater 
risk for this post-operative complication.
 – Patients  with  clinically  atypical  melano-

cytic nevus.

Lentigenes  are  small,  flat  darkly-pigmented 
lesions that can involve any cutaneous surface in 
a  spotty  distribution,  commonly  found  on  sun 
exposed areas in children [66]. Lentigenes result 
from an increased number of melanocytes at the 
dermo-epidermal junction without the formation 
of  nests  and  enlarged  melanosomes  throughout 
the epidermis. Although lentigines can be effec-
tively treated by pigment-specific lasers, it is not 
commonly performed in clinical practice in chil-
dren given their benign nature and the likelihood 
of  recurrence.  The  anxiety  and  pain  associated 
with laser treatment is often not worth the benefit 
of removing a benign lesion. Nonetheless, if the 
lentigenes  are  causing  significant  psychosocial 
distress to the child, such as in the setting of cer-
tain  genodermatoses  associated  with  numerous 
lentigenes or lentigenes in cosmetically sensitive 
areas Q-switched ruby, alexandrite and Nd:YAG 
(frequency doubled 532 and 1064 nm) are highly 
effective. Lentigenes will usually clear after one 
or  two  treatments  but  lesions  commonly  recur 
and  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  has 
been reported in 17–28% of patients. In one study 
using  the  694-nm  Q-switched  ruby  laser,  with 
4.5–7.5 J/cm2 and pulse duration of 40 ns nearly 
all  lentigenes  cleared  after  a  single  treatment 
[67].  Similarly,  using  the  frequency-doubled 
Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  can  lead  to  >75% 
clearance after a single treatment using 2.0-mm 
spot  size,  10  ns  pulse  duration,  and  fluences  of 
2–5  J/cm2  [68].  One  study  used  a  ruby  laser 
(6  mm  spot  size,  fluence  20  J/cm2,  and  pulse 
duration of 450 μs) to treat two pediatric patients 
with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. They experienced 
complete  and  almost  complete  resolution  with 
two and four treatments, respectively [69].

Use of the long pulsed lasers such as the 595-
nm  LPDL  (9–13  J/cm2  and  1.5  ms),  532  nm 
Nd:YAG  or  intense  pulsed  light  devices  may 
reduce risk of post-inflammatory hyperpigmenta-

tion  but  will  require  more  treatment  sessions 
[70].  Newer  picosecond 
technology  further 
reduces the risk of post treatment hyperpigmen-
tation without requiring more treatments. In one 
study of six patients (Fitzpatrick type 4 skin) with 
a total of 255 lentigenes. With a single treatment 
using a 4.5 mm spot size, fluence of 0.65 J/cm2 
and pulse rate of 1.67 Hz, 78% of patients noted 
75–100%  improvement  after  a  single  treatment 
and  post-inflammtory  hyperpigmentation  was 
noted in only 2 of the 255 treated lesions [71].

Café-au-lait  macules  are  flat,  sharply-demar-
cated  lesions  of  uniformly  light  tan  to  brown, 
with uniform melanin pigmentation. The lesions 
can  range  from  a  few  millimeters  to  20  cm  in 
diameter.  Solitary  café-au-lait  macules  are  not 
uncommon  and  can  be  founded  in  10–28%  of 
normal individuals, with the prevalence increas-
ing  during  infancy  and  decreasing  in  adult  life 
[66]. The response to laser treatment is variable, 
not  only  among  different  lasers  treatments  but 
also among café-au-lait macules treated with the 
same laser [4]. The macules may darken, lighten, 
or  recur  after  laser  treatment.  Given  the  benign 
nature  of  these  lesions,  they  are  not  routinely 
treated in the pediatric population except in cases 
where  they  are  causing  significant  psychosocial 
distress. Taylor and Anderson demonstrated sub-
stantial clearing of café au lait with the 694-nm 
Q-switched ruby laser using fluences of 4.5 and/
or 7.5 J/cm2 and a pulse duration of 40 ns [67].

A comparative study of the Q-switched ruby 
laser and Q-switched Nd:YAG laser showed sim-
ilar  efficacy,  with  the  ruby  laser  having  slightly 
better treatment response [72]. Another study of 
café  au  lait  macules,  compared  the  QS  532  nm 
laser, settings: 2.6 mm, 1.2 J/cm2, 2 Hz to ashen 
grey endpoint; three treatments at 4 week inter-
vals  to  the  QS  1064  nm  laser  six  treatments  at 
2  week  intervals  using  settings:  2.6–3  J/cm2, 
10  Hz,  three  passes  until  mild  erythema.  At 
3 months follow up, the QS 1064 nm group had 
better  outcomes,  treatments  were  less  painful, 
there  was  less  associated  downtime  and  lower 
recurrence  rate  (17%  versus  33%).  The  smaller 
lesions  and  those  on  the  face  had  superior  out-
comes.  Six  of  16  patients  (37.5%)  experienced 
complete  response  [73].  Newer  combination 

J. Cervantes et al.



457

devices combine fractional photothermolysis and 
Q-switched technology can lead to superior out-
comes with fewer treatments needed [74].

Nevus spilus is a well-defined patch of hyper-
pigmentation with scattered smaller, darker pig-
mented macules or papules, frequently found on 
the trunk or extremities. Size can vary from 1 to 
20  cm  in  diameter  and  the  prevalence  of  nevus 
spilus is <1% in newborns [66]. The lesion con-
sists of café-au-lait and nevocellular melanocytic 
components.  The  melanocytic  component  can 
range  from  lentigines  to  melanoma,  therefore, 
any  suspicious  lesions  should  be  biopsied  and 
followed [75]. The Q-switched ruby, Q-switched 
alexandrite,  Q-switched 
frequency-doubled 
Nd:YAG  lasers,  as  well  as  the  non  Q-switched 
ruby and alexandrite lasers, have all been used to 
treat nevus spilus [4].

Like  café-au-lait  macules,  the  treatment  out-
come  of  nevus  spilus  is  unpredictable.  There  is 
no  agreement  upon  standard  laser  therapy  for 
nevus spilus, each lesion has variable amounts of 
café  au  lait  and  nevus  components  and  thus 
requires a unique approach.

One report used the 694-nm Q-switched ruby 
laser with a 40 ns pulse duration and fluences of 
4.5  and  7.5  J/cm2  for  small  and  large  lesions, 
respectively. Initial improvement was seen after 
two treatments in small lesions and one treatment 
in larger lesions at the higher fluence; however, 
there was a nearly complete return of background 
pigment  observed  at  1  year  [76].  The  755-nm 
Q-switched  alexandrite  laser  achieved  greater 
than 50% clearance in 32.1% of Japanese patients 
with at least one treatment [77].

Combining  different  laser  modalities  may 
lead to superior outcomes. In one study the coher-
ent fractional CO2 laser was followed by MedLite 
C6  laser  at  two  different  parameter  settings 
(1064  nm  wavelength,  4.0  J/cm2  fluence,  3  mm 
spot size and then 532 nm, 1.2 J/cm2, and 2 mm) 
to treat ten patients, including six children with 
nevus  spilus.  At  the  3  month  follow-up,  all 
patients had >50% improvement, with six experi-
encing >90% improvement [78].

most  commonly  seen  in  Asian  and  African-
American  populations,  as  a  unilateral,  irregular 
blue-gray  patch  along  areas  innervated  by  the 
first and second branches of the trigeminal nerve 
[4]. Greater than 50% of the lesions are present at 
birth,  whereas  40%  manifest  during  puberty. 
Nevus of Ito is patchy blue-gray patch that typi-
cally occurs on upper trunk [79]. Given the depth 
of melanosis, pigmented lasers with longer wave-
lengths  tend  to  clear  lesions  more  quickly  than 
those  with  shorter  wavelengths.  Treatment  with 
Q-switched  ruby  or  Alexandrite  lasers  have 
shown to selectively destroy dermal melanocytes. 
Using  the  755-nm  Q-switched  alexandrite  laser 
(pulse  duration  100  ns  and  4.75–7.0  J/cm2  flu-
ences)  at  8–12  week  intervals,  Alster  and 
Williams  demonstrated  50%  clinical  clearance 
after  two  treatments  and  100%  after  five  treat-
ments in most patients [80]. In another study of 
15 patients between 6 and 52 years of age, using 
694-nm  Q-switched  ruby  laser  with  pulse  dura-
tion  of  40  ns  and  fluences  6–10  J/cm2  showed 
complete clearing of the lesion in nearly 30% of 
patients  and  >50%  lightening  in  the  remaining 
patients [81]. In a larger study with 46 children, 
Q-switched ruby laser used in children produced 
complete  clearance  of  the  lesion  faster  than  in 
adults,  demonstrating  the  advantage  of  early 
treatment of Nevus of Ota in the pediatric popu-
lation [82]. Early treatment is further supported 
by a study using Q-switched Nd:YAG (7–8 mm 
spot  size,  fluence  adjusted  from  2.5  J/cm2, 
5–10  ns  pulse  duration,  and  10-Hz  repeat  rate). 
This study found that a significantly lower mean 
fluence  was  required  for  patients  younger  than 
10  years,  with  18  patients  reaching  near  total 
improvement after a mean of 11.4 sessions [83]. 
In a split-face study of bilateral nevus of ota the 
QS  Nd:YAG  and  the  QS  alexandrite  lasers 
showed equal efficacy [84].

Laser  type  should  be  chosen  based  on  the 
background  skin  color,  color  of  the  lesion  and 
depth of melanocytes [85]. When QS lasers alone 
do  not  work,  the  addition  of  fractionated  laser 
modalities may help clear the lesion [86].

Nevus of Ito and Nevus of Ota are both char-
acterized  by  dermal  melanocytosis  that  appears 
as  blue-gray  patch  of  the  skin.  Nevus  of  Ota  is 

Tattoos  result  from  pigment  deposition  pri-
marily  in  the  dermis,  either  via  professional 
application or trauma. Laser treatment for profes-

27 Laser Applications in Children



458

sional tattoos on adult patients will be discussed 
elsewhere in this book. Traumatic tattoos, such as 
those from the graphite from pencil tips, are the 
most frequently seen in the pediatric population. 
Traumatic  tattoos  are  effectively  treated  with 
Q-switched  ruby,  Q-switched  alexandrite  or 
Q-switched Nd:YAG after single treatment [87]. 
the 
In  one  report,  single 
Q-switched  ruby  laser  successfully  cleared  a 
traumatic  tattoo  from  a  pencil  tip  injury  1  year 
prior [88]. Another study reported successful out-
come  using  the  Q-switched  alexandrite  to  treat 
traumatic  tattoos  from  blacktop,  surgical  pen, 
gravel tattoos, and even fireworks [89].

treatment  using 

Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) are col-
lections of melanocytes that may present as mac-
ular, papular, or plaque-like pigmented lesions in 
various shades of brown. CMN usually present at 
birth  or  shortly  thereafter  and  can  range  in  size 
from a few centimeters to 5–50% of the body sur-
face area [4]. Laser treatment can be effective in 
improving the appearance of CMN by lightening 
or removing superficial cutaneous pigment, how-
ever their role in treatment of CMN is controver-
sial and limited to use in cases when excision of 
CMN is desired but not feasible. Treatment with 
ablative  (e.g.,  carbon  dioxide,  erbium:YAG)  or 
pigment-specific  lasers  have  resulted  in  signifi-
cant  cosmetic  improvement  of  lesions  [90]. 
Ablative lasers remove the epidermis and upper 
portion  of  the  dermis  are  most  effective  during 
the  first  1–2  months  of  life,  when  nevomelano-
cytes  are  concentrated  within  the  upper  dermis 
and there is a lower likelihood of excessive scar-
ring  [91].  Early  treatment  with  Er:YAG  laser 
resurfacing in the first weeks of life in ten patients 
with large and giant CMN was well tolerated and 
led to significant lightening of the lesion but six 
out  of  ten  patients  had  spots  of  repigmentation 
and two patients with large GCMN on the trunk 
developed  hypertrophic  scars  and  skin  atrophy 
[92].  Reports  of  frequent  repigmentation  and 
future development of melanoma arising several 
years  after  ablative  laser  highlights  the  partial 
nature  of  this  treatment  modality  and  points  to 
the need for continued vigilance [92, 93].

Both  QS  and  ablative  lasers  have  been  suc-
cessfully used for small and medium-sized CMN. 

Waldorf et al. demonstrated that Q-switched ruby 
laser effectively lightens and may clear pigmen-
tation and eliminate superficial nevus cells from 
small and medium congenital nevi safely without 
scarring [94]. In this study there was 57% clear-
ance of pigmentation in all nevi by the fourth ses-
sion and an average maximum clearance of 76% 
after  approximately  eight  sessions.  However, 
authors emphasize that results are not permanent 
and should not be considered definitive treatment 
[94].  Combination  of  ablation  (CO2  laser,  pulse 
duration 1 ms, fluence 300 mJ/cm2) followed the 
QS alexandrite was more effective than QS alex-
andrite  alone  [94].  Similarly  in  a  report  of  55 
patients  with  medium-sized  CMN  (mean  age, 
18 years) treated with both carbon dioxide laser 
and  QS  Nd:YAG  with  a  mean  of  five  and  six 
treatments  at  3  month  intervals,  carbon  dioxide 
laser  treatment  was  most  effective  for  head  and 
neck nevi with a papillomatous surface, whereas 
flat  truncal  CMN  responded  best  to  frequency-
doubled Nd:YAG laser therapy [95].

It is important to remember that while lasers 
improve  cosmesis  of  CMN  they  only  remove 
melanocytes  in  the  epidermis  and  upper  dermis 
thus  partial  repigmentation  with  a  speckled 
appearance is quite common after laser treatment 
and the need for vigilance for malignant changes 
is remains. For these reasons, most authors agree 
that the primary role of laser treatment is for cos-
metically disfiguring and surgically unresectable 
lesions [96].

 Ablative Lasers in Children

Carbon dioxide (CO2) laserErbium:Ytrium-Alu-
minum-Garnet (Er:YAG) laser

•  Ablative lasers, including the CO2 and Er:YAG 
laser,  have  been  utilized  to  treat  a  variety  of 
lesions in the pediatric population, including a 
variety  of  nevi,  acne  scars,  keloids,  and  epi-
dermal nevi.

Ablative  (or  resurfacing)  lasers  were  first 
designed for use in the adult population to remove 
or  reduce  wrinkles.  They  are  now  utilized  in 

J. Cervantes et al.



pediatric patients for many conditions, including 
acne  scar,  keloid,  VV,  epidermal  nevus  and 
inflammatory  linear  verrucous  epidermal  nevus 
(ILVEN), angiofibroma, and CMN.

 Indications and Contraindications

•  Indications

 – Epidermal Nevus
 – Scars (acne and keloid)
 – Congenital Melanocytic Nevus
 – Verrucae Vulgaris (Older treatment option)
 – Angiofibromas
•  Contraindications

 – Patients with unrealistic expectations
 – Patients who tend to scar will be at a greater 
risk for this post-operative complication

Epidermal nevi (EN) are benign hamartomas 
of  epidermis  and  papillary  dermis,  and  usually 
occur  within  the  first  year  of  life.  Most  lesions 
appear  as  well-circumscribed,  hyperpigmented, 
papillomatous  papules  that  are  asymptomatic. 
Over  time,  the  nevus  may  become  more  thick-
ened and verrucous, developing into a significant 
cosmetic concern. Since topical therapies are of 
limited utility, most treatment methods attempt to 
ablate the lesion and decrease its thickness with 
resurfacing lasers, such as the CO2 and Er:YAG 
lasers.  One  such  report  of  the  pulsed  2940-nm 
Er:YAG  laser  (0.4–0.45  J/cm2,  spot  size  2  mm) 
demonstrated  excellent  clinical  results  for  the 
treatment of superficial or small, discrete lesions 
which could be ablated accurately; however, they 
did not evaluate the efficacy of laser therapy for 
larger, thicker EN which may be more difficult to 
treat  [97]. Additionally,  CO2  laser  was  effective 
in  some  of  thicker  EN  not  responsive  to  argon 
laser, but there was a high incidence of post-treat-
ment  hypertrophic  scar  [98].  Another  group 
showed  that  the  variable-pulsed  Er:YAG  laser 
(pulse  duration  500  ms,  fluence  7.0–7.5  J/cm2) 
and the dual-mode Er:YAG laser (pulse duration 
350  ms,  fluence  6.3  J/cm2)  were  effective  and 
safe for ILVEN with complete clearance in 75% 
of  patients  in  one  treatment,  although  25%  did 
have  a  relapse  within  1  year  [99].  In  summary, 

459

both CO2 and Er:YAG lasers can be effective for 
the treatment of EN, and its efficacy depends on 
the size and thickness of the lesion.

Similarly, CMN can also be treated with abla-
tive lasers. Ostertag et al. has shown that Er:YAG 
laser  was  effective  to  treat  CMN  in  neonates. 
Overall,  the  treatment  was  well  tolerated,  with 
good clinical and histological results. Eighty per-
cent  of  patients  had  minimal  to  no  repigmenta-
tion  clinically,  and  disappearance  of  heavily 
pigmented  cells  in  the  upper  part  of  the  dermis 
histologically  as  well  [92].  CMN  can  also  be 
effectively treated with CO2 laser, but this appli-
cation may be limited by the slightly higher inci-
dence of observed hypertrophic scarring [100].

Ablative  lasers  have  also  been  utilized  as  an 
alternative  therapy  for  treatment  resistant  viral 
warts. A 2002 study has shown that single treat-
ment  of  recalcitrant  warts  with  CO2  laser  had 
response  rates  between  56%  and  81%  [101]. 
Another group used the CO2 laser and vaporized 
the base of the wart and 5 mm margins. This tech-
nique provided a high success rate with no recur-
rence at 12 months and was well tolerated by the 
patients;  however,  hypopigmentation  was  noted 
in about 25% of the cases [102].

Both CO2 and Er:YAG lasers have been useful 
in the treatment of keloids and hypertrophic scars 
[103].  The  pulsed  Er:YAG  laser  with  a  2-mm 
hand-piece at 500–1200 mJ/pulse at 3.5–9 W was 
used with an improvement of more than 50% in 
hypertrophic, depressed and burn scars [104].

 Adverse Events

Fortunately,  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  PDL  has 
made it an ideal laser system for treatment of vas-
cular lesions in children. Potential adverse effects 
include  dyspigmentation  and  hypertrophic  or 
atrophic scarring [4]. Purpura is a desired effect 
but occasionally prolonged purpura lasting up to 
14 days can occur and is distressing. The risk of 
post  inflammatory  hyperpigmentation  is  higher 
in darker-skinned and tanned patients because of 
the  possible  competitive  absorption  of  melanin. 
To treat this subset of patients, a longer interval 
between treatments is recommended [105].

27 Laser Applications in Children



460

Pain is common during and immediately after 
the procedure. Pain can be minimized when using 
a  cooling  device  with  PDL.  An  ice  pack  to  the 
treated  area  can  help  lessen  pain.  Infection  can 
also occur as a consequence of a diminished skin 
barrier  following  epidermal  damage.  This  risk 
may be higher in patients with coexisting atopic 
dermatitis [106].

Another concern in children is psychological 
sequelae  from  the  treatment. The  pain,  restraint 
and  darkness  associated  with  the  procedure  can 
be psychologically scarring and can lead to fear 
and  stress  in  future  doctor  visits. Techniques  to 
allay  anxiety  and  analgesic  and  sedative  agents 
for  laser  treatments  will  be  discussed  in  more 
detail later in the chapter.

 Special Considerations in Children

 Preoperative Management
Laser treatment of children poses a unique chal-
lenge for a variety of reasons. The approach to a 
child  prior  to  laser  treatments  is  different  than 
their adult counterparts.

First, parents may be more apprehensive and 
have more questions about the procedure than if 
they themselves were the patient. Thus, pre-treat-
ment counseling sessions may be longer as both 
parent  and  child  should  have  their  questions 
answered.  During  the  visit,  the  parent  and  the 
child should informed of what will happen step 
by step on treatment day as well as what to expect 
post-treatment including risk of dyspigmentation 
and  scarring.  Parental  expectations  should  be 
explored  and  all  questions  are  answered. 
Expected  outcomes  and  usual  number  of  treat-
ments  are  discussed  as  well.  Using  before  and 
after  photographs  of  previously  treated  patients 
may help allay anxieties in parents [107].

Secondly,  laser  treatment  produces  sufficient 
discomfort and may not be as easily tolerated by 
children.  Laser  treatments  are  painful  and  have 
been likened to the sensation of flicking a rubber 
band on the skin [108]. There is not one specific 
age at which you can plan that a child will sit still 
and  cooperate  with  the  procedure.  The  age  at 
which a child will cooperate with such a proce-

dure depends on several factors, including matu-
rity  level  among  other  things.  For  example,  a 
3-year-old child who has been in and out of sur-
geries for congenital heart disease may sit still for 
laser  treatments  while  an  immature  10-year-old 
may be uncooperative. In general, rapid and lim-
ited treatments seem to be tolerated well in young 
infants and mature adolescents with no anesthe-
sia at all, or with topical anesthesia alone [107]. 
Some  form  of  anesthesia  should  be  considered 
for all children undergoing laser treatments. The 
kind  of  anesthetic  and  how  it  will  be  adminis-
tered  should  be  discussed  in  the  pre-treatment 
counseling session. At a minimum, a topical local 
anesthetic  such  as  lidocaine  4%  or  5%  cream 
(LMX®) or eutectic mixture of local anesthetics 
(EMLA)  should  be  applied  to  the  area  to  be 
treated. EMLA, which is half lidocaine and half 
prilocaine, has been occasionally associated with 
local  and  systemic  side  effects  in  the  pediatric 
population  [105,  109,  110].  In  addition,  some 
groups discourage its use before laser treatment 
as it can vasoconstrict the target area. LMX® has 
a longer duration of anesthesia, does not require 
occlusion  and  does  not  have  any  reported  side 
effects [106]. According to the package insert, to 
avoid  systemic  absorption,  LMX  should  not  be 
applied  over  an  area  greater  than  100  cm2  in  a 
child  less  than  10  kg  or  to  an  area  greater  than 
600 cm2 in a child weighing 10–20 kg [4]. In our 
practice, we use LMX® 4% invariably for younger 
children and in older children with large lesions. 
The  cream  is  applied  with  tegaderm  or  saran 
wrap  occlusion  (to  keep  the  cream  in  place)  on 
the  target  area  by  our  medical  staff  when  the 
patient first checks in to their appointment. They 
then wait 15–30 min in the waiting room prior to 
laser  treatments.  A  dressing  with  gauze  or  a 
 permeable  bandage  prevents  optimal  absorption 
of LMX® into the skin. Our technique has been 
successful and we have had 6 year olds cooperate 
with  procedure  using  LMX®  only.  Localized 
intradermal  injections  and  local  intradermal 
nerve block have also been used. In younger chil-
dren who will not tolerate the discomfort associ-
ated  with 
local 
anesthesia, then oral, intravenous and/or general 
anesthesia can be used.

the  procedure  even  with 

J. Cervantes et al.



Procedural anesthesia (formerly known as con-
scious sedation) is another method that can should 
be performed under the supervision of an experi-
enced  pediatric  anesthesiologist  to  allow  for  the 
procedure  to  be  done  in  an  outpatient  setting.  In 
addition, oral agents such as chloral hydrate, ben-
zodiazepines and codeine have been used for light 
sedation during in office procedures. These agents 
carry  the  risk  of  respiratory  depression  and  their 
duration  of  action  are  unpredictable  and  thus 
should  only  be  used  by  and  experienced  team. 
While these agents provide light sedation, they do 
not provide any anesthetic effect.

In children with large lesions who require pro-
longed  treatment  and  in  younger  children  when 
immobilization  cannot  be  obtained,  deep  seda-
tion  with  IV  sedatives  or  general  anesthesia 
should be considered. When preformed in a pedi-
atric  hospital  with  pediatric  anesthesiologists 
present there is no increased risk of morbidity or 
mortality  from  deep  or  general  sedation  [111, 
112]. An  increased  complication  risk  with  gen-
eral anesthesia is seen in the first year of life with 
a greater risk in the first months of life (<6 months) 
[113]. Despite the low rate of complications, the 
added risk of general anesthesia and the unknown 
long term effects on the developing brain needs 
to be considered versus the benefits of PDL treat-
ments.  Lesions  that  represent  significant  health 
risks, cause functional impairment or a deformity 
in  which  a  superior  cosmetic  result  would  be 
obtained with early surgical or laser intervention 
or which may impact significantly psychosocial 
development may necessitate early surgical inter-
vention despite the added risk inherent in general 
anesthesia. In other cases, parents may choose to 
wait  until  the  child  is  old  enough  to  cooperate 
with the procedure as an outpatient.

 Intra Operative Management
Even with local anesthesia and a seemingly coop-
erative,  prepared  child,  secure  positioning  is  of 
utmost  importance  when  treating  children  with 
lasers. We believe a minimum of three personnel 
should be in the room when treating a child with 
a laser; one to perform the laser surgery, one at 
the  head  of  the  table,  holding  the  head  and  eye 
protection  in  place,  and  one  at  the  foot  of  the 

461

Fig. 27.5  Distraction anesthesia may be employed with 
the use of handheld DVD or gaming device of their choice

table (see Fig. 27.5). We often also include a par-
ent on the opposite side of the laser to aid in hold-
ing the child and ease their anxiety.

Age-appropriate eye safety is also very impor-
tant.  The  standard  safety  goggles  may  be  too 
large and provide inadequate protection [114]. As 
an  alternative,  overlapping  2  ×  2  in.  pieces  of 
white gauze can be used held in place by staff or 
medical personnel. These patches can absorb or 
reflect laser light. Smaller metal corneal shields 
can also be used. White gauze can also be used to 
cover an area within the spot size diameter that 
should  not  be  treated  or  has  already  been  ade-
quately treated [4].

Creativity  comes  into  play  when  interacting 
with young children in the procedure room. Our 
group  frequently  uses  distraction  anesthesia 
where  by  children  are  distracted  by  a  DVD  or 
handheld  game  of  their  choice  [115].  Another 
technique  often  used  is  the  pinching  of  the  skin 
prior to the injection of lidocaine to distract away 
from  the  initial  sting.  Other  authors  have  sug-
gested  creating  a  “parent  –  child  tent”  such  as 
with  a  gown  or  a  sheet  [116],  this  can  be  espe-
cially useful when the site to be treated is away 
from the face. Songs or counting can also be used. 
Dressing the surgical site with an age appropriate, 
child  friendly  dressing  can  help  the  patient  feel 
more comfortable at the end of the procedure.

27 Laser Applications in Children



462

 Conclusions
Lasers  can  be  safely  and  effectively  used  in 
children  when  the  aforementioned  special 
considerations  are  employed.  Perhaps  the 
most  far-reaching  example  is  the  success  in 
the  treatment  of  PWS  in  young  infants. 
Understanding  the  composition  and  natural 
history  of  pediatric  skin  lesions  and  the 
mechanics of skin and laser interactions is one 
step towards providing effective treatment for 
children. Laser surgery is an important part of 
the  therapeutic  armamentarium  in  children. 
With  advancing  technology  in  laser  surgery, 
there will be an even greater role in the treat-
ment of children.

References

  1.  Stier  MF,  Glick  SA,  Hirsch  RJ.  Laser  treat-
ment  of  pediatric  vascular  lesions:  port  wine 
stains  and  hemangiomas.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2008;58(2):261–85.

  2.  Railan  D,  Parlette  EC,  Uebelhoer  NS,  Rohrer 
TE.  Laser  treatment  of  vascular  lesions.  Clin 
Dermatol. 2006;24(1):8–15.

  3.  Hammes S, Roos S, Raulin C, Ockenfels HM, Greve 
B.  Does  dye  laser  treatment  with  higher  fluences 
in  combination  with  cold  air  cooling  improve  the 
results  of  port-wine  stains?  J  Eur  Acad  Dermatol 
Venereol. 2007;21(9):1229–33.

  4.  Cantatore  JL,  Kriegel  DA.  Laser  surgery:  an 
approach  to  the  pediatric  patient.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 2004;50(2):165–84. quiz 185–8

  5.  Shirley  MD,  Tang  H,  Gallione  CJ,  et  al.  Sturge-
Weber  syndrome  and  port-wine  stains  caused 
by  somatic  mutation  in  GNAQ.  N  Engl  J  Med. 
2013;368(21):1971–9.

  6.  van  der  Horst  CM,  Koster  PH,  de  Borgie  CA, 
Bossuyt  PM,  van  Gemert  MJ.  Effect  of  the  tim-
ing of treatment of port-wine stains with the flash-
lamp-pumped  pulsed-dye  laser.  N  Engl  J  Med. 
1998;338(15):1028–33.

  7.  Morelli  JG,  Weston  WL,  Huff  JC, Yohn  JJ.  Initial 
lesion size as a predictive factor in determining the 
response of port-wine stains in children treated with 
the  pulsed  dye  laser.  Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med. 
1995;149(10):1142–4.

  8.  Chapas AM, Eickhorst K, Geronemus RG. Efficacy 
of  early  treatment  of  facial  port  wine  stains  in 
newborns:  a  review  of  49  cases.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(7):563–8.

  9.  Goldman  MP,  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Ruiz-Esparza 
J.  Treatment  of  port-wine  stains  (capillary  malfor-

mation) with the flashlamp-pumped pulsed dye laser. 
J Pediatr. 1993;122(1):71–7.

  10.  Ashinoff  R,  Geronemus  RG.  Flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed  dye  laser  for  port-wine  stains  in  infancy: 
earlier versus later treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1991;24(3):467–72.

  11.  Nguyen CM, Yohn JJ, Huff C, Weston WL, Morelli 
JG. Facial port wine stains in childhood: prediction 
of the rate of improvement as a function of the age 
of the patient, size and location of the port wine stain 
and  the  number  of  treatments  with  the  pulsed  dye 
(585 nm) laser. Br J Dermatol. 1998;138(5):821–5.

  12.  Anolik R, Newlove T, Weiss ET, et al. Investigation 
into  optimal  treatment  intervals  of  facial  port-
wine  stains  using  the  pulsed  dye  laser.  J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2012;67(5):985–90.

  13.  Troilius A, Wrangsjo B, Ljunggren B. Patients with 
port-wine  stains  and  their  psychosocial  reactions 
after  photothermolytic  treatment.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2000;26(3):190–6.

  14.  Alster  TS,  Railan  D.  Laser  treatment  of  vascular 
birthmarks. J Craniofac Surg. 2006;17(4):720–3.
  15.  Brownell CA, Zerwas S, Ramani GB. “So big”: the 
development  of  body  self-awareness  in  toddlers. 
Child Dev. 2007;78(5):1426–40.

  16.  Kreuger D. Body self. Development, psychopatholo-
gies,  and  psy-choanalytic  significance.  Psychoanal 
Study Child. 2001;56:238–59.

  17.  Hansen  K,  Kreiter  CD,  Rosenbaum  M,  Whitaker 
DC,  Arpey  CJ.  Long-term  psychological  impact 
and  perceived  efficacy  of  pulsed-dye  laser  therapy 
for  patients  with  port-wine  stains.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2003;29(1):49–55.

  18.  Brightman  LA,  Geronemus  RG,  Reddy  KK.  Laser 
treatment of port-wine stains. Clin Cosmet Investig 
Dermatol. 2015;8:27–33.

  19.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermoly-
sis: precise microsurgery by selective absorption of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.

  20.  Liu G, Jia W, Nelson JS, Chen Z. In vivo, high-reso-
lution, three-dimensional imaging of port wine stain 
microvasculature in human skin. Lasers Surg Med. 
2013;45(10):628–32.

  21.  Gao L, Phan S, Nadora DM, et al. Topical rapamycin 
systematically suppresses the early stages of pulsed 
dye  laser-induced  angiogenesis  pathways.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2014;46(9):679–88.

  22.  Mahendran R, Sheehan-Dare RA. Survey of the prac-
tices of laser users in the UK in the treatment of port 
wine stains. J Dermatolog Treat. 2004;15(2):112–7.
  23.  Renfro  L,  Geronemus  RG.  Anatomical  differences 
of port-wine stains in response to treatment with the 
pulsed dye laser. Arch Dermatol. 1993;129(2):182–8.
  24.  Geronemus R, Quintana A, WW WL. High-fluence 
modified  pulsed  dye  laser  photocoagulation  with 
dynamic cooling of port-wine stains in infancy. Arch 
Dermatol. 2000;136(7):942–3.

  25.  Kauvar ANB, Geronemus RG. Repetitive pulsed dye 
laser treatments improve persistent port-wine stains. 
Dermatol Surg. 1995;21(6):515–21.

J. Cervantes et al.



  26.  Zhang B, Zhang TH, Huang Z, Li Q, Yuan KH, Hu 
ZQ. Comparison of pulsed dye laser (PDL) and pho-
todynamic therapy (PDT) for treatment of facial port-
wine  stain  (PWS)  birthmarks  in  pediatric  patients. 
Photodiagn Photodyn Ther. 2014;11(4):491–7.
  27.  Huikeshoven  M,  Koster  PH,  de  Borgie  CA,  Beek 
JF, van Gemert MJ, van der Horst CM. Redarkening 
of  port-wine  stains  10  years  after  pulsed-dye-laser 
treatment. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(12):1235–40.
  28.  Orten  SS,  Waner  M,  Flock  S,  Roberson  PK, 
Kincannon  J.  Port-wine  stains:  an  assessment  of  5 
years  of  treatment.  Arch  Otolaryngol  Head  Neck 
Surg. 1996;122(11):1174–9.

  29.  Cheng CE, Friedlander SF. Infantile hemangiomas, 
complications  and  treatments.  Semin  Cutan  Med 
Surg. 2016;35(3):108–16.

  30.  Chinnadurai  S,  Sathe  NA,  Surawicz T.  Laser  treat-
ment of infantile hemangioma: a systematic review. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2016;48(3):221–33.

  31.  Batta  K,  Goodyear  HM,  Moss  C,  Williams  HC, 
Hiller L, Waters R. Randomised controlled study of 
early  pulsed  dye  laser  treatment  of  uncomplicated 
childhood haemangiomas: results of a 1-year analy-
sis. Lancet. 2002;360(9332):521–7.

  32.  Kessels  JP,  Hamers  ET,  Ostertag  JU.  Superficial 
hemangioma: pulsed dye laser versus wait-and-see. 
Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(3 Pt 1):414–21.

  33.  Reddy  KK,  Blei  F,  Brauer  JA,  et  al.  Retrospective 
study  of  the  treatment  of  infantile  hemangiomas 
using a combination of propranolol and pulsed dye 
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(6):923–33.

  34.  Park KH, Jang YH, Chung HY, Lee WJ, Kim DW, Lee 
SJ. Topical timolol maleate 0.5% for infantile hem-
angioma; it's effectiveness and/or adjunctive pulsed 
dye laser—single center experience of 102 cases in 
Korea. J Dermatolog Treat. 2015;26(4):389–91.
  35.  David  LR,  Malek  MM,  Argenta  LC.  Efficacy  of 
pulse dye laser therapy for the treatment of ulcerated 
haemangiomas:  a  review  of  78  patients.  Br  J  Plast 
Surg. 2003;56(4):317–27.

  36.  McCuaig  CC,  Cohen  L,  Powell  J,  et  al.  Therapy 
of  ulcerated  hemangiomas.  J  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2013;17(4):233–42.

  37.  Greenberger S, Bischoff J. Pathogenesis of infantile 
haemangioma. Br J Dermatol. 2013;169(1):12–9.
  38.  Chang  CJ,  Kelly  KM,  Nelson  JS.  Cryogen  spray 
cooling and pulsed dye laser treatment of cutaneous 
hemangiomas. Ann Plast Surg. 2001;46(6):577–83.
  39.  Tawfik  AA,  Alsharnoubi  J.  Topical  timolol  solu-
tion  versus  laser  in  treatment  of  infantile  heman-
gioma:  a  comparative  study.  Pediatr  Dermatol. 
2015;32(3):369–76.

  40.  Saafan  AM,  Salah  MM.  Using  pulsed  dual-wave-
length  595  and  1064  nm  is  more  effective  in  the 
management  of  hemangiomas.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2010;9(4):310–4.

  41.  Alcantara  Gonzalez  J,  Boixeda  P,  Truchuelo  Diez 
MT, Lopez Gutierrez JC, Olasolo PJ. Ablative frac-
tional  yttrium-scandium-gallium-garnet  laser  for 
scarring  residual  haemangiomas  and  scars  second-

463

ary to their surgical treatment. J Eur Acad Dermatol 
Venereol. 2012;26(4):477–82.

  42.  Tan  E,  Vinciullo  C.  Pulsed  dye  laser  treatment 
of  spider  telangiectasia.  Australas  J  Dermatol. 
1997;38(1):22–5.

  43.  Hoffman  SJ,  Walsh  P,  Morelli  JG.  Treatment  of 
angiofibroma with the pulsed tunable dye laser. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1993;29(5 Pt 1):790–1.

  44.  Gonzalez S, Vibhagool C, Falo LD Jr, Momtaz KT, 
Grevelink  J,  Gonzalez  E.  Treatment  of  pyogenic 
granulomas with the 585 nm pulsed dye laser. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1996;35(3 Pt 1):428–31.

  45.  Kopera  D.  Verrucae  vulgares:  flashlamp-pumped 
pulsed  dye  laser  treatment  in  134  patients.  Int  J 
Dermatol. 2003;42(11):905–8.

  46.  Binder  B,  Weger  W,  Komericki  P,  Kopera 
D.  Treatment  of  molluscum  contagiosum  with 
a  pulsed  dye  laser:  pilot  study  with  19  children.  J 
Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2008;6(2):121–5.

  47.  Silverberg  NB.  Warts  and  molluscum  in  children. 

Adv Dermatol. 2004;20:23–73.

  48.  Kauvar AN, McDaniel DH, Geronemus RG. Pulsed 
dye  laser  treatment  of  warts.  Arch  Fam  Med. 
1995;4(12):1035–40.

  49.  Park  HS,  Kim  JW,  Jang  SJ,  Choi  JC.  Pulsed  dye 
laser therapy for pediatric warts. Pediatr Dermatol. 
2007;24(2):177–81.

  50.  Veitch D, Kravvas G, Al-Niaimi F. Pulsed dye laser 
therapy in the treatment of warts: a review of the lit-
erature. Dermatol Surg. 2017;43(4):485–93.

  51.  Park  HS,  Choi WS.  Pulsed  dye  laser  treatment  for 
viral  warts:  a  study  of  120  patients.  J  Dermatol. 
2008;35(8):491–8.

  52.  Griffith RD, Yazdani Abyaneh MA, Falto-Aizpurua 
L, Nouri K. Pulsed dye laser therapy for molluscum 
contagiosum: a systematic review. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2014;13(11):1349–52.

  53.  Omi T, Kawana S. Recalcitrant molluscum contagio-
sum  successfully  treated  with  the  pulsed  dye  laser. 
Laser Ther. 2013;22(1):51–4.

  54.  Hughes  PS.  Treatment  of  molluscum  contagiosum 
with  the  585-nm  pulsed  dye  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1998;24(2):229–30.

  55.  Hammes  S,  Greve  B,  Raulin  C.  Molluscum  conta-
giosum:  treatment  with  pulsed  dye  laser.  Hautarzt. 
2001;52(1):38–42.

  56.  Kawecki M, Bernad-Wisniewska T, Sakiel S, Nowak 
M, Andriessen A. Laser in the treatment of hypertro-
phic burn scars. Int Wound J. 2008;5(1):87–97.
  57.  Alster  TS.  Inflammatory  linear  verrucous  epider-
mal  nevus:  successful  treatment  with  the  585  nm 
flashlamp-pumped  pulsed  dye  laser.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 1994;31(3 Pt 1):513–4.

  58.  Eisen  D,  Alster  TS.  Use  of  a  585  nm  pulsed  dye 
laser for the treatment of morphea. Dermatol Surg. 
2002;28(7):615–6.

  59.  Sliger BN, Burk CJ, Alvarez-Connelly E. Treatment 
of  granuloma  annulare  with  the  595  nm  pulsed 
dye  laser  in  a  pediatric  patient.  Pediatr  Dermatol. 
2008;25(2):196–7.

27 Laser Applications in Children



464

  60.  Weingold  DH, White  PF,  Burton  CS.  Treatment  of 
lymphangioma  circumscriptum  with  tunable  dye 
laser. Cutis. 1990;45(5):365–6.

  61.  Chowdhury MM, Harris S, Lanigan SW. Potassium 
titanyl  phosphate  laser  treatment  of  resistant  port-
wine stains. Br J Dermatol. 2001;144(4):814–7.
  62.  Clark  C,  Cameron  H,  Moseley  H,  Ferguson  J, 
Ibbotson  SH.  Treatment  of  superficial  cutaneous 
vascular  lesions:  experience  with  the  KTP  532  nm 
laser. Lasers Med Sci. 2004;19(1):1–5.

  63.  Cole PD, Sonabend ML, Levy ML. Laser treatment 
of  pediatric  vascular  lesions.  Semin  Plast  Surg. 
2007;21(3):159–66.

  64.  Gooptu  C,  James  MP.  Recalcitrant  viral  warts: 
results  of  treatment  with  the  KTP  laser.  Clin  Exp 
Dermatol. 1999;24(2):60–3.

  65.  Anderson  RR,  Margolis  RJ,  Watenabe  S,  Flotte  T, 
Hruza GJ, Dover JS. Selective photothermolysis of 
cutaneous  pigmentation  by  Q-switched  Nd:  YAG 
laser  pulses  at  1064,  532,  and  355  nm.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 1989;93(1):28–32.

  66.  Dohil  MA,  Baugh  WP,  Eichenfield  LF.  Vascular 
and  pigmented  birthmarks.  Pediatr  Clin  N  Am. 
2000;47(4):783–812. v–vi

  67.  Taylor CR, Anderson RR. Treatment of benign pig-
mented epidermal lesions by Q-switched ruby laser. 
Int J Dermatol. 1993;32(12):908–12.

  68.  Kilmer SL, Wheeland RG, Goldberg DJ, Anderson 
RR. Treatment of epidermal pigmented lesions with 
the  frequency-doubled  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser. 
A  controlled,  single-impact,  dose-response,  multi-
center trial. Arch Dermatol. 1994;130(12):1515–9.

  69.  Kato S, Takeyama J, Tanita Y, Ebina K. Ruby laser 
therapy  for  labial  lentigines  in  Peutz-Jeghers  syn-
drome. Eur J Pediatr. 1998;157(8):622–4.

  70.  Kono  T,  Chan  HH,  Groff  WF,  et  al.  Long-pulse 
pulsed  dye  laser  delivered  with  compression  for 
treatment  of  facial 
lentigines.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2007;33(8):945–50.

  71.  Guss L, Goldman MP, Wu DC. Picosecond 532 nm 
aluminium  garnet 
neodymium-doped  yttrium 
laser  for  the  treatment  of  solar  lentigines  in  darker 
skin  types:  safety  and  efficacy.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2017;43(3):456–9.

  72.  Tse Y,  Levine  VJ,  McClain  SA,  Ashinoff  R.  The 
removal  of  cutaneous  pigmented  lesions  with 
the  Q-switched  ruby  laser  and  the  Q-switched 
neodymium: 
laser. 
A  comparative  study.  J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol. 
1994;20(12):795–800.

yttrium-aluminum-garnet 

  73.  Kim HR, Ha JM, Park MS, et al. A low-fluence 1064-
nm  Q-switched  neodymium-doped  yttrium  alu-
minium garnet laser for the treatment of cafe-au-lait 
macules. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;73(3):477–83.
  74.  Won KH, Lee YJ, Rhee do Y, Chang SE. Fractional 
532-nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser: one of the safest 
novel  treatment  modality  to  treat  cafe-au-lait  mac-
ules. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2016;18(5):268–9.
  75.  Johr  RH,  Schachner  LS,  Stolz  W.  Management  of 
nevus spilus. Pediatr Dermatol. 1998;15(5):407–10.

  76.  Grevelink  JM,  Gonzalez  S,  Bonoan  R,  Vibhagool 
C,  Gonzalez  E.  Treatment  of  nevus  spilus  with 
the  Q-switched 
laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1997;23(5):365–9. discussion 369–70

ruby 

  77.  Kagami S, Asahina A, Watanabe R, et al. Treatment 
of  153  Japanese  patients  with  Q-switched  alexan-
drite laser. Lasers Med Sci. 2007;22(3):159–63.
  78.  Tang M, Cheng Y, Yang C, et al. Nevus spilus: treat-
ment with fractional CO2 laser in combination with 
MedLite C6 laser: a preliminary study. Lasers Med 
Sci. 2017;32(7):1659–62.

  79.  Polder KD, Landau JM, Vergilis-Kalner IJ, Goldberg 
LH,  Friedman  PM,  Bruce  S.  Laser  eradication 
of  pigmented  lesions:  a  review.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2011;37(5):572–95.

  80.  Alster TS, Williams CM. Treatment of nevus of Ota 
by the Q-switched alexandrite laser. Dermatol Surg. 
1995;21(7):592–6.

  81.  Geronemus  RG.  Q-switched  ruby  laser  therapy  of 
nevus of Ota. Arch Dermatol. 1992;128(12):1618–22.
  82.  Kono  T,  Chan  HH,  Ercocen  AR,  et  al.  Use  of 
Q-switched  ruby  laser  in  the  treatment  of  nevus 
of  ota  in  different  age  groups.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2003;32(5):391–5.

  83.  Seo HM, Choi CW, Kim WS. Beneficial effects of 
early  treatment  of  nevus  of  Ota  with  low-fluence 
1,064-nm  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2015;41(1):142–8.

  84.  Wen  X,  Li  Y,  Jiang  X.  A  randomized,  split-face 
clinical  trial  of  Q-switched  alexandrite  laser  ver-
sus  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  in  the  treatment 
of  bilateral  nevus  of  Ota.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
2016;18(1):12–5.

  85.  Lu  Z,  Chen  J,  Wang  X,  Fang  L,  Jiao  S,  Huang 
W. Effect of Q-switched Alexandrite laser irradiation 
on epidermal melanocytes in treatment of Nevus of 
Ota. Chin Med J. 2003;116(4):597–601.

  86.  Kouba DJ, Fincher EF, Moy RL. Nevus of Ota suc-
cessfully  treated  by  fractional  photothermolysis 
using  a  fractionated  1440-nm  Nd:YAG  laser. Arch 
Dermatol. 2008;144(2):156–8.

  87.  Troilius AM. Effective treatment of traumatic tattoos 
with a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser. Lasers Surg Med. 
1998;22(2):103–8.

  88.  Knoell KA, Schreiber AJ, Kutenplon M, Milgraum 
SS. Q-switched ruby laser treatment of traumatic tat-
tooing induced by pencil point puncture in children. 
Pediatr Dermatol. 1997;14(4):325–6.

  89.  Moreno-Arias  GA,  Casals-Andreu  M,  Camps-
Fresneda A. Use of Q-switched alexandrite laser (755 
nm, 100 nsec) for removal of traumatic tattoo of dif-
ferent origins. Lasers Surg Med. 1999;25(5):445–50.
  90.  Krengel  S,  Marghoob  AA.  Current  manage-
ment  approaches  for  congenital  melanocytic  nevi. 
Dermatol Clin. 2012;30(3):377–87.

  91.  De Raeve LE, Claes A, Ruiter DJ, van Muijen GN, 
Roseeuw  D,  van  Kempen  LC.  Distinct  phenotypic 
changes between the superficial and deep component 
of giant congenital melanocytic naevi: a rationale for 
curettage. Br J Dermatol. 2006;154(3):485–92.

J. Cervantes et al.



  92.  Ostertag  JU,  Quaedvlieg  PJ,  Kerckhoffs  FE, 
et  al.  Congenital  naevi  treated  with  erbium:YAG 
laser  (Derma  K)  resurfacing  in  neonates:  clinical 
results  and  review  of  the  literature.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2006;154(5):889–95.

  93.  Dragieva  G,  Hafner  J,  Kunzi  W,  et  al.  Malignant 
melanoma in a large congenital melanocytic nevus 9 
years after dermabrasion in childhood. Dermatology. 
2006;212(2):208–9.

  94.  Waldorf 

HA, 

Kauvar  AN, 

Geronemus 
RG.  Treatment  of  small  and  medium  congenital 
nevi with the Q-switched ruby laser. Arch Dermatol. 
1996;132(3):301–4.

  95.  August PJ, Ferguson JE, Madan V. A study of the effi-
cacy  of  carbon  dioxide  and  pigment-specific  lasers 
in  the  treatment  of  medium-sized  congenital  mela-
nocytic naevi. Br J Dermatol. 2011;164(5):1037–42.
  96.  Schaffer JV. Update on melanocytic nevi in children. 

Clin Dermatol. 2015;33(3):368–86.

  97.  Pearson  IC,  Harland  CC.  Epidermal  naevi  treated 
with pulsed erbium:YAG laser. Clin Exp Dermatol. 
2004;29(5):494–6.

  98.  Hohenleutner  U,  Landthaler  M.  Laser  therapy  of 
verrucous  epidermal  naevi.  Clin  Exp  Dermatol. 
1993;18(2):124–7.

  99.  Park JH, Hwang ES, Kim SN, Kye YC. Er:YAG laser 
treatment  of  verrucous  epidermal  nevi.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2004;30(3):378–81.

 100.  Horner BM, El-Muttardi NS, Mayou BJ. Treatment 
of congenital melanocytic naevi with CO2 laser. Ann 
Plast Surg. 2005;55(3):276–80.

 101.  Hruza GJ. Laser treatment of epidermal and dermal 

lesions. Dermatol Clin. 2002;20(1):147–64.

 102.  Serour F, Somekh E. Successful treatment of recalci-
trant warts in pediatric patients with carbon dioxide 
laser. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2003;13(4):219–23.
 103. Krakowski  AC,  Totri  CR,  Donelan  MB, 
Shumaker  PR.  Scar  Management  in  the  Pediatric 
and 
Pediatrics. 
2016;137(2):e20142065.

Populations. 

Adolescent 

465

 104.  Kwon SD, Kye YC. Treatment of scars with a pulsed 
Er:YAG laser. J Cutan Laser Ther. 2000;2(1):27–31.
 105.  Rincon E, Baker RL, Iglesias AJ, Duarte A-M. CNS 
toxicity  after  topical  application  of  EMLA  cream 
on  a  toddler  with  molluscum  contagiosum.  Pediatr 
Emerg Care. 2000;16(4):252–4.

 106.  Friedman  PM,  Fogelman  JP,  Nouri  K,  Levine 
VJ,  Ashinoff  R.  Comparative  study  of  the  effi-
cacy  of  four  topical  anesthetics.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1999;25(12):950–4.

 107.  Chapas AM, Geronemus RG. Our approach to pedi-
atric  dermatologic  laser  surgery.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2005;37(4):255–63.

 108.  Spicer  MS,  Goldberg  DJ,  Janniger  CK.  Lasers  in 
pediatric  dermatology.  Cutis.  1995;55(5):270–2. 
278–80

 109.  Calobrisi  SD,  Drolet  BA,  Esterly  NB.  Petechial 
eruption  after  the  application  of  EMLA  cream. 
Pediatrics. 1998;101(3 Pt 1):471–3.

 110.  Chen  BK,  Eichenfield  LF.  Pediatric  anesthesia  in 
dermatologic  surgery:  when  hand-holding  is  not 
enough. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27(12):1010–8.
 111.  Keenan  RL,  Shapiro  JH,  Dawson  K.  Frequency  of 
anesthetic cardiac arrests in infants: effect of pediatric 
anesthesiologists. J Clin Anesth. 1991;3(6):433–7.

 112.  Vespasiano M, Finkelstein M, Kurachek S. Propofol 
sedation: intensivists’ experience with 7304 cases in a 
children's hospital. Pediatrics. 2007;120(6):e1411–7.
 113.  Cohen  MM,  Cameron  CB,  Duncan  PG.  Pediatric 
anesthesia morbidity and mortality in the periopera-
tive period. Anesth Analg. 1990;70(2):160-167.
 114.  Eichenfield  LF.  Vascular  lesion  laser:  practical 
techniques  or  some  “light”  suggestions.  Pediatr 
Dermatol. 1999;16(4):332–4.

 115.  Burk  CJ,  Benjamin  LT,  Connelly  EA.  Distraction 
anesthesia  for  pediatric  dermatology  procedures. 
Pediatr Dermatol. 2007;24(4):419–20.

 116.  Yoo  SS,  Liggett  J,  Cohen  BA.  Use  of  parent-child 
tents  in  pediatric  laser  surgery.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2003;29(4):399–401.

27 Laser Applications in Children



Dressing/Wound Care for Laser 
Treatment

28

Ariel E. Eber, Vincent M. Hsu, Stephen C. Davis, 
and Keyvan Nouri

in 

Abstract
Laser  procedures  have  become  quite  com-
monplace 
the  field  of  dermatology. 
Advancing  technology,  coupled  with  better 
management  and  prevention  of  side  effects, 
has resulted in a large increase in laser proce-
dures.  As  mentioned  throughout  this  text, 
lasers  are  an  appealing  therapy  for  scars, 
photo-damage, ritides, and pigmentary disor-
ders.  Ablative  lasers  have  been  used  effec-
tively for years however with concerns of side 
effects and/or complications. Patient are also 
often  dissuaded  by  the  down-time  required 
after  ablative  laser  procedures.  Furthermore, 
the  demand  for  ablative  procedures  has 
decreased  with  non-ablative  techniques  dra-
matically  on  the  rise. The  non-ablative  how-
to  have  diminished  efficacy 
ever, 
compared  to  ablative  techniques  for  many 

tend 

A. E. Eber 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: a.eber@med.miami.edu 

V. M. Hsu
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: Vincent.hsu@med.miami.edu 

S. C. Davis (*) · K. Nouri 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: sdavis@med.miami.edu; knouri@med.miami.edu

indications. With  the  rapid  advances  in  laser 
technology there is a need to investigate opti-
mal  postoperative  regimens  so  that  we  may 
deliver  better  outcomes  and  increase  patient 
satisfactions.

Keywords
Laser procedures · Ablative lasers · Wound 
dressing · Wound care

 Introduction

Laser  procedures  have  become  quite  common-
place  in  the  field  of  dermatology.  Advancing 
technology, coupled with better management and 
prevention of side effects, has resulted in a large 
increase  in  laser  procedures.  As  mentioned 
throughout this text, lasers are an appealing ther-
apy for scars, photo-damage, ritides, and pigmen-
tary  disorders.  Ablative  lasers  have  been  used 
effectively  for  years  however  with  concerns  of 
side effects and/or complications. Patient are also 
often dissuaded by the down-time required after 
the 
ablative 
demand  for  ablative  procedures  has  decreased 
with non-ablative techniques dramatically on the 
rise.  The  non-ablative  however,  tend  to  have 
diminished  efficacy  compared  to  ablative  tech-
niques  for  many  indications.  With  the  rapid 
advances  in  laser  technology  there  is  a  need  to 

laser  procedures.  Furthermore, 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_28

467





468

investigate  optimal  postoperative  regimens  so 
that we may deliver better outcomes and increase 
patient satisfactions.

Since there are more complications with abla-
tive techniques, we will focus the below discus-
sion on ablative postoperative care. In the skin, 
lasers function through basic principles of pho-
tothermolysis [1, 2]. Water is the targeted chro-
mophore  for  conventional  ablative  lasers.  As 
water is ubiquitous within tissue, there is usually 
ablation of the entire epidermis with subsequent 
effects on the dermis. Thermal injury to the der-
mis  results  in  collagen  denaration,  contraction, 
shrinking, and tightening of tissue. Furthermore, 
the normal cellular and molecular cascade asso-
ciated with injury and wound healing results [3]. 
As a result, the treated skin regains some of its 
youthful elasticity and firmness.6 Although vari-
ous pulsing techniques and cooling strategies are 
aimed at reducing adverse events, all skin reju-
venation  procedures  carry  with  them  some  risk 
of side effects, even in the hands of experts [4]. 
Varying degrees of erythema, pain, swelling and 
crust  formation  are  associated  with  thermal 
injury.  As  with  any  surgical  procedure,  infec-
tions are possible, and if they do occur, tend to 
do so early in the recovery process. Scarring, and 
dyspigmentation  can  also  occur,  but  more 
uncommonly [4].

 Available Post-Operative 
Treatments

Following laser surgery there are various wound 
care  options  including  semi-occlusive,  occlu-
sive  dressings  and/or  a  number  of  topical 
agents. The use of topical agents only is com-
monly referred to the “open” technique, where 
the use of occlusive dressing is considered the 
“closed” technique. It has been determined that 
keeping wounds moist with an occlusive dress-
ing  allows  for  faster  epithelization,  greater 
growth  factor  viability,  pain  alleviation,  and 
reduced scar formation [5]. As different postop-
erative treatments can affect the quality of heal-
ing,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  an  ideal 
dressing or topical agent for post-surgical care 

Table 28.1  Treatment schedule and indications for post- 
operative recovery

Time 
post-operation Treatment
0–48 h

Topicals/dressings
Anti- 
inflammatory
Antiseptic
Cooling

72 h–1 week Moisturizers

1–2 weeks

3–4 weeks

4+ weeks

Antibiotics
Antivirals

Cleansers
Make-up
Anti-erythema
Sunblock
Anti-erythema

Vitamins, 
colorants or 
bleaching agents

Indication
Enhance healing
Reduce swelling
Infection 
prevention

Minimize 
scarring
Infection 
prevention
Remove crusting
Cover and treat 
erythema
Sun protection
Residual 
erythema
Dyspigmentary 
conditions

should stimulate healing, reduce pain, be easy 
to  apply  and  provide  optimal  cosmetic  results 
[6].  The  best  way  to  approach  post-operative 
care  is  by  evaluating  and  managing  the  most 
immediate  risks  given  the  phase  of  healing 
(Table 28.1).

Care should be taken immediately after com-
pletion of the procedure to minimize the proba-
bility  of  scar  formation  and  infection.  This  is 
accomplished  by  using  cooling  techniques  like 
cold water or ice, anti-inflammatory medications 
like  corticosteroids,  and  antibiotics/antivirals. 
After 72 h, gentle moisturizers can be incorpo-
rated  into  the  treatment  regimen  to  enhance 
water  retention  in  the  healing  tissue.  This  will 
also minimize the probability of scar formation. 
One week post-surgery, patients can begin using 
gentle  cleansers  to  remove  crust  or  necrotic 
debris. During the same time period, patients can 
begin  using  hypoallergenic  make-up  to  cover 
residual erythema. After the third week of recov-
ery, patients should focus on sun protection and 
conditioning masks to hydrate skin. One month 
after the procedure, one can begin pigment cor-
rection if necessary while maintaining sun pro-
tection.  Scar  treatment  can  begin,  should  it  be 
necessary.

A. E. Eber et al.



 Immediate Post-Operative 
Treatment (0–48 h)

Ice packs can be applied to a patient to alleviate 
the  burning  sensation  that  is  commonly  experi-
enced immediately after completion of the laser 
procedure.  Petrolatum  can  be  applied  to  the 
treated  area  within  2  h  of  completion  [7,  8]. 
Petrolatum  provides  some  relief  and  a  moist 
environment  conducive 
to  proper  healing. 
Petrolatum is sometimes replaced by the addition 
of an antibiotic ointment. Mupirocin or gentamy-
cin  ointment  is  frequently  recommended  how-
ever, over-the-counter antibiotics are a common 
cause of contact dermatitis and should be avoided 
[9].  Corticosteroids  can  be  combined  to  reduce 
inflammation [10]. Dilute vinegar soaks over pet-
rolatum can be used to gently wash the area sev-
eral times daily to prevent infection. Petrolatum 
should be reapplied afterward. The soaks should 
be gentle enough that debris is not removed for 
several days until the skin underneath has healed 
[8]. Importantly, in a study by Walia and Alster, a 
significantly higher rate of infection occurred in 
patients  receiving  combination  intraoperative 
and/or postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis. The 
most  frequently  cultured  organisms  included 
Enterobacter  and  Pseudomonas  species  [11]. 
Cautious use of antibiotics is suggested in high- 
risk  patients,  certain  anatomic  locations,  and  in 
the presence of infection [12].

 Anti-Inflammatory Agents

•  Corticoids—Corticosteroids play a major role 
in the stress response of the body. They serve 
to  modulate  the  immune  system  and  various 
inflammatory mechanisms. Corticoids can be 
used  to  suppress  the  inflammatory  response 
due  to  laser  injury  but  should  be  used  with 
caution.  Although,  they  have  potent  anti- 
inflammatory  action,  some  corticoids  can 
inhibit healing through their interactions with 
inflammatory  cytokines,  which  are  essential 
of adult mammalian healing [13].

•  Alpha bisabolol—Alpha bisabolol is a cyclic 
monosaturated sesquiterpinic alcohol isolated 

469

from  the  horse  chestnut.  The  compound  is 
more  of  an  anti-irritant 
than  an  anti- 
inflammatory  although  it  does  have  some 
is 
anti- inflammatory  activity.  The  agent 
highly  vasoactive  (constrictive)  and  reduces 
vessel  permeability.  These  activities  are 
attributed to blockage of 5-lipoxygenase and 
cyclooxigenase in the arachadonic acid path-
way [10, 14, 15].

•  Enoxolone  (glycyrrhetinic  acid)—Enoxolone 
has  been  used  to  reduce  inflammation  by 
ancient  civilizations  since  the  third  century 
B.C.  Evidence  of  its  use  has  been  found  in 
China, Greece, Rome, and Egypt [16]. It is iso-
lated from licorice root and was first described, 
in modern times, as a potent anti- inflammatory 
in  1958  [17].  The  compound  functions  as  a 
non-steroidal  antiinflammatory  but  at  high 
doses  may  induce  swelling,  redness,  and 
11-hydroxy- 
inhibiting 
edema 
steroiddehydrogenase [18]. At low concentra-
tions,  enoxolone  has  been  shown  to  interfere 
with steroid metabolism in renal tissues, result-
ing in global anti-inflammatory action [19].

by 

In addition to topical agents, various dressing 
materials  have  been  used  post-operatively  for 
laser  resurfacing.  Occlusive  dressings  can  pro-
vide  a  moist  environment,  protect  the  wound 
from  bacterial  invasion  and  depending  on  their 
composition  influence  the  micro  environment 
[20, 21]. Furthermore, some dressings may alle-
viate  symptoms  and  reduce  erythema  [20,  22–
27]. The fear of infection which is often associated 
with  the  use  of  occlusive  dressings  has  made 
many  practitioners  avoid  their  use.  However, 
studies  have  shown  lower  infection  rates  with 
wounds which are covered with certain types of 
occlusive dressings [28–31]. Laser sites in a por-
cine model covered with different dressing mate-
rials  epithelized  quicker  than  untreated  control 
sites  [6].  Therefore,  when  used  properly,  dress-
ings  can  enhance  patient  discomfort,  simplify 
postoperative wound care and do not increase the 
risk  of 
infection  or  other  complications. 
Importantly, optimal postoperative treatment reg-
imens have not been clearly defined and it appears 
that the choice of dressing is at the discretion of 

28 Dressing/Wound Care for Laser Treatment



470

Table 28.2  Dressings available after laser procedures

Dressing
Transparent 
films

Description/benefits/disadvantages
Polymer sheets (most common—polyurethane) Easy to observe area through 
dressing Does not absorb exudate

Foams

Hydrogel

Polymer mesh

Hydrocolloids

Alignates

Foamed polymers (most common—polyurethane) Adheres to normal skin, 
absorbs exudate Cannot see through dressing material
Hydrophillic polymers (cross linked) Cooling effect for patient’s pain 
Enhances healing of burn wounds Not adhesive to normal skin
Partially transparent polyethylene or silicon polymers allow the passage of 
blood and fluids. Semi-occlusive Can be adhesive or non-adhesive to normal 
skin Does not provide optimal moist environment
Estomeric, adhesive and gelling agents Absorbs exudate well and adheres to 
normal skin Cannot see through dressing material
Derived from seaweed—hydrophilic gelAbsorbs exudate, hemostatic Can be 
difficult to remove

Example
Opsite, 
Tegaderm, Silon 
TSR
Flexzan, 
Revitaderm
Second skin, 
Vigilon
N-Terface, 
Mepitel

DuoDerm

Kaltostat

the practitioner. Below is a list of various dress-
ing  materials  with  a  brief  description  and  men-
tion  of  potential  benefits  and  disadvantages 
(Table 28.2).

 Early Post-Operative Treatment 
(72 h to 1 Week)

During  the  first  week  of  recovery,  remnant  epi-
dermal  debris  may  present  as  darkened  skin. 
Though essential for optimal healing, the debris 
also  functions  as  a  readily  available  nutrient 
source  for  bacteria.  Therefore,  antibiotic  treat-
ment  should  be  continued  to  prevent  infection. 
Antibiotics  may  be  combined  with  moisturizers 
to soften the residual epidermal tissue, and pro-
vide a moist environment for healing.

 Moisturizers

•  Squalene  oil  (olive  oil)—Olive  oil  high  in 
squalene content has been used for centuries 
to  treat  burns  and  wounds,  and  is  thought  to 
play a role in the reduced rate of various types 
of cancers in Mediterranean societies [32]. In 
addition to its anti-cancer properties, squalene- 
rich olive oil has been implicated in acceler-
ated  wound  healing  [10].  Squalene  is  a 
triterpene  and  an  intermediate  in  cholesterol 
biosynthesis [33]. Squalene-rich olive oil has 

been shown to have antioxidant properties and 
protect skin lipids from oxidation induced by 
UV radiation.

•  Hyaluronic  acid—Hyaluronic  acid  is  a  natu-
rally  occurring  component  of 
the  skin. 
Elevated  amounts  of  hyaluronic  acid  in  the 
skin, such as in the developing fetus [34], have 
been  associated  with  scarless  healing,  or 
reduced scar formation [35]. The compound’s 
unique  structure  is  responsible  for  its  hygro-
scopic,  rheological,  and  elastic  properties, 
which  contribute  to  the  effects  it  has  on  the 
skin. As a component of the skin’s extracellu-
lar  matrix,  hyaluronic  acid  helps  maintain 
moisture and elasticity [36]. Both characteris-
tics may play essential roles in healing and in 
the relief of itching sometimes associated with 
laser  procedures.  Increased  elasticity  of  the 
treated skin may enhance results.

•  Bovine mucopolysaccharide-cartilage complex 
(MCC)—Preparations of MCC have been used 
for over 25 years to treat chronic wounds origi-
nating from pressure, trauma, vascular insuffi-
ciency, or venous stasis. MCC has been shown 
to  reduce 
inflammation  and  edema,  and 
enhance  wound  healing  [37,  38].  Cartilage  is 
made primarily of collagen that provides a scaf-
fold  for  chemotactic  and  cellular  factors  in 
wound  healing.  This  scaffolding  enables  the 
migration  and  stabilization  of  granulocytes, 
macrophages,  and  fibroblasts,  all  of  which 
serve major roles in cutaneous healing [39]. A 

A. E. Eber et al.



comparison  of  MCC  to  standard  of  care  for 
Er:YAG treated skin showed a consistent reduc-
tion  in  the  severity  of  erosion,  edema,  and 
inflammation in the MCC treated skin [40].
•  Silicone  ointment—Silicone  ointment  can  be 
used as a moisturizer for the first week of post- 
operative  care.  Silicone  creates  a  barrier  and 
prevents  the  skin’s  exudative  process.  The 
trapped water is reabsorbed into the tissue to 
create a moist environment for cellular migra-
tion [10].

 Intermediate Post-Operative 
Treatment (1–2 Weeks)

The intermediate recovery period is a transitional 
time between active healing and modification in 
the  skin  to  the  remodeling  period,  which  will 
result  in  near-final  results.  During  this  period, 
infections,  or  actively  healing  tissues  should  be 
addressed with more intensive therapies [10]. In 
most cases, the current treatment regimen can be 
maintained,  but  should  any  erythema  or  edema 
remain, it is acceptable to incorporate hypoaller-
genic make-up as cover. These make-up prepara-
tions  may  include  some  of  the  aforementioned 
anti-inflammatory agents [41]. Alpha bisabolol is 
particularly popular in the cosmetic industry for 
its anti-irritant effects [42].

 Late Post-Operative Treatment 
(3–4 Weeks)

During and after the third week of recovery, the 
patient should be encouraged to incorporate pho-
toprotective  agents  into  any  ongoing  regimen. 
Protection from UV rays is highly recommended 
as the skin is in a depleted, highly sensitive state 
following  laser  treatment.  UV  protection  serves 
as  a  precautionary  measure  to  avoid  abnormal 
pigmentation  throughout  recovery.  Because  of 
the initial ablation of melanocytes, the skin may 
not be fully capable of photoprotection, increas-
ing its susceptible to DNA damage. This increased 
vulnerability may increase a patient’s risk of skin 
cancer as well as inconsistent pigmentation. Sun- 

471

blocks  with  moisturizers,  and  equivalent  UV-A 
and UV-B protection factors, along with micron-
ized titanium dioxide, avobenzene, methoxycin-
namate,  or  d-panthenol  should  be  applied. 
Ideally,  patients  should  incorporate  hats  and 
sleeved protective clothing under prolonged sun 
exposure as most, if not all, sun-blocks offer only 
limited overall protection [43].

 Post-Recovery Pigment Correction 
(>4 Weeks)

One of the least appealing results of laser resur-
facing  is  irregular  pigmentation.  Cosmetically 
obtrusive,  hypo-  and  hyperpigmentation  can 
inflict  serious  psychosocial  stress  on  a  patient. 
Though  most  pigmentation  abnormalities  self- 
resolve,  in  some  cases,  adjunct  laser  therapy  or 
chemical treatments may be necessary [44].

•  Hydroquinone—Hydroquinone  is  the  most 
efficient and commonly used pigment correc-
tion agent [24]. It prevents tyrosine action and 
interferes with melanosome development [10].
•  Wildberry extract and kojic acid—Both prep-
arations  contain  variants  of  active  forms  of 
hydroquinone,  and  due  to  slightly  different 
mechanisms  of  actions,  yields  different 
results. Wildberry  extract  contains  hydroqui-
none glycosides, which is a very powerful yet 
extremely stable isoform. Kojic acid contains 
a  copper  kelant,  which  produces  a  powerful 
hydroquinone-like activity [10].

•  Vitamin C—Vitamin C is often to enhance and 
complement  the  effects  of  depigmentating 
agents by stimulating fibroblasts and protect-
ing the skin from photodamage [45].

•  Retinoic acid—Retinoic acid is employed as a 
bleaching  agent  to  treat  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.  However,  retinoic  acid 
may  cause  skin  discomfort  so  it  should  be 
used  in  combination  with  anti-irritants  [9]. 
Although the mechanism of action of retinoic 
acid  is  unclear,  some  studies  suggest  that  it 
inhibits 
enzyme 
 glutathione- S- transferase  thereby  increasing 
melancytotoxicity [46].

detoxification 

the 

28 Dressing/Wound Care for Laser Treatment



472

 Scarring

Hypertrophic scarring is a serious, but rare side- 
effect of laser resurfacing. In addition to the bur-
den  of  cosmetic  psychosocial 
implications, 
hypertrophic  scars  may  also  inflict  significant 
physical  pain  and  result  in  loss  of  function. 
Various  factors  can  contribute  to  hypertrophic 
scarring.  Lackluster  surgical  technique  or  inap-
propriate laser parameters can erroneously pene-
trate  and  damage  deeper  tissue,  resulting  in 
extensive thermal necrosis and scarring. Certain 
anatomical locations require more thorough, sen-
sitive  post-operative  care  and  milder  surgical/
laser techniques to prevent such occurrences. For 
example,  the  mandibular  and  anterior  neck 
regions  are  more  susceptible  to  scarring  and 
should  be  treated  with  caution  [47].  Post- 
operative  infection,  family  history,  previous 
dermabrasion,  or  isotretinoin  treatment  may 
increase the likelihood of scar formation [47].

response.  Topical  and 

•  Class I corticosteroids—Corticosteroids regu-
late the body’s inflammatory and immunolog-
ical 
intralesional 
treatment may aid in halting scar progression. 
The treatment regimen should begin immedi-
ately  upon  detection  of  abnormal  erythema 
with tissue induration [48].

•  Silicone gel—Silicone gels have been success-
ful in the treatment of hypertrophic scars due to 
burn injuries. Treatment moderately improved 
scar thickness and pigmentation [49].

The  precise  mechanism  of  healing  remains 
unclear though clinical trials have elucidated sili-
cone  gels  ability  to  halt  the  progression  of  and 
soften newly forming scars [50]. Trials on estab-
lished  scars  have  been  equally  as  successful  in 
reducing  firmness  and  improving  elasticity  of 
1–6 month old scars [51].

•  Imiquimod 5% cream—Imiquimod cream is a 
topical immune response modulator. It stimu-
lates pro-inflammatory cytokines, particularly 
interferon-α, which mediates collagen break- 
down.  Although  treatments  frequently  result 
in  some  erythema,  local  pain,  and  pinpoint 

bleeding,  imiquimod  results  in  significant 
improvement  in  scar  quality,  elevation,  and 
color [52].

 Conclusion
There are few well-controlled studies that elu-
cidate  the  most  optimal  treatment  regimen 
post- laser therapy. Whether a specific combi-
nation of agents and/or dressings provide the 
best environment to allow beneficial cosmetic 
effects  while  reducing  potential  complica-
tions, remains to be seen. With an increase in 
novel laser technological advances, as well as 
innovative  clinical  uses  for  existing  lasers, 
additional,  well-designed  clinical  trials  dedi-
cated  to  determining  the  postoperative  care 
treatments  that  yield  most  beneficial  results 
are urgently needed.

References

  1.  Altshuler  GB,  Anderson  RR,  Manstein  D, 
Zenzie  HH,  Smirnov  MZ.  Extended  theory  of 
selective  photothermolysis.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2001;29(5):416–32.

  2.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.
  3.  Ross  EV,  McKinlay  JR,  Anderson  RR.  Why  does 
carbon  dioxide  resurfacing  work?  A  review.  Arch 
Dermatol. 1999;135(4):444–54.

  4.  Willey  A,  Anderson  RR,  Azpiazu  JL,  et  al. 
Complications  of  laser  dermatologic  surgery.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2006;38(1):1–15.

  5.  Eaglstein WH. Effect of occlusive dressings on wound 

healing. Clin Dermatol. 1984;2(3):107–11.

  6.  Davis  SC,  Badiavas  E,  Rendon-Pellerano  MI,  Pardo 
RJ. Histological comparison of postoperative wound 
care regimens for laser resurfacing in a porcine model. 
Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(5):387–91. discussion 392–3
  7.  Hrabovsky  SL.  Preoperative  and  postoperative  skin 
care  with  laser  resurfacing.  Semin  Ophthalmol. 
1998;13(3):115–22.

  8.  Kilmer SL, Chotzen VA, Silva SK, McClaren ML. Safe 
and effective carbon dioxide laser skin resurfacing of 
the neck. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38(7):653–7.

  9.  Alster  TS,  Lupton  JR.  Treatment  of  complications 
of  laser  skin  resurfacing.  Arch  Facial  Plast  Surg. 
2000;2(4):279–84.

 10.  Chajchir  A,  Benzaquen  I.  Carbon  dioxide  laser 
resurfacing  with  fast  recovery.  Aesthet  Plast  Surg. 
2005;29(2):107–12.

A. E. Eber et al.



 11.  Walia S, Alster TS. Cutaneous CO2 laser resurfacing 
infection rate with and without prophylactic antibiot-
ics. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(11):857–61.

 12.  Muhlstadt  M,  Kulichova  D,  Kunte  C.  Perioperative 
in  dermatologic  surgery. 

antibiotic  prophylaxis 
Update 2009. Hautarzt. 2009;60(7):546–9.

 13.  Christian  LM,  Graham  JE,  Padgett  DA,  Glaser 
R,  Kiecolt-Glaser  JK.  Stress  and  wound  healing. 
Neuroimmunomodulation. 2006;13(5–6):337–46.
 14.  Andersen  F,  Hedegaard  K,  Petersen  TK,  Bindslev- 
Jensen  C,  Fullerton  A,  Andersen  KE.  The  hairless 
guinea-pig as a model for treatment of cumulative irri-
tation in humans. Skin Res Technol. 2006;12(1):60–7.
 15.  Andersen  F,  Hedegaard  K,  Petersen  TK,  Bindslev- 
Jensen C, Fullerton A, Andersen KE. Anti-irritants I: 
dose-response in acute irritation. Contact Dermatitis. 
2006;55(3):148–54.

 16.  Shibata S. A drug over the millennia: pharmacognosy, 
chemistry,  and  pharmacology  of  licorice. Yakugaku 
Zasshi. 2000;120(10):849–62.

 17.  Finney RS, Somers GF. The antiinflammatory activ-
ity  of  glycyrrhetinic  acid  and  derivatives.  J  Pharm 
Pharmacol. 1958;10(10):613–20.

 18.  Nemeth  AJ,  Eaglstein  WH,  Taylor  JR,  Peerson 
LJ,  Falanga  V.  Faster  healing  and  less  pain  in  skin 
biopsy sites treated with an occlusive dressing. Arch 
Dermatol. 1991;127(11):1679–83.

 19.  Schleimer RP. Potential regulation of inflammation in 
the lung by local metabolism of hydrocortisone. Am J 
Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1991;4(2):166–73.

 20.  Mertz  PM,  Marshall  DA,  Eaglstein  WH.  Occlusive 
wound  dressings 
inva-
sion  and  wound  infection.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1985;12(4):662–8.

to  prevent  bacterial 

 21.  Mertz PM, Eaglstein WH. The effect of a semi-occlu-
sive dressing on the microbial population in superfi-
cial wounds. Arch Surg. 1984;119:287–9.

 22.  Batra  RS,  Ort  RJ,  Jacob  C,  Hobbs  L,  Arndt  KA, 
Dover  JS.  Evaluation  of  a  silicone  occlusive  dress-
ing  after  laser  skin  resurfacing.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2001;137(10):1317–21.

 23.  Mertz  PM,  Davis  SC,  Cazzaniga  AL,  Drosou  A, 
Eaglstein WH. Barrier and antibacterial properties of 
2-octyl cyanoacrylate-derived wound treatment films. 
J Cutan Med Surg. 2003;7(1):1–6.

 24.  Eaglstein  WH,  Davis  SC,  Mehle  AL,  Mertz 
PM.  Optimal  use  of  an  occlusive  dressing  to 
enhance  healing.  Effect  of  delayed  application  and 
early  removal  on  wound  healing.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1988;124(3):392–5.

 25.  Morin  RJ,  Tomaselli  NL.  Interactive  dressings  and 
topical agents. Clin Plast Surg. 2007;34(4):643–58.
 26.  Okan D, Woo K, Ayello EA, Sibbald G. The role of 
moisture balance in wound healing. Adv Skin Wound 
Care. 2007;20(1):39–53. quiz 53–5

 27.  Attinger  CE,  Janis  JE,  Steinberg  J,  Schwartz  J, 
Al-Attar A,  Couch  K.  Clinical  approach  to  wounds: 
debridement and wound bed preparation including the 
use of dressings and wound-healing adjuvants. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2006;117(7 Suppl):72S–109S.

473

 28. Blazeby J, Bluebelle Study G.  Do dressings prevent 
infection  of  closed  primary  wounds  after  surgery? 
BMJ. 2016;353:i2270.

 29.  Cho  CY,  Lo  JS.  Dressing  the  part.  Dermatol  Clin. 

1998;16(1):25–47.

 30. Hutchinson  JJ,  Lawrence  JC.  Wound 

infec-
tion  under  occlusive  dressings.  J  Hosp  Infect. 
1991;17(2):83–94.

 31.  Sood A, Granick MS, Tomaselli NL. Wound dressings 
and comparative effectiveness data. Adv Wound Care 
(New Rochelle). 2014;3(8):511–29.

 32.  Sadick  NS.  Update  on  non-ablative  light  ther-
apy  for  rejuvenation:  a  review.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2003;32(2):120–8.

 33.  Smith TJ. Squalene: potential chemopreventive agent. 

Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2000;9(8):1841–8.

 34.  Mast  BA,  Diegelmann  RF,  Krummel  TM,  Cohen 
IK. Scarless wound healing in the mammalian fetus. 
Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;174(5):441–51.

 35.  Colwell AS, Longaker MT, Lorenz HP. Fetal wound 

healing. Front Biosci. 2003;8:s1240–8.

 36.  Chen WY, Abatangelo G. Functions of hyaluronan in 
wound repair. Wound Repair Regen. 1999;7(2):79–89.
 37.  Prudden JF, Allen J. The clinical acceleration of heal-
ing  with  a  cartilage  preparation;  a  controlled  study. 
JAMA. 1965;192:352–6.

 38.  King  S.  Catrix:  an  easy-to-use  collagen  treat-
ment  for  wound  healing.  Br  J  Community  Nurs. 
2005;10(9):S31–4.

 39.  Purna  SK,  Babu  M.  Collagen  based  dressings—a 

review. Burns. 2000;26(1):54–62.
of 
a 
 40.  Tanzi  EL,  Perez  M.  The 
mucopolysaccharide- cartilage 
healing 
ointment  on  Er:YAG  laser  resurfaced  facial  skin. 
Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(4):305–8.

complex 

effect 

 41.  Grassi A, Palermi G, Paradisi M. Study of tolerance 
and  efficacy  of  cosmetic  preparations  with  leni-
tive action in atopic dermatitis in children. Clin Ter. 
2000;151(2):77–80.

 42.  Ono  I,  Gunji  H,  Suda  K,  Iwatsuki  K,  Kaneko 
F.  Evaluation  of  cytokines  in  donor  site  wound 
fluids.  Scand  J  Plast  Reconstr  Surg  Hand  Surg. 
1994;28(4):269–73.

 43. Lautenschlager  S,  Wulf  HC,  Pittelkow  MR. 
Photoprotection. Lancet. 2007;370(9586):528–37.
 44.  Ke  MS,  Soriano  T,  Lask  GP.  Optimal  treatments 
for  hyperpigmentation.  J  Cosmet  Laser  Ther. 
2006;8(1):7–13.

 45.  Gross RL. The effect of ascorbate on wound healing. 

Int Ophthalmol Clin. 2000;40(4):51–7.

 46.  Kasraee  B,  Handjani  F,  Aslani  FS.  Enhancement 
of  the  depigmenting  effect  of  hydroquinone  and 
4-hydroxyanisole  by  all-trans-retinoic  acid  (treti-
noin): the impairment of glutathione-dependent cyto-
protection? Dermatology. 2003;206(4):289–91.
 47.  Nanni  CA,  Alster  TS.  Complications  of  cuta-
neous  laser  surgery.  A  review.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1998;24(2):209–19.

 48.  Alvarez  OM,  Mertz  PM,  Eaglstein  WH.  The  effect 
of  occlusive  dressings  on  collagen  synthesis  and  re- 

28 Dressing/Wound Care for Laser Treatment



474

epithelialization  in  superficial  wounds.  J  Surg  Res. 
1983;35(2):142–8.

 49. Gold MH. Topical silicone gel sheeting  in  the  treat-
ment  of  hypertrophic  scars  and  keloids.  A  der-
matologic  experience.  J  Dermatol  Surg  Oncol. 
1993;19(10):912–6.

 50.  Fulton JE Jr. Silicone gel sheeting for the prevention 
and management of evolving hypertrophic and keloid 
scars. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21(11):947–51.

 51.  Carney SA, Cason CG, Gowar JP, et al. Cica-care gel 
sheeting in the management of hypertrophic scarring. 
Burns. 1994;20(2):163–7.

 52.  Zurada  JM,  Kriegel  D,  Davis  IC.  Topical  treat-
ments  for  hypertrophic  scars.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2006;55(6):1024–31.

A. E. Eber et al.



Prevention and Treatment of Laser 
Complications

29

Rachael L. Moore, Juan-Carlos Martinez, 
Ken K. Lee, Yun Ehrlich, Brian Simmons, 
and Keyvan Nouri

Abstract
Lasers are useful for treating a variety of der-
matologic  conditions  but  have  a  number  of 
potential  complications  associated  with  their 
use. A basic understanding of laser mechanics 
is paramount in preventing and troubleshoot-
ing complications.

Keywords
Dermatologic lasers · Complications · 
Postoperative complications · Complication 
Prevention · Postoperative complication 
reduction

•  Lasers are useful for treating a variety of der-
matologic  conditions  but  have  a  number  of 
potential  complications  associated  with  their 
use.

•  A  basic  understanding  of  laser  mechanics  is 
paramount  in  order  to  prevent  and  trouble-
shoot complications.

•  Wavelength, fluence, pulse duration and spot 
size can be varied to achieve the desired effect 
on tissue.

•  The  innovation  of  coupling  surface  cooling 
with laser treatment has allowed for the use of 
increased  fluence  to  maximize  treatment 

R. L. Moore · J.-C. Martinez · K. K. Lee 
Dermatologic and Laser Surgery, Oregon Health and 
Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA  

Y. Ehrlich · B. Simmons (*) 
Department of Dermatology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: bjsimmons@med.miami.edu 

K. Nouri 
Department of Dermatology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA 

Surgical Training, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Dermatology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

Ophthalmology, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Otolaryngology, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Dermatologic Surgery, University of Miami,  
Miami, FL, USA 

Dermatology Services at Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of Miami Hospital and 
Clinics, Miami, FL, USA 

Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, 
University of Miami Medical Group,  
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

MOHS, Dermatologic & Laser Surgery,  
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_29

475





476

 efficacy  while  minimizing  damage  to  the 
overlying epidermis.

•  Complications can be avoided by keeping the 
operating room safe. This includes the use of 
eye  protection  and  smoke  evacuators,  when 
indicated.  Operating  suites  should  have  well 
marked  signs  and  restricted  entry.  Lasers 
should be kept in standby mode when not in 
use.

•  Only  adequately  trained  physicians  should 
evaluate  patients  and  determine  their  candi-
dacy  for  laser  treatment  and  select  treatment 
parameters.  This  will  help  ensure  that  lasers 
are not being used inadequately to treat poten-
tially  hazardous  indications  such  as  skin 
cancers.

•  Patients that give a history of pigmentary dis-
orders, connective tissue diseases or abnormal 
scarring  are  at  increased  risk  of  having  an 
adverse  event  following  laser  therapy.  Those 
on certain medications or with dark or tanned 
skin are also at increased risk.

•  Pain, erythema and edema, crusting and vesic-
ulation,  purpura,  dyspigmentation  and  scar-
ring are side effects caused by treatment with 
most  dermatologic  lasers  to  varying  degrees. 
These  side  effects  can  be  minimized  or 
avoided entirely when proper precautions are 
taken.

•  Other  side  effects  are  unique  to  treatment  of 
specific  conditions.  For  example, 
tattoo 
removal  can  be  associated  with  allergic  con-
tact  dermatitis  or  paradoxical  tattoo  darken-
ing,  while  resurfacing  procedures  pose  an 
increased risk of infection.

 Introduction

Dermatologic  laser  therapy  was  initially  intro-
duced in the 1960s; however, it was not until the 
theory  of  selective  photothermolysis  was  intro-
duced  that  their  use  became  widespread.  There 
are  a  variety  of  side  effects  and  complications 
associated with laser therapy. Some of these are 
unavoidable 
preventable. 
Understanding laser mechanics and how to vary 
wavelength, fluence, pulse duration and spot size 

but  many 

are 

to achieve the desired effect can help minimize or 
prevent adverse events. Cooling has allowed for 
the  use  of  increased  fluence  to  maximize  treat-
ment  efficacy  by  protecting  the  epidermis  from 
excess thermal damage.

Since the introduction of lasers into the derma-
tologic  field  by  Dr.  Leon  Goldman  in  1963  [1], 
they  have  become  both  standard  treatment  for 
many  dermatoses  and  a  source  of  future  innova-
tions.  While  generally  considered  safe  and  well 
tolerated,  their  potential  to  cause  adverse  events 
should not be underestimated. A thorough under-
standing  of  lasers  and  their  applications  is  para-
mount  in  managing  predictable  side  effects  and 
avoiding  complications. This  chapter  will  briefly 
outline laser mechanics, provide a detailed descrip-
tion  of  both  common  and  uncommon  complica-
tions, and discuss their prevention and treatment.

 Laser Mechanics

The word laser is an acronym for light amplifica-
tion by the stimulated emission of radiation [2]. 
Laser light is unique in that it is composed of a 
single wavelength and all emitted photons are in 
the  same  phase.  These  properties  are  termed 
monochromatic  and  coherent,  respectively.  The 
wavelength of light is determined by the optical 
medium, which can be a solid (e.g., alexandrite), 
liquid (e.g., pulsed dye laser) or gas (e.g., carbon 
dioxide laser). When laser light hits the skin, it is 
absorbed, reflected, transmitted, or scattered. The 
desired treatment effect occurs when the light is 
absorbed  and  the  energy  is  converted  to  heat 
(photothermal),  acoustic  waves  (photomechani-
cal) or used in chemical reactions (photo-chemi-
cal). The majority of dermatologic lasers employ 
photothermal reactions.

In 1983, the theory of selective photothermoly-
sis  was  introduced,  revolutionizing  the  applica-
tion of lasers [3]. This theory posits that because 
each chromophore has a unique photo absorption 
spectrum,  it  can  be  selectively  targeted  and 
destroyed using specific wavelengths. Endogenous 
chromophores include melanin, hemoglobin and 
water  [2].  Tattoo  ink  is  an   exogenous  chromo-
phore frequently targeted with laser therapy.

R. L. Moore et al.



Table 29.1  Common laser definitions

Terms

Fluence

Pulse duration 
(pulse length or 
pulse width)

 •  Q-switched
 •  Long-pulsed

Thermal 
relaxation time 
(TRT)

Spot size

Unit of 
measurement
J/cm2

10−9–10−12 s
10−3 s

s

cm

Definition

Energy delivered 
per unit area
The time it takes 
a waveform to 
reach 50% of its 
full amplitude
 •   Q-switch is an 
optical valve in 
a laser that 
allows for rapid 
energy build-up 
before it is 
open to allow 
light out

Time required for 
a target to lose 50 
of its heat to the 
surrounding 
environment TRT 
α (directly) to the 
target diameter [2]
The diameter of 
the opening 
through which 
the laser beam is 
emitted

477

target. Destruction of targets with a small diam-
eter, such as melanosomes, requires small pulse 
durations in order to limit damage to surrounding 
tissue.  Those  with  a  larger  diameter,  such  as 
blood  vessels,  can  be  treated  with  longer  pulse 
durations. For this reason, Quality- or Q-switched 
(QS)  lasers  (see  Table  29.1  for  definitions)  are 
often  used  for  pigmented  lesions,  while  pulsed 
dye lasers (PDL), with pulse durations in the mil-
lisecond range, are used for vascular lesions.

Spot size and wavelength can each impact the 
depth of penetration of the laser. Depth of penetra-
tion  is  determined  by  both  the  amount  of  light 
absorption in the tissue and the scatter [2]. In gen-
eral,  larger  spot  sizes  (10–15  mm)  and  longer 
wavelengths  (1000–1200  nm)  have  less  scatter 
than smaller spot sizes (3–5 mm) and shorter wave-
lengths (300–400 nm) and penetrate deeper into the 
tissue.  However,  when  wave-lengths  exceed 
approximately 1300 nm, such as the CO2 resurfac-
ing  laser  at  10,600  nm,  depth  is  limited  to  the 
superficial  epidermis  due  to  absorption  by  water, 
the primary targeted chromophore in this range.

A  basic  understanding  of  laser  physics  is 
required to troubleshoot complications and diffi-
cult-to-treat patients. By varying wavelength, flu-
ence,  pulse  duration  and  spot  size,  the  desired 
effect can be achieved (see Table 29.1 for defini-
tions). The wavelength of light used determines 
which tissue chromophores will be targeted. The 
energy  per  area  emitted  by  the  laser  is  the  flu-
ence. High fluence can result in untoward dam-
age to tissue, while insufficient fluence will lead 
to  incomplete  treatment.  The  concept  of  pulse 
duration is vital in minimizing damage to the sur-
rounding tissue. The ideal pulse duration is gen-
erally the same [4] or shorter [2] than the thermal 
relaxation time (TRT) of the target. Immediately 
following  photon  absorption,  the  chromophore 
loses this newly absorbed energy in the form of 
heat. TRT is the time required for a chromophore 
to lose 50% of its heat to the surrounding tissue 
and  is  directly  proportional  to  the  square  of  its 
diameter.  Thus,  there  is  a  positive  relationship 
between pulse duration, TRT and diameter of the 

 Cooling

The ideal laser settings will provide enough ther-
mal energy and selectivity to damage the targeted 
chromophore while minimizing injury to the sur-
rounding skin [5]. However, the energy required 
to damage the target often exceeds that which is 
needed to harm the overlying epidermis. In order 
to overcome this obstacle, cooling devices have 
been  implemented.  Many  laser  hand  pieces  are 
now equipped with cryogen spray cooling or sap-
phire  contact  plates  that  cool  the  skin  immedi-
ately  prior  to  the  laser  pulse.  The  epidermis  is 
then selectively cooled, raising the threshold for 
thermal  damage,  while  temperatures  for  the 
intended  (deeper)  dermal  targets  are  relatively 
unaffected.  Pre-cooling  with  ice-packs,  gel  and 
aluminum rollers can also be used but these are 
generally  not  as  effective  as  the  incorporated 
cooling  devices.  In  addition  to  increasing  the 
treatment efficacy of lasers, cooling also plays a 
prominent  role  in  providing  anesthesia  during 
therapy.

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



478

 General Considerations

Safety in the operating suites, professional errors 
and certain patient factors should be initially con-
sidered to help limit adverse events. The operat-
ing  suites  should  have  well  marked  signs  and 
restricted  access,  and  lasers  should  be  kept  in 
standby mode when not in use. Use of eye protec-
tion  and  smoke  evacuators  should  be  employed 
when indicated. An appropriately trained physi-
cian  should  evaluate  all  patients  to  determine 
candidacy prior to laser treatment. This will limit 
improper  laser  treatment  of  various  diseases, 
such as skin cancers. The laser parameters should 
also be set by the clinician. Patients with a history 
of  pigmentary  disorders,  connective  tissue  dis-
ease  or  abnormal  scarring  may  be  at  increased 
risk for laser treatment. Additionally, those with 
dark or tanned skin or taking certain medications 
may suffer from additional side effects.

 Laser Devices Malfunction

An  additional  resource  to  look  at  the  safety  of 
lasers  devices  is  the  Manufacturer  and  User 
Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database. 
This  database  covers  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug 
Administration  (FDA)  reported  adverse  events 
and  product  problems  since  1993  with  the  final 
phase  in  1996  that  includes  facility,  distributor 
and manufacturing reports. For instance, between 
2006  and  2011  MAUDE  reported  the  top  five 
manufacturers  device  complications  due 
to 
device malfunction were Lumenis (204), Candela 
(66), Rhytec (65), Cutera (50), and solta (46) [6]. 
This database is a valuable tool for practitioners 
to  look  at  specific  lasers  and  assess  the  risk  of 
malfunction on an individual basis based on laser 
type and use.

 Safety in the Operating Rooms

Lasers are useful medical devices but can be dan-
gerous. The operating staff and patient are suscep-
tible  to  a  number  of  hazards,  including  burns, 
accidental fires, infection and ocular injury. General 

safety measures, such as a visible door sign when 
the  laser  is  in  use  and  controlled  access  into  the 
laser areas, are important. All lasers should be kept 
in standby mode when not in use and have a rapid 
deactivation mode to prevent unintentional firing. 
To  avoid  accidental  fires,  the  use  of  oxygen  and 
alcohol-based cleansing methods should be mini-
mized. Each laser should have its own outlet, limit-
ing  the  use  of  extension  cords.  Since  human 
papilloma virus (HPV) [7] and human immunode-
ficiency virus (HIV) [8] particles have been found 
in aerosolized material after laser therapy, a smoke 
evacuator  should  be  employed  when  lasers  with 
significant potential to splatter aerosolized particles 
(such as CO2 resurfacing) are used.

Lasers can subject the unprotected eye to sig-
nificant damage, including visual loss. The degree 
of ocular damage is determined by the wavelength 
of  light  as  well  as  the  amount  and  duration  of 
energy  exposure  [9].  Within  the  eye,  there  is  a 
broad  absorption  spectrum  resulting  from  three 
primary  chromophores:  melanosomes,  found  in 
the  retinal  epithelium,  iris,  sclera  and  choroid; 
hemoglobin,  found  in  retinal  vasculature;  and 
water, found primarily in the cornea and lens. The 
symptoms associated with damage to these ocular 
structures are summarized in Table 29.2. Especially 
important to remember is that absorption of light 
outside  the  visual  spectrum  is  visually  undetect-
able.  Additionally,  due  to  their  lack  of  sensory 
innervation, absorption damage to the retina, iris, 
choroid  and  sclera  can  be  painless.  Thus,  ocular 
exposure to wavelengths in the near infrared range 
(700–1400  nm),  which  is  primarily  absorbed  by 
these  pigmented  eye  structures,  can  lead  to  pro-
nounced injury without symptoms [9, 10].

To  prevent  untoward  injury,  wavelength-spe-
cific eye protection should be worn any time the 
laser is in operation. Metal contact lenses should 
be placed on the patient when treating periorbital 
skin,  and  metal  goggles  should  be  worn  for  the 
treatment of facial lesions. Plastic goggles should 
be avoided in these cases due to the risk of melt-
ing.  Pediatric  and  smaller  patients  should  have 
size-specific  goggles;  if  these  are  not  available, 
the  use  of  a  thick  layer  of  white  gauze  (which 
non-specifically absorbs and reflects laser light) 
can be used.

R. L. Moore et al.



Table 29.2  Ocular structures at risk for laser injury [9, 10]

Wavelength 
(nm)
180–400

Susceptible ocular 
structure
Cornea and lens

400–700

700–1400

Retina, iris, choroid, 
sclera
As above

Chromophore Mechanism
Tissue 
proteins
Melanin

Photochemical

Photochemical

As above

As above

1400–10,600

Cornea and lens

Water

As above

479

Associated symptoms
Pain

Color flash and afterimage

No symptoms until significant 
visual loss
Immediate burning pain

 Professional Errors

According  to  MAUDE  database,  professional 
(user) errors make up 30% of the most common 
laser surgery complications. The common errors 
include improper laser settings, treatment param-
eters and cleaning laser tips, failure to perform a 
skin patch test before procedure, wearing protec-
tive  eyewear,  replacing  old  or  malfunctioning 
components  on  the  laser  device,  and  failure  to 
follow laser device manufacturer guidelines [11].
An  appropriately  trained  physician  should 
evaluate  all  patients  prior  to  laser  treatment  to 
determine whether they will be appropriate can-
didates for therapy. Some patients are at increased 
risk  of  sustaining  complications  (see  Sect.  2.4 
below),  and  these  factors  should  be  considered 
prior to choosing laser parameters. In some cases 
these risk factors may prove to be contraindica-
tions to laser treatment, as the risk of complica-
tions  may  outweigh  the  benefits.  Verbal  and 
written informed consent, including an explana-
tion of the potential risks and benefits, alternative 
treatment options, number of treatment sessions, 
and cost per session should be obtained prior to 
the planned procedure which can help avoid the 
patient  feeling  pressured  into  making  a  quick 
decision [12].

The  indication  for  laser  therapy  must  be 
appropriate.  While  treatment  of  rhytides  may 
seem straightforward, treatment of other lesions, 
such as those on photo-damaged skin, may pres-
ent  more  challenges  to  the  non-dermatologist. 
Often, only minor differences distinguish a solar 
lentigo from a melanoma, or an actinic keratosis 
from a nonmelanoma skin cancer. These subtle-
ties may not be obvious to the untrained clinician. 

Any lesion in question should be biopsied prior 
to treatment.

Furthermore the extant or number of areas to 
be treated by lasers needs to be taken into consid-
eration. According to a review of 373 cases, one 
body  location  involvement  in  CO2  fractionated 
laser skin treatment is associated with a relatively 
low complication rate, but three concurrent treat-
ments of body locations increases the complica-
tion rate significantly [13].

Troubleshooting complications requires a firm 
understanding of laser mechanics. A skilled oper-
ator  will  not  only  choose  appropriate  laser  set-
tings,  but  will  be  attentive  in  monitoring  the 
tissue reaction to the laser treatment. An immedi-
ate white/gray discoloration can indicate signifi-
cant  thermal  damage  requiring  modification  of 
laser settings. Ideally, test spots should be done at 
least 2 weeks prior to the planned procedure.

 Patient Factors

Patient  factors  must  be  taken  into  account  in  the 
assessment of an individual’s risk profiles. Patients 
with  dark  or  tanned  skin  are  at  increased  risk  of 
hypopigmentation if treated with lasers that target 
melanosomes. Any  history  of  abnormal  scarring, 
vasculopathy or vitiligo should be elicited, as these 
conditions may indicate a propensity toward hyper-
trophic  scarring,  bruising  and  dyspigmentation 
respectively. Treatment should be avoided in areas 
with concurrent infection or inflammation as it can 
exacerbate these conditions. Connective tissue dis-
eases, which can be a marker for photosensitivity, 
may  be  a  contraindication  to  laser  therapy  [14]. 
One  study  reported  new-onset  discoid  lupus  ery-

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



480

Table 29.3  Medications potentially associated with increased risk of laser therapy complications

Medication
Blood thinning agents:
 •  Aspirin
 •  Coumadin
 •  Vitamin E
 •  Anti-platelet agents
Indomethacin

Isotretinoin

Drugs that induce 
pigmentation:
 •  Minocycline
 •  Amiodarone
 •  Anti-malarials
 Tricyclic anti-
 • 
depressants  
(e.g., desipramine, 
imipramine)
Gold (parenteral)

Possible associated complications
Increased bruising, bleeding

Recommendations
Consider discontinuation if using laser with 
high bruising potential (e.g. PDL)

Increased scarring potential shown 
in murine models [17]
Hypertrophic scarring reported 
after dermabrasion [18]; other 
studies have shown no increased 
risk [19, 20]
Dyspigmentation

Not good evidence for discontinuation, but 
may consider if high risk of scarring
Consider discontinuation 6 months prior, 
especially if using lasers with high scarring 
potential (e.g., ablative resurfacing) [21]; 
evidence for this, however, is weak
Consider discontinuation prior to procedure if 
there is increased risk of dyspigmentation 
(e.g., dark or tanned skin, ablative resurfacing 
procedures)

Localized chrysiasis after QS laser 
treatment [22]

Consider avoiding treatment in patient with 
history of parenteral gold therapy

thematosus thought to be from thermal injury sus-
tained  after  argon  laser  treatment  for  facial 
telangiectases [15]. Debate exists in the literature, 
however,  as  others  have  successfully  treated  dis-
coid  lupus  with  similar  lasers  [16]. Additionally, 
there  are  several  medications  (summarized  in 
Table  29.3)  that  may  confer  an  increased  risk  of 
complications.  These  should  be  considered  and 
avoided if possible [17, 18, 21, 22]. There are no 
published reports of adverse effects of laser treat-
ment in patients taking photosensitive medications. 
Thus, patients should not be refused for laser treat-
ment solely on the basis of taking a photosensitive 
medication  [23].  However,  patient  compliance 
with post treatment instructions needs to be taken 
into consideration as well. One study showed that 
4.5% of post laser treatment complications are due 
to patient error, such as failure to use sunscreen or 
avoid sun exposure after laser treatment [6].

 General Laser Complications

Dermatologic  lasers  share  a  number  of  side 
effects  that  can  be  minimized  or  avoided  when 
proper  pre-cautions  are  taken.  Wavelength,  flu-
ence, pulse duration, spot size and cooling can all 

impact  the  degree  of  side  effects  experienced. 
Overlapping  pulses  and  high  fluences  may  help 
achieve a desired affect, but can increase the risk 
of complications. In general, ablative resurfacing 
procedures have an increased incidence of these 
laser 
complications  compared  with  other 
modalities.

Lasers can be used to treat a wide variety of 
conditions  and  each  laser  has  its  own  unique 
properties (see Table 29.4). An innovative xenon–
chloride (excimer) pulsed laser is a form of ultra-
violet laser, which is capable of delivering higher 
energy density with lower heat production. It has 
been  used  mainly  for  psoriasis  and  vitiligo 
 treatment, however FDA has approved for psoria-
sis treatment only [24, 25].

A  complication,  or  adverse  event,  can  be 
defined  as  any  undesirable  or  unforeseen  out-
come  after  a  particular  treatment.  This  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  a  side  effect,  which  is 
expected  after  therapy.  However,  many  side 
effects, if severe, can lead to complications.

The  most  common  complications,  which can 
occur with any laser, are pain, erythema and edema, 
crusting,  vesiculation,  purpura,  dyspigmentation 
and scarring. Identifying the causative factor for 
each of these common complications can aide in 

R. L. Moore et al.



Table 29.4  Commonly used lasers listed by indication

481

Pigmented lesions
QS Ruby (694 nm)

Vascular lesions
PDL 
(585–600 nm)
LP Nd:YAG 
(1064 nm)
LP KTP (532 nm) QS Alexandrite 

QS Nd:YAG (532, 
1064 nm)

IPL

(755 nm)
IPL

Tattoo removal
QS Ruby (694 nm)

Photoepilation
LP Ruby (694 nm)

Resurfacing
Carbon dioxide 
(10,600 nm)
Er:YAG (2490 nm)

QS Nd:YAG (532, 
1064 nm)
QS Alexandrite 
(755 nm)

LP Nd:YAG 
(1064 nm)
LP Alexandrite 
(755 nm)
LP Diode (800 nm) Xenon-Chloride 

Fractional (1540 nm)

Er:YAG  erbium:yttrium  aluminum  garnet,  IPL  intense  pulsed  light,  KTP  potassium  titanyl  phosphate,  Nd:YAG 
neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet, PDL pulsed dye laser, QS Q-switched, LP long-pulsed

IPL

(Excimer)

their prevention and treatment. It is important to 
ask the following:

•  Am  I  treating  the  correct  indication  and 

patient with the correct laser?
•  Was the fluence appropriate?
•  Was the pulse duration appropriate?
•  Was the correct spot size used?
•  Was the cooling appropriate?
•  Was there too much pulse overlap or stacking 

of passes?

The purpose of this section will be to review 
each  of  these  common  side  effects  and  discuss 
their prevention and management.

 Pain

 Risk Factors for Excess Pain
•  Inadequate anesthesia
•  High fluence
•  Insufficient cooling

Although  certain  lasers  are  associated  with 
more pain than others, some level of mild pain is 
an  expected  side  effect  of  most  laser  therapy. 
Unexpected or excessive pain, however, can occur 
with inadequate anesthesia or inappropriate laser 
settings (excess fluence or insufficient cooling).

lasers (e.g., resurfacing lasers) require significant 
pain control. Anesthetics can be injected subcuta-
neously to provide local relief, whereas regional 
nerve blocks can provide anesthesia over a larger 
area. For those patients unable to tolerate the pain 
from  injection  of  local  anesthetic,  pre-cooling 
with  aluminum  rollers  or  ice  packs  for  several 
minutes or application of topical anesthetic com-
pounds 1 hour prior to needle insertion can mini-
mize their discomfort. Pretreatment with Er:YAG 
pulses  followed  by  topical  lidocaine  may  mini-
mize needle insertion pain even further [26].

topical 

anesthetic 

Anesthesia  may  also  be  achieved  with  only 
topical  treatment.  A  randomized,  placebo  con-
trolled  trial  with  30  patients  found  topical 
 lidocaine/tetracaine (S-Caine) peels successful in 
adequately  relieving  pain  associated  with  tattoo 
removal [27]. In addition, an FDA-approved lido-
cream 
caine/tetracaine 
(Pliaglis®)  was  shown  to  be  safe  and  effective 
when used with common laser therapies such as 
ablative  and  nonablative  laser  resurfacing,  laser 
hair removal, laser treatment of vascular lesions, 
and laser tattoo removal [28]. A set protocol with 
hot compresses, topical lidocaine and oral anxio-
lytics (vicodin, diazepam or ketorolac) provided 
adequate pain relief in 190 of 200 patients who 
underwent CO2 resurfacing in a recent case series 
[29].  The  disadvantage  of  using  topical  treat-
ments,  however,  is  the  additional  time  required 
for the anesthetic to take effect.

 Prevention and Treatment
It  is  imperative  to  appropriately  anesthetize 
patients,  as  needed,  prior  to  their  procedure. 
Some lasers (e.g., the PDL) often do not require 
pre-treatment  anesthesia,  while  use  of  other 

Cooling  devices  have  played  a  large  role  in 
minimizing  pain  and  optimizing  treatment  of 
specific  lesions.  Decreased  pain  was  associated 
with concomitant cooling in both the treatment of 
port-wine stains with the PDL [30] and pigmented 

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



482

lesions with the QS Alexandrite [31]. Pre-cooling 
(e.g.,  with  aluminum  rollers  or  ice  packs)  may 
also significantly reduce pain [32].

 Erythema and Edema

emitting diode (LED) device has been shown to 
reduce  the  duration  and  intensity  of  erythema 
after fractional CO2 laser treatment [37]. In addi-
tion, IPL devices and PDL have been considered 
useful to reduce the resistant erythema after laser 
CO2 resurfacing [38].

 Risk Factors for Excess Erythema 
and Edema
•  Pulse stacking, multiple passes
•  High energy settings
•  Location (periocular > other areas)
•  Patient factors (fair skin > dark skin; history of 

acne rosacea)

•  Use of topical tretinoin prior to procedure
•  Inadequate post-treatment cooling

 Crusting and Vesiculation

 Risk Factors for Excess Crusting 
and Vesiculation
•  High fluence
•  Insufficient cooling
•  Small spot size
•  Short wavelengths

Erythema and edema are expected side effects 
of most laser therapies. Although these are usu-
ally transient, they can persist for months. A ret-
rospective study of 500 patients who underwent 
CO2  laser  resurfacing  found  that  all  patients 
experienced  post-operative  erythema  lasting  an 
average of 4.5 months [33]. Prolonged erythema 
and  edema  occurs  in  preventable  situations. 
Excess pulse stacking or passes [34], treatment of 
periocular areas, and use of high energy settings 
can  all  lead  to  prolonged  erythema  and  edema. 
Additionally, patients with fair skin or a history 
of  acne  rosacea  may  be  predisposed  to  intense 
erythema. Use of irritating medications, such as 
topical tretinoin, may also worsen erythema [35].

 Prevention and Treatment
If possible, unnecessary risks should be avoided. 
However, treatment efficacy is often maximized 
with  pulse  stacking  and  use  of  high-energy  set-
tings. Ensuring the patient is aware of these risks 
and that their expectations are appropriate cannot 
be  overemphasized.  Management  of  erythema 
and  edema  is  supportive:  application  of  post-
treatment cold packs, head elevation and sun pre-
cautions  are 
important.  Topical  or  oral 
corticosteroids  can  be  used  in  severe  cases. 
Topical ascorbic acid may be effective in decreas-
ing  the  post-operative  severity  and  duration  of 
erythema  after  ablative  resurfacing  procedures 
[36].  Furthermore,  a  635  nm-wavelength  Light 

and/or 

insufficient 

Crusting  and  vesiculation  are  manifestations 
of epidermal damage that generally results from 
excess thermal injury. This is commonly due to 
high  fluence 
cooling. 
Additionally, treatment with small spot sizes and 
shorter wavelengths imparts a higher risk of epi-
dermal damage due to shallower depth of pene-
tration. It is important to keep in mind. However, 
some  superficial  crusting  is  an  expected  side 
effect for many lasers.

 Prevention and Treatment
Treatment is supportive. Keeping wounds moist 
with  petrolatum  may  help  speed  the  recovery 
process and minimize the risk of scarring. Use of 
over-the-counter  antibiotic  ointments  should  be 
avoided as neomycin and bacitracin are some of 
the most common causes of allergic contact der-
matitis [39] and bacitracin has shown no wound 
healing  benefit  over  white  petrolatum  [40]. 
Petrolatum has also shown better epithelial con-
fluence  and  general  wound  appearance  scores 
with  less  crusting,  erythema  and  edema,  com-
pared  to  Arnebia  euchroma  ointments  (AEO) 
[41].  Variations  on  petrolatum-based  ointments 
exist  that  have  smaller  amounts  of  petrolatum 
and  can  offer  patients  alternatives  to  oilier  high 
percent  petrolatum  products,  while  offering 
effective and faster improvements in wound heal-
ing compared to antibiotic-containing treatments, 
such as Neosporin and Polysporin [42]. Sun pre-

R. L. Moore et al.



cautions  are  recommended.  Patients  should  be 
instructed  not  to  unroof  blisters,  if  they  form. 
Symptomatic  bullae  can  be  lanced  in  a  sterile 
fashion.

 Purpura

 Risk Factors for Excess Purpura
•  High fluence
•  Long wavelengths
•  Treatment  with  pulsed  dye  lasers  (purpura 

mode)

Purpura results when there is damage to small 
vessels and subsequent extravasation of red blood 
cells. It is common following treatment with the 
PDL and is, in fact, a therapeutic endpoint when 
treating certain vascular lesions with short pulse 
durations  and  high  fluences  (so-called  purpura-
mode).  Nevertheless,  unexpected  bruising  can 
occur with use of other lasers if the fluence is set 
too high. Lasers with long wavelengths penetrate 
deeper and have a greater risk of damaging der-
mal blood vessels. Cooling, which primarily pro-
tects  the  epidermis,  has  little  impact  on  the 
amount of damage to dermal blood vessels.

 Prevention and Treatment
If possible, all patients should be off anti-coagu-
lant and anti-platelet agents at least several days 
prior to the planned procedure. Discontinuing a 
medication, even if transiently, should always be 
discussed with the patient’s prescribing physician 
first.

Lowering  fluence  and  increasing  pulse  dura-
tion  (in  the  PDL)  can  help  minimize  purpura. 
Because many vascular lesions, such as port wine 
stains  and  hemangiomas,  cannot  be  effectively 
treated  with  non-purpuric  parameters,  patients 
should be aware of the potential down-time post-
treatment. This is particularly important for peo-
ple  with  high  cosmetic  demands.  In  one  study, 
45% of patients with purpura after treatment  of 
their port-wine stain reported significant restric-
tion in activity, primarily due to the bruising [43].
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  use  of  topical 
Vitamin K will help both prevent and minimize 

483

post-treatment  bruising.  A  small  randomized 
controlled study found decreased bruising sever-
ity  with  twice-daily  application  of  vitamin  K 
cream for 2 weeks following laser treatment with 
the  PDL  [44].  However,  the  same  study  found 
that  pre-treatment  with  vitamin  K  cream  for 
2  weeks  did  not  seem  to  alter  the  bruising. An 
Alternative  herbal  remedy  of  20%  Arnica 
(Arnica montana) has shown been shown more 
effective  than  1%  vitamin  K  with  0.3%  retinol 
[45]. However, the efficacy of Arnica in concen-
trations  less  than  10%  is  not  supported  by  cur-
rent studies [46].

 Dyspigmentation

 Risk Factors for Dyspigmentation
•  High fluence
•  Inadequate cooling
•  Patients factors (dark, tanned > fair skin)
•  Short wavelength
•  Small spot size

Dyspigmentation  can  be  transient  or  perma-
nent and takes on two forms: hyper- or hypopig-
mentation.  Hyperpigmentation  is  a  common 
manifestation of post-inflammatory change in the 
tissue.  Following  resurfacing  procedures,  it  is 
seen in one-third of all patients and nearly all of 
those  with  Fitzpatrick  type  IV–VI  skin  [35].  It 
generally  appears  3–4  weeks  post-operatively 
and spontaneously resolves over the next several 
months,  though  permanent  hyperpigmentation 
can occur.

Hypopigmentation occurs when lasers inad-
vertently  target  melanin  (Figs. 29.1  and 29.2). 
QS  lasers  and  IPL  often  cause  a  transient 
hypopigmentation  during  treatment  due  to  the 
absorption of light by melanin and subsequent 
injury  to  individual  melanosomes  (Fig.  29.1). 
Following  resurfacing  procedures,  “relative 
hypopigmentation”  can  be  seen  where  treated 
areas  lie  adjacent  to  untreated,  photodamaged 
(darker)  skin  [35].  However,  if  the  fluence  is 
too  high  or  cooling  is  inadequate,  thermal 
injury can extend beyond the melanosome and 
damage  melanocytes  and  other  tissue  struc-

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



484

Fig. 29.1  Reticulated hypopigmentation after IPL treat-
ment.  This  likely  resulted  from  actinic  bronzing  that 
caused  increased  absorption  of  light.  This  is  transient; 
with  subsequent  treatments  the  dyspigmentation  will 
even out

Fig.  29.2  Hypopigmentation  and  scar  formation  after 
IPL treatment. Treatment took place when the patient was 
tan, potentially leading to this complication

tures,  causing  permanent  hypopigmentation. 
Rarely,  permanent  hypopigmentation  can 
appear  6–12  months  after  resurfacing  proce-
dures  (“delayed  hypopigmentation”)  due  to 
thermal injury.

In  general,  patients  with  dark  or  tanned  skin 
have a greater risk of dyspigmentation (Fig. 29.2). 
For such patients, treatment with lasers with shal-
lower  depths  of  penetration  (i.e.,  shorter  wave-
lengths  and  smaller  spot  sizes)  confers  greater 
injury  to  epidermal  melanocytes  and  should  be 
avoided.

 Prevention and Treatment
Patients  should  be  aware  of  dyspigmentation 
risks  and  have  appropriate  expectations.  For 
those  with  darker  skin  types,  lasers  with  longer 
wavelengths and larger spot sizes should be con-
sidered, as the depth of penetration will be greater 
and  risk  of  injury  to  epidermal  melanocytes 
smaller  [47].  If  these  options  are  not  available, 
treatment with lower fluences is prudent.

Caution should be used when treating patients 
who are tan. To prevent sun exposure to planned 
treatment  areas,  patients  should  be  advised  to 
keep tattoos or other sites covered, if possible, for 
1  month  prior  to  the  procedure  [47].  For  areas 
such as the face, sun avoidance and regular use of 
sun-screen with an SPF > 30 should be advocated 
prior  to  laser  treatment.  This  is  particularly 
important for resurfacing procedures where there 
is a high risk of dyspigmentation [35].

Pre-treatment of dark skin with alpha-hydroxy 
acids or bleaching agents combined with a topi-
cal  steroid  may  help  reduce  epidermal  pigment 
and  therefore  prevent  hypopigmentation  due  to 
laser  therapy  [47].  Additionally,  many  of  these 
topical  agents  may  cause  minor  inflammation 
that  can  hasten  removal  of  dermal  (tattoo) 
pigment.

For  ablative  resurfacing  procedures,  some 
authors  advocate  pre-  and  postoperative  use  of 
topical  bleaching  agents,  tretinoin  cream  and 
 steroid compounds to help minimize post-inflam-
matory hyperpigmentation [48]. However, a pro-
spective  study  of  100  patients  undergoing  CO2 
laser resurfacing found no significant difference 
in the incidence of post-inflammatory hyperpig-
mentation  between  patients  pre-treated  2  weeks 
with  glycolic  acid  cream  or  combination  treti-
noin/hydroquinone  creams  versus  no  pretreat-
ment [49]. In a 23 patient prospective study using 
1064  nm  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  with  Hori 
nevus, there was no significant difference in the 
incidence  of  post-inflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion when using fucidic acid cream vs. betameth-
asone  with  fucidic  acid  [50].  The  regiment  of 
topical  vitamin  C,  hydroquinone,  retinoic  acid, 
and sunscreen pre- and post-operative was effec-
tive  in  treating  patients  with  post-inflammatory 
hyperpigmentation [51]. Ablative fractional pho-

R. L. Moore et al.



tothermolysis  (AFP)  and  nonablative  fractional 
photothermolysis (NAFP) that introduce a micro-
scopic, pixilated pattern of wounding in the der-
mis have been found potentially effective in the 
treatment of a variety of pigmentation conditions, 
including post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, 
and  laser-induced  hypo-  and  hyperpigmentation 
of the face and neck [52].

Use of petrolatum and strict sun avoidance can 
hasten epidermal healing and help minimize post 
inflammatory dyspigmentation; however, correc-
tion  of  dyspigmentation,  once  it  occurs,  can  be 
difficult. Bleaching creams, superficial chemical 
peels,  kojic  and  retinoic  acid  may  help  blend 
lines  of  demarcation.  These  products  should  be 
avoided,  however,  in  the  first  post-operative 
month  after  resurfacing  procedures,  as  they  can 
cause  profound  irritation  and  worsen  hyperpig-
mentation. For hypopigmentation, use of topical 
PUVA  (oxsoralen  and  UVA  light  therapy)  has 
been used to induce melanogenesis [35].

485

incidence  of  scarring,  listing  the  complication 
instead as textural change. It is the authors’ opin-
ion  that  the  term  textural  change  should  be 
reserved for non-scarring processes only.

The  most  likely  cause  of  scar  formation  fol-
lowing laser treatment is excessive thermal injury 
to  the  treated  tissue.  Pulse  stacking  or  multiple 
passes  [54],  high-energy  fluences  or  inadequate 
cooling can all precipitate thermal injury. Dermal 
depressions can be caused by vessel dissolution 
or  thermal  injury.  Inadequate  contact  cooling 
(e.g., over the alar groove) or high fluences can 
lead  to  this  finding.  Selection  of  an  appropriate 
laser and use of the correct treatment parameters, 
for a given indication, is paramount in avoiding 
excessive  tissue  damage  and  scarring.  Patients 
with  a  history  of  recent  isotretinoin  therapy, 
keloid scar formation or radiation therapy may be 
at increased risk for hypertrophic scar formation 
[18]. 
following 
Additionally,  postoperative  resurfacing  compli-
cations, such as infection and contact dermatitis, 
may also lead to scarring.

resurfacing 

procedures 

 Scarring

 Risk Factors for Excess Scarring
•  High fluence
•  Inadequate cooling
•  Pulse stacking, multiple passes
•  Wrong laser
•  Patient factors (history of isotretinoin, keloid 

formation or radiation therapy)

•  Location  (mandible,  anterior  neck,  infraor-

bital > other areas)

•  Poor post-operative wound care regimen (for 

resurfacing procedures)

•  Infection

Scarring  is  a  rare  but  potentially  severe  side 
effect of laser therapy. The terminology in the lit-
erature  can  be  confusing.  For  some,  textural 
change describes a transient phenomenon where 
there is a change in the contour of the skin, truly 
differentiating  it  from  a  permanent  scar  [53]. 
However, others use textural change to describe a 
subtle, but potentially severe, reticular pattern of 
scarring. Because of this lack of consensus in ter-
minology, many early articles underreported the 

Treatment  of  certain  anatomical  locations, 
including the mandible, anterior neck and infra-
orbital areas are more likely to scar [33]. Reduced 
laser parameters are recommended in these areas.

 Prevention and Treatment
A skilled clinician will monitor the skin for evi-
dence  of  excessive  thermal  injury  both  during 
and  after  laser  treatment.  Marked  erythema  or 
graying  of  the  epidermis  during  treatment  may 
indicate significant damage and the need to dis-
continue treatment or adjust parameters. Multiple 
test  spots  with  varying  fluences  and/or  pulse 
durations  can  be  performed  prior  to  treatment, 
particularly in patients with an increased risk of 
scarring.  These  can  often  be  performed  at  the 
time of initial consultation.

After resurfacing procedures, focal areas of ery-
thema and induration often precede the formation 
of hypertrophic scars [35]. These areas should be 
cultured and the patient treated, if infection is sus-
pected. If infection is ruled out, prompt application 
or intralesional injection of corticosteroids can halt 
the progression of hypertrophic scars. Silicone gel 
sheeting or topical imiquimod may also be useful 

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



486

in preventing and/or treating hypertrophic scar for-
mation [55]. Silicone gel or a silicone sheet is the 
most recognized first line method for the treatment 
and  prevention  of  hypertrophic  scars.  Based  on 
specific  indications,  other  methods  include  cryo-
therapy,  pressure  garments,  corticosteroid  injec-
tions, onion extract gel, and bleomycin [50, 56].

Two to ten cryotherapy sessions with 25 days 
interval maybe used to diminish keloids by caus-
ing  tissue  necrosis  and  sloughing.  Cryotherapy 
with intralesional steroid injections can lead to an 
84%  reduction  in  keloids.  Hypopigmentation 
could  be  a  side  effect  due  to  the  sensitivity  of 
melanocytes  to  cold  temperatures.  In  cases  of 
extensive  scarring  one  could  consider  surgical 
graft or flap repair [57].

Intralesional  steroids,  5-fluorouracil  (5-FU) 
and  laser  therapy  have  proved  beneficial  in  the 
treatment  of  hypertrophic  scars  [58–60].  PDL 
treatment has been reported to improve the symp-
toms, pliability and color and decrease the size of 
hypertrophic scars [58, 60, 61]. A recent single-
blinded  study  with  69  patients  compared  treat-
ment  of  hypertrophic  scars  with  intralesional 
triamcinolone  (TAC)  alone  or  in  combination 
with intralesional 5-FU or intralesional 5-FU and 
PDL  therapy  [59].  Combination  therapy  with 
TAC and 5-FU, both with and without PDL ther-
apy,  provided  statistically  significant  improve-
ment in the overall erythema, pruritus, pliability 
and size of the scars compared with TAC alone. 
Patients reported the most improvement with the 
triple TAC, 5-FU and PDL therapy, however.

Depressed scars may improve over a period of 
several  months  [53].  Ablative  or  non-ablative 
resurfacing procedures and dermal fillers can be 
used to correct the contour defects depending on 
their severity.

 Idiosyncratic Complications

There  are  a  number  of  complications  unique  to 
treating specific lesions. Perhaps the best known 
example  of  this  is  during  removal  of  tattoos. 
Upon laser treatment, tattoo pigment is released 
extracellularly, exposing it to immunologic cells 

and  oxidizing  radicals,  and  can  lead  to  allergic 
contact  dermatitis  or  paradoxical  darkening. 
Resurfacing  procedures  not  only  pose  a  risk  of 
profound scarring (albeit rarely), but the loss of 
the epidermal barrier also makes one more sus-
ceptible  to  infection,  acne  and  milia  formation. 
Treatment of vascular and pigmented lesions and 
photoepilation  are  also  associated  with  unique, 
though uncommon, side effects.

There are a handful of complications that are 
unique  to  treating  specific  dermatologic  condi-
tions  with  certain  lasers.  These  complications 
and  their  management  will  be  discussed  in  the 
following section.

 Photoepilation

 Hypertrichosis
Several  studies  have  documented  paradoxical 
hypertrichosis following laser hair removal [61, 
62].  This  primarily  occurs  after  several  treat-
ments have been performed on the face and neck 
of  female  patients  with  darker  skin  types.  The 
mechanism that triggers the conversion of these 
vellus to terminal hairs is unknown, but may be 
related  to  inflammation  induced  by  the  laser 
therapy  itself.  Management  of  this  uncommon 
complication is with further photoepilation.

 Leukotrichia
Photoepilation  is  most  commonly  performed 
with  the  long-pulsed  Ruby,  Alexandrite  and 
Diode  lasers.  Patients  with  darker  skin  tones 
may  be  treated  with  the  long-pulsed  Nd:YAG 
lasers. These lasers target melanin and penetrate 
deep enough to reach the hair follicle. By using 
millisecond  instead  of  nanosecond  pulse  dura-
tions, thermal damage extends beyond the mela-
nocytes  to  involve  other  structures  within  the 
follicle  important  for  hair  growth  [63].  This 
leads  to  the  desired  destruction  of  the  targeted 
follicle. With sub-therapeutic fluence levels, fol-
licular  melanocytes  may  be  destroyed  in  the 
absence  of  other  follicular  injury,  resulting  in 
leukotrichosis.

R. L. Moore et al.



 Reticulate Erythema
Persistent reticulate erythema has been described 
in  at  least  ten  patients  following  hair  removal 
with  the  Diode  laser  [64].  Pernio,  and  perhaps 
other connective tissue diseases, as well as high-
energy fluences seem to be potential risk factors. 
Most patients are female.

 Urticarial-Like Plaques
Pruritic, urticarial-like plaques have been described 
following  photoepilation  [14].  Unlike  urticaria, 
however, lesions may last several days to weeks. 
Topical  and  oral  corticos-teroids  and  anti-hista-
mines can be used for symptomatic relief.

487

pinpoint bleeding and petechiae. Predictably, this 
is  worsened  with  the  use  of  high  fluences. 
Fluences should therefore be kept to a minimum 
to maintain the desired effect. Smoke evacuators 
should be used when expecting tissue splatter as 
viral  particles  have  been  found  in  aerosolized 
material [7, 8]. Laser treatment through a water-
based  gel  dressing,  such  as  Vigilon  (CR  Bard, 
Inc, Covington, GA) or 2nd Skin (Spenco Medical 
Corp,  Waco,  TX)  minimizes  tissue  splatter  and 
bleeding by acting as a heat sink and protecting 
the epidermis [47].

 Resurfacing

 Pigmented Lesions

 Leukotrichia
Melanin,  located  in  the  epidermis,  dermis  and 
follicular structures, is the primary chromophore 
targeted  in  the  treatment  of  various  pigmented 
lesions. Melanocytes within the hair follicle can 
be destroyed inadvertently when using high flu-
ences and more deeply penetrating, longer, wave-
lengths.  Permanent 
leukotrichia  can  result. 
Limiting  the  fluences  and  selecting  lasers  with 
shorter  wavelengths,  if  possible,  will  minimize 
this complication.

introduce  moderate 

Studies  show  the  Er:YAG  laser  and  micro-
dermabrasion  could 
to 
marked  pigmentation  by  inducing  the  chemical 
mediator  secretion 
to  activate  melanocytes, 
enhance narrow band UVB penetration and 5-flu-
rouracial  ointment  absorption  [65].  In  a  31 
patients  study,  leukotrichia  was  improved  by 
using a non-cultured epidermal suspension trans-
plantation,  taking  methylcobalamin,  and  daily 
sun exposure after dressing removal [66].

 Tissue Splatter and Pinpoint Bleeding
Tissue splatter and pinpoint bleeding are expected 
side effects of treatment with Q-switched lasers. 
When tissue targets are heated to destructive lev-
els over nanosecond (QS) pulse durations, parti-
cles  can  become  aerosolized  creating  tissue 
splatter and blood vessels can rupture leading to 

 Acne and Milia
Acne  flares  and  milia  formation  are  relatively 
common  complications  that  result  from  use  of 
occlusive dressings and petrolatum. Aberrant fol-
licular re-epithelialization may also play a role in 
their development [35]. Those with a history of 
acne are at increased risk.

Generally,  eruptions  tend  to  resolve  on  their 
own once occlusive ointments and dressings are 
removed. For those with more severe, recalcitrant 
acne flares, oral tetracyclines can be used. Once 
the skin has re-epithelialized, topical retinoids or 
manual extraction can be used to treat milia.

 Contact Dermatitis
Contact  dermatitis  is  a  frequent  complication, 
occurring up to 65% of the time, and is generally 
irritant in nature [35]. Loss of the epidermal bar-
rier lends susceptibility to irritants and allergens. 
Bland, non-fragranced emollients should be used 
preventively.  Patients  should  be  counseled  to 
avoid  use  of  topical  antibiotics,  the  most  fre-
quently cited allergens, and other over-the-coun-
ter products and herbal remedies. If an irritant or 
allergic  contact  dermatitis  occurs,  all  suspected 
inciting agents should be promptly discontinued. 
This alone may result in resolution of the derma-
titis.  Topical  corticos-teroids,  cold  compresses 
and oral anti-histamines are additional measures 
that  can  be  taken  to  alleviate  symptoms.  Oral 
prednisone is reserved for severe cases.

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



488

 Ectropion
Ectropion is another potential serious complica-
tion  of  ablative  resurfacing  procedures.  Those 
patients with a history of lower blepharoplasties 
and  other  eyelid  surgeries  are  at  increased  risk 
[35]. Pre-operatively, a “snap” test should be per-
formed to assess the elasticity of the eyelid, and 
patients with low elasticity should be treated with 
caution. Use of lower fluences and reduced pass 
number  are  important  around  periocular  areas. 
Intraoperatively, the dermatologic surgeon should 
observe  excess  collagen  contraction  that  may 
indicate  lid  eversion.  Treatment  of  ectropion, 
should it occur, is surgical.

 Infection
Any  laser  treatment  that  disrupts  the  epidermal 
barrier  carries  a  potential  risk  for  infection. 
However,  due  to  the  extent  of  such  wounding 
associated  with  ablative  resurfacing  procedures, 
the  risk  of  viral,  bacterial  and  fungal  infections 
following these procedures is significantly higher.
Reactivation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) is 
the  most  common  infection,  observed  in  7%  of 
500  patients  in  a  retrospective  analysis,  regard-
less of prior HSV history [33]. The infection may 
not  have  the  typical  defining  characteristic  of 
grouped vesicles and crusts on an erythematous 
base due to the lack of intact epithelium. Any ero-
sions, often subtle, should warrant further work 
up.  Prophylactic  antiviral  medications  are  com-
monly initiated 1–2 days prior to the procedure 
and continued for 7–14 days afterwards, or until 
re-epithelialization is complete [35, 67]. Hospital 
admission  for  initiation  of  intravenous  antiviral 
medication is indicated for the rare, but serious, 
disseminated viral infection.

Bacterial  (e.g.,  Staphylococcus  aureus  and 
Pseudomonas sp.) and fungal (e.g., Candida sp.) 
infections  are  less  common  but  equally  serious 
complications. Significant scarring [11] and pru-
ritus [68] have been associated with such infec-
tions.  Use  of  occlusive  dressings  is  thought  to 
increase the risk of these infections, which gener-
ally occur within the first 10 days after laser treat-
ment  [69].  The  moist,  warm  environment 
provides  an  ideal  growing  medium  for  many 
opportunistic  pathogens.  Occlusive  dressings, 

such as biobrane, are often used in the first post-
operative days to help minimize pain and poten-
tially speed the healing process.

Good  wound  care  instructions  are  essential. 
Hands  should  be  washed  with  an  antibacterial 
soap  prior  to  all  dressing  changes.  Dressings 
should be changed multiple times a day, and can 
be soaked in dilute acetic acid; they should not be 
re-used.

Significant debate exists among dermatologic 
surgeons regarding use of prophylactic antibiot-
ics for ablative resurfacing procedures. To date, 
there have been no prospective, randomized con-
trolled  studies  done  to  evaluate  their  efficacy. 
Some studies have suggested that use of intraop-
erative and postoperative antibiotics may increase 
infection  rates  and  potentially  select  for  more 
pathogenic  bacteria,  such  as  Enterobacter  sp. 
[70] Fluconazole may promote re-epithelialization 
when given post-operatively between days 3 and 
8 [71].

Signs  and  symptoms  of  acute  infections 
include increased pain, erythema, erosions, puru-
lent discharge, and delayed wound healing. If an 
infection is suspected, wound cultures should be 
taken and the patient placed on a broad-spectrum 
antibiotic until the sensitivities return.

 Tissue Splatter
During ablative resurfacing procedures, the epi-
dermal  barrier  is  destroyed  and  tissue  particles 
commonly become aerosolized. (See above Sect. 
4.2  for  more  detail.)  As  with  QS  lasers,  it  is 
important  to  use  smoke  evacuators,  or  a  water 
based  gel  dressing  to  avoid  inhaling  potentially 
harmful viruses that may be harbored in the air-
borne tissue.

 Tattoos

 Allergic and Photoallergic Contact 
Dermatitis
During  laser  treatment  of  tattoos,  pigment  is 
released from intra- to extracellular sites expos-
ing these antigens to the immune system. Rarely, 
a type-IV hypersensitivity reaction or photoaller-
gic reaction to the components in the pigment can 

R. L. Moore et al.



develop [72]. Cinnabar, found in red tattoo pig-
ment, is the most common contact allergen, [73] 
while cadmium, which is found in yellow tattoo 
pigment, is the most frequent photoallergen [47]. 
Those who have a contact dermatitis to pigment 
often  give  a  history  of  pruritus  and  raised  red 
areas  over  their  tattoo  sites.  In  photodermatitis, 
this  reaction  is  heightened  when  exposed  to 
sunlight.

Laser removal of tattoos in those with a pig-
ment allergy has successfully been demonstrated 
with the concomitant use of intralesional or topi-
cal corticosteroids [74, 75]. However, because a 
local  allergy  can  progress  to  a  potentially  life-
threatening  anaphylactic  response,  one  should 
exercise extreme caution in treating these patients 
[47]. Some may consider a tattoo pigment allergy 
an  absolute  contraindication  to  laser  treatment 
because of this risk. Ablative resurfacing proce-
dures  can  be  used  for  tattoo  removal  with  less 
risk of mounting an allergic response. However, a 
localized  allergic  reaction  has  been  reported  to 
become generalized following CO2 laser removal 
of a tattoo in one patient [76].

 Combustion
Treatment  of  tattoos  that  contain  combustible 
material should be avoided. Sparks and incipient 
pox-like scars occurred after QS Ruby laser treat-
ment  of  a  traumatic  tattoo  containing  firework 
debris [77]. If the composition of the pigment is 
unknown, a biopsy and/or test spot should be per-
formed to help elucidate the material [47].

 Paradoxical Tattoo Darkening
Paradoxical darkening of certain tattoo pigments 
has been reported with QS laser treatments [78–
80].  The  exact  mechanism  is  unknown,  but  the 
reduction  of  ferric  oxide  to  ferrous  oxide  may 
play  a  role  [78].  Titanium  dioxide  may  also  be 
implicated  in  paradoxical  darkening  through  a 
similar  mechanism  [9,  80].  Ferrous  oxide  is 
found in some red, orange, peach or other skin-
colored  pigments  and  titanium  dioxide  is  found 
in  white  pigments,  often  used  alone  or  in  con-
junction  with  other  colors  to  brighten  them. As 
such,  specific  areas  of  tattoos  containing  these 
colors  should  undergo  spot  testing  prior  to  full 

489

treatment  with  a  QS  laser.  Once  paradoxical 
darkening  has  occurred,  correction  can  be  diffi-
cult.  Repeated  laser  treatments  have  been  suc-
cessful  [81],  as  well  as  ablative  resurfacing 
procedures [82].

 Tissue Splatter and Pinpoint Bleeding
See explanation in above Sect. 4.2.

 Vascular Lesions

 Reticulated Purpura
Purpura  is  a  common,  and  usually  expect  side 
effect of the PDL. Often a reticulated pattern of 
purpura  develops  after  treatment  due  to  the 
Gaussian  distribution  of  energy  of  each  laser 
pulse. Overlapping pulses by 18% can minimize 
this complication [83].

 Conclusions
Complications  in  dermatologic  laser  therapy 
can  often  be  prevented  by  employing  safety 
precautions and having a thorough knowledge 
of  laser  mechanics  and  patient  risk  profiles 
prior  to  treatment.  Once  complications  do 
occur, it is important to ascertain the cause in 
order  to  prevent,  or  minimize,  future  prob-
lems.  The  most  common  complications  can 
generally  be  avoided  or  minimized  by  care-
fully selecting patients, managing their expec-
tations,  using  proper  anesthetics  when 
indicated,  and  by  meticulously  selecting 
appropriate laser settings.

References

  1.  Goldman  L,  Blaney  DJ,  Kindel  DJ  Jr,  Richfield  D, 
Franke EK. Pathology of the effect of the laser beam 
on the skin. Nature. 1963;197:912–4.

  2.  Tanzi EL, Lupton JR, Alster TS. Lasers in dermatol-
ogy: four decades of progress. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2003;49(1):1–31; quiz 31–4.

  3.  Anderson  RR,  Parrish  JA.  Selective  photothermoly-
sis:  precise  microsurgery  by  selective  absorption  of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.
  4.  Anderson  RR.  Lasers  in  dermatology—a  critical 

update. J Dermatol. 2000;27(11):700–5.

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



490

  5.  Nelson JS, Majaron B, Kelly KM. Active skin cooling 
in conjunction with laser dermatologic surgery. Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2000;19(4):253–66.

  6.  Zelickson Z, Schram S, Zelickson B. Complications 
in  cosmetic  laser  surgery:  a  review  of  494  Food 
and  Drug  Administration  manufacturer  and  user 
facility  device  experience  reports.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2014;40(4):378–82.

  7.  Sawchuk  WS,  Weber  PJ,  Lowy  DR,  Dzubow 
LM. Infectious papillomavirus in the vapor of warts 
treated  with  carbon  dioxide  laser  or  electrocoagula-
tion: detection and protection. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1989;21(1):41–9.

  8.  Baggish MS, Poiesz BJ, Joret D, Williamson P, Refai 
A. Presence of human immunodeficiency virus DNA 
in laser smoke. Lasers Surg Med. 1991;11(3):197–203.
  9.  Barkana  Y,  Belkin  M.  Laser  eye  injuries.  Surv 

Ophthalmol. 2000;44(6):459–78.

 10.  Sliney D, Aron-Rosa D, DeLori F, et al. Adjustment 
of guidelines for exposure of the eye to optical radia-
tion  from  ocular  instruments:  statement  from  a  task 
group  of  the  International  Commission  on  Non-
Ionizing  Radiation  Protection  (ICNIRP).  Appl  Opt. 
2005;44(11):2162–76.

Infection 

 11.  Bellman  B,  Brandt  FS,  Holtmann  M,  Bebell 
methicillin-resistant 
with 
WR. 
Staphylococcus  aureus  after  carbon  dioxide  resur-
facing  of  the  face.  Successful  treatment  with  mino-
cycline, rifampin, and mupiricin ointment. Dermatol 
Surg. 1998;24(2):279–82.

 12.  Greve  B,  Raulin  C.  Professional  errors  caused  by 
lasers and intense pulsed light technology in derma-
tology  and  aesthetic  medicine:  preventive  strategies 
and case studies. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(2):156–61.
 13.  Campbell TM, Goldman MP. Adverse events of frac-
tionated  carbon  dioxide  laser:  review  of  373  treat-
ments. Dermatol Surg. 2010;36(11):1645–50.

 14.  Dawson E, Willey A, Lee K. Adverse events associ-
ated with nonablative cutaneous laser, radiofrequency, 
and  light-based  devices.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2007;26(1):15–21.

 15.  Wolfe  JT,  Weinberg  JM,  Elenitsas  R,  Uberti-
Benz  M.  Cutaneous  lupus  erythematosus  follow-
ing  laser-induced  thermal  injury.  Arch  Dermatol. 
1997;133(3):392–3.

 16.  Kuhn A, Becker-Wegerich PM, Ruzicka T, Lehmann 
P. Successful treatment of discoid lupus erythematosus 
with argon laser. Dermatology. 2000;201(2):175–7.
 17.  Haedersdal  M,  Poulsen  T,  Wulf  HC.  Laser  induced 
wounds  and  scarring  modified  by  antiinflamma-
tory  drugs:  a  murine  model.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1993;13(1):55–61.

 18.  Rubenstein  R,  Roenigk  HH  Jr,  Stegman  SJ,  Hanke 
CW. Atypical keloids after  dermabrasion  of  patients 
taking isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;15(2 
Pt 1):280–5.

 19.  Khatri  KA.  Diode  laser  hair  removal  in  patients 
therapy.  Dermatol  Surg. 

undergoing 
isotretinoin 
2004;30(9):1205–7. discussion 1207

 20.  Khatri  KA,  Garcia V.  Light-assisted  hair  removal  in 
patients  undergoing  isotretinoin  therapy.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2006;32(6):875–7.

 21.  Alster T, Zaulyanov L. Laser scar revision: a review. 

Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(2):131–40.

 22.  Trotter  MJ,  Tron  VA,  Hollingdale  J,  Rivers 
JK.  Localized  chrysiasis  induced  by  laser  therapy. 
Arch Dermatol. 1995;131(12):1411–4.

 23.  Kerstein  RL,  Lister  T,  Cole  R.  Laser  therapy  and 
photosensitive medication: a review of the evidence. 
Lasers Med Sci. 2014;29(4):1449–52.

 24.  Debbaneh MG, Levin E, Sanchez Rodriguez R, Leon 
A, Koo J, Rosenblum MD. laque-based sub-blistering 
dosimetry:  Reaching  PASI-75  after  two  treatments 
with 308-nm excimer laser in a generalized psoriasis 
patient. J Dermatol Treat. 2015;26(1):45–8.

 25.  Nistico  S,  Chiricozzi  A,  Saraceno  R,  Schipani  C, 
Chimenti  S.  Vitiligo  treatment  with  monochromatic 
excimer light and tacrolimus: results of an open ran-
domized  controlled  study.  Photomed  Laser  Surg. 
2012;30(1):26–30.

 26.  Baron ED, Harris L, Redpath WS, et al. Laser-assisted 
penetration  of  topical  anesthetic  in  adults.  Arch 
Dermatol. 2003;139(10):1288–90.

 27.  Chen JZ, Jacobson LG, Bakus AD, et al. Evaluation 
of  the  S-Caine  Peel  for  induction  of  local  anesthe-
sia  for  laser-assisted  tattoo  removal:  randomized, 
double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  multicenter  study. 
Dermatol Surg. 2005;31(3):281–6.

 28.  Cohen JL. Pain management with a topical lidocaine 
and tetracaine 7%/7% cream with laser dermatologic 
procedures. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013;12(9):986–9.
 29.  Kilmer SL, Chotzen V, Zelickson BD, et al. Full-face 
laser resurfacing using a supplemented topical anesthe-
sia protocol. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139(10):1279–83.

 30. Waldorf  HA, Alster  TS,  McMillan  K,  Kauvar AN, 
Geronemus  RG,  Nelson  JS.  Effect  of  dynamic 
cooling  on  585-nm  pulsed  dye  laser  treatment 
of  port-wine  stain  birthmarks.  Dermatol  Surg. 
1997;23(8):657–62.

 31.  Chan  HH,  Lam  LK,  Wong  DS,  Wei  WI.  Role  of 
skin  cooling  in  improving  patient  tolerability  of 
Q-switched Alexandrite  (QS Alex)  laser  in  nevus  of 
Ota treatment. Lasers Surg Med. 2003;32(2):148–51.
 32.  Watanabe  S,  Kakigi  R,  Hoshiyama  M,  Kitamura Y, 
Koyama  S,  Shimojo  M.  Effects  of  noxious  cooling 
of the skin on pain perception in man. J Neurol Sci. 
1996;135(1):68–73.

 33.  Nanni CA, Alster TS. Complications of carbon diox-
ide  laser  resurfacing. An  evaluation  of  500  patients. 
Dermatol Surg. 1998;24(3):315–20.

 34.  Alam M, Omura NE, Dover JS, Arndt KA. Clinically 
significant  facial  edema  after  extensive  treatment 
with  purpura-free  pulsed-dye  laser.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2003;29(9):920–4.

 35.  Alster  TS,  Lupton  JR.  Prevention  and  treatment  of 
side  effects  and  complications  of  cutaneous  laser 
resurfacing.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg.  2002;109(1):308–
16. discussion 317–8

R. L. Moore et al.



 36.  Alster  TS, West  TB.  Effect  of  topical  vitamin  C  on 
postoperative  carbon  dioxide  laser  resurfacing  ery-
thema. Dermatol Surg. 1998;24(3):331–4.

 37.  Oh IY, Kim BJ, Kim MN, Kim CW, Kim SE. Efficacy 
of light-emitting diode photomodulation in reducing 
erythema after fractional carbon dioxide laser resurfac-
ing: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(8):1171–6.
 38.  Ramsdell WM. Fractional CO2 laser resurfacing com-
plications. Semin Plast Surg. 2012;26(3):137–40.
 39.  Wetter DA, Davis MD, Yiannias JA, et al. Patch test 
results  from  the  Mayo  Clinic  Contact  Dermatitis 
Group,  1998–2000. 
J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
2005;53(3):416–21.

 40.  Smack  DP,  Harrington AC,  Dunn  C,  et  al.  Infection 
and allergy incidence in ambulatory surgery patients 
using white petrolatum vs bacitracin ointment. A ran-
domized controlled trial. JAMA. 1996;276(12):972–7.
 41.  Aliasl J, Khoshzaban F, Barikbin B, et al. Comparing 
the  healing  effects  of  Arnebia  euchroma  ointment 
with  petrolatum  on  the  ulcers  caused  by  fractional 
CO2  laser:  a  single-blinded  clinical  trial.  Iran  Red 
Crescent Med J. 2014;16(10):e16239.

 42.  Trookman  NS,  Rizer  RL,  Weber  T.  Treatment  of 
minor wounds from dermatologic procedures: a com-
parison of three topical wound care ointments using a 
laser wound model. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64(3 
Suppl):S8–15.

 43.  Lanigan  SW.  Patient-reported  morbidity  following 
flashlamp-pumped pulsed tunable dye laser treatment 
of port wine stains. Br J Dermatol. 1995;133(3):423–5.
 44.  Shah NS, Lazarus MC, Bugdodel R, et al. The effects 
of topical vitamin K on bruising after laser treatment. 
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47(2):241–4.

 45.  Leu  S,  Havey  J,  White  LE,  et  al. Accelerated  reso-
lution  of  laser-induced  bruising  with  topical  20% 
arnica: a rater-blinded randomized controlled trial. Br 
J Dermatol. 2010;163(3):557–63.

 46.  Brito N, Knipschild P, Doreste-Alonso J. Systematic 
review  on  the  efficacy  of  topical  arnica  montana 
for  the  treatment  of  pain,  swelling  and  bruise.  J 
Musculoskelet Pain. 2014;22(2):216–23.

 47.  Bernstein  EF.  Laser  treatment  of  tattoos.  Clin 

Dermatol. 2006;24(1):43–55.

 48.  Ho  C,  Nguyen  Q,  Lowe  NJ,  Griffin  ME,  Lask 
G.  Laser  resurfacing  in  pigmented  skin.  Dermatol 
Surg. 1995;21(12):1035–7.

 49.  West TB, Alster TS. Effect of pretreatment on the inci-
dence of hyperpigmentation following cutaneous CO2 
laser resurfacing. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(1):15–7.
 50.  Uaboonkul T,  Nakakes A, Ayuthaya  PK.  A  random-
ized  control  study  of  the  prevention  of  hyperpig-
mentation  post  Q-switched  Nd:YAG  laser  treatment 
of  Hori  nevus  using  topical  fucidic  acid  plus  beta-
methasone valerate cream versus fucidic acid cream. 
J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2012;14(3):145–9.

 51.  Sriprachya-anunt  S,  Marchell  NL,  Fitzpatrick  RE, 
Goldman  MP,  Rostan  EF.  Facial  resurfacing  in 
patients  with  Fitzpatrick  skin  type  IV.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2002;30(2):86–92.

491

 52.  Tierney  EP,  Hanke  CW.  Treatment  of  CO2  laser 
induced hypopigmentation with ablative fractionated 
laser resurfacing: case report and review of the litera-
ture. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010;9(11):1420–6.

 53.  Willey  A,  Anderson  RR,  Azpiazu  JL,  et  al. 
Complications  of  laser  dermatologic  surgery.  Lasers 
Surg Med. 2006;38(1):1–15.

 54. Ross EV, Barnette DJ, Glatter RD, Grevelink JM. Effects 
of overlap and pass number in CO2 laser skin resurfac-
ing: a study of residual thermal damage, cell death, and 
wound healing. Lasers Surg Med. 1999;24(2):103–12.
 55.  Zurada  JM,  Kriegel  D,  Davis  IC.  Topical  treat-
ments  for  hypertrophic  scars.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2006;55(6):1024–31.

 56.  Visscher  MO,  Bailey  JK,  Hom  DB.  Scar  treatment 
variations by skin type. Facial Plast Surg Clin North 
Am. 2014;22(3):453–62.

 57.  Alam  M,  Warycha  M.  Complications  of  lasers  and 

light treatments. Dermatol Ther. 2011;24(6):571–80.
 58.  Alster T. Laser scar revision: comparison study of 585-
nm  pulsed  dye  laser  with  and  without  intralesional 
corticosteroids. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29(1):25–9.
 59.  Asilian A,  Darougheh A,  Shariati  F.  New  combina-
tion of triamcinolone, 5-fluorouracil, and pulsed-dye 
laser  for  treatment  of  keloid  and  hypertrophic  scars. 
Dermatol Surg. 2006;32(7):907–15.

 60.  Chesnut  C,  Mednik  S,  Lask  G.  Hypertrophic  scar 
treatment  with  intralesional  triamcinolone  aceton-
ide  and  pulsed  dye  laser  results  in  necrosis.  Cutis. 
2014;94(5):E12–3.

 61.  Manuskiatti  W,  Wanitphakdeedecha  R,  Fitzpatrick 
RE.  Effect  of  pulse  width  of  a  595-nm  flashlamp-
pumped pulsed dye laser on the treatment response of 
keloidal and hypertrophic sternotomy scars. Dermatol 
Surg. 2007;33(2):152–61.

 62.  Alajlan  A,  Shapiro  J,  Rivers  JK,  MacDonald  N, 
Wiggin J, Lui H. Paradoxical hypertrichosis after laser 
epilation. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53(1):85–8.
 63.  Grossman  MC,  Dierickx  C,  Farinelli  W,  Flotte  T, 
Anderson  RR.  Damage  to  hair  follicles  by  normal-
mode  ruby  laser  pulses.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1996;35(6):889–94.

 64.  Lapidoth  M,  Shafirstein  G,  Ben  Amitai  D,  Hodak 
E, Waner  M,  David  M.  Reticulate  erythema  follow-
ing  diode  laser-assisted  hair  removal:  a  new  side 
effect of a common procedure. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2004;51(5):774–7.

 65.  Jee HJ, Do JE, Noh S, Park SH, Oh SH. Leukotrichia 
in stable segmental vitiligo: implication of an alternate 
treatment option. Ann Dermatol. 2014;26(1):132–4.
 66.  Holla AP,  Sahni  K,  Kumar  R,  Kanwar A,  Mehta  S, 
Parsad D. Repigmentation of leukotrichia due to ret-
rograde  migration  of  melanocytes  after  noncultured 
epidermal suspension transplantation. Dermatol Surg. 
2014;40(2):169–75.

 67.  Beeson WH, Rachel JD. Valacyclovir prophylaxis for 
herpes simplex virus infection or infection recurrence 
following  laser  skin  resurfacing.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2002;28(4):331–6.

29 Prevention and Treatment of Laser Complications



492

 68.  Alam  M,  Pantanowitz  L,  Harton  AM,  Arndt  KA, 
Dover  JSA.  prospective  trial  of  fungal  colonization 
after laser resurfacing of the face: correlation between 
culture positivity and symptoms of pruritus. Dermatol 
Surg. 2003;29(3):255–60.

 69.  Sriprachya-Anunt  S,  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Goldman  MP, 
Smith  SR.  Infections  complicating  pulsed  carbon 
dioxide  laser  resurfacing  for  photoaged  facial  skin. 
Dermatol  Surg.  1997;23(7):527–35.  discussion 
535–36

 70.  Walia S, Alster TS. Cutaneous CO2 laser resurfacing 
infection rate with and without prophylactic antibiot-
ics. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(11):857–61.

 71.  Conn  H,  Nanda  VS.  Prophylactic  fluconazole 
promotes  reepithelialization 
in  full-face  carbon 
dioxide  laser  skin  resurfacing.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2000;26(2):201–7.

 72.  Ashinoff R, Levine VJ, Soter NA. Allergic reactions 
to tattoo pigment after laser treatment. Dermatol Surg. 
1995;21(4):291–4.

 73.  Bhardwaj SS, Brodell RT, Taylor JS. Red tattoo reac-

tions. Contact Dermatitis. 2003;48(4):236–7.

 74.  Antony  FC,  Harland  CC.  Red  ink  tattoo  reactions: 
successful  treatment  with  the  Q-switched  532  nm 
Nd:YAG laser. Br J Dermatol. 2003;149(1):94–8.
 75.  Dave  R,  Mahaffey  PJ.  Successful  treatment  of  an 
allergic  reaction  in  a  red  tattoo  with  the  Nd-YAG 
laser. Br J Plast Surg. 2002;55(5):456.

 76.  Zemtsov  A,  Wilson  L.  CO2  laser  treatment  causes 
local  tattoo  allergic  reaction  to  become  generalized. 
Acta Derm Venereol. 1997;77(6):497.

 77.  Taylor CR. Laser ignition of traumatically embedded 
firework debris. Lasers Surg Med. 1998;22(3):157–8.
 78.  Anderson  RR,  Geronemus  R,  Kilmer  SL,  Farinelli 
W, Fitzpatrick RE. Cosmetic tattoo ink darkening. A 
complication  of  Q-switched  and  pulsed-laser  treat-
ment. Arch Dermatol. 1993;129(8):1010–4.

 79.  Ross  EV, Yashar  S,  Michaud  N,  et  al.  Tattoo  dark-
ening  and  nonresponse  after  laser  treatment:  a  pos-
sible  role  for  titanium  dioxide.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2001;137(1):33–7.

 80.  Varma S, Swanson NA, Lee KK. Tattoo ink darkening 
of  a  yellow  tattoo  after  Q-switched  laser  treatment. 
Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27(6):461–3.

 81.  Fitzpatrick  RE,  Lupton  JR.  Successful 

treat-
ment  of  treatment-resistant  laser-induced  pigment 
darkening  of  a  cosmetic  tattoo.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2000;27(4):358–61.

 82.  Herbich GJ. Ultrapulse carbon dioxide laser treatment 
of an iron oxide flesh-colored tattoo. Dermatol Surg. 
1997;23(1):60–1.

 83.  Dinehart  SM,  Flock  S,  Waner  M.  Beam  profile  of 
the  flashlamp  pumped  pulsed  dye  laser:  support 
for  overlap  of  exposure  spots.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
1994;15(3):277–80.

R. L. Moore et al.



Ethical Issues

Abel Torres, Tejas Desai, Alpesh Desai, 
William T. Kirby, and Maren C. Locke

30

Abstract
Ethical  behavior  transcends  legal  implica-
tions, and represents the level of professional-
ism, humanity and morality a physician should 
possess  in  order  to  address  his/her  patient’s 
care.  If  a  physician  upholds  his/her  ethical 
responsibility to a higher standard than a legal 
obligation, the patient’s best interests may be 
addressed.  The  Hippocratic  Oath  may  not 
address specific ethical problems unique to the 
utility  of  lasers,  therefore  many  professional 
associations have devised tenets to follow. The 
simple  acronym,  “E-T-H-I-C-A-L”  may  help 
guide a physician to uphold the highest ethical 
standard when performing a laser procedure. 
Financial  gain  may  entice  a  physician  to  not 
optimize care for a patient. It is ethical for a 
physician to remain honest about their experi-
ence and training. Full disclosure of pertinent 

A. Torres (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Loma Linda University 
School of Medicine, Loma linda, CA, USA
e-mail: atorres3@metrohealth.org 

T. Desai · A. Desai 
Heights Dermatology and Aesthetic Center,  
Houston, TX, USA 

W. T. Kirby 
Kirby Dermatology, Hermosa Beach, CA, USA 

M. C. Locke 
Department of Dermatology, MetroHealth System, 
Cleveland, OH, USA

information to the patient may be sensible so 
he/she may remain the autonomous decision- 
maker without physician biases.

Keywords
Ethics · Lasers · Ethical · Economics  
Training · Heart to heart discussion between 
physician and patient · Interests · Contraindi-
cations · Advertising and Libel versus letting 
authorities know of misconduct

In general, ethics can be considered the science 
of moral duty, of ideal human character, and of 
the  ideal  ends  of  human  action  [1].  Ethics  is 
closely tied to morals, and it can be said that eth-
ics  is  the  science  of  morals,  and  morals  are  the 
practice of ethics [1]. The legal standard of care 
is  usually  the  minimum  required,  while  ethics 
usually pertains to a higher standard. If a physi-
cian  upholds  his/her  ethical  responsibility  to  a 
higher  standard  than  a  legal  obligation,  the 
patient’s best interests may be addressed. It is a 
physician’s  ethical  commitment  to  the  patient, 
himself/herself  and  the  profession  of  medicine 
that may guide a successful laser procedure.

Laser  treatments  in  dermatology  may  create 
an  ethical  dilemma  for  physicians  since  some 
procedures  are  elective.  Clinical  endpoints  for 
laser therapy can be difficult to objectively quan-
tify,  and  patient  satisfaction  often  becomes  the 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_30

493





494

cornerstone  of  treatment  efficacy.  Furthermore, 
cosmetic  patients  may  have  unrealistic  expecta-
tions, and instilled in the public, is a media-driven 
mentality  that  lasers  are  generally  safe  devices 
without complications.

The  continued,  heightened  controversy  in 
recent years is the result of one looming question: 
is  aging  a  physical  illness  [1,  2]?  Whether  the 
aging  face  needs  rejuvenation  may  spark  dead-
end debates even among colleagues in dermatol-
ogy [2, 3]. The Hippocratic Oath may not address 
specific problems unique to the utility of lasers, 
therefore many professional associations includ-
ing  the American  Medical Association  (AMA), 
American  Society  of  Dermatologic  Surgery 
(ASDS),  American  Academy  of  Dermatology 
(AAD),  American  Osteopathic  College  of 
Dermatology (AOCD), and American Society of 
Laser  Medicine  and  Surgery  (ASLMS)  have 
established tenets in terms of patients’ best inter-
ests,  professionalism,  and  personal  conduct. 
These guidelines serve to establish standards for 
non-medically  necessary  care  in  an  ever-chang-
ing,  cosmetic  world.  In  addition,  physicians’ 
ethical  responsibilities  sometimes  differ  from 
their legal ones [4]. They are not solely limited to 
clinical practice, but also include the moral treat-
ment  of  human  subjects  in  laser  medicine  and 
surgery research. Multiple issues may be encoun-
tered between a practitioner’s moral duty and the 
patient’s  best  interests.  A  simple  acronym, 
“ETHICAL”  (Economics,  Training,  Heart  to 
Heart Discussion Between Physician and Patient, 
Interests,  Contraindications,  Advertising  and 
Libel  versus  Letting  Authorities  Know  of 
Misconduct) can serve as a guide to help remind 
physicians  of  their  ethical  responsibilities  to 
patients.

 Economics

Financial gain may entice a physician to not opti-
mize care for a patient. It is wise and ethical for 
the physician to uphold the dignity of the patient, 
and  not  exploit  or  abuse  the  relationship  for 
financial  matters.  Gifts,  kickbacks  and  other 
financial gain received in exchange for operating 

one laser brand over another may be considered 
unethical without the consent of the patient. The 
definition  of  equipment  tampering  is  any  safety 
bypass  allowing  the  unauthorized  reuse  of  the 
product [5]. Replacing approved equipment with 
equipment that is not approved for use may result 
in negative outcomes for the patient. Furthermore, 
the resale of lasers to non-physicians is not advo-
cated and may be subject to penalties under the 
labeling  requirements  of  the  Food  Drug  and 
Cosmetic Act [5]. This action may contribute to 
non-medical workers operating lasers on patients 
without the proper training. Moreover, economic 
bias may sometimes be difficult for physicians to 
preclude,  when  they  may  feel  obligated  to 
endorse  a  product  because  they  receive  monies 
for company lectures and/or research.

 Training

responding  dermasurgeons 

It is ethical for a physician to remain honest about 
their  experience  and  training.  A  recent  survey 
conducted by the ASDS showed that nearly 41% 
of 
reported  an 
increase  in  patients  seeking  treatment  due  to 
injury  caused  by  untrained,  non-physicians  per-
forming  laser  and  light  rejuvenation  techniques 
[5]. To further support this finding, an analysis of 
litigation  related  to  laser  surgery  shows  an 
increase in cases involving non-physician opera-
tors from 36.3% in 2008 to 77.8% in 2011 [6]. A 
majority  of  the  litigated  procedures  in  lasers 
involve laser hair removal. Despite the fact that 
physicians  perform  two-thirds  of  these  proce-
dures,  non-physician  operators  represent  85.7% 
of hair removal lawsuits. Of these lawsuits, 64% 
were performed outside a traditional medical set-
ting [6]. Therefore, it is prudent to disclose to a 
patient  when  medical  personnel  and  extenders 
will  be  part  of  the  treatment  and  their  level  of 
training, since some clinics have nurses or physi-
cian assistants operating lasers or light devices.

Depending on the state, non-medical person-
nel may perform treatments which often requires 
that a physician is on site should a complication 
or issue arise. As a general rule, non-physicians 
must have appropriate documented training in the 

A. Torres et al.



physics, safety, and surgical techniques for each 
procedure performed [5]. Formal procedural der-
matology  training  can  assist  in  demonstrating 
competency in selected laser procedures, includ-
ing their proper use and management of compli-
cations.  The  ASLMS  recommends  physician 
extenders  complete  a  basic  training  program 
devoted  to  the  principles  of  lasers,  their  instru-
mentation  and  safety  issues  [7].  A  minimum 
8–10  h  is  suggested  by  the  American  National 
Standards  Institute  (ANSI)  standards  with  40% 
of the time allocated to practical sessions [7]. It is 
also  recommended  that  such  medical  personnel 
spend time in a clinical setting or preceptorship 
[7].  It  is  encouraged  for  the  novice  to  first  per-
form  procedures  with  the  supervision  by  the 
expert  if  state  law  permits  independent  practice 
[7]. The issue of laser training is becoming a seri-
ous problem in some states because there may be 
no  legal  requirements  for  training,  no  quality 
control measures, no official quality standards or 
guidelines [8]. Even if there is no legal standard, 
ethically physicians should address these issues. 
One study showed that dermatologists as opposed 
to non-medical, laser operators were more likely 
to support clinical regulations that placed licensed 
physicians in control, supporting this ethical obli-
gation [9].

 Heart to Heart Discussion Between 
Physician and Patient

Full  disclosure  of  pertinent  information  to  the 
patient  may  be  essential  so  he/she  may  remain 
the autonomous decision- maker without physi-
cian biases. This helps promote a lasting relation-
ship, build patient trust and most of all, serves the 
patient  to  the  fullest.  Cosmetic  dermatology 
using  medical  lasers  provides  patients  with  the 
anticipation of positive appearance, body image 
and  good  emotional  health.  This  may  elicit 
patient  sensitivity  and  vulnerability  and  places 
physicians in an influential role. This physician- 
patient relationship is the central focus of all ethi-
cal 
is 
[10].  This 
unintentionally not equal because a physician has 
the knowledge of medicine and the patient does 

relationship 

concerns 

495

not [1]. If physicians only accommodate patients’ 
wishes, then patients are left to dictate the physi-
cian’s behavior, causing the patient to become an 
object  of  a  business  transaction  [8].  Hence,  an 
ethical  strain  may  be  placed  on  the  physician–
patient  relationship.  The  physician  has  the 
responsibility  to  put  the  emphasis  back  on  the 
patient as the beneficiary of their liaison, counsel 
the patient and when appropriate refer the patient 
accordingly.

 Interests

Conflicts  of  interest  affect  human  behavior, 
sometimes unconsciously [11]. They may cause a 
physician to not utilize an optimal laser treatment 
for a patient. Unreported interests may not only 
be  financially  unethical  but  also  may  promote 
biased  research  and  conclusions  based  on  false 
pretenses. Relationships that permit or encourage 
product promotion using the names of academic 
medical  centers  and  departments  may  be  ethi-
cally  unsound  and  are  best  subjected  to  careful 
ethical review when contemplated [12]. This may 
not only sacrifice the dignity of patients, but also 
the  physician  and  his/her  moral  standard. 
Disclosure of conflicts of interest becomes more 
of  an  issue  when  clinical  research  is  involved. 
The role of an institutional board review (IRB) is 
to evaluate both the risk-benefit ratio of the pro-
posed  study  and  the  appropriateness  of  consent 
that is obtained from the voluntary research sub-
jects  [13].  An  IRB  should  have  little  difficulty 
determining the appropriateness of dermatologi-
cal  surgical  research  consent  [13].  However, 
judging the suitability of a cosmetic dermatologic 
study  may  be  perplexing  at  times.  Moreover, 
many  currently  available  lasers  receive  nonspe-
cific skin FDA clearance. One study by Perkins 
et al. demonstrated many physicians do not men-
tion evidence of ethics review from an IRB. Out 
of  150  prospective  studies  submitted  to  the 
Journal  of  American  Academy  of  Dermatology 
(JAAD),  a  whopping  36%  had  no  mention,  and 
when asked to resubmit IRB approval, 22% were 
withdrawn,  12%  were  never  resubmitted,  and 
12%  responded  that  ethical  review  was  not 

30 Ethical Issues



496

the 

forth  by 

obtained  [15].  The  JAAD  clearly  states  in  its 
instructions  to  authors,  which  adhere  to  the 
guidelines  set 
International 
Committee of Medical Journal Editors, “studies 
involving  live  human  subjects  must  have  been 
approved by the author’s IRB or its equivalent” 
[14].  The  driving  force  behind  not  reporting  an 
ethics review was likely oversight in many cases, 
but in others approval may not have been obtained 
[14]. This study from Perkins implies that some 
physicians were not ethical about being ethical!

 Contraindications

A  patient  should  not  be  discriminated  against 
except when laser treatment may negatively alter 
treatment for the patient. In these types of situa-
tions, a physician should fully discuss the reasons 
why the patient does not make a good candidate. 
The physician cannot abandon a patient that expe-
riences a complication. Such behavior is not only 
unethical, but may have legal implications. Ethical 
personal  conduct  permits  a  physician  to  make 
sound  therapeutic  judgments  regardless  of  what 
medical science has proven. If a patient is at risk 
for  a  known  side  effect,  a  physician  should  not 
allow  his/her  own  bias  to  affect  the  decision. 
Clinical  research  furnishes  data,  but  ultimately 
personal conduct dictates the level of patient care.

 Advertising

Advertisements  in  cosmetic  dermatology  has 
become commonplace for laser procedures. They 
should  not  be  intended  to  create  unrealistic 
expectations,  and  physicians  should  have  the 
ability  to  substantiate  claims  made  in  those  ads 
[5]. Mechanisms such as photographs or patient 
testimonials are suitable as long as they are not 
fraudulent  or  misleading.  It  is  unethical  to  pro-
mote  non-FDA  medical  lasers  or  devices  on 
advertisements. As of this writing, we know of no 
information that has been submitted to the FDA 
that could constitute solid scientific evidence of 
the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  medical  laser 
devices for cosmetics and related conditions [15]. 

Therefore,  all  such  laser  devices  are  considered 
to be class III Investigational Devices limited to 
use in accordance with the Investigational Device 
Exemption  (IDE)  regulation  [15]. The  commer-
cial promotion, distribution, sale, or use of these 
investigational devices with no IRB approval for 
non-significant  risk  devices,  or  without  FDA 
approval of an IDE application for a significant 
risk device may be considered a violation [15].

 Libel Versus Letting Authorities 
Know of Unethical Conduct

A  physician  may  report  to  peer-review  authori-
ties about unsafe laser practices of another prac-
titioner  if  he/she  presents  a  clear  danger  to  the 
public.  There  are  appropriate  ways  to  report 
unacceptable behavior of a physician for practi-
tioners that may feel reluctance about reporting a 
colleague  or  may  be  concerned  about  being 
accused of slander. On the other hand, a practitio-
ner’s lack of action of not reporting inappropriate 
conduct by another physician may be considered 
unethical  and  unlawful.  Such  practice  may  also 
harm  a  patient. According  to  the AAD,  when  a 
member is convinced that another member is vio-
the  Bylaws,  Code  of  Ethics,  other 
lating 
Administrative  Regulations,  or  Board-approved 
policies, the member should send a confidential 
written form of communication to the Academy’s 
Secretary-Treasurer  or  Executive  Director  [10]. 
Yet is also unacceptable for physicians to slander 
their  competition  if  no  wrongdoing  has  taken 
place.  Instilling  a  negative  image  about  another 
colleague or practice does not reflect ethical pro-
fessionalism to colleagues or patients.

Medical ethics are not laws in the legal sense, 
but they are standards of conduct which physicians 
practice [1]. Ethics in laser medicine is intended to 
facilitate appropriate physician behavior, and not 
to be construed as legal advice. Ethical behavior 
transcends  legal  implications,  and  represents  the 
level of professionalism, humanity and morality a 
physician should possess in order to address his/
her patient’s care. For more information on ethical 
issues  regarding  laser  procedures,  please  visit 
www.aad.org, www.asds.net, and www.aslms.org.

A. Torres et al.



References

  1.  Webster  SB.  Professionalism  and  medical  eth-
dermatology- 2000.  Arch  Dermatol. 

in 

ics 
2000;136(1):101–2.

  2.  Ringel E. The morality of cosmetic surgery for aging. 

Arch Dermatol. 1998;134:427–31.

  3.  Cantor J. Cosmetic dermatology and physicians’ ethi-
cal  obligations:  more  than  just  hope  in  a  jar.  Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2005;24:155–60.

  4.  Finklestein  D,  Wu  AW,  Holtzman  NA,  et  al.  When 
a physician harms a patient by a medical error: ethi-
cal, legal and risk-management considerations. J Clin 
Ethics. 1997;8(4):300–35.

  5.  Guidelines for ethical patient safety practices in today’s 
rapidly  changing,  complex  environment.  www.asds.
net/GuidelinesForEthicalPatientSafetyPractices.aspx.
  6.  Lolis  M,  Dunbar  SW,  Goldberg  DJ,  et  al.  Patient 
safety  in  procedural  dermatology.  Part  II  safety 
related to cosmetic procedures. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2015;73(1):15–24.

  7.  Standards  of  perioperative  clinical  practice  in  laser 

medicine and surgery. www.aslms.org.

497

  8.  Raulin  C,  Greve  B,  Raulin  S.  Ethical  consider-
ations  concerning  laser  medicine.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2001;28:100–1.

  9.  Wagner  RF,  Brown  T,  McCarthy  EM,  et  al. 
Dermatologist  and  electrologist  perspectives  on 
laser  procedures  by  nonphysicians.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2000;26(8):723–7.

 10.  Administrative regulations: code of medical ethics for 

dermatologists. www.aad.org. 2006.

 11. Williams HC, Naidi L, Paul C. Conflicts of interest in 
dermatology. Acta Derm Venereol. 2006;86(6):485–97.
 12.  Newburger A. Taking ethics seriously in cosmetic der-

matology. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:1641–2.

 13.  Goldberg  D.  Dermatologic  surgical  research  and 
institutional  review  board.  Dermatol  Surg. 

the 
2005;31(10):1317–22.

 14.  Perkins  AC,  Choi  JM,  Kimball  AB.  Reporting  of 
ethical  review  of  clinical  research  submitted  to  the 
Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56(2):279–84.

 15. Sec. 393.200 Laser(s) as medical devices for facelift, 
wrinkle  removal,  acupuncture,  auricular  stimulation, 
etc. (CPG 7133.21). Revised Mar 1995. www.fda.gov/
ora/compliance_ref/cpg/cpgdev/cpg393-200.html.

30 Ethical Issues



Medicolegal Issues 
(Documentation/Informed 
Consent/Non-physician Operators)

31

Abel Torres, Tejas Desai, Sailesh Konda, 
Alpesh Desai, and William T. Kirby

Abstract
The  number  of  elective  laser  and  light  proce-
dures continues to grow eliciting a host of med-
icolegal  issues.  Informed  consent  involves  a 
meeting of the minds as a result of a discussion 
between the provider and the patient. The risks, 
benefits and alternatives of a procedure should 
be disclosed to a patient and is paramount to an 
informed  consent.  Unique  patient  and  physi-
cian  concerns  regarding  the  laser  procedure 
should  be  documented  when  possible.  The 
informed  consent  process  might  benefit  from 
supplementary modes of communication such 
as  patient  questionnaires  to  improve  retention 
rates.  Most  laser  procedures  require  for  laser 
individualized informed consents.

Keywords
Informed  consent  ·  Informed  refusal  ·  Medi-
colegal issues · Laser procedures

A. Torres (*) · S. Konda 
Department of Dermatology, Loma Linda University 
School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA, USA
e-mail: atorres@llu.edu; abelt@aol.com 

T. Desai · A. Desai 
Heights Dermatology & Aesthetic Center,  
Houston, TX, USA 

W. T. Kirby 
Kirby Dermatology, Beverly Hills, CA, USA

•  The  continued  growth  of  elective  laser  and 
light procedures has elicited a host of medico-
legal  issues—many  of  which  can  be  avoided 
with proper informed consent.

•  Informed  consent  involves  a  meeting  of  the 
minds as a result of a discussion between the 
provider and the patient.

•  The risks, benefits and alternatives of a proce-
dure  should  be  disclosed  to  a  patient  and  is 
paramount to an informed consent.

•  Unique patient and provider concerns regard-
ing the laser procedure are best documented as 
part of the informed consent.

•  The  informed  consent  process  might  benefit 
from supplementary modes of communication 
such  as  patient  questionnaires  to  improve 
retention rates.

•  Most  laser  procedures  require  individualized 

informed consents.

•  Special  considerations  for  lasers  that  may  be 
included in an informed consent can be recalled 
by a simple acronym, “L-A-S-E-R-S.”

•  It is important that pediatric patients be a part 
of  the  consent  discussion  if  they  have  the 
capacity to do so.

•  Informed refusal by the patient can be docu-
mented  if  the  patient  is  refusing  a  treatment 
the physician is recommending and requesting 
another treatment that may be less beneficial. 
can  decline 
a  physician 
Additionally, 
 performing a treatment if it can be detrimental 
to the patient.

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_31

499





500

•  Laser  procedures  should  only  be  performed 
by  appropriately  trained  physicians  or  allied 
health providers.

to 

According 

the  American  Society  of 
Dermatologic Society (ASDS), its members col-
lectively have performed over 100 million laser, 
light, and energy-based cosmetic procedures [1]. 
In 2013 alone, its members performed 2.25 mil-
lion  of  these  procedures,  which  has  increased 
34%  when  compared  to  2012  [2].  This  number 
should  continue  to  expand  as  life  expectancy 
increases, causing a seemingly everlasting popu-
lation desiring to achieve a more youthful appear-
ance. Combining these numerous laser procedures 
with  unrealistic  patient  expectations  may  be  a 
recipe  for  a  legal  disaster.  Two  recent  studies 
have  illustrated  the  current  medicolegal  land-
scape with regards to laser procedures.

Jalian  and  colleagues  examined  28  years  of 
legal cases secondary to cutaneous laser surgery 
and demonstrated an increasing trend of litigation 
with  a  peak  in  2010.  Laser  hair  removal  (63%) 
was the most commonly litigated procedure and 
lack  of  proper  informed  consent  (53%)  was  the 
most common legal cause of action. They discov-
ered  that  49.2%  of  cases  favored  the  defendant, 
the median indemnity was $380,719, and plastic 
surgeons were the most commonly named defen-
dant.  Nearly  40%  of  the  cases  involved  a  non-
physician  operator,  which  included  both  allied 
health professionals and non-health professionals, 
such as aestheticians and technicians. Even if the 
physician  supervisor  did  not  perform  the  proce-
dure, they were still named as a defendant [3].

More  recently,  Svider  and  colleagues  con-
ducted a focused examination of malpractice liti-
gation regarding laser procedures in the head and 
neck. They discovered that 82% of cases involved 
female  plaintiffs  and  56%  were  resolved  with  a 
defendant  verdict.  The  median  indemnity  was 
$150,000 and dermatologists were the most com-
monly named defendant. Seventy-four percent of 
cases involved cutaneous procedures and the most 
common  allegations  included  permanent  injury 
(71%), disfigurement/scarring (68%), inadequate 
informed consent (50%), unnecessary/inappropri-
ate procedures (44%), and burns (32%) [4].

The  four  commonly  accepted  principles  of 
healthcare ethics are: respect for autonomy, non-
maleficence,  beneficence,  and  justice.  Respect 
for  autonomy  is  the  basis  for  the  practice  of 
informed  consent  in  the  physician-patient  rela-
tionship.  Both  of  the  aforementioned  studies 
underscore the importance of documentation and 
informed consent when performing elective laser 
procedures in dermatology. Educating the patient 
in  layman  terms,  further  explaining  the  risks, 
benefits  and  alternatives  are  wise  actions  even 
before a test spot and/or treatment is attempted. 
Moreover,  the  nature,  course  and  aim  of  treat-
ment should be clearly stated to define the objec-
tives  for  the  patient  and  physician.  This  allows 
the patient to make a rational decision based on 
the pertinent information that has been presented 
to them.

Informed consent in laser procedures not only 
protects  the  provider,  but  the  patient  as  well. 
Informed consent is not merely a piece of paper 
to be signed by the patient. A nonverbal protocol 
functioning as an informed consent does not fully 
protect  a  provider  and  does  not  serve  the  best 
interest of a patient. Informed consent involves a 
meeting of the minds as a result of a discussion 
between  the  provider  and  the  patient.  Written 
consent  is  merely  a  confirmation  of  what  has 
been  discussed. A  patient’s  signature  on  a  pre-
printed  consent  form,  which  has  not  been  pre-
ceded  by  a  discussion,  does  not  grant  free  rein, 
and  in  the  event  of  a  legal  dispute,  such  forms 
may be declared invalid [5]. Unique patient and 
provider concerns regarding the laser procedure 
are best documented as part of the informed con-
sent. This  can  help  identify  and  personalize  the 
treatment plan for each specific patient. Identical 
informed consents without additional notes may 
sometimes appear like a reflex, rather than a com-
munication between patient and provider.

The authors recommend writing a risk, bene-
fit  and  alternatives  (RBA)  note  together  with  a 
written informed consent. The note emphasizes 
the  RBA  that  is  especially  pertinent  to  the 
patient. In this way, it is a reminder to the pro-
vider to discuss these issues with the patient, and 
supplies  additional  documentation  to  the  medi-
cal  record.  Such  a  note  does  not  have  to  be 

A. Torres et al.



lengthy or extensive. It can consist of a sentence. 
An  example  of  this  would  be:  “The  RBA  dis-
cussed  with  the  patient  emphasizing  the  poten-
tial risk of post-treatment, permanent dyschromia 
due to the patient’s Fitzpatrick skin type.

Informed consent retention has been shown to 
be less than 50% in other fields of medicine [6]. 
In addition, in patients undergoing dermatologic 
surgery,  one  study  showed  an  overall  retention 
rate of 26.5% just 20 min after being informed of 
ten  possible  complications  [6].  It  is  apparent 
from this study that informed consent might ben-
efit  from  supplementary  modes  of  communica-
tion to improve retention rates. When treatment is 
usually  reserved  for  a  future  day,  the  overall 
retention rate for patients can be expected to drop 
even more. Patient pamphlets for education can 
complement  written  and  verbal  informed  con-
sent. Handouts can be noted in the medical record 
indicating an exchange took place on the day of 
the consultation. Furthermore, video-based edu-
cation  has  been  shown  to  be  superior  to  pam-
phlet-based education for patients learning about 
a  dermatological  condition  and  this  could  be 
expanded to the informed consent process [7]. It 
is helpful when numerous modes of communica-
tion are involved in order for the patient to solid-
ify his/her decision on a non-medical procedure. 
Some physicians, like Dr. David Duffy, advocate 
using a questionnaire that the patient must answer 
to demonstrate comprehension of the consent.

It  is  wise  to  seek  informed  consent  for  each 
type  of  laser  that  is  operated  by  the  physician. 
Each laser system functions in a unique fashion. 
The  same  laser  created  by  various  competitors 
may  differ  in  terms  of  treatment  settings  and 
potential side effects. For this reason, establishing 
a relationship with the laser company for support 
is  advantageous  for  the  physician.  Furthermore, 
ensuring that the medical device is FDA approved 
for patient therapy could minimize liability.

Special  considerations  involving  informed 
consent for laser therapy include type of anesthe-
sia, permission for release of photographs, revo-
cation  of  consent,  observations,  no  guarantee 
clause, and waiver of liability [8]. These key ele-
ments  may  be  forgotten,  and  provides  useful 
information to the patient while adding pertinent 

501

documentation to the medical record. If preoper-
ative anesthetic is part of the laser technique, its 
risks  and  benefits 
should  be  discussed. 
Photographs  can  be  taken  to  measure  improve-
ment, but at times, may be a sensitive issue with 
certain patients. It is vital that pictures be confi-
dential and without identification when appropri-
ate. This can be explained or added to the medical 
record as an informed consent note. A revocation 
of consent discussion can let a patient know that 
they can discontinue treatment at any time he/she 
wishes.  It  is  useful  under  circumstances  when 
discontinuation  may  alter  the  outcome.  A  “no 
guarantee”  clause  makes  the  patient  aware  that 
although the laser procedure is effective in most 
cases, no guarantees can be made that a specific 
patient  will  benefit  from  the  laser  treatment. 
Finally, informed consent may need to include a 
waiver  of  financial  liability.  A  patient  should 
understand  that  insurance  companies,  including 
Medicare, only pay for services they determine to 
be reasonable and necessary, otherwise, denial of 
payment may ensue [8].

The acronym “LASERS,” representing liabil-
ity  waiver,  type  of  anesthesia,  surveillance  and 
observations,  no  expectation/guarantee  clause, 
revocation of consent, and snapshots/photographs 
can  remind  the  physician  of  the  particular  ele-
ments  to  be  included  into  the  informed  consent 
(Table  31.1).  Additional  documentation  may  be 

Table 31.1  Key elements to be included on an informed 
consent

Liability 
waiver

Anesthesia 
type
Surveillance

Expectations

Revocation of 
consent

Snapshot

A patient needs to be aware that their 
insurance company may not cover 
services rendered
Disclose the risks, benefits and type 
of anesthesia used
Observations, outcomes and side 
effects on the postoperative record 
documents treatment course in the 
best interest of the patient
A no guarantee clause indicates that 
a patient needs to be aware a positive 
clinical outcome cannot be certain
Offer the option of letting the patient 
refuse treatment at any time 
especially if it alters outcome
Photographs kept confidential 
without Identification

31 Medicolegal Issues (Documentation/Informed Consent/Non-physician Operators)



502

specifically geared towards the patient and/or the 
type  of  laser  treatment  they  are  receiving.  For 
example, the informed consent could include the 
risks, benefits and alternatives of a postoperative 
antiviral  if  the  patient  is  at  risk  for  herpes 
labialis.

The  pediatric  cosmetic  dermatologic  patient 
poses  different  considerations  to  informed  con-
sent. The pediatric patient is usually not legally 
competent  so  a  physician  must  obtain  consent 
from the parents or legal guardians. Otherwise, it 
could be considered a battery irrespective of the 
result [9]. The patient’s parents become the sur-
rogate  decision-makers,  and  their  view  of  the 
child  predominates  as  the  primary  clinical  end-
point. Nevertheless, it is important that pediatric 
patients be a part of the consent discussion if they 
have the capacity to do so. If general anesthesia is 
required for children, consent should encompass 
the risks and benefits associated with it.

A  competent  patient  may  refuse  a  recom-
mended laser treatment. Although most laser pro-
cedures  are  voluntary,  the  provider  should 
document  the  refusal  of  a  specific  treatment  if 
warranted.  There  is  more  validity  to  this  state-
ment  when  a  recommended  treatment  is  more 
beneficial than another laser procedure. Patients 
can be motivated to obtain a laser procedure for 
many  reasons  such  as  cost.  Clinical  outcomes 
may  differ,  and  the  physician  is  encouraged  to 
clarify  which  treatment  option  offers  the  best 
results. If the patient chooses to undergo another 
laser treatment with inferior results, an informed 
refusal  appended  to  the  medical  chart  helps 
another  practitioner  understand 
issues 
involved,  and  may  provide  a  deterrent  to  litiga-
tion.  Informed  consent  and  informed  refusal  go 
hand  in  hand,  except  the  latter  explains  to  a 
patient about the potential negative implications 
of refusing a treatment [10]. Additionally, a phy-
sician can decline performing a treatment if it can 
be detrimental to the patient. This ultimately ben-
efits the patient.

the 

Lastly,  as  noted  earlier  by  Jalian  and  col-
leagues, there are an increasing number of legal 
cases  involving  non-physician  operators  [3]. 
Currently, 33 states define the use of lasers as the 
practice  of  medicine  and  the  remaining  states 

have  varying,  and  often  vague,  definitions  as  to 
the scope of practice of non-physician operators. 
It is imperative for dermatologists to familiarize 
themselves  with  their  respective  state’s  laws. 
Laser  procedures  should  only  be  performed  by 
appropriately trained physicians or allied health 
providers. If an allied health provider is perform-
ing the procedure, the physician should be avail-
able in accordance with governing state rules and 
regulations. A survey of dermatologists in Texas 
found that 33% of respondents reported compli-
cations that occurred in the absence of an on-site 
supervising physician [11].

A  successful  laser  procedure  includes  an 
informed  consent  process,  allowing  the  patient 
to  have  peace  of  mind  before  he/she  receives 
treatment and to make an informed decision. In a 
cosmetic world, many patients do not view laser 
treatments as medical care, but it is the provid-
er’s duty to assert his/her role during the course. 
Lasers  and  light  therapies  are  complex  proce-
dures, and a medical problem may occur rather 
easily if one is not careful. While complications 
of  laser  and  light  procedures  are  uncommon, 
there  is  risk  associated  with  these  procedures. 
The  appropriate  level  of  documentation  helps 
clarify  the  care  rendered  regardless  of  what 
occurs.  Periodic  audits  for  quality  assurance 
may be beneficial in a laser-based practice [12]. 
An in-house audit could address weaknesses in 
the  informed  consent  process  and  minimize 
liability.

Acknowledgement  Funding sources: There are no fund-
ing sources for this work.

Conflict  of  interest:  The  authors  have  no  conflict  of 

interest to declare.

References

 1.  Goldberg  DJ.  Legal  considerations  in  cosmetic  laser 

surgery. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2006;5:103–6.

 2.  ASDS survey: skin cancer, cosmetic procedures jump 
22  percent  in  2013.  Available  at  https://www.asds.
net/_Media.aspx?id=7744. Accessed 1 Sept 2014.
 3.  Jalian  HR,  Jalian  CA, Avram  MM.  Common  causes 
of  injury  and  legal  action  in  laser  surgery.  JAMA 
Dermatol. 2013;149:188–93.

 4.  Svider  PF,  Carron  MA,  Zuliani  GF,  Eloy  JA,  Setzen 
M, Folbe AJ. Lasers and losers in the eyes of the law: 

A. Torres et al.



503

liability for head and neck procedures. JAMA Facial 
Plast Surg. 2014;16:277–83.

  5.  Greve  B,  Raulin  C.  Professional  errors  caused  by 
lasers and intense pulsed light technology in derma-
tology  and  aesthetic  medicine:  preventive  strategies 
and case studies. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28:156–61.
  6.  Fleischman M, Garcia C. Informed consent in derma-
tologic surgery. Dermatol Surg. 2003;29:952–5; dis-
cussion 955.

  7.  Armstrong  AW,  Kim  RH,  Idriss  NZ,  Larsen  LN, 
Lio PA. Online video improves clinical outcomes in 
adults with atopic dermatitis: a randomized controlled 
trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;64:502–7.

  8.  Goldberg  D.  Laser  dermatology.  2nd  ed.  Berlin: 

Springer; 2012.

  9.  Lahti  JG,  Shabshin  U,  Lewis  AT,  Benedetto 
AV.  Pediatric  cosmetic  dermatology.  Clin  Dermatol. 
2003;21:315–20.

 10.  Wagner RF Jr, Torres A, Proper S. Informed consent 
and informed refusal. Dermatol Surg. 1995;21:555–9.
 11.  Friedman  PM,  Jih  MH,  Burns  AJ,  Geronemus  RG, 
Kimyai-Asadi A,  Goldberg  LH.  Nonphysician  prac-
tice  of  dermatologic  surgery:  the  Texas  perspective. 
Dermatol Surg. 2004;30:857–63.

 12.  Cohen SN, Lanigan SW. Audit cycle of documentation 
in laser hair removal. Lasers Med Sci. 2005;20:87–8.

31 Medicolegal Issues (Documentation/Informed Consent/Non-physician Operators)



Photography of Dermatological 
Laser Treatment

32

Shraddha Desai and Ashish C. Bhatia

Abstract
The  art  and  science  of  photography  has 
evolved tremendously in the past decade, pro-
viding the practitioner of cutaneous laser pro-
cedures with a versatile and useful set of tools 
to enhance this procedure, ultimately improv-
ing  patient  care.  The  use  of  photography  in 
cutaneous laser therapy is extensive. It encom-
passes the documentation of before-and-after 
assessments and long-term reviews of various 
skin  conditions  treated  via  laser  therapy. 
Treated lesions and/or any potential complica-
tions that may arise after a procedure can be 
monitored  closely.  This  is  benefitted  by  the 
ability  to  upload  these  photos  directly  to  the 
patient’s  electronic  medical  record  (EMR). 
Here,  the  photographs  are  readily  accessible 
for follow-up patient visit and allows for com-
munication  between  physicians  regarding 
identification  of  lesions  and  the  treatments 
performed. Furthermore, outside of the clini-
cal setting photography is an invaluable tool in 

S. Desai 
Dermatology Institute of DuPage Medical Group, 
Naperville, IL, USA 

A. C. Bhatia (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Northwestern 
University – Feinberg School of Medicine,  
Chicago, IL, USA

Oak Dermatology, Schaumburg, IL, USA 
e-mail: ashish@derm.md

the education of trainees, peers, and the gen-
eral  public.  However,  appropriate  and  stan-
dardized digital photographs are essential for 
these benefits to be realized.

Keywords
Photography · Dermatology · Digital camera · 
Digital single lens reflex (DSLR) · Electronic 
medical record (EMR) · Tablet · Dermatologic 
· 
surgery 
Technique

·  Standardized  photos 

·  Laser 

 Introduction

The use of illustrations and imaging has always 
had an essential role in the practice of medicine. 
In the field of dermatology, where visual identifi-
cation  is  imperative,  the  development  of  small 
film cameras not only simplified the description 
of  lesions  made  by  medical  dermatologists,  but 
also allowed for pre- and post-procedural depic-
tions  of  interventions  for  surgical  and  cosmetic 
dermatologists  [1–3].  Now,  with  the  advent  of 
digital cameras and its ongoing evolution, clini-
cians are able to apply this efficient technology to 
cataloging outcomes of cutaneous laser therapy.

The  applications  for  digital  photography  in 
laser treatment are numerous. It can be used in 
the  assessment  of  the  before-and-after  appear-
ance  of  a  lesion,  thereby  determining  success 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_32

505





506

rates  and  long-term  reviews  of  various  skin 
conditions treated via laser therapy. Photographs 
can also be used to monitor treated lesions for 
any complications that arise post-procedure [1]. 
With  the  implementation  of  the  EMR  system, 
digital rather than film photos are favored due 
to  the  ease  of  integration  into  the  medical 
record. Photos are routinely used to teach stu-
dents,  residents,  patients,  and  staff  about  the 
outcomes; both favorable and unfavorable, of a 
laser procedure [3]. In order to gain the benefits 
from digital photography, it is necessary to first 
know how to operate a digital camera. The sci-
ence  of  photography,  like  medicine,  is  rapidly 
evolving as technological innovations continue. 
In  spite  of  these  advances,  the  fundamental 
principles  of  photography  remain  unchanged. 
Therefore,  a  proper  understanding  and  imple-
mentation  of  photo-taking  skills  will  continue 
to aid in the value of photographs used to docu-
ment laser therapy. Disclaimer: Please note that 
any mention of specific manufactured products 
in this chapter is included only for their value 
as examples at this time. There may very well 
be  faster,  less  expensive,  and  easier  to  use 
equipment  in  the  near  future  that  will  render 
moot  any  recommendations  or  brand-specific 
tablet 
comments  made  here.  Additionally, 
devices  will  only  be  discussed  briefly  in  this 
chapter.

 Photography Equipment

Regardless  of  the  subject  matter  and  photo-
graphic  equipment  used,  there  is  one  aspect  of 
photography that remains universal—the captur-
ing  of  light.  Light  has  to  be  reflected  off  of  an 
object, passed through a lens, and then recorded 
on either light-sensitive film or by a digital sen-
sor. In order for the image to be well-recorded, it 
is necessary to accurately resolve the image at the 
film plane or CCD (focus), measure and appro-
priately regulate the amount of light entering the 
lens,  and  to  account  for  the  color  of  the  light. 
Good control of these three functions will result 
in a sharp, adequately exposed, and properly col-
ored photograph.

 Camera Types

•  The  main  categories  of  digital  cameras  are 
type,  Compact/
(SLR) 
single-lens-reflex 
Subcompact 
type,  and 
(point-and-shoot) 
hybrid  cameras.  Because  all  offer  various 
advantages and disadvantages, there is no one 
ideal camera type.

•  Recently,  physicians  have  begun  to  incorpo-
rate  tablets  into  the  clinical  setting.  This 
allows  for  documentation  of  the  patient 
encounter and photographs of lesions of inter-
est; both of which can be uploaded directly to 
the EMR.

•  The  digital  camera  selected  for  clinical  pho-
tography should reflect the needs of the clini-
cian and the clinical setting.

•  Clinical  photography  relies  on  the  recording 
of light, whether it is on film or via an elec-
tronic sensor.

•  The  required  equipment  for  documenting 
laser procedures includes: a digital camera, a 
media  card,  a  media  card  reader,  and  a 
computer.

•  Cameras  and  other  photographic  equipment 
should be selected based upon the needs of the 
practice.  Portability,  image  capacity,  image 
quality, ergonomics, durability, and other sub-
jective  factors  play  into  such  a  decision. 
Generally,  there  are  tradeoffs  for  every  deci-
sion point.

In  general,  clinicians  use  what  is  called  a 
35 mm format camera for photographing patients 
in the exam room or surgical suite. This name is 
a  misnomer,  stemming  from  the  days  when  the 
camera  film  measured  24  ×  36  mm.  It  is  still 
unknown how this initially translated to 35 mm; 
however the specifications for most digital cam-
eras  and  lenses  reference  this  standard.  Current 
35 mm format cameras come in two basic catego-
ries: single lens-reflex (SLR) and compact (point-
and-shoot).  The  SLR  is  the  most  versatile  and 
some manufacturers refer to it as a digital single-
lens-reflex  (DSLR)  [4].  The  advantage  of  this 
camera is that it has the capacity to vary lenses, 

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



which can be important when recording extreme 
close-up  images  or  when  using  the  camera  in 
conjunction  with  other  optical  devices  such  as 
microscopes.  The  other  35  mm  camera  type  is 
much  smaller  and  can  fit  easily  into  a  pocket 
(subcompact) or purse (compact) [4]. Both SLRs 
and  compacts  have  the  ability  to  use  the  same 
recording  media  and  produce  sharp  and  well-
exposed 
correctly. 
Additionally, most are equipped with auto-focus 
technology  which  permits  the  cameras  to  make 
automatic exposures. Tablet cameras may be eas-
ier to use given the simple “tap” to focus and cap-
ture  an  image,  however,  they  are  unlikely  to 
provide the same picture quality as the DSLR and 
subcompact/compacts.

images  when 

used 

 Single Lens Reflex

In the early and middle part of the twentieth cen-
tury,  most  cameras  consisted  of  two  lenses  that 
were vertically mounted to the front of the cam-
era body. One lens enabled the operator to view 
the  scene  while  the  other  recorded  the  image. 
Thus, these cameras were “twin lens” as opposed 
to “single-lens,” made popular with the advent of 
35 mm film. The single lens cameras were also 
given the name “reflex” in reference to a penta-
prism  and  mirrors  inside  the  camera  that  allow 
the  photographer  to  reflexively  view  the  image 
through the same lens that permits light passage 
to the film. At the instant of exposure, the main 
mirror in the camera body flips out of the way so 
that  light  can  travel  unimpeded  onto  the  film 
plane. A disadvantage of SLR cameras is that due 
to  the  necessary  movement  of  the  mirrors,  the 
camera  body  tends  to  be  large  and  frequently 
heavy.  Without  an  attached  lens,  these  cameras 
typically  weigh  between  18  and  33  oz  whereas 
subcompact cameras weigh between 4 and 7 oz 
and compact cameras weigh between 6 and 19 oz 
[6]. However, an advantage of this technology is 
that it allows for the use of a variety of lens and 
flash options. Several lenses, like the wide-angle 
zoom and macro (close-up) are easily attached to 
the  SLR  camera  body  and  are  useful  for  lesion 
characterization. Moreover, SLRs have also been 

507

favored in the past by those who require the abil-
ity  to  set  the  exposure  manually  in  order  to 
accommodate  unique 
lighting  situations.  In 
regards  to  the  new  digital  or  DSLR  cameras, 
many of the older lenses will still function with 
the new digital camera body as long as the manu-
facturer  is  the  same.  Still,  there  may  be  some 
minor formatting compromise due to the differ-
ent field of view of the digital media. Some man-
ufacturers,  like  Nikon™,  Canon™,  and  Fuji™, 
have  overcome  this  by  introducing  reliable  and 
affordable digital SLR cameras that are compati-
ble with their current non-digital gear. In general, 
the cost of good SLR and DSLR cameras ranges 
from  $150  to  $3500  without  lenses,  although 
recent  advances  in  technology  have  driven  the 
price to $8000+ for some.

 Compact/Subcompact

The other 35 mm format camera is the compact/
subcompact  or  point-and-shoot.  Several  years 
ago, this camera was referred to as a “Rangefinder” 
since  this  was  the  focusing  mechanism  it 
employed.  Currently,  it  is  the  overwhelming 
choice of digital camera purchasers in the world. 
The main advantages of this camera are its over-
all body size, LCD size, and economy. Because 
compacts do not rely on a mirror system, they are 
not  limited  to  large  body  sizes  and  even  when 
equipped  with  a  zoom  lens,  a  subcompact  and 
some  compacts  will  fit  easily  into  a  lab  coat 
pocket—a  feat  that  cannot  be  managed  by  an 
SLR. At times, the compact size can be problem-
atic  for  clinicians  with  larger  hands  as  buttons 
and dials on the camera are small. As a result, it 
is  recommended  that  clinicians  physically  test 
cameras  before  purchase.  They  also  have  large 
LCD (liquid crystal displays) screens so that the 
photographer  can  preview  and  review  a  photo-
graph. Often, LCD displays on the SLR cameras 
can  only  be  used  to  review  a  picture  taken,  but 
they cannot be used for preview. Additionally, the 
average  cost  of  subcompact  and  compact  cam-
eras tend to be much lower than that of SLRs. In 
general,  they  range  in  price  from  $100  to  $450 
[5, 6]. Likewise, with recent advances in the art 

32 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment



508

of lens manufacture, many of the enhanced com-
pact  cameras  now  compare  favorably  with  the 
single lens reflex models for most medical situa-
tions. This is especially true if the purpose of the 
image is to document relative sizes and locations 
of lesions or defects. The majority of these mod-
els  come  equipped  with  zoom  lenses  that  can 
offer a range of different focal lengths thus emu-
lating, if not equaling, the chief feature of SLRs. 
One  shortfall  of  compact  cameras  is  their  flash 
capability. Most have a very small “pop-up” flash 
built  into  the  camera  body.  Therefore,  when 
shooting very close to or more than 9 ft from the 
subject,  the  flash  can  result  in  overexposure  of 
the  image  or  be  considerably  underpowered  in 
lowlight  conditions.  However,  these  situations 
can be avoided by using the optical zoom capa-
bilities of the camera while standing at approxi-
mately 4–5 ft from the subject.

Several  manufacturers  also  offer  a  hybrid 
DSLR/compact  camera  which  is  thought  of  as 
“SLR-like.” This camera type is larger than most 
compacts due to the accommodation of a partic-
ularly  un-compact-like  lens.  This  lens,  while 
larger  and  of  a  greater  zoom  capability  than 
other compacts, is not interchangeable. Still, the 
larger lens may have a better close-up capability 
and the camera itself has an option for an auxil-
iary flash. Overall, the camera has the look of a 
DSLR  without  many  of  the  inherent  SLR 
disadvantages.

 Tablet Devices

Although  earlier  models  have  been  available 
since  the  1990s,  tablets  have  gained  popularity 
since  the  mid-2000s.  These  devices  come  stan-
dard with a camera and their main advantage is 
the ease of use and ability to upload directly to 
EMR  systems.  Tablets  are  equipped  with  a 
“Camera”  app,  which  once  opened,  show  an 
LCD screen similar to that of the SLRs and com-
pact cameras. Autofocus features and tapping the 
screen  to  capture  images  make  operating  this 
camera possible at any skill level. The megapix-
els range from 5.0 to 8.0, may come with or with-
out  a  flash,  and  cost  varies  from  $329  to  $929. 

Many  EMRs  are  set  up  to  transfer  the  photos 
directly to the patients’ chart from the tablet once 
connected  to  a  PC.  Low  light  performance  is 
often an issue with the cameras on tablet devices, 
so bright and consistent lighting should be used 
whenever possible.

 Lenses

•  SLR  cameras  have  the  ability  to  exchange 
lenses  for  different  purposes,  while  compact 
cameras  generally  have  non-interchangeable 
lenses with versatile features.

•  Due to the nature of dermatology and derma-
tologic surgery, macro or “close up” capabil-
ity is a must when choosing a camera.

•  With  digital  cameras  (compact/subcompact 
and  tablets),  avoid  using  the  “digital  zoom” 
feature since it can degrade image quality.

No  matter  which  type  of  digital  camera  is 
selected, it is helpful to have a simple familiarity 
with lenses. The choice of lens is generally deter-
mined  by  the  purpose  of  the  camera  as  well  as 
budgetary and shooting space constraints. If the 
intent is to record full body images, it will be nec-
essary to either have a good amount of room in 
which  to  physically  back  up,  or  to  use  a  wide-
angle zoom lens. Should the practice be confined 
to facial surgery for instance, a normal or short 
telephoto  lens  is  adequate.  Still,  in  nearly  all 
practices  the  nature  of  the  subject  seems  to 
require  at 
least  some  macro  or  close-up 
capability.

 Wide Angle Zoom

Zoom lenses are often used in smaller examina-
tion  rooms  to  take  full-body  photographs  of 
patients. This type of lens is especially useful in 
displaying the distribution and pattern of a whole-
body  rash  [5].  They  are  designed  such  that  the 
internal elements can alter position and produce a 
variable  field  of  view,  thus  capturing  the  entire 
area of focus. The majority of compact cameras 
come  equipped  with  zoom  lenses  as  standard 

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



equipment. Most SLRs, however, are sold with a 
normal  lens  and  have  the  option  of  mounting 
other  fixed  focal  length  or  specialty  lenses  like 
wide-angle  zooms.  In  general,  most  digital 
 cameras  contain  both  optical  and  digital  zoom 
capabilities.  An  optical  zoom  is  like  that  of  an 
older  film  camera.  The  camera  alters  its  focal 
length  by  changing  the  position  of  internal  lens 
elements. The optical zoom is frequently favored 
over the digital zoom, because this camera utilizes 
high quality optic lens technology. What has com-
monly been referred to as “digital” zoom does not 
involve optics, but rather is an electronic cropping 
of the image in the camera’s viewfinder followed 
by  enlargement.  This  in  turn  results  in  a  lower 
quality image than a photo taken with an optical 
zoom  lens.  Therefore,  it  is  better  not  to  rely  on 
digital zoom, but instead, use the digital camera’s 
optical zoom feature whenever possible.

 Macro or “Close-Up” Lenses

Macro-lenses are used to focus the camera within 
millimeters of the lesion in question. This allows 
for  certain  characteristics  such  as  texture  and 
color to be visualized with great detail [5]. If the 
dermatologist’s camera of choice does not  have 
the mounting capability for different lenses (like 
SLRs), the built-in lens should be able to focus 
on up-close objects. Unfortunately, many lower-
priced  cameras  are  not  manufactured  with  this 
capability.  For  dermatologic  surgery,  it  is  most 
appropriate to have a macro-lens that can capture 
an image at a 1:1 (subject to film) ratio. At this 
setting,  a  photographed  area  would  be  repro-
duced  at  exactly  the  same  size  on  the  film  or 
media card as in reality. For 35 mm film, the sub-
ject will cover an area that is 24 × 36 mm; ade-
quate for recording a small lesion. However, not 
all  close-focusing  lenses  have  a  1:1  capability. 
Therefore, it is important to ask about this feature 
prior to purchasing a lens.

Note that a lens that has macro capability also 
functions as a regular lens that is dependent on its 
focal length. This length will determine how far 
away the photographer can be while taking both 
normally-focused  and  macro  pictures.  At  our 

509

facilities, we’ve determined that the most appro-
priate  macro-lens  length  for  obtaining  photo-
graphs of patients and surgeries is 105 mm. This 
length allows for close focus of images while the 
camera remains at a reasonable distance from the 
site  of  interest.  This  also  makes  the  situation 
more  comfortable  for  both  the  patient  and 
surgeon.

 Flash

•  Using the camera flash (instead of relying on 
ambient  lighting)  allows  for  image  consis-
tency, adequate depth of field, good color, and 
proper exposure of photographs.

•  A hot shoe is a port on a camera that allows for 
an external flash unit to be mounted. This flex-
ibility is desirable if shooting in situations that 
require complex external flash setups.

Regardless  of  office  quality  or  surgical  suite 
lighting, it is best not to rely on these as primary 
light  sources.  Instead,  use  the  camera  flash.  It 
facilitates  image  consistency,  adequate  field 
depth, improved color, and appropriate exposure. 
An electronic flash produces light that simulates 
daylight,  so  that  color  balance  is  not  required. 
Many  newer  cameras  come  with  a  small  flash 
unit  that  is  adequate  for  this  in  most  cases. 
However,  for  images  requiring  a  more  profes-
sional  look,  or  for  the  flash  to  function  farther 
than 9 ft for full-body shots, it will be necessary 
to supplement the camera with an additional flash 
unit. When shopping for a camera or flash, it is 
important  to  note  that  flashes  are  rated  by  their 
light output by a “guide number” (GN). A guide 
number of 80 or higher (at ISO 100) is adequate 
for most dermatology needs.

 Flash Options

SLRs  have  the  option  to  not  only  exchange 
lenses, but flashes as well. This is accomplished 
with the aid of a “hot-shoe.” A hot-shoe is a flat, 
horizontally  mounted,  square-shaped  socket  on 
top of the camera that attaches to an external flash 

32 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment



510

unit. Most of these units have a number of electri-
cal contacts on the socket (metal dots) that mate 
with similar contacts on the flash that allow for 
communication between the flash and camera. A 
ring  flash  is  a  unique  flash  unit  that  can  be 
attached  via  the  hot-shoe  and  has  the  ability  to 
eliminate  shadows  by  casting  light  in  all  direc-
tions. This can be quite effective if the intent is to 
evenly illuminate and record a flat field. It is also 
useful  for  photographing  within  deep  surgical 
defects or cavities (like the oral cavity), since no 
shadow will be created by the depth. On the other 
hand, this even lighting can be a drawback if the 
intent  is  to  illustrate  a  lesion  or  rash  that  has  a 
subtle texture. The major disadvantage of the ring 
flash is that the emitted lights are almost univer-
sally underpowered.

As a result, illumination of a full human figure 
will often result in underexposure. Still, the ring 
flash  remains  adequate  for  taking  close-focus 
photographs. Another flash option is a point flash. 
Any flash that can be “pointed” at the field either 
by removing it from its mount or by using a mov-
able flash head feature can be called a point flash. 
The  advantage  of  this  type  of  flash  is  that  the 
angle  of  light  in  relation  to  the  photographed 
object creates a slight shadow that reveals shape, 
contour, and topography. If it is important to dis-
play  the  depth,  height,  or  texture  of  a  dermato-
logical  feature,  this  type  of  flash  is  far  superior 
to  a  ring  flash.  Digital  compact  cameras  do  not 
have  the  ability  to  exchange  flash  units  and 
instead  contain  a  built-in  flash  that  may  not  be 
able to produce adequately-exposed photographs. 
Additionally, many compact cameras require bat-
teries, so in order to maintain these for a longer 
period of time; the flash often has to be reduced 
in size and output potential. In order to circum-
vent this, an auxiliary flash can be used.

An  auxiliary  flash  can  either  be  connected 
directly to the camera or can be triggered at the 
right instance by some other means. Since some 
lower-priced compacts and SLRs do not have a 
PC socket or hot-shoe for flash connection, one 
can use a photo cell as an auxiliary flash. A photo 
cell  is  comparable  to  a  wireless  remote,  but 
instead  of  controlling  a  television  set,  it  fires  a 
flash  of  light  when  it  senses  another  flash  (the 

one built into the camera). Photography studios 
have done this for several years, and refer to it as 
a  “slave”  flash  unit.  Several  manufacturers  of 
slave units can provide the medical photographer 
with adequate lighting in virtually all scenarios. 
Note  that  many  digital  cameras  use  a  series  of 
rapid low-power “pre-flashes” in order to set the 
camera  white  balance  for  a  shot  and  to  reduce 
the “red-eye” effect. These pre-flashes can there-
fore  trigger  the  slave  flash  at  an  inappropriate 
time. Be certain that the camera has a setting to 
disable the pre-flash, or that the slave flash has 
the ability to filter out the flashes from its trig-
gering cycle.

 White Balance

•  Adjusting  the  white  balance  on  the  camera 
prior  to  taking  photographs  can  compensate 
for  the  unnatural  color  in  photographs  from 
varying ambient light sources.

All light has color, but this often goes unno-
ticed as our brains color-correct light without any 
conscious  effort  on  our  part.  Each  light  source 
produces a particular wavelength which is identi-
fied by degrees Kelvin and commonly referred to 
as  the  light’s  “color  temperature.”  Digital  cam-
eras  correct  for  color  temperature  with  “white 
balance.”  Since  daylight,  or  white  light  is  the 
standard  by  which  we  measure  color,  yellow  is 
usually seen as yellow, green as green, and so on 
and  so  forth.  However,  when  an  artificial  light 
source is introduced, like fluorescent lighting in 
the  office,  the  color  of  light  takes  on  a  green 
tinge, especially when viewing human skin. The 
camera  unfortunately  records  this  color  very 
well. For this reason, we must make adjustments 
to the “white balance” setting of a camera if sub-
jects  are  photographed  under  fluorescent 
lighting.

The  same  holds  true  for  tungsten  lighting 
found in common filament light bulbs and for the 
tungsten/halogen  hybrid  bulbs  found  in  many 
surgical  rooms.  Fortunately,  an  electronic  flash 
is designed with a color temperature that approx-
imates  daylight  so  a  flash  photo  is  the  most 

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



color-precise image when taken with a daylight 
white  balance  setting.  Most  digital  cameras 
come with menu preset options that change the 
color sensitivity of the camera for various light-
ing  situations. These may be adequate for certain 
situations, but for the most effective and accurate 
recording of color, it is advisable to use the “cus-
tom white balance” option which is explained in 
the camera manual. If the custom white balance 
procedure is followed properly, there will be no 
need  to  repeat  the  process  each  time  the  same 
room and light source is used. Under no circum-
stances  should  one  rely  on  a  common  setting 
called  “Auto  White  Balance”  or  AWB.  This 
option is not able to replicate daylight effectively 
and  because  color  reproduction  is  critical  to 
medical 
not 
photography,  AWB 
recommended.

is 

 Focal Ratio

The focal ratio, also known as the f-ratio, f-num-
ber, or relative aperture, is the ratio of the lens’ 
focal length, or the distance from the lens to the 
point  over  which  initially  collimated  rays  are 
brought  into  focus,  to  the  diameter  of  the  aper-
ture: N = f/D [7]. F-numbers are usually preceded 
by  f/.  For  example,  if  a  lens’s  focal  length  is 
10 mm and its diameter is 5 mm, the f-number is 
2 and the aperture size would be expressed as f/2. 
In  general,  a  lens  with  a  greater  f-number  proj-
ects darker images. To focus on a subject, while 
de-emphasizing  the  fore-  and  background,  a 
small f-number can be used (wide aperture, short 
focal length). On the other hand, if multiple sharp 
objects are required, a high f-number should be 
used [7].

 Digital Media

•  Images stored by a digital camera are recorded 

onto digital media.

•  There  is  an  assortment  of  digital  media  for-
mats  and 
technological  advances  ensure 
increasing  memory  capacity  and  newer 
designs.

511

•  Digital cameras can typically only use specific 
types of digital media, so it is important to use 
the right variety.

When  a  photograph  is  taken  with  a  digital 
camera,  light  passes  through  the  lens  onto  the 
image  capture  device.  This  is  commonly  a 
charge coupled device (CCD). It is a film-sized 
wafer  that  is  embedded  with  millions  of  light 
sensing units called pixels that filter red, blue, 
and green (primary colors) light. With exposure 
to  light,  the  pixels  transmit  light  data  along 
with its position in the array to a micro-proces-
sor which then translates this information into a 
coded pattern. This pattern is called a file for-
mat  and  the  information  it  contains  is  passed 
along  to  the  memory  module  (media  card)  for 
storage. The media card is the “film” of digital 
cameras  and  its  storage  size  ranges  from  64 
megabytes  (MB)  to  128  gigabytes  (GB).  The 
larger  the  storage  size,  the  more  photographs 
that  can  be  stored.  Presently,  there  are  about 
eight  memory  card  types  that  work  in  digital 
cameras. These include the compact flash (CF), 
secure  digital  (SD),  smart  media,  multimedia 
card, memory stick, XQD and xD cards. Most 
formats  have  a  large  range  of  capabilities  and 
are  more  than  adequate  for  recording  photo-
graphic  images.  Remember  that  memory  card 
types are not interchangeable. A single memory 
card can only be used in a camera that accepts 
that type of storage device. However, each card 
can be used repeatedly. And in order to do so, it 
will  be  necessary  to  empty  the  card  or  down-
load the images into a computer once the mem-
ory  card  becomes  full.  A  useful  downloading 
accessory for a digital camera is a memory card 
reader. These small devices connect to a com-
puter  USB  port  and  can  accommodate  various 
memory  cards.  Once  the  card  is  inserted  into 
the reader, the images can be downloaded into 
the computer. The advantage to downloading in 
this fashion as opposed to connecting the cam-
era directly to the computer is that because the 
camera  isn’t  required,  its  battery  power  is 
saved. Most memory card readers are also inex-
pensive and range in price from $10 to $50. The 
main  disadvantage  of  using  memory  cards  for 

32 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment



512

downloading is the risk of damaging the card or 
reader  contacts  with  repeated  insertion  and 
removal of the card.

 Mega-Pixels

•  Mega-pixels reflect the amount of information 

or detail contained within an image.

•  Larger mega-pixel images contain more detail, 
but  also  require  longer  transfer  times  for 
recording  and  greater  space  for  storing  the 
image.

Mega-pixel refers to how many “picture ele-
ments”  (pixels)  are  on  your  CCD  or  comple-
mentary  metal  oxide  semiconductor  (CMOS) 
chip that are exposed to light reflected off of a 
subject. The prefix “mega” means “millions of,” 
and each pixel is the smallest unit in the photo-
graph  that  can  be  assigned  a  unique  color. 
Increasing  the  number  of  pixels  that  makes  up 
an  image  increases  the  detail  but  only  up  to  a 
point. As  the  number  of  mega-pixels  enlarges, 
so  does  the  file  size  (the  amount  of  space 
required  to  store  the  image)  and  the  burden  of 
handling it. Large file sizes can slow down the 
recording of the image onto a memory card, the 
transfer of the images into a computer, and the 
processing  of  images  by  editing  software. 
Moreover,  multi-mega-pixel  digital  cameras 
produce  just  as  much  detail  as  35  mm  format 
cameras of 10 years ago, and even high mega-
pixel  cameras  (8  mega-pixels  and  higher)  are 
not necessary to attain publisher quality images. 
For  the  purpose  of  dermatologic  surgery  and 
laser treatment, obtaining a 1.5–2.5 mega-pixel 
image will be more than adequate.

 Submitting Images for Publications

At  present,  most  publishers  of  medical  jour-
nals  and  texts  are  producing  their  material 
entirely  with  digital  equipment.  In  the  “instruc-
tions  for  authors,”  most  publishers  will  specify 
the parameters for submission of digital images. 
In general, the guidelines are as follows.

Resolution: Publishers specify image resolu-
tion in pixels per inch (ppi). Higher ppi equates 
better  reproduction  quality 
in  most  cases. 
However, it is also true that a resolution that is 
greater  than  that  used  by  the  output  device  is 
simply wasted information. For almost all appli-
cations,  a  resolution  of  300  ppi  is  reasonable. 
Some programs, like PowerPoint™, find a reso-
lution of 150 ppi ideal. Images from digital cam-
eras are generally transferred to the computer at 
a resolution of 72 ppi. This may seem inadequate 
until  the  actual  image  dimensions  (height  and 
width) are taken into account. In most cases, the 
camera saves images at much larger print dimen-
sions than necessary. Many image enhancement 
software  programs  can  be  used  to  change  the 
image size and adjust the ppi for a faster down-
load. For instance, if an image is saved at 72 ppi 
and  at  20  ×  30  in.,  one  can  reset  this  value  to 
300 ppi, and the image size will be automatically 
reduced  to  about  5  ×  7  in.  The  file  size  of  the 
image  will  not  change,  but  the  download  rate 
will be faster.

Dimensions: This is the actual print size of the 
file in inches (or cm or pixels) measured around 
the outside of the image. Usually a 4 × 6 in. or 
5  ×  7  in.  image  is  adequate  for  office  use.  For 
publications, check the “instructions for authors” 
for specific requirements.

File Format: This describes how the applica-
tion  that  created  the  file  encodes  and  stores  the 
information.  To  use  digital  pictures 
in 
PowerPoint™,  save  them  as  BMP,  JPG  or  TIF 
format.

•  Publishers  have  specific  requirements  for 

 Popular Graphic File Formats

accepting and reproducing images.

•  It is important to be familiar with the parame-
ters mandated by a publisher prior to submit-
ting images in order to obtain the best quality 
reproduction in the publication.

BMP: Windows bitmap. A Microsoft™ creation 
that  is  32-bit  raster,  and  has  the  capability  of 
using limited LZW (lossless) compression. When 
used  in  PowerPoint,  however,  these  images  are 

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



CompuServe 

frequently  too  large  to  load  quickly  and  project 
appropriately.
GIF: 

GIF™-Graphics 
Interchange  Format.  This  is  a  format  that  was 
invented by CompuServe™ primarily for images 
viewed on the Internet. It is limited to only 256 
colors  (8  bits  per  pixel),  but  has  several  advan-
tages  when  used  in  its  Internet  role.  It  utilizes 
lossless  compression,  which  when  combined 
with  a  limited  color  palette,  can  result  in  small 
file  sizes.  It  also  has  the  capability  of  using 
“transparent” as one of its colors and in its 89a 
revision, it is used to save and display simple ani-
mations. Consequently, it is an adequate format 
for 
logos,  but  not  for 
photography.

line  drawings  or 

PNG:  Portable  Network  Graphics. Also  pro-
nounced “ping”, was created as a replacement for 
the GIF format. It is presently the most common 
lossless image compression format on the inter-
net.  It  is  best  used  to  transfer  images,  but  not 
ideal for professional or medical use.

JPG: Joint Photographic Experts Group. Also 
written as JPEG and pronounced “jay´-peg”, this 
is another popular Internet format. The main dif-
ference between this and GIF is that JPG files are 
in a raster image format of up to 24 bits per pixel. 
Thus,  a  JPG  is  the  preferred  format  for  images 
that  have  more  than  256  colors  (full  color  pho-
tos). The JPG compression scheme allows one to 
manually determine the amount of compression 
to  apply  to  each  file. Although  this  results  in  a 
smaller file size, image quality is degraded as the 
file is further compressed [5].

TIF: TIFF (TIF) or Tagged Image File Format 
is  the  industry  standard  for  a  cross  platform, 
multi-use raster image format that can be opened 
by  almost  all  graphics  applications.  These  files 
employ  non-degrading  compression. This  is  the 
ideal  format  for  saving  images  with  the  best 
quality.

 Shooting Techniques and Tips

Possibly the most vital element of good surgical 
photography  is  consistency.  Just  as  the  use  of 
standard  procedures  in  a  practice  result  in  effi-

513

Table 32.1  Clinical photography checklist

Obtain informed consent
Remove any unnecessary objects in photo field
Use a neutral background
Take a photo of patient sticker prior to clinical photos
Clean off any make-up
Take photos in standardized manner, ie frontal, lateral, 
oblique views
For macro images, use a ruler to demonstrate size
Add patient information to photo log book
Repeat steps for subsequent visits to ensure 
reproducibility

ciency and high quality care, standard procedures 
for  photography  should  also  be  implemented  to 
provide consistent, high quality photographs. See 
Table 32.1.

•  Prior  to  any  clinical  photography,  be  sure  to 
obtain  written  informed  consent  from  the 
subject.

•  Though  a  dedicated  room  for  photography 
offers  the  best  situation  for  clinical  imaging, 
exam room photography can yield consistent 
results  if  good  technique  and  practices  are 
regularly utilized.

Prior to taking the first photograph of a patient, 
it is imperative that the patient signs a photograph 
consent  form  [8,  9].  This  can  be  and  often  is 
incorporated into the consent for treatment.

The form should clearly state that the patient 
relinquishes all rights to payments and royalties 
that  may  accrue  from  any  use  of  the  images. 
Samples of photo consent forms may be obtained 
from the photography department of a local med-
ical  school  or  the  local  professional  photogra-
phers’  guild.  Have  an  attorney  review  and  alter 
such a form to suit the requirements of the prac-
tice and keep one in every patient chart. The ideal 
office has a location that can be set aside exclu-
sively  for  photography.  There  patients  can  be 
photographed, equipment can be stored securely 
and a space can be provided for review and stor-
age of these photos [8]. This is often not possible 
in busy practices, so compromises must be made, 
with  an  emphasis  on  retaining  consistency  and 
image  quality.  The  space  chosen  should  ideally 
meet the following standards:

32 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment



514

•  It  needs  to  be  large  enough  to  accommodate 
the requirements of whatever lens will be used 
to  shoot  the  broadest  image  (Distance  to 
subject).

•  It  must  have  adequate  lighting  that  will  help 
illuminate  the  subject  without  overwhelming 
the color balance characteristics of the flash. If 
the room has windows, opaque blinds can help 
keep  the  ambient  lighting  consistent  regard-
less of the time of day.

•  It must have a reasonably neutral background 
with no distractions. The most popular colors 
for  patient  clinical  backgrounds  is  light  blue 
or black.

•  It must have facilities for patient privacy and 
comfort. A changing area is ideal, or simply a 
chair and some provision for hanging clothes.
•  It should have a secure cabinet or closet where 
camera  gear  and  adequate  media  is  readily 
available  so  that  the  clinician  needn’t  be 
searching the office for another lens or back-
up  memory  card.  Clean  legible  measuring 
devices should also be kept here for inclusion 
in certain photo fields.

•  Near  the  camera  cabinet,  there  should  be  an 
electrical outlet where the battery charger for 
camera and flash batteries is kept plugged-in. 
Good  lithium-ion  rechargeable  batteries  are 
ideal.

•  A small desk or table must be present for writ-
ing photo information during the session.

In order to accurately represent the results of 
treatment or surgery it is essential that there is 
consistency  in  the  photographic  procedures. 
This can be done by minimizing the variables in 
the  photography  setup.  The  locations  of  the 
patient  and  cameraperson  can  be  marked  with 
tape  on  the  floor.  A  “photo  log”  that  records 
what  poses,  what  camera  settings,  and  what 
exposures were made at previous sessions with 
the same patient, can be quite helpful. If possi-
ble, before and after type shots should be made 
with  the  previously  shot  images  available  for 
reference either printed or displayed on a moni-
tor.  Establish  proper  exposure  and/or  camera 
setting  information  for  various  shooting  dis-
tances  through  testing.  Write  this  information 
on a small piece of paper and tape it to the top of 

the flash or the back of the camera. Then, when 
any  of  the  office  staff  needs  to  take  pictures, 
they  can  simply  determine  the  distance  to  the 
subject  and  refer  to  the  exposure  and  settings 
information written on the guide. This will go a 
long way toward establishing a consistent expo-
sure and tonal range in pictures taken on differ-
ent  days.  It  is  also  important  to  eliminate  any 
unnecessary  distractions  in  the  photograph. 
These  can  range  from  background  features  to 
clothing or jewelry worn by the subject, or arti-
cles  of  clothing.  If  an  object  appears  in  the 
viewfinder that has no relevance to the subject at 
hand, move it or crop it out later.

 Photographic Technique

A  professional  photographer  always  keeps  in 
mind  a  clear  idea  of  what  it  is  he  or  she  is 
about to shoot. This is essential for clinicians 
as well. Location and orientation of the condi-
tion  can  be  best  shown  by  first  shooting  an 
image that includes recognizable features such 
as face, hands, or feet. When shooting a stand-
ing person, rotate the camera 90° and shoot a 
vertical  shot  to  eliminate  wasted  space  in  the 
photo to the left and right of the patient. This 
also  allows  for  greater  subject  size  and  thus 
more  detail  in  the  image.  Since  this  is  an 
unnatural  shooting  position  for  some,  care 
should be taken to see to it that camera straps 
or flash cords do not fall across the lens. Once 
the  orienting  photos  are  complete,  the  next 
shots  should  include  the  total  range  or  extent 
of the condition being photographed. Be sure 
to include all borders of the area of interest so 
that these can be  compared to the same regions 
in  subsequent 
 post-treatment  visits.  Once 
again,  it  may  be  advantageous  to  shoot  verti-
cally. Finally, the last images should be those 
that record close-up details that are represen-
tative  of  the  subject  matter  or  that  provide  a 
highly  detailed  view  of  a  particular  area  of 
concern.  At  least  one  of  the  detail  photos 
should include a measuring device in the field 
to accurately represent the size of the features 
shot  close-up.  Use  a  small  cm  scale  that  is 
made of a non-reflective material.

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



515

 Pre and Postoperative Facial 
Photography

 Surgical Photography

Standardizing the poses used in preoperative and 
postoperative  photography  allows  the  viewer  to 
objectively compare the images taken at different 
points in time [10]. A procedure should be estab-
lished  to  consistently  pose  the  patient  in  these 
situations.  Positioning  aids  with  fixed  distances 
and chin rests may be used. Alternatively, the staff 
can  be  taught  basic  posing  techniques  allowing 
for imaging in smaller rooms without the expense 
of positioning aids. One technique often used in 
cosmetic surgery photography involves position-
ing a patient through five poses at each photo ses-
sion.  These  views  include  a  frontal  view,  two 
oblique views, and two lateral views (Fig. 32.1). 
The  camera  should  be  positioned  at  a  fixed  dis-
tance from the subject, at a height approximately 
level with the subject’s mid-face. The frontal and 
lateral  views  are  self-explanatory.  However,  the 
oblique  view  can  be  consistently  captured  using 
the  technique  where  the  tip  of  the  nose  should 
align with the most prominent edge of the distal 
cheek. Another  option  is  to  use  alignment  soft-
ware such as Photoshop Adobe CS5. Each photo 
can be aligned to the previous photo by manually 
selecting  points  on  anatomic  landmarks,  which 
will help line up pre and post pictures [11].

to  have  someone  who 

In surgery, there are concerns with keeping the 
field  free  of  contaminating  items  such  as  cam-
eras  and  lenses.  Obviously,  it  would  be  most 
appropriate 
is  not 
scrubbed-in  to  handle  the  camera.  This  person 
should  understand  both  how  the  camera  works 
and  what  it  is  that  needs  to  be  photographed. 
Have appropriate stands and stools on hand for 
the camera operator to easily get above the field 
for  the  most  effective  angle.  If  the  camera  is 
equipped with an auxiliary flash and/or battery, 
the  cords  connecting  these  devices  should  be 
taped down prior to surgery so they do not fall 
into the field if the camera is positioned above it. 
Make  the  first  image  of  each  procedure  a  shot 
that will identify the patient, such as the patient 
identification sticker or a card with this informa-
tion printed on it. Certain operating room light-
ing  conditions  are  different 
than  will  be 
encountered in the office setting and may require 
some exposure compensation. For this reason, it 
is  prudent  to  take  some  practice  photographs 
prior to the procedure. If gestures need be made 
in photos to point out a small artifact such as a 
stitch or tiny vessel, do not use fingers to do so. 
Keep  the  presence  of  hands  to  a  minimum  in 
photos  and  instead  indicate  the  area  with  a 

a

b

c

Fig. 32.1  Standard positioning for full facial photography. (a) Frontal view, (b) Oblique view (note nasal tip lined up 
with margin of posterior cheek) and (c) Lateral view

32 Photography of Dermatological Laser Treatment



516

straight clamp, pick-ups, or other such blunt but 
slim devices. It is a sign of professionalism and 
pride if the field and any instruments or gloves 
that must be shown in a surgical photo are wiped 
clean  of  blood  prior  to  taking  a  photograph. 
Also,  if  the  periphery  of  the  operating  area  is 
draped with blue towels, be sure that fresh clean 
ones are available to cover those that have been 
stained  with  fluids.  Maintain  suction  in  deep 
wounds right up until the image is made. Pools 
of blood are very distracting in photographs and 
can in fact obscure areas of interest. Similarly, if 
the wound is wet from irrigation or from wiping 
with wet sponges, quickly pat it dry just before 
the shot is taken in order to reduce the incidence 
of specular highlights. When shooting excised or 
extracted  gross  specimens,  use  a  clean  blue 
towel  as  a  background.  Images  of  specimens 
should be photographed in their correct anatomi-
cal orientation and with at least one of the images 
including  a  size  scale  placed  just  far  enough 
away  from  the  tissue  that  it  may  be  easily 
cropped out later if necessary [6]. In the case of 
Mohs surgery where multiple stages may be nec-
essary,  it’s  possible  that  more  than  one  patient 
may  be  treated  at  a  time.  In  this  instance,  it’s 
imperative to take a photo of the patient sticker/
chart  prior  to  capturing  the  clinical  photo  to 
ensure  proper  documentation  of  the  correct 
patient.

 Final Thoughts

•  Current  digital  camera  technology  has  come 
to the threshold where it is now virtually indis-
tinguishable  from  35  mm  image  quality  for 
most dermatologic purposes.

•  If you purchase a good digital 8 mega pixel 
SLR  camera  system,  you  will  soon  recover 
your investment in film and processing costs 

as  well  as  save  on  office  expenses  and  per-
sonnel time.

•  In dermatology perhaps more than any other 
medical discipline, well-crafted imaging skills 
can enhance your career even as it helps you 
to be of greater value to your profession and 
your  colleagues  and  of  a  greater  service  to 
your patients.

References

  1.  Acetta  P,  Acetta  J,  Kostecki  J.  The  use  of  digital 
cameras  by  US  dermatologists.  JAAD.  2013;69(5): 
837–8.

  2.  Sasson M, Schiff T, et al. Photography without film: 
low-cost digital cameras come of age in dermatology. 
Int J Dermatol. 1994;33(2):113–5.

  3.  Stone  JL,  Peterson  RL,  et  al.  Digital  imaging  tech-
in  dermatology.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 

niques 
1990;23(5 Pt 1):913–7.

  4.  Bhatia AC, Desai S, Brodell RT, Horvath MM. Digital 
photography.  eMedicine  website. Available  at  http://
emedicine.medscape.com/article/1131303-overview. 
Accessed 1 July 2010.

  5.  Chilukuri S, Bhatia AC. Practical digital photography 
in  the  dermatology  office.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 
2008;27(1):83–5.

  6.  Lin BB, Taylor RS, et al. Digital photography for map-
ping  Mohs  micrographic  surgery  sections.  Dermatol 
Surg. 2001;27(4):411–4.

  7.  Taheri  A,  Yentzer  BA,  Feldman  SR.  Focusing  and 
depth of field in photography: application in derma-
tology practice. Skin Res Technol. 2013;19:394–7.
  8.  Kunde  L,  McMeniman  E,  Parker  M.  Clinical  pho-
tography  in  dermatology:  ethical  and  medico-legal 
considerations  in  the  age  of  digital  and  smartphone 
technology. Australas J Dermatol. 2013;54:192–7.
  9.  Lakdawala  N,  Fontanella  D,  Grant-Kels  JM.  Ethical 
considerations  in  dermatologic  photography.  Clin 
Dermatol. 2012;30:486–91.

 10.  Bhatia AC, et al. The clinical image archiving clini-
cal processes and an entire specialty. Arch Dermatol. 
2006;142(1):96–8.

 11.  Balakrishnan  N,  Sathish  BP,  Handattu  S.  A  simple 
instrument  designed  to  provide  consistent  digital 
facial  images  in  dermatology.  Indian  J  Dermatol. 
2013;58(3):194–6.

S. Desai and A. C. Bhatia



Online Resources of Dermatologic 
Laser Therapies

33

Shraddha Desai, Elizabeth Uhlenhake, 
and Ashish C. Bhatia

Abstract
The internet is an abundant and easily acces-
sible source of current health-related informa-
tion 
for  both  patients  and  physicians. 
Physicians can harness the power of the inter-
net  to  keep  up-to-date  on  developments  in 
their field and review the literature on a regu-
lar basis. They can also help direct patients to 
accurate  and  reliable  resources  which  are 
geared  towards  the  general  public.  Proper 
guidance  of  patients  and  their  families  can 
help  make  the  internet  a  valuable  tool  for 
education.

Keywords
Internet  ·  Resources  ·  Dermatology  ·  Laser 
AAD  ·  ASLMS  ·  ASDS  ·  Online  search  
Patient education

S. Desai 
Department of Dermatology, The Dermatology 
Institute of DuPage Medical Group, Naperville, USA 

E. Uhlenhake 
The Dermatology Group, Mason, OH, USA 

A. C. Bhatia (*) 
Department of Dermatology, Northwestern 
University – Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL, USA 

Oak Dermatology, Schaumburg, IL, USA
e-mail: ashish@derm.md

 Introduction

The internet has revolutionized the way in which 
both  lay-people  and  health  care  professionals 
seek  out  and  research  information  regarding 
health care topics and specific disease conditions 
[1, 2]. An updated report states that approximately 
80%  of  adult  Internet  users  have  conducted 
searches online for health or medical information 
[1–3]. With increasing access to the internet and 
rising  familiarity  with  search  engines,  this  per-
centage continues to grow. Aside from accessibil-
ity  and  convenience,  the  Internet  is  superior  to 
most  paper-based  medical  resources  due  to  the 
ease  of  updating  information  to  reflect  the  most 
timely and current data. The wealth of knowledge 
that  can  be  obtained  from  the  Internet  however, 
has its drawbacks. Unfortunately, there is no con-
trol  over  what  information  can  be  accessed  and 
anyone, from a physician to common layperson, 
can contribute information regardless of accuracy. 
This  can  lead  to  misinformation  that  ultimately 
results in mistakes and malpractice [4]. In order to 
prevent  this  from  occurring,  websites  should  be 
critically analyzed to determine their validity, reli-
ability, and credibility. This holds true for anyone 
using such information from a website, but espe-
cially  for  physicians.  It  is  imperative  for  physi-
cians  to  provide  their  patients  with  a  means  of 
evaluating  different  websites  and  using  only  the 
most reliable and precise sources to prevent medi-
cal  misunderstandings. In doing so, patients will 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_33

517





518

get a sense of empowerment over their condition, 
knowing that only the most relevant information 
is being provided to them. Therefore, physicians 
should improve their patients’ knowledge by sup-
plying them with a list of highly reputable web-
sites;  an  action  commonly  desired  by  patients 
according to recent studies [5, 6]. The guidelines 
for  evaluating  websites  that  provide  information 
on cutaneous laser therapies are reviewed here.

 Internet Website Quality Evaluation

In  evaluating  the  quality  of  a  website,  there  are 
several indicators which can be used to measure 
the  usefulness  of  the  information  presented. 
These include, but are not limited to: easy identi-
fication of the background and significance of the 
authors, the recent nature of information and its 
stability, the time since the last update of infor-
mation, the completeness of the information and 
its  ability  to  match  the  searcher’s  needs,  the 
domain of the website, comparability with other 

resources, and the ease of use [7, 8]. Table 33.1 
highlights the important details which should be 
considered in each of these categories.

 Websites for Physicians

Professional  society  websites  offer  valuable  and 
reliable information for physicians in addition to 
links  to  other  highly  regarded  sites.  Access  to 
abstracts of peer-reviewed articles in medicine is 
readily available, providing a convenient way to 
keep abreast of the current literature. It is the phy-
sician’s responsibility to his patients to be critical 
of any and all information that is retrieved from 
the internet. Consequently, suitable sites pertain-
ing to laser therapies include those of well-known 
societies  that  deal  specifically  with  these  proce-
dures.  Such  groups 
the  American 
Academy  of  Dermatology  (AAD),  Skin  Care 
Physicians (from the AAD), the American Society 
of  Dermatologic  Surgeons  (ASDS),  and  the 
American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery 

include 

Table 33.1  Consideration in the evaluation of laser related websites

Easy identification of the background and authority of the authors

 •  Check the authors’ credentials
 •  Author’s level of education
 •  Experience author has in the subject matter
 •  Previous list of publications

Current information/update

 •  When was the information published and/or uploaded onto the Internet
 •  When was the information last updated

Stability of the information

 •  Will the information remain on the site

Information contained matches the searcher’s needs

 • 

 Focus on what you are looking for: laser therapy information, statistics, latest treatments, risks and benefits 
involved, procedural techniques, complications arising during laser procedures, costs involved

Domain of the website

 •  Check the URL to see if it is someone’s personal page. If so, be sure to investigate the author thoroughly
 • 

Is the website educational (.edu), nonprofit organizations (.org), commercial, or government (.gov, .mil, .us)

Comparability with other resources

 •  Look for a site with related links, explore other sites and publications by the author
 • 

 Check to see that the links to the other sources are on the same topic, well organized, and use the above 
criterion to evaluate them

Ease of use

 •  Easy navigation of site
 •  Check to see if the information is targeted toward the physician or the patient
 •  Check if the speed and connection of your Internet is compatible with that of patients visiting this website

S. Desai et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




519

of 

(ASLMS).  The 
Investigative 
Journal 
Dermatology Symposium Proceedings and Derm 
Net websites are also available options for infor-
mation on laser interventions. Additionally, jour-
nal  abstracts  provided  by  PubMed,  eMedicine, 
and  the  Cochrane  Library  are  excellent  sources 
for up-to-date information. The web addresses for 
these sites and others are provided in Table 33.2. 
The AAD website is a practical site in which to 
begin  researching  laser  treatments  due  to  its 
extensive  knowledge  base  and  broad  list  of 
resources and links. Dermatologists also have the 
ability to learn about current issues like new treat-
ment  options  and  management  plans  with 
Dermatology  World  Online.  Additionally,  the 

website  contains  links  for  the  Journal  of  the 
American  Academy  of  Dermatology  (JAAD), 
Dermatology World publication, the Dermatology 
Insights Journal (a patient-oriented journal), and 
the  medical  web  guide. As  a  result,  dermatolo-
gists can safely recommend the AAD website to 
their patients as a source of information on laser 
procedures,  with  close  attention  paid  to  the 
Dermatology  Insights  page  and  medical  web 
guide that offer links for patient education mate-
rial and support groups. Another website created 
by  the  AAD  is  Skin  Care  Physicians  which  is 
geared  specifically  for  patients  and  dermatolo-
gists to use as a resource for the latest information 
on the management of skin conditions including 

Table 33.2  Web addresses of useful websites for physicians and patients

Website
MedicineNet

 http://www.medicinenet.com

Mayo Clinic

 http://www.mayoclinic.com/health

The Hair Removal Journal

 http://www.hairremovaljournal.org/faqs.htm

Derm Net

 http://www.dermnetnz.org/procedures/lasers.html

American Academy of Dermatology

 http://www.aad.org

American Society for Laser Medicine & Surgery

 http://www.aslms.org/

American Society for Dermatologic Surgery

 http://www.asds.net

EMedicine

 http://www.emedicine.com
Skin Care Physicians (AAD)

 http://www.skincarephysicians.com

Skin Care Guide

 http://skincareguide.com

Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium Proceedings

 http://www.nature.com/jidsp/journal/v10/n3/
full/5640219a.html

Cochrane Library

 http://www.cochrane.org/reviews/en/

PubMed

 http://www.pubmed.gov

Medscape Dermatology

 http://www.medscape.com

Skin Therapy Letter

 http://www.skintherapyletter.com

Information for the 
physician

Information for the 
patient

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

33 Online Resources of Dermatologic Laser Therapies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




520

is 

hair removal, photorejuvenation, resurfacing, and 
vascular  procedures.  It  is  an  excellent  tool  that 
provides patients with easy-to-understand expla-
nations and basic information regarding laser pro-
cedures.  Another  well- known  group 
the 
American  Society  for  Dermatologic  Surgery 
(ASDS) and their website is appealing to derma-
tologists  for  several  reasons.  First,  it  contains  a 
physician discussion forum designed specifically 
to begin a dialogue about laser procedures, includ-
ing advances in the latest technology and research 
in the field. Dermatologists can also access recent 
 information regarding dermatologic surgery pro-
cedures,  guidelines,  and  upcoming  educational 
events and meetings. The site also contains links 
to  other  websites  providing  additional  informa-
tion  on  dermatology  and  laser  procedures,  local 
research,  and 
legislative  advocacy  groups. 
Members  of  the  group  are  given  access  to  the 
Journal of Dermatologic Surgery as well. Patients 
also gain benefit from this website. Here they can 
read reports about most dermatologic surgery pro-
cedures  like  laser  or  light  therapy,  laser  hair 
removal, nonablative skin rejuvenation, resurfac-
ing, and vascular treatment. The site also provides 
fact  sheets  for  each  procedure  with  before  and 
after  pictures  and  frequently  asked  questions. 
Finally,  patients  can  use  the  site  to  search  for  a 
dermatologic surgeon by geographic region. This 
is also true for the AAD website. The American 
Society for Laser Medicine & Surgery (ASLMS) 
website is another physician and patient-friendly 
resource. It offers physicians guidelines for office-
based  laser  procedures,  patient  and  procedure 
selection, patient safety, and quality assurance. It 
also addresses patient issues with a brief introduc-
tion to laser procedures, a physician locator fea-
ture,  and  safety  tips  for  patients  considering 
dermatologic laser and light-based device proce-
dures. Additionally, it includes a checklist of ser-
vices each facility that performs such interventions 
should  maintain.  Similar  to  other  dermatology 
organizations, ASLMS also provides access to the 
Lasers in Surgery and Medicine journal, another 
valuable  resource  for  dermatologists.  Another 
site,  the  Journal  of  Investigative  Dermatology 
Symposium Proceedings, has laser hair removal-
specific  information  and  provides  the  physician 

with  an  overview  on  the  physiology  of  the  hair 
follicle in order to discuss the latest strategies for 
photo- epilation. The website also contains a list of 
clinical guidelines that is useful to dermatologists. 
It  is  more  physician-specific  and  therefore  less 
helpful  for  patients.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
DermNet  website  is  good  source  of  valuable 
information  on  laser  procedures  and  includes 
material  for  both  physicians  and  patients.  A 
patient information link leads the patient to data, 
including history, effectiveness, indications, com-
plications,  and  adverse  effects  of  various  lasers. 
Under the doctors tab, the site features numerous 
quizzes and topics for laser discussions and offers 
an  extensive  list  of  resources  available  for  more 
information.  Another  respectable  website  for 
patients and dermatologists for continuing educa-
tion  is  eMedicine.  This  particular  site  notes  the 
history of laser procedures in addition to describ-
ing the various types of lasers that are currently 
and were historically used for laser hair removal, 
treatment  of  acquired  and  congenital  vascular 
lesions,  and  non-ablative  resurfacing.  General 
principles  and  physics  of  laser  therapy,  indica-
tions, contraindications, clinical workup, follow-
up protocols, outcomes, and alternative therapies 
are  also  discussed.  Finally,  PubMed,  a  National 
Institute of Health (NIH) affiliate, offers an enor-
mous  amount  of  information  that  encompasses 
virtually all aspects of medicine. The information 
obtained on this site is in the form of medical arti-
cles  obtained  from  peer-reviewed  medical  jour-
nals. Thus, the information is limited to physicians 
and  not  appropriate  for  patient  use.  Although 
searches  can  be  made  for  any  medical  specialty 
and  subject,  dermatologists  can  specifically 
search  for  articles  relating  to  laser  therapy. 
Furthermore,  many  academic  institutions  offer 
specialized access to PubMed that allows users to 
view full text articles rather than abstracts for any 
subscribed journal.

 Websites for Patients

Many  valuable  online  resources  for  physicians 
have sections geared towards patient education as 
well.  Guiding  patients  to  appropriate  resources 

S. Desai et al.



(ASDS),  and 

can be an asset in laser procedure education. This 
also  supplements  any  information  given  during 
routine office visits. Patient-oriented websites are 
discussed  below.  Many  of  the  aforementioned 
websites  also  provide  useful  knowledge  for  the 
patient  population.  The  American  Academy  of 
Dermatology  (AAD),  Skin  Care  Physicians 
(AAD),  eMedicine,  the  American  Society  of 
Dermatologic  Surgeons 
the 
American Society for Laser Medicine & Surgery 
(ASLMS) websites are of use to both physicians 
and  patients.  Patients,  in  particular,  can  access 
basic information about current laser treatments 
and  follow  helpful  links  to  a  number  of  other 
knowledgeable  websites.  This  not  only  helps 
them understand how the lasers operate, but what 
to expect prior to, during, and after the treatment. 
The  Mayo  Clinic  also  maintains  a  website  for 
patient inquiries on health-related topics. Similar 
to  other  patient-geared  websites,  questions 
regarding  what  the  procedure  entails,  including 
pictures, prep work for the patient, risks and long 
term effects, eligibility for such treatments, and 
typical  results  from  laser  resurfacing  and  hair 
removal procedures, are all answered. The Hair 
Removal  Journal  is  also  a  great  resource  for 
patients considering hair removal with lasers. A 
frequently  asked  questions  page  contains  infor-
mation  on  almost  every  aspect  of  the  process, 
including  cost,  where  it  can  be  performed,  and 
the effect of color-treated hair and tanned skin on 
the  process.  This  website  is  highly  patient- 
oriented and provides a great deal of information 
in a simple and concise way. And like the other 
websites,  it  has  links  to  related  sites  for  more 
information.

 Final Thoughts

The internet is an expansive source of informa-
tion on numerous topics including laser treat-
ment  modalities.  Because  of  its  availability 

521

and  low  maintenance  costs,  it  has  become  an 
attractive  alternative  to  the  more  costly  and 
time- consuming  process  of  paper  publishing. 
However,  the  ease  of  adding  information  in 
spite of its credibility also makes it a tool that 
must  be  used  cautiously.  Therefore,  it  is  of 
utmost  importance  for  physicians  to  critically 
assess the information obtained from websites 
not  only  for  themselves  but  also  for  their 
patients.  Implementation  of  the  above  men-
tioned methods of analysis can make the inter-
net  an  excellent  resource  for  all  that  wish  to 
learn more about laser therapies and other der-
matologic procedures.

References

  1.  Fox S. Online health search 2006. Washington: Pew 

Internet and American Life Project; 2006.

  2.  Fox  S,  Fallows  D.  Internet  health  resources:  health 
searches and email have become more commonplace, 
but  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  searches  and 
overall Internet access. Washington: Pew Internet and 
American Life Project; 2003. p. 1–42.

  3.  Diaz  JA,  Griffith  RA,  et  al.  Patients’  use  of  the 
Internet for medical information. J Gen Intern Med. 
2002;17(3):180–5.

  4.  Murray E, Lo B, Pollack L, et al. The impact of health 
information  of  the  Internet  on  health  care  and  the 
physician-patient relationship: a national U.S. survey 
among  1,050  U.S.  physicians.  J  Med  Internet  Res. 
2003;5(3):e17.

  5.  Diaz  JA,  Sciamanna  CN,  Evangelou  E,  et  al.  Brief 
report:  what  types  of  Internet  guidance  do  patients 
want  from  their  physicians?  J  Gen  Intern  Med. 
2005;20(8):683–5.

  6.  Murray E, Lo B, et al. The impact of health informa-
tion on the Internet on health care and the physician- 
patient relationship: patient perceptions. Arch Intern 
Med. 2003;163(14):1727–34.

  7.  Tillman  HN.  Evaluating  quality  on  the  net.  Babson 
Park: Babson College; 2006. http://www.hopetillman.
com/findqual.html

  8.  University of California Berkeley Library. Evaluating 
web pages: techniques to apply and questions to ask. 
Berkley:  University  of  California  Berkeley  Library; 
2006.   http://www.lib.berkley.edu/teachinglib/guides/
internet/evaluate.html

33 Online Resources of Dermatologic Laser Therapies



Starting a Laser Practice

Vic A. Narurkar

34

Abstract
The  field  of  energy  based  devices  has  wit-
nessed  an  unparalleled  growth  in  the  last  10 
years. The practicing physician is often over-
whelmed  and  confused  with  the  decision  of 
how to integrate these devices into a practice. 
The marketing materials associated with these 
devices  often  override  their  actual  clinical 
merits. Moreover, elaborate terms of financing 
these  devices  with  unrealistic  returns  on 
investment  (ROI)  can  further  confuse  the 
practicing physician. This chapter will review 
some fundamental aspects on how to integrate 
energy based devices in practical practice.

Keywords
Energy based devices · Lasers · Light sources 
Radiofrequency · Ultrasound · Laser practice

 Introduction

The field of energy based devices has witnessed 
an unparalleled growth in the last 10 years. The 
practicing  physician  is  often  overwhelmed  and 
confused  with  the  decision  of  how  to  integrate 

V. A. Narurkar
Department of Dermatology, California Pacific 
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA
e-mail: info@bayarealaserdr.com

these  devices  into  a  practice.  The  marketing 
materials  associated  with  these  devices  often 
override  their  actual  clinical  merits.  Moreover, 
elaborate  terms  of  financing  these  devices  with 
unrealistic returns on investment (ROI) can fur-
ther confuse the practicing physician. This chap-
ter will review some fundamental aspects on how 
to  integrate  energy  based  devices  in  practical 
practice.

•  Different types of lasers or light sources 
have  specific  functions  for  indicated 
treatments

•  Treatment  options  are  based  on  cost-

effective methods

•  Popularity of devices depends on histo-
logical data regarding pros and cons of 
treatment outcomes

•  Laser or light options chosen by physi-
cian depend on practicality of device

 Integrating Energy Based Devices: 
A Systematic Approach

The question that one often asks when starting a 
laser/light/energy”  source 
practice 
should  I  choose  that  will  benefit  most  clinical 
indications?  Often,  devices  are  touted  as  “one 

is  “what 

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_34

523





524

size fits all,” where one laser or light source may 
have a myriad of clinical indications. While this 
is an ambitious goal, it is far from realistic. The 
majority  of  devices  do  one  or  two  things  well, 
and  other  indications  are  suboptimal  at  best. 
Therefore,  the  first  question  one  must  ask  is 
“What procedure do I foresee being the most in 
demand in my practice?” For example, in a der-
matology  practice,  a  significant  number  of 
patients  seek  care  for  vascular  and  pigmented 
lesions. In a plastic surgery practice, the empha-
sis is placed more on rhytids and laxity. Thus, the 
initial  device  that  may  be  most  optimal  may 
reflect the specialty of the physician, as well as 
the  clinical  demographics  of 
the  practice. 
Vascular  and  pigmented  lesion  treatments  are 
also often highly gratifying, as clinical improve-
ment  of  these  entities  is  quite  remarkable  with 
excellent  photographic  documentation  showing 
efficacy.  Examples  of  “workhorse”  devices  for 
vascular lesions include pulsed dye lasers, pulsed 
KTP lasers and pulsed light sources. Examples of 
“workhorse”  devices  for  pigmented 
lesions 
include  Q-switched  lasers  (532,  694,  755  nm) 
and  pulsed  light  sources.  Newer  generation 
pulsed light sources and newer generation pulsed 
dye lasers are effective for the treatment of both 
vascular  and  pigmented  lesions,  and,  therefore, 
may be a more cost-effective method for integrat-
ing  a  single  device,  as  opposed  to  investing  in 
multiple  devices.  Resurfacing  devices  include 
nonablative  fractional  lasers,  ablative  fractional 
lasers and traditional ablative lasers. For plastic 
surgery  practices,  resurfacing  lasers  are  most 
likely the first device of choice. While traditional 
ablative resurfacing is highly effective, the down-
sides  such  as  prolonged  erythema,  risks  of 
hypopigmentation and limitation to facial areas, 
make  these  devices  less  popular  in  the  twenty-
first century. The advent of fractional laser resur-
facing has reduced some of these risks. Thus, a 
fractional  laser  resurfacing  device  is  often  the 
ideal  first  device  for  a  plastic  surgery  practice. 
After investing in the initial device, expansion to 
other devices in a systematic fashion is optimal. 
For dermatologists, a resurfacing device, should 
be the second device to integrate into a practice 
and  for  plastic  surgeons,  a  vascular/pigmented 

lesion  device  fits  this  role.  Afterwards,  other 
devices can be integrated in a step wise fashion 
based on economic returns on the first two. These 
include skin tightening devices, acne devices and 
body  contouring  devices.  The  question  of  hair 
reduction  devices  remains  dubious.  While  this 
procedure is highly effective, it has now become 
much  more  commoditized  and  thus,  should  be 
considered  as  an  adjunctive  procedure  in  both 
dermatology  and  plastic  surgery  practices. 
Moreover, the advent of home held hair removal 
devices is further clouding the issue.

 Costs of Devices: Direct and Indirect

When considering the purchase of an energy based 
device, one must account for all costs—direct and 
indirect.  These  include  the  cost  of  the  capital 
equipment  (usually  defined  as  a  direct  cost)  and 
the  cost  of  consumables  and  service  (usually 
defined as indirect costs). Often, the latter two are 
a  significant  portion  of  the  overall  cost  of  the 
device.  Indirect  costs  are  associated  with  all 
devices, regardless of the cost of “obvious” con-
sumables.  “Obvious”  consumables  include  tips. 
Less obvious consumables include handpieces on 
light  sources  which  expire,  flashlamps,  cryogen 
and parts of devices which expire. Finally, service 
costs  are  a  component  of  any  device. Therefore, 
inclusion of a service contract of reasonable terms 
is advisable in the initial purchase of a device. It is 
imperative to review the terms of the service con-
tract to see what is included similar to an automo-
bile “bumper to bumper” warranty. The longevity 
of the device and the manufacturer should always 
be considered when making a purchase. Recently, 
several  aesthetic  companies  have  closed,  leaving 
buyers with unserviceable devices or unattainable 
consumables.

 Evidence Based Reviews and Peer 
Reviews

The purchase of a device should integrate evidence 
based review and a review by your peers. The first 
is  often  underwhelming  for  devices,  as  many 

V. A. Narurkar



devices  may  be  a  few  years  old. This  should  not 
preclude some evidence based review, as the mar-
kets are now mature and many devices have numer-
ous  peer  reviewed  publications  to  support  their 
claims.  “White  papers”  should  not  substitute  for 
evidence based review, as these are usually spon-
sored  marketing  materials  which  should  only  be 
used  to  supplement  evidence  based  publications. 
The next step after evidence based review, is to lis-
ten to your peers. Often, a manufacturer will pro-
vide names and testimonials from “experts” in the 
field. It is imperative to ask these references of their 
involvement with the company (e.g., was the device 
gifted and what the terms were, was it a study, etc.). 
With mature device markets, it is now easier to get 
a  true  review  by  peers.  This  is  more  challenging 
when one is considering the purchase of a newer 
device with limited penetration in the field.

 Rent Versus Lease Versus Purchase

Most manufacturers now provide in office dem-
onstrations  of  their  devices  in  the  practice  and 
many will leave the device in the office for a short 
period  of  time  for  physician  evaluation.  This  is 
the  optimal  way  of  determining  whether  the 
device will be a “fit” into the practice. When this 
is  not  possible,  renting  devices  is  an  excellent 
opportunity  to  see  if  these  devices  are  indeed 
appropriate  for  the  practice.  Long  term  renting 
does not make sense, as scheduling becomes dif-
ficult and the long term costs of renting are much 
higher  than  leasing/purchasing  the  machine. 
Some  devices  are  amenable  to  renting,  such  as 
tattoo removal devices or ablative devices, where 
it  may  be  feasible  to  schedule  patients  on  a 
restrictive basis. Whether to lease or purchase a 
piece  of  equipment  is  based  on  the  financial 
health of the practice, the capital outlay and long 
term plans for the device. Used devices have very 
little  value,  and,  like  automobiles,  once  pur-
chased  the  value  declines  significantly. A  lease 
may be an easier way of integrating an expensive 
device  without  the  initial  capital  outlay;  but,  as 
with  all  leases,  one  needs  to  review  all  of  the 
terms very carefully to determine “the final costs” 
of  the  equipment.  When  purchasing/leasing  the 

525

equipment,  negotiation  of  a  service  contract 
within the initial cost of the equipment is highly 
advisable.

 Marketing

The central dogma of marketing is internal mar-
keting and is the most effective method for mar-
keting  your  business.  Therefore,  for  mature 
practices, when integrating a device into the prac-
tice,  dissemination  of  the  information  of  the 
device  to  the  existing  data  base  in  the  form  of 
educational seminars, newsletters and web based 
information  is  a  very  cost  effective  method  for 
marketing.  New  practices  may  benefit  from 
investing  in  external  marketing.  Many  device 
companies offer marketing incentives. Moreover, 
most  device  companies  have  sophisticated  web 
based  strategies  such  as  “Find  a  doctor”  which 
can assist physicians to grow their practices. It is 
imperative  to  link  the  physician  website  to  the 
manufacturer  website  for  streamlining  patient 
referrals. Excessive external marketing is a waste 
of  time  and  money.  If  external  marketing  is  the 
main goal, target based external marketing is the 
best  approach.  Finally,  if  the  staff  of  the  physi-
cian can benefit from any of the device based pro-
cedures, they should be offered treatment so they 
can discuss the outcomes and benefit in a positive 
way to grow the practice. As the practice matures, 
marketing should be used primarily for branding, 
as  new  devices  are  integrated  into  the  practice, 
the branding of the practice will enable existing 
and new patients to consider these procedures.

 How to Avoid Common Mistakes

The  single  most  common  mistake  is  to  obtain 
every single device on the market, buy every single 
handpiece on a platform model and to get the latest 
and the greatest. While it is tempting to be the first 
kid on the block to offer the latest laser procedure, 
this can be one of the greatest mistakes. Patients 
are  looking  for  results  and  good  outcomes. 
Disappointing  outcomes  and  bad  results  can 
destroy  the  reputation  of  the  physician  and  the 

34 Starting a Laser Practice



526

practice. The second most common mistake is not 
accounting for all costs (direct and indirect) when 
considering  devices.  The  true  overhead  costs  of 
the device should include fixed and variable over-
head. For example, if it takes 60 min to perform 
procedure X with device X and 30 min to perform 
procedure X with device Y, the fixed costs should 
be  considered  in  the  purchase  price. A  business 
plan  with  a  “real”  return  on  investment  (ROI) 
should be included in all device based purchases. 
One  should  not  rely  on  the  manufacturer’s 
ROI.  Instead,  the  ROI  should  be  based  on  the 
maturity of the practice, the demographics of the 
practice and the competition in the marketplace.

 To Delegate or Not to Delegate

Energy based devices have rapidly become “dele-
gated” procedures. In our practice, we do not del-
egate any energy based device treatments. This is 
not  the  norm  in  most  practices.  However,  one 
needs to assess several parameters before deciding 
whether to delegate an energy based device proce-
dure. First and foremost, is it safe for this device to 
be utilized by a non-physician? This is particularly 
true of ablative devices. They really should only be 
utilized  by  experienced  physicians  with  a  thor-
ough understanding of the skin. Second, what are 
the  state  regulations  of  delegatable  procedures? 
Third,  what  is  the  financial  value  of  delegation? 
With  the  changing  economy,  many  practices 
which relied highly on “delegating” procedures to 
non-physicians  are  seeing  a  sharp  decline,  as 
patients  get  more  conscious  of  spending  dispos-
able  income  on  procedures.  Fourth,  what  is  the 
possibility  of  the  non-physician  going  elsewhere 
and having those patients follow them to a com-
petitor?  While  it  may  be  impossible  (as  in  our 
practice) to perform all of the procedures yourself, 
there  are  reasonable  approaches.  Before  delegat-
ing any procedure to a non-physician, the physi-
cian should master the energy based device and be 
aware of all of the complications and how to fix 
them.  When  delegating  the  procedure  to  a  non-
physician,  direct  supervision  is  optimal.  Many 
states  are  now  mandating  direct  supervision 
because  of  the  plethora  of  complications  from 

inexperienced users. Finally, when delegating pro-
cedures,  one  should  never  lose  the  relationship 
with the patient, as it is this critical bond that builds 
and sustains a practice.

 Conclusions
The field of energy based devices (lasers, light 
sources,  radiofrequency,  and  ultrasound)  is 
undergoing a true revolution. The physician is 
bombarded with information touting the latest 
and the greatest device. It is imperative for the 
physician considering energy based devices to 
approach it in a stepwise fashion. This includes 
evidence based review, discussion with peers 
and assessment of the equipment in a real time 
fashion  for  choosing  the  optimal  device  for 
the practice. It should also include sound busi-
ness  decisions  including  direct  and  indirect 
costs of the equipment, marketing and sustain-
ability of the device in the marketplace.

•  The  indirect/direct  costs  of  the  capital 
equipment and the cost of consumables 
and service should be considered at the 
time of purchase

•  Journal  and  peer  reviews  are  preferred 
over  manufacturer’s  review  since  they 
resemble  experience,  not  commercial-
ism. Validity of new laser/light products 
can  be  evaluated  by  physician  through 
sample  trials.  Renting,  leasing  or  pur-
chasing  is  dependent  on  physician’s 
capital and demand for product

•  Physician can attract patients to preferred 
treatment options by using targeted based 
marketing  between  manufacturer  and 
physician  website,  providing  cost-effi-
ciency and effectiveness

•  Results  and  good  outcomes  are  pre-
ferred over new untested products. Poor 
reliability  of  device  may  ruin  physi-
cian’s reputation and practice

•  Most efficiency of laser/light treatment 
is obtained by an experienced physician 
using a product that has been previously 
tested for efficacy

V. A. Narurkar



Research and Future Directions

Yakir S. Levin, Fernanda Hidemi Sakamoto, 
and R. Rox Anderson

35

Abstract
In this chapter, an overview of new research 
and emerging technologies is provided. The 
subject  is  inherently  speculative  and  the 
clinical adoption of these technologies is far 
from  certain.  Notwithstanding  this  limita-
tion, discussion of the following subjects is 
undertaken: fractionated technologies, selec-
tive cryolysis, selective and deeper targeting 
in photodynamic therapy, laser treatment of 

basal  cell  carcinoma,  development  of  new 
materials  in  dermatology,  and  nondestruc-
tive microscopy.

Keywords
Laser  surgery  ·  Laser  tissue  ablation  ·  Skin 
resurfacing · Fractional technology · Cryolysis 
Photodynamic therapy · Photosensitizers · Basal 
cell carcinoma · Nondestructive microscopy

“It  is  difficult  to  make  predictions,  especially 
about  the  future.”  (Attributed  to  Karl  Steincke, 
Niels Bohr, and/or Yogi Berra)

•  What  is  new  and  what  is  next  in  fractional 

technology?

•  Selective cryolysis: beyond bodysculpting.
•  Selective  targeting  and  deeper  targeting 
using photodynamic therapy: development of 
new  photosensitizers  and  new  activation 
techniques.

•  Laser treatment of basal cell carcinoma
•  New materials in dermatology
•  Nondestructive  microscopy  for  in  vivo  and 

ex vivo use

Y. S. Levin (*) · F. H. Sakamoto · R. R. Anderson
Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,  
MA, USA

Wellman Center for Photomedicine,  
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA
e-mail: ylevin2@partners.org;  
fsakamoto@mgh.harvard.edu;  
fsakamoto@partners.org;  
rranderson@mgh.harvard.edu

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3_35

527





528

 Introduction

Advances  in  medical  diagnosis  and  treatment 
sometimes  proceed  incrementally  through  con-
tinued  refinement  of  existing  technologies.  At 
other  times  progress  comes  in  greater  leaps, 
enabled by development of a new technology or 
application  of  an  existing  one  to  a  previously 
unrecognized problem. It is not unusual for a new 
development to seem, in retrospect, obvious, as if 
it  could  have  been  implemented  years  or  even 
decades earlier. Such was the case for fractional 
laser  treatments,  which  were  introduced  long 
after  the  technology  to  make  microscopic  laser 
beams existed. Similarly, selective cryolysis was 
developed  long  after  the  invention  of  refrigera-
tors (and more sophisticated cooling devices) and 
long after the effects of cooling on cells and tis-
sues  had  been  observed.  Conversely,  the  intro-
duction of a new technology or technique often 
opens  new  vistas  not  foreseen  by  the  inventors. 
For  example,  fractional  photothermolysis  was 
introduced  as  a  technique  for  resurfacing  and 
photorejuvenation.  But  new  uses  such  as  drug 
delivery  and  scar  treatments,  as  well  as  new 
insights  about  tissue  regeneration  and  scarring 
may prove to be more relevant.

With this in mind, we present perspectives on 
a number of advances in dermatology that involve 
energy based devices or that have been developed 
as outgrowths of work in such devices. We focus 
on recent developments and speculate about what 
the future may bring in a number of areas: frac-
tionated technologies, selective cryolysis, selec-
tive  and  deeper  targeting  in  photodynamic 
therapy, laser treatment of basal cell carcinoma, 
development  of  new  materials  in  dermatology, 
and nondestructive microscopy. However, we do 
not know what the future will bring.

juvenation. Fractionated laser methods were rap-
idly  incorporated  into  clinical  practice,  with 
options of ablative and nonablative devices as well 
as stamping and scanning modes. The technology 
overcame some of the limitations of fully ablative 
resurfacing  by  stimulating  skin  remodeling  with 
rapid post-treatment healing, thus reducing down-
time and decreasing the risk of dyspigmentation, 
infection  and  scarring.  However,  since  its  incep-
tion, the use of fractional lasers, and more broadly 
the concept of fractional injury, has been extended 
far beyond its initial applications of photorejuve-
nation and resurfacing. What follows is a discus-
sion of several areas of advancement in fractional 
therapies,  both  direct  applications  of  fractional 
lasers  as  well  as  new  technologies  that  borrow 
from  the  concepts  initially  developed  or  high-
lighted by fractional laser treatments.

 Scars and Contractures

Fractional lasers have been shown to improve the 
appearance  and  function  of  atrophic  and  hyper-
trophic scars of many types including those origi-
nating in trauma, acne, and burns [2–6]. Fractional 
lasers can also increase the mobility of joints that 
are  affected  by  severe  contracture  [7,  8].  Used 
alone or in conjunction with z-plasty, fractional 
lasers  can  be  life-changing  for  patients  with 
severe hypertrophic scars. Additionally, although 
biologically distinct from the above scarring pro-
cesses,  radiation  scars  may  prove  to  be  another 
type  of  chronic  injury  that  benefits  from  frac-
tional laser treatments.

 Fractional Laser Assisted Drug 
Delivery

 Fractional Technology: What Is New 
and What Is Next?

The creation of microscopic patterns of injury and 
sparing described by Manstein et al. [1], resulted 
in a new approach to skin resurfacing and photore-

Fractional laser assisted drug delivery is chang-
ing the way that many skin directed therapies are 
administered. Fractional lasers enable more effi-
cient and more uniform drug delivery than other 
methods,  including  simple  topical  application, 
injection, microdermabrasion and microneedling 
[9]. This is thought to be due to the high density 

Y. S. Levin et al.



of  uniformly  distributed  microchannels  in  the 
skin, resulting in decreased barrier to drug pene-
tration.  Triamcinolone  has  been  delivered  to 
hypertrophic  scars,  and  numerous  therapies 
directed at field cancerization and superficial skin 
cancers  have  been  shown  to  be  effective. These 
include  5-fluorouracil  [10],  ingenol  mebutate 
[11],  aminolevulinic  acid  (ALA)  [12,  13],  and 
imiquimod  [14].  Methotrexate,  used  as  chemo-
therapy and for inflammatory conditions [15] and 
diclofenac [16], a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agent, have also been tested.

One point of caution in the burgeoning field of 
fractional laser assisted drug delivery involves the 
choice of appropriate drug. Although a medication 
may be approved for topical administration, intro-
duction directly into the dermis may be harmful. At 
this time, we recommend routine use of fractional 
assisted drug delivery only for medications that are 
already  approved  for  dermal  administration.  In  a 
research  setting  and  with  appropriate  oversight, 
other  medications  can  be  considered  with  careful 
attention to dosimetry and potential complications.

 Immunogenicity

The  creation  of  microchannels  does  more  than 
simply promote growth of new tissue (in the case 
of rejuvenation) and overcome resistance to pen-
etration (in the case of drug delivery). The injury 
itself seems to result in an immune response that 
is  additive  to  or  perhaps  synergistic  with  the 
pharmaceutical  being  delivered.  Wang  et  al., 
demonstrated  improved  uptake  and  transporta-
tion of antigens as well as broader overall immu-
nity when a nonablative fractional laser was used 
in  conjunction  with  microneedle  delivery  of 
influenza vaccine than when using a microneedle 
array alone [17]. More recently, Kawakubo et al 
[18],  demonstrated  in  a  mouse  model  of  colon 
carcinoma that ablative fractional laser treatment 
of tumors resulted in significantly slower tumor 
growth  as  well  as  a  significant  increase  in  anti-
tumor  immunity.  As  the  immune  response  is 
increasingly  recognized  as  a  powerful  compo-
nent  the  body’s  defense  against  not  only  infec-

529

tious  disease  but  also  cancer,  fractional  lasers 
may have a significant role to play.

 Tissue Copying and Regeneration

Fractional  lasers  highlighted  the  regenerative 
capacity of skin. When the injury is sufficiently 
small,  skin  regrows  without  scarring;  approxi-
mately 40% of skin can be “taken” from a given 
site without any permanent evidence of the theft. 
This  observation  spurred  the  development  of 
technologies to graft skin from a donor site with-
out donor site morbidity, and to regenerate skin at 
a recipient defect with minimal scarring.

A device to perform fractional epidermal har-
vesting was developed at the Wellman Center for 
Photomedicine and recently received FDA clear-
ance [19]. It was initially used for the treatment 
of vitiligo by enabling rapid production of micro-
blister  grafts  without  donor  site  morbidity.  A 
commercial  version  is  being  used  mainly  for 
chronic wounds.

The  concept  has  been  extended  beyond  epi-
dermal harvesting to harvesting of full thickness 
skin columns. Tam et al., have demonstrated [20] 
the ability to harvest sufficiently small columns 
from the skin without donor site morbidity, and 
to reconstitute full-thickness skin (including skin 
appendages)  at  a  recipient  site  [21].  A  device 
based on this technology was recently cleared by 
the FDA and will be used in the treatment of both 
acute and chronic wounds.

Study of tissue regeneration through microin-
jury or micrografting has to date been primarily 
confined  to  the  skin.  Could  fractionated  treat-
ments  be  used  to  treat  or  expand  other  solid 
organs? Could they be used to regenerate  neurons, 
muscle,  liver  or  any  other  vital  cells?  It  is  not 
impossible  that  fractionated  treatments  could 
promote solid organ “rejuvenation”.

 Skin Tightening

Skin changes are among the most visible signs of 
aging. Increasing age is evidenced in part by skin 

35 Research and Future Directions



530

laxity  and  rhytides. As  a  result,  skin  tightening 
procedures  are  increasingly  popular.  The  most 
effective  improvements  in  skin  laxity  can  be 
accomplished  with  surgery,  but  many  patients 
prefer  less  invasive  and  less  expensive  proce-
dures with decreased downtime.

Fractional  lasers  have  been  shown  to  induce 
some amount of skin tightening [22]. Other frac-
tional skin tightening treatments, including frac-
tionated  microfocused  ultrasound  [23,  24]  and 
radiofrequency  devices  [25],  are  among  many 
device-based strategies for decreasing skin laxity. 
The  precise  mechanisms  of 
tightening 
achieved by these devices is uncertain; it may be 
a combination of tissue reduction and restoration 
of skin elasticity through formation of new col-
lagen  and  elastin,  or  simple  microcontraction 
caused by tissue damage. None of these devices, 
however, produces results that approach a surgi-
cal facelift.

the 

An  alternate  approach  that  utilizes  tissue 
removal  along  with  directional  closure  is  cur-
rently  under  investigation.  In  a  swine  model, 
Russe et al. [26], created full thickness wounds in 
skin using 19 G coring needles. When combined 
with  a  compressive  dressing,  tissue  shrinkage 
was  achieved  along  the  direction  of  application 
of the dressing. This approach may enable results 
closer  to  those  of  a  standard  surgical  approach 
while minimizing scarring and downtime.

 Robotic Microsurgery

The  concept  of  selective  photothermolysis 
enabled performance of microsurgery using elec-
tromagnetic  radiation  [27].  Knowledge  of  the 
pigmented  target-selective  properties  as  well  as 
size  and  geometry  of  a  given  target  allowed 
choice of treatment/illumination wavelength and 
pulse  duration  to  achieve  target  destruction. 
Fractional  photothermolysis  [1]  also  performs 
“micro” treatment, but it does so in a nonselec-
tive way; water is its chromophore. The method 
achieves  rejuvenation  by  using  a  narrow  beam 
laser to create very many, very small wounds.

suitable  chromophores  for  traditional  selective 
photothermolysis.  Examples  in  the  skin  include 
nonpigmented  hair  follicles,  sweat  glands  and 
sebaceous  glands.  At  the  several-micrometer 
scale, individual cells, such as melanocytes, lym-
phocytes, mast cells, and keratinocytes, are large 
enough to be addressed by a sufficiently narrow 
laser beam. An autonomous robot that can accu-
rately identify individual targets—whether using 
a standard CCD camera or any of several forms 
of in vivo microscopy—and then deliver a narrow 
beam of electromagnetic radiation to the precise 
location of that target, represents the next step in 
therapeutic laser treatments.

 Selective Cryolysis: Beyond 
Bodysculpting

The  introduction  of  cryolipolysis  in  2008  [28] 
spawned  the  popular  industry  of  noninvasive 
body  contouring.  The  differential  susceptibility 
of  adipocytes  to  cold  temperatures  enabled  the 
destruction  of  subcutaneous  fat  while  sparing 
overlying skin and subcutaneous structures. The 
concept of selective cryolysis can be extended to 
other lipid-rich tissues.

Jalian  et  al.  [29],  used  this  method  to  selec-
tively decrease sebaceous gland density in mice 
and swine, and to damage sebaceous glands and 
reduce sebum output in humans. Acne is a condi-
tion  experienced  by  almost  all  of  humanity  at 
some  point  during  life,  and  controlled  cooling 
may offer a new and effective treatment strategy 
by addressing the sebaceous gland, a major con-
tributor to its pathogenesis.

Garibyan  et  al.  [30],  demonstrated  a  marked 
decrease in mechanical and thermal pain sensitiv-
ity  in  human  subjects  starting  2–7  days  after 
 cryolysis and lasting at least 35 days. The treat-
ment  caused  decreased  epidermal  nerve  fiber 
density  and  myelinated  nerve  fiber  density. 
Chronic  pain  and  itch  represent  two  major 
sources of morbidity, and the prospect of achiev-
ing  long-lasting  relief  by  physical  means  is  a 
source of great anticipation.

Many potential targets, however, are too small 
or too numerous for manual destruction and lack 

In  the  future,  the  concept  of  cryoselectivity 
may also prove useful in the treatment of disor-

Y. S. Levin et al.



ders of pigmentation, as the melanocyte is known 
to have greater cold sensitivity than its neighbor-
ing keratinocytes.

 Laser Treatment of Basal Cell 
Carcinoma

Long-pulsed  lasers  have  been  investigated  for 
their  ability  to  clear  skin  cancer.  Initial  studies 
were performed with the pulsed dye laser (PDL) 
operating at 585 or 595 nm. A preliminary study 
with PDL showed clearance in only one of seven 
treated  tumors  [31].  Ballard  et  al.,  used  pulsed 
dye laser to treat seven volunteers with nine well-
defined  biopsy  proven  basal  cell  carcinomas 
(BCC).  Four  weeks  after  laser  treatment,  shave 
biopsies  were  performed  to  assess  for  residual 
cancer.  Five  of  nine  (55.6%)  demonstrated  no 
evidence  of  BCC,  but  the  remainder  of  lesions 
persisted [32]. Shah et al., treated twenty biopsy-
proven BCCs with four PDL treatments at 2 week 
intervals.  In  tumors  <1.5  cm  in  diameter,  there 
was a 92% regression rate. For tumors ≥1.5 cm in 
diameter, complete response was only 25% [33]. 
In  a  follow-up  study  of  BCCs  measuring  0.8–
3.5  cm,  19  of  20  BCCs  demonstrated  complete 
clinical response to PDL treatment. When biopsy 
was performed as 12–21 month follow-up, com-
plete clearance was demonstrated in 18 of the 19 
tumors that had initially demonstrated complete 
clinical response [34].

More  recently,  the  utility  of  the  1064  nm 
Nd:YAG  laser  has  been  investigated  in  the  treat-
ment of BCC. It is thought that this laser may be 
more effective due to its increased depth of pene-
tration  and  greater  selectivity  for  arterial  blood 
(oxyhemoglobin  over  deoxyhemoglobin).  Ten 
subjects  with  a  total  of  13  biopsy-proven  BCCs 
less than 1.5 cm in diameter received a single laser 
treatment.  Standard  excision  was  performed  one 
month later. Complete clearance was 92% [35].

The potential for a rapid, minimally invasive, 
and  minimally  destructive  treatment  to  clear 
BCC is exciting as it may mitigate the high cost 
of  treatment  of  this  common  condition.  If  the 
lesion  were  to  recur  following  laser  treatment, 
standard excision would remain an option.

531

 New Materials in Dermatology

The field of materials science has recently yielded 
several new technologies with cutaneous applica-
tion,  both  therapeutic  (as  in  the  cases  of  photo-
chemical tissue bonding and a wearable “second 
skin”) and diagnostic (as in the case of a bandage 
that senses tissue oxygenation).

 Photochemical Tissue Bonding

Photochemical tissue bonding (PTB) was devel-
oped by Kochevar and colleagues using rose ben-
gal  as  a  photosensitizer  and  green  light  for 
photochemical activation. The photosensitizer is 
totally reabsorbed into the body, causes little irri-
tation and has no other known side effects. PTB 
causes  collagen  at  tissue  surfaces  to  cross-link 
during about 5 min of light irradiation, yielding a 
bond  with  less  inflammation  or  scarring  than 
would  occur  with  conventional  sutures.  Studies 
for  blood  vessel  [36,  37],  nerve  repair  [38–42], 
cornea [43–46], and skin [47–49] have been pre-
sented.  Interestingly,  nerve  repair  with  PTB  in 
combination  with  human  amniotic  membrane 
was shown to be more efficacious than common 
suture for functional recovery. In comparison to 
standard  sutures,  the  photochemically  sealed 
amnion wrap also improved histological recovery 
[39]. This novel light-activated method of tissue 
repair may potentially produce better appearance 
and functional recovery.

 Second Skin

An  elastic,  wearable  crosslinked  polymer  layer 
(XPL) that mimics the properties of normal skin 
has  been  developed  [50].  The  XPL  is  a  skin-
adherent,  three-dimensional  polymer  network 
that is chemically crosslinked in situ on skin, fol-
lowing  a  two-step  topical  application  process. 
The  technology  has  potential  medical  and  cos-
metic applications, as it is breathable, long-last-
ing (~24 h) and permeable to sweat. With those 
qualities, XPL is a new therapeutic platform and 
can be used as an invisible layer or a new method 

35 Research and Future Directions



532

for drug-delivery. A second skin may preserve or 
restore skin barrier  function in diseases such  as 
atopic  dermatitis.  It  may  also  serve  to  improve 
appearance  of  aging  skin  by  decreasing  the 
appearance of fat herniation, increasing skin elas-
ticity, and by flattening rhytides.

 Oxygen Sensing Bandage

A  breathable,  transparent,  simple-to-apply-and-
read  and  easily  removable  bandage  has  been 
developed  to  measure  oxygenation  in  human 
skin. In this method, an oxygen sensing phosphor 
and a reference dye are embedded in a transpar-
ent liquid polymeric bandage material. The oxy-
gen-sensing phosphor is excited by 415 nm light 
and demonstrates peak emission at 690 nm (red 
light).  The  intensity  of  its  phosphorescence 
depends  on  pO2  in  the  local  environment.  The 
reference  dye  is  excited  by  392  nm  light  and 
demonstrates  peak  emission  at  495  nm  (green 
light).  In  contrast  to  the  oxygen  sensing  phos-
phor, the phosphorescence intensity of the refer-
ence dye is not dependent on local oxygenation. 
Red and green filters are used to detect both col-
ors emitted by the bandage. A reference curve is 
created  so  that  the  ratio  of  intensity  in  the  red 
“channel”  and  the  green  “channel”  corresponds 
to a specific pO2. The technology is unique in its 
ability to provide an oxygenation map of live tis-
sue rapidly and at low cost. It is under investiga-
tion for mapping oxygen in burns and grafts, two 
areas in which adequate oxygenation is necessary 
for appropriate healing [51–55].

 Photodynamic Therapy

Photodynamic  therapy  involves  delivery  of  a 
light-activated drug or precursor. Following light 
irradiation, the drug reacts with oxygen, produc-
ing free radicals, singlet oxygen and other reac-
tive  oxygen  species  (ROS).  The  ROS  damage 
certain “targets” in tissue, by inducing apoptosis, 
necrosis,  or  by  activating  local  inflammatory/
immune responses.

Photodynamic therapy achieves selectivity by 
localized application or uptake of the drug (or its 
precursor) and/or by localized illumination. The 
first  photosensitizers  (PS)  were  systemically 
administered  and 
included  hematoporphyrin 
derivatives  (HpD)  such  as  porfimer  sodium 
(brand  name  Photofrin).  These  were  limited  by 
side effects, however, primarily due to their pro-
longed  phototoxicity.  Second  generation  photo-
sensitizers,  also 
systemically  administered, 
overcame  some  of  the  prolonged  phototoxicity. 
These  include  BPD-MA  (verteporfin,  brand 
name Visudyne) and mTHPC (temoporfin, brand 
name Foscan).

In  dermatology,  photosensitizers  in  the  pso-
ralens family are primarily administered orally or 
by soaking in a tub, followed later by UV illumi-
nation.  This  technique,  called  PUVA  (Psoralen 
and  UltraViolet  A),  is  often  categorized  sepa-
rately  from  photodynamic  therapy,  but  is  based 
on the same principles. It has been used to treat 
psoriasis,  atopic  dermatitis,  chronic  cutaneous 
graft-versus-host disease, lichen planus, mycosis 
fungoides,  polymorphous  light  eruption,  and 
many other dermatoses. PUVA has largely been 
supplanted  by  other  treatment  options  for  these 
conditions,  including  UV  light  without  a  PS  as 
well  as  topical  and  systemic  drugs.  However,  it 
remains a potent and viable treatment option.

The most commonly used photosensitizers in 
dermatology  today  are  topically  applied.  These 
include  ALA  and  its  methyl  derivative,  methyl 
aminolevulinate  [56].  Other  topically  applied 
photosensitizers  include  older  compounds  such 
as methylene blue. These are currently used pri-
marily  in  the  treatment  of  superficial  nonmela-
noma skin cancers and actinic keratosis. However, 
PDT applications in skin are expanding and have 
been successfully demonstrated in the treatment 
of infections (including biofilms), acne vulgaris, 
other  inflammatory  dermatoses,  and  vascular 
malformations. Challenges in PDT include selec-
tivity of the drug and achieving sufficient illumi-
nation  of  the  target  to  enable  formation  of 
ROS.  These  challenges  are  subjects  of  active 
research.

Different  approaches  have  been  described  to 
improve  PS  delivery  and  accumulation  into  tar-

Y. S. Levin et al.



geted structures [57]. One simple approach, frac-
tional laser assisted drug delivery, was described 
previously  in  this  chapter.  In  addition,  PS  have 
been  developed  that  can  penetrate  more  easily 
into  the  plasma  cell  membrane.  This  is  accom-
plished  by  changing  molecular  physico–chemi-
cal  properties,  with  consequent  increased  and 
faster local drug accumulation. An example is the 
use of alkyl-esters of ALA with greater lipophi-
licity such as the methyl, propyl and hexyl-esters 
of ALA [58]. Alternatively, the use of liposome-
encapsulated  molecules,  oil-dispersions,  poly-
mers,  or  other  nanoparticle  carriers  have  been 
described [59].

Another  strategy  for  selective  PDT  is  by 
changing  or  modulating  the  target  environment. 
For example, it is possible to inhibit the accumu-
lation  of  PS  in  normal  surrounding  areas  while 
increasing the amount of PS or its photodynamic 
effect within the targeted structures. When using 
ALA  and ALA-derivatives  to  produce  PDT,  the 
drug must be metabolized into porphyrins, espe-
cially  protoporphyrin  IX  (PpIX).  PpIX  is  the 
active  PS.  PpIX  accumulation  is  dependent  on 
the enzymes of the heme synthesis pathway, iron 
stores,  and  other  variables.  By  manipulating 
these factors, greater selectivity can be achieved. 
One example is the use of temperature to control 
tissue  targeting.  Willey  et  al.,  demonstrated 
increased  PDT  efficacy  if  an  affected  limb  is 
heated during incubation [60], and other types of 
temperature  manipulation  have  been  shown  to 
affect PDT efficacy [58]. Perhaps a simple tem-
perature gradient in skin may localize photosen-
sitizer 
tissue  and  spare  normal 
target 
in 
surrounding areas.

Selective  PDT  can  also  be  accomplished 
using a PS that actively binds to specific mark-
ers. These markers can be located on target cells 
(e.g.  cancer),  in  cells  involved  in  development 
of the disease, or in the cells effecting immune 
response.  PS  antibody  conjugates  (commonly 
referred  to  as  photoimmunoconjugates)  have 
been successfully employed for selective deliv-
ery  of  PS  to  cancers  [61,  62].  PS  can  also  be 
conjugated to specific peptides that bind known 
integrins or to specific ligands that bind known 
cell surface receptors [63].

533

Due to the limited tissue penetration of ultra-
violet and visible light, PDT has historically been 
limited to tissues that are less than a millimeter 
from  an  epithelial  surface  and  therefore  easily 
accessible to external light sources or to optical 
fibers.  These  include  superficial  lesions  of  the 
skin, esophagus, respiratory tract (including head 
and neck cancers and some non small cell lung 
cancers), and bladder. However, additional strate-
gies have been utilized to increase accessibility to 
PDT. There are several examples of optical fibers 
being  placed  directly  into  vascular  anomalies 
within limbs or deep seated abdominal tumors in 
order to achieve sufficient illumination of the tar-
get. Careful adjustment of PS dose and location 
can increase the achieved depth by avoiding PS 
self-shielding, a phenomenon in which high con-
centration of PS in superficial tissue prevents the 
passage of light into deeper tissues. Fractionated 
PDT has also been shown to increase the depth of 
tissue necrosis [64]. Considerable effort has been 
made to increase the tissue depth of penetration 
through development of PDT agents that are acti-
vated by near infrared light, which can penetrate 
more deeply than ultraviolet or visible light; such 
PS  include  Lumin,  Motexafin  lutetium,  and 
TOOKAD. Near infrared light is still limited to 
millimeters of penetration, however. An alterna-
tive approach utilizes x-rays or γ-rays to activate 
the PS. These are of considerably higher energy 
and  penetrate  more  deeply  into  tissue.  If  a  PS 
cannot  be  directly  excited  by  penetrating  radia-
tion,  a  nanoparticle  transducer  can  be  used  to 
locally absorb the incoming radiation and trans-
fer part of its energy to activate the PS [64, 65].

 Nondestructive Microscopy 
for In Vivo and Ex Vivo Use

Dermatology  has  mainly  benefited,  but  in  some 
ways  suffered,  from  the  ready  accessibility  of 
skin. The many advances in noninvasive imaging 
that  have  permeated  other  medical  specialties 
have not yet been widely adopted in the clinical 
practice of dermatology. In general, when a diag-
nosis based on clinical examination is lacking, or 
cancer is a suspected diagnosis, a biopsy is per-

35 Research and Future Directions



534

formed.  When  assessment  of  tumor  margins  is 
done during a Mohs procedure or after a standard 
excision,  standard  histologic  methods  are 
employed.

Since  about  1990,  biomedical  research  has 
been  transformed  by  laser-based  microscopic 
imaging methods including confocal microscopy 
and  multi-photon  fluorescence  microscopy 
among others. These lend themselves for use in 
dermatology  research,  but  have  not  had  much 
clinical impact yet because of cost, lack of stan-
dardization,  and  (until  recently)  lack  of  verified 
diagnostic  value  and  lack  of  reimbursement  for 
their  use. The  technology  continues  to  progress 
rapidly for small reliable lasers, fast beam scan-
ning,  optical  components  and  high-speed  com-
puting—all of which underlie in vivo microscopy. 
When in vivo microscopy achieves greater adop-
tion  in  dermatology,  it  will  change  the  way  in 
which  many  skin  diseases  are  diagnosed  and 
treated.

Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CM) of 
skin  was  first  described  by  Rajadhyaksha  et  al. 
[66,  67],  and  commercialized  devices  are  avail-
able and cleared for human use. CM can operate 
in  either  reflectance  (RCM)  or  fluorescence 
(FCM)  modes.  Light  returning  from  a  tightly-
focused  laser  beam  is  passed  through  a  pinhole 
that eliminates out-of-focal-plane light, creating 
a virtual tissue section when the beam is scanned 
in  a  conjugate  focal  plane  through  live  tissue. 
RCM has been confirmed to offer valuable sensi-
tivity and specificity for detection of melanoma 
and other pigmented lesions as well as nonmela-
noma skin cancer [68–78]. In surgical planning, 
in vivo RCM has been used to assess preopera-
tive  surgical  margins,  with  some  benefit  over 
standard  dermoscopy  in  delineation  of  tumors 
[79].  RCM  is  capable  of  reaching  a  depth  of 
about 0.3 mm in vivo, which includes epidermis, 
papillary  dermis  and  upper  reticular  dermis. 
While  no  stains  are  used,  the  technique  allows 
imaging of function than cannot be seen by con-
ventional histopathology such as blood flow and 
cell  movement.  Perhaps  most  importantly,  the 
technique enables longitudinal imaging because 
it  is  not  destructive.  RCM  has  recently  been 
granted a CPT code for cellular and sub-cellular 

imaging  of  skin,  allowing  physicians  to  receive 
reimbursement  for  its  use  in  the  clinic  [80].  Ex 
vivo,  both  RCM  and  FCM  have  been  used  to 
evaluate  margins  of  Mohs  specimens  between 
surgical stages; this could perhaps eliminate the 
need  for  slide  preparation  [73,  81–83].  FCM  is 
more  effective  than  RCM  in  evaluation  of  mar-
gins in ex vivo tissue because it uses fluorescence 
dyes  such  as  acridine  orange  to  stain  nuclear 
DNA in epidermal keratinocytes. By contrast, in 
RCM  studies  using  acetic  acid  or  citric  acid  as 
contrast  agents,  nuclear  contrast  was  not  as 
robust.

Multiphoton  microscopy  (MPM)  is  based  on 
the  nonlinear  process  of  2-photon  excitation  of 
endogenous fluorophores, which can be used to 
acquire  horizontal  optical  sectioning  of  intact 
biological tissue samples. Two-photon excitation 
achieves  relatively  deep  penetration  (compared 
to  conventional  ultraviolet  excitation)  with  low 
phototoxicity. When studying human skin, MPM 
provides  high-resolution  fluorescence  imaging, 
allowing visualization of cellular and subcellular 
structures  of  the  epidermis  and  upper  dermis 
[84].  Like  RCM,  the  technique  does  not  use 
stains;  near-infrared  light  is  used  to  excite  the 
same natural tissue fluorescence that is seen with 
a Wood’s lamp or other ultraviolet sources. MPM 
has not been developed for clinical dermatology, 
but preliminary studies suggest promise [85–87]. 
The fluorescence of mitochondria provide imag-
ing of cell cytoplasm; elastin fibers can  be spe-
cifically  seen;  collagen  is  easily  imaged  by  the 
same  instrument  through  process  called  second 
harmonic  generation;  and  the  same  information 
of  RCM  can  be  obtained.  Depth  of  penetration 
with  MPM  is  similar  to  CM,  with  the  above 
advantages and resolution exceeding that of con-
ventional histopathology.

Optical  coherence  tomography  (OCT),  like 
CM,  was  invented  and  developed  many  years 
ago, initially for imaging of the retina. However, 
the  technology  has  been  extended  beyond  the 
eye.  A  tethered  capsule  has  been  proposed  for 
in vivo endomicroscopy of the human esophagus 
in order to better identify cancerous lesions [88, 
89], and is currently in advanced stages of devel-
opment. Coronary OCT has also been developed 

Y. S. Levin et al.



to characterize coronary plaques and thus distin-
guish between different causes of acute coronary 
syndrome, and to assess stent placement and neo-
intimal  hyperplasia  within  stents  [90].  In  live 
human skin, OCT creates vertical-section images 
of reflected light with lower resolution than CM 
or MPM, but much greater depth. OCT is based 
on  interferometry;  spatial  and  temporal  coher-
ence of optical waves backscattered from tissue 
is used to create images. It is conceptually similar 
to  detecting  the  ‘echo’  of  ultrasound  waves  for 
medical imaging. For many years, OCT images 
of skin were not felt to be useful because of the 
technology’s  inability  to  resolve  cells,  because 
most  structures  were  indistinct  (low  contrast), 
and because images were grainy due to speckle, a 
phenomenon  that  reduces  image  contrast  and 
results from multiple backscattering and forward 
scattering  of  the  source  laser  beam  within  the 
imaging  volume.  These  problems  have  been 
nearly eliminated. The speed and signal-to-noise 
characteristics  of  OCT  have  increased  dramati-
cally through the introduction of Fourier domain 
imaging [91, 92]. Speckle noise has been signifi-
cantly  improved  through  a  variety  of  methods, 
including some developed very recently [93]. In 
addition to microstructural imaging, versions of 
OCT  that  highlight  microvasculature  (angio-
graphic  OCT),  extracellular  matrix  structure 
(polarization-sensitive  OCT),  and  other  contrast 
mechanisms have also been developed [94]. OCT 
lacks  the  spatial  resolution  to  enable  histologic 
diagnosis at the cellular level, thus making diag-
nostic distinction among different types of cuta-
neous  neoplasms  difficult.  However, 
the 
technology has been used successfully in surgical 
mapping  of  nonmelanoma  skin  cancer  [95,  96]. 
The  additional  contrast  mechanisms  mentioned 
above are likely to further improve the ability of 
OCT to serve as a tool for noninvasive diagnosis 
of skin lesions and for surgical planning.

Additional strategies for tumor margin detec-
tion  have  also  been  demonstrated.  One  such 
method, polarization imaging, has been shown to 
provide  real-time,  intraoperative  delineation  of 
nonmelanoma  skin  tumor  margins  in  ex  vivo 
samples. It was recently used in vivo in combina-
tion with methylene blue fluorescence (following 

535

intralesional injection of dye) to rapidly delineate 
tumor margins during Mohs surgery [97–99].

frequencies. 

Conventional 

In the forms of optical microscopy discussed 
above, the detection occurs at or (in the case of 
fluorescence) near the frequency(ies) of illumina-
tion. By contrast, signals in Raman spectroscopy 
and  related  imaging  technology  result  from 
inelastic  scattering  of  light  within  tissue;  they 
correlate with the molecular vibrations of various 
tissue  biomolecules.  These  vibrational  frequen-
cies  are  generally  very  different  from  illumina-
Raman 
tion 
spectroscopy  involves  illumination  of  a  sample 
with a laser at a single frequency, and collection 
of emitted signals. From this time-domain signal, 
a spectrum can be constructed [100]. Using con-
ventional Raman spectroscopy, both ex vivo and 
in  vivo  spectra  have  been  collected  from  many 
different skin lesions and from normal skin, and 
various  algorithms  have  been  implemented  to 
distinguish  benign  lesions,  malignant  lesions, 
and normal skin with overall good sensitivity and 
specificity  [101–113].  In  order  to  significantly 
enhance  the  intensity  of  Raman  signals  and  to 
enable collection of images within a reasonable 
timeframe, strategies under the general category 
of  coherent  Raman  scattering  have  been  imple-
mented.  Examples  include  Stimulated  Raman 
Spectroscopy  and  Coherent  Anti-stokes  Raman 
Spectroscopy (CARS). In these methods, two dif-
ferent frequencies of light are used to illuminate 
a sample. The difference between the frequencies 
is tuned to match molecular vibrations of interest, 
such as the known vibrational frequencies of lip-
ids, proteins, DNA, amino acids, etc. The signal 
that  is  produced  is  several  orders  of  magnitude 
larger than that of conventional Raman spectros-
copy. By scanning over a surface, an image cor-
responding to the quantity of a particular bond is 
created  [100].  For  example,  Jung  et  al.,  used 
CARS microscopy to study sebaceous glands in 
mouse ears and their response to cryotherapy by 
probing the vibrational frequency of CH2 bonds 
in lipids [114]. CARS techniques have been used 
to detect pheomelanin [115] and to aid in detec-
tion of skin cancer [116, 117].

Like the methods described above, photoacous-
tic imaging (also known as optoacoustic imaging) 

35 Research and Future Directions



536

uses a light source to illuminate the tissue of inter-
est.  However,  instead  of  detecting  scattered  or 
emitted  photons,  this  imaging  technology  uses 
ultrasonic technology to detect acoustic waves. A 
pulsed nanosecond-long laser beam is used to illu-
minate  the  tissue  of  interest  causing  photons  to 
propagate diffusely inside. The absorption of these 
photons leads to a slight localized heating of the 
tissue causing thermoelastic expansion. This tran-
sient  thermoelastic  tissue  expansion  generates 
pressure  waves  (ultrasound),  which  can  then  be 
detected by broadband ultrasonic transducers, and 
converted  into  images  [118].  There  are  a  few 
examples  of  use  of  this  technology  in  skin. 
Photoacoustic  microscopy  has  been  explored  for 
melanoma detection and staging, with penetration 
depths  up  to  3  mm  [119].  Favazza  et  al.  [120], 
investigated the technique in volunteers by assess-
ing skin microvasculature as well as a nevus. The 
technique has also been used to assess cutaneous 
wounds [121–124].

As noted in the introduction to this section, the 
slow  uptake  of  noninvasive  and  nondestructive 
imaging techniques in dermatology has been due 
to  multiple  factors.  As  these  technologies  have 
been refined and improved, their potential clini-
cal utility is becoming increasingly clear. Clinical 
adoption will depend on additional factors such 
as  standardization,  reimbursement  for  clinical 
use,  cost,  and  physician  education  and  training. 
RCM is the first such modality to be reimbursed 
for clinical use, and the other barriers to adoption 
(particularly  physician  education  and  comfort 
with the technology) are slowly being addressed. 
Hopefully  this  process  will  be  repeated  with 
other modalities. In the long term, a multimodal 
imaging approach will, in all likelihood, be most 
effective, and we may be left wondering how we 
could ever have practiced without it.

 Final Words

meate our lives, including everything from smart-
phones to self-driving cars. We are not far away 
from  medical  apps  for  complex  diagnosis  or 
robotic treatment methods. Let the future tell us 
what is next!

References

  1.  Manstein  D,  Herron  GS,  Sink  RK,  Tanner  H, 
Anderson  RR.  Fractional  photothermolysis:  a  new 
concept  for  cutaneous  remodeling  using  micro-
scopic patterns of thermal injury. Lasers Surg Med. 
2004;34(5):426–38.

  2.  Anderson RR, Donelan MB, Hivnor C, et al. Laser 
treatment  of  traumatic  scars  with  an  emphasis  on 
ablative  fractional 
laser  resurfacing:  consensus 
report. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150(2):187–93.
  3.  Waibel  JS,  Wulkan  AJ,  Shumaker  PR.  Treatment 
of  hypertrophic  scars  using 
laser 
assisted  corticosteroid  delivery.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2013;45(3):135–40.

laser  and 

  4.  Issler-Fisher  AC,  Waibel  JS,  Donelan  MB.  Laser 
modulation  of  hypertrophic  scars:  technique  and 
practice. Clin Plast Surg. 2017;44(4):757–66.
  5.  Waibel J, Beer K. Ablative fractional laser resurfac-
ing for the treatment of a third-degree burn. J Drugs 
Dermatol. 2009;8(3):294–7.

  6.  Waibel  J,  Wulkan AJ,  Lupo  M,  Beer  K, Anderson 
RR.  Treatment  of  burn  scars  with  the  1,550  nm 
nonablative  fractional  Erbium  Laser.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2012;44(6):441–6.

  7.  Kineston  D,  Kwan  JM,  Uebelhoer  NS,  Shumaker 
PR.  Use  of  a  fractional  ablative  10.6-mum  carbon 
dioxide laser in the treatment of a morphea-related 
contracture. Arch Dermatol. 2011;147(10):1148–50.
  8.  Shumaker  PR,  Kwan  JM,  Badiavas  EV,  Waibel  J, 
Davis S, Uebelhoer NS. Rapid healing of scar-asso-
ciated chronic wounds after ablative fractional resur-
facing. Arch Dermatol. 2012;148(11):1289–93.
  9.  Bay  C,  Lerche  CM,  Ferrick  B,  Philipsen  PA, 
Togsverd-Bo  K,  Haedersdal  M.  Comparison  of 
physical  pretreatment  regimens  to  enhance  pro-
toporphyrin  IX  uptake  in  photodynamic  therapy: 
a  randomized  clinical 
trial.  JAMA  Dermatol. 
2017;153(4):270–8.

laser-assisted 

  10.  Wenande  E,  Olesen  UH,  Nielsen  MM,  et  al. 
leads 
Fractional 
to  enhanced,  accelerated  and  deeper  cutaneous 
5-fluorouracil  uptake.  Expert  Opin  Drug  Deliv. 
2017;14(3):307–17.

topical  delivery 

We have seen an explosion of new medical treat-
ments in recent decades since the introduction of 
lasers as medical tools. As we increase our under-
standing, the number of applications continues to 
expand. At the same time, new technologies per-

  11.  Erlendsson  AM,  Taudorf  EH,  Eriksson  AH,  et  al. 
Ablative  fractional  laser  alters  biodistribution  of 
ingenol  mebutate  in  the  skin.  Arch  Dermatol  Res. 
2015;307(6):515–22.

  12.  Waibel  JS,  Rudnick  A,  Nousari  C,  Bhanusali 
DG.  Fractional  ablative  laser  followed  by  trans-

Y. S. Levin et al.



dermal  acoustic  pressure  wave  device  to  enhance 
the  drug  delivery  of  aminolevulinic  acid:  in  vivo 
fluorescence  microscopy  study.  J  Drugs  Dermatol. 
2016;15(1):14–21.

  13.  Haak  CS,  Christiansen  K,  Erlendsson  AM,  et  al. 
Ablative  fractional  laser  enhances  MAL-induced 
PpIX  accumulation:  impact  of  laser  channel  den-
sity,  incubation  time  and  drug  concentration.  J 
Photochem Photobiol B. 2016;159:42–8.

  14.  Lee  WR,  Shen  SC,  Al-Suwayeh  SA,  Yang  HH, 
Yuan  CY,  Fang  JY.  Laser-assisted  topical  drug 
delivery  by  using  a  low-fluence  fractional  laser: 
imiquimod and macromolecules. J Control Release. 
2011;153(3):240–8.

  15.  Taudorf  EH,  Lerche  CM,  Erlendsson  AM,  et  al. 
Fractional  laser-assisted  drug  delivery:  laser  chan-
nel  depth 
influences  biodistribution  and  skin 
deposition  of  methotrexate.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2016;48(5):519–29.

  16.  Bachhav  YG,  Heinrich  A,  Kalia  YN.  Using  laser 
microporation  to  improve  transdermal  delivery  of 
diclofenac: Increasing bioavailability and the range 
of therapeutic applications. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 
2011;78(3):408–14.

  17.  Wang  J,  Li  B,  Wu  MX.  Effective  and  lesion-free 
cutaneous influenza vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2015;112(16):5005–10.

  18.  Kawakubo  M,  Demehri  S,  Manstein  D.  Fractional 
laser  exposure  induces  neutrophil  infiltration  (N1 
phenotype)  into  the  tumor  and  stimulates  sys-
temic  anti-tumor  immune  response.  PLoS  One. 
2017;12(9):e0184852.

  19.  Purschke  M,  Asrani  FA,  Sabir  SA,  Farinelli  WA, 
Anderson  RR.  Novel  methods  for  generating 
fractional  epidermal  micrografts.  Br  J  Dermatol. 
2015;172(4):1021–8.

  20.  Tam J, Wang Y, Farinelli WA, et al. Fractional skin 
harvesting: autologous skin grafting without donor-
site  morbidity.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg  Glob  Open. 
2013;1(6):e47.

  21.  Tam J, Wang Y, Vuong LN, Fisher JM, Farinelli WA, 
Anderson RR. Reconstitution of full-thickness skin 
by microcolumn grafting. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 
2017;11(10):2796–805.

  22.  Rahman  Z,  MacFalls  H,  Jiang  K,  et  al.  Fractional 
deep  dermal  ablation  induces  tissue  tightening. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2009;41(2):78–86.

  23.  Fabi  SG,  Goldman  MP.  Retrospective  evalua-
tion  of  micro-focused  ultrasound  for  lifting  and 
tightening  the  face  and  neck.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2014;40(5):569–75.

  24.  Fabi  SG,  Massaki  A,  Eimpunth  S,  Pogoda  J, 
Goldman  MP.  Evaluation  of  microfocused  ultra-
sound with visualization for lifting, tightening, and 
wrinkle  reduction  of  the  decolletage.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 2013;69(6):965–71.

  25.  Alexiades-Armenakas  M,  Rosenberg  D,  Renton 
B,  Dover  J,  Arndt  K.  Blinded,  randomized, 
quantitative  grading  comparison  of  minimally 
invasive,  fractional  radiofrequency  and  surgi-

537

cal  face-lift  to  treat  skin  laxity.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2010;146(4):396–405.

  26.  Russe  E,  Purschke  M,  Farinelli  WA,  et  al.  Micro-
fractional,  directional  skin  tightening:  a  porcine 
model. Lasers Surg Med. 2016;48(3):264–9.
  27.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermoly-
sis: precise microsurgery by selective absorption of 
pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–7.
  28.  Manstein  D,  Laubach  H, Watanabe  K,  Farinelli W, 
Zurakowski  D,  Anderson  RR.  Selective  cryolysis: 
a novel method of non-invasive fat removal. Lasers 
Surg Med. 2008;40(9):595–604.

  29.  Ray  Jalian  H,  Tam  J,  Vuong  LN,  et  al.  Selective 
cryolysis  of  sebaceous  glands.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
2015;135(9):2173–80.

  30.  Garibyan  L,  Cornelissen  L,  Sipprell  W,  et  al. 
Transient  alterations  of  cutaneous  sensory  nerve 
function  by  noninvasive  cryolipolysis.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 2015;135(11):2623–31.

  31.  Allison  KP,  Kiernan  MN,  Waters  RA,  Clement 
RM. Pulsed dye laser treatment of superficial basal 
cell  carcinoma:  realistic  or  not?  Lasers  Med  Sci. 
2003;18(2):125–6.

  32.  Ballard  CJ,  Rivas  MP,  McLeod  MP,  Choudhary  S, 
Elgart  GW,  Nouri  K.  The  pulsed  dye  laser  for  the 
treatment of basal cell carcinoma. Lasers Med Sci. 
2011;26(5):641–4.

  33.  Shah  SM,  Konnikov  N,  Duncan  LM,  Tannous 
ZS. The effect of 595 nm pulsed dye laser on super-
ficial and nodular basal cell carcinomas. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2009;41(6):417–22.

  34. Konnikov  N, Avram  M,  Jarell A,  Tannous  Z.  Pulsed 
dye  laser  as  a  novel  non-surgical  treatment  for  basal 
cell carcinomas: response and follow up 12–21 months 
after treatment. Lasers Surg Med. 2011;43(2):72–8.
  35.  Ortiz AE, Anderson RR, Avram MM. 1064 nm long-
pulsed  Nd:YAG  laser  treatment  of  basal  cell  carci-
noma. Lasers Surg Med. 2015;47(2):106–10.

  36.  O'Neill  AC,  Winograd  JM,  Zeballos  JL,  et  al. 
Microvascular  anastomosis  using  a  photochemi-
cal  tissue  bonding  technique.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2007;39(9):716–22.

  37.  Senthil-Kumar  P,  Ng-Glazier  JH,  Randolph  MA, 
et al. An intraluminal stent facilitates light-activated 
vascular  anastomosis.  J  Trauma  Acute  Care  Surg. 
2017;83(1 Suppl 1):S43–s49.

  38.  Fairbairn  NG,  Ng-Glazier  J,  Meppelink AM,  et  al. 
Light-activated sealing of acellular nerve allografts 
following  nerve  gap  injury.  J  Reconstr  Microsurg. 
2016;32(6):421–30.

  39.  Henry  FP,  Goyal  NA,  David WS,  et  al.  Improving 
electrophysiologic and histologic outcomes by pho-
tochemically sealing amnion to the peripheral nerve 
repair site. Surgery. 2009;145(3):313–21.

  40.  Johnson  TS,  O’Neill  AC,  Motarjem  PM,  et  al. 
Photochemical  tissue  bonding:  a  promising  tech-
nique  for  peripheral  nerve  repair.  J  Surg  Res. 
2007;143(2):224–9.

  41.  O'Neill  AC,  Randolph  MA,  Bujold  KE,  Kochevar 
IE,  Redmond  RW,  Winograd  JM.  Photochemical 

35 Research and Future Directions



538

sealing improves outcome following peripheral neu-
rorrhaphy. J Surg Res. 2009;151(1):33–9.

  42.  O'Neill  AC,  Randolph  MA,  Bujold  KE,  Kochevar 
IE,  Redmond  RW,  Winograd  JM.  Preparation  and 
integration  of  human  amnion  nerve  conduits  using 
a  light-activated  technique.  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 
2009;124(2):428–37.

  43.  Gu C, Ni T, Verter EE, Redmond RW, Kochevar IE, 
Yao  M.  Photochemical  tissue  bonding:  a  potential 
strategy  for  treating  limbal  stem  cell  deficiency. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2011;43(5):433–42.

  44.  Proano  CE,  Azar  DT,  Mocan  MC,  Redmond  RW, 
Kochevar  IE.  Photochemical  keratodesmos  as  an 
adjunct  to  sutures  for  bonding  penetrating  kerato-
plasty  corneal  incisions.  J  Cataract  Refract  Surg. 
2004;30(11):2420–4.

  45.  Proano CE, Mulroy L, Jones E, Azar DT, Redmond 
RW, Kochevar IE. Photochemical keratodesmos for 
bonding  corneal  incisions.  Invest  Ophthalmol  Vis 
Sci. 2004;45(7):2177–81.

  46.  Wang  Y,  Kochevar  IE,  Redmond  RW,  Yao  M.  A 
light-activated method for repair of corneal surface 
defects. Lasers Surg Med. 2011;43(6):481–9.
  47.  Kamegaya Y, Farinelli WA, Vila Echague AV, et al. 
Evaluation  of  photochemical  tissue  bonding  for 
closure of skin incisions and excisions. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2005;37(4):264–70.

  48.  Xu  N,  Yao  M,  Farinelli  W,  et  al.  Light-activated 
sealing  of  skin  wounds.  Lasers  Surg  Med. 
2015;47(1):17–29.

  49.  Yao  M,  Yaroslavsky  A,  Henry  FP,  Redmond  RW, 
Kochevar  IE.  Phototoxicity  is  not  associated  with 
photochemical  tissue  bonding  of  skin.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2010;42(2):123–31.

  50.  Yu B, Kang SY, Akthakul A, et al. An elastic second 

skin. Nat Mater. 2016;15(8):911–8.

  51.  Koolen  PGL,  Li  Z,  Roussakis  E,  et  al.  Oxygen-
sensing  paint-on  bandage:  calibration  of  a  novel 
approach  in  tissue  perfusion  assessment.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2017;140(1):89–96.

  52.  Li  Z,  Roussakis  E,  Koolen  PG,  et  al.  Non-invasive 
transdermal  two-dimensional  mapping  of  cutane-
ous oxygenation with a rapid-drying liquid bandage. 
Biomed Opt Express. 2014;5(11):3748–64.

  53.  Nichols  AJ,  Roussakis  E,  Klein  OJ,  Evans 
CL.  Click-assembled,  oxygen-sensing  nanocon-
jugates  for  depth-resolved,  near-infrared  imaging 
in  a  3D  cancer  model. Angew  Chem  Int  Ed  Engl. 
2014;53(14):3671–4.

  54.  Roussakis E, Li Z, Nichols AJ, Evans CL. Oxygen-
sensing  methods  in  biomedicine  from  the  mac-
roscale to the microscale. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 
2015;54(29):8340–62.

  55.  Roussakis E, Li Z, Nowell NH, Nichols AJ, Evans 
CL.  Bright,  “clickable”  porphyrins  for  the  visual-
ization of oxygenation under ambient light. Angew 
Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015;54(49):14728–31.

  56.  Zhao  B,  He  YY.  Recent  advances  in  the  preven-
tion  and  treatment  of  skin  cancer  using  photo-

dynamic  therapy.  Expert  Rev  Anticancer  Ther. 
2010;10(11):1797–809.

  57.  Solban N, Rizvi I, Hasan T. Targeted photodynamic 
therapy. Lasers Surg Med. 2006;38(5):522–31.
  58.  Juzeniene  A,  Mikolajewska  P.  5-Aminolevulinic 
acid  and  its  derivatives.  In:  Hamblin  MR,  Huang 
Y-Y,  editors.  Handbook  of  photomedicine.  Boca 
Raton: CRC Press; 2013. p. 267–73.

  59.  Ramos  J,  Huang  H-C,  Rege  K.  Laser  targeting 
to  nanoparticles  for  theranostic  applications.  In: 
Hamblin  MR,  Huang  Y-Y,  editors.  Handbook  of 
photomedicine.  Boca  Raton:  CRC  Press;  2013. 
p. 757–62.

  60.  Willey A, Anderson RR, Sakamoto FH. Temperature-
modulated  photodynamic  therapy  for  the  treatment 
of actinic keratosis on the extremities: a pilot study. 
Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(10):1094–102.

factor 

  61.  Abu-Yousif AO, Moor AC, Zheng X, et al. Epidermal 
growth 
receptor-targeted  photosensitizer 
selectively inhibits EGFR signaling and induces tar-
geted  phototoxicity  in  ovarian  cancer  cells.  Cancer 
Lett. 2012;321(2):120–7.

  62.  Kuimova  MK,  Bhatti  M,  Deonarain  M,  et  al. 
Fluorescence  characterisation  of  multiply-loaded 
anti-HER2  single  chain  Fv-photosensitizer  conju-
gates suitable for photodynamic therapy. Photochem 
Photobiol Sci. 2007;6(9):933–9.

  63.  Joshi  P,  Saenz  C,  Missert  JR,  Pandey  RK.  Recent 
advances in developing improved agents for photo-
dynamic therapy. In: Hamblin MR, Huang Y-Y, edi-
tors. Handbook of photomedicine. Boca Raton: CRC 
Press; 2013. p. 227–60.

  64.  Mallidi S, Anbil S, Bulin AL, Obaid G, Ichikawa M, 
Hasan  T.  Beyond  the  barriers  of  light  penetration: 
strategies, perspectives and possibilities for photody-
namic therapy. Theranostics. 2016;6(13):2458–87.

  65.  Wang  GD,  Nguyen  HT,  Chen  H,  et  al.  X-ray 
induced  photodynamic 
therapy:  a  combina-
tion  of   radiotherapy  and  photodynamic  therapy. 
Theranostics. 2016;6(13):2295–305.

  66.  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Gonzalez  S,  Zavislan  JM, 
Anderson  RR,  Webb  RH.  In  vivo  confocal  scan-
ning  laser  microscopy  of  human  skin  II:  advances 
in instrumentation and comparison with histology. J 
Invest Dermatol. 1999;113(3):293–303.

  67.  Rajadhyaksha M, Grossman M, Esterowitz D, Webb 
RH, Anderson RR. In vivo confocal scanning laser 
microscopy of human skin: melanin provides strong 
contrast. J Invest Dermatol. 1995;104(6):946–52.
  68.  Busam  KJ,  Charles  C,  Lee  G,  Halpern 
AC.  Morphologic  features  of  melanocytes,  pig-
mented keratinocytes, and melanophages by in vivo 
confocal  scanning  laser  microscopy.  Mod  Pathol. 
2001;14(9):862–8.

  69.  Busam  KJ,  Hester  K,  Charles  C,  et  al.  Detection 
of  clinically  amelanotic  malignant  melanoma 
and  assessment  of  its  margins  by  in  vivo  confo-
cal  scanning  laser  microscopy.  Arch  Dermatol. 
2001;137(7):923–9.

Y. S. Levin et al.



  70.  Langley  RG,  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Dwyer  PJ,  Sober 
AJ,  Flotte  TJ,  Anderson  RR.  Confocal  scanning 
laser  microscopy  of  benign  and  malignant  mela-
nocytic  skin  lesions  in  vivo.  J Am Acad  Dermatol. 
2001;45(3):365–76.

  71.  Pellacani  G,  Guitera  P,  Longo  C,  Avramidis  M, 
Seidenari  S,  Menzies  S.  The  impact  of  in  vivo 
reflectance  confocal  microscopy  for  the  diagnostic 
accuracy  of  melanoma  and  equivocal  melanocytic 
lesions. J Invest Dermatol. 2007;127(12):2759–65.

specificity  of 

  72.  Nori  S,  Rius-Diaz  F,  Cuevas  J,  et  al.  Sensitivity 
and 
reflectance-mode  confocal 
microscopy  for  in  vivo  diagnosis  of  basal  cell  car-
cinoma: a multicenter study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2004;51(6):923–30.

  73.  Guitera  P,  Menzies  SW,  Longo  C,  Cesinaro  AM, 
Scolyer  RA,  Pellacani  G.  In  vivo  confocal  micros-
copy  for  diagnosis  of  melanoma  and  basal  cell 
carcinoma  using  a  two-step  method:  analysis  of 
710 consecutive clinically equivocal cases. J Invest 
Dermatol. 2012;132(10):2386–94.

  74.  Giambrone  D,  Alamgir  M,  Masud  A,  Bronsnick 
T,  Rao  B.  The  diagnostic  accuracy  of  in  vivo  con-
focal  microscopy  in  clinical  practice.  J  Am  Acad 
Dermatol. 2015;73(2):317–9.

  75.  Gerger  A,  Hofmann-Wellenhof  R,  Langsenlehner 
U, et al. In vivo confocal laser scanning microscopy 
of melanocytic skin tumours: diagnostic applicabil-
ity using unselected tumour images. Br J Dermatol. 
2008;158(2):329–33.

  76.  Farnetani F, Scope A, Braun RP, et al. Skin cancer 
diagnosis  with  reflectance  confocal  microscopy: 
reproducibility of feature recognition and accuracy of 
diagnosis. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151(10):1075–80.
  77.  Astner  S,  Gonzalez  E,  Cheung  A,  Rius-Diaz  F, 
Gonzalez S. Pilot study on the sensitivity and speci-
ficity of in vivo reflectance confocal microscopy in 
the  diagnosis  of  allergic  contact  dermatitis.  J  Am 
Acad Dermatol. 2005;53(6):986–92.

  78.  Borsari  S,  Pampena  R,  Lallas  A,  et  al.  Clinical 
indications  for  use  of  reflectance  confocal  micros-
copy  for  skin  cancer  diagnosis.  JAMA  Dermatol. 
2016;152(10):1093–8.

  79.  Venturini  M,  Gualdi  G,  Zanca  A,  Lorenzi  L, 
Pellacani G, Calzavara-Pinton PG. A new approach 
for  presurgical  margin  assessment  by  reflectance 
confocal  microscopy  of  basal  cell  carcinoma.  Br  J 
Dermatol. 2016;174(2):380–5.

  80.  Rajadhyaksha  M,  Marghoob  A,  Rossi  A,  Halpern 
AC,  Nehal  KS.  Reflectance  confocal  microscopy 
of skin in vivo: From bench to bedside. Lasers Surg 
Med. 2017;49(1):7–19.

  81.  Gareau DS, Karen JK, Dusza SW, Tudisco M, Nehal 
KS, Rajadhyaksha M. Sensitivity and specificity for 
detecting  basal  cell  carcinomas  in  Mohs  excisions 
with confocal fluorescence mosaicing microscopy. J 
Biomed Opt. 2009;14(3):034012.

  82.  Bennassar A, Vilata A, Puig S, Malvehy J. Ex vivo 
fluorescence  confocal  microscopy  for  fast  evalua-

539

tion  of  tumour  margins  during  Mohs  surgery.  Br  J 
Dermatol. 2014;170(2):360–5.

  83.  Chung  VQ,  Dwyer  PJ,  Nehal  KS,  et  al.  Use  of 
ex  vivo  confocal  scanning  laser  microscopy  dur-
ing  Mohs  surgery  for  nonmelanoma  skin  cancers. 
Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(12 Pt 1):1470–8.

  84.  Paoli  J,  Smedh  M,  Ericson  MB.  Multiphoton  laser 
scanning  microscopy—a  novel  diagnostic  method 
for superficial skin cancers. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 
2009;28(3):190–5.

  85.  Koehler  MJ,  Konig  K,  Elsner  P,  Buckle  R,  Kaatz 
M.  In  vivo  assessment  of  human  skin  aging  by 
multiphoton  laser  scanning  tomography.  Opt  Lett. 
2006;31(19):2879–81.

  86.  Konig K. Multiphoton microscopy in life sciences. J 

Microsc. 2000;200(Pt 2):83–104.

  87.  Konig  K,  Riemann  I.  High-resolution  multiphoton 
tomography of human skin with subcellular spatial 
resolution and picosecond time resolution. J Biomed 
Opt. 2003;8(3):432–9.

  88.  Gora MJ, Sauk JS, Carruth RW, et al. Tethered cap-
sule endomicroscopy enables less invasive imaging 
of  gastrointestinal  tract  microstructure.  Nat  Med. 
2013;19(2):238–40.

  89.  Gora  MJ,  Simmons  LH,  Queneherve  L,  et  al. 
Tethered  capsule  endomicroscopy:  from  bench  to 
bedside  at  a  primary  care  practice.  J  Biomed  Opt. 
2016;21(10):104001.

  90.  Yonetsu T, Bouma BE, Kato K, Fujimoto JG, Jang 
IK. Optical coherence tomography – 15 years in car-
diology. Circ J. 2013;77(8):1933–40.

  91. de Boer JF, Cense B, Park BH, Pierce MC, Tearney GJ, 
Bouma BE. Improved signal-to-noise ratio in spectral-
domain compared with time-domain optical coherence 
tomography. Opt Lett. 2003;28(21):2067–9.

  92.  Yun  S,  Tearney  G,  de  Boer  J,  Iftimia  N,  Bouma 
B.  High-speed  optical  frequency-domain  imaging. 
Opt Express. 2003;11(22):2953–63.

  93.  Liba  O,  Lew  MD,  SoRelle  ED,  et  al.  Speckle-
modulating optical coherence tomography in living 
mice and humans. Nat Commun. 2017;8:15845.
  94.  Vakoc BJ, Fukumura D, Jain RK, Bouma BE. Cancer 
imaging by optical coherence tomography: preclini-
cal progress and clinical potential. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2012;12(5):363–8.

  95.  Alawi SA, Kuck M, Wahrlich C, et al. Optical coher-
ence tomography for presurgical margin assessment 
of non-melanoma skin cancer - a practical approach. 
Exp Dermatol. 2013;22(8):547–51.

  96.  Wang  KX,  Meekings  A,  Fluhr  JW,  et  al.  Optical 
coherence tomography-based optimization of mohs 
micrographic  surgery  of  Basal  cell  carcinoma:  a 
pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 2013;39(4):627–33.
  97.  Fan B, Neel VA, Yaroslavsky AN. Multimodal imag-
ing  for  nonmelanoma  skin  cancer  margin  delinea-
tion. Lasers Surg Med. 2017;49(3):319–26.

  98.  Yaroslavsky AN, Feng X, Neel VA. Optical mapping 
of nonmelanoma skin Cancers-A pilot clinical study. 
Lasers Surg Med. 2017;49(9):803–9.

35 Research and Future Directions



540

  99.  Yaroslavsky AN, Neel V, Anderson RR. Demarcation 
of nonmelanoma skin cancer margins in thick exci-
sions using multispectral polarized light imaging. J 
Invest Dermatol. 2003;121(2):259–66.

 100.  Austin  LA,  Osseiran  S,  Evans  CL.  Raman 
in  cancer  diagnostics.  Analyst. 

technologies 
2016;141(2):476–503.

 101.  Bodanese  B,  Silveira  FL,  Zangaro  RA,  Pacheco 
MT,  Pasqualucci  CA,  Silveira  L  Jr.  Discrimination 
of basal cell carcinoma and melanoma from normal 
skin  biopsies  in  vitro  through  Raman  spectroscopy 
and principal component analysis. Photomed Laser 
Surg. 2012;30(7):381–7.

 102.  Gniadecka  M,  Philipsen  PA,  Sigurdsson  S,  et  al. 
Melanoma  diagnosis  by  Raman  spectroscopy  and 
neural  networks:  structure  alterations  in  proteins 
and lipids in intact cancer tissue. J Invest Dermatol. 
2004;122(2):443–9.

 103.  Gniadecka M, Wulf HC, Johansson CK, Ullman S, 
Halberg P, Rossen K. Cutaneous tophi and calcino-
sis diagnosed in vivo by Raman spectroscopy. Br J 
Dermatol. 2001;145(4):672–4.

 104.  Lui  H,  Zhao  J,  McLean  D,  Zeng  H.  Real-time 
Raman spectroscopy for in vivo skin cancer diagno-
sis. Cancer Res. 2012;72(10):2491–500.

 105.  Nijssen  A,  Bakker  Schut  TC,  Heule  F,  et  al. 
Discriminating  basal  cell  carcinoma  from  its  sur-
rounding  tissue  by  Raman  spectroscopy.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 2002;119(1):64–9.

 106.  Nijssen  A,  Maquelin  K,  Santos  LF,  et  al. 
Discriminating  basal  cell  carcinoma  from  perile-
sional  skin  using  high  wave-number  Raman  spec-
troscopy. J Biomed Opt. 2007;12(3):034004.

 107.  Osada  M,  Gniadecka  M,  Wulf  HC.  Near-infrared 
Fourier  transform  Raman  spectroscopic  analysis 
of  proteins,  water  and  lipids  in  intact  normal  stra-
tum  corneum  and  psoriasis  scales.  Exp  Dermatol. 
2004;13(6):391–5.

 108.  Osada M, Kjaersgard Hansen L, Wulf HC, Gniadecka 
M, Brandrup F. Raman spectroscopy analysis of pro-
tein structure of hair in patients with trichothiodys-
trophy. Br J Dermatol. 2003;148(3):600–1.

 109.  Philipsen  PA,  Knudsen  L,  Gniadecka  M,  Ravnbak 
MH,  Wulf  HC.  Diagnosis  of  malignant  melanoma 
and basal cell carcinoma by in vivo NIR-FT Raman 
spectroscopy  is  independent  of  skin  pigmentation. 
Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2013;12(5):770–6.
 110.  Sigurdsson  S,  Philipsen  PA,  Hansen  LK,  Larsen  J, 
Gniadecka M, Wulf HC. Detection of skin cancer by 
classification of Raman spectra. IEEE Trans Biomed 
Eng. 2004;51(10):1784–93.

 111.  Wessel  S,  Gniadecka  M,  Jemec  GB,  Wulf 
HC. Hydration of human nails investigated by NIR-

FT-Raman  spectroscopy.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta. 
1999;1433(1–2):210–6.

 112.  Schleusener  J,  Gluszczynska  P,  Reble  C,  et  al.  In 
vivo  study  for  the  discrimination  of  cancerous  and 
normal  skin  using  fibre  probe-based  Raman  spec-
troscopy. Exp Dermatol. 2015;24(10):767–72.
 113.  Zhao J, Lui H, Kalia S, Zeng H. Real-time Raman 
spectroscopy  for  automatic  in  vivo  skin  cancer 
detection:  an  independent  validation. Anal  Bioanal 
Chem. 2015;407(27):8373–9.

 114.  Jung Y, Tam J, Ray Jalian H, Rox Anderson R, Evans 
CL. Longitudinal, 3D in vivo imaging of sebaceous 
glands  by  coherent  anti-stokes  Raman  scattering 
microscopy: normal function and response to cryo-
therapy. J Invest Dermatol. 2015;135(1):39–44.
 115.  Wang H, Osseiran S, Igras V, et al. In vivo coherent 
Raman imaging of the melanomagenesis-associated 
pigment pheomelanin. Sci Rep. 2016;6:37986.
 116.  Heuke S, Vogler N, Meyer T, et al. Detection and dis-
crimination of non-melanoma skin cancer by multi-
modal imaging. Healthcare. 2013;1(1):64–83.
 117.  Legesse  FB,  Medyukhina  A,  Heuke  S,  Popp 
J.  Texture  analysis  and  classification  in  coherent 
anti-Stokes  Raman  scattering  (CARS)  microscopy 
images  for  automated  detection  of  skin  cancer. 
Comput Med Imaging Graphics. 2015;43:36–43.
 118.  Zackrisson  S,  van  de  Ven  S,  Gambhir  SS.  Light 
in  and  sound  out:  emerging  translational  strate-
gies  for  photoacoustic 
imaging.  Cancer  Res. 
2014;74(4):979–1004.

 119.  Li  C,  Wang  LV.  Photoacoustic 

tomography 
and  sensing  in  biomedicine.  Phys  Med  Biol. 
2009;54(19):R59–97.

 120.  Favazza CP, Jassim O, Cornelius LA, Wang LV. In 
vivo  photoacoustic  microscopy  of  human  cutane-
ous  microvasculature  and  a  nevus.  J  Biomed  Opt. 
2011;16(1):016015.

 121.  Aizawa  K,  Sato  S,  Saitoh  D,  Ashida  H,  Obara 
M.  Photoacoustic  monitoring  of  burn  healing  pro-
cess in rats. J Biomed Opt. 2008;13(6):064020.
 122.  Hirao A, Sato S, Saitoh D, Shinomiya N, Ashida H, 
Obara M. In vivo photoacoustic monitoring of pho-
tosensitizer  distribution  in  burned  skin  for  antibac-
terial photodynamic therapy. Photochem Photobiol. 
2010;86(2):426–30.

 123.  Yamazaki M, Sato S, Ashida H, Saito D, Okada Y, 
Obara M. Measurement of burn depths in rats using 
multiwavelength  photoacoustic  depth  profiling.  J 
Biomed Opt. 2005;10(6):064011.

 124.  Zhang HF, Maslov K, Stoica G, Wang LV. Functional 
for  high-resolution 
photoacoustic  microscopy 
and  noninvasive  in  vivo  imaging.  Nat  Biotechnol. 
2006;24(7):848–51.

Y. S. Levin et al.



Index

A
Ablative approaches, 23
Ablative fractional photothermolysis (AFP), 484–485

characteristics, 166, 168–169
clinical course, 187, 189
drug and cell delivery into skin, 192
operator technique, 191
optical radiation, 192
photoaging, 188, 190
procedure, 186
skin histology, 187
treatments, 188
wound healing, 187, 188

Ablative fractional resurfacing (AFR), 157, 158
Ablative laser skin resurfacing, 68, 69, 198–200, 314
AFR (see Ablative fractional resurfacing (AFR))
complications, 147
contraindications, 139
cutaneous lesions, 139
ectropion formation, 147
Er:YAG laser, 143–145
hyperpigmentation, 147, 148
hypertrophic scar, 147
indications, 139
non-ablative/fractional laser procedure, 139
patient selection, 139, 140
photodamaged facial skin, 159
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 147
postoperative hypopigmentation, 147
postoperative management, 145
postoperative morbidity, 159
preoperative management, 140, 141
preoperative patient evaluation and education, 139
pulsed CO2 laser systems, 141, 142
short-pulsed Er:YAG laser, 139
side effects and complications, 146, 147
wound care, 145
wound infections, 146

Absorption spectra of skin chromophores, 5
Acne scars, 410–413

ablative fractional lasers, 438
CO2 laser resurfacing, 438
energy bipolar fractional RF, 439
GASS, 439
IPL, 280, 281

matrix-tunable radiofrequency technology, 439
non-ablative fractional lasers, 438–440
sublative rejuvenation, 439
VAS, 439

Acne vulgaris, 228–234, 310–313

definition, 228
genetic, neuroendocrine, and dietary factors, 228
laser based therapies

erbium glass laser, 231
585-nm and 595-nm pulsed-dye lasers, 228
fractionated Er:glass, 231
Nd:YAG, 230
1450-nm diode laser, 229

light based therapies

blue light, 231–232
blue–red light, 232
intense pulsed light, 233–234
longer wavelengths, 232
shorter wavelength, 232

prevalence, 228
treatment, 228

Acquired nevus of Ota-like macules, 96
Actinic keratoses (AK), 262, 267–269, 309, 310, 380, 381

RCM

imiquimod therapy, 393
photodynamic therapy, 393
shave biopsy, 394

Acute wound healing

dye-enhanced tissue soldering, 344
growth factors, 344
lasers-assisted wound bonding, 345, 346
lasers vs. conventional methods, 344, 345
optimal wound bonding, 346
tissue soldering, 343, 344
tissue welding, 343
Adipose tissue, 251–253

invasive fat removal (see Liposuction)
non invasive fat removal
cryolipolysis, 248
HIFU, 249
low frequency focused ultrasound, 249–250
low level laser therapy, 250
mechanism, 248
radiofrequency, 250
1210 nm laser, 251

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018 
K. Nouri (ed.), Lasers in Dermatology and Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76118-3

541





542

Index

Air cooling, 4
Aktilite device, 264
Alabaster skin, 166
Alexandrite laser, 4, 51, 442
Allergenicity, tattoo, 112
Allergic contact dermatitis, 488–489
Alma Accent RF System, 255
Alopecia areata, 359
Alopecic skin, 354, 357
Alpha bisabolol, 469
Amateur tattoos, 405
American Academy of Dermatology (AAD),  

518, 521

American National Standard for the Safe Use of Lasers, 

405

American Society for Dermatologic Surgery (ASDS), 

518, 520, 521

American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery 

(ASLMS), 37, 518–521

Aminolevulinic acid (ALA), 261, 305

acne, 265
actinic keratoses, 262, 267–269
basal cell carcinomas, 262
contraindications, 266–267
hypertrophic AKs, 262
micro-invasive squamous cell carcinomas, 262
nonhypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
non oncologic skin conditions, 265
onychomycosis, 266
photoaging, 266
plaque-type (stage I) mycosis fungoides, 264
rosacea, 265

Amplification of light, 3
Androgenetic alopecia (AGA), 359, 361,  

368, 369, 372

Anesthesia

action mechanism, 428
classification, 428
conscious sedation, 435
hair removal, 431
historical development, 427, 428
infiltrative anesthesia, 430 (see also Local 

anaesthesia)

nerve blocks, 431–433
non-ablative rejuvenation, 431
pigmented lesions, 431
safety, 402–405
tattoos, 431
topical anesthesia, 428
treatment, 370–371
tumescent anesthesia, 431

Angioma, 384, 385
Argon dye lasers, 340, 346
Arnd-Schultz law, 300
Atrophic scarring, 410–412
laser resurfacing, 68
ablative, 68, 69
fractional resurfacing, 69, 70
nonablative, 69

Authorized Personnel-Laser Users, 41
Autonomy, 500
Auxiliary flash, 510

B
Basal cell carcinomas (BCC), 378–380

laser treatment, 531
RCM

cryotherapy, 394
imiquimod therapy, 393
non-melanocytic skin lesions, 378–380
photodynamic therapy, 393
pigmented lesions, 385

Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), 363
Beam directionality, 3
Beam profiles, laser, 7
Beam propagation, 11–13
Beam, temporal profile, 302, 303
Betacaine-LA ointment, 429
Biostimulation, 20, 319
Biphasic dose response curve, 357
Bipolar radiofrequency, 27, 254, 255
Blisters, 423
Blu-U device, 263
Body dysmorphic disorder, 416, 417
Body self-awareness, 451
Bovine mucopolysaccharide-cartilage complex (MCC), 470
Bowen disease (BD), 381
Bronzing effect, 181, 182
Bruising (ecchymoses), 423
Brushing technique, see Rolling technique
Bulk tissue heating, 173
Bupivacaine, 430

C
Café au lait macules (CALMs), 94, 101

Er:YAG resurfacing, 94
prevalence, 93
treatment, 93

Capillary malformations, 53–55
Capillus® 272 device, 369
Carbon di oxide laser skin resurfacing, 141, 142, 438
Carbon dioxide fractional laser therapy, 355
Carbon dioxide lasers, 6, 340, 346, 459

tatto removal, 408
CARS techniques, 535
Catastrophic pancutaneous thermal damage, 14
Cellulite treatments, 253–256

laser and light based treatments, 253
sources

intense pulsed light, 253
laser, 254
light emitting diode, 254
massage, 254
Nd:YAG Laser, 255–256
radiofrequency, 254
radiofrequency devices, 253





Index

543

Cerebriform nests, 391
Charge coupled device (CCD), 511
Children, laser surgery, 449–452, 455–457
ablative/resurfacing lasers, 458, 459
adverse effects, 459
congenital melanocytic nevi, 458, 459
dermal lesions

Nevus of Ito and Nevus of Ota, 457
traumatic tattoos, 457

epidermal lesions

café-au-lait macules, 456, 457
lentigenes, 456
nevus spilus, 457
epidermal nevi, 459
hypertrophic scars, 455
infantile hemangiomas, 452–454
intra operative management, 461
molluscum contagiosum, 454
palmar plantar warts, 454
pigmented lesions, laser types, 455
port-wine stains

blood vessel destruction, 451
flashlamp-pumped PDL, 450
follow-up, 452
IPL, 452
natural history, 450
PDL, cryogen cooling spray device, 451
photodynamic therapy, 452
post-treatment purpura, 450
treatment, 451

preoperative management, 460, 461
spider telangiectasias, 454
vascular lesions, 450
KTP laser, 455
PDL, 449, 450
quasi continuous lasers, 455

verrucae vulgaris, 454

Chromophores, 13

absorption coefficients, 9, 12
carbon, 13
dry collagen, 13
fat, 13
hemoglobin, 13
melanin, 13
water absorption, 13

Complaints, laser and cosmetic patients, 419
Complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) 

chip, 512

Complete hair loss, 122
Compression therapy, 75
CompuServe GIF™-Graphics Interchange  

Format, 513

Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CM), 534
Conscious sedation, 435
Contact dermatitis, 487
Continuous wave lasers (CW mode), 4
Convective air cooling, 21
Conventional Raman spectroscopy, 535
Cooling devices, 481
CoolSculpting®, 446
CoolTouch®, 204
Corneal eye shield

in adults, 402, 404
in child, 402, 403
sizes, 402
tray set up, 402

Corticoids, 469
Corticosteroids, 472
Cosmetic dermatology, 46, 122, 123, 134
Cosmetic lip tattoo, 407
Cosmetic rejuvenation, 16
Cosmetic tattoo, 406, 407
Counseling patients, 415, 417

caregivers, 420
communication with physician, 420
patient concerns, 419
photographs, 421
physician question, 419
treatment history, 420
treatment options, 420
written materials, 421

Crusting

prevention and treatment, 482–483
risk factors, 482

Cryolipolysis, 248–249, 446
Cryoselectivity, 530
Cryotherapy, BCC, 394
Cutaneous laser medicine, 13

Chronic wounds

healing, 346, 347
incidence, 340
molecular and cellular effects, 348

Coagulation-denaturation, 18
Cocaine, 427, 428
Coherence gating, 395
Coherent Raman scattering, 535
Cold laser therapy, 357
Collagen shrinkage and dermal remodeling, 142
Collimation, 3
Combination KTP/Nd:YAG, 52
Combination PDL/Nd:YAG therapy, 52
Compact/Subcompact (point-and-shoot) type, 506

D
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT), 73
Delegation, to non-physician caregivers, 418, 419
Dermabrasion, tattoo removal, 114
Dermal heating, 27–29
Dermal pigmented lesions

broad band light sources, 95
drug-induced pigmentation, 98, 99
melanocytic nevi, 95, 96
melasma, 96–98
nevus fuscoceruleus ophthalmomaxillaris, 96
Nevus of Ota, 96
oculodermal melanoma, 96
Q-switched lasers, 95





544

Index

Dermatofibroma (DF), 383, 384
Dermatological laser treatment, 476, 480, 513

compact/subcompact, 506–508
digital media, 511–512
flash

advantage, 510
auxiliary flash, 510
camera, 509
electronic, 509
hot-shoe, 509
rapid low-power pre-flashes, 510
ring, 510
focal ratio, 511
lenses

macro/close-up lenses, 509
wide angle zoom, 508–509

mega-pixel, 512
photographic technique
equipment, 506
location and orientation, 514
pre and postoperative facial photography, 515
surgery, 515–516

publications, submitting images

CompuServe GIF™-Graphics Interchange 

Format, 513
dimensions, 512
File Format, 512
Joint Photographic Experts Group, 513
Portable Network Graphics, 513
resolution, 512
Tagged Image File Format, 513
Windows bitmap, 512
shooting techniques, 513–514
single lens reflex, 506, 507
tablet devices, 508
white balance, 510–511

Dermatologic laser therapies, websites

internet website quality evaluation, 518
patients, 520
physicians, 518

Dermatology

medical and cosmetic applications, 531
noninvasive and nondestructive imaging techniques, 

536

oxygen sensing bandage, 532
photochemical tissue bonding, 531
second skin, 532
XPL, 531

Dermatology Insights Journal, 519
Dermatology World publication, 519
DermNet website, 520
Dermoscopy-RCM correlation, 391, 392
Digital Media, 511–512
Digital nerve block, 432, 434
Digital photography, 505, 506
Digital single-lens-reflex (DSLR), 506
Diode laser (DL) system, 3, 78, 79, 198, 207, 442

acne vulgaris, 229–230

Dissatisfaction, of patients, 415, 417
Dosimetry, 302

Dressing/wound care

anti-inflammatory agents, 469–470
early post-operative treatment, 470
hyaluronic acid, 470
immediate post-operative treatment, 469
intermediate post-operative treatment, 471
late post-operative treatment, 471
MCC, 470
olive oil, 470
post-operative care, 468
post-recovery pigment correction, 471
scarring, 472
silicone ointment, 471

Dual wavelength combination lasers, 52
Dye-enhanced tissue welding, 343, 344
Dye lasers, 3
Dyschromias, 219
Dyspigmentation

prevention and treatment, 484–485
risk factors, 483–484
Dysplastic nevi, 387–388

E
Ectropion, 488
Edema

prevention and treatment, 482
risk factors, 482
Educating laser patients
adverse events, 424
bruising, 423
complaints, 419 (see also Counseling patient)
downtime, 423, 424
erosions, 423
hives and blisters, 423
procedure-associated issues, 424
redness and swelling, 422, 423

ELA-Max, 429
Elective laser procedures, 500
Electric tattoo device, 111
Electronic flash, 509
eMedicine, 520, 521
Emitted laser radiation, 4
Endogenous chromophores, 476
Endogenous photodynamic therapy, 306
Endovenous laser ablation, 75
Enoxolone, 469
Epidermal cooling devices, 203
Epidermal pigmented lesions

CALMs, 93
clinical studies, 92
ephelides (freckles), 94
intense pulsed light devices, 101
lentigines, 92, 93
melanocyte, 87
millisecond domain lasers, 101
seborrheic keratoses, 94
treatment, 213

Erbium:YAG laser resurfacing, 143–145,  

148, 441, 459





Index

Erbium glass laser, 198, 207, 208, 355

acne vulgaris, 231
devices, 204

Erosions, 423
Erythema

prevention and treatment, 482
risk factors, 482

Ethical issues

advertisements, 496
contraindications, 496
economics, 494
heart to heart discussion, physician and patient, 495
interest, 495, 496
training, 494–495

Etidocaine, 430
Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA), 460
Excimer lasers (XeCl), 4, 19

ablative decomposition, 238
cold ablation, 238
hypopigmentation, 239–240
psoriasis, 237–239
Vitiligo, 238–239

Exogenous photodynamic therapy, 304–306
Eye and skin protection, 43, 44
Eyewear, 402

F
Facial acne scarring, 67, 410
Facial and nasal telangiectasias, 58
Facial nerve blocks, 433
Facial telangiectasias, 57, 278
Factitial dermatoses, 417
Far infrared systems, 11
Fashlamp-pumped pulsed dye lasers, see Pulsed dye 

lasers

FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health 

(CDRH), 38

Federal Laser Product Performance Standard, 42
Feedback mechanism, 3
Femtosecond (10−15) domain lasers, 103
Fiber optics, 4
Field radiofrequency, 250
Finsen’s electric arc lamp-based system, 286
Fitzpatrick skin types IV–VI, 181, 422
Flash lamp-pumped pulsed dye laser (PDL), 51

vascular lesions, 450

Flash lamp-pumped ruby-based laser, 286
Fluence, 477
Fluorescence confocal microscopy (FCM), 534
F-number, see Focal ratio
Focal ratio, 511
Focused intense ultrasound (IUS), 445
Follicular unit extraction, 353
Folliscope, 371, 372
Food Drug and Cosmetic Act, 494
Forward looking infrared camera (FLIR), 30
Fractional CO2 laser, 70
Fractional CO2 laser-assisted transdermal delivery of 

topical timolol, 56

545

Fractional delivery systems, 11
Fractional epidermal harvesting, 529
Fractional Erbium YAG laser, 70
Fractional laser assisted drug delivery, 533
Fractional laser skin resurfacing

ablative system, 156
contraindications, 156
indications, 156
non-ablative lasers, 156
optimal treatment parameters, 159
photothermolysis, 156, 157
post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, 159
postoperative management, 159
postoperative recovery period, 156
preoperative patient evaluation and education, 158
side effects, 159
and skin phototypes, 159
skin rejuvenation, 156
topical anesthetic cream, 158
treatment techniques and parameters, 158, 159

Fractional photothermolysis (FP), 22, 171–173,  

194, 530

aFP (see Ablative fractional photothermolysis (aFP))
annual citations, 166, 167
biological organs, 193
complexity, 175
complications, 191
concept, 166
home-use product, 193
MTZs

bulk tissue heating, 173
depth of, 171
pulse duration, 172
rolling technique, 172
skin cooling, 173
stamping technique, 172
thermal injury, 173
wavelength, 171
multiple treatment, 174
nFP (see Non-ablative fractional photothermolysis 

(nFP))

post-operative considerations, 192
pre-operative considerations, 191, 192
rules of, 175
side effects, 174

Fractional radiofrequency microneedle system, 70
Fractional resurfacing, 69, 70
Fractional technology, 314

fractional laser assisted drug delivery, 528
full thickness skin columns, 529
immunogenicity, 529
robotic microsurgery, 530
scars and contractures, 528
skin regeneration, 529
skin tightening, 529–530
tissue regeneration, 529

Fractionated erbium glass laser, tissue coagulation, 91, 

231
F-ratio, see Focal ratio
Full thickness skin columns, 529





546

Index

G
Gallium arsenate (AsGa) laser, 358
Gallium-aluminum-arsenide (GaAlAs) lasers, 340, 346
Gallium-arsenide (GaAs) lasers, 340, 343, 346, 347
Gas lasers, 3
Gaussian profile, 7
Global acne scarring scale (GASS), 439
Gorlin syndrome (GS), 269, 393
Green light laser, 5
Grotthuss-Draper Law, 295
Guide number (GN), 509

H
Hair growth, 356

LLLT (see Low level light therapy (LLLT))
paradoxical hypertrichosis, 356

Hair removal, 46
device, 2, 21
Hair Removal Journal, 521

Hair removal, laser

active cooling, 123
advantages, 122
alexandrite laser, 125
chromophore’s thermal relaxation time, 122
contraindications, 125
diode laser, 125, 127, 128
endogenous chromophore melanin, 123
home-use devices, 130, 131
indications, 125
IPL systems, 129, 130
long-pulsed alexandrite laser, 123, 126, 127
long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser, 123
long-pulsed ruby laser, 123
long-pulsed semiconductor diode laser, 123
Nd:YAG, 128
nonsurgical procedures, 122
patients with hypertrichosis/hirsutism, 122
perioral area pretreatment, 129
pre-operative management
patient history, 125
physical examination, 125
prophylactic antiviral agents, 126
right axillary area pretreatment, 129
ruby laser, 125, 126
theory of selective photothermolysis, 122
vascular reduction, 123

Hair transplantation

advantages, 356, 357
after 900 grafts, 352
after 1000 grafts, 352
before surgery, 352, 353
CO2 fractional laser therapy, 355
CO2 laser assisted recipient sites, 354, 355
CO2 laser, risk, 356
disadvantages, 356, 357
erbium laser, 355
follicular unit extraction, 353
holmium laser, 355
incidence, 352

instruments for recipient sites, 356, 357
laser-recipient sites vs. steel created sites, 354
physicians challenges, 353

Hairmax Lasercomb™, ®, 360–362, 369
Hand-based tattooing technique, 111
Healthcare ethics, 500
Health provider, 502
Heat conduction, 20, 21
Heat diffusion, 11
Heat generation
LTIs, 16
SPT, 13–16

Heat shock protein (HSP), 347

expression, 18

Heat transfer to epidermis, 51
Helium-neon lasers, 340, 346, 358
Hemangiomas, 278
Heme biosynthetic pathway, 261
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), resurfacing, 488
Hidradenitis suppurativa, 281
High efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter, 44
High energy short pulses (Q-switched ns pulses), 5
High intensity, beam, 3
High intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), 248–249
Home-use dermatology devices, 193
Home-use diode laser, 130

hair removal devices, 125
side effects, 131
Hybrid cameras, 506
Hydroquinone, 471
Hyperpigmentation, 422, 483
Hypertrichosis, 486
Hypertrophic PWSs, 54
Hypertrophic scars, 65, 280, 410, 455, 472

ablative CO2 and Erbium:YAG lasers, 65
in burn wounds, 66
collagen fibers, 64
combination therapy, intralesional corticosteroids and 

5-FU, 70

fibroblasts, 64
and keloids, 64–65
PDL treatment, 67
treatment, 66
wound healing process, 64

Hypopigmentation, 239–240, 483, 484

I
Idiosyncratic complications, 486–489

photoepilation

hypertrichosis, 486
leukotrichia, 486
reticulate erythema, 487
urticarial-like plaques, 487

pigmented lesions

leukotrichia, 487
tissue splatter and pinpoint bleeding, 487

resurfacing

acne flares, 487
bacterial infection, 488





Index

547

contact dermatitis, 487
ectropion, 488
fungal infection, 488
herpes simplex virus, 488
milia formation, 487
tissue splatter, 488

tattoos

allergic contact dermatitis, 488–489
combustion, 489
paradoxical darkening, 489
photoallergic contact dermatitis, 489
pinpoint bleeding, 489
tissue splatter, 489

iGrow®, 369, 371
Imiquimod cream, 472
Immunogenicity, 529
Inebriation, 427
Infantile hemangiomas (IH), 55, 56, 411, 452–454
Infiltrative anesthesia, 430
Informed consent, 500–502
Infrared tightening, 444, 445
Institutional board review (IRB), 495
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), 363
Integrated cooling device, 123
Intense pulsed light (IPL), 78, 125, 198, 223, 278–282, 290

acne vilgaris, 233
cellulite treatment, 253
clinical treatment
acne, 280, 281
facial telangiectasias, 278
hair removal, 280
hemangiomas, 278
hidradenitis suppurativa, 281
nail psoriasis, 281–282
PDT, 280
photorejuvenation, 279
pigmented lesions, 279
Poikiloderma of Civatte, 278
reticular leg veins, 278
sarcoidosis, 281
scars, 280
seborrheic keratosis, 281
dermatologic treatment, 276
devices, 5, 52, 53
energy, 277
flashlamp, 3
for hair removal, 124, 129, 130
history, 276
melasma, 442
photorejuvenation, 441
port-wine stains, 452
pulse duration, 277
sources, 200, 201, 208–210
spot size, 277
system, hair reduction, 123
water-filled gel, 276
wavelengths, 277
xenon flash lamp, 276

Intensity, 332–333
International Society of Hair Restoration Surgery, 352

Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) regulation, 496
Irradiance, 298–302

J
Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPG), 513
Journal of Investigative Dermatology Symposium 

Proceedings, 520

Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology 

(JAAD), 519

Junctional nevi, 385

K
Keloid scars, 438
Keratinocytes, 342
Krypton lasers, 340, 346
KTP lasers, 198, 201

L
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA), 405
Laser-assisted wound closure, 345, 346
Laser complications, 481–489

adverse events, 480
cooling, 477
idiosyncratic (see Idiosyncratic complications)
indications, 480, 481
laser devices malfunction, 478
laser mechanics, 476–477
medications, 480
patient factors, 479, 480
prevention and treatment
crusting, 482–483
dyspigmentation, 484–485
edema, 482
erythma, 482
pain, 481–482
purpura, 483
scarring, 485–486
vesiculation, 482–483

professional errors, 479
risk factors

crusting, 482
dyspigmentation, 483–484
edema, 482
erythema, 482
pain, 481
purpura, 483
scarring, 485
vesiculation, 482

safety, 478
vascular lesions, 489

Laser devices malfunction, 478
Laser exposure spot size, 6
Laser hair reduction, 8
Laser hair removal

Alexandrite laser, 442
diode laser, 442
Nd:YAG laser, 442, 443





548

Laser lipolysis, 251
Laser mechanics, 476–477
Laser physics, 477
Laser practice

delegating procedures, 526
direct and indirect costs, 524, 526
evidence based review, 525
integrating energy based devices, 523–524
marketing, 525
peers review, 525
rent vs. lease vs. purchase, 525
results and good outcomes, 525
return on investment, 526

Laser Protective Barriers and Curtains, 43
Laser Protective Eyewear, 43
Laser safety, 37

administrative controls, 41
delegation of medical procedures, 45
in dermatology, 40
healthcare, 40
for perioperative nursing, 39
program, 42
for support personnel, 39
training and credentialing, 39
warning signs and labels, 42, 43

Laser skin resurfacing, 18
Laser systems, 198, 204, 206
Laser therapy, 501
Laser toning, see Sub-surfacing lasers
Laser welding, 342–344
LaserCap®, 369
Lasers and light therapies, 502
Laser-tissue interactions (LTIs)

carbonization, 25
chromophore concentrations, 22, 24
dermal transmission, 23
epidermal damage ratio, 22
hyperosmolar solutions, 25
immediate and delayed pigmented darkening, 24
logical sequence, 32
macroscopic responses, 25
medical treatment, 2
molecular basis, 16
non-radiative relaxation of optical energy, 25
optical damping, 23
Perfluorodecalin, 25
and photobiologic effects, 16
photon recycling, 25
photothermal response, 26
physical aspects, 32
pixilated injury, 22
pulse duration, 21
skin transparency, 25
threshold-based, 24
two-photon absorption, 21
vascular applications, 24
vascular heating, 24
wound healing, 22

Lasing media, 3, 4
LED low level light therapy  
(LED-LLLT), 317

Index

Leg veins, 75, 76, 79–81
anatomy, 73, 74
clinical evaluation, 74
dilated vessels, 74
diode laser, 78, 79
duplex imaging, 74
IPL, 78
KTP laser, 77
laser therapy

fluence, 76
hydrostatic pressure, 75
oxyhemoglobin, 75
procedure end point, 80
pulse duration, 76
side effects, 81
vessel heating, 76

LPA laser, 78
Nd:YAG laser, 79, 80
patient populations, 73
PDL, 77
prevalence, 73
surgical stripping, 73
treatment approaches, 75
with venous outflow obstruction, 75
venous structure and function, 74

Lenses

macro/close-up lenses, 508–509
wide angle zoom, 508–509

Lentigines, 2, 9, 15
Lentigo maligna melanoma (LMM), 394
Leucoderma, 239, 240
Leukocyte trafficking, 379
Leukotrichia, 486, 487
Lichen planopilaris, 359
Lidocaine, 428–431, 433, 434
Light

absorption/scattering, 3, 11
applications, 3
device terminology, 5–7
electromagnetic spectrum, 2
Far IR, 2
MIR, 2
molecular/microscopic level, 3
NIR I, 2
NIR II, 2
peak power, 3
photons, 3
scattering, 3
therapeutic applications, 3
UV, 2
VIS, 2
wavelength, 3
waves, 2

Light devices, skin

deep stratum, 219–222
mid stratum, 223
superficial stratum, 223–224

Light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 4, 293–302, 304–306, 

309, 310, 312, 313, 324–327, 368, 369

advantages, 290, 292
applications, 330, 331





Index

549

on board chips, 287, 289, 330
in clinical practice

acne vulgaris, 310, 312, 313
actinic keratoses, 309, 310
NMSCs, 309, 310
platelet-rich plasma, 324
skin rejuvenation, 312
transcranial indication, 324

continuous wave, 333
cost, 291
divergent beams, 330
electricity-light conversion ratio, 290
GaAs laser diode, 329
high-quality dome-type LED, 287, 289
history, 287
home market, 330
intensity, 332–333
in vitro experiment, 333, 334
irradiance, 298–302
laser diode-based handpiece, 329
vs. lasers/intense pulsed light, 289–290
MedLine and/or PubMed, 334
NASA LED, 290
near infrared, 328
negative and positive materials, 287
on-board chips, 329
PDT

endogenous, 306
exogenous, 304, 305

photobiomodulation, 306–308
photoosmotic and photoacoustic effects, 329
phototherapeutic light source, 290
photothermal and athermal reactions

hemangioma simplex lesion, 294, 295
Ohshiro’s zebra method, 294, 295
photoactivated cells, 293
temperature-dependent bioeffects, 293
in tissue, 293, 294
printed circuit boards, 287
recommended dose, 333
regulatory approvals, 332
safety

blink reflex, 326
clinician goggles or glasses, 326
contraindications, 327
incident power density, 325
maximum permissible exposure, 325
non-significant risk device, 326
safe and effective, 326
side effects, 326, 327

Soret band short wavelength visible blue light, 328
state-of-the-art FDA-cleared new generation LED 

phototherapy system, 292

substrates and colors, 287, 289
temporal profile, 302–304
visible red light, 328
visible yellow light, 328
wavelengths, 332

depth of the target, 295
dosimetry, 298–302

Grotthuss-Draper Law, 295
laser therapy application and research, 297
membrane-located transport mechanisms, 298
oxyhaemoglobin absorption curve, 297
photoreception of light, 298, 299
target chromophores, 295
transmission photospectrogram, 296
visible light and invisible infrared  

light, 298

water absorption, 297
wavelength specificity, 295

whole-body arrays, 329

Light sources, 524
Light-tissue interaction, 2
Limelight device, 223
Liposonix® device, 446
Liposuction

external ultrasound, 252
internal ultrasound, 252–253
low level laser, 251
Nd:YAG laser with and without, 251

LMX®, 460
LMX-4, 429
Local anesthesia, 431

adverse effects, 432–434
chemical structure, 428, 429
development, 427
lactation, 434
pediatric patients, 434, 435
pregnancy, 434

Localized delivery systems, 237
Localized heating, 14
Long pulsed alexandrite (LPA) laser, 15, 78
Long pulsed dye laser (PDL), 77, 81
Lower extremity venous system, 73
Low frequency focused ultrasound, 249–250
Low level laser therapy, 249–250
Low level light therapy (LLLT), 224–225

AsGa laser, 358
basic science, 357
commercial devices, 360
helium neon laser, 358
inflammation, 358–359
mechanisms of action, 361, 362
mitochondria transport chain, 358, 359
products, 359–361
wound healing, 363

Lymphangioma, vascular lasers, 60

M
Macrowound fractional technologies, 23
Maintenance therapy, 200
Male androgenetic alopecia (MAA), 355
Malfunctions, 478
Malpractice litigation, 500
Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience 

(MAUDE) database, 478

Matrix, 358
Matrix-tunable radiofrequency technology, 439





550

Index

Maximum permissible exposure (MPE), 325
Medical and cosmetic applications, laser, 115
Medical laser training programs, 38, 40, 45, 46
Medical use, lasers, 38
Medicolegal landscape, 500
Melanin dust, 388
Melanin index (MI), 242
Melanocytic nevi, 385–387
Melasma and post-inflammatory  

hyperpigmentation, 96–98

MENDs shuttle, 177, 179
Meshwork pattern, 386
Methyl aminolevulinate (MAL), 262

acne, 265
advantages, 264
BCC, 269
Bowen’s disease, 263
combination therapy, 262
contraindications, 266–267
indications, 263
monotherapy, 262
non-hypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
non oncologic skin conditions, 265
plaque-type (stage I) mycosis fungoides, 264
recurrence rates, 264
refractory mycosis fungoides, 264
superficial BCC, 263

Miami Scar Scale, 67
Microbeams, 26
Microneedling fractional radiofrequency  

devices, 27

Microscopic epidermal necrotic debris (MEND), 177, 

178, 182

Mid infrared diode laser systems, 203
Mid-infrared lasers, 200

diode laser system, 207
erbium glass laser, 207, 208
laser systems, 204, 206
Nd:YAG laser, 204, 205
Q-switched laser system, 204

Minocycline-induced pigmentation, 98, 99
MIR-lasers and deeply penetrating halogen  

lamps, 10, 11
Mitochondria structure, 358, 359
Mohs micrographic surgery, 392
Molluscum contagiosum, 454
Monochromaticity, 3
Monopolar devices

EndyMed intensif, 31
Exilis system, 29
Infini, 30, 31
InMode Fractora, 31
Pelleve, 30
radiofrequency energy, 29
Thermage, 29
ThermiTight, 30
TrueSculpt, 30
Vanquish, 30

Monopolar radiofrequency, 26, 27, 254

devices, 251

Multicolor tattoo, 405–407

Multiphoton microscopy (MPM), 534
Mycosis fungoides (MF), 381, 382

N
NAF 1550 nm laser, 438
Nail psoriasis, 281–282
Nanoshells, 344
NASA LEDs, 287
National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA) 

Space Medicine Program, 287

ND:YAG lasers, 79, 80, 198, 203–205, 219, 343, 346, 

356, 442, 443

cellulites, 255–256
mid stratum, skin, 223
with and without liposuction, 251

Near infrared lasers, 10, 346
Neodymium: yttrium aluminum garnet laser  

(Nd:YAG), 52

acne vulgaris, 230

Nevus fuscoceruleus ophthalmomaxillaris, 96
Nevus of Ota, 96, 97
New York Education Law, 46
Nominal Hazard Zone (NHZ), 41
Non ablative fractional laser, 23
Non invasive fat removal
cryolipolysis, 248
HIFU, 249
low frequency focused ultrasound, 249–250
low level laser therapy, 250
mechanism, 248
radiofrequency, 250
Nonablative approaches, 23
Nonablative fractional photothermolysis (NAFP), 485

burn scar, 184, 185
characteristics, 167, 176
effects, 179
energy dependent response, 179, 180
energy levels, 176, 177
erythema and edema, 181, 182
fine and moderate (dynamic) rhytides, 184
melasma, 185
patient discomfort, 181
patient satisfaction, 181
PIH, 182
scarring, 184, 185, 190, 191
skin histology, 177–179
thermal damage, 181
thermal energy, 180, 181
thulium laser, 182, 183
traumatic scar, 184

Nonablative fractional skin resurfacing (NAFR), 157
Non-ablative laser skin resurfacing, 69, 150–155

contraindications, 148
cryogen spray cooling, 152
cytokine release stimulation, 152
dynamic cryogen spray cooling, 152
electromagnetic spectrum, 149
epidermal protection, 151
facial photodamage, 149
indications, 148





Index

551

intense pulsed light treatment, 150
long-pulsed 1320 nm Nd:YAG laser, 151
monopolar radiofrequency device, 155
patient selection, 148, 149
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 153
postoperative hyperpigmentation, 156
postoperative management, 155
preoperative patient evaluation and  

education, 148
pulsed dye laser, 149
radiofrequency device, 155
side effects/complications, 156
subclinical epidermal injury, 152
thermal sensor, 152
Sub-surfacing lasers, See also
Non-ablative rejuvenation effect, 202
Nonablative resurfacing, 314
Non-beam hazards, 44
Non-bulk skin heating, 13
Non-coherent light sources, 92
Non-contact capacitive electrode system, 28
Non-fractional CO2 laser, 408
Nonhypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
Non-invasive treatment
limiting factors, 214
Nd:YAG laser, 219
pre and post operative, 214

Non-laser devices, 3
Non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs), 309, 310
Non-physician operators, 502
Nonpigmented hair removal
adverse events, 132
antibiotics, 133
complications, 132
direct light stimulation, 133
epidermal cooling, 133
meladine, 132
photodynamic therapy, 132
photosensitizer 5-aminolevulinic acid, 132
piroxicam gel, 133
post-operative management, 132
side effects, 132

Non-sterile tattooing practices, 112
Nonverbal protocol functioning, 500
Novocaine, 428

O
Oaze, 361
Occlusive dressings, 488
Ocular structures, 478, 479
Oculodermal melanoma, 96
Ohshiro’s zebra method, 295
Omnilux® PDT™ system, 309
On board chip (OBC), 287, 289
Online resources, 520
Optical coherence tomography (OCT), 534
Optical exciters (lamps), 3
Optical penetration depth (OPD), 171, 172
Optoacoustic imaging, 535
Oxygen sensing bandage, 532

P
Paget disease (PD), 385
Pain

prevention and treatment, 481–482
risk factors, 481

Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis (PPPP), 241
Paradoxical hypertrichosis, 356, 486
Paradoxical tatoo darkening, 489
Patient selection

body dysmorphic disorder, 416, 417
dissatisfaction with prior patients, 417
patient’s response, 418
problem identification, 417, 418
psychiatric illness, 417
reasonable expectation, 416
retreating/managing reasonable patient, 418

Peeling techniques, 193
Perfluorodecalin (PFD)-infused patches, 406,  

407

Periodic audits, 502
Periorbital laser skin resurfacing, 147
Peripheral nerve blocks, 432
Permanent hair loss, 122, 133
Petechial bleeding, 182
Photoacoustic effects, 329
Photoacoustic imaging, 535
Photoacoustic microscopy, 536
Photoactivated cells, 293
Photoaging, 219–222

Photorejuvenation, See also
Photoallergic contact dermatitis, 489
Photobiological theory, 297
Photobiomodulation (PBM), 306–308

AGA, 368
definition, 367
device characteristics, 368, 369
device efficacy, 369–371
HairMax® LaserComb, 369
iGrow®, 369, 371
LEDs, 368
mechanism, 368
safety profile, 372

Photochemical reactions, 19, 20
Photochemical tissue bonding (PTB), 531
Photodecomposition, 19
Photodisruption, 19
Photodynamic therapy (PDT), 262–271

actinic keratosis, 532
adverse events

prevention and treatment, 270–271
side effects/complications, 270–271

aminolevulinic acid

acne, 265
actinic keratoses, 262, 267–269
basal cell carcinomas, 262
contraindications, 266–267
hypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
nonhypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
non oncologic skin conditions, 265
onychomycosis, 266
photoaging, 266





552

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) (cont)

plaque-type (stage I) mycosis fungoides, 264
rosacea, 265
applications, 532
endogenous, 306
exogenous, 304, 305
fractional laser assisted drug delivery, 533
heme biosynthetic pathway, 261
IPL, 280
light-activated drug/precursor, 532
localized application, 532
localized illumination, 532
methyl aminolevulinate

acne, 265
advantages, 264
BCC, 269
Bowen’s disease, 263
combination therapy, 262
contraindications, 266–267
monotherapy, 262
non-hypertrophic actinic keratoses, 262
non oncologic skin conditions, 265
plaque-type (stage I) mycosis fungoides, 264
recurrence rates, 264
refractory mycosis fungoides, 264
superficial BCC, 263

photosensitizer/photosensitizer precursor, 261, 532
post-operative management, 267, 269–270
PpIX, 533
pre-operative management, 267
PUVA, 532
reactive oxygen species, 261
selective, 533
skin rejuvenation, 225
superficial nonmelanoma skin cancers, 532

Photoepilation, 122

hypertrichosis, 486
leukotrichia, 486
reticulate erythema, 487
urticarial-like plaques, 487

Photographic technique

location and orientation, 514
pre and postoperative facial photography, 515
surgery, 515–516

Photomechanical effects, 18
Photon energy, 3
Photon intensity, see Irradiance
Photoosmotic effect, 329
Photorejuvenation, 20, 210, 279

ablative and nonablative fractional lasers, 441
fractionated diode laser, 440, 441
intense pulsed light, 441 (see Sub-surfacing lasers)

Photosensitizers (PS), 531, 532
Phototherapeutic light source, 290
Phototherapy, 287

history, 286–287
LED (see Light-emitting diodes (LED))

Photothermal and athermal reactions

hemangioma simplex lesion, 294, 295
Ohshiro’s zebra method, 294, 295
photoactivated cells, 293

Index

photothermal nonablative skin  

rejuvenation, 294, 296
temperature-dependent bioeffects, 293
in tissue, 293, 294

Photothermal and photochemical effects, 9
Photothermal nonablative skin rejuvenation, 294, 296
Photothermal processes, 16–18
Photothermal-photochemical conversion, 21
Photothermolysis, 202, 277, 468
Photovaporization (ablation), 18
Picosecond laser technology, 91, 103, 443
Pigmented basal cell carcinoma, 385
Pigmented lesions, 99, 100

argon laser, 85
carbon dioxide laser, 85
complications, 103
contraindications, 92
epidemiology, 85
indications, 92
laser-tissue interactions, 85–87
leukotrichia, 487
lower fluences, 102
nonselective continuous wave sources, 85
patient education, 104
pigment non selective lasers, 87
post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, 101
post-operative management, 102
pre-operative management

anesthesia, 99
beam hazards, 99
non-beam hazards, 99
medical history, 99
patient evaluation, 99
protective goggles, optical density, 100

Q-switched and pulsed lasers and light sources, 86, 

87, 100

quality pre-treatment, 103
quality switched ruby laser, 85
side effects, 103
tissue splatter and pinpoint bleeding, 487
topical anesthesia, 102
treatments, 90, 101, 103, 524

Pigmented target lesions, 224
Pigmented/vascular dyschromias, 223
Pigment nonselective lasers, 87, 88
Pigment selective lasers, 90–92
Pinpoint bleeding

pigmented lesions, 487
tattoos, 489

Plaque-based sub-blistering dosimetry, 243
Plasma induced ablation, 20
Platelet rich plasma (PRP) therapy, 368, 369
Pneumatic skin flattening (PSF), hair removal, 123
Poikiloderma of Civatte (POC), 278
Point flash, 510
Polarizing lamp, illumination, 26
Portable Network Graphics (PNG), 513
Port-wine stains (PWS), 429

blood vessel destruction, 451
flashlamp-pumped PDL, 450
follow-up, 452





Index

553

IPL, 452
natural history, 450
PDL with a cryogen cooling spray device, 451
photodynamic therapy, 452
post-treatment purpura, 450
treatment, 451

Post inflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH), 93,  

181, 182

Postinflammatory secondary hyperpigmentation, 286
Potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser, 77, 229, 455
Power density, 5
Printed circuit boards (PCBs), 287
Procaine, 428, 431
Proficiency in laser techniques, 40
Protective equipment, laser, 41
Protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), 261, 533
Psoralen and UltraViolet A (PUVA), 532
Psoriasis

adverse events, 244
contraindications, 240
cost of therapy, 242
dose determination, 243
dosimetry, 243
excimer laser, 237–239
eye protection, 242
indications, 240
initial dose determination, 242, 243
initial evaluation, 242
MED, 242
medical treatment, 244
plaque thickness and skin type, 242
risks and benefits, 242
subsequent dose determination, 243

Psychiatric illness, 417
PubMed, 520
Pulse duration, 477
Pulse dye laser (PDL), psoriasis, 238
Pulse profile, 8
Pulsed CO2 lasers, 354, 355
Pulsed dye laser (PDL), 4, 51, 198, 202, 450, 451, 

453–455, 524

acne vulgaries, 228
applications, 8
in children

cooling device, 451
cryogen cooling device, 453
dynamic cooling devices, 450
flashlamp-pumped PDL, 450
hypertrophic scars, 455
mixed/deep hemangiomas, 453
molluscum contagiosum, 454
palmar plantar warts, 454
topical rapamycin, 451
ulcerating hemangiomas, 453
verrucae vulgaris, 454

Pulsed light sources, 524
Pulsed nanosecond-long laser beam, 536
Pumping energy, 3
Purpura, 489

prevention and treatment, 483
risk factors, 483

Q
Q switched alexandrite laser, 7, 91, 203, 443
Q-switched laser reaction, 2, 21, 198, 204, 477
Q-switched Nd:YAG laser, 443, 484
Q-switched neodymium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet  

laser, 240
Q-switched ruby laser, 88, 89
Quality switching, 4, 477
Quasi continuous lasers, vascular lesions, 455

R
Radiation Control for Health and Safety Act  

(RCHSA), 38

Radiofrequency, 250–251
ablation, 75, 250–251
devices, 131, 132
energy, 26

Raman spectroscopy, 535
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 261
Red and Near IR, 9
Red light therapy, 286
Redness and swelling, 422, 423
Reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM), 383–387, 390, 

391, 393, 394, 534
actinic keratoses, 380, 381
anti-inflammatory treatment, 394
BCC, 378–380
biopsy, 392
Bowen disease, 381
cryotherapy, 394
dermoscopy-RCM correlation, 391, 392
dysplastic nevi, 387, 388
imiquimod therapy

actinic keratosis, 393
BCC, 393
LMM, 394

laser abalation, BCC, 394
malignant melanoma
drawbacks, 391
melanocytic vs. non-melanocytic lesions, 390
subtypes, 390, 391
margin assessment, 392
Mohs micrographic surgery, 392
mycosis fungoides, 381, 382
normal skin, 377, 378
photodynamic therapy
ALA-PDT, 393
MAL-PDT, 393

pigmented lesions

acquired nevus, 386
angioma, 384, 385
BCC, 385
dermal nevus, 387
dermatofibroma, 384
melanocytic nevi, 385–387
Paget disease, 385
seborrheic keratosis, 383

principles, 376, 377
shave biopsy, 394
squamous cell carcinoma, 381, 382





554

Index

Reflection, 2
Refraction, 2
Regional anesthesia, 427, 434
Registration of laser systems, 45
Regulatory and professional organizations, laser safety, 38
Relative aperture, see Focal ratio
Residual thermal damage (RTD), 19
Restless leg syndrome (RLS), 74
Resurfacing, 138, 139

ablative (see Ablative laser skin resurfacing)
acne flares, 487
bacterial infection, 488
carbon dioxide laser, 138
contact dermatitis, 487
continuous-wave lasers, 138
ectropion, 488
fungal infection, 488
herpes simplex virus, 488
lasers and light sources, 139
milia formation, 487
non-ablative (see Non-ablative laser skin resurfacing)
short-pulsed erbium

yttrium–aluminum–garnet laser, 138

tissue splatter, 488

Reticular veins, 74
Reticulated purpura, 489
Reticulate erythema, 487
Retinoic acid, 471
Return on investment (ROI), 526
Revage 670®, 360
Ringed pattern, 386
Ring flash, 510
Risk, benefit and alternatives (RBA), 500, 501
Robotic microsurgery, 529–530
Rolling technique, 167, 172
Room suction systems, 44
Ruby lasers, 340, 346
therapy, 357

S
Safety measures

anesthesia, 402–405
eye safety, 401, 402
eyebrows, 402, 405
eyelashes, 402, 405 (see also Scars) (see also Tattoos)

Same old epidermis (SOE) syndrome, 314
Sarcoidosis, 281
Scar formation, 484
Scarring, laser

acne scar, 411–413
atrophic scar, 410–412
combination therapy with intralesional corticosteroids 

or 5-FU, 67
complications, 68
cosmetic issues, 66
cryotherapy, 67
hypertrophic scar, 410
intralesional steroids and/or 5-FU, 70
multiple keloids, 65

pain, 68
pigmentation alteration, 68
post-operative management, 67
pre-operative management, 66, 67
prevention and treatment, 66, 70, 485–486
risk factors, 485
types, 409, 410

Scatter limited therapy, 26
Scattering, light, 12, 13
Scleroplus pulsed dye laser, 4
Sclerotherapy, 73, 75, 77, 81
Scrotal hemangioma, 57
Seborrheic keratosis, 281, 383
Second harmonic generation, 534
Selected cell targeting, 26
Selecting patient, see Patient selection
Selective cryolipolysis, 530
Selective cryolysis, 528, 530
Selective photothermolysis (SPT), 12, 13, 49, 50, 75, 86, 

476, 530

selective temperature elevation, 15
thermal damage time, 15
thermal relaxation time, 14, 15

Semiconductor (diode) lasers, 4
Shave biopsy, 394
Silicone gels, 472
Single lens reflex (SLR), 506, 507
Skin biopsy, 202, 203
Skin Care Physicians, 518, 519, 521
Skin optical properties, 11
Skin protection, 43
Skin rejuvenation, 310–317

low-level light therapy, 224–225
photodynamic therapy, 225
Skin tightening, 219, 529–530
body contouring, 445, 446
infrared tightening, 444, 445
non-invasive skin tightening devices, 444
RF treatment, 444
ultrasound tightening, 445

SmartLipo™, 251
Smoke evacuators, 44
SmoothBeam laser, 207
SmoothShapes, 254
Soft laser therapy, 357
Solar lentigines, 92–94, 99, 102
Solid-state lasers, 3
Spatial and temporal coherence of beam, 3
Specialty-specific requirements, laser, 46
Spider angiomas, 56, 57
Spider telangiectasias, 454
Spider veins, 74
Spitz/Reed nevi, 388
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 381, 382
Stamping technique, 167, 172, 176
Stimulated emission, 3
Sublative rejuvenation, 439
Sub-surfacing lasers, 201, 202, 204–208

ablative laser resurfacing systems, 198–200
adverse events, 211





Index

555

contraindications, 197
indications, 197
intense pulsed light sources, 200
IPLs, 201, 209, 210
maintenance therapy, 200
mid-infrared lasers, 200, 201
diode laser system, 207
erbium glass laser, 207, 208
laser systems, 204, 206
Nd: YAG laser, 204, 205
Q-switched laser system, 204
non-ablative laser resurfacing, 200
vascular lasers, 200, 201
KTP lasers, 201
pulsed dye laser, 202

Sunetics product, 360
Superficial musculoaponeurotic system  

(SMAS), 176
Surface cooling, 20, 21
Surgical photography, 515–516
Synergie Aesthetic Massage System™, 254
System integrity, 7

T
Tablet devices, 508
Tagged Image File Format (TIFF), 513
Tanned patient, 422
Target chromophores, 295
Tattoo removal, 91, 101, 103, 116, 443

absorption spectrum, 117
anticipated pigment removal, 118
carbon dioxide lasers, 115
chemical peels, 113
complications, 408, 409
cosmetic, 406, 407
cryosurgery, 113
dark skin, 407, 408
dermabrasion, 113, 114
gradation effect, 116
harsh exfoliation techniques, 113
by ink color, 117
laser surgery, 113
medical technologies, 113
melanin, 115
perfluorodecalin-infused patches, 406, 407
Q-switched Alexandrite, 115
Q-switched Nd:YAG, 116
Q-switched Ruby, 115
at right wrist, 116
selective photothermolysis, 115
short-pulse lasers, 115
surgical excision, 113, 114
surgical resection, 113
tattoo granules, 113
thermal means, 113
at upper leg, 117

Tattoos, 110

allergic contact dermatitis, 488–489
allergic reactions, 112

application, 110
combustion, 489
cosmetic, 407
granules, 113
human culture, 110
ink, 476
paradoxical darkening, 489
photoallergic contact dermatitis, 489
pigments, 112
pinpoint bleeding, 489
placement, dermis, 111
prevalence, 110
removal (see Tattoo removal)
tissue splatter, 489

Telangiectasias, 74
Temporal profile, beam, 302, 303
TerraQuant, 360
Tetracaine gel, 430
Thermal damage time (TDT), 16, 277
Thermal denaturation, 18
Thermal injury to cells, 17
Thermal kinetic selectivity (TKS), 16
Thermal relaxation time (TRT), 277, 477
Thermokinetic selectivity (TKS), 15
Thulium laser, 182, 183
Tissue coagulation, 17, 18
Tissue cooling, 2
Tissue optics, 12
Tissue repair, 341, 346
Tissue soldering, 343, 344
Tissue splatter

pigmented lesions, 487
resurfacing, 488
tattoos, 489
Tissue water, 12
Tissue welding, 343
Tongue depressor, 402, 405
Topical anesthesia, 428–430
Traditional resurfacing approach, 166, 170, 186, 188, 192
Transmission photospectrogram, 296
Treatment

multimodality treatment, 421, 422
patient color, 422
tanned patients, 422

TriActive™, 254
Tumescent anesthesia, 431
Tumor margin detection, 535
2-layer soldering
Type I collagen production, 203
Type III procollagen, 203

U
Ulcerated congenital hemangioma, 56
Ultrapulse Encore laser, 438
Ultrashape™ System, 249
Ultrasound-assisted lipoplasty, 253
Ultrasound bio-macroscopic (UBM) techniques, 371, 372
Ultrasound tissue interaction, 31, 32
Unipolar radiofrequency, 255





556

Urticaria, 423
Urticarial-like plaques, 487
UV laser and light sources, 8

V
Valvular insufficiency, 75
Vancouver Scar Scale, 67
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 361
Vascular lasers, 2, 8, 13, 26

KTP lasers, 201
pulsed dye laser, 202–204

Vascular lesions

capillary malformations, 53–55
epidermal temperature control, 51
frequency-doubled neodymium\:yttrium-aluminum-

garnet laser, 51

IHs, 55, 56
IPL, 53
laser therapy, 59
long pulsed alexandrite laser, 51
methemoglobin, 52
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet lasers, 52
optimal pulse duration, 50
PDLs, 51, 52
scarring, 49
selective photothermolysis, 49, 50
spider angiomas, 56
telangiectasias, 57, 59
theory of selective thermolysis, 60
treatment, 49, 59
venous lakes, 59
VelaSmooth™, 254, 255
Venous lakes, 59
Verrucae vulgaris, 454
Vesiculation

prevention and treatment, 482–483
risk factors, 482

Vibrational absorption bands, 12
Vibrational frequencies, 535
Video-based education, 501
Violet IPL emissions, 8
Virgin angioma, 420
Visible door sign, 478
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), 439
Vitamin C, 471
Vitiligo, 529

adverse events, 244
anatomic location, 242
combination therapy, 244, 245
contraindications, 242
cost of therapy, 243
erythema, 244
excimer laser, 239
factors, 243
grafting techniques, 244
indications, 242
initial dose, 244
initial evaluation, 243
risks and benefits, 243
skin type, 242

Index

subsequent treatments, 244
surgical techniques, 244

VitiligoWood’s light, 243

W
Wavelength-specific phototherapy research, 286
Web addresses, 519
Websites

internet website quality evaluation, 518
patients, 520
physicians, 518–520
White balance, 510–511
Wildberry extract and kojic acid, 471
Windows bitmap (BMP), 512
Wound closure, see Wound healing
Wound healing, 343

acute vs. chronic ulcers, 342
acute wounds (see Acute wound healing)
advantages, 345
biostimulation, 319
blood flow, 323
burns, 321
chemotactic factors, 64
coagulation, 64
disadvantages, 345
epidermal basa layer keratinocytes, 320
Er:YAG laser ablation, 322
HeNe laser, 319
hypertrophic scars and keloids, 64
infection, control of, 322, 323
inflammatory phase, 64, 317, 319, 321–323, 341, 342
lasers for, 342, 343
LED-LLLT, 322–324
LED rejuvenation trial, 315
LLLT, 363
macrophages, 64, 320
mast cells, 320
maturation, 64
mechanism of laser-assisted, 347, 348
neutrophils, 320
nonhealing ulcers, 322
photoactivated keratinocytes, 320
proliferative phase, 64, 318, 319, 342
remodeling phase, 64, 318, 319, 342
revascularization, 64
satisfaction index, 322
systemic theory, 322
tissue repair, 341

Wound repair process, see Wound healing
Written consent, 500

X
XeCl excimer laser, 8
Xenon–chloride (excimer) pulsed laser, 480
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), 393

Y
Yttrium scandium gallium garnet (YSGG) lasers, 87





