Skin Care
 Beyond the Basics

Fourth Edition

 Mark Lees

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Beyond the Basics, Fourth Edition
Mark Lees

President, Editorial: Dawn Gerrain

Acquisitions Editor: Martine Edwards

Editorial Assistant: Elizabeth Nutting-Edwards

Director of Beauty Industry Relations: 
Sandra Bruce

Executive Marketing Manager: 
Gerard McAvey

Production Director: Wendy Troeger

Senior Content Project Manager: 
Angela Sheehan

Art Director: Benjamin Gleeksman

© 2012, 2007 Milady, a part of Cengage Learning

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.

For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706

For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com

Library of Congress Control Number: 2011925806

ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-8745-1

ISBN-10: 1-4354-8745-1

Milady
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA

Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions 
with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: 
international.cengage.com/region.

Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.

For your lifelong learning solutions, visit milady.cengage.com.

Visit our corporate website at cengage.com.

Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein 
or perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product 
information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly 
disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that 
provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider 
and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities de-
scribed herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions 
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such 
instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any kind, 
including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁtness for particular purpose or 
merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the 
material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect 
to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, 
or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material.

Printed in the United States of America
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  15  14  13  12  11



Dedication

This book is dedicated in memory of my mother, Dr. Virginia Lees. 
Thank you for your teaching and communication skills!



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Contents

 Acknowledgments • x
About Dr. Lees • xi
Letter to the Reader • xii

CHAPTER  1  Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin 

The Structure of the Cell • 2
A Day in the Life of a Cell • 3
The Nucleus • 4
Cell Specialization • 5
Physiology of the Skin • 6

The Epidermis • 8
Barrier Function of the Skin • 11
Specialized Cells and Pigmentation • 13
Skin Penetration • 14
In Conclusion • 20

CHAPTER  2  Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques 

Sterilization • 26
Disposable Materials • 29
Nondisposable Items • 29
General Cleaning • 32

About OSHA • 33
Protecting You and Your 
   Clients from Disease • 34
In Conclusion • 37

CHAPTER  3  The Immune System 

Components of the Immune 
   System • 44
How Medicine Helps 
   the Immune System • 46
The Immunity Role of the Skin • 46
How the Immune System 
   Communicates with Itself • 48

About Cancer • 49
Inﬂammation and Free Radicals • 50
Autoimmune Diseases • 52
In Conclusion • 56

CHAPTER  4  Communicable Diseases  

1

23

43

57

Common Diseases that Affect 
the Skin Care Practice • 58
MRSA • 60
About AIDS • 61
How People Get Infected 
   with AIDS • 61
Testing for the AIDS Virus • 62
Symptoms of HIV Infection • 63

Treatment of AIDS and HIV Infection • 64
Prevention of AIDS • 65
Personal Precautions • 66
Dispelling Myths about AIDS • 66
AIDS and the Esthetician • 66
Skin Symptoms Associated 
   with AIDS • 67
Skin Cancers Associated with AIDS • 70

iv         



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.CONTENTS      v

The Mental and Emotional 
   State of Persons with AIDS • 71
Handling Client Questions 
   about AIDS • 72

AIDS and the Future • 72
About Hepatitis • 72
AIDS/HIV Knowledge Quiz • 74
In Conclusion • 75

CHAPTER  5  Hormones  

The Endocrine Glands • 78
Hormones Produced by the 
   Ovaries and Testes • 82
Hormonal Phases of Life • 83
Pregnancy • 87
Premenstrual Syndrome • 90
Birth Control Pills • 92

Menopause • 93
Skin Conditions Associated 
   with Menopause • 94
About Hirsutism • 97
Obesity, Anorexia, and Hormones • 97
In Conclusion • 97

 CHAPTER  6  Skin Analysis 

77

99

Fitzpatrick Skin Typing • 100
Esthetic Skin Typing • 101
Skin Types versus Skin 
   Conditions • 104
The Skin Analysis Procedure • 104
Dehydration • 107
Pore or Follicle-Related 
   Conditions • 109

Redness Conditions • 113
Pigmentation Conditions • 113
Aging and Sun Damage • 116
Medical Conditions of the Skin • 118
Prioritizing Analysis Observations • 119
Client Conﬁdentiality • 119
In Conclusion • 120

CHAPTER  7  Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions 

Primary and Secondary Lesions • 122
Acne • 123
Common Infections of the Skin • 123
Common Reactions, Rashes, 
   and Irritations • 131
Vascular Lesions • 135

Growths • 136
Commonly Used Prescription 
   Dermatological Drugs • 137
Cortisone • 138
In Conclusion • 139

CHAPTER  8  Essential Knowledge of Chemistry 

Principles of Chemistry • 142
How Chemical Reactions 
   Take Place • 147
Chemicals Found in the Skin 
   and Body • 147

Ph, Acids, and Bases • 148
Chemical Terms Estheticians 
   Should Know • 151
In Conclusion • 152

121

141

CHAPTER  9  Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients 

153

About Water • 154
Emollients • 155
Fatty Acids • 156

Fatty Alcohols • 157
Fatty Esters • 157
Surfactants • 158



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.vi         CONTENTS    

Emulsiﬁers • 159
Physical Emulsions • 161
Solvents • 162
Antimicrobials and Preservatives • 162
Other Types of Preservatives • 164
Chelating Agents • 165
Buffering Agents • 165

Gellants and Thickening Agents • 165
Coloring Agents • 165
High-Tech Vehicles • 166
Micelles • 167
Liposomes and Microencapsulation • 167
Other Innovative Vehicles • 169
In Conclusion • 169

CHAPTER  10  Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients 

171

“Cosmeceutical” Ingredients • 172
Cleansing Agents • 172
Performance Agents in Toners • 174
A Word about Alcohol • 174
Performance Ingredients 
   for Dehydrated Skin • 175
Hydrating Ingredients • 175
Other Humectants • 176
Occlusives • 177
Emollients • 177
Products for Dry Skin • 178

Ingredients for Aging Skin • 179
Alpha Hydroxy Acids • 179
More Antiaging Ingredients • 182
Combining Antiaging Ingredients • 186
Plant Extracts • 187
Performance Ingredients 
   for Sensitive Skin • 187
Over-the-Counter Drugs • 189
Performance Ingredients for 
   Oily and Acne-Prone Skin • 192
In Conclusion • 193

CHAPTER  11  Skin Care Products 

A Visit to the Product Stockroom • 196
Cleansers • 196
Toners • 201
Day Creams and Treatments • 203
Night Creams and Treatments • 205

About Ampoules and Serums • 209
Special Creams and Treatments • 210
How Products Are Developed • 215
In Conclusion • 217

CHAPTER  12  Claims in Cosmetics 

Drug versus Cosmetic • 220
Verbal Claims • 221
The Labeling Law • 221
Drug Labeling • 223

Other Cosmetic Claims • 224
Buying Products for Your Salon • 227
In Conclusion • 228

195

219

CHAPTER  13  Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants 

229

Sensitive Skin • 230
Genetic Factors Affecting 
   Sensitive Skin • 230
Analysis of Sensitive Skin • 230
Sensitive Skin and Barrier Function • 232

Respecting the Barrier Function • 232
The Inﬂammation Cascade • 233
Analysis Technique • 234
Allergies, Irritants, and 
   Contact Dermatitis • 235



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.CONTENTS      vii

Irritant Reactions • 236
Allergic Reactions • 237
Common Allergens • 238
Noncosmetic Allergies • 244
Eyelid Dermatitis • 245
Treatment Concepts 
   for Sensitive Skin • 246
Irritancy and Allergy Testing • 247
Treatment Contraindications 
   for Treating Sensitive Skin • 248
Suggested Treatment 
   for Sensitive Skin • 249

If a Client Has a Reaction in the 
   Treatment Room • 250
Home-Care Concepts for Sensitive 
   Skin • 250
At-Home Skin Care Programs 
   for Sensitive Skin • 251
Consultation for Clients with Sensitive 
   Skin • 254
Medical Treatment of Allergies and 
   Contact Dermatitis • 254
External Factors That Inﬂuence 
   Sensitivities • 255
In Conclusion • 256

CHAPTER  14  Rosacea 

259

Causes of Rosacea • 262
Lifestyle Triggers for Rosacea 
   Flushing and Flares • 263
The Role of the Esthetician 
   in Rosacea Management • 269
Goals of Esthetic Treatment 
   for Clients with Rosacea • 270
Choosing Skin Care Products 
   for Clients with Rosacea • 270

Step-by-Step Home-Care 
   Recommendations for 
   Clients with Rosacea • 272
Salon Treatment for Clients 
   with Rosacea • 273
Light-Emitting Diode Treatment 
   for Redness • 273
Get to Know the Rosacea Skin • 273
In Conclusion • 274

CHAPTER  15  Acne and the Esthetician 

275

Common Acne • 276
Hereditary Factors in Acne • 276
Noninﬂammatory and Inﬂammatory 
   Acne Lesions • 276
Environmental Factors 
   That Inﬂuence Acne • 287
Overcleaning • 288
Self-Trauma Excoriations • 288
Nutrition and Diet • 289
Acne and Cosmetics • 290
Acne-Related Conditions • 290
Concepts of Acne Treatment • 292

Treatment Products and
   Ingredients for Acne • 294
Home-Care Products for Clients 
   with Acne • 297
Topical Drugs Often Prescribed by the 
   Dermatologist for Acne Treatment • 303
Dermatological Treatment of Cysts • 307
Light Therapy for Acne • 307
Analysis Technique for Acne or Problem 
   Skin • 308
Using Glycolic and Other Peels 
   for Acne • 311
In Conclusion • 312

CHAPTER  16  Comedogenicity 

313

Background • 314
Testing for Comedogenicity • 316
Other Tests • 317

Types of Ingredients That Are Often 
   Comedogenic • 318
The Chemistry behind Comedogenicity • 320



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.viii         CONTENTS    

Comedogenic Product Analysis • 323
Dehydrated, Clogged Skin • 325
Clinical Comedogenics • 326

Client Product Analysis • 327
In Conclusion • 328

CHAPTER  17  Extraction 

329

Analysis of the Need 
   for Extraction • 330
Open Comedones • 333
Pre-Softening before Extraction • 334
Other Pre-Extraction Procedures • 335
Hygiene and Extraction • 336
Extraction of Open Comedones • 336
Closed Comedones • 338
Extraction of Closed Comedones • 338
Extraction of Pustules • 339

Facial Treatment before and after 
   Extraction • 340
Extraction of Milia • 341
Lesions around the Eyes • 344
Treating Clogged and Dehydrated 
   Skin • 345
Solar Blackheads • 345
Duration of Extraction • 346
In Conclusion • 347

CHAPTER  18  The Intrinsic Aging Process 

349

Heredity and Genetics • 352
What Causes the Symptoms 
   of Skin Aging? • 352
Prevention and Management 
   of Aging Skin • 355
The Beginning of Aging • 357
Dermal and Epidermal 
   Structural Changes • 358

Age Spots • 358
Psychological Effects of Aging • 358
Speciﬁc Home-Care Programs 
   for the Aging Skin • 359
Facial Treatments for Aging 
   Skin • 360
In Conclusion • 362

CHAPTER  19  Sun and Sun Damage 

363

Short-Term Sun Problems • 365
Long-Term Photo Damage • 369
Skin Cancers and Other 
   Sun-Related Skin Growths • 371
Prevention of Sun Damage • 376
Sun Skin Types • 378
Types of Sunscreens • 380

Time of Day and the Sun • 380
Frequent Misconceptions about Sun 
   Damage and Sunbathing • 380
The Quest for the Golden Tan • 382
Self-Tanning Products • 387
In Conclusion • 388

CHAPTER 20  The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment 

391

Photo Damage • 392
The New Science of Aging 
   Skin Treatment • 392
Analysis of Photoaging 
   Skin • 393

Treatment of Photoaging Skin • 394
Prevention Is Still the 
   Best Treatment • 411
In Conclusion • 411



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.CONTENTS      ix

CHAPTER  21  Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures 

413

Surface Exfoliation • 414
Salon Exfoliation Treatments • 416
Alpha Hydroxy and Glycolic 
   Peeling Treatments • 418
The Pre-Peel Consultation • 428

The Superﬁcial Peeling Procedure • 428
After the Treatment • 432
Reactions to Peeling • 432
In Conclusion • 433

CHAPTER  22  Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient 

435

Concerns of the Patient • 436
Plastic Surgery • 436
Types of Surgeons • 437
Common Types of Cosmetic 
   Surgery • 437
Esthetic Management of the 
   Post-Laser Patient • 453

Procedures for the Esthetician • 455
Other Surgical Procedures • 460
Referrals • 465
In Conclusion • 465

CHAPTER  23  Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations 

467

How Estheticians Work 
   with Physicians • 468
Medical Training • 468
Other Doctors • 469
What Is “Paramedical” Esthetics? • 469
Cosmetic Dermatology and Medical 
   Spas • 470
Establishing a Relationship 
   with a Doctor • 475

What Doctors Like . . . and Don’t 
   Like • 477
Your First Contact with 
   a Dermatologist • 478
Doctors’ Concerns • 478
How to Refer a Client • 480
Working with the Plastic Surgeon • 482
In Conclusion • 483

CHAPTER  24  The Scientiﬁc Approach 

485

The Scientiﬁc Method • 486 
Evaluating Products • 487

In Conclusion • 490

Bibliography and Recommended Readings  493
Index  495



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acknowledgments

Very special thanks to the following people and organizations for contributing in 
many ways to this book. The author very much appreciates their efforts.

Editors and Staff of Milady/Cengage Learning

My wonderful staff, family, and friends who put up with me while I was writing 

this book

The late Erica Miller

Timothy Berger, M.D., Dermatologist, San Francisco, California

Michael Bond, M.D., Dermatologist, Orlando, Florida

Sophia Camejo, Tarzana, California

DAYSPA Magazine, Van Nuys, California

Dermascope Magazine, Garland, Texas

Melvin Elson, M.D., Dermatologist, Nashville, Tennessee

George Fisher, M.D., Dermatologist, Hickory, North Carolina

Rebecca James-Gadberry, Instructor of Cosmetic Science, UCLA Extension

Derek Jones, M.D., Facial Plastic Surgeon, Pensacola, Florida 

Samuel J. LaMonte, M.D., Facial Plastic Surgeon

Les Nouvelles Esthétiques—American Edition, Coral Gables, Florida

Anne Martin, Seattle, Washington

Marta Martine, Martine Business Development, Santa Barbara, California

Charles Mizelle

Howard Murad, M.D., Dermatologist, Murad, Inc., Los Angeles, California

National Rosacea Society

Revitalight, Chicago, Illinois

Rube Pardo, M.D., Ph.D., Dermatologist, Coral Gables, Florida

Skin, Inc., Carol Stream, Illinois

Kirk Smith, M.D., Plastic Surgeon, Pensacola, Florida 

Sothys USA, Miami, Florida 

St. Tropez, Inc., Santa Clarita, California

David Suzuki, Bio-Therapeutic, Inc., Seattle, Washington

Thibiant International, Beverly Hills, California 

Department of Dermatology, University of Miami

David Wanetik, Skin Culture Institute, New York, New York

Figures are reprinted from Acne: Morphogenesis and Treatment by Gerd Plewig, 
M.D., and Albert M. Kligman, M.D., Ph.D.; permission of publishers, Springer-
Verlag, New York, USA, and Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany.

x         



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.About Dr. Lees

Dr. Mark Lees is one of the country’s most noted skin care specialists, an award-
winning speaker and product developer. He has been actively practicing clini-
cal skin care for over 20 years at his CIDESCO-accredited Florida salon, which 
has won multiple awards for “Best Facial,” “Best Massage,” and “Best Pampering 
Place” by readers of the Pensacola News-Journal. 

His professional awards are numerous and include American Salon Maga-
zine  Esthetician  of  the  Year,  the  Les  Nouvelles  Esthétiques  Crystal  Award,  the 
Dermascope Legends Award, the Rocco Bellino Award for outstanding educa-
tion from the Chicago Cosmetology Association, and Best Educational Skin Care 
Classroom from the Long Beach International Beauty Expo. Dr. Lees has also 
been inducted into the National Cosmetology Association’s Hall of Renown.

Dr. Lees has been interviewed and quoted by NBC News, The Associated 
Press, The Discovery Channel, Glamour, Self, Teen, Shape Magazine, and many 
other publications.

Dr.  Lees  is  co-founder  of  the  Institute  of  Advanced  Clinical  Esthetics  in 
Seattle. In 2011, he opened the Skin Care Training Room in Tallahassee, Florida, 
where he offers special science-based advanced training programs for clinical 
estheticians.

Dr.  Lees  is  former  chairman  of  EstheticsAmerica,  the  esthetics  education 
division of the National Cosmetology Association, and has served as a CIDESCO 
International Examiner. He has also served on the national board of directors 
of the NCA.

Dr. Lees is former chairman of the board of the Esthetics Manufacturers and 
Distributors Alliance, and is a member of the Society of Cosmetic Chemists. 
Dr. Lees is an accomplished writer, having published dozens of skin care, technical, 
and business articles for almost every major beauty and esthetics trade publica-
tion.  He  serves  on  the  editorial  advisory  board  of  Les Nouvelles Esthétiques—
American Edition.

He also authored the recently released consumer book, The Skin Care Answer 
Book, and has been a contributing author for many other general cosmetology 
and medical texts.

He holds a Ph.D. in Health Sciences, a Master of Science in Health, and a 
CIDESCO International Diploma. He is licensed to practice in both Florida and 
Washington State. His line of products for problem, sensitive, and sun-damaged 
skin is available at ﬁner salons and clinics throughout the United States.



     xi

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Letter to the Reader

I am very excited to present the Fourth Edition of Skin Care: Beyond the Basics. 
In the 15-plus years since the original manuscript was published, a wealth of 
knowledge and treatment has surfaced in the world of professional skin care. 
Scientists are now understanding so much more about skin function and its ef-
fects on appearance. Peptide technologies, new light therapies, and incredibly 
effective combinations of ingredients help clients achieve much more beautiful 
results for their skin.

It is always exciting for me to update my writing with new knowledge for 
estheticians. In this revision, you will ﬁnd lots of new information, and dozens 
of  new  photos,  many  of  them  case  studies  demonstrating  the  effects  of  new 
products and technology. As always, I have tried to present technical material in 
easy-to-understand terms that are consumer friendly. 

I  want  to  thank  so  many  teachers,  students,  and  skin  care  professionals 
who stop me at trade shows or contact me to tell me how much they use this 
book, both in learning and daily practice. Whether you are a skin care student, 
practicing esthetician, medical professional, or someone who simply wants to 
understand the skin and its treatment, I sincerely hope you ﬁnd this new edition 
of Skin Care: Beyond the Basics helpful.

Mark Lees, Ph.D., M.S. 
CIDESCO Diplomate 
Tallahassee, Florida

xii         



CHAPTER

1

Advanced Anatomy 
and Physiology 
of the Skin

OBJECTIVES . . . 

In this chapter you will learn about the anatomy and func-
tions of cells. You will also recognize different types of tissues 
and their functions. You will learn, in detail, about the different 
layers of the skin and functions of various reactions that take 
place in the different layers of the skin. Skin penetration will 
be studied, as well as some techniques for better penetrating, 
moisturizing, and conditioning treatments for the skin.

Before we can learn how to treat cosmetic disorders of 

the skin, we must ﬁrst fully understand the functions and 
activities of the body, and more speciﬁcally, the cell. The cell 
is almost a self-contained factory of life. Cells are the build-
ing blocks of the human body. Within each cell, many chemi-
cal and physical processes constantly take place. To simplify, 
let’s think of the cell as a very, very small living body. This is, 
of course, an oversimpliﬁcation, but it will help us understand 
the many miraculous functions that happen inside each cell of 
the human body. It should be mentioned here that the surface 
cells of the skin, the corneum, are not actually alive. However, 
even though these cells are not actually live cells, many 
biochemical processes occur within the corneum.



     1

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.2         CHAPTER 1    

Cell is a very small, self-contained 
unit of life. Within the human 
body, cells specialize in individual 
functions.

Cell membrane gives the cell 
structure and shape and contains 
the many internal parts of the cell.

Selective permeability means 
that the cell membrane can let 
substances into the cell, such as 
food, water, and oxygen. It can 
also let substances out of the cell, 
such as waste and carbon dioxide.

Receptor sites are small 
structures on the cell membrane 
that are “docking stations” for 
hormones and other chemicals. 
Receptor sites receive chemical 
messages from other cells or 
organs that cause the cell to 
behave in a certain way.

Cytoplasm is a ﬂuid inside cells 
that is made of water and other 
substances.

THE STRUCTURE OF THE CELL

Much like the skin that covers our bodies, the cell is protected by an outer shell 
known as the cell membrane (Figure 1-1). The cell membrane gives the cell 
structure and shape and encapsulates the many internal parts of the cell. The 
cell membrane is made of a network of lipids (fatty matter) and protein. The cell 
membrane  possesses  a  function  known  as  selective  permeability.  Selective 
permeability means that the cell membrane can let substances into the cell, such 
as food, water, and oxygen. It can also let substances out of the cell, such as 
waste and carbon dioxide. The cell is furnished food, water, and oxygen by the 
blood. Blood is also the vehicle that carries waste materials and carbon dioxide 
away  from  the  cell  membrane  and  eventually  out  of  the  body.  Blood  itself  is 
made up of cells.

Located on the cell membrane are special structures called receptor sites. 
Receptors are the communication system between different cells, tissues, organs, 
and parts of the body. Each tissue has cells with unique receptor sites that carry 
out the activity of a particular type of cell. Receptors receive “messages” from 
hormones and other chemical messengers made by other cells. Receptor sites 
work with these chemical messengers like a lock-and-key system. The receptor 
site is the “lock,” and the chemical it comes in contact with is the “key.” When 
a chemical comes in contact with its speciﬁc special receptor, a message is sent 
to the cell, which carries out speciﬁc functions. A good example of this is seba-
ceous gland activity. Production of sebum in the sebaceous gland is stimulated 
by  male  hormones  that  are  received  by  the  receptor  sites  in  the  cells  of  the 
sebaceous  gland.  The  sites  are  like  switches  that  are  turned  on  when  a  male 
hormone stimulates the receptor site.

Inside the cell is a ﬂuid called cytoplasm. Cytoplasm is made of water and 
other substances. It has a gel-like consistency. Cytoplasm allows other structures 

Ribosomes Centriole

Lysosome

Vacuole

Nucleolus

Nucleus

Golgi
apparatus
(complex)

Plasma
membrane

Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum

FIGURE 1-1  Structure of the cell.

Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Mitochondrion

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©




 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      3

to move around inside the cell. If you think of the cell as a human body, the cyto-
plasm would play the part of the blood, allowing transportation within the cell.

Organelles

Organelles are small structures within the cell that each have their own func-
tion. You can think of organelles as being miniature body organs in the cell. For 
many years, scientists did not know about the existence of organelles. But as 
science progressed, these super-small structures were discovered.

Inside the cell cytoplasm is a structure that is formed like a maze, sort of like 
a house of mirrors at a carnival. This maze is called the endoplasmic reticulum. 
This network of material forms little canals within the cytoplasm that allow sub-
stances and other organelles to move around. Think of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum as blood vessels within the body.

The mitochondria are the “lungs” and the “digestive system” of the cell. 
The  mitochondria  can  be  thought  of  as  the  cell’s  nutritionist.  They  convert 
oxygen and nutrients so that they can be used as energy by the cell. The mito-
chondria are also responsible for converting oxygen to carbon dioxide, which 
is an essential part of the oxygen usage system within the body. The mitochon-
dria have “departments” that also control the amount of water and other sub-
stances that are allowed into the cytoplasm at particular times. As a “digestive 
factory,” they help break down simple sugars, fats, and parts of proteins called 
amino acids. Mitochondria take nutrients such as proteins, fats, and carbohy-
drates  and  manufacture  a  substance  called  adenosine  triphosphate,  better 
known as ATP. You can think of ATP as a ready-to-use energy packet that can 
be used by any organelle in the cell. Some skin treatments have been shown 
to increase production of ATP, making skin healthier. These are discussed later 
in  this  book.  The  Golgi  apparatus  is  a  storage  mechanism  that  helps  store 
proteins for later conversion to manufacture other necessary chemicals when 
the cell needs them. Think of the Golgi apparatus as a tiny silo, storing fuels 
for a future date.

Ribosomes are very small organelles that help build the protein structures 

the cell needs. They are the protein “construction division” of the cell.

Lysosomes are the “demolition crew” of the cell. They manufacture enzymes 
that help break apart large molecules entering the cell so that they can be more 
easily converted to other necessary chemicals and substances. Lysosomes also 
are the “self-destruct” mechanism for the cell. When a cell dies, the lysosome 
releases enzymes that help destroy the cell membrane.

Vacuoles are often one of the biggest organelles. They are the “storage vats” 

for waste and excess food supplies.

A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A CELL

Let’s go through an oversimpliﬁed yet representative day in the life of a cell. 
The  blood  cells  deliver  foods  for  the  cells  that  have  already  been  substan-
tially broken down by the digestive system, absorbed through the intestinal 
wall, and absorbed by the blood. The blood also delivers fresh oxygen from 
the  lungs.  First  the  cell  membrane  acts  as  a  guard,  allowing  only  certain 
substances  into  the  cytoplasm.  Once  inside,  they  may  be  guided  to  their 
destination by the canals of the endoplasmic reticulum. The lysosomes start 
breaking  down  the  large  protein  molecules.  The  ribosomes  are  building  or 
rebuilding  the  proteins  that  the  cell  needs  at  the  time.  The  mitochondria 
serve  as  a  power  plant,  making  usable  energy  for  the  cell  from  the  variety 

Organelles are small structures 
within the cell that have their own 
function.

Endoplasmic reticulum is 
a maze-like structure inside cells. 
This network of material forms 
little canals within the cytoplasm 
that allows substances and other 
organelles to move around.

Mitochrondria are the “lungs” 
and “digestive system” of the cell.

Amino acids are proteins that 
help break down simple sugars, 
fats, and parts of proteins.

Adenosine triphosphate, also 
known as ATP, is a substance 
produced in the mitochondria as 
an energy source for the cell.

Golgi apparatus is a storage 
mechanism that helps store pro-
teins for later conversion to manu-
facture other necessary chemicals 
when the cell needs them.

Ribosomes are very small organ-
elles that help build the protein 
structures needed by the cell.

Lysosomes manufacture enzymes 
that help break apart large mol-
ecules entering the cell so that 
they can be more easily converted 
to other necessary chemicals and 
substances.

Vacuoles are the “storage vats” for 
waste and excess food supplies.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.4         CHAPTER 1    

Nucleus of the cell is made 
largely of protein and is also 
responsible for building certain 
proteins.

Chromatin is largely responsible 
for cell division.

Nucleic acids are a mixture 
of protein and special chemicals 
that make up chromatin.

Mitosis is the division and repro-
duction of cells.

Genes are small structures that 
contain hereditary traits.

Chromosomes are chromatin 
ﬁbers.

of proteins, sugars, oxygen, and fats that have arrived. Excess food product 
and waste from production are stored in the vacuoles. The Golgi apparatus 
stores proteins to use later for manufacturing enzymes and hormones. After 
production is over, waste materials and carbon dioxide are released by the 
cell membranes to the blood. The blood takes the waste away to the lungs, 
where the carbon dioxide is breathed out, and to the kidneys, which ﬁlter out 
the other waste.

THE NUCLEUS

We have discussed some of the respiratory, digestive, and synthesis functions of 
the cell. But what controls these many functions? Where is the brain of the cell? 
Centered in the cytoplasm is a large structure called the nucleus. The nucleus 
of the cell is made largely of protein and is also responsible for building certain 
proteins. It contains ﬁbers called chromatin. Chromatin is largely responsible 
for cell division, which is discussed later. The chromatin is made of a mixture 
of protein and special chemicals called nucleic acids. The most important of 
these acids is deoxyribonucleic acid, better known as DNA (Figure 1-2). DNA 
is a long, spiral-shaped molecule that looks like a twisted ladder. This shape is 
known as a double helix. The DNA has the power to duplicate itself, and within 
it are the “directions” for running the cell operations. Therefore, it may pass on 
instructions  to  new  cells  as  it  duplicates,  ensuring  that  each  type  of  cell  will 
know the blueprint for life.

Cells  divide  and  reproduce  by  a  process  known  as  mitotic  division,  or 
mitosis. Hereditary traits for the cell are found in small structures in the DNA 
called genes. When the cell divides, the chromatin ﬁbers line up and are seen 
as chromosomes. The entire blueprint is duplicated in the DNA, and the cell 

.

m
o
c
.
k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
m
o
r
f

e
s
n
e
c

i
l

r
e
d
n
u

d
e
s
U

.
2
1
0
2

i

,
d
v
a
r
u
s

t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C
e
g
a
m

I

FIGURE 1-2  The DNA double helix.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      5

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

First Phase

Second Phase

Third Phase

Fourth Phase

Fifth Phase

One cell has divided
to create two cells.

FIGURE 1-3  Indirect division of the human cell.

First phase—Chromosomes begin to line up in the center of cell.
Second phase—Chromosomes duplicate themselves.
Third phase—New structures begin migrating to opposite ends of the cell.
Fourth phase—Nucleus of the cell begins dividing.
Fifth phase—Nucleus breaks into two identical nuclei.
Sixth phase—Cell forms two identical cells.

splits into two separate cells, both containing exactly the same DNA, and genes 
(Figure  1-3).  By  this  process  cells  are  constantly  reproducing  themselves, 
carrying out the same functions.

CELL SPECIALIZATION

Many types of cells are found within the human body. Groups of cells that perform 
the same function are called tissues. There are many different types of tissue.

Muscular  tissue  is  of  three  types:  visceral  muscle,  skeletal  muscle,  and 

cardiac muscle.

Visceral muscle is responsible for involuntary muscle actions. Involuntary 
muscle  actions  are  movements  that  happen  subconsciously.  Movement  of  the 
lungs expanding and contracting, muscles of the intestines, and muscles of the 
digestive  system  are  involuntary  muscles.  In  other  words,  these  muscle  struc-
tures operate on automatic pilot. Involuntary muscles are also known as smooth 
muscle tissue.

Skeletal muscles are responsible for the movement of the bones and the 
body’s physical motion. Because these muscle cells have stripes, or striations, 
they are also known as striated muscles. Skeletal muscles are responsible for 
voluntary  movement  and  therefore  are  known  as  voluntary  muscles.  These 
muscles are controlled by the conscious brain, which means the brain directly 
controls  their  movement.  Walking  across  a  room  to  pick  up  an  object  is  a 
motion in which the brain has complete control and is an example of a volun-
tary muscle action.

Tissues are groups of cells that 
perform the same function.

Muscular tissue is of three types: 
visceral muscle, skeletal muscle, 
and cardiac muscle.

Visceral muscle is responsible 
for involuntary muscle actions.

Skeletal muscles are responsible 
for the movement of the bones 
and the body’s physical motion.

Striations are stripes on skeletal 
muscles that control body move-
ment. These muscles are known 
as striated muscles.




 
 
 
 
 
6         CHAPTER 1    

Cardiac muscle tissue is both 
striated and involuntary.

Connective tissue is a group 
of cells that specialize in provid-
ing support and cushioning for 
the body.

Cartilage is a type of tough 
connective tissue that helps form 
structures in the body.

Ligaments are connective 
tissues that connect the bones 
of the body.

Skeletal tissue makes up the 
bones of the body.

Nerve tissue is a group of cells 
that control the brain and nerves.

Liquid tissue includes blood and 
lymph.

Plasma makes up the liquid part 
of the blood.

Red corpuscles complete 
oxygen–carbon dioxide transport 
to and from the cells.

White corpuscles are responsi-
ble for defending the body against 
bacterial invasion.

Lymph nodes are ﬁlters in the 
lymph system.

Adipose tissue is fat tissue.

Endothelial tissue refers to inner 
tissues that line the walls of the 
intestines, lungs, and other inter-
nal organs.

Epithelial tissue refers to outer 
tissues that line the outer and 
exposed body surfaces.

Cardiac muscle tissue used to be considered an involuntary smooth muscle, 
but it has since been established that this tissue is also striated, so it is now in a 
separate category. Cardiac muscle is both striated and involuntary.

Connective tissue is a group of cells that specialize in providing support 
and cushioning for the body. Cartilage and ligaments are examples of connec-
tive tissue. They help connect bones to each other, and bones to muscle. The ear 
and nose are made of cartilage.

Skeletal tissue makes up the bones in the body.
Nerve  tissues  are  cells  that  control  the  brain  and  the  nerves.  Nerve  cells 
transmit  messages  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  The  skin  has  many  types  of  nerve 
cells, which are discussed later in this chapter. Think of the nerves as a long line 
of dominoes that can transmit messages by touching one another. This “domino 
effect” enables the nerves to transport commands from the brain and carry infor-
mation to the brain. Let’s pretend that you accidentally touch a hot stove. The heat 
and pain nerve cells in the skin transmit the feeling up the body to the brain in a 
split second. The brain, in turn, sends a response in another split second, immedi-
ately telling your arm muscles to remove your hand from the hot stove.

Liquid tissue includes blood and lymph. The blood is responsible for car-
rying oxygen and food to all the cells in the body and for carrying waste and 
carbon dioxide away from the cells. Blood is mostly made of a substance called 
plasma. Plasma makes up the liquid part of the blood. Floating in the plasma 
are red blood cells, or red corpuscles, whose function is to complete oxygen–
carbon dioxide transport to and from all the cells. The other main type of blood 
cell is white blood cells, or white corpuscles, which are largely responsible 
for defending the body against bacterial invasion. Much more about the white 
blood cells is discussed in Chapter 3, The Immune System.

Lymph  is  a  liquid  that  bathes  all  the  tissues  of  the  body  and  helps  ﬁlter 
wastes from the bloodstream and the body. Filters in the lymph system are pres-
ent in many areas of the body, such as the armpits, groin, and neck. These ﬁlters 
are called lymph nodes. When you are sick, sometimes you have swelling in 
your neck or other areas. This is because the lymph is ﬁltering debris and dead 
bacteria from the body, attempting to rid the body of these wastes. The lymph 
nodes swell when they are ﬁltering lots of debris.

Adipose tissue is fat tissue. Fat, although it has a bad reputation, contrib-
utes to many functions within the body. It helps cushion all the other types of 
tissue. Imagine sitting on a sofa that had no cushions. It would be very hard 
and would break more easily if it was dropped or damaged. Fat helps the body 
in the same way, helping to soften injuries and protect the organs. Fat also is 
needed to produce hormones and other chemicals necessary for life.

Endothelial tissue refers to inner tissues that line the walls of the intes-

tines, lungs, and other internal organs.

Epithelial  tissue  refers  to  outer  tissues  that  line  the  outer  and  exposed 

body surfaces. The skin is an example of epithelial tissue.

PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SKIN

Subcutaneous layer is the most 
internal layer of the skin.

Lamellated corpuscles are nerve 
endings in the subcutaneous skin 
layer.

Dermis, often called the “live” 
layer of the skin, lies next to the 
subcutaneous skin layer.

The  skin  is  comprised  of  three  major  layers  (Figure  1-4).  The  subcutaneous 
layer  is  the  most  internal  layer  of  the  skin.  It  contains  large  layers  of  fat  to 
provide  cushioning  for  the  internal  organs,  as  previously  discussed.  Winding 
through the subcutaneous layer are blood vessels and lymph vessels, again insu-
lated by fat tissue. The subcutaneous layer also contains nerve endings called 
lamellated corpuscles, which are responsive to pressure.

The dermis is the next layer toward the skin surface. The dermis is often 
called  the “live”  layer  of  the  skin.  The  upper  part  of  the  dermis  is  called  the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      7

Hair shaft

Stratum
corneum

Stratum
lucidum

Basal
layer

Stratum
spinosum

Stratum
basale

Arrector pili muscle

Sebaceous (oil) gland

Hair follicle

Papilla of hair

Nerve fiber

Nerve

Sweat gland
Pacinian corpuscle

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Sweat pore

Dermal papilla

Sensory nerve 
ending for touch

Epidermis

Dermis

Subcutaneous
fatty tissue
(hypodermis)

Vein

Artery

FIGURE 1-4  Histology of the skin, hair, and glands.

papillary layer because it contains the dermal papillae. Think of the dermal 
papilla as a hand-like structure attached to the epidermis, the outermost of the 
three layers. The dermal papillae look like ﬁngers holding the two layers together. 
Inside  the  papillae  are  many  small  blood  vessels,  called  capillaries,  spiraling 
through the papillae. Also found in the papillary layer are some nerves sensitive to 
ﬁrm  touch;  they  are  called  Meissner’s  corpuscles.  These  nerves  sense  deep 
touch. As an experiment, gently touch your hand. Next, exert more pressure on 
your hand. Doesn’t it have a completely different feeling? This is because deeper 
nerves are stimulated when the skin is touched or pushed more ﬁrmly.

The lower, more internal area of the dermis is called the reticular layer. 
The reticular layer contains a multitude of structures and activity. Collagen and 
elastin  ﬁbrils  intertwine  throughout  the  reticular  layer.  Both  of  these  ﬁbers 
are made of protein and are examples of connective tissue. They give the skin 
ﬁrmness and elasticity. Collagen is not ﬂexible and gives skin its ﬁrmness and 
inability to stretch very much. Next to water, collagen is the most abundant sub-
stance in the skin. There are about 16 different types of collagen. The two most 
important types for the skin are Type I, which makes up most of the ﬁbrils in the 
reticular dermis, and Type IV, which is present in the area between the dermis 
and the epidermis. Collagen is manufactured by ﬁbroblasts, specialized cells 
that produce these long molecules of amino acids. 

Elastin  is  the  ﬁbrous  structure  that  gives  skin  elasticity  and  the  ability  to 
“bounce back.” Elastin is also produced by the ﬁbroblasts. Elastin is produced 
regularly until about age 25, when the ﬁbroblast begins producing less elastin. 
The  amount  of  elastin  produced  continues  to  decrease  with  further  age.  This 
decrease in elastin production is believed to be part of the normal (intrinsic) 
aging process—natural genetic aging due to passing of the years, over which 
we have little control. If you gently pinch the skin of an older client and then 
release it, you will notice how slowly skin returns to its original, normal shape. 

Papillary layer is the upper part 
of the dermis.

Dermal papillae attach to the 
epidermis.

Epidermis is the outermost layer 
of the skin and is made up of ﬁve 
layers.

Meissner’s corpuscles are 
nerves located in the papillary 
layer and are sensitive to ﬁrm 
touch.

Reticular layer is the lower, 
more internal area of the dermis.

Collagen is made of large, long-
chain molecular proteins that lie 
on the top of the skin and bind 
water, also helping to prevent 
water loss.

Elastin ﬁbrils intertwine 
throughout the reticular layer 
and give the skin ﬁrmness and 
elasticity.

Fibroblasts are specialized cells 
that produce collagen.

Intrinsic aging is a natural 
genetic aging over which we have 
little control.




 
 
 
 
 
8         CHAPTER 1    

Elastosis is the lack of normal 
elasticity in the skin.

Ground substance is a jelly-like 
ﬂuid in the dermis that cushions 
and helps with moisture retention.

Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) 
are carbohydrate chains that help 
bind water in the dermis.

Hyaluronic acid is a molecule 
that helps to bind water in the 
dermis. Also used in skin care 
products to bind water to the skin 
surface.

Sudoriferous glands, or sweat 
glands, are found in the reticular 
layer.

Sebaceous (oil) glands are 
found in the reticular layer.

Sebum is an oily substance, 
secreted onto the skin surface 
by the sebaceous gland in the 
dermis, that helps prevent dehy-
dration of the corneum cells.

Apocrine glands are present in 
the groin area and armpits. They 
produce a thicker form of sweat 
and are responsible for produc-
ing the substance that, when in 
contact with bacteria, produces 
body odor.

Eccrine glands are sweat glands 
found in the face and other parts 
of the body.

Epidermal–dermal junction is 
where the epidermis and dermis 
are connected.

Lack  of  elasticity  in  the  skin  is  called  elastosis.  This  may  be  evident  on  the 
hands  and  arms  of  older  clients,  especially  those  whose  skin  is  severely  sun 
damaged. In clients who are as young as 35 to 40, you may notice the beginning 
of elastosis in the eyelid skin. 

The  elastin  and  collagen  ﬁbrils  are  immersed  in  a  jelly-like  ﬂuid  called 
ground substance, which is made of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Glycos-
aminoglycans are carbohydrate chains known as polysaccharides. One of these 
components very familiar to the esthetician is hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid 
has a tremendous ability to bind water, holding up to 1,000 times its own weight 
in water. This gives more structure and stability to the dermis and cushions the 
ﬁbrils,  and  the  high  water  content  allows  for  better  communication  between 
cells. Hyaluronic acid is a very large molecule, and it cannot penetrate the skin. 
It  is,  however,  a  powerful  water  binder  when  used  in  skin  care  products.  It 
spreads across the skin surface to bind water to the surface cells, helps plump 
dried surface cells, and makes skin look smoother. In skin care products, it is 
most often present in the form of sodium hyaluronate. Hyaluronic acid is also 
used as injectable ﬁller by plastic surgeons and dermatologists.

Fat globules are also in the dermal layer, as well as numerous blood vessels 
(arteries and veins), lymph vessels, and nerve endings that are sensitive to pain, 
heat, cold, and pressure. The base or bottom part of the hair follicle is also found 
in the reticular layer, as well as the sudoriferous glands, or sweat glands, and 
the sebaceous (oil) glands.

The  sebaceous  glands  secrete  an  oily  mixture  of  fatty  materials  known 
as  sebum.  The  main  functions  of  sebum  are  to  protect  the  surface  of  the 
corneum  against  dehydration  and  to  provide  an  acid  barrier  against  outside 
bacterial invasion.

The  sudoriferous  glands  produce  sweat.  There  are  two  kinds  of  sweat 
glands: the apocrine glands and the eccrine glands. The apocrine glands are 
present in the groin area and the armpits. They produce a thicker form of sweat 
and are basically responsible for producing the substance that, when in contact 
with bacteria, produces body odor.

The eccrine glands are abundant on the face and other parts of the body. 
They are present in extremely large numbers in the palms of the hands and the 
soles of the feet as well as on the face, in the forehead skin, and the skin above 
the upper lip.

Sweat  is  a  mixture  of  water,  salt,  urea,  uric  acid,  ammonia,  broken-down 
proteins (amino acids), simple sugars, and vitamins. Sweat is a function of the 
body that controls temperature. As sweat evaporates, it helps cool the surface of 
the skin. Some wastes are excreted by sweat, but body temperature regulation is 
its major function. When looking through a microscope, eccrine glands take the 
form of a spiral tube, much like the inside of a refrigerator. Apocrine glands are 
branched, appearing more like blood vessels off a major artery.

THE EPIDERMIS

The outermost major layer of the skin is known as the epidermis (Figure 1-5). 
This is the part of the skin the esthetician directly treats. The epidermis is located 
just above and is attached to the papillary dermis. This area is known as the 
epidermal–dermal junction.

The epidermis is very thin. To show how thin the epidermis is, think of a 
paper cut on your ﬁnger. A paper cut is a very shallow cut, but it is deep enough 
to go through the epidermis. The reason we know this is that there are no blood 
vessels or nerve endings in the epidermis; so when you bleed or hurt from a 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      9

Stratum corneum

Stratum lucidum
Stratum granulosum

Stratum spinosum

Basal layer     

Papillary layer

Reticular layer

Epidermis

Dermis

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 1-5  The epidermal and dermal layers of the skin.

paper cut, the cut has gone through to the papillary dermis, where there are 
nerve endings and small blood capillaries.

The epidermis is the layer of the skin that is constantly being replaced by 
new cells. Old cells shed off the skin in a process known as desquamation. The 
lower-level cells are constantly dividing and pushing the old cells toward the 
skin surface, where they will shed. The cells are actually dying as they migrate 
toward the skin surface. Although the epidermis is mostly dead and dying cells, 
a tremendous amount of biochemical activity occurs within this layer. Science is 
constantly realizing that many reactions within the epidermis inﬂuence how the 
dermis behaves.

Desquamation is the process of 
dead cells shedding off the skin.

The epidermis is made of ﬁve basic layers, or strata. One layer is called a 

Strata are skin layers.

stratum.




 
 
 
 
 
10         CHAPTER 1    

Basal cells are the cells that 
make up the innermost layer of 
the epidermis, where the epider-
mal skin cells form.

Basal layer is the innermost layer 
of the epidermis.

Keratin is a protein that helps 
protect the skin against invasion.

Keratinocytes are epidermal cells 
ﬁlled with keratin.

Lipids are fats that occur naturally 
in the barrier function of the skin.

Stratum is a layer of the skin or 
epidermis.

Stratum spinosum is so called 
because the cells appear to have 
little spines or thorns on the out-
side of the membrane.

Stratum granulosum is the 
layer where cells are ﬁlled with 
keratohyalin, which helps form 
keratin.

Keratohyalin helps form keratin.

Stratum lucidum, or clear layer, 
is ﬁlled with a substance called 
eleidin.

Eleidin is a substance produced 
from keratohyalin and will eventu-
ally form keratin.

Stratum corneum is the outer-
most layer of the epidermis.

Corneocytes are cells of the 
stratum corneum.

Lamellar bodies are thought 
to be produced during the stage 
of keratinization in the granular 
layer of the skin. Their function 
is to produce lipids.

The basal cells in the basal layer, formerly known as the germinative layer 
or stratum germinatavum, make up the innermost layer of the epidermis. The 
basal cells are the only truly live layer in the epidermis.

The basal cells are constantly dividing through mitosis, constantly pushing 
upward to the outside of the skin. As they divide and move toward the surface, 
the  intercellular  structures  discussed  earlier  begin  to  change.  They  produce  a 
protein called keratin, which is the “magic” that helps protect the skin against 
invasion. All of the cells in the epidermis are known as keratinocytes, which 
means “cells full of keratin.” As the cells change they also produce a variety of 
fats, or lipids, that help hold the keratinized cells together in much the same 
way mortar holds a brick wall together.

Protein keratin synthesis begins in the basal layer, where ﬁbrils of keratin 
begin to form out of the cytoplasm in the cell. As the cells move up from the 
basal layer, they start to form the next cellular layer, or stratum. The spiny layer, 
or stratum spinosum, is so called because the cells appear to have little spines 
or thorns on the outside of the cell membranes. In this layer, the cells change 
shape from cube-like to multisided.

The next layer is the stratum granulosum, or granular layer. The granular-
looking  cells  are  ﬁlled  with  a  protein-based  substance  called  keratohyalin, 
which  helps  form  keratin  from  the  microtubule  structures  ﬁrst  formed  in  the 
basal cell layer. Keratohyalin is produced by the endoplasmic reticulum, as pre-
viously discussed. The nuclei of the dying cells are breaking down, and the cell 
is dying. In the granular stage new lipids are formed, which will again help serve 
as a medium or “mortar” for the spaces between the cells.

The group of lipid substances just described forms the “mortar” of the epi-
dermis. They include triglycerides, sphingolipids, and glycolipids, also known as 
ceramides, cholesterol, phospholipids, waxes, and fatty acids.

The next layer of the skin is the stratum lucidum, or clear layer, so called 
because it appears lucid or clear on microscopic examination. It is ﬁlled with a 
substance called eleidin, which is produced from keratohyalin, and will even-
tually form keratin. This layer is present in the thicker areas of the epidermis, 
namely, the soles of the feet and palms of the hand.

The outermost layer of the epidermis is called the stratum  corneum, or 
“horny” layer, so called because the cells are piled onto one another in layers 
and have a horny appearance on the microscopic surface. Cells in this layer are 
referred to as corneocytes. In the mortar of the “bricks” in this layer are small 
structures called lamellar bodies. Lamellar bodies are thought to be produced 
during the stage of keratinization in the granular layer of the skin. Their function 
is to produce more lipids, which serve to permit certain substances in and out 
of the corneum. In other words, lipids permit certain substances into the mortar 
of  the  cell  layer  and  allow  certain  gases  and  toxins  produced  by  the  skin  to 
escape through the same pathway. The fats formed by the lamellar bodies serve 
almost the same purpose as the cell membrane discussed earlier. They possess 
the characteristic of selective permeability.

Let’s take a minute to review the process of keratinization. The epidermis is 

divided into ﬁve layers:

  1. The basal layer is a live layer where the cells are dividing and constantly 
pushing  upward.  The  melanocytes  are  also  present  in  this  layer.  As  cells 
drift upward through the ﬁve layers, they die. In the process of dying, they 
form keratin, a resilient protein that eventually serves to protect the skin 
from invasion.

  2. The spiny layer is where the shapes of the cells have changed.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      11

  3. The granular layer is where keratin continues to form and where fats that 

will make up the “mortar” begin to form.

  4. The clear layer is where the process of keratinization continues.
  5. Ultimately, the cells reach the top of the skin in the horny layer or stratum 
corneum,  where  they  become  the  bricks  in  the  outer,  protective  layer  of 
skin. The cells are ﬁlled with keratin protein. The lamellar bodies are small 
“fat  factories”  that  help  produce  the  mortar  to  seal  between  the  cellular 
bricks but that have the unique ability to allow certain substances in and out 
of the skin.

BARRIER FUNCTION OF THE SKIN

Dr. Peter Elias, a dermatologist at the University of California at San Francisco, 
created the brick-and-mortar concept of the skin. The cells are bricks, and the 
lipids between the cells are the mortar, forming a brick wall to the outside envi-
ronment (Figure 1-6).

The intercellular cement or interstitial lipid matrix is the substance 
found  between  the  cells  in  the  epidermis,  especially  the  stratum  corneum. 
It is the mortar between the bricks and is referred to by scientists and der-
matologists as the barrier function of the skin. The barrier function of the 
skin is an extremely important function to understand. It is responsible for 
binding  water  between  the  cells  of  the  epidermis,  helping  the  skin  look 
smooth  and  ﬁrm,  and  maintaining  skin  health.  The  barrier  function  lipids 
prevent  transepidermal  water  loss  (TEWL),  which  dehydrates  the  skin 
surface, interferes with proper functioning of cells, and can lead to irritation 
or inﬂammation. 

The barrier function also prevents irritants from entering the skin, helping 
the skin resist invasion by foreign objects or irritating substances or chemicals. A 
brick wall that is new has an even layer of mortar between the bricks. The top 
of the wall is even and smooth. The wall does not leak or allow rain or weather 
inside. An old or poorly maintained brick wall, however, is missing mortar; or 
the  mortar  is  crumbling,  allowing  air  inside  the  building  to  escape  or  rain  or 
wind to enter the structure.

In addition to the interstitial lipids forming a barrier to prevent irritants from 
entering the skin and moisture leaving the skin, there are special structures in 
the outside surface cells of the corneum layer of the epidermis that help fur-
ther strengthen the barrier function. During the keratinization process, proteins 
form that intertwine and produce a shield-like structure within these cells; the 
structure is called the corniﬁed envelope. The corniﬁed envelope is located 
just under the corneum cell membrane, where the envelope structure is bound 
to ceramide lipids within the cell membrane. The corniﬁed envelope provides a 
tough structure within these surface cells, adding a strong reinforcement to the 
barrier function.

Keeping the barrier function healthy is an important part of good skin care, 
and it makes a huge difference in the way the skin looks and feels. If the lipid 
barrier is injured or damaged, it is said to be impaired. A skin with impaired 
barrier function looks dry, rough, and ﬂaky. Wrinkles are more apparent. The 
skin is irritated much easier than normal skin.

Let’s look at an example. If the barrier function on the skin of your hand is 
healthy, you can get lemon juice on your hand and not feel anything. However, 
if your hands are chapped and rough, that lemon juice can burn and inﬂame 
the skin. The healthy barrier function stops the lemon juice from entering the 

Intercellular cement, or inter-
stitial lipid matrix, is the cush-
ion of lipid substance between the 
cells of the corneum that keeps 
the skin from dehydrating and 
helps protect the skin from irritat-
ing substances.

Barrier function refers to the 
protective barrier furnished by the 
corneum and intercellular cement. 
This protects against dehydration 
of the epidermis and exposure to 
irritative substances.

Transepidermal water loss 
(TEWL) is the evaporation of 
excess intercellular water.

Corniﬁed envelope is a structure 
in the top-layer cells of the stra-
tum corneum, located just beneath 
the cell membrane, made of a va-
riety of overlapping proteins that 
form a very strong barrier to help 
provide additional barrier capabili-
ties at the top of the epidermis.

Impaired means there is damage 
in the barrier function of the skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.12         CHAPTER 1    

Light skin

Dark skin

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Melanin

Melanocytes

FIGURE 1-6  Melanocytes in the epidermis produce melanin.

epidermis. An impaired barrier function allows the lemon juice to enter between 
the cells, and the low pH of the lemon juice irritates nerve endings under the 
epidermis. If enough lemon juice gets through, redness can also appear as blood 
rushes to the scene with immune cells to check out the “invasion.”

Another good example is the petroleum (petrolatum) jelly used on a baby’s 
bottom. Petroleum jelly, in this case, is like a fake barrier function. The petro-
latum  prevents  drying  out  of  the  skin  and  also  prevents  urine  from  irritating 
the  baby’s  skin.  The  lipids  that  make  up  the  barrier  function  are  a  variety  of 

Petrolatum is an occlusive 
agent that is used to prevent water 
loss and irritants from entering 
the skin.




 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      13

substances that help attract and retain moisture. These substances are known 
as  natural  moisturizing  factors  (NMFs).  NMFs  are  produced  during  the 
keratinization process as the cells ﬁll with keratin on their way to the corneum. 
Sodium  PCA,  a  strong  humectant,  sphingolipids  and  glycosphingolipids 
(also known as ceramides), fatty acids, triglycerides, and cholesterol are all 
components of the barrier function.

SPECIALIZED CELLS AND PIGMENTATION
Two types of specialized cells in the epidermis should be discussed. One is the 
Langerhans cell, an immune “guard” cell that “patrols” the epidermis, looking 
for foreign invaders. Much more on the immune system is found in Chapter 3.

The  second  important  specialized  cell  in  the  epidermis  is  the  melanocyte. 
Melanocytes are cells that are the “pigment factories” for the skin. Melanocytes 
are located at the basal cell layer and also can be present in the upper papillary 
dermis (Figure 1-7). Different-colored skin types have the same number of mela-
nocytes, but people of certain races and ethnic backgrounds simply carry genes 
that make the melanocytes produce more melanin or pigment. Sunlight, injuries 
to the skin (including acne lesions), certain diseases, and hormones can stimulate 
melanin production. Blotches and dark marks that form from overproduction of 
melanin are known as hyperpigmentation. Hyperpigmented marks that develop 
from injuries to the skin are known as post-inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation.

There are three types of melanin:

  1. Eumelanin is the only type of melanin in the skin that is brown-black 

in color.

  2. Pheomelanin is responsible for the color of red hair but is not present 

in skin.

  3. Trichochrome is a different type of red-yellow pigment in the hair.

Melanin is what causes a tan to develop. The primary function of melanin is to 
shield and protect the skin from damaging sunrays or injury. It is the body putting 
up a “parasol” to deﬂect ultraviolet rays. Essentially, a “healthy-looking” tan is actu-
ally an immune function—the body is defending itself from something unhealthy. 
Melanocytes are dendritic cells, which means one end of the cell resem-
bles  a  tree  branch.  The  melanin  is  present  in  the  dendrites,  or  branches. 
The  melanocytes  use  their  dendrites  to  “inject”  melanin  into  the  cells  at  the 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Intercellular matrix

FIGURE 1-7  The brick-and-mortar concept of the outermost layer of skin.

Natural moisturizing factors 
(NMFs) are a group of substances 
produced in the interstitial layer 
that help attract and retain mois-
ture in the skin.

Keratinization is the process in 
which the epidermal cells ﬁll with 
keratin protein as they approach 
the surface of the epidermis.

Sodium PCA is a humectant that 
helps bind water in the epidermis.

Sphingolipids, also known as 
ceramides, are fatty substances 
that help hold water in the epider-
mis’s barrier function.

Glycosphingolipids, also known 
as ceramides, are fatty substances 
that help hold water in the epider-
mis’s barrier function.

Fatty acids are another compo-
nent of the fatty materials in the 
barrier function.

Triglycerides are fatty materials 
that make up part of the barrier 
function.

Cholesterol is another compo-
nent of the fatty materials in the 
barrier function.

Langerhans cell is an immune 
cell that “patrols” the epidermis 
looking for foreign invaders.

Melanocytes are cells that are 
“pigment factories” for the skin.

Melanin is the pigment of the skin.

Hyperpigmentation is dark 
splotchiness that forms from over-
production of melanin.

Post-inﬂammatory hyperpig-
mentation is hyperpigmented 
marks that develop from injuries 
to the skin.

Eumelanin is the only type of 
melanin in the skin that is brown-
black in color.

Pheomelanin is responsible for 
the color of red hair but is not 
present in skin.

Trichochrome is a different type 
of red-yellow pigment in the hair.

Dendritic describes cells that 
have one end with branches.

Dendrites are the branch-like 
structures on the ends of certain 
cells, such as nerve cells and 
melanocytes.




 
 
 
 
 
14         CHAPTER 1    

Skin of color is black or brown 
skin or any skin color that is darkly 
pigmented through genetics.

Melanosomes are granules ﬁlled 
with melanin.

Transdermally means to 
penetrate the epidermis and the 
dermis and then be absorbed in 
the bloodstream.

basal layer, and as they drift upward toward the surface, the cells are eventu-
ally shed from the surface through normal desquamation. This is what causes 
tans to fade and eventually disappear. The number of melanocytes and the dis-
tribution of melanocytes are the same in Caucasian skin and in skin of color 
(black  or  brown  skin  or  any  skin  color  that  is  genetically  darkly  pigmented). 
The melanocytes produce melanin in ﬁlled granules called melanosomes. The 
melanosomes are placed in the keratinocytes, mainly at the basal layer, through 
the dendrites on the ends of the melanocytes. Darker skin produces more and 
larger melanosomes that are more ﬁlled with melanin than lighter (Caucasian) 
skin tones. The darkness level of skin of color is greatly inﬂuenced by individual 
hereditary factors and by sun and environmental exposure.

SKIN PENETRATION

Not long ago, scientists and physicians believed the skin was a barrier to almost 
everything.  Now  we  know  that  quite  a  number  of  substances  can  penetrate 
the skin. Drugs have been developed that are absorbed transdermally, which 
means  that  these  drugs  penetrate  the  epidermis  and  the  dermis  and  then  are 
absorbed  into  the  bloodstream.  This  discovery  of  transdermal  drug  delivery 
opened new pathways for many treatments, including treatment of heart irregu-
larities and motion sickness, and now includes nicotine replacement for smok-
ing cessation and even hormone patches.

One of the ﬁrst signs that the skin is more penetrable than ﬁrst thought was 
an incident in which hexachlorophene, an antimicrobial—which at the time was 
available  in  an  over-the-counter  (OTC)  cleanser—was  found  to  penetrate  the 
skin readily. Hence this substance was taken off the OTC market and is now 
available by prescription only.

A variety of tests have been developed to measure skin penetration of sub-
stances, using techniques involving dyes and substances that have been “labeled” 
with radioactive compounds. These radioactive substances can be measured in 
the tissue or the blood to determine the amount and level of penetration.

Routes of Penetration

The investigation of skin penetration is still largely theoretical. Although we know 
that many substances can penetrate the skin to varying degrees, we know that 
many cannot. The issue of drug claims versus cosmetic claims inﬂuences the fol-
lowing few paragraphs. Please be careful with the claims you make for cosmetics. 
For more information on this issue, read Chapter 12, Claims in Cosmetics.

It is generally accepted that skin penetration occurs in four ways (Figure 1-8). 

Certain substances can penetrate the skin through the following routes:

  1. The hair follicle, which is essentially a hollow tube that begins with its open-
ing at the epidermis and ends with its root in the dermis. It is theoretically 
possible that small enough substances could go into the hair follicle and end 
up a lot closer to the blood vessels because the hair follicle extends into the 
dermis. The inner walls of the follicle are lined with epidermal cells. The 
layers of the epidermis basically dip into the follicle. The problem here is 
that the space is relatively limited because the hair follicles occupy a rela-
tively small proportion of the entire epidermis.

  2. The sebaceous glands may also provide a pathway for certain substances. 
Many of these glands empty directly into the hair follicle; however, some of 
the apocrine glands may not be associated with a hair follicle.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      15

Follicle wall as
route of penetration

Sebaceous gland as
route of penetration

Intercellular route

Transcellular route

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 1-8  Various routes of skin penetration: through the follicle wall, the 
sebaceous glands, and intercellular and transcellular routes.

  3. The sudoriferous duct, which is relatively small compared with the size of a 

follicle (pore) opening, may provide a pathway.

  4. The intercellular (i.e., mortar) lipids are probably the best vehicle for pen-
etration of the epidermis. Its surface area is large. But how do we penetrate 
the stacks of keratinized corneocytes, which are impermeable to many sub-
stances? The fatty ﬂuid holding the cells together is actually permeable by 
certain substances.




 
 
 
 
 
16         CHAPTER 1    

Liposomes are lipid microcapsules 
that contain other ingredients.

Compromised is to be impaired or 
injured, not completely functional.

Remember that earlier in the chapter we discussed how cells migrate from 
the basal layer to the corneum. In this process, they die and form keratin but 
also manufacture new lipids, along with the lamellar bodies that secrete more 
lipids into the intercellular cement. Even though the cells are actually dead at 
this point, biochemical processes continue.

These  lipids  in  the  intercellular  cement  will  accept  similar  substances.  In 
other  words,  theoretically,  if  we  can  make  substances  that  are  similar  to  the 
lipids in the intercellular cement, these substances may be readily accepted by 
the intercellular cement. Lipid-based products and ingredients are more likely to 
penetrate the skin through the intercellular lipids. Examples include liposomes, 
which are basically lipid microcapsules that contain other ingredients. Another 
example is chemically attaching a lipid to another type of molecule, like a pep-
tide to produce an ingredient that easily penetrates the lipid matrix of the cor-
neum. Even if the lipid matrix will accept lipid-based ingredients more readily, 
ingredients that are too large still do not penetrate the corneum.

Other  factors  that  affect  skin  penetration  include  the  speciﬁc  area  where 
penetration is attempted. The order of permeability of various areas of the body 
is, in descending order, the genitals, head, trunk, and ﬁnally the arms and legs. 
So the face is generally more accepting of skin penetration than the back, and so 
forth. The forehead seems to be the most penetrable area of the skin on the face.
The  size  of  the  corneocytes  may  play  an  important  role  in  penetration 
potential.  The  forehead  has  smaller  corneocytes  than  do  other  areas  on  the 
face. The thickness of the stratum corneum may also be a factor. Another issue 
is the condition of the skin being treated. Torn or injured tissue, or skin that 
has  a  rash  or  abrasion,  may  be  more  easily  penetrated.  This  point  is  simply 
explained.  Skin  that  is  injured  or  suffering  from  a  rash,  eczema,  or  abrasion 
is  said  to  have  a  compromised  barrier  function,  which  means  that  the  bar-
rier function is not working like it should because of the injury or disorder. A 
compromised barrier function enables the skin to be more permeable by some-
times undesirable materials, such as allergens and irritants. Barrier function can 
be injured or decreased by exposure to detergents, acids, alkaline substances, 
keratolytics,  or  injuries.  Even  overexposure  to  an  alpha  hydroxy  acid  could 
interfere with barrier function by exposing lipids to chemicals that loosen or 
dissolve  the  lipids  within  the  intercellular  ﬂuids.  The  corneocytes  are  not  as 
thick in such areas.

The size of the molecule being penetrated has a big effect on its permeabil-
ity. Large proteins like collagen are not permeable. They are simply too big to go 
between the cells. However, smaller molecules with more afﬁnity for lipids like 
sodium PCA (a humectant), retinoids, squalane, and fat-soluble vitamins such 
as vitamins A, D, and E seem to have good permeability. Some large molecules 
such as collagen do not need to penetrate the skin to be useful cosmetically. 
Collagen  is  a  substantive,  which  means  that  it  adheres  readily  to  the  surface 
of the corneum, helping to bind water and reduce water loss from within the 
epidermis. 

Not  all  ingredients  will  or  should  penetrate  the  skin  surface.  Cleansers, 
sunscreens, and makeup foundations are examples of substances that should 
not  penetrate.  They  totally  lose  their  cosmetic  effectiveness  at  lower  levels, 
assuming they could penetrate the skin surface at all. Keratolytics like salicylic 
acid need to stay on the surface because they work solely on the corneum. 
However,  for  medicinal  purposes,  it  obviously  is  necessary  to  penetrate  the 
full epidermis in many cases. Cosmetically, moisturizers work better and hold 
moisture for longer periods of time if they are able to penetrate deeper into 
the corneum.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      17

Other Factors That Inﬂuence Penetration

The  thickness  of  the  stratum  corneum  obviously  affects  skin  permeability.  If 
there is a large buildup of dead cells on the surface, penetration is hindered. 
When a moisturizer is applied, for example, an excessively thick corneum does 
not absorb the moisturizer as well. The buildup of cells is usually dry and brittle 
due to the large amount of keratin present within each cell, and it “grabs” the 
moisture  from  the  moisturizer.  Therefore,  the  lower  corneum  is  less  likely  to 
beneﬁt from the moisture treatment.

Excessively  oily  skin  has  a  layer  of  excess  sebum  on  the  surface,  further 
slowing penetration. Doctors often apply a strong solvent such as acetone before 
applying chemical peel solutions. This is done to cut the excess sebum on the 
surface, so that the chemical peeling solution can better adhere to and affect 
the desired area. This, of course, is a medical procedure and not recommended 
for salon services. 

Certain  solvents  commonly  present  in  many  skin  care  products  can  also 
increase skin penetration by dispersing surface lipids including sebum. These 
include propylene glycol, SD alcohols, and isopropyl alcohol.

Temperature of the skin also inﬂuences its acceptance of preparations. Warm 
skin is generally more accepting. Heat causes activity within molecules, kind of 
“stirring up” the molecules in the intercellular cement and the cell activity itself. 
However, certain substances such as hydrocortisone are known to be absorbed 
better when cold compresses are applied to the area.

Wet  skin  is  more  receptive  to  penetration  than  dry  skin.  In  addition,  wet 
skin has water on the surface that can become trapped by moisturizers or other 
products applied over wet (damp) skin. This helps the skin increase its water 
content, and it is why dermatologists tell patients to apply moisturizers immedi-
ately after a shower or bath.

Salon Application Techniques for Good 
Absorption of Topical Preparations

Because some routes of penetration are more effective than others, some techniques 
can be used in the salon to get products to penetrate better. Moisturizing and condi-
tioning treatments are more effective if they can get deeper into the corneum.

Preparing the Skin for Treatment

Cleansing the skin helps rid the surface of dirt, dust, pollutants, makeup, and 
excess secretions such as sweat and sebum. Some dead keratinocytes (corneal 
cells) are removed during basic cleansing.

Using toners, fresheners, and astringents helps remove more excess sebum 
on the surface. Using these products both in the salon and at home helps to 
better  prepare  the  surface  for  penetration  of  appropriate  cosmetic  treatment 
preparations.

The amount of alcohol, propylene glycol, and other solvents directly affects 
the amount of sebum removed. The oilier the skin is, the more solvent should 
be present in the toner. This process can work against the treatment as well. For 
example, if you use a strong astringent on dry, dehydrated, thin, sensitive skin 
and then apply a treatment that is too strong, it can irritate the skin instead of 
helping it. In this case the chemicals will dissolve part of the lipid barrier, thus 
reducing the barrier function. A toner for oily skin is often inappropriate for dry 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.18         CHAPTER 1    

Proteolytic means protein 
dissolving.

Chemo exfoliation is the use of 
chemicals to exfoliate or peel the 
surface of the skin.

Microdermabrasion uses a 
pump-driven machine to exfoliate 
the skin by propelling small par-
ticles onto the skin surface.

Corundum is an aluminum oxide 
crystal powder often used in 
microdermabrasion.

skin. Be careful to choose the appropriate cleanser and toner for the skin type 
you are treating.

Removing cellular buildup—for skin types with excess corneum, this means 
using mechanical, enzyme, or cosmetic peeling or other exfoliating treatments—
helps remove excess corneocytes. Removing these dead cells helps improve the 
appearance of the skin in four ways.

  1. Removing  these  dead  keratinized  cells  immediately  improves  the  skin’s 
surface appearance, making it look smoother and clearer. Removing the 
cells that surround wrinkles makes the wrinkles less apparent. If you think 
of a wrinkle as a ditch, a mound of dead cells on either side of the ditch 
makes  the  ditch  look  deeper.  Removing  the  mounds  reduces  the  space 
between the bottom of the wrinkle and the skin surface, making the wrin-
kle less obvious.Because the surface cells may contain melanin or have a 
gray cast due to pileups of dead keratin in the dead surface cells, removal 
of these excess cells has a lightening and evening effect on the skin. Skin 
color appears more even, and splotchy darkness diminishes with exfoliation 
treatments.

  2. Makeup can be applied more evenly to a smoother surface. Clients report 
that makeup goes on much easier for up to 2 weeks after a good exfoliation.
  3. Removal of the cells increases the cell turnover rate, stimulating the division 
of cells and the production of intercellular lipids, therefore improving the 
barrier function. The improved barrier function and increased intercellular 
lipids  make  the  skin  look  healthier  and  smoother,  improving  circulation 
and glow.

  4. Removing the cells increases physical penetration of moisture treatments or 

other preparations applied after the exfoliation.

It is important to remember that too much exfoliation disturbs the barrier 
function, causing skin irritation and making the skin more susceptible to inﬂam-
mation and irritation from topical substances, allergens, and the environment. It 
can also cause redness and scaling as well as make the skin look less smooth 
and ﬁrm.

Types of Exfoliation

Mechanical exfoliation involves physically removing the cells from the skin. The 
cells are actually being “bumped” from the surface of the skin. Good examples 
of mechanical exfoliation are the use of a brushing machine or granulated scrub. 
“Peel-off”  masks  and  drying  preparations  that  are  rubbed  off  are  also  good 
examples of mechanical exfoliation.

Enzyme  treatment  uses  proteolytic,  or  protein-dissolving,  enzymes  that 
actually dissolve the excess corneocyte buildup. Enzyme “peeling” is a common 
salon treatment that is discussed in more detail in Chapter 21, Chemical Peeling 
and Exfoliation Procedures.

Chemical solvents and light chemical peeling are used to reduce excess cor-
neocytes on the surface. Chemo exfoliation is the use of chemicals to exfoliate 
or peel the surface of the skin. Glycolic acid, resorcinol, salicylic acid, and lactic 
acid are chemicals used in this type of procedure, which is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 21.

Another  relatively  new  mechanical  exfoliation  technique  is 
microdermabrasion.  This  procedure  uses  corundum,  or  aluminum  oxide 
crystals,  to  “sandblast”  the  skin.  This  procedure  also  is  further  discussed  in 
Chapter 21.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      19

Increasing Physical Absorption 
of Moisture Treatments

Besides  improving  surface  permeability  with  the  skin  preparation  techniques 
just discussed, various techniques or tools for increasing absorption can make 
penetration of treatment preparations more likely.

Massage stimulates the skin both physically and thermostatically, meaning 
that the heat generated by friction with the skin actually warms the surface as 
well as warms the preparation you are using. A good but gentle massage with 
the appropriate moisturizer increases its penetration and effectiveness.

Use the knowledge you obtain in this book to help select the right prepara-
tion. Manufacturers now develop preparations that are more readily accepted 
by the lipids in the intercellular cement. Examples are lipid-containing moisture 
products and liposome treatments. Creams that are very heavy or greasy may be 
less permeable due to the large size of the molecules in their base formulations. 
Classic “massage creams,” usually with a base of petrolatum or mineral oil, are 
good examples of nonpermeable creams.

Use of heat and cold increases cream penetration. Infrared lamps and infra-
red “skin irons” release heat, which aids absorption. Heat masks and parafﬁn 
treatments produce similar results. 

Warning! Do not use direct heat on sensitive skin; red, irritated skin; rosa-
cea; or skin with enlarged or distended capillaries! Use of direct heat increases 
blood ﬂow which can worsen these conditions!

Cold penetration with cold “globes” may be more appropriate for sensitive 
skin. Globes are glass or plastic balls that contain cryogenic (extremely cold) 
liquids.  Cold  temperature  exposure  causes  blood  vessels  to  constrict,  which 
reduces redness and irritation. The best way to use the globes is to apply the 
serum or product to be penetrated and then to place a large piece of gauze over 
the  face.  After  the  gauze  is  applied,  then  apply  the  globes.  Use  of  the  gauze 
prevents the extremely cold globes from directly touching the skin.

Occlusion is the process of covering the skin with a heavy substance such 
as a mask (Figure 1-9). Applying a hydrating ﬂuid, serum, or ampoule and then 

Occlusion means covering the 
skin with some sort of imperme-
able substance that helps improve 
moisturization of the skin and 
blocks moisture evaporation.

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

.
l
e
f
r
e
W
b
o
R
y
b

FIGURE 1-9  Occlusive mask.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20         CHAPTER 1    

.
l
e
f
r
e
W
b
o
R
y
b
y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Occlude is to cover the skin with 
some sort of substance that helps 
improve moisturization of the skin 
and block moisture evaporation.

High-frequency treatment 
releases heat deeper into the skin 
layers, helping to stimulate the skin 
and increase product absorption.

Ultrasonic treatment uses ultra-
sound vibration to help expand 
the area between cells and to 
warm tissue for better absorption 
of certain products.

Iontophoresis uses electrical cur-
rent to polarize preparations into 
the skin.

Ionization uses electrical current to 
polarize preparations into the skin.

Microcurrent is a form of galvanic 
current that can also be used to 
penetrate certain preparations.

FIGURE 1-10  The electrode on the client’s face is the positive pole.
The current ﬂows to the negative pole in the client’s hand. Positively charged, water-
based materials are repelled by the positive pole and attracted to the negative 
pole, increasing absorption of material into the skin surface. Desincrustation, using 
negatively charged alkaline liquids, is performed by switching the electrodes—using 
negative on the face while the client holds the positive electrode.

applying a mask will occlude the skin, forcing more penetration of the prod-
uct. Occlusion also traps already existing moisture in the corneum. Examples of 
occlusive masks include alginate (seaweed type) “rubberized” masks and min-
eral masks that harden, such as plaster of paris.

High-frequency treatment releases heat deeper into the skin layers, help-

ing to stimulate the skin and increase product absorption.

Ultrasonic treatment uses ultrasound vibration to help expand the area 

between cells and to warm tissue for better absorption of certain products.

Iontophoresis  or  ionization  uses  electrical  current  to  polarize  prepara-
tions into the skin (Figure 1-10). Ions are repelled into the skin by use of galvanic 
current.  Microcurrent  is  a  form  of  galvanic  current  that  can  also  be  used  to 
penetrate  certain  preparations.  See  Milady’s  Standard  Esthetics:  Fundamentals 
for further instructions on machine usage.

Use  of  masks  over  creams  restricts  evaporation  of  the  creams,  therefore 

increasing penetration.

Warning! Some types of treatments should not be used with these penetra-
tion  techniques,  and  certain  individuals  are  not  good  candidates  for  some  of 
these techniques. Use common sense and follow manufacturers’ instructions for 
all treatments, preparations, and devices.

IN CONCLUSION

Understanding both cellular and skin tissue anatomy and physiology is essential 
to understanding how skin care products work and interact with the skin. This 
knowledge is also important in understanding skin disease and learning how to 
maintain proper skin health.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin      21

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is the function of the cell membrane?

  2. What is selective permeability?

  3. Why is the nucleus of the cell so important?

  4. What is the difference between involuntary and voluntary muscles?

  5. Discuss the three major layers of skin and the structures contained in each 

layer.

  6. Discuss in detail methods for helping creams penetrate the skin better in 

the salon.

  7. What is a receptor site?

  8. What is the barrier function, and why is it important?

  9. Why should estheticians be careful with exfoliation procedures?

 10. How far should the skin be penetrated for esthetic purposes?

 11. What type of ingredient would you want to penetrate the skin surface?

 12. Are there products or ingredients that should not penetrate the skin?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

2

Hygiene and 
Sterilization 
Techniques

OBJECTIVES . . . 

Sterilization, aseptic techniques, good hygiene, and disinfection 
methods are essential for every health and personal care prac-
tice. Esthetics is no exception. You will learn the importance of 
aseptic techniques as well as procedures for disinfecting many 
salon implements. You will learn to protect yourself and your 
clients from exposure to pathogenic organisms.

Germs are microorganisms that literally cover almost every 

surface, including the skin of the human body. Because this is 
true, it is important that we learn how to control microorgan-
isms through proper cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization.

Let’s take a minute to review some of the various types of 
microorganisms. Bacteria are one-celled microorganisms. There 
are both pathogenic (disease-causing) and nonpathogenic 
(nondisease-producing) bacteria. In fact, our bodies need certain 
types of bacteria to help defend us against invasive pathogenic 
bacteria and help in the process of digestion. However, this 
chapter does not focus on the good-guy bacteria, also known 
as symbiotic bacteria. We are concerned here about disease-
producing, pathogenic bacteria (Figure 2-1).

There are basically three types of bacteria:

  1. Bacilli are rod-shaped bacteria that cause a variety of dis-
eases. Among these diseases are tuberculosis and tetanus.
  2. Cocci are round bacteria that often occur in groups. There 
are three types of cocci. Staphylococci grow in small groups. 
Localized infections are conﬁned to one area. Pustules are a 



     23

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.24         CHAPTER 2    

Pathogenic means “disease-
causing.”

Nonpathogenic means “non-
disease-producing.”

Bacilli are rod-shaped bacteria 
that cause a variety of diseases, 
including tuberculosis and tetanus.

Cocci are round bacteria that 
often occur in groups.

symptom of a localized infection caused by staphylococci. Staphy-
lococci can also produce systemic infections, which are those that 
affect the entire body, meaning that the infection has entered the 
bloodstream and may affect multiple organs or systems. Staphy-
lococci infections are sometimes called staph (pronounced staff) 
infections.  Streptococci  infections  can  cause  “strep  throat”  and 
other infections. They are another form of cocci. Diplococci, still 
another  form  of  cocci,  and  the  smallest  of  all  bacteria,  cause 
pneumonia and gonorrhea.

Bacilli (rod)

Flagella

Bacillus
(flagellated)

Diplobacillus

Streptobacillus

Cocci (round)

Diplococcus

Staphylococcus

Streptococcus

Spirilla (spiral)

Spirilla

Spirochete

FIGURE 2-1  Bacterial shapes.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©




 
 
 
 
 
Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      25

MRSA (pronounced MUR-sah) is 
an aggressive form of staphylo-
coccus bacteria. MRSA stands for 
methicillin-resistant staphylococ-
cus aureus, which means that 
this bacterium is very resistant to 
many forms of traditional antibi-
otic treatment.

MRSA (pronounced MUR-sah) is an aggressive form of staphylococcus bacteria. MRSA 
stands for methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, which means that this bacterium 
is very resistant to many forms of traditional antibiotic treatment. MRSA evolved from 
hospitals, where the bacterium mutated to resist most forms of antibiotic used to kill 
it. But MRSA is no longer just in hospitals. It has mutated and is now affecting people 
outside hospitals, through a new bacterium called CA-MRSA (community-associated 
methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus). This type of MRSA most often presents as an 
infection that looks like an infected hair or a spider bite and evolves into the form of a 
large, boil-like lesion (Figure 2-2). Because CA-MRSA often affects the skin, it is important 
that estheticians be very aware of the disease and its symptoms.

Everyone has MRSA on their skin, and it is colonized in the nares (nostrils) of one 
out of three people but does not cause problems for most. When the numbers of MRSA 
bacteria become large enough to be pathological, a bulla lesion may develop on the skin.
Some people are colonized, or have a pathogenic number of MRSA; but they are not 

infected, nor do they show symptoms of infection. These carriers can transfer MRSA to 
other people even if they are healthy. If the other person is immunocompromised, or if 
there is a small injury or cut in the skin and the bacteria come into contact with that cut, 
an infection can occur in the person receiving the bacteria.

Most MRSA is spread from skin-to-skin contact and often affects athletes such as 
wrestlers, but it also can be spread by contact with contaminated surfaces such as gym 
equipment or other surfaces. However, persons infected with MRSA can transfer the 
infection before the obvious skin infection occurs. Early symptoms include fever and ﬂu-
like symptoms; an infected person will have a red spot at the site of the coming bulla, but 
the full bulla skin symptoms will not be developed yet. For that reason, estheticians may 
be exposed to MRSA without knowing it. This emphasizes the need for wearing gloves 
during all treatments.

The best prevention is good disinfection of equipment and implements, wearing 
gloves, frequent hand washing, and regular bathing. Avoid sharing personal items like 
towels. Clothing should be washed regularly. Gym clothes should be worn once and 
washed with bleach. It is advisable not to shave one’s legs prior to anticipated bare skin 
leg contact to any surface which might be contaminated.

Esthetic chairs and tables should always be thoroughly cleaned and wiped with 

disinfectant, and linens must be changed for every client.

  3. Spirilla  are  a  third  form  of  bacteria.  Spirilla  are  also  called  spi-
rochetes. They are spiral in shape. Syphilis is probably the best-
known disease caused by spirilla.

Spirilla are spiral in shape. 
Syphilis is the best-known disease 
caused by spirilla.

Bacteria can be active or inactive. In their inactive stage, they 
form cocoon-like shells called spores. Spores are much harder to 
kill than active bacteria. This is important to know when we discuss 
sterilization later in the chapter.

Viruses are another form of microorganism. Viruses are not 
really cells, in that they do not have membranes. They are more 
like pieces of DNA proteins that are very small and penetrate the 
skin more easily. Viruses enter healthy cells and disrupt the cell 
membrane, causing damage or death to the cell. Vaccines are 

Viruses are another form of 
microorganism that are often 
pathogenic.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.26         CHAPTER 2    

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P
d
n
a

l

o
r
t
n
o
C
e
s
a
e
s
D

i

r
o
f

s
r
e
t
n
e
C
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 2-2  MRSA lesion.

available to prevent some diseases caused by viruses, such as the ﬂu 
and measles. Antibiotics do not kill viruses. Although most people 
do not fear viruses as they do bacteria, viral infections such as HIV, 
inﬂuenza, and hepatitis can be very dangerous. 

There are various types of fungi. Mold and mildew are examples 

Mycoses are fungal infections.

of fungi. Fungal infections are known as mycoses.

Many illnesses are caused by microorganisms. The variety of 
bacteria, viruses, and fungi, and the various diseases they can cause, 
are much too extensive to fully discuss in this book. We touch on 
the basics in order to understand the importance of hygiene and 
sterilization.

STERILIZATION

Sterilization is the process of 
killing all microorganisms, includ-
ing good and bad ones. Steriliza-
tion also kills spores—bacteria 
that are in their inactive phase.

Autoclave is a machine that 
sterilizes equipment, implements, 
and other materials through a 
combination of steam heat and 
pressure.

Sterilization is the process of killing all microorganisms, including good and 
bad ones. Sterilization also kills spores—bacteria that are in their inactive stage. 
Disinfectants kill only some spores.

Sterilization can be performed in several ways, but sterilization in our industry 
is most practical when performed by a process called autoclaving. An autoclave 
is a machine that sterilizes equipment, implements, and other materials through a 
combination of steam heat and pressure. It works similarly to a pressure cooker. 
Microorganisms cannot survive in an autoclave (Figure 2-3).

Autoclaves have a large metal chamber that can hold metal surgical instru-
ments, sponges, gauze, and other materials. After the chamber is ﬁlled with the 




 
 
 
 
 
Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      27

K
R
A
M
D
M
©

I

FIGURE 2-3  Example of an autoclave.

materials to be sterilized, a heavy-duty door is shut and then locked to form an 
airtight seal. The autoclave then heats up, at the same time building pressure 
inside the chamber. The temperature of the heat goes above the boiling point 
of 212°F. Articles are sterile when they have been exposed to very high heat 
(usually about 260°) and sufﬁcient pressure has built up inside the autoclave. 
Once the autoclave has reached the required temperature and pressure, mate-
rials  are  left  to  sterilize  for  about  20  minutes.  The  autoclave  is  then  vented, 
allowing the pressure and temperature to drop. The pressure is so high that it is 
impossible to open an autoclave during the sterilization cycle.

Items placed in the autoclave are placed in sealed, special plastic or paper 
envelopes so they remain sterile once the autoclave has completed the steril-
ization cycle. It is important to read the manufacturer’s instructions well before 
operating an autoclave, because instructions for the procedures will vary.

Some materials cannot be autoclaved. Glass, for example, cannot withstand 
the high pressure. Check manufacturers’ instructions to see which items cannot 
be  autoclaved.  Metal  extractors  are  the  perfect  instrument  for  the  autoclave. 
Metal items to be autoclaved should ﬁrst be cleaned and immersed in a tuber-
culocidal disinfectant; good aseptic technique should be used during these pro-
cedures. As autoclaving becomes more and more an issue in our industry, many 
items that formerly could not be autoclaved are being engineered to withstand 
the process.

An  autoclave  is  an  important  tool  for  the  esthetician  as  well  as  any  other 
personal  care  or  health-care  professional,  and  it  is  the  only  method  of  killing 
all microbes. It is crucial to protect your clients and yourself from exposure to 
pathogenic microorganisms. The AIDS epidemic brought great attention to steril-
ization procedures in the 1980s and initiated awareness of infection control in all 
personal care industries. However, the AIDS virus is relatively easy to kill through 
proper disinfection and sterilization. Hepatitis viruses, tuberculosis bacteria, and 
other microorganisms actually pose a much greater health risk in terms of infec-
tion control procedures. New viruses such as H1N1, better known as the swine 
ﬂu, and other newly emerging pathogenic microbes have also raised awareness 
of proper hygiene and infection control to avoid the transfer of disease.




28         CHAPTER 2    

Disinfection is the process of 
killing the majority of pathogenic 
microorganisms.

Invasive procedures are proce-
dures that enter the body.

Disinfectants are chemicals that 
kill pathogenic microorganisms.

EPA-registered disinfectant is 
a disinfectant that is registered 
with the Environmental Protection 
Agency.

Antiseptics are a weaker form of 
disinfectant. They are usually mild 
enough to use on the skin.

Aseptic procedure is the term 
scientists use to describe proper 
handling techniques of sterilized 
and disinfected equipment.

Disinfection is the process of killing the majority of pathogenic microorgan-
isms. Disinfection is the general procedure that has been followed in the cosme-
tology industry. It has been assumed that because we do not perform invasive 
procedures,  or  procedures  that  enter  the  body,  we  do  not  have  to  concern 
ourselves with the levels of sterilization that are used in hospitals. Though this 
may be true for hair designers, many people now consider the esthetic and nail 
industries in the realm of their “potential exposure to body ﬂuids,” as discussed 
in  the  Universal  Precautions  section  of  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health 
Administration (OSHA) Standards. Many experts in disinfection now believe that 
professionals in the cosmetology industry must raise our level of prevention to 
autoclaving for our implements. We do perform procedures such as extraction, 
waxing, and tweezing that sometimes cause blood on the surface of the skin. 
Because  of  this  exposure  to  blood,  we  must  be  very  careful  to  use  excellent 
aseptic techniques and sterile or disinfected implements and materials.

Disinfectants are chemicals that kill many pathogenic microorganisms. The 
most popular disinfectant chemical used in the cosmetology industry is quaternary 
ammonia. However, it will damage some surfaces, such as some types of rubber, 
plastic, and other coatings. An EPA-registered disinfectant is a disinfectant that 
is  registered  with  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  to  be  used  in  infection 
control. EPA-registered disinfectants have a registration number on the original con-
tainer. Records must be kept on the purchase of these disinfectants. They should 
not be used on the skin. There are two types of EPA-registered disinfectants: 

  1. Disinfectants  registered  as  viricidal  (kills  many  viruses),  bactericidal  (kills 
many bacteria), and fungicidal (kills many fungi) are the current standard to 
disinfect tools and implements.

  2. Tuberculocidal (kills tuberculosis) disinfectant is required in some states either 
for everyday use as a disinfectant or to disinfect in the instance of a blood spill.

Disinfectants  are  also  used  in  maintenance,  such  as  disinfectant  ﬂoor  deter-
gents and aerosol sprays, to kill bacteria in the air and control the odors they cause.
Disinfectants  designed  for  disinfecting  equipment  or  implements  are  too 
strong to use on the skin. Antiseptics are a weaker form of disinfectant, mild 
enough  to  use  on  the  skin.  Hydrogen  peroxide,  alcohol,  and  other  ﬁrst  aid 
chemicals are examples of antiseptics.

Aseptic procedure is the term scientists use to describe proper handling 
techniques of sterilized and disinfected equipment. For example, placing a ster-
ile comedone extractor on a dirty towel is a violation of aseptic procedure. Han-
dling sterile equipment with other sterile materials is good aseptic procedure.

Theoretically, nothing is completely sterile once a seal has been broken on 
an envelope of an autoclaved utensil. Packages that have become wet or torn are 
considered unsterile. Because bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms are in 
the air, they land on the sterile equipment. But we cannot sterilize a building or a 
room, so we must do the next best thing in handling disinfected and sterile imple-
ments with the best hygienic techniques possible.

Some disinfectants are somewhat stronger than quaternary ammonia and are 
being used more frequently in salons, particularly in esthetics and electrolysis 
practices.

Popular  stronger  disinfectants  are  glutaraldehyde,  formaldehyde  solutions, 
benzalkonium  chloride,  and  sodium  hypochlorite  (household  bleach).  Form-
aldehyde and glutaraldehyde are illegal to use in cosmetology in many states. 
These types of disinfectants are very strong and can be irritating. If they are not 
thoroughly removed by lots of rinsing, the residue can cause allergic and irritat-
ing reactions to the skin and may be irritating to the eyes and lungs.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      29

Disinfectant  solutions  are  excellent  for  disinfecting  mask  brushes,  metal 
instruments such as tweezers, and other implements that cannot be autoclaved. 
Disinfectant concentrates are available from medical and esthetic supply houses 
under a variety of trade names.

Most disinfectant comes in concentrated form. It is mixed with water to form 
a solution that is potent in killing many microorganisms. Read the label well and 
follow  all  manufacturers’  instructions.  Make  sure  that  the  solution  is  replaced 
regularly, according to manufacturer’s instructions, and that implements are left 
in the solution for the amount of time the manufacturer requires for successful 
disinfection.

Household bleach can be diluted by a ratio of 1:10 with water and serves 
as a good disinfectant for some articles. Besides being used for laundry, bleach 
can also be used to disinfect sponges and other linens. Do not use bleach to 
disinfect metal instruments, because chlorine is extremely corrosive to metals.

DISPOSABLE MATERIALS

The best way to ensure aseptic procedure is to use disposable materials. These 
materials should be used once and discarded. There is no way to transfer micro-
organisms from one client to another if you are using disposable materials.

Popular disposable items include the following:

•  cleansing pads made of sheet (roll) cotton
•  disposable one-use lip brushes
•  one-use mascara wands
•  disposable eyeshadow sponges
•  inexpensive cellulose sponges
•  cotton swabs
•  facial tissue
•  wax strips
•  disposable spatulas for wax or junior size tongue depressors
•  paper towels and sheets
•  gloves

Lancets, if your state regulatory agency allows their use by estheticians, should 
always be presterilized for one use and disposable. Never use a lancet more than 
once! Electrolysis needles and fi laments are also available in disposable types.

Disposables should be discarded in sealed plastic bags. Sharp items such as 
lancets and electrolysis needles should be disposed of in a “sharps box,” which 
is acquired from and returned to a company regulated to dispose of sharp items. 
A sharps box is a puncture-resistant, leakproof plastic box with a hole in the top 
in which you place used lancets and needles. The container should be marked 
with a biohazard symbol. The plastic box helps prevent you or anyone else han-
dling the refuse from accidental injury by used lancets or needles. Even though 
blood is a rarity, it is best to protect everyone by using these precautions.

NONDISPOSABLE ITEMS

Some items must be used more than once. Because of expense and practicality, 
items such as brush attachments, high-frequency electrodes, mask brushes, suc-
tion apparatuses, comedone extractors, and other items must be either sterilized 
or disinfected.

When cleaning esthetic tools you must be careful not to cross-contaminate 
them. Cross-contamination means that the tools or implements are accidentally 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.30         CHAPTER 2    

reexposed to microorganisms during handling. Examples of cross-contamination 
are rinsing implements in an undisinfected bowl, handling clean brushes with 
dirty towels, and re-dipping used spatulas into the same jar of cream.

You must use extreme care not ever to contaminate any item used in treat-
ment by touching it with something that is dirty or has been used on a client. 
The following are instructions for properly disinfecting implements or equip-
ment pieces.

Always wear disposable gloves when practicing disinfectant procedures.

Disinfection of Brushes

It would be ideal if mask brushes could be autoclaved, but most brushes would 
be destroyed in the autoclave procedure. The high temperature melts the glue 
that  holds  the  brush  together.  In  at  least  one  state,  the  use  of  reusable  mask 
brushes is against the state regulations. Masks can also be applied with gloved 
hands or disposable spatulas. Soak brushes well in a disinfectant soap solution. 
The  soak  will  help  loosen  mask  materials  from  the  brush.  After  soaking  the 
brushes, put on a pair of gloves and rinse them well in a bowl. After they are 
thoroughly rinsed, immerse them in a disinfectant solution. Let brushes soak for 
20 minutes in the disinfectant. Remove them, rinsing well in a different rinsing 
bowl. It is best to label your rinsing bowls so that you don’t rinse disinfected 
brushes  in  the  soap-rinsing  bowl.  Remember  to  rinse  very  well  so  that  you 
do not have disinfectant residue on the brushes. Wrap the disinfected brushes 
loosely in a clean towel to allow them to dry. After they are dry, they should be 
kept in a clean, closed container; a clean drawer; or an ultraviolet (UV) light box.
UV light boxes are good for storing clean, disinfected items. They kill some 
types of microorganisms with ultraviolet light, but they affect only the surface 
exposed  to  the  light.  They  do  not  sterilize.  Items  still  must  be  disinfected  or 
autoclaved before they are stored in a UV light box.

Machine  brushes  should  be  washed  well  or  soaked  in  a  soap  solution  to 
remove all debris. They should then be soaked in a disinfectant solution, similar 
to the technique used for mask brushes. Rinse machine brushes well and store 
in a clean, dry place.

High-frequency electrodes should be carefully cleaned with an EPA-registered 
disinfectant. After initial cleaning, immerse the bulb part of the electrode (not the 
metal part) in a disinfectant solution for 10 minutes. Rinse the glass well with cool 
water, being very careful not to get the metal part of the electrode wet. Gently dry 
with a clean towel. Because high-frequency treatment is performed after extraction, 
small amounts of blood or bacteria can be present on a used electrode. You should 
have more than one electrode so that you can use one while disinfecting another. 
Do not attempt to autoclave electrodes! Galvanic desincrustation attachments should 
be thoroughly cleaned with an EPA-registered disinfectant after each use. 

Iontophoresis rollers should be thoroughly cleaned with an EPA-registered 
disinfectant.  The  metal  rollers  can  be  detached  and  soaked  in  a  disinfectant 
solution for 20 minutes. Follow manufacturer’s directions for cleaning, because 
attachments  may  differ.  Be  careful  not  to  immerse  any  electrical  parts  of  the 
machine. Again, it is advisable to have additional machine attachments so that 
you can use one while disinfecting another.

Suction attachments should be thoroughly cleaned and then soaked in an 

EPA-registered disinfectant for 10 minutes. Store in a clean, dry place.

Comedone  extractors  are  very  likely  to  contain  small  amounts  of  blood 
or debris after use. Clean them well with an EPA-registered disinfectant. It is 
important  to  autoclave  comedone  extractors!  If  an  autoclave  is  unavailable, 
soak the clean comedone extractor in an EPA-registered disinfectant solution 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      31

for 20 to 25 minutes. Rinse thoroughly. Never use an extractor on more than 
one person without sterilizing it ﬁrst!

Tweezers should be cleaned well with an EPA-registered disinfectant after 
each use with a brush and soapy water. Stainless steel tweezers can be auto-
claved or disinfected. Store tweezers in a bowl or jar with quaternary ammonia, 
and rinse well before each use.

It cannot be stressed enough that it is important to have additional imple-
ments of all types available to allow many services without the reuse of imple-
ments. It is also very important to be extremely systematic about cleansing and 
disinfecting  or  sterilizing  all  materials  at  all  times.  Your  entire  staff  should  be 
aware of salon infection control procedures so that all staff members follow the 
same techniques and cross-contamination does not occur (Figure 2-4).

COMMONLY USED DISINFECTANTS 

Name

Form

Strength

How to Use

Quaternary
Ammonium
Compounds
(Quats)

Liquid or
tablet 

Phenolics

Liquid

Mix according
to manufacturer's
instructions.

Immerse implements in solution
for 10 or more minutes, or,
per manufacturer's labelling
instructions.

Mix according to
manufacturer's
instructions.

Immerse implements in solution
for 10 or more minutes. Should
never be used to disinfect
equipment and treatment tubs
as they may damage plastic,
rubber, and some metals. 

Immerse implements in solution
or sanitize electrodes and sharp
cutting edges for 10 or more
minutes, or, per manufacturer's
labelling instructions.

Bleach or
Sodium
Hypochlorite

Liquid

Mix according to
manufacturer's
instructions.

COMMONLY USED ANTISEPTICS 

Name

Form

Strength

Use

White crystals

2–5% solution

Cleanse the eyes.

2% solution

Cleanse cuts and wounds.

3–5% solution

Cleanse skin and minor cuts.

Liquid

Liquid

Liquid

60% solution

Cleanse hands, skin, and minute
cuts. Not to be used if irritation is 
present. 

Cleanse skin and hands, and for
general use. 

White crystals

1⁄2% solution

White crystals

1⁄2% solution

Rinse the hands.

Boric Acid

Tincture of
Iodine

Hydrogen
Peroxide

Ethyl or
Isopropyl
Alcohol 

Chloramine-T
(Chlorazene;
Chlorozol)  

Sodium
Hypochlorite
(Javelle water; 
Zonite) 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Other approved disinfectants and antiseptics are being used in beauty salons. Consult
your state board of cosmetology or your health department. 

FIGURE 2-4  Commonly used disinfectants and antiseptics.



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32         CHAPTER 2    

Cleaning Sponges

Ideally, cleansing sponges should be used once and discarded. Many salons 
include  the  price  of  the  sponges  in  the  service  and  then  give  the  used 
sponges  to  the  client  so  that  they  may  be  used  at  home  between  salon 
treatments.

If disposable sponges are not a possibility, or a requirement of your state, 
used sponges should be washed in the washing machine with chlorine bleach. 
After washing, they should be removed from the washing machine and auto-
claved. If an autoclave is not available, the following disinfecting procedure is 
recommended. Collect several dozen sponges after they have been prewashed 
by hand or in the washing machine. Place the sponges in a garment washing 
bag (the kind used for hosiery). Place the bag in the washing machine. Fill the 
washer with cold water and mix in about a gallon of household bleach. Allow 
the sponges to soak for 15 to 20 minutes in the bleach solution. Depending 
on the size of your washing machine, more or less bleach may be added. The 
bleach solution should be 1 part bleach to 10 parts cold water. After allowing 
sponges to soak for 15 to 20 minutes, put the washing machine on the rinse 
cycle.  It  may  be  necessary  to  run  the  sponges  through  two  rinse  cycles  to 
remove all the bleach solution. The spin cycle will remove most of the water. 
Allow the sponges to dry in a clean place. It is best to store sponges in a UV 
light box.

GENERAL CLEANING

The facial room should be cleaned between clients. Implements and equipment 
should  be  thoroughly  disinfected.  All  towels  and  linens  should  be  replaced 
between clients.

At  the  end  of  each  day,  the  room  should  be  very  thoroughly  cleaned. 
The following are instructions for room shutdown procedures at the end of 
each day:

  1. Put on a pair of disposable polyurethane gloves.
  2. Wear a protective garment and disposable gloves to remove all dirty laun-
dry from the hamper. Spray the hamper with a disinfectant aerosol spray, 
or wipe it down with surface disinfectant. Mildew grows easily in hampers. 
Make  sure  to  wear  a  new  pair  of  gloves  after  handling  dirty  laundry  and 
before you handle fresh linens or remake the treatment bed.

  3. Remove all dirty spatulas, used brushes, and other implements. Most of these 
should have been removed between clients during the day. Thoroughly dis-
infect all materials.

  4. Wipe down all counters, the facial chair, machines, and other furniture with 
an EPA-registered disinfectant. Clean the magnifying lamp on both sides in 
the same manner.

  5. Replenish  the  room  with  fresh  linens,  spatulas,  implements,  and  other 

supplies so it is ready for the next day.

  6. Change disinfecting solution daily, and as necessary.
  7. Maintain vaporizer as necessary.
  8. Check  the  room  for  dirt  or  smudges  on  the  walls,  baseboards,  or  dust  in 

corners or on air vents.

  9. Vacuum and mop the room with a disinfectant.
 10. Spray the air in the room with a disinfectant aerosol spray.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      33

 11. Replenish any empty jars. If you are reusing jars for dispensing creams from 
a bulk container, always use up the entire content of the small jar before 
replenishing. Never add cream to a partially used jar. Wash and rinse the 
empty jar well with hot water and then disinfect with an EPA-registered dis-
infectant, rinsing thoroughly. Allow to dry before reﬁlling the jar.

Following these procedures on a daily basis will serve three purposes:

  1. Your room will always be ready the next morning.
  2. Cleaning  at  night  cuts  down  on  the  number  of  microorganisms  that  can 

breed overnight.

  3. Your room will always be spotless, making your clients conﬁdent and reas-
sured  that  they  are  being  treated  in  a  hygienic  environment.  Never  leave 
the  room  dirty  overnight,  because  this  allows  increased  contamination  to 
develop.

Laundry

Anyone handling dirty laundry should always wear thick rubber or latex gloves 
during the entire laundry procedure—and something to prevent clothing con-
tamination. Special care must be taken in handling dirty laundry because dirty 
lancets,  sponges,  and  gauze  may  be  contaminated  and  can  accidentally  get 
mixed in with the laundry. Sheets and towels should be washed well with chlo-
rine  bleach  and  immediately  dried  in  the  dryer.  Headbands,  turbans,  smocks, 
and lab coats should also be washed in the same manner. If not disposable, the 
protective cover worn during cleaning can be washed with the linens. Make sure 
that all laundry is completely dry and hot when removed from the dryer—no 
dampness should remain.

Linen service is an alternative to washing. Linen services are familiar with 
cleaning  standards  and  disinfection  procedures  and  are  a  good  choice  if  you 
have little space in your salon.

ABOUT OSHA

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is a federal 
government agency, part of the Department of Labor, formed to help ensure that 
places of employment maintain a safe and healthy environment for employees.
Salons are expected to have a program in place to educate employees about 
possible hazards in the workplace. In the skin care profession, we must educate 
employees about safe practices in proper aseptic procedure and precautions to 
avoid possible exposure to chemicals as well as precautions to avoid exposure 
to bodily ﬂuids. Universal precautions for bloodborne pathogens include the use 
of protective equipment such as gloves and lab coats, and the proper disposal of 
used or contaminated tools such as lancets, waxing supplies, and other soiled 
or used implements.

Manufacturers  of  any  chemically  based  products  are  required  to  furnish 
Material  Safety  Data  Sheets  (MSDSs),  which  are  special  instruction  sheets 
that describe safety concerns for products used in the skin care practice. Data 
include  how  to  safely  clean  up  accidental  spills  and  any  special  instructions 
regarding eye contact or accidental ingestion. Because skin care products are 
designed to be applied to the skin, often very few, if any, precautions are listed. 
Nevertheless,  product  manufacturers  are  required  to  furnish  you  with  MSDSs 
when requested.

Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA) 
is a federal government agency, 
part of the Department of Labor, 
formed to help ensure that places 
of employment maintain a safe 
and healthy environment for 
employees.

Material Safety Data Sheets 
(MSDSs) are special instruction 
sheets that describe safety con-
cerns of products used in the 
skin care practice.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.34         CHAPTER 2    

MSDS sheets should be kept in a binder and stored in a place where every 
employee can have access to them. It’s a good idea to have a sign-off sheet 
in the MSDS binder so each employee can sign off on knowing where they 
are kept.

MSDS are necessary only for professional products used in the salon. They 
are  not  necessary  or  required  for  retail  products  intended  for  home  use.  All 
employees must read and sign off on having read the MSDS for their specialty 
before going to work in the salon.

In the skin care salon, MSDSs for antiseptics, germicides, disinfectants, and 
nail chemicals are probably the most important. Many of these chemicals are 
more dangerous if mishandled or accidentally spilled.

For  more  information  on  OSHA  rules  and  precautions,  contact  the  U.S. 
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 200 Con-
stitution Ave. N.W., Washington, D.C. 20210. More information on this subject 
can  also  be  found  in  The  Esthetician’s  Guide  to  Working  with  Physicians,  by 
Susanne Warﬁeld (available from Milady, a part of Cengage Learning.)

PROTECTING YOU AND YOUR 
CLIENTS FROM DISEASE

Besides  the  many  cleaning,  disinfection,  and  sterilization  procedures  already 
discussed,  it  is  important  that  you  personally  carry  out  personal  aseptic  pro-
cedures on a routine basis. You must be careful not to reuse disposable items 
or to contaminate your products by using a spatula more than once. To avoid 
cross-contamination  while  removing  creams  from  jars,  there  are  several  good 
techniques:

  1. Always  remove  creams  from  jars  with  a  new  or  disinfected  spatula.  Use 

spatulas only once before discarding or disinfecting.

  2. When removing creams from jars, remove enough for the entire service. It 
is better to remove too much product than to re-dip into a jar. If you need 
more cream, use a fresh spatula. Place used spatulas in a soaking bowl for 
later cleaning and disinfecting. You should have at least six spatulas for each 
client you see in a day.

  3. It is a good idea to use small, disposable paper cups for dispensing creams. 
You may prepare measured portions of various products early in the day 
before clients arrive. By measuring the correct amount, you have eliminated 
all chances of contamination because you never touch a client’s skin during 
preparation.  Store  cream  portions  wrapped  in  plastic  wrap,  or  use  small 
portion cups with plastic lids, like the kind used in restaurants for ketchup 
or sauces. These portion cups must be disposable, disinfectable, or autoclav-
able after each use.

  4. Pumps are another great idea because they prevent contamination. Cleans-
ers, ﬂuids, and moisturizers can be dispensed easily from pumps. Squeeze 
bottles with ﬂip tops are another good type of dispenser. Using these types 
of dispensers also saves time in the treatment room.

  5. Tubes or pumps are by far the best method for retail client use products. 
Your clients should also be instructed to use spatulas for jars at home. Using 
tubes or pumps eliminates this problem.

  6. Wax  should  also  be  dispensed  by  using  one  spatula  per  dip.  Again,  a 
larger  amount  of  wax  may  be  removed  and  placed  in  a  paper  cup  for 
application.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      35

Use of Antiseptic Washes

Always wash your hands between clients with a good antiseptic soap or wash. 
Dispensers are the best method of accomplishing this. Bar soap is not appropri-
ate, because you touch and retouch the bar each time you wash your hands. 
When you are unable to wash your hands, use an alcohol-free hand sanitizer 
gel. Hand sanitizers should always be available where there is no sink to wash 
the hands, such as makeup bars and consultation areas. Know, however, that 
the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), while acknowledging and supporting the 
use of hand sanitizers, does not believe they are a replacement for brush scrub-
bing and washing of hands. The CDC encourages professionals to wash their 
hands properly and often.

Gloves

You  absolutely  must  use  disposable  gloves  when  performing  waxing  or  any 
service that might involve exposure to blood or body ﬂuids. It is strongly sug-
gested to use gloves from start to ﬁnish of all facial treatments, electrolysis, and 
waxing (Figure 2-5).

Gloves will protect your hands from exposure to many microorganisms. 
If  you  don’t  use  gloves  for  the  entire  facial  treatment,  at  least  wear  them 
during and after extraction, through the remainder of the treatment. If you 
have any cuts, abrasions, or irritations on your hands, you must use gloves 
at all times!

Many estheticians think that gloves take away the “personal touch” from 
the client. The truth is that most clients think gloves feel smoother than hands 
for massage, and they appreciate your efforts to use prophylactic procedures. 
The  key  is  that  the  esthetician  must  wear  properly  ﬁtting  gloves  to  prevent 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 2-5 
dures, including facial treatments, extraction, waxing, and electrolysis.

It is important for estheticians to wear gloves during many proce-




 
 
 
 
 
36         CHAPTER 2    

Contamination means that a 
surface or substance has been 
exposed to microorganisms.

Cross-contamination occurs 
when you touch a contaminated 
surface or substance and then 
touch an uncontaminated item.

the possibilities of annoying glove squeaking. The gloves should not be loose 
around the ﬁngers.

Some consider latex to be the best choice for estheticians. However, many 
people are allergic to latex. It is important to have vinyl or nitrile gloves on hand 
in case you have a client who is allergic to latex. In many practices, latex has 
been completely replaced by nitrile. The problem with vinyl gloves is that they 
generally are not as form ﬁtting. Nitrile gloves are made of a special synthetic 
polymer. These gloves ﬁt like latex, but they are not latex. Nitrile is synthetic 
latex.  It  contains  no  latex  proteins  and  is  three  times  more  puncture-resistant 
than rubber. Nitrile also provides excellent resistance to many types of chemi-
cals. It is highly elastic and has a low-friction surface that makes gloves easy 
to apply. Some chemicals readily pass through latex and vinyl gloves. Nitrile is 
more durable and resists odors that leach through other types of gloves. Latex 
gloves can also break down when used with many oils or lotions. If you use oils 
or lotions for massage, it is best to use vinyl or nitrile gloves.

Some  gloves  are  powdered  with  talc  or  cornstarch  for  ease  in  putting  on 
the gloves. Powder in gloves binds to latex and other allergens inside the glove. 
When the glove is removed, these particles are dispersed into the air and inhaled. 
Unfortunately, health-care workers, including estheticians, often become allergic 
to or develop contact dermatitis from glove powders. Completely powder-free 
gloves are now available. Also be sure to purchase gloves that are the right size. 
Gloves that are too tight can rub and irritate the skin.

Gloves need not be sterile. Nonsterile, disposable gloves usually are avail-
able in small, medium, and large sizes from a medical, dental, or esthetic supply 
house. Avoid storing gloves in excessive heat or light, which causes rapid disin-
tegration of the latex or other material.

Avoiding Cross-Contamination

Contamination  means  that  a  surface  or  substance  has  been  exposed  to 
microorganisms.  Cross-contamination  occurs  when  you  touch  a  contam-
inated  surface  or  substance  and  then  touch  an  uncontaminated  item.  For 
example, if you touch the client’s skin with your ﬁngers and then get makeup 
out of a bottle by dumping it on your foreﬁnger, or you place product on the 
back of your ungloved hand, you have cross-contaminated the product. If you 
went to a party and someone took a potato chip, dipped it in dip, ate part of 
it, and then re-dipped it, that person cross-contaminated the dip. Don’t be a 
double-dipper!

The solution is to use a clean or disposable spatula to remove the makeup 
from the bottle and then place the makeup in a disposable plastic cup. You can 
re-dip into the disposable cup because its contents have not touched the skin, 
and you are going to throw the cup away.

Another common source of cross-contamination in the salon is the use of 
bowls that have not been disinfected properly between clients. If you have 
a bowl of clean water and dip your hands in it after touching the client, the 
bowl  has  been  contaminated.  You  must  disinfect  all  bowls  between  clients 
using an EPA-registered disinfectant, or you should autoclave the bowls. The 
best solution is to have numerous wet sponges and a clean bowl of water, so 
that you never have to rinse and reuse sponges. Also, never rinse sponges by 
placing them in a sink. Sinks are loaded with bacteria! Use a clean bowl of 
water instead.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      37

Techniques for Avoiding Blood Exposure 
during Treatment

Always perform extractions by starting from the chin and working upward on 
the face. If you should encounter blood, gravity will pull the blood down the 
face and away from areas you will be extracting from next. Always wear gloves, 
and avoid touching anything but the client’s skin. Prepackaged, portioned prod-
ucts discussed earlier will help prevent you from touching any bottles, jars, or 
other implements while extracting.

Using a magnifying lamp during extraction helps protect your eyes from expo-
sure to debris. Although masks and eye goggles are a good idea, they are not always 
required for estheticians. If you work with an assistant, the person should also wear 
gloves. Blood may accumulate under a mask in an acne treatment, for example. Wear 
gloves when removing masks or ﬁnishing the treatment. It is generally not necessary 
to wear gloves during makeup application unless you are working with a person 
with acne or performing corrective camouﬂage makeup on a client with open abra-
sions or incisions. Makeup brushes should also be washed and disinfected between 
uses. Makeup brushes are damaged much more easily during disinfection than are 
mask brushes. Be careful to use a mild disinfectant for makeup brushes, and do not 
leave brushes in the disinfectant for longer than necessary.

When applying gloves, carefully slip your hand into the glove and then check 
the glove for any small tears or holes. Gloves with holes should be immediately 
discarded. To remove soiled gloves, grab a section of the cuff (the wrist part of the 
glove) and remove the glove, turning the glove inside out. Repeat with the other glove. 
Turning the gloves inside out will prevent accidental contact with the soiled part 
of the glove. Discard used gloves immediately.

Other Diseases

Most states have cosmetology laws that prevent cosmetology professionals from 
working on clients with infectious diseases or on clients who have open sores 
suggestive of infectious disease. Taking a good client history on all new clients 
will help inform you of diseases that a client may have or has had. Clients with 
infectious diseases such as conjunctivitis (pinkeye), impetigo, herpes infection, 
or other infectious diseases should not be worked on until a doctor certiﬁes that 
the client is well. The client history also informs the esthetician of any chronic 
conditions that must be a consideration.

IN CONCLUSION

The esthetician is at relatively little risk of infection by most microorganisms. 
However,  it  is  always  important  to  take  precautions  to  avoid  contact  with 
blood or other body ﬂuids. Always wear gloves, and use the disinfection and 
sterilization procedures outlined in this chapter. Laws vary slightly from state 
to  state.  Make  sure  you  are  thoroughly  acquainted  with  your  state  infection 
control  regulations  regarding  the  practice  of  esthetics.  You  can,  of  course, 
move to a higher level (autoclave) to protect yourself and your clients even 
more. Most important, use common sense. Always be aware of your profes-
sional  hygiene  and  prevention  techniques.  Constantly  practicing  good  tech-
niques will become a habit.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.38         CHAPTER 2    

ASEPTIC ACCIDENTS
All-Too-Common Mistakes in Cleaning 
and Disinfection

Okay, we all know the basic rules of cleanliness and disinfection. We know 
the difference between diplococci and spirochetes. We know that we are 
supposed to use spatulas. We know that we are supposed to use quater-
nary ammonia to disinfect reusable implements. 

Estheticians  perform  personal  care  services  on  live  human  skin.  It  is 
imperative that all therapists practice aseptic technique, and there really is 
no excuse or room for mistakes.

So why and how do so many estheticians make so many aseptic blun-
ders on a fairly regular basis? Please read the following, and see how many 
violations affect you or your place of business.

Disinfection versus Sterilization

There is a big difference between disinfecting and sterilizing. Using an EPA-
registered disinfectant is the most common disinfecting procedure in the 
practice  of  professional  skin  care.  These  are  liquid  solutions  that  serve 
as  soaking/immersion  disinfectant  agents.  Disinfection  kills  pathogenic 
organisms,  but  not  pathogenic  spores.  Sterilization  is  the  process  of 
killing all the microorganisms, as well as the spores, that are present on the 
implement. The only real way to sterilize an implement is to use an auto-
clave. Autoclaves are not frequently used in the practice of esthetics unless 
the practice is being performed in a medical facility, where invasive proce-
dures may be taking place (such as injections, surgery, or procedures that 
always expose live tissues or blood). But for the highest level of implement 
infection  control,  an  esthetic  clinic,  salon,  or  spa  must  consider  the  use 
of  an  autoclave.  For  example,  the  extractor  touches  body  ﬂuids,  such  as 
extracted suppurate from acne or blood.

A common misconception in the esthetics community is that UV-light 
storage boxes are sterilizers. In fact, they are often wrongly labeled as ster-
ilizers. UV-light storage boxes do a good job of keeping already-disinfected 
materials and implements clean, but they do not sterilize; they cannot take 
the place of autoclaves or disinfectant solutions like quaternary ammonia 
(quats).

Cleansing versus Disinfecting
Cleansing and disinfecting are not the same thing! Dirty and used imple-
ments  must  be  thoroughly  washed  and  cleaned before  being  placed  in 
disinfectant solution. Metal implements such as tweezers or comedone 
extractors  should  be  thoroughly  washed  with  a  suitable  detergent 
before immersion in disinfectant or autoclaving. It is advisable to wear 
gloves  while  washing  such  implements.  If  splash  is  likely,  wear  safety 
goggles as well. 

Brushes should be soaked in a mild detergent bath in a tub, cleaned of 
all mask or product, and then thoroughly rinsed before immersion in disin-
fecting solution.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      39

Aseptic Procedure
Aseptic  procedure  refers  to  the  proper  handling  of  disinfected  and  sterile 
equipment or implements. In the nonmedical esthetic practice, aseptic pro-
cedure  means  the  type  of  material  and  implement  handling  that  should 
take place. Sterile procedure is the type of procedure followed by hospitals 
and surgical facilities, and it is much more stringent.

Aseptic procedure involves the proper handling of disinfected materi-
als with gloved hands, and avoiding the introduction or mixing of undisin-
fected materials with the disinfected items. 

Double-Dipping: Cross-Contamination

Many of the aseptic errors we will be discussing involve cross-contamination, 
which  is  contaminating  a  disinfected  or  sterile  surface  by  exposing  that 
surface to something that is not disinfected. This is mishandling of disin-
fected or sterilized equipment or supplies, and it is therefore a violation of 
aseptic procedure.

Reusing the same spatula more than once to remove product is a no-no 
if the spatula has touched a contaminated area such as your hand or the 
client’s skin. The correct technique is to remove product with a spatula and 
place the product in a disposable bowl or palette. You can re-dip your brush 
on the palette or the bowl, as long as both the brush and the bowl or pal-
ette will be used on only one client before being discarded or disinfected. 
Using the same eye-makeup brush to apply a second coat of eye shadow 
is ﬁne as long as you do not double-dip into the eye-shadow compact with 
the same brush. Again, the correct aseptic technique is to scrape the eye 
shadow with a clean spatula and then place the scraping on a palette. Small 
paper plates make excellent disposable palettes.

Common Cross-Contamination Errors

Here are some other cross-contamination errors you can avoid by follow-
ing proper handling procedures. 
❏  Washing  dirty  laundry  and  using  the  same  basket  for  dirty  and 
clean  linens.  This is a frequent boo-boo! Use different-colored baskets 
for linens, and clearly mark them as dirty and clean. Make sure your cus-
todial help is well acquainted with aseptic technique, so that they aren’t 
accidentally contaminating your fresh linens. Plastic baskets are easier to 
clean and properly disinfect than wicker or weave baskets. They should be 
sprayed regularly with disinfectant spray. It is a good idea to wear gloves 
when working with soiled laundry.

❏  Reusing the same spatula while waxing. This is a very frequent blunder. 
This includes using the same spatula over and over, making direct contact 
with  the  wax  pot,  on  the  same  client,  as  well  as  not  changing  spatulas 
between clients. Both errors contaminate the wax for all future clients!

The only correct way to wax using the same spatula is to place some 
warm wax into a disposable cup. You can re-dip a spatula into this dispos-
able cup as long as you are working on the same client. The spatula and cup 
should be disposed after each client. Junior size (children’s) tongue depres-
sors make excellent inexpensive, one-use, disposable spatulas for waxing.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.40         CHAPTER 2    

Dirty Sinks

There is really no way to completely disinfect a sink, because of the drain. 
Sinks are notorious for their pathogen content. The only items that should 
have direct contact with a sink are items that are going to be disposed of 
immediately or disinfected properly before being reused. 

Filling a sink with water to prepare implements, sponges, or pads is not 
acceptable  aseptic  procedure.  Preparing,  wetting,  or  rinsing  of  sponges 
must take place in a bowl that can be disinfected between clients or uses. 
Likewise, cotton pads should not be prepared in a sink without using a dis-
infected bowl. Bowls should be thoroughly washed and disinfected with a 
disinfectant anytime they have had contact with a soiled or contaminated 
item such as a dirty facial sponge or used mask brush.

Other Cleaning and Disinfecting Issues

Glove Use
Disposable gloves should always be worn when performing any service that 
might  involve  contact  with  body  ﬂuids.  This  includes  extraction,  waxing, 
tweezing,  and  any  procedure  that  might  expose  small  amounts  of  blood. 
Gloves should also always be worn after these services are performed, since 
blood or body ﬂuids may continue to be present after the actual procedure 
is ﬁnished. If the client has any scrape on the skin—or likewise, if the esthe-
tician has a scrape or skin hand injury—gloves should be worn constantly. 
Gloves should be worn only once, for one client only, and then discarded.
The  best  choice  for  gloves  is  disposable  nitrile  gloves.  These  synthetic 
gloves are less likely to cause allergies than latex, and they ﬁt better than 
disposable vinyl gloves.

Brow Hair in the Bottom of the Tweezer Jar
Tweezers should be used on one client and then placed in a “dirty box” for 
later disinfecting. Too many facial rooms have only one set of tweezers, and 
they are often not properly disinfected between clients. If you do have only 
one set, rinse them thoroughly after each use (to remove all hair!), and keep 
them constantly immersed in a jar containing disinfectant solution.

Disinfecting Electrodes
Because glass high-frequency electrodes often come in direct contact with 
clients’  skin,  they  must  be  properly  disinfected  between  uses.  Metals  can 
become corroded easily by some disinfectants, so the glass part of elec-
trodes  must  be  disinfected  without  exposing  the  metal  portion  of  the 
electrode to the disinfectant. By allowing the glass part of the electrode to 
be immersed in a shallow bowl of disinfectant for 15 to 20 minutes, you can 
disinfect the part of the electrode that touches the client without exposing 
the metal tips to the disinfecting solution. Again, it is a good idea to have 
more than one set of electrodes so that you can work efﬁciently.

Disinfecting Ourselves
Most public health ofﬁcials agree that the very best way to curb the spread 
of infection is the conscientious effort to wash the hands properly, on a 
frequent and regular basis. Estheticians should always wash their hands, in 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques      41

front of the client, at the beginning of every treatment. Hands should be 
rewashed before touching any disinfected implement. 

One of the best ways to practice aseptic procedure is to premeasure 
products in small disposable paper cups before the beginning the client’s 
treatment. This way you have a premeasured amount of product, and the 
paper cup can be thrown away after that use. You can touch or retouch the 
cup as long as you are working on the same client.

Likewise, it is a great idea to set up equipment before starting the treat-
ment. Lay out tweezers, cotton swabs, tissue, cotton, electrodes, and other 
tools before starting the treatment. By laying out this “kit,” you can avoid 
fumbling around in the middle of treatment while trying to ﬁnd tools. Being 
organized also helps decrease the likelihood of cross-contamination.

Coming in early before work to get organized also helps prevent acci-
dents or accidental contamination that can occur when therapists get in a 
hurry during the day.

Purchasing products with pumps or dispenser caps is another efﬁcient 
way to ensure an aseptic practice. The less a product is handled, the less 
the chance of cross-contamination. Even if products do come in jars, place 
smaller amounts of the product in small cups for easy use on one client, as 
described previously. 

Some Generally Good Ideas for Easy 
Aseptic Technique
❏  Use  disposable  items  whenever  possible.  Inexpensive  disposable  lip 
brushes,  cotton  swabs,  makeup  sponges,  and  junior  tongue  depressors 
(for use as spatulas) are easy one-use  implements.  All  sharp  implements 
like lancets should be one-use only and disposed of in a sharps container.
❏  Include your sponges in the cost of a facial treatment, and give them to 

the client for home use when you are ﬁnished with the treatment.

❏  For reusable (nondisposable) implements, have more than one implement 
in each room. In other words, have 6 sets of tweezers in every room, 
4 comedone extractors, and so on. This way you always have a fresh, disin-
fected implement. Place your used ones in a “used” container for disinfect-
ing or sterilizing later, when you are not busy with clients.

❏  If you use high-quality, nondisposable makeup brushes, have lots of them 
on hand. That way you can use each one once, and then place it in a “dirty 
box”  for  disinfecting  later.  If  you  need  to  reapply  eye  shadow  a  second 
time, you have a fresh brush. Prepare a kit for every service, and make sure 
it includes plenty of disinfected brushes.

❏  Have  clearly  marked  baskets  or  large  bins  for  contaminated  linens  or 

implements. 

❏  Be sure all trash containers have lids. This is a state regulation in many states.
❏  Wash your hands frequently, in front of your clients. This lets them know you 
care about cleanliness and their health. Use hand sanitizer as needed also.
❏  In a prominent place, hang a poster or bulletin letting your clients know 

what your disinfection techniques are.

❏  Have a detailed, written outline of cleaning and disinfectant procedures. This 
information  should  be  included  in  your  employee  manual.  All  employees, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.42         CHAPTER 2    

including nonlicensed personnel such as reception staff, should be trained in 
aseptic procedures since they inevitably help out with doing laundry, keeping 
the dispensary clean, preparing cotton pads, and so on.

❏  Have  daily  checklists,  and  have  team  members  initial  that  all  procedures 

have been followed properly.

❏  Have regular facility inspections, and have each therapist maintain a thor-

ough checklist.

Check Out Your Own Ofﬁce!

Part of an aseptic practice is also image! Get out of the box, and pretend you 
are a client visiting your own salon or clinic. Enter through the front door. 
How does your lobby or reception area look? Are the shelves dusty? Do 
the testers look used, with smears of product on the container or product 
crusted around the pump dispenser? Are there fresh and easily accessible 
disposable brushes in the makeup area for clients to use while looking at 
makeup? Is there a team member nearby to make sure clients are properly 
trying  testers  and  not  contaminating  testers  with  their  ﬁngers?  All  areas 
of the facility should be immaculately clean, especially client access areas!

Enter the treatment room. Are the counters clean or dusty? Lie down 
on the facial chair or table. Look around the room. Are the jars well orga-
nized  and  clean?  Are  there  dust  bunnies  under  the  carts?  Is  the  ceiling 
stained or the air vents dirty? Is the equipment clean and new-looking?

All of these examples can make a great or an unfavorable impression 
on a client. By taking routine tours of your facility, you can stay ahead of 
the dirt and project a great image!

Summary

Much of good aseptic practice involves being well organized! Educate your 
team well, and enforce rules of aseptic procedure. Make sure that you are 
also  following  regulations  and  laws  established  by  your  state  board  and 
OSHA.  Having  an  established  procedure  for  all  cleaning  and  disinfection 
functions  makes  it  much  easier  to  always  have  a  beautifully  clean  and 
sanitary facility.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is the difference between disinfection and sterilization?

  2. What is an invasive procedure?

  3. What is aseptic procedure?

  4. Discuss various methods for disinfecting equipment and materials.

  5. Discuss general cleaning procedures.

  6. Why are gloves important?

  7. Discuss the correct ways to put on and take off latex gloves.

  8. Why is it important to have both latex and vinyl gloves?

  9. What is OSHA, and why is it important?

 10. What is an MSDS?



CHAPTER

3

The Immune System

OBJECTIVES . . .

The body’s immune system is very complex. It is the body’s 
defense mechanism against disease and other invaders. This 
chapter describes how the immune system functions and 
examines some of the many reactions that take place in the 
body’s ﬁght against disease. You will learn the many immune 
functions of the skin and why the skin is one of the most 
important parts of the immune system.

The immune system is the body’s mechanism for ﬁght-
ing disease. The immune system involves a complex series 
of specialized cells, the blood, the nervous system, organs, 
hormones, and many complex chemical reactions. When a 
person possesses the necessary substances and charac-
teristics to avoid getting a disease, that person is said to be 
immune to that disease.

Let’s suppose that your body is invaded by a pathogenic 
organism. A pathogenic organism is a type of bacteria, virus, 
or other one-celled organism that causes disease. This kind 
of organism is, of course, foreign material to the body. An 
antigen is a foreign substance that the body recognizes as 
foreign and therefore attempts to defend against. The body 
will produce a special kind of protein called an antibody that 
helps neutralize foreign organisms entering the body. When 
you have already had chicken pox, you cannot get chicken 
pox again. This is because your body produced antibodies the 
ﬁrst time you had the illness. When your body builds anti-
bodies to diseases when you are sick, the process is called 
acquired immunity. In other words, you acquired immunity 
to a future illness of the same type that you did not have 
before you were ill.



     43

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.44         CHAPTER 3

Immune system is the body’s 
mechanism for ﬁghting diseases.

Immune describes the body’s 
defense against disease and inability 
to contract an illness due to excel-
lent function of the immune system.

Pathogenic organism is a 
type of bacteria, virus, or other 
one-celled organism that causes 
disease.

Antigen refers to a foreign sub-
stance recognized by the immune 
system as an invader.

Antibody is a protein that helps 
neutralize foreign organisms en-
tering the body.

Acquired immunity is the 
process of building antibodies to 
disease when you are sick.

Natural immunity is immunity to 
certain diseases that you have had 
since you were born.

Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
(or polymorphs) are white blood 
cells that attack bacteria and other 
pathogenic organisms.

Phagocytosis is the process in 
which polymorphs attack bacteria 
and other pathogenic organisms.

Necrotic tissue is dead tissue.

Macrophage is a large type of 
white blood cell that acts as a 
guard, constantly patrolling the 
body looking for foreign invaders.

Lymphocyte is produced in the 
lymph nodes, the spleen, and the 
thymus gland.

B cells, also called B lympho-
cytes, make antibodies that are 
proteins that help prevent further 
infection or reoccurrence.

T cells, also called T lympho-
cytes, help alert the immune 
system.

Immunoglobulins, or Igs, are 
antibodies that protect against 
speciﬁc invaders.

Natural immunity is immunity to certain diseases that you 
have had since you were born. You obtain the antibodies for natu-
ral immunity from your mother’s blood and your parents’ genes 
before you are born. In Chapter 1, we mentioned white blood cells. 
White blood cells are largely responsible for ﬁghting disease in 
the immune system. White blood cells are produced by the bone 
marrow but also by the spleen, liver, and lymph nodes. Each millili-
ter of blood contains 8,000 white blood cells. When the body has 
an infection, the blood may contain up to 50,000 white blood cells 
per milliliter!

COMPONENTS OF THE IMMUNE 
SYSTEM

There are two kinds of white blood cells. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
are  referred  to  as  polymorphs.  Polymorphs  are  divided  into  three  types: 
esoinophils, basophils, and neutrophils. Polymorphs attack bacteria and other 
pathogenic organisms in a process called phagocytosis. They surround for-
eign bodies and destroy them. They also help in disposing of necrotic (dead) 
tissue. Pus is largely comprised of defeated, dead polymorphs. You can under-
stand this better if you think about a pimple. When acne bacteria take over 
a pore, polymorphs rush to the rescue. Some are killed by the bacteria, and 
some die during the struggle. Their bodies are the main component of pus in 
the pustule.

A very large type of white blood cell is called a macrophage. Macrophage 
means “large phagocyte.” It acts as a guard, constantly patrolling the body look-
ing for foreign invaders. Its cell membrane will surround and “swallow” bacteria. 
It is large enough to swallow and destroy even 100 bacteria at a time. Macro-
phages can identify foreign bodies and determine that they are invaders and not 
part of the body’s cells. In other words, they can tell the difference between the 
body’s own cells and foreign invading organisms.

The  other  type  of  white  blood  cell  is  called  the  lymphocyte.  Lympho-
cytes are produced by the lymph nodes, the spleen, and the thymus gland. The 
thymus gland is located under the breastbone in the chest. It secretes hormones 
and helps trigger synthesis of more lymph tissue.

There  are  two  types  of  lymphocytes:  B  lymphocytes  and  T  lymphocytes, 
also  known  as  B  cells  and  T  cells.  T  cells  are  of  three  types.  T-helper  cells 
help alert the immune system. Think of T-helper cells as messengers. When a 
macrophage identiﬁes a foreign organism, the T-helper cell runs to the lymph 
nodes, where another type of T cell, the T-killer cell, is waiting. T-killer cells are 
activated and rush to the invasion site of the foreign organism. The T-killer cells 
work to kill the organisms. After the battle is won, another type of T cell, called 
the T-suppressor cell, stops the T-killer cells from ﬁghting and signals them that 
the battle is over.

The T-helper cell also plays another role in the immune system. It signals 
the B cells, which are in the lymph nodes. The B cells make antibodies that are, 
as we discussed previously, proteins that help prevent further infection or reoc-
currence. Antibodies are also called immunoglobulins, called Igs by scientists. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Immune System      45

Igs ﬂoat through the bloodstream and help protect against invasion by organ-
isms they recognize.

Let’s put all this information in perspective. Think of the body as a commu-
nity. The immune system is the ﬁre department (Figure 3-1). The macrophage 
is the ﬁre patrol unit, constantly looking for ﬁres (foreign organisms). If it spots 
a ﬁre, it holds it and checks it out, making sure it is not a false alarm. Once the 
macrophage  has  established  that  the  organism  is  real,  it  signals  the  T-helper 
cells, who rush to the ﬁre station to alert the T-killer cells, who are waiting to 
“slide down the pole.” The T-killer cells rush to the scene, ﬁercely battling the 
“blaze” of foreign organisms, killing all the organisms. Watching the battle is the 
T-suppressor  cell—who  is  sort  of  a  lookout.  When  the  ﬁre  is  out,  the  T-sup-
pressor cells blow the whistle to let the T-killer cells know that the ﬁre is under 
control. The T-helper cells have also alerted the B cells in the lymph nodes. The 
B cells start producing ﬁreprooﬁng materials (antibodies, Igs). The Igs serve as 
safety ofﬁcers to make sure that this type of ﬁre never starts again.

1. The macrophage spots
  a “ﬁre” and signals the
  T-helper cells.

2. The T-helper cells run to
the “ﬁre department.”

3. The  T-killer cells rush to the scene of the ﬁre.

T-killer

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

4. The T-killer cells
    “extinguish”
    invading
    organisms.

5. T-suppressor cell
  “blows whistle” to let
  T-killer cells know that
  everything is under
  control.

6. B cells manufacture
  antibodies (“ﬁreprooﬁng”),
  helping to prevent another

invasion.

FIGURE 3-1  The immune ﬁre department.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46         CHAPTER 3

Vaccines are an artiﬁcial way of 
tricking the immune system into 
making antibodies, or Igs.

Modiﬁed live vaccines are still 
alive, but radiation treatment 
renders the organisms unable to 
reproduce.

Antibiotics are drugs made from 
extracts obtained from living 
organisms and used to ﬁght bacte-
rial infections.

HOW MEDICINE HELPS 
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

Vaccines

Vaccines are an artiﬁcial way of tricking the immune system into making antibod-
ies, or Igs. Vaccines introduce very small amounts of antigen (foreign organisms) 
into the body. Not enough of the organism is introduced to cause the body to 
become ill, but enough that it triggers the B cells to make immunoglobulins (Igs) 
to protect against whatever organism is being used in the vaccination process.

Sometimes the vaccination process produces minor symptoms of the ill-
ness. You have probably heard of people getting slightly ill after receiving a 
ﬂu  vaccine.  In  cases  where  small  amounts  of  the  organisms  are  enough  to 
trigger disease, doctors sometimes use dead viruses or irradiated organisms in 
vaccines. Irradiated organisms used in vaccines have been treated with some 
form of radiation before being used. They are still alive, but the radiation treat-
ment renders the organisms unable to reproduce. These are sometimes called 
modiﬁed live vaccines.

Vaccines are available against a large variety of diseases, including polio, small-

pox, measles, mumps, certain types of inﬂuenza (ﬂu), and many other diseases.

Antibiotics

Antibiotics are drugs that are made from extracts obtained from living organ-
isms. Penicillin is probably the best-known form of antibiotic. It is derived from 
a type of mold. Antibiotics do not produce long-term, or active, immunity. They 
simply kill the bacteria.

Science has yet to develop much effective treatment for viruses. Viruses are 
different from bacteria in that they do not have the same characteristics as one-
celled organisms. Viruses are particles instead of cells. They do not have the same 
structure as a cell. They invade the body by “injecting” themselves into healthy 
cells. They reproduce in great numbers inside the body cell, eventually killing 
the cell. When the cell dies, the many viruses are released to invade other cells.

The  immune  system  is  our  best  protection  against  viruses.  Scientists  have 
developed  immune  system  stimulants  and  synthetic  immunoglobulins  that  may 
help the body’s own immune system ﬁght viruses. However, so far no drugs to kill 
viruses have been found as effective as antibiotics are against bacterial infections.
Sometimes antibiotics kill the wrong bacteria as well as the ones they were 
intended to kill. It is not unusual for people who are taking antibiotics to have 
gastrointestinal disturbances. This is because the antibiotics also kill “good-guy” 
bacteria while they are attacking the pathogenic organisms. Many bacteria pres-
ent in our bodies help with necessary chemical reactions that happen within the 
body constantly. These good-guy bacteria are referred to as ﬂora. When these 
bacteria are killed by an antibiotic, normal body functioning may be affected.

THE IMMUNITY ROLE OF THE SKIN

The skin is the outer shield of the body, so it acts as an immune barrier. Keratin 
in the corneocytes helps protect the body against invasion by foreign bodies and 
organisms. The ability of skin to resist being punctured by a needle illustrates 
this point. If you touch your ﬁnger against the point of a needle, the skin is not 
pierced unless you apply more pressure.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Immune System      47

Acid mantle is the layer of lipids 
and sweat secretions on top of the 
skin that help kill bacteria.

Langerhans cells are “guard” 
cells that constantly patrol the 
epidermis.

Dendrites are tentacle-like struc-
tures on the end of some cells 
including nerves, melanocytes, 
and Langerhans cells.

Pseudopod means “false foot.”

Microorganisms are found all over the surface of the skin and at all times. 
These organisms generally do not penetrate the skin, because the layers of cor-
neocytes prevent absorption. The acid mantle, or the layer of lipids and sweat 
secretions on top of the skin, help kill many bacteria. What if we tear the skin or 
puncture it with that needle? When we puncture the skin, we break the barrier 
of the corneocytes and expose the broken skin and blood to the many microor-
ganisms on the needle as well as to those on the surface of the skin.

Diseases that cause breaks in the skin surface, such as eczema, acne, and der-
matitis, make the skin more susceptible to invasion by microorganisms. Derma-
titis is often accompanied by a secondary infection such as a fungus or bacteria.
The second possibility for passing the barrier of the corneum is through the 
routes  of  skin  penetration  we  discussed  earlier.  It  is  physically  possible  for  a 
microorganism to penetrate the skin through the intercellular ﬂuids or cement that 
we discussed in Chapter 1. But this organism would have to penetrate the cor-
neum, its layers of keratinized cells, the acid mantle, and the intercellular cement.
Let’s suppose that a microorganism gets through the outer layer. The micro-
organism is ﬁrst noticed by the Langerhans cell. Langerhans cells are “guard” 
cells  that  constantly  patrol  the  epidermis.  Langerhans  cells  look  like  spiders, 
because  one  end  has  many  tentacle-like  structures  called  dendrites.  On  the 
other  end  of  the  Langerhans  cell  is  a  pseudopod.  Pseudopod  means  “false 
foot.” The Langerhans cell is able to extend this oval-shaped foot to help it move.
When the Langerhans cell is stimulated by a foreign body, it breaks off a 
sample piece of the antigen. The Langerhans cell then presents the sample piece 
to the macrophage, which is present in the epidermis just under the Langerhans 
cell. The macrophage then identiﬁes the antigen, and if it is indeed a pathogenic 
organism, it signals the T cells to the rescue.

The Langerhans cells are particularly sensitive to sun exposure. A moder-
ate  amount of sun exposure knocks them  out of commission for a few days. 
Repeated sun exposure may knock them out of commission long enough for 
skin-cancer cells to get a good start. With the Langerhans cells “on sick leave” 
from the sun exposure, the skin is left vulnerable to other microorganisms. This 
explains  why  many  people  get  ﬂares  of  herpes  simplex  (fever  blisters)  when 
they are exposed to the sun. This lack of immune protection may also have a 
domino effect on other parts of the immune system in other parts of the body.

For many years, scientists thought that the epidermis was dead and had no 
chemical  processes.  Whereas  keratinocytes  are  technically  dead  or  dying,  we 
now know that numerous functions and vital biochemical reactions are carried 
out in the epidermis.

The keratinocytes in the epidermis also help secrete a number of important 
immune substances. The keratinocytes secrete a protein substance called apoli-
poprotein-E (apo-E). Apo-E helps transport cholesterol, which makes up a part 
of the intercellular cement. Keratinocytes also help neutralize potential carcino-
gens and produce two different forms of interleukin, the hormone-like substance 
that helps immune cells communicate. The keratinocytes also produce another 
substance  called  granulocyte-macrophage  colony-stimulating  factor  (GM-CSF), 
which helps promote replication of the macrophages in the granular layer of the 
epidermis. Last but not least, the keratinocytes produce a substance very similar 
to that produced by the thymus gland. These hormones help T cells to mature.
Also present in the epidermis are the Granstein cells, which are believed to 
play a part in suppressing immune function. It is theorized that the Granstein cells 
act similarly to T-suppressor cells in discontinuing actions of the immune system.
Cosmetic and medical scientists are now learning more and more about the 
function of the epidermal cells and how they can be manipulated by topical 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.48         CHAPTER 3

Receptors from a speciﬁc cell 
inform T cells of what type of cell 
the receptor belongs to and that it 
is an “ofﬁcial” cell of the body and 
not an antigen.

Interleukin is present in the cy-
toplasm of T cells and is released 
as an alarm system when the T 
cell is alerted to a foreign body.

agents. It is now possible to stimulate lipid synthesis, speed up epidermal cell 
turnover, and send signals to the cells to perform other functions. Research of 
this type may be important to both the cosmetic and medical worlds, because 
this type of treatment might help a number of problems ranging from wrinkles 
to wound healing.

HOW THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 
COMMUNICATES WITH ITSELF

In Chapter 1, we discussed how DNA replicates itself in cell division and how 
each cell is a self-contained life system connected to other cells, specialized into 
the different tissues.

The information contained in the DNA of each cell allows the cell to dupli-
cate an exact copy of itself, passing on the instructions from one cell generation 
to the next. This is a unique code in each individual person.

Just  as  the  DNA  is  coded,  so  is  the  surface  of  the  cell  membrane.  Each 
cell membrane has on its surface special codes called receptors. Receptors are 
basically  how  cells  communicate.  Receptors  can  receive  messages  from  other 
cells or other tissues. Hormones often communicate to cells via their receptors. 
Receptors from a speciﬁc cell inform T cells of what type of cell the recep-
tor  belongs  to  and  that  it  is  an “ofﬁcial”  cell  of  the  body  and  not  an  antigen 
(foreign body). The receptors on the cell membranes are made of special pro-
teins. These proteins speciﬁcally ﬁt similar protein structures on the surface of 
immune system cells, such as macrophages. The proteins in the receptors and 
proteins in the immune sytem cells work like a lock and key (Figure 3-2). As 
long as the macrophage’s “key” ﬁts a cell’s “lock,” the macrophage recognizes 
the cell as part of the body’s tissue. When the key does not ﬁt, the macrophage 
starts the process of investigating the unidentiﬁed body.

The T cells communicate with each other by releasing a hormone-type sub-
stance called interleukin. Interleukin is present in the cytoplasm of T cells and 
is released as an alarm system when the T cell is alerted to a foreign body. It 
is sort of like a skunk spraying when it is disturbed. The other T cells receive a 
similar alarming message from the interleukin.

Cell

Macrophage

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 3-2  Lock and key of the membrane.




 
 
 
 
 
Two  other  important  biochemicals  involved  in  the  immune  processes  are 
prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Prostaglandins regulate inﬂammatory response 
and are produced through the action of an enzyme called cyclooxygenase, often 
called COX. You may have heard of COX-inhibitor drugs, which block reactions 
that cause inﬂammation.

Leukotrienes help bring investigatory white blood cells to the source of 
inﬂammation within the body. They also help make blood vessels more perme-
able, which causes redness and swelling in areas of inﬂammation. 

ABOUT CANCER

Cancer is one of the most intriguing and destructive diseases. Cancer starts in 
one cell. The cell becomes deformed and then duplicates through mitosis, but 
the process of mitosis does not stop. The abnormal cell keeps dividing, creating 
more and more cancerous cells.

With the thousands of cell duplications happening constantly in our bodies, 
some cells become mutated, or changed, from time to time. They become deformed 
and are recognized as deformed by the immune system. The immune system will 
kill these cells. So it is theoretically probable that cancerous cells develop periodi-
cally but that these cells are usually killed by the immune system. However, when 
the immune system does not function properly, or when the cancerous cells divide 
too fast to be killed by the immune system, cancer, as we know it, develops.

Cancer cells can also “disguise” themselves. The T cells are trained to react 
to receptors on the cell membrane that help them distinguish body cells from 
foreign bodies. In a cancerous cell, the cell membrane is actually the same as 
the  membrane  of  a  normal  body  cell.  The  T  cells  cannot  tell  that  the  cell  is 
cancerous. The T cell treats the cell as a normal cell, ignores it, and does not 
attack. Cancerous cells that have abnormalities in their cell membrane may be 
recognized  as  unusual,  but  normal  cell  membranes  will  indicate  no  problem 
to the immune system. Cancer occurs when abnormal cells are uncontrollably 
duplicating themselves. This is how cancer can spread so quickly. Spreading of 
cancer is called metastasis; the cancer is said to be metastasizing.

T cells, as we have already discussed, are produced by the thymus gland in 
the chest. The thymus gland is very productive early in life and then its produc-
tion is signiﬁcantly reduced. T cells, unlike other body cells, live for about 
60  years  and  then  start  to  die.  This  may  explain  why  older  people  are  more 
likely to get cancer and illnesses of any kind.

The Immune System      49

Prostaglandins are biochemi-
cals that regulate inﬂammatory 
response. 

Cyclooxygenase, often called 
COX, is an enzyme that helps 
produce prostaglandin. 

Leukotrienes help bring inves-
tigatory white blood cells to the 
source of inﬂammation within the 
body; they also help make blood 
vessels more permeable, which 
causes redness and swelling in 
areas of inﬂammation. 

Mutated means “changed.”

Metastasis is the spreading of 
cancer.

Onco– means “tumor,” and –ology means “the study of.” Oncology is the study of 

Oncology is the study of cancer.

cancer. Physicians who specialize in the treatment of cancer are called oncologists.

Let’s  review  for  a  moment  some  things  we  learned  in  Chapter  1.  In  the 
nucleus of cells in our body lies the DNA. DNA contains instructions for running 
the cell. In the DNA are the genes, which determine our hereditary traits.

Among the genes are the oncogenes. Oncogenes play an important part 
in cell duplication. They help trigger the replication process. Everything is ﬁne 
unless they get out of control. Scientists believe that oncogenes out of control 
may initiate the beginning of that one cancerous cell.

Oncologists are physicians who 
specialize in the treatment of 
cancer.

Oncogenes are specialized genes 
that regulate and trigger cell 
duplication.

Cancer Causes

What speciﬁcally causes oncogenes to go out of control is not known. How-
ever, some substances are carcinogenic. Carcinogenic means “cancer causing.” 
Substances that are carcinogenic are called carcinogens. There are many well-
known carcinogens. Let’s start with the one discussed the most—smoking!

Carcinogenic means “cancer 
causing.”

Carcinogens are substances that 
cause cancer.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.50         CHAPTER 3

Immunosuppression refers 
to the slowing of the immune 
system.

Plaque is a buildup of cholesterol 
and triglycerides in the blood 
vessels.

Smoke insults the body like almost no other substance. Smoke is, of course, 
foreign to the body. So, the body tries to get rid of it like it would any other foreign 
substance. The chemicals in smoke kill cells and contain more free radicals (deﬁned 
later in this chapter) and poisons than almost any other substance. Exposure of the 
cells to these substances severely damages cells. The cells have to work hard to 
repair the tissue damaged by the chemicals. This hurried process to repair the cells 
in the tissues, along with possible aggravation of the oncogenes by the chemicals, 
may  cause  abnormal  cell  replication  and  therefore  cancerous  cells.  Because  the 
body is stressed by the repair process, the immune system is overworked during this 
rebuilding process. The “tired” immune system is less likely to react well to invad-
ers. Thus, one effect of smoking is that it decreases immune functions in the body.

Many other substances can contribute to “slowing” of the immune system. 
Excessive alcohol intake, illegal drug use, stress, improper diet, too much fat, 
lack of exercise, and many other factors can contribute to malfunctions of the 
immune system. Let’s think about these factors individually.

Alcohol in excessive amounts can cause tremendous stress on all body sys-
tems. It is, in fact, a poison in signiﬁcant quantities. Continual, repetitive damage 
is done day after day to the body of an alcoholic. Alcoholics also tend not to eat 
correctly, not to get enough sleep, and to cause themselves stress by creating 
problems for those around them.

Illegal drug use also damages the body. The effects are similar to that of alco-
hol. High stress levels, poor diet, and inﬂammation to the tissues are all effects of 
drug use. Drug users also risk the danger of overdose, which often kills.

Stress insults every function of the body. Scientists and physicians are learning 
more and more about stress and its inﬂuence on disease. It is generally accepted 
that stress can be a factor in almost every disease. When the body is under stress, 
the immune system is overworked. Immunosuppression refers to the slowing 
of the immune system by any of the factors mentioned in this section.

Improper diet robs the body of its fuel—the fuel it needs to carry out all the 
chemical reactions that take place in every single cell in the body. Imagine how 
you would feel if you were not able to eat for several days. The cells cannot func-
tion properly without proper nutrition. And the immune system is made of cells!
Too much fat in the diet causes a buildup of cholesterol and triglycerides in 
the blood vessels. This buildup, called plaque, obstructs blood ﬂow. How do 
cells receive their food and oxygen? From the blood! If the “road” is blocked, 
the supplies cannot get through. And the cells of the immune system are on the 
delivery route.

Regular  aerobic  exercise  such  as  walking,  biking,  aerobics,  or  swimming 
improves the oxygen transport system of the body. This means that the body 
gets more oxygen. Exercising regularly also can lower blood pressure, reduce 
cholesterol and triglycerides, and reduce stress. All of these factors we have just 
discussed involve one thing—common sense! Treat your body with respect, and 
it will treat you with respect.

Free radicals are oxygen atoms 
that are unstable because they 
have lost an electron in their outer 
orbit. They are attracted to fats 
and lipids, which have extra elec-
trons available to stabilize these 
oxygen atoms.

INFLAMMATION AND FREE RADICALS
Anyone who reads health magazines has heard of free radicals. Free radicals 
are wild, unstable atoms or molecules. Often they are unstable oxygen atoms. 
Oxygen occurs in the atmosphere as O2, or two oxygen atoms linked together. 
These atoms are stable because they have a stable number of electrons in their 
outer orbit (see Chapter 8, Essential Knowledge of Chemistry). When a cell or 
a chemical reaction within the body needs an atom of oxygen, it takes one of 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.the two atoms, leaving one unstable atom that no longer has the right number 
of electrons to be stable. This is a free radical, which in this case is also referred 
to as singlet oxygen.

It is the sole mission of every atom to become stable by obtaining enough 
electrons  in  its  outer  energy  level  (see  Chapter  8).  So,  the  unstable  oxygen 
atom desperately looks for electrons to ﬁll its outer energy orbital. One great 
source for electrons is fat. Fatty materials tend to have electrons that are easy 
to steal. Lipids and, more speciﬁcally, lipids within a cell membrane are easy 
targets. Singlet oxygen steals electrons from these fats to stabilize itself, but it 
creates another free radical called lipid peroxide. Lipid peroxide can create yet 
another free radical called the hydroxyl radical, one of the most aggressive and 
destructive free radicals. Different kinds of free radicals are known as reactive 
oxygen species (ROS).

So what’s the big deal about losing an electron or forming a new substance? 
Chemical reactions are very dependent on electron transfer, or trading electrons 
to form new compounds and reactions. So, if a substance or atom has the wrong 
number  of  electrons,  this  can  easily  interfere  with  proper  chemical  reactions 
and, therefore, with proper body and cellular functioning.

Let’s pretend there are three estheticians who work in the same salon: Deborah, 

Joanne, and Lisa. Each has her own room and her own equipment.

Deborah arrives at work at 8:45 and discovers that her steamer is broken. 
She looks into Joanne’s room and sees that she is not there yet. So Deborah bor-
rows Joanne’s steamer for her 9:00 client.

Joanne arrives around 9:00 for her 9:20 appointment and discovers that her 
steamer has been taken. She looks into Lisa’s room and sees that Lisa is not there 
yet, so she borrows Lisa’s steamer.

Lisa arrives at 9:15 for her 9:30 appointment and discovers her steamer is 
missing. She looks into Deborah’s room, whose client is now under a mask, and 
sneaks Deborah’s (really Joanne’s!) steamer out of the room.

And  so  goes  the  day!  We  have  all  known  days  like  this,  whether  it  is  a 
broken steamer or a series of clients late for their appointments. The point of 
this story is that the estheticians taking the steamers from each other’s rooms 
work like free radicals stealing electrons from various other atoms. What would 
that day be like in the salon? Chaotic? Irritating? Inﬂammatory? 

We often think of inﬂammation as redness and swelling. However, these are 
only symptoms indicating inﬂammation. Inﬂammation is a complex or series 
of biological biochemical processes responding to a negative event that affects 
cells of the human body. 

Free radicals do create havoc and chaos—and often real inﬂammation, even 
if it is not clearly visible. For example, free radicals are formed whenever the 
skin is directly exposed to sun, even if the skin does not turn red or hurt. Inﬂam-
mation that does not have physical, objective symptoms is called subclinical 
inﬂammation.

Free radicals are by-products of many normal biochemical and cellular func-
tions and activity within the skin (and the body), including ATP creation and 
conversion. Probably the biggest cause of free radicals that affect the skin is sun 
exposure. In addition, many free radicals are produced due to pollution, smok-
ing, stress, and other external factors. DNA damage from free radicals can occur 
and  is  certainly  a  factor  in  skin  cancer.  DNA  damage  also  can  affect  genetic 
expression, which can affect collagen production. Hyperpigmentation can also 
be linked to free-radical-related inﬂammation. 

Antioxidants are chemicals that can neutralize or chemically “lock up” free 
radicals. Free radicals are controlled within the skin and body by the presence of 

The Immune System      51

Singlet oxygen describes a very 
reactive single oxygenation that 
lacks the proper electrons for 
stability.

Lipid peroxide is a fat that has 
been attacked by singlet oxygen.

Hydroxyl radical is a very de-
structive form of free radical.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
deﬁnes any type of molecule that 
is a free radical and contains a 
form of oxygen.

Inﬂammation is a complex or 
series of biological biochemical 
processes responding to a nega-
tive event that affects cells of the 
human body.

Subclinical inﬂammation is an 
irritation with no obvious physical 
symptoms.

Antioxidants are chemicals that 
can neutralize or chemically “lock 
up” free radicals.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.52         CHAPTER 3

Autoimmunity is a condition in 
which the immune system cannot 
distinguish the difference between 
antigens and its own body cells.

Autoantibodies are antibodies 
that attack the body’s own cells.

Rheumatoid arthritis is an au-
toimmune disease that affects the 
joints in the body.

Psoriasis is an autoimmune dis-
ease that causes rapid desquama-
tion of the skin, resulting in severe 
inﬂammation of the skin.

Vitiligo is a condition in which 
the skin stops making skin pig-
ment, resulting in white splotches 
on the skin.

many naturally occurring antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E and other inter-
nal antioxidants. Later in this book, we learn about how inﬂammation-related 
reactive  oxygen  species  causes  damage  to  the  skin  that  can  lead  to  signs  of 
aging, tissue breakdown, redness and inﬂammation, and skin cancers. We also 
learn how topical antioxidants can be used to reduce inﬂammation associated 
with free radicals and to prevent free radicals from forming.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES

Autoimmunity is a condition in which the immune system cannot distinguish 
the  difference  between  antigens  and  its  own  body  cells.  The  immune  system 
essentially starts attacking the body cells. A good example of an autoimmune 
response  is  what  happens  sometimes  after  an  organ  transplant.  We  have  all 
heard  about  a  kidney  transplant  patient  who “rejected”  the  new  kidney.  The 
immune system sees the new kidney as a foreign body and works to attack and 
reject the new kidney.

Autoimmune diseases also cause rejection, but the person’s own body cells 
are being rejected. In autoimmune diseases, it is theorized that the B cells pro-
duce antibodies in an out-of-control way. It has been theorized that the suppres-
sor cells, for some reason, do not stop the B cells from producing antibodies. 
The antibodies produced that are responsible for attacking the body’s cells are 
called autoantibodies.

There are about 80 different identiﬁed autoimmune diseases. These include 
rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and several different types of thyroid 
disease. Some forms of autoimmune disease affect the skin. 

Psoriasis  is  a  fairly  common  skin  disorder  in  which  skin  cells  turn  over 
too quickly. The skin cell turnover rate is normally 28 to 30 days. In psoriasis 
patients, the cells turn over in as little as four days. Instead of shedding natu-
rally, these cells pile up on the skin surface. There are several forms of psoriasis, 
but the most common is called plaque psoriasis. It can affect any part of the 
body, but it is most common on the legs, arms, and trunk. Psoriasis is treated 
with  topical  steroids  and  sometimes  oral  medications  that  help  suppress  the 
overactive immune system. Another treatment technique called PUVA uses light 
therapy to slow the turnover rate of the cells. One of the newest therapies for 
severe psoriasis involves intravenous therapy with drugs that block the action of 
T cells or certain autoimmune proteins that can trigger psoriasis. Many of these 
intravenous therapies can also be used to treat other autoimmune diseases like 
rheumatoid  arthritis.  For  more  information  about  psoriasis,  visit  the  National 
Psoriasis Foundation’s website at http://www.psoriasis.org.

Vitiligo is a fairly common, noncontagious autoimmune skin condition in 
which the skin stops making skin pigment, resulting in white splotches on the 
skin. It is believed to have both autoimmune and genetic causes. There appears 
to be a connection between vitiligo and thyroid disease in many patients. 

Vitiligo can be treated by dermatologists with repigmentation therapy using 
light therapy or lasers. Prescription hydrocortisone drugs are also used in some 
cases. This can be a slow procedure, and total repigmentation is unusual. 

Prescription  depigmentation  drugs  can  also  be  used  in  severe  cases  to 
remove the remaining pigment. This can be an effective treatment for patients 
who have large hypopigmented areas and are not good candidates for repig-
mentation therapy. Depigmentation uses a strong prescription hydroquinone to 
remove additional pigment, thus helping to lighten and even out the skin color. 
Vitiligo  patients  are  often  good  candidates  for  corrective  makeup  ser-
vices. Estheticians can use and teach the patients how to cover and blend the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Immune System      53

:
t
a
e
n

i
l

n
o
d
e
h
s

i
l

b
u
P

.
d
e
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
c
n
I

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
a
t
a
m
r
e
D
d
n
a
a
e
Z
w
e
N

l

g
r
o
.
z
n
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w

/
/
:
p
t
t
h

FIGURE 3-3  Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) butterﬂy rash.

hypopigmented  patches  using  corrective  camouﬂage  concealing  foundations. 
For  more  information  about  vitiligo,  visit  the  National  Vitiligo  Foundation’s 
website at http://www.nvﬁ.org.

Scleroderma is another autoimmune skin disease that causes a thickening 
of  skin  tissue.  Scleroderma  actually  means “hardening  of  the  skin.”  The  skin 
becomes thick and tight. Scleroderma severity varies with individual cases, but 
it can affect connective tissues throughout the body as well as internal organs. 
Lupus is a disease that affects more than a half a million Americans, pre-
dominantly women. It is estimated that 1 in 1,000 Caucasians have some form 
of lupus. The predominance is higher among Latinos and even higher among 
African  Americans.  The  word  lupus  means “wolf”  in  Latin;  one  of  the  major 
symptoms of lupus is a butterﬂy-shaped rash across the cheeks and nose that 
resembles the bite of a wolf across the face (Figure 3-3).

In patients with lupus, the immune system is producing too many antibod-

ies, including antibodies to the body’s own cells. 

There  are  two  main  forms  of  lupus:  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  and 
discoid lupus. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the most severe form 
of  lupus.  SLE  can  affect  the  skin,  joints,  nervous  system,  lungs,  and  kidneys, 
and it may affect virtually any body tissue or organ. The severity of SLE varies 
greatly.  Some  patients  with  lupus  have  very  mild  symptoms,  whereas  others 
have almost chronic problems. Lupus symptoms, in many patients, can come 
and go. When someone is having a problem caused by lupus, they are said to 
be having a lupus ﬂare. When the disease is not ﬂared, the patient is said to be 
in remission.

The body is constantly cleaning itself of dead body cells. In SLE, the lym-
phocytes  also  produce  antibodies  to  these  dead  cells.  When  the  lymphatic 
and  blood  systems  are  still  trying  to  rid  the  body  of  these  dead  cells,  the 

Scleroderma is an autoimmune 
disease that causes thickening of 
the skin.

Systemic lupus erythemato-
sus (SLE), commonly known as 
lupus, is an autoimmune disease 
that primarily affects the skin, the 
joints, the nervous system, and the 
kidneys.

A lupus ﬂare occurs when some-
one is having a problem caused 
by his or her lupus.

Remission is a period of time 
when a disease stops being active.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54         CHAPTER 3

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Discoid lupus erythematosus 
(DLE) is a form of lupus that 
affects the skin, producing hard, 
round lesions.

Discoids are the hard, round 
lesions that form around hair fol-
licles when a person has DLE. 

Rheumatologists are physicians 
who specialize in treating autoim-
mune diseases.

FIGURE 3-4  Discoid lesion in discoid lupus.

antibodies produced by the malfunctioning immune system bind themselves 
to the dead cells, creating “trafﬁc jams” in the blood vessels. Damage to the 
blood vessels results.

Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a form of lupus that primarily affects 
the skin. Discoids are hard, red round lesions that form around hair follicles and 
that appear mainly on the face, neck, scalp, and inside the ears (Figure 3-4). DLE, 
fortunately,  generally  does  not  affect  internal  organs;  but  about  10  percent  of 
patients with DLE eventually develop a mild form of SLE.

Causes of Lupus

There  is  no  known  cause  or  cure  for  lupus.  Several  theories  involve  genetic 
defects in regulating certain cells, like the suppressor cells. Lupus varies greatly in 
severity and can be managed with drug therapy, symptom relievers, and steroids. 
In addition, new drugs are available that help calm the immune system. Doctors 
who manage patients with lupus are rheumatologists; they also manage other 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.

Skin Problems Associated with Lupus

Skin problems associated with lupus vary greatly. Some lupus patients develop 
red  or  purple-blue  rashes  or  raised  hives.  Many  develop  the  previously  men-
tioned butterﬂy rash across the upper cheeks

Sun exposure is a major problem for patients with lupus, who should gener-
ally avoid sun exposure. Sun exposure, especially prolonged sun exposure, can 
cause ﬂares such as the above-mentioned rashes, including the butterﬂy rash. In 
fact, many patients with SLE are ﬁrst diagnosed with lupus when experiencing 
a  ﬂare  after  a  sunburn  or  prolonged  sun  exposure.  It  seems  that  the  immune 
system in some patients with lupus reacts violently to sun exposure. This reaction 




 
 
 
 
The Immune System      55

:
t
a
e
n

i
l

n
o
d
e
h
s

i
l

b
u
P

.
d
e
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
c
n
I

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
a
t
a
m
r
e
D
d
n
a
a
e
Z
w
e
N

l

g
r
o
.
z
n
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w

/
/
:
p
t
t
h

FIGURE 3-5  Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE).

not only affects the skin, but is often systemic. It affects the joints, and causes 
fevers and ﬂu-like symptoms.

Subacute  cutaneous  lupus  erythematosus  (SCLE)  is  a  sub-form  of 
lupus. It is a skin disorder somewhat resembling psoriasis that presents as a rash 
affecting the sun-exposed areas of the body skin, such as the trunk, shoulders, 
arms, neck, and, less likely, the face. (Figure 3-5). The lesions in these rashes are 
red and scaly, and they may or may not itch. Often these lesions are red, round, 
ring-like, scaly lesions that occasionally are mistaken for ringworm. Again, per-
sons with SCLE must avoid sun exposure, which is the major trigger. It is also 
believed that certain prescription drugs may play a role in ﬂares of the condition. 
Persons with SCLE do not necessarily have major systemic SLE symptoms. SCLE 
is usually treated with topical steroids.

Daily sunscreen protection is important for everyone, but it is even more 
important  for  patients  with  lupus.  Daily  use  of  an  SPF  15  or  higher  broad-
spectrum sunscreen is essential. Because patients with lupus tend to have more 
sensitive  skin,  choose  a  product  that  has  been  thoroughly  irritancy  tested.  A 
sunscreen containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide is generally a better choice 
because these agents reﬂect rather than absorb sunlight, reducing heat factors 
that can add to inﬂammation.

Generally speaking, treat the skin of the patient with lupus as you would 
sensitive skin. Avoid fragrances, stimulating ingredients, and common allergens.
Treating the skin during a ﬂare may be risky. Incidences of skin reactions 
have occurred following procedures such as electrolysis, extraction, and waxing. 
Lupus is often treated with systemic or topical corticosteroids, drugs such as 
prednisone, to suppress the excessive immune responses. Patients using steroid 
drugs are more likely to react to these procedures; but there is no real rule, and 
some patients tolerate the procedures with no problem.

It  is  a  good  idea  to  check  with  the  client’s  rheumatologist  and  have  the 
doctor tell you what might need to be avoided in esthetic care of the patient with 
lupus. Many patients with lupus can really beneﬁt from esthetic care because 
they require help in choosing products appropriate for their skin.

Subacute cutaneous lupus 
erythematosus (SCLE) is a 
sub-form of lupus that is a skin 
disorder that presents as a rash 
affecting the sun-exposed areas
 of the body skin such as the 
trunk, shoulders, arms, neck, and, 
less likely, the face.

Corticosteroids are drugs used 
to suppress symptoms and the 
overactive immune system.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56         CHAPTER 3

IN CONCLUSION

The skin is a very large and important part of the immune system. Because skin 
is often affected by inﬂammation, knowledge of the immune function is vital to 
understanding allergies, sensitivity, and irritant skin reactions. Autoimmune dis-
eases often affect the skin, and skin symptoms are often the ﬁrst sign of autoim-
mune disease. Estheticians may be the ﬁrst to notice these signs and must refer 
the client to a physician.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is the function of the immune system?

  2. What is the difference between acquired and natural immunity?

  3. Describe the process of the immune system functioning on a foreign body.

  4. What are some factors that suppress the immune system?

  5. Discuss the skin’s immune function.

  6. What is an autoimmune disease? What is one of the most prevalent autoim-

mune diseases the esthetician sees?

  7. Explain why free radicals are bad for cells.



CHAPTER

4

Communicable Diseases

OBJECTIVES . . .

Because estheticians work with the public, they must be familiar 
with common diseases that are communicable diseases. 
Communicable diseases are those that can be transferred 
from one person to another. In this chapter, we discuss 
common communicable diseases and ways you can prevent 
these diseases from affecting you or your clients.

Some of these diseases are not devastating and are easily 

curable. Others, such as AIDS (acquired immune deﬁciency 
syndrome) and hepatitis, can severely threaten the health and 
lives of persons they affect.

This chapter is intended to make you knowledgeable 
about these diseases, including how they are spread and how 
to prevent spreading them. Precautions you can take in the 
salon or clinic to help prevent the spread of these diseases 
are explained. The chapter is also intended to enable you 
understand when to refer the client to the proper medical 
professional.



     57

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.58         CHAPTER 4

Communicable diseases are dis-
eases that can be transferred from 
one person to another.

Infectious diseases are highly 
contagious diseases that can easily 
be transferred to another person.

Conjunctivitis is a bacterial 
eye infection, commonly called 
pinkeye.

COMMON DISEASES THAT AFFECT 
THE SKIN CARE PRACTICE

This section describes some common diseases that are frequently seen in the 
salon. These diseases are communicable, so skin care professionals must take 
precautions. The skin care professional is not a medical doctor and should never 
attempt to diagnose, treat, or give advice to clients about these diseases. How-
ever, estheticians should be able to recognize these diseases so that they may 
refer the client to a doctor for treatment. 

Further, estheticians must not expose themselves or other clients to these 
diseases by performing services on clients who have infectious diseases, which 
can easily be transferred by contaminating hands or skin care implements.

Conjunctivitis  is  a  bacterial  infection  of  the  conjunctiva  of  the  eye;  this 
condition is commonly known as pinkeye (Figure 4-1). The eye or eyes appear 
red or pink and have a yellowish discharge that easily forms a crust. Clients may 
comment that their eyelids are stuck together when they awake. Conjunctivitis is 
extremely contagious and spread by touching the eye and spreading the bacteria 
to skin care or makeup implements, either at home or in the salon or clinic. 
Mascara wands, eye creams in which the client has dipped her ﬁnger, eye shadows 
and eye-shadow brushes, and essentially anything the client has touched may be 
contaminated with bacteria. Clients must discard any eye product or implement 
they have touched.

Estheticians must never work on a client with conjunctivitis. The client must 
be referred to a doctor and wait until the doctor approves further esthetic treat-
ment.  Normally,  conjunctivitis  is  cured  in  only  a  few  days  by  using  antibiotic 
eye drops. Should you accidentally treat a client with conjunctivitis, you must 
discard or sterilize any item that may have been touched or contaminated during 
the service.

l

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P
n
a
e
C
c
M
m
T
m
o
c
.
o
t
o
h
p
k
c
o
t
S

/

i

FIGURE 4-1  Conjunctivitis (“pinkeye”). 

i

©




 
 
Communicable Diseases      59

.

.

D
M

,
r
e
g
r
e
B
y
h
t
o
m
T

i

.
r

D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 4-2  Herpes simplex.

Herpes Simplex

Herpes  simplex  is  a  virus  that  causes  outbreaks  of  blisters  on  and  around 
the lips and mouth, commonly known as fever blisters or cold sores (Figure 4-2). 
Herpes can also cause outbreaks on other areas of the body, including the ﬁngers, 
which is why wearing gloves is so important! The herpes virus is not curable and 
remains dormant in a person’s body throughout their lifetime, becoming symp-
tomatic under the right conditions. Herpes can ﬂare easily when the immune 
system of the body is suppressed; this can be caused by illness, stress, or sun 
exposure. Many people experience severe ﬂares with prolonged sun exposure. 
Herpes simplex is managed with antiviral drugs such as acyclovir.

Estheticians  should  never  treat  clients  with  open  herpes  blisters,  because 
this is when the virus is most contagious. Clients with herpes sometimes have a 
reddened area around the mouth or lips before developing a blister. Carefully 
examine the skin before treatment, especially if the client has a history of herpes 
outbreaks.  Clients  should  be  referred  to  a  doctor  for  treatment.  Occasionally, 
herpes ﬂares after a facial treatment, especially chemical exfoliation treatments, 
or a facial waxing. Your health-screening form should ask if the client has a his-
tory of cold sores or fever blisters. If you have a client who has herpes, he or 
she should be referred to a doctor for pretreatment with acyclovir before using 
chemical exfoliation products in the salon.

Impetigo

Herpes simplex is the virus that 
causes fever blisters or cold sores.

Acyclovir is a prescription antivi-
ral drug used to treat and prevent 
herpes viruses.

Impetigo is a contagious bacterial infection of the skin. This condition is often 
seen in children, but it can be spread to adults. Impetigo ﬁrst presents as red 
bullae that break, becoming crusty lesions that ooze or weep (see Figure 7-1). 
They often occur on the face but can occur anywhere on the skin. Impetigo can 
be spread to an esthetician through an opening in the cuticle skin of the ﬁngers. 

Impetigo is a bacterial skin infec-
tion resulting in weeping sores; 
commonly seen in children.




 
 
 
60         CHAPTER 4

Methicillin-resistant Staphy-
lococcus aureus (MRSA; 
pronounced MUR-sah) is a dan-
gerous type of antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria.

Community-acquired MRSA 
(CA-MRSA) is a type of MRSA 
that can result in boil-like skin 
lesions. It must be referred to a 
physician.

It should be noted here that 20 percent of impetigo lesions now contain MRSA 
(see below).

Clients with impetigo must be referred to a doctor for antibiotic treatment. 

They should not be treated in the salon until cleared by the physician.

MRSA

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA; pronounced MUR-sah) 
is  a  type  of  staphylococcus  (staph)  bacterium  that  is  antibiotic  resistant  and 
potentially fatal. Over time, these bacteria have developed resistance to many 
antibiotics  commonly  used  to  treat  staph  infections,  and  these  antibiotics  no 
longer work on these infections. In the past, MRSA was an infection exclusive 
to hospitalized patients. However, in the last few years, community-associated 
MRSA (CA-MRSA) has shown up outside the hospital environment. CA-MRSA 
is now the biggest cause of skin infections in the United States.

Skin-related CA-MRSA infections appear as large, boil-like eruptions that do 
not respond to normal treatments (Figure 4-3). They may look like a pimple or 
spider bite in their early stages, but eventually they develop into large abscesses. 
Extremely strong antibiotics, along with incision and abscess drainage, must be 
used to treat these infections. Often, the patient must have intravenous antibiotic 
therapy for several weeks to kill the bacteria and control the infection.

MRSA  presents  ﬁrst  as  a  small,  slightly  raised  and  reddened  area  on  the 
skin and is contagious then, even before becoming boil-like. This is a problem 
for estheticians since they may be exposed even though there are not obvious 
symptoms.  MRSA  lesions  can  weep  and  be  spread  from  person  to  person  by 
touch, body contact, and even by contaminated linens. Athletes who participate 
in contact sports such as wrestling can be more susceptible to MRSA infections. 
All clients who have obvious skin infections should never be treated in the salon 
and should be referred to a doctor immediately.

;
.

.

D
M

i

,
d
r
a
n
g
o
C
o
n
u
r
B

/
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P
d
n
a

l

o
r
t
n
o
C
e
s
a
e
s
D

i

r
o
f

s
r
e
t
n
e
C

.

.

S
H
M

.

,
n
a
m
e
g
a
H

f
f
e
J

FIGURE 4-3  MRSA lesion.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MRSA is a very hearty bacterium that can live on surfaces for extended peri-
ods of time, and it enters the body through small tears and cuts in the skin. For 
example,  freshly  shaven  legs  make  a  person  susceptible  to  MRSA,  if  MRSA  is 
present on a surface where the person sits. This makes the need to disinfect all 
surfaces extremely important.

Following proper disinfection and aseptic procedures in the skin care salon 
or clinic is the best prevention technique for estheticians to protect themselves 
and their clients.

ABOUT AIDS

AIDS is a devastating disease that has already affected millions of people and 
continues to affect millions more. In this chapter, you will learn how the AIDS 
virus affects the immune system and the body. We discuss how AIDS is transmit-
ted and what can be done to prevent further spread of AIDS. We discuss AIDS 
symptoms in the body, including many symptoms that may appear in the skin. 
Management of the person with AIDS is reviewed, so that you will be knowl-
edgeable about the medical treatment of AIDS and AIDS-related conditions.

AIDS is a syndrome caused by a virus known as the human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus (HIV), which is capable of destroying the immune system in persons 
infected with it. The immune system is the human body’s vital natural defense 
system  against  diseases.  Without  a  properly  functioning  immune  system,  the 
body is unable to ﬁght off pathogens and infections that threaten it.

As  we  have  already  learned,  viruses  work  by  “injecting”  themselves  into 
healthy  cells.  Once  they  are  inside  the  healthy  cells,  they  reproduce  in  great 
numbers, eventually killing the cell. The cell ruptures, releasing millions of new 
viruses. Each of these new viruses can “inject” other cells, repeating the process 
and duplicating even more viruses.

When the body is infected with HIV, the virus invades certain types of white 
blood cells known as T cells or CD4 cells, and the genetic material of the virus 
becomes a part of the blood cell. The virus “tricks” the blood cell into duplicat-
ing its genetic material, eventually overtaking the cell while breeding new virus 
capsules. It essentially uses the cell to duplicate itself, and the new viruses attack 
other  T  cells.  Eventually,  the  number  of  T  cells  dwindles  until  there  are  not 
enough to defend the body against invasion by disease-causing organisms. These 
organisms,  normally  kept  in  check  by  a  properly  functioning  immune  system, 
begin  attacking  the  body.  Such  diseases  are  called  opportunistic  infections, 
which  means  they  are  diseases  that  rarely  affect  a  normal,  healthy  body;  but 
because  the  HIV-infected  body  does  not  have  a  properly  functioning  immune 
system, the body is unable to defend itself against these infections. 

When people with AIDS die, it is because the body simply can no longer 
defend itself against disease. No one actually dies of AIDS; they die of infections 
or diseases that infest the body due to the failure of the immune function.

HOW PEOPLE GET INFECTED WITH AIDS
HIV has been linked to a similar virus in African green monkeys. The monkeys 
carry this similar virus but are not always affected by it. When viruses or other 
organisms duplicate many times, the DNA in the organism sometimes changes 
slightly. This change is called a mutation. Many scientists believe that the AIDS 
virus mutated in a human after the human was bitten by a monkey in Africa. 
The virus was then probably spread sexually. There are many, many cases of 
AIDS in Africa, mostly in heterosexuals. Because HIV attacks white blood cells, 

Communicable Diseases      61

After each treatment, 
an esthetician—wearing 
gloves—should remove 
used linens from the treat-
ment bed or chair. This is 
done by folding the linens 
with the insides together 
and then rolling them up 
and immediately placing 
them in the dirty laundry 
storage. To avoid contami-
nation, never touch dirty 
linens without the protec-
tion of gloves and a cover 
over your clothing.

Opportunistic infections are 
sicknesses that the immune 
system normally has no trouble 
ﬁghting off.

Mutation means a change in the 
DNA of an organism that affects 
all new forms of that organism.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.62         CHAPTER 4

Window phase is the period of 
time between exposure to HIV 
and the time antibodies are made.

it can spread very rapidly in the body. Blood, as you know, ﬂows through the 
body. Every ﬂuid in the body contains some blood cells. Body ﬂuids are blood, 
semen, urine, vaginal secretions, spinal ﬂuid, tears, saliva, and amniotic ﬂuids in 
pregnant women. Semen and blood appear to be the only real sources capable 
of spreading HIV. No infection from tears or saliva has ever been documented.

Intravenous drug users can be infected with HIV by using dirty hypodermic 
needles that contain small amounts of blood from another person. When injecting 
the illegal drugs, the drug user also injects the other person’s HIV-infected blood.
Many  persons  who  received  blood  transfusions  before  blood  was  being 
checked  for  HIV  contamination  became  infected.  Organ  donors  infected  with 
HIV donated organs that were also contaminated, causing AIDS to develop in 
some people. However, there are now very strict tests to screen blood and tissue 
donations,  making  infection  through  blood  transfusions  or  organ  transplants 
highly unlikely.

The number one risk source for HIV infection is sexual intercourse. Sexual 
intercourse  involves  direct  transmission  of  body  ﬂuids  from  one  individual  to 
another. The vagina, the penis, and the rectum all have many small blood vessels 
that can break during intercourse, causing direct exposure. When HIV-infected 
blood  enters  the  body,  infection  can  occur.  Once  the  virus  enters  the  body,  it 
can spread very quickly. However, symptoms caused by the breakdown of the 
immune system may not be noticed for months or years. A person can be infected 
with HIV and may not test positive for the virus for up to 6 months after infection.
Anyone  who  has  been  infected  by  HIV  can  transmit  the  virus  to  others 
through  sexual  contact,  whether  or  not  that  person  has  symptoms.  Until  the 
very late stages of the disease, it is virtually impossible to tell if an individual is 
infected by simply looking at that individual.

TESTING FOR THE AIDS VIRUS

When the body is infected with HIV, the B cells produce antibodies to the virus. 
These antibodies can be identiﬁed by blood tests, which are able to isolate the 
antibody.

The ﬁrst test most often performed for the HIV antibody is called the ELISA 
(enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) test. This is a screening test for the HIV 
antibody, and getting the results can take 1 to 2 weeks. A rapid test for HIV is 
now available that takes only a few minutes for results. If the test is positive, this 
indicates that the person has antibodies to the virus. Conﬁrmation of a positive 
ELISA test or rapid test is completed by a second blood test called a Western blot 
test. If the second test is also positive, the person deﬁnitely has HIV antibodies. 
Doctors refer to these persons as HIV-positive. Persons who do not have the 
virus or antibodies are called HIV-negative. Individuals who are HIV-positive, 
as we said before, may not show symptoms of AIDS for months or for as long 
as 10 years or more. Medical scientists believe, however, that without antiviral 
treatment, all individuals who are HIV-positive will eventually develop AIDS.

Sometimes a person with HIV infection does not test positive for the virus 
immediately. Let’s suppose an individual was exposed through sexual contact 
but did not test positive when he was tested for HIV two months later. How-
ever, several months later he tested positive for the virus. This delayed reac-
tion occurs because the B cells have not yet produced antibodies to the virus. 
The B cells eventually produced antibodies, and they were identiﬁed during 
the later test. The period of time between exposure to HIV and the time anti-
bodies are made is called a window phase. Individuals do not test positive 
if there are no antibodies, because the test identiﬁes the antibodies, not the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Communicable Diseases      63

virus. For high-risk individuals, several tests should be performed at intervals 
over a period of 1 year to 18 months. During that time, the individual must 
abstain from sexual contact with others to prevent the possibility of another 
window phase from occurring.

More than 33 million people around the world are infected with HIV, and 
25 million people have died of AIDS. More than a million individuals in the United 
States are HIV-positive or living with AIDS. That is about 1 in 250 Americans. 
A  few  of  these  HIV-positive  individuals  have  not  shown  symptoms  in  almost 
20 years, but most developed AIDS in the ﬁrst 10 years. Persons who are HIV-
positive may infect an uninfected person through sexual contact or exchange of 
blood, semen, or other body ﬂuids. The test for HIV is now available through 
private  physicians,  state  and  local  health  departments,  and  other  health-care 
facilities. An at-home, mail-in test is currently available that can be purchased at 
pharmacies.

SYMPTOMS OF HIV INFECTION

Many small infections can occur in a person who is HIV-positive before more 
major symptoms develop. Strange skin rashes and lesions, repeated infections 
such as frequent ﬂu-like symptoms, chronic tiredness, and other symptoms may 
be caused by HIV infection. Of course, many other diseases can have these same 
symptoms. A person who has symptoms like these is not necessarily infected 
with HIV. The beginning of immune system breakdown, however, may result in 
multiple minor infections.

To call his or her HIV infection AIDS, a person must be HIV-positive and 
show signs of advanced immune system breakdown, which is identiﬁed by the 
presence of a deﬁnite opportunistic disease or extremely low T-cell counts. We 
discuss these diseases shortly. Doctors often refer to persons with these symp-
toms as having “full-blown” AIDS.

Illnesses Associated with HIV 
Infection and AIDS

In the early years of the AIDS epidemic, there were no powerful antiviral medi-
cations that now extend the life of HIV-positive patients. If these drug therapies 
are started early in the progression of the infection, many of these once common 
infections can be avoided.

Lung infections are prevalent in patients with AIDS. Fungal and yeast infec-
tions  of  the  lungs  are  common,  as  well  as  fungal  and  yeast  infections  of  the 
esophagus. Other forms of bacterial infection may also occur in the lungs. Some 
of these infections may occur simultaneously.

Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP), formerly known as Pneumocystis 
carinii, affects persons with AIDS. This form of pneumonia produces high fever, 
a horrible, hacking cough owing to ﬂuid in the lungs, and almost always results 
in hospitalization.

Swollen lymph nodes are also common in individuals with HIV. The immune 
system is trying to ﬁght off infection but is losing the battle. The nodes are swol-
len from ﬁltering toxins and waste from the body tissues. Swollen lymph nodes 
may indicate the presence of a large number of dead T cells killed by HIV.

Various forms of cancer are much more likely to occur in persons with AIDS. 
Again, the immune system no longer can protect the body. Any sort of recurrent 
infection may be a symptom. A simple infection may be treated with antibiotics, 
but quickly reoccurs. In untreated or advanced cases of HIV infection, dementia 

Dementia is a decrease in cogni-
tive abilities that can occur in a 
chronic, slowly progressing man-
ner or as part of an acute illness 
such as encephalitis.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.64         CHAPTER 4

Chronic wasting syndrome 
refers to rapid, unexplained 
weight loss.

Viral load is a measurement of 
how many viral particles are in a 
person’s blood.

Enzyme inhibitors are chemicals 
that interfere with enzyme activity. 
In the case of HIV infection, they 
interfere with enzymes that cause 
viral replication.

Drug cocktails are mixtures of 
several different drugs that work 
well together.

Strains are slightly genetically 
different forms of the same virus.

is a result of an infection of the brain or cerebrospinal tissues. This may result 
in personality disorders or mental illnesses. Chronic wasting syndrome, seen 
frequently in the early days of the AIDS epidemic, refers to rapid, unexplained 
weight loss. With today’s antiviral therapy, this is no longer a common symptom.
These are only a few general symptomatic diseases of AIDS. Again, it must 
be stressed that all of these diseases may occur in healthy persons. But they are 
most likely to occur when the immune system is not functioning well, as is the 
case  with  HIV  infection.  These  diseases  are  sometimes  called  AIDS-indicator 
diseases. Doctors know that if a person with HIV has these diseases, AIDS is 
often indicated.

TREATMENT OF AIDS AND HIV INFECTION
Although there is still no cure for AIDS, much progress has been made in under-
standing the biochemistry and physical aspects of the virus and its physiology in 
relation to the immune system.

Great strides also have been made in the management of the person with 
HIV. It is important that persons with HIV receive testing regularly to monitor 
their immune systems. Constant monitoring can help doctors slow the progress 
of the disease. New tests have been developed that measure viral load, which 
is an indication of how many viral particles are actually in the infected person’s 
blood. When the viral load is high, the person is most likely to have symptoms 
and can spread the virus more readily. Other tests can now monitor CD4 cells, a 
speciﬁc type of T cell severely affected by HIV. A low CD4 count is an indication 
of low resistance to diseases.

The  immune  system  must  be  strong  and  healthy  to  ﬁght  off  disease  and 
infections.  To  help  restore  or  partially  restore  the  immune  system  in  persons 
with HIV, scientists have developed drugs known as enzyme inhibitors, which 
interfere with the normal activity of the HIV virus. Azidothymidine (AZT) is an 
example of this type of drug. This drug therapy results in reduction of the virus 
replicating process and therefore reduces the amount of HIV in the body, allow-
ing the body to restore immune function or at least partially restore it. Combi-
nations of drugs, known as drug cocktails, interfere with various biochemical 
reactions the virus needs to complete its replication.

By combining antiviral drugs, doctors can now lower and keep viral loads 
in check, thus keeping CD4 counts higher. These drug groups are already keep-
ing persons with HIV healthy, enabling them to live much longer, productive 
lives as well as to have a higher quality of life. There are some indications that if 
properly monitored, persons with HIV will be able to live out normal life spans.
Some of these drugs have side effects in some people, and not all persons 
are able to take them. Side effects include intestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea, 
and tiredness. Many of these drugs are also very expensive and thus place ﬁnan-
cial burdens on the person, their family, and society.

Unfortunately,  in  some  cases  the  drugs  stop  working  or  stop  working  as 
effectively. This may mean that the virus has adapted to the drugs. At this point 
the virus could spread again and immune suppression could take place, leav-
ing the person susceptible to many infections. Fortunately, several types of drug 
cocktails  are  available,  and  doctors  can  sometimes  adjust  the  combination  of 
drugs to try a new approach.

One problem with the virus is that it mutates frequently, and there are sev-
eral types or strains of HIV. This means that the virus can change and adapt 
itself to the drug therapy. In fact, 20 percent of persons with AIDS today have 
now been infected with viruses mutated from the cocktails. This indicates that 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Communicable Diseases      65

Abstinence means that the 
persons do not engage in sexual 
intercourse at all.

they probably had sexual intercourse, or blood or body ﬂuid contact, with per-
sons being treated with the enzyme inhibitors.

Scientists at Scripps Research Institute in California have recently discovered 
two “broadly neutralizing antibodies” that can stop the actions of the HIV virus. 
These  antibodies  were  obtained  from  blood  samples  of  HIV-positive  persons 
who  had  not  developed  any  diseases  associated  with  HIV  infection.  It  seems 
these individuals produce antibodies that block the activity of HIV. Researchers 
believe this discovery may lead to development of a practical vaccine.

PREVENTION OF AIDS

Prevention is still the best treatment for AIDS. Prevention involves taking steps to 
stop people from getting a disease. In this case, it means stopping people from 
becoming infected with HIV. The best way to prevent the spread of the virus is 
through education. This is where the esthetician can play an important part in 
prevention of AIDS. If you are knowledgeable about AIDS, you can help your 
clients understand the syndrome as well as answer questions about preventing 
the spread of AIDS. It is, therefore, very important for all estheticians, and in fact 
all health and personal care professionals, to be aware of prevention techniques.

Prevention Techniques

People can get HIV infection or AIDS through contact with infected individuals 
in only two ways. Both ways involve the exchange of blood, blood products, or 
body ﬂuids contaminated with HIV between individuals.

Because  sexual  contact  is  the  number  one  cause  of  the  spread  of  AIDS, 
“safe sex” practices must be implemented. Any exchange of blood, semen, or 
vaginal  ﬂuids  during  sexual  contact  may  cause  HIV  infection  if  one  person 
is  infected.  Precautions  must  be  carefully  carried  out  to  prevent  exchange  of 
these ﬂuids. The absolute safest prevention technique is abstinence. Abstinence 
means that the persons do not engage in sexual intercourse at all. If sexual part-
ners choose to have sexual intercourse, using a condom (rubber) is important. A 
synthetic condom is the only type that is safe to use. Some condoms are made 
of skin taken from lambs. Skin can be permeable, as we discussed in Chapter 1, 
Advanced Anatomy and Physiology of the Skin. A condom made of lambskin 
could  leak  semen  and  cause  infection.  Condoms  must  be  worn  throughout 
sexual relations, from start to ﬁnish.

Avoiding  body  penetration  is  also  helpful  in  preventing  AIDS.  When  the 
penis enters any body oriﬁce (such as the vagina, rectum, or mouth), the pos-
sibility of disease transmission increases greatly.

Monogamy means that two persons who engage in sex are faithful to one 
another and never have sex with any person other than their spouse or partner. 
Persons who are in a monogamous relationship where both persons have tested 
negative for HIV and have received medical counseling regarding proper HIV 
testing need not worry about HIV infection, as long as there are no other risk 
factors. Other risk factors include use of intravenous drugs.

The use of intravenous drugs (illegal drugs injected by a hypodermic needle 
into  the  body)  is  terrible  for  the  health  of  any  individual.  Besides  the  many 
health  risks  that  illegal  drug  use  causes,  HIV  infection  is  also  very  possible. 
People who are addicted to intravenous drugs are often careless about health 
and  hygiene.  They  use  other  addicts’  needles  or  share  needles  that  are  dirty 
and contaminated with HIV and other diseases. Direct injection of HIV-infected 
blood almost certainly leads to HIV infection.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.66         CHAPTER 4

One of the newest concerns is complacency due to the news of successful 
drug therapy. Some people are being careless about safe sex and needles, mis-
takenly thinking AIDS is controllable. It isn’t.

HIV infection among homosexual males has declined, but the infection rate 
has  increased  among  women  and  teenagers  and  is  increasing  among  African 
Americans and Hispanics.

PERSONAL PRECAUTIONS

HIV  infection  and  AIDS  are  preventable.  Following  are  some  general  tips  for 
prevention:

  1. Do not have unprotected sex. Use a synthetic condom from start to ﬁnish.
  2. Sex with multiple partners is extremely risky. Anal and oral sex are also very 
risky. Any sexually active persons with multiple sexual partners, regardless 
of sexual preference, expose themselves to blood or semen.

  3. Do not use intravenous drugs or have sex with anyone who does. AIDS is 

rampant among IV drug users, many of whom are also prostitutes.
  4. HIV infection is on the rise in teenagers, heterosexuals, and females.
  5. Never assume that anyone is not HIV-positive. Persons may have HIV and 

appear perfectly healthy.

  6. Even if a potential sexual partner tells you that he or she has tested negative 
for HIV, there is a window phase in which a person being tested may not 
have developed antibodies to the virus yet. All HIV tests detect antibodies 
in the blood. Someone who is in a window phase may test negative, yet still 
have the virus. Always use a condom.

DISPELLING MYTHS ABOUT AIDS

When  people  do  not  fully  understand  something  that  is  life-threatening,  like 
AIDS, they tend to be afraid. Because they are afraid, rumors often get started 
about how the disease spreads. Let’s stop some of those rumors. These are the 
facts about AIDS.

  1. The only way to get AIDS is to exchange blood, or body ﬂuids contaminated 

with blood from a person with HIV.

  2. You cannot get AIDS from casual contact. Sitting next to someone who is 

infected cannot give you HIV.

  3. You cannot get AIDS by drinking from someone’s glass or by sharing eating 

utensils.

  4. You cannot get AIDS by hugging, touching, social kissing (on the cheek), or 

eating food prepared by someone who is infected.
  5. You cannot get AIDS from mosquito or insect bites.
  6. No cases of AIDS have ever been associated with French kissing.
  7. AIDS is not a “gay disease.” Anyone can become infected if they engage in 

unsafe sex or share needles with an infected person.

AIDS AND THE ESTHETICIAN

Exposure to HIV in the cosmetology workplace has not been documented. Even 
so, it is extremely important to use the hygiene and aseptic techniques listed 
later in this chapter.

There have been some incidences of health care workers becoming infected 
with HIV after needle-stick injuries. This means that the health-care worker was 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Communicable Diseases      67

Herpes zoster is the virus that 
causes both shingles and chick-
enpox.

accidentally  stuck  with  a  used,  dirty  needle  from  a  person  with  HIV.  This,  of 
course, can cause infection in the same way as it does in intravenous drug users. 
It is very important that all people working in the ﬁelds of health care and per-
sonal care take precautions to avoid such accidents.

We, of course, do not work with body ﬂuids like health-care workers do. 
However, certain procedures performed by estheticians may sometimes result in 
very small amounts of blood surfacing on the skin. Extraction, waxing, tweezing, 
and electrolysis are examples of such procedures. Clients may express concern 
about your salon’s techniques for sterilizing equipment to prevent HIV infection. 
Because we work in a ﬁeld that sometimes involves contact with small amounts 
of body ﬂuids and blood, we must take special precautions when handling cli-
ents. We must make sure to follow strict disinfection guidelines and make sure 
that all our utensils and equipment are thoroughly disinfected at all times. We 
discussed techniques to prevent transmission of AIDS and many other diseases 
in Chapter 2, Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques.

SKIN SYMPTOMS ASSOCIATED 
WITH AIDS

Fortunately,  early  detection  of  HIV  now  allows  medical  management  of  the 
HIV-positive  person.  Skin  problems  as  well  as  other  problems  that  occur  due  to 
immune system dysfunction are therefore less likely to occur. Nevertheless, we should 
discuss the skin symptoms and problems that may be associated with HIV and AIDS.
Many HIV-related symptoms may occur in the skin. These include unusual 
or severe cases of common diseases such as shingles (herpes zoster), herpes 
simplex genital herpes, genital warts, seborrheic dermatitis, unexplained rashes, 
warts, impetigo, fungal infections, folliculitis, athlete’s foot, and other infections 
of the mouth and throat. Most of the people seen with these infections do not 
have HIV; however, in people with HIV such infections are often recurrent or 
extremely  severe.  They  may  also  prove  resistant  to  normal  treatment.  All  of 
the preceding symptoms indicate potential medical conditions, and the person 
should be referred to a physician immediately.

Because the skin is a major organ of the immune system, some of the ﬁrst 
symptoms of HIV infection or AIDS show up on the skin. HIV and AIDS are often 
ﬁrst  diagnosed  in  a  dermatologist’s  ofﬁce.  Although  estheticians  are  not  in  the 
business of diagnosing or treating disease, it is important to be aware of these pos-
sible symptoms and encourage clients who show signs of these illnesses to see a 
physician regardless of HIV status.

Again,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  all  these  symptoms  may  occur  in 
normal, healthy, HIV-negative individuals. The esthetician should never mention 
the AIDS relationship of these symptoms to the client. As with any medical con-
dition, the esthetician should only refer these problems to a doctor.

The symptoms, which affect many people anyway, tend to be much more 
severe and chronic in those with HIV. Physicians may need to use more aggres-
sive therapies to treat skin problems in persons with AIDS. Many of these symp-
toms  may  also  affect  mucous  membranes,  such  as  the  inside  of  the  mouth, 
rectum, vagina, and eye.

Herpes

Herpes is a virus that comes in many different forms. In fact, eight forms of it can 
infect humans. Most people think of genital herpes when they hear the word 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.68         CHAPTER 4

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 4-4  Herpes type 2 in patient with HIV.

Herpes refers to a group 
of viruses.

Shingles, known also as herpes 
zoster, is caused by the same virus, 
varicella zoster virus (VZV), 
that causes chicken pox. The 
lesions of herpes zoster look like 
multiple red blisters.

herpes. But, as explained later in this chapter, there are many different herpes 
viruses and not all are transmitted by sexual contact (Figure 4-4).

Cold sores, for example, result from one form of the herpes virus (type 1). 
Genital herpes (type 2) is another form. In persons with HIV, herpes ﬂare-ups 
tend to be much more severe and happen more often. Physicians may give these 
individuals antiviral medications to help the suppressed immune system heal the 
lesions associated with a herpes infection.

Another  form  of  herpes  is  called  varicella  zoster  virus  (VZV),  better 
known as shingles. Shingles is actually an adult manifestation of chicken pox. 
The virus that originally caused the chicken pox becomes reactivated. The virus, 
once  in  the  body,  can  lie  latent  in  nerve  cells  and  then  show  up  as  shingles 
later  in  life,  often  when  the  immune  system  is  deﬁcient.  This  can  occur  in 
older people with weak immune systems, in chemotherapy patients, and any 
person with a deﬁcient immune system. Shingles can be very painful. Shingles in 
patients with HIV is often much worse and widespread than in normal healthy 
individuals (Figure 4-5).

Warts

Warts are caused by a variety 
of viruses known as papovavirus 
or verruca.

Molluscum contagiosum is a 
viral infection frequently seen on 
the faces of children; it appears 
as groups of small, ﬂesh-colored 
papules.

Warts are the manifestation of a virus on the skin surface and are often recur-
rent and more widespread in HIV-positive persons. They may occur in unusual 
places such as the beard area, mouth, and tongue. Plantar warts on the feet or 
hands may also be present. Plantar warts are the most common type of wart 
on the feet of all humans, regardless of HIV status. The physician may ﬁnd that 
these warts are resistant to normal treatment. Venereal warts on the genitals, 
anus, and vagina are also often seen and are more prevalent in HIV-positive 
persons.

Molluscum contagiosum is often seen in normal children. It often looks 
like a large group of warts and is frequently seen on the face. This condition 
used to be frequently seen in patients with advanced HIV disease, but it is less 
prevalent now due to the use of drug cocktails.




 
 
 
 
Communicable Diseases      69

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 4-5  Shingles on the neck and face of a patient with HIV.

Infections

Impetigo is a bacterial infection, again often seen in normal children, that can also 
affect adults. In persons with AIDS, the lesions can be much worse. Impetigo is 
characterized by multiple scab-like lesions, often around the mouth and chin area. 
The  lesions  have  a  crusty  top  but  ooze  transparent  ﬂuid.  Impetigo  is  extremely 
contagious. Impetigo is caused by a bacterium that is normally present in the nares 
(nostrils), but it overgrows when the immune system is compromised. Refer the 
client with these symptoms to a physician immediately.

Mycosis infections are fungal infections. Many fungal infections can affect 
both the skin and the internal organs of the person with AIDS. Skin infections 
from fungi may indicate internal fungal infections in persons with AIDS. Fungal 
infections may show many different forms of symptomatic lesions.

Folliculitis is caused by an irritation of the hair follicle that develops into 
a  bacterial  infection.  The  follicles  appear  inﬂamed,  are  in  groups  or  patches, 
and often may appear as patches of very tiny pustules. Persons with curly hair 
are more susceptible to folliculitis due to the tendency of curly hair to become 
ingrown and cause follicle irritation.

Severe seborrheic dermatitis may be seen in persons with HIV. Many cli-
ents  may  have  a  small  area  of  seborrheic  dermatitis,  but  in  persons  with  AIDS 
the condition may be much worse. Red, scaly patches are apparent in all areas of 
the face, especially the hairline and ears. Severe seborrheic dermatitis may cause 
cracks in the skin and bleeding. Oozing lesions may also be present. The scalp 
can be severely affected as well. Again, seborrheic dermatitis affects many healthy 
individuals, but in persons with AIDS it is much more widespread, inﬂamed, and 
chronic. Normal treatment may be ineffective. More potent, topical steroids are 

Impetigo is a skin infection char-
acterized by large, open, weeping 
lesions.

Mycosis are fungal infections.

Folliculitis is a bacterial infection 
of the hair follicle.

Seborrheic dermatitis, or sebor-
rhea, is an inﬂammation of the 
sebaceous glands and follicles 
resulting in redness, ﬂaking, and 
itching in oily areas of the face.




 
 
 
 
70         CHAPTER 4

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 4-6  Seborrheic dermatitis in a patient with HIV.

often needed to control the disorder (Figure 4-6). Psoriasis may develop or worsen 
in persons with AIDS.

Mouth Symptoms

Oral thrush is an infection of the 
mouth and throat caused by the 
yeast known as Candida albicans.

Hairy leukoplakia is a tumor-
like eruption that can occur on 
the tongue or the insides of the 
cheeks.

One of the earliest symptoms of AIDS may be a yeast infection of the mouth 
called  oral  thrush.  Candida  albicans  is  the  name  of  the  yeast  that  causes 
thrush.  Thrush  symptoms  include  an  abnormally  thick,  white  paste  covering 
mouth tissues. It looks like cotton stuck to patches in the mouth. Thrush often 
occurs in persons with HIV, and it is often a problem for small children who do 
not have AIDS. It is not seen as often in normal, healthy adults.

Hairy leukoplakia is a tumor-like eruption that can occur on the tongue or 
the insides of the cheeks. It is hard and scaly looking. Herpes lesions, or “fever 
blisters,” may also affect the inside of the mouth of persons with AIDS.

Other Skin Symptoms

Many unusual skin lesions plague persons with HIV. Strange skin bumps and 
lesions may be apparent. Because persons with AIDS have lowered resistance 
to infection, physicians constantly see new and strange lesions on the skin of 
these individuals.

SKIN CANCERS ASSOCIATED 
WITH AIDS

Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) is a rare 
form of skin cancer characterized 
by purple-brown lesions.

Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) was, at one time, a frequent skin symptom of AIDS. It 
appears as purple-brown lesions. It is a rare form of skin cancer, but it can affect 
persons with AIDS because their body is immunosuppressed. Because progress 
has been made in antiviral treatment, persons with HIV are now much less likely 
to develop Kaposi’s sarcoma (Figure 4-7).




 
 
 
 
Communicable Diseases      71

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 4-7  Kaposi’s sarcoma in an AIDS (HIV-positive) patient.

Other  skin  cancers  are  also  seen  in  persons  with  AIDS.  Although  not  as 
prevalent as Kaposi’s sarcoma, basal and squamous cell carcinomas have been 
detected in persons with AIDS and seem to spread much faster in these indi-
viduals. Malignant melanoma may also be seen, and it also tends to spread faster 
in individuals who are immunosuppressed.

THE MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL 
STATE OF PERSONS WITH AIDS

A person with AIDS may experience many different emotions concerning the 
illness. Because it is a relatively new disease, much is still to be learned about 
AIDS. Although we basically understand its transmission and its effect on the 
immune system and the body, we are still learning about management of the 
individual  with  HIV.  Because  of  these  uncertainties,  persons  with  AIDS  may 
have  great  difﬁculty  coping  with  their  situations.  There  is  no  cure  for  AIDS, 
only treatment.

Persons  who  have  AIDS  or  who  are  HIV-positive  may  feel  anger  toward 
others  or  themselves  about  the  disease.  They  may  also  deny  having  the  dis-
ease. They experience many of the same emotional conﬂicts felt by individuals 
with cancer. The stigma originally attached to AIDS, a so-called gay disease, is 
decreasing; but many people are still not educated about its transmission. This, 
again, is where the esthetician can play a part in helping to educate the public. 
If a client says something incorrect about AIDS, tactfully correct the client. Only 
by getting the right word out can the many misunderstandings about this illness 
be clariﬁed.




 
 
 
 
72         CHAPTER 4

Hepatitis is an inﬂammation 
of the liver.

Jaundice is a yellowing of the 
skin and eyes.

Cirrhosis is scarring within the 
liver caused by chronic inﬂamma-
tion; it can be caused by chronic 
viral infection and is often caused 
by alcoholism. Cirrhosis can lead 
to liver failure, liver cancer, and 
death.

HANDLING CLIENT QUESTIONS 
ABOUT AIDS

Clients may have questions regarding AIDS and the salon—speciﬁcally, questions 
about disinfection and sterilization. It is acceptable for clients to ask these ques-
tions and for you to answer. It is very important for you to be knowledgeable 
about the salon’s disinfection and aseptic procedures and to be familiar with the 
requirements of your state regarding proper aseptic procedure in the salon.

The client may be completely misinformed about AIDS and HIV. Cosmetol-
ogy professionals are in a unique position to educate the consumer about issues 
such as AIDS. Rumors about AIDS are rampant, and it is important for you to 
stay well informed so you can help dispel these rumors.

Following are some tips about handling questions:

  1. Answer the questions factually and brieﬂy, but do not dwell on the subject.
  2. Reassure the client that everything you use is disinfected or disposable and 
that you have taken all the precautions possible. (Make sure that you do!) 
A poster or plaque listing your disinfection practices is a good idea. 

  3. Make sure that your salon is always spotless. Let your client observe you wash-
ing your hands and following aseptic procedures. The impact of an immacu-
lately clean salon or clinic will squelch most doubts the client may have.
  4. Make sure that all coworkers are equally informed with the facts about AIDS 

and aseptic and disinfecting procedures.

  5. A client may conﬁde in you or come to you for advice concerning his or her 
exposure or sickness. Refer the client to a physician immediately. Use the 
same caring attitude you would with any client.

AIDS AND THE FUTURE

At the time of this writing, 1 in 250 people in the United States is HIV-positive. 
In your lifetime, you are likely to know someone who is HIV-positive or who 
has AIDS. Although great progress in treatment has been made, we all hope that 
a cure or a vaccine is on the horizon.

ABOUT HEPATITIS

The liver is an extremely important organ of the body. It helps break down fats 
and store energy. It is vital in detoxiﬁcation of red blood cells and in producing 
enzymes necessary for digestion. A person cannot survive without a function-
ing liver.

Hepatitis is inﬂammation of the liver. It may be caused by viral or bacterial 
infection, alcohol or chronic drug abuse, and rarely from autoimmune disease. 
It can also be caused by overuse of acetaminophen, particularly when accom-
panied by alcohol consumption. 

Hepatitis  interferes  with  the  liver’s  ability  to  function  properly.  Symptoms 
of hepatitis include jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), abdominal pain, 
fever,  and  constant  fatigue.  Hepatitis  can  result  in  permanent  damage  to  the 
liver.  Cirrhosis  is  scarring  within  the  liver  caused  by  chronic  inﬂammation. 
Cirrhosis can be caused by chronic viral infection and is very often caused by 
alcoholism. Cirrhosis can lead to liver failure, liver cancer, and death.

Severe viral infection can cause liver failure, which is often fatal. The hepatitis 
virus can also live quietly in the liver after symptoms have gone away. If the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Communicable Diseases      73

virus lives after the initial disease, the person can still infect other people and is 
known as a carrier.

Hepatitis viruses are extremely infectious, and the odds of becoming infected 
with a hepatitis virus are much higher than with HIV. This is a result of the virus 
being present in much higher numbers. 

Carrier refers to a person who is 
infected with an illness and able 
to transmit it to another person. 
A carrier may or may not show 
symptoms of the disease.

Viral Types of Hepatitis

The viruses known to cause hepatitis are called hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. This 
section describes these ﬁve viral types.

Hepatitis A is caused by eating food contaminated with the virus, usually 
through contamination with fecal material and poor hygiene. This is the type of 
hepatitis associated with eating raw oysters and other raw shellﬁsh. Oysters eat 
by ﬁltering water, and bay water can be contaminated with human waste from 
sewage.  Hepatitis  A  is  the  least  dangerous  of  the  hepatitis  viruses,  and  most 
people recover completely. A vaccine for hepatitis A is now available.

Hepatitis B is a much more serious type of infection and, like HIV, is most 
often spread by sexual contact or body ﬂuids. Unlike HIV, however, hepatitis B 
can be contracted by kissing. Hepatitis B symptoms may last for months. Although 
most people recover fully from it, a few develop permanent liver damage, and 
about 10 percent become carriers. Liver cancer is often known to occur in long-
term carriers after 30 or more years. Up to 2 million people worldwide die of dis-
eases related to hepatitis B each year. There is also a hepatitis B vaccine, which 
many estheticians have taken due to the possibility of exposure to bodily ﬂuids.
Hepatitis C was identiﬁed only a few years ago. The symptoms are similar 
to hepatitis B, and it is sometimes associated with HIV infection. Hepatitis C is 
frequently a lifelong chronic condition that can lead to cirrhosis of the liver and 
liver  cancer.  Hepatitis  C  has  been  detected  in  the  skin  and  sweat  of  infected 
individuals. No hepatitis C vaccine is available.

Hepatitis D affects those already infected with hepatitis B. This is a serious 

infection that is much more likely to cause permanent damage.

Hepatitis E, which is similar to hepatitis A, occurs mainly in underdeveloped 

countries.

Vaccines and Prevention of Hepatitis

Hepatitis B and C can be prevented or avoided by the same precautionary mea-
sures as for HIV. Hepatitis A can be prevented by proper disinfection, by proper 
hand washing, and by following general cleanliness guidelines.

As mentioned earlier, vaccinations are available for hepatitis A and B. They 
are administered in a series of injections that slowly build the body’s immunity 
to the virus. Hepatitis vaccinations are highly advisable for estheticians because 
they are periodically exposed to blood and body ﬂuids.

Hepatitis and the Salon

Proper disinfection of implements, proper disposal of contaminated materials, 
the use of single-use implements, and the use of hospital-grade disinfectants 
(all discussed in Chapter 2, Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques) are the best 
methods for preventing accidental exposure to hepatitis viruses in the salon.

Technically, hepatitis viruses are harder to kill than HIV and are much more 
numerous  in  body  ﬂuids.  A  person  is  much  more  likely  to  contract  hepatitis 
rather  than  HIV  from  an  improperly  disinfected  or  contaminated  implement. 
Risk can be reduced greatly by use of proper disinfection procedures.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.74         CHAPTER 4

AIDS/HIV KNOWLEDGE QUIZ

True or False

--------------    1.  Any person can get AIDS.

--------------    2.   To become infected with HIV, infected blood or body ﬂuids must 

enter the body.

--------------    3.  One in 250 Americans is now infected with HIV.

--------------    4.  Prevention is still the best treatment for HIV and AIDS.

--------------    5.  AIDS can be spread by mosquitoes.

--------------    6.  Anyone who gets AIDS is a promiscuous individual.

--------------    7.  There are other diseases more transmissible than AIDS.

--------------    8.  You can easily spot a person with HIV.

--------------    9.   It is against the law to discriminate against persons with AIDS or 

HIV.

--------------  10.   If a person has a negative HIV test, the person absolutely does not 

carry the virus.

--------------  11.   The  best  way  to  prevent  diseases  of  any  type  in  the  salon  is  to 

assume that all your clients are HIV-positive.

--------------  12.   Persons with HIV may not show symptoms for years.

--------------  13.   The biggest increase in AIDS is currently seen in teenagers, women, 

African Americans, and Hispanics.

Answers
  1. True.
  2. True.
  3. True.
  4. True.
  5. False. No cases of AIDS or HIV infection have ever been traced to mos-
quito bites, casual contact, kissing, swimming pools, toilet seats, contact 
through cosmetology, pets, drinking fountains, food handling, or donating 
blood. You can get AIDS only from exchange of blood, blood products, or 
body ﬂuids.

  6. False. Although promiscuous sex is risky, anyone can get HIV from unpro-

tected sex with an infected person.

  7. True.  Hepatitis  and  many  other  diseases  are  much  easier  to  catch  than 

AIDS/HIV.

  8. False. Symptoms of AIDS may not show up for years. It is often impossible 

to tell by sight if a person has HIV or AIDS.

  9. True.
 10. False. HIV tests may be false negative if the person has yet to develop anti-
bodies to the virus, which is what HIV tests detect. Persons should be tested 
several times, several months apart, without participating in any risky activ-
ity during that time.

 11. True. The very best way to ensure proper hygiene is to assume that all clients 

are HIV-positive.

 12. True.
 13. True.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Communicable Diseases      75

IN CONCLUSION

Many communicable diseases affect the skin. Because estheticians work on the 
human body, it is imperative that all skin care professionals understand and rec-
ognize common diseases of the skin in order to prevent spreading disease, and 
to know when they should refer the client to a physician. 

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is MRSA? 

  2. Why should your health form ask your client about their possible history of 

herpes-related fever blisters?

  3. Why is it possible for an HIV-infected person to show no symptoms?

  4. Discuss the medical management of the person with HIV.

  5. What can be done to prevent the spread of AIDS?

  6. Why is it important to know that AIDS often affects the skin?

  7. Why are skin infections in persons with AIDS so much more severe than in 

healthy individuals?

  8. Discuss the future of the AIDS epidemic.

  9. What progress has been made in the management of individuals with HIV?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

5

Hormones

OBJECTIVES . . .

Every esthetician needs to be familiar with the endocrine 
system and hormones. Hormones have very deﬁnite effects 
on the skin, and their functioning is directly related to many 
skin problems. For example, acne is often related to hormone 
factors, as are symptoms of aging skin that may be related to 
menopause. This chapter familiarizes the esthetician with the 
major glands of the endocrine system and their function. You 
will also learn about the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, meno-
pause, and diseases and disorders of the endocrine system. 
The effect of hormones on the skin is discussed in depth.
Hormones are basically chemical messengers that are 
manufactured or secreted by glands within the body. As you 
have previously learned, many glands are present in the body. 
Exocrine glands such as the sebaceous glands and the sudo-
riferous glands have ducts through which chemical secretions 
move. Apocrine glands are present in the groin and armpit. 
Endocrine glands secrete hormones. The endocrine glands 
are ductless glands, and they secrete hormones directly into 
the bloodstream. Although most people think of hormones in 
terms of sex hormones, sex hormones are only a few of the 
hormones that the endocrine system produces.

Hormones work by transmitting chemical messages to 
the various body cells. The hormones have special “keys” that 
ﬁt the “locks” on the cell membranes that they are intended 
to affect. The key ﬁtting the lock causes the cell membrane 
to produce enzymes that stimulate other chemical reactions 
within the cell. The locks on the cells are called receptors or 
receptor sites. Each hormone affects speciﬁc cells in different 
ways, and each endocrine gland produces different hormones.



     77

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.78         CHAPTER 5    

Hormones are special chemicals 
that are manufactured or secreted 
by glands within the body.

Secreted means synthesized 
or released by various cells or 
organs.

Exocrine glands, such as the 
sebaceous glands and the sudorif-
erous glands, have ducts through 
which chemicals move.

Apocrine glands are present in 
the groin area and armpits. They 
produce a thicker form of sweat 
and are responsible for produc-
ing the substance that, when in 
contact with bacteria, produces 
body odor.

Endocrine glands secrete 
hormones directly into the 
bloodstream.

Receptors inform T cells about 
the type of cell it is and that it is 
an “ofﬁcial” cell of the body and 
not an antigen.

Pineal

Posterior 
lobe

Pituitary

Anterior lobe

Thyroid

Parathyroid
glands

Posterior view

Cortex

Medulla

Adrenal gland

Testis (in male)

Thymus

Pancreas
    (Islets of Langerhans)

Ovary (in female)

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Pituitary gland is found in the 
center of the head. It serves as the 
“brain” of the endocrine system.

Hypothalamus gland controls 
some involuntary muscles, such 
as the muscles of the intestines 
that help move food through the 
gastrointestinal system.

Neurohormones are secreted by 
the hypothalamus and trigger the 
pituitary gland to make speciﬁc 
hormones

Hypothalamus manufactures hor-
mones that stimulate the pituitary 
gland to make other hormones. It 
is also able to detect needs of vari-
ous parts of the body by chemi-
cally monitoring the blood.

Trophic hormones are chemicals 
that cause other glands to make 
hormones.

FIGURE 5-1  The endocrine system.

THE ENDOCRINE GLANDS

There are eight major endocrine glands in the human body (Figure 5-1).

The  pituitary  gland  is  found  in  the  center  of  the  head.  It  serves  as  the 
“brain” of the endocrine system. This gland is connected to the brain by another 
endocrine gland called the hypothalamus gland. You might say that the hypo-
thalamus  is  the  “interpreter”  between  the  brain  and  the  pituitary  gland.  The 
hypothalamus is able to detect the needs of various parts of the body by chemi-
cally monitoring the blood that ﬂows through it. The hypothalamus works like 
a  communicator  between  the  endocrine  system  and  the  nervous  system.  This 
gland also secretes neurohormones, which trigger the pituitary to make certain 
hormones. The hypothalamus controls some involuntary muscles, such as the 
muscles in the intestines that help move food through the gastrointestinal system.
The  pituitary  gland  secretes  many  hormones  called  trophic  hormones. 
Trophic hormones are chemicals that cause other glands to make other hormones. 




 
 
 
 
 
Hormones      79

Trophic hormones are “signal hormones.” Trophic hormones secreted by the 
pituitary gland include follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which is the pitu-
itary hormone that causes production of sex hormones in the glands present 
in the sex organs. The pituitary gland also produces special hormones that 
cause regulation of the amount of ﬂuid retained by the body, hormones that 
control growth, and special hormones that cause the female breast to pro-
duce milk.

HORMONAL DISORDERS THAT AFFECT THE SKIN

Although it is not the esthetician’s job to diagnose illness, you should be aware of some 
symptoms that you may connect with certain skin problems or be able to discuss a cli-
ent’s skin symptoms related to an endocrine illness. You should always refer suspicious 
skin problems to a physician. If you have a client who has multiple symptoms of any kind 
of illness, always refer the client to a doctor.

The  thyroid  gland  is  located  in  the  neck.  It  regulates  both  cellular  and 
body metabolism and produces hormones that stimulate growth. The two main 
hormones  secreted  by  the  thyroid  gland  that  regulate  the  metabolism  are 
thyroxine and triiodothyronine. Calcium metabolism and usage in the body is 
also regulated by the thyroid through a hormone called calcitonin.

Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland secretes too 
much  thyroid  hormone.  Physical  symptoms  may  include  heart  palpitations, 
weight loss, and fatigue. Esthetic and skin symptoms include thinning of the skin, 
heat  intolerance,  facial  ﬂushing,  hair  loss,  and  rapidly  growing  nails.  Another 
skin symptom of hyperthyroidism is myxedema, a condition in which the skin 
on the shins becomes thick and red-brown with a bumpy texture.

Hypothyroidism is just the opposite of hyperthyroidism. The thyroid gland 
does not produce enough hormone. Puffy eyelids; facial swelling; intolerance to 
cold temperatures; dry, ﬂaky, and coarse-textured skin that is very dehydrated; 
and dry and brittle hair and nails are esthetic symptoms of hypothyroidism, if 
they are also associated with weight gain, poor balance, or hearing problems. 
Several diseases can cause hyper- or hypothyroidism. They include Graves’ dis-
ease, an autoimmune disease that may include direct symptoms of an enlarged 
thyroid gland (known as goiter) and bulging eyes. Graves’ disease may also be 
associated with the hypopigmentation disorder vitiligo.

The thyroid gland uses a lot of iodine in its manufacture of hormones. This 
is why it is important to have some iodine in the diet. Iodine is present in ﬁsh, 
meat, and some vegetables.

Behind  the  thyroid  gland  lies  a  related  glandular  structure  called  the 
parathyroid  gland.  The  parathyroids  are  responsible  for  regulating  cal-
cium and phosphates in the bloodstream; these substances are necessary for 
proper bone growth. Vitamin D is another important element in the regula-
tion of calcium.

The adrenal glands are located just above the kidneys. Like hair, they have 
an inner part called the medulla and an outer core called the cortex. The medulla 
makes the two main hormones called adrenaline and noradrenaline. These two 
hormones are needed by the nervous system to transport nerve impulses.

Adrenaline is also secreted when the body is under stress. Many of us have 
experienced the situation when a car pulls out right in front of us. That feeling 

Thyroid gland is located in the 
neck. It regulates both cellular and 
body metabolism and produces 
hormones that stimulate growth.

Thyroxine is one of the two main 
hormones secreted by the thyroid 
gland.

Calcitonin is one of the hor-
mones secreted by the thyroid 
gland.

Hyperthyroidism is a condition 
in which the thyroid gland se-
cretes too much thyroid hormone.

Hypothyroidism is a condition 
in which the thyroid gland se-
cretes too little thyroid hormone.

Parathyroid gland is responsible 
for regulating calcium and phos-
phates in the bloodstream.

Adrenal glands are located just 
above the kidneys and produce 
hormones needed by the nervous 
system to transport nerve impulses.

Adrenaline is secreted when the 
body is under stress.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.80         CHAPTER 5    

Pineal gland is located in the 
brain. Its function is not well un-
derstood, but it is theorized to be 
related to the sex hormones.

Pancreas is located in the 
abdomen. It secretes pancreatic 
enzymes that are delivered into 
the intestine.

Diabetes is a disease that results 
from the pancreas not secreting 
enough insulin.

you  get  immediately  after  almost  being  involved  in  an  accident  is  caused  by 
adrenaline. You could call adrenaline the emergency hormone. No doubt you 
have heard stories of people having almost superhuman strength during emer-
gencies. This is also caused by the adrenal hormones. When a large amount of 
adrenaline  is  secreted  suddenly  into  the  bloodstream,  the  body  responds  by 
preparing for an emergency. The heartbeat increases, pupils of the eyes dilate, 
the bronchi in the lungs expand, and the body generally focuses all its attention 
on the impending emergency. The cortex of the adrenal glands manufactures 
steroids, which are very small hormone molecules that can penetrate cell mem-
branes and enter cells for speciﬁc reasons. The steroid hormones produced by 
the adrenal cortex are called corticoids. The corticoids help regulate the metabo-
lism  and  the  body’s  use  of  carbohydrates,  proteins,  and  fats.  They  also  help 
maintain water balance in the body and regulate sodium and potassium levels.

Adrenal gland disorders can also result in skin symptoms. Cushing’s syndrome 
is a disease of the adrenal glands. Persons with Cushing’s syndrome secrete too 
much  hydrocortisone.  Too  much  medicinal  hydrocortisone  can  also  cause  the 
disease. Symptoms are thinning of the skin and bruises that occur easily. Addi-
son’s disease is the exact opposite of Cushing’s syndrome. The adrenal glands do 
not produce adrenal hormones. Skin symptoms include severe hyperpigmenta-
tion on the face, dark freckles on the torso and hyperpigmentation on the palms 
of the hands. Addison’s disease is easily treated with hormone therapy.

The pineal gland is located in the brain, like the pituitary gland. It is very 
small and funnel shaped. Its function is not well understood, but it is theorized 
to be related to the sex hormones.

The pancreas is located in the abdomen. It has several functions. It secretes 
pancreatic  enzymes  that  are  delivered  into  the  intestine.  These  enzymes  help 
digest foods taken into the body.

Within the pancreas are a group of specialized cells called the islets of Lang-
erhans. These cells manufacture a hormone called insulin, which regulates blood 
sugar or glucose levels. Diabetes is a disease that results from the pancreas not 
secreting enough insulin. Diabetics must take synthetically produced insulin. 

There  are  two  main  types  of  diabetes.  Type  1  diabetes  (also  sometimes 
called juvenile diabetes) is caused by failure of the pancreas to secrete insulin, 
which is necessary for the body to convert dietary carbohydrates (sugars and 
starches) into energy for the cells and body. Type 1 diabetes is controlled by 
the use of insulin and other drugs. Less than 10 percent of persons who have 
diabetes have type 1 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes (sometimes called adult-onset diabetes) is the most preva-
lent form of the disease. This is the type of diabetes related to obesity and being 
chronically overweight. It may also involve genetic, age, and ethnic factor inﬂu-
ences. In type 2 diabetes, there may be a deﬁciency of insulin; or the cells do 
not respond to insulin normally, allowing blood sugar levels to increase outside 
the cells. This lack of response to insulin is known as impaired glucose toler-
ance (IGT). Type 2 diabetes can be avoided or prevented, in many cases, by 
controlling the diet, keeping weight to a normal range, and exercising regularly.
Uncontrolled diabetes can lead to heart, blood vessel, and kidney problems 
that can be chronic or fatal. Many diseases are caused or worsened by diabetes. 
Gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that affects pregnant women. It 
is believed to be caused by hormones from the placenta; they sometimes pro-
duce an insulin resistance that results in high blood sugar. The fetus may also 
have high blood sugar and, in response, manufacture high levels of insulin. This 
condition is not healthy and can result in health and birth issues for the baby. It 
is important that all pregnant women be aware of gestational diabetes since 
it affects about 4 percent of all pregnancies.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Diabetes can have many skin symptoms, many of which are not within the 
esthetician’s  scope  of  practice.  The  American  Diabetes  Association  states  that 
33 percent of all diabetes patients have skin conditions caused or related to the 
disease. Poor circulation and immune dysfunction associated with diabetes may 
play a large factor in these conditions.

Here are some common skin conditions associated with diabetes:

•  Bacterial, yeast, and fungal infections of the skin may occur.
•   Diabetic  dermopathy—this  condition  is  caused  by  damage  to  small  blood 

vessels, resulting in brown, scaly lesions, primarily on the legs.

•   Acanthosis nigracans—this condition is characterized by brown, raised areas 

of skin on the neck, groin, and armpits.

•   Wound healing is a serious issue for diabetics. Because of poor circulation 
and poor immune response, many forms of lesions do not heal quickly or 
easily. Specialized wound care is often required for advanced stages of diabe-
tes, especially in the feet and extremities.

Keeping  the  skin  in  healthy  condition  through  good,  consistent  skin  care 

can help prevent problems and is encouraged.

Diabetes is becoming more and more prevalent in Americans. The American 
Diabetes  Association  has  an  excellent  informational  Web  site  at  http://www.
diabetes.org. Visit this site for much more information about diabetes.

The  thymus  gland  has  already  been  discussed  in  Chapter  3,  The  Immune 
System. As you know, it produces specialized lymphocytes to help the body ﬁght dis-
ease. The thymus gland grows during childhood and begins shrinking in later years.
The  last,  but  not  least,  of  the  major  endocrine  glands  are  the  sex  glands. 
These  are  the  ovaries  in  females  and  the  testes  in  males.  The  ovaries  are 
located above the uterus and are connected to the uterus by two hollow tubes 
called the fallopian tubes (Figure 5-2). The ovaries contain eggs that eventually 

Hormones      81

Thymus gland is located under 
the breastbone in the chest. It se-
cretes hormones and helps trigger 
synthesis of more lymph tissue.

Ovaries are located just above the 
uterus and are connected to the 
uterus by two hollow tubes called 
fallopian tubes.

Testes are present within the 
scrotum and produce sperm.

Fimbriae

Ovary

Cervix

Vagina

Rectum

Anus

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 5-2  Female reproductive organs.

Fallopian tube

Uterus

Urinary bladder

Pubic Bone

Clitoris

Urethra
Vulva

Vagina




 
 
 
 
 
82         CHAPTER 5    

Rectum

Anal opening

Vas deferens

Epididymis

Testicle

Ureter

Vas deferens

Urinary bladder

Pubic Bone

Prostate gland

Urethra

Penis

Foreskin

Scrotum

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 5-3  Male reproductive organs.

are  released  into  the  fallopian  tubes  for  possible  fertilization  by  sperm.  The 
testes are present within the scrotum. The testes are connected to another tube 
called the vas deferens. The vas deferens leads to a holding sac called the semi-
nal vesicle, which holds sperm manufactured by the testes. This series of tubules 
continues and eventually joins the urethra, which is the tube that leads to the 
outside of the penis (Figure 5-3).

HORMONES PRODUCED BY THE OVARIES 
AND TESTES

The sex glands of both men and women produce hormones. The testes secrete 
testosterone. Testosterone is the male hormone responsible for development 
of typical male characteristics such as a deep voice, broad shoulders, body hair, 
and other male characteristics. Male hormones are called androgens.

The ovaries produce three hormones. Estradiol is one of the female hor-
mones, better known as estrogen. Estrogen is the hormone that gives a woman 
female  characteristics,  such  as  breasts,  and  helps  in  the  development  of  the 
menstrual  cycle.  Another  hormone  secreted  by  the  ovaries  is  progesterone, 
which is a steroid hormone that helps prepare the uterus for pregnancy and is 
an important hormone in the menstrual cycle. A third hormone manufactured by 
the ovaries is relaxin, which helps enlarge the pelvic opening during childbirth.
Both male and female sex glands receive many of their “cues” for hormone 
production  from  the  pituitary  and  the  hypothalamus.  The  pituitary  makes  a 

Testosterone is the male hor-
mone responsible for develop-
ment of typical male character-
istics.

Androgens are male hormones.

Estradiol is a steroid made from 
the hormone estrogen that gives 
women female characteristics.

Estrogen is the hormone that 
gives women female character-
istics.

Progesterone helps prepare the 
uterus for pregnancy and is an im-
portant hormone in the menstrual 
cycle.

Relaxin is a hormone manufac-
tured by the ovaries that helps 
enlarge the pelvic opening during 
childbirth.




 
 
 
 
 
Hormones      83

Follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) is a hormone secreted by 
the pituitary gland that causes the 
development of the egg, or ovum.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) 
causes the actual process of 
ovulation or the release of the egg 
from the ovary. It also causes the 
testes to manufacture testosterone.

Puberty is the stage of life when 
physical changes occur in both 
sexes and when sexual function 
of the sex glands begins to take 
place.

hormone called follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). FSH from the pituitary 
gland  causes  the  testes  to  produce  sperm.  Another  pituitary  hormone  called 
luteinizing hormone (LH), causes the testes to manufacture testosterone.

The same types of pituitary hormones cause production of female hormones 
in the ovaries. The FSH produced by the pituitary causes the development of the 
ovum, or egg. Luteinizing hormone (LH) causes the actual process of ovulation 
or the release of the egg (ovum) from the ovary.

HORMONAL PHASES OF LIFE

Several phases of life in humans are dramatically inﬂuenced and caused by the 
presence or lack of hormones. Although we produce hormones to some extent 
throughout life, more pronounced changes occur during several stages.

Puberty

Puberty  is  the  stage  of  life  when  physical  changes  occur  in  both  sexes  and 
when sexual function of the sex glands begins to take place. Sexual reproduc-
tion is physically possible at puberty.

At the beginning of puberty, which is usually about 12 to 14 years of age 
(females may be earlier than males), the hypothalamus begins producing a hor-
mone called luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), which in turn stim-
ulates the pituitary gland to manufacture much larger amounts of FSH and LH.

The FSH and LH are trophic hormones. They cause the ovaries and testes to 
secrete  more  hormones,  speciﬁcally  estrogens  and  androgens.  The  sudden  pro-
duction of these hormones starts a number of drastic changes in physical appear-
ance. Girls begin developing breasts, fat deposits form around the hips to provide 
feminine curvature, and the sweat glands begin producing body odor. Androgen 
production in females gives rise to pubic, leg, and underarm hair. In males, these 
changes in appearance include muscle development, development of the mascu-
line form, broader shoulders, deeper voice, body and facial hair, and general physi-
cal growth. Puberty, of course, also triggers sexual attraction to the opposite sex.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  just  when  sexual  attraction  begins,  the  main-
tenance of attractiveness gets more difﬁcult! Many changes happen within the 
skin  at  puberty.  As  hormone  production  of  the  sex  organs  begins  at  puberty, 
many hormone changes occur that affect the skin. Probably the biggest change 
is related to the production of androgen, the male hormone, which is produced 
by  both  males  and  females.  As  the  production  of  androgen  begins,  the  seba-
ceous glands produce more and more sebum. Androgen is a sebaceous gland 
stimulant. As androgen enters the bloodstream, it carries its hormonal messages, 
resulting in appearance changes such as the growth of body hair and the devel-
opment of body odor. At the same time, androgen affects the sebaceous glands.
The increase in sebaceous gland activity and production causes dilation of 
the  follicles.  This  is  when “pores”  are  ﬁrst  easily  visible.  You  may  notice  that 
small children have no easily visible pore structure on the surface of their skin. 
The pores become dilated due to increased sebum production. As the sebum 
ﬁlls the follicle, it begins pushing against the follicle walls, stretching them and 
making the pores on the surface appear larger. The nose is usually the ﬁrst to 
develop visible pores. This development of the pore structure continues onto 
the bridge of the nose, then the forehead, and then the chin. You may notice 
that a 12-year-old client has visible follicles only in these areas. The scalp also 
becomes oilier due to androgen production. This is the beginning of what many 
refer to as the T-zone, so named because of its pattern (Figure 5-4).



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.84         CHAPTER 5    

a
d
n
e
G

l

/
.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 5-4  Combination skin can be recognized by an oilier T-zone, down the 
middle of the face, and smaller pores, indicating drier skin in the perimeter of the face.

For  many  teenagers,  puberty  is  also  the  beginning  of  tendencies  toward 
acne and breaking out. You may see a young client with large comedones in 
the nose, chin, and forehead areas or occasionally only very small comedones 
in the nose only. The comedones at this age are small because the follicle walls 
have yet to stretch out much. The androgens have not yet had their full effect 
on the sebaceous glands.

Mothers  often  bring  in  young  teenagers  with  all  of  these  problems.  The 
young client should be advised of proper home care, but it is extremely impor-
tant to keep it simple! Children of this age are often not used to daily skin care. 
Please be very thorough in your explanation of home-care procedures. Although 
it is important to instruct young clients in proper care, they cannot be expected 
to perform a seven-step regimen twice a day! They should be instructed to use 
a washable, foaming cleanser twice a day, followed by a gentle, low-pH toner. A 
mild antiacne product should be used at night if necessary. A 2 percent salicylic 
or a 2.5 percent benzoyl peroxide gel is recommended.

Sunscreen should be used daily. It is important to convince young clients 
to start using sunscreen on a daily basis. This is the best way to prevent future 
sun damage. Teaching good health habits at a young age will help the client 
maintain  good  skin  for  a  lifetime.  Emphasize  the  dangers  of  excess  sun,  and 




 
 
 
 
Hormones      85

Keratosis pilaris is a condition 
in which the skin exhibits redness 
and irritation in patches, accompa-
nied by a rough texture and small 
pinpoint-sized white papules that 
look like very small milia.

give helpful hints about using sunscreens at the beach. Moisturizers are rarely 
needed by pubescent teenagers, except in very cold climates. Make sure you 
always recommend products that are noncomedogenic (see Chapter 15, Acne 
and the Esthetician, and Chapter 16, Comedogenicity).

Treatment in the salon should follow these steps:

  1. Cleanse  the  face  well  with  a  cleansing  milk  for  oily  or  combination  skin. 
Do not use toner or astringent at this point in treatment—the follicles are 
usually already tight and small. Using toner on this skin at the beginning of 
treatment only makes extractions more difﬁcult.

  2. Pre-soften the clogged areas by using a desincrustant solution or pre-mask. 
Steam with this solution on the face for about 8 minutes. It is very important 
that the skin is hydrated for this type of treatment.

  3. Remove the pre-mask or desincrustant solution. Gently pat the skin dry.

  4. Begin extraction, being careful to explain to the young client what you are 
doing. Explain to the client that extraction should always be performed by 
a professional. You may have difﬁculty extracting these tightly packed com-
edones. Be gentle, and take your time. Remember, this is the young client’s 
ﬁrst experience with extraction! Slow, gentle pressure applied in small areas 
is most effective.

  5. After extraction is complete, apply a toner or antiseptic astringent.

  6. Apply a light hydrating ﬂuid and apply high-frequency current.

  7. Apply a clay-based drying mask for oily skin.

The  ﬁrst  facial  treatment  for  a  teenage  client  should  be  an  educational 
experience  rather  than  a  feel-good  treatment.  You  should  help  young  clients 
understand (in simple terms) what is happening to their skin and the need for 
consistent hygiene. Explain the use of noncomedogenic cosmetics and the need 
for professional advice in choosing the right products.

Acne development should also be explained to teenage clients, so that they 

are aware of possible future occurrences and how to prevent them.

If the young client already experiences acne ﬂare-ups, you should make the 
proper treatment recommendations (see Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician). 
Treatment for most pubescent teens is necessary only bimonthly, until further 
development of the pore structure or the beginning of acne ﬂare-ups occurs.

Another  problem  associated  with  puberty  is  the  development  of  a  con-
dition  called  keratosis  pilaris.  Keratosis  pilaris  appears  as  small  pinpoint-
sized  bumps,  usually  on  the  cheeks,  accompanied  by  generalized  redness. 
This condition is often seen in “rosy-cheeked” children. In this condition, the 
androgens have affected the growth of either terminal or lanugo hairs, which 
have started growing but are not strong enough to push through the follicle 
opening. The hairs remain trapped inside the follicle, as a result irritating the 
follicle and surrounding skin. This condition, which also affects adults (primar-
ily on the upper arms), is frequently seen in the skin care salon. You should 
treat this condition very gently by using mildly abrasive scrubs, light enzyme 
gommage  treatments,  and  light  extraction.  Routine  use  of  a  mild  abrasive, 
such as granular scrubs that are not excessively drying, helps open the follicle 
and allow the hair to come out, thus cutting down on irritation. A 10 percent 
glycolic  lotion  with  a  pH  of  3.5  or  higher  should  be  applied  on  damp  skin 
once or twice a day. Using this combination of alpha hydroxy exfoliation and 
light hydration on a daily basis helps reduce the roughness and redness of this 
nuisance condition.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.86         CHAPTER 5    

Menarche is a girl’s ﬁrst period.

Menstruation is the body getting 
rid of an unused ovum and ac-
companying endometrium.

Appearance Changes in Adolescence

As teenagers get further into their teenage years, they usually experience more 
problems with acne. Salon treatments for these clients should then be admin-
istered on at least a monthly basis, except in cases of more severe acne, when 
they should be more frequent.

The Menstrual Cycle

With  puberty  and  adolescence  comes  menarche,  the  beginning  of  the  men-
strual cycle in females. Menarche is the girl’s ﬁrst “period.” Menstruation is the 
correct name for the period. Menstruation is actually the body getting rid of an 
unused ovum and accompanying endometrium (the lining of the uterine wall), 
a process that occurs each month in females. The endometrium is formed by the 
uterus in response to the hormone progesterone. The menstrual cycle is a 27- to 
30-day cycle in which the female’s ovaries manufacture an ovum and hormonal 
changes take place that prepare the uterus for pregnancy in case the ovum is 
fertilized by sperm. When the ovum is not fertilized, the uterus sheds the lining 
(endometrium), which is menstruation (Figure 5-5).

The menstrual cycle actually involves six phases. Phase 1 occurs during the 
ﬁrst ﬁve days of the cycle. The hypothalamus senses low levels of estrogen and 
progesterone and signals the pituitary gland to secrete FSH and LH. The ovaries 
then begin producing larger amounts of estrogen and progesterone, which pre-
pare and release the ovum, or egg.

In phase 2, the hypothalamus detects that the ovaries are secreting the right 
amount  of  estrogen  necessary  for  ovulation,  shuts  down  the  pituitary  gland’s 

Endometrium

Fallopian tube

Ovary

Uterine cavity

Egg

Fimbria

Cervix
Vaginal canal

Egg

Discharge

1. Hormonal levels rise and the
    uterine lining is prepared to receive
    a fertilized egg.

2. Around mid-cycle, the ripened egg
    leaves the ovary and travels through
    the fallopian tube.

Egg

Corpus luteum

Menstrual ﬂow

3. The egg approaches the uterine
    lining.

4. If conception has not taken place,
    the egg disintegrates and the lining
    is shed as menstruation.

FIGURE 5-5  The menstrual cycle.

i

g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©




 
 
 
 
 
large  production  of  FSH,  and  begins  producing  more  LH.  This  occurs  during 
days 6 to 12 of the cycle.

In phase 3, the hormone levels of estrogen and progesterone are adjusted 
again. The estrogen level reaches a high point, which signals the pituitary gland 
to release a very large amount of LH, which then causes the release of the egg 
from the ovary. The surge in LH occurs on days 12 and 13 of the cycle.

Phase 4 is on the 14th day, when the egg (ovum) is released from the ova-
ries and begins its journey down the fallopian tube to the uterus. What is left of 
the follicle from which the egg was released turns into a hormone-producing 
structure called the corpus luteum, which produces large amounts of progester-
one. The progesterone produces the uterine lining, or endometrium, which is 
the “nest” that the uterus builds for a fetus. This 14th day is when a sperm can 
fertilize an egg and the woman becomes pregnant.

Phase 5 is essentially the last two weeks of the 28-day cycle. If fertilization of 
the egg has not occurred, the pituitary hormones FSH and LH drop substantially. 
The corpus luteum shrinks, substantially lowering its production of progester-
one. This decrease in progesterone causes the breakdown of the endometrium.
Phase 6 begins menstruation, or the period. The whole cycle begins again 

on the 28th day.

Many women experience differences in the actual days on which different 
phases  of  the  menstrual  cycle  take  place.  Stress,  obesity,  anorexia,  and  other 
endocrine system disorders can all affect the cycle.

PREGNANCY

If the ovum is fertilized by a sperm on the 14th day of the cycle, the female 
becomes pregnant. The corpus luteum continues to produce progesterone, and 
the  endometrium  becomes  much  thicker.  The  fertilized  egg  goes  through  a 
series of transformations, begins mitotic division, and forms a mass of cells. The 
embryo begins to form, surrounded by a capsule-like structure called a tropho-
blast. The trophoblast, in simple terms, provides nutrition for the embryo. The 
membrane of the trophoblast eventually evolves into the placenta, which is a 
thick layer of hormone-producing cells that serves as the nutrient, oxygen, and 
waste-exchange system between the growing embryo and the blood system of 
the mother.

The placenta manufactures many hormones, including those that affect the 

corpus luteum, embryo growth, and milk production in the mother’s breasts.

Skin and Appearance Changes during Pregnancy

A vast number of obvious changes take place in the human body during preg-
nancy. Many of these changes affect the skin. Hyperpigmentation is often seen in 
pregnant women. The skin often tans much more easily than normal. Pregnancy 
mask, or melasma, is a condition in which the face develops signiﬁcant hyper-
pigmentation, resembling a dark facial mask (Figures 5-6 and 5-7). Light areas 
surround the eye areas, and the rest of the face is dark with pigment. Pregnancy 
masks  and  pregnancy-related  hyperpigmentation  are  caused  by  a  hormone 
secreted by the placenta that stimulates the melanocytes in the skin. Normally, 
hyperpigmentation subsides after the birth of the child; but sometimes the condi-
tion has to be treated in the salon after childbirth. Treating hyperpigmentation 
during pregnancy is not advisable. Even if a lightening effect can be achieved by 
using skin bleaches such as hydroquinone, the placenta continues production 
of the melanin-producing hormone, only to result in more hyperpigmentation. 

Hormones      87

Melasma are splotchy, pigmented 
complexions that may be present 
after use of birth control pills.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.88         CHAPTER 5    

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

.

D
M

i

,
r
e
h
s
F
e
g
r
o
e
G
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 5-6  Mask of pregnancy (melasma).

FIGURE 5-7  Melasma in a male patient is very unusual.




 
 
 
Hormones      89

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 5-8  Striae (stretch marks).

It is best to wait until the pregnancy is over. Observe whether the hyperpigmen-
tation  decreases  signiﬁcantly  with  the  shutdown  of  placental  hormones.  If  the 
hyperpigmentation does not fade within several months, it can then be treated. 
Avoiding exposure to the sun will help cut down on the amount of pigment pro-
duced during pregnancy.

Stretch marks, or striae, are marks that occur in pregnant women (Figure 5-8). 
These  strip-like  lines  may  be  red  or  brown  to  tan  in  appearance  and  are  the 
result of rapid weight gain during pregnancy. The skin simply stretches quickly, 
and the marks occur in the areas of the abdomen, breasts, buttocks, and legs. 
Unfortunately,  little  can  be  done  for  stretch  marks.  Many  stretch  marks  fade 
after childbirth. The use of good, hydrating body creams and lubricants during 
the pregnancy seems to keep some women from developing stretch marks or 
at least reduces the severity. The creams must be applied on a daily, consistent 
basis for best results. In some women creams seem to have no effect. Some theo-
ries indicate that the development of stretch marks may be connected to hered-
ity or genetics. Research is currently being conducted using retinoids, electrical 
stimulation, and other methods to treat post-pregnancy stretch marks.

An increase in blood ﬂow and blood pressure during pregnancy may lead 
to the development of telangiectasias, or small, red, enlarged capillaries on the 
face and other areas of the body. Avoiding sun and hot temperatures will help 
reduce the possibility of telangiectatic development. Telangiectasias are some-
times described as couperose by European estheticians.

Telangiectasias usually fade rapidly after childbirth. If there are still obvious 
red lines after several months, they may be treated by a dermatologist or plastic 
surgeon using lasers or intense pulsed light (IPL).

Varicose  veins  may  also  develop  on  the  legs  during  pregnancy,  due  to 
weight and pressure on the legs. Resting with the legs elevated helps prevent the 
occurrence of varicose veins. Use of support hose is also helpful in preventing 

Telangiectasias are small, red, 
enlarged capillaries of the face 
and other areas of the body.

Couperose refers to diffuse 
redness, including telangiectasis 
of the face and other areas of 
the body.




 
 
 
 
90         CHAPTER 5    

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) 
is a condition in which some 
women experience uncomfort-
able physical changes before 
menstruation.

varicose veins. Most varicose veins, again, fade after pregnancy; but those that 
do not can be treated by a dermatologist, plastic surgeon, or vascular surgeon.
Waterproof leg makeup may be used to conceal varicose veins or telangi-
ectasias. Pregnant women may also have problems with their facial skin. Fluc-
tuations in hormones may make problem skin worse, or signiﬁcantly better. In 
many cases, acne-prone skin becomes worse at the beginning of pregnancy and 
then becomes much better in the third or fourth month, resulting in clear skin 
for the rest of the pregnancy. This is the result of the abundant female hormones 
present in the bloodstream during pregnancy. Acne often ﬂares up again after 
the baby is born, or just after the mother stops nursing. This, of course, results 
from a dramatic drop in female hormones in the bloodstream.

Acne in the pregnant woman should be treated as you would any case of 
acne (see Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician), except that therapy with gal-
vanic and high-frequency current should be eliminated. Check with the client’s 
physician if you have any doubts about treatment or products.

Precautions for Treating the Pregnant Woman

No type of electrical therapy, speciﬁcally galvanic or high-frequency therapies, 
should be administered to a pregnant woman without written permission from 
her physician. Physicians often approve of electrolysis treatment, but it is impor-
tant to get a written note from the client’s doctor and keep it on ﬁle with her 
record for legal reasons.

Many  topical  preparations,  including  alpha  hydroxy  acids,  have  never 
been extensively evaluated as to their safety when used for pregnant women. 
Although no currently available cosmetic agent is known to affect the fetus, it is 
best to be conservative when using topical treatments and products, particularly 
newer functional agents. If you are in doubt about recommending a particular 
treatment to a pregnant client, check with her physician before administering 
that treatment or any questionable product for home use.

Most  routine  procedures  may  be  performed  on  pregnant  women.  Special 
courses in body massage therapy for pregnant women are available from certi-
ﬁed massage therapy schools. Make sure you have taken such a course before 
performing body massage on a pregnant woman.

Pregnant  women  may  sometimes  develop  strange  reactions  to  otherwise 
well-accepted treatments. Waxing, for example, may suddenly be very irritating 
to the skin. The only way to predict these types of reactions is to start slowly 
and patch-test areas for treatment. The woman’s physician should supervise any 
internal or external drugs she takes during pregnancy. Pregnant women need 
lots of esthetic help during pregnancy. Pedicures may become a necessity rather 
than a luxury service. Changes in the nails, skin, and hair may occur. It is also 
very important to be sensitive to a pregnant client’s needs, because pregnancy is 
a wonderful but sometimes emotional time for some women.

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a condition in which some women experi-
ence uncomfortable physical changes before menstruation. These changes are 
caused by the ﬂuctuating levels of hormones in the bloodstream. Increased estro-
gen levels may lead to water retention that can cause bloating, swelling of the 
breasts, swelling of the hands and feet, and general heaviness. The increase in 
hormones can also cause mood swings and may make the woman more sus-
ceptible to stress.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hormones      91

Controlling stress is one of the best ways to deal with PMS. Stress-reducing 
techniques such as deep-breathing exercises, aerobic workouts, massage, or gen-
eral  relaxation  techniques  may  help  reduce  the  symptoms.  Esthetic  care  plays 
an important role in helping women with PMS feel better both physically and 
psychologically. Wearing looser clothes may help constricted feelings associated 
with water retention.

In severe cases, hormones and other therapy administered by a physician 
may be warranted. Physicians may use drugs for high blood pressure or hor-
mone-suppressing drugs to treat women with severe PMS.

PMS and Acne Flare-Ups

Women  frequently  experience  acne  ﬂare-ups  7  to  10  days  before  menstrua-
tion. Speciﬁc days in the cycle associated with acne ﬂare-ups may vary in some 
women.  The  cause  of  premenstrual  acne  is  not  completely  understood.  It  is 
theorized that large levels of progesterone, present in the bloodstream during 
the cycle days normally associated with premenstrual acne, switch on the seba-
ceous glands, which quickly ﬁll the follicles with sebum. This sudden surge of 
sebum inﬂames the follicle walls, causing acne papules to erupt.

Often, these ﬂare-ups occur in the chin and jawline area. This is referred to 
as chin acne (Figure 5-9). The ﬂares present as large, sore papules. Many times 
they do not develop into pustules but clear up after a few days. Treatment at 
home with 2.5 percent benzoyl peroxide gel or a sulfur-resorcinol drying lotion 
may make them dry up faster.

Women  who  experience  constant,  recurrent  breakouts  during  premenstrual 
times should be referred to a dermatologist, gynecologist, or endocrinologist (hor-
mone specialist) for treatment. Ortho Tri-Cyclen® is a birth control pill that has 
been developed to help clients who have chin acne during premenstrual periods.
Premenstrual acne should be treated in the same manner as any acne ﬂare-up. 
Administering  a  good  deep-cleansing  facial  treatment  one  week  before  the 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 5-9  Chin acne.




 
 
 
 
92         CHAPTER 5    

normal monthly breakout seems to help many women reduce or eliminate the 
ﬂare-ups. Use of noncomedogenic products also can help control the breakouts, 
as can other therapies recommended in Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician. 
Increased stress during PMS can also cause breakouts or sudden acne ﬂare-ups. 
Help  your  client  choose  some  stress-reducing  techniques  or  suggest  that  she 
treat  herself  to  a  body  massage  or  other  special  pampering  salon  service  to 
reduce stress and make herself feel better.

BIRTH CONTROL PILLS

Birth control pills work by regulating hormones normally associated with the 
menstrual cycle. They interfere with the normal development of the ovum by 
preventing or obstructing ovulation.

There are two basic types of birth control pills. One type contains both estro-
gen and progesterone and works by preventing the egg from maturing, therefore 
preventing ovulation. The other type is mainly progesterone. These are often called 
mini-pills. They work by exposing the bloodstream to extra amounts of proges-
terone, which causes thickening of the uterine ﬂuids and thus keeps the egg from 
becoming fertile.

Skin Problems Associated 
with Birth Control Pills

A skin problem often associated with the use of birth control pills is the tendency 
to have acne ﬂare-ups. This does not occur in all women using birth control pills, 
but it does occur in a substantial number. Estheticians commonly see acne ﬂares 
in clients who have just started using a new type of birth control pill. The hor-
mones in the pills change normal hormone levels, affecting sebum production.

Birth control pills that contain little or no estrogen tend to be more aggravat-
ing to acne conditions. Estrogen-dominant pills tend to improve acne-prone skin.
In the past, birth control pills with high levels of hormones often caused very 
frequent acne ﬂares. More modern birth control pills contain smaller amounts of 
hormones and do not cause as many problems with acne ﬂares.

Starting and stopping birth control pills may dramatically affect acne. Starting 
an androgen-dominant or progesterone-dominant pill may make acne immedi-
ately worse, whereas starting an estrogen-dominant pill may make acne-prone 
skin immediately better.

Stopping the pill may have similar effects. Because the pill tends to suppress 
natural hormone levels, discontinuing the pill may throw off natural hormone 
levels,  making  acne  worse.  It  may  take  some  time  for  the  body  to  adjust  to 
not having the hormone “supplement” present in the birth control pills. Some 
women take much longer to adjust.

Hyperpigmentation and the Birth Control Pill

The other appearance problem related to birth control pills is that of hyperpig-
mentation, or melasma. Splotchy, pigmented complexions may be present after 
use of birth control pills. This hyperpigmentation usually is located in the fore-
head and cheeks. The upper lip is also often affected by melasma. Some women 
can develop a full-scale pregnancy mask associated with birth control pills.

Sunlight,  especially  deliberate  exposure  such  as  sunbathing,  can  make 
melasma much worse. Advise a client with melasma to stay out of the sun. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hormones      93

.

.

D
M

,
k
o
o
C

.

l

i

R
e
n
a
E
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 5-10A  Melasma before 
Triluma treatment.

FIGURE 5-10B  Melasma after Triluma 
treatment.

If she must go in the sun, recommend the use of a high-SPF, broad-spectrum 
sunscreen. Sometimes the doctor can adjust the dosage or the type of the client’s 
pill to reduce the possibility of melasma resulting from its use.

You should treat hyperpigmentation with hydroquinone and glycolic acid. 
Prescription topical drugs speciﬁcally designed to treat melasma are also avail-
able. One of these is Triluma®, which is a topical combination of hydroquinone, 
tretinoin  (the  active  ingredient  in  Retin-A®),  and  a  steroid.  This  combination 
has proven effective in many cases of melasma (Figure 5-10A and 5-10B). See 
Chapter  20,  The  New  Science  of  Aging  Skin  Treatment,  for  more  information 
on treating melasma. Camouﬂage cosmetics can also be used to cover the dark 
splotches in melasma patients.

MENOPAUSE

Menopause is the time in a woman’s life when the ovaries stop releasing ova. 
Menopause  normally  occurs  when  a  woman  is  in  her  late  forties  or  early  ﬁf-
ties. The time before and around menopause is called perimenopause. What 
actually happens during menopause is that the ovaries have run out of follicles 
containing eggs. A female is born with 700,000 to 2 million eggs, which are con-
tained in the follicles within the ovaries. Many of these eggs soon die or atrophy, 
but at puberty about 400,000 remain. The pituitary gland secretes FSH and LH, 
but the ovaries stop responding. When no follicles are left to respond to follicle-
stimulating hormone, no estrogen is produced in the ovary, and the preparation 
of the uterus does not occur.

Menopause is the time in a 
woman’s life when the ovaries 
stop producing ova.

Perimenopause is the time before 
and around menopause.




 
 
 
94         CHAPTER 5    

Osteoporosis is a weakening 
of the bones that is associated 
with aging and is predominant 
in women.

Hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT) uses oral or injectable 
female hormones to control or 
prevent symptoms of menopause. 
HRT may also help prevent 
skin changes or osteoporosis in 
women.

The drop in hormone levels in the bloodstream causes a variety of physical 
symptoms.  Hot  ﬂashes,  rapid  heartbeat,  decreases  in  vaginal  secretions,  emo-
tional irritability, bloating, and other signs may occur.

The  same  symptoms  may  be  produced  after  a  hysterectomy.  If  a  woman 
has a hysterectomy early in life, the gynecologist often leaves the ovaries and 
removes  only  the  uterus.  The  presence  of  the  ovaries  helps  secure  hormone 
levels  in  the  bloodstream,  at  least  until  true  menopause  takes  place.  Medi-
cal science has discovered that women who lose their ovaries early in life are 
more likely to develop osteoporosis, a weakening of the bones that is associ-
ated with aging and is predominant in women. Many women have hormone 
replacement  therapy  (HRT)  after  menopause  or  after  a  hysterectomy.  Use 
of  synthetic  estrogen  and  progesterone,  taken  in  the  sequence  of  the  normal 
menstrual cycle hormone secretions, helps prevent many of the symptoms asso-
ciated  with  menopause.  It,  of  course,  does  not  make  women  ovulate  again. 
Estrogen is believed to have a positive effect on reducing the chances of osteo-
porosis development, offers a decreased chance of cardiac problems, and may 
help prevent rheumatoid arthritis.

Some recent studies indicate that the risk of breast cancer may increase in 
women who use HRT longer than ﬁve years. If there is a history of breast cancer 
in the immediate family (sister, mother), there may be a greater risk. The use 
of HRT should be an individual and personal decision based on personal and 
family history; menopausal symptoms and their severity; and, most important, a 
thorough consultation with a doctor.

SKIN CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED 
WITH MENOPAUSE

In the next two decades, 40 million women will go through menopause. Estheti-
cally, a woman may have any number of symptoms associated with perimeno-
pause. This may include thinning hair, excess hair growth on the face or other 
body areas, or even increased oiliness or dryness of the skin.

Today  an  abundance  of  research  indicates  that  the  presence  of  estrogen 
strongly  inﬂuences  collagen  formation.  As  menopause  occurs,  estrogen  levels 
drop dramatically and may have an obvious effect on the appearance of wrinkles 
and lack of elasticity. Use of HRT may improve and reduce the loss of collagen, 
therefore causing skin to regain more of its previous elasticity and suppleness.
Lack of estrogen may signiﬁcantly affect barrier function, increasing sensi-
tivity of the skin, dehydration, possible hyperpigmentation, and ﬂuctuations in 
blood  ﬂow.  Estrogen  is  responsible  for  sending  many  hormonal  messages  to 
the skin, and a decrease can affect many functions of the skin and, therefore, 
its appearance.

Many aging problems associated with menopause may actually be the result 
of cumulative sun exposure earlier in life. It is coincidental that the damage of 
years of sun exposure happens to surface about the same time as menopause in 
some women. Having both sun damage and menopausal effects on the skin can 
cause real esthetic problems and is even more reason that your client needs lots 
of care at this important time.

Hot Flashes and Flushing

Hot ﬂashes are caused by a ﬂuctuation in blood ﬂow resulting from decreased 
estrogen, which normally helps with smooth blood ﬂow. Without estrogen, there 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hormones      95

Formication is an itching and 
tingling feeling of the skin expe-
rienced by some women during 
menopause.

are sudden “spurts” in blood ﬂow, resulting in redness and the feeling of heat in 
the skin. Flushing and hot ﬂashes can be reduced or eliminated with hormone 
replacement therapy.

Rarely, women experience a condition called formication, which feels 
like continuous tingling and itching. Some women have described it as feel-
ing  like “bugs  crawling  on  the  skin.”  Again,  this  condition  can  be  treated 
with HRT.

Use  of  fragrance-free  creams  with  lipid  replacement  ingredients  such  as 
sphingolipids or ceramides may help with dryness and itching. The skin may be 
more sensitive to any stimulating product, so be careful with these, especially 
the stimulating aromatherapy products.

Moodiness

Women may experience moodiness during menopause. Although some of this 
may be caused by hormonal ﬂuctuations, it may also be stress related or may 
be complicated by depression. It is important to be understanding of the needs 
of your client who is menopausal and to offer stress-reducing services such as 
massages or aromatherapy.

Perimenopausal Acne

Clients  may  experience  a  sudden  ﬂare-up  of  acne  during  or  just  after  meno-
pause. This is again caused by a decrease of estrogen in the bloodstream, which 
in turn increases the percentage of the male hormone androgen that turns on 
the  sebaceous  glands.  This  results  in  increased  oiliness,  hirsutism,  and  acne 
lesions. You should treat this as you would any other acne case, but remember 
that  the  client  may  more  readily  experience  dehydration  and  be  concerned 
about aging skin. Be careful not to overdry the skin.

Esthetic Management of Menopausal Skin

The esthetician can play a signiﬁcant role in helping the client going through 
menopause with skin problems. The esthetician may actually notice small symp-
toms  in  the  skin  before  the  client  is  even  fully  aware  that  she  is  beginning 
menopause.

Keep a client’s age in mind when noticing some of the symptoms we have 
discussed here. Adjusting a client’s home care and treatment schedule may help 
a great deal.

Menopausal Skin Symptoms

During menopause, your client may experience some of these skin symptoms:

  1. Dryness and itchy skin on the face and body
  2. Increased sensitivity
  3. Sudden ﬂares of acne
  4. Sudden hair growth on the face
  5. Mood swings
  6. “Suddenly aging” skin
  7. Hot ﬂashes and ﬂushing
  8. A “tired” look to the skin, with increased elastosis



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.96         CHAPTER 5    

Phytoestrogens are plant 
hormones.

A Treatment Plan for the Menopausal Skin

As previously discussed, there is much overlap among many of the skin “aging” 
symptoms  associated  with  menopause  and  those  associated  with  cumulative 
sun damage. Whether caused by menopause, sun damage, or both, the symp-
toms often occur at the same time in life. Many of the treatments performed 
for aging and/or sun-damaged skin are also helpful for skin experiencing aging 
symptoms  associated  with  the  time  of  menopause.  For  more  detailed  infor-
mation on these treatments, read Chapter 20, The New Science of Aging Skin 
Treatment.

Although symptoms can vary from dryness to acne, the following guidelines 

should help with most of the age-related symptoms of menopause.

•   Daily use of sunscreen/moisturizer. Make sure the moisture base is appropri-
ate for the skin type. Make sure the sunscreen is broad spectrum and has a 
sun protection factor (SPF) of 15 or higher. 

•   Use of alpha hydroxy acids on a daily basis helps improve the appearance of 
wrinkles and hyperpigmented splotching, increased moisture in both the epi-
dermis and the dermis, improved cell turnover that improves barrier function, 
less skin ﬂakiness, and improved surface texture and feel of the skin. Make 
sure you use a product appropriate for the skin type. Usually the best choice 
for this time of life is a serum applied under a moisturizer.

•   Retinoids such as retinol are vitamin A–based ingredients that also can help 
reduce the appearance of sun damage. Retinol should be used carefully since 
it sometimes produces irritation.

•   Use of topical antioxidants help prevent reactions that lead to further collagen 

breakdown; their use also may help prevent inﬂammation and redness.

•   Use of topical phytoestrogens, which are plant hormones frequently seen in 

ingredients like soy sterols, wild yam extract, and red clover extract. 

•   For dry skin, home-care moisturizers or body lotions containing lipid ingre-
dients such as ceramides or sphingolipids help reinfuse the barrier function 
with lipids, improve dryness, diminish wrinkles, increase ﬁrmness, and make 
the skin feel better and less itchy.

•   Facial  creams  or  serums  that  contain  peptides  and  collagen  stimulants  will 
help the skin look ﬁrmer and more supple as well as decrease the appearance 
of elastosis and wrinkling.

Here are some salon treatments advised for the menopausal client:

•   Alpha hydroxy exfoliation (peels), beginning with a series and then maintain-
ing  the  results  with  follow-up  alpha  hydroxy  treatments.  These  exfoliation 
treatments, along with the alpha hydroxy home care recommended above, 
often make a big difference in the skin appearance relatively quickly.

•   Microcurrent treatments, again administered in a series of treatments, improve 

elasticity and help stimulate the skin to look healthier.

•   Light-emitting  diode  (LED)  treatments  use  rapidly  ﬂashing  light  energy  to 
stimulate  the  skin,  resulting  in  a  younger-looking  appearance  and  less 
redness.

•   More frequent salon treatments, including facial and body massage, may help 

esthetic symptoms as well as help clients with stress management.

Lastly, clients experiencing menopausal symptoms should always consult with a 
board-certiﬁed gynecologist or endocrinologist. Diet changes and stress-reducing 
programs often can help with the many symptoms of menopause.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Hormones      97

Hirsutism refers to excessive hair 
growth.

ABOUT HIRSUTISM

Hirsutism refers to excessive hair growth. Women who have hormonal ﬂuctua-
tions may experience hirsutism. Excess hair growth, primarily on the face, may 
happen at any time in a woman’s life, but especially after menopause. The domi-
nance of the androgenic hormones after menopause is the main cause.

Hirsutism may be treated by waxing or electrolysis in the salon. Excessive 
facial hair growth is often best treated by electrolysis because the electrolysis 
is eventually permanent. Waxing may provide temporary relief in minor cases. 
Stiffer hairs in the chin and lip areas are best treated by electrolysis. Estheticians 
and electrologists should be aware of other symptoms that may require refer-
ral to a physician. Although most excessive hair is mainly a cosmetic nuisance, 
accompanying symptoms such as thinning of the hair, deepening of the voice, 
and loss of menstruation should be referred to a gynecologist.

OBESITY, ANOREXIA, AND HORMONES
Women who are extremely obese may experience a loss of hormone activity, 
resulting in menstrual irregularity, hirsutism, and acne. Women who are anorexic 
may have hormonal ﬂuctuations and irregular menstrual cycles.

Women athletes who have a very low body fat percentage may also experi-
ence similar hormonal problems. Many estheticians have observed a correlation 
between avid female athletes and low body fat, hirsutism, and acne.

IN CONCLUSION

Hormones are biochemical messengers that are involved in virtually every func-
tion of the human body, including the physiology of the skin. Many hormonal 
disorders or conditions can affect the skin, and they range from acne to meno-
pausal aging. While hormones and endocrinology are complicated medical sub-
jects, the esthetician should understand the basics of how hormones can affect 
the skin.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What are the major endocrine glands?

  2. What is puberty, and what hormonal changes take place with puberty?

  3. What  precautions  should  the  esthetician  take  when  treating  a  pregnant 

woman?

  4. What are some esthetic side effects of birth control pills?

  5. What are some esthetic problems associated with menopause?

  6. Name several endocrine disorders, and discuss their effects on the skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

6

Skin Analysis

OBJECTIVES . . .

Skin analysis is the process of determining the client’s skin 
type and conditions that require esthetic care. Skin analy-
sis is a very important skill for all estheticians. It is the key to 
determining and planning correct skin treatment programs.
In this chapter, we discuss differences in esthetic and 
dermatological skin typing, proper health screening, and tech-
niques used in professional skin analysis. You will learn about 
properly recording your analysis and how to use charts for 
the client.

You will learn how to recognize very basic skin conditions 
and lesions. This chapter is not intended to provide extensive 
information on particular skin conditions. For more informa-
tion on any of the conditions discussed within, please refer to 
other chapters on the speciﬁc skin conditions.



     99

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.100         CHAPTER 6

Skin analysis is the process of 
determining a client’s skin type 
and conditions.

Fitzpatrick Skin Typing is a sys-
tem that classiﬁes skin by heredi-
tary pigmentation and resistance 
to sun damage and sunburn.

FITZPATRICK SKIN TYPING

When a dermatologist speaks about the skin type of a patient, he or she will 
probably use a term such as type 1 or type 2. Dermatologists do not generally 
refer to clients’ skin types as oily, normal, or dry, as estheticians do. They assess 
skin in terms of genetic pigment coloration. This type of skin typing was origi-
nated by Thomas Fitzpatrick, a famous research dermatologist.

Fitzpatrick  Skin  Typing  is  a  system  of  classifying  the  client’s  individ-
ual  skin  by  hereditary  pigmentation,  indicating  their  resistance  to  sun-related 
damage and sunburn. The lower the number, the lighter the skin coloration and 
the more the client is susceptible to sun-related damage or disease (Figure 6-1). 
The system describes skin coloration, eye color, and hair color of each skin type 
and  states  the  typical  scenario  regarding  the  tendency  of  skin  to  burn  or  tan 
when exposed to the sun (Table 6-1).

A

B

C

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b
y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

D

E

F

FIGURE 6-1  A, Fitzpatrick I; B, Fitzpatrick II; C, Fitzpatrick III; D, Fitzpatrick IV; 
E, Fitzpatrick V; and F, Fitzpatrick VI.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      101

Contraindications are treatment 
techniques, products, or ingredi-
ents that must be avoided because 
of individual client conditions that 
may cause side effects or possibly 
endanger the client’s health.

Table 6-1

Fitzpatrick Skin Types

Skin Type

Burns or Tans

Characteristics

Type I

Always burns, never tans

Type II

Burns easily, tans minimally

Very fair skin, red or blonde hair, blue 
eyes, likely freckled skin

Fair skin; blue, green, or hazel eyes; 
blonde or red hair

Type III

Sometimes burns, gradually 
tans

Very common coloring; still fair, but 
with any color hair and eyes

Type IV

Rarely burns, always tans

Typical Mediterranean Caucasian 
skin; medium to heavy pigmentation

Type V

Vary rarely burns, always 
tans

Middle-Eastern skin types, not sun 
sensitive

Type VI

Almost never burns

Black skin, generally never sun 
sensitive

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

ESTHETIC SKIN TYPING

Client Health History

The ﬁrst treatment for every client should begin by taking a health history for the 
client. This will give you important information about the client, including his or 
her health, skin care, or lifestyle habits, medical conditions, and other informa-
tion that can affect your treatment of the client’s skin.

The client should ﬁll out the client health form (Figure 6-2). After the client 
completes the form, you should discuss any questions you have with the client. 
When in doubt, postpone treatment until the client has approval for the treat-
ment from her doctor

Contraindications are treatment techniques, procedures, equipment, prod-
ucts,  or  ingredients  that  must  be  avoided  because  of  individual  client  condi-
tions that may cause side effects or somehow endanger the client’s health. For 
example, when a client tells you she is allergic to all forms of nuts, you must 
avoid using any products containing nuts or nut by-products. In this case, the 
use of nuts is contraindicated.

Using,  for  example,  a  honey  and  almond  scrub  on  this  client  will  likely 
cause an allergic reaction. If a client has a pacemaker or is pregnant, the use 
of electrical current is contraindicated. If a client is already using prescription 
peeling agents prescribed by her dermatologist, the further use of more peeling 
agents is contraindicated.

What to Ask About

In  this  section,  we  review  some  of  the  more  common  contraindications.  This 
is intended only as an overview of common contraindications. For much more 
information  on  health  screening  and  contraindications,  see  Milady  Standard 
Esthetics: Fundamentals and Milady Standard Esthetics: Advanced.





 
 
 
 
 
102         CHAPTER 6

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-2  Conﬁdential skin health survey.

Allergies Does the client have any known allergies to any cosmetics, foods, or 
drugs? You must avoid using any chemical or ingredient that the client is known to 
be allergic to. Common allergies include fragrances, nuts, iodide allergies (avoid 
seaweed products), speciﬁc sunscreen ingredients, and hydroquinone (melanin 
suppressant  for  hyperpigmentation).  The  client  may  be  allergic  to  many  other 
ingredients. You need to discuss this thoroughly with the client before treatment 
begins to make sure you are clear about the client’s speciﬁc allergies. Carefully 
check labels on products to determine if the product contains the allergic ingredi-
ent. If there is any doubt, always check with the client’s doctor or dermatologist.
Clients sometimes mix up irritant and allergic reactions, so it is important 
that you try to establish whether the client is actually allergic or simply overused 





 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      103

a product and had an irritant reaction from over-exfoliating or overstimulating 
the skin.

Clients also sometimes mix up allergic reactions with acnegenic reactions. 
Acnegenic  reactions—discussed  in  detail  in  Chapter  16,  Comedogenicity,  and 
Chapter 13, Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants—is a ﬂaring of acne pimples 
caused by an irritant reaction to an ingredient or product. This sudden breakout 
of acne is not the same as an allergic reaction.

Patients with rosacea also must avoid many ingredients and treatments to avoid 
ﬂares.  For  more  information  on  allergic  and  irritant  reactions,  see  Chapter  13, 
Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants, and Chapter 14, Rosacea.

Drugs  and  Medications  Many drugs can cause skin treatment side effects. 
Several  of  these  are  topical  drugs  such  as  tretinoin  (Retin-A®,  Renova®,  etc.), 
tazarotene  (Tazorac®),  azelaic  acid  (Azelex,  Finacea®,  or  Finevin®),  adapalene 
(Differin®), and others. Ask speciﬁcally if the client is using any topical drug. 
Many of these topical prescriptions are keratolytic (surface peeling) drugs. The 
main  contraindications  for  these  drugs  are  the  use  of  additional  exfoliants  or 
peeling agents by the client or the esthetician, fragrances, and any stimulating 
product that increases blood circulation. This includes avoidance of rough gran-
ular scrubs, professional peeling or exfoliation treatments, home-care or profes-
sional-use enzymes or alpha or beta hydroxy acid treatments, and mechanical 
professional treatments such as electric brushing or microdermabrasion. Over-
exfoliation can cause redness (erythema), peeling, reactivity to other substances, 
and discomfort.

Isotretinoin  (originally  sold  under  the  brand  name  Accutane®)  is  an  oral 
drug  used  primarily  for  treating  grade  IV  acne  that  has  many  cosmetic  side 
effects. Clients using isotretinoin must avoid other peeling agents as listed above 
as well as waxing on any part of the body. Waxing the skin of an isotretinoin 
patient  may  cause “skin  lifting,”  which  means  the  surface  skin  can  be  peeled 
off along with the hair and the wax. For more information on isotretinoin, see 
Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician.

Clients using the oral steroid drugs such as prednisone or prednisilone may 
have  an  autoimmune  disease  such  as  lupus.  Clients  using  prednisone  should 
avoid waxing, peeling, and other stimulating treatments. Likewise, patients using 
topical steroid creams, including hydrocortisone, should be careful with these 
treatments, depending on the medical skin condition being treated, the strength 
of the drug, and the frequency of use. Again, when in doubt, check with the 
client’s physician.

Medical Conditions Many medical conditions can affect skin treatment. Spe-
ciﬁcally, you need to know if the client has heart (cardiac) problems, epilepsy 
or seizure disorders, cancer, lupus, hepatitis, or fever blisters (herpes simplex), 
or if she is pregnant.

Occasionally,  you  will  immediately  recognize  a  condition  that  requires 
immediate medical referral, such as an infection or an allergic reaction. In gen-
eral, if you have any doubt about treating a client with medical conditions, check 
with the client’s doctor before treating the client. For legal reasons, you should 
get a written note from the physician authorizing esthetic treatment and keep it 
in the client’s permanent ﬁle.

Any  treatment  involving  the  application  of  electrical  current  should  be 
avoided  on  patients  with  heart  problems,  clients  who  are  pregnant,  patients 
with a seizure disorder, and clients with implanted metal bone pins or plates.

Light treatments, such as LED treatments, should be avoided on clients with 
seizure disorders, unless you have written permission from the client’s physician.



104         CHAPTER 6

Skin types is the determination of 
the hereditary oiliness or dryness 
level of an individual’s skin.

Skin conditions are generally 
treatable disorders of the skin that 
are often related to environmental 
damage or the client’s skin type.

Photo damage or photoaging 
describes skin symptoms of aging 
skin, such as wrinkles and sagging 
that are caused by lifelong and cu-
mulative exposure to the sun.

Vehicles are the spreading agents 
in skin care or cosmetic products.

Clients with lupus sometimes react unusually to any stimulating treatment. 

Be careful with extraction, stimulant treatments, and waxing on these clients.

Clients  who  have  had  problems  with  fever  blisters,  especially  chronically, 
should have any skin treatment cleared by the doctor. Peeling treatments, spe-
ciﬁcally,  have  been  known  to  aggravate  herpes  simplex  outbreaks.  Doctors 
frequently prescribe a prophylactic (preventative) drug to be taken before treat-
ment to avoid ﬂares of herpes simplex.

SKIN TYPES VERSUS SKIN CONDITIONS
It is important to distinguish the difference between skin types and skin con-
ditions. Skin types is the determination of the hereditary oiliness or dryness 
level of an individual’s skin. Skin types are hereditary and generally cannot be 
changed through esthetic treatment. Skin conditions are treatable disorders of 
the skin. Skin conditions often can be changed through esthetic treatment.

Certain skin types have typical conditions associated with them. For exam-
ple, oily skin often has skin conditions such as comedones, clogged pores, and 
frequent acne breakouts. Dry skin often has a condition of dehydration, because 
there is not enough sebum to prevent the skin from dehydrating.

Estheticians can treat comedones through extraction and exfoliating prod-
ucts  and  can  improve  dehydration  by  using  moisturizers  and  hydrating  treat-
ments and products. They cannot, however, change the hereditary skin type.

Some conditions can affect any skin type. Sun damage (also referred to as 
photo damage or photoaging) and intrinsic aging conditions, such as wrin-
kles, elastosis (sagging skin), or hyperpigmentation can affect oily, combination, 
or dry skin.

The importance of establishing skin type is to determine the type of prod-
uct to be used on the skin. For example, sunscreens are available in a variety of 
vehicles, the carrying base and spreading agent of the product. A sunscreen in 
a vehicle that contains oils and emollient ingredients is more appropriate for dry 
skin types, whereas a sunscreen in a lightweight vehicle with lesser amounts of 
emollients is more appropriate for oilier skin that does not need as much oil and 
lubrication.

Consumers as well as estheticians often choose a product or treatment to 
help a skin condition that is in the wrong vehicle for the client’s skin type. They 
are focused only on the skin condition and are not paying attention to the skin 
type. They may choose a product to help symptoms of sun damage, but may not 
realize that the product is in the wrong vehicle for their skin type. An antiaging 
product that is in the wrong vehicle can create other unwanted conditions.

It  is  essential  that  skin  type  be  ﬁrmly  understood  for  success  in  any  skin 

care program.

THE SKIN ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

  1. Begin by cleansing the skin with a gentle cleansing milk or lotion. Thoroughly 
remove all makeup. Do not tone the skin after cleansing when performing an 
analysis, because this can make pores look smaller than they actually are and 
interfere with an accurate analysis.

  2. Place  eye  pads  on  the  client  to  shield  the  eyes  against  bright  light.  Look 
at the client’s skin carefully through a magnifying lamp (mag lamp). Most 
magnifying lamps enlarge the appearance of the skin by three to ﬁve times. 
Carefully observe the entire skin from top to bottom (Figure 6-3). To avoid 




Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Analysis      105

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-3  A lighted magnifying lamp.

sudden ﬂashes of light that might disturb the client, do not turn the lamp on 
and off while it is focused on the face.

  3. To  determine  the  skin  type,  look  for  the  presence  or  absence  of  visible 
pores. Pore is a lay term for the follicles; it commonly refers to the top view 
of  the  follicle.  Where    the  pores  are  clearly  visible,  the  sebum  ﬂow  from 
the follicle is either normal or oily. The larger the pore, the oilier the skin 
area. The smaller the pore, the less oil is reaching the surface to lubricate 
and help prevent surface dehydration. The pore size is, in general, a good 
indication  of  how  much  sebum  is  being  produced  and  reaching  the  skin 
surface.  Some  clients  appear  to  have  no  pores.  The  follicles  are  actually 
present, but they are simply not dilated because there is little sebum passing 
through the follicle. Follicles stretch to accommodate the amount of sebum 
being produced by the sebaceous glands. Oily skin areas are characterized 
by larger pores (Figure 6-4); normal skin by average size pores, and dry 
(alipidic) skin by very small, sometimes barely visible pores (Figure 6-5). 
We refer to dry skin as alipidic, meaning a lack of lipids are being produced 
by the sebaceous gland. Clients often call their dehydrated skin “dry,” but 
it is important to distinguish between a lack of sebum ﬂow and a lack of 
moisture in the skin surface, which is dehydration. Dehydration can affect 
any skin type.

Combination  skin  is  characterized  by  oily,  normal,  and  dry  skin  in 
different  areas.  Combination  skin  is  the  most  common  type  of  skin,  usu-
ally with oilier areas in the center of the face and pores becoming visibly 
smaller  (indicating  alipidic  skin)  as  you  look  across  the  face  toward  the 
perimeter (toward the ears). The perimeter of the face is the outside edges, 

Pore is the lay term for follicle; it 
is most often used to refer to the 
top view of the follicle.

Oily skin is a skin type character-
ized by enlarged pores, indicating 
active sebaceous production.

Normal skin is a skin type char-
acterized by evenly distributed 
average-sized pores.

Dry (alipidic) skin is a skin 
type characterized by very small 
or barely visible pores, indicating 
below-average sebaceous 
production.

Combination skin is facial skin 
characterized by a mix of oily and 
dry skin areas.

Perimeter is the outside edge 
of the face, bordered by the ears, 
lower chin and neck, and top 
of the forehead.





   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106         CHAPTER 6

FIGURE 6-4  Large pores indicate oily skin areas.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-5  Alipidic skin is characterized by a lack of visible pore openings.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      107

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-6  Combination skin.

bordered by the ears, lower chin and neck, and top edge of the forehead. 
The T-zone is the area of the forehead, nose, and chin. This area is often 
oily  and  may  often  have  larger  pores  (Figure  6-6).  Estheticians  frequently 
refer to combination skin as combination-dry or combination-oily. This 
means that the client has combination skin, but it tends to be either drier 
or oilier. The width of the T-zone determines whether the combination skin 
leans toward being combination-dry (narrower T-zone) or combination-oily 
(wider T-zone).

Because acne is hereditary, many consider it to be a skin type. There are 
four different grades of acne. For information about this skin type, please 
read Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician.

  4. After you have established the skin type, you must observe any conditions 
of the skin. Table 6-2 is a basic guide for different conditions frequently seen 
during skin analysis. For much more information on any of these conditions, 
consult the speciﬁc chapters on aging, sun damage, acne, and sensitive skin 
as well as on recognizing and referring medical conditions. Some of these 
terms are not medical or scientiﬁc, but they are included because they are 
commonly used among estheticians.

DEHYDRATION

Dehydration is a condition in which the skin lacks moisture in the surface cells. 
Dehydration can affect any skin type. Dehydrated skin may have the appear-
ance  of  being  covered  by  a  thin  layer  of  plastic  wrap  with  many  ﬁne  lines 
and wrinkles that form when the skin is slightly pinched. It also may have the 
appearance or texture of parchment paper, again with very ﬁne wrinkles when 
slightly pinched (Figure 6-7). More severe forms of dehydration will appear as 
ﬂaking, scaling, or peeling skin. Sunburn and frostbite are both severe forms of 
dehydration.

T-zone is the middle area of the 
face, including the forehead, nose, 
and chin.

Combination-dry is a skin type 
that has both oily and dry areas 
but is predominantly dry. It is 
indicated by larger pores through 
the middle of the T-zone only.

Combination-oily is a skin type 
that has both oily and dry areas 
but is predominantly oily. It is 
indicated by larger pores through 
the T-zone, expanding into the 
outer cheeks, with smaller pores 
in the facial perimeter only.

Dehydration is a condition in 
which the skin lacks moisture in 
the surface cells.





   
 
 
 
 
 
108         CHAPTER 6

Table 6-2

Determining the Skin Type

Skin Type

Characteristics

Normal

Oily

Perfectly even pore distribution

Enlarged pores throughout the face; may be very 
shiny with obvious oiliness

Usually also has many clogged pores, 
open or closed comedones

Comments

Very unusual

Dry/Alipidic

Very small or invisible pores

Combination-Oily

Combination-Dry

Larger pores through the “T-zone” (nose, chin, and 
forehead), extending to the cheeks, with smaller, 
less visible pore structure in the perimeter of the 
face

Pore structure visible only through the very center 
of the face, especially in the nose area; ﬁne or 
invisible pore structure on the cheeks and outer 
areas of the face

May also be very dehydrated; typical 
in older skin

Very typical skin type, especially in clients 
who are younger than 40–50 years of age

Typical in older skin, especially older 
female clients

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p

a
,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Dehydration  can  make  aging  skin  look  much  worse.  Lack  of  moisture  in 
surface cells can accentuate the appearance of wrinkles, rough surface texture, 
and skin sagging. Probably one of the most common conditions, dehydration 
is caused by environmental exposure, sun exposure, poor skin care, and use of 
skin products that are stripping the natural surface moisture. Numerous drugs 
and medical conditions can also cause skin dehydration.

Basic  treatment  of  dehydration  involves  the  use  of  humectants  or 
hydrophilic agents, which attract and bind water to the skin cells, infusing the 

Humectants or hydrophilic 
agents are ingredients in moistur-
izers that attract and bind water to 
the skin cells, infusing the dehy-
drated cells with moisture.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-7  Dehydration is characterized by many ﬁne lines and wrinkles.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      109

dehydrated cells with moisture. This smoothes the appearance of the skin, help-
ing restore softness and making rough, aging symptoms look much smoother 
and younger. Use of exfoliating agents like alpha hydroxy acids actually helps 
remove dehydrated dead cells from the skin surface, also making the skin appear 
and feel smoother.

PORE OR FOLLICLE-RELATED 
CONDITIONS

Follicle-related conditions are generally symptoms of oily skin or oily areas.

•  Open comedones—enlarged clogged follicles, commonly known as blackheads, 
generally associated with oily areas. A single lesion is called an open comedo.
•  Closed comedones—small, white bumps just under the skin surface. Careful 
observation will indicate a very small pore opening. Closed comedones are 
associated with oily and acne conditions (Figure 6-8). A single lesion is called 
a closed comedo.

•  Sebaceous ﬁlaments—small, clogged pores with black tops often seen in 

the nose and center areas of the face (Figure 6-9).

•  “Orange peel” texture—refers to large areas of enlarged pores, indicative 

of oily skin.

•  Sebaceous hyperplasias—often said to look like a “daisy” or “donut,” these 
lesions are indicative of oily and sun-damaged areas. They can vary some in size 
and shape. They are caused by overgrowth of sebaceous glands (Figure 6-10A 
and 6-10B).

•  Papule—a red bump, usually acne related.

.

.

D
M

,
d
n
o
B

.
J

l

i

e
a
h
c
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-8  Open and closed comedones.





 
 
 
110         CHAPTER 6

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-9  Sebaceous ﬁlaments, often called clogged pores, are follicles ﬁlled 
with solidiﬁed sebum. The black tip is oxidized sebum in the top of the follicle.

.

.

D
M

i

,
r
e
h
s
F
e
g
r
o
e
G
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-10A  Multiple sebaceous hyperplasia in an adult male with oily skin 
and sun damage. Sebaceous hyperplasias usually are found on the forehead, 
temple, and upper cheeks, but they can appear anywhere on the face.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      111

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-10B  Sebaceous hyperplasia can vary in size and shape, as seen in this 
photo.

•  Pustule—a red bump with a white head, usually an acne lesion.
•  Ingrown hairs—these may look like papules or pustules but are caused by 
hairs that have broken off in the follicle and irritated the follicle walls, usually 
as a result of improper shaving or tweezing. Look for these in areas of the 
face such as the chin, where clients may be tweezing unwanted hair. These 
also may be frequently seen on the neck of male clients.

•  Milia—perfectly  round,  white  bumps  that  resemble  sesame  seeds  or  tiny 
pearls. Milia contain impactions of keratinized cells and sebum (Figure 6-11).
•  Cyst—large bump under the skin surface; must be referred to a dermatologist.
•  Scarred ostia—often called “open pores” or ice pick scars, these are small 

scarred follicles that always appear enlarged.

•  Pseudopores—a  European  esthetic  term  referring  to  enlarged  pore  struc-
ture  in  older,  sun-damaged  skin.  Usually  appear  in  groups  on  the  cheeks 
immediately on the sides of the nose; these open pores are not clogged and 
always appear enlarged. This is a symptom of sun damage. The skin is typed 
as dry but still shows these obvious pores, but the client generally has dry or 
combination-dry skin (Figure 6-12).

SKIN ABNORMALITIES

While analyzing the skin, you should also make note of any unusual skin prob-
lems or abnormalities, even if you will not be treating these conditions.
•  Birthmarks—often splotches of hyperpigmentation that are congenital (have 
been present since birth.) Some birthmarks may be treated by dermatologists.
•  Port-wine stains—large red-to-purple splotches that are vascular (involving 
blood vessels). They are congenital and can be treated with lasers by derma-
tologists or plastic surgeons.

•  Scars—should be noted in the client’s chart. Location of the scar should also 
be noted. Hypertrophic scars are above the skin. Hypotrophic scars are 
depressions in the skin, such as pockmarks.

Congenital refers to conditions of 
the body present since birth.

Hypertrophic describes a raised 
scar above the skin’s surface.

Hypotrophic describes a de-
pressed scar. 

Pockmarks are hypotrophic scars 
often caused by chicken pox or 
acne.





 
 
 
 
112         CHAPTER 6

.
c
n
I

,
s
e
g
a
m

I

l

i

a
c
g
o
L
©

i

i

.
t
h
g
s
n
k
S
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C
e
g
a
m

FIGURE 6-11  Milia.

FIGURE 6-12  Pseudopores.

I

Pseudopores

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      113

Dyschromias are conditions 
that cause changes in the normal 
colors of the skin.

Sensitive-oily is a skin type that 
is both oily and tends to be red 
and reactive.

Sensitive-dry is a skin type that 
is both dry (alipidic) and tends to 
be red and reactive.

REDNESS CONDITIONS

Conditions  that  cause  changes  in  the  normal  colors  of  the  skin  are  called 
dyschromias. This can include any discoloration of the skin, whether it might 
be redness from inﬂammation, pigmentation from sun, or any other changes in 
skin color. Redness conditions can appear on any skin type. Skin that is red with 
oily skin symptoms is often classiﬁed as sensitive-oily skin. Skin that has red-
ness without obvious pore structure is classiﬁed as sensitive-dry skin. Redness, 
of course, can be a sign of inﬂammation, which can affect any skin type. Diffuse 
redness is also often present in photo-damaged skin and may be mixed with 
sun-related mottling and pigmentary splotchiness in photoaging skin.

•  Telangiectasias—dilated red capillaries (Figure 6-13)
•  Couperose—the European term for areas of telangiectasias
•  Diffuse redness—areas of mild, constant redness
•  Pinkness—usually indicative of sensitive skin or inﬂammation
•  Erythema—the medical term for redness. Numerous medical conditions are 

erythemic and need medical referral.

•  Rosacea—medical  condition  characterized  by  nose  redness,  other  diffuse 

redness, and telangiectasias

PIGMENTATION CONDITIONS

Pigmentation  conditions  are  variations  in  skin  coloration.  Most  pigmentation 
conditions are caused by abnormalities in pigment production in the melano-
cytes. Pigmentation problems can affect any skin type.

•  Hyperpigmentation—overproduction of melanin, resulting in dark splotches
•  Hypopigmentation—lack of melanin production, resulting in light-colored 

areas

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-13  Telangiectasias.





 
 
 
 
114         CHAPTER 6

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p

a
,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-14  Solar lentigenes.

•  Solar lentigenes—freckles caused by sun exposure (Figure 6-14)
•  Mottling—speckled hyperpigmentation, also usually caused from cumulative 

sun exposure (Figure 6-15)

•  Vitiligo—a medical hypopigmentation condition resulting in absence of pig-

ment in splotches (Figure 6-16)

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L
y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-15  Mottling.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Analysis      115

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 6-16  Vitiligo.

•  Post-inﬂammatory  hyperpigmentation—dark  splotches  or  spots  related 
to skin trauma. Dark spots of pigmentation left from acne blemishes are the 
result of pigmentation produced from inﬂammation of the acne lesion. They 
can also result from scratching or chronic picking at acne lesions. These are 
particularly common in darker skin types.

•  Melasma—commonly  referred  to  as  pregnancy  mask.  This  condition  pre-
sents as mask-patterned splotches of hyperpigmentation. Sometimes melasma 
affects only part of the face, but it still has a pattern and is most often sym-
metrical, affecting both sides of the face equally (Figure 6-17).

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L
y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-17  Melasma.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116         CHAPTER 6

Intrinsic aging, sometimes re-
ferred to as natural aging, is aging 
of the skin due to genetics, grav-
ity, and other factors that people 
have no control over.

Extrinsic aging is premature 
aging of the skin due to envi-
ronmental factors such as sun 
exposure.

Mottling is a splotchy form of 
small, sun-related freckles and can 
be an early sign of photo dam-
age on any skin type. The skin is 
simply no longer one color. 

Chloasma, commonly known as 
liver spots (other than their color, 
they have nothing to do with 
the liver), are concentrated areas 
of hyperpigmentation common 
in skin that has cumulative sun 
damage.

Rhytides are wrinkles. 

Intrinsic wrinkles, also known 
as expression lines, are natu-
rally occurring wrinkles caused 
by constant or repetitive facial 
expressions.

Expression lines are caused 
by constant or repetitive facial 
expressions.

Elastosis is lack of skin ﬁrmness 
and lack of elasticity.

Tactile roughness refers to a 
rough texture to the touch.

Glogau Photoaging Classiﬁcation 
is a scale developed by renowned 
University of California dermatolo-
gist Richard Glogau which ranks 
the severity level of photoaging 
skin by the speciﬁc characteristics 
of the individual’s skin.

AGING AND SUN DAMAGE

Sun damage and aging symptoms can appear on any skin type. Although skin 
tends to become drier as it ages, aging skin can be dry, oily, or combination. 
Intrinsic  aging,  sometimes  referred  to  as  natural  aging,  is  aging  of  the 
skin due to genetics, gravity, and other factors that people have no control over.
Extrinsic aging is premature aging of the skin due to environmental 
factors  such  as  sun  exposure,  inﬂammation,  tobacco  use,  and  poor  health 
habits. We do have control over the factors contributing to extrinsic aging.

The  following  skin  conditions  are  indicative  of  intrinsic  aging  or 
photoaging. Make sure to document any or all of these conditions as you 
observe them during the analysis procedure. The more of these conditions 
that  exist  on  the  same  face,  the  more  severe  the  degree  of  aging  of  that 
individual skin.

•  Abnormal pigmentation is one of the very ﬁrst signs of photoaging, caused 
by cumulative sun damage. Young, healthy skin has very even skin color. 
Mottling is a splotchy form of small, sun-related freckles and can be an 
early sign of photo damage on any skin type. The skin is simply no longer 
one  color.  Chloasma,  commonly  known  as  liver  spots  (other  than  their 
color,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  liver),  are  concentrated  areas  of 
hyperpigmentation common in skin that has cumulative sun damage. Chlo-
asma  is  most  often  present  on  the  face  and  hands—areas  that  are  fre-
quently exposed to sunlight.

•  Rhytides  are  wrinkles.  Intrinsic  wrinkles,  also  known  as  expression 
lines,  are  caused  by  constant  or  repetitive  facial  expressions.  The  ﬁrst 
wrinkles  to  appear  are  ﬁne  lines,  mostly  around  the  eye  areas.  Typical 
expression lines are the nasolabial folds from the corners of the nose to 
the corners of the mouth, horizontal forehead lines, “scowl” lines between 
the eyes, and “crow’s feet” around the outside corner of the eyes. Expres-
sion lines in sun-damaged skin are deeper and more pronounced. Wrinkles 
related to sun damage often also occur in the facial expression areas. They 
tend to crisscross each other and are often in areas of the face such as the 
cheeks and neck. 

•  Elastosis is lack of skin ﬁrmness and lack of elasticity. Sagging skin is a 
symptom of elastosis. Skin that does not “snap back” when lightly pinched 
lacks  elasticity.  Elastosis  is  caused  by  gravity,  sun  exposure,  weight  gain 
and  loss,  and  other  factors.  It  is  an  indication  of  damaged  collagen  and 
elastin  ﬁbers  in  the  dermis.  All  skin  has  some  elastosis  with  age  due  to 
gravity, but elastosis caused by photo damage is more pronounced.

•  Tactile roughness refers to a rough texture to the touch. This can be a 
characteristic of very dry, dehydrated skin, but it is even more pronounced 
in photo-damaged skin. The skin between the numerous wrinkles is very 
rough to the touch, is often sallow, and has a thickened appearance,

Most  conditions  indicating  photo-damaged  skin  are  determined  by  a 
mix  of  all  of  the  above  conditions.  The  difference  between  aging  skin  and 
photoaging skin is determined by the severity and combination of symptoms. 
Photoaging skin is always more severe, and it is much more likely to involve 
pigmentation and redness conditions.

The  Glogau  Photoaging  Classiﬁcation  is  a  scale  developed  by 
renowned University of California dermatologist Richard Glogau. The Glogau 
scale ranks the severity level of photoaging skin by the speciﬁc characteristics 
of the individual’s skin (Figure 6-18A through 6-18D).




Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Analysis      117

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 6-18A  Glogau Type I—No 
wrinkles.

FIGURE 6-18B  Glogau Type II—wrinkles in motion.

m
o
r
f

e
s
n
e
c

i
l

r
e
d
n
u

d
e
s
U

.
2
1
0
2

l

,
t
u
o
s
b
a
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C
e
g
a
m

I

m
o
c
.
k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S

FIGURE 6-18C  Glogau Type III—
wrinkles at rest.

FIGURE 6-18D  Glogau Type IV—only wrinkles.

Glogau Type I: No Wrinkles
•  Very minor or no wrinkling
•  Little to no skin mottling or discoloration
•  No keratoses (skin overgrowths such as seborrheic keratosis)

Type I skin does not require much foundation makeup (if any) for coverage.





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118         CHAPTER 6

Charting is the process of creat-
ing a written record of clinical 
observations and treatments in a 
client’s or patient’s chart.

Glogau Type II: Wrinkles in Motion
•  Wrinkling seen only during facial movement; minor eye and mouth lines
•  Minor skin mottling or discoloration
•  No visible keratoses

Type II skin requires minimal foundation makeup for coverage.

Glogau Type III: Wrinkles at Rest
•  Constant visible wrinkles
•  Clearly visible skin mottling or discoloration
•  Visible keratoses

Type III skin requires heavier foundation makeup for coverage.

Glogau Type IV: Only Wrinkles 
•  Severe wrinkles in all areas
•  Very apparent elastosis
•  Obvious skin mottling or discolorations with sallow or grey undertone to skin
•  Visible keratoses and possible current or prior skin cancers

Type IV skin has trouble getting makeup to cover and look smooth due to rough 
textures and multiple wrinkles.

Each type of Glogau scale has different skin care treatment needs. These are 

discussed in Chapter 20, The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment.

MEDICAL CONDITIONS OF THE SKIN

Although estheticians do not diagnose medical conditions or administer medical 
procedures, notes should be made during the analysis of any diagnosed medi-
cal  condition  that  affects  the  client.  Notes  should  also  be  made  of  any  areas 
that currently exhibit symptoms of the medical condition. This includes areas 
affected by rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, skin cancer or scars from skin cancer 
treatment, and so on.

During analysis, you may notice signs of probable medical conditions that 
require referral to a dermatologist or other doctor. Although you should never 
tell a client she has a disease or medical condition, you must refer the client to a 
doctor any time that you suspect a client has a medical condition. Medical refer-
rals to doctors to diagnose and treat your client’s medical conditions should also 
be recorded. For much more information about these conditions, see Chapter 7, 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions.

Recording Your Analysis

All of your observations during the skin analysis should be written down in a 
special chart for the client. The writing down of all observations and treatments 
is referred to as charting.

Analysis  and  treatment  charts  are  available  from  many  skin  care  companies 
and are easy to ﬁll out. These forms have places to mark skin types and conditions, 
along with their location. They also have places to record treatment procedures and 
home-care recommendations and purchases.

You should use a special color of highlighter pen to mark any contraindica-
tions, so that any esthetician looking at the chart notices the contraindication. 
Medical ofﬁces often use colored stickers to denote allergies, special warnings, 




Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Analysis      119

or other contraindications. This system helps prevent any accidental use of prod-
ucts or treatments that are contraindicated for your client.

At every visit, you should record the exact treatment you performed and note 
any differences in the skin condition. Write down any questions or issues dis-
cussed with the client. Also note any new products purchased or recommended.
Some estheticians take photos of the client’s skin during the ﬁrst visit and 
keep the photos in the client’s chart. This is a good idea, but it is time consuming 
and sometimes expensive. However, it can be very helpful, as well as impressive, 
for use in showing clients their progress over time. It also can serve as a legal 
protective mechanism, in case of any discrepancy about scars or other problems 
that existed before the client was ever seen by the esthetician.

PRIORITIZING ANALYSIS OBSERVATIONS
After ﬁnishing the analysis procedure and recording your observations, you will 
then begin the process of determining the course of treatment for the client. It 
is important to take all the information obtained in the analysis and consulta-
tion into careful consideration when choosing both professional treatment and 
home-care programs.

The following are recommendation considerations when determining treat-

ment plan options:

•  Medical symptoms and referral take ﬁrst priority. If, in your analysis, you sus-
pect that the client has a medical condition or disease, immediately refer the 
client to a physician.

•  Any  signs  of  inﬂammation  must  be  addressed.  This  may  require  physician 
referral  or  may  be  as  simple  as  discontinuing  a  product  causing  irritation. 
Never address other esthetic issues without ﬁrst making sure there is no skin 
inﬂammation!

•  Make  sure  you  take  client  history,  medical  conditions,  and  allergies  into 
careful  consideration  when  determining  both  professional  and  home-care 
treatment.

•  Pay attention to causes of conditions. For example, if a client has hyperpig-
mented areas from prior acne pimples, treating the pigmentation issue will be 
of little use unless the acne problem is brought under control ﬁrst.

•  As previously discussed, pay attention to skin types when determining treat-
ment  products.  For  example,  treating  an  acne-prone  client  for  wrinkles  by 
using a product that has a heavy, fatty base (spreading agent) may help the 
wrinkles, but it will aggravate the acne. You must always consider both the 
skin condition as well as the skin type when choosing treatments or products 
for your client.

The more you work, the more prioritizing will become second nature to you. 
While you are learning to prioritize, though, it is a great idea to use a checklist and 
review the client history form and record carefully before planning treatments.

CLIENT CONFIDENTIALITY

You must always hold anything the client tells you in the strictest conﬁdence. 
Never show pictures of a client without obtaining the client’s written permission. 
All ﬁles and charts should be kept in a secure location, accessible only by staff 
members.  You  must  never  discuss  a  client’s  condition  with  another  client.  All 
staff members should also be trained in client conﬁdentiality.




Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.120         CHAPTER 6

If  you  work  in  a  physician’s  or  medical  ofﬁce,  you  must  follow  the  fed-
eral rules regarding client conﬁdentiality. The Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 protects the privacy of patient health infor-
mation. If you work in a medical ofﬁce, you must acquaint yourself with these 
rules. Ask the medical ofﬁce manager or the physician regarding how to learn 
about HIPAA regulations.

IN CONCLUSION

Determining the condition of a client’s skin is the most important skill that an 
esthetician must have. Skin analysis involves not only thoroughly examining the 
skin but also taking into account all factors that may affect the client’s skin con-
ditions. These include health status, home-care habits, and contraindications that 
might affect treatment. Only a thorough skin analysis will allow the esthetician 
to determine the best treatment plan for the client.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. Explain Fitzpatrick Skin Typing. What does it indicate?

  2. What are contraindications? List several and explain how they might affect 

skin treatment.

  3. Why is esthetic skin type important when choosing products and treatments 

for the client?

  4. What are the differences between skin type and skin condition?

  5. What is the Glogau Photoaging Classiﬁcation scale?

  6. What are some skin conditions that might be found on certain skin types?

  7. What is client conﬁdentiality, and why is it important?




CHAPTER

7

Recognize and 
Refer Medical 
Conditions

OBJECTIVES . . . 

The esthetician should be trained to recognize common medi-
cal conditions and diseases of the skin and refer them to the 
proper medical authority—in most cases, the dermatologist.
This chapter is designed to illustrate and brieﬂy discuss 

some of the medical conditions that the esthetician may 
observe in routine practice. Although not all of these condi-
tions are life-threatening, many skin conditions need to be 
referred to the dermatologist for proper medical treatment.

The esthetician often has clients who come to the salon for 

treatment of what they may think is a cosmetic disorder but 
is actually a dermatological condition. The esthetician should 
never diagnose a medical condition, but he or she should be 
able to recognize conditions that require medical treatment. 
The esthetician should be well educated about the different 
types of common skin diseases and conditions and should 
be able to discuss conditions with the dermatologist. The 
esthetician should also be familiar with the cosmetic effects 
of certain skin disorders and know how they can help with 
cosmetic symptoms that the client may need to conceal.

This chapter teaches you about medical conditions that 
need medical referral. You should always refer any condition 
that you do not understand or that is obviously not just a 
minor cosmetic problem.

Before discussing the medical conditions in this chapter, it is 
important to discuss common medical terminology—speciﬁcally 



     121

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.122         CHAPTER 7    

Lesion is any mark on the skin that 
is not a normal part of the skin.

Primary lesions are lesions that are 
in the early stages of development.

Secondary lesions are lesions that 
primary lesions eventually become; 
characterized by piles of material 
on the skin surface such as a crust 
or scab, or depressions in the skin 
surface such as an ulcer.

Macules are ﬂat (nonelevated) 
marks on the skin where there is 
only a change in the normal skin 
color.

Patches are large macules that 
are larger than 1 centimeter.

Papules are raised areas on the 
skin that are generally smaller 
than 1 centimeter.

Plaques are papules that are 
larger than 1 centimeter.

Nodules are raised lesions that are 
larger and deeper in the skin. A 
nodule looks like a lump, but the 
skin can be moved over the lesion.

Tumors are very large nodules.

Pustule is a clump of white 
blood cells that have formed and 
risen to the surface of the skin.

Abscesses are extremely deep 
infections with pockets of pus.

Vesicle is the medical term for 
blisters.

Bulla is a large vesicle.

Wheal is a raised red lesion as-
sociated with sensitivity or allergy. 
Wheals are also called hives.

Erosion refers to a shallow de-
pression in the skin.

Excoriations are scratches on 
the skin.

Ulcers are deep erosions in which 
part of the dermis has been lost.

Crust is caked body ﬂuids, pus, 
or blood remnants left from dis-
eased skin.

Scales are patches of dry, dehy-
drated skin without crust.

Erythema refers to any area of 
redness associated with a lesion.

Hematomas are bruises.

Purpura are hemorrhages of the 
blood vessels.

dermatological terminology. The medical community has precise 
descriptions for symptoms of the skin. Using these specific 
terms, dermatologists can very accurately describe lesions 
and therefore diagnose illnesses more efﬁciently. (The author 
wishes to thank Dr. Rube Pardo and the Department of Dermatology 
at the University of Miami for their assistance in preparing this 
section on dermatological terminology.)

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY LESIONS

A lesion is any mark on the skin that is not a normal part of the skin. It does not 
necessarily mean that the skin is diseased. A freckle is a lesion; so is a wrinkle. 
However, lesions can also be symptoms of disease, such as melanoma, shingles, 
or measles. Primary lesions of the skin are lesions that are in the early stages 
of development.

Secondary lesions are lesions that primary lesions eventually become. Sec-
ondary skin lesions are characterized by piles of material on the skin surface, 
such as a crust or scab, or depressions in the skin surface, such as an ulcer.

Macules are ﬂat (nonelevated) marks on the skin where there is only a change 
in the normal skin color. Again, a freckle can be an example of a macule, and the 
ﬂat red mark left after a pimple has healed is also a macule. It is simply a descriptive 
term meaning that this is a ﬂat area with a change in the normal color of the skin. 
The adjective used to describe a lesion is macular. Large macules, larger than 1 cen-
timeter, are called patches. Papules are raised areas on the skin that are generally 
smaller than 1 centimeter. Plaques are papules that are larger than 1 centimeter.

Nodules are raised lesions that are larger and deep in the skin. A nodule 
looks like a lump, but the skin can be moved over the lesion. Very large nodules 
are called tumors.

A pustule is a lesion that is ﬁlled with pus, which is discussed in the chap-
ter Acne and the Esthetician. Extremely deep infections with pockets of pus are 
called abscesses.

Vesicle is the medical term for blisters. They contain body ﬂuids. A bulla is 
a large vesicle. A vesicle or bulla that has ruptured so that the ﬂuid is exposed 
to the surface of the skin is said to be weeping or oozing.

A wheal is a hive. Wheals are caused by a concentration of the ﬂuid in the 

tissue. Wheals are reabsorbed into the bloodstream via the lymphatic system.

Erosion refers to a shallow depression in the skin. Scratches on the skin 
are called excoriations, which we discuss further in Chapter 15, Acne and the 
Esthetician. Deep erosions are called ulcers, in which part of the dermis has 
been lost.

Diseased skin often has remnants of body ﬂuids, pus, or dried blood caked 

to a lesion. This is described as crust.

Scales are patches of dry, dehydrated skin without crust.
Erythema refers to any area of redness associated with a lesion. Bruises are 

known as hematomas. Purpura are hemorrhages of the blood vessels.

Atrophy means “wasting away.” Skin that has thinned from age or chronic 
sun exposure is said to have atrophied. Hypertrophy is thickening of a tissue. 
Hypertrophic  scars  are  raised  scars,  due  to  thickening  of  a  tissue.  Atrophic 
scars are depressed scars, such as acne pocks, caused by loss of tissue.

A number of terms are used to describe the shapes of certain lesions. 
A  linear  lesion  is  a  line-like  lesion.  A  ring-shaped  lesion  is  described  as 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      123

annular.  Lesions  that  have  a  snake-like  pattern  are  called  serpiginous. 
Geographic lesions look like a map. Target, or iris, lesions have a center with 
a round surrounding area, such as a pustule.

Keratosis is a general term meaning a thickening of the stratum corneum, 

such as seborrheic keratosis, described in Chapter 19, Sun and Sun Damage.

Eczematization refers to a combination of symptoms, including erythema, 

weeping, crusting, and present vesicles.

A nevus is a mole. More than one mole are described as nevi. Lentigines 
are freckles. Dyschromias are skin color abnormalities. Hyperpigmentation 
refers to any area that has more than the normal amount of melanin. Hypopig-
mentation refers to any area with less than the normal amount of pigment.

ACNE

Severe acne requires medical attention. Grade IV acne is severe inﬂammatory 
acne with cystic lesions. Cysts should always be referred to the dermatologist. 
The  medical  treatment  for  cysts  includes  injections  with  steroids,  which  help 
shrink the lesion. Some cysts may be lanced by the dermatologist and drained. 
Both topical and oral antibiotics may be used to help control inﬂammatory acne 
conditions. Common topical preparations may include the antibiotic erythromy-
cin  (trade  name  A/T/S  or  Erycette®)  or  another  antibiotic,  clindamycin  (trade 
name Cleocin T®). These preparations are available only by prescription. They 
are lotions or liquid roll-ons that are applied to the skin either daily or twice 
daily. The doctor may suggest that the client not use certain cosmetic products 
that will increase irritation. Frequently, dermatologists will prescribe prescription 
keratolytic products such as prescription-strength benzoyl peroxide treatments, 
retinoic acid (Retin-A®), adapalene (Differin®), azelaic acid (Azelex®), or other 
peeling and sloughing agents. These and other drugs for acne are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician.

Other acne-related medical conditions include rosacea, perioral dermatitis, 

and seborrheic dermatitis, all of which are also discussed in other chapters.

COMMON INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN

Infections  of  the  skin  may  be  grouped  into  three  types:  bacterial,  fungal, 
and viral.

Common Bacterial Infections

Impetigo is a skin infection that is commonly seen on the face, particularly in 
the lower part of the face, but it can occur anywhere (Figure 7-1). This disease is 
characterized by large, open, weeping lesions. They look like large sores, similar 
to acne, except that impetigo lesions weep and appear damp. The lesions can 
range in size. Impetigo is frequently seen in children and is extremely conta-
gious. Impetigo is caused by staphylococcus bacteria. The disease is treated by 
the use of antibiotics.

Folliculitis is a bacterial infection of the hair follicle. The infection results 
in irritation and is characterized by multiple pinpoint irritations around the pore 
openings (Figure 7-2). Pseudofolliculitis is caused by irritation from shaving. 
It also appears as irritated follicles but is not usually infected. Ingrown hairs are 
the main cause of pseudofolliculitis, which is seen frequently in the beard area 
of male clients, especially the neck.

Atrophy means “wasting away.”

Hypertrophy is thickening of a 
tissue.

Atrophic scars are depressed 
scars such as acne pocks, caused 
by loss of tissue.

Linear lesion is a line-like lesion.

Annular lesion is a ring-shaped 
lesion.

Serpiginous lesion is a lesion 
that has a snake-like pattern.

Geographic lesion looks like a 
map.

Target, or iris, lesion has a center 
with a round surrounding area, 
such as a pustule.

Keratosis is a general term 
meaning thickening of the stratum 
corneum, such as seborrheic 
keratosis.

Eczematization refers to a com-
bination of symptoms, including 
erythema, weeping, crusting, and 
present vesicles.

Nevus is a mole.

Lentigines are freckles.

Dyschromias are skin color 
abnormalities.

Hyperpigmentation refers to 
any area that has more than a 
normal amount of melanin.

Hypopigmentation refers to any 
area with less than the normal 
amount of pigment.

Impetigo is a skin infection char-
acterized by large, open, weeping 
lesions.

Folliculitis is a bacterial infection 
of the hair follicle.

Pseudofolliculitis is caused by 
irritation from shaving. Ingrown 
hairs are the main cause of 
pseudofolliculitis.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.124         CHAPTER 7    

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Furuncle is a severe infection of 
the hair follicle. It is also known 
as a boil.

Carbuncles are large boils that 
often result in abscesses.

Septicemia, also known as blood 
poisoning, occurs when a bacterial 
infection enters the bloodstream.

FIGURE 7-2  Folliculitis on the back.

A more severe infection of the hair follicle is called a furuncle, also known 
as a boil. Large boils often result in abscesses and are referred to as carbuncles. 
Folliculitis,  furuncles,  and  carbuncles  are  treated  with  antibiotics.  If  a  furun-
cle or carbuncle bursts on the inside of the lesion, the bacteria may enter the 
bloodstream, causing septicemia, also known as blood poisoning. Septicemia is 




 
 
 
 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      125

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-3  Facial cellulitis. Note the severe swelling and inﬂammation.

characterized by a red erythemic line running from the source of primary infec-
tion. Septicemia is extremely serious and should be treated immediately by a 
physician. Cellulitis is a deep infection of the dermis, caused by streptococcus 
(Figure 7-3). A severe form of cellulitis is called erysipelas, also known as 
St. Anthony’s Fire. Again, this condition is extremely serious and should be seen 
immediately by a physician.

In both the hygiene and communicable disease chapters, we have already 
discussed MRSA, which is an antibiotic-resistant form of Staphylococcus aureus. 
MRSA is becoming a very commonly seen infection in dermatologists’ ofﬁces. In 
the beginning stages, a MRSA skin lesion often resembles a spider bite quickly 
developing into a large, pustular, boil-like lesion (Figure 7-4).

MRSA lesions occasionally resemble a severe acne pustule or cyst. They occa-
sionally occur on the face but are more likely to be seen on the arms, legs, or torso. 
As  with  any  large  infected  cyst  or  boil-like  lesion,  clients  with  these  lesions 
should be immediately referred to a physician if seen by an esthetician. MRSA is 
very contagious and requires immediate and serious medical treatment. In some 
severe cases, intravenous antibiotics and even hospitalization may take place.

Fungal Skin Infections

Cellulitis is a deep infection of the 
dermis caused by streptococcus.

Erysipelas, also known as 
St. Anthony’s Fire, is a severe 
form of bacterial cellulitis.

There are a number of fungal and yeast infections of the skin. Fungal and yeast 
infections are called mycoses.

Tinea versicolor is sometimes called sun fungus (Figure 7-5). It is often seen 
on the backs and chests of persons who are tan. Tinea versicolor inhibits the 
production of melanin in the skin, which results in its appearance as white patches. 

Mycoses are fungal infections.

Tinea versicolor is what many 
refer to as sun spots or sun fun-
gus. These white splotches are a 
fungal condition.




 
 
 
 
126         CHAPTER 7    

FIGURE 7-4  MRSA lesion.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P
d
n
a

l

o
r
t
n
o
C
e
s
a
e
s
D

i

r
o
f

s
r
e
t
n
e
C
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-5  Tinea versicolor, sometimes called sun fungus.

It is not actually directly related to sun exposure, but is often seen on tanned per-
sons because the skin will not tan in the areas where tinea versicolor is active. The 
disease is easily treated with the use of antifungal prescription medications.

Tinea pedis, commonly known as athlete’s foot, is a fungal infection of the 
skin  on  the  foot.  The  disease  is  characterized  by  severe  itching  and  scaling, 
particularly on the sole of the foot. Again, tinea pedis is easily treated by the use 
of antifungal prescription medications.

Tinea pedis is commonly known 
as athlete’s foot, which is a fungal 
infection of the skin on the foot.




 
 
 
 
 
 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      127

Tinea corporis is better known by the public as ringworm. It can occur on 

any area of the body and presents itself as a ring-like lesion (Figure 7-6).

Candidas are yeast infections. They can cause a variety of skin infections, 
including  perleche,  also  known  as  cheilitis,  which  appears  as  softened  and 
sometimes  reddened  cracks  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth  (Figure  7-7).  Oral 
thrush, seen often in infants and persons with suppressed immune systems, such 
as patients with AIDS and diabetes, is a yeast infection of the mouth characterized 
by white patches inside the mouth.

Tinea corporis is better known 
as ringworm.

Candidas are yeast infections.

Perleche is a yeast infection af-
fecting the corners of the mouth.

Cheilitis, also known as perleche, 
is a yeast infection affecting the 
corners of the mouth.

FIGURE 7-6  Tinea corporis infection on the leg.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-7  Perleche.




 
 
 
 
 
128         CHAPTER 7    

.

.

D
M

,
r
e
g
r
e
B

.

G
y
h
t
o
m
T

i

.
r

D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-8  Herpes simplex causes common cold sores.

Viral Skin Infections

Herpes refers to a group of viruses. Herpes simplex is the cause of common 
cold sores, which generally appear on or around the mouth and often appear as 
oozing red ulcers (Figure 7-8). They are very contagious and should be treated 
by a physician. Facial treatments should be avoided for clients with active lesions. 
Certain facial treatments, such as chemical peels, have been known to cause a 
ﬂare-up of the herpes virus.

Herpes zoster, better known as shingles, is caused by the same virus that 
causes chicken pox. Herpes zoster is harbored by the nervous system and gener-
ally follows a pattern along the nerves in the skin. The lesions of herpes zoster 
look  like  multiple  red  blisters  (Figure  7-9).  Subjective  symptoms  may  include 
burning,  tingling,  or  numbness,  and  severe  cases  can  result  in  extreme  pain. 
Minor infections can be only a nuisance, and the disease subsides by itself. How-
ever, the infection can reoccur and in some cases causes scarring and pain due to 
nerve inﬂammation. There is no cure for herpes zoster, although some prescrip-
tions are helpful in controlling it. Herpes zoster is another infection that may be a 
problem in immunosuppressed individuals, such as patients with AIDS.

Molloscum contagiosum is a viral infection frequently seen on the faces of 
children. It appears as groups of small, ﬂesh-colored papules that often resemble 
milia but are in groups or clusters and are hard to the touch (Figure 7-10). They 
must be treated by a physician.

The most frequent viral lesions seen are warts. Warts are caused by a variety 
of viruses known as papillomaviruses or veruccae. Wart treatment varies with 
the lesion, including topical acid therapy using salicylic acid or trichloroacetic 
acid.  Other  dermatologic  treatments  include  freezing  the  lesions  with  liquid 

Herpes refers to a group of 
viruses.

Herpes zoster, better known as 
shingles, is caused by the same 
virus that causes chicken pox. The 
lesions of herpes zoster look like 
multiple red blisters.

Molluscum contagiosum is a 
viral infection frequently seen on 
the faces of children; it appears 
as groups of small, ﬂesh-colored 
papules.

Warts are caused by a variety 
of viruses known as papilloma-
viruses or verrucae.




 
 
 
 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      129

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J
e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-9  Typical case of herpes zoster (shingles). Note that the lesions follow 
a typical nerve-route pattern.

.

.

D
M

,
n
o
s
E

l

.
L

i

l

n
v
e
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-10  Molloscum contagiosum.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130         CHAPTER 7    

Pityriasis rosea is a patchy, red, 
rash-like disorder.

nitrogen or cautery with an electric needle. Warts are contagious, especially to 
the same individual, and they can be spread to another area of the body easily. 
Warts may be seen by the esthetician on the face, feet, and hands, especially 
the nails, and should be referred to a dermatologist for treatment (Figure 7-11).
Pityriasis rosea is a patchy, red, rash-like disorder. It can occur anywhere 
on the body but is frequently seen on the trunk. Groups of patches may develop. 
Many outbreaks resemble the pattern of a Christmas tree on the trunk. Its origin 
is unknown, and there is no real cure for pityriasis rosea, but it usually subsides 
after a few weeks. Itching associated with infection can be treated with topical 
prescription steroid creams (Figure 7-12).

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-11  Warts.

FIGURE 7-12  Pityriasis rosea.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      131

Dermatitis is inﬂammation of 
the skin.

Contact dermatitis is an irrita-
tion caused by either an allergic 
reaction or irritation to something, 
or by some substance touching 
the skin or coming in contact with 
the skin’s surface.

COMMON REACTIONS, RASHES, 
AND IRRITATIONS

In Chapter 13, Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants, we discuss common aller-
gies that the esthetician sees routinely. Dermatitis means inﬂammation of the 
skin. It is a descriptive term used to describe many different types of skin inﬂam-
mation and irritation. Dermatitis is an irritation rather than a disease. It is gener-
ally not caused by pathological organisms, such as infections caused by viruses, 
bacteria, and fungi. Many of the other terms already discussed in this chapter are 
used as adjectives to describe different types and patterns of dermatitis.

Contact Dermatitis

Contact dermatitis is probably the most common form of dermatitis observed 
by the esthetician. Contact dermatitis is an irritation caused by an allergic reac-
tion or irritation to something, or by some substance touching the skin or coming 
in  contact  with  the  skin’s  surface.  Cosmetics  are  a  frequent  cause  of  contact 
dermatitis. Other frequent causes of contact dermatitis include jewelry, laundry 
products, clothing fabrics and dyes, plants (such as poison ivy), and other sub-
stances (Figure 7-13A and 7-13B).

There are two basic treatments for contact dermatitis. The ﬁrst, of course, 
is  to  avoid  contact  with  the  offending  substance.  This  is  sometimes  hard  to 
pinpoint,  because  we  touch  so  many  substances  on  a  daily  basis.  Often  the 
dermatologist can tell much about the source of irritation by the location of the 
dermatitis. Irritation of the hands is often caused by household products. Health 
and personal care professionals, including estheticians, often suffer from derma-
titis related to substances they touch at work.

Irritation from hand washes, disinfectants, and antiseptics—even allergies to latex 
gloves—are frequently seen in these professionals. Estheticians also come in contact 
with a large number of cosmetic products, which can also be a source of irritation.

The process of eliminating the offending substance is often a matter of trial 
and error: eliminating one or all substances and testing by slowly adding steps 
of substance contact. Allergies are sometimes easier to detect. The dermatologist 
often runs allergy patch tests, and allergies have a tendency to be more acute 
than irritation dermatitis.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-13A  Contact dermatitis in a hairstylist due 
to parapheneline-diamine.

FIGURE 7-13B  Contact dermatitis due to nickel allergy.




 
 
 
 
132         CHAPTER 7    

Atopic eczema, also known as 
atopic dermatitis, is a chronic 
inﬂammatory condition of the 
skin that is hereditary and may be 
related to respiratory allergies or 
asthma.

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-14  Atopic dermatitis.

The second part of contact dermatitis treatment is to soothe and stop the 
inﬂammation. Topical steroid creams are often prescribed by the dermatologist 
to ease the symptoms of allergic or irritant dermatitis. These prescription creams 
usually work fairly quickly, assuming that the source of irritation has also been 
eliminated.

Dermatitis can have many characteristics visually, but it is usually red (erythe-
mic) and often itchy or burning. The term eczema is often used interchangeably 
with the term dermatitis.

Atopic Dermatitis

Atopic eczema or dermatitis is a more complicated form of dermatitis (Figure 7-14). 
It is a more severe and chronic condition and is associated, in most cases, with 
heredity. It may be affected by illness, stress, and other changes. Some patients 
suffer from atopic dermatitis all their lives. It can occur anywhere on the body, 
but it is very common on the extremities, including hands and arms, and legs 
and feet.

Atopic eczema can be controlled with the use of prescription steroid creams 
and  oral  antihistamines.  Cosmetologically,  the  patient  with  atopic  eczema  is 
more  likely  to  have  irritant  reactions  to  cosmetics.  If  you  have  a  client  with 
atopic eczema, discuss any cosmetics with the client’s doctor. In general, stick 
to fragrance-free, simple products—the simpler the better, and the fewer ingre-
dients the better. Use the same care as discussed in Chapter 13, Sensitive Skin, 
Allergies, and Irritants.

It  is  very  important  for  patients  with  atopic  dermatitis  to  maintain  proper 
barrier function. Impaired barrier function can start a ﬂare of eczema in chronic 
eczema patients. Clients should maintain daily moisturization of the skin to help 
avoid ﬂares.

Occasionally, you may notice a rash following a pattern on the face that does 
not clear up. Rashes in a butterﬂy pattern across the cheeks can be a symptom 




Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      133

of lupus erythematosus. We have already discussed lupus (see Chapter 3, The 
Immune System). If you notice a recurrent rash on a client’s face, you should 
refer the client to a physician, as you should with all rashes and chronic redness.

Seborrheic Dermatitis

Seborrheic dermatitis is a commonly seen and often chronically reoccurring 
condition that appears as red, ﬂaking, dry-looking skin in the hairline, eyebrows, 
T-zone, corners and sides of the nose, and the ears. Inexperienced estheticians 
and clients often view this condition as “dry skin” and treat it with moisturizers; 
this method is not only ineffective, but may actually worsen the condition. Occa-
sionally rich moisturizers can trigger a ﬂare.

Seborrheic dermatitis is actually an inﬂammation of the sebaceous glands, 
and it is more common in men. It may ﬂare with changes in weather or season, 
or when the patient is experiencing unusual amounts of stress. 

Seborrheic  dermatitis  is  treated  with  steroid  creams  and  prescription  anti-
fungal creams. Although the cause is not completely understood, it is thought to 
be associated with the presence of a skin yeast called pityrosporum ovale. See 
Chapter  15,  Acne  and  the  Esthetician,  for  more  information  about  seborrheic 
dermatitis.

Psoriasis

Psoriasis is an autoimmune inﬂammatory disease of the skin that is caused by 
the skin and epidermis “turning over” faster than it does in a normal individual. 
It is believed to be genetic and can be chronic and last over a lifetime. Psoriasis 
is not contagious and is not related to any pathological organism (Figure 7-15).
Psoriasis  primarily  affects  the  skin  on  the  body  and  is  often  symmetrical, 
which means it occurs simultaneously on both sides of the body in the same 
place. It often affects the elbows, the knees, and other extremities.

Seborrheic dermatitis is a 
chronic condition that appears as 
red, ﬂaking, dry-looking skin in 
the hairline, eyebrows, T-zone, 
corners and sides of the nose, and 
the ears. It is thought to be associ-
ated with the presence of a skin 
yeast called pityrosporum ovale.

Psoriasis  is an autoimmune 
inﬂammatory disease of the skin 
that is caused by the skin and 
epidermis “turning over” faster than 
it does in a normal individual, 
resulting in red, ﬂaky patches.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-15  Psoriasis.




 
 
 
 
134         CHAPTER 7    

Biologics are protein compounds 
prepared from live cells; they help 
suppress different biochemical 
reactions that cause psoriasis, thus 
helping to control and prevent 
symptoms.

Urticaria, or hives, is due to 
allergies.

Treatments  used  to  control  psoriasis  include  steroid  creams,  antihistamines, 
and light therapy using controlled exposures of ultraviolet A (UVA). Promising treat-
ment is now also available using a class of drugs called biologics, which are protein 
compounds prepared from live cells. These drugs help suppress different biochemi-
cal reactions that cause psoriasis, helping to control and prevent symptoms.

Urticaria

An outbreak of urticaria, or hives, is due to allergies. Urticaria often quickly 
fades without treatment, but the source of the allergy should be identiﬁed. Der-
matologists use topical steroids, oral steroids, antihistamines, and allergy testing 
to treat and identify causes of urticaria. For more information, see Chapter 13, 
Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants.

Keratosis Pilaris

Keratosis pilaris is a condition 
in which the skin exhibits redness 
and irritation in patches, accompa-
nied by a rough texture, and small 
pinpoint-sized white papules that 
look like very small milia.

Keratosis pilaris is a chronic condition in which the skin exhibits redness and 
irritation in patches, accompanied by a rough texture and small pinpoint-sized 
white papules that look like very small milia (Figure 7-16A and 7-16B). Keratosis 
pilaris is often found on the cheeks and upper arms. It is often seen in children 
and teenagers, but it can affect any age group. Many children outgrow the con-
dition. In most cases, it is a nuisance disorder. 

FIGURE 7-16A  Keratosis pilaris often affects the 
upper arm.

FIGURE 7-16B  Keratosis pilaris is often seen on 
the lower cheeks.

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      135

Mild  forms  of  keratosis  pilaris  can  be  successfully  treated  and  controlled 
with mild glycolic or lactic acid moisturizers used on a daily basis, along with 
gentle periodic exfoliation with mild scrubs or gommages. Severe forms should 
be referred to a dermatologist. 

VASCULAR LESIONS

Vascular  lesions  are  visible  conditions  that  involve  the  blood  or  circulatory 
system. Probably the most common forms of vascular lesion are telangiectasias, 
distended capillaries, commonly incorrectly referred to as broken capillaries. Areas 
of  skin  that  contain  telangiectasias  are  described  as  couperose  (Figure  7-17). 
In fact, the capillaries are not actually broken; they are simply dilated or new 
extensions of deeper capillaries that have developed near the surface of the skin. 
Telangiectasias are permanent and are caused by a variety of factors, including 
sun exposure as well as exposure to extreme temperatures, friction, or injury to 
the skin. They can be characteristic of rosacea.

Telangiectasias can be caused or worsened by vasodilators, which are drugs 
or substances that cause dilation of the blood vessels. Included in the category of 
vasodilators are tobacco and alcohol. Alcoholics often have many telangiectasias.
Telangiectasias are too deep in the skin to be affected or improved by ordi-
nary esthetic treatment. Removal of irritants from the skin care regimen, addi-
tion of soothing agents, improvement of the barrier function, and treatment with 
LED light may improve the appearance or severity of the visible telangiectasias. 
To remove the lesion, however, medical treatment is required. Most telangiecta-
sias are only a beauty nuisance, but clients with multiple telangiectasias should 
be referred to a dermatologist for treatment and evaluation.

Medical treatment of telangiectasias is most often performed with a specialized 
laser or intense pulsed light (IPL) device. These devices cause a “drying up” 
of the vessel. When the ﬂow of blood has been cut off to the telangiectasias, 

Vascular lesions are visible 
conditions that involve the blood 
or circulatory system.

Telangiectasias are small, red, 
enlarged capillaries of the face 
and other areas of the body.

Couperose refers to diffuse red-
ness, including telangiectasias of 
the face and other areas of the 
body.

LED light is made up of light-
emitting diodes, which are fast-
ﬂashing lights that emit energy to 
the skin and are used to treat sun 
damage and redness.

Specialized lasers are designed 
for speciﬁc treatment uses such as 
vascular lesions and aging skin.

Intense pulsed light (IPL) is a 
powerful medical light treatment 
used to treat pigmentation, vascu-
lar lesions, and aging skin.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-17  Telangiectasias, also 
sometimes known as couperose.




 
 
 
 
136         CHAPTER 7    

Spider angiomas are a type of 
blood vessel distention that 
resembles a spider.

Port-wine stains are hereditary 
vascular birthmarks.

Vascular lasers are designed spe-
ciﬁcally to treat vascular lesions.

the capillary collapses. The results of these treatments are almost immediate and 
may involve some ﬂaking or drying of the skin area.

Spider angiomas are similar to telangiectasias but have a central “body” and 
branches of telangiectasias resembling a spider. They are also usually beauty nui-
sances and are treated by dermatologists by the same methods used for telangiectasias.
Telangiectasias have a strong tendency to reoccur, even after medical treat-

ment, or new telangiectasias can develop.

Port-wine stains are a form of vascular birthmark. They are large red or 
purple-toned patches, often involving as much as half the face. They are also 
treated with vascular lasers. Often many treatments are required over a period 
of time. Estheticians trained in camouﬂage makeup may be of great help to cli-
ents with port-wine stains.

GROWTHS

Solar-induced skin growths and conditions that require medical referral are seen 
frequently by estheticians. These include hyperplasias, keratoses, sun-induced 
pigmentation disorders, and skin cancers. For much more information on these 
conditions, see Chapter 19, Sun and Sun Damage.

You should review Chapter 19 and be very familiar with identifying these 

growths, especially cancers and precancers.

Skin tags are very small, thread-
like growths. They are benign 
lesions but frequently are irritated 
by jewelry or clothing rubbing 
against them.

Skin tags are very small, threadlike growths. They are frequently seen on 
the  eyelids,  neck,  and  décolleté.  They  are  benign  lesions,  but  frequently  are 
irritated  by  jewelry  or  clothing  rubbing  against  them.  Most  people  ﬁnd  them 
unattractive, and they should be removed. They are easily removed by the der-
matologist using freezing, electric needle, or scissors (Figure 7-18).

.

.

D
M

,
d
n
o
B

.
J

l

i

e
a
h
c
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-18  Skin tags are often seen on the neck and in the chest area.




 
 
 
Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      137

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

l

l

i

a
c
g
o
o
t
a
m
r
e
D

l

d
n
a
a
e
Z
w
e
N

,
g
r
o
.
Z
N
t
e
N
m
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 7-19A AND B  Xanthalasmas can appear on any area of the eyes and sometimes on the cheeks or forehead.

Xanthomas are fatty pockets 
found on the eyelids.

Xanthalasmas are much ﬂatter 
than milia, have a yellowish ap-
pearance, are below the skin’s 
surface, and may have irregular 
shape.

Skin tags are largely hereditary and have been associated with obesity, preg-
nancy, postmenopause, diabetes, and intestinal disorders. These medical asso-
ciations are another reason that skin tags should be seen by a physician.

Xanthomas or xanthalasmas are fatty pockets found on the eyelids. They 
look like large, closed comedones and are frequently found on the upper and 
lower  lids  (Figure  7-19A  and  7-19B).  They  are  somewhat  ﬂat  and  are  usually 
oval or egg-shaped.

Xanthalasmas should be referred to a dermatologist for treatment with ste-
roid  injections  or  removal  by  extraction  or  excision.  They  can  be  associated 
with high cholesterol, and often the dermatologist will order tests to determine 
cholesterol levels.

We have only touched on the many disorders and diseases that can affect 
the skin. We have, however, discussed many conditions frequently observed by 
the practicing esthetician.

Again, this chapter should educate you to recognize possible symptoms of 
conditions that should be referred to a dermatologist or other appropriate physi-
cian. Estheticians treat cosmetic disorders of the skin. They should never attempt 
to diagnose or treat a disease or medical disorder. Always refer any suspicious 
rash, growth, or other abnormality to a dermatologist.

COMMONLY USED PRESCRIPTION 
DERMATOLOGICAL DRUGS

It is important for practicing estheticians to have a working knowledge of both 
topical and internal drugs frequently used in dermatology. The main reason it 
is important to have a basic understanding of these drugs is that they may have 
contraindications  for  types  of  esthetic  or  cosmetic  treatments  and  side  effects 
that affect esthetic treatment.

Keratolytic Drugs

Keratolytic drugs are topical medications applied directly to the skin. They cause 
rapid exfoliation of the skin and are actually peeling agents. They are primarily 
used to treat acne, but they also can be used to treat sun-damaged skin, actinic 
keratoses, and other dermatological problems.




 
 
 
 
138         CHAPTER 7    

Retinoids are drug or skin care 
ingredients that are vitamin A 
derivatives.

Tretinoin, commonly known as 
its trademark names Retin-A or 
Renova, is a vitamin a derivative 
topical prescription medication 
used to treat acne as well as sun 
damage symptoms.

Adapalene (also known as 
Differin) is a vitamin A deriva-
tive topical prescription acne 
medication.

Tazarotene (also known as 
Tazorac) is a vitamin A deriva-
tive topical prescription acne 
medication.

Isotretinoin (commonly known 
as Accutane ) is an oral medica-
tion derived from vitamin A and 
used to treat severe cystic acne.

Hydroquinone is an active 
topical ingredient that inhibits 
the production of melanin.

Mequinol is an active topical 
ingredient that inhibits the 
production of melanin.

Metronidazole is a prescription 
anti-yeast antibiotic that is used 
topically to treat rosacea.

sulfacetamide is a sulfur-based 
prescription topical drug used to 
treat rosacea.

Doxycycline, commercially 
known as Oracea, is an oral an-
tibiotic used to treat more severe 
cases of rosacea.

Hydrocortisone is a hormone 
that helps relieve inﬂammation 
and skin irritation.

Many  of  these  drugs  are  retinoids,  or  vitamin  A  derivatives.  Tretinoin 
(Retin-A®, Renova®, Avita®), adapalene (Differin®), and tazarotene (Tazorac®) 
are all retinoids. They cause peeling of the skin; thin the surface layers; and can 
cause inﬂammation, redness, and ﬂaking. 

Isotretinoin (commonly known as Accutane®) is thoroughly discussed in 
Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician. This oral drug has many side effects and 
cosmetic  effects.  Use  the  same  precautions  as  for  the  retinoids.  For  patients 
taking  isotretinoin,  no  waxing  or  any  form  of  peeling/exfoliation  treatment 
should be administered anywhere on the body. Review the chapter on acne for 
more information.

Azelex® and Finacea®, generically known as azelaic acid, are used to treat 
acne, rosacea, sun damage, and hyperpigmentation. Azelaic acid is not a reti-
noid, but it has similar though milder side effects.

Contraindications for keratolytic drugs mainly involve the avoidance of other 
peeling agents and exfoliation procedures such as alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) and 
other peels and microdermabrasion. Waxing on or around the areas being treated 
should also be strictly avoided. Fragranced products, essential oils, and other stim-
ulating treatments, including aggressive massage, should be avoided. Drying alco-
hols may cause or worsen ﬂaking and inﬂammation in clients using these drugs. 

Hyperpigmentation Drugs

Prescription-strength hydroquinone, usually at 4 percent concentration, is also 
used  to  treat  hyperpigmentation.  Commercially  known  as  Melanex®,  Solaquin 
Forte®, and other names, often these drugs are used in conjunction with tretinoin. 
Again, the same esthetic and waxing treatments should be avoided. 

A newer active ingredient is mequinol, which is a lightening agent and a 
chemical cousin of hydroquinone. It is often combined with tretinoin, and the 
combination is available as the prescription topical drug Solage®.

Triluma® is a combination of tretinoin, hydroquinone, and a steroid called 
ﬂuocinolone acetonide. It is used to treat melasma and hyperpigmentation. Con-
traindications are the same as for other keratolytics.

Rosacea Drugs

Metronidazole, commercially known as Metrogel®, Metrocream®, Metrolotion®, 
and  Noritate®,  is  actually  an  antibiotic  topical.  Finacea®  (azelaic  acid)  and 
sulfacetamide (Sulfacet-R®, Klaron®, and Novacet®) are also used for rosacea 
treatment. Oral doxycycline, commercially known as Oracea, is an oral antibi-
otic used to treat more severe cases of rosacea.

The list of contraindications for rosacea is extensive. Please review Chapter 14, 

Rosacea.

CORTISONE

Hydrocortisone is a hormone that helps relieve inﬂammation, redness, rashes, 
and other skin irritations. Up to 1 percent hydrocortisone can be obtained as 
an over-the-counter drug, but prescription cortisone drugs are much stronger. 
Repetitive use of strong cortisone creams can cause thinning of the skin. Again, 
peeling  agents,  waxing,  drying  alcohols,  fragranced  products,  and  stimulating 
treatments should be avoided if the client is using a hydrocortisone topical drug. 
For more information on all these drugs, please see the pharmacology section 
of Milady’s Standard Esthetics: Advanced.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions      139

IN CONCLUSION

Estheticians are not medical professionals, but personal care services involve 
the esthetic treatment of the human body, and estheticians often are the ﬁrst to 
observe conditions that require medical referral. The esthetician must be able 
to  differentiate  between  conditions  that  are  treatable  by  the  esthetician  and 
conditions that require the services of a physician. Many diseases and medical 
conditions,  such  as  rosacea,  have  esthetic  effects  that  can  be  helped  by  the 
esthetician. Understanding common diseases of the skin enables the esthetician 
to provide safe and effective care for the client.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is the difference between a primary and a secondary lesion?

  2. What are some common infections of the skin? What are their causes?

  3. What are some common fungal infections?

  4. Use  your  knowledge  of  dermatological  terminology  to  describe  a  Grade  III 

acne condition.

  5. Why should estheticians be familiar with common forms of skin disease?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

8

Essential Knowledge 
of Chemistry

OBJECTIVES . . . 

The esthetician is not really a chemist. The esthetician 
specializes in applying cosmetic chemicals and teaching 
clients about their uses. However, it is extremely important 
that the esthetician have a working knowledge of basic 
chemistry to better understand the biochemical functions 
of both the skin’s cells and the cosmetics and products used 
in the practice of esthetics. This chapter focuses on basic 
principles of chemistry, providing the practicing esthetician 
with the basic knowledge needed to communicate better 
with clients about skin care and cosmetic products.



     141

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.142         CHAPTER 8

Element is a chemical in its 
simplest form.

Matter is anything that takes up 
space and has substance.

Periodic table is the chart of all 
the elements.

Atom is the smallest measurable 
unit of an element.

Nucleus of the cell is made up 
largely of protein and is also 
responsible for building certain 
proteins.

Electrons are negatively charged 
particles that orbit the nucleus of 
an atom. The exchange of these 
particles causes chemical reactions.

Protons are very small, positively 
charged particles within the atom.

Neutrons are very small, un-
charged particles within the atom.

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

Chemicals make up our whole world, from the ink on this page to the tip of 
your ﬁnger. Everything is made of chemicals. In the practice of esthetics, esthe-
ticians  handle  many  chemicals  on  a  daily  basis.  When  you  select  the  proper 
product for a client, or use galvanic current, or clean a steamer with vinegar, 
you are dealing with chemistry. Because our lives, as well as our jobs, involve a 
series of chemical reactions and procedures, it is important that the esthetician 
understand the basics of chemistry.

An element is a chemical in its simplest form. In other words, it cannot be 
changed to be any purer by practical purposes and means. About 110 elements 
make up all chemicals and all matter.

Matter is anything that takes up space and has substance. You are matter. 
This book is matter. Your products are matter. Essentially everything is matter! 
And therefore, everything is chemicals.

Examples  of  elements  are  silver,  gold,  carbon,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  silicon, 
hydrogen, sodium, chlorine, and so on. Remember, these chemicals (elements) 
cannot  be  broken  down  by  ordinary  means.  The  chart  of  all  the  elements  is 
called the periodic table (Figure 8-1).

The smallest measurable unit of an element is called an atom. An atom is 
made up of a nucleus, which is the center of the atom, and electrons, which 
orbit  around  the  nucleus.  An  atom  resembles  planets  orbiting  the  sun.  The 
“planets” are the electrons, and the “sun” is the nucleus. The nucleus of an atom 
is made up of protons and neutrons. Protons are very small, positively charged 
particles, whereas neutrons are very small particles with no real charge.

Electrons, which orbit the nucleus, are negatively charged. Remember from 
basic science how positive and negative charges are attracted to one another? 
This principle is what keeps electrons orbiting around the nucleus. The electrons, 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 8-1  Periodic table of the elements.




 
 
 
 
 
Essential Knowledge of Chemistry      143

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Na(cid:2)

Cl(cid:3)

Sodium atom

Chlorine atom

FIGURE 8-2  Sodium and chlorine atoms.

which are extremely light (it takes about 1,800 electrons to equal the mass of 
one proton), are attracted to the nucleus because they are negative. The nucleus, 
of course, is positive because it is made up of positive protons and neutrons that 
have no charge. Electrons orbit the nucleus in circular patterns. These patterns 
are called electron shells or energy levels. We refer to these orbital patterns as 
shells or levels. There may be one shell or many shells, depending on the size 
of the particular atom (Figure 8-2).

All  atoms  of  the  same  element  are  exactly  alike.  They  are  the  same  size, 
weigh the same, and have the same number of protons. Atoms also have the 
same number of protons and electrons. The atomic weight of an element is the 
number of protons in one of that element’s atoms. So if the number of protons 
in an atom is the same as the number of electrons in that atom, and you know 
the atomic weight of that element, you know exactly how many protons and 
electrons an atom of that element has. For example, hydrogen is a very small 
atom. It has a molecular weight of 1. That means that it has one proton in its 
nucleus and one electron orbiting the nucleus. Carbon is a bigger atom. It has 
an atomic weight of 6. Therefore, it contains six protons orbited by six electrons.
It takes a certain number of electrons to ﬁll one of the shells, which are also 
called energy levels. The bigger the element, the more levels of electrons are 
present. The ﬁrst energy level holds two electrons; the second level holds eight 
electrons;  the  third  level  holds  eight  electrons.  This  arrangement  is  important 
because each level holds a certain capacity of electrons, sort of like the capacity 
of a room. Atoms have a physical need to have full outer levels.

This  means  that  if  an  outer  level  of  electrons  is  almost  full,  the  level  will 
“want” to ﬁll itself up. If the outer lever is almost empty, it will want to get rid 
of its few outer electrons. For example, chlorine has seven electrons in its outer 
level. It needs eight to complete the level. Chlorine has a tendency to want to 
ﬁll that level. Sodium, however, has only one electron in its outer level; it has 
a tendency to want to get rid of that one electron, so its next level will be full. 
Remember, the normal conﬁguration of atoms is to have “full” outer levels of 
electrons. Where can the chlorine atom ﬁnd that extra electron it needs to ﬁll its 
outer level? Maybe it can get one from the sodium atom that wants to get rid of 
its outer electron! So chlorine “steals” the electron from sodium, which sodium is 
glad to get rid of. Both atoms now have full outer levels of electrons. However, 
remember that we said earlier that each atom had the same number of positive 




 
 
 
 
 
144         CHAPTER 8

Na(cid:2)

Cl(cid:3)

Sodium atom

Chlorine atom

Sodium chloride molecule (NaCl)

FIGURE 8-3  Sodium and chlorine ions.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

protons in its nucleus as negative electrons orbiting the atom. Now that chlorine and 
sodium have exchanged electrons, doesn’t that change their positive–negative elec-
trical charges? Now that chlorine has an extra electron, it has one more electron 
than it has protons. That means that it has one more negative charge than it did 
before. Sodium has lost an electron, so it now has one more proton than it has 
electrons, giving it a positive charge. It has one more positive charge (protons) 
than it has negative charges (electrons).

When atoms “steal” or “give away” electrons to each other, the resulting atoms 
with new charges (and number of electrons) are called ions. Ions are charged 
atoms. The chlorine is now negative, and the sodium is now positive (Figure 8-3).
Positive and negative charges are attracted to one another. So chlorine, with 
its negative charge, will be closely attracted to sodium, with its positive charge. 
They are so closely attracted, they become “locked” together because of their 
charges.  When  two  or  more  atoms  are  locked  together  in  this  manner,  they 
become  a  molecule.  A  molecule  is  two  or  more  atoms  joined  together.  Mol-
ecules have completely different properties than individual atoms. Chlorine is 
a gas, and sodium is a solid. Together in this molecule they are called sodium 
chloride, which is actually table salt. When two ions form a molecule by being 
attracted to each other’s charge, the bond is said to be an ionic bond.

Therefore, the way atoms are joined together has a lot to do with how many 
electrons are present in the outer electron levels. The number of electrons in the 
outer level is known as the valence of that atom or element. Low-valence atoms 
are, in general, attracted to high-valence atoms.

What happens if an atom has a medium number of electrons in its outer 
shell?  In  other  words,  if  the  shell  is  half  full,  will  the  atom  try  to  get  more 
electrons or lose outer electrons? Elements with a medium-ﬁlled outer level of 
electrons share electrons, rather than trading electrons as in ionic bonds. When 
atoms share electrons, the bond between the atoms is called a covalent bond. 
For  example,  carbon  has  four  electrons  in  its  outer  level.  It  needs  four  more 
electrons to ﬁll its outer level. So it shares electrons with other atoms. Often, it 
shares with four other carbon atoms (Figure 8-4).

Ions, or charged atoms, are the 
resulting atoms with new charges 
when atoms “steal” or “give away” 
electrons to each other.

Molecule is two or more atoms 
joined together.

Sodium chloride is the com-
pound created by combining 
sodium and chloride, commonly 
known as table salt.

Ionic bond is the bond of two 
ions joining to form a molecule.

Valence is the number of elec-
trons in the outer energy level of 
an atom.

Covalent bond is the bond be-
tween atoms sharing electrons.




 
 
 
 
 
Essential Knowledge of Chemistry      145

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

FIGURE 8-4  Carbon atoms “sharing” electrons with other carbon and hydrogen 
atoms.

Let’s go back and look at the periodic table of the elements. The elements 
in vertical columns are called families of elements. The elements that are in the 
same horizontal column are called a period. The elements are listed from left 
to right in order of their atomic numbers, or the number of protons in the atom 
of each element. Also listed is the atomic mass, which for the purposes of this 
discussion is the weight of an atom of that element.

Each element has its own abbreviation, or symbol. Some symbols are the ﬁrst 
letter, or the ﬁrst two letters, of the element name. Some abbreviations are taken 
from the Latin word for that element. For example, the symbol for carbon is C, 
but the symbol for iron is Fe, which stands for ferrous, the Latin term for iron.

When atoms join together to form molecules, the number of atoms of each 
element in the molecule is listed beside the symbol for the element. For exam-
ple, water (H2O) is made of one atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen. 
Hydrogen  atoms  need  one  electron  to  ﬁll  the  outer  level.  Oxygen  needs  two 
electrons to ﬁll its outer ring. Each hydrogen atom shares an electron with the 
oxygen atom (Figure 8-5).

Water molecule

H

H

(H2O)

O

FIGURE 8-5  H2O molecule “sharing” electrons between hydrogen and oxygen atoms.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©




 
 
 
 
 
146         CHAPTER 8

Compound is produced when 
molecules of two different ele-
ments join.

Mixture is produced when differ-
ent elements or compounds are 
mixed together physically.

Solution is a mixture of chemicals.

Solvent is the liquid part of a 
solution.

Solute is the solid part of a 
solution.

When  a  molecule  joins  two  different  elements  together,  the  reaction  pro-
duces what is known as a compound. A compound is two or more elements 
joined chemically to produce an entirely different substance. The new substance 
has completely new chemical and physical characteristics.

A mixture is produced when different elements or compounds are mixed 
together physically but still retain separate characteristics. Most cosmetic formulas 
are mixtures. In other words, the ingredients do not change when mixed with 
other chemicals. We discuss cosmetic formulations in more depth in Chapter 9, 
Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients.

A  solution  is  a  mixture  of  other  chemicals.  It  is  an  even  mixture,  which 
means the various chemicals are evenly dispersed throughout the mixture. An 
example of this is salt water. If you mix salt in water, the salt distributes itself 
evenly throughout the water. If you keep adding more salt to the water, the salt 
begins to pile up on the bottom of the container. This means that no more salt 
can be dispersed evenly in that amount of water. The point at which mixtures 
no longer mix evenly is known as the saturation point.

The liquid part of a solution is called a solvent. A solute is the solid part 
of the solution. So, in the example of salt water, salt is the solute and water is 
the solvent. Salt water is a mixture, not a compound. The salt has not changed 
chemically; it is simply dispersed through the water. Salt (sodium chloride: NaCl) 
is a compound, and so is water (H2O). The two compounds are mixed together 
but do not react chemically with one another (Figure 8-6). Many cosmetics are 
solutions. Makeup is a good example of pigments evenly distributed through a 
solvent of oil or water or both. This foundation makeup, too, is an example of 
a solution.

Na(cid:2)Cl(cid:3)

Na(cid:2)Cl(cid:3)

Na(cid:2)Cl(cid:3)

Na(cid:2)Cl(cid:3)

Na(cid:2)Cl(cid:3)

NaCl (salt) is dispersed in a
solution in a glass of water.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 8-6  NaCl solution.




 
 
 
 
 
Essential Knowledge of Chemistry      147

HOW CHEMICAL REACTIONS TAKE PLACE
Reactions  between  two  elements  or  two  compounds  that  result  in  chemical 
changes are called chemical reactions. During a chemical reaction, electrons 
of the elements or compounds involved begin either to share energy levels in a 
covalent bond or to form ionic bonds.

Some  chemical  reactions  take  place  simply  by  mixing  two  chemicals 
together.  Sodium,  for  example,  is  very  reactive  with  water.  In  fact,  sodium  is 
violently reactive with water. The sodium bonds with hydrogen and oxygen to 
form sodium hydroxide (lye) and allows hydrogen gas to escape. In the process, 
much energy is given off in the form of heat. The reaction is as follows:

2Na + 2H2O = 2NaOH + H2 energy (heat)
Let’s talk about this equation, or symbol, for the chemical reaction taking place. 
Remember the chemical symbols from the periodic table. Na is the symbol for 
sodium; O is for oxygen; and H is for hydrogen. The number in front of each 
chemical stands for the number of molecules of each chemical. Numbers below 
a chemical symbol stand for the number of atoms of that element in a particular 
molecule. So, getting back to the reaction, 2Na stands for two atoms of sodium, 
and 2H2O stands for two molecules of water, which equals 2NaOH, two mol-
ecules of sodium hydroxide, plus H2, one molecule of hydrogen.

Notice that the same number of atoms are present before and after the reac-
tion. Before the reaction, there were two sodium atoms, four hydrogen atoms, 
and two oxygen atoms: 2Na 2H2O. After the reaction, the number of atoms is the 
same, only with a different chemical structure. Because of the electron change-
overs, we now have two totally new chemicals, lye and hydrogen. Hydrogen, of 
course, is a gas, and it generally escapes into the air. The 2NaOH, or two mol-
ecules of sodium hydroxide, have two atoms of sodium, two atoms of oxygen, 
and two atoms of hydrogen. The other two hydrogen atoms are given off as H2 
(hydrogen gas). So, equal numbers of the same atoms are on either side of the 
reaction. This is why the reaction is called an equation.

Some  reactions  such  as  the  one  discussed  here  occur  very  naturally,  by 
simply combining two chemicals. Other reactions do not happen as naturally. 
These types of chemical reaction require a catalyst—a substance that helps cause 
the reaction, or speed up the reaction, without its atoms becoming a direct part 
of the reaction’s products.

Another condition required for some chemical reactions is heat. Heat can 
trigger chemical reactions. Some reactions require exposure to ultraviolet light 
or pressure to take place.

CHEMICALS FOUND IN THE SKIN 
AND BODY

When  we  discuss  chemicals  and  chemical  reactions  within  the  body,  we  are 
talking about a subject called biochemistry. Biochemistry is a highly complex 
subject that we will barely touch. Many complex chemical reactions take place 
in the body, and many of these reactions are still not fully understood.

As  discussed  in  previous  chapters,  almost  every  body  function  involves 
chemical reactions. The hormones that tell our cells what to do are chemicals 
that react with receptor sites. The pituitary hormones that signal other glands to 
manufacture other hormones are another example of chemical reactions within 
the body.

Chemical reactions are reactions 
between two elements or two 
compounds that result in chemical 
changes.

Equation is a chemical reaction 
such that equal numbers of the 
same atom are on either side of 
the reaction.

Biochemistry is the study of 
chemicals and chemical reactions 
within the body.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.148         CHAPTER 8

Polymers are chains of carbon–
carbon and carbon–hydrogen 
bonded together.

Protein is made of carbon, 
oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and 
sulfur.

Amino acid is a protein that 
helps break down simple sugars, 
fats, and parts of proteins.

Peptide bond is the bond be-
tween two amino acid groups.

Peptide is a chain of amino acids.

Polypeptide is a chain of amino 
acid molecules (peptides).

Saccharide can refer to any 
carbohydrate group.

Monosaccharide is one saccharide 
by itself.

Disaccharide means two saccha-
rides are bonded together.

Polysaccharide means many 
saccharides are bonded together.

Most of the chemical reactions within the body are called organic reactions. 
Organic chemistry does not mean natural chemistry. Organic chemistry is the 
chemistry of compounds containing carbon atoms. Carbon is an element that is 
a large constituent of almost all the many chemicals in the body. The chemicals 
that the body uses most are oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. Carbon and 
hydrogen frequently bond together in chains. These chains of carbon–carbon 
and carbon–hydrogen bonds are known as polymers. Polymers are found in 
many of the body’s chemicals. Proteins, DNA, sugars, and carbohydrates are just 
a few examples of polymers in the body’s chemistry.

Protein is made of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and sulfur. The basic 
unit of a protein molecule is called an amino acid. Think of amino acids as mod-
ules  or  cars  of  a  toy  train.  When  many  different  modules  are  placed  together,  a 
protein molecule results. Simple proteins are groups of amino acids linked together. 
Sometimes the amino acids will have another chemical linked to them that is not 
an amino acid. These proteins with a non-amino-acid group are called conjugated 
proteins. Conjugated proteins make up most of the substances found in intercellular 
cement. Glycoproteins are amino acid chains with a carbohydrate group attached to 
it. Lipoproteins are amino acid chains with lipids or fats attached to the chain. Phos-
phoroproteins have a phosphorus or phosphate group attached to the protein chain.
The bond between amino acid groups is called a peptide bond. When many 
amino  acids  are  in  long  chains,  there  are  obviously  many  bonds.  A  chain  of 
amino acids is called a peptide. A chain of peptides is known as a polypeptide, 
and polypeptides make up proteins.

Simple proteins make up basic material for the body’s tissues. The skin, hair, 
and connective tissue are made up of a protein called schleroprotein. The proteins 
that make up the blood and lymph are called globulins. Albumin is another type 
of simple protein used in the blood. Nucleic acids with protein DNA structures are 
another type of simple protein product. The carbohydrate groups include sugars 
and  other  compounds.  Carbohydrates  are  formed  by  a  chain  of  carbon  atoms 
united with oxygen and hydrogen. They form units, similar to protein and amino 
acid units. A simple unit of a carbohydrate is called a saccharide. One saccha-
ride by itself is called a monosaccharide. Two saccharides together are called a 
disaccharide. Many saccharides bonded together are called a polysaccharide. 
Examples of the various carbohydrates are illustrated (Figure 8-7).

Monosaccharides are simple sugars like glucose (blood sugar). Disaccharides 
include sucrose or table sugar, and maltose, the sugar used to make malted milk.
Polysaccharides are the more complex carbohydrates. They include the sugars in 
starch and the carbohydrates that make up vegetables and cellulose-type substances.
Lipids are basically fats. They are a third major chemical group within the 
body. Lipids are made up of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen. Lipids do not form 
in units like proteins and carbohydrates. They are more complex. Triglycerides 
are the best-known type of lipid. Other lipids include waxes, fats, and steroids.
Again, lipids are very important chemicals in cosmetology. They can bind 
with proteins to form proteolipids, which are a major part of the intercellular 
cement. Phospholipids and glycolipids are two examples of lipid–protein com-
pounds found in the intercellular cement.

pH, ACIDS, AND BASES

When water is added to certain compounds like acids, the water (H2O) breaks 
up and restructures as certain atoms join the acid chemicals. Hydrogen chloride 
(HCl),  for  example,  becomes  hydrochloric  acid  when  mixed  with  water.  The 
hydrogen ions ﬂoat separately in the acid. The measurement of these hydrogen 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Essential Knowledge of Chemistry      149

A  D-Fructose (levulose)

CH2OH

O

H

HO

H

OH

CH2OH

HO

H

B  Sucrose (glucose + fructose)

CH2OH

H

H

OH

H

HO

C  Amylopectin

H

CH2OH
O

H
OH

O

H

O

O

H

HO

CH2OH

O

H

H

OH

CH2OH

HO

H

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

H

H

CH2OH
O

H

H

CH2OH
O

H

O

H

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

H

OH

H

OH

H

OH

H

HO

H

O

CH2

H
OH

O

H

H

H

O

CH2OH
O

H

H
OH

H

O

H

OH

H

OH

FIGURE 8-7  Examples of (A) monosaccharide, (B) disaccharide, (C) polysaccharide.

ions is known as the pH of the substance. The term pH is an abbreviation for the 
negative logarithm of hydrions (positively charged hydrogen ions). Acids have a 
low pH, which actually means that they have a large number of hydrogen ions. 
Alkaline substances, or bases, have a low concentration of hydrogen ions. They 
have high pH values. Acids all have similar chemical characteristics. Bases, or 
alkaline substances, are also similar to each other.

The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14. The lower the pH, the more acidic the 
substance. The higher the pH, the more alkaline the substance. Figure 8-8 gives 
examples of various substances and their pH values.

Why pH Is Important in Cosmetics

The skin has an acid mantle on its surface that is made of a mixture of lipids, 
sebum, and sweat. This acid mantle has a pH of about 5.5. Therefore, it has a 
slightly acidic pH.

Bases have a low concentration 
of hydrogen atoms and high pH 
values.




 
 
 
 
 
150         CHAPTER 8

r
e
t
a
W
e
r
u
P

d
o
o
B

l

Skin

H
air

U
r
in
e

S
a
l
i
v
a

e
t
a
n
o
b
r
a
c
i
B

m
u
i
d
o
S

o
o
p
m
a
h
S

6

7

8

5

9

Peroxide
AlumVinegar

4

Lemon Juice

Muriatic Acid

2

1

10

3

l

           Acid                                Alkaline 

a
r
t
u
e
N

Soap

11

Depilatories

12

13

Strong

Strong

14

Lye

FIGURE 8-8  Average pH values.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Cosmetics should also have a slightly acidic pH. Higher pH values tend to 
swell the skin and make it more permeable. This can be good or bad, depending 
on the circumstances. For example, desincrustant solutions and pre-masks used 
for treating clogged pores and oily areas need to have a slightly alkaline pH to 
slightly dilate the pores and work as a solvent to soften fatty plugs of sebum 
in the follicle for easier extraction. They also help conduct electricity (galvanic 
current) better for desincrustation.

Cleansers for oily skin may also have a slightly higher pH than that of the 
acid mantle. This enables these cleansers to perform a more efﬁcient job of cut-
ting the sebaceous secretions of oily or problem skin. Most of these high-pH 
cleansers are followed by low-pH toners. A cleanser with a pH of 6.5 or 7.0 is 
often followed by a toner with a pH of 4.0 or 4.5. High pH values, however, 
can be harmful to the skin also, particularly if they are not controlled. High pH 
increases the permeability of the skin, making it easier for bacteria, microorgan-
isms, and other harmful substances to enter the body. Harsh, high-pH soaps can 
be very irritating and can severely overdry the skin.

Being aware of pH values is very important in chemical exfoliation and peel-
ing procedures. Alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) and beta hydroxy acid (BHA) profes-
sional esthetic exfoliation treatments have lower pH values. The lower the pH, 
the more acidic the product is. The ideal pH for AHA professional esthetic treat-
ments is 3.0 with an AHA concentration of not greater than 30 percent. When 
the  pH  is  less  than  3.0,  the  irritation  potential  of  these  exfoliation  treatments 
increases. Likewise, concentrations of greater than 30 percent can increase irrita-
tion potential.

Exposure to pH values of less than 3.0 increases chances of barrier func-
tion damage and therefore increases the possibility of inﬂammation. Frequency 
of application can also increase irritation potential. Generally, AHA treatments 
with a pH of 3.0 should not be administered more than once or twice a week to 
begin treatment, and not more than twice a month after an initial series of 6 to 
12 treatments. Should irritation such as peeling skin or redness develop, exfolia-
tion should be discontinued, at least until the irritation subsides.

Combining chemical exfoliation treatments with mechanical exfoliation such 

as microdermabrasion further increases irritation chances and is not advisable.

The ideal pH for at-home AHA exfoliation products is 3.5. Again, repeatedly 
using products with a pH less than 3.5 on a daily basis can lead to irritation. 
Other products, such as certain vitamin serums, can also have very low pHs.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Essential Knowledge of Chemistry      151

Clients using AHA or BHA products should always use a daily broad-spectrum 

sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15.

BHA exfoliation treatments cannot be performed as frequently. Always follow 
the  manufacturer’s  instructions  when  using  any  exfoliation  product.  Do  not 
attempt to use chemical exfoliation procedures unless you have been properly 
trained. For much more information about chemical exfoliation, see Chapter 21, 
Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures.

CHEMICAL TERMS ESTHETICIANS 
SHOULD KNOW

A variety of chemical terms besides those already mentioned are important for 
estheticians to know so they can better interpret ingredient labels and under-
stand more about cosmetic chemicals. Some of these words are actually sufﬁxes 
or preﬁxes that you will see attached to different chemical names. Most of these 
are derived from Latin.

  Proteo—(preﬁx)  refers  to  protein.  Proteolytic,  as  in  proteolytic  enzyme 

peelings, means “protein dissolving.”

  Lipo—(preﬁx)  refers  to  fats,  lipids,  or  waxes.  Examples  are  lipoproteins, 
found  in  the  intercellular  cement,  or  liposuction,  the  surgical  procedure 
used to remove fat.

  Saccharides—can refer to any carbohydrate group. An example is muco-

polysaccharide, a popular moisturizing ingredient.

  Saturated—can mean either that a solution has absorbed as much solute as 
possible or that a molecule has taken on as many hydrogen atoms as it can 
hold (as in saturated fat).

  Aqueous—water-based, as in an aqueous solution.
  Aerobic—refers to a reaction that takes place in the presence of oxygen. 

Anaerobic means “without oxygen.”

  Hydration—water is added.
  Homogenous—a  mixture  that  is  even.  The  solute  is  evenly  dispersed 

throughout the solvent.

  Suspension—the solute is suspended throughout a solvent. Suspension is 
usually not homogenous. A separating makeup foundation is an example of 
a suspension.

  Alcohol—is a molecule that has a hydroxy (OH) group bonded to it. The 

molecule must be a hydrocarbon made of carbon and hydrogen atoms.

  Amino—(preﬁx)  refers  to  compounds  that  have  an  amino  acid  group 

attached; may also indicate protein derivation.

  Mono—(preﬁx) meaning “one.” Example: monosaccharide, which is a simple 

sugar with one saccharide group.

  Di—(preﬁx)  meaning “two.”  Disodium  is  the  term  for  two  sodium  atoms 

that are included in a molecular structure.

  Carbo—(preﬁx) has carbon as a base in the molecule. Example: carbohydrate.
  Distilled—heated  to  remove  one  chemical  from  another.  Water,  for  ex-
ample, is distilled by boiling water and allowing the gas to condense back 
into  liquid,  separating  the  water  from  impurities  and  other  contaminant 
chemicals.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152         CHAPTER 8

  Enzyme—a  protein  that  is  involved  as  a  catalyst  in  a  chemical  reaction. 
Enzymes in cosmetics are often used to break down substances, as a pro-
teolytic  enzyme  breaks  down  keratin  protein  in  dead  cells.  The  chemical 
names  of  enzymes  generally  end  in  the  sufﬁx  –ase.  Examples  are  lipase 
(fat-dissolving enzyme) and maltase, which breaks maltose, a disaccharide, 
into two simple glucose (sugar) molecules.

  Ionized—substance has been charged by changing atoms to ions. Deionized 

means that ions have been neutralized and do not have a charge.
  Poly—(preﬁx) meaning “many.” Examples: polymer, polysaccharide.
  Tri—(preﬁx) meaning “three.” Example: tridecyl trimellitate, an emollient.
  Cyclo—(preﬁx) meaning “circle.” Used to describe a molecule that is in a 
ring structure. The carbon atoms are joined in a ring formation. Example: 
cyclomethicone, a silicone-based emollient.

  Aldehyde—a  compound  made  of  carbon  and  hydrogen,  with  a  carbon, 

hydrogen, and oxygen group on the end of the molecule.

IN CONCLUSION

The skin and the body are made of chemicals. Understanding the principles of 
basic  chemistry  provides  elemental  knowledge  to  help  the  esthetician  under-
stand how skin care products are made and affect the skin’s appearance, as well 
as concepts such as biochemical reactions that affect the way the skin behaves.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is an element?

  2. Explain why electrons orbit the nucleus.

  3. What is the difference between an element, a compound, and a mixture?

  4. Describe pH. Give some pH values for various substances.

  5. Explain how variations in pH affect the skin.




 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER

9

Cosmetic Chemistry 
and Functional 
Ingredients

OBJECTIVES . . . 

It is very important for estheticians to be well informed about 
cosmetic ingredients. This chapter is an overview of common 
types of cosmetic ingredients. Discussion of their chemical 
functions in formulations is also included. You will learn about 
vehicles, including surfactants, emulsiﬁers, and emollients. We 
also discuss preservatives, coloring agents, and other chemi-
cals necessary to produce cosmetics.

Cosmetic chemistry is a highly complex ﬁeld. Cosmetic 
chemists work very closely with cellular function and must 
be well versed in medicine, biology, chemistry, pharmacology, 
and cosmetology. They must be aware of the beauty needs 
of people but at the same time be well trained in chemistry in 
order to make beauty products.

Making cosmetics is not as simple as many people think. 

Cosmetics vary greatly in formula. One slight variation in 
chemical makeup can create a whole new product texture, 
color, or other property. Cosmetic chemicals are divided into 
two basic groups. The ﬁrst group is known as the functional 
ingredients. Functional ingredients make up the main part 
of any cosmetic or skin care product. They help the prod-
uct spread across the skin, help place certain ingredients in 



     153

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.154         CHAPTER 9

Functional ingredients are 
cosmetic ingredients that are used 
primarily to spread, preserve, or 
affect the feel or look of a product.

Performance ingredients, or 
performance agents, are cosmetic 
ingredients that cause the actual 
physical appearance to change.

Active agents are chemicals that 
cause physical changes in the 
skin’s appearance or alter the 
appearance in any way.

Active ingredients are ingredi-
ents in drug products that cause 
a change in the function of the 
human body.

Vehicles are ingredients used as 
spreading agents. 

Water is the most common 
vehicle ingredient.

Deionizing is the process of 
neutralizing ions in water that can 
cross-react in a product.

Distillation is the process of 
purifying water.

speciﬁc areas, help the product stay mixed and uniform in texture, 
adjust the pH of the product, or help the product stay fresh. Func-
tional ingredients do not usually cause physical appearance changes 
associated with the use of skin care products and cosmetics.

Ingredients that cause the actual physical changes to the 
appearance of the skin are known as performance ingredients 
or performance agents. They occasionally are also called active 
agents. There is a trend toward not calling these chemicals active 
agents, because the similar-sounding term active ingredients is 
reserved for drug products. Saying a skin care product has an active 
ingredient implies that it is a drug. For more information about the 
technical differences between drugs and cosmetics, see Chapter 12, 
Claims in Cosmetics.

In this chapter, we discuss functional ingredients, which include 

a large number of cosmetic chemicals. You will learn about how 
ingredients are used to stabilize, thicken, preserve, and spread other 
ingredients across the skin that cause the physical changes we see 
when we use skin care products.

The biggest category of functional ingredients is vehicles. 

Vehicles are spreading agents. They are the substances in which the 
performance ingredients are “ﬂoating.” They are the carrier within 
a skin care product and deliver performance ingredients to speciﬁc 
areas of the skin. They make up the largest actual amount of any 
skin care product or cosmetic. Without vehicles, we could never 
apply the performance ingredients and cause the changes we see to 
the skin’s appearance.

ABOUT WATER

Water is the most common vehicle ingredient. You will notice that water is listed 
ﬁrst on the ingredient label of most products. That means there is more water 
than  any  other  ingredient  in  the  product.  The  thinner  the  product,  the  more 
water is present.

Cosmetic factories have large tanks to purify water before using it in a for-
mulation. This puriﬁcation process is accomplished by ﬁltering, distilling, deion-
izing, and sterilizing water before it is used in a formula.

Deionizing water neutralizes ions that can cross-react with other ingredi-
ents  or  make  a  product  unstable.  Deionization  is  important  in  the  process  of 
emulsiﬁcation,  or  keeping  the  product  well  blended.  Distillation  means  that 
the water has had minerals and other trace elements removed from it.

Water  is  both  a  functional  and  a  performance  ingredient.  As  a  functional 
ingredient,  it  is  an  excellent  spreading  agent  and  is  important  in  rinsing  and 
removing certain products. It works as a performance ingredient in moisturizers, 
helping to hydrate the skin. Water is the real magic ingredient in moisturizers 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      155

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 9-1  Emollients spread across the skin, helping to prevent dehydration 
and smooth the skin surface.

because it is attracted to and binds to humectants used in moisturizers. We dis-
cuss much more about these ingredients in Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients 
and Active Ingredients.

EMOLLIENTS

Emollients also can be both functional and performance ingredients. Emollients 
are ingredients that lubricate the skin; work as vehicles to help to spread other 
performance ingredients; and give cosmetics a soft, smooth feeling. Emollients also 
signiﬁcantly help skin care products and cosmetics adhere or stick to the skin sur-
face. Emollients also help ﬁll in texture gaps in the skin surface, making the skin 
look smoother and feel softer. There are many types and textures of emollients.

As performance ingredients, emollients sit on the skin surface and prevent 
water loss (dehydration; Figure 9-1).They help trap water in the skin. Because 
emollients  are  larger  molecules,  water  has  problems  evaporating  through  the 
emollient. Chemists often refer to chemicals that stop water evaporation from 
the  skin  as  protectants.  Protectants  can  also  help  prevent  other  agents  from 
entering the skin.

A really good example of an emollient is mineral oil. Mineral oil with fra-
grance is commonly known as baby oil. Applying baby oil to a baby’s bottom 
helps keep the skin protected from dryness (dehydration) and prevents human 
waste from penetrating the skin and causing irritation known as diaper rash.

Petrolatum,  commonly  known  as  petroleum  jelly,  has  similar  properties 
and  beneﬁts.  Commonly  used  in  ointments,  petrolatum  is  used  as  a  vehicle, 
protectant, and lubricant.

Silicones  are  a  multipurpose  group  of  different  chemicals  that  are  com-
monly used in many skin care and makeup products as protectants and vehicles. 
Silicones leave a protective ﬁlm on the skin surface, preventing water evapora-
tion. Known as breathable barriers, they help protect the skin from dehydration 
without being heavy or completely occluding the skin surface. They can vary 
in molecular size and concentration in a formula, and they have many different 
feels  and  textures.  Silicones  generally  feel  very  soft  and  silky,  improving  the 
texture  and  feel  of  many  skin  care  products.  They  help  creams  and  makeup 
products  glide  across  the  skin  and  ﬁll  in  rough  textures  for  a  smoother  skin 
appearance. Silicones are also used to more evenly apply sunscreen ingredients.
Cyclopentasiloxane, dimethicone, cyclomethicone, phenyl trimethicone, 
and  polymethylsilsequioxane  are  several  examples  of  silicone  compounds 
frequently used in moisturizers, sunscreens, serums, and foundations. They are also 

Emollients are somewhat like 
occlusives in that they mostly lie 
on the surface of the skin and 
prevent water loss. They also help 
“ﬁll in the cracks” of dry, dehy-
drated skin.

Protectants are chemicals that 
stop water evaporation.

Petrolatum prevents urine and 
soggy diapers from irritating the 
baby’s sensitive skin.

Silicones are emollients that 
leave a protective ﬁlm on the 
surface of the skin.

Cyclopentasiloxane is a silicone 
compound often used as a spread-
ing agent.

Dimethicone is a smaller, lighter 
version of silicone.

Cyclomethicone is a type of sili-
cone used primarily as a vehicle 
or emollient.

Phenyl trimethicone is a type of 
silicone emollient.

Polymethylsilsequioxane is 
another type of silicone-based 
vehicle.




 
 
 
 
 
156         CHAPTER 9

Biologically inert means a 
substance that does not react with 
chemicals in the human body.

Natural oils occur in nature, 
primarily in plants.

Waxes are thick, fatty substances 
that are derived primarily from 
plants and used as emollients in 
skin care products.

Fatty acids are naturally derived 
fatty materials used in cosmetics 
as emollients, lubricants,and to 
improve product texture.

used in pressed powders and blushes, helping to keep the powdered makeup in a 
cake form and helping it adhere to the skin when applied.

One of the best features of silicones is that they are noncomedogenic (not 

pore clogging) and nonacnegenic (do not cause acne ﬂares).

Petrolatum,  silicone  compounds,  and  mineral  oil  are  biologically  inert, 
which  means  they  do  not  cross-react  with  normal  skin  biological  processes 
within  the  skin,  making  them  extremely  unlikely  to  cause  allergic  or  irritant 
reactions. Therefore, these are excellent ingredients that are frequently used in 
formulations for sensitive skin, including use for drug vehicles for dermatologi-
cal conditions such as eczema and psoriasis.

Unfortunately, all three of these emollient ingredient types have been errone-
ously accused of causing problems because they are not “natural,” having been 
puriﬁed or derived from other sources in the laboratory. The truth is that many 
natural substances, including plant oils, are much more likely to cause allergies.

Other Types of Emollients

Emollients  also  include  the  categories  of  natural  oils,  such  as  sunﬂower,  saf-
ﬂower, jojoba, palm, and coconut oils. Waxes such as parafﬁn are also emollients. 
Natural oils and waxes are fatty emollient materials derived from plant sources.

FATTY ACIDS

Fatty acids are derived from plant or animal sources. They are not corrosive 
acids like hydrochloric acid, and they are not inﬂammatory to the skin. They are 
triglycerides that have been broken down by removing glycerin from fat. They 
help give a soft, ﬁrm texture to lotions and creams. They are good emollient 
lubricants and smooth across the skin evenly. Fatty acids also add stability to 
formulations. They are also major ingredients in many soaps. When fat is mixed 
with sodium hydroxide, soap forms.

Fatty acids are also often used in creams, lotions, shaving creams, and lip-
sticks and are used as pressing agents in pressed powders and blushes. They 
are also used in foundations and cleansers. Each cosmetic use of fatty acids may 
be somewhat different.

In lipstick, for example, the fatty acid may be used to improve creaminess or 
adherability. In shaving creams, stearic acid is frequently used because it adheres 
well to the skin and allows the razor to move smoothly across it. It is also a good 
protectant against razor burns and accidental cuts to the skin.

In makeup, fatty acids may be used for improving spreadability and texture. 
In pressed powders and blushes, fatty acids are used to “press” the powder into 
a cake, which keeps the product in a solid form until it is used.

Common fatty acids used in cosmetic formulations are as follows:

•  Stearic acid—derived from animal fats and some plants.
•  Caprylic acid—derived from coconut oil, palm oil, or animal sources.
•  Oleic acid—from animal fats and vegetable oils.
•  Myristic acid—occurs in coconut oil, animal fat, palm seed, and other vegetable 

fats.

•  Palmitic acid—derived from plant and animal sources.
•  Lauric acid—derived from laurel oil and coconut oil.

All of these acids are derived from fats (triglycerides) from natural sources.

Although fatty acids have many good properties for cosmetic use, many can 

be comedogenic. For more details, see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      157

FATTY ALCOHOLS

When  most  people  think  of  alcohol,  they  think  of  isopropyl  alcohol,  poured 
on cuts as an antiseptic when they were children. They may also think of alco-
holic beverages. All of these forms of alcohol have negative connotations. This 
may explain the notorious (and undeserved) reputation that alcohol has in the 
cosmetic industry. Although isopropyl (rubbing) alcohol can be very drying to 
the skin’s surface, this is only one type of alcohol. The term alcohol is a chemi-
cal  term  that  simply  means  that  an  oxygen  atom  and  a  hydrogen  atom  have 
attached themselves to the end of a carbon chain. 

Most types of alcohol used in the cosmetic industry are actually more like oils 
or waxes. There are many types of fatty alcohols, which are fatty acids that have 
been exposed to hydrogen. They have a slightly waxy feel as a raw ingredient. 
They are used as emollients in moisturizers. They are less sticky and less heavy 
than many fats. Fatty alcohols are also frequently used to improve the viscosity of 
lotions and creams. Viscosity is the thickness and liquidity of a solution. 

There are many types of fatty alcohols:

•  Cetyl alcohol—a widely used fatty alcohol. Cetyl alcohol is used as an emol-
lient,  an  emulsiﬁer,  an  opacifying  agent  (helps  turn  a  cream  an  opaque 
color, which helps protect the product from light exposure), and a spreading 
agent.  Cetyl  alcohol  was  originally  derived  from  animal  tallow  but  now  is 
derived from coconut or palm oils, or made synthetically.

•  Lauryl alcohol—derived from coconut and palm seed oils; used as an emol-

lient and spreading agent.

•  Stearyl alcohol—derived from stearic acid; used as a foam-booster in deter-

gent cleansers, as an emollient, and as a builder of viscosity-opacity.

•  Cetearyl  alcohol—a  mixture  of  cetyl  and  stearyl  alcohols;  its  uses  are  the 

same as its parent alcohols. 

•  Oleyl alcohol—derived from oleic acid, is somewhat fattier and greasier than 
other alcohols. It is often used in superfatted soaps and dry skin emulsions.

FATTY ESTERS

An  ester  is  formed  when  an  organic  (carbon  chain)  acid  combines  with  an 
alcohol. Fatty esters are frequently used in skin care products and cosmetics as 
emollients and conditioning agents. One of their best qualities is that they do 
not feel as oily to the touch as some other types of emollient fatty ingredients.

As  both  functional  and  performance  ingredients,  esters  can  be  used  to 
smooth  the  surface  of  the  skin  or  hair,  to  serve  as  a  protectant,  and  to  help 
replace natural fatty esters that are missing from older, drier skin types. Esters 
are sometimes used as emulsiﬁers.

The easiest way to spot fatty esters in an ingredient label is that they have the 
sufﬁx –ate. An example is isopropyl palmitate. Isopropyl palmitate is a palmitic 
acid molecule that has been attached to the carbon chain of an alcohol, propanol.
Fatty  esters  vary  greatly  in  molecular  weight  and  size.  The  size  can  affect 
how the ester is used in cosmetics and skin care formulations. Again, fatty esters, 
like fatty acids and alcohols, are often comedogenic; many of them should be 
avoided in formulations for oily and acne skin (see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity).
Here are some  fatty esters frequently used in skin care and cosmetic for-

mulations:

•  Isopropyl myristate
•  Isopropyl palmitate

Fatty alcohols are fatty materials 
used as vehicles and emollients in 
skin care products and cosmetics.

Viscosity is the thickness and 
liquidity of a solution, skin care 
product, or cosmetic.

Opacifying agent is a functional 
ingredient that helps a product be 
opaque in color.

Esters are modiﬁed fatty sub-
stances that are primarily used as 
vehicles and emollients in skin 
care products and cosmetics.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.158         CHAPTER 9

Surfactants are chemicals in 
cosmetics that enable the cosmetic 
to slip across or onto the skin.

Detergents are surfactants used 
for cleansing.

Anionic surfactants are strong 
cleansers and are frequently used 
in household products.

Cationic surfactants have a 
positive ionic charge. They are 
frequently used in cosmetics and 
hair shampoos.

Amphoteric surfactants may 
have either a positive or negative 
ionic charge. They are frequently 
used in facial lotions and creams.

•  Ethylhexyl palmitate
•  Ethylhexyl stearate
•  Isopropyl isostearate
•  Glyceryl stearate
•  Propylene glycol dicaprate/dicaprylate
•  Cetyl palmitate
•  Decyl oleate

SURFACTANTS

Surfactants are chemicals in cosmetics that lower surface tension on the sur-
face of the skin to allow products to slip across and adhere to the skin. They are 
one of the biggest categories of cosmetic chemicals.

Surfactants also include detergents and soaps. Detergents are surfactants 
used  for  cleansing.  They  break  up  oils,  fats,  and  other  debris  and  cause  the 
debris to separate from the skin. When detergents are applied to the skin and 
are mixed with water, they begin to bubble. This bubbling is a good example 
of  how  surfactants  and  detergents  reduce  surface  tension  and  allow  water  to 
spread more easily across the skin. Bubbling is air that has come between the 
surfactant and the surface of the skin. The surfactant removes surface oils from 
the skin, as well as makeup, dirt, pollutants, and other agents that have come in 
contact or adhered to the skin during the day.

Another good example of reduction of surface tension by a surfactant is in 
your kitchen. Suppose you cooked hamburgers for dinner, and you left the pan 
with the hamburger grease on the stove while you ate dinner. During that time 
the grease, which is fats and fatty acids, has solidiﬁed in the pan. After dinner, 
you add hot water to the pan, which liqueﬁes the fat. It is the temperature, not 
the water, that liqueﬁes the fat. If you leave the water in the pan, the grease will 
remain nonsolid for the most part. But we know that hot water alone cannot 
remove beef grease from a pan.

So you pour in some dishwashing liquid. If you look closely while you are 
pouring in the dishwashing liquid, you will notice that the fat has a tendency 
to “run” from the dishwashing liquid. This “running” is actually the surfactant or 
detergent improving the water’s ability to remove the grease from the pan’s sur-
face. The grease will break up much faster with the detergent added to the pan.
During  the  process  of  cleaning  the  pan,  you  accidentally  rubbed  grease 
from the hamburgers onto your hand. When you remove your hand from the 
sink, you discover that your hand is greasy. Dipping your hand into the dishwa-
ter seems to loosen the grease from your hand. This is because the surfactant 
(detergent) works on skin in the same way that it works on the dishes or pan.

Of course, the surfactant used in dishwashing is much too strong a detergent 
to use routinely on your skin. Similar detergent agents may be used in dishwashing 
liquids, but the concentration of detergent in the formula is far greater than that 
used in a facial cleanser. Detergent facial cleansers also may vary in strength and 
concentration. The four major types of surfactants vary with the pH of the water 
being used in the formulation. The four basic types of surfactants are as follows:

  1. Anionic surfactants have a negative ionic charge. Anionic surfactants are 

strong cleansers and are frequently used in household products.

  2. Cationic surfactants have a positive ionic charge. They are frequently used 

in cosmetics and hair shampoos.

  3. Amphoteric  surfactants  may  have  either  a  positive  or  negative  ionic 
charge. They will adapt to the pH of the water used in the solution. Because 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      159

they are so adaptable to both acid and alkaline water, they are frequently 
used in facial lotions and creams. The neutrality of the surfactant is impor-
tant to the mildness of the cosmetic product.

  4. Nonionic surfactants are used in heavier creams such as hand creams.

Some surfactant ingredients are very frequently used in cosmetic cleansers. 

Some of these are as follows:

•  Sodium lauryl sulfate
•  Sodium laureth sulfate
•  Disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate
•  Ammonium lauryl sulfate
•  Cocoamphocarboxyglycinate
•  Cocamidopropyl betaine
•  Alpha-oleﬁn sulfonate
•  Decyl polyglucoside

All  of  these  surfactants  can  help  remove  oils,  dirt,  and  other  debris  from  the 
skin’s surface. Cleansers vary in strength directly from the amount of surfactant 
that is in the formula. How much oil and surface debris they remove depends 
on the amount of surfactant in the individual cleanser. Mild cleansers designed 
for dry skin types have less surfactant, and more aggressive cleansers for oilier 
skin have more surfactant.

Surfactants are also sometimes added to creams to improve the cream’s slip 
and adhesive qualities. Some surfactants may be very irritating to sensitive skin 
when used in creams.

For sensitive and drier skin types, cosmetic manufacturers often add a fatty 
acid,  oil,  or  wax  to  cut  the  contact  of  the  surfactant  with  the  skin.  The  fatty 
substance prevents too much of the surfactant from coming in contact with the 
skin. Too much detergent can be irritating or dehydrating to sensitive, dry, or 
thin skin.

EMULSIFIERS

Emulsiﬁers are chemicals that keep water and oil solutions well mixed. Let’s 
go back to the kitchen for a moment. Remember that greasy pan? Let’s pretend 
that the grease is in a mayonnaise jar. If you add water to the jar with grease in 
it, what happens to the oil? It ﬂoats to the top. This is because water and oil will 
not mix under normal circumstances.

If  you  add  some  dishwashing  detergent  to  the  jar,  the  oil  starts  to “break 
up.” If you put a top on the jar and shake it, the oil is dispersed throughout the 
water evenly. The water becomes cloudy because the oil has saturated the water 
in small droplets.

The detergent is what made the oil break into small droplets and disperse 
throughout the water. But didn’t you add a detergent to the water? You thought 
that this section was about emulsiﬁers? Well, it is. It just so happens that surfac-
tants, detergents included, are also emulsiﬁers. They reduce the tension of the 
water in a cleanser and also reduce the tension of the water in a solution, or 
even a cosmetic lotion.

Emulsiﬁers work by forming a sort of “shell” around the very small oil drop-
lets, allowing them to remain suspended in a solution of water. When a solution 
of water and oil is mixed, and it is mostly water, the solution is called an oil-in-
water (O/W) solution. When the solution is mostly oil, it is called a water-in-
oil (W/O) solution (Figure 9-2).

Nonionic surfactants are used 
in heavier creams such as hand 
creams.

Emulsiﬁers are chemicals that 
keep water and oil solutions well 
mixed.

Oil-in-water (O/W) is a solution 
of water and oil that is mostly 
water.

Water-in-oil (W/O) is a solution 
of oil and water that is mostly oil.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.160         CHAPTER 9

Types

OIL-IN-WATER (O/W)

WATER-IN-OIL (W/O)

Oil (10%)

Emulsifier

Thickener
(0.5%)

Water (90%)

Water (10%)

Emulsifier

Oil (90%)

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 9-2  Types of emulsions.

Most lotions available today are oil-in-water emulsions. They are much lighter 
in weight and texture, feel much less greasy, and are easier to remove. Most bottled 
moisturizers  are  oil-in-water  emulsions.  Old-fashioned  cold  creams  are  a  good 
example of a water-in-oil emulsion. Some heavy night creams are also water-in-oil.
Have  you  ever  found  an  old  bottle  of  lotion  in  your  cabinet?  Did  it  look 
“watery”?  Over  time,  generally  a  year  or  more,  emulsiﬁers  can  stop  working 
in an emulsion. When this happens, the lotion begins to separate back into its 
water and oil phases.

As a general rule, almost anything in a bottle is an oil-in-water emulsion. 
Almost all water-in-oil emulsions are packaged in jars. They are often too heavy 
and thick to be poured out of a bottle. Another way to determine a particular 
product’s emulsion type is to check the ingredient label. The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) requires that cosmetics list their ingredients in descending 
order. If oil is listed before water, it is a water-in-oil emulsion. If water is listed 
ﬁrst, then it is oil-in-water.

Emulsiﬁers help provide stability and texture to lotions and creams. They 
make the cream feel even and smooth. If they were not used in moisturizers, the 
lotion would feel wet and oily when applied. Some frequently used emulsiﬁers 
are as follows:

•  Amphoteric 9
•  Ceteth-20
•  Beeswax
•  Polyethylene glycol (PEG)
•  Polysorbate
•  Carbomer
•  Carbopol
•  Stearamide




 
 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      161

The phrase “water-based” generally means that the emulsion or lotion is an 
oil-in-water emulsion. It does not necessarily mean that the emulsion is oil-free. 
The main reason cosmetic companies refer to a product as being water based 
is to appeal to the consumer. Consumers who have oily or problem skin, and 
consumers who do not like greasy products, look for products that are watery 
textured because they are lighter in weight and not greasy.

How can you tell the difference among the three basic types of surfactants? 
Surface active agents (which reduce surface tension of water for spreading of 
cosmetic products), detergents (cleansing and foaming agents), and emulsiﬁers 
(which keep water and oils in emulsion state) are all surfactants.

The difference among the three has to do with their molecular structures. 
The  size  of  the  molecule  determines  the  different  properties  that  a  particular 
surfactant has in a cosmetic solution. Surfactants are polymer molecules. This 
means that a chain of carbon atoms are connected to one another. Surfactant 
polymer  molecules  have  two  ends.  One  end  is  attracted  to  water;  the  other 
end is repelled by water. The end that is repelled by water is instead attracted 
to fatty substances. Lipophilic means “fat-loving.” Hydrophilic means “water-
loving.” The size of the lipophilic end of the polymer determines which kind 
of surfactant group the molecule will be. Short-chain carbon polymers, chains 
with 8 or 10 carbon atoms, have a shorter lipophilic end and are surface active 
agents used in creams to improve slip (how well the product ﬂows across the 
skin) and spreadability.

Medium-length chain molecules with a medium-size lipophilic end are the 
detergents used in cleansers that help foam and remove surface debris. Long-
chain  polymers,  which  have  a  large  lipophilic  end,  are  the  emulsiﬁers.  This 
makes  sense,  because  these  molecules  must  have  a  strong  attraction  to  fat. 
Remember,  these  molecules  are  the  ones  that “surround”  or  form  the “shell” 
around the oil droplets and spread themselves throughout the water solution. 
The other end of the emulsiﬁer (the hydrophilic end) is attracted to the water 
in the solution. So the molecule produces a tug-of-war between the oil and the 
water. The emulsiﬁer is attracted to the oil and is more or less wrapped around 
the oil, but the other end is attracted to the water in which it is ﬂoating. This 
constant “pulling” keeps the oil or fat evenly suspended in the water solution, or 
vice versa in the case of a water-in-oil suspension. The oil droplets in an oil-in-
water emulsion are referred to as globules. They are the dispersed part of the 
emulsion and are referred to as the internal phase. The water in an oil-in-water 
emulsion  is  called  the  external  phase.  A  suspension  is  a  liquid  solution  in 
which the internal and external phases do not stay mixed for any period of time.
We have talked here about lotions only. Many types of cosmetic emulsions 
are not lotions and contain other components besides water and oils. Makeup, 
for example, is a solid such as talc that is emulsiﬁed in a liquid. The external 
phase of a makeup base is usually water, possibly mixed with propylene glycol 
or another solvent. Aerosol hair spray is an example of a liquid that is emulsi-
ﬁed within a gas. Mousse is an example of a gas that is emulsiﬁed within an 
external-phase liquid.

PHYSICAL EMULSIONS

Emulsiﬁers can sometimes cause problems for thin, sensitive, or dry skin types. 
In these cases, the emulsiﬁers actually start breaking down the natural intercel-
lular lipids that form the barrier function of the skin. Although this is not a prob-
lem for all types of skin, it can cause sensitivity for already thin, sensitive skin 
with impaired barrier function.

Lipophilic means “fat-loving.”

Hydrophilic means “water-
loving.”

Globules are oil droplets in an 
oil-in-water emulsion.

Internal phase is the dispersed 
part of the emulsion.

External phase is the water in an 
oil-in-water emulsion.

Suspension means the solute is 
suspended throughout a solvent. 
Suspension is usually not homog-
enous. The internal and external 
phases do not stay mixed for any 
period of time.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.162         CHAPTER 9

Homogenizers are high-speed 
mixers used to emulsify lotions 
and creams.

Physical emulsions are lotions 
or creams that use physical 
rather than chemical techniques to 
blend and suspend oil and water 
mixtures.

Preservatives are chemical 
agents that inhibit the growth 
of microorganisms in creams or 
cosmetic products.

There  is  a  relatively  new  technology  that  uses  high-speed  mixers,  called 
homogenizers, to emulsify products. Most of these products are creams and 
lotions for sensitive skin. These products use special blends of emollients and 
nonsurfactant emulsifying agents that are then mixed at high speeds under pres-
sure. This process produces a suspended effect without the use of traditional 
surfactant emulsiﬁers, thus eliminating further disturbance of the barrier func-
tion. These types of products are physical emulsions and are known as excel-
lent moisturizers for sensitive skin.

SOLVENTS

Solvents  have  already  been  discussed  in  Chapter  8,  Essential  Knowledge  of 
Chemistry. Solvents are used in cosmetic formulations either as vehicles for the 
product or as vehicles for other ingredients.

Plant  extracts  used  in  cosmetics,  for  example,  have  to  be  extracted  from  the 
actual plant. The solvent normally used for extraction is propylene glycol. So, if you 
see “arnica (arnica montana) extract” on a cosmetic label, it often means that the 
arnica extract is present in a solution of propylene glycol or another solvent. Both the 
extract and the solvent must be listed on the cosmetic product label. However, both 
ingredients still must be listed in the exact order of predominance in the ﬁnal for-
mulation. Alcohols of various types are also often used as solvents for plant extracts.

ANTIMICROBIALS AND PRESERVATIVES
Preservatives are chemical agents that inhibit the growth of microorganisms in 
creams or cosmetic products. Because of the many fats used in cosmetics, these 
formulations are more susceptible to invasion by microorganisms than are other 
types of chemical formulations.

The three main types of microorganisms present in cosmetic formulations 
are  bacteria,  fungi,  and  yeast.  Cosmetics  may  become  contaminated  because 
of cross-contamination by the user. The user applies the cream to the skin, re-
dipping the same hand that has touched the skin into the jar of cream. When 
the ﬁngers touch the cream, bacteria and other microorganisms come in contact 
with the product in the jar.

Preservatives must be added to cosmetics to kill these contaminating bac-
teria. Bacteria are also present in small amounts in the raw ingredients used to 
make the cosmetic. In the making of cosmetics, preservatives are usually the ﬁrst 
or one of the ﬁrst ingredients used in the production process. This is because, if 
the preservative is already in the mixing tank, any bacteria introduced into the 
formula will be killed as ingredients are added.

Preservatives work by either directly poisoning bacteria or releasing other 
chemicals that poison the microorganisms. We have already discussed the allergy 
and  irritation  possibilities  associated  with  preservatives.  It  is  important  that 
enough preservative be used in the cosmetic formulation to kill microorganisms 
without adding so much preservative that allergies will be more likely to ﬂare.
Another trend in skin care products is the use of botanical (plant) ingredi-
ents and other natural materials. Natural materials are more likely to break down 
than synthetic materials and are more likely to be contaminated with microor-
ganisms such as fungi. Therefore, the use of natural materials actually increases 
the need for preservatives!

The most commonly used preservatives are methylparaben, propylparaben, 
and imidazolidinyl urea. Other paraben groups such as ethyl and butyl paraben 
are also used.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic formulations contain many preservative agents besides those already 

mentioned. Here are some of the more frequently used preservatives:

Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      163

•  Methylparaben
•  Propylparaben
•  Ethylparaben
•  Butylparaben
•  Caprylyl glycol
•  Chlorphenesin
•  Chlorxylenol
•  Iodopropynyl butylcarbamate 
•  DMDM hydantoin
•  Methylchloroisothiazolinone
•  Methylchlorothiazolinone
•  Methylisothiazolinone 
•  Polyaminiopropyl biguanide
•  Quaternium-15
•  Imidazolidinyl urea
•  Diazolidinyl urea
•  Phenoxyethanol 
•  Cetylpyridinium chloride

Preservatives are used in very small quantities so they do not cause unnec-
essary irritation. Because they are present in small quantities, they are almost 
always  some  of  the  very  last  ingredients  to  be  listed  on  an  ingredient  label. 
Remember, federal law requires that ingredients must be listed in descending 
order of the amount used in the product.

Natural  preservatives  have  been  developed  by  using  extracts  form  citrus 
seeds, curry, cinnamon, Japanese honeysuckle, and other sources. Unfortunately, 
these  naturally  sourced  preservatives  have  been  the  subject  of  controversy 
because  some  samples  were  found  to  be  mixed  with  standard  and  synthetic 
chemical preservatives. Some plants actually produce parabens, which may be 
why they work as preservatives.

A WORD ABOUT PARABEN PRESERVATIVES

There  has  always  been  a  great  deal  of  controversy  and  misinformation 
about preservatives in general. Because preservatives have chemical prop-
erties  that  kill  bacteria,  some  consumers  erroneously  believe  they  are 
“toxins.”  While  some  preservatives  are  known  to  cause  allergies  in  a  few 
sensitive individuals, many botanical extracts and natural substances can 
also cause allergies and sensitivities. 

In 2004, a study was published by a British researcher who observed that 
substances resembling parabens were found in breast cancer tissue. Medical 
scientists have since observed numerous scientiﬁc ﬂaws in this study, includ-
ing not citing whether the substances were found in normal breast tissue 
and not providing any evidence that parabens caused the cancer.

The parabens have been safe and effective preservatives in skin care, 
cosmetics,  drugs,  and  foods  for  many  years.  Parabens  are  organic  sub-
stances that are naturally manufactured by fruit and vegetable plants to 
inhibit  their  own  microbial  issues.  Parabens  are  low-cost  preservatives, 
have a long-term safety proﬁle, and have been successfully used in many 
products for sensitive and allergy-prone skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.164         CHAPTER 9

Unfortunately, some organizations jumped on this one observation in 
this one study and began publishing (mostly via the Internet) strong opin-
ions about the “toxic” effects of parabens. Some skin care manufacturers 
also jumped on the bandwagon and began touting the absence of para-
bens in their products, taking issue with competitors who continued to use 
parabens.  Other  companies  have  quietly  switched  their  preservative  sys-
tems to squelch questions about their products. Some of these systems do 
not have the safety or efﬁcacy history of the parabens. Some may cause 
allergies or issues no one knows about yet.

This is an excellent example of how bad information, and bad interpretation 
of that information, can fuel panics in the consumer market. Most consum-
ers are not science minded and do not always know the right questions to ask 
when confronted with this type of information. It also is an excellent example of 
the power of the Internet to spread information, both good and bad.

Since the panic started, the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), an expert 
panel of dermatologists and toxicologists that reviews the safety of ingre-
dients used in the cosmetic industry, once more reviewed the safety of the 
parabens. The panel found that the parabens were safe and effective pre-
servatives. The FDA has also echoed this opinion.

When you see information like this on the Internet, please take the time 
to do some research to check the validity of the statements made. Every 
esthetician  should  have  a  mentor  who  understands  scientiﬁc  research 
methods and can help get to the bottom of the issue.

Oxidation is the process by 
which oxygen is exposed to cer-
tain ingredients, which results in a 
breakdown of the ingredient.

Antioxidants are topical free-
radical scavengers that help 
neutralize free radicals before 
they can attach themselves to 
cell membranes and eventually 
destroy the cell. They are added 
to cosmetic formulas to prevent 
oxidation.

OTHER TYPES OF PRESERVATIVES

Besides microorganisms, chemical reactions can take place that can alter or even 
ruin cosmetics. Oxidation is one of these chemical reactions. Oxidation is the 
process by which oxygen is exposed to certain ingredients, which results in a 
breakdown of the ingredient. It is also the process by which free radicals form. 
Fats and fatty substances are particularly vulnerable to oxidation. Have you ever 
been to a picnic and noticed that the potato salad was a yellowish color on the 
top; but when you spooned some onto your plate, you noticed that the potato 
salad below the surface was lighter?

This is oxidation. One of the main ingredients in potato salad is mayonnaise, 
which is mainly oil. The oil in the mayonnaise oxidizes very quickly, causing the 
yellow color on the top of the potato salad.

Exactly the same reaction takes place in the fats, fatty acids, and esters in 
cosmetic products. Oxygen constantly comes in contact with the cream during 
the manufacturing process. After the product is opened by the consumer, the 
product is exposed to more oxygen. Every time the consumer opens and shuts 
the container, the product is exposed to oxygen.

Antioxidants are chemicals added to cosmetic formulas to prevent oxida-
tion.  They  also  keep  creams  and  other  products  from  developing  color  and 
odor changes caused by oxidation. A bad odor may develop in creams that do 
not contain enough antioxidant. An oxidized cosmetic product that has discol-
oration  and/or  odor  due  to  oxidation  is  said  to  be  rancid.  Commonly  used 
antioxidants are as follows:

Rancid means discoloration and/
or odor due to oxidation.

•  Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA)
•  Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      165

•  Tocopherol (Vitamin E)
•  Benzoic acid

Antioxidants can also be used as skin protectants. This topic is discussed in 

Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients.

CHELATING AGENTS

A  chelating  agent  is  a  chemical  that  is  added  to  cosmetics  to  improve  the 
efﬁciency  of  the  preservative.  Chelating  agents  work  by  breaking  down  the 
cell walls of bacteria and other microorganisms so that the preservative is more 
easily absorbed by the microorganism.

Common  chelating  ingredients  are  disodium  EDTA,  trisodium  EDTA,  and 
tetrasodium  EDTA.  EDTA  stands  for  the  chemical  name  ethylenediaminetet-
raacetic acid. Again, you will see these ingredients further down on the ingredi-
ent list because they are not used in large quantities.

BUFFERING AGENTS

Buffering refers to adjusting the pH of a product to make it more acceptable to 
the skin. Sometimes, when products are made, the pH of the end product may 
be too high or too low. These pH levels may be irritating to the skin if they are 
not adjusted.

To remedy this problem, the chemist adds a small amount of an acidic or 
basic chemical to raise or lower the pH as needed. Citric acid is commonly used 
to lower the pH of a product. Tartaric acid is another acidic agent used in small 
quantities to lower the pH to an acceptable acid level.

Some products have the opposite problem. The product turns out to be too 
acid for the skin. Ammonium carbonate, calcium carbonate, potassium, sodium, 
or ammonium hydroxide is sometimes added to a product to raise the pH. These 
buffering agents are added in very small quantities and again are seen lower on 
the ingredient label, indicating their small concentration in the product.

GELLANTS AND THICKENING AGENTS
A gellant is an agent that is added to a product to give it a gel-like consistency. 
It improves the appearance of the product and gives it more body, making it 
stiffer  and  less  runny.  Thickening  agents  make  the  product  thicker,  so  that  it 
spreads more easily, is easier to handle, and is more acceptable to the eye.

Examples of thickening and gellant agents are methyl cellulose, xanthum gum, 
beeswax, and carbomer. Many thickening agents can also be used as emulsiﬁers.

COLORING AGENTS

Colors  are  added  to  products  to  make  them  more  appealing  to  consumers. 
There is no other legitimate reason to use color agents in skin care products.

In makeup, of course, color agents are extensively used. Color agents appear 
on the ingredient label as a variety of different names. There are two types of 
regulated colors, certiﬁed and noncertiﬁed.

Certiﬁed colors are pigments, also called lakes, certiﬁed and regulated by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). They are named by listing the color name, 
the number assigned to that color agent by the FDA, and the metal associated 

Chelating agent is a chemi-
cal that is added to cosmetics 
to improve the efﬁciency of the 
preservative.

Buffering refers to adjusting the 
pH of a product to make it more 
acceptable to the skin.

Gellant is an agent that is added 
to a product to give it a gel-like 
consistency.

Lakes are certiﬁed colors and are 
regulated by the Food and Drug 
Administration.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.166         CHAPTER 9

with the chemical structure. An example is D & C (stands for Drug and Cosmetic) 
Red No. 4 Aluminum Lake. On food packages, you may see listed on the ingre-
dient label F, D, & C Yellow, for example. Some colors are approved for use in 
foods, drugs, and cosmetics. However, in general, you will rarely see F, D, & C 
listed on a cosmetic ingredient label.

The  colors  certiﬁed  by  the  FDA  are  blue,  green,  orange,  red,  and  yellow. 
Noncertiﬁed colors are not metal salts. Most of these are natural plant or animal 
extracts,  mineral  pigments,  and  sometimes  synthetic  colors.  Although  these 
colors are regulated by the FDA, they do not have a speciﬁc certiﬁcation number. 
They include a variety of common cosmetic color agents, including iron oxide, 
zinc  oxide,  carmine,  beta-carotene,  chlorophyllin–copper  complex,  annatto, 
ferric ferrocyanide, mica, the ultramarine colors, henna, and others.

Iron oxides are used extensively in the development of foundations. Iron 
oxide is frequently used to give makeup its color. There are various shades of 
iron oxide; and, of course, they can vary with the amount used in a particular 
solution. Iron oxide is actually rust, but it is used in scientiﬁc formulations in 
makeup production.

Color agents are used extensively in the formation of foundations, mascara, 
eye shadows, eye pencils, lip pencils, powders, blush, lipstick, and contour and 
camouﬂage products. Certiﬁed colors are not permitted by the FDA to be used 
in  any  cosmetics  intended  for  the  eye  area.  Chemists  must  use  noncertiﬁed 
colors in eye shadow, eyeliner, and other cosmetics intended for the eye area.

When the FDA ﬁrst began regulating colors, there were about 116 certiﬁed 
colors. Over the years, the FDA has determined that many of these colors are not 
safe for continual use; therefore, the list has dwindled to about 35 certiﬁed color 
agents. Some individuals are allergic to certain of the color agents. You must be 
careful to notice if a client tells you she is allergic to a particular color. You must 
check the ingredient labels of any products you wish to use on her or to sell her 
for that particular color agent.

As discussed previously, there is no reason other than esthetics to put color 
agents in skin care products. The one exception to this rule would be a mois-
turizing bronzer, designed to moisturize or protect and still give a slight hint of 
color to the skin’s surface.

Many cosmetic companies now totally eliminate color from their skin care 
products, because the public is becoming more aware of the lack of need for 
these chemicals in skin care formulations. Also, because color agents can occa-
sionally cause allergic reactions, eliminating the coloring agents from skin care 
products cuts down on the likelihood of allergic reaction to the product.

If you use imported cosmetics, you must check to see if the import com-
pany  has  complied  with  FDA  rules  concerning  color.  Some  countries  do  not 
have strong laws governing the use of color agents and therefore may use color 
agents that are not permitted in cosmetics in the United States. The European 
Economic  Community  (EEC,  now  known  as  the  EC),  European  Union  (EU), 
Germany,  and  Japan  all  have  regulations  regarding  color,  but  even  they  may 
differ signiﬁcantly from those of the United States.

HIGH-TECH VEHICLES

As we learn more about the skin’s anatomy and physiology, the intercellular cement, 
and penetration of the skin, we learn more about formulating products that are 
more easily accepted by the skin and that penetrate the skin’s surface better.

We know, for example, that the intercellular cement is made of various lipids. 
Making  products  and  using  vehicles  that  are  compatible  with  the  intercellular 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      167

lipids can increase the product’s permeability and efﬁcacy. Lipid-based products 
are  good  examples.  Of  course,  not  every  product  should  easily  penetrate  the 
skin.  There  are  many  examples  of  ingredients  that  would  be  irritating  if  they 
penetrated deeper, and many ingredients that are too large in molecular size to 
penetrate, regardless of what type of vehicle is used.

Delivery  systems  are  special  ingredients  or  groups  of  ingredients  that 
place speciﬁc ingredients in speciﬁc places for best results in affecting the skin’s 
appearance. Delivery systems may help certain ingredients penetrate the skin 
to  various  degrees,  improve  the  absorption  of  certain  ingredients,  or  spread 
speciﬁc ingredient complex in a smoother or better way. Later in this chapter 
we discuss microencapsulation, the process of using barrier and intercellular-
compatible materials like lipids to form special microshells to protect and better 
penetrate certain ingredients. Polymers are a type of delivery system that uti-
lizes synthetic molecular structures as state-of-the-art spreading agents that help 
many ingredients spread evenly across the skin, adhere to the skin surface, or 
penetrate performance ingredients. Polymers are used for texture to help deliver 
performance  ingredients  more  effectively,  improve  efﬁcacy  of  sunscreens  and 
other drug ingredients, and avoid irritant, allergic, and acnegenic reactions.

MICELLES

If you over-emulsify an ingredient, the result is called a micelle. When you add 
emulsiﬁer to a solution of water and oil, the emulsiﬁer surrounds the internal 
phase of the solution. As the emulsiﬁer lines up around the oil, as an example, 
there are small spaces between emulsiﬁer molecules (Figure 9-3).

In  a  micelle,  the  emulsiﬁer  completely  surrounds  the  oil,  creating  a  sort 
of  bubble.  The  bubble  encloses  the  oil,  or  whatever  internal  phase  ingredi-
ent is being emulsiﬁed. A cosmetic that has micelles present in it is said to be 
micellized.

LIPOSOMES AND MICROENCAPSULATION
Many  ingredients  that  are  unstable  or  highly  reactive  can  be  protected  from 
becoming unstable and can be delivered more effectively through microencap-
sulation. A good example is tocopherol, or vitamin E. Vitamin E, if unprotected, 
serves as an antioxidant for the product. But if tocopherol is microencapsulated, 
it serves instead as an antioxidant for the skin’s protection. A good example of 
microencapsulation is the liposome.

Liposomes  are  tiny,  hollow  spheres  made  of  phospholipids,  often  from 
soy lecithin. You can think of a liposome as a balloon, made out of lipids that 

Detergent molecule

Hydrophilic end

Hydrophobic end

Grease

Micelle

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

FIGURE 9-3  Detergent micelle.

Delivery systems are special in-
gredients or groups of ingredients 
that place speciﬁc ingredients in 
speciﬁc places for best results in 
affecting the skin’s appearance.

Microencapsulation is the 
process of using barrier and inter-
cellular-compatible materials like 
lipids to form special microshells 
to protect and better penetrate 
certain ingredients.

Polymers are a type of deliv-
ery system that utilizes synthetic 
molecular structures as state-of-
the-art spreading agents that help 
many ingredients spread evenly 
across the skin, adhere to the skin 
surface, or penetrate performance 
ingredients.

Micelle is an over-emulsiﬁed 
ingredient.

Liposomes are hollow spheres 
made of phospholipids that are 
used to transport other agents.




 
 
 
 
 
168         CHAPTER 9

Loaded is the term used to de-
scribe a microencapsulation unit, 
such as a liposome, that contains 
a performance ingredient, such as 
an antioxidant.

Liposomes

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 9-4  Liposomes help protect and transport performance ingredients into 
the epidermis.

are  compatible  with  the  lipids  making  up  the  intercellular  cement.  Because 
they are small, and made of lipids, liposomes can enter and be “accepted” by 
the lipid-based barrier lipid system. This absorption allows the liposomes to be 
transported to different locations within the skin (Figure 9-4).

Liposomes may be used to transport other agents, which may include anti-
oxidants, moisturizers, conditioning agents, or drugs. Drugs, of course, are not 
used in cosmetic formulations. A liposome that contains an agent to be trans-
ported is said to be loaded.

Ingredients  carried  by  liposomes  will,  theoretically,  penetrate  the  skin  to 
some degree. Eventually, the liposome begins to dissolve, releasing the ingredi-
ent into the intercellular cement, to carry out whatever function it is meant to 
complete (Figure 9-5).

What you can put into a liposome depends on many factors. These include 
the size of the liposome, the size of the ingredient to be carried by the liposome, 
the shape of the liposome, the ionization of any components, and the purpose 
of the product. Many ingredients are simply too big to put inside a liposome.

Liposome

Encapsulation

Instant release   

.
s
i
r
a
P

i

t
o
n
u
G
/
s
t
r
o
p
m

I

n
a
m
h
c
a
L

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Lipid (Oil) shell

FIGURE 9-5  Encapsulation methods in the liposome and the nanosphere or 
microsponge.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Chemistry and Functional Ingredients      169

Nanotechnology is the develop-
ment of ingredients, substances, 
and products that are very 
small molecular structures that 
sometimes can penetrate the skin 
surface. 

Nanoparticles are ultra-small 
particles derived from larger mo-
lecular structures or ingredients.

Empty liposomes, or unloaded liposomes, are sometimes used in cosmetics 
to improve the penetration of a cream or moisturizer. Liposomes are not listed 
as such on ingredient labels—ingredients of the liposome are listed. These may 
include soya lecithin, lecithin, phospholipids, ceramides, or others.

OTHER INNOVATIVE VEHICLES

Liposomes are an example of a type of nanotechnology, which is the devel-
opment  of  ingredients,  substances,  and  products  that  are  very  small  molecu-
lar  structures  that  sometimes  can  penetrate  the  skin  surface.  These  structures 
are  ultra-small  particles  called  nanoparticles,  which  are  derived  from  larger 
molecular structures or ingredients. Another example of nanotechnology is the 
“microsponge” that releases an active ingredient once inside the skin. Another 
is the nanosphere. Nano-ingredients are also used in makeup formulations to 
improve  application  and  light  reﬂection,  which  can  soften  the  appearance  of 
wrinkles and rough, textured skin. 

Nanotechnology is quite controversial. The positive side of the issue is that 
products may be developed that are better and more effective than any products 
we know to date. The questionable side is that creating nanoparticles is creating 
chemistry that we do not fully understand, and penetration of certain ingredients 
may not be beneﬁcial or may actually be harmful.

Such innovations may be used for drugs before they are developed for cos-
metics. As researchers learn more about the functions of the epidermis and the 
ways  chemicals  react  with  the  surface  of  the  skin,  they  will  learn  more  about 
transport mechanisms for various cosmetic as well as pharmaceutical ingredients.

IN CONCLUSION

Many factors are involved in producing the products that estheticians use every 
day. Understanding basic cosmetic chemistry and types of cosmetic chemicals 
gives the esthetician the ability to understand how products are made and how 
they may affect the skin, as well as the ability to intelligently explain products 
to the consumer.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is a vehicle?

  2. Discuss the difference between a surfactant, a detergent, and an emulsiﬁer.

  3. What is a suspension? List some examples.

  4. How are fatty esters formed? Why are they often used in cosmetic formulas?

  5. Why are preservatives necessary in cosmetics? Name some frequently used 

cosmetic preservatives.

  6. Why are “natural” products more likely to need more effective preservatives?

  7. What are delivery systems?

  8. Discuss microencapsulation. Why is it important for some ingredients?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

10

Performance 
Ingredients and 
Active Ingredients

OBJECTIVES . . . 

It is important to understand the difference between an active 
ingredient used in a drug and a performance ingredient used 
in a skin care product or cosmetic. The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) deﬁnes a drug as “articles (other than 
food) intended to affect the structure or any function of 
the body.” Cosmetics are deﬁned as “articles intended to be 
rubbed, poured, sprinkled, or otherwise applied to the human 
body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting 
physical attractiveness or altering the appearance.”

Ingredients within a skin care product or cosmetic that 

actually cause changes to the appearance of the skin are 
known as performance ingredients or active agents. They 
are intended to affect the appearance of the skin. Active 
ingredients are chemicals or substances within a drug that 
are intended to cause physiological changes, meaning they are 
intended to affect a structure or biochemical function of the 
body, including the skin.

Performance ingredients are by far the most important 
ingredients in cosmetic chemistry. In this chapter, we discuss 
many different performance ingredients used in cleansers, 
moisturizers, and treatment products for various skin types 
and conditions, as well as active ingredients used in over-the-
counter (OTC) drugs like sunscreens and acne products.
Every skin care product or cosmetic has at least one 

performance ingredient. Performance ingredients may also be 



     171

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.172         CHAPTER 10

Drug is an article intended to 
affect the structure or any function 
of the body.

Cosmetics are articles intended to 
be applied to the human body to 
alter the appearance or promote 
attractiveness.

Performance ingredients are 
ingredients within a skin care 
product or cosmetic that actually 
cause changes to the appearance 
of the skin.

Active agents is another term for 
performance agents.

Active ingredients are the 
chemicals within drugs that 
cause physiological changes.

Cosmeceuticals are products that 
are not drugs intended to treat 
disease, but they still beneﬁt the 
skin in a positive way.

Detergents are cleansing ingre-
dients that help break up and 
remove fatty residues and other 
impurities from the skin.

Defatting agents remove fats 
and lipids, along with dirt, make-
up, and debris, from the surface 
of the skin.

functional ingredients, or vehicles. For example, an emollient that 
helps spread a moisturizing cream can also serve as a barrier to 
keep moisture from leaving the stratum corneum. The emollient is 
both a functional and a performance ingredient.

“COSMECEUTICAL” INGREDIENTS

In the past two decades, many new ingredient and technology discoveries have 
been  made  to  signiﬁcantly  improve  the  appearance  of  aging  skin.  Scientists 
understand both the aging process and the function and structure of the skin 
much  better  than  ever  before.  We  understand  that  although  the  epidermis  is 
technically dead, it is biochemically active, which means that many biochemical 
reactions are taking place in the epidermis. We also know now that many topical 
ingredients deﬁnitely affect the appearance of the skin as well as the biochemi-
cal reactions occurring in the epidermis and the dermis.

Again, although we know that there are deﬁnite changes in these reactions 
and understand that these changes are deﬁnitely responsible for the appearance 
changes we see when we use certain skin care products, we cannot tout these 
physiological reactions because of the legal deﬁnitions of the terms drugs and 
cosmetics.

Cosmeceuticals  refers  to  products  that  are  not  drugs  intended  to  treat 
diseases,  but  that  purportedly  beneﬁt  the  skin  in  a  positive  way,  help  restore 
normal skin behavior, and enhance the health of the skin. Although not ofﬁcially 
recognized  by  the  FDA,  this  category  of  ingredients  refers  to  ingredients  that 
promote skin health and have positive effects on the appearance of the skin.

Many scientists believe that, eventually, this category of ingredients may be 
ofﬁcially  recognized  by  the  scientiﬁc  community.  When  and  if  this  happens, 
FDA deﬁnitions will have to be rewritten. In the meantime, cosmetic companies 
and estheticians must adhere to the laws and rules as they are currently written, 
discussing only the appearance effects of these ingredients.

That being said, in this chapter we discuss what science knows about the 
biochemical effects of certain ingredients and why they likely affect the appear-
ance of the skin.

CLEANSING AGENTS

Performance ingredients in cleansers may be of two types: detergents or emul-
sion  cleansing  agents.  Detergents  cause  cleansers  to  foam,  as  we  discuss  in 
Chapter  9,  Cosmetic  Chemistry  and  Functional  Ingredients.  A  performance 
ingredient detergent is present in any foaming cleanser, rinseable cleanser, or 
shampoo. They are essentially defatting agents, which means they remove fats 
and lipids, along with dirt, makeup, and debris, from the surface of the skin.

The following are commonly used detergent ingredients used in cleansers:

•  Sodium lauryl sulfate
•  Sodium laureth sulfate
•  Ammonium lauryl sulfate
•  Disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate
•  Decyl polyglucoside
•  Lauramphocarboxylglycinate
•  Cocamidopropyl betaine



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      173

Detergents work by loosening sebum and debris from the skin surface. Individ-
ual detergents can be stronger than others. Strength of a cleanser is also related 
to the amount of detergent ingredients in the cleanser, the product pH, and how 
long the cleanser is left on the skin.

Soap  also  defats  the  skin’s  surface.  Soaps  are  usually  made  of  salts  of 
fatty acids. There are two basic disadvantages to soap. First, many soaps have 
a high pH, which can irritate and dry the skin, impair the barrier function by 
removing too much sebum, and begin removing intercellular lipids from the 
corneum. Second, many soaps, because of their fatty content, leave a residue 
or ﬁlm on the skin that is created by insoluble salts, which are formed when 
the soap is used.

Both fatty acid salts in soap and detergents in foaming cleansers can strip 
too much sebum if the soap or detergent is too strong for a certain skin type, 
such as dry or sensitive skin. When this happens, the skin can become dry, ﬂaky, 
tight, and irritated. The cleanser can “eat” into the lipids within the intercellular 
cement (“the mortar”), damaging the barrier function and making the skin sus-
ceptible to dehydration and irritation. Continued use of the soap or cleanser may 
further damage the barrier function and further dry and irritate the skin.

Because of this overdrying factor, fats and oils are often added to cleansers 
and soaps to prevent too much of the irritating cleansing agent from coming in 
contact with the skin for too long a period of time. You can think of these fats 
and oils as “buffer zones” set up to keep the product from stripping too much 
oil from a fragile, dry, or sensitive skin. When cleansers have fat added to buffer 
their contact with the skin, they are called superfatted soaps or cleansers. Of 
course, the fats that are added to these products can also leave a ﬁlm on the 
skin. This can be a problem for oily skin types because the fats may cause devel-
opment of comedones. In dry skin, the fats may actually help retain moisture. 
Fats used in true bar-type soaps include the following:

•  Sodium tallowate
•  Sodium oleate
•  Sodium cocoate
•  Sodium stearate

You will notice that fatty additives in soap almost always start with the word 
sodium and end in a fatty ester of one of many fatty acids: stearic, myristic, oleic, 
and  so  on  (see  Chapter  9,  Cosmetic  Chemistry  and  Functional  Ingredients). 
Sometimes potassium is used instead of sodium.

Emulsion cleansers are what most estheticians think of as cleansing milks. 
They  are  often  used  for  removing  makeup  and  are  often  recommended  for 
sensitive  skin  because  of  their  gentleness.  Most  do  not  have  detergents,  but 
detergents can be used in these products to help the product foam slightly, to 
make the product more rinseable and easier to remove, or to keep the product 
emulsiﬁed. Cleansing milks are made mostly of water with an oil or fat mixed 
in the emulsion; therefore, they are an oil-in-water emulsion. The oil or fat is 
the  active  agent  used  to  create  a  slippery  surface  for  removal  of  makeup  or 
other debris from the skin’s surface. The advantage to these cleansing milks is 
that they are less drying and irritating to the skin and perform an efﬁcient job 
of removing makeup. The disadvantage is that they generally leave a residue on 
the skin. This residue is usually an emollient, the same one often used as the 
active cleansing agent, that helps loosen the debris from the skin’s surface.

The emollient ﬁlm left on the skin can be good or bad. For drier skins that 
do not make enough oil, emollient can actually help condition the surface. For 
oily skins or acne-prone skins, it can be a problem because it leaves a residue 
of fat to further clog the problem skin.

Soap is made of salts of fatty ac-
ids. It defats the skin’s surface.

Superfatted cleansing agents 
have had fat added.

Emulsion cleansers, better 
known as cleansing milks, are 
nonfoaming, cream-type cleansers.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.174         CHAPTER 10

Astringents have a tightening 
effect on the skin or pore 
appearance.

Witch hazel, or Hamamelis 
extract, can be a soothing agent; 
in higher concentrations, it is an 
astringent.

Potassium alum is a strong 
astringent.

Lemon extract and citrus 
extracts have astringent effects.

Isopropyl alcohol is a fairly 
strong drying alcohol used as 
a cleansing and drying agent 
to remove excess oil from very 
oily skin. Isopropyl alcohol can 
dehydrate and irritate if overused 
or used on skin that is not exces-
sively oily.

SD alcohol is specially denatured 
ethyl alcohol, also known as 
ethanol.

Another type of emulsion cleanser is cold cream. Cold cream is often made 
primarily of mineral oil, making it a water-in-oil emulsion. It is certainly an oilier 
emulsion cleanser, although it is very effective for removing heavy makeup. It 
often leaves a signiﬁcant amount of oil on the skin after use. Clients often com-
plain about the greasy feeling after using a cold cream. These types of cleansers 
are slowly losing popularity. Emulsion cleansers should always be followed by 
using a toner.

PERFORMANCE AGENTS IN TONERS

The main function of toners is to lower the pH of the skin after cleansing. Second, 
toners help remove any excess cleanser or residue left on the skin after cleansing. 
Performance agents in toners vary greatly, depending on the skin type.

pH Adjusters

Most  toners  have  a  lower  pH,  usually  around  4.0  to  5.5.  This  low  pH  helps 
restore the normal pH of the skin’s acid mantle after cleansing. Normal pH has 
been reported in the past as being around 5.5 to 6.2, though recent scientiﬁc 
ﬁndings now place the ideal pH of the skin mantle around 4.7. Citric acid or 
lemon extract is sometimes added to toners to help lower the pH of the product.

Toners for Oily Skin

Astringents are performance ingredients (but sometimes are active ingredients 
if used in a drug formulation) that have a tightening effect on the skin or pore 
appearance. Astringent ingredients include witch hazel (Hamamelis extract), 
potassium alum, lemon extract, and other citrus extracts. Astringents actu-
ally  work  by  causing  a  slight  swelling  around  the  pore  openings,  helping  to 
tighten the skin and minimize the appearance of the pore opening. Toner prod-
ucts for oily skin are sometimes referred to as astringents, although astringent is 
technically a drug term.

For oilier skins, alcohol is often used as a performance agent. Isopropyl 
and SD alcohols are drying alcohols, unlike cetyl alcohol, which is a fatty alco-
hol used in creams. SD alcohol is specially denatured ethyl alcohol, also known 
as  ethanol.  Denaturing  makes  the  alcohol  unsuitable  for  drinking.  Bittering 
agents are added to the ethanol to make it taste terrible to ensure safety, so that 
infants  who  might  try  to  ingest  the  product  will  leave  it  alone.  SD  alcohol  is 
listed on the ingredient label followed by a number. This number indicates the 
technique used to denature the alcohol.

SD alcohol and isopropyl alcohol are strong cleansing agents or defatting 
agents that help remove excess quantities of sebum from oily skin or oily areas. 
In larger concentrations, they are antiseptics that help kill surface microorgan-
isms. This, of course, is a drug claim; and the alcohol becomes an active ingre-
dient when used in an antiseptic. Isopropyl alcohol is an even stronger drying 
alcohol. The drying effect of these alcohols on the skin can also have an astrin-
gent effect on oily skin and pore appearance.

A WORD ABOUT ALCOHOL

Alcohol has an undeserved terrible reputation in the cosmetics industry. Many 
companies tout the claim that their products are “alcohol free,” referring to the 
drying effect of certain alcohols on the skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      175

Although large amounts of SD or isopropyl alcohol can be irritating or over-
drying to dry or sensitive skin, they are useful in helping to control oiliness in 
very oily and some acne-prone skin. Do not reject a product simply because it 
has some SD or isopropyl alcohol. Make your decision based on the skin type 
you are treating. For more information on alcohol, see Chapter 9.

PERFORMANCE INGREDIENTS 
FOR DEHYDRATED SKIN

Toners for Dry Skin

Toners for dry skin often contain humectants that help restore moisture to the 
dehydrated  skin  after  cleansing.  A  humectant  is  an  ingredient  that  attracts 
water. Toner humectants may include butylene glycol, propylene glycol, and 
sorbitol. These humectant ingredients are also known for their hydrating and 
softening effect on the skin. Humectants are discussed in more detail later in this 
chapter. Dry skin toners also have an acidic pH.

Various other performance ingredients may be added to toners. For exam-
ple,  green  tea  extract,  azulene,  chamomile,  or  bisabolol  might  be  added 
for their soothing effect in a toner for dry, sensitive skin. Salicylic acid might 
be added to an oily skin toner for its keratolytic or peeling effect on the oily, 
hyperkeratinized skin.

HYDRATING INGREDIENTS

When skin is dehydrated, it is suffering from lack of water in the surface epi-
dermis. Skin becomes dehydrated from too much sun, weather exposure, harsh 
cleansers, and aging. Humectants are water-binding agents. They have a strong 
attraction to water. Many chemically bind water to them, holding many water 
molecules.

We have already discussed the barrier function of the skin. Impaired bar-
rier  function  can  result  not  only  in  ﬂaking  and  esthetic  problems  but  also  in 
increased skin sensitivity. Natural humectants, lipids, or hydrating agents found 
within  the  intercellular  cement  are  known  as  natural  moisturizing  factors 
(NMFs). The NMFs in the skin help preserve water or hydration within the epi-
dermis, keeping the barrier function intact and keeping the skin soft and supple. 
Impaired barrier function can mean a lack of NMFs from missing lipids or other 
components  and  can  cause  dehydration,  which  is  sometimes  severe.  Lack  of 
NMFs can also give the skin surface a wrinkly, unﬁrm appearance.

NMFs  include  sodium  PCA,  sphingolipids  and  glycosphingolipids 
(also known as ceramides), phospholipids, fatty acids, glycerol, squalane, 
and cholesterol. These intercellular components are produced during the cell 
renewal process as cells migrate from the basal layer to the stratum corneum. As 
we age, our cell renewal slows down and, therefore, we produce fewer NMFs. 
This reduces the ability of the skin to hold hydration, making the skin dry, tight, 
ﬂaky, and dull-looking.

In  recent  years,  scientists  have  been  able  to  isolate  and  prepare  special 
ingredients that help “repair” or “patch” the moisture barrier. These ingredients 
can now be used in products for dry, dehydrated, aging, and sun-damaged skin.
Lipid  replacement  is  accomplished  by  applying  a  group  of  lipid  ingre-
dients  to  the  skin.  These  include  ceramides  or  sphingolipids,  phospholipids, 
cholesterol, and fatty acids. These lipid ingredients can actually be derived from 

Humectant is an ingredient that 
attracts water.

Butylene glycol is a humectant 
often used in dry- or sensitive-skin 
moisturizers.

Propylene glycol is a humectant 
that penetrates the skin fairly easily, 
making it a good hydrating agent.

Sorbitol is a humectant.

Green tea extract is a strong 
antioxidant that also has anti-
glycation and anti-inﬂammatory 
properties.

Azulene is a hydrocarbon that 
is derived from the chamomile 
ﬂower.

Chamomile is a soothing agent.

Bisabolol is a soothing agent that 
is added to cosmetics designed for 
sensitive skin.

Salicylic acid is an antibacterial, 
soothing, and keratolytic agent.

Natural moisturizing factors 
(NMFs) are hydrating agents 
found within the cells and within 
the intercellular cement.

Sodium PCA is a hydrating agent 
that is a natural moisturizing factor 
ingredient.

Sphingolipids are lipid materials 
that are a natural part of the inter-
cellular cement.

Glycosphingolipids are lipid 
materials that are a natural part of 
the intercellular cement.

Ceramides are lipid materials that 
are a natural part of the intercel-
lular cement.

Phospholipids are naturally 
moisturizing humectants found 
within the skin.

Fatty acids are derived from 
plant or animal sources.

Glycerol is a humectant that is 
a natural part of the intercellular 
cement.

Squalane is a lipid material that is 
a natural part of the intercellular 
cement.

Cholesterol is a lipid material 
that is a natural part of the inter-
cellular cement.

Lipid replacement involves 
using topical lipids to repair the 
barrier function.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.176         CHAPTER 10

Soy sterols are natural sources of 
lipid materials.

Soy lecithin is used as a mois-
ture-binding material; it is also 
used for many liposomes.

Linoleic acid is a fatty acid that is 
a natural part of the intercellular 
cement.

Evening primrose oil is an 
excellent source of fatty acids, 
including linoleic acid.

Sunﬂower oil is an excellent 
source of fatty acids, including 
linoleic acid.

Borage oil is an excellent source 
of fatty acids, including linoleic 
acid.

Hydrophilic ingredients, or 
“water-loving” ingredients, attract 
and bind water.

Glycerin is a humectant and is a 
very strong water binder.

plant or animal sources, although most are derived from plant materials such 
as soy sterols or soy lecithin. Linoleic acid can be derived from numerous 
plant sources, including evening primrose oil, sunﬂower oil, or borage oil. 
These lipid components are naturally in the intercellular material at a ratio of 
4:1:1:1. In other words, it is four parts ceramides to one part of each of the other 
components.  This  complex  of  performance  lipid  ingredients  literally  patches 
the impaired barrier. Its function is to hold water within the intercellular matrix.
However,  lipids  alone  are  not  as  effective  without  the  use  of  humectants 
or hydrophilic ingredients. Hydrophilic literally means “water-loving.” These 
ingredients work like “water magnets,” attracting water while the lipids hold the 
water within the intercellular spaces between the cells. This combination of lipid 
complexes with hydrators is excellent for helping restore essential moisture to 
dry, dehydrated, and sensitive skin.

Sodium PCA is an excellent hydrator. It has a strong ability to attract water 
and  is  readily  accepted  by  the  skin.  Sodium  PCA  is  used  frequently  in  night 
creams, day creams, sunscreens, and other hydrating products. It can be used 
without lipids to hydrate oilier or combination skin. It is lightweight on the skin 
and does not cause clogged pores.

Glycerin  is  a  humectant  that  has  been  used  for  many  years.  It  is  a  very 
strong water binder. It is, in fact, so strong that it should not be used by itself. 
Glycerin can actually make the skin drier over a period of time because it doesn’t 
just pull water from cosmetics and the atmosphere when applied to the skin. In 
large amounts, it can pull water from the lower levels of the epidermis, causing 
transepidermal water loss (TEWL), which results in drier skin. Used in a moder-
ate amount in a good hydrating cream, glycerin is an excellent hydrating agent.
Propylene glycol is another widely used humectant. It penetrates the skin 
fairly  easily,  making  it  a  good  hydrating  agent.  However,  because  propylene 
glycol can increase permeability of the skin, it can cause problems for sensitive 
or dry skin with impaired barrier function. Butylene glycol is now being used 
more frequently in products for dehydrated or sensitive skin. It has less potential 
for sensitive skin irritation than its chemical cousin, propylene glycol. Sorbitol 
is another excellent hydrating agent that is frequently used in hydrating lotions.
Alpha  hydroxy  acids,  besides  being  surface  exfoliants,  are  also  hydrators. 
Lactic acid is actually used in prescription-strength moisturizers. Glycolic acid is 
also a hydrating agent.

OTHER HUMECTANTS

Hyaluronic acid or sodium 
hyaluronate is a hydrophilic 
agent with excellent water-binding 
properties.

Mucopolysaccharides are carbo-
hydrate–lipid complexes that are 
also good water binders.

Collagen is a large, long-chain 
molecular protein that lies on top 
of the skin and binds water; it also 
helps prevent water loss.

Elastin is a large, long-chain 
molecular protein that lies on top 
of the skin and binds water; it also 
helps prevent water loss.

Other water binders work very differently from the standard hydrophilic agents. 
Hyaluronic acid, also known as sodium hyaluronate, is one of these agents. 
Hyaluronic acid can hold up to 400 times its own weight in water. The molecule 
is quite large. It cannot penetrate the skin to any degree. However, because of its 
excellent water-binding properties, it is a frequently used hydrating performance 
ingredient and does an excellent job in surface hydration. Hyaluronic acid is an 
expensive hydrator. Creams and lotions containing hyaluronic acid may be more 
expensive than others. 

Mucopolysaccharides  are  carbohydrate–lipid  complexes  that  are  also 
good  water  binders.  Considered  a “mother  molecule”  to  hyaluronic  acid,  this 
ingredient  is  capable  of  holding  large  amounts  of  water  and  is  an  excellent 
hydrator. Again, it is too large to penetrate the skin.

Collagen and elastin are large, long-chain molecular proteins that lie on top 
of the skin and bind water, also helping to prevent water loss. Collagen and elas-
tin have been used in creams for many years. They are too big ever to penetrate 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      177

Substantives are ingredients that 
attach themselves well to the sur-
face of the skin, sort of spreading 
out across the skin, to protect and 
hydrate the surface.

Occlusive is a heavy, large mol-
ecule that sits on top of the skin 
and prevents moisture loss.

Petrolatum prevents urine and 
soggy diapers from irritating the 
baby’s sensitive skin.

Petroleum jelly is an excellent 
occlusive, preventing moisture 
loss from the skin.

the skin, but they do a good job of hydrating. Because they lie on top of the skin, 
they also help “ﬁll in” small lines and wrinkles, making skin look smoother.

Mucopolysaccharides,  hyaluronic  acid,  sodium  hyaluronate,  collagen,  and 
elastin are all performance ingredients known as substantives, which are ingre-
dients that attach themselves well to the surface of the skin, sort of spreading out 
across the skin, to protect and hydrate the surface.

Some of the more recent discoveries in humectants include algae and sea-
weed extracts. These are quite remarkable hydrators. They are substantive, form-
ing a surface gel. Some forms of algae are now being used as hydrating base 
materials  for  sensitive  skin  products  without  using  traditional  emulsiﬁers  that 
can decrease the barrier function in sensitive skin with loss of lipid barrier.

OCCLUSIVES

An occlusive is a heavy, large molecule that sits on top of the skin and prevents 
moisture loss. Occlusives are exactly what they sound like, forming a barrier on 
top of the skin to shield the skin from transepidermal moisture loss from the inside 
out, much like the barrier function, except on top instead of within the skin.

A good example of an occlusive is petrolatum, or petroleum jelly. Petro-
latum can be used by itself or incorporated into a cream or lotion. The amount 
of  occlusion  created  by  the  petrolatum  depends  on  the  amount  used  in  the 
cream formulation.

The advantages of using petrolatum in formulations are many. It is extremely 
hypoallergenic, rarely causing a problem with allergies or irritations. Hence, it 
is often used in formulas, both drug and cosmetic, for sensitive or irritated skin.
Petrolatum provides an excellent occlusive barrier both to keep water in the skin 
and to keep allergens, antigens, and foreign bodies out of the skin. A good example 
of this is the application of petroleum jelly or mineral oil to a baby’s bottom to avoid 
skin contact with urine in the baby’s diaper. Petrolatum is also very inexpensive.

There are some disadvantages to using petrolatum. First, it is extremely sticky, 
slippery, and greasy. Most clients do not like this greasy feeling. It is also hard 
to accomplish any task when your hands are too slippery to handle anything. It 
is extremely greasy on the face, creating esthetic problems as well. Second, it is 
disadvantageous to use petrolatum for oily and problem skin. Although petrola-
tum is not comedogenic in its pure state, it is very greasy and heavy. Besides the 
obvious esthetic problem for oily skin, the occlusive action of petrolatum also 
blocks the follicles from oil dispersion as well as from transepidermal water loss. 
In other words, although it keeps the water in the skin, petrolatum does not allow 
sebum to leave the follicle, therefore causing a “backup” of sebaceous secretions.
Many estheticians do not like petrolatum because it is not “natural.” This is 
simply not true. Petrolatum comes from minerals in the earth. What could be 
more natural? In short, petrolatum is a useful product, but it should not be used 
in all cases of dehydration.

EMOLLIENTS

As  the  skin  ages,  it  tends  not  to  produce  as  much  of  the  essential  lipids  that 
make up the intercellular cement; or the skin produces less sebum, which helps 
provide a barrier on the surface of the skin to prevent dehydration. This is when 
emollient ingredients are used in cosmetic systems. Emollients are somewhat 
like  occlusives  in  that  they  mostly  lie  on  the  surface  of  the  skin  and  prevent 
water loss. Emollients help smooth the surface of wrinkled skin, ﬁlling in the 
cracks of dry and dehydrated skin.

Emollients are somewhat like 
occlusives in that they mostly lie 
on the surface of the skin and 
prevent water loss. They also help 
“ﬁll in the cracks” of dry, dehy-
drated skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.178         CHAPTER 10

Alipidic means “lack of lipids.” 
These skin types do not produce 
enough lipids.

Silicones help protect skin from 
epidermal water loss, and they 
improve the product feel and 
spreadability. 

Cyclopentasiloxane is a silicone-
based ingredient used as a vehicle 
or emollient.

Cyclomethicone is a type of sili-
cone used primarily as a vehicle 
or emollient.

Dimethicone is a lightweight 
silicone emollient.

Phenyl trimethicone is a sili-
cone emollient.

Biologically inert chemicals 
are chemicals that are unlikely 
to cause reactions with the skin, 
making them ideal for sensitive 
formulations.

Emollients are often used not only for dehydrated or water-dry skin but also 
for oil-dry or alipidic skin. Emollients have a second use as spreading agents, as 
previously discussed in Chapter 9. Emollients are used extensively in moisturizers 
and creams but are also used in cleansers, masks for dry skin, and other products.
Alipidic literally means “lack of lipids.” These types of skin do not produce 
enough lipids. This could be true of both the intercellular lipids and the sebum 
produced by the sebaceous gland.

Emollients  help  supplement  skin  that  suffers  from  this  lack  of  lipid  pro-
duction. They serve as a substitute, helping to keep the surface lubricated and 
protected. These emollients are of several categories. Fatty acids have already 
been discussed in Chapter 9. They are emollients. Fatty alcohols and fatty esters 
are also emollients. We have already discussed new types of emollients that are, 
again, actually a synthetic version of intercellular cement lipids. These include 
cholesterol,  ceramides,  lecithin  (also  a  humectant),  squalane,  and  glycosphin-
golipids.

Lanolin is another good emollient. Lanolin has had much bad press in the 
past  because  of  its  allergy-causing  potential.  Many  of  the  older  formulas  that 
contained  lanolin  also  contained  large  amounts  of  perfumes  and  fragrances, 
which also had a strong allergy potential. Puriﬁcation processes for lanolin have 
also improved substantially over the decades, making today’s lanolin a useful 
and relatively harmless active agent.

Mineral oil is another emollient. Like petrolatum, it is a petroleum deriva-
tive. It has many of the same advantages and disadvantages as petrolatum. It is 
hypoallergenic and a good emollient, helping to soothe irritated, dry, scaly skin. 
But  it  is  also  greasy,  particularly  in  its  pure  state.  However,  when  formulated 
properly into a cream, it can be an excellent active agent emollient for dry, dehy-
drated skin, especially when mixed with good humectant active agents.

Silicones  are  often  used  now  instead  of  traditional  fatty-type  emollients. 
Silicones  include  cyclopentasiloxane,  cyclomethicone,  dimethicone,  and 
phenyl trimethicone, often used in combination. Often referred to as “breath-
able barriers,” these lightweight and unique ingredients help block water to pre-
vent it from escaping from the surface of the skin while keeping the skin feeling 
light and comfortable. Another advantage is that silicones are biologically inert, 
which  means  these  chemicals  are  unlikely  to  cause  reactions  with  the  skin, 
making them ideal for sensitive skin formulations also. The silicones are non-
comedogenic  and  do  not  irritate  the  pores;  thus,  they  are  ideal  for  oily  and 
acne-prone formulations. They can be used in creams, lotions, cleansing milks, 
and foundations and are often used in concentrated lipid serums for dry and 
sensitive skin with impaired barrier function.

PRODUCTS FOR DRY SKIN

Most products designed for dry skin contain a combination of humectants and 
emollients to help boost moisture levels and improve the skin’s ability to hold 
the moisture. Dry skin products often contain lipid replacement ingredients, as 
we have previously discussed, to improve barrier function. Normally these prod-
ucts are water based, or oil-in-water emulsions, although some may be water-in-
oil emulsions designed for more severely alipidic skin.

These moisturizing products vary greatly in the amount of emollients and 
humectants they contain. The more oil-dry (alipidic) the skin is, the more emol-
lient the product should contain.

Treatments  with  larger  amounts  of  humectants  and  less  emollients  are 
designed for oilier and combination skin. Hydration ﬂuids designed for younger 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      179

or  oilier  skin  types  may  contain  just  enough  emollient  to  serve  as  a  vehicle 
to  spread  the  product  on  the  skin.  Because  some  emollients  often  can  clog 
oily  skin  or  worsen  acne-prone  skin,  special  emollient  ingredients  have  been 
designed to be used in hydrating ﬂuids for oilier skin. These special emollient 
complexes do not clog the follicles. For more information on these chemicals, 
see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity.

INGREDIENTS FOR AGING SKIN

The amount of information that has been discovered in the past two decades 
about the aging process is amazing. Researchers are constantly discovering new 
ingredients and treatments that make skin look and behave like younger skin.

These treatments include drug and cosmetic products and high-tech machine 

technology such as lasers, LED light treatments, and microcurrent technology.

Often, estheticians combine several types of these performance ingredients 
in an individualized home-care program for their aging client, along with spe-
ciﬁc  professional  clinic-based  treatments  in  a  specialized  program  to  achieve 
better results in making the skin look younger. 

ALPHA HYDROXY ACIDS

In the history of cosmetics, no other ingredient or family of ingredients has had 
the impact or efﬁcacy of alpha hydroxy acids. Alpha hydroxy acids (AHAs) 
are a family of naturally occurring, mild acids. Most AHAs are present in fruits 
and vegetables, but some actually occur in human cells. Most AHAs used in cos-
metics have been synthesized in the laboratory or are the by-product of other 
industrial chemical processes, such as the making of ﬁlm.

AHAs have a large number of applications in skin care and can help many 
conditions,  including  oily  and  acne-prone  skin,  sun  damage,  dryness,  and 
hyperpigmentation. Several AHAs are used in skin care treatment. These include 
lactic acid, tartaric acid, malic acid, and by far the best-known AHA, glycolic 
acid. Salicylic acid and citric acid are also often included when discussing 
hydroxy acids, but they are actually beta hydroxy acids (BHAs).

The chemical difference between alpha hydroxy and beta hydroxy acids is 
the location of the hydroxy group on the carbon chain of the acid. Alpha indi-
cates that the group is on the ﬁrst carbon atom, whereas beta means that the 
group is on the second carbon atom. Glycolic acid is the smallest, molecularly, 
of all the alpha hydroxy acids. It has been widely researched and, because of its 
size, penetrates between cells more readily than the other AHAs.

AHAs are theorized to work by loosening the bond between dead corneum 
cells, dissolving part of the surface intercellular cement that holds dead epider-
mal cells together. This makes it easy to remove dead cells from the skin surface, 
which has a positive effect on many conditions:

  1. Removing dead cell buildup helps smooth the surface of dry, sun-damaged, 
or aging skin, improving roughness and making wrinkles appear much less 
deep. Results on an aging skin can become apparent in a very short period 
of time.

  2. Removing dead surface cells stimulates cell renewal, bringing younger, fresher 
cells to the surface more quickly and increasing the production of intercellu-
lar lipids; improving barrier function; and, therefore, improving hydration of 
the skin. Well-hydrated skin is smoother and ﬁrmer looking and is generally 
healthier, helping all activities of the skin proceed more efﬁcaciously.

Alpha hydroxy acids (AHAs) 
are a family of naturally occurring, 
mild acids.

Lactic acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid occurring naturally in milk; it is 
both an exfoliant and a hydrophilic.

Tartaric acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid occurring naturally in grapes 
and passion fruit.

Malic acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid derived from apples.

Glycolic acid is the most fre-
quently used alpha hydroxy acid; 
it is an exfoliant and hydrophilic.

Salicylic acid is a beta hydroxy 
acid with exfoliating and anti-
septic properties; natural sources 
include sweet birch, willow bark, 
and wintergreen.

Citric acid, a beta hydroxy 
acid, is most often used as a pH 
adjuster but can also be used as a 
mild exfoliant.

Beta hydroxy acids (BHAs) are 
a group of organic acids used in 
skin care products; BHA includes 
salicylic acid.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.180         CHAPTER 10

  3. Removing dead cell buildup from the inside of follicles helps loosen clogged 
pores, comedones, and other impactions on an oily skin or oily area. Contin-
ued use helps keep dead cells from accumulating on the follicle wall, which 
prevents impactions that can lead to inﬂammatory acne lesions. This prop-
erty of AHAs and BHAs make them good ingredients to use for acne-prone 
and oily skins.

  4. Removing  dead  cells  can  mean  the  removal  of  hyperpigmented  cells, 
thus helping to lighten discolored or splotchy skin. Used in combination 
with a melanin suppressant, such as hydroquinone, AHAs help remove 
melanin-stained  cells,  and  hydroquinone  helps  suppress  the  activity 
of  the  melanocytes.  A  broad-spectrum  sunscreen  with  an  SPF  of  15  or 
higher should always be used with AHA products, especially when treat-
ing hyperpigmentation.

  5. AHAs  can  also  be  used  on  body  skin,  such  as  legs,  arms,  and  the  torso, 
removing dead, dry cells and helping to improve retention of moisture. This 
helps conditions such as dry, winter skin and helps dermatologists in treat-
ing medical conditions such as eczema and icthyosis. Alpha hydroxy acids 
are also helpful in removing calluses on feet, elbows, and hands. 

  6. New  information  now  indicates  that  routine  use  of  alpha  hydroxy  acids 
improves barrier function of the epidermis, and long-term studies indicate 
the improvement of collagen content in the dermis.

Alpha  hydroxy  and  beta  hydroxy  acids  can  be  used  in  many  products, 
including cleansers and toners. They are most effective when used in leave-on 
products such as treatment gels, serums, or moisturizing creams.

Strengths and Effectiveness of AHAs

Alpha hydroxy acids can vary extensively in their strengths. Products have been 
formulated with as little as 2 or 3 percent to as high as 20 percent in higher-
strength treatment preparations, which are generally available only through der-
matologists and plastic surgeons. A great deal of controversy has focused on the 
irritation potential of various higher strengths. The scientiﬁc community gener-
ally accepts that products must contain 8 to 10 percent AHA in order to show 
results in helping the various conditions previously discussed, although even 
5 percent can show gradual improvements to the skin conditions.

The pH is also a very important factor in AHA efﬁcacy. The lower the pH, 
the higher the strength of the acid and the more cells that will be removed from 
the skin. Also, though, the lower the pH, the more potentially irritating the acid 
will be to the skin. AHA leave-on products of 8 percent or higher sting slightly 
when applied, indicating some irritancy, even though this effect is probably very 
minor at this concentration.

The Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) is a special panel of scientists and 
dermatologists  who  investigate  cosmetic  ingredient  safety  for  the  Personal 
Care Products Council (formerly known as Cosmetic, Toiletries, and Fragrance 
Association), the largest cosmetic manufacturers association. The CIR shares 
its  ﬁndings  with  the  industry  as  well  as  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration 
(FDA). Recently, the CIR conducted an extensive investigation of the safety of 
alpha hydroxy acids and many derivatives of AHA. The CIR determined that 
home-use products were generally safe, as long as they contained no more 
than 10 percent AHA, and had a pH no less than 3.5. Remember, the lower 
the pH, the stronger the acid.

Likewise, the CIR looked at salon-use AHAs. These higher-strength AHAs are 

discussed in Chapter 21, Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      181

To be effective, AHA products must be used by the client on a routine, daily 
basis at home. Occasional use of AHA products will not deliver the results most 
clients desire.

Vehicles and Other Ingredients with AHAs

The cosmetic spreading agent or vehicle for AHAs can also vary greatly. AHAs 
can be incorporated into leave-on gels (used frequently on oily, acne-prone, and 
combination skin types) and lotions or creams (which are more suitable for dry 
skin and body skin). The most recent trend is to use a silicone-based vehicle 
in specialty AHA serums for dry and aging skin. These serums help deliver the 
AHA in an efﬁcient manner but are less irritating than AHA in other vehicles. 
These serums can often be used successfully on sensitive skin.

Other ingredients may also be combined with AHAs in different formulations. 
Hydrating ingredients or emollients may be included for dry skin, hydroquinone 
(a melanin inhibitor and lightening agent) may be included for hyperpigmented 
skin, and salicylic acid may be included for acne-prone skin. Additionally, sooth-
ing agents can be added to AHA formulations to reduce irritation potential.

Contraindications for Alpha 
Hydroxy Acid Treatment

AHAs should not be used on the following clients:

•  Are using or have recently used isotretinoin (also known as Accutane®))
•  Have  recently  had  laser  resurfacing,  chemical  peel,  dermabrasion,  or  other 

peeling procedure

•  Have recently been waxed, or immediately before waxing
•  Are  using  tretinoin  (Retin-A®,  Renova®),  tazarotene  (Tazorac®),  adapalene 

(Differin®), or other exfoliating prescription drugs

•  Are known to be allergic to AHA or BHA
•  Are sunburned or have visibly irritated or inﬂamed skin
•  Are currently experiencing a ﬂare of rosacea
•  Have cuts; abrasions, including open acne lesions that have been scratched; 

or blisters

•  Are using other topical medications, unless approved by their physician
•  Are planning to deliberately expose their skin to the sun or sun beds
•  Have not had a thorough consultation and may be using products that are 

contraindicated

•  Are pregnant or nursing (AHA safety has not been determined for pregnant 

or nursing women.)

In  addition,  AHAs  should  be  used  carefully  with  other  peeling  agents  such 
as  salicylic  acid,  benzoyl  peroxide,  sulfur,  resorcinol,  or  products  with  large 
amounts of alcohol.

Combining peeling agents can increase irritation. Using AHA products on 
skin that has recently had a microdermabrasion treatment may also increase irri-
tation potential. It is not generally advisable to combine mechanical and chemi-
cal exfoliation procedures. Be careful when using any stimulating product with 
AHAs, because this may increase irritation.

In  general,  it  is  best  to  supervise  your  client’s  entire  home-care  program 
when using AHA products. This way you can determine exactly what they are 
using with the AHA product for best results and the least irritation.

Last, but certainly not least, the client must use a daily sunscreen with an 

SPF of at least 15 while using AHA products!



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.182         CHAPTER 10

Inﬂammation cascade is a series 
of biochemical reactions that lead 
to production of self-destruct en-
zymes that damage the skin.

Proteases are enzymes that dis-
solve proteins.

Collagenase is an enzyme pro-
duced during inﬂammation that 
breaks down collagen in the skin.

Elastase is an enzyme produced 
during inﬂammation that breaks 
down elastin ﬁbers in the skin.

Hyalurodinase is an enzyme 
produced during inﬂammation 
that breaks down hyaluronic acid 
in the skin.

Antioxidants are topical free-
radical scavengers that help 
neutralize free radicals before 
they can attach themselves to cell 
membranes, eventually destroy-
ing the cell. They are added to 
cosmetic formulas to prevent 
oxidation.

Broad-spectrum antioxidant is 
a formulation containing several 
antioxidants that help neutralize 
different types of free radicals.

MORE ANTIAGING INGREDIENTS

Sunscreens

Probably the single most important antiaging ingredient group is sunscreens. Broad-
spectrum SPF 15 or higher sunscreens that screen both ultraviolet A and B rays 
should be used daily on all skin types but especially on aging and sun-damaged 
skin. Sunscreens are best used by building them into day moisturizers, and their 
regular use will prevent sun damage, inﬂammation, and free-radical reactions 
that can cause aging skin symptoms, skin growths, and skin cancer. Individual 
sunscreen ingredients are discussed in Chapter 19, Sun and Sun Damage.

Antioxidants

We discuss free radicals in other chapters. Many scientists believe that inﬂamma-
tion and free radicals, or reactive oxygen species, are responsible for aging of 
the body as well as the skin. Free radicals cause much havoc in the skin. Free 
radicals occur in normal body cellular and physiological reactions. Free radicals 
are also caused by forms of inﬂammation such as sun exposure, smoking, pollu-
tion, and certain types of chemical exposure. Free radicals are essentially unsta-
ble oxygen atoms that rob electrons from the surface of skin cell membranes, 
creating another form of free radical called lipid peroxide and starting a domino 
effect of chemical reactions that lead to skin damage and even damage to DNA. 
The inﬂammation cascade is a series of biochemical reactions that lead to the 
production of self-destruct enzymes in the skin called proteases. Collagenase, 
elastase, and hyaluronidase are three of these self-destruct enzymes. As you 
might  guess  by  their  names,  they  cause  destruction  of  collagen,  elastin,  and 
hyaluronic acid. Collagen and elastin are ﬁbers responsible for elasticity, ﬁrm-
ness,  and  smoothness  of  the  skin,  and  hyaluronic  acid  in  the  lower  dermis 
makes up the ground substance that gives the skin further cushion and support. 
Constant, cumulative free-radical damage eventually results in the skin damage 
we think of as aging skin.

Antioxidants  are  free-radical  scavengers.  Some  neutralize  free  radicals 
before they attack cell membranes, beginning the inﬂammation cascade. Others 
squelch other forms of free radicals. Antioxidants work by supplying electrons 
to radical oxygen atoms, which need electrons to be stable. This prevents the 
need for the free radical to attack the cell membrane, thus avoiding the start of 
the inﬂammation cascade.

The routine use of topical antioxidants can help improve the visible signs 
of aging and help prevent the inﬂammation process that leads to cell and skin 
damage. Because numerous types of free radicals form during the inﬂammation 
cascade,  many  skin  care  scientists  now  believe  that  several  different  types  of 
antioxidants should be combined to squelch the different types of free radicals 
at  all  levels  of  the  reaction  cascade.  When  different  types  of  antioxidants  are 
combined  in  a  formulation,  the  formulation  is  said  to  be  a  broad-spectrum 
antioxidant.

Antioxidants are, by nature, very unstable substances. Because they are so 
reactive,  they  must  be  stabilized  to  remain  effective  in  a  skin  care  product. 
Antioxidants have been used for many years to keep products fresh by neutral-
izing free radicals within the product. This helps prevent rancidity. However, the 
ingredient worked in the product, not on the skin! Only in the past few years 
have we learned how to stabilize antioxidants so they can be used as perfor-
mance ingredients.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      183

Bioavailable means “able to be 
easily used by the skin.” 

The invention of liposomes and other forms of microencapsulation helped 
provide a way to keep these reactive substances stable until they could be used. 
Besides acting as protective “shells” to keep the antioxidants bioavailable, or 
able to be used as a performance ingredient in the skin, the lipid-based micro-
encapsulation also improves penetration of the antioxidants. 

Antioxidants  are  used  as  performance  ingredients  in  sunscreen  products, 
moisturizers, eye creams, and soothing products for sensitive and redness-prone 
skin as well as in intensive serums for aging skin. They sometimes are combined 
with other performance ingredients such as peptides, hydrators, or lipids.

Common antioxidant ingredients include the following:

•  Superoxide dismutase (an enzyme that helps prevent the start of the cascade)
•  Tocopherol (vitamin E)
•  Tocopherol acetate (another form of stabilized vitamin E)
•  Ascorbic acid (vitamin C acid)
•  Magnesium ascorbyl phosphate (vitamin C ester)
•  Grapeseed extract (contains very strong antioxidants known as 

proanthocyanidins)

•  Green and white tea (contain strong antioxidants called polyphenols)
•  Stearyl glycyrrhetinate (an anti-inﬂammatory antioxidant derived from 

licorice)

•  Malachite extract
•  Lichochalcone (from licorice root)
•  Silymarin (from milk thistle)
•  Elagic acid (from pomegranate)
•  Hypericin (from St. John’s wort)
•  Lipoic acid
•  Coenzyme Q-10 (naturally occurring antioxidant)
•  Idebenone 
•  Peumus boldus leaf extract (also known as D-boldine)

Flavonoids

Flavonoids  are  plant-derived  antioxidant  substances.  Hesperidin  methyl 
chalcone is a citrus bioﬂavonoid used to normalize blood ﬂow; it is used cos-
metically to reduce the appearance of pufﬁness, redness, and under-eye circles. 
It  is  often  used  in  conjunction  with  chrysin  (another  ﬂavonoid  derived  from 
passion ﬂower) and hydroxysuccinimide to help clear dark circles from under 
the eyes. These performance ingredients are reported to work by chelating iron 
and bilirubin (a pigment in hemoglobin), helping to disperse the biological com-
ponents that create dark circles.

These agents for reducing dark circles are often combined in eye creams or 
serums with peptides that help reduce pufﬁness and with other peptides that 
help improve elasticity.

Antiglycation Ingredients

Glycation is an abnormal, damaging, biochemical process in which blood 
sugars  bind  with  proteins  or  fats.  Simple  carbohydrates  or  sugars,  in  the 
form of glucose, are found throughout the body. Glucose is necessary for 
energy production in the cells. It is normal for glucose to bind with proteins 
or  fats  when  energy  is  being  created;  but  this  normal  reaction,  known  as 
glycosylation, takes place with the presence of an enzyme. In a glycation 
reaction there is no enzyme, and after several steps in the reaction, molecules 

Flavonoids are plant-derived anti-
oxidant substances. 

Hesperidin methyl chalcone 
is a citrus bioﬂavonoid used to 
reduce the appearance of redness 
and under-eye circles. 

Chrysin is a ﬂavonoid derived from 
passion ﬂower, used to help clear 
up dark circles under the eyes. 

Hydroxysuccinimide helps clear 
up dark circles under the eyes 
by chelating iron and bilirubin (a 
pigment in hemoglobin), helping 
to disperse the biological compo-
nents that create dark circles.

Glycation is an abnormal, damag-
ing biochemical process in which 
blood sugars bind with proteins 
or fats.

Glycosylation is a normal reaction 
that binds proteins to glucose in the 
production of energy for the cell.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.184         CHAPTER 10

advanced glycation end prod-
ucts (AGEs) are formed during 
glycation and can create cross-
linked proteins, resulting in skin 
wrinkling and elastosis. 

known  as  advanced  glycation  end  products  (AGEs)  are  formed.  The 
reaction also releases reactive oxygen species.

In a similar fashion to free radicals, AGEs can damage proteins throughout 
the  body,  resulting  in  cross-linked  proteins,  which,  in  simple  terms,  are  stiff-
ened. AGEs can affect collagen and elastin in the skin, causing the proteins to 
be stiffened. Like free-radical damage and photo damage, the visible damage is 
cumulative. When enough of this damage occurs, the skin suffers from wrinkling 
and elastosis. 

More important, elastin in tissues such as the blood vessels is also affected 
by AGEs. AGEs increase in presence by ﬁve times between the ages of 20 and 85. 
Atherosclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, asthma, arthritis, and heart disease are all 
affected  by  AGEs  caused  by  the  glycation  process.  Because  it  involves  high 
levels of sugars, glycation is especially a problem for diabetics and those with 
high blood sugar. Reducing sugar intake in the diet and lowering blood sugar 
reduces glycation and the formation of AGEs.

Antiglycation  ingredients  are  now  being  blended  into  advanced  skin  care 
formulations for aging skin. These agents work similarly to antioxidants by bind-
ing  glucose  before  it  reacts  with  proteins  and  fats.  Antiglycation  ingredients 
include 

•  Carnosine (a dipeptide comprised of two amino acids) 
•  L-carnitine (also derived from amino acids) 
•  Aminoguanidine 
•  Ergothioneine (amino acid)
•  Pisum sativum (pea) extract 
•  Salicylic acid 
•  Resveratrol (also antioxidant)
•  Alpha lipoic acid (also antioxidant)
•  Idebenone (also antioxidant)
•  Extracts of green and white tea (also antioxidants) 
•  Grapeseed extract (also antioxidant)
•  Pomegranate (also antioxidant)

Resveratrol

Resveratrol, a naturally occurring 
plant-derived biochemical, is a 
very strong antioxidant and has 
an effect on cells that, in essence, 
slows the expression of genes that 
cause or contribute to aging. 

Sirtuins (silent information 
regulator 2 [Sir2] proteins) 
are enzymes involved in cellular 
activity that help deactivate gene 
expression and are involved in 
production of energy for the cell 
in the form of ADP (adenosine di-
phosphate), a biochemical cousin 
of ATP (adenosine triphosphate).

One  of  the  most  talked-about  ingredients  in  cosmetic  chemistry  today  is 
resveratrol.  Resveratrol  is  a  naturally  occurring  plant-derived  biochemical 
that is a very strong antioxidant. More important, resveratrol has an effect on 
cells that, in essence, slows the expression of genes that cause or contribute to 
aging. Many scientists today believe that controlling gene expression may be an 
important tool in understanding, and possibly controlling, the aging process—
even intrinsic aging.

There are enzymes involved in cellular activity called silent information 
regulator 2 [Sir2] proteins, better known as sirtuins. Sirtuins help deactivate 
gene  expression  and  are  involved  in  production  of  energy  for  the  cell  in  the 
form of ADP (adenosine diphosphate), a biochemical cousin of ATP (adenosine 
triphosphate). ATP and ADP are discussed in Chapter 1, Advanced Anatomy and 
Physiology of the Skin.

Resveratrol activates sirtuins to function. The evidence that resveratrol stimu-
lates sirtuin activity was discovered only a few years ago. Scientists found that 
yeast cells exposed to resveratrol lived about two-thirds longer.

Resveratrol is available as an oral nutritional supplement and is now being 
used in topical skin care products. Resveratrol is probably most famous because 
it  is  found  in  red  wine,  which  has  been  often  touted  for  its  health  beneﬁts 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      185

(consumed in moderation) on blood pressure and blood lipids. However, res-
veratrol  is  found  in  much  higher  concentrations  in  Polygonum  cuspidatum 
extract, more commonly called Japanese knotwood or Mexican bamboo. This 
plant is the source for most resveratrol used in skin care products.

Resveratrol  also  has  anti-inﬂammatory  effects,  making  it  a  good  ingredi-
ent choice for sensitive and reactive, redness-prone skin as well as aging skin. 
Resveratrol can be combined with other ingredients such as lipids, antiglycation 
ingredients,  and  other  antioxidants.  It  is  most  produced  often  in  serum  form 
but can be used in moisturizers or other products. Resveratrol is an expensive 
ingredient  when  used  in  the  concentrations  needed  for  results,  so  products 
with resveratrol are somewhat higher priced. Resveratrol products—along with 
sunscreen, AHAs, peptides, lipids, and other antioxidants—are an important ele-
ment in treating aging skin.

Lipid Replacement for Aging Skin

A  good  barrier  function  in  a  mature  skin  helps  the  skin  look  smoother  and 
ﬁrmer,  and  reduces  redness  and  sensitivity.  Unfortunately,  as  skin  gets  older, 
the cell renewal cycles slows down, and therefore the interstitial barrier lipids 
produced during cell renewal diminish. Lipid replacement ingredients are often 
used to repair and support the barrier function of aging or sun-damaged skin by 
patching areas of missing lipids in the intercellular cement. 

As  previously  discussed  in  the  section  for  treatment  of  dehydrated  skin, 
ingredients that supplement lipid components of the epidermal barrier include 
sphingolipids,  also  known  as  ceramides,  phospholipids,  cholesterol,  and  fatty 
acids. These ingredients improve hydration, plumpness, and smoothness of the 
skin, helping to make wrinkles less apparent. Improvement of the barrier func-
tion also reduces sensitivity by making the skin more resistant to irritant pen-
etration  and  therefore  reducing  the  chances  of  inﬂammation  that  can  lead  to 
cascade reactions. Lipids for aging skin may be featured in high-tech sunscreen/
day creams, moisturizers, eye products, masks, and intensive serums.

Use of AHAs on a regular basis at home also helps the skin naturally manu-

facture more lipids by increasing cell renewal. 

Hydrating Aging Skin

Hydrators  added  to  emollients  and  lipid  replacement  ingredients  help  bind 
water to the skin, improving hydration. Sodium PCA, hyaluronic acid or sodium 
hyaluronate, seaweed or algae extracts, and glycerin are frequent hydrators used 
for aging skin. They may be used in almost any type of product for dehydrated 
or aging skin.

Peptides and Collagen Stimulants

One of the newest and most effective ingredient types are the peptides. Peptides 
are chains of amino acids that can cause various responses when applied to the 
skin. When amino acids are linked, they are peptides, and when peptides are 
linked, they form a protein.

You can think of amino acids as letters, and peptides as words. Different 
amino acids are combined in different sequences to signal a certain biochemi-
cal response from the skin. Peptides are now available that increase ﬁrmness by 
stimulating ﬁbroblasts that make collagen and elastin, increase ﬁbronectin and 
hyaluronic acid in the dermis, soften the appearance of wrinkles, reduce pufﬁ-
ness in eye areas, reduce redness, and signal damage repair within the skin. 

Peptides are chains of amino 
acids used in skin care products 
to produce changes in the skin’s 
appearance.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.186         CHAPTER 10

Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4 is a 
peptide (also known as Matrixyl®) 
used in cosmeceuticals to have a 
ﬁrming effect on the skin’s 
appearance.

Acetyl-hexapeptide-8 is a 
peptide used in “wrinkle-relaxing” 
products.

Palmitoyl oligopeptide is a 
peptide used to improve the ap-
pearance of skin elasticity.

Acetyl dipeptide-2 is a peptide 
used to help reduce pufﬁness.

Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7 is a 
peptide that has soothing effects 
and is also used to improve the 
appearance of skin elasticity.

Hydrocotyl (Centella asiatica) 
is part of a patented botanical 
complex that helps improve the 
appearance of skin elasticity.

Coneﬂower (Echinacea 
purpurea) is part of a patented 
botanical complex that helps 
improve the appearance of skin 
elasticity.

Retinol is a natural form of vita-
min A, appears to regulate skin 
function, and is theorized to be 
necessary for skin cell generation.

Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4 (formerly called palmitoyl pentapeptide-3) was the 
ﬁrst big successful breakthrough peptide ingredient and probably the most com-
monly used peptide for aging skin. Also known as Matrixyl®, palmitoyl pentatpeptide-4 
has been demonstrated to signiﬁcantly increase collagen synthesis, improving the 
appearance  of  wrinkles  and  sagging  of  the  aging  skin.  Palmitoyl  pentapeptide-4 
is basically a sequential piece of a collagen molecule. It is theorized to work by 
“tricking” the skin into “believing” that too much collagen has been broken down, 
thereby curbing the production of collagenase, the enzyme that destroys collagen, 
and  stimulating  ﬁbroblasts,  the  cells  that  produce  collagen.  The  results  of  using 
palmitoyl pentapeptide-4 are remarkable, and the performance ingredient does not 
cause the irritation that can be caused by other antiaging ingredients such as retinol.
Acetyl-hexapeptide-8 (formerly known as acetyl hexapeptide-3) is another 
popular peptide ingredient. Acetyl-hexapeptide-8 is used in “wrinkle-relaxing” 
creams. This ingredient is reported to prevent certain reactions in the skin that 
create skin folding as a result of facial expressions, softening pronounced wrin-
kles and expression lines.

Other  peptides  help  with  inﬂammation,  elastosis,  wrinkles,  eye  pufﬁness, 
and eye wrinkling. These include palmitoyl oligopeptide, acetyl dipeptide-2, 
and palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7.

As  individual  ingredients,  palmitoyl  oligopeptide  stimulates  collagen  pro-
duction, and palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7 helps reduce inﬂammation and slows the 
breakdown of skin components that support younger-looking skin. When palmi-
toyl oligopeptide is combined with palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7, they work extremely 
well together to signal stimulation of collagen, ﬁbronectin, and hyaluronic acid 
production and tissue repair in general. These changes result in reductions in 
wrinkle depth and roughness, and a better skin tone. Acetyl dipeptide-2 helps 
reduces pufﬁness. Peptides are now used in many different products including 
intensive serums, specialized eye products, and high-tech moisturizers.

Peptide technology is a very promising area, and new ingredients will surely 
be developed that have other appearance effects on the skin. Peptides are used 
extensively  in  antiaging  serums,  creams,  lotions,  eye  creams  and  serums,  and 
even serums designed to reduce redness and pufﬁness.

Hydrocotyl (Centella asiatica) and coneﬂower (Echinacea purpurea) 
extracts are a patented complex of botanical ingredients that has been demon-
strated to stimulate collagen production. Often, peptides are combined with this 
complex in products to improve collagen content, soften wrinkles, and improve 
skin ﬁrmness.

Retinol

Retinol is a natural form of vitamin A that stimulates cell repair and regulate 
skin functions and is theorized to be necessary for skin cell generation. Retinol is 
incorporated into serums and moisturizers to stimulate collagen production and 
increase cell turnover. Retinol has some side effects in a signiﬁcant number of 
people, sometimes producing redness and irritation, and should always be used 
with a daily broad-spectrum sunscreen.

COMBINING ANTIAGING INGREDIENTS
All  of  these  antiaging  ingredients  we  have  discussed  deﬁnitely  help  improve 
the appearance of sun-damaged and aging skin. However, the best results are 
achieved  by  combining  products  and  performance  agents.  Choosing  just  one 
ingredient modality does not provide the beneﬁt that you will see when you 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      187

combine all the types of ingredients discussed here. Using a good sunscreen in a 
lipid-based hydrating vehicle, antioxidant/peptide collagen-stimulating serums, 
antiglycation agents, newer ingredient types such as resveratrol, and AHA gels 
or serums provides a program approach to improving the appearance of aging 
or sun-damaged skin.

PLANT EXTRACTS

Hundreds  of  plant  extracts  are  used  as  performance  ingredients  in  skin  care 
products. One-third of all prescription drugs are made from plants. Plant extracts 
are generally liquids that are pressed, boiled, or chemically extracted from dif-
ferent plants.

Plant extracts are simply naturally occurring complexes of various chemi-
cals. Many estheticians like plant extracts because they believe they are “natural.” 
Nevertheless, they are chemicals! All life-forms are made of chemicals. A single 
plant extract can be made up of literally hundreds of chemicals. Single chemi-
cals can be isolated from extracts in the laboratory to produce speciﬁc chemicals 
used as performance ingredients. Examples include ceramides and other lipids, 
many antioxidants, resveratrol, vehicle and emollient oils and fat complexes, and 
many other ingredients derived from plants. 

Some  plant  extracts  are  better  researched  than  others.  At  one  time,  most 
plant extracts were used in skin care products for their anecdotal properties. 
Anecdotal means that the ingredient, based on personal observation, is reputed 
to have certain beneﬁts for improving the appearance of the skin; but the ben-
eﬁts  have  not  been  substantiated  or  proved  by  accepted  scientiﬁc  evaluation. 
While some products still contain some plant extracts that have not been thor-
oughly researched, today many extracts have had substantial research performed 
on them. Often, the actual chemical or chemicals within an extract that cause the 
appearance change have been isolated.

Plant extracts that are performance ingredients are normally used in rela-
tively small quantities in skin care products. Because of their smaller concen-
trations  within  a  product,  these  extracts  generally  are  listed  further  down  on 
ingredient labels. 

PERFORMANCE INGREDIENTS 
FOR SENSITIVE SKIN

Treating redness and sensitive skin can be tricky because so many ingredient 
factors can inﬂuence or worsen redness-prone or sensitive skin. As we discuss 
in Chapter 13 (Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants) and Chapter 14 (Rosacea), 
many ingredients—including fragrances and some preservatives—can cause irri-
tation, inﬂammation, and allergies and can overstimulate fragile, reactive skin. 
These known irritants and common allergens must be avoided in sensitive skin 
formulations. They include the following:

•  Fragrances, the number one cause of cosmetic allergic reactions
•  Color agents, common allergens that are generally unnecessary in skin care 

products 

•  Formaldehyde-releasing  preservatives  such  as  quaternium-15,  2-bromo-
nitropropane-1, 3-diol, imidazolidinyl or diazolidinyl urea, or DMDM hydantoin
•  Drying alcohols, such as isopropyl or SD alcohol, which can strip barrier lipids 
•  Extreme pH values, low or high, that strip and cause irritation

Anecdotal is information that 
purported to be accurate but has 
not yet been substantiated, or 
proved, by scientiﬁc means.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.188         CHAPTER 10

There are also scenarios in which ingredients or products are misused or 
abused, a practice that can damage the barrier function, erythemic reaction, and 
general reactivity. Please remember that we are discussing avoiding these sce-
narios, speciﬁcally for inﬂamed, sensitive, or reactive skin types. Following are 
some of these scenarios:

•  Use or overuse of any type of exfoliant, chemical or mechanical, which will 
strip a thin, protective corneum and damage barrier function in sensitive or 
already inﬂamed skin. This would include acid exfoliants such as AHAs or 
BHAs as well as enzymes such as bromelain or papain. 

•  Mechanical  exfoliating  ingredients  such  as  sharp  crushed  shells  or  alumi-
num oxide, which is the exfoliant most often used in machine and manual 
microdermabrasion.

•  Extremely low pH or high concentrations associated with AHA or BHA products.
•  Combining exfoliating or keratolytic agents or procedures on obviously sensi-
tive or inﬂamed skin, such as using both benzoyl peroxide and AHA or com-
bining microdermabrasion and AHA treatments.

•  Overwashing the face, or using cleansers that are too strong for the sensitive 
skin type or have a high concentration of detergent ingredients. High-foaming 
cleansers are included in this product type.

Protecting the Barrier Function in Sensitive Skin

Guarding  and  replenishing  the  barrier  function  is  very  important  in  treating 
sensitive skin. Not only does the barrier function need to be reinforced, but care 
must be taken to avoid stripping the barrier function. Strong detergents and sur-
factants, some emulsiﬁers, drying alcohols, and other ingredients can eat away 
at the fragile barrier function in sensitive skin. If the barrier function is stripped, 
the skin turns red from inﬂammation and exposure.

Lipid  replacement  ingredients  such  as  sphingolipids,  glycosphingolipids, 
phospholipids,  cholesterol,  and  certain  fatty  acids  can  serve  as  a  complex  to 
patch and reinforce barrier function, just as it does in helping the aging skin. 
Use of physical emulsiﬁers reduces the chances of damage to the natural barrier 
function lipids. Keeping the barrier function intact prevents irritants from enter-
ing the skin and therefore prevents inﬂammation, which can create or worsen 
redness in fragile, sensitive skin types.

Soothing and Anti-Redness Agents

Soothing agents have an anti-reddening effect on the skin. They make the skin 
feel  cooler  and  more  comfortable.  Many  antioxidants  also  serve  as  soothing 
agents, probably because they interfere with the inﬂammation cascade that can 
lead to redness. They are often added to many products designed for sensitive 
skin, and they are most effective in leave-on products. Recently, many peptides 
have been developed to manage redness as well.

The following ingredients are used for their soothing or anti-redness beneﬁts:

•  Stearyl glycyrrhetinate (derived from licorice)
•  Dipotassium glycyrrhizinate (derived from licorice)
•  Lichochalcone (also derived from licorice)
•  Feverfew extract
•  Matricaria extract (a type of chamomile) 
•  Pseudopterogorgia elizabethae (sea whip) extract 
•  Ranunculus fi caria extract (rutin; also known as vitamin P) 
•  Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-3



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      189

•  Acetyl dipeptide-1 cetyl ester 
•  Hesperidin methyl chalcone (bioﬂavonoid)
•  Green tea extract
•  Grapeseed extract
•  Ginseng extract
•  White tea extract
•  Allantoin (derived from comfrey root)
•  Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice) extract
•  Aloe barbadensis (aloe vera) extract
•  Chamomile extract 
•  Azulene (derived from chamomile)
•  Bisabolol (derived from chamomile)
•  Calendula extract
•  Zinc oxide
•  Horse chestnut extract (strengthens capillaries)
•  Mallow extract
•  Hamamelis extract (nonalcoholic witch hazel)

Finished products designed for sensitive skin should be independently tested to 
ensure their low irritancy potential. For more information, see Chapter 13, Sensi-
tive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants.

OVER-THE-COUNTER DRUGS

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates both prescription and 
over-the-counter  (OTC)  drugs.  OTC  drugs  have  been  determined  to  have 
relatively few side effects and therefore are deemed safe for consumers to use 
without a doctor’s prescription. OTC drugs are carried by stores and are often 
sold by estheticians. These include acne medications, skin-lightening products, 
mild hydrocortisone products, and sunscreens.

OTC and Drug Facts Labeling

OTC drugs are required by law to use special chart labels called drug facts 
labels  (Figure  10-1).  These  standardized  labels  are  designed  to  be  uniform 
and clearly inform the consumer what the product is used for and how to use 
the product. The label also includes warnings as to possible side effects and 
contraindications. Drug facts labels are required to be printed on the outside 
of  the  container  of  any  OTC  drug.  For  most  products,  this  means  the  drug 
facts label is printed on the box; but if the product is not sold in a box, it 
must be on the actual container. For small containers, “accordion” labels may 
be attached.

Active  ingredients  are  the  ingredients  within  a  drug  that  cause  the  physi-
ological change that occurs when the drug is used. They are listed ﬁrst on the 
drug facts label, along with their purpose. Uses for the product are listed second. 
Warnings are listed third. After the warnings are sections for “when using this 
product” advice and “stop use and ask a doctor if,” instructing consumers when 
they  should  seek  a  physician’s  advice  if  the  drug  is  not  working  or  they  are 
experiencing  an  adverse  reaction.  Directions  follow  these  sections,  with  clear 
instructions on how to use the product. Last, the “inactive” ingredients are listed. 
The inactive ingredients are all the ingredients in the OTC product that are not 
the actual active ingredients. Ingredients that are considered to be cosmetic per-
formance ingredients affecting skin appearance are called “inactive ingredients” 
when listed on the label of an OTC drug.

Over-the-counter (OTC) 
drugs are available without 
a prescription.

Drug facts labels are special 
charts used on the packages of 
over-the-counter drugs to inform 
the consumer about the drug’s 
uses and possible problems.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.190         CHAPTER 10

Aloe Barbadensis Leaf Juice, Butylene Glycol, Caprylic/
Capric Triglycerides, Cholesterol, Ceteth-20, Cetyl
Alcohol, Carbomer, Dimethicone, Disodium EDTA,
Diazolidinyl Urea, Glyceryl Stearate, Glycerin,
Glycoproteins, Glycosphingolipids, Methylparaben, 
Propylene Glycol Dicaprylate/Dicaprate, PEG-100
Stearate, Parafﬁn, Phospholipids, Propylene Glycol,
Propylparoben, Stearic Acid, Silk Amino Acids,
Sphingolipids, Sodium Hyaluronate, Sodium PCA,
Triethanolamine, Water (Aqua).

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 10-1  Drug facts label.

OTC products can also be cosmetics. A sunscreen that contains moisturizing 
ingredients is both a drug and a cosmetic. However, it must be labeled as an 
OTC drug, and cosmetic claims cannot be made on the drug facts label. Any 
appearance claims must be made somewhere else on the package.

You  may  notice  that  products  from  different  companies  have  very  similar 
wording on their drug facts labels. This is because the FDA has very strict rules 
about what a company can say about an OTC drug product. Speciﬁc words and 
phrases are expressly approved for different active ingredients and for explain-
ing how to use an OTC drug product.

Sunscreen Ingredients

There are two types of sunscreen ingredients—absorbing sunscreens and physi-
cal sunscreens. Absorbing sunscreens work by absorbing and neutralizing ultra-
violet rays from the sun. Physical sunscreens work by reﬂecting the rays. For 
much more on these ingredients and how they work, see Chapter 19, Sun and 
Sun Damage.

In  the  past  few  years,  the  FDA  has  changed  the  ofﬁcial  name  of  numer-
ous sunscreen ingredients. The following lists are some of the new names (old 
names are in parentheses). Also listed is the type of UV light screened by each of 
these agents. Often these sunscreen active ingredients are used in combination 




 
 
 
 
 
Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      191

to screen various parts of the spectrum of UV light from the sun. This topic is 
discussed more extensively in Chapter 19.

The most widely used absorbing sunscreen active ingredients include the 

following:

•  Octinoxate (octyl methoxycinnimate) UVB screen
•  Octisalate (octyl salicylate) UVB screen
•  Oxybenzone (benzophenone) UVB and partial UVA screen
•  Avobenzone (also known as Parsol 1789) UVA screen
•  Homosalate—UVB screen 
•  Octocrylene—UVB and partial UVA screen

There are only two physical sunscreens. These screen both UVA and UVB rays:

•  Zinc oxide
•  Titanium dioxide

Sunscreens or Sunblocks?

What  is  the  difference  between  a  sunscreen  and  a  sunblock?  In  the  old  FDA 
regulations, a sunblock claim could be made if the sunscreen product contained 
a  physical  sunscreen  active  ingredient  of  titanium  dioxide  or  zinc  oxide.  The 
new regulations do not allow the term sunblock to be used. No sunscreen agent 
or product blocks 100 percent of the sun’s rays.

Active Ingredients for Acne Medications

There are four major OTC-approved ingredients for the treatment of acne:

  1. Benzoyl peroxide—used in 2.5, 5, and 10 percent concentrations, depend-
ing  on  the  acne  severity.  Usually  these  are  in  a  gel  spreading  agent,  but 
they can also be in a cream base or a drying paste. Benzoyl peroxide is a 
keratolytic, which means “keratin-dissolving” and works by loosening dead 
cells  stuck  in  the  follicles.  It  also  releases  oxygen  in  the  follicle.  Because 
acne bacteria are anaerobic, they cannot survive in the presence of oxygen. 
Benzoyl peroxide essentially works both as an interfollicular exfoliant and 
as an antibacterial.

  2. Salicylic  acid—a  beta  hydroxy  acid  that  also  sloughs  dead  cell  buildup 
within the follicle, acts as a mild antibacterial, and has soothing properties. 
Salicylic acid is regarded to be less irritating than benzoyl peroxide and has 
less allergy potential, but it is also less aggressive in treating acne. It is often 
used for treating milder forms of acne. The concentration in OTC drugs is 
limited to 2 percent. Salicylic acid is also used as a performance ingredient 
exfoliant in smaller concentrations, without making a drug claim.

  3. Sulfur—both a follicular exfoliant and a mild antibacterial. Sulfur also tends 
to be less aggressive than benzoyl peroxide, and it often is marketed for adult 
acne conditions. It is used in up to 10 percent concentration in OTC products.
  4. Sulfur mixed with resorcinol—resorcinol is a peeling agent, and its anti-
acne activity seems to be enhanced when combined with sulfur. Resorcinol 
can be toxic and should not be used on large areas or on broken skin. Sul-
fur-resorcinol lotions are often marketed as so-called spot-drying products.

It should be noted here that salicylic acid, sulfur, and resorcinol are all kera-
tolytic agents. In addition, they are often used as performance agent exfoliating 
and drying agents, without making antiacne drug claims.

Keratolytic is a keratin-dissolving 
ingredient type used in exfoliators 
and acne drugs.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.192         CHAPTER 10

Hydroquinone is an active 
topical ingredient that inhibits the 
production of melanin.

Magnesium ascorbyl phosphate 
is an ester of vitamin C that is 
a fat-soluble antioxidant, often 
considered to be a stable form of 
topical vitamin C; also used for 
skin brightening.

Arbutin is an ingredient used for 
skin brightening.

Kojic acid is an ingredient used 
for skin brightening.

Bearberry and mulberry 
extracts are ingredients used for 
skin brightening.

Oil absorbers are agents used to 
absorb excess sebum.

Nylon is a synthetic molecule used 
in oil-control products to absorb 
excess sebum and reduce shininess.

Silica is an oil absorber.

Glycolic acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid used primarily as a cellular 
exfoliant. It has many beneﬁcial 
effects on the skin’s appearance.

Skin Lightening

Only one OTC drug ingredient is FDA approved for lightening of skin hyper-
pigmentation. Hydroquinone is used at up to 2 percent concentration in OTC 
products, but it is used at higher concentrations in prescription lightening prod-
ucts. Hydroquinone works by interfering with the physiological processes that 
cause pigment to form.

Hydroquinone  is  sometimes  combined  with  performance  ingredient  exfo-
liants  such  as  salicylic  or  glycolic  acids,  which  exfoliate  dead  cells  for  better 
absorption  of  the  hydroquinone.  Prescription  hydroquinone  is  in  higher  con-
centrations  (usually  4  percent  and  up)  and  is  often  combined  with  tretinoin, 
again to exfoliate for better absorption. One prescription drug, Triluma®, con-
tains hydroquinone, tretinoin, and a corticosteroid called ﬂuocinolone. Triluma 
is  used  to  treat  melasma,  a  skin  condition  previously  discussed  in  Chapter  6, 
Skin Analysis.

Skin “Brightening”

Many performance ingredients have a lightening effect on hyperpigmentation. 
Because they are not approved OTC active ingredients, they cannot be marketed 
with “lightening” claims. Therefore, many of these ingredients are marketed 
as  “brighteners”  or “whiteners.”  These  agents  include  magnesium  ascorbyl 
phosphate, arbutin, kojic acid, bearberry and mulberry extracts, and others.

PERFORMANCE INGREDIENTS FOR OILY 
AND ACNE-PRONE SKIN

The goal in treating oily and acne-prone skin is to clear the follicles of dead 
cell buildup and to control the excessive sebum produced by these skin types. 
Use of foaming cleansers with higher concentrations of the rinseable, foam-
ing detergent cleansing agents already discussed is helpful in controlling the 
excessive  oil.  Sometimes  oil  absorbers  such  as  nylon  (actually  made  from 
nylon ﬁbers) and silica are used in “oil-control” lotions or gels that are worn 
under makeup.

Use of follicular exfoliants like glycolic acid help to slough dead cells from 
the inside of the follicle that clog the pores. Additionally, the previously listed 
OTC drug exfoliants are used.

Even oily skin needs to be properly hydrated. Because of the excess sebum 
produced  by  these  skin  types,  little  emollient  is  required  in  products  for  oily 
skin. Use of hydrating agents such as sodium PCA and glycerin help bind water 
without  adding  oily  emollients  to  an  already  oily  skin.  Special  nonclogging, 
lightweight emollient-spreading agents have been developed so that these prod-
ucts  may  be  applied  without  making  the  skin  feel  oily  or  heavy  and  without 
clogging pores.

Exfoliants

Exfoliants are performance 
ingredients that help remove dead 
cells from the skin surface.

An exfoliant is a performance ingredient that helps remove dead cells from 
the  skin  surface.  Exfoliants  help  the  appearance  of  the  skin  by  removing 
dead  cells  and  making  the  surface  look  smoother  and  more  reﬁned.  They 
actually help stimulate the skin to replace these old cells with fresher cells. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients      193

Mechanical  exfoliants  are  usually  granular  particles  that  bump  or  scratch 
the  skin  surface  to  remove  cells.  Polyethylene,  ground  shells  or  nuts,  and 
hydrogenated jojoba oil beads are examples of these types of particles. Some-
times these ingredients are mixed into cleansers to increase their rinseability. 
When applied with the ﬁngertips and gently massaged, these agents bump off 
excess dead cells from the skin surface. Aluminum oxide, the particle used in 
microdermabrasion salon treatments, is sometimes now mixed into products 
for exfoliation in the salon or at home. Unlike polyethylene or other smooth 
microgranules, these tiny, sharp crystals are aggressive mechanical exfoliants; 
so  products  containing  aluminum  oxide  should  never  be  used  more  than 
once or twice a week, and they should be used gently. 

Chemical  exfoliants  include  alpha  hydroxy  acids,  such  as  glycolic  and 
lactic acids, and the beta hydroxy salicylic acid. They help improve the appear-
ance of wrinkles, ﬁne lines, rough textures, and clogged pores, and they improve 
cell renewal and the lipid content in the barrier function. They also can shed 
discolored cells, helping with hyperpigmentation. On oily skin, they can loosen 
clogged pores and remove buildup of dead cells within the follicles. They are 
best used when applied to the skin in a gel, serum, or cream and worn under 
a moisturizer or sunscreen. These acids work by dissolving surface intercellular 
lipids in the top of the corneum, loosening the bonds between the dead cells 
so the cells can be shed. Sometimes these acids are added to cleansers or rinse-
able scrubs, but they work best when left on the skin. Benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, 
and resorcinol are stronger exfoliants and are used in OTC acne products, as 
discussed earlier.

Enzymes such as papain (derived from papaya), bromelain (derived from 
pineapple), and pancreatin (a pancreatic enzyme derived from beef or pork 
processing)  work  by  dissolving  protein  in  dead  cells.  They  are  keratolytics 
known as proteolytic enzymes. Proteolytic literally means “protein dissolving.” 
Enzymes are often used in professional salon skin care treatments. Enzymes can 
be used in “vegetal” peels or gommages, roll-off surface exfoliation treatments 
that are actually both chemical and mechanical exfoliant products. Enzymes also 
are available in the form of a powder that is mixed with water to activate the 
enzyme and form a paste, which is applied to the skin in the ﬁrst part of facial 
treatments.

Other Ingredients

Clays such as bentonite, kaolin, hectorite, and silica are used for their tighten-
ing and oil-absorbing beneﬁts. They are also sometimes used in drying lotions 
for  acne  blemishes.  They  have  drawing  effects  on  clogged  pores,  helping  to 
remove impactions and tighten the appearance of pores.

IN CONCLUSION

Hundreds of chemicals are used as performance ingredients in cosmetics. Some 
active agents, as you have seen, are also vehicles and have more than one func-
tion in a cosmetic.

We have touched on only a few performance ingredients, but you will be 
able to use this knowledge to understand ingredient labels and their functions. 
With additional study, you should eventually be able to pick up a product and, 
simply by reading the ingredient label, know what kind of product it is and for 
what skin problem it is intended.

Mechanical exfoliants are 
ingredients used to bump off dead 
cells from the skin’s surface. Some 
examples include granules, jojoba 
oil beads, and ground nut shells.

Chemical exfoliants are ingre-
dients used to remove dead cells 
from the skin’s surface by chemi-
cally dissolving the bond between 
dead cells or dissolving the dead 
cell itself.

Enzymes are naturally occurring 
chemicals used in cosmetics pri-
marily as chemical exfoliants.

Papain is a keratolytic enzyme 
derived from papaya fruit.

Bromelain is keratolytic enzyme 
derived from pineapple.

Pancreatin is a keratolytic en-
zyme derived from bovine (cow) 
or porcine (pig) pancreas extract.

Keratolytic or proteolytic 
means “protein dissolving”; these 
agents work by dissolving keratin 
protein within dead surface cells, 
helping to remove these cells, and 
making the skin look clearer and 
smoother.

Gommages are roll-off exfoliation 
treatments.

Bentonite is a clay often used in 
cleansing masks.

Kaolin is a clay used in oil-
absorbing and cleansing mask 
products.

Hectorite is a clay used in cleans-
ing masks.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.194         CHAPTER 10

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is a performance ingredient? How does it differ from an active ingredient?

  2. What are the two basic types of cleansing ingredients? Discuss the products 

in which each type is used.

  3. What are natural moisturizing factors? Name some that are used in cosmetics.

  4. Discuss some ingredients used to help aging skin.

  5. What are free radicals?

  6. What are peptides, and how do they affect the skin’s appearance?

  7. What is glycation, and how does it affect the skin? How can it be prevented?

  8. Discuss some ingredients used to treat oily skin and problem acne skin.



CHAPTER

11

Skin Care Products

OBJECTIVES . . . 

After graduating from school, the esthetician will be amazed 
at the variety of skin care products available. This chapter 
discusses various types of skin care products available, prod-
ucts for different skin types and problems, and the chemical 
makeup of products for different skin types.

Although this chapter provides only an overview of the 
products available, it will teach the esthetician about factors 
involved in choosing products for various skin problems and 
clients’ needs.

In Chapters 9 and 10, you learned about cosmetic chemistry 

and the various ingredients used in manufacturing cosmet-
ics. Now you will learn about practical application of various 
formulas of cleansers, toners, creams, and other products.

Literally hundreds of different products are available to 
estheticians. These are products that you will use in the treat-
ment room and recommend that your clients use at home. It is 
important to carry a variety of products to sell to your clients 
for home use. There are many good esthetic product manu-
facturers, and the most successful skin care salons carry lines 
made by at least two or three of them. No one line of prod-
ucts is the answer to every problem you will see. What your 
clients are doing to their skin at home is actually more impor-
tant than your in-room treatments. Your client is treating his 
or her skin with something twice a day—that’s 60 times a 
month! What could be more important than what products 
are used on your client’s skin 24 hours a day? It is essential to 
the success of any skin care program that the client partici-
pates at home by using the correct products you recommend 
(Figure 11-1).



     195

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.196         CHAPTER 11

m
o
r
f
e
s
n
e
c

i
l

r
e
d
n
u
d
e
s
U

.
2
1
0
2
,
n
y
z
s
k
a
d
o
r
p
t
h
g
i
r
y
p
o
C
e
g
a
m

I

m
o
c
.
k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S

FIGURE 11-1  The success of any skin care program depends on having the client 
participate at home.

A VISIT TO THE PRODUCT STOCKROOM
Let’s  take  a  trip  to  the  stockroom  of  a  successful  skin  care  salon.  We  do  not 
mention name brands here, but we do talk in chemical terms about the various 
products available. You will be able to use what you have learned. Remember, 
a primary objective is for you to be able to read ingredient labels and tell what 
kind of product you are examining and which skin type it is intended for. While 
touring  this  imaginary  stockroom,  we  look  at  various  types  of  products.  This 
stockroom contains enough types of products to handle most esthetic problems 
(Figure 11-2).

The most important factor in prescribing the right home care for your clients 
is your education and knowledge of skin analysis. Make sure you receive good 
training in analysis. It is one of the biggest keys to success in esthetics.

Before we enter the stockroom, remember that many products are available 
to the esthetician and that new products are developed every year. We cover 
only a portion of the products available, but they are a representative sampling 
of what is frequently used in skin care salons.

CLEANSERS

As we enter the stockroom, the ﬁrst thing you notice is the wide assortment of 
cleansers. There are milk-type cleansers and rinseable detergent-type foaming 
cleansers, and there are some specialty cleansers for acne- and clog-prone skin.
Let’s  talk  about  rinseable  cleansers  ﬁrst.  Rinseable  cleansers  usually  come 
in a tube, sometimes in a bottle. They vary in strength and texture. Rinseable 
cleansers are important to carry because you will ﬁnd that many clients are used 
to washing their faces with bar soap. They like the foaming action and do not 
“feel clean” unless they have “washed” their faces.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin Care Products      197

.
i
l
l

e
c
o
r
t
e
P
o
n
D
y
b

i

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 11-2  A well-organized retail area is important to the esthetics practice.

Product Proﬁle: Rinseable Cleanser for Oily 
and Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type The ﬁrst rinseable cleanser we look at a rinseable cleanser 
for oily and combination skin. Clients with oily and combination skin are espe-
cially fond of rinseable cleansers because these clients need some detergent to 
help cut excess amounts of oil. However, we don’t want our cleanser to overdry 
the skin or strip the acid mantle.

Product Characteristics This particular cleanser is in a tube. The product con-
sistency feels almost like soap. When the client adds water, it begins to foam 
moderately. It rinses completely, leaving the skin feeling fresh and clean but not 
too tight. This feeling of clean but not tight is a good sign that the product has 
the right amount of detergent ingredient for the skin type.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  Chemically,  this  product  uses  disodium  lauryl 
sulfosuccinate  as  a  detergent–surfactant.  It  also  contains  smaller  amounts  of 
avocado oil and cetyl alcohol, emollient ingredients added to cut the detergent 
action on the skin’s surface so that it is not stripping. This cleanser is also fra-
grance-free, a helpful characteristic when treating sensitive skin. This cleanser is 
a good recommendation for adult oily and combination skin or for clients who 
are used to heavier moisturizers but really need to switch to a lighter program 
for oily or combination skin (Figure 11-3A).

Product Proﬁle: Rinseable Cleanser for Dry 
and Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type This rinseable cleanser is designed for clients who have 
dry skin but still want the action of a detergent cleanser. This cleanser is good 
for a mature client with dry skin who is used to using soap over milk cleanser. 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
198         CHAPTER 11

INGREDIENTS: Deionized Water, Mineral Oil, 
Cetyl Alcohol, Sodium Lauryl Sulfate, Cetearyl 
Alcohol, Ceteth-20, Imidazolidinyl Urea, Methyl 
Paraben.

A

INGREDIENTS: Deionized Water, Disodium 
Lauryl Sulfosuccinate, Cetyl Alcohol, Ceteth-20, 
Propylene Glycol, Avocado Oil, Methylparaben, 
DMDM Hydantoin.     

FIGURE 11-3  Sample ingredient labels for cleansers.

B

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Of course, many soaps can be overdrying, and we would prefer this client use 
a non-soap, rinseable wash.

Product  Characteristics  This  rinseable  cleanser  is  also  packaged  in  a  tube. 
It foams very slightly. It rinses well but leaves the skin feeling very soft. This 
cleanser is not aggressive enough for oily–combination skin. However, for more 
alipidic skin, it is excellent.

Chemical Action and Design If you look at the ingredient label of this product, 
you  will  notice  that  its  detergent  agent,  sodium  lauryl  sulfate,  is  listed  about 
halfway down the list of ingredients. This means the product is not nearly as 
strong a cleanser as the ﬁrst cleanser we discussed. The ingredients listed, after 
water, are different types of emollients, fatty alcohols, and esters. This cleanser 
contains lots of emollients because it is designed for dry skin. The large amounts 
of emollients keep the detergents from stripping too much lipid from the skin’s 
surface. This product is superfatted (Figure 11-3B).

Product Proﬁle: Rinseable Cleanser 
for Very Oily Skin

Client and Skin Type This stronger rinseable cleanser is designed for clients who 
have very oily skin. Their skin is covered with enlarged pores, and they almost 
never have any dryness or dehydration. This type of client’s skin is extremely 
oily by 10 or 11 o’clock in the morning.

Product Characteristics This cleanser is a liquid in a bottle. It has almost the 
consistency  of  shampoo.  It  foams  quite  strongly  and  rinses  thoroughly,  leav-
ing the skin feeling very clean. It is much too strong for any skin type except 
extremely oily skin.

Chemical Action and Design The active detergent in this rinseable cleanser 
is an anionic surfactant called ammonium laureth sulfate. This cleanser con-
tains some glycolic acid, which, in a cleanser, is helpful in loosening surface 




 
 
 
 
 
Skin Care Products      199

cells. Glycolic and other alpha hydroxy acids can be used in cleansers but, 
of  course,  are  rinsed  off  and  do  not  have  the  same  long-term  conditioning 
effects  as  AHAs  that  are  used  in  leave-on  products.  This  cleanser  is  mixed 
with  gelling  agents  to  form  shampoo-like  consistency.  The  surfactant  con-
centration in a cleanser such as this is somewhat higher than other rinseable 
detergent cleansers that are designed for less oily skins. This product contains 
no  emollients,  and  therefore  it  has  no  buffer  against  stripping  oil  from  the 
skin’s surface. However, this is appropriate for a cleanser designed for very 
oily skin.

Product Proﬁle: Rinseable Medicated Cleanser 
for Acne

Client and Skin Type This rinseable cleanser, which is actually a drug, is made 
for mild to moderate acne, excessively oily, and chronic acne-prone skin. This 
skin type is not sensitive and is fairly thick, due to the accumulation of corneo-
cytes on the surface of the skin. This client may have a currently active acne 
condition or may tend to develop moderate acne frequently. This product may 
also be excellent for teenage acne.

Product Characteristics This cleanser is very similar to the one designed for 
chronically oily skin, except that it contains an antimicrobial agent to kill bacte-
ria. Medicated cleansers like this are over-the-counter (OTC) drugs (see Chapter 
12, Claims in Cosmetics). It is a strong foaming cleanser. It may also be formu-
lated as an exfoliant, depending on the ingredients.

Chemical Action and Design Benzoyl peroxide may serve as the antimicrobial 
in a product like this, or another antimicrobial such as salicylic acid or sulfur 
may  be  used.  Benzoyl  peroxide  (see  Chapter  15,  Acne  and  the  Esthetician) 
is  also  a  keratolytic  agent,  as  is  salicylic  acid,  which  lightly  peels  away  dead 
corneocytes from the surface of the skin and ﬂushes the follicular canal. Some 
products  like  this  cleanser  may  also  contain  a  mechanical  exfoliant,  such  as 
polyethylene granules. These small, bead-like granules are used in the cleanser 
because they are gritty and literally “bump off” dead-cell buildup.

Next, as we move down the shelf from the rinseable cleanser, we notice a 
variety of milk cleansers in several different colors. A closer look reveals that 
these cleansers are designed for a variety of skin types.

Product Proﬁle: Milk Cleanser 
for Oily and Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type This milk cleanser is an emulsion to be used for makeup 
removal on oily and combination skin. Milk cleanser for acne and extremely 
oily skin is rarely used, at least not by itself. For acne, a milk cleanser may be 
used strictly as a makeup remover, followed by a rinseable detergent cleanser 
for extra cleansing action. This cleansing milk is a good choice for the mature 
client with oily or combination skin who has a tendency toward oiliness and 
minor  but  persistent  breakout  problems.  This  type  of  client  may  ﬁnd  twice-
daily  cleansings  with  detergents  to  be  too  dehydrating.  Older  skin  tends  to 
dehydrate much more easily than younger skin. This skin type may use a rinse-
able foaming cleanser in the morning and then a gentler milk cleanser for nightly 
makeup removal.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.200         CHAPTER 11

Product Characteristics This cleansing milk is a water-based ﬂuid. It is slightly 
slippery to the touch and leaves the skin feeling fairly clean when removed. 
This product should be applied and removed with a room-temperature, damp 
sponge cloth or cleansing sponge. Use a very soft cloth to apply and remove 
all milk cleansers, because they do not contain much detergent, if any, and do 
not rinse as easily as detergent cleansers. This cleanser, however, rinses well 
when  used  with  a  sponge  or  sponge  cloth.  Makeup  is  removed  very  easily 
with this product. This product should not be used on the eyes, because it is 
designed for oily and combination skin and is not chemically appropriate for 
the eye area.

Chemical Action and Design The emollients used in this cleanser are tridecyl 
stearate, neopentylglycol dicaprate/dicaprylate, and tridecyl trimellitate, which 
are a complex of emollients designed to be a noncomedogenic oil replacement. 
They do not clog the skin and are easily removed from the skin. The emollients 
mix with the dirt, makeup, and oils and work to dissolve these foreign materials 
so they may be removed from the skin’s surface. This product has a pH of about 
7.0, typical of a cleanser designed for oily and combination skin. The slightly 
higher pH helps the cleanser be a more aggressive solvent. The cleansing pro-
cess should be followed by a low-pH toner to lower the pH and remove any 
ﬁlm left from the emollient.

Product Proﬁle: Cleansing Milk 
for Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type This thicker cleansing emulsion is made for clients who 
wear  heavier  makeup  and  therefore  need  an  oilier  cleanser  to  dissolve  the 
thicker, oilier makeup. This cleanser is often prescribed for mature clients with 
combination skin. It is considerably heavier than many other cleansing milks. 
This cleanser may also be used frequently by actors and other performers who 
wear heavier stage makeup routinely.

Product Characteristics This cleanser is a thicker liquid in a bottle. It absolutely 
must be used with a sponge or a soft cloth. Otherwise, it would leave a residue 
on the skin. Its emollients dissolve makeup very readily, making it an excellent 
product for heavy makeup wearers. This product should be followed by a toner 
designed for combination skin. The toner needs to be strong enough to remove 
any residue left from this cleanser.

Chemical Action and Design Petrolatum and mineral oil are the secrets of the 
slipperiness of this cleanser. There is enough emulsiﬁer in this product to make 
it relatively thick. The petrolatum makes the product physically heavy. Mineral 
oil mixed with petrolatum is an excellent makeup dissolver. Plant extracts have 
been added to this product for soothing.

Product Proﬁle: Cleansing Milk 
for Sensitive Skin

Client and Skin Type This lightweight milk cleanser is designed for sensitive 
skin.  It  is  designed  for  the  client  with  thin,  fragile  skin  that  reddens  easily. 
It is not speciﬁcally designed for oily skin; its emollient content is intended 
more for dry, irritated skin. The client who has sensitive, thin skin can use this 
product.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      201

Product  Characteristics This is a lightweight cleansing milk designed to be 
used with a soft cloth or sponge. It does not leave much residue when rinsed 
and has very little fragrance. It removes liquid makeup well.

Chemical Action and Design This water-based cleanser combines a relatively 
large amount of water with a mixture of emollients to dissolve makeup. It does 
not contain a traditional emulsiﬁer. It is a physical emulsion, blended by homog-
enization. As we have discussed in Chapter 9, Cosmetic Chemistry and Func-
tional Ingredients, traditional emulsiﬁers can impair barrier function when used 
on sensitive skin, thus increasing reactivity. Using cleansers that are physically 
emulsiﬁed does not further damage an already thin barrier. This cleanser con-
tains  azulene,  bisabolol,  and  chamomile  extract,  which  are  included  for  their 
soothing properties. No fragrance is used because of allergy potentials. The only 
fragrance is from the plant extract used.

Product Proﬁle: Cleansing Milk for Dry Skin

Client and Skin Type Dry, mature skin will beneﬁt from the use of this fairly 
lightweight milk designed for this speciﬁc skin type.

Product  Characteristics  Again,  this  product  should  be  applied  and  removed 
with a damp, soft cloth. This cleanser is slightly richer to the touch than the other 
milk cleansers we looked at. It does leave a residue if not carefully removed, and 
it should be used with a toner designed for dry skin.

Chemical Action and Design The ultra-rich emollient oils in this cleanser are 
added to help condition the surface of the skin while cleansing, thus helping to 
avoid overstripping of the natural oils. It contains no detergents, which can strip 
older alipidic skin.

Some skin care companies add expensive conditioners to cleansing product. 
These conditioning ingredients are normally used in creams, lotions, and ﬂuids 
that are in the form of day or night treatments. In other words, these products 
stay on the face for long periods of time. Many cosmetic scientists believe it is 
useless to include expensive conditioning ingredients in cleansers, because they 
simply do not stay on the face long enough to do any good. Soothing agents and 
agents that are meant to strengthen or weaken the action of the cleanser are the 
only types of these agents that should be added.

TONERS

Toners,  clarifying  lotions,  fresheners,  and  astringents  are  all  basically  the  same 
type of product. Products labeled as “astringents” are considered to be OTC drugs. 
Toners vary in strength, drying ability, and alcohol content. They are made for four 
speciﬁc reasons:

  1. They remove excess cleanser and residue from liquid cleansers.
  2. They have a relatively low pH, helping to adjust the pH of the acid mantle 

after cleansing so it is not overstripped.

  3. They  provide  a  temporary  tightening  effect  to  both  the  skin  and  the 
individual  follicle  openings,  helping  to  temporarily  shrink  the  appear-
ance of pores.

  4. They can contain humectants that help hydrate the skin surface immediately 

after cleansing.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.202         CHAPTER 11

Ingrown hair is an infected fol-
licle caused by a hair that grows 
into the side of the follicle wall.

Product Proﬁle: Toner for Oily 
and Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type This toner is designed for oily and combination skin. It is 
good for the client who develops clogs easily but still needs a hydrating moistur-
izer. Adult oily–combination skin will beneﬁt from this toner.

Product Characteristics This toner is a clear, water-based liquid. It should be 
applied with a dampened cotton pad, a sponge, or a soft cloth after using a rinse-
able cleanser or cleansing milk, or it can be sprayed on to the skin with a ﬁne-
mist sprayer. (Sprayers have become popular for nonalcoholic toners because 
they are so convenient to use; because of possible accidental contact with the 
eyes, sprayers cannot be used for toners containing alcohol.) This toner, which 
has a lemon fragrance, makes the skin feel clean and toned but not dry. Pores do 
look smaller after using this product. Men can also use this product as an after-
shave. It is a good product for men because it is not femininely fragranced and 
has enough astringent action for use after shaving. It helps constrict the follicles, 
which keeps the hair pointed in an outward direction so it does not become an 
ingrown hair by growing into the side of the follicle wall. The same astringent 
effect makes pores look smaller temporarily.

Chemical Action and Design The low pH in this toner is due to a combination of 
citric acid and lemon extract, which has an astringent action. It is blended into 
a liquid with mostly water, but it also contains a glycerin derivative, which is a 
humectant that helps restore water to dehydrated skin.

Product Proﬁle: Toner for Extremely Oily Skin

Client and Skin Type This toner is made for skin that quickly becomes very oily 
and has very large pores that clog easily. Clients with this skin type rarely get 
dehydrated because their skin is so oily. These clients use a strong, rinseable 
cleanser for very oily skin (discussed earlier). This toner should be applied on a 
predampened cotton pad or damp sponge.

Product  Characteristics  This  toner  is  a  water-based  liquid  that  is  used  after 
cleansing milk or rinseable cleanser. It has a strong astringent action. It leaves the 
skin feeling very clean and tight. Application to dry skin would be too drying.

Chemical  Action  and  Design This oily skin astringent contains plant extracts 
for oily skin as well as sulfur (a keratolytic peeling agent) and potassium alum 
(a strong astringent agent). These ingredients are in a base vehicle of water and 
propylene glycol, a hydrating agent.

Product Proﬁle: Astringent for Acne-Prone Skin

Client and Skin Type This very strong astringent is made for inﬂamed acne and 
extremely oily skin. It is a good product for teenage acne, Grades II and III (see 
Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician).

Product Characteristics  This  astringent  is  a  light-colored  liquid  with  a  strong 
medicinal (alcohol) odor. It is applied with a damp cotton ball after cleansing. It 
is very stripping, removes lots of sebum, and is very drying to the skin. It may 
burn or tingle slightly when applied, especially if applied to open acne lesions. 
Some extremely oily skin needs this much oil removal.

Chemical Action and Design This product is actually an over-the-counter drug. 
Isopropyl alcohol is the active ingredient for its astringent properties as well as 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      203

its oil-stripping action. Isopropyl alcohol and water are the main ingredients in 
this  liquid  astringent.  Witch  hazel  distillate  provides  astringent  properties  and 
temporary pore “tightening.” Camphor is included as a soothing agent.

Product Proﬁle: Toner for Normal Skin

Client and Skin Type This toner is a medium-strength tonic designed for normal 
skin. It is for adult skin that basically needs moderate hydrating and has no par-
ticular problems.

Product Characteristics This toner is a liquid and has a very mild astringent action. 
It does not pull on the skin. It has a moist feeling when applied. It has a slight 
soothing effect on the skin. It is applied with cool, wet, cotton pads after cleansing.

Chemical Action and Design This is a very simple formula made with water, 
rosewater,  propylene  glycol  (as  a  humectant),  cucumber  extract  for  soothing, 
and allantoin. It contains a smaller amount of witch hazel extract than do toners 
for oily skin.

Product Proﬁle: Toner for Extra-Dry Skin

Client and Skin Type Dry, mature skin is the type of skin this toner will help. It 
has moisturizing properties and helps gently remove traces of cleanser from dry, 
sensitive skin. This type of dry skin can become so dehydrated due to lack of pro-
tective sebum that the face becomes very tight even after a quite gentle cleanser. 
This toner is designed for dry skin that becomes tender after cleansing. This toner 
should be used after cleansing and applied with a cool, damp, cotton pad.

Product Characteristics This is a very moist toner, almost soft to the touch. It 
has practically no astringent action. It is designed to moisturize the skin with 
humectants that provide a buffer to prevent the skin from being stripped if the 
toner is used after cleansing.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  A  large  amount  of  butylene  glycol  provides 
humectant effects for the skin in this water-based, ﬂuid toner. Glycerin also has 
hydrating action on the surface of the dry skin. Extracts of chamomile, mallow, 
and cornﬂower are included for their softening and soothing properties. This is 
an unusually moisturizing toner.

DAY CREAMS AND TREATMENTS

Day  creams  are  made  for  various  skin  types.  Treatments  for  everything  from 
acne to extremely dry and aging skin are available. These products vary greatly 
in texture and thickness, depending on the amount of fats or emollients added.
Sunscreen is probably the biggest health beneﬁt that can be contained in a day 
cream. Besides preventing premature aging of the skin, using sunscreen on a daily 
basis is one of the best ways to help prevent skin cancer. Many day creams are also 
sunscreens, making them OTC drugs. Because sunscreen is such an important fea-
ture and beneﬁt, it is becoming traditional to combine broad-spectrum UVA–UVB 
protection in day treatment products. Sunscreen product ingredient labels are drug 
facts labels, as discussed in Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredi-
ents. They list the sunscreen ingredients as the active ingredients. Other ingredients 
are listed in the “inactive ingredients” section of the drug facts label. It is illegal to 
claim sunscreen protection and not list the active ingredients in a drug facts label.

Day  creams  almost  always  contain  either  an  occlusive  agent  or  some 
sort of protective ingredient that helps hold moisture in the surface layers of 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.204         CHAPTER 11

the skin. They may also contain various hydrating ingredients, emollients, or 
other  performance  ingredients,  depending  on  the  skin  type  for  which  they 
are designed.

Some  companies  market  day  creams  that  are  basically  moisturizers  with 
hydrating and protective inclusive ingredients and do not have sunscreen ingre-
dients. If these day creams are used, it is necessary to apply sunscreen over the 
moisturizer.  Again,  most  companies  now  have  sunscreen  built  into  their  day 
creams, which also include hydrating and protective ingredients. This is much 
more convenient for the client, who then has to apply only one product.

Product Proﬁle: Day Sunscreen Protection Fluid 
for Oily and Combination Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is designed for oily and combination skin. 
Clients who have oily skin appreciate this product because it does not feel oily 
or greasy and is noncomedogenic. It is a good choice for 20- to 50-year-old cli-
ents who develop clogged pores easily. This product is a good choice for people 
whose skin needs hydrating but becomes oily easily. These clients generally have 
trouble with their makeup not staying on well and becoming oily during the day. 
The reduced amount of emollient ingredients in this cream will beneﬁt the client 
who prefers a light-textured, non-heavy day product. This product also serves 
well as a daytime moisturizer-protectant for oily skins during the winter months.

Product Characteristics This lightweight day protection ﬂuid comes in a tube. 
It is not a thick product and feels very light and nongreasy when touched. It 
absorbs quickly, helping to hydrate the skin and protect against daytime water 
loss, and it contains SPF 15 sunscreen to shield against routine daily sun expo-
sure. It is applied with the ﬁngertips in the morning before makeup, or it can be 
used alone. It is noncomedogenic, which means it has been tested and found 
not to clog pores. This product is unusual because it hydrates, protects, condi-
tions, contains two sunscreens, and is noncomedogenic.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  This  ﬂuid  is  water  based  and  contains  small 
amounts of noncomedogenic emollients. These emollients are tridecyl stearate, 
tridecyl trimellitate, neopentylglycol dicaprate/dicaprylate, and glyceryl stearate. 
The humectants that help bind water in this ﬂuid are glycerin and sodium PCA. 
Other conditioning agents include allantoin, cornﬂower extract, tocopherol, and 
retinyl palmitate. Octinoxate (formerly called methoxycinnimate) and titanium 
dioxide  are  the  sunscreen  ingredients;  and  dimethicone,  because  of  its  light 
weight, is used to shield against water loss.

Product Proﬁle: Day Cream for Dry 
and Dehydrated Skin

Client and Skin Type Designed for oil-dry (alipidic), dehydrated, or mature skin, 
this cream helps the client whose skin becomes dry very easily due to lack of oil 
production. It is for clients with a slight amount of oiliness through the T-zone, 
but with dryness and dehydration in the large part of the outer perimeter of the 
face. It serves as a daily sunscreen as well as a moisturizer. It contains enough 
hydration and emollient ingredients to help smooth the surface of the skin and 
reduce the appearance of lines, wrinkles, and rough textures.

Product Characteristics This cream is packaged in a tube. It is deﬁnitely cream, 
containing a substantial amount of emollient. It contains a broad-spectrum SPF 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      205

15 sunscreen and a protective agent. It is not extremely greasy or heavy, so it 
may be worn by clients who prefer a lighter-weight day cream. It is blue due 
to the azulene content. It should be applied under makeup or alone during 
the day.

Chemical Action and Design This cream contains butylene glycol and aloe as 
hydrating  agents.  It  contains  dimethicone  as  a  shielding  protective  agent,  a 
broad-spectrum  sunscreen  combining  sunscreen  active  ingredients  zinc  oxide 
(which ﬁlters UVA and UVB), and UVB screening ingredients octinoxate (formerly 
called methoxycinnimate) and octisalate (formerly called octyl salicylate). These 
active ingredients are mixed into a water-based blend of emollients, including 
lipid-supplement ceramides, cholesterol, cetyl palmitate, and beeswax. Azulene 
provides soothing beneﬁts.

Product Proﬁle: Sunscreen Day Lotion 
for Sensitive Skin

Client  and  Skin  Type The client with sensitive, dehydrated, redness-prone skin 
will appreciate this product. This lotion is designed for skin that turns red easily. It 
helps reduce the appearance of redness and provides SPF 15 sunscreen protection.

Product  Characteristics  This  is  a  medium-weight  ﬂuid  in  a  tube.  It  can  be 
applied under makeup or alone.

Chemical Action and Design This lotion contains performance soothing ingre-
dients such as Aloe barbadensis gel, matricaria extract, green tea extract, and lic-
orice extract. Its sunscreen active ingredients are octinoxate and zinc oxide, with 
glycerin as a hydrator. Protective emollients include sunﬂower oil and caprylic/
capric triglycerides. It contains no fragrance or color agents, which is important 
for sensitive skin; it has been dermatologist-tested for irritancy potential and has 
been determined to be noncomedogenic.

NIGHT CREAMS AND TREATMENTS

Night treatment creams are normally extra-intensive treatment products designed 
to help hydrate and condition skin during the night—when normal tissue repair 
is taking place all over the body, including the skin. Night treatments are often 
heavier  in  consistency  and  texture  than  day  products.  They  normally  contain 
more emollient than day cream and are not made for use under makeup. Night 
creams should be applied all over the skin, according to manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. It is important that the skin be thoroughly cleansed before applying night 
treatment.

Product Proﬁle: Night Treatment Fluid 
for Oily–Combination, Dehydrated Skin

Client and Skin Type This ﬂuid is made to hydrate adult oily skin that is also 
dehydrated.  It  can  be  used  on  oily  and  combination  skin.  These  clients  are 
normally adults who need to use a hydrating agent but develop clogged pores 
and break out easily. This ﬂuid has been laboratory tested and found to be non-
comedogenic. It is also ideal for the client who prefers a lighter-weight night 
treatment.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.206         CHAPTER 11

Product Characteristics Due to its low emollient content, this ﬂuid is very light 
in texture and feel. It does not feel oily at all because it contains mostly humec-
tants to attract water to the skin, rather than oils and fats that will clog this type 
of skin. This ﬂuid comes in a tube and should be applied in moderate amounts 
to the entire skin before bedtime.

Chemical Action and Design This ﬂuid contains sodium PCA, a natural moistur-
izing factor (NMF), and glycerin as hydrating agents. It also includes allantoin, 
retinyl  palmitate,  and  tocopherol  for  their  conditioning  properties.  This  ﬂuid 
has been carefully designed without comedogenic ingredients (see Chapter 16, 
Comedogenicity)  to  avoid  clogging  the  oily  and  combination  skin  for  which 
it  is  intended.  The  emollients  added  are  tridecyl  stearate,  tridecyl  trimellitate, 
and neopentylglycol dicaprate/dicaprylate, speciﬁcally chosen because they are 
noncomedogenic. This ﬂuid adds hydration to the skin without adding excess 
emollients that cause buildup of cells, which in turn causes clogs to form.

Product Proﬁle: Night Treatment for Oily, 
Clogged Adult Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is designed for oily skin or oily, clogged areas. 
It is for clients who have a tendency to break out but ﬁnd that most drying agents 
overdry. Adult acne can beneﬁt from this type of product because it incorporates a 
peeling agent and a hydrating agent as well as a protectant. This product is also ideal 
for an adult client with oily skin, who has been using heavy moisturizers that are 
clogging the skin. It feels like a moisturizer but is actually a very light peeling agent.

Product Characteristics This lightweight product has an unusual texture, some-
where  between  a  gel  and  a  cream.  It  is  very  light  and  dries  quickly  when 
applied. It has a matte dry feeling when used. It should be applied in the eve-
ning after cleansing and toning. It takes the place of moisturizer and can be used 
under makeup or alone.

Chemical Action and Design Salicylic acid, a beta hydroxy acid, is used in a 
very small quantity in this product to promote some exfoliation. This product 
contains  glycerin  and  propylene  glycol  as  humectants,  and  dimethicone  pro-
vides protection against excess water loss.

Product Proﬁle: Night Hydrating Cream 
for Combination Mature Skin

Client and Skin Type Designed for older oily and combination skins that need 
hydration but do not need extra oils, this lightweight cream is good for mature 
clients  who  still  have  a  tendency  to  break  out.  It  provides  hydration  without 
oiliness. This cream could also be used as a night treatment for younger, extra-
dehydrated skin types. The cream has been laboratory tested and determined to 
be noncomedogenic.

Product Characteristics The cream is extremely lightweight and is absorbed by 
the skin easily. After use, the skin feels smooth and “plumped up.” It is contained 
in a tube and should be applied to clean skin before bedtime. It contains no 
color or fragrance, which is helpful for sensitive and allergy-prone skin.

Chemical Action and Design A mixture of lipids, including fatty acids, sphin-
golipids, phospholipids, and cholesterol, helps reinforce the barrier function of 
the  mature  combination  skin.  Hydrating  agents  include  sodium  hyaluronate, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      207

glycerin, and butylene glycol. Protective emollients that help prevent dehydra-
tion include caprylic/capric triglycerides and dimethicone.

Product Proﬁle: Night Moisturizing Lotion 
for Dehydrated Combination Dry Skin

Client and Skin Type This lotion is formulated to help skin that is both oil-dry 
and water-dry. This type of skin has a very narrow T-zone with little oil produc-
tion or visible pore structure. Clients are typically mature women.

Product Characteristics This treatment is a lotion, packaged in a bottle. It is 
slightly oily to the touch and leaves a slight ﬁlm on the skin surface. This char-
acteristic is helpful for drier skin types. It is a light blue color, due to its azulene 
content. It should be applied before bedtime.

Chemical Action and Design The lotion contains a mixture of oils, emollients, 
and humectants that provide both hydration and oils for the oil-dry skin. It con-
tains the humectants urea, propylene glycol, and butylene glycol and is mixed 
with  sesame  oil,  peanut  oil,  and  various  emollient  esters  and  fats.  Because  it 
contains a good amount of both hydrator and oils, it contains sodium lauryl sul-
fate, used as an emulsiﬁer to keep the oils in the water-based emulsion. Sodium 
lauryl sulfate is rarely used as an emulsiﬁer in modern formulations, indicating 
that this is likely an older formula.

Product Proﬁle: Night Cream for Dry, 
Dehydrated Skin

Client and Skin Type Alipidic (oil-dry), dehydrated, mature skin is the target for 
this heavier cream. This type of client is very dry for most of the year and needs 
a richer cream.

Product Characteristics This cream comes in a jar. It is rich in texture, leaves 
an emollient residue on the skin when applied, and stays on the skin all night. 
The product is fragrance-free.

Chemical Action and Design This cream is a mixture of humectants and a large 
amount of emollients. The chief humectant in this cream is sorbitol. Emollients 
include caprylic/capric triglycerides, jojoba oil, and squalane, which help pre-
vent moisture loss. It is fragrance-free and has been tested to be noncomedo-
genic, although it is intended for skin that does not tend to develop comedones 
(Figure 11-4).

Product Proﬁle: Firming Night Cream for Mature 
Skin with Lack of Elasticity

Client and Skin Type This night cream is for clients with combination to dry, 
dehydrated, sun-damaged skin that needs more elasticity. 

Product Characteristics This cream comes in a jar. It has a ﬂuffy, light texture and 
absorbs easily. It has no color or fragrance; these are helpful features for sensitive 
skin. The product has been tested for irritancy potential and comedogenicity.

Chemical Action and Design This high-tech cream is a mixture of humectants 
and emollients with a complex of botanical performance ingredients, hydrocotyl 
and coneﬂower extracts, that are helpful in improving the appearance of skin 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.208         CHAPTER 11

Hydrator

Hydrator

Oil

A

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Oil

B

FIGURE 11-4  Bottle A has more oil and emollient for dry skin. Bottle B has less 
oil and more hydration for dehydrated, oilier skin.

with poor elasticity. The chief humectants in this cream are sodium hyaluronate, 
glycerin,  and  butylene  glycol  as  well  as  protective  cyclomethicone,  a  silicone 
derivative, which helps prevent moisture loss. 

Product Proﬁle: Acetyl Hexapeptide Cream 
for Wrinkled Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is for clients with combination to dry, sun-
damaged skin with many wrinkles, especially expression lines. 

Product Characteristics This cream has a richer feel because of its emollient 
content and is designed for a drier skin type. The product comes in a jar. It also 
contains hydrators, so it can be used as a general moisturizer as well as a wrin-
kle treatment. It is used all over the face and can be used on a wrinkled neck 
as well. The product has been tested for irritancy potential and comedogenicity.

Chemical Action and Design Acetyl hexapeptide-8 (also known as Argireline®) 
is the featured performance ingredient in this cream. Acetyl hexapeptide-8 helps 
relax the appearance of wrinkles and is especially effective for facial expression 
lines. Emollients caprylic/capric triglycerides and sunﬂower oil help make this 
product helpful for alipidic, dry older skin. Hydrators help plump the surface 
cells with moisture, making the skin texture smoother. Regular use of this cream, 
along  with  a  good  alpha  hydroxy  serum,  will  help  the  skin  look  much  less 
wrinkled and younger. 




 
 
 
 
 
Skin Care Products      209

Ampoules are sealed vials of 
concentrated ingredients designed 
to give intensive treatment to a 
skin condition.

Serums are products contain-
ing concentrated ingredients that 
are usually in pump or tincture 
bottles.

ABOUT AMPOULES AND SERUMS

Ampoules are sealed vials of concentrated ingredients. They may be made of 
glass or plastic. They are designed to give ultra-intensive treatment to the skin. 
They often contain larger concentrations of performance ingredients in a water 
base, although occasionally they are in an oil base. Ampoules must be applied 
under a night cream or ﬂuid.

Ampoules  are  available  for  a  wide  variety  of  skin  types  and  problems. 
Ampoules are often designed to be used in a series once a month or several 
times a year. Others are designed to be used nightly. Ampoules are frequently 
found in European skin care lines. The disadvantages of ampoules are that they 
are more trouble to use and are often very expensive. Clients who are extremely 
conscientious about their home care often take the time to use ampoules and do 
not mind paying extra for them.

In the past decade, serums have replaced ampoules, at least in many Amer-
ican  lines.  Like  ampoules,  serums  contain  concentrated  ingredients,  often  in 
liposomes or other advanced delivery systems, but they are easier to use. Many 
serums are designed to be used daily and sometimes twice a day.

Serums are usually in pump bottles or tincture bottles. Many contain anti-
oxidants, peptides, lipids, or other intensive ingredients. Like ampoules, they are 
applied under a day or night cream or ﬂuid.

Product Proﬁle: Firming Serum for Mature Skin 
with Lack of Elasticity

Client and Skin Type This product is for dehydrated, sun-damaged skin of any 
skin type that needs more elasticity. 

Product Characteristics This water-based serum is in a pump bottle. It has a 
liquid-gel consistency. Because it contains no fats or oils, it can be used on any 
skin type. It has no color or fragrance; these are helpful features for sensitive 
skin. The product has been tested for irritancy potential and comedogenicity.

Chemical Action and Design This advanced serum combines palmitoyl pentapep-
tide-3, a peptide known for ﬁrming skin and improving the appearance of skin that 
is mature, sun damaged, and wrinkled. The base of the serum contains hyaluronic 
acid, boosting water levels; the peptides improve elasticity. Additionally, this serum 
contains four different antioxidants in liposomes, and a botanical complex of cone-
ﬂower and hydrocotyl extracts, which are known for their ﬁrming effects.

Product Proﬁle: Lipid Serum for Wrinkles 
and Dry Skin

Client  and  Skin  Type  This  product  is  for  dry,  dehydrated,  mature  skin  and 
wrinkle areas.

Product Characteristics This serum is in a pump bottle. It feels slippery, but when 
applied  to  the  skin  it  seems  to  absorb  quickly,  leaving  the  skin  feeling  velvety. 
Applying this serum to wrinkled areas shows almost immediate smoothing effects. 
The serum does not contain color or fragrance; these are helpful features for sensi-
tive skin. The product has been tested for irritancy potential and comedogenicity.

Chemical Action and Design This serum for very dry skin is anhydrous, which 
means it contains no water. Because it contains no water, no preservatives are 

Anhydrous means that a product 
does not contain water.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.210         CHAPTER 11

needed.  The  vehicle  of  this  serum  is  a  complex  of  three  silicone  derivatives: 
cyclomethicone, dimethicone, and phenyl trimethicone. A speciﬁc lipid complex 
has been added to mimic the natural proportions of lipids present in the normal 
barrier function.

SPECIAL CREAMS AND TREATMENTS

Many treatment creams are available for special problems or special areas. These 
treatments should be used in conjunction with other day and night treatments. 
These include performance-oriented products like alpha hydroxy acid formula-
tions, antioxidant serums, and melanin-suppressing OTC formulations for hyper-
pigmented skin as well as products for care and treatment of acne.

Product Proﬁle: Alpha Hydroxy Treatment 
for Dry, Sun-Damaged Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is designed for dry, dehydrated mature skin 
that is wrinkled or sun damaged.

Product Characteristics This is a very emollient, thicker cream containing mul-
tiple alpha hydroxy acids. It is in a jar and should be applied after cleansing and 
toning and before using sunscreen or night hydration cream. SPF 15 or higher 
sunscreen should be used daily with this product.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  Alpha  hydroxy  acids—glycolic  and  lactic—and 
beta hydroxy—citric acid—combined with fruit-derived hydroxy acids from sug-
arcane, orange, and apple extracts work to exfoliate dead cells and smooth sur-
face wrinkles and lines. Long-term use helps with barrier function and moisture 
retention. Emollients include hydrogenated polyisobutene, cetyl alcohol, dimethi-
cone,  and  polyacrylamide,  an  appropriate  combination  for  a  drier  skin  type. 
Green tea extract is present in a fairly large concentration to soothe potential irri-
tation caused by this 10 percent acid blend. Even with a large emollient base, this 
product has been determined to be noncomedogenic through independent test-
ing, and has been dermatologist tested for irritancy. These results may be helpful 
when deciding which client is best suited for this product. The pH of this product 
is 3.5, in compliance with the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) recommenda-
tions discussed in Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients.

Product Proﬁle: Alpha Hydroxy Treatment Gel 
for Oily–Combination, Clogged Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is designed for any skin with clogged pores 
and oily or oily–combination skin. This product is appropriate for patients with 
acne and acne-prone skin.

Product Characteristics A liquid gel in a bottle, this 10 percent alpha hydroxy 
and beta hydroxy blend should be used on oily to combination skin once or 
twice a day to help improve clogged pores and affected areas. Sunscreen with 
an SPF of 15 or higher should be used daily with this product.

Chemical Action and Design A 10 percent mixture of alpha hydroxy acids—
glycolic,  lactic,  tartaric,  and  malic—with  beta  hydroxy  acids—salicylic  and 
citric—help  exfoliate  the  surface  as  well  as  the  follicle,  removing  dead-cell 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.buildup and loosening pore accumulations. The gel base contains SD alcohol 
40, aloe vera gel, and hydroxycellulose, which give the product its gel-like feel. 
The pH of this product is 3.5 in compliance with the CIR recommendations dis-
cussed in Chapter 10.

Product Proﬁle: Lightening Treatment 
Gel for Hyperpigmented Skin

Client and Skin Type This treatment gel is intended for clients who have splotchy 
hyperpigmentation, melasma, or chloasma on the face or hands.

Product  Characteristics A liquid gel in an amber bottle, this product should 
be  applied  every  day  for  best  results.  Clients  using  this  product  must  always 
wear a sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or 30, because the symptoms being treated 
are caused by sun exposure. This product oxidizes very quickly; it easily turns 
brown, indicating decreased effectiveness.

Chemical Action and Design An OTC drug, the active ingredient in this prod-
uct is 2 percent hydroquinone, which suppresses production of melanin by the 
melanocytes in the basal layer of the epidermis. The gel also contains 10 percent 
glycolic acid, which helps remove stained surface cells and helps clear the skin 
for better absorption of the hydroquinone. It also contains magnesium ascorbyl 
phosphate, a vitamin C derivative antioxidant performance ingredient known for 
its melanin-suppressing activity. Hydroquinone is a frequent allergen, and the 
product should be patch-tested before using it on larger areas.

Product Proﬁle: Benzoyl Peroxide 
Gel for Acneic Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is designed for mild to moderate acneic skin, 
Grades I and II. Both adults and teenagers can use this product.

Product Characteristics A lotion in a tube bottle, this 5 percent benzoyl perox-
ide lotion is used only at night on skin with acne papules and pustules. A light 
application to all areas should be followed by dabbing a small amount on any 
raised lesions. Do not use in the eye area.

Chemical Action and Design This is an OTC drug. A 5 percent concentration of 
benzoyl peroxide is the active ingredient, which helps ﬂush and exfoliate debris 
from the follicle. The oxygen released from the benzoyl peroxide kills anaerobic 
Propionibacterium  acnes  bacteria.  The  lightweight,  glycerin-based  lotion  is  a 
simple emulsion that serves as a spreading agent for the benzoyl peroxide. Ben-
zoyl peroxide acts as a bleach to fabric and hair. It can be irritating if overused, 
and some clients are allergic to it.

Eye creams are specially designed for the skin around the eye area. This 
area of the skin is usually more oil-dry and more sensitive than other areas of 
the  skin.  Therefore,  creams  designed  for  these  areas  are  generally  higher  in 
emollient and lower in humectant content. Because the skin around the eyes 
is very thin, if you “plump it up” by using lots of hydrating agents, you end up 
making the eyelid look puffy. More emollient is added to these creams to help 
supplement the lack of oil production associated with the eye area. 

Eye creams sometimes cause irritation and allergic reactions. Because this area 
is very thin and sensitive, eye creams must be carefully designed not to irritate. 

Skin Care Products      211

Eye creams are designed for the 
skin around the eye area.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.212         CHAPTER 11

Neck creams are made with 
more emollients and less humec-
tant, because the neck area has 
thinner skin that dries easily.

They  are  often  tested  by  independent  ophthalmologists  to  ensure  that  they 
are  unlikely  to  cause  irritant  or  allergic  reactions.  Eye  creams  should  be  used 
twice daily.

Newer formulations of eye creams often contain peptides, antioxidants, or 
complexes of ingredients to treat common eye-area esthetic issues such as dark 
circles, pufﬁness, and lack of elasticity.

Product Proﬁle: Serum for Puffy Eyes

Client  and  Skin  Type  This  high-tech  product  is  designed  to  treat  pufﬁness 
around the eyes and reduce the appearance of under-eye bags. It can be used 
on any skin type. The serum has been independently ophthalmologist-tested to 
determine that it is safe for use around the eyes and is unlikely to cause irritation 
or allergic reactions.

Product Characteristics This serum, in a plastic tincture bottle, has a watery 
texture. It is applied lightly to lower and/or upper eyelids to reduce the appear-
ance of pufﬁness. It should dry in just a few seconds, and it should be com-
pletely dry before applying any makeup to the area.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  This  water-based  serum  contains  glycerin  and 
butylene glycol as hydrators, and a small amount of xanthan gum thickens the 
product slightly. It is fragrance-free and color-free, thus eliminating two factors 
that often cause allergic or irritant reactions. The performance ingredients in this 
product are hesperidin methyl chalcone (a ﬂavonoid that helps condition lymph 
vessels  to  reduce  ﬂuid  leaking  into  tissue)  and  peptides  dipeptide-2,  which 
helps reduce pufﬁness, and palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7, which helps reduce inﬂam-
mation and improve elasticity.

Product Proﬁle: Eye Cream for Wrinkles 
and Dark Circles

Client and Skin Type This modern eye cream is designed to reduce dryness and 
smooth the appearance of wrinkles in the eye area, improve the appearance of 
elasticity, and reduce the appearance of dark circles under the eyes. It can be 
used on any skin type but works best on mature skin. The product has been 
independently ophthalmologist-tested to determine that it is safe for use around 
the eyes and is unlikely to cause irritation or allergic reactions.

Product Characteristics This cream is packaged in a small jar. It is a soft cream 
that spreads easily across skin in the eye area. It should be applied lightly, twice 
daily, using a gentle tapping movement with the ﬁngertips, to both lower and 
upper eyelid areas. Not all eye creams can be applied to the upper lids. The skin 
around the eyes immediately looks smoother upon application.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  This  multifunction  eye  cream  is  a  water-based 
emulsion  with  silicone-derivative  cyclopentasiloxane  and  emollient  caprylic/
capric  triglycerides  as  the  primary  vehicles.  Performance  ingredients  include 
ceramide-2  (sphingolipids),  phospholipids,  and  cholesterol  to  supplement  the 
barrier  function,  sodium  PCA,  glycerin,  and  hyaluronic  acid  are  included  for 
hydration. Chrysin and hydroxysuccinimide are performance ingredient chelat-
ing agents that help disperse the pigments that cause dark circles. Peptides are 
incorporated for improved elasticity.

Neck creams are also made with more emollients and less humectant. The 
neck area has thinner skin that dries easily. Neck creams should be massaged 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      213

Masks are designed to treat a 
variety of skin problems, from oil 
dryness to acne.

into the skin twice daily. They are available in a variety of formulations and may 
include peptides, lipids, or antioxidant performance ingredients.

Masks are designed to treat a variety of skin problems, from oil dryness to 
acne. They are formulated with less water than creams, lotions, and ﬂuids and 
are considerably heavier than any of these products.

Masks for oily skin generally contain bentonite and kaolin; these clays are 
helpful in absorbing excess oil and drying the skin. These clays cause the drying 
of masks designed for cleansing oilier and combination skin types. These masks 
may contain other conditioning ingredients. For example, for acne-prone skin 
the mask might contain sulfur, salicylic acid, or benzoyl peroxide. For oily and 
combination skin, it might contain camphor for soothing and antiseptic action 
or cornstarch for soothing action.

Masks for dry skin often do not dry tightly and contain large amounts of emol-
lients. To give substance to the mask, the chemist may include titanium dioxide 
or may use a gelling agent or thickener to give the mask a thicker texture. These 
dry skin masks may contain a variety of plant extracts, conditioning agents, emol-
lients, and humectants. They work by adding water to surface layers as well as 
emollients, helping to temporarily ﬁll in or plump up small lines and wrinkles. 
They can have a lasting effect on the skin, particularly if preceded by the use of 
a good humectant or other active agent. The effects may last up to several days.

Product Proﬁle: Clay-Based Cleansing Mask 
for Clogged Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is for use on clients with oily or oily–combination 
skin with clogged pores.

Product Characteristics This clay-based mask has a thick, paste-like texture and 
is packaged in a tube. It is applied to any areas with enlarged or clogged pores 
and allowed to “set” for about 10 minutes. The mask dries during this time, and 
it must be removed with wet cloths or sponges. It is best to thoroughly wet the 
processed mask before attempting to remove it.

Chemical Action and Design Bentonite and kaolin are clays used in this formu-
lation. They absorb excess sebum and have both a drying and exfoliating effect 
on the skin. This mask helps remove sebaceous ﬁlaments that appear as clogged 
pores. The mask also contains the humectant sorbitol, which is included to keep 
the mask in a thick liquid state until it is applied. Magnesium aluminum silicate 
is a drawing agent that has an astringent effect making the pores look smaller 
and reﬁned.

Product Proﬁle: Gel Mask for Dehydrated Skin

Client and Skin Type This gel mask can be used for any client with dehydrated 
skin, including sensitive dehydrated skin.

Product Characteristics This mask has a medium gel consistency. It is in a tube, 
and it is designed to be applied over a moisturizer or hydrator. The gel is left 
on for about 10 minutes, although it can stay on longer. This mask produces a 
beautiful smoothing and hydrating effect on the skin,

Chemical Action and Design This mask is based with water and glycereth-7, 
a  potent  hydrator.  The  gel  consistency  is  achieved  through  the  inclusion  of 
carbomer. Licorice and matricaria extracts are included for their soothing and 
anti-redness beneﬁts.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.214         CHAPTER 11

Exfoliants usually come in the 
form of scrubs. They are water-
based products containing a 
humectant mixed with some sort 
of abrasive agent such as almond 
meal or polyethylene granules.

Product Proﬁle: Moisturizing Mask for Dry, 
Alipidic Skin

Client and Skin Type This product is for clients with dry, mature, aging, and 
wrinkled skin.

Product Characteristics This moisturizing mask has an extremely creamy tex-
ture. It is in a jar. It is applied to the skin in a thick, even layer after applying an 
appropriate hydrating moisturizer. It does not dry and can be left on indeﬁnitely, 
but usually only 10 to 20 minutes. It has a softening effect on wrinkles and is 
especially helpful for use around the eyes, mouth, and neck. 

Chemical  Action  and  Design  Sunﬂower  oil,  borage  oil,  and  shea  butter  pro-
vide important emollient beneﬁts for the very dry skin. This mask also includes 
a  variety  of  lipid  ingredients  to  improve  barrier  function  including  plant  ste-
rols, squalane, and glycolipids. Pentylene glycol serves as the primary hydrating 
ingredient.

Mechanical exfoliants usually come in the form of scrubs. They are usually 
water-based  products  containing  a  humectant  mixed  with  some  sort  of  abrasive 
agent such as almond meal or polyethylene granules or hydrogenated jojoba oil 
beads. They are applied after cleansing and massaged over the skin. The granules 
literally “bump  off”  dead  cells  from  the  skin’s  surface.  The  humectant  keeps  the 
product from overdrying the skin. Exfoliants should be used several times a week 
for best results. They should be followed by a toner and a night or day cream. New 
treatments are constantly being developed. Improvements in both active agents and 
vehicle and delivery transport systems for active ingredients constantly help improve 
the quality of cosmetics and their positive effect on the appearance of the skin.

Product Proﬁle: Granular Exfoliant for Dry 
and Dehydrated Skin

Client  and  Skin  Type  This  product  is  designed  for  clients  with  dry,  mature, 
aging, and wrinkled skin.

Product Characteristics Packaged in a tube, this fairly thick granular scrub feels 
creamy and gritty at the same time. It is to be applied on wet skin and gently 
massaged. It is then rinsed off with tepid water. The creaminess of this scrub 
prevents any dryness and helps buffer any harsh effects of any granular material 
in the scrub while leaving a thin emollient ﬁlm on the skin.

Chemical  Action  and  Design  This  scrub  contains  hydrogenated  jojoba  beads, 
which are supersaturated beads of jojoba oil that solidify in tiny spheres when 
hydrogenated. Because they are fats, they are very soft and gentle when used as 
mechanical bead exfoliants. The scrub also contains sunﬂower oil and shea butter 
to  serve  as  emollients  and  to  suspend  and  soften  the  application  of  the  jojoba 
beads. Decyl glucoside, a mild surfactant, helps make the product rinseable.

Product Proﬁle: Microdermabrasion Scrub 
for Oily and Clogged Skin

Client and Skin Type This scrub is for use by clients with oily or oily–combina-
tion, clogged skin. This product absorbs oils and helps exfoliate thick, rough-
textured skin. It is not designed for sensitive skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      215

Product Characteristics This scrub feels very sandy and has a thick clay base. 
It  is  applied  to  pre-cleansed  wet  skin  with  small,  gentle,  circular  motions.  It 
foams slightly and rinses easily after use. The skin looks much smoother even 
after one use. 

Chemical Action and Design This scrub contains aluminum oxide crystals, the 
same  crystal  used  in  traditional  machine  microdermabrasion.  The  crystals  are 
blended into a water-based, semi-thick mixture containing bentonite clay that 
helps absorb excess oils. Ammonium lauryl sulfate, an anionic surfactant, works 
to make the product foam and rinse easily. The microcrystals aggressively exfoli-
ate the corneum. Since this skin type is thick and hyperkeratinized, the exfolia-
tion is helpful in achieving a much smoother surface appearance and does help 
exfoliate the tops of clogged pores and comedones. This product is generally 
too aggressive an exfoliant for use on sensitive skin.

HOW PRODUCTS ARE DEVELOPED

Many steps are involved in developing new skin care and cosmetic products. Let’s 
go through the process of developing a new skin care product (Figure 11-5).

r
e
e
V
/
y
c
n
a
F
/
h
t
r
i

W
x

i
l

e
F
©

FIGURE 11-5  Formulating all types of skin care products is both interesting and 
challenging.




 
216         CHAPTER 11

Step 1—The Idea

The ﬁrst step is, of course, recognizing the need for a new product. It must 
be determined that a product is needed and will sell. What is the appear-
ance  change  that  is  desired?  What  type  and  condition  of  skin  will  beneﬁt 
from this product? 

Let’s suppose that we want a new cleanser for combination skin. We want 
a product that is strong enough to remove some oil from the oily areas of the 
skin but not so strong that it strips areas of the facial skin that is more alipidic 
and prone to dehydration.

Step 2—Product Characteristics 
and Client Type

What characteristics do we want this product to have? Will it be a foaming or 
nonfoaming cleanser? Will it be a gel or lotion? How easily will it rinse? Will it 
have fragrance? How sensitive is the skin we want it to cleanse?

Let’s think about the lifestyle of the client who is likely to buy this product. 
We  need  to  know  the  client  type,  which  is  best  determined  from  day-to-day 
client interaction. What age is the client who is most likely to buy this product? 
Are these clients asking for a particular type of product? Have they asked for a 
particular characteristic?

Let’s suppose that we are aiming this product toward a 30- to 40-year-old 
client who is likely to have combination skin. This typical client has a family, 
and ease of use is important because such clients do not have a lot of free time. 
We have determined that the best product for this client will be an easy-to-rinse, 
lightly foaming cleansing lotion.

Step 3—Choosing Ingredients and Budgeting

We need to choose the individual ingredients for the product. We talk this over 
with our chemist, making sure the chemist understands the product idea, the 
product characteristics, and the client type.

Budgeting is an important part of product development. We need to deter-
mine how much we want to charge for this product. What type of packaging 
will we use? A cheap container does not necessarily support a higher price for 
the product. Attractive packaging is important, but it is more important here to 
be practical. Is the packaging type acceptable for use with the speciﬁc chemi-
cals contained in the products? Sometimes packaging materials can cross-react 
with the chemicals in the product. This must be determined. The use of exotic 
or expensive ingredients may be prohibited to keep the cost and price of the 
product reasonable.

If  this  product  will  foam,  we  need  a  detergent  foaming  cleansing  agent. 
There  are  many  to  choose  from.  We  choose  a  classic  detergent,  ammonium 
lauryl sulfate. Ammonium lauryl sulfate is not the strongest detergent, and we 
can vary the strength of the cleanser by carefully deciding how much detergent 
we use in the formula. The more we use, the more aggressive the cleanser will 
be. Ammonium lauryl sulfate might not be the best choice for ultra-sensitive or 
delicate skin, but this is not the target client or skin type.

With the chemist, we need to decide what type of preservative, emulsiﬁer, 
thickener, and fragrance to use with this product, based on the type and condi-
tion of the skin and the client’s lifestyle.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Skin Care Products      217

Prototype is a product sample 
that has been developed by the 
chemist and is ready to be tried.

Step 4—The Prototype and Use Testing

A prototype product is a product sample that has been developed by the chem-
ist and is ready to be tried. Actual people will try the sample cleanser, and we 
will gather their opinions after they use the product. Is the smell of the product 
nice?  Does  it  rinse  well?  How  does  the  skin  feel  after  its  use?  Did  it  cleanse 
enough, or did the skin feel stripped? How did other products feel after the skin 
was cleansed? Did the packaging work well during use?

Of course, we want the client to love the product; but it is important to get 
unbiased, honest opinions. If most of the test participants like all the character-
istics of the product, we have an acceptable product. If most of the participants 
dislike a characteristic of the product, we need to change this characteristic and 
retest until we have a product well liked by all participants. This phase of devel-
opment can take a substantial amount of time.

Step 5—Independent Testing

If we are making speciﬁc claims about the product, we need to arrange for claims 
substantiation testing, which is performed by an outside lab. Let’s say we want 
to make an irritancy-tested claim. We contract with an independent testing lab 
to  perform  irritancy  testing  on  the  cleanser.  We  need  to  send  the  lab  enough 
cleanser for testing on 200 people. This testing can take a few months to perform, 
depending on the type of testing, the product, the claims, and other factors.

Step 6—Production

All  the  tests  have  come  back  with  acceptable  results.  We  have  budgeted  and 
chosen our packaging. We need to have artwork made to silk-screen the bottle, 
and  we  must  make  sure  that  all  the  labeling  complies  with  Food  and  Drug 
Administration (FDA) regulations. We need to decide on the size of the batch 
and how many bottles will be produced. The ﬁnished product must be tested in 
microbiology to make sure the product is not contaminated and that the preser-
vative system is working properly.

Step 7—Marketing

Marketing of a product actually begins with the initial idea. We have to get the 
word out that the product is great and explain why people need to use it. Mar-
keting involves every step of the development. Without proper marketing, no 
one will know how great the product is, and it will not sell well.

As you can see, developing a new product involves many details. The more 
claims  and  the  more  speciﬁc  the  skin  condition,  the  more  complicated  the 
development.

IN CONCLUSION

Product recommendation is an important part of the practice of esthetics. What 
the client does to his or her skin 24 hours a day makes a signiﬁcant difference 
in achieving positive results. With an excellent knowledge base in performance 
ingredients,  every  esthetician  can  and  must  understand  the  myriad  products 
available to them. They can then make the best recommendations to their clients 
to obtain the very best results in improving their appearance.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.218         CHAPTER 11

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What are the differences between rinseable cleansers and emulsion cleansers?

  2. What determines the difference between types of rinseable cleansers?

  3. Describe some different types of toners.

  4. Describe a good day cream for oily or combination skin.

  5. Describe some of the various types of day creams you may ﬁnd in a salon.

  6. What is the difference between a day treatment and a night treatment?

  7. Describe some of the different types of products that use AHAs and how 

they might differ for oily and dry skin types.

  8. What are some desired characteristics of an eye cream?



CHAPTER

12

Claims in Cosmetics

OBJECTIVES . . .

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is a federal agency 
that regulates the cosmetics industry. In this chapter, you will 
learn about the FDA and how it functions. You will also learn 
about various claims made about cosmetics and what the 
difference is between a drug claim and a cosmetic claim.

You will learn what kind of questions to think about when 

evaluating claims made by cosmetics companies about their 
products, which you may be using in your salon.

In 1938 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act 

was passed by the U.S. Congress. The act called for certain 
deﬁnitions of cosmetics and drugs.

The FDA is a federal government agency designed to 
ensure safety of consumer products, namely food, drugs, and 
cosmetics. It regulates the cosmetics industry. Unlike the regu-
lation of the drug industry, where approval of drugs is neces-
sary before they are marketed, the FDA controls cosmetics 
only from the standpoint of disapproving them. The FDA does 
not “approve” cosmetics.

This means, essentially, that the FDA regulates the cosmetic 

industry only when the agency disapproves of a claim or or 
the safety of a product. This also means that cosmetic compa-
nies are not required to list their products or formulas with the 
FDA. They are required to register only on a voluntary basis.
When a “bad” cosmetic is found by the FDA, the agency 
begins investigating the cosmetic or claim. If the cosmetic is 
found to be unsafe, or to be making untrue claims, or to be 
making drug claims, the FDA will move to warn the company 
or remove the product from the market.



     219

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.220         CHAPTER 12

DRUG VERSUS COSMETIC

The FD&C Act of 1938 deﬁnes cosmetics and drugs as follows:

Drug—Articles  (other  than  food)  intended  to  affect  the  structure  or  any 
function of the body.
Cosmetics—Articles  intended  to  be  rubbed,  poured,  sprinkled,  or  other-
wise applied to the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautify-
ing, promoting attractiveness or altering the appearance.

Now, in the last few chapters we have discussed how functional or perfor-
mance agents work on the skin. But even if these performance agents do affect 
the function of the skin, we cannot make this claim if the product is a cosmetic. 
We can, however, say that the product “improves the skin’s appearance.”

Does this sound silly? Many cosmetic scientists agree, but this is the law as it 
exists. Cosmetics affect the appearance. If it is claimed that they affect the body 
or the skin’s physiological function, they are considered drugs.

The key words here are claims and intention. If your product does affect 
the skin’s function, and you do not mention it while selling the product as a 
cosmetic, you have not broken the law. You are selling the product and claiming 
only that it improves the appearance.

In other words, what you intend for the product to do is what makes it a 
cosmetic or a drug. Let’s look at a few examples. A toner for oily skin contains an 
antiseptic ingredient. Killing bacteria is a drug claim because it affects the skin’s 
function and rids the body of possible disease-causing microorganisms. But if 
the toner contains the antiseptic ingredient and no claim about the antiseptic 
action is made, then it is not a drug claim. You can say that the toner “helps 
make enlarged pores look smaller” or “helps remove excess oil” or “improves the 
appearance of oily areas.” These are all claims about the appearance. The fact 
that the toner also probably kills bacteria is just not mentioned.

Now, if you register the same product as a drug, you can say, “This product 
helps  kill  bacteria”  or “Kills  germs  that  can  cause  infection.”  You  are  permit-
ted  to  make  these  physiological  claims  if  the  product  is  registered  with  the 
FDA as a drug, and the outer package must have a drug facts label. Over-the-
counter (OTC) drugs are drug products for which a physician’s prescription is 
not  needed.  Prescription  drugs  require  a  written  prescription  from  a  licensed 
physician. Dentists and veterinarians are also permitted to write prescriptions. 
Estheticians are allowed to use or sell only OTC drugs. OTC drugs that are used 
by  or  sold  by  estheticians  may  include  sunscreens,  melanin  suppressants  for 
hyperpigmentation, acne medications, and hydrocortisone creams.

Let’s explore another possibility. A cream is made with good vehicle ingredi-
ents that are very acceptable to the intercellular cement, making the probability 
of deeper penetration of the product higher. The cream includes the free-radical 
scavengers  tocopherol  and  grapeseed  extract  that  help  reduce  irritation  and 
redness. It also contains alpha hydroxy acids, shown to stimulate new collagen 
production when used routinely.

Now these theories may be true, but if the label says that “this cream makes 
cells healthier by reducing free radicals with vitamins A and E and stimulates the 
production of new collagen,” a drug claim has been made. You are saying that 
the product (1) contains vitamins, which are known to affect body functions; (2) 
“makes cells healthier,” which is a physiological claim; and (3) “stimulates the 
production of new collagen,” another physiological claim.

So you have three drug claims in just one descriptive phrase. To make these 
claims, the product would have to be registered as a drug. If you claim that the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Claims in Cosmetics      221

Cosmeceutical is a product de-
signed for improving appearance 
but may have positive physi-
ological effects on the skin, on a 
cellular level.

cream makes skin look healthier and helps smooth rough textures, you have made 
a  cosmetic  claim.  You  have  simply  made  the  claim  that  the  product  improves 
appearance and have not said anything regarding physiological function.

Registering a product as a drug means that the product must have had sub-
stantial testing to support its ingredient claims, efﬁcacy, and safety. It takes years 
to have new drug ingredients approved.

Drug ingredients that have been safely and effectively used for long periods 
of time are permitted for the uses for which they are approved. Salicylic acid, for 
example, has long been approved for use in OTC acne products. This ingredient 
is recognized as safe and effective for treating minor acne. Because of its long 
history of safety, manufacturers may use it in acne products and must register 
the product if they are making a drug claim. They do not need to ﬁle for “new 
ingredient” testing, though.

VERBAL CLAIMS

As a licensed esthetician or cosmetologist, you must be careful of what you say 
to  clients  regarding  claims  for  products.  If  you  say  that  a  product  affects  the 
physiology of the skin, then you intend for that product to have drug effects, and 
you are therefore making drug claims.

You  must  be  careful  never  to  make  a  claim  about  a  cosmetic  that  is  a 
drug  claim.  Always  describe  products  as “improving  the  appearance,” “reduc-
ing the visible signs of wrinkles” (intention: you are reducing the appearance 
of the wrinkle, not the wrinkle itself), “lessening the appearance of puffy eyes” 
(you are treating the appearance of pufﬁness, not the physiological factors that 
caused the pufﬁness). Good key words include the following:

“helps to . . .”
“reduces the appearance of . . .”
“diminishes the visual signs of . . .”
“enhances the appearance of . . . ”
“improves the appearance of the skin . . .”

Any  words  that  imply  that  the  skin  looks  better  are  usually  appropriate. 
Remember, a cosmetic cleanses, beautiﬁes, promotes attractiveness, and alters 
the appearance.

But  what  about  how  cosmetics  really  affect  the  skin?  It  is  the  opinion  of 
this author and many other cosmetic and health scientists that we need a new 
product classiﬁcation with the FDA. It has been proposed that a “cosmeceutical” 
category be established. A cosmeceutical would be deﬁned as a product that 
is designed for appearance improvement but may have positive physiological 
effects  on  the  skin  on  a  cellular  level.  Because  cosmetic  scientists,  as  well  as 
scientists from the medical community, do have evidence that many cosmetic 
ingredients affect the behavior and function of the skin, many researchers feel 
that this new category is needed. Cosmetologists and estheticians cannot legally 
explain the actual biological chemical reactions that affect the skin.

THE LABELING LAW

In 1977, the Federal Packaging and Labeling Act was instated by the FDA. This 
package  of  regulations  required  all  cosmetic  manufacturers  to  list  ingredients 
used in their products. The initial reasoning for this package of regulations was to 
protect consumers who suffered from allergic reactions to particular ingredients.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.222         CHAPTER 12

International Nomenclature 
Cosmetic Ingredient (INCI) 
names are standardized ingredient 
names that have been approved 
for worldwide use by the interna-
tional cosmetic community.

In theory, the consumer could check the ingredient label for allergen ingre-

dients and thus, theoretically, avoid a potential allergic reaction.

The ingredients are required to be listed on the outermost part of the pack-
aging.  If  the  product  is  in  a  box,  the  ingredients  must  be  listed  on  the  box. 
Products that are marketed in jars or containers without using a box or other 
outer packaging must list ingredients on the container itself. The ingredients are 
required to be on the outermost surface of the packaging so that the consumer 
can easily ﬁnd the list.

Again, in this author’s opinion, this law is both helpful and hurtful. It is true 
that a consumer can check for ingredients he or she is allergic to. But the con-
sumer often reads other chemical names that he or she does not understand or 
knows nothing about. As an example, a consumer once said that she did not 
want to use a particular moisturizer because it contained methylparaben, and 
she did not like to use products with oils in them! The consumer had mistaken 
the preservative paraben for the oil paraffi n. An easy mistake, perhaps, but it 
nevertheless  illustrates  that  consumers  generally  do  not  know  enough  about 
chemistry to read an ingredient label, much less know what it means.

The names of the ingredients listed must be registered in the International 
Cosmetic  Ingredient  Dictionary  &  Handbook  (formerly  known  as  the  CTFA 
compendium—the Cosmetics, Toiletries, and Fragrance Association changed its 
name to the Personal Care Products Council [PCPC]), which is essentially a direc-
tory of generic chemical names agreed on by the international cosmetic indus-
try associations. These names are known as the International Nomenclature 
Cosmetic Ingredient (INCI) names for ingredients. These names are required 
to be used on ingredient lists on packaging. The United States, the European 
Union,  and  other  countries  accept  INCI  names  as  standard.  These  names  are 
used  so  that  any  two  companies  that  use  a  particular  ingredient  will  list  it  in 
the same way on their ingredient labels. These names are the industry standard. 
Listing chemicals by their trade names or functions is not acceptable to the FDA.
On the label, ingredients must be listed in the order of their concentration 
in the product. In other words, a cream that is a mixture of 70 percent water, 
10 percent mineral oil, and 5 percent sodium lauryl sulfate must list the ingre-
dients in descending order of concentration such as, “water, mineral oil, sodium 
lauryl  sulfate,  .  .  .”  The  exception  to  the  concentration  listing  rule  is  that  any 
ingredient  that  is  in  the  product  in  less  than  1  percent  concentration  can  be 
listed in any order. In other words, toward the end of the list, after ingredients 
with 1 percent concentration are listed, any ingredient (at less than 1 percent 
concentration presence in the product) may be listed in any order.

The sources of the ingredients are also illegal to use on the ingredient label. 
Some “natural” cosmetics manufacturers list cetyl alcohol, for example, followed 
in parentheses by (coconut oil ) to indicate that cetyl alcohol is derived from a 
“natural” source. This is an illegal listing because it may be confusing to the con-
sumer. Second, just because a chemical is naturally derived does not necessarily 
mean that the quality is better.

Extracts  from  plants  are  usually  listed  by  the  plant  name  and  the  word 
extract. Plant extracts or derivatives must include the Latin genus and species 
of the particular extract. For example, lemon extract must be listed as “Citrus 
medica limonum (lemon) extract.” This rule is intended to designate the exact 
type  of  plant  that  was  extracted.  For  example,  there  are  numerous  types  of 
seaweed. Different types may have very different functions. The extract may or 
may not contain a solvent such as oil, propylene glycol, water, or alcohol. The 
term extract implies, according to the industry rules, that this plant extract con-
stituent may contain solvent ingredients. It is generally accepted that this is an 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Claims in Cosmetics      223

Allantoin, C12-15 Alkyl Benzoate, Cera Alba, 
Centaurea Cyanus (Cornflower) Flower
Extract, Citrus Medica Limonum (Lemon)
Peel Extract, Castor Oil Phosphate, Carbomer,
DEA-Cetyl phosphate, Dimethicone,
Disodium EDTA,  Glycerin, Glyceryl Stearate,
Imidazolidinyl Urea, Methylparaben,
Neopentyl Glycol Dicaprate/Dicaprylate,
Panthenol, Propylene Glycol, Retinyl
Palmitate,  Sodium PCA, Tridecyl  Stearate,
Tridecyl Trimellitate, Tocopherol Acetate,
Triethanolamine, Triethoxycaprylylsilane,  
Ulmus Fulvia (Slippery Elm) Bark Extract, 
 Water (Aqua), Xanthan Gum.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 12-1  Drug facts label.

acceptable labeling practice. Sometimes extracts are listed as “essence of . . .” or 
“infusion of . . . .” This means that the extract is in a suspension of water or that 
extracts have been added to water used in the formulation.

DRUG LABELING

On OTC products, the manufacturer must print an OTC drug facts label (Figure 12-1), 
as discussed in Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients. The 
active  ingredients  are  listed  ﬁrst,  with  their  purpose,  and  all  other  ingredients 
must be listed in the inactive ingredients section of the drug facts label. All OTC 
products, regardless of type, must have a drug facts label. For example, an eye 
cream that is also a sunscreen must have a drug facts label. The active ingredients 
section might read as shown here.

Active Ingredient 
Octinoxate 4% 
Zinc Oxide 4% 

Purpose
Sunscreen
Sunscreen

The inactive ingredients section will list the other ingredients, even if they are 
performance ingredients with cosmetic beneﬁts. A new regulation requires that 
they be listed in alphabetical order:

Inactive Ingredients: Allantoin, Beeswax, C12-15 Alkyl Benzoate, Carbomer, 
Castor  Oil  Phosphate,  Centaurea  Cyanus  Flower  Extract,  Citrus  Medica 
Limonum (Lemon) Peel Oil, DEA-Cetyl Phosphate, Dimethicone, Disodium 
EDTA,  Glycerin,  Glyceryl  Stearate,  Imidazolidinyl  Urea,  Methylparaben, 
Neopentyl  Glycol  Dicaprylate/Dicaprate,  Panthenol,  Propylene  Glycol, 



   
 
 
 
 
 
224         CHAPTER 12

Hypoallergenic cosmetics have 
generally been manufactured 
without the use of certain ingredi-
ents that are known to frequently 
cause allergic reactions.

Anhydrous products are treat-
ment products that do not contain 
water.

Retinyl Palmitate (Vitamin A), Sodium PCA, Tocopheryl Acetate, Tridecyl 
Stearate,  Tridecyl  Trimellitate,  Triethanolamine,  Triethoxycaprylylsilane, 
Ulmus Fulva Bark Extract, Water.

There  are  other  rules  regarding  claims  for  OTC  drugs.  Often,  standard 
phrases must be included for usage instructions or to describe functions of the 
drug, along with warnings. These are mandated by the FDA.

Once again, when it comes to cosmetics, the FDA is a disapproving agency, 
meaning  that  it  investigates  a  cosmetic  only  if  it  believes  that  a  fraudulent  or 
medical  claim  is  being  made  or  that  the  product  is  unsafe  or  contaminated. 
The FDA does not approve cosmetics. Claims that a particular cosmetic is “FDA 
approved” are false, misleading, and illegal.

OTHER COSMETIC CLAIMS

Hypoallergenic

A cosmetic that is claimed to be hypoallergenic has generally been manufac-
tured without the use of certain ingredients that are known to frequently cause 
allergic reactions. Fragrance is generally left out of the hypoallergenic cosmetics, 
because fragrance is one of the main causes of allergic skin reactions.

The term hypoallergenic does not mean “nonallergenic.” There is no such 
thing  as  a  nonallergenic  cosmetic.  Someone  could  be  allergic  to  any  one  (or 
more) ingredients in any product in the cosmetic industry. Although there is no 
way to guarantee a product as nonallergenic, hypoallergenic cosmetics statisti-
cally cause fewer allergic reactions.

Generally, companies run sophisticated dermatological allergy tests on their 
products to demonstrate their hypoallergenic status. This unfortunately still does 
not  guarantee  nonallergenicity;  it  simply  shows  that  the  company  cares  and 
believes  in  its  product  enough  to  have  it  tested.  The  tests  determine  that  the 
ﬁnished product is very unlikely to cause allergic or irritant reactions when used 
as directed.

The truth is that most cosmetics today are hypoallergenic and are designed 
that way. Most companies take great care to make sure their products can be 
used by most people. It is in their ﬁnancial interest to do so as well.

Fragrance-Free Cosmetics

As  discussed  earlier,  many  cosmetic  manufacturers  purposely  do  not  use  fra-
grances in their products to reduce the chances of allergic reaction. Such prod-
ucts may still have an odor or smell. This is the odor of the actual ingredients 
used in the product formulation. However, not adding fragrance to a cosmetic is 
generally a good idea when possible.

Preservative-Free Cosmetics

Recently, thanks largely to advancements in silicone technology, some preser-
vative-free  cosmetics  have  been  developed.  These  treatment  products  are 
anhydrous,  which  means  they  do  not  contain  water.  (Water  is  an  essential 
element to sustain the life of pathological bacteria.) Most of these products are 
serums,  based  with  silicone  mixtures  or  petrolatum.  Most  cosmetics  and  skin 
care products do contain preservatives, which are necessary to inhibit growth 
of harmful bacteria.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Claims in Cosmetics      225

Noncomedogenic

The  term  noncomedogenic  means  that  certain  ingredients  known  to  cause 
comedone development and acne ﬂare-ups have not been used in a cosmetic 
formulation.  Fats  and  emollients  are  the  principal  agents  that  cause  these 
reactions.

Unfortunately, there is no standard industry deﬁnition of the word noncom-
edogenic, and the FDA does not require that testing be performed to make such 
a claim. Regrettably, certain companies take advantage of lack of rules and make 
claims that their products are noncomedogenic without performing the proper 
testing. For much more information on noncomedogenic testing, see Chapter 16, 
Comedogenicity.

Nonacnegenic

Often, the term nonacnegenic is used interchangeably with noncomedogenic, 
but nonacnegenic means that the product has been designed to not cause devel-
opment of comedones or cause follicle irritancy that can cause immediate acne 
ﬂare-ups.  It  can  take  as  long  as  six  months  for  comedones  to  form,  whereas 
follicle irritancy has the potential to cause an acne ﬂare-up much more quickly. 
For example, if you try a new skin care product and three days later your face 
is full of pimples, you are having an acnegenic reaction.

Again, a variety of tests for follicle irritancy can be run, but some companies 

make the claim without proper testing.

Dermatologist Tested

Once  again,  the  term  dermatologist  tested  can  be  very  confusing.  Generally, 
ethical companies mean that the product has been tested for irritancy or allergy 
potential under the supervision of a dermatologist. One writer asks the question, 
“Dermatologist tested—for what?” That’s a good question. This can be a mislead-
ing term. Perhaps it would be better to say “independently dermatologist tested 
for irritancy.”

Natural Cosmetics

For the last two decades, one of the latest rages in cosmetic development has 
been so-called natural cosmetics. Many consumers wish to use only products 
that  they  believe  are  made  from  naturally  occurring  sources.  Although  there 
is no statistical evidence proving that natural products are better or safer than 
those containing synthetically derived ingredients (or a mixture of natural and 
synthetic or bioengineered ingredients), these consumers believe that products 
made of natural ingredients are somehow better choices. 

Naturally  derived  ingredients  in  cosmetics  have  actually  been  used  for 
decades.  Although  nature  has  some  wonderful  chemicals  to  contribute  to  the 
cosmetics industry, these ingredients are not always sufﬁcient by themselves, nor 
are they always superior to synthetic chemicals. The fact is that in one form or 
another, everything comes from the earth. Think about it. Even the ingredients 
used to make plastic come from Mother Nature.

Natural  products  can  also  cause  allergic  reactions.  For  more  on  this,  see 
Chapter 13, Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants. Many wonderful things come 
from nature, but there are also many safe and effective ingredients that are labo-
ratory derived.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.226         CHAPTER 12

In vitro refers to scientiﬁc testing 
that occurs outside of a living 
organism. It has not been tested 
on a live specimen.

Organic Cosmetics

For  many  years,  terms  organic  and  natural  were  used  interchangeably.  The 
United  States  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA)  government  standards  were 
established  for  organic  foods  in  1992.  The  “USDA  Organic”  seal  means  that 
foods or plants are grown without traditional pesticides or synthetic fertilizers 
and without using hormones, or chemically altered plants or seeds. Farms grow-
ing organic foods must implement a number of practices in order to label their 
products as USDA Organic.

In  2005,  the  USDA  approved  new  organic  standards  for  the  production  of 
skin care and other topical products. To label a product organic, 95 percent of its 
ingredients must be organic. “Made with organic ingredients” may be claimed for 
products that contain at least 75 percent organic ingredients. All plants used in 
production of the ingredients used in the products must be grown with organic 
standards, and the products are not to contain any synthetic chemicals or deriva-
tives from petroleum. Companies making organic claims that do not comply with 
the above concentrations are making illegal claims. Again, products that make a 
“natural” claim do not necessarily comply with the ofﬁcial USDA organic standard. 
Organic does not mean nonallergenic, noncomedogenic, or nonacnegenic, 
and it needs to be remembered that many plants, extracts of plants, and essential 
oils from plants can cause allergic and irritant reactions, whether or not the plant 
was grown organically.

Pufﬁng

Puffi ng is a term used to describe the way some companies make their products 
sound better. This is an insulting term, because it is typically used to mean that 
the cosmetic company is making the product sound better than it actually is.

Most  companies  want  their  products  to  sound  good.  Companies  that  use 
outrageous claims to promote their products, such as calling them a “face lift in a 
jar,” make the entire industry suffer. Companies that promote their cosmetics for 
their real beneﬁts are fortunately in the majority. However, there is always one 
unscrupulous company promoting outrageous claims in order to make money. 
Fortunately, consumers soon ﬁnd that their claims aren’t true.

Animal Testing

Today, it is common to see a claim on a skin care or cosmetic product saying, 
“No animal testing” or “cruelty-free.” Although many companies do not believe 
in animal testing, certain tests must be performed to ensure a safe product.

Finished products often are not tested on animals; but almost all ingredients 
used in cosmetics have, at one time or another, been tested on animals. This is 
the only way to make sure that the individual ingredients are safe for human 
use.  Individual  ingredient  testing  is  generally  not  performed  by  the  company 
producing the ﬁnished product. Ingredient testing is performed by the manufac-
turer of the actual ingredient.

In  general,  cosmetics  companies  have  made  a  legitimate  effort  to  reduce 
animal  testing  and  eliminate  excessive  and  unnecessary  testing.  Many  have 
switched to human testing for many types of evaluations and testing. 

Some estheticians are single-mindedly against animal testing. Many of these 
estheticians do not understand that it is vital to ensure ingredient safety. Still, 
some important tests, particularly those determining toxicity, cannot be performed 
without using animals. Rapidly developing technology may eventually eliminate 
animal testing. Laboratory-produced skin and other in vitro tests not performed 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Claims in Cosmetics      227

Claim substantiation testing is 
performed, usually by indepen-
dent consumer testing laboratories, 
to back up and document claims 
made by product companies.

on live organisms are being developed. Progress is being made, but as of this 
writing there are still a few very important safety tests that cannot be run with-
out the use of animals. We all hope that eventually animal testing will no longer 
be an issue, but we also must be scientiﬁc enough to understand the need for 
nontoxic products that are safe for human use.

Claim Substantiation

You will often see claims like these in advertisements for skin care products: 
“Reduces the appearance of wrinkles by 50% in two weeks,” or “98% of users 
saw  an  improvement  in  skin  texture  in  one  week.”  These  are  both  cosmetic 
claims, but the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has rules that such claims must 
be documented by reasonable scientiﬁc evaluation or studies. 

Claim  substantiation  testing  is  performed,  usually  by  independent  con-
sumer  testing  laboratories,  to  back  up  and  document  claims  made  by  product 
companies. This is particularly important for speciﬁc claims like those presented 
above. These laboratories have highly technical equipment that can measure char-
acteristics of skin such as pore size, elasticity, ﬁrmness, texture and light-reﬂective 
potential, and many more. Researchers carefully, and scientiﬁcally, evaluate skin 
characteristics before and after the preplanned exposure to the skin care products. 
Then  they  use  statistics  to  determine  what  kind  of  improvement  claim  can  be 
made. Products that claim “allergy- or irritancy-tested,” “ophthalmologist-tested,” 
and other similar statements must also have similar testing to back up these claims.

International Companies

Some products are imported from other countries where laws regarding cosmet-
ics may be different from those of the United States. Because of this, some com-
panies make claims that are legitimate by their country’s standards but are illegal 
or misleading by U.S. standards. Importers of these products should be aware of 
these differences and change claims that are not permitted in the United States. 
Although many companies are extremely conscientious about this issue, a few 
companies, out of ignorance, do not make the proper changes.

Today’s consumer is generally better informed than consumers of years past 
and knows better than to believe unrealistic claims. Unfortunately, enough “bad 
guy” companies have “cried wolf” often enough that the consumer is often wary 
when buying cosmetics.

Discussing Claims with Clients

Always try to be honest with clients about a product’s true beneﬁts. Hard selling 
only offends clients. Estheticians should educate their clients about proper prod-
ucts for their skin. The client is interested only in making the skin look the best 
it can. Do not make promises you can’t keep. Each client has unique problems 
and conditions, and clients do not always react to products in the same way. 
There is no way an esthetician can absolutely be sure any product will work. All 
an esthetician can do is give the best advice possible.

BUYING PRODUCTS FOR YOUR SALON
Throughout  your  career,  you  will  no  doubt  attend  many  trade  shows  where 
cosmetics companies display their products for you to purchase. You should do 
your homework before purchasing products from any company.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.228         CHAPTER 12

You should ask many questions before buying a product line. Some of these 

questions are as follows:

  1. Are the theories used by the company’s products rational?
  2. Do they make legitimate claims? If the product sounds too good to be true, 

it probably is too good to be true!

  3. How much care does the company take in developing cosmetics?
  4. Are their products formulated with allergies and comedogenicity in mind?
  5. If  the  company  makes  claims  about  hypoallergenic  or  noncomedogenic 

products, does it test those products?

  6. Are these tests run by the company or by an independent testing company? 
(It  is  better  if  they  are  performed  by  an  outside  company—they  are  less 
likely to be biased.)

  7. Is the company willing to explain its testing procedure and results?
  8. Are the company’s prices competitive with similar products offered by other 

companies?

  9. Do the products contain ingredients that you have never heard of? If you are 
current on your skin care journal reading, you should be aware of new and 
innovative ingredients that are legitimate.

 10. What is the company’s history? Who is its founder, and what are the founder’s 

credentials?

The more education you have, the better you will be at selecting the best, 
most reputable companies. Be careful not to be pressured. Good, solid compa-
nies don’t mind if you think about a purchase before making it.

Many more questions should be asked of companies before you choose a 
product line. You should investigate their reputation with colleagues you respect. 
You should look into the ﬁrm’s marketing programs, ﬁnd out if the company is 
accessible if you have questions, and ask how fast their service is.

The bottom line is, are they honest; and do they have a high-quality, legiti-

mate product?

IN CONCLUSION

There are many laws regarding cosmetics, and deﬁnitions that formally distin-
guish a drug from a cosmetic. Estheticians must be able to explain products and 
treatments to clients, while always remembering that esthetics is the practice of 
making skin look more attractive. Ethical explanation and practice are impera-
tive for success as an esthetician, and knowledge about legal and ethical claims 
is a big part of continued success in esthetics.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What does the FDA regulate?

  2. Why is the FDA called a “disapproving” agency?

  3. Discuss the Food and Drug Act deﬁnitions of cosmetics and drugs. How do 

these deﬁnitions differ?

  4. What is the reason for listing ingredients on a cosmetic label?

  5. What are the labeling laws for drug products?

  6. Discuss the terms noncomedogenic and nonacnegenic. What tests should be 

run to legitimately make these claims?



CHAPTER

13

Sensitive Skin, 
Allergies, and 
Irritants

OBJECTIVES . . .

Sensitive skin is a common condition seen by estheticians. 
More and more women seem to have sensitive skin. Skin 
sensitivities can be attributed to a variety of causes, from 
hereditarily sensitive skin to irritant and allergic reactions to 
skin that has been overexposed to peeling agents.

In this chapter, we discuss how to analyze sensitive skin, 
treat and manage skin that is chronically sensitive, and iden-
tify ingredients and procedures that should be avoided on 
sensitive skin.



     229

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.230         CHAPTER 13

Neurological factors are those 
involving nerves and the nervous 
system.

Blanching occurs when the skin 
turns white upon being touched 
ﬁrmly with the ﬁngers.

Erythema refers to any area of 
redness associated with a lesion.

Urticaria, or hives, is due to 
allergies.

Hives are a localized swelling, 
usually caused by allergies.

Wheals, or welts, are raised, 
swollen, red lesions, usually 
caused by allergies.

Edema is swelling.

Objective symptoms, such as 
redness or swelling, are physically 
observable.

Pruritus is the technical term 
for itching.

Subjective symptoms include 
itching or burning.

SENSITIVE SKIN

Sensitive  skin  is  very  thin,  fragile-looking,  pink-colored  skin.  People  with  red 
hair and blue eyes or of Celtic, Irish, Scottish, or British descent are more likely 
to have sensitive skin than other ethnic groups with darker-colored skin, hair, 
or eyes. Because of the skin’s thinness, the blood vessels and nerve endings are 
much closer to the surface of the skin. This explains why this skin type tends to 
be more easily irritated by skin care and cosmetic products.

Sensitive skin is becoming more and more common. In some studies, 40 to 
90 percent of women surveyed report that they believe their skin is sensitive. 
Some of these clients actually do have sensitive or reactive skin, and some have 
“perceived sensitive skin,” meaning that they simply believe their skin is sensi-
tive. These clients have often had one bad experience with a topical reaction to 
a skin care or makeup product or have experienced clogged pores or breakouts 
from products that were too oily or fatty for their skin. It is important to under-
stand as much as possible about sensitive skin and to know that not all reactions 
are fully understood by medical science.

GENETIC FACTORS AFFECTING 
SENSITIVE SKIN

Besides genetic skin thinness, already discussed, two other genetic factors may 
contribute to skin sensitivity.

  1. Neurological factors are those that involve nerves and the nervous system. 
Research  is  ongoing  to  establish  some  reasons  for  increased  neurological 
responses that apparently affect many people with sensitive skin. Investiga-
tors theorize that persons with chronically sensitive, reactive skin may have 
genetic defects or damage that causes an overresponse of nerve endings in 
the  skin,  thus  triggering  an  immune  response.  These  defects  may  include 
hypersensitive nerve endings or malfunctions in communicative proteins or 
peptides, resulting in what is thought of as hypersensitive, reactive skin. 
  2. An overresponsive immune response, likely genetic in nature, may explain 

hyperreactivity of sensitive skin.

ANALYSIS OF SENSITIVE SKIN

Sensitive skin is often obvious on examination. It is most often Fitzpatrick type I, 
which always burns when exposed to the sun. It often appears thin, bruises easily, 
and blanches (or turns white) easily when touched. Blanching is caused by press-
ing on the thin skin; the pressure actually pushes the blood away from the surface 
tissues, thus causing a temporary white, or lighter, appearance (Figure 13-1).

Clients with sensitive skin often report frequent inﬂammation during their 
ﬁrst visit to the esthetician, including histories of erythema (redness), urticaria 
(the medical term for hives (Figure 13-2), wheals, or welts), and sometimes 
edema (swelling). All three of these symptoms are objective symptoms, which 
means they can be physically observed or measured. Symptoms like pruritus 
(itching),  stinging,  tingling,  or  burning  are  subjective  symptoms.  Subjective 
symptoms  are  felt  by  the  client  but  cannot  be  seen  by  the  esthetician.  Some 
clients have both types of symptoms, and some have only one. The most dif-
ﬁcult  situation  is  when  the  client  has  only  subjective  symptoms,  because  the 
esthetician cannot observe any indications and must rely solely on the feelings 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      231

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L
y
b

FIGURE 13-1A 
In sensitive skin, the area appears 
whiter than the surrounding skin after pressure has 
been applied and ﬁrst removed.

FIGURE 13-1B  The skin quickly regains its pink tone, 
sometimes becoming darker after pressure.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-2  Urticaria (hives).

described by the client. Most scientists now believe that chronic subjective symp-
toms are neurological (caused by irritated nerve endings) or may be caused by 
an overreactive immune system.

Clients with sensitive skin often are quite vocal about their sensitivity. They 
have  experienced  problems  before,  and  they  don’t  want  to  experience  them 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
232         CHAPTER 13

Permeable means “easily 
penetrated.”

Transepidermal water loss 
(TEWL) is the evaporation of 
excess intercellular water.

Corniﬁed envelope is a structure 
in the top-layer cells of the stra-
tum corneum, located just beneath 
the cell membrane, made of a 
variety of overlapping proteins 
that form a very strong barrier 
structure to help provide ad-
ditional barrier capabilities at the 
top of the epidermis.

Hereditary describes a trait or 
condition inherited from parents; 
genetic.

Transient means “temporary.”

again! It is important to listen carefully to your client’s experiences and history of 
symptoms to help determine the exact cause of her reactions. Even if the client 
doesn’t know what caused the earlier reactions, she may be able to give you clues 
about what to avoid using or what might be appropriate treatment. It is important 
to ask about previous allergic or irritant reactions to cosmetics, skin care products 
and topical medications, drugs, and foods. Some clients may already have had 
dermatological testing to determine exact causes of allergic reactions.

SENSITIVE SKIN AND BARRIER FUNCTION
Probably the most important factor in helping clients with sensitive skin is to 
protect or restore the barrier function of the skin. Sensitive skin does not have a 
natural barrier function that is as effective as that of normal, nonsensitive skin. 
The skin of a client with impaired barrier function has holes in the lipid bar-
rier between the epidermal cells, resulting in a more permeable (more easily 
penetrated) epidermis. Irritants are more likely to cause inﬂammation because 
it easier for them to penetrate the skin’s surface, where they come in contact 
with poorly protected nerve endings and blood vessels. Impaired barrier func-
tion also results in transepidermal water loss (TEWL), meaning that water 
is  escaping  from  the  layers  of  the  epidermis,  causing  severe  dehydration  and 
inﬂammation. If skin is inﬂamed due to a diminished barrier function, it is more 
likely to react to skin care products and cosmetics.

The cells in the top layer of the stratum corneum contain a structure called 
the corniﬁed envelope. The corniﬁed envelope is located just beneath the cell 
membrane in these surface cells. The corniﬁed envelope forms during the epi-
dermal keratinization process and is made of various overlapping proteins that 
form a strong barrier to help provide additional protective capabilities at the top 
of the epidermis. These proteins are bound to ceramide lipids inside the cell 
membrane.

It is now believed that people who have genetically sensitive skin may not 
produce epidermal corniﬁed envelopes in a normal manner. Genetic mutations 
may cause malformation of the proteins that comprise the corniﬁed envelope, 
resulting in a defective surface barrier that can lead to impaired barrier function 
and therefore to reactions that we observe as sensitive skin.

Sensitive skin may be hereditary (genetic) or transient. Hereditary sensi-
tive skin is chronically sensitive for life. Transient sensitivity is usually caused 
by an injury to the barrier function (for example, over-exfoliation, sunburn, or 
windburn).  These  sensitivities  usually  resolve  themselves  when  the  cause  is 
determined  and  avoided  or  removed.  For  instance,  an  acne  client  overusing 
drying agents may have stripped the barrier function and may have redness and 
burning. When the barrier is restored by reducing the exposure to the drying 
products, the redness and burning are no longer a problem.

RESPECTING THE BARRIER FUNCTION
In sensitive skin, avoid exposure to strong detergents and surfactants and other 
solvents that can decrease barrier function by stripping important lipids. Heavily 
foaming washes contain large amounts of surfactants, which are chemicals that 
remove oils from the skin. They are designed to remove excessive oil from the 
skin surface but often also remove lipids within the intercellular cement. While 
they may be helpful for an oily, nonsensitive skin, they tend to damage barrier 
function in fragile, sensitive skin. The more a cleanser foams, the more damag-
ing it may be to the barrier function.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      233

The best choice of cleanser for sensitive skin is a lightweight, nonfoaming 
or low-foaming (doesn’t produce much foam) lotion cleanser. Look for a gentle 
cleansing ingredient such as decyl glucoside or disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate in 
these products. Often they are buffered by an oil or silicone to prevent too much 
cleansing agent from contacting the skin. Body washes for sensitive skin often 
contain petrolatum or mineral oil to buffer the contact with the skin. Make sure 
the product has been tested for irritancy potential by an independent laboratory. 
Continuing  to  use  a  foaming  cleanser  on  a  redness-prone,  inﬂamed  skin 

only produces further problems and prevents healing and recovery.

Some ingredients increase penetration of the skin. Often these are solvents 
that are safe on normal skin but can be very damaging to the fragile barrier func-
tion of a sensitive skin. Propylene glycol is an example of a solvent that can be 
used on oilier skin but should be avoided on sensitive skin. 

Products  containing  drying  alcohols  such  as  isopropyl  or  SD  alcohol 
should be avoided on sensitive skin because they can also damage its fragile 
barrier  function.  It  is  important  to  note  that  not  all  alcohols  are  drying.  Cetyl 
alcohol, for example, is a wax-like moisturizing ingredient that acts as an emol-
lient to smooth the skin surface.

Desincrustation products, if used, should be applied for a shorter time and 
only if necessary. Be careful to use them only in areas where they are needed. 
Chemicals used for exfoliation, such as alpha hydroxy acids and other peeling 
and exfoliation agents, can damage the barrier function if overused and should 
never be used if the skin is inﬂamed. Scrubs, microdermabrasion, brushing, and 
other mechanical exfoliation techniques must also be avoided.

Oils and water are often mixed to make a moisturizer or skin care product. 
Chemical  emulsiﬁers  are  used  in  products  to  keep  oil-in-water  emulsion 
products  properly  mixed.  They  work  by  dispersing  oils  from  water  to  keep 
the  product  in  a  uniform,  blended  state.  Unfortunately,  these  normally  harm-
less chemicals can also dissolve lipids within the lipid barrier, damaging barrier 
function in sensitive skin. State-of-the-art sensitive skin products are now being 
produced with special physical emulsiﬁers that separate oil particles and keep 
the  product  blended  without  damaging  the  barrier  function.  The  process  of 
making these products, known as physical emulsiﬁcation, sometimes involves 
using  high-pressure  manufacturing  techniques.  Inclusion  of  special  barrier-
protective agents, such as lipids or silicones, helps protect the lipid barrier from 
contact with emulsifying agents.

The thicker a product is, the more emulsiﬁer is needed and used. The more 
emulsiﬁer a product contains, the more likely the barrier function will be dam-
aged. Creams have more emulsiﬁer than lotions. Therefore, the most appropriate 
products for sensitive skin are in ﬂuid, lotion, or gel forms.

Drying alcohols are alcohols 
used in cosmetics that have a 
drying effect, such as isopropyl 
or SD alcohol.

Chemical emulsiﬁers are agents 
that cause an even blending of 
water and oil in a lotion or cream.

Physical emulsiﬁers are used 
in skin products to separate oil 
particles, thus keeping the product 
blended without damaging the 
barrier function.

THE INFLAMMATION CASCADE

The  inﬂammation  cascade  is  a  series  of  biochemical  reactions  that  occurs 
when the skin is irritated or inﬂamed. When a cell is irritated, it releases special 
chemicals called inﬂammatory mediators, which alert the immune system to 
the irritation. The immune system then sends leukocytes, or white blood cells, 
to the site of irritation. Because the leukocytes are mixed with red blood cells, if 
the inﬂammation is severe enough, the site of irritation becomes red.

The leukocytes release another special chemical called a cytokine. The cyto-
kine signals cells to produce “self-destruct” enzymes called proteases. Proteases 
break down substances in the skin, including collagen, elastin, and hyaluronic 
acid, which are responsible for skin ﬁrmness, elasticity, and moisture content.

Inﬂammation cascade is a series 
of chemical reactions that occurs 
when the skin is irritated.

Inﬂammatory mediators are 
chemicals released by irritated 
cells that alert the immune system 
to the irritation.

Leukocytes are white blood cells.

Cytokine is a chemical released 
by cells to signal other chemical 
immune responses.

Proteases are enzymes that 
dissolve proteins.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.234         CHAPTER 13

Subclinical symptoms, such as 
stinging or tingling, have no 
visible appearance.

Dermatographic literally means 
“skin writing.” Skin turns red and 
swells at the slightest scrape.

Telangiectasias, or couperose, 
are small, red, enlarged capillaries 
of the face and other areas of the 
body.

Chronic skin inﬂammation has a cumulative effect on skin aging and dete-
rioration  due  to  the  constant  cascade  of  reactions.  Although  many  of  these 
reactions are subclinical (that is, not visibly detectable), they produce a slow, 
gradual deterioration of the skin. Therefore, it is extremely important to avoid 
chronically inﬂaming or irritating the skin, whether the inﬂammation is from sun 
exposure or constantly stripping the skin with harsh chemicals.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE

  1. Begin  by  cleansing  the  skin  with  a  very  mild,  nonfoaming,  fragrance-free 
cleanser using cool, wet cotton pads. Using sponges or other implements may 
cause a friction reaction in extremely sensitive skin. Redness during the very 
beginning of treatment is a sureﬁre symptom of sensitive skin. Skin that turns 
red from friction or the slightest touch or scrape is called dermatographic 
(literally, “skin-writing”). Persons with dermatographic skin experience hive-
like swelling from slight scratches from an activity as simple as carrying a 
cardboard box if the edges of the box lightly scrape the arms. These same 
people  are  likely  to  experience  swelling  and  redness  from  common  skin 
care  practices  such  as  mechanical  exfoliation  (brushing  or  scrubs),  micro-
dermabrasion,  extraction,  waxing,  hardening  masks,  and  other  physical  or 
mechanical  skin  treatment  techniques.  All  physical  treatments  previously 
listed should be avoided as much as possible on these clients.

  2. Remove  all  traces  of  makeup  and  cleanser.  Do  not  tone  the  skin.  Toning 
before analysis may distort the true appearance of the skin and lead to an 
error in the analysis procedure.

  3. Using your magnifying lamp, look carefully at all areas of the skin. Sensitive 
skin generally has a pink tone and may have red areas or red or pink splotches 
or blotchiness. It may have telangiectasias, or distended red capillaries, also 
known  as  couperose  (Figure  13-3)  Not  all  clients  with  telangiectases  are 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-3  Telangiectasias.




 
 
 
 
Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      235

sensitive, because this condition can also be caused by sun damage, injuries, 
and high blood pressure. However, if the client has both telangiectases and 
red–pink splotchiness, he or she probably has sensitive skin that likely is reac-
tive to some treatments and products.

  4. Press  gently  on  different  areas  of  the  face,  especially  the  forehead  and 
cheeks. If these areas turn lighter in color when pressed, this indicates blood 
close to the surface of the skin—another trait of sensitive skin. Remember 
from  Chapter  3,  The  Immune  System,  that  the  immune  system  is  largely 
within the blood and uses the blood as a vehicle to react to invaders. Hence, 
the sensitive skin may be more likely to have immune responses and reac-
tions due to the close proximity of the blood to the skin surface.

  5. Make careful notes of your observations. Write down points of your discus-
sion with the client, along with any pertinent information obtained from the 
client’s health history form.

ALLERGIES, IRRITANTS, AND CONTACT 
DERMATITIS

Dermatitis is a term dermatologists use to describe general skin inﬂammation. 
There are many types of dermatitis. Contact dermatitis is a skin inﬂammation 
resulting from physical contact with a particular substance (Figure 13-4). Allergic 
contact  dermatitis  (ACD)  is  an  inﬂammation  resulting  from  an  allergy  to  a 
particular chemical or substance. Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is inﬂam-
mation due to a substance that is irritating the skin. There are many differences 
between  allergies  and  irritants.  An  allergy  is,  clinically,  the  body’s  immune 

Dermatitis means “inﬂammation 
of the skin.”

Contact dermatitis is an in-
ﬂamed condition caused by an 
allergic reaction to, or by irritation 
of, something or some substance 
that touches the skin or comes in 
contact with the skin’s surface.

Allergic contact dermatitis 
(ACD) is inﬂammation resulting 
from an allergy to a particular 
substance.

Irritant contact dermatitis 
(ICD) is inﬂammation resulting 
from a substance that is irritating 
the skin.

Allergy is the body’s immune 
system’s rejection of a particular 
substance.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-4  Severe contact dermatitis as a reaction to cosmetics.




 
 
 
 
236         CHAPTER 13

Allergen is a substance that 
provokes an allergic reaction.

Irritant is a substance that can 
inﬂame the skin.

Overprocessed describes irrita-
tion resulting from overusing a 
product or using too many 
products that exfoliate.

system’s rejection of a particular agent or substance. The immune system has 
identiﬁed that substance (or cosmetic ingredient) as a foreign invader. It reacts 
by sending out T cells to ﬁght off the allergen, the offending substance. The 
immune response is what causes the redness and inﬂammation associated with 
an allergic reaction on the skin. This is a true allergy.

As an example, many people are allergic to peanuts. If you had a room full 
of 1,000 people and gave all of them peanuts to eat, a few would have an aller-
gic reaction. Allergies affect only a small number of individuals.

If you took the same room full of people and gave each person three micro-
dermabrasion  treatments  followed  by  ﬁve  glycolic  peels  in  one  session,  all 
would have inﬂamed skin! This is an irritant reaction. An irritant reaction can 
happen to anyone, whereas an allergic reaction affects only certain individuals.

IRRITANT REACTIONS

Irritant reactions are the most frequently seen reactions in the practice of esthet-
ics. Irritant reactions are usually caused by over-exfoliating the skin and damag-
ing the barrier function of the skin. They are frequently caused by overusing a 
product or using too many products that exfoliate. Irritant reactions are char-
acterized  by  red,  ﬂaking,  and  uncomfortable  skin.  The  skin  often  stings  after 
almost any product is applied. This is caused by irritants easily penetrating the 
damaged barrier function and stimulating nerve endings that cause the feeling 
of stinging and burning. The redness is caused by the immune response. Estheti-
cians often refer to this as overprocessed skin. 

Any client can have irritant reactions, and they can be frequency or dose 
related. In other words, treatments that are used too frequently and in too high 
a concentration can be culprits. A 10 percent alpha hydroxy acid product may 
be  tolerated,  but  a  15  percent  product  may  over-exfoliate.  A  client  may  be 
able to tolerate application of benzoyl peroxide gel once a day, but not twice 
a day. Irritant reactions are also caused by damaging the barrier function from 
overwashing, which strips the skin of oils to the point of damaging the barrier 
lipids. Detergents, heavy foaming washes, extreme high- or low-pH products, 
and clients washing their face too frequently are all examples of treatment that 
can strip the barrier lipids.

Mechanical  irritations  are  caused  by  substances  rubbing  against  the  skin. 
They, too, can cause skin reactions such as urticaria. Clothing, bras, belts that 
are too tight, helmets, chinstraps, poorly ﬁtting eyeglasses, and even skin contact 
from playing the violin can cause skin reactions and dermatitis.

Mechanical exfoliants, including scrubs, brushes, microdermabrasion, roll-off 
(gommage) products, should all be avoided or used sparingly on sensitive skin. To 
avoid further skin damage, never use these products on obviously inﬂamed skin.
Drying chemicals such as isopropyl or SD alcohols, drying clay masks (par-
ticularly if left on too long or used too often), and peeling/exfoliation agents 
such as alpha hydroxy acids (glycolic, lactic, etc.), benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, res-
orcinol, and salicylic acids all can cause an irritant reaction if overused, applied 
too heavily, or used in too high a concentration. Hereditarily sensitive skin is 
especially vulnerable to this type of irritant reaction.

Stimulating  treatments  that  increase  circulation  can  also  cause  or  worsen 
irritant reactions. Overuse of hot steam, aggressive and stimulating massage, too 
much extraction, and some essential oils and aromatherapy treatments can all 
set off irritant reactions, especially in known sensitive skin.

The main goal in treating irritant reactions is to remove the source of the 
irritation. Once the source of irritation is stopped, the barrier begins repairing 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      237

itself. Although the redness and inﬂammation may appear to decrease in only 
a day or two, it may take 10 days for the barrier function to restore itself fully.

Clients who are overprocessed tend to try too many products at once and 
may be a little obsessive about dealing with aging and having perfect skin. Clients 
may need education about the overuse of certain products or attempting to exfo-
liate too often. Using products that help repair barrier function may be helpful in 
resolving the reaction. A thorough consultation and education session with the 
client may help her understand the stripping of the barrier function and subse-
quent irritation. Set a very speciﬁc program for the client, using simple, fragrance-
free,  nonstripping  products  that  have  been  tested  for  irritancy  potential.  Make 
sure she understands that she must not use any products not in the program.

ALLERGIC REACTIONS

When a person develops a routine allergic response to a substance, the person 
has become sensitized to that substance. The substance or chemical is known 
as a sensitizer. The immune system has identiﬁed this particular substance as 
a  foreign  invader.  Sensitization  to  a  particular  product  may  take  place  after 
many exposures or uses of that product or ingredient. This condition can take 
place  even  after  years  of  using  a  product!  Late-onset  allergies  are  allergies 
developed to a product after years of use.

Signs of an allergic reaction usually involve edema (swelling) and erythema 
(redness)  and  may  involve  neurological  symptoms  (pain,  stinging,  burning, 
itching). Other symptoms include the following:

•  Rash—a  splotchy,  red,  usually  ﬂat  area,  sometimes  associated  with  itching. 

The area is seldom raised.

•  Wheal (also called a welt)—a raised lesion associated with allergy.
•  Hives (also known as urticaria)—a group of wheals with surrounding erythema. 
They often itch and sting. Hives are caused by the release of a hormone-like 
chemical called histamine.

Histamine causes dilation of blood vessels to the area. Antihistamines are 
drugs that combat the formation of histamines. Often associated with nasal aller-
gies to decrease swelling of the nasal tissues, antihistamines are also used to treat 
skin allergies. In severe allergic reactions, dermatologists may inject antihistamines.

Sensitized is having developed 
an allergic reaction to a substance.

Sensitizer is the substance or 
product a person has developed 
an allergic reaction to.

Sensitization refers to the 
process of becoming allergic to 
a substance; it also refers to the 
establishment of antibodies that 
will always react to exposure to 
that substance.

Late-onset allergies are the 
development of allergies to 
cosmetics after years of use.

Histamine is a hormone-like 
chemical released during allergic 
reactions.

Antihistamines are drugs pro-
duced to combat the formation 
of histamines.

Distinguishing between Allergic 
and Irritant Reactions

Both allergic and irritant reactions can cause erythema and edema as well as 
dryness  and  ﬂaking.  These  reactions  sometimes  are  indistinguishable  from 
symptoms alone. Here are some factors that may help pinpoint if the reaction is 
allergic or caused by irritants:

•  What caused the reaction? Allergic reactions are a rejection of a substance 
by the body’s immune system. Irritant reactions are caused by overapplication 
or overuse of a product, or from choosing a product that is too strong, too 
exfoliating, or too stripping for the skin type.

•  What  was  the  reaction  time?  In  allergic  reactions,  the  symptoms  often 
appear  in  a  delayed  period  of  time.  In  irritant  reactions,  symptoms  usually 
appear quickly.

•  Who has the reaction? In allergic reactions, only certain people are affected. 

In irritant reactions, anyone can have the reactions.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.238         CHAPTER 13

Hypoallergenic cosmetics are 
generally those manufactured 
without the use of certain ingredi-
ents that are known to frequently 
cause allergic reactions.

•  How severe is the reaction? Generally, allergic reactions tend to produce 
more severe symptoms and may affect parts of the body not associated with 
the topical application of the offending substance. Irritant reactions generally 
are limited only to the area of application.

•  How much product was used? Allergic reactions can occur from exposure 
to the smallest amount of allergen. In an irritant reaction, the severity is often 
connected to the amount of substance applied, and often to the frequency of 
application.

•  Have repeat reactions occurred? If a client is allergic to a product, he or 
she will always be allergic. A client who has an irritant reaction to a product 
may be able to use the product again if the dosage, strength, or frequency of 
application is decreased.

COMMON ALLERGENS

Clients  who  have  allergies  are  frequently  allergic  to  similar  ingredients.  It  is 
important  to  know  these  ingredients  and  avoid  them  when  treating  sensitive 
skin with allergy histories and tendencies.

Hypoallergenic cosmetics are skin care or cosmetic products from which 
many well-known allergens have been removed. These ingredients have a history 
of causing allergic reactions in many people. Hypoallergenic and nonallergenic 
have  different  meanings.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  nonallergenic  cosmetic! 
More and more companies now claim that their products are designed for sensi-
tive skin. Unfortunately, no one really governs this claim. Skin care and cosmetic 
products intended for sensitive skin should be tested by an independent testing 
laboratory for potential irritancy and allergies. Most companies that have outside 
testing performed are proud of this fact and use their test results to promote their 
products. When you are choosing products for sensitive skin, look for products 
that have been independently tested for allergy and irritancy potential. 

Fragrance Allergies

Many different fragrances, derived from various sources, are used in skin care 
and  cosmetic  products.  Some  are  natural  and  have  been  derived  from  plants 
(e.g., essential oils). Turpenes extracted from trees are another type of natural 
fragrance. Some musks are derived from animal by-products, and synthetic fra-
grances are developed.

The beauty and esthetics industries frequently use fragrances in many prod-
ucts  for  their  psychological  effects;  they  also  use  them  during  aromatherapy 
treatments. These agents certainly can be pleasant for the client whose skin is 
not allergy prone or sensitive.

Fragrances, however, are the number one cause of cosmetic allergies. It does 
not matter if the fragrance is natural or synthetic. Frequent fragrance allergens 
include eugenol, hydroxycitronellal, cinnamic alcohol, geraniol, and ylang-ylang. 
A basic rule in treating sensitive skin is to use as few ingredients and as few 
products as possible. Fragrances, including essential oils, can contain as many as 
600 individual chemicals. Combining these chemicals with vehicles and delivery 
systems can increase the potential for skin penetration and, therefore, increase 
the potential for skin reaction.

There  are  approximately  400  essential  oils,  which  are  also  fragrances  or 
groups of fragrances. Many essential oils have had very little scientiﬁc testing 
and may present a major problem for sensitive skin.

Fragranced products should be avoided when treating any reactive, sensi-
tive, or allergy-prone skin. Estheticians have access to fragrance-free products. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      239

Some products are labeled “no artiﬁcial fragrance,” or “perfume-free.” This is not 
the same as fragrance-free. Fragrance-free means that no ingredient was added 
to the product for the purpose of adding a fragrance.

Here  is  the  good  news:  Companies  that  produce  fragrance  ingredients 
are now conducting research to develop fragrance ingredients that reduce the 
chances of allergic reactions. The companies accomplish this by removing cer-
tain biochemical components from the extracts (e.g., proteins) that are known 
to cause allergic reactions.

Natural Products

The current trend is toward using natural and organic components in skin care 
products.  Claims  of “all-natural,” “organic,”  and “botanicals”  attract  consumers 
who evidently believe that these products are safer or work better because the 
ingredients come from nature.

While many very safe and beneﬁcial ingredients are used in both cosmetics 
and drugs derived from botanical sources, it is important to note that natural 
does  not  mean “safer  or  more  effective,”  nor  does  it  mean  that  the  products 
contain no chemicals. In fact, most plant extracts may contain hundreds of dif-
ferent chemicals that occur in nature. One important biochemical contained in 
plant  extracts  is  protein.  Proteins  are  biochemicals  that  are  a  major  cause  of 
allergic reactions.

Here is another interesting fact: So-called natural products that contain a lot 
of botanical ingredients actually often require the addition of more preservatives 
to  prevent  the  breakdown  of  the  plant  ingredients  and  inhibit  the  growth  of 
fungi and other unwanted organisms in the plant extracts. Many people think of 
natural ingredients as being less irritating, but they actually can be more irritat-
ing due to the presence of so many chemicals in each extract and the need to 
use larger quantities of preservatives in the product.

Many extracts and essential oils are stimulating to the immune and circula-
tory systems, and this can cause redness and inﬂame sensitive skin. It is best to 
avoid these ingredients and treatments when dealing with sensitive or redness-
prone skin.

Color Agents

Color agents are used in skin care products strictly for marketing appeal and 
generally have nothing to do with product function. Clients may be sensitive to 
various  color  agents.  Because  color  agents  serve  no  purpose  beyond  making 
the  product  visually  attractive,  they  can  easily  be  omitted  from  formulations 
designed for sensitive skin.

Color agents used in makeup products are a different story. They are obvi-
ously used for their visual appeal on the skin. However, many clients with very 
sensitive skin have difﬁculty ﬁnding makeup products that do not cause problems. 
Color agent allergies are often associated with lipstick and eye-shadow allergies. 
Swollen, peeling lips characterize lipstick allergy after using a particular lipstick. 
Eye-shadow allergy shows up as red, ﬂaking upper lids and sometimes lower lids. 
Although it is possible to be allergic to any color agent, many people are allergic 
to the Drug and Cosmetic (D&C) yellow colors and the D&C red colors.

Preservatives

Preservatives  are  necessary  ingredients  in  almost  every  skin  care  or  cosmetic 
product and in many foods and drugs. The function of a preservative is to keep 
harmful bacteria from contaminating these products.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.240         CHAPTER 13

Formalin donors are preserva-
tives or chemicals that release 
small amounts of formaldehyde.

Preservatives must be used in almost all cosmetic and skin care products; 
unfortunately, they frequently produce allergies. There is no strict rule to deter-
mine allergies and sensitivities to preservative ingredients.

The most frequently used preservative complex in the cosmetic industry is 
paraben.  Methylparaben,  propylparaben,  butylparaben,  and  ethylparaben  are 
used in literally thousands of cosmetic formulations. It has been estimated that 
1 percent of the U.S. population is allergic to these preservatives.

Imidazolidinyl urea is the next most commonly used preservative. It is often 
used with methylparaben and propylparaben because these three agents work 
well together against a large number of microorganisms.

Many  preservatives  work  by  emitting  minute  quantities  of  formaldehyde. 
Unfortunately,  formaldehyde  is  a  well-known  skin  irritant.  Preservative  ingre-
dients  that  emit  formaldehyde  are  known  as  formalin  donors.  Commonly 
used formalin donors include imidazolidinyl urea, diazolidinyl urea, 2-bromo-2-
nitropropane-1, 3-diol, DMDM hydantoin, and quaternium compounds. These 
important ingredients do not cause problems for most people, but they may be 
problem  ingredients  for  people  with  sensitive  or  allergy-prone  skin  and  skin 
with impaired barrier function.

The  parabens  make  up,  again,  the  most  common  preservative  system  and 
are not formalin donors. Phenoxyethanol is another non-formaldehyde-releasing 
preservative often used with the parabens. Methylisothiazolinone is another pre-
servative  that  does  not  release  formaldehyde.  Methylisothiazolinone  is  often 
coupled  with  its  chemical  cousin,  methylchloroisothiazolinine,  and  both  are 
primarily  used  in  rinse-off  cleansers  and  products  because  they  have  caused 
some  allergies  in  leave-on  products  such  as  lotions  and  creams  when  these 
preservatives are used together.

Although these ingredients are not formalin donors and generally are con-
sidered the safest preservatives for allergy-prone skin, they still may cause prob-
lems in some individuals.

If you are treating clients who have known preservative allergies, in addition 
to checking labels for documented allergens, you should also patch-test each 
product separately on the client before using it in larger areas. In addition, it is 
best to have a variety of products with different preservative systems on hand. 
For more information on preservatives, see Chapter 9, Cosmetic Chemistry and 
Functional Ingredients.

A  controversial  issue  has  recently  arisen  about  the  paraben  preservatives. 
Some consumers are concerned about one published study that detected para-
bens in breast tumors. Although the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the 
Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) have both stated that parabens are believed to 
be safe ingredients, many companies are now reformulating their products with 
paraben-free preservatives because of this consumer concern. 

The parabens have long been considered one of the safest ingredients in 
terms  of  allergy  and  reactivity.  Because  of  the  reformulations  to  avoid  para-
bens, new preservatives and preservative groups are being used and may affect 
the number of reactions associated with preservatives. Companies will have to 
arrange  for  new  testing  of  their  products.  Again,  it  is  always  best  to  look  for 
irritancy- and allergy-tested products when choosing products for sensitive skin.

Sunscreen Allergies and Sensitivity

Sunscreen ingredients are another potential source of skin allergy. Para-amino 
benzoic acid, better known as PABA, is no longer commonly used in sunscreens 
because  of  its  allergen  potential.  PABA  is  an  excellent  ultraviolet  B  (UVB) 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      241

Physical sunscreens work by 
reﬂecting rather than absorbing 
UV rays. Examples are zinc oxide 
and titanium dioxide.

sunscreen agent, but unfortunately it caused many allergic reactions. Padimate-
O and Padimate-A are chemical cousins of PABA. Oxybenzone (also known as 
benzophenone-3) is another good sunscreen ingredient, though it occasionally 
causes allergic reactions.

Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide are the two sunscreen ingredients least likely 
to cause allergies. Zinc oxide is the white cream that surfers use on their noses 
to prevent sunburn. Both these agents are physical sunscreens that work by 
reﬂecting the sun rather than absorbing it. In the past few years, new technology 
has been developed to micronize these normally white, opaque ingredients so 
that they can be easily mixed into a product without looking white and powdery 
on the skin. The downside to these ingredients is that, when used alone, they 
must  be  placed  in  rather  thick  formulations  to  suspend  the  sunscreen  agents 
evenly throughout the product. To make a more user-friendly product that is not 
thick and uncomfortable to wear, companies often mix zinc oxide or titanium 
dioxide with a different sunscreen such as octinoxate (also known as methoxy-
cinnimate)  or  octisalate  (also  known  as  octyl  salicylate).  Mixing  some  of  the 
physical sunscreen with an absorbing sunscreen such as octinoxate results in 
an easy-to-use product that is lighter in weight and does not look white on the 
skin. In addition, a mix of these ingredients provides excellent broad-spectrum 
protection against UVA and UVB sunrays. Still, when working with clients who 
have sensitive skin, you will occasionally ﬁnd someone allergic to one of the 
absorbing screens. In these cases, the only choice is to use a product containing 
zinc oxide and/or titanium dioxide physical screens only.

Salicylate Allergies

Some people are allergic to the salicylates, a group of chemicals related to sali-
cylic acid. Salicylic acid in its oral form is aspirin. Be careful to screen products 
carefully if your client tells you she has an aspirin allergy or salicylate allergy.

Salicylic acid is a beta hydroxy acid frequently used for treating acne and oily 
skin. It is also used in exfoliating products and some chemical peels. Although it 
is an excellent ingredient for these skin conditions, salicylic acid should never be 
used on clients with aspirin or documented salicylate allergies. Salicylic acid occurs 
naturally in many foods, including many fruits and vegetables. Products containing 
fruit extracts should generally be avoided in clients with salicylate allergies. Some 
botanical ingredients such as wintergreen, peppermint, spearmint and willow bark 
extracts contain salicylates. The preservatives BHA and BHT both contain salicy-
lates,  as  do  many  red  and  yellow  color  agents  used  in  skin  care  to  color  the 
product. Octisalate (octyl salicylate) and phenyl salicylate are excellent sunscreen 
ingredients, but they should be avoided in clients with salicylate allergies.

Other Sunscreen Irritations

Many people complain that sunscreen burns their eyes. This often occurs when 
the client gets hot and perspires when wearing the sunscreen. Often the client 
has applied too much product or has gotten the product too close to the eyes.

Advise your client to apply the sunscreen 30 minutes before going out into 
the sun. This allows the sunscreen to be absorbed into the skin better and pre-
vents it from running into the eyes. Products containing zinc oxide or titanium 
dioxide are less likely to fume and irritate the eyes. Using a cream-based sun-
screen rather than a gel seems to work better for many clients.

Another helpful tip for clients is not to apply sunscreen on hot skin. Many 
clients wait until they are already outside to apply sunscreen. Any irritating factor 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.242         CHAPTER 13

becomes more pronounced when applied on skin that is at an elevated tempera-
ture. Again, advise the client to apply the sunscreen before going outside.

Gel screens are lighter-weight products and are generally more comfortable for 
oily and acne-prone skin. They are, however, not water resistant. They often have 
a base that is SD alcohol, which may irritate some sensitive skin when applied.

Nail Products

Many nail products contain formaldehyde or a formaldehyde derivative. Many 
people are allergic to nail products. Nail polish, hardeners, conditioners, top and 
base coats, and other nail chemicals often contain these allergens.

Eyelid  allergic  reactions  and  irritations  are  often  caused  by  nail  products. 
These  reactions  occur  when  people  rub  or  touch  thin,  delicate  eyelids  with 
painted or treated nails.

Acne Product Allergies and Irritations

Because many acne products are also exfoliants or peeling agents, they tend to 
irritate the skin. Some irritation caused by acne products is often necessary for 
the products to work. Slight redness, minor inﬂammation, and ﬂaking or peeling 
skin is a fairly normal occurrence, especially when ﬁrst using peeling agents to 
treat acne and oily skin. Although allergies to acne products are certainly pos-
sible, most of these are irritant reactions and can be resolved by applying the 
product less often, applying a smaller amount of product, or using a decreased 
strength of the product. Clients frequently misinterpret irritant reaction as aller-
gies. However, severe peeling, redness, or swelling is not normal and may indi-
cate an allergic reaction or more severe irritant reaction.

Treating acne on sensitive skin can be tricky. You may ﬁnd that your client 
cannot tolerate nightly use of an acne medication or exfoliating agent. For these 
clients,  you  can  recommend  that  they  apply  the  product  lightly  every  other 
night.  On  the  alternate  night,  suggest  that  they  use  a  noncomedogenic,  fra-
grance-free, hydrating ﬂuid. Alternating these two products seems to work well 
for many clients with sensitive-oily or sensitive-acne skin. The theory is that you 
are peeling one night and hydrating the next. Therefore, you are reducing the 
amount of irritation and soothing the skin on alternate nights.

Another  helpful  solution  for  clients  sensitive  to  acne  peeling  agents  is  to 
have the client use them daily, only for short periods, and slowly build up to a 
longer exposure. For example, a client with sensitive skin may use benzoyl per-
oxide for only 10 to 15 minutes the ﬁrst night of treatment. If this short treatment 
is tolerated, on the next night the client can leave the product on for 30 minutes, 
and  so  on.  This  routine  slowly  builds  the  client’s  tolerance  for  the  treatment. 
Your client will learn or establish her own tolerance level.

Benzoyl  peroxide,  an  excellent  acne  treatment,  is  available  in  several 
strengths.  The  standard  strengths  are  2½  ,  5,  and  10  percent.  Sensitive  clients 
often tolerate 2½   percent much better than the higher strengths.

Some clients are truly allergic to benzoyl peroxide. These clients experience 
much more severe redness and possibly edema. They should completely discon-
tinue the use of benzoyl peroxide.

Clients who are allergic to benzoyl peroxide have several alternatives. They can 

use alpha hydroxy acids, sulfur, sulfur combined with resorcinol, or salicylic acid.

Salicylic acid is generally a milder treatment for acne than benzoyl peroxide 
is,  but  clients  with  salicylate  allergies  cannot  use  it.  Salicylic  acid  has  already 
been discussed as a possible allergen. Salicylic acid, however, is a good alterna-
tive for sensitive acne clients who are not allergic to salicylates.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      243

Sulfur, or sulfur combined with resorcinol, is a standard alternative to ben-
zoyl  peroxide  and  is  one  of  the  oldest  acne  treatments.  Unfortunately,  again, 
some clients are allergic to sulfur, resorcinol, or both. Some clients will tell you 
they are allergic to sulfur when they are actually allergic to sulfa, an oral anti-
biotic. It is important to clarify with the client what type of reaction she experi-
enced. Most people allergic to oral sulfa are not allergic to topical sulfur. Another 
good hint is to ask the client if she is allergic to eggs, which are very high in 
sulfur content. If the client is not allergic to eggs, he or she is very unlikely to 
have a topical sulfur allergy.

Alpha hydroxy acids, in particular glycolic acid, are not approved as over-
the-counter (OTC) acne ingredients. However, alpha hydroxy acids are excel-
lent and generally gentle exfoliants that help remove dead-cell buildup that can 
cause comedones; therefore, they are very helpful ingredients for clogged and 
acne-prone skin. Sometimes they are mixed with salicylic acid. Alpha hydroxy 
acids seem to cause very few allergies, but they can cause stinging and if over-
used can trigger irritant reactions and result in redness and ﬂaking. Also, some 
alpha hydroxy products have very low, acidic pHs that can cause barrier func-
tion problems. Look for home-care products with a pH of at least 3.5. They are 
safer and less irritating than products with a lower pH.

In general, when treating oily or acne-prone sensitive skin, the key rule is to 
be slow and less aggressive with treatments and products. Avoid harsh washes, 
astringents, and scrubs, and stick to one gentle product for exfoliation. Routine 
use of a gentle, noncomedogenic, fragrance-free hydrator helps balance mois-
ture that can be lost from exfoliating products.

Common Allergens

The following list of common cosmetic allergens may help you pinpoint pos-
sible allergic or irritant ingredients when helping your client with sensitive or 
allergy-prone skin. Remember, no ingredient is nonallergenic! All of these ingre-
dients have important functions in cosmetics, and those listed here are not bad 
ingredients. Many can be used successfully on sensitive skin. These ingredients, 
listed by type, are simply some of the more common allergens and irritants that 
may affect sensitive skin.

Fragrances

Clove oil
Eucalyptus
Jasmine
Sandalwood oil
Cinnamics
Essential oils
Geraniol
Musk ambrette
Other plant oils

Preservatives

Methyl-, propyl-, ethyl-, or butylparaben
Imidazolidinyl urea



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.244         CHAPTER 13

Diazolidinyl urea
Quaternium-15
Benzalkonium chloride
Triclosan
Methylchloroisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone
2-Bromo-2-nitropropane-1, 3-diol
DMDM hydantoin
Phenoxyethanol

Sunscreens

PABA
Padimate-O
Padimate-A
Octinoxate (methoxycinnimate)
Octisalate (octyl salicylate)
Oxybenzone (benzophenone)
Methyl salicylate
Avobenzone

Other Ingredients

Hydroquinone
Propylene glycol
Salicylic acid
Alpha hydroxy acids (glycolic, lactic, malic, tartaric)
Benzoyl peroxide
Sulfur
Resorcinol
Tocopherol
Triethanolamine
Formaldehyde
Hydrolyzed animal protein
Lanolin

NONCOSMETIC ALLERGIES

Frequently, you will have clients who are allergic to products other than cos-
metics, and these allergies result in skin symptoms. Many clients are allergic to 
nickel,  which  is  often  used  in  powder  laundry  detergents  and  jewelry.  Dryer 
sheets  or  fabric  softeners  cause  problems  for  some  individuals.  Clients  with 
nasal allergies sometimes have skin reactions related to their nasal allergies. Cli-
ents with obvious and chronic allergies should be referred to an allergist. Hard 
water is water that contains a lot of minerals and lime. Hard water can contrib-
ute to dry and irritated skin, especially on the body and especially in the winter 
months. If your client lives in an area with hard water, suggest that she consider 
installing  a  water-softening  system  that  removes  minerals  from  the  water. 

Hard water is water that contains 
a lot of minerals and lime.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      245

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-5  Eyelid contact dermatitis from cosmetics.

This  may  be  particularly  advisable  for  clients  who  suffer  from  atopic  eczema 
(see Chapter 7, Recognize and Refer Medical Conditions).

EYELID DERMATITIS

A frequent problem seen by the esthetician is eyelid dermatitis (Figure 13-5). 
The eyelid skin is the thinnest skin on the human body, and it is the most sensi-
tive to allergies and irritants. Red, ﬂaky, swollen upper and/or lower eyelids are 
signs of eyelid dermatitis. If you see a client with eyelid dermatitis, you need to 
check the following:

  1. Has the client started any new eye treatment, eye shadow, liner, mascara, 

false eyelashes, or any other new eye products?

  2. Is the client wearing nail polish? If so, is it a new color or brand?
  3. Has the client had a nail service recently?
  4. If the client answered yes to question 3, did the nail technician use any new 

treatment?

  5. Does the client have a new hand cream?
  6. Does the client have a history of nasal allergies?
  7. Has the client had an eyebrow waxing recently?
  8. Is the client taking any new prescription drugs?
  9. Does the client wear contact lenses and therefore use contact lens solution?
 10. Does the client use eye drops or have any new eye drops?

All or any of these factors can cause eyelid irritation and dermatitis (Figure 13-6). 
If the reaction is severe or chronic, the client should be referred to a dermatologist, 
ophthalmologist, or allergist.

Frosted eye shadow, and those containing  mica,  can  be  sources  of  irrita-
tion on the lid. Besides products used directly on the affected eye skin, nail and 
hand products cause many of these eye skin irritations. Clients touch their eyes, 
or wipe their eyes, and the skin comes in contact with the nail or hand product.

Eyelid dermatitis is a lid 
irritation resulting in swelling 
and redness of the eyelids.

Mica is a coloring agent used in 
makeup to cause a shiny effect.




 
 
 
 
246         CHAPTER 13

Irritancy potential is the ten-
dency of a substance to cause 
skin irritation.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-6 

Irritant eye reaction after using a new eye product.

Suggest to clients that they remove all products from the eyes and hands 
until the inﬂammation clears completely. Then, they can add one product at a 
time, waiting a few days between adding each product. If the irritation reoccurs, 
this procedure often helps identify the offending product.

Clients using systemic steroids for treatment of autoimmune diseases, such 
as lupus, frequently have lid dermatitis. These clients should be referred to their 
doctor for treatment.

Clients  with  a  history  of  eyelid  dermatitis  should  avoid  waxing  the  eye 
area. They also should avoid using frosted eye shadow or excessive use of eye 
shadow, fragranced eye creams, or other products for the eye. Simple products 
with few ingredients are the best ones for these clients.

TREATMENT CONCEPTS 
FOR SENSITIVE SKIN

The following basic concepts are widely accepted for treating sensitive skin:

  1. Be very careful about protecting the barrier function of the skin. Use prod-
ucts that support the barrier function, and avoid any product or procedure 
that might strip or impair it, including strong foaming soaps and cleansers.
  2. Be very careful when using or recommending any type of exfoliant, either 
chemical or mechanical. Keratolytic and exfoliating agents can cause prob-
lems for sensitive skin by thinning the barrier function, especially if used too 
frequently or in too high a concentration.

  3. Avoid known irritating and sensitizing materials, products, and procedures. 
This  includes  fragrances,  certain  preservatives,  many “natural”  ingredients 
(many  of  which  have  little  or  no  irritancy  research  data),  and  stimulating 
products. It also includes products that can injure the barrier function, such 
as strong soaps, surfactants, solvents, and emulsiﬁers. Avoid any ingredient 
to which the client has had a previous allergic or irritant reaction.

  4. Use  products  that  have  been  shown  through  independent  testing  to  have 
low irritancy potential. This means the product has been determined to 
be  unlikely  to  cause  irritation  or  allergy.  It  does  not  mean  the  product  is 
appropriate for every single client. Remember that for every single ingredi-
ent, you can ﬁnd someone, somewhere in the world, who is allergic to it.




 
 
 
 
Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      247

  5. Certain ingredients added to skin care products have been shown to decrease 
sensitivity.  These  include  chamomile  extract,  feverfew,  cornﬂower 
extract, licorice extract, bisabolol, stearyl glycyrrhetinate, dipotassium 
glycyrrhizinate, matricaria extract, and azulene. Also, the inclusion of 
ingredients that protect or enhance the barrier function, such as lipid com-
plexes, are helpful in a sensitive skin product.

IRRITANCY AND ALLERGY TESTING

Products developed for sensitive skin should be tested by an independent labo-
ratory to determine their irritancy potential (Figure 13-7). There are several types 
of irritancy testing:

  1. Primary irritation testing, also known as a 48-hour patch test, involves the 
simple procedure of applying a small amount of the product (or ingredient) 
to be tested to the back skin of test participants. The area is then occluded 
with a bandage (hence the term patch testing) and checked for any irrita-
tion  48  hours  later.  This  is  a  very  simple,  inexpensive  test  that  should  be 
administered and interpreted by a board-certiﬁed dermatologist. This test, to 

Chamomile extract is a soothing 
agent.

Feverfew is a soothing agent.

Cornﬂower extract is a soothing 
agent.

Licorice extract is a soothing agent.

Bisabolol is an agent that is 
added to cosmetics designed for 
sensitive skin.

Stearyl glycyrrhetinate is a 
soothing agent derived from lico-
rice extract.

Dipotassium glycyrrhizinate 
is a soothing agent derived from 
licorice extract.

Matricaria extract is a soothing 
agent.

Azulene is a hydrocarbon derived 
from the chamomile ﬂower.

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

A

B

FIGURE 13-7  A, Dermatologist-administered patch tests for various contact allergies. B, Positive patch test indicating 
allergy to nickel.




 
 
 
 
248         CHAPTER 13

be truly reﬂective of irritation potential, should be run on at least 50 people. 
The more people tested, the more reliable the results of the test.

  2. A  repeated  insult  patch  test  (RIPT)  is  similar  to  the  primary  irritation  test 
but considered by physicians and scientists to be much more reliable and 
indicative of potential sensitivities or allergy potential. The same technique 
for primary irritation testing is followed but repeated again and again on the 
same participants. Breaks of a few days are taken between test applications, 
allowing the body’s immune system time to develop antibodies to the mate-
rial being tested. Repeat testing is likely to reveal any delayed allergy. Again, 
to be reliable and be considered scientiﬁcally sound, this test should be run 
on 50 to 200 test participants.

  3. Tape strip irritation testing is a test in which the skin is purposely irritated by 
repeatedly pulling tape off the area to be tested. Once the skin is irritated, 
the  test  product  is  applied  and  observations  are  made.  Irritating  products 
will increase the irritation in the stripped area.

  4. Sensitive skin actual-use testing involves using participants who are known 
to have sensitive skin. These individuals actually use the product for several 
weeks, and the results are observed at the end of the time allotted. This is a 
good method of testing but involves many variables. This test should be run 
in addition to one of the more controlled procedures, such as the RIPT.

TREATMENT CONTRAINDICATIONS 
FOR TREATING SENSITIVE SKIN

In the treatment room, it is advisable to avoid the following procedures when 
treating clients with sensitive or redness-prone skin:

  1. Avoid heat exposure, including close or prolonged exposure to steam. Cool 
ultrasonic steamers are now available, and these may be helpful in providing 
the hydration of steam without the heat.

  2. Avoid  parafﬁn,  electric  heat  masks,  or  exothermic  mineral-type  heating 

masks. Extremely cold compresses should also be avoided.

  3. Use nonfragranced products. Fragrances are the number one cause of cos-

metic skin allergies and may also be irritants.

  4. Microdermabrasion,  brushing  machines,  enzyme  treatments,  gommages 
(roll-off treatment products), and granular scrubs may be too aggressive.

  5. Waxing should be avoided on sensitive skin.
  6. Avoid the use of extremely low-pH exfoliation chemicals, such as low-pH 
alpha hydroxy (AHA or glycolic) acid or enzymes. AHA exfoliants with a pH 
of 3.5 or greater are usually acceptable as long has the skin is not already 
inﬂamed. When in doubt, don’t use it! Avoid using exfoliation too often on 
sensitive skin.

  7. Avoid  prolonged  or  vigorous  massage,  such  as  petrissage  or  any  deep  or 
rapid  manipulation,  which  may  be  too  stimulating  and  increase  redness. 
Efﬂeurage, shiatsu, gentle tapotement, and manual lymph drainage (if you 
are trained for it) are usually acceptable for use on sensitive skin.

  8. Avoid  overdrying  masks  or  leaving  clay  masks  on  too  long.  Drying  clay 

masks are often inappropriate for sensitive skin.

  9. Many  essential  oils  or  aromatherapy  products  may  be  too  stimulating  for 

sensitive skin.

 10. Extraction must be gentle and limited to a brief period to avoid redness. As 
you become better acquainted with an individual client’s skin, this treatment 
can be adapted.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      249

 11. Avoid heavily mentholated or alcohol-based treatment.
 12. Avoid  using  products  containing  isopropyl  or  SD  alcohol  on  sensitive 

skin.

SUGGESTED TREATMENT 
FOR SENSITIVE SKIN

  1. Dampen  the  skin  using  cool  (not  cold),  wet  cotton  compresses.  Apply  a 
gentle, nonfragranced, nonfoaming cleanser designed for sensitive skin with 
your gloved hands. Gently massage the cleanser and remove the cleanser 
using cool, wet cotton pads. Sponges and other cleansing implements are 
often too rough textured for sensitive skin.

  2. Apply  a  lightweight,  nonfragranced  hydrating  ﬂuid  designed  for  sensitive 
skin to the face. Carefully focus steam on the skin. If warm steam is used, 
it should be used at a distance of 18 to 20 inches from the face and should 
be used for only a few minutes. Cool steam, if available, is preferable. Cool 
steamers use ultrasonic vibration to create a mist that is not hot. They help 
hydrate the skin without exposing the sensitive skin to heat. Cool steam can 
be used for a longer time.

  3. Brushing and suction should be avoided on sensitive skin.
  4. Most sensitive skin should not be exfoliated during treatment. If you do use 
a bead-type exfoliant, it should be nonfragranced, very gentle, and easily 
removed from the skin. Avoid using enzymes and peels of any type.

  5. Gentle extraction may be performed using the cotton swab technique dis-
cussed in Chapter 17, Extraction. Avoid using comedone extractors on sen-
sitive skin. If skin begins to welt, redden severely, or swell, stop extraction 
immediately. Extraction should be limited to 3 to 4 minutes only, particularly 
during the ﬁrst visit.

  6. Spray the skin with a mild, nonfragranced, nonalcoholic toner designed for 

sensitive skin.

  7. If the skin is still very red after extraction, apply cool, wet compresses for 
about ﬁve minutes. Do not apply any product—just cool-water compresses. 
This step helps calm the skin.

  8. After  the  skin  has  cooled  down,  apply  a  nonfragranced  hydrating  ﬂuid 
designed for sensitive skin. Using very gentle movements such as efﬂeurage, 
massage the face for a short time, using the ﬂuid as the treatment product 
for massage. If redness increases, discontinue the massage immediately and 
remove the product with cool, wet cotton compresses.

  9. Assuming the skin is not inﬂamed, apply more of the same hydrating ﬂuid. 
Unfold a 4" × 4" piece of gauze and place across the face. Move cool “globes” 
over the gauze to help the hydrating ﬂuid penetrate. These globes contain 
refrigerant, much like the type used in freezer packs. It is important not to 
apply the globes without the gauze, so the globe does not make direct con-
tact with the skin. Remember, any treatment should be cool but not cold. 
High-frequency or ionization treatments at low settings can be used on most 
sensitive skin; however, the cool globes are a better choice, at least during 
the ﬁrst treatment.

 10. Apply  a  nonsetting,  nondrying,  nonfragranced  gel  mask  designed  speciﬁ-
cally for sensitive skin. It should contain soothing agents such as feverfew, 
matricaria, chamomile, or licorice extract. Allow the mask to sit on the face 
for 10 minutes. Check frequently with the client to make sure the treatment 
is not stinging or burning.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.250         CHAPTER 13

 11. Wet the mask with a cool spray, and remove the mask with cool, wet cotton 
pads. Pre-wetting the mask allows less pressure to be used during the physi-
cal removal of the mask.

 12. Apply  a  gentle,  nonfragranced  hydrating  ﬂuid  or  sunscreen  designed  for 

sensitive skin.

 14. It is best to avoid immediate makeup application after a treatment on sensi-

tive skin. Wait at least two hours before applying makeup.

IF A CLIENT HAS A REACTION 
IN THE TREATMENT ROOM

Occasionally,  a  client  experiences  a  reaction  in  the  treatment  room.  Most  of 
these reactions are irritant reactions and are mild. They are not true allergies. A 
client may complain of a particular product stinging or burning. Some products 
such as alpha hydroxy acids are supposed to cause a mild tingling sensation. 
Most of the time, these minor sensations quickly dissipate.

Red, rashy, and swollen skin, however, is not normal. Severe burning and 
stinging  are  not  normal.  If  a  client  experiences  extreme  burning,  redness,  or 
swelling, remove whatever is on the face immediately by using cool cotton pads. 
Apply cool, wet compresses or spray atomized water on the skin to soothe it. 
Many times simply removing the irritant greatly reduces the inﬂammation. It is 
always best to end the treatment if a client has a reaction. Applying further prod-
ucts, even if you are trying to help, may only aggravate the reaction. Wait several 
days until the reaction has completely subsided before trying a different plan. 
As always, severe reactions should be immediately referred to a dermatologist.

HOME-CARE CONCEPTS 
FOR SENSITIVE SKIN

You should spend some time educating your clients about treating their skin at 
home. Emphasize the importance of avoiding activities and procedures that can 
increase redness or the chance of reactions and damage to the barrier function. 
With the client, discuss the following precautions. Many of these concepts are 
similar to those previously mentioned for use in the treatment room.

  1. Avoid  heat,  including  sun  exposure,  sitting  directly  in  front  of  ﬁreplaces, 
and hot water in the shower or when cleansing the skin. Heat may stimulate 
both neurological and immune responses.

  2. Avoid sun exposure, and always wear a sunscreen during daylight hours.
  3. Avoid using scrubs and strong exfoliants.
  4. Avoid using fragranced products.
  5. Stop using any product that feels stimulating or overdrying.
  6. Avoid overcleansing or cleansing the skin too often.
  7. Avoid using alcohol-based products.

Some clients with sensitive skin who also have rosacea may experience more 

redness in the following cases:

•  Drinking alcoholic beverages, especially red wine
•  Eating spicy foods
•  Drinking hot beverages
•  Exercising, especially in the heat or sun
•  Getting into a hot car



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      251

•  Sitting in saunas and steambaths
•  Experiencing extreme temperature changes of any type

AT-HOME SKIN CARE PROGRAMS 
FOR SENSITIVE SKIN

Choosing the right products for sensitive skin can be tricky. Products that can be 
used on most skin types may be too irritating for sensitive skin. You must also 
keep in mind the client’s skin type (oily, dry, etc.) and address other skin condi-
tions the client may have.

Always choose products that are nonfragranced; that are free of formalin-
releasing preservatives; and most important, that have been tested for potential 
skin irritation (Figure 13-8). Check with your supplier to make sure the products 
have been independently tested.

Unfortunately, many products that claim to be appropriate for sensitive skin 
have never been tested for their irritancy potential. Even if the product has been 
tested, remember that there is no such thing as a nonallergenic product.

The  following  is  a  model  home-care  program  for  sensitive  skin.  It  also 

provides information on precautions.

A

B

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 13-8  A–F, Using a home skin care regimen that is speciﬁcally designed and tested for sensitive skin can 
show reduction in the appearance of facial redness and telangiectasias.




 
 
 
 
D

F

252         CHAPTER 13

C

E

FIGURE 13-8 

(continued)

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      253

Cleansers

Cleansers should be very mild and should not foam much. As with all products 
for  sensitive  skin,  cleansers  should  be  nonfragranced.  Cleansers  for  sensitive 
skin  should  be  easy  to  remove  without  applying  much  pressure  to  the  skin. 
Mild surfactants, such as decyl glucoside or disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate, may 
provide slight foaming and are generally acceptable. Nonfragranced cleansing 
milks are appropriate for makeup removal. If the client has oily-sensitive skin, a 
slightly foaming cleanser may be a better choice.

Cleansers should be applied with ﬁngertips and cool (not cold) water. Instruct 
clients to avoid any exposure to hot water. Cleansers should be removed with 
extremely soft cloths or cotton pads.

Toners

Toners should be fragrance-free and alcohol-free. They should contain soothing 
agents and should be free of solvents such as propylene glycol. (Butylene glycol 
is acceptable.) Spray-type toners are convenient and often used for sensitive skin.

Antioxidants

Antioxidants can be very helpful for soothing sensitive skin. They are theorized 
to work by interrupting the cascade of chemical reactions that lead to inﬂamma-
tion. These products are most often in serum form. Green tea, white tea, licho-
chalcone, and grapeseed extract are examples of soothing antioxidants. Advise 
clients to be careful with some serums that have a very low pH. If the product 
burns when applied, its pH is probably too low for use on sensitive skin.

Special  soothing  serums  for  redness-prone  skin  are  now  available.  These 
serums  generally  contain  soothing  and  anti-redness  agents  such  as  sea  whip, 
feverfew, and licorice extracts; specialized peptide ingredients; and the previ-
ously mentioned antioxidants.

Sunscreens

This is a tricky one. Sunscreen ingredients can cause both allergic and irritant 
reactions. Look for a product that contains zinc oxide or titanium dioxide; these 
physical sunscreen ingredients are much less likely to cause irritation. They are 
sometimes  blended  with  an  absorbing  sunscreen,  such  as  octinoxate,  so  they 
do not appear white and pasty. Look for a lotion or ﬂuid product that contains 
soothing  agents,  non-formalin-releasing  preservatives,  and  has  been  indepen-
dently tested for irritancy potential.

Hydrators and Moisturizers

These products should be formulated carefully, so that they are not only free of 
fragrances and other well-known allergens and irritants but also do not contain 
large amounts of emulsiﬁer that can damage the barrier function. As previously 
discussed, emulsiﬁers are used in skin care products to help keep ingredients 
evenly mixed in the product. They work by polarizing oil throughout the water 
in a lotion or cream. Unfortunately, when used on skin with impaired barrier 
function,  they  can  damage  the  lipids  in  the  barrier  function,  making  the  skin 
even more sensitive and reactive. Newly developed technology allows products 
to be formulated without these irritating emulsiﬁers or with very low levels of 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.254         CHAPTER 13

Acnegenic refers to the tendency 
of a product or ingredient to ir-
ritate the follicle, which can cause 
sudden ﬂares of pimples.

Comedogenic is the tendency 
of a topical substance to cause a 
buildup of dead cells, resulting in 
the development of comedones.

the emulsiﬁers. These products are commonly known as physical emulsions and 
are very helpful when treating sensitive skin. Physically emulsiﬁed products are 
usually in a ﬂuid or lotion form rather than a thicker cream.

CONSULTATION FOR CLIENTS 
WITH SENSITIVE SKIN

Clients who have sensitive, reactive, or allergy-prone skin tend to be cosmeti-
cally “gun-shy.”  Clients  with  sensitive  skin  have  experienced  reactions  before, 
and  they  are  skeptical  and  self-protective  because  they  do  not  want  to  have 
another reaction.

There are two ways to help calm the client’s concerns. First, you must know 
what you are doing with sensitive and allergy-prone skin; and second, you must 
convince the client that you know what you are doing.

It is important to be honest with the client. Discussing past problems with 
sensitivity will give you clues on what has and has not worked. Knowing that 
most clients with sensitive skin should avoid fragrances, formalin-releasing pre-
servatives,  stimulants,  and  other  well-known  irritants  and  allergens,  you  can 
add the information you obtain from the client to choose the most appropriate 
products for her skin.

Sometimes clients have had reactions to common irritants, or their skin has 
become  overprocessed  from  using  too  many  exfoliants.  Sometimes  they  have 
had  an  acnegenic  or  comedogenic  reaction,  resulting  in  an  acne  breakout. 
This is not the same thing as an allergy, although the client knows she reacted! 
It is important to pinpoint the type of reaction the client has had in the past. 
This will help you establish if the reaction was transient and simply related to 
overprocessing, or if the client truly has a reoccurring allergy.

MEDICAL TREATMENT OF ALLERGIES 
AND CONTACT DERMATITIS

Estheticians  are  not  qualiﬁed  to  treat  allergic  reactions.  Clients  who  have 
extremely sensitive skin and seem to react to many products should be referred 
to  a  dermatologist  or  an  allergist  for  allergy  testing.  The  doctor  applies  small 
amounts of products or ingredients on the client’s back and then covers each 
product with a small bandage. About 24 or 48 hours later, the doctor removes 
the bandages and checks each site for any form of inﬂammation. Any area that 
is red or swollen indicates an allergy or irritant for that client.

Standard treatment for cosmetic allergies is to remove the offending ingredi-
ent or product from use by the client. The doctor tells the client which products 
or ingredients seem to cause problems and advises the client not to use those 
products or ingredients.

Clients  having  severe  allergic  reactions  may  need  hydrocortisone  cream, 
which the doctor prescribes. Hydrocortisone helps eliminate symptoms of the 
reaction, but it is not a cure for the problem. The client must avoid using the 
offending  product  or  ingredient.  In  severe  cases,  the  dermatologist  may  pre-
scribe oral steroids or antihistamines.

Salon Patch Testing

A simpler type of patch test for allergens or irritancy potential can be performed 
by  the  esthetician.  If  your  client  has  extremely  sensitive  skin  or  a  history  of 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      255

routine skin inﬂammation, it is a good idea to patch-test new products on the 
client’s back or forearm before trying them on the face. The procedure is simple:

  1. Check the client’s past allergy history. Does the client have any known ingre-
dient, drug, or cosmetic allergies? If she does, you can eliminate the use of 
any products containing those known allergenic ingredients.

  2. Type and analyze the client’s skin as you normally would.
  3. Select the proper home-care program based on your analysis, taking spe-
cial  precautions  to  avoid  fragranced  products  or  any  product  with  a  long 
ingredient list. The simpler the product’s ingredients, the better. Also avoid 
essential oils and other stimulating ingredients.

  4. Apply a small amount of each product on the client’s back or inner forearm. 
Each application should be about the size of a coin. Cover each patch with 
a hypoallergenic bandage strip. Many sensitive clients are also sensitive to 
some bandage adhesives. Assign a number to each product tested, and write 
the number on the bandage. Record each number and the corresponding 
product on the client’s record. For example, the test cleanser is 1, the toner 
is 2, and so forth.

  5. Instruct the client not to wash the area during the test period, which is usu-

ally 24 or 48 hours.

  6. After 24 or 48 hours has elapsed, remove the bandages and check each area 
for irritation, redness, swelling, itching, urticaria, or ﬂaking. If you see any of 
these signs, avoid using that product.

  7. Notice  what  ingredients  are  in  the  offending  products,  and  compare  the 
ingredients with the ingredient list of a product that the client did not react 
to.  What  do  the  two  lists  have  in  common—or  more  important,  what  is 
different about the two lists? For example, if the client reacted to her day 
cream, which contained a certain preservative, but did not react to her night 
cream,  which  contained  a  different  preservative,  you  can  deduce  that  the 
client may be allergic to the preservative in the day cream.

It takes time and experience to be good at isolating allergens. An essential 
knowledge of cosmetic chemistry and ingredients is also important. If you do 
not feel comfortable with these procedures, refer the client to a dermatologist 
for patch-testing.

Unfortunately, sometimes what occurs on the back does not occur on the 
face.  The  facial  skin  tends  to  be  more  sensitive  than  the  body  skin  on  most 
people; so occasionally, a product that did not react on the back will react on 
the face. Again, it is important for both the esthetician and the client to realize 
that allergic reactions are seldom predictable, unless it is known what speciﬁc 
ingredients are the allergens.

EXTERNAL FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE 
SENSITIVITIES

Besides general product allergies and irritants, other factors can inﬂuence reac-
tions  and  possibly  worsen  their  severity.  Climate  is  one  of  these  factors.  Hot, 
humid  weather  or  extremely  cold  weather  can  play  a  part  in  sensitivity.  Hot, 
humid weather is often accompanied by a high pollen or mold count in the air, 
which can make people who are allergic to pollen or mold more susceptible 
to nasal and skin reactions. Heat alone can aggravate sensitive skin, enlarging 
capillaries and making the skin more reactive than normal. Extreme cold can 
have similar effects. Cold weather and wind tend to impair the barrier function, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.256         CHAPTER 13

Photoallergic describes drugs 
that can cause allergic reactions 
if the patient has sun exposure 
while using the drug.

reducing intercellular lipids, increasing chances of dehydration, and making the 
skin dry and ﬂaky. Dry, ﬂaky skin is always indicative of impaired barrier func-
tion and is more likely to have reactions. Severely dehydrated skin may burn or 
tingle when moisturizers are applied. Sunburned skin can also react to cosmetics 
or other topicals more easily.

The general rule with all these climatic effects is strict adherence to all the 
concepts  we  have  already  discussed.  Avoid  stripping  cleansers;  avoid  strong 
exfoliants or overuse of exfoliants, washing the skin too frequently, or any prod-
uct or treatment that is fragranced or stimulating. As seasons change, you may 
need to adapt the proper products for the client.

Drug Inﬂuences on the Skin

Certain  drugs  make  the  skin  more  sensitive  to  sun  exposure  and  can  cause 
photoallergic reactions. Tetracycline and other antibiotics, as well as systemic 
steroids and other drugs, can increase sun sensitivity or cause allergic reactions 
when the client has sun exposure during their use.

Clients  using  prescription  topical  keratolytics  such  as  the  retinoids  (i.e., 
Retin-A®, Tazorac®, Differin®, etc.) should avoid sun exposure. These drugs can 
also make the skin more sensitive to products the client may have used for a 
long time. Make sure you have looked carefully at all the client’s medications to 
help determine if these may be factors in the sensitive skin.

If the client has started using a prescription peeling agent, you must elimi-
nate the use of any other peeling agent or exfoliant, including home exfoliants 
such as alpha hydroxy acids or benzoyl peroxide. Too much exfoliation impairs 
barrier function and causes sensitivity. The client may also need to consult with 
her doctor concerning proper use of the prescription exfoliant. Often, the client 
is unintentionally misusing the drug.

Sudden Reactions

A client sometimes comes into the salon complaining of a sudden rash or other 
allergic or irritant reaction. See if you can specify any recent changes in the cli-
ent’s skin care program or if the client is taking any new medications. Always 
check for new cosmetics or skin care products, nail products (which can affect 
the face because the client touches or scratches her face), or other possible topi-
cal contact allergens or irritants. If the client has not changed any home-care 
products,  you  must  look  further  to  see  if  she  is  taking  any  new  medications. 
This client may suddenly have developed an allergy to a product she has used 
for a long time.

Have the client discontinue all products, including makeup, until the red-
ness and sensitivity clears completely. Then, have the client start using the prod-
ucts  again,  one  by  one,  adding  another  product  every  couple  of  days.  When 
and if the reactive product is added, the client will notice problem symptoms 
again, and you will know the client has a problem with that speciﬁc product. 
As always, when in doubt, refer the client to a dermatologist for allergy testing.

IN CONCLUSION

Many clients have sensitive, reactive, and redness-prone skin. Most symptoms 
of sensitivity seen by an esthetician are caused by irritants rather than allergies.
Teach  your  clients  to  avoid  stripping  the  barrier  function,  because  this  is 
the bottom-line problem in irritant reactions. Teach them to avoid overuse or 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sensitive Skin, Allergies, and Irritants      257

extremely  strong  exfoliants  and  other  well-established  irritants.  For  your  part, 
remember to avoid using too many treatments on clients with sensitive skin or 
products with many ingredients. 

Using a simple program approach to managing sensitive skin can produce 
excellent results. Using products that repair and protect the barrier function, and 
soothing ingredients that calm redness, can really help. Look for products that 
you know have been thoroughly tested for irritancy potential.

When you help resolve the problems for your clients with sensitive skin, you 

will be their hero!

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is an allergy?
  2. What is the difference between an allergic and an irritant reaction?

  3. Describe a sensitive skin.

  4. Why is barrier function so important in sensitive skin?

  5. What are some common allergens that should be avoided for sensitive skin?

  6. What are the differences between allergic and irritant reactions?

  7. Why does irritated skin turn red?

  8. What are some basic concepts to follow when treating sensitive skin?

  9. Why is the client’s health history important when treating sensitive skin?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

14

Rosacea

OBJECTIVES . . .

Rosacea is a common skin disorder associated with diffuse 
redness, acne-like papules and pustules, dilated capillaries, and 
other symptoms. Although rosacea is a medical condition and 
must be diagnosed by a physician, clients with rosacea can be 
signiﬁcantly helped by proper skin care.

In this chapter we discuss the different subtypes of rosa-
cea and what the esthetician can do to help with the esthetic 
problems associated with rosacea. We also discuss what 
causes ﬂares of rosacea and how you can help your client 
with rosacea avoid ﬂares and worsening of the symptoms 
of this disorder.

Rosacea, formerly known as acne rosacea and sometimes 

referred to as adult acne, is a skin disorder characterized 
by redness (erythema), ﬂushing (sudden dilation of capillar-
ies causing sudden diffuse redness, often accompanied with 
a feeling of heat) and turning red very easily, telangiectases 
(dilated or distended capillaries; Figure 14-1), and sometimes 
acne-like papules and pustules. A single distended capillary is 
known as a telangiectasia. Areas of telangiectases are also 
known by the European term couperose.

It is important to note that not all clients with telangiec-
tases have rosacea, but almost all clients with rosacea have 
telangiectases. Telangiectases can also be seen in clients with 
sun damage and injuries to the skin and can be more apparent 
in clients with high blood pressure.

Rosacea is a vascular disorder, meaning that it is related to 

blood vessels and circulation of the blood. Rosacea normally 
affects persons older than 30 years of age, but it can appear 
as early as age 20 and as late as age 70 or 80. The sudden 



     259

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.260         CHAPTER 14

Rosacea, sometimes called adult 
acne, is a condition of the skin 
in which the skin turns red very 
easily.

Flushing refers to the reddening 
of the skin due to stimulation.

Telangiectases are dilated or 
distended capillaries.

Telangiectasia is a single dis-
tended capillary.

Couperose refers to small, red, 
enlarged capillaries of the face 
and other areas of the body.

Vascular means “blood vessel 
related.”

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-1  Nose telangiectasias. Dilated capillaries, called telangiectasias, and 
a coarse-textured appearance of nose ostia are typical of the rosacea client.

rushing of the blood to the facial skin can stimulate sebaceous 
glands and irritate follicles, causing large red papules and pustules 
in the nose, cheeks, and chin areas. When clients with rosacea have 
sudden redness or breakouts due to their condition, this is known 
as a rosacea ﬂare (Figure 14-2).

Flare is when pimples and red-
ness occur in a person who has 
rosacea.

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-2  An example of a severe ﬂare of rosacea, which can affect the 
whole face.




 
 
 
 
 
Rosacea      261

Vascular growth factor (VGF) is 
a biochemical within the skin that 
triggers the growth of capillaries.

The sudden ﬂushing of blood to the face triggers the release of 
a biochemical within the skin called vascular growth factor (VGF). 
Vascular growth factor, as its name implies, triggers the growth or 
expansion of new blood vessels, speciﬁcally arterial capillaries in 
the skin. The addition of these new capillaries further increases the 
chances of ﬂushing. Therefore, the disorder is self-perpetuating; it 
continually progresses due to the formation of new blood vessels.
The expansion of blood vessels and erythema causes a higher 
skin temperature in persons with rosacea. It has been theorized that 
bacteria may produce more toxic proteins when at higher tempera-
tures. These more toxic proteins may be responsible for rosacea ﬂares.
Rosacea may ﬁrst appear as chronically red cheeks or a chroni-
cally red nose (Figure 14-3). Clients may notice ﬂushing, which also 
produces a warming of the facial skin. Flushing can occur when the 

A

B

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-3  A–C, The beginning stages of rosacea. The ﬁrst symptoms of rosacea may be just a redness pattern 
across the nose and cheeks or a red, slightly swollen nose.




 
 
 
 
262         CHAPTER 14

C

i

y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-3  (Continued )

client becomes hot, drinks alcohol or wine (especially red wine), or 
eats spicy foods. Clients with rosacea are very likely to redden when-
ever they get physically hot, and some may notice ﬂushing during 
or just after exercising. All these activities, known as triggers, cause 
vasodilation, or increased blood ﬂow due to dilated blood vessels, 
resulting in ﬂushing or a rosacea ﬂare.

CAUSES OF ROSACEA

No one is completely sure of the exact cause or causes of rosacea, but it appears 
to be hereditary and strongly related to how easily a person blushes. Rosacea 
is most prominent in light-skinned persons of Irish, Celtic, or western European 
origin.  It  is  also  sometimes  seen  in  persons  of  African  American  and  Native 
American descent.

Theories for the cause of rosacea have included the presence of a mite called 
Demodex folliculorum, which may cause inﬂammation and therefore redness. 
Elevated numbers of bacteria such as Propionibacterium acnes, Bacillus olero-
nius, and Staphylococcus epidermidis may also play a role in inﬂammation. Bacil-
lus oleronius is known to be associated with the presence of demodex mites. 

It has also been theorized that the presence of excessive yeast on the skin 
might  be  a  factor.  One  of  the  topical  drugs  used  to  treat  rosacea  is  an  anti-
yeast  medication,  although  the  reason  it  works  is  thought  to  be  because  of 
anti-inﬂammatory action. An intestinal bacterium found in patients with ulcers, 
Helicobacter pylori, is also thought to be involved. 

Triggers are activities that cause 
facial ﬂushing, which can lead to 
a rosacea ﬂare.

Vasodilation is the dilation of the 
blood vessels resulting in ﬂushing.

Demodex folliculorum is a type 
of skin mite that is sometimes as-
sociated with rosacea.

Helicobacter pylori is a type of 
intestinal bacterium that is some-
times associated with rosacea.




 
 
Rosacea      263

Cathelicidin is an immune pro-
tein that normally helps protect 
skin from infection and other 
problems.

Stratum corneum tryptic 
enzymes (SCTE) are enzymes 
involved in activating the 
cathelicidin protein.

Remission is a phase of disease 
where the disease is dormant and 
no symptoms are present.

None of these theories alone have ever been conﬁrmed to be a cause 
of rosacea because the presence of mites, yeast, and bacteria vary among 
clients  with  rosacea.  It  may  be  that  a  group  of  problems  are  causing  the 
disorder.

Recently, a University of California study found that persons with rosacea 
have  excess  antimicrobial  proteins,  which  are  immune  system  proteins.  The 
researchers also have detected an elevated level of cathelicidin, an immune 
protein  that  normally  helps  protect  skin  from  infection  and  other  problems, 
and they have found an elevated level of enzymes called stratum corneum 
tryptic  enzymes  (SCTE),  which  are  involved  in  activating  the  cathelicidin 
protein.  This  very  new  and  unique  research  information  may  lead  to  better 
knowledge and control of exactly how these proteins may cause the symptoms 
of rosacea.

The search for real causes and a cure continues. As of this writing, there is 
no conﬁrmed cause or cure for rosacea. There are, however, many known suc-
cessful ways to control and manage rosacea and to keep its symptoms under 
control for long periods through the use of medical treatment and lifestyle and 
skin care changes. When the ﬂares of rosacea are under control for a long time, 
this phase is referred to as rosacea remission.

LIFESTYLE TRIGGERS FOR ROSACEA 
FLUSHING AND FLARES

It is evident that constant ﬂushing of the face makes rosacea worse and is respon-
sible for ﬂares. We know there are certain triggers for ﬂares, and all of these trig-
gers can cause ﬂushing of the facial skin. Remember, ﬂares and ﬂushing cause the 
release of biochemicals that grow and expand capillaries, which further increase 
ﬂushing during subsequent ﬂares.

Flushing  triggers,  which  should  be  strictly  avoided  by  people  who  have 

rosacea, include the following:

•  Sun exposure of any type—the worst culprit in rosacea ﬂares. Sun must be 
avoided at all times. In fact, past sun exposure may be a factor in rosacea. 
One study surveyed people who have rosacea and found that 44 percent of 
them had a history of blistering sunburn at some time in their lives. In the 
same study, only 5 percent of the people who did not have rosacea (the con-
trol group) had a history of sunburn.

•  Besides ultraviolet rays, sun also radiates heat, a known cause of ﬂushing and 

ﬂares. People who have rosacea should wear sunscreen every day.

•  Heat exposure to the face of any type—this includes exposure when opening 
ovens, sitting in front of ﬁreplaces, or experiencing indoor heating that is too 
warm. Allow hot cars to air out before getting in.

•  Hot or cold weather.
•  Extreme temperatures of any type—including saunas, steam baths, and hot 

water on the skin. Cold water should also be avoided.

•  Ingestion of alcohol, especially red wine.
•  Exercise  that  raises  body  temperature—it  is  best  that  people  with  rosacea 
exercise indoors in air conditioning. If exercise takes place outside, it is best 
to  exercise  in  the  very  early  morning  or  after  dusk  to  avoid  heat  and  sun 
exposure. Exercise in a pool is a good choice, although chlorine might be a 
trigger, and the skin should be thoroughly rinsed after swimming.

•  Hot beverages.
•  Spicy foods.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.264         CHAPTER 14

Erythematotelangiectatic 
rosacea is a subtype of rosacea 
characterized by diffuse, patchy 
redness and a grainy texture.

Transient erythema is redness 
that comes and goes.

Papulopustular rosacea is a 
subtype of rosacea that often re-
sembles acne vulgaris, with large 
red pustules and papules.

•  Emotional stress.
•  Caffeinated beverages.
•  Aged foods such as hard cheeses.

Not all these factors affect everyone who has rosacea. Each person is different, 
but heat and sun exposure seem to be factors in causing ﬂushing in almost all those 
who have rosacea. Scientists have determined that certain bacteria on the skin of 
people with rosacea produce toxic proteins at higher skin temperatures. These toxic 
proteins may be responsible for the papules and pustules associated with rosacea.

Skin Care Triggers

Some  skin  care  products  and  ingredients  have  been  associated  with  rosacea 
ﬂares.  In  general,  drying,  alcohol-based  products;  products  that  evaporate 
quickly, such as many toners and astringents; and any stimulating product con-
taining stimulating essential oils, peppermint, menthol, or other ingredients that 
increase blood ﬂow may cause a ﬂare.

In general, many of the same precautions should be taken for rosacea as 
for sensitive skin. Make sure any products used have been thoroughly irritancy-
tested. Avoid toners, or use an alcohol-free toner that has been tested on sensi-
tive skin. Avoiding exfoliants, especially granular or rough scrubs, is a good rule. 
Anything  that  scrapes  the  skin  can  cause  redness  and  a  possible  ﬂare.  Avoid 
rough sponges, drying and setting masks, or masks that release heat, such as 
mineral masks or parafﬁn masks.

Any form of heat or extreme cold can trigger ﬂushing. Teach your clients to 
use tepid water only when rinsing. Pat the face dry, rather than rubbing. Cotton 
or extremely soft cloths are best for cleansing.

Fragranced products have been known to cause ﬂushing. Fragrance should 

be avoided when choosing skin care products for clients with rosacea.

As  with  sensitive  skin,  any  product  that  might  damage  barrier  function 
should be avoided. This includes products such as heavily foaming cleansers as 
well as aggressive peeling and drying agents.

Subtypes of Rosacea

The National Rosacea Society is a nonproﬁt organization founded for research, 
education,  and  support  of  persons  who  have  rosacea.  The  society  estimates 
that as many as 14 million Americans have some form of rosacea. Its members 
conduct frequent surveys to determine factors that may trigger ﬂares or ﬂushing, 
and they assemble committees of dermatologists and other experts to conduct 
and interpret research about rosacea and its management. An expert committee 
of the society has divided rosacea into the following four subtypes:

  Erythematotelangiectatic (er-uh-THEM-uh-toe-tel-an-jee-EK-tuh-tic) rosacea 
(subtype  1)  is  characterized  by  diffuse  facial  redness,  patchy  redness  in  the 
nose and cheeks, and turning red extremely easily (Figure 14-4). Clients may 
or may not have distended capillaries (telangiectases). Persons with erythem-
atotelangiectatic  rosacea  may  have  transient  erythema  (er-uh-THEE-muh), 
which means that the redness and symptoms can come and go. Facial swell-
ing, skin roughness, dry-looking patches, tightness, and a grainy texture that 
feels much like ﬁne sandpaper also may be seen. This grainy texture occurs 
primarily in the forehead and cheeks. The skin can sting and burn periodically.
  Papulopustular (PAP-yuh-lo-PUS-tyuh-lur) rosacea (subtype 2) often resem-
bles acne (Figure 14-5). The one difference is that often, no clogged pores or 




 
Rosacea      265

i

y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-4  Subtype 1: facial redness (erythemato-
telangiectatic rosacea). Flushing and persistent 
redness. Visible blood vessels may also appear.

FIGURE 14-5  Subtype 2: bumps and pimples 
(papulopustular rosacea). Persistent facial redness 
with bumps or pimples. Often seen following or 
with subtype 1.

comedones are present. These larger-than-normal pimples primarily occur on 
the nose and upper cheeks. There may be a lot of redness in the skin around 
the papules and pustules. Surface skin in these areas may appear dehydrated 
and crinkled. Subjective symptoms of burning and stinging may also be present.
  Phymatous (FEYE-muh-tus) rosacea (subtype 3) has a thickened appearance 
and results in an enlargement of the nose or other facial areas (Figure 14-6). 

Phymatous rosacea is a subtype 
of rosacea in which the nose has 
a thickened appearance and the 
client sometimes has rhinophyma 
(a noticeable, substantial enlarge-
ment of the nose).

FIGURE 14-6  Subtype 3: skin thickening (phymatous 
rosacea). Skin thickening and enlargement, usually 
around the nose.

i

y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

i

y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
266         CHAPTER 14

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-7  Red, swollen noses can be the beginning of rhinophyma.

Rhinophyma is an enlarging of 
the nose, often resulting from a 
severe form of acne rosacea.

An  enlarged  nose  resulting  from  rosacea  is  known  as  rhinophyma 
(ry-no-FEYE-muh;  Figure  14-7  and  Figure  14-8).  The  famous  comedian 
W. C. Fields suffered from rhinophyma, as evidenced by his well-known red, 
bulbous nose. Many people thought that his big, red nose was the result of 
alcoholism; in fact, phymatous rosacea was the cause. Alcohol use can cause 
ﬂares and ﬂushing, but it does not directly cause the thickening of tissues 
associated with rhinophyma (Figure 14-9).

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-8A AND B  Rhinophyma.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rosacea      267

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-9  Dark and red distended capil-
laries, enlarged pores, and enlargement of the 
nose are shown in this photo of rhinophyma. 
This nose also has large amounts of sebaceous 
ﬁlaments and secretions.

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-10  Subtype 4: eye irritation (ocular rosacea). 
Watery and bloodshot appearance, irritation, burning, or 
stinging.

Phymatous  rosacea  can  affect  either  women  or  men,  but  it  is  more 
prevalent in men. It is interesting to note that rosacea is more common in 
women, but phymatous rosacea is more common in men.

  Ocular  (AHK-yuh-lur)  rosacea  (subtype  4)  occurs  in  the  eye  and  eye-
lids, resulting in eye redness (bloodshot eyes), swollen eyelids, chalazia 
(small, lumpy cysts in the eyelids), hordeolums (better known as styes), 
eyelid skin telangiectases, stinging and burning, and other visual problems 
(Figure 14-10).

Combinations of Subtypes

It is possible for a client to have more than one subtype of rosacea. Subtypes 
1 and 2 are frequently seen together. Some people with rosacea have all four 
subtypes.

Another  factor  that  may  affect  any  subtype  of  rosacea  is  known  as 
granulomatous  (gran-yoo-LO-muh-tus)  rosacea.  This  is  not  a  subtype;  it  is 
more of a factor that can affect the four basic subtypes. Granulomatous rosacea 
causes hard, nodular papules in the cheeks and around the mouth. They may 
be red, yellowish, or brown in color, and multiple papules are identical in size 
and shape on an individual client.

Rosacea—A Medical Condition

A  physician,  preferably  a  dermatologist,  must  make  the  diagnosis  of  rosacea. 
Because it is a medical condition, estheticians should not tell their clients they 
have rosacea unless a doctor has ofﬁcially diagnosed it.

Ocular rosacea is a subtype 
of rosacea that affects the eyes, 
resulting in eye redness, swollen 
eyelids, and other eye lesions.

Chalazia are small, lumpy cysts in 
the eyelids.

Hordeolums, or styes, are 
infected tear ducts.

Granulomatous rosacea causes 
hard, nodular papules in any form 
of rosacea.




   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
268         CHAPTER 14

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S
a
e
c
a
s
o
R

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-11A AND B  Before and after rosacea treatment. Rosacea can be kept under control by using prescribed 
topical and/or oral medication, controlling ﬂushing; avoiding heat, spicy foods, and other triggers; and using 
nonirritating skin care products.

That being said, estheticians see rosacea frequently in the salon. Clients may 
think they have acne blemishes or an allergy to a product. It is important that 
estheticians  be  familiar  with  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  rosacea,  so  that  they 
may refer the client to a dermatologist for diagnosis and medical treatment.

Many esthetic issues accompany rosacea, and estheticians can certainly help 
with the appearance problems of rosacea and can serve as educators to instruct 
their clients on proper skin care for rosacea, including choosing good products 
and  being  aware  of  activities  that  may  trigger  ﬂares  and  should  be  avoided. 
Once the diagnosis has been made and medical treatment has been prescribed, 
the  esthetician  can  work  with  the  client  who  has  rosacea  to  help  determine 
the proper skin care products and makeup to help reduce redness and avoid 
inﬂammatory products and treatments. and the esthetician also can work with 
the dermatologist to help the client manage the rosacea ﬂushing and, hopefully, 
avoid ﬂares (Figure 14-11).

Medical Treatment of Rosacea

The most common topical treatment drug in dermatological treatment of rosacea 
is metronidazole, commercially known as Metrogel®, Metrocream®, Metrolotion®, 
or  Noritate®.  Sodium  sulfacetamide  and  sulfur,  under  the  trade  names  of 
Klaron®,  Sulfacet-R®,  or  Novacet®,  are  another  type  of  topical  medication  for 
rosacea. The newest topical drug, as of this writing, is 15 percent azelaic acid, 
marketed as Finacea®. All of these prescription topicals have anti-inﬂammatory 
and antimicrobial effects. Topical therapy is the standard for medical treatment 
of erythematotelangiectatic rosacea.

Dermatologists often prescribe the oral antibiotic doxycycline (Oracea®), to 
accompany topical prescription treatment, especially in papulopustular rosacea. 
Other oral antibiotics, such as tetracycline, and minocycline, are also occa-
sionally  prescribed  by  dermatologists  for  patients  with  more  severe  rosacea. 
Occasionally, laser treatment of telangiectasias is used to help control ﬂares and 
reduce redness and the appearance of these capillaries. In severe cases, a low 

Metronidazole is a medication 
used to control rosacea and 
decrease inﬂammation.

Sodium sulfacetamide is a 
topical drug agent used to 
treat rosacea.

Sulfur is a topical drug agent 
used to treat rosacea.

Azelaic acid is a topical drug 
agent used to treat rosacea.

Doxycycline is an oral antibiotic 
used to treat more severe rosacea.

Tetracycline is an oral antibiotic 
used to treat more severe rosacea 
and other acne-related conditions.

Minocycline is an oral antibiotic 
used to treat more severe rosacea 
and other acne-related conditions.




 
 
Rosacea      269

Seborrheic dermatitis is a skin 
disorder characterized by ﬂaky, 
red, patchy skin primarily in 
the eyebrows, T-zone, and 
scalp. Seborrheic dermatitis is 
caused by inﬂammation of the 
sebaceous gland.

dose of isotretinoin, formerly often called Accutane (a drug normally used for 
Grade IV cystic acne), is also beneﬁcial.

The goal in medical treatment of rosacea is to reduce inﬂammation; reduce 
or eliminate ﬂares and ﬂushing; and, in some cases, kill or reduce bacteria asso-
ciated with papules and pustules.

People with rosacea also suffer occasionally from seborrheic dermatitis, a 
disorder caused by an inﬂammation of the sebaceous gland. The signs of sebor-
rheic dermatitis include ﬂaking and redness in oily areas of the face, especially 
the  eyebrows,  hairline,  and  the  sides  and  the  corners  of  the  nose.  Additional 
medical treatment may be necessary to control the seborrheic dermatitis.

Surgical treatment of rosacea is sometimes necessary. As mentioned earlier, 
laser treatments may be used to obliterate telangiectasias. Laser resurfacing is 
sometimes used to remove extensive telangiectases. Removal of these telangiec-
tases slows the progression or worsening of rosacea.

Laser and plastic surgery sometimes are used to reduce or remove excess 

tissues developed in patients with rhinophyma.

THE ROLE OF THE ESTHETICIAN 
IN ROSACEA MANAGEMENT

As we have already discussed, rosacea is a medical condition, and a dermatolo-
gist  or  medical  physician  must  diagnose  it.  Never  tell  a  client  he  or  she  has 
rosacea, unless a medical diagnosis has been made.

However, you may often suspect that a client has rosacea. If you notice that 
a client has frequent ﬂares of redness, has large papules and pustules without 
comedones, gets very red during treatment, or has redness that is always present 
and never seems to fade, this client likely does have rosacea. Speciﬁc symptoms 
you may notice include the following:

  1. Diffuse redness and distended capillaries, especially in the center of the face, 

such as the cheeks or nose.

  2. Patches of redness in the cheek area, often accompanied by large pores or 

a grainy texture.

  3. Enlarged  appearance  of  the  nose;  bulbous  structure,  redness,  and  very 
prominent pore appearance of the skin on the nose. Skin in this area some-
times appears rough and bumpy.

  4. Turning red very easily or redness after drinking wine or alcohol or eating 

spicy foods.

  5. Turning red easily during facial treatments, even extremely gentle treatment.
  6. Flushing that appears after exercise and does not go away quickly.
  7. Flares of large, red, solid-looking, or “lumpy” papules and pustules on the 
cheeks, nose, and chin. Often, there are no comedones in these areas, as 
you might see in acne vulgaris.

  8. Very dehydrated, sometimes ﬂaking, red areas in the nose and cheeks. The 
skin may appear thick or swollen in these areas, and the client may com-
plain of burning and stinging.

If you notice any of these signs during analysis, refer these clients to a derma-
tologist for diagnosis and treatment.

Estheticians can play an important role in the management of rosacea. Edu-
cating clients about lifestyle triggers, helping them choose skin care products 
that do not trigger ﬂushing, and helping with makeup techniques to help cam-
ouﬂage redness are examples of how the esthetician can help.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.270         CHAPTER 14

GOALS OF ESTHETIC TREATMENT 
FOR CLIENTS WITH ROSACEA

The biggest role the esthetician can play in helping the client with rosacea is 
to educate them about avoiding ﬂushing and learning the triggers that lead to 
ﬂares. The esthetician may also help the clients with rosacea by making sure 
they understand their individual skin care needs:

•  Respecting  and  maintaining  the  barrier  function  is  vital  in  preventing  both 
redness and rosacea ﬂares. Choosing cleansers that do not strip the interstitial 
barrier lipids, and using products that reinforce this barrier, will help prevent 
problems, especially for drier skin types.

•  Cleansers  need  to  be  strong  enough  to  remove  excess  sebum,  but  not  so 
strong as to strip the barrier lipids. Removing excess sebum removes sources 
of fatty acids that feed bacteria and cause inﬂammation. 

•  The proper daily use of sunscreen, preferably built into a hydrating formula, 

is necessary for clients with rosacea.

•  Maintaining the proper levels of hydration and protection, based on the skin 

type, is also important for control of rosacea.

•  Use of antioxidants and soothing agents help reduce and prevent inﬂamma-
tion  as  well  as  prevent  cascades  of  reactions  that  cause  redness  and  even 
collagen breakdown.

•  Using treatments that keep the skin cool, and avoiding heat exposure, help 

clients with rosacea.

CHOOSING SKIN CARE PRODUCTS 
FOR CLIENTS WITH ROSACEA

In  general,  the  same  procedures  should  be  followed  as  already  discussed  in 
Chapter  13  (Sensitive  Skin,  Allergies,  and  Irritants).  The  basic  principle  is  to 
avoid  exposure  to  any  product  that  can  cause  redness  or  inﬂammation.  This 
includes any product with the potential to damage the barrier function or stimu-
late  blood  ﬂow.  Also,  make  sure  that  all  products  are  noncomedogenic  (see 
Chapter 16, Comedogenicity) because exposure to fatty ingredients may worsen 
the condition, especially in clients with oily skin and rosacea.

Skin Care Products

The following product speciﬁcs are recommended for use by clients with rosacea.

Cleansers Wash-off cleansers are best for rosacea skin. These products are easy 
to  rinse  off  and  should  leave  no  residues.  Keep  in  mind  the  skin  type  when 
choosing  a  cleanser.  Clients  with  oilier  skin  need  cleansers  that  remove  more 
sebum, but these products should not be aggressive and stripping. The mission is 
to remove excess sebum without removing lipids from the barrier function. Dry 
and dehydrated skin with rosacea needs less aggressive cleansers that foam less. 
Make sure the product has a slightly acidic pH, particularly if no toner is used.

Toners  Toners  can  be  a  problem  for  clients  with  rosacea,  and  they  are  the 
number one cosmetic trigger for ﬂushing. Avoid any toner with alcohol or astrin-
gent ingredients. A nonalcoholic, hydrating mist with soothing ingredients may 
be tolerated better.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Rosacea      271

Moisturizers  Nonfragranced,  lightweight  hydrating  moisturizers  are  the  best 
tolerated. Fluids are better choices than thicker creams. Again, follow the guide-
lines already discussed in Chapter 13. Addition of soothing agents like matricaria 
extract, licorice extract, green tea, or silymarin may help reduce redness. Lipid 
infused moisturizers may be helpful for drier skin types.

Sunscreens Sunscreens are very important for those who have rosacea because 
sun exposure is a major ﬂare trigger. Clients with rosacea, like all clients, should 
wear a sunscreen every day. Look for a fragrance-free sunscreen that contains a 
built-in hydrator and soothing ingredients, and check to make sure it has been 
irritancy-tested.  Sunscreens  containing  physical  sunscreens  like  zinc  oxide  or 
titanium dioxide are the best choices for clients with rosacea.

Exfoliants Exfoliants must be very carefully chosen, if used at all in clients with 
rosacea.  Mechanical  exfoliants,  such  as  beaded  scrubs  or  gommages,  tend  to 
aggravate ﬂushing. Aluminum oxide crystals, such as those used in microderm-
abrasion, are not recommended. 

Probably the best exfoliant is a gentle alpha hydroxy (AHA) or beta hydroxy 
(BHA) serum or lotion, but even these can cause ﬂushing in some clients with 
rosacea, especially if the barrier function of the skin is impaired. Never apply 
an exfoliant during a rosacea ﬂare, because doing so aggravates the condition 
and may damage the skin. Many dermatologists believe that mild AHA use at 
home may be helpful to rosacea patients, but not all patients tolerate them well. 
Always choose a serum or lotion form with a pH no lower than 3.5. 

In general, it is best to start the client on basic products ﬁrst. After a few 
weeks of successful use, add an AHA or BHA exfoliant lotion. Try lightly apply-
ing the lotion only every other day until you see how the client tolerates it. If 
there  is  any  question  in  your  mind,  consult  the  client’s  dermatologist  before 
making a recommendation.

Soothing Products

Products are available to help soothe sensitive skin, and some of these may be 
helpful in reducing redness and preventing ﬂushing (Figure 14-12).

Many of these products are antioxidants, and they are generally more effective 
in serum form. Look for ingredients like green tea, white tea, grapeseed extract, 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 14-12A AND B  Esthetic management of redness-prone skin using a speciﬁc concept-designed system of 
home care can make a big difference in redness and help avoid ﬂushing and ﬂares of rosacea.




 
 
 
 
272         CHAPTER 14

allantoin  (naturally  occurs  in  comfrey  root,  although  most  is  now  laboratory 
manufactured) silymarin, sea whip (Pseudopterogorgia elizabethae) extract, and 
licochalcone (from licorice root). These serums are typically used after cleansing 
and before applying a sunscreen or moisturizer.

Medication Application

Do  not  forget  that  the  client’s  topical  medication  has  to  be  applied  at  some 
point during the home-care regimen. Usually these medications are applied after 
cleansing and allowed to be absorbed for a few minutes before using a moistur-
izer or sunscreen. If in doubt, check with the client’s dermatologist or pharmacist 
to know when this important step should take place.

STEP-BY-STEP HOME-CARE 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
CLIENTS WITH ROSACEA

Morning

  1. Wet the face with tepid (body temperature) water. Apply a nonfragranced, 
lightly foaming cleanser that is easily rinseable. Choose the cleanser care-
fully, based on the client’s skin type and dehydration level. Nonfoaming or 
low-foaming cleanser may be used for drier skins. In clients with oilier skin, 
a  slightly  more  aggressive  foaming  cleanser  may  help  reduce  oiliness.  In 
clients experiencing ﬂares, a nonfoaming cleanser is usually a better choice.
  2. Apply  a  spray-type,  nonalcoholic  toner  containing  soothing  agents  and 
hydrators. Toners have been known to cause ﬂushing, so make sure you 
choose a toner that has no stripping agents and no fragrance. Pat the skin 
with a clean, dry towel. It is important to emphasize to the client that the 
skin should be patted and not wiped with a rough towel that can abrade 
and cause ﬂushing.

  3. A soothing serum may be used to calm redness. These are often hydrating 
serums  with  soothing  agents  and  antioxidants  that  are  theorized  to  inter-
fere  with  the  inﬂammation  cascade.  Grapeseed,  sea  whip,  and  green  tea 
extracts are typical components. Peptides and ﬂavonoids are now included 
in serums for redness. These agents help decrease swelling and pressure on 
the capillaries, thus reducing the appearance of redness and even distended 
capillaries.

  4. Medication usually is typically applied at this step. Have the client check 
with  her  dermatologist  to  determine  the  exact  application  step  for  the 
medication.

  5. A fragrance-free moisturizer, appropriate for the skin type and containing an 
SPF 15 or higher broad-spectrum sunscreen, should be used. A product con-
taining zinc oxide or titanium dioxide as a sunscreen agent is a good idea 
and is often less reactive than absorbing chemical sunscreens. The presence 
of soothing agents in the formula may also reduce redness tendencies.

Evening

  1. Makeup should be removed using a nonfoaming, fragrance-free cleansing milk. 
The client should apply this cosmetic with the ﬁngertips to slightly dampen 
skin. Use of cleansing sponges and other implements to apply cleanser may 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Rosacea      273

Light-emitting diode (LED) 
treatment is a fast-ﬂashing light 
treatment that is often used to 
treat diffuse redness.

Photomodulation is the process 
of using light to treat conditions 
of the skin.

cause redness. After applying and lightly massaging the cleanser to dissolve 
makeup, wipe off the cleanser with cool, wet cotton pads. Splashes of tepid 
water will help remove any excess cleanser.

  2. Apply toner as in the morning.
  3. Apply soothing serum as in the morning.
  4. Medication  usually  is  applied  at  this  step.  Have  the  client  check  with  her 
dermatologist to determine the exact application step for the medication.
  5. A lightweight, fragrance-free hydrator with soothing agents should be applied 

lightly.

SALON TREATMENT FOR CLIENTS 
WITH ROSACEA

Typically, the salon treatment used for sensitive skin (discussed in Chapter 13) 
is appropriate. It is best to use cool steam and nondrying products and to avoid 
stimulating, peeling, and stripping products. Keep every step mild and gentle. 
Extraction, although helpful for oilier rosacea skin, should be as gentle as pos-
sible; the treatment time should be short.

After you have worked with the individual client’s skin for a number of treat-
ments, you may want to slowly add some steps to the treatment. Add only one 
change in treatment per visit. If the client experiences a ﬂare after treatment, you 
will know what may have caused it. 

If professional exfoliation is performed, it should be a gentle AHA with a pH 
no lower than 3.5, and skin should be used to using a daily AHA serum at home. 
Very gentle enzyme treatment may also be used.

LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE TREATMENT 
FOR REDNESS

Light-emitting diode (LED) treatment is a procedure using fast-ﬂashing lights to 
cause changes in the appearance of the skin. Also known as photomodulation, 
LED treatments use nonburning, low-wattage lights that ﬂash rapidly to energize 
activities of the skin. Unlike lasers and intense pulsed light, LED does not pro-
duce the intense heat that can cause damage to the dermis. LED is used to treat 
various symptoms of sun damage.

LED  light  treatments  have  been  used  to  treat  diffuse  redness  in  the  skin. 
Although LED does not remove or ablate any skin or dilated capillaries, it can 
be used safely to minimize redness in clients with rosacea. LED is used by both 
esthetic  clinics  and  dermatologists’  ofﬁces.  Usually,  a  series  of  treatments  are 
administered over a period of weeks (usually every 1 to 2 weeks), followed by 
regular maintenance treatments. Each machine varies as to treatment protocols.

GET TO KNOW THE ROSACEA SKIN

Rosacea skins vary in sensitivity levels, oiliness or dryness, and what seems to 
cause ﬂares. It is best to keep any treatment or home care very simple when ﬁrst 
helping your client with rosacea. Pay attention to medications that have been 
prescribed by the dermatologist, and respect the doctor’s instructions.

Have the client keep in close touch with you, and monitor his or her prog-
ress  carefully.  Always  start  slowly  and  gently.  You  can  always  try  other  treat-
ments later, when you have established the sensitivity level of the client’s skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.274         CHAPTER 14

IN CONCLUSION

Rosacea is a medical condition with many esthetic issues. Although diagnosis and 
medical treatment are the domain of the dermatologist, the esthetician can greatly 
help the client who has rosacea with education on skin care and avoiding triggers 
as well as with planning an appropriate, well-tested skin care program to reduce 
redness, ﬂushing, and ﬂares.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What  might  be  some  differences  in  procedures  or  products  you  would 

recommend for clients with oily versus dry rosacea? Why?

  2. What are rosacea triggers? Name several.

  3. Why should you never tell a client he or she has rosacea?

  4. Name several procedures or product types that should not be used on clients 

with rosacea.

  5. Discuss the goals of esthetic treatment for clients with rosacea.

  6. Discuss how medical and esthetics professionals can work together to best 

help a client with rosacea.



CHAPTER

15

Acne and the 
Esthetician

OBJECTIVES . . .

In this chapter, you will learn about factors that inﬂuence 
the development of different types of acne. You will learn to 
identify the different types of acne lesions, and you will learn 
about several acne-like medical conditions. You will learn how 
dermatologists treat acne and when you should refer a client 
to a dermatologist. A variety of treatments, ingredients, drugs, 
and products will also be studied.

Acne is a skin condition that results in inﬂammatory and 
noninﬂammatory lesions. Commonly associated with teenage 
and adolescent skin, it actually affects many age groups at 
different stages of life. While approximately 80 percent 
of teenagers experience at least some problems with acne, 
54 percent of adult (older than 25 years) females and 40 percent 
of adult males also have acne-related skin problems. Estheti-
cians see many forms of acne and acne-related conditions 
every day. Although many forms of acne require the care 
of a dermatologist, many clients can beneﬁt from esthetic 
treatments for problem skin.



     275

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.276         CHAPTER 15

Acne is a skin condition that 
results in inﬂammatory and nonin-
ﬂammatory lesions.

Acne vulgaris is the most com-
mon form of acne that is often 
associated with teenagers.

Hereditary means a trait or 
condition is inherited from the 
parents; it is genetic.

Retention hyperkeratosis is the 
hereditary tendency of dead cells 
to stick to the sides of the follicle 
wall.

Oiliness describes a larger-than-
normal amount of sebum secreted 
onto the skin by the sebaceous 
glands.

Microcomedo is a small impaction 
formed by cells that have built up 
on the inside of the follicle wall.

COMMON ACNE

The most common form of acne is called acne vulgaris. This is the type of acne 
so  often  associated  with  teenagers.  It  usually  begins  at  the  onset  of  puberty, 
when teenagers begin producing larger amounts of sex hormones (see Chapter 5, 
Hormones). These hormones cause stimulation of the sebaceous gland, which 
produces an overabundance of sebum.

HEREDITARY FACTORS IN ACNE

From our parents, we inherit certain genes that determine how our bodies, and 
our skin, function and behave. These are known as hereditary or genetic fac-
tors. If either of a child’s parents had acne or excessively oily skin, the child also 
stands a good chance of having a strong tendency to develop acne.

Two major factors in acne development are hereditary. As we learned ear-
lier, the epidermal cells, particularly the corneum, are constantly shedding and 
being  replaced  by  younger  cells.  Retention  hyperkeratosis  is  a  hereditary 
condition in which these cells are retained. The dead cells stick to the surface of 
the skin and begin lining the inside walls of the follicle. For simplicity, we refer 
to retention hyperkeratosis as “cell buildup.” Much like wax tends to build up on 
the surface of furniture, the cells inside the follicle build up.

This  process  of  buildup  is  complicated  by  the  activity  of  the  cells,  which 
continue pushing to the surface of the epidermis at a faster rate. Hyper– means 
“more than normal,” so hyperkeratosis means the process of keratinization (turn-
over of cells) occurs at a rate much faster than normal.

Some researchers believe that retention hyperkeratosis is caused by an inabil-
ity of the body to produce intercellular structures called lamellar granules. These 
granules are theorized to release an enzyme that causes dead cells to break away 
from the corneum in the normal manner. It has been determined that chronic 
acne patients have fewer of these active structures present in their follicular cells.
The second major hereditary factor in the tendency to develop acne is 
oiliness.  The  amount  of  sebum  produced  by  the  skin  is  largely  hereditary. 
People who have acne or excessively oily skin have inherited this tendency.

The excessive sebum “bathes” and “waxes over” the cell buildup. The sebum 
becomes sticky and solidiﬁes, much like the fat in chicken broth hardens and 
solidiﬁes when it is refrigerated.

When enough cells and waxy sebum build up in the bottom of the follicle, 
they form a small impaction called a microcomedo. Microcomedones (plural) 
are  a  mixture  of  dead  cell  buildup,  bacteria,  fatty  acids  from  the  sebum,  and 
other cellular debris. They are the beginning phase of any acne lesion.

Microcomedones cannot be seen on the surface of the skin. They are deep 
in the follicles and can be seen only by microscopic examination of skin tissues 
(Figure 15-1).

NONINFLAMMATORY AND 
INFLAMMATORY ACNE LESIONS

Inﬂammatory means “swollen 
and red.”

Noninﬂammatory refers to 
an impaction that is not red or 
inﬂamed.

As microcomedones continue to retain more and more dead cells and are coated 
by more and more sebum, they develop into larger, visible acne lesions. They 
may  become  either  inﬂammatory  or  noninﬂammatory  lesions.  Inﬂammatory 
acne lesions are inﬂamed, meaning they are red and swollen lesions. A typical 
acne pimple is an inﬂammatory lesion. Noninﬂammatory refers to an impaction 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      277

Normal follicle 

Dermis 

Sebaceous 
glands 

Microcomedo 

Noninflammatory

Inflammatory 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Closed comedo 
(whitehead) 

Open comedo 
(blackhead) 

Papule

Pustule

FIGURE 15-1  The progression of acne.

that is not red or inﬂamed. Examples of noninﬂammatory acne lesions are open 
comedones (blackheads) and closed comedones (whiteheads; Figure 15-2).

Open  comedones  occur  when  the  follicle  is  large  enough  to  hold  all  of 
the debris retained by the follicle. The ostium, or opening, in these follicles is 
dilated by the mass of the impaction, allowing the comedo to push toward the 
surface opening.

Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes) is the scientiﬁc name of the primary 
bacterium  that  causes  acne  vulgaris.  P.  acnes  bacteria  are  anaerobic,  which 

Open comedones are noninﬂam-
matory acne lesions, usually called 
blackheads.

Closed comedones are nonin-
ﬂammatory acne lesions, known 
as whiteheads.

Ostium is the opening in follicles.

Propionibacterium acnes 
(P. acnes) is the scientiﬁc name 
of the bacteria that cause acne 
vulgaris.

Anaerobic bacteria are those that 
do not need oxygen to grow and 
survive.

.

.

D
M

,
d
n
o
B

.
J

l

i

e
a
h
c
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-2  Open 
and closed comedones.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
278         CHAPTER 15

i

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Melanin is the pigment of the 
skin.

Papule is a raised area on the 
skin; it is generally smaller than 
1 centimeter.

Pustule is a clump of white 
blood cells that have formed and 
risen to the surface of the skin.

FIGURE 15-3  The 
development of acne 
in a young girl.

means they cannot survive in the presence of oxygen. These bacteria are con-
stantly present in all follicles in small numbers. They are kept from reproducing 
to  large  numbers  by  the  oxygen  that  is  constantly  aerating  the  open  follicle. 
However, when the follicle gets blocked from oxygen circulation, these bacte-
ria multiply in great numbers, feeding off fatty acids that are obtained by the 
bacteria  breaking  down  the  sebum  produced  by  overactive  sebaceous  glands 
(Figure 15–3). Open comedones do not encourage development of this bacterial 
growth, because the follicle opening is large enough to expose the follicle to 
oxygen. The oxygen is also what causes the blackhead to form at the exposed 
part of the impaction. This darkening is caused by the exposure of the top of the 
comedo to the oxygen in the air outside the follicle. The sebum turns a brown 
color, similar to the way mayonnaise turns yellow if left out on a picnic table. 
The darkness is also caused by clumps of melanin (skin pigment) present in 
the dead cells in the comedo. This theory is easily demonstrated by observing 
an extracted open comedo. It is a solid, cylindrical plug, topped by a dark area 
that gets lighter as the deeper parts of the impaction are extracted.

Open comedones, therefore, rarely develop into inﬂammatory lesions. Unfor-
tunately, the same cannot be said for closed comedones. Closed comedones have 
very small pore openings, which prevents oxygen from readily penetrating the 
follicle.  The  walls  of  the  follicle  stretch  to  hold  the  contents  of  the  impaction, 
but the follicle opening does not. Because of this lack of oxygen, the lesions can 
easily become inﬂamed due to the increasing number of bacteria multiplying in 
the anaerobic environment.

Closed comedones are easily recognizable. They are frequently seen in adult 
women, often in the blush line of makeup users. They are small “underground” 
bumps that are not easily extracted. They are frequently associated with the use 
of comedogenic cosmetics (see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity).

When enough bacteria form inside the closed comedo and the impaction 
becomes large enough, a small tear occurs in the follicle wall. This stimulates the 
immune system to release white blood cells into the area (see Chapter 3, The 
Immune System). These white blood cells arrive via the blood vessels, causing 
the lesion to become red. This is an inﬂammatory lesion.

A papule is a red, sore bump without a whitehead (no pus; Figure 15-4). 
This is the beginning of the “rescue” by the white blood cells. When enough 
white  blood  cells  arrive,  they  may  form  a “clump”  and  rise  to  the  surface, 
creating what is known as a pustule (Figure 15-5). Pus is the common name 




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      279

Follicle almost closed

Epidermis

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

Follicle wall

FIGURE 15-4  The papule.

Flat, dead cells bursting
through follicle wall

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-5  The pustule.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
280         CHAPTER 15

.
c
n
I

i

e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Nodule is a raised lesion that 
is larger and deeper in the skin. 
A nodule looks like a lump, but 
the skin can be moved over the 
lesion.

Cysts are deep infections caused 
by the deep, massive invasion of 
white blood cells.

FIGURE 15-6  The cyst.

for this “clump” of dead white blood cells. For practical purposes, a papule is 
often described by the client as a large, red, sore bump that never “comes to a 
head.” Papules sometimes seem to “magically disappear.” This is because the 
immune system has “won the battle” and disposed of the impaction through 
enzymes and absorption, and the body has disposed of the remains through 
normal blood excretion. Papules affect the nerve endings more than pustules 
because they are deeper in the skin. This explains the soreness. Pustules have 
caused the impaction to “migrate” toward the skin surface, dilating the follicle 
opening  and  relieving  the  pressure  on  the  nerve  endings,  and  the  result  is 
less pain.

A nodule is similar to a papule, but it is deeper in the skin and feels very 
solid and sore. Cysts are deep infections caused by a deep, massive invasion of 
white blood cells. They are very pustular and very large (Figure 15-6).

The Grades of Acne

Acne is “graded” by dermatologists on a four-point scale (Figure 15-7A–D.)

  Grade  I  acne—mostly  open  and  closed  comedones  with  an  occasional 

pimple. Grade I acne is typical of a teenager just beginning puberty.

  Grade II acne—very large number of closed comedones, with occasional 

pustules or papules.

  Grade III acne—thought of by most people as “typical teenage acne.” It 
involves a large number of open and closed comedones as well as many 
papules and pustules. It is very inﬂamed and red.

  Grade  IV  acne—commonly  referred  to  as  cystic  acne,  with  many  deep 

cysts and scar formation.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.
e
n
c
A

I
I
I

e
d
a
r
G
4
0
4
3

#

e
d

i
l

i

S
g
n
h
c
a
e
T
c
g
o
o
t
a
m
r
e
D

l

i

f
o
y
r
a
r
b
L

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

Acne and the Esthetician      281

FIGURE 15-7A  Grade I acne.

FIGURE 15-7B  Grade II acne.

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

6
0
4
3
#

e
d

i
l

i

S
g
n
h
c
a
e
T
c
g
o
o
t
a
m
r
e
D

l

i

f
o
y
r
a
r
b
L

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

.
e
n
c
A
V

I

e
d
a
r
G

FIGURE 15-7C  Grade III acne.

FIGURE 15-7D  Grade IV acne

Why Scars Form

Scars form when the skin, in a desperate attempt to heal itself, produces lots of 
collagen in the effort to compensate for the lack of normal skin functioning, and 
to ﬁll in gaps in tissue that are caused by infection. This type of scar is usually 
raised. Acne “pit” or “pock” scarring occurs from actual destruction of the tissue 
during the inﬂammatory process. Cystic acne is almost always associated with 
scarring (Figure 15-8).

Inﬂammatory versus Comedonal Acne

So far in this chapter we have discussed comedonal acne, which is caused by 
genetic  retention  hyperkeratosis  and  genetic  oiliness.  Comedonal  acne  is  the 
most common form of acne. It develops from a microcomedo that evolves into 
a comedo or more advanced type of acne lesion. Each comedonal lesion may 
take weeks to develop.

Comedonal acne is the most 
common form of acne; the skin 
develops comedones from genetic 
retention hyperkeratosis and 
oiliness.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
282         CHAPTER 15

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 15-8  Acne scarring.

Inﬂammatory acne is a form 
of acne caused by inﬂammation 
occurring inside the follicle.

Perifollicular inﬂammation is 
inﬂammation that occurs in and 
around the follicle.

Acnegenic reaction is an inﬂam-
matory reaction caused by a skin 
care product or cosmetic or other 
inﬂammation; the result is sudden 
ﬂares of papules or pustules. 

Comedogenic reaction is a 
gradual buildup of cells caused by 
fatty topical products; the result is 
the formation of open or closed 
comedones.

Inﬂammatory  acne  is  a  second  common  type  of  acne.  It  is  caused  by 
inﬂammation  occurring  inside  the  follicle.  This  inﬂammation,  which  can  be 
caused  by  numerous  factors  including  inﬂammatory  or  stimulating  skin  care 
products, causes swelling of the follicle walls, called perifollicular inﬂammation. 
This swelling of the follicle walls can obstruct the aeration and ﬂow of oxygen 
in the follicle, decreasing the ﬂow of oxygen to the lower part of the follicle and 
creating an “anaerobic pocket”—an ideal environment for the P. acnes bacteria. 
The  bacteria  multiply,  feeding  off  the  sebum  and  causing  inﬂammation,  and 
therefore, a sudden ﬂare of acne papules and pustules without an increase in 
open or closed comedones. “Overnight zits” are the result of an inﬂammatory 
acne reaction.

An acnegenic reaction is an inﬂammatory reaction caused by a skin care 
product or cosmetic, or other inﬂammation, resulting in sudden ﬂares of papules 
or pustules. A comedogenic reaction is a gradual buildup of cells caused by fatty 
or oily skin care or cosmetic products, resulting in the formation of open or closed 
comedones. These comedones, of course, can evolve into inﬂammatory lesions 
such  as  papules  and  pustules.  Comedogenic  reactions  are  generally  caused  by 
fatty  emollient  ingredients  used  in  skin  care  and  cosmetic  products.  For  more 
information on these comedogenic ingredients, see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity.




 
 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      283

Unfortunately, professional products are not immune from being acnegenic. 
Even  so-called  natural  products  are  not  necessarily  nonacnegenic.  Check  to 
make  sure  that  the  products  you  use  and  sell  have  been  properly  tested  for 
irritancy, so they do not cause acnegenic or follicle irritancy reactions. Inﬂamma-
tory acne is characterized by sudden ﬂares of papules and sometimes pustules.
Overtreated skin that has been exposed to many peeling or drying agents 
(or peeling agents were applied too often) will show signs of dry irritation and 
often ﬂares of inﬂammatory acne. Be very observant of your clients’ habits in 
these cases. Often they are overtreating their skin, combining peeling agents or 
peeling drugs, or may be using a new product that causes a ﬂare.

Hormones

Hormones—speciﬁcally  male  hormones,  or  androgens—are  the  substances 
that stimulate the sebaceous glands, which, in turn, produce more sebum. This 
sebum causes inﬂammation in the follicles, coating the cell buildup and provid-
ing a source of fatty acids, which is the food of P. acnes bacteria.

Testosterone,  an  androgen,  converts  to  dihydrotestosterone  (DHT), 
another form of male hormone, which “switches on” the oil gland. The oil gland 
is stimulated via receptor sites on the cells of the sebaceous glands, which are 
like little switches that are turned on by hormonal stimulation.

As we discussed in Chapter 5 (Hormones), males and females produce both 
male  and  female  hormones,  which  are  transported  around  the  body  via  the 
circulatory system.

Androgens are male hormones 
largely responsible for oily skin 
and acne.

Testosterone is the male hormone 
responsible for the development 
of typical male characteristics.

Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 
is a form of male hormone that 
stimulates the sebaceous glands 
to produce sebum.

Premenstrual, Hormonal, and Adult Acne

Premenstrual acne ﬂares are often referred to as adult acne. Often, women who 
have never had problems with acne as teenagers suddenly develop a problem in 
their 20s or 30s. Although this reaction can be related to comedogenic cosmet-
ics, stress, and hereditary acne factors, hormones play a signiﬁcant role in adult 
female acne.

Again, the male hormone (androgen) ﬂares in the bloodstream are the trigger 
for this type of ﬂare-up. Premenstrual ﬂares are caused by a sudden predominance 
of androgen, which corresponds with the eventual loss of the egg during menses.
The elevation of testosterone in the bloodstream begins 8 to 10 days before 
a  woman’s  period.  This  elevation  is  actually  not  an  increase  in  androgen  as 
much as a decrease in the female hormone estrogen. Nevertheless, a larger per-
centage of androgen suddenly is present in the bloodstream; therefore, a sudden 
likely increase in stimulation of the sebaceous glands occurs.

A  sudden  ﬂow  of  sebum  in  the  follicle  causes  perifollicular  inﬂammation 
(inﬂammation around the inside of the follicle), thus creating an anaerobic environ-
ment and resulting in sudden ﬂares of papules and pustules. Many women also 
notice that premenstrual ﬂares result in sore, inﬂamed papules. The soreness is due 
to the swelling and relatively deep inﬂammation inside the follicle. This deep swell-
ing is more likely to cause pressure on nerve endings, thus creating a painful lesion.

Chin Acne

Many women suffer from premenstrual acne ﬂares, predominantly in the lower 
part of the face, the chin, and the jawline (Figure 15-9). Many researchers believe 
that this area is the most responsive to male hormone sebaceous stimulation. It is 
also believed that many women have very large sebaceous glands in these areas 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.284         CHAPTER 15

.
c
n
I

i

e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-9  Acne in the chin and jawline can be related to hormone imbalances.

and relatively small follicles. When a sudden sebaceous stimulation occurs, these 
follicles  ﬁll  rapidly,  causing  inﬂammation  due  to  the  large  amount  of  sebum. 
Women who suffer from chronic chin acne should see a dermatologist. Hormone 
treatments are available to help this problem.

Stress

Stress is what causes “pimples on prom night.” Many acne sufferers, as well as 
dermatologists and estheticians, have noticed acne ﬂare-ups when a patient is 
under stress. A ﬁnal exam at school, dating problems, ﬁnancial problems, or dif-
ﬁculties at work frequently seem to accompany breakouts.

There is a fairly simple explanation for this relationship. Stress causes the 
brain to manufacture a hormone that, in turn, causes the adrenal gland to make 
more hormones, which causes an abundance of oil to be produced. The reac-
tion is very similar to the premenstrual reaction.

Birth Control Pills

Birth control pills can cause an androgenic ﬂare-up that can contribute to acne. 
When a woman starts using birth control pills, her skin may get better or worse. 




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      285

The same may be true when she discontinues birth control pills. Women using 
birth control pills may ﬁnd that their monthly premenstrual breakouts occur at 
different times in the cycle.

The reasoning here is simple. Birth control pills affect hormone levels and may 
affect  different  women  in  different  ways.  For  more  information,  see  Chapter  5, 
Hormones. If your client seems to experience ﬂares of acne when starting, stop-
ping, or changing birth control pills, advise her to see her doctor.

Pregnancy

Pregnancy may also produce unpredictable ﬂare-ups or clearing of acne. The 
usual course is that acne gets worse during the ﬁrst three months of pregnancy 
and then gets dramatically better. The acne may ﬂare up again after childbirth 
or after breastfeeding is discontinued. Theoretically, these reactions are due to 
obvious hormone changes; but stress levels may be partially responsible.

Menopause

During  menopause,  similar  hormonal  changes  are  very  prominent  and  may 
cause ﬂares. Because menopause is a time of more permanent hormonal change, 
some  women  experience  even  more  acne  ﬂares  and  other  androgen-induced 
symptoms, such as facial hair growth.

Treatment of Hormonal Acne

In many cases, hormonal acne ﬂares can be handled using topical treatments to 
manage these ﬂares. Regular deep-cleansing facial treatments, along with proper 
home care for acne-prone skin, as described later in this chapter, are helpful in 
controlling the problem in many cases.

Many women with hormonal acne also have very oily or oily–combination 
skin. Proper use of a good rinseable foaming-type cleanser, gel-based 10 percent 
alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) used daily, and the elimination of products that are 
comedogenic (cause clogged-pores; see Chapter 16) help prevent comedones 
from forming and cut down on acne ﬂares.

In chronic cases of hormonal acne, hormonal therapy using special kinds 
of  birth  control  pills  may  be  prescribed  by  a  dermatologist,  gynecologist,  or 
family  physician.  Tricyclen®  is  a  birth  control  pill  approved  by  the  Food  and 
Drug Administration (FDA) as a management drug for hormonal acne. It works 
by decreasing the blood levels of the androgen testosterone, which decreases 
stimulation of the sebaceous glands. 

Spironolactone is another form of prescription hormonal therapy for acne 
that is anti-androgen. It works by binding the androgen receptors and decreas-
ing androgen production. Spironolactone cannot be used in pregnant women. 

In extreme cases, chronic hormonal acne may also be a symptom of more 
serious illnesses such as ovarian polycystic disease and adrenal growths. If you 
notice chronic hormonal breakouts that are not responsive to topical treatment, 
do not hesitate to suggest that the client consult her doctor.

The Beginning of Teenage Acne

The beginning of teenage acne is characterized by minor breakouts in the nose 
area. Small blackheads and clogged follicles, small papules, and small milia are 
found. The esthetician will notice obvious visible pores in the nose and chin and 

Spironolactone is an anti-
androgen medication used to 
treat hormonally related acne 
in women.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.286         CHAPTER 15

Keratosis pilaris is a condition 
in which the skin exhibits redness 
and irritation in patches, accompa-
nied by a rough texture, and small 
pinpoint-sized white papules that 
look like tiny milia.

sometimes the forehead. This is the beginning of adolescent pore structure, and 
usually, of puberty and adolescence. Usually within six months, more pimples 
will develop. Boys may notice small pimples in the lower cheeks. This may be 
caused by the beginning of beard hair growth. The hair is beginning to grow, 
but the follicle is not large enough to accommodate the hair.

This condition is known as keratosis pilaris, which essentially is a genetic 
condition of hyperkeratinization resulting in a “pile-up” of dead cells blocking 
the follicle. Often, a very small hair is trying to force its way out of the follicle, 
resulting in irritation. This condition may affect girls or boys, usually making the 
skin red or pink and producing a “sandpaper” texture. It is often seen in the 
lower cheeks. If you look carefully at the area, you may notice very small white-
heads, which are responsible for the bumpy feel. Keratosis pilaris also frequently 
occurs on the upper arm and is more likely to affect adults in this area. Keratosis 
pilaris is best treated with alpha ahydroxy acid home-care lotions and gels, and 
use of mild mechanical exfoliating cleansers helps bump off dead cells to allow 
the hair to come out. Salon treatment using softening and extraction techniques 
is also helpful (Figure 15-10).

Young teenagers should be treated every two to three months until breakouts 
become persistent. At that time, more frequent salon treatments are recommended. 
Recommend home care including a gentle, nonmedicated, foaming cleanser, a toner 

A

B

.
c
n
I

i

e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-10A AND B 

Improvement in bumpy arms after using a glycolic hydrator.




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      287

for oily–combination skin, and a mild gel of alpha hydroxy acid or salicylic acid 
or 2½   percent benzoyl peroxide gel. Used regularly, these products will help pre-
pubescent teens through this period. Teenagers usually do not need a moisturizer 
except  in  cold  weather.  Regular,  daily  use  of  noncomedogenic,  broad-spectrum 
sunscreen is also advised. If makeup is used, it should be noncomedogenic.

Lack of Care

Young teenagers may not be disciplined when it comes to a regular facial care 
routine. Gently explain to them the need for consistent care. At this age, they 
usually will take advice from you before they will from their mother.

Teenagers are not the only age group that suffers from lack of skin hygiene. 
Even though acne is not caused by dirt, many adults neglect their skin. Sleeping 
in makeup is not only unhygienic, it also means that the night treatment is not 
applied. Explain to the client that she may come to have a treatment at the salon 
twice a month, but she is responsible for the other 60 times a month that the skin 
is cleansed and conditioned. Help her ﬁnd simple routines that she enjoys doing. 
Teach her to clean her face as soon as she gets home for the evening. This is also 
a good time to ﬂoss her teeth, right after dinner. When she gets sleepy later in the 
evening, she can walk past the bathroom guilt-free!

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 
THAT INFLUENCE ACNE

Heat and Humidity

Without question, acne is more likely to ﬂare up in the summer months when 
heat and humidity are high. Heat causes the skin to swell slightly, and humidity 
causes tremendous swelling of the outer epidermis. It is reasonable to assume 
that this swelling could possibly exert enough pressure on the follicles to further 
complicate an already existing condition.

It has been observed over the years that people who live in tropical, warm 
climates with high humidity experience a fairly predictable seasonal pattern of 
ﬂare-ups. Estheticians should tell their clients about this pattern. If a client feels 
her skin ﬂares up a lot in the summer, encourage her to have more frequent salon 
treatments during this type of weather. Adjustment of the client’s home care to ﬁt 
the seasonal weather issues is also a good idea.

Sun Exposure

Although sun exposure may have an immediate drying effect on acne lesions, 
sun damages skin and is documented to cause more “cell buildup,” which can 
add to or increase the chances of acne ﬂare-up.

Many patients with acne claim their acne improves with sun exposure. Tan-
ning masks the redness, and as the buildup of tan cells occurs on the surface 
of the skin, acne may appear better. As soon as beach season is over, however, 
these same patients notice reoccurrence of their acne. What actually happens is 
that the tan fades as tanned cells shed and the cell buildup subsides, suddenly 
exposing a tremendous number of clogged follicles and closed comedones. The 
most  unfortunate  part  of  this  situation  is  that  these  clients  have  a  strong  ten-
dency to neglect treating their acne during beach season, thus making it more 
complicated when the tan fades. It is up to the esthetician to educate the client 
before sun season to avoid this problem.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.288         CHAPTER 15

Greasy Workplaces

Patients  with  acne  who  work  in  environments  where  their  skin  is  constantly 
exposed to large amounts of occlusive grease or airborne grease, such as that 
present in fast-food restaurants, may notice a strong ﬂare-up in their conditions. 
Occupations such as car mechanics and short-order cooks are good examples 
of such situations. It is best for these individuals to avoid working for prolonged 
periods of time under these conditions. Advise clients who must work in these 
types of jobs to cleanse their skin at regular intervals (about twice during an 
eight-hour period) with a mild cleanser that will remove the environmental oil 
without drying the skin too much.

Smoking and Acne

Smoking has long been suspected to be involved in many types of skin condi-
tions.  Now  it  has  been  scientiﬁcally  linked  to  noninﬂammatory  acne,  charac-
terized by clogged pores, closed comedones, milia, and even small cysts. This 
condition appears to affect more women than men, and it is more likely to affect 
adults who had acne as teenagers.

OVERCLEANING

Clients are constantly under the impression that acne is directly caused by lack 
of cleansing. Although keeping skin as clean as possible is certainly important, 
acne is not caused by dirt. In fact, acne can be aggravated by too much cleaning. 
Repeated exposure to detergents in facial cleansers, for example, can aggravate 
acne if the client is using the cleansers too often. Estheticians often ﬁnd that their 
clients are cleaning the face numerous times daily (more than three times). This 
can  easily  cause  enough  irritation  to  precipitate  an  inﬂammatory  acne  aggra-
vation.  It  can  also  damage  barrier  function,  causing  redness  and  dehydration 
issues. Instruct these clients to cleanse only two or at most three times a day. 
Another suggestion is to use a more aggressive cleanser only once a day and 
then use a gentler cleanser for any additional cleansings.

Acne excoriée is a condition 
in which a person picks at his 
or her acne lesions, causing 
scrapes and possible scars and 
hyperpigmentation.

An excoriation is a scrape or 
scratch on the skin.

Compulsive skin picking (CSP) 
is a condition in which a person 
picks at acne lesions.

Post-inﬂammatory hyperpig-
mentation describes dark mela-
nin splotches caused by trauma to 
the skin; this condition can result 
from acne pimples and papules.

SELF-TRAUMA EXCORIATIONS

Acne excoriée is a condition in which the client constantly picks at the skin. 
An excoriation is a scrape or scratch on the skin, in this case caused by the 
client. Most of the time, these clients are scratching or picking at small, closed 
comedones and papules. Often the raised portion of the acne lesion is literally 
scraped off the face, usually with the ﬁngernails.

It  has  been  estimated  that  2  percent  of  patients  have  a  problem  with 
compulsive skin picking (CSP), and that the disorder affects eight times as 
many  women  as  men.  Picking  may  be  subconscious  or  deliberate.  The  same 
individuals may overclean their skin or overapply medications or drying agents.
An  esthetician  will  notice  acne  excoriée  during  skin  analysis  because  the 
acne  lesions  are  ﬂat,  red,  and  sometimes  raw,  where  the  client  has  scraped 
off  the  entire  epidermis  to  the  point  of  bleeding.  The  lesion  often  looks  like 
a  freshly  scraped  knee  or  a  brush  burn  (Figure  15-11).  Sometimes  there  are 
scabs, which these clients have trouble leaving alone. Sometimes the esthetician 
notices round, dark, hyperpigmented lesions. This is hyperpigmentation, either 
caused by trauma, known as post-inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation, or by 
exposure to sun after the client has picked the lesions raw.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      289

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-11  Acne excoriée.

Clients  who  have  obvious  excoriated  acne  lesions  should  be  told  by  the 
esthetician not to pick at the lesions. The lesions will never heal properly if the 
scabs are constantly being scratched off. Fingernails carry many germs that can 
cause other infections besides acne. Encourage “picker” clients to use a mask at 
home instead of picking, or tell them to call and move their treatment appoint-
ment to an earlier date. Suggest that they wear cotton gloves while reading or 
watching television. The touch of the glove material will make them aware of 
picking at their skin.

Clients sometimes absentmindedly pick at an occasional pimple. However, 
when clients constantly have several scraped areas on the face, this is a differ-
ent situation. Some chronic pickers are often troubled mentally or suffer from a 
psychological disorder such as obsessive-compulsive disorder. Some may need 
referral to a psychologist or other mental health professional.

NUTRITION AND DIET

Numerous  falsehoods  exist  regarding  the  effects  of  food  on  acne.  Chocolate, 
nuts, seafood, speciﬁc greasy “teenage” foods such as burgers and french fries, 
pizza, and candy have all been falsely accused at one time of causing or worsen-
ing acne. Although many of these foods are not healthy in large quantities due to 
high sugar, cholesterol, or triglyceride content, they do not directly cause acne. 
Many patients with acne—and, unfortunately, some estheticians—still have the 
mistaken impression that these speciﬁc foods cause acne.

New  evidence,  however,  indicates  that  acne  symptoms  can  improve  with 
a low-glycemic diet. This type of diet avoids starchy carbohydrate foods, high-
sugar  foods,  and  carbohydrate-loaded  fast  foods.  Obese  individuals  are  very 
likely  to  have  hormonal  abnormalities,  and  a  low-glycemic  diet  can  not  only 
improve acne but also result in weight loss, which can have a stabilizing effect 
on hormones.

A properly balanced diet is important for good skin and good health. The 
food group that has consistently been implicated in aggravating acne conditions 
is iodides. Foods that are high in iodides include some types of shellﬁsh, kelp, 
squid, asparagus, and iodized salt in salty foods. Iodine causes a follicular irri-
tancy when ingested in large quantities. When consumed occasionally and in 
reasonable quantities, these foods probably do not cause serious problems. It 
stands to reason, though, that excessive consumption of foods high in iodides 
can cause acne to ﬂare up.

Milk and some milk products have been found to cause problems, primar-
ily in females. The fat in milk does not appear to be associated with acne. It is 
theorized that the hormones present in milk (from the cow) are the probable 




 
 
 
 
290         CHAPTER 15

culprits for causing acne ﬂares. If your client experiences chronic acne that topi-
cal treatment does not seem to clear up, ask her if she consumes a lot of milk 
or milk products. Milk is an important part of the diet, especially for the body’s 
calcium needs, and should not be discontinued unless the client experiences a 
direct correlation between milk consumption and ﬂares of acne.

Foods  are  not  the  major  cause  of  acne.  Unfortunately,  many  estheticians 
overemphasize diet when treating problem skin; they blame foods when their 
treatments seem not to be working. Failure of the treatment plan is more likely 
to result from poor product choices or incomplete home-care programs. If you 
are truly concerned about the client’s diet, suggest that she see her doctor or 
refer her to a registered dietician.

Zinc supplements are furnished by dermatologists to some of their patients 
with acne. When prescribed for cases of inﬂamed acne to reduce redness and 
inﬂammation, the usual dosage is 100 mg per day. It is best to check with a der-
matologist before suggesting zinc supplements to your clients, because estheti-
cians are not registered dieticians and therefore are not authorities on nutritional 
science. It is best to leave advice to the specialists in this area.

ACNE AND COSMETICS

Probably  the  best  service  an  esthetician  can  render  to  a  patient  with  acne  is 
helping the patient choose cosmetics and skin care products that are noncom-
edogenic (see Chapter 16, Comedogenicity).

So many factors cause or contribute to acne, but the esthetician has control 
over only a few. Heredity and hormones are not part of the practice of esthetics. 
Even though we may know a lot about these subjects, the esthetician can do 
little to control or affect these factors. Estheticians can temporarily reduce stress 
by  administering  soothing  treatments,  but  the  stress-reducing  effects  of  these 
therapies do not last long when the client gets in an argument with the boss or 
forgets when a term paper is due.

The point here is that the only real factors estheticians can control are how 
the client cleanses the skin and what cosmetics and skin care products the client 
uses routinely.

It is imperative that the esthetician fully understand comedogenicity for cli-
ents with acne or problem skin. It is the best service we can offer them. The 
client may come in for treatment only once a month, but she exposes herself to 
cosmetics and skin care up to 60 times a month.

The  esthetician  must  eliminate  all  possible  comedogenic  factors  from  the 
home-care and cosmetic regimen of the patient with acne. Cosmetics, skin care, 
and  topical  drugs  are  the  only  substances  that  are  in  constant,  direct  contact 
with the skin.

ACNE-RELATED CONDITIONS

Seborrheic dermatitis is an 
inﬂammation of the sebaceous 
glands, resulting in patches of 
inﬂamed ﬂakiness in oily areas 
of the skin.

Pityrosporum ovale is a type 
of yeast sometimes associated 
with seborrheic dermatitis.

Seborrheic dermatitis is a sometimes chronic inﬂammation of the skin asso-
ciated  with  oily  skin  and  oily  areas.  Seborrheic  dermatitis  is  characterized  by 
dry-looking, ﬂaky, crusty patches. Redness is often apparent under these ﬂaky 
patches.  Seborrheic  dermatitis  is  most  often  seen  in  the  T-zone  of  the  face, 
eyebrows, hairline, inside the ears, along the sides of the nose, and in the scalp 
(Figure 15-12). The exact cause of seborrheic dermatitis is unknown, but it is 
believed to be associated with a type of yeast called Pityrosporum ovale.

Seborrheic dermatitis is often misdiagnosed by the client or an inexperienced 
esthetician as dry skin; it is actually an inﬂammation of the oil glands. Seborrheic 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      291

.
d
e
v
r
e
s
e
r

s
t
h
g
i
r

l
l

A

l

.
y
g
o
o
t
a
m
r
e
D

f
o

y
m
e
d
a
c
A
n
a
c
i
r
e
m
A
m
o
r
f

i

i

n
o
s
s
m
r
e
p
h
t
i

w
d
e
t
n
i
r
p
e
R

FIGURE 15-12  Seborrheic dermatitis presents with red, ﬂaky skin in oily areas of the 
face and most often affects the T-zone of the face, eyebrows, ears, scalp, and hairline.

dermatitis is best treated by a dermatologist, but the esthetician may be involved 
in choosing the correct skin care program. Sometimes a ﬂare may be triggered 
after a client ﬁrst uses a cream or product that is too rich or fat based. It is, again, 
important to avoid fatty, comedogenic products. Suggest a gentle but thorough 
rinseable cleanser; toner; and a very light, noncomedogenic moisturizing ﬂuid. 
Overmoisturizing can be a contributing factor to ﬂares of seborrheic dermatitis. 
Sunscreen is important for all skin types. Fragranced products, essential oils, or 
stimulating products and products with drying alcohols may aggravate or cause 
seborrheic dermatitis to ﬂare.

Clients who suffer from seborrheic dermatitis are likely to experience ﬂares 
as the seasons are changing. Lack of routine cleaning occasionally has been asso-
ciated with the disorder. Dermatological treatment usually includes topical hydro-
cortisone, coal tar shampoos, salicylic acid, selenium sulﬁde, and zinc pyrithione. 
Anti-yeast/antifungal topical and oral medications are used in severe cases.

In the salon, avoid excessive massage, stimulating treatments or products, 
and products with drying alcohol. Most peeling agents should be avoided when 
the seborrheic dermatitis is ﬂared. Use soothing, nonirritating treatments, as if 
you were treating oily-sensitive skin. Gentle extraction of the areas affected is 
helpful.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
292         CHAPTER 15

Perioral dermatitis is dermatitis 
around the mouth.

i

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-13  Typical pattern of perioral dermatitis on the chin. Perioral dermatitis 
can also appear on the cheeks or anywhere around the mouth area.

Perioral Dermatitis

Perioral dermatitis, which is dermatitis around the mouth, is also considered 
an acne-related disorder. Red papules and pustules in the mouth, nose, and chin 
area, usually small in size and in clusters of several lesions, are apparent. Almost 
always found in women, perioral dermatitis often occurs during the child-bear-
ing years, from ages 20 to 35 (Figure 15-13).

The condition is sometimes accompanied by scaliness and stinging dehy-
dration. Moisturizers may complicate the condition. If a moisturizer is used, it 
should be water based and noncomedogenic and used sparingly. Perioral der-
matitis is, again, in the domain of the dermatologist. There is no known cause 
for  perioral  dermatitis.  Because  it  is  almost  exclusively  seen  in  females,  it  is 
thought to be somehow hormonally related. 

Clients may report to you that their normal acne treatments are not working 
on this area of the face. This is not typical acne, and it needs medical referral. 
The usual course of treatment is oral antibiotics. Sometimes topical antibiotics 
or antibacterials are prescribed, but topicals are not usually effective. It is not 
unusual to have recurrences, and they must be treated by the doctor.

Instruct the client not to touch or rub the area, because this can worsen the 
condition. In the salon, avoid massage or overstimulation of the area. Esthetic treat-
ments can help the client’s other problems, but you must refer the client to a der-
matologist  for  treatment  of  the  perioral  dermatitis.  Home  care  for  clients  should 
emphasize lightweight, nonfatty, noncomedogenic, fragrance-free hydrating ﬂuids 
or sunscreen/day creams. Stay away from any heavy-textured or oily product. Mild 
foaming cleansers and toners designed for oily to combination skin are appropriate.

CONCEPTS OF ACNE TREATMENT

Esthetic  treatment  of  acne,  acne-prone,  and  clog-prone  skin  involves  several 
basic concepts.




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      293

Follicular Exfoliation

Many estheticians make the mistake of giving deep-cleansing facials, carefully 
and  skillfully  removing  sebaceous  ﬁlaments  (clogged  pores)  and  open  and 
closed comedones. But they never make an effort to have the client treat the 
areas on a daily basis at home to prevent new lesion development. They treat 
only the visible lesions, forgetting about the hundreds of microcomedones lying 
under the surface of any acneic skin. The esthetician must always remember that 
the microcomedo is the primary lesion of acne. If you do not control the devel-
opment of the microcomedo, you cannot control the problem skin.

The  key  to  controlling  the  microcomedo  is  the  daily  use  of  follicular 
exfoliants. These are chemicals that cause the inside of the follicle to exfoliate, 
breaking loose cell buildup and solidiﬁed sebum, loosening clogged pores, and 
drying  visible  acne  lesions.  The  client  must  use  some  type  of  these  exfoliant 
products at home every day. The real value in using these chemicals is that they 
break up the microcomedones that already exist and keep the hyperkeratosis 
from accumulating to form new microcomedones.

Keep in mind that there is no cure for acne. You are battling hereditary fac-
tors. Just because you clear a face does not mean it will stay clear, unless the client 
takes daily care at home to keep the cell buildup broken up and to prevent new 
microcomedones from developing, therefore preventing new visible acne lesions. 
The client must treat the skin every day, even if the skin seems perfectly clear.

These exfoliants are not scrub cleansers. They are keratolytics that cause dead 
skin cells to shed by loosening them from each other. Over-the-counter (OTC) 
drug forms of these exfoliants include benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, resorcinol, and 
salicylic acid. Exfoliant performance ingredients include glycolic acid, lactic 
acid, other alpha hydroxy acids (AHAs), and enzymes. Prescription keratolytics 
include  tretinoin  (Retin-A®),  adapalene  (Differin®),  tazarotene  (Tazorac®),  and 
azelaic acid (Azelex®).

Clients should not use more than one type of exfoliant agent at a time, espe-
cially if using the prescription exfoliant, because they are much more aggressive. 
Double exfoliation is not a good idea. It strips the barrier function and makes the 
skin very red and suddenly incredibly sensitive. Also, do not use any salon exfo-
liation treatments, such as microdermabrasion or AHA peels, in combination with 
these prescription drugs, unless approved by the physician treating the patient.

Oil Control

Controlling  and  dispersing  the  large  volume  of  sebum  involved  with  acne  is 
helpful  in  preventing  lesion  development.  Daily  home  use  of  foaming,  deter-
gent-type cleansers helps disperse this excess oil. Some cleansers may include 
a  keratolytic  or  antibacterial  like  benzoyl  peroxide  or  salicylic  acid.  Carefully 
choose a cleanser for your client that has the right amount of detergent for her 
skin type and sensitivity.

Oil control can also be achieved with the use of oil control cosmetics, which 
may be lotions, gels, or actual color cosmetics that contain ingredients that help 
absorb excess oil. They remedy shine problems more than having a therapeu-
tic effect. These products should be used in conjunction with, not instead of, a 
good, foaming, rinseable cleanser.

Avoidance of Oils and Comedogenic Products

Persons with oily, clog-prone, and acne-prone skin must be very careful when 
choosing moisturizing and conditioning skin care products and makeup products. 

Follicular exfoliants are chemi-
cal ingredients that slough the 
inside of the follicle, shedding 
and preventing cell buildup that 
can cause comedones and acne 
lesions.

Sulfur is an exfoliant and an 
antibacterial.

Resorcinol is a peeling agent, 
usually coupled with sulfur, used 
in acne treatments and drying 
lotions.

Salicylic acid is a beta hydroxy 
acid ingredient used for exfo-
liating and for its antibacterial 
properties.

Glycolic acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid used in acne treatment as a 
follicular exfoliant.

Lactic acid is an alpha hydroxy 
acid used as an exfoliant.

Enzymes are naturally occurring 
chemical substances that help dis-
solve cell buildup.

Tazarotene is a topical prescrip-
tion retinoid (vitamin A derivative) 
used to treat acne. It is commer-
cially known as Tazorac®.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.294         CHAPTER 15

Erythromycin is an antibiotic 
used topically for medical acne 
treatment.

As discussed in Chapter 16, many cosmetic and topical agents are fatty materials 
that can contribute to the worsening of acne or clogged pores when used on 
acne-prone and clog-prone skin types. All of these fatty agents must be strictly 
avoided  when  treating  any  skin  that  is  already  overproducing  sebum.  Clients 
rely  on  estheticians  to  be  experts  in  choosing  the  correct,  noncomedogenic 
products for their skin. It is important that estheticians who treat problem skin 
be well educated in this area.

Antimicrobials and Antibiotics

Antimicrobial and antibiotic drug chemicals kill acne bacteria. OTC antimicro-
bials  include  benzoyl  peroxide,  sulfur,  and  salicylic  acid.  Prescription  topical 
antibiotics  include  clindamycin  (Cleocin-T ®)  and  erythromycin.  Prescription 
oral antibiotics are taken by mouth and are prescribed in more severe cases of 
acne. Common oral antibiotics used for acne include tetracycline, minocycline, 
and erythromycin.

TREATMENT PRODUCTS 
AND INGREDIENTS FOR ACNE

Benzoyl Peroxide

Benzoyl peroxide is a frequently 
used acne medication; it is an 
exfoliant and antiseptic.

Benzoyl peroxide is an excellent acne treatment medication that works well on 
most forms of acne vulgaris and occasional pimples. It is an OTC drug ingredi-
ent used and sold by estheticians practicing corrective skin care (Figure 15-14A 
and 15-14B).

Benzoyl peroxide works by dislodging and shedding off excess cell buildup, 
temporarily dilating the follicles, and breaking up follicle impactions and debris. 

A

B

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-14A AND B  This client had Grade II acne complicated by hormonal therapy. After eight weeks using 
a mix of benzoyl peroxide gel and an AHA/salicylic mixed gel, the client had good clearing results.




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      295

Benzoyl peroxide also releases oxygen in the follicle, helping to kill bacteria. 
Benzoyl peroxide is available in a variety of bases, from drying clay bases to 
masks, creams, gels, and lotions. The lotions and gels are most frequently used 
by estheticians.

Benzoyl peroxide normally is made in three strengths:

•  2½   percent for mild acne and thin, sensitive skin
•  5 percent for moderate acne
•  10 percent for more severe acne

Additional strengths are available by physician’s prescription. Scrubs and foaming 
washes containing benzoyl peroxide are also widely used. Unfortunately, many 
people are or become allergic to benzoyl peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is also a 
bleach and may remove color from fabric and hair if contact is made. Benzoyl 
peroxide may also be used in the treatment room as a treatment after extraction.

Recommended Usage of Benzoyl Peroxide

  1. First and most important, check to see if the client has ever experienced an 
allergy to benzoyl peroxide. Many clients will overuse a benzoyl peroxide 
product, resulting in peeling and irritation that the client may assume is an 
allergy. When in doubt, don’t use it.

  2. Benzoyl peroxide may be used as a keratolytic to loosen impactions (open 
and closed comedones) or as a treatment for papules and pustules. There-
fore, benzoyl peroxide can be used on present pimples or used as a pre-
ventative for development of future lesions. Using benzoyl peroxide only on 
pimples does not help prevent microcomedones. The product must be used 
lightly all over the face (except the eyes) to keep follicles ﬂushed of debris 
and to prevent new acne lesions from developing.

  3. Benzoyl peroxide should be applied at bedtime after cleansing and toning 
the skin with an appropriate cleanser and toner. Apply several very small 
dots across the face and gently massage until the product is absorbed. Avoid 
using anywhere near the eye area. After applying it across the face, apply 
small dots to individual raised acne lesions as needed. Be sure the product 
is absorbed and dry before bedtime. Benzoyl peroxide is a natural bleach 
that will bleach fabric and even hair if overapplied.

  4. Benzoyl peroxide can be an aggressive drying agent. Visible peeling of skin 
and ﬂakiness occur if the product is overused or used in too high a concen-
tration for the skin type. Some clients, especially older women, confuse this 
peeling with “aging.” Tightness of the peeling skin may accentuate lines and 
wrinkles for a short period of time. As the dead skin buildup is removed, the 
visible peeling lessens or subsides with continual use of benzoyl peroxide. 
Unfortunately, these clients often stop using the benzoyl peroxide just when 
it is beginning to work. It is best to explain this risk of temporary dryness 
and occasional ﬂakiness to the client at the ﬁrst consultation before the peel-
ing actually begins. Explain that the peeling will be temporary and is not the 
same type of drying that occurs with aging. Many older clients ﬁnd that, with 
continued use of a keratolytic agent, their aging skin looks better and their 
acne is controlled. With many clients, especially older ones, it is good to rec-
ommend a light, noncomedogenic moisturizer that they can use to combat 
the visible ﬂaking and peeling from drying agents. This product will make 
the skin more comfortable as well as make the drying areas look smoother.
Recommend that clients use a low percentage of benzoyl peroxide, usu-
ally 2.5 percent, when ﬁrst beginning to use benzoyl peroxide. A 2.5 percent 
gel works well on many clients without causing peeling and dryness.




   
296         CHAPTER 15

If  the  client’s  skin  is  very  sensitive  or  dryness-prone,  start  using  the 
benzoyl peroxide product every other night, alternating on the other night 
with a noncomedogenic hydrating ﬂuid. As the client’s skin gets used to the 
benzoyl peroxide, she can begin using this product every night.

  5. Occasionally, a client calls complaining of severe itching, burning, urticaria 
(hives), and rash. This is most likely an allergic reaction. Tell the client to 
discontinue treatment immediately. Severe allergic reactions should be seen 
by  a  dermatologist.  Overuse  of  benzoyl  peroxide  products,  as  previously 
discussed, can cause an irritation reaction similar in appearance. The client 
should  wait  until  the  irritation  completely  subsides  before  trying  benzoyl 
peroxide again. The client should then try applying the benzoyl peroxide to 
a small area for the ﬁrst day or two of application. If the irritation returns to 
the small test area, she should completely discontinue use.

  6. Benzoyl peroxide should be used with extreme caution on clients with very 
dark or black skin. It is recommended not to exceed 5 percent benzoyl per-
oxide in these clients. The area around the mouth should be treated very 
lightly, because occasionally African American clients will experience dark-
ening (hyperpigmentation) of this area.

Sulfur and Resorcinol

Sulfur and resorcinol are often combined in an acne-drying product. These prod-
ucts are usually available in gels, creams, masks, and clay-based “spot” treatment 
products. They are ideal for use when a client is allergic to benzoyl peroxide 
products. These products are also irritants and can cause irritant or allergic reac-
tions. They can be used in the same way as benzoyl peroxide products. They 
help  peel  away  excessive  cell  accumulations  and  loosen  follicle  impactions. 
Unlike benzoyl peroxide, however, these products do not release oxygen. As a 
general rule, they are not quite as aggressive as benzoyl peroxide; but they are 
less irritating. Although benzoyl peroxide is usually the more effective treatment, 
sulfur-resorcinol products are very helpful in drying acne lesions. If an allergy 
occurs, follow the same procedures as recommended for benzoyl peroxide.

Salicylic Acid

Probably the mildest of the drying agents, salicylic acid is ideal for use on older, 
drier skin types. It usually comes in lotion form and can be incorporated in a 
moisturizing  base.  It  is  available  in  various  strengths.  Many  companies  auto-
matically include salicylic acid in their moisturizers for problem skin. In thin or 
sensitive skin, it is often used as a day treatment, whereas benzoyl peroxide or 
sulfur-resorcinol  is  used  as  a  night  treatment.  One  advantage  of  salicylic  acid 
is that the ingredient is not only antibacterial and keratolytic but also has anti-
inﬂammatory beneﬁts.

Some people are very allergic to salicylates, the family of salicylic acid prod-
ucts. Salicylic acid, in its oral form, is aspirin. If your client is allergic to aspirin, 
avoid using salicylic acid on her skin.

Glycolic and Alpha Hydroxy Acids

Alpha hydroxy acid at 8 to 10 percent in a gel base is very effective in helping 
to remove impactions. Alpha hydroxy acids help acne by removing dead cell 
buildup and loosening impactions in the skin. Coupled with salicylic acid—and 
in more serious acne, benzoyl peroxide or sulfur-resorcinol—this treatment can 




   
Acne and the Esthetician      297

really help clogged skin and problem acne. After the acne has cleared, regular 
use can help keep follicles clearer of hyperkeratosis, helping to prevent com-
edones and other acne lesions. 

Anti-inﬂammatory Ingredients

Reducing redness and inﬂammation is another important treatment concept for 
treating acne and acne-prone skin. Products intended for acne now often contain 
anti-inﬂammatory  or  soothing  ingredients.  Soothing  agents,  many  of  which  are 
topical antioxidants like matricaria extract, green tea, chamomile, allantoin, licorice 
extract, and lichochalcone, are now routinely used in acne formulations. These 
soothing agents help with redness as well as follicular inﬂammation that can lead 
to inﬂammatory lesions. Anti-inﬂammatory agents should be used in conjunction 
with keratolytics and antibacterials for the best results. Some skin care companies 
now also feature internal supplements for acne that also address inﬂammation.

HOME-CARE PRODUCTS FOR CLIENTS 
WITH ACNE

Scrubs and washes are popular treatment cleansers for the acne patient. Several 
types of these rinseable cleansers are available.

The base of most of these washes is water and a mild-to-aggressive deter-
gent. These detergents are surfactants that help remove excess oil from the skin’s 
surface, which helps keep the oil from further clogging follicles. Examples of 
detergents are ammonium lauryl sulfate and disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate (a 
milder, less drying detergent used for more sensitive skin).

Acne medications such as benzoyl peroxide, sulfur-resorcinol, glycolic acid, 
and  salicylic  acid  are  sometimes  added  to  these  detergent  bases.  These  are 
referred  to  as  medicated  cleansers.  They  can  be  considerably  more  active 
than  regular  cosmetic  detergent  cleansers.  For  extremely  oily,  problem  skin, 
these  medicated  cleansers  sometimes  contain  small,  bead-like  granules  made 
of polyethylene or ground nuts, seeds, or hulls. These exfoliating cleansers 
mechanically remove surface cell buildup, helping the detergents or medication 
penetrate  the  surface  better.  However,  they  can  be  abrasive  to  red,  sensitive, 
thin skin, and they are not recommended for patients using Retin-A® or other 
prescription keratolytic drugs or isotretinoin (Accutane®). They should be used 
only on the thickest, oiliest skin types.

Cleansing milks for acne are generally recommended for makeup removal 
only. Their use should be followed by a mild-to-moderate detergent cleanser to 
remove  any  traces  of  the  cleansing  milk.  These  cleansing  milks  are  generally 
used at night only and should be made of noncomedogenic ingredients.

Astringents and Toners

Astringents and toners are usually recommended for clients with acne to use after 
cleansing. These toners are helpful in controlling surface oils and in lowering the 
pH after cleansing. They are always water based, with astringent chemicals such 
as witch hazel, isopropyl or SD alcohol, lemon extract, or citric acid. Some toners 
are made with antiseptics such as salicylic acid, which also exfoliates the skin.

Toners containing more aggressive drying agents such as alcohol and sali-
cylic  acid  should  be  avoided  on  sensitive  skin  or  the  skin  of  someone  using 
Retin-A® or other prescription peeling agents.

Medicated cleansers are acne 
cleansers to which medications 
such as benzoyl peroxide, sulfur-
resorcinol, and salicylic acid have 
been added.

Exfoliating cleansers are acne 
cleansers to which small, bead-
like granules made of polyeth-
ylene or ground nuts, seeds, or 
hulls have been added.

Cleansing milk is an emollient, 
nonfoaming cleanser generally 
used for makeup removal.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.298         CHAPTER 15

Bentonite is an oil-absorbing clay 
frequently used in clay cleansing 
masks.

Day Treatment for Acne-Prone Skin

Acne and oily skin are not immune from sun damage. In fact, sun protection is 
often neglected in the patient with acne. The use of peeling agents increases this 
need for sunscreen protection.

Advise your client to use an SPF 15 or higher, lightweight, broad-spectrum 
sunscreen  that  has  been  tested  for  comedogenicity  and  follicle  irritancy.  This 
should be applied every morning after an application of 8 to 10 percent alpha 
hydroxy gel.

Night Treatments

Medicated gels have already been brieﬂy discussed. These gels or creams con-
tain peeling agents to help remove cell buildup and are extremely beneﬁcial to 
clients  with  acne.  They  contain  benzoyl  peroxide,  salicylic  acid,  sulfur,  resor-
cinol, or glycolic acid. The exfoliant gel should be applied very lightly all over 
the face (except the eye area), even in areas where there are no current acne 
ﬂares.  Remember,  you  must  prevent  the  development  of  microcomedones  to 
prevent the recurrence of acne.

Hydrating ﬂuids are sometimes needed by clients with acne to combat ﬂak-
ing caused by the medicated gels. Adult patients with acne frequently require 
the  use  of  these  hydrating  ﬂuids.  A  good  hydrating  ﬂuid  for  problem  skin  is 
extremely  light  in  texture  and  made  without  comedogenic  ingredients.  These 
ﬂuids are often alternated with peeling treatments and used on skin with acne 
tendencies and during colder seasons.

Masks for Acne

Masks for clients with acne are almost always in a clay-type drying base. The 
clay most frequently used is bentonite, which has excellent oil-absorbing quali-
ties. Masks for acne are frequently also medicated, containing benzoyl peroxide, 
sulfur, or sulfurated lime. They are available in a variety of strengths. Camphor is 
a popular ingredient for more sensitive and adult skins, because it is less drying 
than the keratolytic agents. Some clay masks also contain a mechanical granule, 
such as pumice or polyethylene, to help exfoliate during application and rinsing.
Masks should be applied for 15 to 20 minutes after night cleansing. After 
drying, they should be removed by wetting the mask and then gently wiping 
it off with a very soft cloth or sponge. Toner and night treatment should then 
be applied.

Masks are used two or three times a week, depending on the client’s condi-

tion and oiliness. Weather and climate may also inﬂuence use frequency.

Home-Care Treatment for Beginning 
Teenage Acne
Morning Treatment

  1. Wash the face thoroughly with rinseable foaming cleanser. Use a sponge or 

soft cloth to help exfoliate surface cells. Rinse thoroughly.

  2. Apply mild antiseptic toner with a damp cotton ball or gauze to the entire 

face.

  3. Apply an 8 to 10 percent alpha hydroxy gel to the entire face, avoiding the 
eye area. Before doing so, explain to the teenager that it is normal for this 
gel to sting slightly when ﬁrst applied.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      299

  4. After the alpha hydroxy gel has been absorbed, apply a noncomedogenic, 
lightweight  broad-spectrum  SPF  15  sunscreen.  Most  sun  damage  occurs 
before people reach age 18; therefore, sunscreen must be used daily.

Night Treatment

  1. Remove any makeup thoroughly with noncomedogenic cleansing milk.
  2. Wash face thoroughly with rinseable cleanser. Apply toner.
  3. Apply alpha hydroxy gel as in the morning treatment.
  4. Apply a small amount of 2½   or 5 percent benzoyl peroxide gel to clogged 
areas. Gently massage until the gel penetrates. Apply additional dabs of gel 
to  individual  raised  lesions  (papules  and  pustules).  The  only  medication 
seen should be on the lesions. Excessive peeling may result—particularly in 
young, sensitive skin—if too much medication gel is used.

Salon Treatment

Salon  treatment  should  be  administered  whenever  clogs  and  comedones  are 
present. Sometimes treatment is necessary only every month or two during the 
early teenage years. Treatment should be more frequent when apparent blem-
ishes are more frequent. Parents should be consulted and advised when treating 
very young skin, so that they may advise children at home. It is often best to 
consult with the young client without the parent present and then discreetly talk 
to the parent afterward. Teenagers often perform home care better if they do not 
feel supervised. It is important to advise parents to bring the young client in as 
soon as pimples start to develop. Unfortunately, many parents neglect a child’s 
acne, thinking he or she will “outgrow it,” until the teenager has a more serious 
condition. Remember: “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure!”

Home-Care Treatment for Grade I Acne
Morning

  1. Wash the face with granular (nongranular if sensitive or thin skin) medicated 
cleanser, with wet ﬁngertips and then with a wet sponge or very soft cloth. 
Rinse thoroughly with room-temperature water.

  2. Apply moderate strength toner to the entire face (except eyes). Allow to dry 

brieﬂy.

  3. Apply an 8 to 10 percent alpha hydroxy gel to the entire face, avoiding the 

eye area.

  4. After the alpha hydroxy gel has been absorbed, apply a noncomedogenic, 

lightweight, broad-spectrum, SPF 15 sunscreen.

Afternoon It is sometimes advisable in very oily skins to repeat the morning 
procedure in the midafternoon, or after school for teenagers. Cleansing should be 
repeated in the afternoon if working in a greasy environment or after exercising.

Evening

  1. Remove makeup thoroughly with noncomedogenic cleansing milk.
  2. Wash  the  face  again  with  medicated  cleanser.  Nonmedicated  foaming 
cleanser can be substituted if the skin is irritated, sensitive, or peeling.

  3. Apply toner as in the morning.
  4. Apply alpha hydroxy gel as in the morning.
  5. Apply 2½   or 5 percent benzoyl peroxide, sulfur-resorcinol, or salicylic gel 
or lotion to all clogged and oily areas lightly. This treatment should penetrate 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.300         CHAPTER 15

A

B

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-15A AND B  This case of Grade I acne was improved signiﬁcantly in only six weeks of home care by 
eliminating comedogenic products, using daily follicular exfoliants to loosen and prevent hyperkeratosis, and us-
ing an effective foaming cleanser to control sebum.

almost immediately. Apply additional dabs to pimples and raised lesions. 
It is important for the client to understand that they are to treat not only 
the raised lesions. Treating unaffected but oily areas routinely with light 
applications  will  help  break  up  cell  buildup  and  prevent  future  lesions 
(Figure 15-15 and Figure 15-16).

Frequency of Salon Treatments Weekly or biweekly deep-cleansing extrac-
tion  treatments  are  advised  until  the  acne  clears  substantially.  This  normally 
takes between three and six months. After clearing, the client should be treated 

A

B

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-16  This male college student had excellent results using a combination 
of mild 2.5 percent benzoyl peroxide gel and AHA/salicylic acid mixed gel, along 
with proper cleanser, noncomedogenic moisturizer, and sunscreen.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      301

every three to four weeks in the salon and should use masks two to three times 
a week at home. The client should be reminded that acne is a controllable, not 
curable, condition and that upkeep is very important.

Home-Care for Grade II Acne

The  home-care  routine  is  the  same  as  for  Grade  I  acne;  however,  avoid  very 
strong toners. Remember, there are usually many closed comedones in Grade 
II acne. These lesions have smaller pore openings, and astringents may prevent 
these follicle openings from loosening with home-care therapy.

Grade II acne is one of the hardest types to clear. It requires diligent atten-
tion from both client and esthetician. Treatments in the salon should be weekly 
or biweekly. Extensive extraction is necessary. After the ﬁrst consultation, allow 
the client to use products two weeks before the second salon treatment. The 
closed  comedones  usually  will  be  much  easier  to  extract  after  two  weeks  of 
proper home care. It is especially important for these clients to avoid comedo-
genic products. The esthetician should check every product carefully for com-
edogenic ingredients (Figure 15-17A–D and Figure 15-18A–D).

B

A

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-17A–D  This client had problem skin for 15 years and was using comedogenic product before starting 
treatment. All comedogenic products, including makeup, were eliminated and replaced with noncomedogenic 
products. Home care included sunscreen, hydrator, a 10 percent alpha/beta hydroxy gel, a drying lotion for 
blemishes, a sulfur-based mask, and effective surfactant cleansers. No salon treatment was performed. Results 
photographed after six weeks of home care. Note improvements in redness, comedones, texture, and coloration.




 
 
 
 
302         CHAPTER 15

C

D

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-17A–D  (continued)

Home Care for Grade III Acne

Most Grade III acne cases should be seen by both the dermatologist and the esthe-
tician. The esthetician must pay careful attention to the dermatologist’s instruc-
tions and prescriptions. Benzoyl peroxide granular washes, stronger astringents, 
and 5 to 10 percent benzoyl peroxide gel may be used, if they are not contrain-
dicated by the dermatologist. Oral medication is often required for these clients. 
They also will need help in choosing noncomedogenic products and makeup.

Treatment is advised weekly, unless otherwise directed by the dermatologist. 
Once clear, the client should be seen for salon treatment every three to four weeks.

Home Care for Grade IV (Cystic) Acne

Grade IV acne always requires a dermatologist. This is the oiliest and worst acne 
condition. Home care should be the same as for Grade III acne, again following any 
speciﬁc instructions from the dermatologist. Salon treatment should be frequent to 




 
 
 
 
A

B

Acne and the Esthetician      303

.
c
n
I

i

e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 15-18A–D  Grade II acne. This client improved signiﬁcantly after several months of esthetic treatment.

help prevent lesions by removing clogs and open and closed comedones. Be very 
careful if cysts or nodules are present during treatment. Refer the client to the der-
matologist immediately for treatment of any cysts, nodules, or deep papules. Again, 
avoidance of comedogenic ingredients is a must for these clients.

TOPICAL DRUGS OFTEN PRESCRIBED 
BY THE DERMATOLOGIST 
FOR ACNE TREATMENT
Retin-A, Retinoids, and Other 
Prescription Keratolytics

Tretinoin, better known as Retin-A, is a vitamin A acid that was developed in the 
late 1960s at the University of Pennsylvania by a team of researchers headed by 
Dr. Albert Kligman. Retin-A works by helping to “ﬂush out” follicular debris, thus 
helping to clear the follicles of comedones. It also is an excellent drying agent for 
oily skin and pimples. It is used extensively as a prescription in all grades of acne 

Tretinoin is a form of vitamin 
A acid, also known as Retin-A®, a 
prescription drug for treating acne.




 
 
 
 
304         CHAPTER 15

C

D

FIGURE 15-18A–D  (continued)

.
c
n
I
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

i

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

and is often used for other skin problems (see Chapter 20, The New Science of 
Aging Skin Treatment). Tretinoin requires a physician’s prescription, because it is 
a potent topical acid. It is available in cream, gel, and liquid forms.

Because it is a powerful keratolytic, tretinoin is usually not used with other 
keratolytics  such  as  benzoyl  peroxide,  sulfur-resorcinol,  and  alpha  hydroxy  or 
salicylic  acids,  except  by  dermatologist  recommendation.  Occasional  cases  do 
well with benzoyl peroxide and Retin-A. This is a dermatological decision. Do not 
add keratolytics to a Retin-A user’s regimen without consulting the dermatologist.
Tretinoin,  also  known  as  retinoic  acid,  has  no  direct  antibacterial  effect  on 
bacteria within the follicle, however. It is often used with a topical antibiotic called 




 
 
 
 
Acne and the Esthetician      305

Clindamycin is a topical pre-
scription antibiotic used for acne 
treatment.

Adapalene is a form of vitamin A, 
also known as Differin®, that is a 
topical prescription drug used for 
acne treatment.

Azelaic acid is a form of acid, 
also known as Azelex®, that is a 
topical prescription drug used for 
acne treatment.

clindamycin (trade name Cleocin-T™), a powerful antibiotic that does kill bacte-
ria. It is in an alcohol base and by itself can be quite drying. The theory here is to 
use a powerful “follicle ﬂusher” along with an antibiotic to kill bacteria and remove 
comedones and impactions. Because Retin-A is such a powerful keratolytic, it is 
also an irritant. It is not unusual for clients beginning Retin-A to experience ﬂaking, 
dry  skin,  redness,  irritation,  and  slight  discomfort.  The  prescribed  dosage  varies 
with the client and the dermatologist, but many dermatologists start patients on 
Retin-A every third night, slowly increasing the frequency to nightly applications.

Due  to  the  irritating  side  effects  of  this  drug,  clients  often  ﬁnd  that  their 
present skin care program and cosmetics may be irritating or overdrying. It is up 
to the esthetician to work with the client or dermatologist to ﬁnd products that 
work with retinoic acid therapy.

Adapalene, commercially known as Differin®, is a chemical cousin of reti-
noic acid. Adapalene produces similar effects and side effects as tretinoin, but it is 
reputed to be less irritating in some patients. Tazarotene, commercially known as 
Tazorac®, is yet another retinoid approved by the FDA for acne treatment. Again, 
it is an aggressive peeling agent, and the same precautions should be followed. 
Azelaic acid, commercially known as Azelex®, is a different type of acidic 
agent that helps ﬂush follicular debris. Azelaic acid also has a melanin-suppress-
ing effect on hyperpigmented skin; as of this writing, this product is not ofﬁcially 
approved as a melanin suppressor for prescription drug use. It is approved for 
acne treatment.

Topical  prescription  drug  products  that  are  a  combination  of  antibiotic/
antibacterial agents and keratolytics are now available. These drugs help remove 
dead  cell  accumulations  and  kill  acne  bacteria.  Also  available  are  prescrip-
tion  formulations  that  combine  antibiotic  clindamycin  and  benzoyl  peroxide 
(Acanya®), another blend with clindamycin and tretinoin (Ziana®), and another 
with adapalene and benzoyl peroxide (Epiduo®).

Skin Care Products for Users of Prescription 
Exfoliation Drugs

As  previously  discussed,  strong  prescription-grade  topical  keratolytic  drugs, 
including  tretinoin  (Retin-A),  adapalene,  tazarotene,  azelaic  acid,  or  combina-
tion drugs) may make the skin much more sensitive. Skin care routines must be 
redesigned so that they do not include other nonprescription keratolytics or any 
other peeling, drying, or stimulating ingredients. The following is a list of adjust-
ments that should be made if a client is using a prescription keratolytic drug:

  1. First, eliminate any other keratolytics from the client’s home-care program. 
As discussed previously, avoid benzoyl peroxide, sulfur, resorcinol, salicylic 
and glycolic acid. Use these products for clients using prescription kerato-
lytic drugs only with the approval of the dermatologist.

  2. Eliminate products with high alcohol content, particularly those containing 

isopropyl alcohol.

  3. Avoid fragranced products.
  4. Avoid spicy, stimulating products.
  5. Avoid large amounts of citric acid.
  6. Eliminate essential oils from the regimen. Large amounts of many plant extracts 

may cause further irritation.

  7. Sometimes it is necessary to totally eliminate the use of astringents or fresh-
eners, particularly during the ﬁrst six to eight weeks of prescription kerato-
lytic therapy.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.306         CHAPTER 15

  8. Encourage  the  use  of  sunscreens,  because  prescription  keratolytics  also 

make the skin more photosensitive.

  9. Eliminate the use of granular scrub cleansers or tight drying masks, particu-
larly during the ﬁrst part of the prescription keratolytic therapy. Later in the 
therapy (six to eight weeks), a gentle granular exfoliant, diluted with cleans-
ing milk, may be beneﬁcial in helping to remove dry, dead cells.
 10. Discontinue use of highly stripping cleansers, soaps, and abrasives.

Basic Home Care for Clients Using Prescription 
Peeling Agents for Acne
Morning

  1. Cleanse the face with a gentle foaming cleanser for oily or combination skin.
  2. Apply a gentle, nonalcoholic toner if not too irritated from beginning treatment.
  3. Apply  a  noncomedogenic  SPF  15  sunscreen.  If  using  clindamycin  alone, 
apply sunscreen after clindamycin application or follow the dermatologist’s 
speciﬁc instructions.

Evening

  1. Remove makeup with a gentle cleansing milk. Extremely oily skin may need 
to be washed gently with a foaming cleanser. Apply toner if the skin is not too 
sensitive.

  2. Wait 20 minutes.
  3. Apply the topical drug as directed by a physician.

If  the  skin  is  very  dehydrated,  a  light,  nonfragranced,  noncomedogenic, 
hydrating ﬂuid may be applied 20 minutes later. Make sure that this product is 
approved by the physician. If the doctor recommends that prescription kerato-
lytics are to be used on alternate nights, the client may choose to use the same 
noncomedogenic hydrating ﬂuid on alternate nights to combat dehydration.

Salon Treatment Changes for Clients Using 
Prescription Peeling Agents

  1. Do  not  use  wax  on  these  patients.  Waxing  is  extremely  irritating  to  skin 
exposed to prescription peeling agents. Electrolysis is usually acceptable to 
continue.

  2. Avoid  enzyme  treatment,  particularly  when  starting  the  prescription.  After 

eight weeks or so, these treatments may be acceptable.

  3. Do not use mechanical abrasion; or microdermabrasion, brushing, or rub-off 

masks.

  4. Avoid all keratolytics previously discussed during treatment.
  5. Camphor masks should be avoided.
  6. Avoid excessive massage.
  7. Electrical therapy should be shortened in duration and performed at a lower 

intensity.

  8. Avoid heavy, thick creams, as with all clients with acne.

Isotretinoin (Accutane)

Isotretinoin (also called Accutane) is a cousin of retinoic acid. It is an oral medi-
cation prescribed for patients with severe, chronic, Grades III and IV acne with 
multiple cysts. This product is very useful when treating this type of patient.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      307

Isotretinoin has numerous side effects, including severe drying of the skin 
and  mucous  membranes,  nosebleeds,  and  severely  dry,  cracked  lips.  More 
severe side effects include birth defects in children of women who take isotreti-
noin during their child-bearing years. Many doctors insist on a pregnancy test 
for women planning to undergo isotretinoin therapy. Other side effects include 
muscle aches. Periodic blood, kidney, and liver function tests are administered 
during  isotretinoin  therapy.  Isotretinoin  has  been  associated  with  depression 
and  occasionally  suicide.  These  incidences,  although  rare,  have  caused  some 
controversy and more investigation about the drug.

Clients considering isotretinoin therapy should thoroughly discuss the possi-
ble side effects with the dermatologist before starting the drug. Although isotreti-
noin seems to have a lot of side effects, for Grade IV cystic and severe acne 
sufferers, it can be the only drug that makes a difference.

Skin  Care  for  the  Isotretinoin  Patient  Follow  the  same  precautions  as 
recommended for patients using prescription keratolytic drugs. No waxing on 
any part of the body should be done during, or for several months after, isotreti-
noin is discontinued. You may need to administer soothing hydrating treatments 
to  the  isotretinoin  patient,  using  light,  noncomedogenic,  hydrating  ﬂuids  and 
gentle gel or cream masks.

Again,  avoid  all  keratolytics,  excessive  massage,  and  any  stimulating 
treatments.  Extractions  on  patients  taking  isotretinoin  should  be  extremely 
gentle, because the skin becomes extremely thin and fragile and reddens and 
bruises easily.

Help  the  client  taking  isotretinoin  with  light  hydrating  ﬂuids  and  gentle 
cleanser. This may be the ﬁrst time this client has ever used a moisturizer. Take 
some time to instruct the client in the uses of these new products.

After isotretinoin therapy, the skin usually returns to being somewhat oily; 
rarely is it as oily as it was before treatment. Within two or three months after 
isotretinoin  is  discontinued,  reevaluate  the  skin  and  recommend  the  correct 
home-care regimen.

DERMATOLOGICAL TREATMENT 
OF CYSTS

The dermatologist treats cysts by a number of different methods. Extraction is 
used and involves making a small incision to drain the cyst. This technique is 
known as acne surgery.

Sometimes the dermatologist injects the cyst with a steroid. The steroid usu-
ally clears the lesion from one to three days after injection. This is an extremely 
effective treatment for cysts. The doctor usually also prescribes an oral antibiotic 
for  these  patients.  Avoid  pressure  or  extraction  around  a  freshly  treated  cyst. 
Sometimes the dermatologist will suggest avoiding facial treatment until the cyst 
is completely healed.

LIGHT THERAPY FOR ACNE

Photodynamic  therapy  (PDT)  is  a  medical  treatment  using  intense  types  of 
light. Similar to laser therapy, an extremely focused blue light in a very speciﬁc 
spectrum is used. The blue light reacts with chemicals called porphyrins, natu-
rally given off by acne bacteria. The reaction of the blue light with the porphyrins 
kills  acne  bacteria.  In  some  cases,  a  special  drug  gel,  5-aminolevulinic  acid, 

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is 
a medical treatment using intense 
types of light.

Porphyrins are chemicals 
produced by acne bacteria dur-
ing normal metabolic processes. 
These chemicals can react with 
blue light and become toxic to the 
bacteria.

5-aminolevulinic acid, also 
known as Levulan® or Kerastick®, 
is a drug chemical that is used 
when administering photodynamic 
therapy.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.308         CHAPTER 15

also known as Levulan® or Kerastick®, is applied to the skin. The blue light reacts 
with the aminolevulinic acid to release intense forms of oxygen, thus creating 
free radicals that kill the acne bacteria. 

Photodynamic  therapy  is  particularly  effective  for  clearing  back  or  chest 
acne, but it also can be used on the face. It is a good choice of treatment for 
stubborn  acne  that  does  not  respond  well  to  other  therapies  alone.  It  is  still 
not a cure for acne, but it may be able to bring acne breakouts under control, 
particularly in resistant cases. Topical or combination topical and oral therapy is 
still needed. Light therapy is a relatively expensive treatment choice, especially 
compared with traditional therapies.

ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE FOR ACNE 
OR PROBLEM SKIN

Before treating problem skin, the esthetician should take a thorough health his-
tory of the client. This is best accomplished by having the client ﬁll out a health 
form. The completed form should provide you with the following information:

  1. Client name, address, and phone numbers.
  2. The client’s occupation. This tells you if the client is in a high-stress job or 
if the client is employed in a situation where there is constant exposure to 
“greasy air,” such as in a fast-food restaurant.

  3. Is the client already seeing a dermatologist? If so, was medication prescribed? 
Is the client using the medication as instructed by the dermatologist? (Often a 
client is not using the medication correctly or has discontinued it because of 
excessive drying or irritation. Do not interfere with a doctor’s prescription or 
attempt to instruct the client about medication. Refer your client to the derma-
tologist for further instruction. Never instruct a client to discontinue prescribed 
medication!) If questions arise, call and consult with the dermatologist.

  4. How long has the client experienced problem skin? This may tell you if it is 
a long-term hereditary problem or if it is caused by short-term factors such 
as comedogenic cosmetics, hormones, drugs, stress, and so on.

  5. When  does  the  client  have  ﬂare-ups?  Shortly  before  her  period?  During 

stressful times?

  6. Is the client under a lot of stress?
  7. What  cosmetics  and  skin  care  products  does  the  client  use  now?  Ask  the 
client to bring in products currently being used. This will allow you to check 
for comedogenic products and see what steps the client is taking to help his 
or her problem skin.

  8. Is the client using birth control pills? If yes, what type?
  9. Has the client had any history of hormone problems? Is she experiencing 

menopause? Is she taking prescribed hormones?

 10. Is she pregnant?
 11. Does the client have allergies to any cosmetics, foods, or drugs?
 12. Does the client have any other health problems or use any other form of 

medication?

 13. Does the client eat a balanced diet?
 14. Does the client take vitamin supplements?
 15. Does the client have a history of acne in the family?
 16. How often does the client clean the skin, and with what product?
 17. Does the client pick at acne lesions?
 18. The client’s age. Sometimes this information will indicate the nature of the 

problem.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      309

These standard questions should also be asked on the preliminary evaluation 
form your client completes on the ﬁrst visit. Any client who has not visited in six 
months should ﬁll out a new health evaluation form. Make sure you check for 
any other health problems or contraindications for home-care or salon treatments 
(such as electrical therapy, heart problems, etc.) just as you would for any client.

Hands-On Analysis

Remove the client’s makeup, and thoroughly cleanse the skin’s surface. Analyze the 
client’s skin through a magnifying lamp. It is a good idea at some point in the begin-
ning of analysis for you and the client to look at the skin with a magnifying mirror. 
The best way to accomplish this is to use one of the two-way mirror devices available 
through equipment manufacturers. This interaction allows the client to see what you 
are describing. Explain each type of problem to the client as thoroughly and simply 
as possible. Remember, the client is a consumer, not a professional. The bottom line 
of interest for the client is how you can help with beauty problems and problem skin.

Ask the client lots of questions about any skin problems:

  How often are you having breakouts?
  Where do they occur?
  Do they seem to come at certain times of the month?
  What do the blemishes look like when they occur?
  Do you normally have more or less breakout than this?
  Explain what you are doing now at home.

Even though the client may have written some of these answers on the health 
form, it’s a good idea to discuss them. Clients sometimes forget to mention some-
thing, or the esthetician may discover that the client is doing something incorrectly. 
This is also a good opportunity to review any experiences that the client has had 
with previous esthetic or dermatological treatment.

While observing the skin under the magnifying lamp, make detailed, written 
notes of any problems and any discussion you have with the client. You should 
particularly note the following:

  1. Number of lesions.
  2. What  type  of  lesions?  Open  comedones?  Closed  comedones?  Papules? 

Pustules? Nodules? Cysts?

  3. Chin breakouts, particularly if isolated to that area.
  4. Breakout around the mouth, isolated to that area. (This could be perioral 

dermatitis.)

  5. Flaking in the hairline, sides of nose, eyebrows, and ear areas. (This is possibly 

seborrheic dermatitis.)

  6. What is the thickness of the skin? Is it sensitive? Does it turn red easily?
  7. Are the unaffected follicles clogged and enlarged? (This indicates generally 

oily skin.)

  8. Large red pustules and surrounding redness in the nose area. (This could 

be rosacea.)

  9. Flat red lesions that look like scraped skin, sometimes with scabs. (Client is 

probably scraping with the ﬁngernails.)

 10. Scarring—make special notes of any existing scarring, icepick scars, raised 

(hypertrophic) scars, and any scars from cyst removal.

 11. Macules, which are lesions that have healed but are still red or tan in color. 
They are ﬂat and are most often found in the ﬂeshy areas of the face, such 
as the cheeks.




 
 
 
 
 
310         CHAPTER 15

 12. Is there any surface ﬂaking or dehydration? Is the skin tight or pliable?
 13. What grade of acne exists?

The esthetician must check to see if any client with rosacea, seborrheic der-
matitis, perioral dermatitis, or cysts is seeing a dermatologist. These conditions are 
dermatologic, not esthetic. It is not the esthetician’s place to diagnose or suggest 
these conditions to the client. Simply suggest that the client see a dermatologist. 
After the client sees the doctor, call the doctor and discuss esthetic concerns or 
arrange for the client to obtain a letter from the doctor.

Salon Treatments

Before discussing the subject of salon treatments, here are a few important pro-
cedures and precautions:

  1. Do not use any product or ingredient that the client is allergic to.
  2. Extraction  should  never  last  more  than  10  or  15  minutes  in  one  session.  If 
you are uncomfortable with extraction procedures, omit this step completely. 
Extraction is probably the most important part of esthetic salon treatment, but it 
can also be the most harmful if done improperly. Never extract a lesion you are 
not sure about. Open and closed comedones and pustules are the only lesions 
that the esthetician should extract. Leave papules, nodules, and cysts alone!
  3. The esthetician should wear disposable exam gloves during the entire acne 

treatment.

  4. If lancets are used, they must be sterile and disposable.
  5. Active acne should never be massaged. After the acne is completely cleared, 

then consider a light massage.

  6. Instruct your clients not to wear makeup for at least two hours after treatment.
  7. Skin that has been exposed to Retin-A or other prescription peeling agents 
should  not  be  exfoliated.  Eliminate  the  use  of  all  keratolytics—including 
benzoyl peroxide, salicylic acid, sulfur, resorcinol, or glycolic acid—for cli-
ents using Retin-A.

  8. Be careful how much you extract on the ﬁrst visit. As the client begins home 
care, these products will make impactions much softer and easier to extract 
and  a  lot  more  comfortable  for  the  client.  Explain  this  so  the  client  will 
understand that you will do more extraction on the second visit, when the 
client has been using the correct products for a week or two.

Basic Salon Acne Treatment

The basic salon acne treatment includes these steps.

  1. Thoroughly cleanse and analyze. Do not tone the skin.
  2. Cleanse again, this time with a foaming cleanser.
  3. Apply a desincrusting pre-mask. Begin the steam treatment during the pre-

mask. Allow the pre-mask to sit for eight minutes.

  4. Remove the pre-mask, unless the product can be used with galvanic current 
(check the manufacturer’s directions). Proceed with galvanic desincrustation 
as normal; this treatment should take about ﬁve minutes.

  5. Begin extraction in the chin area ﬁrst, moving up the face and ﬁnishing at 
the forehead. This method avoids contact with any blood or ﬂuids. As previ-
ously mentioned, the esthetician should wear latex disposable gloves during 
extraction and throughout the remainder of treatment.

  6. After extraction, apply a generous amount of antibacterial toner to the entire 

area extracted.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Acne and the Esthetician      311

  7. Unfold  a  12-ply  piece  of  gauze  and  place  across  the  client’s  entire  face. 
Avoiding  the  eye  area,  apply  high-frequency  current  to  the  client’s  face 
(through the gauze) for one to two minutes. Remove the gauze.

  8. Apply a small amount of 5 percent benzoyl peroxide to the extracted areas.
  9. Apply a drying clay-based mask. (For more severe conditions, you may use 

a sulfur drying mask or benzoyl peroxide mask.) Avoid the eye areas.

 10. Allow the mask to sit for about 15 minutes. Wet the mask well with a cold 
spray solution of toner or a wet towel compress to loosen before removal. 
Remove with wet sponges or a soft cloth. Spray the face again with toner 
mixture to remove any excess mask.

 11. Apply a small amount of sunscreen to ﬁnish the treatment.

Alternative Treatment 1 for Acne

This treatment is effective for thicker skin types with Grades II and III acne.

  1. Thoroughly cleanse and analyze.
  2. Cleanse again with an alkaline pre-mask or an alkaline rinseable cleanser.
  3. Apply a soft-setting enzyme treatment to help dissolve surface cell buildup 
and dilate follicles. Begin the steam treatment during the enzyme treatment. 
Allow the enzyme treatment to sit for eight minutes.

  4. Remove  the  enzyme  treatment.  Proceed  with  galvanic  desincrustation  as 

normal; this treatment should take about ﬁve minutes.

  5. If you are using a lancet, begin dilating the follicle openings of the closed 
comedones in the chin area, moving up the face to the cheeks and ﬁnishing 
on the forehead. Proceed with extraction. Using a new sterile lancet each 
time, gently dilate the top of any follicles with pustules. Extract pustules.
  6. After extraction, apply a generous amount of antibacterial toner to the entire 

area extracted.

  7. Unfold  a  12-ply  piece  of  gauze  and  place  across  the  client’s  entire  face. 
Avoiding  the  eye  area,  apply  high-frequency  current  to  the  client’s  face 
(through the gauze) for one to two minutes. Remove the gauze.

  8. Apply a small amount of 5 percent benzoyl peroxide to extracted areas.
  9. Apply a drying sulfur or benzoyl peroxide mask, avoiding the eye area. For 
more sensitive skins, apply a slow-drying clay mask or a soothing gel mask.
 10. Allow the mask to sit for about 15 minutes. Wet the mask well with a wet 
towel compress or cold spray solution of toner to loosen before removal. 
Remove with wet sponges or a soft cloth. Spray the face again with toner 
mixture to remove any excess mask.

 11. Apply a small amount of sunscreen to ﬁnish the treatment.

USING GLYCOLIC AND OTHER 
PEELS FOR ACNE

Use of exfoliant peels such as glycolic, salicylic, or mixed acid 30 percent AHA 
peels can be beneﬁcial in drying, exfoliating, and speeding up results in chronic 
acne and very oily, clogged skin. The client should be using a 10 percent AHA 
at home for at least two weeks before starting the use of these light peels. 

AHA peels can be used between extraction facial visits, and if the skin is not 
too sensitive, peels can be performed at the beginning of a regular facial treatment. 
Microdermabrasion may be used in cases of clogged, oily skin, but it is not 
recommended for papular, pustular, or inﬂammatory acne. Microdermabrasion 
should not be used in addition to any other form of exfoliation or peel.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.312         CHAPTER 15

No form of peels should be performed on clients using prescription kerato-

lytic drugs, unless approved by their dermatologist.

Treatment for Clients Who Have Recently 
Begun Using Retin-A or Other Prescription 
Peeling Agents

  1. Thoroughly cleanse and analyze, paying particular attention to any red or 

sensitive areas.

  2. If the skin is red or sensitive, apply a light, noncomedogenic hydrating ﬂuid. 
Proceed with steam for ﬁve to eight minutes. Be very careful not to get the 
skin hot from the steam. Cool steam is a good choice here. For skin that 
appears noninﬂamed, apply a desincrustant pre-mask instead of the dehy-
drating ﬂuid.

  3. Remove the pre-mask or hydrating ﬂuid. Galvanic treatment is best avoided 

on clients just beginning Retin-A treatment.

  4. Begin extraction gently in the chin-to-forehead pattern described earlier.
  5. Apply a generous amount of antibacterial nonalcoholic toner on a cool, wet, 
cotton pad or soft cloth. Apply to all extracted areas. If you prefer, use a 
diluted cold spray toner solution.

  6. Apply  a  noncomedogenic  hydrating  ﬂuid.  Cover  with  gauze  and  proceed 

with high frequency (mushroom attachment) for one to two minutes.

  7. Apply a cool, soothing treatment with aloe, azulene, bisabolol, or chamomile. 
Gel masks are very beneﬁcial and gentle, as long as they are free of alcohol 
and fragrance. For thicker skins, you may want to try a light application of 
soft-setting, clay-based mask.

  8. Do not allow the mask to sit for more than ﬁve to seven minutes. Remove 
the mask by thoroughly wetting it with cold spray and then gently wiping 
with cool, wet cotton or soft cloths.

  9. Apply a light, noncomedogenic moisturizer with sunscreen.

IN CONCLUSION

Successfully helping clients with acne-prone skin is one of the most rewarding 
parts  of  the  esthetics  profession.  Both  teenagers  and  adults  can  beneﬁt  from 
this type of help. A good knowledge base about acne-prone skin and a careful 
analysis of each client scenario will help determine the right course of treatment.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is acne?

  2. Trace the development of the comedo.

  3. Explain how hormones affect acne.

  4. Name some environmental factors inﬂuencing acne development.

  5. Explain various cleansers, toners, and treatment creams and lotions available 

for acne. Describe their action on the skin.

  6. Discuss  some  acne-related  conditions  that  should  be  referred  to  the 

dermatologist.

  7. What are some questions that should be asked of the client during the ﬁrst 

consultation?



CHAPTER

16

Comedogenicity

OBJECTIVES . . .

Many ingredients used in cosmetics can make acne worse and 
can contribute to the development of comedones of all types.
Comedogenicity is the tendency of topical substances to 
cause the development of comedones, possibly leading to or 
worsening acne eruptions. Multiple comedones, both open 
and closed, can lead to the formation of inﬂammatory acne 
lesions. Dermatologists began scientiﬁc documentation in 1941 
of topically induced acneiform eruptions as occupational acne 
in workers handling certain chemicals such as chlorinated 
hydrocarbons.

Comedogenicity is a particularly important subject for 
the esthetician to understand, because the esthetics profes-
sion specializes in keeping skin healthy and clean and advising 
clients about cosmetic treatment preparations. It is a vital part 
of the esthetician’s job to prevent potential reactions on their 
clients’ skin and to educate clients about preventative treat-
ment techniques, including avoiding treatments or products 
that may not be right for their skin.

In this chapter, you will learn about these ingredients and 
how they affect the skin. You will learn how to check ingredi-
ent lists for possible comedogenic ingredients. You will also 
learn about the many products that are helpful for clog-prone, 
oily, and acne-prone skin.



     313

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.314         CHAPTER 16

Comedogenicity is the tendency 
of topical substances to cause the 
development of comedones, pos-
sibly leading to or worsening acne 
eruptions.

Acne cosmetica is acne caused 
or worsened by the use of com-
edogenic or inﬂammatory 
cosmetics or skin care products.

Comedogenic refers to the 
tendency of a topical ingredient 
or product to increase the buildup 
of dead cells within the follicle, 
eventually causing comedone 
formation.

Noncomedogenic means that the 
ingredient or product does not 
cause excessive follicular hyper-
keratosis and therefore is unlikely 
to cause comedone development.

Acnegenic refers to the tendency 
of a topical substance, usually a 
cosmetic or skin care product, to 
cause inﬂammation or aggravate 
acne.

BACKGROUND

For  many  years,  dermatologists  often  told  women  who  had  acne  or  problem 
skin to avoid using makeup. Many doctors said this as a blanket statement and 
encouraged women with acne to avoid all cosmetics.

These doctors noticed that women often did not respond to traditional acne 
therapy. They also noticed that many of the women continued to use makeup 
and cosmetics on a regular basis.

These dermatologists did not know at the time speciﬁcally why the cosmet-
ics  caused  acne  to  become  worse  or  not  to  improve  during  treatment.  Many 
thought that the cosmetics sat on the skin and occluded aeration of the follicles, 
not allowing oxygen to penetrate the follicles. Others were aware that many of 
the cosmetics had a high fat or oil content. It seemed to make sense that oily 
skin that developed acne lesions easily did not need additional oil from outside.
These theories made sense, and some studies touched on the subject of cos-
metics and hair products aggravating acne. But it wasn’t until the early 1970s that 
doctors published studies that showed increased retention hyperkeratosis, or a 
buildup of cells within the follicle, in patients using some types of cosmetics.

It was discovered that the use of certain ingredients within cosmetics was more 
likely to cause a pronounced buildup of cells within the follicle. This buildup lined 
the follicle walls, and when enough was accumulated, it began forming a micro-
comedo. The microcomedo eventually evolved into an open or closed comedone 
and then possibly into an inﬂammatory acne lesion, such as a papule or pustule.

The  acne-prone  women  who  used  the  cosmetics  in  question  already  had 
a predisposition to clog development. In other words, they already tended to 
develop clogged pores from hereditary retention hyperkeratosis and oiliness.

The  doctors  coined  a  term  for  this  condition:  acne  cosmetica,  meaning 
“cosmetic  acne.”  They  were  able  to  correlate  excessive  buildup  of  dead  cells 
within  the  follicles  of  patients  using  certain  cosmetics.  These  cosmetics  were 
said to be comedogenic. Comedogenic refers to the tendency of a topical ingre-
dient or product to increase the buildup of dead cells within the follicle, eventu-
ally causing comedone formation. Noncomedogenic means that the ingredient 
or product does not cause excessive follicular hyperkeratosis and therefore is 
unlikely to cause comedone development.

Two basic types of reactions are cosmetic-induced acne aggravators. First is 
true comedogenesis, which can take up to several months to occur and results in 
comedo formation. Comedogenic products essentially cause increased follicular 
hyperkeratosis, combining with sebaceous secretions and resulting in solidiﬁed 
plugs or comedones.

The second is a perifollicular irritation that can cause an acute eruption of 
papules  or  pustules  in  a  very  short  time.  Clients  occasionally  experience  an 
overnight ﬂare of pimples when using a new cream or even after a salon facial 
treatment. It is this irritant type of reaction that can cause overnight ﬂares. The 
irritation from the chemical or product causes follicular inﬂammation or swell-
ing, creating a narrowing of the follicle and thus creating an anaerobic pocket, 
which is ideal for acne bacteria to ﬂourish. This is known as an acnegenic reac-
tion. The product or ingredient causing the inﬂammation is known as an acne-
genic ingredient or product. The term acnegenic is probably more appropriate 
than  comedogenic,  because  the  deﬁnition  of  acnegenic  actually  encompasses 
both comedogenic and follicular irritant reactions.

Irritant reactions and true comedogenic reactions can be evaluated by micro-
scopic examination of the follicles exposed to the ingredients, or of the ﬁnished 
product, and then checking for inﬂammation or thickening of the follicle wall.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The  development  of  comedones  through  comedogenic  product  exposure 
can take months to occur. Acnegenic reactions due to perifollicular irritation can 
occur very quickly.

Analysis of Acne Cosmetica

Acne cosmetica is most often characterized by multiple open and closed comedo-
nes. These may be all over the face, or in isolated areas where a certain product 
is being used, or where the skin is oily and susceptible to comedo development.
Acne cosmetica often looks like bumpiness just under the surface of the skin. 
This can be particularly apparent in the chin or cheeks. You may also notice that 
the client wears a lot of makeup, uses very oily products, or tends to try many 
different skin care and cosmetic products.
Ask the client the following questions:

  1. Do  you  notice  increase  of  acne  ﬂaring  or  clogging  after  using  certain 

products?

  2. Do you notice excessive oiliness when using certain products?
  3. Is one area more clogged than others?
  4. Are  there  many  clogged  pores  and  comedones,  or  just  papules  without 

comedones?

  5. Do pimples seem to ﬂare during certain times of the month?
  6. How long have you had this problem?

Following are some scenarios that may be helpful in determining causes of 

ﬂares or comedones.

Clients reporting a recent ﬂare of inﬂammatory lesions (papules and/or pus-
tules)  or  increased  comedones  may  be  able  to  pinpoint  a  new  or  fairly  new 
product as the culprit. Comedones can take up to six months to form, so you 
must  help  the  client  remember  any  product  changes  in  the  last  six  months. 
Sudden ﬂares of papules are more likely to indicate acnegenicity or a follicle-
irritating  product.  Follicle  irritation  can  cause  an  overnight  ﬂare.  This  can  be 
connected to a very recent product addition.

Flares of acne without comedones are inﬂammatory acne and can result 
from  hormonal  ﬂares  or  acnegenic  products  causing  follicle  irritation.  Some 
medications also may contribute to ﬂares.

Sudden  ﬂares  of  acne  after  using  certain  products  also  indicate  that  the 
products may be acnegenic. Excessive oiliness when using a particular product 
can indicate that an oily emollient is present in the products. This oiliness tends 
to worsen when the product has been worn for an hour or two and body tem-
perature has caused the product to feel oilier.

If one area is more clogged than another, this may indicate an isolated com-
edogenic product or an area of the skin that is more prone to comedo develop-
ment. Blushline acne, characterized by multiple closed comedones, is a good 
example of acne in an isolated area.

When the rest of the face is clear, the clogged T-zone indicates a tendency 
of the skin to clog in this area. Careful monitoring of products applied to this 
area is needed.

Bumpiness in the skin of the forehead and around the hairline is known as 
pomade acne. This occurs when comedogenic or irritating hair products, usu-
ally styling gels, conditioners, scalp oils, or sprays, coat the surface of the skin 
around the hairline. Pomade acne is often seen in teenagers who regularly use 
hair waxes or gels as well as in African American clients, who often use scalp 
oils. Many hair waxes and oils contain fatty acids, oils, or derivatives of fatty acids. 

Comedogenicity      315

Inﬂammatory acne is ﬂares of 
acne without comedones; it can 
result from hormonal ﬂares or 
acnegenic products causing 
follicle irritation.

Blushline acne is a type of 
acne cosmetica characterized by 
multiple closed comedones in the 
blushline; it is caused by comedo-
genic pressing agents and/or dyes 
in the blush.

Pomade acne is bumpiness in the 
skin of the forehead and around 
the hairline.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.316         CHAPTER 16

Histopathological refers to 
microscopic examination of tissue 
to determine causes of disease or 
abnormality.

Gels sometimes have a stiff plastic-like polymer that can occlude the skin surface 
when it accidentally is applied to the skin, especially in the forehead area.

If the client reports ﬂares of acne during certain times of the month, and 
ﬂare-ups occurring primarily in the chin and jawline areas of the face, hormonal 
factors are likely playing a role in acne-prone skin. Sudden stimulation of the 
sebaceous glands from ﬂares of male hormones produces sebum, irritating the 
follicle walls and creating what is basically the same as an acnegenic reaction. 
Even though the client’s acne ﬂare may be hormonal, it is still important to make 
sure the client avoids comedogenic products.

TESTING FOR COMEDOGENICITY

Researchers have developed a test for comedogenicity using the inside of a rab-
bit’s ear. Cosmetic or drug topical products were applied to the inside of the ear, 
because the follicles inside the rabbit ear develop comedones much faster than 
human skin does. Within three weeks, most cosmetics can be tested using the 
rabbit-ear method.

The procedure for rabbit-ear assays, as they are called by the scientiﬁc com-
munity, is really quite simple. A product is applied to the inside of one ear of a 
male albino rabbit that is at least 12 weeks old. The speciﬁc sex and age of the 
rabbit is important due to the size of these particular animals’ follicles, which are 
better for evaluation of comedo development.

The other ear of the rabbit is left alone, as a control. A control is an exper-
imental  factor  that  remains  the  same  throughout  the  experiment.  Scientists 
can compare the two ears at the end of the three-week period to determine 
the difference seen in the follicles of the skin of the two different ears of the 
rabbit model.

The  product  is  applied  to  the  test  area  daily  for  three  weeks.  Each  day, 
the ear is observed for obvious changes to the skin and checked carefully for 
comedo formation.

If after three weeks there are no comedones, the product testing is ﬁnished. 
However,  to  be  absolutely  sure  there  is  no  excessive  follicular  hyperkeratosis, 
small tissue samples are taken surgically from the skin of the ear and examined 
under a microscope. Any hyperkeratosis will be obvious because it lines the fol-
licle walls. At the same time, the follicle is examined for inﬂammation that might 
cause immediate acne reactions due to follicle irritation. The test is not fully com-
plete unless this microscopic test is run. This test is called a histopathological 
study (Figure 16-1).

If comedo formation is detected, it is rated on a scale of 0 to 3. A score of 
0 means that no comedones formed. A score of 3 means that the product or 
ingredient is comedogenic. Only products with overall scores of 0 on all rabbits 
tested are claimed to be noncomedogenic.

The  hyperkeratosis  and  inﬂammation  within  the  follicle  found  during  the 
histopathological examination are rated on the same scale. Although most fol-
licles will develop a small amount of irritation and keratosis while being tested, 
large  amounts  of  keratosis  may  indicate  a  delayed  comedogenic  reaction.  In 
other  words,  a  high  test  score  in  the  histopathology  report  may  indicate  that 
longer exposure time to the product or ingredient may cause comedo develop-
ment or that the test material may cause sufﬁcient irritation within the follicle to 
promote sudden acne ﬂares.

Materials that are found to be both noncomedogenic and show no signiﬁ-
cant irritancy or retention hyperkeratosis within the histopathological examina-
tion are said to be nonacnegenic.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Impacted
follicle

Comedogenicity      317

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Subcutaneous fat layer 

FIGURE 16-1  The microscopic view of retention hyperkeratosis shows excessive 
cell buildup and swelling. This slide represents a positive test for comedogenicity.

A  few  scientists  and  physicians  use  a  ﬁve-point  scale.  Both  tests  are  run 
using scores of 0 to 5, rather than 0 to 3. If you look at various studies, you will 
notice that both scales are used; but the three-point scale is more often used and 
is the standard widely accepted by the cosmetic industry. If you look at comedo-
genicity studies or charts, you will notice that one rating number is followed by 
a slash mark and then a 3 or a 5. As an example, you may see a rating of 2/3. 
This means that out of 3 possible points, the product or ingredient tested had a 
rating of 2, thus making it signiﬁcantly comedogenic. Scores of 3/3, 4/5, or 5/5 
indicate highly comedogenic materials or products.

A score of 1/3, 1/5, or 2/5 means that the product or material showed com-
edogenic results in the rabbit ear, but they were not as strong as the results of a 
material with a higher score.

Remember, clients who are subject to easy development of clogged pores, 
comedones,  and  other  acne  lesions  must  ﬁrst  hereditarily  develop  retention 
hyperkeratosis.  A  client  who  does  not  develop  clogged  pores  easily  and  has 
fairly oil-dry skin may show no reaction when treated with a product that has a 
low score of comedogenicity (e.g., approximately 1/3 or 2/5). Clients who easily 
develop acne ﬂare-ups may be much more sensitive to even a mildly comedo-
genic material.

OTHER TESTS

Because of concerns for animal welfare, many companies are now using only 
human  panelists  for  comedogenicity  testing.  These  human  tests  for  comedo-
genicity  are  most  often  done  on  human  backs.  The  product  or  ingredient  to 
be tested is applied and occluded with a patch or bandage. This application is 
repeated daily for a speciﬁed amount of time. The skin is observed for comedo 
development  by  scientists  or  dermatologists.  The  skin  can  also  be  biopsied, 

Biopsied refers to removal of a 
small sample of tissue for micro-
scopic or other examination.




 
 
 
 
318         CHAPTER 16

Cyanoacrylate is a synthetic 
polymer, commonly known 
as superglue.

which means a tissue sample is removed by using a cyanoacrylate biopsy. Cya-
noacrylate, the main ingredient in powerful household glues, is applied to the 
skin. When the cyanoacrylate is peeled off, the content of the follicle is attached 
to the chemical. The tissue sample can then be examined under a microscope 
for follicular debris and hyperkeratosis.

Another  type  of  human  test  involves  establishing  a  group  of  acne-prone 
persons and having them actually use a speciﬁc product for several weeks. A 
dermatologist carefully examines the skin of each participant before they use the 
speciﬁc product. Periodically during the test period, each participant is reexam-
ined and any changes in the skin are recorded. 

Many scientists believe that the rabbit-ear assay is a much more accurate test 
for determining comedogenicity. There are several reasons for this opinion. First, 
the rabbit ear forms comedones much faster than human skin does, thus making 
the  testing  procedure  much  faster  and  more  economical.  Second,  rabbit-ear 
skin is very sensitive to comedo development. Human skin develops clogged 
pores much more slowly. The skin on the back of a human may not necessarily 
develop retention hyperkeratosis hereditarily. Third, and probably most impor-
tant, a rabbit can be easily controlled, and very few variables are involved with 
testing.  The  rabbit  is  in  a  controlled  environment,  with  a  controlled  diet  and 
climate. Humans, however, are not conﬁned, so researchers must consider liter-
ally hundreds of variables when interpreting test results. As examples, human 
models may have different diets, different environments, and different activities. 
Because of these variables, many scientists believe that human studies are not as 
reliable or as accurate as rabbit-ear studies.

The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) has issued extensive guide-
lines  for  the  scientiﬁc  evaluation  of  products  for  comedogenicity  and  follicle 
irritancy. These tests involve applying ﬁnished products to skin and observing 
any comedo development, carefully examining histological follicle biopsies for 
hyperkeratosis and perifollicular inﬂammation. The best conﬁrmation of noncom-
edogenicity and nonirritancy is to have documentation by an independent test 
laboratory. Ask manufacturers how they determine if their products are noncom-
edogenic and nonirritating to follicles. Are the products tested by an independent 
laboratory, and what types of tests are run? Unfortunately, some companies make 
a noncomedogenic claim and have no tests to document their claim. 

The bottom line of these guidelines is that for a true assessment of comedo-
genicity, the ﬁnal skin care or cosmetic product should be scientiﬁcally evalu-
ated using the accepted protocol.

TYPES OF INGREDIENTS THAT 
ARE OFTEN COMEDOGENIC

The most frequent culprit in the most comedogenic products is the spreading 
agent  or  vehicle.  A  good  example  of  this  is  a  foundation  or  moisturizer  with 
a  comedogenic  vehicle.  These  ingredients  are  used  to  apply  the  skin  care  or 
cosmetic product to smooth the skin’s appearance, to serve as an emollient or 
sebum replacement in alipidic (oil-dry) skin types, or to add an elegant feel to 
the product. Oily skin areas are, of course, not alipidic. Because some of these 
emollients are designed to mimic human sebum, it is no wonder that some of 
these ingredients add to the problem of cell buildup and comedo development. 
Unfortunately, the vehicle often makes up the greatest part of any product; so 
when comedogenic ingredients are present in the vehicle, they can be present 
in fairly substantial quantities.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Comedogenicity      319

A  second  most  frequent  culprit  is  emollient  ingredients.  Certain  emollient 
fats,  oils,  waxes,  fatty  alcohols,  fatty  acids,  and  esters  are  the  most  common 
comedogenic ingredients, and many of these can be either vehicle or emollient 
ingredients. These ingredients often have waxy or sebum-like textures. Because 
of their oily and heavy texture, they are generally not appropriate for a skin that 
is already producing too much sebum.

Think of the dead corneum cells constantly being shed from the walls of the 
follicles as ﬂakes of oatmeal lining a drinking glass. Because of the hereditary 
tendency to retain cells and because of this type of skin’s oiliness, the ﬂakes of 
dead cells naturally stick to the follicle walls.

Now imagine pouring oil down the sides of this glass ﬁlled with oatmeal. 
Imagine  how  oil  would  make  the  oatmeal  sticky  and  how  the  ﬂakes  would 
clump together. 

This may be an unusual metaphor, but it does illustrate the point. Many of 
the fats, oils, esters, and emollient ingredients used in cosmetics do penetrate 
the follicles of already clog-prone individuals, adding fatty substances to the fol-
licles of skin that are already burdened with too much sebum and cell buildup.
These ingredients are considered comedogenic. Their purpose in cosmetics is 
to lubricate or serve as a spreading agent. Although this may be helpful to truly dry 
skins that do not produce enough oil, it is bad for clog-prone skin. Unfortunately, 
not all comedogenic ingredients feel greasy or oily. In fact, some actually feel light-
weight, so they confuse clients and estheticians alike. This is why it is so important 
for estheticians to understand comedogenic and acnegenic principles, so they can 
help their clients avoid using the wrong products and can have noncomedogenic 
and nonirritating formulations available for purchase. Again, the bottom line is to 
make sure your products have been properly tested by an independent laboratory 
to ensure that they are truly noncomedogenic and nonacnegenic.

Emollients and Oils

Emollients that often clog pores are derived from fats or waxes of animal or veg-
etable origin. For this discussion, we have divided these substances into several 
categories.

Oils Many vegetable and animal oils are comedogenic. Coconut oil, cocoa butter, 
peach kernel oil, linseed oil, grapeseed oil, soybean oil, olive oil, and sesame oil 
are comedogenic oils. Less comedogenic or noncomedogenic oils include avo-
cado oil, safﬂower oil, castor oil, jojoba oil, and sunﬂower oil. Mineral oil is also 
noncomedogenic.

Other  Waxes  and  Fats  Beeswax  is  noncomedogenic,  particularly  in  small 
quantities of concentration, as it is often used. Emulsifying wax, carnauba waxes, 
and candelilla wax, often used in lipstick, are noncomedogenic. Petrolatum is also 
noncomedogenic. However, because petrolatum is relatively greasy, it is not used 
often in cosmetics for oily and clog-prone skin, especially in large concentrations.

Fatty Acids Probably the most comedogenic group of cosmetic chemicals is the 
fatty acids. Fatty acids, which are used to give cosmetics a creamy consistency, 
are  often  comedogenic.  Fatty  acids  are  also  the  food  of  acne  bacteria,  which 
they obtain by breaking down sebum. Fatty acids used in skin care and cosmetic 
products are derived from animal and plant oils and include oleic acid, lauric 
acid, isostearic acid, palmitic acid, and myristic acid. Capric acid, caprylic acid, 
and  behenic  acid  are  less  comedogenic  but  still  should  not  be  used  in  large 
concentrations for oily, problem skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.320         CHAPTER 16

Esters The fatty esters obtained from combining alcohols with fatty acids are 
also often comedogenic. These esters are often used in cosmetics because they 
feel less oily than raw fatty acids. However, their chemical alteration to an ester 
often renders them comedogenic. The esters that are comedogenic include iso-
propyl myristate, which is very well known as a highly comedogenic ingredient. 
Other comedogenic esters are isopropyl palmitate, isopropyl isostearate, decyl 
oleate,  sorbitan  oleate,  isopropyl  lanolate,  iosopropyl  linoleate,  butyl  stearate, 
and myristyl myristate.

Fatty  Alcohols  Fatty  alcohols  are  used  in  cosmetics  as  emollients.  They  are 
generally less comedogenic than their parent acids or esters. The comedogenic 
fatty alcohols include oleyl alcohol, isostearyl alcohol, and octyldodecanol.

Lanolin Lanolin is derived from sheep sebum. It is an excellent emollient. In 
its purest form, in a small quantity, lanolin causes few problems for clog-prone 
skin. However, chemically altered lanolins, such as lanolic acid, isopropyl lano-
late, and acetylated lanolin alcohol, are comedogenic.

Performance Agents It is interesting that most extracts, pigments, humectants, 
and other performance agents are noncomedogenic ingredients. Emollients and 
fatty-type ingredients create the most problems. The other ingredients that create 
problems are inorganic pigments, speciﬁcally the red dyes.

Some ingredients, including some natural ingredients, may not be comedo-
genic. Still, they irritate follicle walls and create the possibility of an overnight 
type of acnegenic reaction.

The Red Dyes Almost every red dye is comedogenic. This explains why you 
may often notice closed comedones on women’s cheekbones. Red dyes are fre-
quently used in blushes.

These dyes are derivatives of coal tar. Coal tar is extremely comedogenic. 
Red dyes are used in blush, lipsticks, powders, foundations, and skin care prod-
ucts. They are not permitted to be used in eye shadows. Coal tar is known to be 
a major eye irritant and is not safe for use in the eye area.

Unfortunately, many of the beautiful shades of blush or lipstick cannot be 
made without D&C red dyes. The red color in an organic pigment called car-
mine and in certain colors of iron oxide is noncomedogenic. Carmine is more 
expensive to use than D&C red dyes, and its red colors are not as vivid.

Thus you can correctly assume that, in general, the redder a product appears, 
the more likely it is to contain D&C red dyes and the more likely it is to be com-
edogenic.  Again,  these  dyes  cause  no  problems  for  many  clients  who  are  not 
acne-prone.  However,  they  should  be  avoided  in  oily  and  acne-prone  clients. 
Some cosmetics companies do manufacture blushes that are free of coal-tar dyes.

THE CHEMISTRY BEHIND 
COMEDOGENICITY

The chemical reasons why certain cosmetic ingredients are comedogenic are not 
fully understood. Logic tells us that the fats that simulate human sebum could 
potentially  cause  problems  for  oily,  problem  skin.  It  is  believed  that  the  size 
of the molecule has a great deal to do with comedogenic potential. The larger 
the molecule, the less likely it is to be comedogenic. This explains why some 
fatty acids become more or less comedogenic when they are altered chemically. 
When a large molecular structure is added to a fatty acid, it tends to become 
less comedogenic. When a fat is broken down to a smaller molecule, it is more 
comedogenic. This result is theorized to be linked to the size of the molecule 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Comedogenicity      321

and its ability to penetrate the follicle. It makes sense that smaller fatty molecules 
penetrate more easily into the follicle and therefore may cause more problems.

Concentration of Comedogenic Ingredients

The amount of comedogenic ingredients used within a particular cosmetic formu-
lation may also affect the overall comedogenicity of the product. Moisturizers with 
large amounts of known comedogenic ingredients are more likely to be comedo-
genic than products with a lower concentration of comedogenic ingredients.

Controversy  continues  over  the  amount  of  comedogenic  ingredients  that 
should be used in cosmetics. Some scientists believe that as long as comedo-
genic ingredients make up less than 5 percent of the product, they will not affect 
its comedogenicity. The ﬂaw in this idea is that neither the consumer nor the 
esthetician knows exactly how much comedogenic chemical is used in any par-
ticular product, because no cosmetic company publishes its percentages on the 
label. This lack of information makes this theory impossible to use in practice.
The other argument against this theory is that known comedogenic ingredi-
ents should simply not be used in products that are designed for clog-prone, oily, 
or acne-prone skin. Again, the bottom line is to have the ﬁnished product tested. 
Many good noncomedogenic emollients and vehicle ingredients are now available.

Pressing Agents

Besides  the  problem  with  D&C  red  dyes,  the  other  problem  with  blushes,  as 
well as pressed powders, is the pressing agent. Emollients are added to talc and 
other  products  to  create  cake-type  blush  and  powder.  Pressed  powder  is  an 
example. The powder is mixed with a sticky emollient to form a pressed cake, 
which is usually marketed as a compact or powder blush.

If a comedogenic emollient is used to press the powder or blush, the prod-
uct may indeed cause or increase comedone development. If a blush with D&C 
red dyes is pressed with a comedogenic agent, the result is a “double whammy” 
as far as comedogenicity is concerned!

Zinc stearate, octyldodecyl stearoyl stearate, mineral oil, and silicones such 
as cyclomethicone are safe ingredients to use in pressing powders. They do not 
cause clogging and make good pressing agents.

The other problem with pressing agents is that they involve mixing a fat, 
which is liquid or semiliquid, with a nonsoluble powder. This means that, unlike 
moisturizers,  which  are  usually  water  based  and  always  liquid,  there  are  no 
liquid  ingredients  to “water  down”  the  comedogenic  effects  of  the  emollient 
pressing agent. Because of this, comedogenic powders tend to be very comedo-
genic because the skin is more directly exposed to the concentrated emollient.

Loose Powders

Loose powders are not immune from comedogenicity just because they are not in 
a cake form. Emollients are also added to loose powders to give them a silky tex-
ture and to help them adhere to the skin. Check powders carefully to make sure 
they are free of both comedogenic emollients and coal-tar-derived D&C red dyes.

Skin Care Products

Skin care products are often comedogenic, particularly many types of moisturiz-
ers, lotions, ﬂuids, and creams. They may be made with comedogenic emollients 
or other fatty ingredients. If you are treating a clog-prone client, check ingredi-
ents carefully (Table 16-1).



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.322         CHAPTER 16

Table 16-1

Chart of common comedogenic ingredients.

Common Comedogenic Ingredients 
Highly Comedogenic (4-5/5 or 5/3)

Soybean Oil

Tocopherol

Acetylated Lanolin

Coal Tar

Cocoa Butter

Coconut Oil

Isopropyl Isostearate

Isopropyl Linoleate

Isopropyl Myristate

Isopropyl Palmitate

Isostearic Acid

Lanolic Acid

Linseed Oil

Myreth 3 Myristate

Myristyl Myristate

Oleic Acid

Oleth-3

Oleyl Alcohol

Squalene

Moderately Comedogenic 
(3-4/5 or 2/3)

Butyl Stearate

Decyl Oleate

Grapeseed Oil

Isostearyl Neopentanoate

Lauric Acid

Mink Oil

Most D&C Red Pigments

Myristyl Lactate

Octyl Palmitate

Octyldodecanol

Sorbitan Oleate

Mildly Comedogenic
(2-3/5 or 1/3)

Avocado Oil

Caprylic/Capric Triglycerides

Corn Oil

Evening Primrose Oil

Glyceryl Stearate

Hexylene Glycol

Lanolin

Lanolin Alcohol

Lauryl Alcohol

Mineral Oil

Olive Oil

Peanut Oil

Sesame Oil

Safﬂower Oil

Stearic Acid

Sunﬂower Oil

(Please note that mildly comedo-
genic ingredients are generally not 
a problem when used in diluted 
concentrations. Check to see their 
ranking of concentration on the 
ingredient label.)

Noncomedogenic

Allantoin

Behenic Acid

Butylene Glycol

Carbomer

Castor Oil

Cetyl Palmitate

Cholesterol

Cyclomethicone

Cyclopentasiloxane

Dimethicone

Glycerin

Iron Oxides

Isopropyl Alcohol

Jojoba Oil

Kaolin

Lecithin

Octyldodecyl Stearate

Octyldodecyl Stearoyl Stearate

Octinoxate

Octisalate

Oxybenzone

Panthenol

Petrolatum

Phenyl Trimethicone

Polysorbates

Propylene Glycol

Propylene Glycol Dicaprate/
  Dicaprylate

SD Alcohol

Sodium Hyaluronate

Sodium PCA

Sorbitol

Soya Sterol

Squalane

Tridecyl Stearate

Tridecyl Trimellitate

Water

Zinc Oxide

Zinc Stearate

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
2
1
0
2
©

The Controversy over Ingredient Lists

Some scientists have objected to comedogenic ingredient lists (like the one in 
Table 16 -1). Their objection is based on the theory that mixtures of ingredients 
may not be as harmful as the individual ingredient’s test score indicates.

Although it is true that the bottom line is to have the ﬁnal product tested, 

many companies do not test their products or publish the results of testing.




 
 
 
Comedogenicity      323

Testing  for  comedogenicity  can  be  expensive  and  time  consuming.  This 
is an additional expense for the company. Theoretically, claims testing should 
always be performed by an independent testing ﬁrm. When testing is performed 
outside the cosmetic company, the test results are more likely to be accurate, 
reliable, and nonbiased. Lists like this one are compiled so that estheticians and 
consumers can check the labels of their skin care products and cosmetics for 
comedogenic ingredients. Even though this may not always be the most scien-
tiﬁc or accurate method of determining potential comedogenicity, it is certainly 
the most practical for helping clients choose the right products.

COMEDOGENIC PRODUCT ANALYSIS

When you consult with a client who has acne or develops clogged pores easily, 
ask him or her to bring in the products currently being used. You can then check 
them for comedogenic ingredients.

Consumers today have heard the word noncomedogenic, but they generally 
are not aware of the variety of cosmetic ingredients that are comedogenic. One 
of the esthetician’s most important duties is to educate consumers about cos-
metic chemistry. Although your clients do not need to know everything in this 
chapter,  they  will  appreciate  your  knowledge  about  comedogenic  ingredients 
and products as well as the advice you can give about eliminating comedogenic 
products from home skin care and cosmetic routines.

You  cannot  run  a  comedogenicity  test  on  every  product  that  your  client 
might bring in, but you can check the products for comedogenic ingredients. 
Check each ingredient against charts like the one in Table 16-1. Companies that 
produce noncomedogenic cosmetics often provide charts listing ingredients and 
their comedogenic levels. On request, many of these same companies will gladly 
share the results of their comedogenic studies on their own products with you.
During your product analysis, ask your clients what products they are rou-
tinely using. Clients often bring in products that they are not actually using. It is 
important that your client is honest with you regarding daily habits.

Begin by checking your client’s moisturizers and treatment preparations. The 
most important products to observe are products that remain on clog-prone areas 
of the face for prolonged periods of time. These include day creams, night treatment 
creams, serums, moisturizers, hydrators, sunscreens, foundations, powders, blushes, 
and any other specialty products that stay on the face for long periods of time.

Cleansers and toners should also be noncomedogenic, but these products 
do  not  stay  on  the  face  for  eight  hours  at  a  time.  Cleansers  should  be  very 
easily rinseable and should not leave residues on the face. Superfatted soaps, 
for example, tend to leave a ﬁlm on the face. Often the fat added to these soaps 
is comedogenic. Toners, particularly if they are designed for extra dry, alipidic 
skin, can also be made with fats.

A  good  noncomedogenic  cleanser  should  be  made  with  noncomedogenic 
emulsiﬁers. Many contain a detergent. They may vary in strength, but many are 
on the stronger side. This is because most skin types that develop clogs easily 
are also predominantly oily, thus making thorough cleansing a necessity. These 
detergent cleansers do a good job of cleansing surface oil and debris. The cleans-
ers may be too strong for very dry skin, but most alipidic skins do not clog easily.
A foaming cleanser is often used. These cleansers are extremely rinseable and 
leave the skin feeling very clean, a feeling clients often describe as squeaky. There 
is nothing wrong with this feeling, as long as the cleanser does not have a high pH 
and thus strips off too much oil and impairs the barrier function. Most oily-skinned 
clients like to feel superclean. They enjoy and will use a foaming-type cleanser, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.324         CHAPTER 16

particularly if they use soap on a regular basis. In short, foaming cleansers give 
the client the feeling of using soap without the undesirable effects of some soaps. 
Foaming cleansers are also convenient and easy to use in the shower or bath.

Toners should be, as previously discussed, free of fats. They should have 
moderately  strong  astringent  action  that  helps  remove  excess  oils  and  cell 
buildup.  Some  toners  may  contain  an  antibacterial,  and  some  of  the  stronger 
ones for oily skin may contain a mild peeling agent like salicylic acid. Cleans-
ing milk can be used for makeup removal, but it should be easy to remove and 
should not leave a residue on the skin. For oilier skin, clients may want to use 
a foaming cleanser after removal of makeup with a cleansing milk. Cold-cream 
types of cleansers should not be used for clog-prone skin, because they leave 
too much residue and do not remove enough oil from the surface.

Sunscreens and Day Creams

When  most  people  think  of  sunscreens,  they  imagine  the  greasy,  coconut-
fragranced oils and creams worn at the beach. Obviously, many of these oily 
products are comedogenic, and many clients may associate them with a previ-
ous acnegenic experience.

Sunscreens  are  now  made  for  daily  use  and  are  much  more  lightweight 
than  the  beach  products  many  of  us  remember.  Still,  it  is  important  to  check 
the ingredient labels of the sunscreens you are using and selling to acne-prone 
clients to make sure they are truly noncomedogenic and are also lightweight in 
texture for those clients with oily and combination skin.

Sunscreens for oily skin are usually in a light lotion, blended with hydrators 
and/or silicones such as dimethicone to help prevent dehydration. Like all sun-
screens, they should be broad spectrum, screening both ultraviolet A (UVA) and 
ultraviolet B (UVB) light. It cannot be stressed enough that day sunscreens must 
be very comfortable for the user. They cannot be sticky, and they must perform 
well under makeup.

Night Treatments

Two basic types of night treatments are designed speciﬁcally for treating clogged 
and problem skin: hydrators and exfoliating products.

Hydrating creams or ﬂuids are made for skin that is clogged or acne-prone but 
still dehydrated—in other words, skin that really needs hydration but also breaks 
out easily. These ﬂuids are water based, very light in texture, noncomedogenic, and 
free of the offending ingredients we have discussed. They contain hydrating agents 
that will not clog, such as sodium PCA, glycerin, sorbitol, or hyaluronic acid. These 
agents hydrate without causing clog development and may be used in products 
without high levels of fatty emollients. Exfoliating products and ﬂuids are designed 
to help exfoliate excess dead-cell buildup and break loose impactions. These prod-
ucts contain peeling agents such as benzoyl peroxide, salicylic acid, glycolic acid, 
resorcinol, sulfur, or a combination of these ingredients. They should be used in a 
lightweight vehicle base that is noncomedogenic. For more information on how to 
use these acne treatments, see Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician.

Foundations for Clog-Prone Skin

Foundation makeup for clogged and acne-prone skin must be noncomedogenic, 
preferably in a “fat-free,” water-based liquid. As a general rule, liquid foundations 
and noncomedogenic mineral powder makeup are the only appropriate types 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Comedogenicity      325

Mineral makeup is another term 
for loose powder makeup founda-
tion; it largely comprises earth-
based ingredients. This product 
contains coverage pigments like 
zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, 
both of which are also physical 
sunscreens.

of foundation for clogged and acne-prone skin. Creams and stick makeup are 
frequently a problem for clients with this skin type. 

Liquid  foundation  for  clogged  skin  should  be  completely  free  of  come-
dogenic  ingredients,  and  it  should  be  very  lightweight.  Coverage  can  still  be 
attained if you look for foundations that contain a lot of talc and pigment. Many 
of these foundations include some sort of evaporating agent, like witch hazel, 
to help control surface oiliness. These foundations often dry to a matte ﬁnish, 
a good characteristic for oily skin. Some of the newer foundations contain sili-
cones such as cyclomethicone as a spreading agent. These foundations are good 
for older clients with acne problems, because they do not dry as matte.

Recently,  loose  powder  makeup  foundation,  also  known  as  mineral 
makeup, has been developed. This product is called mineral makeup because 
it largely comprises earth-based ingredients. It contains coverage pigments like 
zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, both also physical sunscreens.

The powder is often blended with some sort of binder, usually a fatty sub-
stance, to help it adhere to the skin. Mineral makeup provides good coverage, 
but it should be checked for comedogenic binders that may serve as spreading 
agents to help the powder adhere to the skin.

Other Products That May Be Comedogenic

Hair products and many kinds of face creams may contain comedogenic agents. 
The purposes, or claims, of these creams may vary greatly. They may not fall 
into the categories just mentioned. Check all products that come in contact with 
clog-prone areas.

Some  items  such  as  lipstick,  eye  shadows,  and  other  products  need  not 
be noncomedogenic, because they are not being used in clog- or acne-prone 
areas.  However,  you  may  want  to  check  these  products  if  the  client  has  an 
isolated clogged area, such as the lip line (you should check her lipstick or lip 
conditioner), or if the client is using the product in an area for which it was not 
intended (i.e., using a hair conditioner on the face). Hair conditioners and styl-
ing products often contain fats, oils, and other comedogenic ingredients. They 
are not designed to be used on the face.

Eye creams or concealers can be a factor in cosmetic acne. Because of grav-
ity, these products may “drift” onto the upper cheeks while being worn. If any of 
these products are comedogenic, they could cause problems for acne-prone areas.
Comedogenic  ingredients  are  also  sometimes  used  in  ointments  and  pre-
scription topical drugs. Although you should never tell a client to discontinue the 
use of a prescribed drug, you should be aware that some topical medications can 
be comedogenic.

DEHYDRATED, CLOGGED SKIN

Many women, particularly mature women, suffer from dehydrated skin that is 
also clogged. This is caused by the client mistaking dehydrated skin for dry skin. 
In other words, the client actually has dehydrated (water-dry) skin but mistak-
enly uses products designed for dry (oil-dry) skin. These products designed for 
mature alipidic skin are often full of fatty acids, esters, waxes, oils, and fats. In 
the attempt to treat their dehydrated skin or wrinkles, the clients expose oily 
areas to the excessive fats and oils present in these emollient products.

Unfortunately,  these  clients  have  often  been  misdiagnosed  by  a  cosmetic 
salesperson  or,  more  unfortunately,  by  a  poorly  educated  esthetician.  Many 
women have a fear of “dry skin,” because they fear aging and associate dry skin 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.326         CHAPTER 16

with aging. They do not understand that aging is not caused by dryness but by 
genetics,  hormonal  factors,  and  primarily  sun  damage.  They  attempt  to  treat 
aging with oils.

It is important to educate such clients about dehydration versus oil dryness. 
Explain to clients that dehydration makes the skin look dry and ﬂaky, but this 
does not mean that they need oil; instead, they need water.

Hydration can be achieved in one of two ways. Hydrating active agents can 
be used to increase the water level of the surface cells, thus easing dehydration 
and ﬂaking, making the skin look smoother and softer, and helping the skin feel 
better.

Adding oily products to this type of skin keeps the skin from further dehy-
dration,  but  it  does  not  necessarily  add  signiﬁcant  water  to  the  surface  cells. 
Fatty, oily products often contain comedogenic ingredients. When these clients 
attempt  to  “moisturize,”  they  actually  cause  clogged  pores  to  form,  possibly 
developing into acne. These products are not the best treatment for these clients’ 
clog-prone, dehydrated skin.

Almost  all  hydrating  active  agents  are  noncomedogenic.  Many  emollient-
active agents for oil-dry skin are comedogenic. Retrain clients to use noncom-
edogenic products with noncomedogenic emollient ingredients and to use good 
noncomedogenic  hydrating  agents  such  as  sorbitol,  sodium  PCA,  glycerin,  or 
hyaluronic acid. Make sure you check the vehicle ingredients for comedogenic 
ingredients. Most often the spreading agents are comedogenic.

Avoid using overdrying peeling agents on these clients. Psychologically, the 
clients will feel that their skin is even drier, particularly in the ﬁrst few days of 
treatment. To ensure your clients’ compliance with the new program, it is impor-
tant that they be comfortable.

Heavy Creams

Many heavy creams can make acne-prone or oily clog-prone skin worse. Some of 
these creams are not actually comedogenic, but they contain large amounts of oils 
or petrolatum. They are simply too heavy for these oily-skinned clients. Although 
neither petrolatum nor mineral oil is particularly comedogenic, these products are 
not appropriate in large concentrations for oily, clogged, or acne-prone skin.

Oil-Free and Water-Based Claims

The “oil-free”  and “water-based”  claims  are  often  made  for  products  supposedly 
designed for oily skin. Neither of these two terms means the same thing as noncom-
edogenic. Oil-free means, technically, that the product contains no oils. That doesn’t 
mean there are no fatty esters, fatty acids, or other comedogenic ingredients.

Water-based simply means that the main ingredient is water, which might 
be mixed with comedogenic ingredients. The bottom line is, check the product 
carefully for comedogenic ingredients.

CLINICAL COMEDOGENICS

Some clients will have a sudden acne ﬂare-up when introduced to certain new 
products. Although there can be many reasons for this reaction, occasionally even 
a  noncomedogenic  product  can  cause  an  acne  ﬂare-up  due  to  irritation  of  the 
follicles. If your client reports such a ﬂare-up, advise him or her to try the cream 
again after a short time. If the reaction continues, the client should discontinue 
use of the product.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Comedogenicity      327

Checklist of Products

The following products should be checked during a comedogenic analysis:

•  Cleansers, washes, and soaps
•  Toners, fresheners, and astringents
•  Day creams, moisturizers, and sunscreens
•  Night ﬂuids, creams, eye creams, specialty products, and ampoules
•  Foundation makeup of all types
•  Blush of all types
•  Any other product that is being used over a clog-prone area of the face for a 

prolonged period of time

Checklist of Analysis Procedures

  1. Analyze the skin and the areas that have comedones, clogged pores, seba-

ceous ﬁlaments, or other acne lesions.

  2. Check the client’s current products for comedogenic ingredients.
  3. Are the products the client is using really correct for the skin type, or is the 

client using products for oil-dry skin when the skin is actually dehydrated?

  4. Is the client using ﬂuids and lotions or creams?
  5. Are the products the client is using simply too heavy for the skin?
  6. Is the client skipping steps that should be done, or is she inconsistent in fol-

lowing home skin care routines?

  7. If  the  products  the  client  uses  contain  comedogenic  ingredients,  are  they 
high  or  low  on  the  ingredient  list?  If  the  client  has  a  minimal  number  of 
clogged pores, it may not be caused by the products. Remember, in order to 
have a comedogenic reaction, you must have comedogenic products and a 
skin type that tends to clog due to hereditary oiliness and hyperkeratosis.

CLIENT PRODUCT ANALYSIS

As  previously  discussed,  you  should  ask  a  client  who  has  clog-prone  skin  to 
bring in all products for analysis on the ﬁrst visit. First, check the products with 
the checklist for analysis.

After checking the products for correct skin type, and so forth, begin check-
ing the products for comedogenic ingredients. Let’s look at a typical label. You 
have already established that the client’s skin is deﬁnitely clog-prone. Here are 
the products the client is using:

  1. Product: Cleansing cream Ingredients: Mineral oil, puriﬁed water, bees-
wax, sodium borate, isopropyl palmitate, petrolatum, stearyl alcohol, lanolin 
alcohol,  ceteareth-20,  magnesium  aluminum  silicate,  sodium  dehydroace-
tate, methyl paraben, propyl paraben, D&C red #6.

    Analysis: More than comedogenic, this cleansing cream is simply much 
too greasy and heavy for oily, clog-prone skin. It contains isopropyl palmi-
tate, a known comedogenic ingredient. However, the ingredient is fairly low 
on the ingredient list. It also contains D&C red #6, which is not very com-
edogenic compared to other D&C red dyes and is present in a fairly small 
quantity. The biggest problem with this cleanser is that it is oil based, very 
heavy, and is probably not being rinsed off well, which can be a real prob-
lem for oily, clog-prone skin. This cleanser works well for drier skin types 
or for those who wear heavy or theatrical makeup and need a thorough oil-
based cleanser. It should be replaced for your client with a rinseable foam-
ing cleanser and/or a nongreasy cleansing milk.




328         CHAPTER 16

  2. Product: Day protectant Ingredients: Water, isopropyl palmitate, isopropyl 
myristate,  mineral  oil,  propylene  glycol,  propylene  glycol  stearate,  stearic 
acid, magnesium aluminum silicate, oleic acid, cellulose gum, methyl para-
ben, propyl paraben, fragrance.

    Analysis:  This  day  cream  is  loaded  with  potentially  comedogenic 
ingredients. Isopropyl myristate, isopropyl palmitate, and oleic acid are all 
comedogenic  chemicals.  Isopropyl  myristate  and  isopropyl  palmitate  are 
extremely high on the ingredient list, indicating a fairly large concentration 
of these problem agents. This cream is left on the face all day, creating a true 
exposure time. This day cream should be used only on skin types that are 
not clog-prone. Your client should discontinue this product.

  3. Product: Liquid makeup Ingredients: Water, propylene glycol, SD alcohol 40, 
titanium dioxide, talc, witch hazel extract, zinc oxide, magnesium aluminum 
silicate, methyl paraben, propyl paraben; may contain iron oxides and ultra-
marine blue.

    Analysis: This is an excellent example of a noncomedogenic product. It 
contains no comedogenic ingredients and no real emollient fats. It contains 
witch hazel and SD alcohol as mild drying agents—a plus for oily skins. This 
makeup is safe enough to be used on acne. Your client made a good choice 
here and should continue to use this product.

  4. Product: Loose powder Ingredients: talc, myristyl myristate, zinc stearate, 

methyl paraben, propyl paraben, iron oxides, fragrance.

    Analysis: This product would be acceptable if it did not have myristyl 
myristate as a pressing agent. It should not be used on oily, acne, or clogged skin.

These are only a few examples of how to do a comedogenic analysis. Use 
your head and the facts you have been taught. Here is the bottom-line question 
for all of this testing and analysis: Is your client’s skin developing clogged pores? 
If it is, something is not working correctly.

You should of course have available to your clients an entire range of non-
comedogenic  products.  When  purchasing  products  for  your  salon,  remember 
to check carefully for the ingredients and testing procedures we have discussed 
throughout this chapter.

IN CONCLUSION

Understanding comedogenicity is a skill that any esthetician should have. Helping 
clients with clog-prone and acne-prone skin to choose noncomedogenic products 
that are correct for their skin conditions can make a tremendous difference for 
these clients.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. Discuss testing for comedogenicity.

  2. Discuss the difference between noncomedogenic and nonacnegenic products.
  3. Discuss the concentration of possible comedogenic ingredients in a product. 

How might this concentration affect comedogenicity?

  4. Why are comedogenic ingredient lists controversial?
  5. Discuss the various types of products for clog-prone skin. What should you 

look for in a day cream? Night treatment? Foundation?

  6. Discuss treatment of adult, mature, clogged, and dehydrated skin.
  7. Why is it important to test the ﬁnal product for comedogenicity and irritancy?




 
 
 CHAPTER

17

Extraction

OBJECTIVES . . .

Extraction is an extremely important part of the esthetician’s 
skills, and it is a difﬁcult process to master.

With proper hands-on supervision, this chapter will help 
the esthetician learn about extraction procedures for many 
different types of follicle impactions. Different methods of 
extraction are discussed as well as speciﬁc unusual problems 
that may be encountered during extraction.

Extraction refers to the removal of dead cells, sebum, 
bacteria, and other debris from the skin’s follicles. This expul-
sion technique is probably the most important function of 
a facial treatment. The solid mass of sebum, dead cells, and 
other matter stuck in the follicles is both an esthetic and a 
physiological problem. Besides being unsightly, these lesions 
may lead to more serious acne and skin health problems, not 
to mention permanent scarring, if they are not treated.

Extraction techniques cannot be learned by simply studying 
a book. You must have hands-on training in all areas of extrac-
tion, taught by a well-qualiﬁed instructor. Do not attempt any 
of the procedures outlined in this chapter without the super-
vision and hands-on demonstration of a qualiﬁed, licensed 
instructor.

Extraction is an essential part of the esthetics profession 
and is possibly the most important service that estheticians 
perform. It can also be an uncomfortable and unsafe proce-
dure if performed incorrectly.

Although many states now require training for estheticians 
in proper use of lancets used for follicle dilation in extraction, 
some states still do not allow the use of lancets for extrac-
tion. Check with your esthetics instructor or school for laws 
governing the use of lancets by estheticians in your state.



     329

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.330         CHAPTER 17

Extraction refers to the removal 
of dead cells, sebum, bacteria, 
and other debris from the skin’s 
follicles.

ANALYSIS OF THE NEED 
FOR EXTRACTION

Retention hyperkeratosis refers 
to an overabundance of sebum 
that often begins at the time 
teenagers begin producing larger 
amounts of sex hormones.

Sebaceous ﬁlaments are small, 
impacted follicles on the nose and 
other facial areas; they are caused 
by oxidized, solidiﬁed sebum.

Open comedones are noninﬂam-
matory acne lesions, usually called 
blackheads.

Closed comedones are nonin-
ﬂammatory acne lesions, called 
whiteheads.

Ostium is the opening in follicles.

Almost every skin that you will see under the magnifying lamp will need at least 
some  extraction.  Even  dry,  older  skin  is  likely  to  have  some  clogged  follicles 
in the nose area. Observe your client’s skin closely under a magnifying lamp. 
Check all areas of the face well, including behind and in front of the ears, the 
neck, and the jawline.

Understanding Clogged Pores

All clogged pores (follicles) and comedones have several developmental factors. 
Retention hyperkeratosis, a hereditary factor, refers to the tendency of dead 
skin  cells  (corneocytes)  not  to  shed  in  a  regular  and  uniform  manner.  These 
dead cells accumulate inside the follicle, lining the walls.

Sebum production levels are also hereditary, and in clog-prone individuals, 
overactive glands secrete excess sebum, coating the buildup of cells. As sebum 
becomes  exposed  to  air  (oxygen),  the  sebum  oxidizes  and  forms  a  semisolid 
mass; any sebum exposed to the oxygen turns dark, creating the black part of 
the “blackhead.”

Sebum is basically a complex of fatty materials and can solidify similarly to 
the way chicken fat turns solid when refrigerated. This solidiﬁcation helps form 
the impaction in the follicle.

Sebaceous ﬁlaments are the small, clogged pores many clients have on 
their  noses.  These  are  not  classic  comedones;  they  are  mostly  just  oxidized 
sebum and very little cell buildup. This explains their frequent occurrence and 
presence on many clients’ skin.

Open comedones are classic blackheads, with a distinctly dilated follicle 
opening.  They  contain  a  mix  of  keratinized  cells  and  solidiﬁed  sebum.  Open 
comedones are often about the size of a pinhead. They have a large black top, 
hence the term blackhead. Open comedones are the easiest lesions to extract.

Closed comedones appear as small bumps just underneath the skin. They 
are frequently found in the cheekbone area, especially in the blush line. They 
are often associated with comedogenic skin care and makeup products, hence 
their frequent appearance in the blush line from blushes pressed with comedo-
genic fats or use of coal-tar-derived red dyes. Closed comedones are frequently 
found just under the corners of the mouth. The difference between closed and 
open  comedones  is  that  in  the  closed  comedo,  the  follicle  is  not  uniformly 
dilated. The follicle opening, or ostium, is barely visible, even when examining 
the skin with a magnifying lamp.

Analysis

After  thoroughly  removing  all  makeup  using  a  light,  nonfragranced  cleansing 
milk, examine the skin carefully using a magnifying lamp. Do not tone the skin 
before  analysis,  because  this  will  make  the  pores  look  smaller  and  will  also 
constrict  them.  This  is  not  helpful  for  proper  extraction.  Spread  the  skin  taut 
between your ﬁngers and observe all areas, moving down the face and continu-
ing the spreading movement and observation. Look for clogged pores (follicles), 
small white bumps just under the skin (closed comedones), large dilated open 
comedones, papules, and pustules. Carefully note the size of the pores and the 
location.  This  pattern  will  determine  the  type  of  skin  (oily,  combination,  etc.). 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Extraction      331

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Alipidic means “lack of lipids.” 
These skin types do not produce 
enough lipids.

FIGURE 17-1  Combination skin.

Clogged pores are rarely found on a truly dry or alipidic (does not produce 
enough  sebum)  skin.  Because  oil-dry  skin  does  not  produce  much  sebum 
and therefore has very small pores, it is unlikely to suffer from comedones or 
clogged pores.

On combination skin, you are likely to see small clogged pores through the 
T-zone area and scattered larger clogged pores or blackheads. In any area, you 
may see small white bumps or closed comedones, milia (whiteheads), pustules, 
and papules associated with acne. The width of the T-zone will determine the 
oiliness of the area and therefore the number of clogged pores. Clogged pores 
are always a sign of an oily area (Figure 17-1).

The perimeter of the face is an ideal place for clogged pores and acne lesions 
to form. These are areas your clients often miss while cleansing. You can think 
of these areas as “cobwebs” in the corner of a room (see Figure 17-2). “Perimeter 
acne” may also be the result of comedogenic hair care or styling products. Often 
pomade acne is seen around the facial hairlines. For more information, see the 
section on pomade acne in Chapter 16, Comedogenicity.

Think about your client doing at-home cleaning. The client is not a skin care 
specialist and probably does not take the time or care cleaning that you would 
when  cleaning  your  own  face.  The  client  applies  the  cleanser  and  massages 




 
 
 
 
332         CHAPTER 17

Examination Procedures for Extraction

1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Cleanse the skin well.
Using a magnifying lamp, examine the skin, observing areas with enlarged
pores and noting areas with smaller and larger pores.
Combination skin—Note enlarged pores through the T-zone, indicating oilier skin,
or smaller pores around the edges of the face, indicating less oil production. The
width of the oily T-zone determines whether the skin is oily-combination or dry-
combination. The wider the visible enlarged pore structure, the oilier the skin is.
Clogged pores, comedones, closed comedones, papules, and pustules are
more likely to be seen in the oilier areas.
The small clogged pores in the nose are usually sebaceous filaments, not open
comedones; they are simply follicles filled with oxidized sebum.
IN THE OILY AREAS . . . Pull the skin taut with the thumb and forefinger and
observe any small white bumps under the skin. These are closed comedones.
Check the perimeter of the face well, including the chin, jawline, neck, and
in front of and behind the ears.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-2  Examination procedures.

it but does not notice the remnants of cleanser or makeup left in front of the 
ears, in the hairline, and under the jawline. The client may also omit toner as a 
follow-up in these areas.

Failure  to  thoroughly  remove  makeup  and  cleanser  in  these  areas  means 
that dead cells build up here, as well as emollients and ingredients left from the 
cleanser. Clogs will inevitably form.

The  ﬁrst  thing  you  should  do  when  you  encounter  perimeter  acne  is  to 
gently make the client aware of it and discuss why it is probably there. Instruct 
your client to pay extra attention to cleaning these areas and to use toner after 
cleansing. You may also suggest that a foaming cleanser be used as a second 
cleanser after makeup removal. This not only helps remove any emollients left 
from a cleansing milk, but the foam itself is very obvious when it is still on the 
face or in one of those hidden corners. Your client will see the foam and rinse 
off the area.

Continuing the Analysis . . .

Gently spread the skin with your thumb and foreﬁnger. Move the ﬁngers across 
the face, constantly spreading the skin gently. Look for any small white bumps 
that are visible only when the skin is pulled taut. These are often closed com-
edones and can be seen on any area of the face, but they can be hidden espe-
cially in the chin area, just under the lower lip, and under the chin and jawline.
Check the skin for sebaceous ﬁlaments, which are not really open comedo-
nes. They are what most clients refer to as clogged pores. These are follicles that 
have ﬁlled with sebum, sometimes over a very short period of time. They are 
most noticeable on the nose but can appear in any area. On very oily skin, they 
can literally seem to be in every single area (Figures 17-3A, 17-3B).

Sebaceous ﬁlaments indicate an oily area. They are not nearly as large or 
dilated as an open comedo, but they are basically the same type of lesion. The 
only real difference is that a sebaceous ﬁlament is mostly sebum, whereas a real 
open comedo is dilated, is much larger, and is ﬁlled with many dead cells. An 
open comedo may take weeks to form, but sebaceous ﬁlaments may form in just 




 
 
 
 
Extraction      333

FIGURE 17-3A AND B  Treatment for clogged, dehydrated skin includes noncomedogenic hydration ﬂuid and 
sunscreen with low levels of emollient, along with an alpha hydroxy acid gel. This home care was used for six 
weeks in this case study. Note the differences in texture, tone, clarity, and even coloration.

a few days. The debris extracted from a sebaceous ﬁlament will be much smaller 
than that of an open comedo, and you will also notice that the plug is not as 
deep or as solid (Figure 17-4).

OPEN COMEDONES

Open comedones may appear anywhere on the face. They are most noticeable 
in acne conditions and in older clients who have neglected their skin for a long 
time. They are also frequently observed in young adolescents who have a budding 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-4  Sebaceous ﬁlaments, 
often called clogged pores, are fol-
licles ﬁlled with solidiﬁed sebum. 
The black tip is oxidized sebum in 
the top of the follicle.




 
 
 
 
334         CHAPTER 17

Desincrustation refers to the 
process of softening the skin and 
sebaceous impaction by applying 
a chemical that helps liquefy the 
sebum, reducing hard, solid plugs 
to a softer consistency.

adolescent acne problem but may not be cleaning well and have not taken a true 
interest in their personal appearance yet.

Open comedones can certainly appear in any skin type, but they are more 
prevalent in the previously mentioned situations. Very conscientious clients are 
aware of these lesions and will either have them extracted or attempt to do so 
themselves.

PRE-SOFTENING BEFORE EXTRACTION
The  procedure  you  follow  before  extraction  signiﬁcantly  helps  loosen  follicle 
impactions, making extractions less difﬁcult for the esthetician and less uncom-
fortable for the client. The skin must be pretreated before extraction. This pre-
treatment helps soften the accumulations in the follicles as well as the surface 
of  the  skin,  making  the  skin  softer  and  more  ﬂexible  during  the  extraction 
procedure.

Desincrustation

Desincrustation  refers  to  the  process  of  softening  the  skin  and  sebaceous 
impaction by applying a chemical that helps liquefy the sebum, reducing hard, 
solid plugs to a softer consistency. This technique softens clogs signiﬁcantly. The 
chemical used for this procedure is usually an anionic surfactant, or a complex 
of  surfactants.  Thus  desincrustation  solutions  usually  have  a  higher,  or  more 
alkaline, pH. 

Desincrustation solutions are usually either liquids or a soft gel-cream con-
sistency, often referred to as a pre-mask. The liquid is applied to the affected 
areas of the face after preliminary cleansing or is sometimes poured onto cotton 
compresses and then applied to the face.

The pre-masks can be applied to the face either with a brush or your hands. 
Pre-masks have a thicker consistency than liquid solutions. They can be seen on 
the skin, whereas liquids cannot. Being careful to follow manufacturer’s instruc-
tions, allow the solution or pre-mask to sit on the face for 5 to 10 minutes. It 
is important to carefully time use of desincrustant products since overexposure 
can cause skin inﬂammation and dryness. 

Steam  treatment  is  frequently  used  at  the  same  time.  Steaming  does  not 
“open  the  pores”;  however,  it  does  hydrate  the  surface,  helping  to  make  the 
skin considerably more ﬂexible for extraction. Galvanic desincrustation may be 
applied over the pre-mask or liquid, depending on the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Galvanic treatment with a desincrustant chemical provides for better pene-
tration of the product and better reduction of the plug due to chemical reactions 
produced by the electricity within the follicle. (See Milady’s Standard Funda-
mentals for Estheticians or Milady’s Comprehensive Training for Estheticians for 
further explanation and instructions for use of galvanic current.)

The oilier and more impacted the skin, the better it is to use galvanic treat-
ment. Some clients who have a minimal number of clogged follicles and more 
dehydrated  skin  may  ﬁnd  galvanic  treatment  is  too  drying.  It  is  a  good  idea 
to use galvanic treatment routinely on acne conditions, provided there are no 
medical contraindications for use.

After  completing  the  “soak”  period  with  desincrustation  solution  or  pre-
mask or galvanic treatment, remove the desincrustant product well and proceed 
with extraction.

Desincrustant chemicals are often slippery and must be removed thoroughly 
before extraction. Otherwise, the skin is too slippery for extraction procedures.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Extraction      335

.
c
n
I

,
c
i
t
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
T
-
o
B
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

i

FIGURE 17-5  An ultrasonic “blade” is used here to exfoliate the corneum before 
extraction.

OTHER PRE-EXTRACTION PROCEDURES
The use of a brushing machine may help loosen dead cells, particularly on skin 
that is both dehydrated and clogged.

The  electric  rotating  brush  should  be  gently  applied  after  steaming.  The 
brush  should  be  used  over  a  layer  of  emulsion-type  cleanser  to  prevent  too 
much  scratching  of  the  face  during  the  brushing  procedure.  Do  not  use  the 
brush on acne, couperose, or sensitive skin. (For further instruction on brushing, 
see Milady’s Standard Fundamentals for Estheticians or Milady’s Comprehensive 
Training for Estheticians.) 

Use of an ultrasonic device can also aid in extraction. Applying the “blade” 
of the ultrasonic device to the skin can help exfoliate the skin and in some cases 
cause small impactions to self-expel. Devices vary, so check with your manufac-
turer for correct use of this device (Figure 17-5).

Suction, or vacuuming, may be performed with a skin suction machine after 
desincrustation  or  steaming.  Suction  may  help  further  loosen  impactions  that 
have  already  been  loosened  with  desincrustation.  Suction  removes  very  little 
debris from the follicle, but the procedure feels good to the client and has a nice 
psychological effect. Again, suction should not be used on sensitive or couperose 
skin or acne. See Milady’s Standard Fundamentals for Estheticians or Milady’s 
Comprehensive Training for Estheticians for instruction on suction machines.

Enzyme Peels and Alpha Hydroxy Exfoliation 
to Ease Extraction

Using light peeling treatments performed with enzymes or alpha hydroxy acids 
(AHAs) can help remove dead surface cell buildup, loosening clogged pores and 
other impactions. Clients who use AHAs at home, such as a 10 percent AHA gel, 




 
336         CHAPTER 17

on a daily basis signiﬁcantly loosen comedones and sebaceous ﬁlaments. Two 
weeks  of  home  care  using  AHA  gels,  or  in  more  severe  cases,  AHA  gels  and 
benzoyl peroxide gels, can make a huge difference in the ease of extraction, and 
even in reducing sebaceous ﬁlaments.

Clients who have had two weeks of AHA at home are safe to have a 30 per-
cent AHA performed at the beginning of their extraction treatment. Treatments 
of 30 percent AHA exfoliation help loosen and slightly dilate follicle openings. 
Enzyme treatments using pancreatin or papain also can help remove from 
the skin surface dead-cell buildup that blocks follicle openings. Clients who are 
both dehydrated and clogged may particularly beneﬁt from an enzyme treatment 
before extraction. Enzymes are normally applied during the steam treatment for 
an 8- to 12-minute period. For further information on how to use enzymes, see 
Chapter 21, Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures. 

Peeling  the  surface  of  the  skin  helps  remove  dead  cells  and  helps  dilate 
follicle openings, but it does not signiﬁcantly affect the hardened sebum in the 
follicles. Desincrustation products are designed to work on the fatty plugs, as 
opposed to enzymes and AHAs, which work more on dead cell buildup. After 
exfoliation, it may still be necessary to use a desincrustant to soften the seba-
ceous impactions.

HYGIENE AND EXTRACTION

An  important  rule  of  hygiene  is  always  to  wear  gloves  during  extraction.  It  is 
generally good practice to wear gloves throughout the treatment, especially if any 
acne lesions are present. Before beginning extraction, please review Chapter 2, 
Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques.

EXTRACTION OF OPEN COMEDONES
After pre-softening the accumulations, remove all products from the skin, leav-
ing the face moist but not wet. Wet skin or skin that still has product on it is 
impossible to extract. Take two cotton swabs. Hold them as you would hold two 
pencils. It is best to use the type of swab that has a soft, ﬂexible plastic stick. 
These plastic cotton swabs are much easier to work with and have a built-in 
safety feature; they will snap if too much pressure is applied (Figure 17-6).

Place a swab on each side of the open comedo. Gently press down on the 
swabs and then gently move the swabs closer together, with the tips touching 
the skin. This has a lifting effect on the solid plug. Keep applying gentle pres-
sure until you see the plug come out of the follicle. If the plug does not come 
out easily, move the swabs to another angle around the sides of the comedo 
and  repeat  the  procedure.  Once  the  plug  is  out,  continue  to  press  gently  on 
the sides of the follicle to make sure all of the debris has been removed. When 
working around the sides of the nose, place one cotton swab under the cartilage 
of the nostril, and the other swab on the side of the nose. Using the two swabs, 
gently  arch  the  cartilage  of  the  nostril  and  slowly  but  ﬁrmly  slide  the  lower 
swab  upward  toward  the  other  swab.  This  is  a  great  technique  for  extracting 
sebaceous ﬁlaments in the nose area. The technique may need to be repeated.

Finger Technique

Wrap  your  gloved  foreﬁngers  in  damp  cotton.  Using  the  same  technique  of 
gentle  downward  and  inward  pressure,  attempt  to  extract  the  comedo.  Work 
your ﬁngers all around the comedo while using this technique.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Extraction      337

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-6  Cotton swabs are used to gently extract comedones and sebaceous 
ﬁlaments by gently lifting and slightly twisting the skin. Careful preparation of the 
skin with desincrustation is essential for ease in extraction.

Cotton  swabs  are  easier  for  many  estheticians  because  swabs  are  smaller 
than ﬁngers. Most clients agree that the cotton swab technique is more comfort-
able and more effective.

Extractor Technique

Comedo extractors are best to use on nonﬂeshy parts of the face, such as the 
forehead or cheekbones, or on clients whose skin does not have a ﬂeshy thick-
ness  that  can  be  physically  manipulated.  Comedo  extractors  should  never  be 
used on thin, fragile, sensitive, or couperose skin.

Place the extractor over the open comedo, with the hole in the extractor 
directly over the comedo. Be very sure that the lesion is smaller than the hole 
in the metal extractor. If the lesion is wider than the hole in the extractor, do 
not use the extractor. Either try a large extractor or use the cotton swab method.
Assuming that the comedo can easily ﬁt into the hole in the extractor, gently 
press straight down on the extractor, using the leverage of the handle end to 
exert pressure. The plug should come out of the follicle and be noticeable inside 
the hole of the extractor. It is a good idea to follow this extraction procedure 
with another gentle expression of the follicle using the cotton swabs to check 
for any further debris that might be trapped in the follicle.

Remember when using a metal extractor that the extractor is metal and is 
not ﬂexible. The use of a comedo extractor can be very painful for the client, 
particularly if the entire face requires treatment. Reserve the extractor for use on 
bony areas or nonﬂeshy skin. In general, comedo extractors are more uncom-
fortable than extraction techniques using the ﬁngers or cotton swabs.

Comedo  extractors  are  available  in  a  variety  of  sizes.  Some  are  made 
with a slight bend for better leverage. Some are made with a round hole, and 
some have an oval or rectangular hole. You should have some of each type 




 
 
 
 
338         CHAPTER 17

available; and you will, over time, develop a feel for which is appropriate to 
use.  Comedo  extractors  must  be  sterilized  after  each  client.  Plastic  dispos-
able extractors are breakable and are generally not advised. See Chapter 2, 
Hygiene and Sterilization Techniques, for information about sterile and asep-
tic procedure.

CLOSED COMEDONES

Closed comedones appear as small bumps just beneath the surface of the skin. 
They can be found on any area of the face but are frequently found on the 
cheeks, jawline, and chin. Often you will see a large number of closed com-
edones on the cheekbones of female clients. These are frequently caused by a 
comedogenic reaction to a blush. The closed comedo is just beneath the skin 
and normally has a very small follicle opening. If you look carefully through 
a  magnifying  lamp,  you  may  detect  a  tiny  opening  in  the  top  of  the  closed 
comedo. Often, these follicles must be dilated with a lancet before extraction.

EXTRACTION OF CLOSED COMEDONES
Closed comedones are the most difﬁcult of any lesion to extract, because they 
are just beneath the surface of the skin, have a very small pore opening, and 
may vary greatly in size. If you can see the opening of the follicle well and the 
white area surrounding the opening does not appear to be very large, you can 
attempt to extract the area by using the cotton swab technique. Make sure you 
have  softened  the  area  well  with  a  desincrustant.  Place  the  tip  of  the  cotton 
swabs on either side of the closed comedo, being careful to identify the border 
of the lesion. In other words, make sure the entire comedo is located between 
your  two  swabs.  Failure  to  do  so  may  result  in  extracting  only  part  of  the 
comedo. Gently press down on the swabs and then gently turn them inward 
while pulling the skin taut with the outside ﬁngers. A solid white stream of seba-
ceous material will emerge from the comedo. Continue to press the area gently 
until no more material emerges.

In many closed comedones, follicle dilation is necessary. This procedure is 
performed for three reasons. Dilation of the follicle allows more room for the 
sebaceous material to emerge. Secondly, dilation of the closed comedo relieves 
pressure on the follicle walls and helps avoid rupturing the follicle wall during 
extraction. Finally, relieving the pressure on the lesion by lancet dilation makes 
the extraction procedure much more comfortable for the client.

To dilate the follicle, ﬁnd the small opening in the top of the closed comedo. 
Using  a  sterile,  disposable  lancet,  gently  dilate  this  follicle  opening  by  gently 
pressing the tip of the lancet through the follicle opening. To avoid damaging 
the follicle, do not attempt to force the lancet into the follicle (Figure 17-7).

After the follicle is dilated, extract the comedo using the cotton swab tech-
nique.  Waiting  a  few  seconds  after  lancet  dilation  sometimes  helps  expel  the 
debris. Relief of the pressure accomplished by dilation often causes some “self-
expelling” action. This helps make the extraction process easier. It is not advis-
able  to  use  comedo  extractors  on  closed  comedones.  Closed  comedones  are 
often found in ﬂeshy areas of the face, thus making use of an extractor cumber-
some and difﬁcult. Second, closed comedones often have a larger diameter than 
that of the opening in a comedo extractor, so using the extractor is unsafe and 
inappropriate.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Extraction      339

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-7  Dilation using a lancet.

EXTRACTION OF PUSTULES

Pustules are raised, inﬂammatory acne lesions. They have a “head” that is ﬁlled 
with pus. Most of the pustule and its contents are above the surface of the skin.
To extract a pustule, gently place the tip of a sterile disposable lancet against 
the side of the pustule. Bracing the outside of your hand against the face, gently 
“lift” the very top of the pustule away with the lancet. This procedure is similar 
to removing a splinter from your ﬁnger, except that the lesion is above the skin. 
Because you are strictly removing dead cells from the top of the pustule, this 
procedure should not be uncomfortable to the client.

When the top of this dead cell layer has been removed, the pus will begin to 
emerge from the follicle opening. Placing two cotton swabs on the sides of the 
lesion, gently press downward and inward on the swabs, being careful to hold 
the area taut with the outside ﬁngers. The rest of the impaction should emerge 
from the follicle. Following the pus will be the emergence of the actual comedo, 
often referred to as the core. This part of the extracted material looks much like 
the debris extracted from an open or closed comedo, except that these impac-
tions are slightly harder and denser.

It is not unusual for a small amount of bleeding to occur while extract-
ing pustules. Remember, the follicle wall has ruptured in a pustule, allowing 
blood to come into the follicle. A slight amount of red blood appearing after 
extracting a pustule indicates that no more debris or sebum is present in the 
follicle.

Papules, nodules, and cysts are deep inﬂammatory lesions and are the domain 
of the dermatologist. Do not attempt to extract these lesions. Although papules 
often  develop  into  pustules  or  dissipate  without  treatment,  cysts  and  nodules 
should always be referred to the dermatologist for treatment.




 
 
 
 
340         CHAPTER 17

Frequent Mistakes in Extraction Techniques

Several common mistakes are made in extraction procedures:
❏  Failing to pre-soften the skin and impactions. Make sure you use a good desin-
crustant  product  before  extraction.  Soft  impactions  are  much  easier  to 
extract.

❏  Using highly acidic products such as astringents or AHA exfoliants immediately 
before extraction. These products can cause an astringent “crimping” effect 
on the follicle opening, inhibiting ease of extraction. The skin and follicle 
should be relaxed, hydrated, and slightly moist to be the most ﬂexible for 
extraction.

❏  Attempting to extract too large an area at once. This not only can be unsuc-
cessful, but can cause bruising and redness. Focus on small areas, gently 
lifting these areas with cotton swabs or gloved ﬁngertips. 

❏  Using extractors instead of ﬁngertips or cotton swabs. This technique can be 

very uncomfortable, especially for the ﬁrst-time client. 

❏  Trying to get every clog in one visit. Extraction “marathons” cause inﬂamma-
tion and make the client uncomfortable. Ten minutes should be the limit, 
especially on the ﬁrst visit!

❏  Failing to let your home care go to work. Home care helps clear the client’s 
skin and makes your extraction work much easier. Explain to the client that 
after  a  few  weeks  of  using  home  care  regularly,  especially  exfoliant  gels 
such  as  AHA  or  benzoyl  peroxide,  her  clogged  pores  will  loosen  and  be 
much easier to extract on future salon treatment visits. 

❏  Failing to recommend proper home care. Without home care, your clients will 

never achieve the long-term results they desire.

FACIAL TREATMENT BEFORE 
AND AFTER EXTRACTION

We  have  discussed  the  actual  extraction  procedures  used  in  removing  debris 
from the follicles. Treatment before and after extraction is important to help ease 
the extraction process by softening the follicle accumulations, to treat the area 
after extraction to prevent infection and possible ﬂares of inﬂammatory papules 
and pustules, and to help further dry the lesions. The following is a suggested 
treatment in which extraction takes place. This treatment is known in the esthetics 
industry as deep-pore cleansing.

  1. Completely remove all the makeup from the face with a liquid cleanser.
  2. Analyze the skin under the magnifying lamp. Check all areas of the face for 
clogged pores (sebaceous ﬁlaments), open and closed comedones, milia, and 
pustules. At the same time, of course, check for other disorders of the skin.
  3. Apply  steam  treatment  to  the  face  with  a  vapor  machine  in  the  usual 
manner. Apply a desincrustant pre-mask, desincrustation lotion compresses, 
or enzyme treatment to the skin.

  4. Remove the desincrustant or enzyme treatment after allowing the treatment 
to sit on the face for about 8 to 10 minutes, or the time prescribed by the 
product manufacturer.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Extraction      341

Milia are small deposits of sebum 
between the follicle and the 
corneum.

  5. Galvanic desincrustation treatment may be used to further loosen the debris 

in the follicle, especially in cases of multiple impactions or acne.

  6. Suction may be used, providing there are no contraindications, as previously 

discussed.

  7. Begin extraction in the chin and jawline area ﬁrst, working upward on the 
face. This order of extraction helps the esthetician avoid contaminating the 
hands or other areas of the face with debris extracted from the lower part of 
the face. It is the most hygienic and aseptic pattern of treatment.

  8. After completing all extractions, apply an antiseptic toner to the face with 
damp sponges or cotton pads. This helps kill any bacteria on the surface 
of the skin. It also lowers the pH from the use of the alkaline desincrustant 
treatment. Use of a soothing serum helps soothe the follicles and reduce the 
chances of post-extraction ﬂares of pimples due to inﬂammation.

  9. Apply the appropriate treatment for the particular skin type. An ampoule or 
antiseptic lotion may be appropriate. Benzoyl peroxide or salicylic acid can 
be used on oilier and acne-prone skin.

 10. Apply  high  frequency  over  the  face.  This  also  helps  kill  surface  bacteria 
further. Using a piece of gauze over the face while extracting helps intensify 
the frequency treatment and helps the electrode move easily across the skin.
 11. Apply  a  drying,  clay-based  mask  to  the  area  that  was  extracted.  A  mask 
containing sulfur, salicylic acid, or benzoyl peroxide may be used for acne. 
A  bentonite-based  mask  with  camphor  may  be  more  appropriate  for  oily 
or more sensitive clogged areas. The mask should be allowed to dry com-
pletely, usually for about 15 to 20 minutes.

 12. Remove the mask with damp, soft cloths, sponges, or cotton pads. Apply 

more toner after removing the mask.

 13. Apply a noncomedogenic, hydrating sunscreen.

Strongly advise your clients not to wear makeup for about two hours after 
extraction.  Extraction  can  be  slightly  irritating,  and  application  of  makeup  to 
freshly extracted areas may be more irritating.

EXTRACTION OF MILIA

Milia  are  small  deposits  of  sebum  and  keratin  between  the  follicle  and  the 
corneum (Figure 17-8). A milium is not the same as a comedo. The sebaceous 
material is trapped above the skin’s surface, covered with a layer of dead cells. 
Milia may occur for several reasons. Milia are frequently seen on older, mature 
skin (Figure 17-9A). This may be associated with the use of heavy creams loaded 
with emollients for treating dry, dehydrated skin, or the use of fat-containing bar 
soap. Injuries to the skin sometimes also cause milia to develop. Dermabrasion 
by a plastic surgeon is often followed by a large number of milia forming. This 
procedure  is  discussed  more  in  detail  in  Chapter  22,  Plastic  and  Cosmetic 
Surgery: Treating the Patient.

To extract a milium, make sure that it is large enough to be extracted. Milia 
are almost always perfectly round in shape and are found on any area of the 
face, but especially the upper cheeks and the forehead. A milium must be large 
enough to easily lift off the top with a lancet. This is about the size of the heads of 
two pins. Make sure you are absolutely positive that the lesion is a milium. Other 
types of skin lesions look like milia, including some types of skin growths. Check 
the shape carefully. The milium should not have any capillaries running through 
it. If the lesion has a capillary associated with it, leave it alone. Also, if the milium 
seems to give you any resistance while using the lancet, leave it alone. The dead 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.342         CHAPTER 17

Horny zone of epidermis
grown over follicle opening

Trapped sebum,
keratin and
bacteria

Dead cells, sebum
and bacteria

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 17-8  Milia.

cell layer on the top of a milium is very thin. Milia are easily treated with a lancet 
and should not give any resistance to pressure from the lancet.

Gently spread the skin taut around the milium with your ﬁngertips. Using a 
sterile disposable lancet, gently lift off the top cell layers from the milium. Gently 
place the lancet against the side of the top of the milium. The lancet should slide 
easily into the top. These are all dead cells in the elevated part of the milium, so 
the client should barely feel the lancet.

You  should  barely  see  the  opening  you  have  created  in  the  top  of  the 
milium. Sometimes a small amount of sebaceous material emerges from the side 
of the milium where you have lifted the dead skin. After the lancet procedure 
is complete, place a cotton swab on both sides of the milium and gently press 
and lift on the milium. You may ﬁnd it helpful to put slightly more pressure on 
the “unopened” side of the milium. This pressure helps the sebaceous material 
exit the follicle easier.

If the milium does not extract easily, you can try lifting more dead cells with 
the  lancet.  Sometimes  when  the  milium  is  small  enough,  it  is  easier  to  use  a 
comedo extractor, particularly on nonﬂeshy areas of the face such as the forehead. 
Place the comedo extractor over the milium. Gently press down on the unopened 




 
 
 
 
 
Extraction      343

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-9A  Milia are often seen around the eye area, forehead, and cheeks, as 
seen in this photo.

Some General Rules for Extraction
  1. Always  wear  disposable  latex  or  vinyl  gloves  during  extraction  and 

throughout the remainder of the treatment.

  2. Do  not  extract  for  more  than  ten  minutes  in  any  single  treatment. 
More than ten minutes of extraction is too stimulating for most skin 
types and can be very uncomfortable.

  3. Reduce discomfort of the client by keeping the skin pulled taut during 

extraction and only extracting very small areas at a time.

  4. Never  attempt  extraction  if  you  have  not  had  hands-on  experience 

with a qualiﬁed instructor.

  5. The biggest mistake made in extraction is failure to properly presoften 
impactions.  Make  sure  you  are  using  the  correct  products  for  this 
important phase of the treatment.

  6. Always  use  an  antiseptic,  low  pH  toner,  or  special  after-extraction 
product after completing your extraction procedures. This is important 
to reduce the chance of infection, soothe the skin, reduce redness, and 
reestablish the proper pH.

  7. Do not use any alpha hydroxy acid or beta hydroxy acid products imme-
diately  after  treatment,  especially  salon  concentrations.  Clients  may 
use a low percentage AHA that evening, if recommended.

FIGURE 17-9B  Chart of general extraction rules.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
344         CHAPTER 17

Xanthelasmas (zan-thuh-LAZ-
muhs) are much ﬂatter than milia, 
have a yellowish appearance, are 
below the skin’s surface, and may 
have an irregular shape.

Syringomas (sear-in-GO-muhs) 
are small pinpoint lesions that 
occur under the eyes.

side of the milium, moving the extractor very slowly toward the open side of the 
milium. You should see the emerging sebaceous material.

If the milium does not respond to treatment, do not continue attempting to 
extract it! You must have lots of experience to extract milia. Do not extract milia 
until you have been given hands-on instruction by a qualiﬁed licensed instructor.

LESIONS AROUND THE EYES

Many clients complain of small, milia-like lesions around the eye area. Some of 
these lesions are milia. Some are other types of skin growth or lesions called 
xanthelasmas (zan-thuh-LAZ-muhs). Xanthelasmas are much larger and ﬂatter 
than milia, have a yellowish appearance, are below the skin’s surface, and may 
have  an  irregular  shape  (Figure  17-10).  They  are  rarely  round  like  a  milium. 
These lesions should be referred to a dermatologist—they are not in the domain 
of the esthetician. Xanthelasmas can sometimes be an indicator of other diseases 
or  disorders,  such  as  high  cholesterol.  Refer  the  client  to  a  dermatologist  for 
treatment and follow-up.

Syringomas (sear-in-GO-muhs) are small pinpoint lesions that occur under 
the eyes. These are actually small cysts on the sudoriferous glands. They may 
look like very small milia and are usually seen in multiple numbers. They are 
thought to be hereditary or possibly caused by sun damage. They are generally 
not extractable and should be referred to a dermatologist or an ophthalmologist 
for treatment.

Other small milia in the eye area are often associated with the use of heavy 
eye  creams,  concealers,  and  other  eye  cosmetics  that  are  thick,  heavy,  and 
loaded with fatty emollients. This can cause a buildup of dead cells in the area. 
Advise the client to switch to a lighter eye cream or a gel-type treatment. These 
have fewer or lesser concentrations of emollients.

i

.
y
t
e
c
o
S

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
t
a
m
r
e
D
d
n
a
a
e
Z
w
e
N

l

FIGURE 17-10  Xanthelasmas.

,
g
r
o
.
Z
N
t
e
N
m
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
Extraction      345

Improper cleansing has also been associated with milia development around 
the eyes. Clients who do not remove their eye makeup well on a nightly basis 
have a tendency to develop milia. These clients leave traces of makeup or do not 
remove the eye makeup at all. Instruct the client about the correct procedure to 
remove eye makeup, and make sure she is using a proper eye makeup remover.
Clients who are very rough in removing their eye makeup may also suffer 
from milia development around the eyes. Injuries and excessive manipulation of 
the eyelid tissue have been associated with milia development.

Do not attempt to remove milia found on the eyelids. This tissue is extremely 
difﬁcult to handle properly and is extremely fragile. Refer this client to an oph-
thalmologist or dermatologist and give proper advice for home care. Occasion-
ally milia will clear by themselves by drying up or shedding off the skin after the 
adjustment of proper home care.

TREATING CLOGGED 
AND DEHYDRATED SKIN

Skin that is both clogged and dehydrated is extremely difﬁcult to treat. The cli-
ent’s  skin  feels  dry  but  is  actually  oily  and  dehydrated.  The  follicle  becomes 
“crimped shut” from the tightness of the surface dehydration, making extraction 
difﬁcult if not impossible.

You should avoid using heavily drying products on such clients. Products 
that are made with high levels of humectants and low levels of emollients are 
appropriate for this skin problem. The hydrating agents will help hydrate the 
skin’s surface, making it feel less dry and more pliable so that extraction is more 
easily accomplished.

To treat this type of skin, apply a hydrating ﬂuid during salon steam treat-
ment. Allow to steam with the humectant-based hydrating ﬂuid for 8 to 10 min-
utes. This water from the steam and the humectant helps soften the skin, hydrate 
the surface, and reduce the crimped effect on the follicles.

After this procedure, proceed with extraction. Follow extraction with a toner 
and then apply hydrating ﬂuid to the skin before applying a gentle, clay-based 
drying mask. Applying a drying, clay-based mask without applying a hydration 
ﬂuid can be overdrying to this type of skin problem. Clients should be instructed 
to use the hydrating treatment with the mask at home too. Twice-a-week appli-
cation will help clear the clogged pores.

The  client  with  both  dehydrated  skin  and  clogged  pores  often  is  middle 
aged, trying desperately to “ﬁght aging” through the use of heavy moisturizing 
and believing that he or she is “drying up” with age. These heavier, and often 
comedogenic,  cosmetics  clog  the  skin  while  the  client  attempts  to  treat  the 
wrinkles and lines associated with aging, dehydrating, and sun damage.

This  client  needs  lots  of  education  about  the  aging  process,  sun  damage, 
and comedogenic cosmetics. It is up to the esthetician to provide this education 
and help the client ﬁnd a product program that helps dehydration but will not 
be clogging to this clog-prone skin condition.

SOLAR BLACKHEADS

In older clients, often men, you will ﬁnd a concentration of large, open comedones 
around the eye area. Although the development of these huge blackheads is similar 
to acne-related blackheads, these lesions are caused by excessive long-term sun 
exposure. This condition is called Favre-Racouchot syndrome (see Figure 17-11). 
More on this condition is discussed in Chapter 19, Sun and Sun Damage.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.346         CHAPTER 17

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 17-11  Favre-Racouchot syndrome (senile solar comedones) in a typical 
pattern on an individual with sun damage.

Solar comedones must be extracted very gently. This type of skin often has 
extremely  fragile  capillaries,  also  associated  with  excessive  sun  exposure  and 
damage. This sun-damaged skin bruises easily, and it is easy to cause redness 
that lasts for days after treatment. Remember to be extremely gentle while treat-
ing this fragile skin.

Begin by cleansing or steaming the skin. Applying a ﬂuid hydrating agent 
while steaming will help loosen the impactions and make the skin more pliable. 
Very gently extract the lesions with the cotton swab technique. Do not attempt 
to  remove  every  single  clog  in  one  session.  Advise  the  client  to  have  weekly 
treatments  in  the  salon  until  the  problem  is  clear  and  then  regular  monthly 
treatments to prevent or control the return of these lesions. Favre-Racouchot is 
a  chronic  problem,  and  this  client  often  has  other  sun-related  skin  problems. 
Medical treatments are available for Favre-Racouchot syndrome and other sun-
damage conditions.

DURATION OF EXTRACTION

Extraction should not be performed for more than 10 to 15 minutes on any client 
during one treatment visit. Extraction that is longer than this can be painful and 
traumatic to both the client and the skin. You will, of course, have to assess the 
needs and the duration for each client as an individual.

Clogged skin should never be massaged, at least not for prolonged periods 
of time. Avoid massage on clients with excessively clogged skin, until the skin 




 
 
 
 
Extraction      347

is almost completely clear of clogged pores and any other type of acne lesion. 
As a general rule, if you take 10 minutes or more for extraction on a client, that 
client should not be massaged. Massaging of the clogged skin simply stimulates 
more oil production and applies pressure to clogs, forcing them to become more 
impacted in the skin.

IN CONCLUSION

Extraction is an important skill for all estheticians to have mastered. Removal of 
follicle impactions not only improves the appearance of the skin but also can 
help  preclude  inﬂammatory  acne  lesions  from  developing.  Knowledge  of  the 
various types of impactions and the protocol for their extraction will make the 
esthetician more adept at clinical esthetics.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. Discuss extraction—can any skin type need extractions?

  2. Why is it important to pre-soften the skin before extraction? What are some 

techniques used to pre-soften the skin for extraction?

  3. Describe the extraction process for closed comedones. When is follicle dilation 

necessary? Describe the extraction procedure for pustules.

  4. Describe the order of facial treatment procedures involved in a deep-cleansing 

treatment. 

  5. What  is  the  difference  between  the  effects  of  exfoliating  products  versus 

desincrustation products on clogged skin?

  6. Discuss  problem  impactions  around  the  eyes.  Which  of  these  problems 

should be referred to the dermatologist?

  7. What are some special procedures used for treating clogged skin that is also 

dehydrated?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

18

The Intrinsic 
Aging Process

OBJECTIVES . . .

Aging is a process that almost every person fears. Some 
changes in the skin inevitably happen as years pass. In this 
chapter, we discuss the way the skin changes as it becomes 
older and some of the ways we can manipulate these changes 
to make the skin look better.

It is the natural order of life that matter changes as it ages. 

Skin is not immune to this natural law.

Let’s take a minute to differentiate between two major 

types of factors that contribute to aging skin. Extrinsic 
aging factors are the effect of outside inﬂuences on the 
skin’s health. These are factors over which people have at 
least some control. The very best example here is sun expo-
sure, known to be the major factor in premature skin aging 
as well as skin cancer development. Smoking is another 
good example. Many medical and cosmetic scientists now 
believe that 85 percent of the aging process is due to 
extrinsic factors.

Intrinsic aging is the part of the aging process that is due 

to the actual passing of the years, wearing out of the body, 
gravity, hormonal changes, especially during and after meno-
pause, and genetic factors. Expression lines are an example of 
intrinsic facial aging. Regardless of our sun protection habits, 
we still “fold” our faces in expression, and this eventually leads 
to wrinkles in the skin due to repetitive movement of the skin 
in the same way.

It is important for estheticians to consider the two types 
of aging factors when analyzing and treating aging skin, so 



     349

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.350         CHAPTER 18

Extrinsic aging factors are the 
effect of outside inﬂuences on 
the skin’s health.

Intrinsic aging is the part of the 
aging process that is due to the 
actual passing of the years, wear-
ing out of the body, and hereditary 
factors.

we can determine the symptoms caused by intrinsic factors and 
those caused by extrinsic factors. There is also, inevitably, some 
overlap of the two. This chapter deals mostly with intrinsic aging 
factors. It also mentions some symptoms, normally associated by 
the consumer with passing of the years, that are actually extrinsic 
and preventable.

A human baby has beautiful, supple, smooth skin that is all one 
color. As skin is exposed to the environment, defends itself against 
disease, and is affected by nutrition, health habits, exposure, and 
time, it begins to change.

Scrapes and accidents we receive as children inevitably leave 
scar tissue, which develops from injuries. At puberty, the hormonal 
system begins functioning in a new way. Suddenly pores begin 
to enlarge; skin becomes oilier, apocrine glands start functioning 
differently, and the skin’s appearance changes. Pimples form from 
impacted follicles and sometimes leave scars, particularly from the 
more severe forms of acne. Body hair begins growing, and skin 
texture changes as well.

Most teenagers are more concerned with the zit on their cheek 
than with how they will look at age 35 or 55. Many take their good 
skin for granted.

During their early 20s, most people start being aware of the 
changes associated with aging skin. They begin to notice small lines 
and wrinkles around the eyes and sometimes in other areas.

If you look closely and carefully at a square inch of skin on a 
baby’s face and compare it with a square inch of skin on the face 
of someone in their 20s, you will notice many differences. The 
skin looks rougher; the texture is coarser to the touch. The skin is 
no longer all one color, but multicolored due to melanin deposits, 
primarily from sun exposure.

If you again compare this square inch of skin with that of 
someone in their 40s or 50s, you will notice even more dramatic 
changes. Many of these changes are due to sun exposure, which 
we discuss much more completely in Chapter 19, Sun and Sun 
Damage.

However, some of these changes happen naturally as years go 
by. The natural aging process of the skin is called intrinsic aging. In 
other words, these changes happen within the body and are not 
directly associated with external factors such as sun or weather 
(Figure 18-1).



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.A

B

C

D

E

The Intrinsic Aging Process      351

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b
y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

FIGURE 18-1A–E  Each decade of life may add more signs of aging skin.

SKIN CHANGES BY THE DECADE

As they age, people notice changes in the appearance of their skin. Every-
one  is  different,  so  we  all  have  different  signs  of  aging  at  earlier  or 
later times.
❏  In  our  20s,  we  begin  to  notice  the  appearance  of  faint  expression  lines. 
Depending  on  the  amount  of  sun  exposure,  there  is  usually  some  skin 
mottling  (uneven  coloration)  and  possibly  some  faint  lines  around  the 
eyes.  Sagging  of  the  brow  area  may  begin  to  occur.  Lower  lid  pufﬁness 
(bags) may occur.

❏  In  our  30s,  most  people’s  expression  lines  become  more  evident.  Crow’s 
feet  around  the  eyes  may  be  noticeable.  Circles  under  the  eyes  (mainly 
from stress, sinus conditions, and lack of sleep, but they can be genetic) 
may appear. Skin texture may appear less smooth than it did in the 20s. 
Hyperpigmentation or melasma may be more evident, especially in women. 
In men, hair loss may be a factor in looking older.

❏  In our 40s, we see the beginning of elastosis or skin laxity. The neck and 
jawline  areas  sag  slightly,  and  there  is  some  elastosis  in  the  upper  or 
lower eyelids. The beginning of loss of muscle tone may occur. Expression 
lines  are  more  evident,  especially  in  the  eye  areas,  nasolabial  folds,  and 
the  forehead.  Perimenopause  is  likely  to  begin,  and  with  it  a  decrease  in 
collagen-producing estrogen. This can result in more pronounced elasto-
sis and wrinkling, more pronounced hyperpigmentation issues, drier skin, 
and sometimes hair growth. Women begin to have problems with perioral 
wrinkling, lines around the mouth (often called smoker’s lines, although 
they can occur in nonsmokers).The face may appear fuller due to weight 
gain. Redness issues, such as rosacea, often appear during the 40s. If the 
skin is sun exposed, all these symptoms are more prevalent. Skin growths 
due to sun exposure may begin to (such as hyperplasias and seborrheic 
keratoses)  occur.  Some  skin  cancers  may  occur,  especially  in  former  or 
current sun worshippers.

❏  In our 50s, elastosis is more pronounced in the entire face. We can see 
more ptosis of the brow and lower lid areas, and expression lines are very 
apparent. Muscles in the face are less toned due to gravity and genetics. 
The jawline becomes less angular and wider in the chin area. Jowls in the 
lower face and jawline areas may be starting to appear. “Marionette” lines 

Perioral wrinkling, lines around 
the mouth (often called smoker’s 
lines, although they can occur in 
nonsmokers).




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
352         CHAPTER 18

Elastosis means “loss of elasticity 
of the skin.”

Ptosis (TOE-sis) refers to more spe-
ciﬁc areas of drooping skin, such as 
eyelid ptosis or breast ptosis.

appear from the corners of the mouth to the chin. Perioral wrinkling is 
worse. Hyperpigmentation may manifest itself in “age spots” or heavily 
pigmented areas on sun-exposed areas, mainly due to sun damage accu-
mulated over 50 years. Skin may be drier and have continued and wors-
ening wrinkle and elastosis issues related to menopause. Skin growths 
such  as  keratoses  and  skin  cancers  are  more  likely  due  to  cumulative 
sun damage.

❏  In  our  60s  and  beyond,  some  more  pronounced  genetic  changes  take 
place. These include a loss of subcutaneous fat, making the face appear 
bony. This is especially prevalent in people in their 70s and up. Ear and nose 
cartilage begins growing, and the nose may droop due to this enlargement 
and  gravity.  The  skin  is  also  physically  thinner  and  possibly  more  sensi-
tive due to decreased barrier function. In the later years, the skull actually 
shrinks, reducing skeletal support to the skin.

HEREDITY AND GENETICS

Many middle-aged people visit the esthetician for the ﬁrst time and describe look-
ing in the mirror and seeing one of their parents! Many genetic factors inﬂuence 
facial appearance, bone structure, skin color, and sometimes genetic skin disorders 
or diseases. Some intrinsic aging factors are also hereditary. Family history and 
ethnic background do govern skin aging. For example, redheaded, thin-skinned, 
and fair-skinned individuals develop the skin characteristics of aging much more 
rapidly than individuals with thicker, darker skin, such as black or Hispanic skin. 
Although it is true that darker skins produce more melanin and therefore ward off 
more solar damage, the skin itself varies widely between different ethnic groups.
In general, the darker the skin, the less visible aging takes place, depending 
on the amount of sun exposure an individual experiences. Thicker skin does not 
show signs of aging as fast as thinner, fragile skin types.

This is certainly not to say that dark skin types cannot or do not age. It is 
just that they are less likely to look aged as fast. A lot of this depends on how a 
person takes care of his or her skin.

WHAT CAUSES THE SYMPTOMS 
OF SKIN AGING?

Here we discuss several factors that inﬂuence aging. Gravity is certainly a factor. 
The gravity of the earth constantly pulls on our bodies, including the facial skin. 
This gravity is one factor that causes skin and muscle to sag. Lack of estrogen 
after menopause diminishes production of collagen, causing sudden changes in 
the skin and resulting in more skin laxity, wrinkles, and dryness. Even an indi-
vidual who takes immaculate care of both skin and body will have some sagging 
of the face over a period of years. Even people who have never exposed their 
faces to the sun will have some sagging. This sagging is referred to clinically 
as elastosis, which means “loss of elasticity.” Ptosis (TOE-sis) refers to more 
speciﬁc areas of drooping skin, such as eyelid ptosis or breast ptosis. Although 
facial treatments and state-of-the-art products can help prevent and treat elasto-
sis to some degree, the appearance of severely sagging skin can be corrected on 
a long-term basis by plastic surgery (Figure 18-2).



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Intrinsic Aging Process      353

.

.

D
M

i

,
t
r
o
p
a
p
a
R
d
v
a
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 18-2  Elastosis.

Let’s look at an example of elastosis. If you purchase a new pair of under-
wear, it has an elastic waistband. If you wear this underwear many, many times, 
the elastic begins to wear out. At some point, the elastic waistband no longer 
“snaps back” the way it did when the underwear was brand new. Skin is the 
same way—aging causes a wearing down of the elastin ﬁbrils in the dermis that 
give skin its elasticity. If you pinch the skin of a 50-year-old person’s cheek, it 
does not snap back as fast as that of a 20-year-old. We have previously discussed 
glycation in Chapter 10, Performance Ingredients and Active Ingredients. Cumu-
lative effects of glycation can be a factor in wrinkles and elasticity as well.

Gravity also causes the nose to droop downward and the ears to become 
larger over a period of years. In addition, cartilage in both the nose and ears 
can grow after age 40, making the nose and ears larger. Individual bone struc-
ture plays a role in intrinsic aging. As elastosis occurs, facial bone structure can 
affect how the facial features appear. Someone with a strong, prominent jaw-
bone may appear younger than someone with a less prominent jawbone. High 
cheekbones are also a good facial feature (due to genetic bone structure) that 
can soften the appearance of cheek elastosis.

Expression Lines

Expression  lines  are  another  symptom  of  intrinsic  aging.  Individuals  develop 
lines from their unique consistent and repetitive facial movements. “Smile” lines 
occur in the nasolabial area. “Frown” lines may also occur in the forehead, eye, 
and chin areas. Any repetitive movement of a facial expression such as raising 
the eyebrows, frowning, smiling, scowling, or any other facial movement even-
tually causes a crease to occur, just like pants get more wrinkled the more you 




 
 
354         CHAPTER 18

Dehydration is the decreasing 
ability of the skin to hold water.

wear them. “Eye smilers” smile and squint at the same time, creating additional 
eye  lines.  Squint  lines  also  occur  around  the  eyes  from  squinting  due  to  sun 
exposure, light exposure, or facial expression. It is important to wear ultraviolet 
protective sunglasses while outside to provide protection against both ultraviolet 
light exposure and the tendency to squint when exposed to light.

Smokers often get “smoker’s lines” around the mouth and eyes from con-
tinually moving these areas during smoking activities. Smoking also causes thou-
sands of free radicals to invade the body and is known to interfere with proper 
collagen production. Many women who never smoked also get what appear to 
be smoker’s lines around the mouth. This is obviously not caused by smoking, if 
the woman never smoked. Men generally do not get these multiple lines around 
the mouth. Although it is not conﬁrmed what causes these lines in nonsmokers, 
it most likely is caused by a hormonal factor, or a physiological genetic factor 
in females.

Sleep habits, such as sleeping on one side or directly on the face, will eventu-
ally create lines and elasticity problems. Advise clients to sleep on their backs as 
much as possible, thus helping to avoid “sleep creases” that when they happen 
repetitively have a strong effect on the aging symptoms of the face.

The “Wearing Out” of the Foundation

As time progresses, the muscles, fat, and skin on our faces undergo structural 
changes. The amount of fat in the subcutaneous layer decreases with age, pro-
viding less cushion and plumpness to the skin, resulting in less support. People 
who are overweight often do not have as many noticeable wrinkles on the face 
as thin people or people of normal weight. This does not mean that the skin has 
not aged; it simply means there is more fat to “plump out” the skin, making it 
smoother looking. The skin is stretched back and forth over a lifetime, causing 
an “enlargement” of the skin, and gravity pulls down on the skin. The muscles 
have partially receded, causing the effect of more elastosis.

Slowing of Cell Renewal

As the skin ages, the cell renewal cycle within the skin slows down. Therefore 
the production of intercellular lipids decreases, which in turn decreases the skin’s 
ability to hold water and thus decreases barrier function. This is dehydration, 
and it results in dull, rough-textured skin that feels dry. This lack of moisture 
can make wrinkles and elastosis look much worse. The lack of lipids in the bar-
rier function also can result in increased sensitivity in older skin. The lipids in 
the normal barrier prevent penetration of irritants. When the barrier is compro-
mised, irritants may penetrate and cause inﬂammation, which can cause redness 
and discomfort as well as lead to biochemical aging effects on the skin structure.
Several techniques will help slow the cell renewal cycle and the decrease in 

lipid production: 

•  Using proper protective moisturizers and sunscreen on a daily basis will guard 
the barrier function and intercellular lipids. Products that contain protective 
emollients such as silicones, petrolatum, or natural emollients help preserve 
the  barrier  function.  Avoidance  of  stripping  detergent  cleansers  also  helps 
preserve the barrier lipids and function. As a general rule, if the skin feels 
tight after cleansing, the cleanser is too strong for that particular skin.

•  Use of lipid replacement ingredients can help supplement and “patch” the inter-
cellular  barrier  lipids.  Lipid  ingredient  complexes  combining  ceramides,  cho-
lesterol,  phospholipids,  and  fatty  acids  can  be  used  in  sunscreens,  hydrators, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Intrinsic Aging Process      355

specialty creams and serums, eye and neck products, and masks, and they can 
be blended with antioxidants and peptides. 

•  Regular  daily  use  of  an  alpha  hydroxy  acid  serum,  lotion,  or  cream  has 
been documented to improve the look of the skin surface. AHAs also boost 
cell renewal and improve barrier function by promoting intercellular lipid 
production.

Hormonal Factors in Aging

During menopause, in a woman’s 40s and 50s, the ovaries dramatically reduce 
the secretion of the female hormone estrogen. Estrogen is required to stimulate 
the production of collagen in women’s skin. This sudden lack of estrogen causes 
less collagen to be produced and results in thinner skin, dryness and dehydra-
tion, more wrinkling, and skin laxity or elastosis.

If the skin is also sun damaged, the symptoms are even worse. For spe-
ciﬁc information on treating menopausal skin aging symptoms, see Chapter 5, 
Hormones.

Wrinkles versus Sagging

Wrinkles  and  skin  sagging  are  characteristics  of  both  intrinsic  and  extrinsic 
aging.  Wrinkles  are  usually  seen  before  sagging  or  elastosis.  Clients  usually 
express concern about wrinkles as early as age 30, and they express concern 
about sagging about 10 years later.

Wrinkles associated with intrinsic aging are primarily expression lines. Sagging 
associated with intrinsic aging is relatively minor and is attributable to gravity and 
intrinsic physiological changes.

Criss-cross wrinkling, wrinkles not in the normal facial expression, and severe 
elastosis are all symptoms of sun and extrinsic damage. These topics are discussed 
further in Chapter 19 (Sun and Sun Damage) and Chapter 20 (The New Science 
of Aging Skin Treatment).

PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT 
OF AGING SKIN

Each year, ski researchers learn more and more about how to prevent aging of 
both the body and the skin. One of the newest theories is that the symptoms 
we think of as aging are actually only an accumulation of tissue damage that 
has occurred over a number of years. In other words, the signs of aging may be 
related more to damage of tissue than to the actual passing of the years.

Although there is really very little anyone can do to completely prevent inev-
itable intrinsic aging of the skin, everyone can develop certain health habits that 
will help delay the onset and manage the severity of intrinsic aging symptoms. 

Sun Protection on a Daily Basis

Even though intrinsic aging is not caused by sun exposure, prevention of sun 
exposure  is  the  biggest  preventable  factor  in  avoidance  of  prematurely  aging 
skin. Daily use of broad-spectrum sunscreen is paramount in any skin care pro-
gram. Preventing the inﬂammatory reactions caused by sun exposure is bound 
to have positive effects on skin health in general.

Sun exposure is, of course, an example of an extrinsic aging factor. We cover 

this topic in great detail in Chapter 19.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.356         CHAPTER 18

Diet and Exercise

Again, good health habits do not prevent all intrinsic aging, but they help the 
body nourish the skin better and therefore help ﬁght aging. Avoiding excessive 
alcohol also helps the body function better. A regular aerobic exercise program 
and  a  well-balanced,  healthy  diet  can  certainly  help  an  individual  live  longer 
and better and promote healthy skin function.

Many  scientists  believe  that  a  diet  rich  in  antioxidant  foods  and  the  use 
of  antioxidant  supplements  (vitamins  C  and  E  and  grapeseed  and  green  tea 
extracts)  may  help  protect  body  tissues,  including  the  skin,  from  free  radical 
damage, thus reducing the signs of aging. Smoking is known to severely affect 
health and function of all cells in the body. Smoking and exposure to second-
hand smoke should be avoided for a healthy body or skin.

We learn more and more each day about nutrition and its relation to health. 
Although we do not focus on nutrition in this book, many estheticians ﬁnd it 
helpful to receive a good nutrition education. Although it is not the esthetician’s 
role to give nutritional advice and counseling (this is the role of the physician 
and registered dietitian), the esthetician should have a working knowledge of 
the  elements  of  nutrition  to  better  understand  skin  function  and  health  and 
to  refer  clients  with  nutritional  or  eating  disorders  to  the  properly  qualiﬁed 
professionals. Investigate taking courses in nutrition and wellness through the 
departments of health or wellness science at your local community college or 
university.

Weight Gain and Loss

People who are overweight have problems with skin stretching to accommodate 
the extra fat. This can occur anywhere on the body, but it is especially notice-
able in the face. Extra skin below the chin and on the neck is a good example.
When people lose weight, sometimes the skin has been overstretched and 
does not return to its original contour. This is especially true if the client is mor-
bidly obese, has been overweight for a long time, or is older than 40 years of 
age. Again, this symptom can occur anywhere on the body, but it is especially 
common in the facial skin.

Plenty of Sleep

Getting  plenty  of  sleep  is  another  good  health  habit.  The  body  needs  time 
to regenerate its tissues and repair damaged cells. Lack of sleep can cause or 
worsen eye circles and pufﬁness and contribute to stress that can have a debili-
tating effect on both the mind and body.

Stress

Each day, medical researchers are learning more and more about stress and its 
effect on health, nutrition, and aging. Avoiding high amounts of stress certainly 
will help prevent premature aging signs not only of the skin, but of the other 
organs of the body.

Many resort spas, as well as day spas, now offer stress management, yoga, 
and other body treatments designed to reduce and manage stress. Massage ser-
vices, aromatherapy services, and a soothing environment within the spa can 
help reduce daily stresses for you and your clients. Again, although estheticians 
cannot permanently change their clients’ lifestyles, they should be abreast of the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Intrinsic Aging Process      357

newest research regarding stress and health to help give their clients the best 
esthetic care possible. Estheticians should also be aware of referral services to 
qualiﬁed professionals who handle stress, such as psychologists.

Good Skin Care

More and more evidence indicates that a good skin care program helps combat 
and prevent the skin symptoms of even intrinsic aging. Besides making the skin 
look better on a daily basis, long-term use of good skin care appears to have 
long-term rewards.

A good home-care program for aging skin includes these components: 

•  A daily-use broad-spectrum sunscreen moisturizer with an SPF of 15 or higher. 

This should be properly selected for the client’s skin type. 

•  Alpha  hydroxy  treatment  serum  with  at  least  8  to  10  percent  AHA  (usu-
ally glycolic and/or lactic acids). As previously mentioned, daily use of AHA 
stimulates  cell  renewal,  improves  barrier  function,  rehydrates  the  skin,  and 
removes  dead,  dull  surface  cell  buildup.  It  makes  the  skin  look  smoother, 
minimizes  the  appearance  of  wrinkles,  and  improves  skin  color  and  tone. 
Long-term daily use of AHAs also promotes formation of new collagen. As 
an  alternative  to  AHAs,  your  client  can  use  retinoids  including  retinol  and 
prescription tretinoin (Retin-A®, Renova®). These products are derived from 
vitamin A and help smooth wrinkles, improve coloration, and reﬁne texture.
•  Hydration is vital; clients should use both water-binding and protective ingre-
dients appropriate for their skin type. Hydration ingredients include sodium 
PCA,  sorbitol,  glycerin,  hyaluronic  acid,  or  sodium  hyaluronate.  As  previ-
ously  discussed,  lipid  ingredients  help  support  barrier  function,  improving 
skin hydration and reducing sensitivity. 

•  Antioxidants protect skin cells from inﬂammation caused by reactive oxygen 

radicals, preventing gradual skin structure breakdown. 

•  Antiglycation  agents  protect  against  stiffening  of  protein  ﬁbrils,  which  can 

create and worsen wrinkles. 

•  Peptides are used to stimulate collagen, relax wrinkle tightness, reduce ﬂuid 
retention, and decrease inﬂammation. They are available as serums or can be 
combined with hydrators and antioxidants in creams or ﬂuids. 

•  Use  of  mechanical  exfoliants  at  home  several  times  a  week  can  also  help 
remove dead cells loosened by daily use of alpha hydroxy acids. Mechani-
cal exfoliating ingredients include polyethylene granules, cornmeal, ground 
almonds, or hydrogenated jojoba oil beads. These products literally “bump 
off” dead cells and can diminish the look of tired or neglected skin.

•  Clients should be careful, no matter what their skin type, not to overexfoliate. 
This can be very irritating and damaging to the skin. Aging skin may be more 
vulnerable to mechanical or chemical damage because it is thinner or may 
have impaired barrier function.

In the salon, enzymes such as bromelain, papain, or pancreatin or profes-
sional alpha hydroxy acid exfoliation treatments, or the use of microdermabra-
sion can be used to freshen dull-looking, aging skin.

THE BEGINNING OF AGING

Many clients notice the signs of aging, and they occasionally “freak out” at the 
ﬁrst wrinkle. Be understanding and give them the best advice you can, teaching 
them realistic preventative techniques. We emphasize the word realistic because 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.358         CHAPTER 18

Vasodilators dilate the blood 
vessels, making more blood ﬂow 
through the arterial system.

ethical  estheticians  do  not  endorse  “miracle”  treatments;  they  advise  clients 
about the best, proper, realistic skin care program.

The key word here is program. Treatment of the aging skin must address 
the many factors of aging. One cannot apply a hydrator and expect to revive the 
skin from 40 years of sun damage and bad habits.

Good skin care habits are most effective if started early in life to prevent 
problems,  but  many  clients  do  not  start  using  proper  home  care  or  develop 
good skin care habits until they notice the ﬁrst signs of aging.

A combination of good home-care products (as previously discussed) along 
with regular salon treatments, alpha hydroxy acid treatments, microcurrent, and 
light-emitting  diode  (LED)  treatments  can  help  the  client  manage  and  signiﬁ-
cantly reduce the visible signs of aging.

We  discuss  sun  damage  and  sunscreen  usage  more  in  detail  in  the  next 
chapter. But it certainly bears repeating that daily use of broad-spectrum sun-
screen is by far the most effective method for prevention of premature aging.

DERMAL AND EPIDERMAL 
STRUCTURAL CHANGES

Several histological changes take place within the dermis and the epidermis as 
the skin ages. These changes are often associated with sun damage and chronic 
sun exposure, but some of them occur through the natural intrinsic aging process.
The  epidermis  slowly  becomes  thinner  with  age,  and  the  dermis  increases 
in thickness. Breakdown of the network of collagen and elastin ﬁbrils within the 
dermis also occurs. Glycosaminoglycans and hyaluronic acid in the dermis, respon-
sible for support and ﬁrmness in the lower dermis, begin to break down. Blood ves-
sels tend to fragment, causing redness—telangiectasias, known to many estheticians 
as couperose. Because of this fragmented blood vessel formation, the blood supply 
is also fragmented, resulting in poorer blood distribution than in younger skin.

Older skin, as we previously discussed, tends to be thinner and more fragile 
than younger skin. Clients must be careful not to overexfoliate, use harsh abrasives, 
or apply too much pressure. Hot water and extremely cold water should be avoided 
on skin with couperose or capillary fragility. Avoid using hot masks such as parafﬁn 
or warming clay masks, or steaming the face too closely. Clients who have extreme 
redness should be advised to avoid alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and spicy foods, 
because all of these are vasodilators, which means they cause dilation of the blood 
vessels and sudden surges of blood ﬂow in the already fragile vessels.

AGE SPOTS

“Age spots,” or dark splotches of hyperpigmentation, are one of the ﬁrst signs of 
what we think of as skin aging. Hyperpigmentation of this type is virtually com-
pletely caused by sun damage and overexposure. It has nothing to do with age, 
only how much sun damage has occurred over time. We discuss this symptom 
further in Chapter 19, Sun and Sun Damage.

PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF AGING
Clients may experience psychological effects when they realize that the aging pro-
cess has begun. They may seek “immediate result” treatments, which do not work 
in  the  long  term.  Work  with  these  clients  to  establish  a  good,  solid  home-care 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Intrinsic Aging Process      359

program coupled with good salon treatments. The more often the client comes 
into the salon, the better the program will be, because this client needs lots of 
encouragement and “coaching.”

Try  to  steer  the  client  away  from  unrealistic  or  gimmicky  face-lift-in-a-jar 
approaches to skin care. Stress using sunscreen, avoiding sun exposure, using 
good hydrators designed for the client’s skin type, and using specialty products, 
such as conditioners containing alpha hydroxy acids, antioxidants, and peptides.
This type of client also sometimes tends to “drown” her skin in heavy mois-
turizers, often causing comedogenic or acnegenic results. Explain to the client 
that aging and sun damage are not caused by a lack of oil. Only clients who 
are truly alipidic (oil-dry) need to be using heavier emollient products, and then 
those products need to contain the right kind of emollient.

SPECIFIC HOME-CARE PROGRAMS 
FOR THE AGING SKIN

Home care should be adapted to help the client’s aging signs, whatever their 
severity. Begin by thoroughly analyzing the skin. Always adapt the entire pro-
gram to the skin type. Treatment conditioners for aging skin will be useless if 
they are for the wrong skin type. Aging clients will still have predominantly dry 
or oily skin. For clients with oily skin, stick to noncomedogenic ﬂuids, lotions, 
or gels. For more oil-dry skin, you can use heavier emollients.

•  Cleansers and toners for aging skin—stick to very gentle cleansers with little 
or  no  detergents.  Remember,  the  aging  skin  already  has  fewer  intercellular 
lipids.  You  do  not  want  to  strip  these  essential  lipids  by  using  an  overly 
aggressive  cleanser.  Low-foaming  washes  and  cleansing  milks  are  best  to 
use  for  the  aging  skin.  Toners  should  be  alcohol  free  and  should  contain 
a humectant such as butylene glycol or glycerin. Toners should not have a 
strong astringent action.

•  Specialty treatment serums for aging skin may include alpha hydroxy serums, 
gels or creams, peptide and collagen stimulant serums and other products, 
antioxidant  serums,  and  lipid-based  serums.  These  are  special  functional 
products that help protect the skin from free-radical damage and help exfoli-
ate or hydrate the skin. These serum-type products are often layered under 
or over other products.

•  Day moisturizing creams should contain a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an 
SPF of 15 or higher, and an agent to protect against moisture loss, such as 
dimethicone, mineral oil, or cyclomethicone. These agents will help the skin 
retain  water  better  in  the  surface  layers.  The  consistency  of  the  day  cream 
will  vary  depending  on  the  oiliness  or  dryness  of  the  skin. “Poreless”  skin 
with poor sebum production needs more emollients, and the cream should 
generally be heavier. Oily skin should be treated with a lighter-weight, non-
comedogenic day cream containing less emollient and more hydration agents.
•  Night treatment will vary, again depending on the skin type. Hydrators such 
as lecithin (liposomes), sorbitol, sodium PCA, glycerin, and hyaluronic acid 
are appropriate. Night treatment may also contain peptides, antioxidants, or 
antiglycation agents, or night hydration products may be layered over spe-
cialty treatment serums.

•  Special treatment products for the eye and neck areas are very helpful to the 
aging skin. The skin of the eyes and the neck is much thinner than the rest 
of the facial skin and is therefore likely to show more signs of aging. This 
skin also makes less natural emollient in the form of sebum and is therefore 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.360         CHAPTER 18

less protected against dehydration. Good skin care products for eye areas will 
contain lipids to replenish barrier function, peptides, antioxidants including 
ﬂavonoids,  and  proper  levels  of  hydration  ingredients.  Neck  area  products 
may combine the use of peptides, lipids, and mild alpha hydroxy acids, and 
they are generally a little heavier in texture due to increased emollient levels 
in the products. The client should use eye and neck care products 24 hours 
a day for best results.

Many estheticians vary the night treatment for clients, alternating different 
types of night treatments. The theory here is that the change in night treatment 
will help stimulate sluggish skin.

FACIAL TREATMENTS FOR AGING SKIN
Salon  facial  treatments  for  aging  skin  must  be  administered  frequently.  You 
should  begin  by  treating  the  skin  weekly  or  biweekly  for  6  to  12  treatments, 
slowly  decreasing  to  once  every  two  to  four  weeks.  Although  it  is  normal  to 
administer  salon  treatments  monthly,  aging  skin  often  needs  treatment  more 
often. It is certainly advisable to perform facial treatments weekly or biweekly 
on drier, aging skin, if this is affordable for the client. You may also vary the 
types of treatments administered when the client is visiting the salon more often.
You should always design the facial based on skin type and conditions. Aging 
skin often is thin, so be careful with harsh exfoliants, microdermabrasion, brush-
ing, and suction machines. As skin gets older, it tends to become more oil-dry, 
particularly after age 50. Keep this in mind when treating the skin. Occasionally, 
you will see an oily or, more often, a combination aging skin. Because many treat-
ment products designed for aging skin contain larger percentages of emollients 
and fats, be careful not to use creams that are too oily or heavy for combination 
and oily skin types.

Microcurrent Treatment

Microcurrent is a low-level cur-
rent application used to stimulate 
and improve the elasticity of aging 
and sun-damaged skin.

The  use  of  microcurrent,  a  gentle  treatment  using  an  ultra-small  amount  of 
galvanic current is showing great promise to help the signs of both extrinsic and 
intrinsic aging (Figure 18-3). Regular use of microcurrent improves elasticity and 
skin texture, and it can be combined with other modalities like AHA exfoliation, 
antioxidants, and peptide technology. For more on this method of treatment, see 
Chapter 20, The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment.

Exfoliation

Mild  chemical  exfoliation  treatments  are  helpful  in  improving  the  aging  skin. 
Exfoliation gently stimulates the skin and removes dead, dry cells on the sur-
face,  helping  the  skin  look  and  feel  smoother  and  softer  and  minimizing  the 
appearance  of  rough  textures  and  wrinkles.  Mild  enzyme  peeling  treatments 
are effective in helping to remove this dead-cell buildup. Mild alpha hydroxy 
acid exfoliation treatments also are helpful in improving aging skin symptoms, 
and they produce an immediate improvement in skin texture and feel. For more 
information on peeling treatments, see Chapter 21, Chemical Peeling and Exfo-
liation Procedures.

Massage helps soothe and hydrate aging skin by stimulating blood ﬂow. Be 
careful not to overmassage or use rough massage techniques on fragile, thin, 
aging skin with distended capillaries.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Intrinsic Aging Process      361

.
c
n
I

,
c
i
t
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
t
-
o
B
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

i

FIGURE 18-3  Although it is not the same as a face lift, microcurrent, when applied 
correctly, has been shown in university studies to improve elasticity, collagen content, 
and elastin content.

Treatment for Aging Skin

  1. Remove makeup by gently massaging a cleansing milk into the pre-dampened 
skin  and  then  removing  the  makeup  and  cleanser  with  damp,  soft,  facial 
cloths, sponges, or cotton pads. Follow with gentle toner on cool wet pads 
or a soft cloth, or use the cold spray machine with alcohol-free toner.

  2. After cleansing and toning, carefully examine the skin for elasticity, dryness, 
dehydration,  couperose  or  distended  capillaries,  hyperpigmentation,  and 
sun damage symptoms (see Chapter 19).

  3. Apply a very lightweight hydrating ﬂuid during steam treatment. Steam the 
skin at a distance of 14 to 20 inches with the hydrating ﬂuid on the skin. 
This helps soften the skin and attract the steam. Do not use oil-based ﬂuid 
or heavier creams, because they repel water instead of attracting it. As an 
alternative treatment, a gentle enzyme mask can be applied during steam 
instead of a hydrating ﬂuid.

  4. If the skin is not too fragile, you can use the brushing machine over a thick 
coat of hydrating ﬂuid. (Do not use the brushing machine after enzyme or 
alpha  hydroxy  acid  treatment.)  Avoid  brushing  if  the  skin  is  thin,  red,  or 
couperose.

  5. Gently extract any clogged pores, milia, or comedones.
  6. Use cold spray with a mild toner solution after extraction.
  7. Apply  a  hydrating  ﬂuid,  ampoule,  or  cream  to  the  skin.  Make  sure  it  is 
designed for both the aging skin and the individual skin type. Gently mas-
sage the skin. Massage should last about 10 minutes. If using an ampoule, 
you may want to use electrical treatment before continuing massage.

  8. Apply high-frequency treatment at a low setting or ionization rollers over the 
ampoule, hydrating ﬂuid, or specialty cream. As an alternative, you can use 




 
362         CHAPTER 18

iontophoresis or an ultrasonic device to penetrate the product. Make sure 
to check all health precautions and contraindications before using electrical 
therapy.

  9. Apply masks appropriate for the particular skin types. Most masks for aging 
skin are creamy and soft setting or are the gel variety. Clay masks can be 
used on oily or clogged areas.

 10. Allow the mask to sit for 15 to 20 minutes. For extra dry skin, you can apply 

extra-hydrating ﬂuid or cream instead of a mask.

 11. After  15  to  20  minutes,  spray  the  mask  with  an  atomized  cold  spray  of 
diluted toner or conditioning water. This helps soften and loosen the mask. 
Apply strips of cool, wet cotton or soft facial cloths in a compress technique, 
gently molding the compresses to the face. Remove the strips one at a time, 
wiping the mask off the skin as you remove the compress.
 12. Finish by applying an appropriate day cream with sunscreen.

Aging skin can be stimulated, cleansed, softened, ﬁrmed, and hydrated. With 
careful management, aging skin can be made to look much softer and smoother. 
However,  no  one  can  actually  turn  back  the  clock.  Avoid  using “miraculous” 
treatments. Explain sensible care to your client, and emphasize the importance 
of careful, consistent, diligent care both in the salon and at home.

IN CONCLUSION

Intrinsic aging encompasses factors in aging that we have little, if any, control 
over. Genetics, bone structure, and hormonal changes are all examples of intrin-
sic  aging  factors.  Skin  scientists  are,  however,  learning  more  and  more  about 
managing these factors, and techniques to make the skin look younger than its 
actual years.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What changes occur in the skin from birth to the 20s, and on into the 40s 

and 50s?

  2. Discuss hereditary characteristics and aging.

  3. What is the difference between intrinsic and extrinsic aging?

  4. Discuss other factors related to aging.

  5. Discuss home-care procedures for aging skin.

  6. Discuss salon treatment for aging skin.



CHAPTER

19

Sun and Sun 
Damage

OBJECTIVES . . .

The sun is a phenomenal structure that helps plants convert 
carbon dioxide to pure oxygen. We cannot live without 
oxygen, and we cannot live without sun. Sun exposure helps 
us manufacture vitamin D, an important vitamin nutrient 
essential for many body functions, including healthy bones 
and a healthy immune system. 

Yet the sun is, by far, the worst enemy of the skin. The sun 

creates free radicals, also known as reactive oxygen species, 
which cause cell damage. Cell damage from cumulative sun 
exposure causes the destruction of collagen and elastin, and 
free radicals can even alter DNA and eventually result in skin 
cancers. Repetitive exposure to the sun causes severe skin 
damage, premature aging, and skin cancer. Sun is respon-
sible for most wrinkles, many pigmentation changes associ-
ated with age, rough skin textures, and solar elastosis. These 
symptoms caused by cumulative sun exposure are collectively 
known as photoaging, symptoms of aging skin caused by 
cumulative sun exposure or photo damage, damage to the 
skin caused by sun exposure.

Besides obvious “aging” signs, the sun is also largely 
responsible for inﬂammation associated with redness issues, 
capillary distention, ﬂares of rosacea, and other inﬂammatory 
damage.

Yet many people continue to bask in the sun’s rays, achiev-

ing a golden tan but also accumulating terrible damage to 
the skin. In this chapter, you will learn about the way the sun 
affects the skin, in both the long and short term. You will learn 



     363

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.364         CHAPTER 19

Photoaging are symptoms of 
aging skin caused by cumulative 
sun exposure

photo damage is damage to the 
skin caused by sun exposure.

Gamma
Rays

X-rays

Ultra-violet
Rays

i

l

e
b
s
V

i

Infrared
Rays

Radar

FM
Radio

TV

AM
Radio

AC
Circuits

400

500

600

Wavelength (nanometers)

700

FIGURE 19-1  The spectrum of light—wavelengths.

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o
t
r
a
p
a
,
y
d
a
M
©

l
i

Nanometers are measurement 
units of light wavelength.

Ultraviolet (UV) rays are light 
rays produced by the sun.

Ultraviolet C (UVC) rays are 
short sunrays blocked by the 
ozone layer.

Ultraviolet B (UVB) rays are 
sunrays that cause sunburn and 
most types of skin cancer.

Ultraviolet A (UVA) rays are 
longer, deeper-penetrating rays 
that affect the dermis of the skin. 
These rays are responsible for 
most premature aging symptoms.

Melanocytes are cells that are 
“pigment factories” for the skin.

Melanin is the pigment of the 
skin.

about the best ways to prevent sun damage and skin cancer and 
how to detect skin cancer.

Light is electromagnetic radiation, which consists of several 
different types of rays, including  X-rays, infared rays, light that 
is visible to humans, and ultraviolet light. Types of light or radia-
tion are measured in nanometers (nm), units of light wavelength 
measurement which specify the part of the spectrum that contains 
the particular ray. Visible light falls in the range between 400 and 
700 nanometers (Figure 19-1).

The sun projects three basic kinds of ultraviolet (UV) rays, or 
UV rays. ultraviolet C (UVC) rays (200 to 280 nm) are short rays 
that are blocked by the ozone layer. They have germicidal properties 
and in large doses are deadly to live creatures.

Ultraviolet B (UVB) rays are the next-longest ultraviolet ray. 
Ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation falls within 290 to 320 nanometers (nm) 
in the ultraviolet light spectrum. UVB rays cause most skin cancers 
and are responsible for sunburns. They penetrate the epidermis 
to the basal layer. Some UVB rays penetrate the dermis, but most 
stop at the basal layer. UVB are much stronger than UVA rays, even 
though ultraviolet A (UVA) rays are longer and penetrate the 
dermis. UVA rays fall within 320 to 400 nanometers in the spectrum. 
They are subcategorized into shortwave UVA (320 to 340 nm) and 
longwave UVA (340 to 400 nm). UVA rays actually penetrate glass, so 
when someone is sitting by a window they are being bombarded by 
UVA, unless they are wearing a sunscreen that screens UVA rays.

Within the basal layer and upper dermis are the melanocytes, 
the pigment-producing cells. These cells are stimulated by exposure 
to ultraviolet rays and manufacture melanin, the skin pigment that 
is the body’s natural sunscreen. Although many people think a tan is 
healthy, a tan is actually a chemical reaction of the body defending 
itself from the damaging rays of the sun. A tan is actually the body 




 
 
 
 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      365

and the skin saying, “Don’t do this to me”—just like a warrior picking 
up a shield to ward off an enemy!

Again, UVA rays are longer rays, penetrating the dermis and the 
precious collagen and elastin ﬁbrils. UVA damage is now thought to be 
the primary type of light-related sun damage that causes the effects 
of photoaging. UVA burns only in large doses and is therefore the 
type of UV ray used in most tanning beds and booths. Although the 
tanning bed is unlikely to burn the skin, the damaging UVA rays pene-
trate the dermis, affecting the supportive structure of the collagen 
and elastin ﬁbrils and causing other detrimental changes to the skin.

SHORT-TERM SUN PROBLEMS

Most of us know that long-term sun exposure causes skin aging and skin cancer, 
but very few people are aware of the short-term damaging effects of ultraviolet 
and sun exposure. Sun exposure causes a variety of short-term skin and esthetic 
problems. These may affect both beauty and health.

Sunburns happen very frequently, especially in the summer months. They 
can  be  mild  to  severe.  The  skin  becomes  very  red,  sore,  and  sensitive  to  the 
touch, symptoms caused by dilation of blood vessels and stimulation of nerve 
endings in the skin. The skin eventually peels due to the extreme dryness associ-
ated with the sunburn. The skin literally bakes to a very dehydrated condition, 
just  as  cookies  burn  and  become  dry  if  cooked  too  long  in  the  oven.  Many 
of these sunburns happen because people are ignorant about sun protection. 
Whereas Floridians and Californians are very familiar with sun protection, tour-
ists from areas where sunbathing is not popular due to the climate are especially 
vulnerable to sunburn. It is important that estheticians also be very familiar with 
sun protection methods to help their clients protect themselves from sunburn as 
well as long- and short-term sun damage.

A variety of remedies can ease the pain of a minor sunburn. These include 
taking cool baths with vinegar added to cool water, applying cool packs, applying 
plain yogurt to the area, and using local spray anesthetics. The latter must be used 
with  caution.  Although  the  spray  anesthetics  can  provide  temporary  pain  relief 
to the sunburned area, many people have allergies to localized skin anesthetics. 
Advise clients to be very careful if using these products. Sunburn is actually a medi-
cal condition and therefore is in the domain of the physician, not the esthetician. 
Severe sunburns can cause shock, fever, nausea, and even death. Any “bubbling” of 
the skin or severe blistering should always be referred to a medical doctor.

After the initial burn is relieved, your client may ask you for help with the 
remaining esthetic skin problems associated with a sunburn. The skin may be 
extremely dehydrated, ﬂaking, and peeling, and have hyperpigmented splotches. 
Occasionally,  these  pigment  discolorations  may  be  long  term.  First  and  most 
important,  strongly  advise  the  client  not  to  expose  himself  or  herself  to  any 
more sun until all the symptoms of the sunburn are completely gone, especially 
peeling of the skin. Further sun exposure during the peeling process following 
a sunburn often results in further long-term skin damage and permanent solar 
lentigenes (freckles induced by the sun) and other skin discolorations.

You should not attempt to treat sunburned skin that is still extremely red or 
sensitive to the touch. If the skin is no longer extremely red or sensitive, you can 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.366         CHAPTER 19

Hyperpigmentation refers to 
any condition that has more than 
a normal amount of melanin.

Chloasma, often called “liver 
spots,” are dark brown patches 
of hyperpigmentation on the skin 
caused by sun overexposure.

use very gentle techniques to hydrate the skin. Use cool steam, fragrance-free 
hydrating ﬂuids and lotions, nonhardening and nonstimulating masks, and other 
products designed for super-sensitive skin. For post-sunburned skin, ﬂuids are 
generally better choices than heavy creams or oils. Avoid exfoliating or stimulat-
ing treatments, including brushing, galvanic desincrustation, microdermabrasion, 
any  type  of  chemical  exfoliation,  and  even  heavy  massage,  which  stimulates 
blood ﬂow—the last thing a red skin needs! Advise the client to use similar proce-
dures at home until all symptoms subside. Give the client good instruction about 
the proper use of sunscreens to avoid a reoccurrence of the situation.

Other Short-Term Sun-Related Problems

Hyperpigmentation is both a long- and short-term cosmetic problem caused 
by the sun. Hyperpigmentation is dark splotching, and it is one of the ﬁrst vis-
ible  signs  of  what  we  think  of  as  skin  aging.  Hyperpigmented  literally  means 
“overpigmented.” Solar lentigenes are sun-related freckles.

Sun-induced skin discoloration begins in the late teens and early 20s and gets 
continually worse. Skin that has been repeatedly burned or has not healed from 
a sunburn before additional sun exposure is especially vulnerable. If you look at 
the skin of a 15-year-old and compare it with that of a 25-year-old, the biggest 
difference you will notice is in the skin pigmentation. The main noticeable dif-
ference between teenage skin and skin in the early 20s is speckly discoloration, 
known as mottling, caused by deposits of melanin. If you look carefully at make-
over  pictures,  one  of  the  biggest  differences  between  the “before”  and “after” 
photographs is the even coloring of the individual’s skin in the “after” picture.

Chloasma, also known as “liver spots,” are almost completely caused by long-
term sun exposure. They have nothing to do with the liver and everything to do 
with cumulative sun exposure (Figure 19-2). These dark-brown patches primarily 
on the face and hands are areas of concentrated pigment. You may notice that 

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 19-2  Chloasma, or liver spots, are spots of concentrated melanin caused 
by sun damage.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

B

Sun and Sun Damage      367

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-3  Hyperpigmentation, often caused by cumulative sun exposure, can be improved with the use of 
alpha hydroxy and beta hydroxy acids, and lightening or brightening agents such as hydroquinone or magnesium 
ascorbyl phosphate. In this case study, a series of 30 percent alpha hydroxy acid exfoliation treatments showed 
this improvement in three weeks.

many clients do not exhibit hyperpigmentation on the body as much as they do 
on the face, arms, and hands. Although there are exceptions to this rule, the face, 
hands, and arms are areas that have been chronically exposed to the sun for many 
years. Hence the pigmentation is much worse in these areas (Figure 19-3A, 19-3B).
Hyperpigmentation may appear suddenly, especially in women, after years of 
sun exposure. It may appear ﬁrst as subtle splotching that you may notice when 
examining the skin under a magnifying lamp or especially a Wood’s lamp. From 
this relatively mild splotching, darker, larger splotches may develop. Hyperpig-
mentation occurs in many patterns and is also associated with hormone ﬂuctua-
tions and pregnancy (see Chapter 5, Hormones). Even if the hyperpigmentation 
is  primarily  caused  by  hormones  in  the  form  of  melasma,  sun  exposure  is  a 
major factor in improving or worsening of the condition.

Hyperpigmentation is treated by having the client apply a solution contain-
ing a melanin suppressant. These agents stop the chemical reactions occur-
ring in the melanocytes at the basal cell level that lead to hyperpigmentation. 
The solution is applied daily, most often at night before bedtime. Hydroqui-
none is the best known of these agents and the only one ofﬁcially recognized 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Other unrecognized yet effec-
tive melanin suppressive ingredients include kojic acid, magnesium ascorbyl 
phosphate  (also  an  antioxidant),  arbutin,  bearberry  or  mulberry  extract, 
and azelaic acid. Legally, these ingredients cannot be called lightening agents, 
and are therefore often referred to as brighteners.

Melanin suppressants are frequently used in tandem with some sort of peel-
ing  agent  like  an  alpha  hydroxy  acid  or  prescriptive  tretinoin.  These  kerato-
lytic exfoliants help remove already stained corneocytes and also help increase 
absorption of the melanin suppressant. In cases of stubborn melasma, the cli-
ent’s physician may prescribe a mixture of hydroquinone, tretinoin, and a steroid 
(ﬂuocinolone acetonide).

It is imperative that any client being treated for hyperpigmentation carefully 
avoid  sun  exposure  and  use  a  broad-spectrum,  SPF  30  sunscreen  at  all  times 
during the daylight hours. It is crucial to educate these clients about the need for 
sun avoidance, and to make sure the client understands proper use of sunscreen 
and other sun exposure precautions.

Melanin suppressant is a 
substance that interferes with 
the skin’s production of melanin 
pigment.

Hydroquinone is a drug ingredi-
ent in melanin suppressant. 

Kojic acid is a melanin suppres-
sant “brightening” ingredient.

Magnesium ascorbyl phosphate 
is a stable form of vitamin C that 
also inhibits melanin production.

Arbutin is a melanin suppressant.

Bearberry or mulberry extract 
is a naturally occurring melanin 
suppressant.

Azelaic acid is a melanin sup-
pressant that is also used for acne 
and rosacea.




 
 
 
 
368         CHAPTER 19

Tinea versicolor is what many 
refer to as “sun spots” or “sun 
fungus.” These white splotches are 
a fungal condition.

Explain  to  clients  that  wherever  they  have  a  hyperpigmented  area,  a  con-
centration of active melanocytes are present in the lower epidermis and upper 
dermis,  producing  melanin  and  depositing  it  in  epidermal  cells  that  are  drift-
ing toward the corneum. This is the “factory” where melanin is produced. The 
melanin is the “product.” Melanin suppressors, like the ones listed earlier, work 
by interfering with the chemical reactions that cause production of the melanin. 
They do not actually stop the factory; they just interfere with production. There-
fore,  the  factory—the  melanocyte—is  still  present  and  active,  even  when  the 
hyperpigmentation has faded. This is why it is so important for the client to avoid 
the controllable factors that stimulate the melanocytes, namely sun exposure. As 
long as the client continues to expose himself or herself to the sun and not wear 
a broad-spectrum SPF 30 or higher sunscreen, melanin production will continue. 
There is mounting evidence that heat from the sun’s infrared rays may play a big 
role in melanin production as well, and there is no screen for infrared heat waves.
Many clients concerned with hyperpigmentation are or have been active sun 
worshippers. It must be explained to these clients that sun exposure is what caused 
the pigmentation problem in the ﬁrst place and that they must change this aspect of 
their lifestyle to achieve any change in their skin. All clients should receive instruc-
tion on the need for everyday sun care and proper use of sunscreens.

Tinea versicolor is what many refer to as “sun spots” or “sun fungus.” These 
white splotches, which usually appear on the chest and back of avid sunbathers, 
are actually a fungal condition. The fungus interferes with the melanocytes’ abil-
ity to make melanin, which causes the white splotches to appear when the body 
is tanned. If you have a client with this condition, refer the client to a dermatolo-
gist for treatment (Figure 19-4).

The Real Damage from the Sun

Continual exposure to sun results in the formation of more and more damaging 
free radicals. Although not visible at ﬁrst, or even for years, the routine damage 

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

FIGURE 19-4  Tinea versicolor.

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      369

to  the  cells  eventually  accumulates,  resulting  in  wrinkles,  hyperpigmentation, 
elastosis, and rough-textured skin. Cumulative sun exposure can also contribute 
to  many  problems  with  redness  and  inﬂammation  in  patients  or  clients  with 
sensitive skin and rosacea. 

As we have previously discussed, the sun-exposed skin falls victim to the 
inﬂammation cascade, resulting in breakdown of collagen and elastin due to self-
destruct enzymes manufactured through the immune system’s defense against 
the sun exposure and damage to the cells of the skin. When enough damage 
occurs, it becomes apparent as photoaging in the skin’s appearance.

What You Don’t Know about Short-Term 
Sun Exposure

We now know that sun exposure may actually suppress the immune functions 
of the skin. Exposure to sunlight “chases off” your protective macrophage “guard 
cells,” allowing substances and organisms to enter the skin and increasing the 
chance of infection. A good example of this immune suppression is the ﬂares of 
herpes simplex that occur in some individuals when they are exposed to sun. 
Many cases of lupus, an autoimmune disease, are diagnosed after a sunburn, 
when the immune system has overreacted to the injury.

Sunscreen as a Childhood Health Habit

It is so important that we teach young children to use sunscreen daily. About 
80  percent  of  the  sun’s  damage  to  the  skin  occurs  before  the  age  of  18.  Sun 
freckles  appearing  on  teenagers’  faces  represent  problem  areas  in  the  future. 
Most sun exposure is not from sunbathing, but from day-to-day exposure. Think 
about how many children play outdoors. Every time they go outside, they expose 
themselves to harmful ultraviolet rays. That’s why every time they go outdoors, 
they should be protected with a good sunscreen. We tend to think about sun-
screens during the summer months, but it should be a year-round consideration.
Sun exposure starts at birth, and so should sun protection. Obviously, infants 
must be shielded from almost any sun exposure. As babies turn into toddlers, 
they  should  be  taught  that  part  of  going  outside  is  applying  sunscreen  every 
single day. Children form health habits very early in life. Teach them good ones!
Infants  often  have  sensitivities  that  they  outgrow.  Before  purchasing  a 
sunscreen  for  an  infant,  check  with  the  child’s  pediatrician  for  the  doctor’s 
recommendation.

LONG-TERM PHOTO DAMAGE

Almost  every  symptom  we  think  of  as  aging  is  directly  related  to  sun  expo-
sure. Even intrinsic aging symptoms, such as facial expression lines, are made 
worse because of sun damage. Hyperpigmentation, leathery texture, roughness, 
wrinkles,  some  forms  of  hypopigmentation,  severe  elastosis  (sagging  of  the 
skin),  chest  and  cleavage  wrinkling,  splotchiness,  couperose  and  telangiecta-
sias, ﬂares of rosacea, neck texture problems, severe dehydration, and barrier 
function problems are all directly related to sun exposure. There are, of course, 
many medical problems associated with sun damage, including skin growths 
and skin cancers.

Dermatoheliosis (dur-matt-toh-heel-ee-OH-sis) is the medical term describ-
ing long-term damage to the skin caused by sun exposure. The skin is severely 
affected by long-term exposure.

Dermatoheliosis (dur-muh-toh-
heel-ee-OH-sis) is the medical 
term describing long-term dam-
age to the skin caused by sun 
exposure.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.370         CHAPTER 19

Cross-linking is a process in 
which collagen and elastin ﬁbrils 
in the dermis collapse, causing the 
support system for the skin also to 
collapse.

Tactile roughness means rough-
ness to the touch.

Collagen and elastin ﬁbrils in the dermis begin a process called cross-linking. In 
essence, collagen and elastin ﬁbrils collapse due to cumulative effects of cell damage 
from repeated sun exposure, causing the support system for the skin also to col-
lapse. Esthetically, this results in deep wrinkling of the skin, sagging, and elastosis.

Sun-damaged  skin  appears  much  more  severely  aged  than  skin  that  has 
aged solely from intrinsic factors. The wrinkling does not only appear in expres-
sion lines. Many, many lines develop, in all areas and in all directions. Wrinkles 
may be both horizontal and vertical. Normal expression lines are much deeper 
in sun-damaged skin.

The  abnormal  structure  of  the  dermis  and  the  epidermis  give  the  skin  a 
“leathery” appearance and feel. This type of skin is also severely discolored due 
to melanin deposits and hyperpigmentation.

The skin of a person with sun damage is very rough to the touch, and the 
surface is actually uneven. This is termed tactile roughness, meaning “rough-
ness to the touch,” and is caused by damage to the cells, which causes the cor-
neum and other epidermal cells to shed in an abnormal, uneven manner. This 
is due to the altering of the DNA from chronic sun exposure. The cells become 
“confused,”  divide  unevenly,  and  no  longer  retain  their  normal  shape.  If  you 
look at a cross section of normal skin, you will notice that the cells in the epi-
dermis form layers that look like layers of brick in a brick wall. In sun-damaged 
skin,  the  same  structure  looks  like  a  brick  wall  that  is  collapsing,  made  with 
uneven bricks that are poorly made.

The epidermis of sun-damaged skin becomes progressively thinner, and the 
dermis slowly begins to atrophy, or collapse, and fall apart. This is how the sun 
eventually “zaps” the skin and destroys it.

Clients with severe sun damage have multiple wrinkles, not just around the 
eyes and neck, but all over the face. They have many more pronounced wrinkles 
than seen in other clients. Their skin is literally a multitude of uneven colors, very 
freckled. This skin has a leathery feel and look (Figure 19-5). There frequently 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-5  Long-term sun damage.




 
 
 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      371

Basal cell carcinomas are the 
most common forms of skin 
cancer; lesions have a pearl-like 
appearance with small blood 
vessels running through.

may  be  patches  of  dryness,  and  clients  may  often  complain  about  how “dry” 
their skin is. The truth is that as the skin cells become disﬁgured, they also fail 
to produce sufﬁcient amounts of intercellular cement, thus causing an impaired 
barrier function and making proper hydration of the skin practically impossible.
Products containing a combination of lipid replacement ingredients such as 
ceramides, cholesterol, and phospholipids, along with good hydration ingredi-
ents such as hyaluronic acid, glycerin, or sodium PCA, can help restore the bar-
rier lipids and signiﬁcantly improve the hydration of the skin. The daily routine 
use of an 8 to 10 percent, pH 3.5, alpha hydroxy acid serum or cream can lessen 
the  appearance  of  wrinkles,  tactile  roughness,  and  discolorations  as  well  as 
improve cell renewal, which can also help the skin improve its own lipid barrier.
Sun-damaged skin may also have many telangiectasias or couperose areas. 
Sun damage also causes collapse of some of the blood vessels and decreased 
blood ﬂow. The small capillaries look like tributaries of a river. These vessels 
may be very fragile, and bruises may appear easily. You may notice how easily 
some  of  your  older  clients  bruise.  Although  this  may  be  due  to  many  medi-
cal factors, sun-damaged skin bruises much more easily than normal, healthy, 
nondamaged skin. You will also notice that these clients who bruise easily have 
very thin-looking, dry, hyperpigmented skin. This is because the skin is almost 
always severely sun damaged.

SKIN CANCERS AND OTHER 
SUN-RELATED SKIN GROWTHS

Skin cancer is caused by the damage to the DNA that we have been discussing. 
The cells begin dividing unevenly and rapidly, but the genetic material in the 
DNA is damaged from the sun. This rapid dividing of the cells may take the form 
of small tumors, which we know as skin cancer.

There are three major kinds of skin cancer. Basal cell carcinomas are the 
most common. They are almost always found on the sun-exposed areas, typi-
cally on the face, hands, legs, back, and chest. They often look like small pearls 
or whitish, waxy nodules. Sometimes they have a small blood vessel running 
through  them.  They  are  not  usually  perfectly  round  like  a  milium.  On  older 
hyperpigmented skin, they may be hard to differentiate from milia. You must 
look carefully to tell the difference (Figure 19-6A and 19-6B).

.

D
.
h
P

,
.

.

D
M

,
o
d
r
a
P

.
J

e
b
u
R

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-6A  Basal cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 19-6B  Basal cell carcinoma.




 
 
 
 
 
 
372         CHAPTER 19

.

.

D
M

,
d
n
o
B

.
J

l

i

e
a
h
c
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

m
o
c
.
t
e
n
m
r
e
d
.
w
w
w
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-7A  Squamous cell carcinoma.

FIGURE 19-7B  Squamous cell carcinoma.

Squamous cell carcinomas are 
a common form of skin cancer 
characterized by unexplained skin 
bleeding or a small red or pink, 
sometimes ulcerated, lesion.

Mohs’ surgery is a specialized 
form of surgery for very precise 
removal of skin cancer cells.

Melanoma is characterized by 
moles or mole-like lesions that 
are dark in color.

Estheticians are not in the business of diagnosing skin cancer. However, you 
should know the signs of the major forms of skin cancer and be able to refer 
suspicious-looking lesions and areas to a dermatologist.

Basal  cell  carcinomas  are  very  often  curable.  In  fact,  95  percent  of  these 
cancers are cured. They rarely spread to the internal parts of the body, but they 
can grow. If they are not treated, they can affect large areas of the skin. Basal 
cell carcinomas are sometimes removed surgically, sometimes frozen, and some-
times treated with laser or other means.

Squamous cell carcinomas are the second most frequently diagnosed form 
of skin cancer. They may look like red or pink solid bumps on the skin. They 
may appear as open sores or ulcers that do not seem to heal. They may look 
crusty,  or  the  client  may  notice  a  crusty  area  that  bleeds  easily  (Figure  19-7A 
and 19-7B). Many clients notice this when washing or cleansing the face. Again, 
these lesions appear on chronically sun-exposed areas. Treatment is similar to 
treatment for basal cell carcinoma, but squamous cell carcinoma may sometimes 
spread to other areas of the body. Mohs’ surgery is a specialized surgical tech-
nique, named after its developer, Frederic Mohs, M.D. In Mohs’ surgery, the der-
matologist trims more and more tissue from the cancer lesion, carefully checking 
each sample of tissue for cancerous cells using a microscope, until all the cancer-
ous tissue is removed.

The least frequently seen form of the three major kinds of skin cancer is also 
the most deadly. Melanoma is characterized by moles or mole-like lesions that 
are dark in color. The Skin Cancer Foundation has coined an expression that is 
easy to remember when looking at suspicious lesions (Figure 19-8). They call 
this the ABCDEs of Melanoma: A stands for asymmetric. The melanoma lesion 
is usually growing to one side of the lesion and is uneven. B stands for border. 
The borders of melanomas are uneven and not smooth. C is for color. Melano-
mas often have dark brown and black colors and are usually splotchy and not 
all one color. D stands for diameter. Melanomas are usually at least the size of 
a pencil eraser or bigger. Regular moles are usually smaller than this. E stands 
for evolving. You must watch for changes and “evolving” moles. Changes may 
include darkening or variations in color, moles that itch or hurt, and changes in 
the shape or growth of the mole.

Melanomas can be found on any area of the body but are most likely, again, 
to be found on areas that have had repeated sun exposure. They are most typi-
cally found on individuals with a history of sunburn and light-skinned individuals.




 
 
 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      373

FIGURE 19-8A1  Benign mole—symmetrical. Common 
moles are usually round and symmetrical.

FIGURE 19-8A2  Melanoma—asymmetrical. Most 
early melanomas are asymmetrical; a line drawn 
through the middle will not create matching halves.

FIGURE 19-8B1  Benign mole—even edges. 
Common moles usually have smooth, even borders.

FIGURE 19-8B2  Melanoma—uneven edges. The 
borders of early melanomas are frequently uneven, 
often containing scalloped or notched edges.

g
r
o
.
r
e
c
n
a
c
n
k
s
.
w
w
w

i

,
n
o
i
t
a
d
n
u
o
F
r
e
c
n
a
C
n
k
S
e
h
T

i

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C
s
e
g
a
m

I

FIGURE 19-8C1  Benign mole—one shade. Common 
moles usually are a single shade of brown.

FIGURE 19-8C2  Melanoma—two or more shades. 
Varied shades of brown, tan, or black are often the 
ﬁrst sign of melanoma. As melanomas progress, the 
colors red, white, and blue may appear.




 
 
 
 
 
 
374         CHAPTER 19

FIGURE 19-8D1  Benign mole—6 mm or smaller. 
Common moles are usually 6 mm (1/4 inch) or 
smaller, but they can sometimes be larger.

FIGURE 19-8D2  Melanomas usually have larger 
diameters than benign moles. Typically, they are 
bigger than the size of the eraser on your pencil 
(1/4 inch or 6 mm). However, they may sometimes 
be smaller when ﬁrst detected.

FIGURE 19-8E1 AND E2  Common, benign moles look the same over time. Be on the alert when a mole starts to 
evolve or change in any way. When a mole is evolving, see a doctor. Any change—in size, shape, color, elevation, 
or another trait, or any new symptom such as bleeding, itching, or crusting—points to danger.

Actinic keratoses, or precancers, 
are rough areas of sun-damaged 
skin, indicating dysplastic cell 
growth.

Dysplastic means “abnormal 
growth.”

Other Sun-Related Growths

Actinic keratoses are rough areas of sun-damaged skin, indicated by dysplas-
tic cell growth. Dysplastic means “abnormal growth.” Actinic keratoses are fre-
quently found on the faces of individuals who have had chronic sun exposure. 
They are also prevalent in light-skinned individuals. They are rough patches of 
skin and can be crusty, scaly, and coarse to the touch. Sometimes they feel like 
small needles or splinters sticking out of the skin when they are touched with 
the ﬁngers, and they are often noticed during applications of products or mas-
sage. They are frequently in the temple areas, forehead, and upper cheekbones. 
They frequently occur in small groups or patches. Because they are dysplastic 

.
g
r
o
.
r
e
c
n
a
c
n
k
s
.
w
w
w

i

,
n
o
i
t
a
d
n
u
o
F
r
e
c
n
a
C
n
k
S
e
h
T

i

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C
s
e
g
a
m

I




 
 
 
 
 
 
A

B

Sun and Sun Damage      375

.

.

D
M

,
d
n
o
B

.
J

l

a
e
h
c
M

i

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-9  Actinic keratosis is frequently seen in sun-damaged clients.

cells,  they  can  become  cancerous  and  are  often  referred  to  as  precancers 
(Figure 19-9A and 19-9B).

Actinic keratoses may be treated surgically, with cryosurgery (freezing with 
liquid nitrogen), or with chemical therapy using a chemical called ﬂuorouracil 
(also commercially known as Efudex®).

Unusual-looking moles, or moles that are changing, should be checked by a 
dermatologist. If you or your client notices changes in a wart or mole, refer the 
client to a dermatologist for diagnosis and treatment.

Sebaceous hyperplasias are small, doughnut-shaped lesions that look like 
large, open comedones surrounded by a ridge of skin. Sebaceous hyperplasia actu-
ally means “overgrown oil glands.” These lesions are frequently seen on oily skins 
that have had repeated sun exposure, but they can appear on any skin, usually 
in someone age 25 and older. You will frequently ﬁnd them on the forehead and 
temples, although they may appear anywhere on the face (Figure 19-10). Seba-
ceous hyperplasias are benign lesions that rarely cause any problems, except 
esthetically. They are rarely removed surgically, because the scar from excision 
is usually worse than the appearance of the lesion. Sebaceous hyperplasia can 
be  treated  with  electrodessication  with  an  electric  needle  or  sometimes,  with 
cryosurgery.  This  helps  ﬂatten  the  lesion,  but  the  patient  may  need  to  be  re-
treated  periodically  because  the  oil  glands  are  deep  within  the  skin  and  can 
keep growing. Sebaceous hyperplasias are seen frequently by estheticians, and 
clients are often concerned about them. Clients who have them also may have 
other symptoms of sun damage.

Seborrheic keratoses are large, ﬂat, crusty-looking, brown, black, yellowish, 
gray or sometimes ﬂesh-colored lesions that are often found on the faces of older, 
sun-damaged clients. They are frequently found on the temples or cheekbones, 
although they can appear anywhere on the skin. They look almost like a scab, 
and clients sometimes pick at them, which they obviously should not do. These 
growths are usually harmless but can occasionally turn into other more serious 
lesions,  such  as  basal  cell  carcinomas.  They  are  treated  by  the  dermatologist, 

Precancers are conditions in cells 
that may become cancerous.

Cryosurgery is the dermatologi-
cal removal of lesions by freezing, 
usually with liquid nitrogen.

Fluorouracil is a topical prescrip-
tion drug used to remove multiple 
actinic keratoses.

Sebaceous hyperplasias are 
small, doughnut-shaped lesions 
that look like large, open comedo-
nes surrounded by a ridge of skin.

Seborrheic keratoses are large, 
ﬂat, crusty-looking, brown, black, 
yellowish, or gray lesions that are 
often found on the faces of older, 
sun-damaged clients.




 
 
 
 
376         CHAPTER 19

Sutures are materials used in 
reconnecting areas of surgical 
incisions.

Solar freckles, also known 
as “liver spots,” are clumps of 
hyperpigmentation caused by 
sun exposure.

.

.

D
M

i

,
r
e
h
s
F
e
g
r
o
e
G
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-10  Multiple seba-
ceous hyperplasia in an adult 
male with oily skin and sun dam-
age. Sebaceous hyperplasias are 
typically found on the forehead, 
temple, and upper cheeks but can 
appear anywhere on the face.

usually by curettage (a curette, a small, scoop-like instrument, is used to scrape 
the lesion off the skin). Seborrheic keratoses are more of a cosmetic nuisance than 
anything in most cases. Nevertheless, they should be referred to a dermatologist 
for treatment because they may indicate other areas or other forms of sun damage 
that may require treatment.

After  a  dermatologist  treats  skin  cancer,  the  doctor  may  suggest  that  the 
client not have skin care treatments until the lesion is healed completely. As a 
general rule, clients should not have facial treatment if a treated lesion still has 
sutures,  or “stitches.”  Clients  treated  with  ﬂuorouracil  should  not  have  facial 
treatment until the therapy is completed, unless approved by the dermatologist, 
who may occasionally refer such a client for help with side effects. Make sure 
you have been properly trained by the doctor before treating these clients.

Other  forms  of  growth  treatment,  such  as  electrosurgery  or  cryosurgery, 
generally  do  not  cause  any  problem  for  treatment,  except  that  facial  treat-
ment should not be performed until the lesion is healed or unless the doctor 
advises otherwise. Avoid these areas completely, and simply treat the rest of the 
untreated areas of the face. If you have any questions, contact the dermatologist, 
and remember always—when in doubt, don’t!

Solar lentigenes, often called solar freckles or “liver spots,” are skin areas 
containing “clumps” of hyperpigmentation caused by sun exposure. They can 
appear on any area but frequently appear on the face and hands. These can be 
treated by the esthetician, and more severe cases can be treated by the derma-
tologist. More on treating hyperpigmentation is covered in Chapter 20, The New 
Science of Aging Skin Treatment.

PREVENTION OF SUN DAMAGE

Without question, the most effective treatment for sun damage is prevention. This 
involves daily use of sunscreen products. Sunscreen products are designed to ﬁlter, 
reﬂect, or absorb UVA and/or UVB rays emitted by the sun. Sunscreen products 




 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      377

Chemical-absorbing sunscreen 
contains ingredients that absorb 
and neutralize ultraviolet rays.

Octinoxate is a UVB-absorbing 
sunscreen ingredient.

Octisalate is a UVB-absorbing 
sunscreen ingredient.

Oxybenzone is a UVB- and UVA-
absorbing sunscreen ingredient.

Ecamsule, also known as 
Mexoryl®, is a UVA-absorbing 
sunscreen ingredient.

Avobenzone is a UVA-absorbing 
sunscreen ingredient.

Broad-spectrum sunscreens 
protect against both ultraviolet 
A and B rays.

are regulated as over-the-counter drugs by the FDA. Some sunscreen ingredients 
absorb and neutralize ultraviolet light, and others reﬂect ultraviolet light.

Chemical-absorbing  sunscreen  ingredients  include  the  most  popular 
sunscreen  ingredient,  octinoxate  (formerly  called  octyl  methoxycinnimate); 
octisalate (formerly called octyl salicylate); oxybenzone (formerly called ben-
zophenone); ecamsule, also known as Mexoryl®; and avobenzone, also known 
as Parsol® 1789. These ingredients absorb and chemically neutralize ultraviolet 
light rays. They are often used in combination. As octinoxate and octisalate, they 
screen parts of the UVB spectrum; oxybenzone screens some of UVB and some 
of UVA; and ecamsule and avobenzone screens a broad range of UVA rays. Using 
a  combination  of  sunscreen  ingredients  enables  larger  areas  of  the  ultraviolet 
spectrum to be screened. When several sunscreen ingredients are combined to 
screen both UVA and UVB spectrums of light rays, this product is known as a 
broad-spectrum sunscreen.

SUNSCREEN INGREDIENTS: WHICH RAYS DO 
THEY SCREEN?

Ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation falls within 290–320 nanometers (nm) in the 
ultraviolet light spectrum. Ultraviolet A (UVA) falls within 320–400 nm in the 
spectrum. Within the UVA range, radiation that falls within the 320–340 nm 
range in wavelength is called short UVA rays, and UVA radiation that falls 
between 320–400 nm in wavelength is known as long UVA rays. By combin-
ing ingredients in sunscreen products, larger ranges of ultraviolet light can 
be screened.

The following frequently used sunscreen ingredients either reﬂect or 

absorb UV radiation in the listed respective UV nanometer range:

UVB Sunscreen Ingredients
  Octinoxate (the most widely used UVB absorber): 270–328 nm
  Octisalate: 300–310 nm

UVA Sunscreen Ingredients

  Avobenzone: 310–400 nm
  Ecamsule ( Mexoryl®): 320–400 nm

Sunscreen Ingredients that Screen a Mixture 
of UVA and UVB Rays

  Zinc oxide: 290–380 nm
  Titanium dioxide: 290–340 nm
  Octocrylene: 290–360 nm
  Oxybenzone (benzophenone): 270–350 nm

Some advantages of the absorbing sunscreen ingredients are that they cannot 
be seen when worn, and they are easier to formulate in higher SPFs. Their main 
disadvantage is that they are more reactive with the skin, particularly sensitive 
skin. Because they absorb UV light and turn it into heat energy, they sometimes 
add heat to the skin, which can be a problem for redness-prone skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.378         CHAPTER 19

Physical sunscreen contains an 
ingredient that works by reﬂecting 
ultraviolet rays off the skin.

Sun protection factor (SPF) is a 
number that represents how long 
a person can stay out in the sun 
without burning while using the 
product.

Minimal erythemal dose (MED) 
refers to how much time passes 
without the skin turning red from 
irritation.

Physical sunscreen ingredients work by reﬂecting the light off the skin. The 
FDA has approved the use of only two of these ingredients: titanium dioxide and 
zinc oxide. Physical sunscreens are sometimes referred to as sunblocks, although 
this term is no longer allowed by the FDA. They are excellent sunscreens, block-
ing out large portions of both UVB and UVA light. For many years, these prod-
ucts took the form of opaque creams, such as the white cream that surfers wore 
on  their  noses  (some  still  do).  Micronized  versions  are  now  available  and  are 
less noticeable. Unfortunately, the micronization process still leaves particles big 
enough  to  see,  particularly  on  dark  skin.  These  ﬁnely  ground  minerals  sit  on 
the  skin  and  literally  bounce  the  light  off.  Physical  sunscreens  are  much  less 
likely to react with the skin than the absorbing screens, thus making them good 
choices for sensitive, redness-prone, or allergy-prone skin. In high SPF numbers, 
however, they are hard to formulate without looking white or pasty on the skin 
or being sticky. Just like the absorbing screens can be combined to provide a 
broader  spectrum  of  protection,  the  physical  screens  can  also  be  mixed  with 
the absorbing sunscreen agents. This works very well in many cases, producing 
cosmetically acceptable, higher-SPF sunscreens with broad-spectrum protection.
Because  sunscreen  is  so  important  in  skin  treatment  and  sun  damage 
prevention,  broad-spectrum  sunscreens  are  now  included  in  most  better  day 
creams,  along  with  moisturizing,  conditioning,  and  other  functional  cosmetic 
ingredients. Sunscreens can be mixed into lotion or cream forms, and different 
weights and different amounts of emollient are available for speciﬁc skin types.
SPF stands for sun protection factor. SPF is a number that represents how 
long a person can stay out in the sun without burning while using the product. 
It is a measurement of the minimal erythemal dose (MED), which means how 
much time passes without the skin turning red from irritation. If a person normally 
burns in one hour without sunscreen, an SPF 2 sunscreen theoretically will allow 
the person to stay out in the sun two times as long, or two hours, without burning. 
An SPF 4 would allow the skin to be exposed four times as long, or four hours 
without  burning.  SPFs  are  really  designed  to  prevent  sunburns.  An  SPF  rating 
does not measure how much light is actually being blocked from the skin or how 
much UVA and UVB rays are being screened, which is actually more important 
in preventing sun damage. An SPF 15 sunscreen blocks about 94 percent of UVB 
light, whereas an SPF 30 blocks about 98 percent. However, for sensitive skin, the 
higher the SPF, the more potentially irritating is the sunscreen chemical used.

As a general rule, most dermatologists, pharmacists, and estheticians con-
sider an SPF 15 sunscreen product to be a good protection against sun damage. 
It does not guarantee there will be no sun damage. It simply means that an SPF 
15 screen provides a fairly high amount of protection. Results will vary depend-
ing on the individual’s heredity, method of application, frequency of application, 
his or her own skin, weather and climate conditions, and other factors.

The  FDA  has  proposed  a  new  rating  system  for  sunscreen  products.  This 
proposal is still tentative and under review as of this writing. Sunscreen products 
will still indicate the SPF; but under the proposed system, sunscreens will also 
have a “star rating” that indicates how much UVA the product is screening. Sun-
screen products with less UVA protection will have fewer stars, and sunscreen 
products with the highest protection against UVA will have four stars.

SUN SKIN TYPES

There  is  a  universal  system  of  classifying  skin  types  when  discussing  sun 
exposure.  This  typing  system,  which  is  generally  accepted  by  the  scientiﬁc 
community,  was  originated  by  Dr.  Thomas  Fitzpatrick  and  is  referred  to  as 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sun and Sun Damage      379

Fitzpatrick Skin Typing is a way 
of classifying skin by its tendency 
to sunburn or tan; indicates how 
susceptible a person is to sun 
damage and erythema.

Fitzpatrick Skin Typing (Figure 19-11). The following is an excerpt from a 
brochure provided by the Skin Cancer Foundation.

Type  I:  Always  burns;  never  tans.  Very  fair,  with  red  or  blond  hair  and 

freckles.

Type II: Burns easily; tans minimally. Usually fair skinned.
Type III: Sometimes burns; gradually tans.
Type  IV:  Minimum  burning;  always  tans.  Usually  white  with  medium 

pigmentation.

Type V: Very seldom burns; always tans. Medium to heavy pigmentation.
Type VI: Never burns, but tans darkly. Blacks as well as others with heavy 

pigmentation.

C

F

A

B

D

E

.
l
l
i

m
a
H
y
r
r
a
L

y
b

y
h
p
a
r
g
o
t
o
h
P

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 19-11  A, Fitzpatrick I; B, Fitzpatrick II; C, Fitzpatrick III; D, Fitzpatrick IV; E, Fitzpatrick V; F, Fitzpatrick VI.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
380         CHAPTER 19

As you can see, the scale has a lot to do with hereditary and genetic skin 
characteristics. According to the Skin Cancer Foundation, your choice, or your 
client’s choice, of a sunscreen should be based on the sun skin type, the amount 
of time you plan to spend in the sun, the intensity of the sun in your geographic 
region, and the preference of the formulation.

The geographic location does affect the intensity of the sun. As a general 

rule, the closer to the equator you live, the more intense the sun’s rays.

TYPES OF SUNSCREENS

Water-resistant  screens  are  designed  for  individuals  who  participate  in  water 
sports, or who are outdoors in hot environments, or who plan on staying out in 
the sun for long periods of time. To make a water-resistant claim, independent 
tests must be run on the products showing that they still function as sunscreens 
after 80 minutes of exposure to water. These products are often used by ﬁsher-
men, athletes, and people who work outdoors. They usually contain a fairly large 
amount of oil, petrolatum, or fat, which makes them highly water resistant. These 
products sometimes cause problems for oily-skinned individuals, and often the 
waterprooﬁng ingredients are comedogenic or acnegenic. Sometimes consumers 
refer to water-resistant sunscreens as waterproof. Because no sunscreen is 100 
percent waterproof, this is an erroneous statement. Manufacturers are required to 
use the term water-resistant to describe these successfully tested products.

Sunscreens made for oily skin are often in an alcohol gel. They are lighter in 
weight and generally noncomedogenic. Unfortunately, they are also usually not 
very water resistant and therefore must be applied more frequently.

Sunscreens are also available in oils, creams, and lotions. These choices are 
really a matter of personal preference and individualized skin type. Many cos-
metics companies make a variety of products that vary in SPF strength, vehicles, 
and usage directions.

TIME OF DAY AND THE SUN

Because the earth revolves, at certain times of the day the sun is closer and more 
intense, and more ultraviolet rays reach the earth’s surface. Most estheticians and 
dermatologists agree that the sun is at its most powerful between 10 a.m. and 
4 p.m. Advise your clients not to be out in the sun during these hours.

FREQUENT MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT 
SUN DAMAGE AND SUNBATHING

Consumers have many misconceptions about sunbathing and the way the sun 
damages the skin. It is the duty of the esthetician to dispel these wrong ideas. 
Some of these misconceptions are as follows:

  1. You cannot tan or burn if the weather is cloudy or rainy. This idea, of course, 
is  completely  false.  Clouds  do  ﬁlter  a  small  amount  of  UV  light,  but  not 
enough to affect damage to the skin. It is certainly possible to tan or burn 
even in cloudy, overcast weather, particularly without using sunscreen.
  2. You cannot burn if you are in the water. This too is false. Water may feel 
cool to hot skin that has been basking in the sun, but it has no effect on 
the sun’s burning and damage potential. The heat from the sun is caused 
by infrared rays, not ultraviolet rays. Swimming and going into the pool or 
ocean may indeed remove some amount of the sunscreen applied earlier. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sun and Sun Damage      381

If  your  client  plans  on  swimming  or  participating  in  water  sports,  advise 
him or her to use a water-resistant sunscreen product. Sunscreens should 
be reapplied when swimming every time the client gets out of the water, or 
about once an hour.

  3. Umbrellas or large hats will prevent sun damage. The real truth is that although 
these are a help, they do not prevent much sun from reaching the fragile skin 
and  certainly  do  not  replace  a  good  sunscreen.  They  primarily  cut  down 
on  glare  so  that  the  person  does  not  squint  as  much,  thus  helping  to  pre-
vent worsening of the expression lines. It’s a good idea to wear lightweight 
but sun-resistant clothes, which also help ﬁlter light, but ultraviolet rays can 
burn the skin right through a lightweight shirt. Sun-ﬁltering clothing is now 
available in sports and department stores. This clothing has been tested and 
actually has an SPF rating. Advise your clients to wear a hat and other proper 
attire, sit in the shade as much as possible, but still wear a good sunscreen.
  4. Baby  or  mineral  oil  accelerates  tanning.  This  is  simply  not  true.  In  fact, 
because these oils do not contain sunscreen, they may accelerate burning, 
and they do not protect against sun damage.

  5. Applying  moisturizer  after  sunbathing  will  prevent  peeling.  This  idea  is 
completely false! If the skin has burned, it will peel no matter what is done 
to the skin. Applying moisturizer to well-protected skin may help replace 
some  of  the  water  in  the  dehydrated,  exposed  skin,  or  it  may  lubricate 
peeling areas, making the skin look better, but it does not stop the sun-
damaged skin from peeling.

  6. Applying lots of moisturizer will counter the damage the sun causes.  False 
again. Hydrating ﬂuids do help replace some of the water that is also being 
robbed  from  the  surface  cells  during  sun  exposure,  but  ultraviolet  rays 
cut right through the skin. Remember, the UVA rays penetrate the dermis, 
destroying  collagen  and  elastin  ﬁbrils  and  causing  dysplastic  cell  growth 
and  other  horrifying  effects  we  have  already  discussed.  Esthetically,  you 
should administer good, soothing, hydrating facial treatments to your sun-
worshipping clients, but doing so does not treat or prevent the damage the 
sun causes to these clients.

  7. Wearing  sunglasses  helps  prevent  sun  damage.  True,  but  only  if  the  sun-
glasses contain UV ﬁlters and only if they are worn constantly while outside. 
When purchasing sunglasses, make sure to check that the glasses contain 
UV ﬁlters. The larger the glasses, the more area they will help protect.

VITAMIN D, SUN, AND THE SKIN

As  previously  mentioned,  sun  is  necessary  for  human  skin  to  produce 
vitamin D. Vitamin D is important for healthy bones and healthy immune 
function. New evidence suggests that sufﬁcient vitamin D is necessary as a 
factor in the possible prevention of some major diseases, including several 
forms of cancer, multiple sclerosis, high blood pressure, heart disease, type 
1 diabetes, and several mental illnesses. 

Recent headlines have shown that perhaps at least half of the Ameri-

can adult population is vitamin D deﬁcient.

Because vitamin D is produced by the skin when it is exposed to sun, 
some scientists argue that a moderate amount of sun exposure is neces-
sary for proper production of vitamin D, and that sunscreen usage prevents 
this vitamin D synthesis. With advancing age, the skin’s ability to produce 
vitamin D decreases. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.382         CHAPTER 19

It has been said that 30 minutes of sun exposure without sunscreen is 
the same as taking 10,000 International Units (IU) of vitamin D. Because the 
body stores vitamin D in fat tissue, about half of the vitamin D generated 
by sun exposure is stored for future use. The daily recommended allowance 
for vitamin D is currently 800 IU. According to Harvard Public Health, most 
authorities on vitamin D now believe that a healthy amount is between 1,000 
and 2,000 IU daily from all combined sources including diet, supplements, and 
sun exposure. It is generally recommended that anyone taking an oral vitamin 
D supplement limit the dosage to 2,000 IU per day. The American Academy 
of Dermatology has issued a statement, along with other defending derma-
tologists, arguing that people can meet their vitamin D requirements without 
exposing their skin to damaging UV rays. Sufﬁcient amounts of Vitamin D 
can be obtained from supplements and fortiﬁed foods including milk, and by 
eating foods rich in vitamin D. The best natural food source for vitamin D is 
fatty ﬁsh such as salmon, sardines, and tuna. Other foods with lesser levels of 
vitamin D include eggs, shiitake mushrooms, and orange juice.

It is important for all skin care professionals to stay abreast of this con-
temporary issue and to understand that some clients may argue this point 
to justify their desire for sun exposure.

THE QUEST FOR THE GOLDEN TAN

In medieval and Elizabethan times, a suntan was considered a sign of poverty. 
A suntan meant that the person worked outdoors on a farm or at a less prestigious 
job. White skin was considered fashionable and a mark of success and sophisti-
cation. This is also true today in certain cultures in the world.

However, in the 20th century, as leisure time increased, many people con-
sidered a tan a mark of success, because the person was successful enough to 
afford leisure time spent in the sun. Some clients will always value this “beautiful 
tan.” Unfortunately, golden-brown skin at age 20 translates to wrinkled, leathery, 
ugly, splotchy, old-looking skin at age 40 or 50. Although some clients will never 
listen to reason about tanning, you should always make an effort to inform, edu-
cate, and save them from the ugly, long-term ravages of sun exposure!

Tell your clients the following:

  1. Sun exposure is the number one cause of premature aging and skin cancer. 
The best way to prevent wrinkles, skin sagging, and skin discolorations is to 
stay out of the sun.

  2. Everyone should wear sunscreen every day, not just when sunbathing. We 
do not spend most of the time at the beach. Hour for hour, most people 
receive more sun damage going to work, walking outside, and sitting by a 
window than they do basking in the sun. Sunbathing certainly makes the 
damage worse, but most sun damage occurs from day-to-day exposure.
  3. As discussed earlier, it is best not to go out in the sun between the hours of 

10 a.m. and 4 p.m.

  4. Sunscreen should be applied about 30 minutes before sun exposure. This 
provides  better  protection  and  allows  the  product  to  absorb  and  distrib-
ute itself more evenly. This is particularly important for sunscreens contain 
absorbing sunscreen agents.

  5. Reapply sunscreen often if you are in direct light, generally every 2 hours, 
or more often if you have very sun-sensitive skin. Always reapply sunscreen 
after  swimming  or  perspiring.  Please  note  that  sunscreen  applications  are 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sun and Sun Damage      383

not cumulative (two applications of SPF 15 sunscreen do not make an SPF 
30 sunscreen).

  6. Consider  using  self-tanning  milk  instead  of  sunbathing.  These  products 
cause keratin in the corneocytes to darken. Used on a regular basis, they 
can produce a beautiful golden color. Spray tanning has gained popularity 
as a salon service. These booths are designed to spray an even layer of self-
tanning lotion on the body. Two words of caution: First, self-tanning prod-
ucts generally work better and more evenly on the body than on the face. 
Second, a “tan” produced by a self-tanning product provides no additional 
resistance to sunburning.

  7. A tanning booth is not a safe alternative. These machines still use rays that 

promote long-term damage, which can cause premature aging.

The sun is the number one enemy of the skin. Educate, teach, and warn your 

clients about its effects!

FACTS ABOUT SUN CARE YOUR CLIENTS 
SHOULD KNOW . . .

(This article by the author appeared 
in Dermascope Magazine.)

Sun is, by far, the number one enemy of the skin. Routine sun exposure 
causes  long-term  cumulative  damage  to  the  skin,  and  is  responsible  for 
the majority of the symptoms we think of as aging. It is also responsible for 
most skin cancers, and is actually the number one cause of cancer, since 
there are more skin cancers diagnosed than any other form of cancer.

The truth is that most of what we see as aging is not really due to the 
passing of time. It is because chronic sun damage has occurred over that 
period of time.

Sun  is  responsible  for  most  wrinkles,  pigmentation  changes  associated 
with age, rough skin textures, and solar elastosis. Besides obvious “aging” signs, 
the sun is also largely responsible for inﬂammation associated with redness 
issues, capillary distention, ﬂares of rosacea, and other inﬂammatory damage.

The saving grace in these facts is that sun care in the form of sunscreen 
and  avoidance  of  deliberate  sun  exposure  is  the  number  one  preventive 
measure for signiﬁcantly lessening the chances of all of the problems men-
tioned above. 

It is up to the skin care professional to assume the role of health edu-
cator with all of our clients. Making sun education our number one priority 
will help our clients avoid many skin problems, and will help logically explain 
the many conditions that our clients wish to improve.

In this article we will discuss the real facts about sun care, and what 
we need to do to make sun damage prevention a reality for our clients and 
patients.  Hopefully,  you  will  be  able  to  use  this  information  to  inform  or 
update your clients to help them prevent skin cancers and the many signs 
of “aging” related to the sun.

1.  Most people do not get the majority of their sun damage from trips 

to the beach.

Many clients truly believe that sun damage only occurs from deliberate 
exposure to the sun. Clients who are told that their wrinkles are due to 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.384         CHAPTER 19

sun  damage  often  say  that  they  have  not  had  a  tan  or  deliberate  sun 
exposure  in  years.  While  deliberate  sun  damage  certainly  causes  skin 
damage,  the  truth  is  that  the  damage  that  is  now  manifesting  itself  on 
their wrinkled faces probably occurred in little doses over a long period 
of time.

The majority of the sun damage we receive takes place on a day-by-
day basis while getting our mail from the mailbox, taking the dog for a walk, 
playing ball with our kids, and sitting next to a window at work.

Sun  exposure  creates  inﬂammation  that  results  in  the  formation  of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), better known as free radicals. These unsta-
ble oxygen-related molecules wreak havoc by stealing electrons, interfering 
with  normal  cellular  function.  Free  radicals  can  also  cause  the  alteration 
of  DNA  in  cells,  which  can  cause  many  problems  including  skin  cancer. 
They  also  cause  breakdown  of  skin  support  structures  such  as  collagen 
and elastin, responsible for skin ﬁrmness and elasticity. Small amounts of 
damage accumulate over time, eventually resulting in damage to the skin 
that we see as “aging.”

2. Sun care needs to be an everyday habit.

While  it  is  extremely  important  to  practice  sun  care  while  outdoors,  it  is 
even more important to prevent damage on an everyday basis. Many clients 
believe that they do not need a sunscreen every day because they are not 
in direct sun. They need to be educated that, as we previously discussed, 
most of our cumulative skin sun damage is caused by ambient sun expo-
sure. The routine use of a sunscreen every single day will help prevent skin 
cancers and signs associated with sun-related aging.

Clients also erroneously believe that sunscreens need to be sticky and 
smell like coconut. This may have been true in the past, but we now have 
the  technical  capabilities  of  formulating  and  producing  very  cosmetically 
elegant sunscreen products.

3. The  easiest  way  for  people  to  practice  sun  damage  prevention  is 
to make sure a broad-spectrum sunscreen is built into every daily 
moisturizer.

Almost every client uses a moisturizer every day. The easiest way to prac-
tice  excellent  sun  care  is  to  use  a  moisturizer  every  morning  that  con-
tains a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher. This practice 
eliminates  the  issue  of  applying  2  products:  a  moisturizer  and  then  a 
sunscreen.

One of the major roles of the esthetician is to determine the client’s 
skin type and lifestyle needs, and make sure they have chosen the right sun-
screen moisturizer for their individual skin and needs. For example, a client 
with oily, clog-prone skin needs a very lightweight moisturizing base that is 
free of fats that can clog the pores and cause acne ﬂares. 

More  importantly,  every  client  should  be in  love  with  the  weight  and 

wearability of their moisturizer! This makes daily sunscreen use a snap!

4. The ultraviolet spectrum ﬁltered by a sunscreen product may be more 

important than the SPF.

The two types of sunrays that affect the skin are ultraviolet alpha (UVA) 
and ultraviolet beta (UVB) rays. UVB rays are short powerful rays that 
stop  at  the  epidermal–dermal  junction.  They  are  responsible  for 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sun and Sun Damage      385

sunburns and the majority of skin cancers (basal cell and squamous cell 
carcinomas). 

UVA  rays  are  much  deeper-penetrating  longer  rays  that  go  all  the 
way into the dermis, and will go through a window. These are the rays 
that  cause  the  damage  associated  with  aging,  and  is  believed  by  many 
scientists to be a signiﬁcant cause of melanoma, the most deadly form 
of skin cancer.

For many years, sunscreens were mainly intended to prevent sunburn. 
They  contained  almost  exclusively  active  sunscreen  ingredients  that  ﬁl-
tered  UVB  rays.  Only  in  the  last  few  years  have  the  medical  and  scien-
tiﬁc  communities  recognized  the  damage  caused  by  powerful  UVA  rays, 
necessitating the addition of UVA screening actives. Also, it has been rela-
tively recent that new and useable UVA actives have been researched and 
developed.

SPF  (Sun  Protection  Factor)  is  a  measurement  of  how  long  a  person 
can stay in the sun without burning or becoming red (erythemic). It does 
not measure the amount of the UV spectrum ﬁltered. While an SPF 15 sun-
screen ﬁlters about 93% of rays, and SPF 30 screens out about 97% of the 
UV rays, exactly what part of the light spectrum is ﬁltered depends on the 
sunscreen actives and their percentage contents.

A  broad-spectrum  sunscreen  contains  ﬁltering  ingredients  that  ﬁlter 
both UVB and UVA rays. Each individual sunscreen active ingredient ﬁlters 
a different part of the ultraviolet spectrum. Commonly used UVB ﬁlters are 
octinoxate and octisalate, UVA ﬁlters include ecamsule (Mexoryl®) and avo-
benzone  (Parsol®  1789),  octocrylene  and  oxybenzone  cover  part  of  both 
spectrums.  The  broadest-spectrum  actives  are  the  physical  sunscreen 
actives, zinc oxide and titanium dioxide. To cover a broader spectrum, most 
formulations are mixes of 2 or more active ingredients. The amounts and 
choices of sunscreen ﬁlters are determined by what speciﬁc UV ranges are 
ﬁltered by each active. When several actives are combined, more of the UV 
spectrum can be covered. Other considerations in formulations are wear-
ability, conditions of use, and skin sensitivities.

The FDA has recently introduced a new proposed program to give sun-
screens a ranking based on the amount of spectrum ﬁltered, in addition to 
SPF measurements. It will take a while to actually see this on packaging, but 
most scientists believe that this type of labeling is more realistic than SPF 
rankings alone.

5. A tan is an immune function.

Most people think of a tan as a beautiful bronze color, but a tan is actually 
an immune function. (It is fun to watch clients’ faces when you expose this 
fact!) A tan is the skin desperately trying to block the sun’s harmful rays. 
UV exposure triggers the production of melanin—skin pigment intended to 
help block exposure to the rays.

More  and  more  celebrities  and  models  are  becoming  aware  of  the 
damage caused by the sun, and are appearing less tan and talking about 
sun damage prevention. This will eventually help change the image of the 
tan to hopefully, discourage deliberate tanning. Another helpful service is 
the advent of the spray tan. However, if your clients get spray tans or if 
you offer spray-tanning services, please teach them that these tans are not 
real, and that they do not have any protection against sun that they have 
with a real tan!



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.386         CHAPTER 19

6. Hats and glasses are important parts of sun damage prevention.

Hats and glasses help prevent UV exposure, which is just as bad for eyes 
as it is for skin. Make sure you wear sunglasses with built-in UV protection. 
Hats can help prevent scalp skin damage, especially in those people with 
thin or balding hair. Clothing is now being made that is able to ﬁlter UV rays, 
and actually has measurable SPF. Look for this type of clothing in sports 
clothes shops.

Hats and glasses also help prevent squinting, which leads to eventual 

expression squint lines and crow’s feet.

Protective clothing is important, but it does not substitute for daily 
sunscreen  use!  Make  sure  your  clients  use  both  for  best  preventive 
results!

7.  Sun damage prevention should start at birth.

Sun  exposure  starts  at  birth  and  so  should  sun  protection.  Obviously, 
infants must be shielded from almost any sun exposure. As babies turn into 
toddlers, they should be taught that part of going outside is applying sun-
screen every single day! Children form health habits very early in life. Teach 
them good ones!

Infants often have sensitivities that they outgrow. Before purchasing a 
sunscreen for an infant, check with the child’s pediatrician for the doctor’s 
recommendation.

8. There is no such thing as a “sunblock.”
The term sunblock has been used interchangeably with sunscreen for years. 
Originally,  the  FDA  ruled  that  the  term  sunblock  could  only  be  used  to 
describe  sunscreen  products  that  contained  a  physical  sunscreen  active, 
namely zinc oxide or titanium dioxide.

Recently the FDA rescinded its allowance to use the word sunblock. The 
reasoning behind this decision is that no ingredient or product technically 
blocks 100% of the sun’s rays. The term sunscreen is the correct term for a 
sun prevention product.

9. All sunscreens are chemicals!

Some companies refer to their sunscreens as being chemical-free. This is 
just wrong terminology! All sunscreens are chemicals! There is absolutely 
no such thing as a non-chemical sunscreen ingredient or product!

Most  of  these  companies  are  referring  to  the  fact  that  they  contain 
only  physical  sunscreen  actives  that  reﬂect  sunrays,  as  opposed  to  sun-
screen actives that absorb and neutralize UV rays. They should call them 
“non-absorbing” sunscreens or “physical sunscreens.” That would be more 
correct!

10. Know all the basics of sun care.

As you can see, we are learning more and more about sun, its dangers, and 
how to best prevent damage. But make sure your clients know the basics 
of sun care:
❏  Make  sure  you  use  enough  sunscreen!  Six  or  seven  dots  around  the 
face  massaged  in,  don’t  forget  your  neck  and  the  back  of  your  neck! 
When outside, it takes a full ounce of sunscreen to cover the average 
beach body.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Sun and Sun Damage      387

Dihydroxyacetone (DHA) is an 
ingredient used in self-tanning 
agents that causes keratin to turn 
brown when applied.

❏  Sunscreen needs to be applied at least 30 minutes before sun exposure to 
be most effective. Applying sunscreen after the skin is hot and red from 
sun exposure can lead to irritant reactions!

❏  Once the skin is burned, nothing will stop it from peeling. Good moistur-
ization may make the peeling look better, but the damage has been done!
❏  If you do get burned, apply cool compresses or take a cool bath. Do not 
apply  moisturizer  until  the  skin  has  cooled  down  substantially.  Applying 
moisturizer on hot, burnt skin will help to insulate the heat!

❏  Any sunburn resulting in physical illness or skin blistering should be seen 

immediately by a physician!

❏  Always try to stay out of direct sun between 10 am and 4 pm, when the sun 

is at its most intense because of its proximity to the earth.

❏  Watch  your  meteorologist  for  the  daily  UV  index.  Weather,  the  season, 

and temperature can all inﬂuence the sun’s intensity.

❏  Using  a  good  antioxidant  serum  under  your  sunscreen.  Topical  antioxi-
dants help to neutralize free radicals created by the sun exposure. How-
ever, they do not take the place of sunscreen!

  Make it a project to have a sun care education program for your clients. 
Develop your own brochures, or get in touch with the Skin Cancer Foun-
dation  or  the  American  Cancer  Society,  both  of  which  have  brochures 
available to help educate the public. 

  Your clients will appreciate your efforts!

SELF-TANNING PRODUCTS

Self-tanning lotions are becoming more and more popular. These safe alterna-
tives to the tanning impart a tan color without exposure to the sun. These prod-
ucts contain dihydroxyacetone (DHA), a chemical derived from sugarcane or 
beets,  that  turns  brown  when  exposed  to  alkaline  environments.  Self-tanning 
products stain the very surface cells in the stratum corneum and therefore are 
shed within a few days to a few weeks. A darker color can be obtained by more 
frequent applications. Products containing more DHA will produce a darker tan 
(Figure 19-12).

Self-tanning lotions will provide the best results when applied to healthy, 
hydrated  skin.  Skin  that  needs  exfoliating  or  is  very  dehydrated  will  tend  to 
“grab” the lotion, producing a splotchy result.

Here are some tips for good results with self-tanning:

  1. Carefully follow the manufacturer’s directions. Self-tanning products do vary 

in spreading agent or DHA concentration.

  2. Exfoliate with a mechanical scrub product before using the products. Loo-
fahs tend to leave uneven texture, creating streaking. Continue to exfoliate 
at least twice a week.

  3. Daily moisturization helps the self-tan look better.
  4. Even  application  is  extremely  important.  Uneven  application  produces  a 

muddy, splotchy result.

  5. Make sure to wash your hands well immediately after application. Otherwise, 
your palms will turn dark, especially in the crevices between your ﬁngers.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.388         CHAPTER 19

l

.
s
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
E
g
n
n
n
a
T
z
e
p
o
r
T

i

.
t

S

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 19-12  Proper application of a well-formulated DHA self-tanning product 
produces beautiful results in a short period of time and is the only safe way to “tan.”

  6. Make sure your feet are well exfoliated for an even application.
  7. Do not shave immediately before applying the product.
  8. Generally  speaking,  self-tanning  produces  better  results  on  the  legs  and 
arms than on the face. Facial skin renews faster and is therefore more likely 
to look splotchy or muddy.

Most importantly, make sure your clients understand that this is a fake tan. 
Many people have made the mistake of going to the beach, thinking they are “tan” 
and not using sunscreen. The result—a terrible, painful, and damaging sunburn!

Tanning “Pills”

A chemical called canthaxanthin appears on the “health food” market every few 
years  as  a “tanning  pill.”  This  chemical  accumulates  in  the  skin  and the eyes, 
turning them a yellowish-brown color. This product has not been proved safe. 
Avoid taking any pill that promotes tanning!

IN CONCLUSION

The sun is, by far, the biggest enemy of the skin. Cumulative overexposure to 
sun causes most skin cancers and most of the appearance conditions associated 
with aging. Estheticians must be extremely knowledgeable about prevention of 
sun damage. This includes knowledge about sunscreens and their correct use, 
and the ability to help education clients about sun safety and prevention of sun 
damage.




 
 
 
 
Sun and Sun Damage      389

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION
  1. Why is the sun the worst enemy of the skin?

  2. Discuss what happens to the skin histologically after long-term sun exposure.

  3. Discuss esthetic problems caused by long-term sun damage.

  4. What are the ABCDEs of melanoma?

  5. List  some  rules  for  sun  exposure,  and  discuss  some  common  misconcep-

tions about sun exposure.

  6. What are UVA and UVB rays? What are the differences?

  7. Explain what SPF means. What does broad-spectrum mean, and why is it 

important?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

20

The New Science 
of Aging Skin 
Treatment

OBJECTIVES . . .

Only in the past two and a half decades have skin science 
researchers discovered that many topical agents can cause 
signiﬁcant changes in the behavior and the appearance 
of aging and photo-damaged skin. In this chapter, you will 
learn about various agents and new technology that can 
really improve the appearance of aging and, speciﬁcally, 
sun-damaged skin.



     391

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.392         CHAPTER 20

Inﬂammation cascade is a series 
of biochemical reactions triggered 
by inﬂammation (often sun expo-
sure) and resulting in skin damage 
and breakdown; also sometimes 
called the free-radical cascade.

PHOTO DAMAGE

As we have previously discussed, aging skin does not look like it does because of 
the passing of years. The skin looks bad because of accumulated damage, most 
of which is from sun exposure, also known as photoaging or photo damage.

We  have  already  touched  on  the  long-term  damage  that  cumulative  sun 
exposure does to the skin. We have also already deﬁned the difference between 
intrinsic aging, or aging of the skin that appears normally or genetically over 
time, and extrinsic aging, aging of the skin that occurs from induced or envi-
ronmental  causes,  such  as  sun  damage  from  exposure.  These  signs  of  aging 
skin from extrinsic sources do not show up for years. We know that the signs of 
extrinsic aging and sun damage are caused by free radicals and reactive oxygen 
species, unstable molecules that attack cell membranes and wreak havoc within 
the skin and the body. These unstable molecules interfere with normal function-
ing of the skin and cause the formation of different reactive molecules, creating 
a series of biochemical reactions called the inﬂammation cascade. These reac-
tions eventually cause the breakdown of collagen and elastin ﬁbrils and other 
support structures of the skin. We know that these reactions are primarily set 
into motion by exposure to the sun, and that the effects of these reactions are 
cumulative. Even though damage is occurring during a sunburn at age 4, it may 
not show up until a wrinkle appears at age 30, or a skin cancer at age 40. The 
cumulative effects of these inﬂammatory reactions cause the symptoms that we 
think of as skin aging, which technically should be referred to as skin damage.

Sun-damaged  skin  is  signiﬁcantly  more  leathery,  with  deeper  and  more 
numerous wrinkles and severe loss of elasticity, than skin that has symptoms of 
intrinsic aging. Sun-damaged skin also has signiﬁcant discolorations, splotching, 
and hyperpigmentation. Intrinsically aged skin does not have nearly as great a 
problem  with  hyperpigmentation  and  demarcation,  nor  does  it  have  as  many 
wrinkles or as pronounced elastosis.

Histologically,  sun-damaged  skin  shows  very  large  differences  from  nor-
mally aging skin. The epidermis of photoaged skin is remarkably thicker. There 
is a large increase in elastic tissue in sun-damaged skin, but it takes on the form 
of a disorganized “blob,” with little apparent organized structure. The ﬁbroblasts 
in the thickened dermis of sun-damaged skin are considerably more numerous 
and are overactive, producing more collagen, but obviously in a disorganized 
fashion. There are also signiﬁcant decreases in the vascular system of sun-dam-
aged skin, which carries much-needed blood to various areas of the skin.

In short, the skin has obviously desperately tried to repair itself, producing 
an overabundance of tissue ﬁbrils, but in a “panicked” and dysfunctional manner.

THE NEW SCIENCE OF AGING 
SKIN TREATMENT

Only  in  the  past  few  years  have  researchers  understood  more  about  photo 
damage and discovered methods of effective treatment for photoaging. Although 
prevention and daily use of broad-spectrum sunscreens are still the best treat-
ment,  estheticians  now  have  at  their  disposal  new  and  promising  techniques 
and ingredients to help reduce the esthetic effects of photo damage and to help 
protect  and  maintain  healthy  skin.  Recently,  more  and  more  is  being  learned 
about DNA repair and also ingredients like resveratrol, which may give us some 
control over genetics-related intrinsic appearance signs of aging skin. Learning to 
stimulate collagen production helps both signs of sun damage and signs of aging 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      393

due to hormonal factors affecting collagen production. This means we soon may 
have ways of treating extrinsic damage as well as some factors in intrinsic aging.
Although the esthetician primarily treats the appearance of the skin, there is 
mounting scientiﬁc evidence that many of the new techniques and ingredients 
likely have a positive effect on skin health as well as on sun-damage prevention. 

ANALYSIS OF PHOTOAGING SKIN

You will notice many symptoms of photoaging skin. Some of these symptoms 
may show up as early as the 20s. Severely sun-damaged skin appears thick and 
leathery; it is rough to the touch; and it has many wrinkles that may be both 
vertical and horizontal. Severe and multiple wrinkling in the nonintrinsic aging 
areas may be present. In other words, mild to moderate wrinkling around the 
eyes and nasolabial folds is normal, intrinsic skin aging. Severe wrinkling and 
surface roughness in the neck, cheek, chest, and other areas are usually not the 
result of intrinsic aging. These areas show cumulative effects of repeated sun 
exposure. Severe telangiectasias (couperose) are also often present. The skin is 
muddy looking, and has diverse dark coloration, lentigines, and general brown 
splotchiness.

Redness on the sides of the neck in a horseshoe pattern may be a deﬁnite 
sign of photoaging. These red areas may be accompanied by hyperpigmentation 
and telangiectasias. This is known as poikiloderma of civatte (Figure 20-1).

In younger clients, you may notice all of the previously mentioned symp-
toms  in  lesser  amounts.  The  ﬁrst  sign  is  often  hyperpigmented  mottling,  or 
speckly blotchiness of the skin. Other signs might include rough, patchy skin 
and the beginning of “chicken neck.” In this condition, the skin of the neck has 
constant “goose pimples,” which are reﬂected by small, pinpoint, uncolored ele-
vation of the follicles on the sides of the neck, like a plucked chicken. Wrinkles 
around the eyes and mouth may be especially severe for the client’s age. How-
ever, brown splotchiness is the most evident sign of premature aging due to sun 
damage. The use of a Wood’s lamp will indicate even more hyperpigmentation 
beneath the skin’s surface. Lack of pigmentation will also be observable.

The treatment of the photo-damaged or photoaging skin is a program, not 
a magic bullet. Many treatment methods contribute to a successful program for 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-1  Poikiloderma of civatte is a condition of the neck skin with hyper-
pigmentation and telangiectasias caused by years of cumulative sun exposure.

Poikiloderma of civatte is a 
condition in sun-damaged skin 
resulting in horseshoe-shaped 
pigment and red splotching on 
the neck.




 
 
 
 
394         CHAPTER 20

managing aging and sun-damaged skin. This combination topical skin care pro-
gram for photo-damaged skin can be summarized as six basic concepts:

  1. Prevention, using broad-spectrum daily sunscreen protection
  2. Use of topical alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) or other exfoliating agents
  3. Daily use of topical broad-spectrum antioxidants
  4. Use of topical peptides and collagen stimulants
  5. Use of lipid-based products to repair or improve barrier function in ultra-dry 

skin

  6. Regular use of hydrators that help attract and bind essential moisture to the 

skin

TREATMENT OF PHOTOAGING SKIN

Prevention—No Sun!

Daily use of broad-spectrum sunscreen is the ﬁrst step in photo-damage treat-
ment.  Even  if  the  skin  is  already  severely  sun  damaged,  daily  application  of 
sunscreen prevents more damage and gives the skin a better chance to produce 
good effects from other topical treatments.

Using sunscreen on a daily basis cannot be emphasized enough. Many cli-
ents erroneously worry only about sunburn. They think sun damage occurs only 
through visible sunburn and irritation. They are often likely to apply sunscreen 
only when they know they will be exposed to direct sunlight for several hours.
The truth is that most of our sun damage occurs through day-to-day expo-
sure.  Driving  to  work,  going  to  the  mailbox,  playing  with  our  children,  and 
taking a walk are examples of everyday sun exposure that becomes cumulative. 
Even sitting by a window exposes us to deep-penetrating (and aging) UVA rays, 
which go right through glass. This is why it is so important that estheticians help 
clients by advising daily use of a good sunscreen. 

Remember that broad-spectrum sunscreens are important to shield the skin 
from UVA and UVB rays. Look for active ingredient lists containing ingredients 
that protect against both forms of UV light. Effective combinations include octi-
noxate with titanium dioxide or zinc oxide or combinations of absorbing octi-
noxate, oxybenzone, avobenzone, ecamsule, and octisalate.

In most cases, clients can wear a day cream with built-in sunscreen. Most 
scientists and dermatologists recommend a sun protection factor (SPF) of 15 or 
higher  with  broad-spectrum  protection.  It  is  usually  not  necessary  to  wear  a 
separate moisturizer cream, except in extremely dry skin or extremely cold, dry 
climates. Good day sunscreens are now available in a variety of weights and in 
lotion, gel, or cream forms, so they can be selected for the right skin type. Many 
sunscreens contain hydrators like glycerin or hyaluronic acid, soothing ingredi-
ents like green tea extract, and other conditioners for speciﬁc skin types.

Having this variety of daily-use sunscreens available helps with client com-
pliance in using a sunscreen every day. Clients will use a product that is comfort-
able and meets their individual needs, such as a lightweight product, a product 
that works well under makeup, or one that is also a moisturizer.

The client’s ﬁrst visit should include a thorough discussion about the harmful 
effects of sun. This author recommends a no-holds-barred lecture (in a friendly 
way!) about the ravages of cumulative sun damage. Emphasis should be placed 
on the cumulative nature of sun damage. Many clients will say, “I haven’t had 
any sun in months!” The truth is that most of the sun damage estheticians see is 
from sunbathing that occurred 20 years ago and through years of daily exposure.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      395

Unless  the  client  follows  good  sun  habits—or  better  yet,  stays  out  of  the 
sun  altogether—improvement  will  be  at  best  minimal.  The  ﬁrst  need  of  sun-
damaged skin is to remove the source of damage.

Exfoliation

The  cell “turnover  rate”  slows  down  with  aging  anyway,  but  the  rate  is  even 
slower  in  sun-damaged  skin.  Not  only  is  the  rate  often  slower,  the  cells  are 
disorganized and are not in even layers. You must remember that sun damage 
causes  abnormal  cell  growth  and  generally  disorganizes  normal  cell  patterns. 
This, of course, also affects the epidermis, piling dead cells on top of the skin in 
uneven patterns as they accumulate. Microscopic cross-section photographs of 
sun-damaged skin show severe disﬁgurations of the normal growth patterns of 
the strata of the epidermis. This can be both a medical and a cosmetic concern. 
Dysplastic cell growth can eventually cause skin cancer but esthetically causes a 
rough, dry, scaly appearance on the skin’s surface and contributes to the appear-
ance of wrinkles.

Since intercellular lipids are produced by the skin during the cell renewal 
(keratinization) process, as the cell renewal rate slows, so does the production 
of intercellular lipids. This reduction in lipid production interferes with barrier 
function and reduces the ability of the skin to hold essential moisture. Clients 
who have this type of sun-damaged skin have a great deal of difﬁculty keep-
ing their skin moisturized. Hydrators attract water to the skin, but there is not 
enough lipid to bind the moisture. 

Daily use of an alpha hydroxy serum or cream increases the speed of cell 
renewal, improves lipid production, and removes excess accumulations of dead 
cell  buildup  from  the  skin  surface.  By  removing  this  conglomeration  of  dry, 
dead cells, the surface of the skin appears much smoother, and wrinkles appear 
less deep. Hydrators applied over the alpha hydroxy treatments perform better 
because they do not have to moisturize the dead-cell buildup. Instead they work 
to hydrate the skin more evenly, which makes the skin appear much smoother.
Imagine a thick layer of cells lying on top of the skin. These cells are all 
dried up, like a thick layer of dust lying on top of a piece of furniture. This cell 
buildup makes the skin’s surface look dull and ﬂat, just as dust prevents light 
from reﬂecting from a piece of furniture. Surface mechanical exfoliation, which 
we have already discussed, helps to remove some of the “dust.” Alpha hydroxy 
acids, however, work by loosening the “glue” of lipids that hold the cells together, 
helping to continually shed off this sheath of cells. This removal of dead cells is 
also beneﬁcial to acne-prone skin, helping to loosen both surface cell buildup 
and impacted dead cells inside the follicle, which, as previously discussed, can 
lead to comedones and possibly to acne.

Use of a daily chemical exfoliant helps rid skin of thick epidermal corneum 
that makes skin look dull. Cell buildup can make wrinkles look worse, dryness 
more uncomfortable, and splotchiness and hyperpigmentation more apparent. 
Daily use of an alpha hydroxy and/or beta hydroxy acid treatment product can 
signiﬁcantly  improve  skin  texture,  color  evenness,  depth  of  surface  wrinkles, 
and smoothness.

More importantly, regular use of AHAs helps “re-layer” the epidermal cells, 
which improves barrier function, hydration, and intercellular lipid production. 
All of these changes not only help the appearance but also result in healthier 
skin. Using chemical exfoliants like AHAs, BHAs, or retinoids makes the daily 
use of broad-spectrum sunscreen even more important. Because the corneum is 
thinner in these skin types, the skin is more sun sensitive.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.396         CHAPTER 20

Retinoids are vitamin A–based 
chemicals that include prescrip-
tion tretinoin or retinoic acid.

Tazarotene, commercially known 
as Tazorac®, is a vitamin A–derived 
topical prescription medication used 
to treat both acne and aging symp-
toms caused by sun damage.

Retinoids

The ﬁrst real science that showed that topical agents could be used to improve 
photo-damaged skin was performed in the 1980s. Women who had been using 
the  prescription  drug  Retin-A®  for  their  acne  noticed  that  their  wrinkles  were 
less noticeable and that their treated skin looked smoother. Studies of this drug 
followed for the treatment of photoaging skin. Retinoids are vitamin A–based 
chemicals that include prescription tretinoin or retinoic acid, better known as 
Retin-A or Renova®, and tazarotene, a chemical cousin of vitamin A, commer-
cially known as Tazorac®.

These  prescription  drug  chemicals  have  been  shown  to  reduce  wrinkles, 
roughness,  solar  freckles,  and  hyperpigmentation  and  generally  improve  the 
skin’s appearance. Renova®, a more moisturizing version of tretinoin, is the ﬁrst 
prescription drug ever approved to treat the symptoms of sun damage.

Histologically,  tretinoin  has  been  shown  to “reorganize”  the  skin,  reestab-
lishing a more normal epidermis, increasing blood vessel formation, increasing 
collagen production, and generally improving the damaged skin.

With these positive changes, there are some side effects including redness, 
irritation,  ﬂaking,  dryness,  and  severe  dehydration.  Sun  exposure  should  be 
avoided because the drug makes the skin more sun sensitive. A broad-spectrum 
sunscreen, as with any skin, is even more important for the patient.

Nonprescription retinoids used in skin care products include retinol and reti-
nyl palmitate, which are other forms of vitamin A. These are good antioxidant 
ingredients, but they do not work by the same mechanism or show the same 
results as tretinoin. Retinol, combined or used with alpha hydroxy acid, has been 
shown to improve sun-damaged skin.

Alpha Hydroxy Acids

Alpha hydroxy acid treatment is probably the most effective tool that the esthe-
tician has to treat the photoaging skin. We have already discussed how alpha 
hydroxy acids affect the skin. Alpha hydroxy as well as beta hydroxy acids have 
a remarkable effect on photoaging. They are an integral part of any program for 
treating photoaged skin (Figure 20-2A through 20-20D).

The terms alpha hydroxy acid and glycolic acid are often used interchange-
ably. However, technically, glycolic acid is an alpha hydroxy acid, and treatments 
may involve both alpha hydroxy and beta hydroxy acids.

Alpha hydroxy acids include glycolic acid, lactic acid, tartaric acid, and malic 
acid. These functional agents can be used in products as an individual acid or in 
special AHA blends. Although very different from retinoids, these agents also help 
“reorganize” the epidermis. Regular use of an 8 to 10 percent alpha hydroxy treat-
ment product with a pH of no less than 3.5 can reduce the appearance of wrin-
kles,  smooth  the  skin  surface,  reduce  uneven  coloring,  and  improve  hydration 
and ﬁrmness. Cell renewal triggers increased intercellular lipid synthesis, resulting 
in  improved  barrier  function,  thus  improving  hydration  and  reducing  sensitiv-
ity. Long-term use results in increased collagen deposition. Again, these changes 
occur with regular, daily applications as described earlier. They do not occur with 
periodic use or an occasional salon AHA treatment without home-care AHA use.

Rules for the Retinoid Client

  1. Tretinoin,  adapalene,  and  tazarotene  and  other  prescribed  retinoids  are 
prescription drugs. The client must follow the advice of the dermatologist 
regarding usage procedures.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      397

B

D

A

C

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-2  A–D, Dramatic improvement is seen in the appearance of this skin treated with alpha hydroxy 
acids, peptides, collagen stimulants, and sunscreen.

  2. Cosmetic and skin care product usage may be affected by the use of reti-
noids. Clients may ﬁnd they are more sensitive to products that they nor-
mally and routinely use. The esthetician needs to help guide the client to 
choose products that can be used with retinoids.

  3. Facial treatments may need to be adapted for the patient using a retinoid. 
This includes discontinuing the use of any chemical or mechanical exfolia-
tion treatment; using gentle, fragrance-free hydrators; and avoiding heat and 
any alcoholic or stimulating skin care products.

  4. Redness and peeling can be normal transitional side effects, particularly when 
ﬁrst using a prescription retinoid. These side effects can be minimized by using 
good hydrators and being careful with the amount and frequency of applica-
tion of the retinoid. Some patients ﬁnd it helpful to “phase in” retinoids, using 
the retinoid every second or third night and slowly switching to every night.
  5. Sun  should  be  completely  avoided  when  using  retinoids.  Deliberate  sun 
exposure is contraindicated and is counterproductive to any therapy for the 
improvement of photo-damaged skin.

  6. Scented and fragranced products, alcohol-based lotions, stripping products, 
abrasive  scrubs,  microdermabrasion,  alpha  hydroxy  or  beta  hydroxy  acid 
products, benzoyl peroxide, sulfur-resorcinol, and other exfoliating agents 
should be avoided on clients using retinoids.




 
 
 
 
398         CHAPTER 20

A

C

B

D

.
c
n
I

,

i

e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-3  A–D, Many clients are concerned about loss of elasticity. This client shows great improvement 
after using alpha hydroxy acids, peptides, collagen stimulants, and sunscreen.

  7. Do not wax clients using retinoids! Electrolysis is usually acceptable after the 

transitional side effects have passed (Figure 20-3A through 20-3D).

Besides typical aging and wrinkles, alpha hydroxy acids can help improve 

hand and foot calluses, general dry and dehydrated skin, and dry body skin.

Stimulation

The circulation of sun-damaged skin is impaired by the malformation of blood 
vessels due to sun damage. Therefore, the skin is not nourished properly through 
normal blood ﬂow. The use of good but gentle massage techniques is helpful 
in  improving  the  circulation.  Massage  also  improves  hydration  and  stimulates 
better product absorption.

Be careful when massaging skin that is being treated with a strong kerato-
lytic such as Retin-A or other retinoids. This skin can be treated with massage, 
but be careful not to overstimulate.

Alpha Hydroxy Home Treatments

Different  products  are  formulated  with  individual  vehicle  ingredients,  release 
symptoms, and different concentrations of alpha hydroxy acid, depending on 




 
 
 
 
The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      399

the type of problem treated. Preparations for acne, oily, and problem skin are 
usually  in  a  gel  form,  so  designed  to  combat  oily  skin.  Many  AHA  products 
designed for oily or acne-prone skin also contain beta hydroxy salicylic acid. 
They can be very helpful when used in conjunction with other acne treatments. 
As a word of caution, be careful when combining peeling agents. Combining 
a  product  containing  glycolic  acid  with  a  second  product  containing  benzoyl 
peroxide,  salicylic  acid,  resorcinol,  sulfur,  or  retinoic  acid  must  be  done  very 
carefully, if at all. If the skin is thin, sensitive, or reactive, using more than one 
keratolytic  peeling  product  may  cause  unwanted  irritation.  Check  the  manu-
facturer’s instructions well before combining home keratolytic treatments. The 
alpha hydroxy solution for oily and acne-prone skin should be applied to the 
face, usually twice daily, under a protective sunscreen moisturizer, or it can be 
coupled with a light, noncomedogenic hydrating product at night. Some com-
panies suggest treatments only once a day at home. This may be advisable for 
more sensitive skin. Always check the manufacturer’s instructions.

Alpha hydroxy products for the body are usually made in lotion form, to be 
applied like a body lotion. These are almost always oil-in-water emulsions and 
sometimes are not designed for facial use. Again, check the instructions.

Alpha hydroxy products for fading hyperpigmentation are in a gel or lotion 
form. The glycolic acid is mixed in the solution with a melanin suppressant, such 
as  hydroquinone  or  another  melanin  suppressant  such  as  magnesium  ascor-
byl phosphate, licorice extract, kojic acid, bearberry extract, or arbutin. Alpha 
hydroxy acid helps remove the buildup of dead cells, which helps the melanin 
suppressant work better and faster. Age spots, sun freckles, pregnancy masks, 
and hyperpigmented areas from acne all can be helped with such a solution. 
As with any treatment for hyperpigmentation, the client should be instructed to 
use a good sunscreen and avoid sun exposure, which, of course, can result in 
recurrence of the hyperpigmentation.

In  the  treatment  of  wrinkles  and  the  appearance  of  sun  damage,  alpha 
hydroxy acid loosens the dead-cell buildup, again helping to make the skin look 
smoother and softer. The appearance of wrinkles can be greatly improved with 
continued use. The products available to help the appearance of aging skin are 
usually in a serum, cream or lotion form. The cream form is for alipidic, dry, 
dehydrated, aging skin. Lotions or serums are more appropriate for combination 
skin showing signs of aging including wrinkles, leathery texture, dull appear-
ance, and uneven surfaces. The cream or lotion is applied under the moisturizer 
or sunscreen and under the night treatment. Most companies recommend twice 
daily application.

Recommending Alpha Hydroxy Home Care

First, as always, carefully evaluate the appearance of the client’s skin. You must 
also assess the client’s current home care. If he or she is currently using home 
care that is inappropriate, such as strong soap for aging skin, this must ﬁrst be 
corrected.  Alpha  hydroxy  treatment  is  most  effective  when  used  with  a  well-
planned general home-care program designed for the skin type and conditions.
Explain  to  your  client  how  alpha  hydroxy  acid  works  on  aging  skin,  and 
stress the importance of the “program.” Best results cannot be expected if the 
client is using a hodgepodge of products along with the alpha hydroxy acid. 
Be careful to ﬁnd out if the client is using other peeling-type products or drugs. 
Heavily scented products or products that are extremely stimulating should also 
be avoided when alpha hydroxy acid is being used. The client should also be 
instructed in the importance of regular use. No product will work if it is sitting in 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.400         CHAPTER 20

Microdermabrasion is a proce-
dure using crystal particles that 
are pressure-sprayed onto the 
skin and then vacuumed. Micro-
dermabrasion is a mechanical 
exfoliation technique that removes 
corneum cells.

the medicine cabinet! Other problems such as hyperpigmented skin or problem 
oily areas should be addressed separately.

Alpha hydroxy acid often produces a mild to moderate tingling sensation 
when applied to the skin. Usually the tingling feeling lasts only 10 or 20 seconds. 
The client should wait for a short amount of time (a few minutes) before apply-
ing  other  hydrating  or  conditioning  products.  When  a  client  ﬁrst  starts  using 
alpha  hydroxy  acid,  some  slight  cosmetic  side  effects  might  be  experienced. 
Rarely, in the case of dry or aging skin, the skin may show some ﬂaking, which 
the client may misunderstand as dehydration. Explain that this is the dead cell 
layer coming off the surface, is a normal occurrence, and can be controlled by 
using the appropriate products along with the alpha hydroxy acid cream.

This is another reason that the “surrounding” products are so important. If 
the client uses the wrong treatment cream or a cleanser that is too harsh, side 
effects will be more intense. The client’s skin may feel “crunchy,” as if it is peel-
ing. Again, this feeling can be alleviated by using a good hydrating ﬂuid. For 
clients who have clog-prone or combination skin, be sure to recommend a non-
comedogenic moisturizer.

If  the  client  experiences  severe  peeling,  instruct  her  or  him  to  call  you. 
Instruct the client to discontinue using the alpha hydroxy solution temporarily 
until the peeling subsides. Then phase in the alpha hydroxy product, starting 
once a day, and eventually work back into twice daily application. In most cli-
ents, no side effects are apparent. The skin appearance just continually improves.
Some clients with extremely thin skin may have problems with waxing. This 
is unusual, but it does occur sometimes. Waxing in these clients, or any other 
procedure that involves removing cells, should be discontinued. Allergic reac-
tions to alpha hydroxy acid are rare, but as with any other cosmetic ingredient, 
allergic  reaction  is  possible.  Allergic  symptoms  are  the  same  as  for  any  other 
reaction. These may include redness, itching, and general irritation. The client 
should, of course, discontinue the treatment.

Treatments with alpha hydroxy acids are also performed in the salon. For 
more information, see Chapter 21, Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures.

Microdermabrasion

Microdermabrasion  is  a  technique  using  small  crystals,  usually  aluminum 
oxide,  to  exfoliate  the  skin  mechanically  (Figure  20-4).  A  microdermabrasion 
machine  uses  pressure  to  spray  the  crystals  onto  the  skin  surface,  physically 
removing dead cells from the stratum corneum. Some companies also sell crys-
tals in creams that can be applied with the hands.

Microdermabrasion is an alternate technique to forms of chemical exfoliation. 
Chemical and mechanical exfoliation should not be combined, because the com-
bination can overexfoliate the skin and damage its barrier function if overused. 
Because  microdermabrasion  is  mechanical,  and  its  frequency  of  application, 
pressure of application, and number of passes (how many times the technique is 
applied to a certain area of skin) can vary with the esthetician’s judgment, it can 
easily be overdone. Be very careful in assessing the skin sensitivity and thickness 
of the individual client before choosing the correct exfoliation technique.

Antioxidant Therapy

There is growing evidence that the use of topical antioxidants reduces the visible 
signs of aging, helps prevent damage due to reactive oxygen species (free radi-
cals), and makes the skin behave in a better way. Skin science researchers now 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      401

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L
e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p
a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 20-4  Microdermabrasion.

know that antioxidants seem to work better when several different antioxidants 
are combined. We know that not all antioxidants work to squelch reactions at all 
levels of the inﬂammation cascade of chemical reactions. These combinations of 
antioxidants are referred to as broad-spectrum antioxidants. There are many 
types of antioxidants, including vitamins like vitamin C as L-ascorbic acid and 
magnesium ascorbyl phosphate (the ester form of vitamin C), and vitamin 
E  as  tocopherol  and  tocopheryl  acetate.  Plant  extract  antioxidants  include 
green tea, white tea, and grapeseed extract (known to be 50 times as strong 
an antioxidant as vitamin C). Superoxide dismutase is an enzyme that helps 
squelch early reactions in the cascade of reactions. Some of the “newest” powerful 
antioxidant ingredients include lichochalcone, resveratrol, alpha lipoic acid, 
idebenone, coffeeberry, and stearyl glycyrrhizinate (derived from licorice).

Antioxidants are believed to work by interfering or stopping reactions within 
the inﬂammation cascade, reducing inﬂammation and production of damaging 
enzymes that can injure or destroy the collagen and elastin ﬁbrils that keep the 
skin  smooth  and  elastic.  There  is  growing  evidence  and  scientiﬁc  acceptance 
that antioxidants are helpful in preventing skin damage and in the treatment of 
photo-damaged skin.

It is not enough simply to include these ingredients in a treatment product. 
The antioxidants must stay stable until they are used on the skin, and they must 
be delivered properly to where they are needed. Most antioxidants are unstable 
and must be formulated correctly so they are protected from oxidation. One sign 
that an antioxidant has been oxidized is that the product turns brown quickly 
when exposed to air, speciﬁcally oxygen.

Microencapsulated delivery systems such as liposomes provide good protec-
tion for the antioxidants. The lipid-based encapsulation protects the antioxidants 
from oxidation, and the lipid “shells” are readily accepted by the intercellular 
cement that comprises the barrier function, thus helping them penetrate more 
easily into the epidermal layers.

Broad-spectrum antioxidants 
are a mix of various antioxidants 
that help neutralize or stop vari-
ous free-radical reactions during 
the inﬂammation cascade.

Vitamin C is a water-soluble 
vitamin essential in the skin for 
helping to neutralize free radicals; 
it is also needed in the production 
of collagen.

L-ascorbic acid is a water-soluble 
form of vitamin C.

Magnesium ascorbyl phosphate 
is a fat-soluble, more stable form 
of vitamin C ester.

Vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin 
that is a strong antioxidant.

Tocopherol is the chemical name 
for vitamin E.

Tocopheryl acetate is a more 
stable form of vitamin E often 
used in skin care products.

Green tea is a very strong 
antioxidant, often used in sooth-
ing, anti-redness, and anti-aging 
products.

White tea is a strong antioxidant 
extract.

Grapeseed extract is a powerful 
antioxidant extract, often used in 
soothing, anti-redness, and anti-
aging products.

Superoxide dismutase is an en-
zyme that helps squelch reactions 
early in the cascade of reactions.

Lichochalcone is a powerful anti-
oxidant derived from licorice root.

Resveratrol is a powerful anti-
oxidant, known for its presence in 
red wine, but derived from plant 
sources for use in skin care.

Alpha lipoic acid is a potent 
antioxidant.

Idebenone is a powerful 
antioxidant.

Coffeeberry extract, a potent 
antioxidant source, comes from 
the berry fruit of the coffee plant.

Stearyl glycyrrhizinate is a 
potent soothing agent antioxidant 
derived from licorice.




 
 
 
 
 
402         CHAPTER 20

Powerful broad-spectrum antioxidant complexes are often manufactured in 
serum  form  and  should  be  applied  before  an  alpha  hydroxy  acid  treatment 
product, sunscreen, or hydrator.

Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4, also 
known as Matrixyl®, is a pep-
tide that stimulates collagen and 
reduces the production of col-
lagenase, the enzyme that breaks 
down collagen in photoaging skin.

Palmitoyl oligopeptide and 
palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7, also 
known as Matrixyl-3000® (an 
updated complex), are a combina-
tion of two different peptides 
that together stimulate collagen, 
ﬁbronectin, and hyaluronic acid 
content in the skin. Palmitoyl 
tetrapeptide-7 also has soothing 
properties. 

Peptides

As we have already discussed in Chapter 10 (Performance Ingredients and Active 
Ingredients), peptides are chains of amino acids that biochemically communi-
cate with the skin, causing changes in behavior that result in improvement in the 
appearance  of  various  esthetic  skin  conditions  (Figure  20-5A  through  20-5D). 
Some of the peptides used in the treatment of aging and photoaging skin are 
as follows:

•  Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4, also known as Matrixyl®, was the ﬁrst peptide to 
be widely used in products for aging skin. It stimulates collagen and reduces 
the  production  of  collagenase,  the  enzyme  that  breaks  down  collagen  in 
photoaging skin.

•  Palmitoyl  oligopeptide  and  palmitoyl  tetrapeptide-7,  also  known  as 
Matrixyl-3000®  (an  updated  complex),  are  a  combination  of  two  different 

A

C

B

D

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-5  A–D, This client was treated with a combination of products containing acetyl hexapeptide-8, lipids, 
daily sunscreen and alpha hydroxy acids for eight weeks to achieve these positive results in smoothness and the 
appearance of wrinkle reduction.




 
 
 
 
The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      403

peptides  that  together  stimulate  collagen,  ﬁbronectin,  and  hyaluronic  acid 
content in the skin. Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7 also has soothing properties. 
•  Acetyl hexapeptide-8, also known as Argireline®, is known as the wrinkle-
relaxing peptide. This peptide works to soften expression lines and is helpful 
in clients who have multiple wrinkles. It works well when used with alpha 
hydroxy serums, which together help reduce wrinkle depth as well as relax 
wrinkle tension. It can also be used in conjunction with the palmitoyl pep-
tides discussed earlier.

•  Acetyl  Dipeptide-2  is  used  in  eye  creams  to  help  reduce  pufﬁness.  Eye 
creams  containing  this  peptide  also  often  contain  the  collagen  stimulant 
peptides, and often ﬂavonoids like hesperidin methyl chalcone and chrysin 
that help fade the appearance of dark circles under the eyes (Figure 20-6A 
through 20-6D).

Peptides are easily combined with other ingredients and can be used in mois-
turizers, serums, and eye creams. They also rarely cause any inﬂammation or 
reactions.  When  used  with  sunscreens,  AHA  products,  and  antioxidants,  they 
produce excellent results in making photoaging skin look smoother, more elastic, 
and younger.

Acetyl hexapeptide-8, also 
known as Argireline®, is known as 
the wrinkle-relaxing peptide. 

Acetyl Dipeptide-2 is a peptide 
used to help reduce pufﬁness.

B

D

A

C

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-6  A–D, Use of specialty eye products (creams or serums) containing a mixture of peptides for ﬁrming 
and reduction of pufﬁness, along with ﬂavonoids to reduce dark circles, can achieve results like these shown over 
four weeks.




 
 
 
 
404         CHAPTER 20

Use of Lipid Products and Hydrators

Hydration  is  very  important  in  improving  the  appearance  of  photo-damaged 
skin. Sun damage results in the skin losing its ability to hold water. Lipid ingredi-
ents, as previously discussed, are helpful in “patching” the “mortar” between the 
cells, helping to boost hydration, ﬁrmness, and smoothness and reduce inﬂam-
mation  potential.  These  lipids  include  phospholipids,  sphingolipids  or  glyco-
sphingolipids (also known as ceramides), cholesterol, and fatty acids.

These lipid complexes can be included in sunscreens, hydrators, specialty 
creams, masks, or serums. They are especially effective as a treatment for dry, 
alipidic,  or  extremely  dry  skin.  The  lipids  work  by  helping  to  hold  essential 
hydration in the epidermis. They should be used with a hydrator to attract water 
to the skin.

Hydration  ingredients  include  butylene  glycol,  hyaluronic  acid  or  sodium 
hyaluronate,  glycerin,  sodium  PCA,  or  sorbitol.  These  ingredients  are  also 
blended into the same products for sun-damaged skin as mentioned earlier.

Be careful to remember the skin type when you are choosing a hydrator or 
other cream. Aging oily or combination skin can become impacted and comedo-
nal from exposure to too many fatty emollients. Gels, liquids, and lotions that are 
especially designed for oily or acne-prone oily skin should be recommended.

Avoidance of Irritation

The symptoms of what we think of as aging are an accumulation of damage to 
skin tissue caused by chronic irritations, such as sun exposure. All clients should 
avoid irritating the skin at any age, but especially in already photo-damaged skin.

A Typical Home-Care Program 
for Photoaging Skin

Clients with photoaging skin should have the entire skin care program explained 
to them in detail. It is important that they understand the function of all prod-
ucts prescribed and why each has importance in the success of their program. 
It  should  be  emphasized  that  for  the  program  to  succeed,  the  client  must  be 
diligent  about  home-care  use  (Figure  20-7A  and  20-7B).  Provide  them  with  a 
step-by-step home-care instruction sheet to follow, and use it to describe each 
step during the consultation.

The Basics of Treating Sun-Damaged Skin

•  Sun exposure must be carefully avoided, especially during the hours between 

10 a.m. and 3 p.m.

•  An SPF 15 (or higher) broad-spectrum sunscreen should be worn on a daily 

basis, incorporated into a day cream or ﬂuid.

•  An 8 to 10 percent alpha hydroxy acid product, with a pH of no less than 3.5, 

should be used daily.

•  A daily stabilized broad-spectrum antioxidant serum applied to the skin will 
help prevent cell damage, and in the long term will help prevent skin break-
down resulting in wrinkles and elastosis.

•  A serum or cream containing peptides, such as palmitoyl pentapeptide-4 (for-
merly called palmitoyl pentapeptide-3), or the newer complex of palmitoyl 
oligopeptide  and  palmitoyl  tetrapeptide-7,  should  be  used  daily.  Collagen 
stimulants such as hydrocotyl (Centella asiatica) and coneﬂower (Echinacea 
purpurea) may also be used, or combined into this type of product. Serums 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.A

B

The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      405

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-7  Clients must take a program approach to achieve global improvement as seen here. This client 
used a home-care product system for six months with peptides, AHAs, lipids, antioxidants, and daily sunscreen.

and creams are now available that contain a blend of liposomed antioxidants, 
collagen stimulants, and peptides.

•  Avoid all irritation and sources of inﬂammation to the skin.
•  Hydration helps improve moisture content in the skin, improving smoothness 

and elasticity.

•  Lipid-based  products  are  especially  effective  for  dry  and  dehydrated  sun-
damaged skin. Lipid products help improve hydration and barrier function.

Clients who are not used to a multi-step program may wish to “phase in” 
the program. This approach sometimes is helpful in getting clients accustomed 
to a home regimen, but you should insist to the client that the whole program 
must be followed to achieve the results they are expecting. In other words, be 
understanding of their need for simplicity, but also make them understand that 
all the products must be used to see the results they want. 

Cleansing  should  be  gentle  and  thorough,  and  the  client  must  avoid  any 
harsh cleanser, including bar soaps, which can be stripping and damaging to the 
barrier function. Cleansing milk or a light, rinseable liquid cleanser is advised. 
This should be followed by a mild nonalcoholic toner, which helps to remove 
cleanser residue and lower the pH of the skin.




 
 
 
 
406         CHAPTER 20

After  cleansing  and  toning,  the  client  should  apply  an  antioxidant  serum. 
Sometimes these will also contain peptides. It is important to follow manufactur-
ers’ instructions because products do vary in ingredients and product form, such 
as a serum versus a lotion.

The client should then apply the alpha hydroxy product, which could be a 
serum, gel, lotion, or cream, depending on the skin type. During the day, this 
product will be followed by an SPF 15 or higher broad-spectrum sunscreen with 
built-in hydrator. For drier skin, make sure the sunscreen contains lipids to help 
support the barrier function and protect against daytime moisture loss. In the 
evening, the same basic steps are followed, but this may vary depending on the 
client’s speciﬁc needs or differences in product type. For example, some clients 
may be able to use an AHA only once a day, depending on climate, skin thin-
ness, or genetic characteristics. Some companies may prefer that the client use 
an AHA at night and an antioxidant during the day. Again, follow the instructions 
of your product manufacturer. In the evening, use a hydrating cream instead of 
sunscreen. Hydrating creams may also contain peptides and antioxidants as well.
Supplemental products, such as eye creams, or specialty serums, such as a 
concentrated lipid serum, also may be advisable depending on the skin type. 
Eye  creams,  normally  used  both  day  and  night,  can  contain  peptides,  lipids, 
antioxidants, bioﬂavonoids, or even low concentrations of alpha hydroxy acid. 
The choices depend on the skin type. Concentrated lipid serums are helpful for 
very dry, wrinkled skin or areas of extreme damage like the neck or wrinkles 
around the mouth or eyes. Lipid serum is applied after all other products, includ-
ing sunscreen, but before makeup application.

Salon Treatment Program

The ﬁrst treatment performed for aging skin should include a thorough analy-
sis of the skin conditions and a complete consultation with the client. At this 
appointment,  you  should  plan  the  client’s  skin  care  program  for  professional 
treatments as well as home care. Many programs begin by treating the skin with 
regular clinical facial treatments, emphasizing moisturization and light stimula-
tion through massage techniques. Design the treatment for the skin type (oily, 
dry, etc.) and, if necessary, perform deep cleansing with extraction for any sun-
damaged skin that is also oily or comedonal.

A good ﬁrst step in skin improvement for sun-damaged and aging skin can 
often be accomplished by performing a series of six professional alpha hydroxy 
acid  treatments.  AHA  exfoliations  are  extremely  helpful  in  treating  the  sun-
damaged skin. After the client has been using 8 to 10 percent AHA home-care 
treatment for at least two weeks, administer 30 percent AHA applications in the 
salon, twice a week for three weeks; follow with weekly treatments if necessary. 
Discontinue  or  temporarily  delay  any  treatment  that  is  irritating  or  produces 
lasting  redness.  Over  the  long  term,  regular  monthly  or  twice-monthly  AHA 
exfoliation treatments are advisable, alternating with hydrating facial treatments. 
Performing a series of AHA treatments near the beginning of the treatment pro-
gram for aging skin helps remove unnecessary surface dead-cell buildup and 
will show quick improvement in the skin texture and leave the skin in better 
shape for other treatments both in the salon and at home.

Microcurrent Treatments

The high-tech microcurrent treatments use extremely small amounts (less than 
400 microamperes) of galvanic current to improve both skin texture and elastic-
ity. Traditional galvanic treatments are up to 20 times the microamperage and 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      407

do not have the same effects on the skin as the lower levels of current used in 
microcurrent treatments.

Microcurrent treatments are ideal for a client who is beginning to think about 
a face lift, but is not quite ready for surgery. Although it is not the same as a 
face lift, microcurrent, applied correctly with speciﬁc patented technology, has 
been shown in university studies to improve elasticity, collagen content, elastin 
content, and blood circulation. Microcurrent stimulates the skin cells, signiﬁcantly 
increasing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by as much as 500 percent in the cells. 
Microcurrent has also been documented to decrease inﬂammation and swelling.
Sometimes referred to as “muscle reeducation,” microcurrent can help tighten 
or relax muscle tissue, depending on the area. The current used in microcurrent 
is so gentle that it does not cause visible muscle contraction. However, when 
administered in the salon correctly in a treatment series, usually two to three 
times a week for 12 treatments, microcurrent can produce great improvement in 
elasticity and contour. 

Microcurrent treatments must be routinely administered after the initial series 
to keep up the results. If the client quits coming for treatments, results will not be 
maintained. This should be explained to the client before ever beginning the series.
It is a great idea to have “before and after” pictures of clients’ results to show 
to other clients considering the treatment. This is true for all types of aging skin 
treatment programs, including AHAs, peptides, and home-care programs. You 
must, however, obtain written permission from the clients whose photographs 
you are presenting.

There are a few contraindications for microcurrent treatment. These are sim-
ilar to those for galvanic current. Patients with heart problems or a pacemaker, 
persons who have seizure disorders, pregnant women, and any client whom you 
feel might have questionable health conditions should not have treatment until 
she or he obtains written permission from their physician.

Well-made microcurrent machines can be expensive. As with all equipment 
and product lines, it is important to check out the qualiﬁcations of the company 
and their training programs.

Light-Emitting Diode Treatments

We  brieﬂy  mentioned  the  use  of  light-emitting  diode  (LED)  treatment  earlier 
in this book when discussing treatments for redness. LED treatment devices 
are fast, ﬂashing lights that emit energy to the skin, modulating cellular activ-
ity.  Hence,  LED  procedures  are  sometimes  referred  to  as  photomodulation. 
LED treatment has been shown to improve redness and stimulate ﬁbroblasts to 
increase collagen content in the skin, resulting in improved smoothness, texture, 
tone, and reduced appearance of ﬁne lines (Figure 20-8).

LED treatments can be helpful in improving skin texture and diffuse redness 
in mild to moderately sun-damaged skin. LED treatments are administered in a 
series of weekly or biweekly sessions and must be followed up to maintain results.
Contraindications for LED include epilepsy and seizure disorders. Other pre-

cautions should be taken, such as having the client wear eye goggles.

Again, carefully shop when purchasing an LED machine. There are differ-
ences among machines. Always work with a reputable manufacturer who can 
answer your many questions and who has documentation of results and safety.

Which Treatment Is Right for My Client?

None of the treatment methods mentioned in this chapter are substitutes for one 
another. You should plan your client’s treatment based on your skin analysis and 

LED treatment emits energy onto 
the skin using fast, ﬂashing light. 
It has been shown to improve 
redness and increase the collagen 
content of skin.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.408         CHAPTER 20

.

D
E
L

t
h
g

i
l

a
t
i
v
e
R
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 20-8  LED treatment has been shown to reduce redness and increase 
collagen content in the skin.

the client’s desires. Many clients use all the methods mentioned. They are all 
different in which signs of aging they improve and treat.

Some  estheticians  tend  to “drop”  good  treatment  techniques,  products,  or 
ingredients because of trends. A new technique comes along, and they forget all 
the advantages of the classic treatment in favor of a new, trendy technique. This 
is not good scientiﬁc protocol. It is important to recognize the beneﬁts or pitfalls 
of any treatment method and adapt the client’s individual program to treat his 
or her speciﬁc needs.

The one rule of caution is not to over-exfoliate the skin. Doing so can cause 
barrier function damage leading to inﬂammation, and the trauma can also cause 
post-inﬂammatory  hyperpigmentation.  Never  combine  exfoliation  procedures 
in the attempt to speed up the treatment results. More is not necessarily better! 

SYMPTOM AND TREATMENT GUIDE

The following is a quick reference guide to examples of which treatments 
and products are more appropriate for speciﬁc photoaging symptoms. Each 
client’s skin, of course, is different, and may require a combination of the 
products and treatment modalities. 

Wrinkles, Rough Textures 

❏  Home Care. Alpha hydroxy acid in the form of a serum is the ﬁrst prior-
ity  to  rid  the  skin  of  excess  dead-cell  buildup.  This  helps  smooth  the 
skin surface, softening rough textures and improving hydration as well 
as minimizing the appearance of the depth of wrinkles, especially ﬁne 
lines. Sunscreen is important for all forms of aging skin symptoms, but 
it is a required accompanying product for the use of any AHA product. 
Creams  or  serums  used  after  the  AHA  serum  application  with  acetyl 
hexapeptide-8 help soften the look of wrinkles, especially facial expres-
sion lines.




 
The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      409

❏  Professional  Treatment.  A  series  of  30  percent  AHA  exfoliation  treatment 
is the ﬁrst treatment priority, since this series signiﬁcantly improves skin 
smoothness as well as improving the absorption and efﬁcacy of home care 
and other professional treatments. Microdermabrasion in a series of treat-
ments  is  an  alternative  to  the  AHA  in-ofﬁce  treatments.  After  the  initial 
series of AHAs, maintenance treatments are needed, and a series of LED 
treatments will help to further reﬁne the skin surface.

Poor Elasticity, Skin Sagging 

❏  Home Care. Alpha hydroxy acid in the form of a serum, followed by a serum 
or  product  with  palmitoyl  pentapeptide-4  or  palmitoyl  oligopeptide  and 
palmitoyl  tetrapeptide-7,  will  help  improve  the  appearance  of  ﬁrmness. 
Antioxidant topicals are also helpful and may be included in the peptide 
serum. Daily sunscreen is a must, as is hydration appropriate for the skin 
type. Collagen stimulants such as hydrocotyl (Centella asiatica) and cone-
ﬂower (Echinacea purpurea) may also be included in the product mix. 

❏  Professional Treatment. A series of 12 microcurrent treatments, administered 
twice a week and followed by regular maintenance microcurrent, will show 
the most improvement quickly. If the skin is severely wrinkled or damaged, 
an AHA series before the microcurrent series is advisable.

Eye Area Photoaging Conditions 

❏  Home Care for Fine Lines and Wrinkles (“Crows Feet). Best choices are a spe-
cialty eye cream containing lipids and palmitoyl peptides for collagen stim-
ulation. A cream with a very low concentration of mild alpha hydroxy acid 
may also be appropriate, or can be alternated.

❏  Home  Care  for  Bags  under  Eyes  and  Eye  Area  Pufﬁness.  Best  choices  are  a 
specialty  eye  product  (cream  or  serum)  containing  ﬂavonoid  hesperidin 
methyl  chalcone  to  help  capillary  leakage  and  acetyl  peptide-2  for  ﬂuid 
dispersion. Many of these products can be coupled with ﬁrming peptide 
ingredients, as well. Cool packs and very light massage can also be helpful.
❏  Home Care for Dark Circles under Eyes. Best choices are a specialty eye prod-
uct  (cream  or  serum)  containing  chrysin  and  hydroxysuccinimide,  which 
help break up and disperse pigments that comprise dark circles.

Hyperpigmentation Treatment

Hyperpigmentation is one of the main symptoms of photoaging. It is also one 
of  the  main  concerns  of  sun-damaged  clients  and  one  of  the  most  difﬁcult 
disorders to manage. We have already discussed in other chapters how hyper-
pigmentation occurs during sun exposure. Long-term sun exposure, as well as 
hormonal activity, particularly in female clients, results in overproductive mela-
nocytes in the skin.

The melanocytes, the cells that produce melanin, are in the lower epider-
mis and upper dermis. They produce melanin when they are stimulated by sun 
exposure, but the melanocytes also can be stimulated by hormones, exposure 
to some chemicals (including overstimulating skin care products), injuries to 
the  skin  (including  laser  surgery  or  some  forms  of  chemical  peeling),  and 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.410         CHAPTER 20

many  forms  of  inﬂammation.  In  some  clients,  melanocytes  may  actually  be 
present  in  lower  areas  of  the  dermis.  These  clients  rarely  are  responsive  to 
treatment.

When stimulated, the melanocytes produce melanin as a protective mecha-
nism. Melanocytes have dendrites, which are small branches on the cells contain-
ing the melanin. The dendrites are “embraced” by the skin cells, which absorb 
the melanin before they drift toward the surface of the skin. This process gives 
the cell a characteristic melanin color, which is seen as hyperpigmentation when 
concentrated areas of cells contain melanin.

Three types of products and therapy are effective in reducing skin pigment: 
chemical exfoliation, melanin-suppressing agents, and sunscreens. Normally, all 
three are used in treating hyperpigmented photo-damaged skin.

Chemical exfoliants include alpha hydroxy acid (usually glycolic or a blend), 
beta hydroxy acid (salicylic acid), or tretinoin (Retin-A or Renova). Use of both 
is not advised, because this may produce unnecessary irritation. Chemical exfoli-
ants remove cells containing melanin, thus helping to fade the skin. They also 
clear hyperkeratinized areas of cell buildup on the skin surface to enable better 
treatment of the skin.

Melanin-suppressing  agents  interfere  with  the  chemical  process  of  mela-
nin production. Many inhibit tyrosinase, an enzyme used to convert the amino 
acid  tyrosine,  which  is  instrumental  in  the  production  of  melanin.  The  only 
FDA-approved skin-lightening agent at the time of this writing is hydroquinone, 
available in over-the-counter products at 2 percent and 4 percent prescription 
strengths.  Other  unapproved  so-called  brightening  ingredients,  which  are  all 
basically  melanin  suppressants,  include  kojic  acid,  arbutin,  asafetida  extract, 
bearberry  extract,  magnesium  ascorbyl  phosphate  (also  an  antioxidant),  and 
azelaic acid. 

Melanin suppressants, particularly hydroquinone, have two drawbacks. Many 
clients are allergic to hydroquinone, and it is a strong oxidant, which means it 
neutralizes and turns darker fairly quickly upon exposure to air (oxygen). It is 
best to patch-test clients for hydroquinone use before dispensing the product. It 
is also advisable to explain that hydroquinone solutions are fairly easily ruined 
and should be kept in a cool, dark place; also, they should always be securely 
closed after each use.

Daily  use  of  broad-spectrum  sunscreens  (as  all  sunscreens  really  should 
be) and avoidance of sun exposure are imperative if the client with hyperpig-
mentation wants to see results. Unfortunately, many of these clients are “sun 
addicted,” and it is hard for them to give up tanning. Nevertheless, the estheti-
cian should insist that for any pigment-evening treatment to work, sun must 
be avoided.

It is important to understand that hyperactive melanocytes do not react only 
to ultraviolet rays. They also react to heat from the infrared rays from the sun, 
and to inﬂammation. No sunscreen available now, or in the foreseeable future, 
can block infrared heat. So, the bottom line is that sun and heat must be avoided 
for these clients. The esthetician is advised to have a thorough consultation with 
each  client  to  explain  all  the  facts  about  hyperpigmentation  treatment  and  to 
provide an informational handout.

Most companies recommend that an AHA product be used before applica-
tion of melanin suppressant and that sunscreen or a night hydrator be used after 
the application. Some companies recommend applying AHA during the day and 
melanin suppressant at night. It is best to check with the individual manufac-
turer and to remember that clients’ skin types vary; twice daily application of 
both treatments may be too much for some clients.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment      411

PREVENTION IS STILL THE BEST 
TREATMENT

Avoiding sun exposure and using sunscreens are still the best and most viable 
treatments for sun damage. Clients should always be instructed in the proper use 
of sunscreens to help prevent this terrible insult to the skin.

IN CONCLUSION

Not long ago, estheticians had little more than good moisturizers to recommend 
to improve the appearance of sun-damaged or aging skin. Now, with the advent 
of both high-tech ingredients and equipment, estheticians can make really mea-
surable  differences  in  making  our  clients’  skin  look  smoother,  healthier,  and 
younger.  Treatments  must  be  carefully  planned  and  consistently  executed  by 
the client. A good and complete home-care program is essential for the results 
we have seen here.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What are some signs of the beginning of sun damage?

  2. Discuss the research on the use of retinoids for photoaging skin.

  3. What would you say when discussing sun damage with a client?

  4. What precautions would you take to avoid overstimulating photoaged skin?

  5. Discuss alpha hydroxy acids and their effect on the appearance of photo-

aged skin.

  6. How does alpha hydroxy acid improve the surface of aging skin?

  7. Explain the treatment for hyperpigmentation. Why is it important to have a 

thorough consultation with the client who is hyperpigmented?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

21

Chemical Peeling 
and Exfoliation 
Procedures

OBJECTIVES . . .

Many different types of peeling and exfoliation treatments 
are available, ranging from brushing treatment and light 
enzyme peels to strong surgical peels that are adminis-
tered by dermatologists and plastic surgeons. This chap-
ter discusses the various types of peeling treatments, both 
cosmetic and medical, and the various conditions that can 
beneﬁt from different types of peeling treatments. This 
chapter is not a substitute for hands-on training in the use 
of superﬁcial salon chemical peelings. The esthetician should 
always receive hands-on training before attempting any of 
the procedures discussed here.

The process of peeling the surface of the skin dates 
back to the nineteenth century in Europe. Chemical peeling 
was actually brought to America by a young esthetician, the 
daughter of a European doctor, who immigrated to America. 
The process of peeling the skin can take place in varying 
degrees, ranging from scrubs to salicylic creams to surgical-
level phenol peeling. Removing cell layers from the surface of 
the skin can be used to treat a variety of both cosmetic and 
medical problems.

The esthetician’s domain is the superﬁcial epidermis. It is 
important to note that the esthetician should not perform 
treatments that involve live layers of the skin. This is medi-
cal peeling and is the domain of the dermatologist or plastic 
surgeon. Removal of dead cells by chemical means is chemical 



     413

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.414         CHAPTER 21

Mechanical exfoliation de-
scribes any process that removes 
dead cells from the skin surface 
by physical means, such as brush-
ing, a granular scrub, or micro-
dermabrasion.

or esthetic exfoliation. The preferred terminology for estheticians is 
exfoliation treatments rather than peels. However, we must be realistic 
and say that both estheticians and consumers alike use these words 
interchangeably.

SURFACE EXFOLIATION

As we have previously discussed in Chapter 10 (Performance Ingredients and 
Active  Ingredients),  there  are  basically  two  types  of  exfoliation  treatments. 
Mechanical  exfoliation  uses  some  method  of  physical  contact  to  literally 
scrape or bump cells off the skin. Granular scrubs, such as honey and almond 
scrubs; preparations with polyethylene granules or jojoba beads; and the use of 
a brushing machine or microdermabrasion with aluminum oxide crystals—these 
are all examples of mechanical peeling treatments. When the granules of these 
products or the bristles of a brushing machine come in contact with the surface 
corneum cells, the movement of the product or the brush literally “bumps off” 
cells from the surface of the corneum.

Many skin care companies include brushing as a standard part of their salon 
treatments. The brushing machine is used over a layer of cleanser or moisturizer 
that helps buffer contact with the skin. The skin should be thoroughly cleansed, 
toned, and steamed before the brushing machine is used. Applying a noncom-
edogenic hydrating ﬂuid before steaming the face is helpful in hydrating the dry 
surface cells and also helps loosen dead-cell buildup on the surface. This makes 
removal of the dead cells much easier, and gentler pressure can be used.
Removing the surface cells helps the skin in the following ways:

  1. The  procedure  helps  remove  uneven  buildup  of  dead  cells,  so  the  skin 

appears much smoother.

  2. It helps clear away dead cells and debris from the pore openings, making 

extraction and other treatment of clogged pores much easier.

  3. When the dead-cell layer is removed, the lower-level cells move to the sur-
face more quickly, thus improving the moisture content of the surface.
  4. Skin tone improves as dark dead cells containing pigment and dull-colored 

keratin are removed.

  5. Because of the increase in cell turnover, the epidermis makes more barrier 

lipids, hence improving hydration and decreasing sensitivity.

  6. Mechanical treatment stimulates blood ﬂow to the surface of the skin.
  7. Removing  the  dry,  dead-cell  buildup  helps  deliver  moisturizers  and  other 

treatment deeper into the epidermis.

All  of  these  advantages  generally  help  smooth  the  skin’s  surface,  which 
makes  makeup  application  more  even.  The  dead  cells  eventually  build  back 
up  on  the  surface,  thus  making  this  procedure  only  a  temporary  appearance 
change. However, regular use of mechanical exfoliators such as granular scrubs 
or  alpha  hydroxy  acid  (AHA)  home  treatment  products  helps  maintain  this 
appearance. Granular scrubs for normal to dry skin are usually recommended 
two to three times per week.

Precautions for Mechanical Treatment

Under  many  circumstances,  mechanical  treatment  is  not  appropriate.  Do  not 
use  brushing  machines,  microdermabrasion,  or  any  harsh  mechanical  peeling 
techniques on the following skin types and conditions:



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      415

  1. Couperose  skin,  or  telangiectatic  skin,  with  many  visible  capillaries  and 
blood  vessels.  The  blood  vessels  in  these  skin  types  are  very  fragile  and 
should not be subject to brushing or suction treatment.

  2. Fragile, thin skin that reddens easily. The epidermis of this skin is consid-
erably  thinner  than  other  skin  types.  Brushing  or  abrasive  treatment  may 
redden and irritate this skin easily.

  3. Older skin that is thin and bruises easily.
  4. Severely sun-damaged skin. This skin also often has many distended capil-

laries and redness.

  5. Skin that is being medically treated with any prescription keratolytic drug, 
including  tretinoin  (retinoic  acid  or  Retin-A®),  azelaic  acid,  adapalene 
(Differin®), alpha hydroxy acid, or ﬂuorouracil (see Chapter 20, The New 
Science of Aging Skin Treatment).

  6. Acne-prone skin types, particularly those with inﬂamed acne, papules, and 

pustules.

  7. Patients  taking  isotretinoin  (Accutane®).  Microdermabrasion  should  be 

avoided for one year after isotretinoin use.

  8. Any skin that is red, irritated, thin, or extremely fair.
  9. Skin that has a history of being easily irritated.

Other Mechanical Exfoliation Techniques

As an alternative to using a brushing machine, the esthetician may choose to use 
a granular scrub, such as honey and almond scrub, after steaming. Apply the 
scrub with your ﬁngertips and gently massage the client’s face in upward, out-
ward circular movements. Do not scrub the face for more than one or two min-
utes. Be extremely gentle with the pressure you apply. For thinner skin types, 
you may want to dilute the scrub with cleanser or moisturizer before applying 
the preparation. This dilution helps provide a buffer between the skin’s surface 
and  the  scrub,  which  cuts  down  on  irritation  potential  and  allows  for  easier 
removal of the product from the skin.

For oilier skins, you can apply a granular scrub made with ﬁne polyethylene 
beads or granules. These preparations often contain a small amount of sulfur or 
salicylic acid as additional chemical exfoliators and antiseptics. These scrubs are 
generally excellent for oily, problem skin and will help clear the surface of dead 
cells and other debris, making extraction easier.

One of the most recent techniques in mechanical exfoliation is the technique 
known as microdermabrasion. This process involves “pressure spraying” alu-
minum oxide (corundum) crystals at the skin with a special closed-loop appara-
tus. The crystals, after hitting the skin and exfoliating dead cells, are then picked 
up by a vacuum attached to the same handheld apparatus. This technique must 
be learned hands-on, under the supervision of an expert in the procedure.

Microdermabrasion is used to treat superﬁcial symptoms of aging, similar to 
those treated with an AHA product and salon exfoliations. It is generally admin-
istered in a series of treatments.

Microdermabrasion is favored by many estheticians because it shows fairly 
quick results in improving skin texture. Microdermabrasion should be used with 
extreme  care,  especially  in  clients  prone  to  hyperpigmentation.  Overuse  can 
cause inﬂammation that results in increased pigmentation in some clients.

Even though alpha hydroxy treatments do seem to produce visible improve-
ments in skin texture, the ongoing and long-range improvements in skin mois-
ture, lipid content, and barrier function are likely due to daily applications of 
AHAs,  which  does  not  happen  with  microdermabrasion.  Microdermabrasion 

Microdermabrasion is a proce-
dure using crystal particles that 
are pressure-sprayed onto the 
skin and then vacuumed. Micro-
dermabrasion is a mechanical 
exfoliation technique that removes 
corneum cells.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.416         CHAPTER 21

Gommages are mechanical 
exfoliation treatments in which a 
parafﬁn-based cream is applied 
to the skin, allowed to dry, and 
then “rolled” off the skin surface, 
removing dead surface cells.

should not be performed with alpha hydroxy treatments, unless the two treat-
ments are spaced well apart. To perform both treatments in the same session 
could certainly result in unwanted inﬂammation and possible barrier function 
damage. Most estheticians recommend that clients not use AHA home products 
for up to two weeks after having had a microdermabrasion treatment.

Home Care Using Mechanical Exfoliation

For clients with dry to normal skin, recommend using a light scrub such as honey 
and almond scrub two or three times per week. The client should apply the scrub 
after cleansing with a milk-type cleanser. Instruct the client to be very gentle with 
the scrub. Home-care scrubs should not be recommended for extremely thin skin 
or skin that is being treated with the therapies already listed in the precautions.

For oily and problem skin, granular scrubs are sometimes recommended on 
a daily or twice-daily basis. This, of course, depends on the skin type, contra-
indications previously discussed, and what other drug or esthetic therapies are 
being used to treat this skin type. Exfoliation and removal of dead cells usually 
are very helpful in treating problem oily and clog-prone skin.

SALON EXFOLIATION TREATMENTS

Salon exfoliation treatments are actually a type of chemical exfoliation, but they 
are extremely gentle. They are sometimes appropriate to use when mechanical 
exfoliation  is  not  appropriate.  These  procedures  involve  the  use  of  enzymes, 
speciﬁcally  proteolytic  enzymes.  Proteolytic  means  “protein  dissolving.”  The 
enzymes work to destroy the keratin in the dead cells on the surface of the skin. 
These are often referred to as enzyme peeling or enzyme treatments.

One  enzyme  often  used  in  these  treatments  is  papain,  which  is  derived 
from the papaya fruit. Papain is also used in meat tenderizer for its ability to 
soften tissue and dissolve protein. In Europe, this type of treatment is known as 
a lysing or lysis. Another biological enzyme often used is pancreatin, which is 
derived from beef by-products.

There are three basic types of proteolytic enzyme peeling. One is a cream 
that is applied to the skin after steaming and initial preparation. This cream con-
tains an enzyme as well as parafﬁn, which dries and forms a hardened crust. The 
cream dries in about 10 minutes and then is massaged or “rolled” off the skin. 
Treatments of this type are sometimes called “vegetal” or “vegetable” peelings or 
gommages. This treatment is actually a combination of enzyme and mechanical 
peeling. The “rolling” provides friction that physically removes dead cells. The 
ﬂakes coming off the skin are not dead cells, but dried parafﬁn. The actual dead 
cells removed are not visible without a microscope. They can also be irritating 
for the skin types listed previously.

The second, and probably more popular, type of enzyme treatment uses a 
powdered form of enzyme. Mixed with warm water immediately before appli-
cation, this treatment stays soft during application and does not dry. It is easily 
removed because it is soft and moist. This type of enzyme treatment generally 
produces a more even peeling of the cell buildup and helps slightly dilate the 
follicle openings, which makes extraction much easier. Brushing the skin may 
miss  some  of  the  cells,  whereas  this  type  of  enzyme  treatment  works  evenly 
across the surface of the skin. Enzyme peelings are often available in varying 
strengths and are suitable for the following conditions:

•  Oily, clogged skin with open and closed comedones and minor acne breakouts.
•  Dry or dehydrated skin with cell buildup, ﬂaking, and tight, dry surface.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      417

•  Dull,  lifeless-looking  skin.  This  skin  condition  actually  has  a  tremendous 
buildup of dead cells that produces a slight gray color on the surface of the 
skin.

•  Skin with multiple milia.
•  Clients who desire a smoother appearance to their skin and a more even sur-

face for makeup application.

A third type of enzyme exfoliating treatment is the fruit enzyme peel. Also 
originally known as the pumpkin peel, these peels are made from fruit enzymes 
and often contain a fruit AHA, primarily lactic acid. The fruit peels now come in 
a variety of “ﬂavors,” often having the exact aroma of the fruit they are named 
for. They are normally used within a facial treatment as the exfoliating phase 
of the treatment. Most come in a cream-type, ready-to-use form. Manufacturer’s 
instructions and strengths vary, so make sure to carefully read instructions.

Enzyme treatments are generally gentle enough to repeat even on a sched-
ule of once every two weeks, although most clients have them with their regular 
monthly facial treatments. Most clients notice immediate softening of the skin 
after the very ﬁrst application of the enzyme. Because enzyme treatment slightly 
dilates the pore openings, which helps with extraction, clients notice that extrac-
tion  is  more  comfortable  and  that  gentler  pressure  may  be  used  to  facilitate 
extraction of the clogged pores, comedones, and other impactions.

Procedure for Powder Enzyme Treatment

Caution:  Always  follow  manufacturer’s  directions  for  using  particular  peeling 
treatments! Failure to follow these instructions may result in skin inﬂammation 
or poor product performance. The following is an example of typical treatment 
with enzymes, but these directions may vary with the manufacturer.

  1. Remove all makeup and cleanse the skin well, using a milk cleanser appro-

priate for the skin type.

  2. Apply a pre-peel lotion, usually furnished by the manufacturer. This solution 
is applied in a similar method as a toner. This solution is normally slightly 
alkaline,  which  helps  remove  excess  oils  on  the  surface  of  the  skin  and 
makes the enzyme achieve better contact with the dead surface cells.
  3. Choose  the  appropriate  strength  of  enzyme  preparation  for  the  particu-
lar skin type, thickness, and condition. Most companies make at least two 
strengths or furnish formulas to dilute the enzyme action of the product.
  4. Mix  the  product  with  warm  water  in  a  small  mixing  cup  or  beaker.  Most 
enzyme treatments have the consistency and thickness of mayonnaise when 
mixed with warm water. Stir the preparation until the treatment is smooth 
and free of powder lumps.

  5. Apply the enzyme to the face with a soft mask brush. Stay clear of the eye 
area and other sensitive areas unless otherwise directed by manufacturer’s 
instructions.

  6. Many companies recommend steaming during the application of the treat-
ment and during treatment setting time. The steam helps keep the treatment 
warm and also helps keep the preparation from drying out on the surface. 
It is important to keep the preparation moist. If enzymes are allowed to dry 
on the face, they can be irritating to the skin and are also hard to remove. 
Allow the treatment to set for about eight minutes. Remove with tepid, damp 
sponges or a damp, soft facial cloth. Be careful to remove the enzyme treat-
ment  thoroughly.  It  is  easy  to  leave  remnants  of  the  peeling,  particularly 
around the perimeter of the face such as under the chin, on the jawline, and 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.418         CHAPTER 21

in front of the ears. This leftover enzyme can be irritating if not removed 
after the appropriate amount of time.

  7. Brushing is not necessary when using an enzyme treatment. In fact, it can 

be irritating. Do not use the brush during an enzyme treatment.

  8. Because of the follicle dilation caused by the enzyme, desincrustation using 
galvanic current is usually not necessary. It can also be irritating to thin, sen-
sitive, or dry skins when combined with enzyme treatment. Excessively oily 
skin,  acne-prone  skin,  and  thick,  oily  skin  with  multiple  comedones  may 
beneﬁt from galvanic desincrustation after an enzyme treatment. Use your 
best judgment and remember, when in doubt, don’t!

  9. Proceed  with  extraction  in  a  normal  manner.  You  will  probably  ﬁnd  that 
you do not have to use nearly as much pressure during extraction. This will 
appeal to the client as well, because treatment is more comfortable.

 10. Apply a toner to lower the pH of the skin immediately after extraction. It is 

important to lower the pH after the enzyme treatment.

 11. Proceed with the rest of treatment as normal. You should not massage the skin 
before applying the enzyme. This may increase irritation potential. Any facial 
waxing should be done toward the end of the treatment session, not before 
the enzyme is applied. The waxing procedure will also physically remove dead 
cells. It is best to perform waxing after the enzyme is removed; or, on sensitive 
skin, suggest that the client make a separate appointment for a different day.
 12. You may ﬁnd that you do not need to use as aggressive a mask as usual after 
an enzyme treatment. Some masks also remove dead-cell buildup. On dry or 
thin skins, apply a gel mask, a cream mask, or simply apply a thick layer of 
hydrating ﬂuid as a mask. These types of masks are nonhardening and are 
easier to remove from sensitive or thin skins.

Most skin care salons charge an additional fee for enzyme treatments. You 
may want to allow clients to try the enzyme treatment once at no charge, so that 
they can see the nice results.

ALPHA HYDROXY AND GLYCOLIC 
PEELING TREATMENTS

Before reading this section, review the section on alpha hydroxy acid in Chapter 
20, The New Science of Aging Skin Treatment. Alpha hydroxy blends or glycolic 
acid are available in a variety of strengths for salon use. The typical concentra-
tion of AHA used in salon treatment is between 15 and 30 percent. Strengths 
higher  than  this  are  usually  used  only  by  physicians.  It  is  strongly  suggested 
that you not experiment with higher percentages of alpha hydroxy acid, unless 
under the supervision of a dermatologist or plastic surgeon.

The Cosmetic Ingredient Review of the Personal Care Products Council (for-
merly called the Cosmetics, Toiletries, and Fragrance Association) has issued a 
recommendation that licensed estheticians use alpha hydroxy acid salon exfolia-
tion products that do not exceed 30 percent concentration and have a pH of 3.0 
or above. Higher concentrations or lower pH can cause irritation.

Before you administer alpha hydroxy acid exfoliation, be sure the client has 
been using an 8 to 10 percent concentration gel, serum, lotion, or cream at home 
for at least two weeks. Home use of the AHA before AHA exfoliation should be 
mandatory because it helps acclimate the skin to higher-strength salon products. 
Failure  to  use  AHA  at  home  as  described  may  result  in  increased  discomfort 
during the procedure and increased chances of redness and irritation after the 
exfoliation treatment.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      419

The standard treatment consists of a 10-minute application of 30 percent, 
pH  3.0  gel.  This  is  administered  twice  a  week  for  three  weeks  for  a  client 
beginning AHA treatments. Maintenance treatments are usually twice a month 
but vary based on client needs, budgets, and sensitivity levels. It is important 
to pay attention to manufacturers’ instructions, which may vary from product 
to product.

Alpha  hydroxy  exfoliation  works  by  dissolving  surface-binding  lipids  that 
hold the cells of the corneum together. AHA treatments can be used to help the 
same conditions listed for enzyme exfoliation but will also improve hyperpig-
mentation, ﬁne lines and wrinkles, and surface roughness. Continual use reﬁnes 
pore appearance and helps achieve even texture and coloration.

Mild alpha hydroxy treatment may be inﬂuenced by the cleansing procedure 
that  takes  place  before  extraction.  The  cleansing  procedure  determines  how 
much surface oil is removed before applying the AHA peeling treatment. The 
following is a typical procedure for AHA treatment, but read the instructions of 
the particular product you are using and follow them.

Procedure for Alpha Hydroxy Acid Exfoliation

  1. Cleanse the skin with a mild cleansing milk, removing makeup.
  2. Apply a compress to the eyes to avoid accidentally spilling the solution into 

the eyes.

  3. Set a timer for ten minutes, or the length of time suggested by the manufac-
turer. Apply the alpha hydroxy acid gel with two cotton swabs held together. 
Begin with the forehead, and apply the gel using small, circular motions with 
the cotton swabs. Proceed to other areas in a precise clockwise pattern. It is 
important to follow a precise pattern to ensure even application of the gel.

The alpha hydroxy treatment is allowed to stay on the skin for the prescribed 
amount of time, as recommended by the manufacturer. A typical time for a low-
strength solution is ten minutes. After ten minutes, remove the gel from the face 
with  cool,  wet  gauze  pads.  Rinse  the  face  well  with  the  wet  gauze.  You  can 
follow this with a cool spray of plain water in an atomizer and another cleanup 
with wet gauze. Finish by applying a sunscreen moisturizer (Figure 21-1).

This  treatment  is  normally  performed  twice  a  week  for  the  ﬁrst  three 
weeks. The pretreatment before application of the AHA gel can inﬂuence the 
strength of the treatment. The strength of the cleansing products used deter-
mines the amount of surface oils and corneum cells removed before applica-
tion of the gel.

You should, during the ﬁrst treatment, cleanse with very mild cleansing milk. 
If the ﬁrst treatment does not produce any redness or irritation, the second treat-
ment can be preceded by a slightly stronger milk cleanser. For the third visit, 
again assuming there is no irritation, you can add a mild toner to complete the 
cleansing. The fourth treatment can be strengthened by using a slightly stron-
ger milk cleanser with a slightly stronger toner. The cleansers and toners used 
should never be extremely strong or alcoholic.

It  is  strongly  recommended  that  a  minimum  of  six  treatments  be  given 
before assessing the results. Results are not particularly dramatic after one treat-
ment. It takes several applications of 30 percent AHA, over several weeks, to see 
appreciable results in many cases (Figure 21-2A and 21-2B).

After the initial treatment, you may decide to repeat the treatment weekly, 
biweekly, or monthly, depending on the results. You should reassess the condi-
tion of the skin after the ﬁrst few applications to determine a further treatment 
course.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.420         CHAPTER 21

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-1  Glycolic acid is applied to the skin of a client who has been us-
ing a lower-strength glycolic treatment product for at least two weeks at home. 
This treatment is applied with cotton swabs and carefully monitored according to 
manufacturer’s directions.

Precautions to Take When Administering 
Alpha Hydroxy Peelings

•  Always  make  sure  the  skin  has  been  pretreated  with  lower-strength  alpha 
hydroxy  acid  at  home  for  at  least  two  weeks  before  administering  salon-
strength treatment. Failure to do this may cause irritation. For instructions on 
home-care AHA treatment, see Chapter 20, The New Science of Aging Skin 
Treatment.

A

B

FIGURE 21-2A AND B  Glycolic treatment is popular for lessening the appearance of facial wrinkles. Shown here 
are before and after photos of the eye area.

.
p
u
o
r
G

l

i

a
c
d
e
M
d
a
r
u
M

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      421

•  Do not use the alpha hydroxy acid treatment if the client is currently using pre-
scription keratolytic drugs including tazarotene (Tazorac®), tretinoin (Retin-A® 
or Renova®), adapalene (Differin®), or azelaic acid (Azelex®), or other prescrip-
tion peeling agents. Treatment with any of these drugs should be discontinued 
for several weeks before using salon AHA exfoliation treatments.

•  Do not use glycolic or alpha hydroxy acid on patients taking Accutane®.
•  Do not administer AHA treatments if the client is under a dermatologist’s care, 
for any skin disorders, without ﬁrst obtaining approval from the dermatologist.
•  Be careful to use eye pads, and avoid getting the alpha hydroxy acid close 

to the eyes.

•  Do not use the peeling gel on a male client immediately after he has shaved. 
It is best to wait several hours after shaving to apply salon AHA treatment.
•  Check with the client before each successive treatment to make sure the client 
has  not  experienced  any  irritation  from  the  previous  treatment.  If  irritation 
developed  after  the  previous  treatment,  do  not  add  pre-cleansing  steps,  as 
discussed earlier. Avoid any area that is peeling, red, or irritated, or wait a few 
days before resuming treatment.

•  Do  not  administer  AHA  treatments  to  any  skin  that  is  already  irritated 
or  inﬂamed.  This  includes  rosacea  ﬂares,  seborrheic  dermatitis,  eczema, 
windburned  or  sunburned  skin,  or  skin  that  is  irritated  from  a  previous 
treatment of any type. Never double-exfoliate skin, or use other keratolyt-
ics at the same time, whether chemical or mechanical. This is especially 
true for microdermabrasion.

•  A  broad-spectrum  sunscreen  of  SPF  15  or  higher,  appropriate  for  the  skin 
type, should be applied after any salon AHA exfoliation treatment and should 
be used daily by the client at home.

•  Do not use AHA treatment or any other form of chemical exfoliation if the 
client has a history of herpes simplex (cold sore) breakouts. Refer the client 
to  his  or  her  doctor  for  prophylactic  treatment  for  herpes  simplex  before 
administering any chemical exfoliation treatments. Always remember, when 
in doubt, don’t!

•  Make sure that the client does not plan on having any direct sun exposure for 
at least a week after the AHA treatment. Fall and winter are good times for 
performing an AHA treatment series because the client should easily be able 
to avoid direct sun exposure.

You should not combine professional alpha hydroxy acid application with 
other  salon  facial  treatments  when  beginning  a  client’s  AHA  treatment  series. 
After  the  initial  series  of  AHA  salon  applications,  you  may  administer  alpha 
hydroxy treatment during facial treatments, depending on the client. As always, 
check  manufacturer’s  instructions  for  instruction  regarding  combining  AHA 
treatment with other types of salon skin care treatments.

The skin should never be exfoliated before AHA application. Avoid pretreat-

ment with any technique or product that is stimulating, heating, or irritating.

AHA treatment with low-strength gel can be administered indeﬁnitely on a 
weekly, biweekly, or monthly basis, depending on the client and the skin type 
(Figure 21-3A and 21-3B).

Using AHA Treatment for Acne

For clients with acne, the AHA treatment procedure is essentially the same as 
we have just discussed. You may notice an apparent increase in slight ﬂaring 
of acne lesions during the ﬁrst few treatments, because AHA is an exfoliating 
treatment and a mild irritant. It is also comedolytic, which means it uncovers 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.422         CHAPTER 21

A

B

.
s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R
n
k
S
d
a
r
u
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

i

FIGURE 21-3A AND B  Routine use of home alpha hydroxy acid products along with a series of AHA profes-
sional treatments can dramatically affect the appearance of wrinkles in aging skin.

closed comedones and loosens open comedones while exfoliating the dead-
cell layer on the surface of the skin (and this layer can be fairly heavy on 
oily, problem skin). Before beginning the treatment, you should explain to 
the client that the skin may seem to get worse before it gets better. Continued 
treatment,  along  with  alternating  extraction  treatments  on  different  days, 
will help loosen the acne impactions (Figure 21-4A and 21-4B, Figure 21-5A 
and 21-5B).

A

B

FIGURE 21-4A AND B  Glycolic treatment can signiﬁcantly improve the appearance of problem and acne–prone 
skin (before and after).

.
p
u
o
r
G

l

i

a
c
d
e
M
d
a
r
u
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
 
 
A

B

Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      423

.
p
u
o
r
G

l

i

a
c
d
e
M
d
a
r
u
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-5A AND B  Treatment at home with alpha hydroxy and beta hydroxy acid, along with professional 
AHA and extraction treatments, can help clear blemishes and improve hyperpigmentation in the skin of color.

Treatment for Hyperpigmented Skin

Again, the treatment method for hyperpigmented skin is essentially the same as 
described earlier. As always, have your client treat his or her skin at home for 
several weeks before starting salon treatment. The client should use home-care 
products that include a melanin suppressant such as hydroquinone, kojic acid, 
magnesium ascorbyl phosphate, arbutin, asafetida extract, or a combination of 
these agents. Premixed solutions are available that include combinations of the 
above with alpha hydroxy acids. The theory here is to remove already stained 
corneum cells while suppressing melanin production in the melanocytes. Need-
less  to  say,  hyperpigmented  clients  should  wear  a  daily  broad-spectrum  sun-
screen of SPF 15 or 30, and they should avoid sun exposure completely. Infrared 
rays, which are not blocked by sunscreen products, cause heat in the skin, which 
stimulates melanin production (Figure 21-6A and 21-6B, Figure 21-7A and 21-7B).

Stronger Alpha Hydroxy Peeling

Stronger solutions are available for salon use, but with added strength comes 
added risk. Some of these treatment products have only 30 percent AHA, but 
their pH is much lower than 3.0 (which is the generally accepted safe pH) and 
therefore  they  are  much  more  acidic.  This  makes  the  treatment  much  more 
aggressive. 




 
 
424         CHAPTER 21

A

B

FIGURE 21-6A AND B  Glycolic treatment can help the appearance of hyperpigmented skin conditions.

A

B

.
s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R
n
k
S
d
a
r
u
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

i

.
s
e
i
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L

i

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R
n
k
S
d
a
r
u
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-7A AND B  Hyperpigmentation can be improved by the daily use of alpha hydroxy acids and 
hydroquinone—and of course, daily use of sunscreen at home—as well as professional AHA treatments in the 
salon or clinic.

These products should be used conservatively, if at all, and should never be 
left on the skin for more than two minutes. The amount of time AHA is allowed 
to contact the skin is directly related to the strength and depth of the treatment. 
Do not experiment! Stick to manufacturer’s directions at all times!

Medical AHA Treatment

Dermatologists  and  plastic  surgeons  can  use  alpha  hydroxy  acid  solutions  in 
concentrations  of  50  to  70  percent.  These  are  medical-grade  strengths  that 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      425

estheticians should never use unless they are working under the direct super-
vision  of  a  dermatologist  or  plastic  surgeon.  High  strengths  are  used  to  treat 
deeper wrinkles, solar lentigines, and actinic keratoses.

STRONGER PEELING TREATMENTS

The treatments we have been discussing, using 20 to 30 percent alpha hydroxy 
acid, are generally very safe and helpful for cosmetic effects. This level of AHA 
is acceptable for almost all skin types and produces a good cosmetic effect with 
a very low amount of potential irritation. One company calls its treatment “rapid 
exfoliation,”  indicating  that  it  is  actually  a “high-tech  exfoliator,”  rather  than  a 
“chemical peel.”

The  stronger  peels  are  of  three  types  and  three  levels.  Surgical  phenol 
peeling is a deep-peeling procedure that should be administered only by a der-
matologist or a plastic surgeon. This procedure involves applying a very strong 
solution of a very strong chemical called phenol. Phenol peeling must be admin-
istered  in  a  doctor’s  ofﬁce  or  surgical  unit.  Phenol,  in  large  amounts,  can  be 
absorbed into the bloodstream and rarely can cause heart ﬂuctuations. The heart 
is monitored during this procedure to ensure safety. The phenol peel penetrates 
the aged, severely wrinkled skin and can also be used to treat skin growths such 
as repeated instances of skin cancers and actinic keratoses (Figure 21–8A and 
21–8B). It may produce hypopigmentation of the skin and a ruddy surface to 
the face (Figure 21–9A and 21–9B). For further information on phenol peeling, 
please read Chapter 22, Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient.

Surgical phenol peeling is a 
very deep-peeling procedure 
performed by a plastic surgeon or 
dermatologist. The peel affects the 
dermis and has considerable risks.

A

k
r
i

K

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

.

D
M

,
h
t
i

m
S

B

FIGURE 21-8  A, Phenol solution is used on the wrinkled lip of this patient. Shown here is the “frosting” effect 
after application of the phenol solution. B, Several months after the peel, the lip is much smoother.

A

B

.

.

D
M

,
n
o
s
E

l

.
L

l

i

n
v
e
M

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-9A AND B 

In-depth phenol peel (before and after).




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
426         CHAPTER 21

Carbon dioxide (CO2) laser is a 
surgical laser used in resurfacing. 
It removes epidermal and dermal 
tissue to treat wrinkles in sun-
damaged skin.

Ablated is a medical term mean-
ing “removed.” Tissue ablated dur-
ing laser resurfacing is removed 
by the laser.

Ablative is a term describing a 
laser that removes tissue.

Medium-depth peels are per-
formed by dermatologists or plas-
tic surgeons. These trichloroacetic 
acid (TCA) peels affect the dermis, 
but not as deeply as phenol.

Superﬁcial peeling affects the 
epidermis and is performed by 
estheticians or physicians. These 
peels include alpha and beta 
hydroxy acids, Jessner’s solution, 
and resorcinol peeling treatments.

Laser resurfacing is the surgical technique of using a laser to reduce wrinkles 
and  imperfections  in  skin  texture.  Laser  resurfacing  uses  a  carbon  dioxide 
(CO2)  laser  to  remove  skin  layers.  In  most  cases,  the  entire  epidermis  and 
some of the dermis is ablated or evaporated through laser application. CO2 and 
erbium lasers are ablative lasers, meaning they remove or destroy tissue. You 
will read more about laser resurfacing in Chapter 22.

Deep  wrinkles  cannot  be  removed  unless  part  of  the  dermis  is  removed. 
Deep wrinkles involve severe damage to the collagen and elastin network, which 
cannot be removed with weaker peeling techniques. Again, all procedures that 
peel  living  tissue  are  the  domain  of  the  dermatologist  or  plastic  surgeon  and 
should never be attempted by estheticians.

Medium-depth peels include 35 to 50 percent trichloroacetic acid, better 
known to the medical community as TCA. Because TCA at this strength pen-
etrates to the layer of the dermis, this procedure should be administered only 
by  a  dermatologist  or  a  plastic  surgeon.  Doctors  sometimes  use  combina-
tions of TCA and glycolic acid, or TCA and Jessner’s solution, to treat deeper 
wrinkles.

Unlike high concentrations of phenol, TCA does not have the potential for 
absorption  into  the  bloodstream.  Lighter  peelings  can  be  given  with  TCA  at 
concentrations of 15 to 35 percent, but they do not have the dramatic results 
of the deeper phenol peels. Some doctors use repeated treatments with these 
smaller concentrations of TCA. In general, the potential for scarring is greater 
with phenol peeling than with TCA.

Some  companies  sell  low-percentage  TCA  to  estheticians,  and  lower  TCA 
strengths (10 to 20 percent) are considered to be superﬁcial peels. That being 
said, this author’s opinion is that TCA belongs in the hands of dermatologists 
and plastic surgeons only. TCA is too unpredictable and is generally beyond the 
scope of esthetic exfoliation.

Superﬁcial peeling is the deepest type of chemical peeling performed by 
estheticians.  Superﬁcial  peelings,  unlike  deep  and  medium  medical  peelings, 
remove only cells from the stratum corneum. These superﬁcial chemical peels 
are helpful for treating small, superﬁcial wrinkles, dark spots, and other forms of 
hyperpigmentation, melasma, and acne-prone skin.

The superﬁcial peel evens the surface skin pigment, smoothes the appear-
ance  of  the  skin,  and  dries  the  surface  of  acne  and  problem  skin.  Like  AHA, 
superﬁcial  peeling  may  also  temporarily  increase  the  amount  of  surface  acne 
lesions because it causes slight follicular inﬂammation that loosens impactions 
in the follicles. In other words, this type of peel may cause acne to get worse 
before it gets better. Superﬁcial peels can be helpful for acne, but they should 
be alternated with routine extraction treatments to remove the debris. This will 
hasten skin clearing 

The chemical most frequently used for superﬁcial peeling is known as Jess-
ner’s solution—a mixture of salicylic acid, resorcinol, lactic acid, and ethanol. 
Some superﬁcial peeling formulas also contain a small amount of phenol, usu-
ally  2  percent,  and  sometimes  sulfur.  Although  Jessner’s  solution  is  a  liquid, 
some cream forms of superﬁcial peels are similar and produce similar effects on 
the skin.

Another superﬁcial peel used by estheticians is the salicylic peel. Most often 
at 20 percent concentration, these peels can be a helpful and safe treatment for 
many esthetic problems including acne, mild hyperpigmentation or uneven mot-
tling, and ﬁne lines and wrinkles. It has an interesting freshening effect on the 
skin’s appearance. With proper training, this liquid exfoliation treatment is a safe 
and effective procedure.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      427

Candidates for Salon Superﬁcial Peelings

Clients  who  have  sun-damaged  skin,  hyperpigmented  skin,  or  other  forms  of 
melasma are the best candidates for superﬁcial peeling. Technically, most adult 
clients can beneﬁt from these peelings because most adults do have some form 
of ﬁne wrinkling or hyperpigmentation.

There  are,  of  course,  many  other  alternatives  for  treating  these  cosmetic 
problems. Alpha hydroxy acid, hydroquinone solutions, or a combination can 
be very effective for many forms of hyperpigmentation. Low-strength AHA peels 
are  also  another  alternative.  Most  estheticians  will  attempt  to  treat  these  cos-
metic conditions with more conservative treatments, such as those listed, before 
resorting to a more intensive superﬁcial chemical peel like Jessner’s.

Make sure that your client has started on home care before administering 
superﬁcial chemical peeling. This pretreatment will ensure that the client’s skin 
is in better shape before using chemical peels. Many estheticians insist that a 
client have facial treatments for a period of time before administering a chemical 
peel. This is not a bad idea, because it allows you to learn about the client, the 
client’s skin, and the client’s needs before using peels.

Many clients call the salon speciﬁcally to ask about chemical peels. Informa-
tion given out over the phone should be minimal, because you have not seen the 
client’s skin. Ask the client to make an appointment for a consultation before you 
issue an opinion about her skin. Many clients have cosmetic problems that can 
be treated by other, simpler methods than chemical peels. Some clients are not 
using proper home care. Good home care and salon care may make the differ-
ence they need and establish a good, healthy program for their skin for a lifetime. 
Chemical peeling should not be looked at as a “magic bullet” for skin problems. 
Every client needs to continually take care of the skin at home on a regular basis.
Other forms of lighter peels, such as enzyme or AHA, may be sufﬁcient for 

treating the client’s problem.

Chemical  peeling  is  probably  the  most  drastic  and  dramatic  treatment 
administered  by  an  esthetician.  Superﬁcial  peeling  has  some  disadvantages 
including discomfort, temporary discolorations, a small risk of allergic reaction, 
a  bad  appearance  to  the  skin  during  the  actual  procedure,  and  a  possibility 
of  hyperpigmentation.  All  of  these  disadvantages  should  be  explained  to  the 
client long before administering the procedure. Clients who agree to have the 
superﬁcial chemical peel should be required to sign a release saying they have 
been informed of all the side effects and discomfort that may be associated with 
chemical peeling. Clients should also be shown pictures taken of clients during 
the peel, so that they can see how they might look.

These  few  paragraphs  are  not  meant  to  discourage  the  use  of  chemical 
peelings. They are meant to clarify that clients do not always fully understand 
chemical peeling or the conditions it is intended to treat. Clients who are not 
familiar with good skin care and do not use a regular skin care program gener-
ally do not have as good or as long-lasting results as clients who have regular 
salon treatments and are good about home care.

You  should  also  get  to  know  a  client’s  personality.  Chemical  peeling  is 
uncomfortable, and during the procedure the skin looks terrible. A client who 
is nervous or who becomes hysterical easily should not have chemical peelings. 
You will save yourself a world of trouble by getting to know your client well 
before performing chemical peeling.

Other clients who should not have chemical peeling are the following:

•  Clients who are pregnant or are lactating.
•  Clients who have a history of heart problems.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.428         CHAPTER 21

•  Clients who have a history of medical problems. These clients should have 
written permission from their physician. Examples of these conditions include, 
but are not limited to, eczema, lupus, seborrheic dermatitis, rosacea, psoriasis, 
bacterial skin infections, mental disorders, extremely sensitive or hyperaller-
gic skin, and other systemic problems. Take a thorough health history, and 
refer the client to a medical doctor if you have any questions.

•  Clients who have a history of fever blisters or herpes simplex, which can be 
stimulated by chemical peeling. Clients should discuss this with a physician. 
Prophylactic  prescription  treatment  can  prevent  ﬂares  that  might  be  stimu-
lated by peeling procedures.

•  Clients using isotretinoin (Accutane®) or other dermatological drugs. Isotretinoin 
should be discontinued for at least 6 to 12 months before peeling treatments.
•  Clients using retinoic acid (Retin-A or Renova), which should be discontinued 

about three months before superﬁcial peeling is administered.
•  Clients who have extremely thin telangiectatic or couperose skin.

THE PRE-PEEL CONSULTATION

At least a week before the peeling is scheduled, the esthetician should have a 
consultation  appointment  with  the  client.  Explain  to  the  client  what  normally 
happens, step-by-step. Make sure the client understands the discomfort and how 
he or she will look during the procedure. Explain that the client should not have 
any sun exposure for eight weeks after peeling and must use a broad-spectrum 
sunscreen  at  all  times.  Clients  who  are  being  treated  for  hyperpigmentation 
should always be especially careful about sun exposure.

Show the client pictures of what a normal peel looks like during the process. 
Take pictures of the client’s skin before and after the procedure. This will allow 
you to show the client the improvement in the skin’s appearance.

Have the client sign a release saying that he or she has been fully informed 
about the possible disadvantages of peeling and the actual procedure that takes 
place.  It  is  very  important  to  be  honest  with  the  client.  Most  companies  that 
manufacture peeling treatments have prepared forms for you to use.

Inform the client that superﬁcial peeling does not do the following:

•  Remove deep wrinkles.
•  Remove scarring or acne pocks.
•  Repair severe sun damage to any appreciable degree.
•  Cause a lifting effect on the skin.

Superﬁcial peeling does do the following:

•  Improve the skin’s texture.
•  Even the coloring.
•  Help lighten hyperpigmentation.
•  Improve ﬁne lines and rough textures.

THE SUPERFICIAL PEELING PROCEDURE
Several different procedures are used for superﬁcial salon chemical peeling, and 
they  vary  according  to  the  manufacturer.  The  following  are  two  examples  of 
typical procedures for liquid and cream peelings. These are meant to serve only 
as  examples.  Always  follow  the  manufacturer’s  directions  for  the  preparation 
you are using. Failure to do so may results in unnecessary inﬂammation, skin 
damage, or poor results.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      429

Liquid Peeling

The liquid type of peeling solution is normally Jessner’s solution. Another is a 
20 percent solution of salicylic acid. Again, be sure to follow any speciﬁc direc-
tions furnished by the manufacturer. You should also have complete hands-on 
training on the treatment before attempting the procedure in the salon! The solu-
tion is applied with cotton swabs to the face. The following procedure is typical:

  1. Complete all the pre-peel consultation procedures discussed.
  2. Remove the client’s makeup thoroughly with a cleansing milk.
  3. Apply a “prep” lotion furnished by the manufacturer. This solution is usually 
acetone, which “defats” the skin surface, removing excess oils and surface 
dead cells for better and more even penetration of the peeling solution.
  4. Turn on a small fan, and place it so it blows gently on the client’s face. Do 
not turn the fan to high speed, because this may blow the liquid. Some com-
panies do not recommend using a fan at all for this reason. Some battery-
operated fans are small enough for clients to hold in their hands.

  5. Put on a pair of latex gloves. Paint the liquid solution onto the client’s face, 
using a large cotton swab. Begin with the forehead and apply the solution 
in  small,  gentle,  circular  motions.  Do  not  apply  pressure  with  the  swab. 
Proceed from the forehead down the cheek and around the face. It is very 
important  that  the  application  be  as  even  as  possible.  Do  not  apply  the 
solution  to  the  lips,  ears,  or  upper  lids.  Lower  lids  may  be  treated,  but  it 
is strongly suggested to stay within one-eighth inch of the lower lid edge. 
Again,  this  depends  on  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations.  The  client 
should keep the eyes shut during the procedure.

  6. Allow  this  coat  to “dry”  for  two  minutes.  If  you  notice  any  white  areas 
forming  on  the  face,  this  is  known  as  frosting.  Frosting  is  caused  by 
keratin protein denaturing due to exposure to the peel chemical, and it 
occurs when the peel is complete. For some clients, frosting occurs after 
one coat; for others, it occurs after two or three coats of solution. If frost-
ing does not occur after the ﬁrst coat, repeat the application procedure 
and wait for another four minutes. Occasionally, some areas of the face 
will frost and others will not. If this happens, reapply the solution to the 
unfrosted areas only.

  7. Apply the solution at four-minute intervals until frosting occurs. Most clients 
require from one to three coats. The solution remains on the face, and the 
client should stay in the salon for about an hour.

The client will feel a strong burning sensation when application starts. The 
intensity of the burning sensation varies with the client. This is the reason for the 
fan, which helps cool the sensation. After about 15 minutes, this burning sensation 
will stop, and the skin feels numb and slightly tingly (Figure 21-10, Figure 21-11A 
through 21-11F).

The Cream Peel

The preparation procedure for a cream peel is the same as for the liquid peel. 
No prep solution is used with the cream peel.

  1. With  gloved  hands,  apply  the  cream  peel  to  the  forehead,  cheeks,  nose, 
chin, and neck and ﬁnish with a very light application to the lower lids using 
a cotton swab. Apply evenly. The face will begin to burn and sting. Again, 
this sensation can be lessened by the use of a fan and usually subsides after 
15 to 20 minutes.

Frosting describes a white ap-
pearance of the skin that appears 
after applying a strong exfoliation 
or peeling substance. It is caused 
by denaturing keratin protein in 
the corneum cells.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.430         CHAPTER 21

A

B

FIGURE 21-10  Application of 
salicylic acid using a large swab.

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-11  A, B This series of photos illustrates exfoliation treatment using 20 percent salicylic acid. Notice 
the frosting on the skin where the treatment has been applied. Before any treatment, cumulative sun damage 
results in uneven pigmentation and hydration.




 
 
 
 
C

D

Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      431

FIGURE 21-11  C, D Note improvement after two treat-
ments, six weeks apart.

F

E

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

A
S
U

,
s
y
h
t
o
S
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 21-11  E, F Temporary hyperpigmentation and discoloration can occur during the ﬁrst one or two weeks 
following salicylic treatment. In this more extreme case, dark splotches exfoliate to reveal smoother texture and tone.




 
 
 
 
 
 
432         CHAPTER 21

  2. You do not have to watch for frosting with this treatment. It happens auto-
matically. There is no need for a second application until the next day. This 
thick treatment stays on the face for 1-1/2 hours. After this time, the cream is 
gently removed with a tongue depressor and then cleansed well with cool, 
wet, cotton compresses.

  3. After removing the treatment, apply the thick moisturizing cream furnished 
in the peeling kit. The client will continue to apply this emollient cream to 
the face at home. The skin should be well lubricated with the emollient at 
all times.

  4. On the second day, the same procedure is repeated in the salon with this 
cream peel. The client continues to keep the skin moist with the emollient 
cream.

Although  these  procedures  sound  fairly  simple,  you  must  be  thoroughly 
trained  and  experienced  to  perform  them  correctly.  You  must  have  hands-on 
training to perform chemical peeling. Do not think you are qualiﬁed simply by 
reading  this  chapter  or  a  manufacturer’s  handbook.  Observe  several  peeling 
procedures before you attempt to perform peeling!

AFTER THE TREATMENT

Immediately after treatment, the skin often looks slightly red and ﬂushed. There 
is often little change during the ﬁrst day. On the second day of either peel, the 
skin becomes tan-looking, sometimes splotchy.

On the third day, the skin becomes very dark and often splotchy and feels 
tight and dry. Peeling begins around the mouth and chin ﬁrst, then the cheeks, 
and then the eyes. The neck and forehead are the last to peel. The skin peels 
usually from the third through the sixth or seventh day. Occasionally, the peeling 
continues for several more days. Warn the client not to pull on the loose skin. 
This can cause infection and possible hyperpigmentation. It is best for the client 
to visit the salon daily for a quick check, and the esthetician can gently peel off 
areas that are ready.

Clients should not wash the face at all during the peeling procedure. They 
may use moisturizer, depending on the manufacturer’s instructions. Cool water 
may be applied, but not cleanser.

Granular scrubs and other keratolytic preparations should be discontinued 
for at least the ﬁrst two weeks after peeling. These include glycolic acid, benzoyl 
peroxide, sulfur, resorcinol, Retin-A, salicylic acid, lactic acid, or any other peel-
ing or exfoliating agent.

The skin should be completely protected with a daily sunscreen for at least 

eight weeks after peeling. Direct sun exposure must be avoided.

REACTIONS TO PEELING

Rarely, a client has an allergic reaction to a chemical peeling. The symptoms may 
include severe itching, swelling, severe redness, and stinging. Refer this client 
to a dermatologist who is familiar with your services, particularly your peeling 
procedures. Normally, a steroid cream is prescribed, which quickly alleviates the 
problem.

Dark skin types sometimes tend to hyperpigment after a peel. Many estheti-
cians will not administer chemical peeling to darker or black skins. If the client 
pulls off skin that is not ready, splotchy hyperpigmentation can occur. Normally 
this fades within a few weeks, as long as the skin is protected with a sunscreen. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Chemical Peeling and Exfoliation Procedures      433

Sometimes you may need to treat the skin with a mild bleaching cream, if the 
hyperpigmentation does not decrease within two or three weeks after peeling.

Your proﬁciency in chemical peeling will grow as you perform more and 
more peelings. This is why it so important for you to be thoroughly trained by 
someone accomplished in the practice of superﬁcial peeling and to observe the 
actual peeling that takes place during the six or seven days after the procedure 
is performed. With this training, you can become proﬁcient at superﬁcial chemical 
peeling.

IN CONCLUSION

Superﬁcial chemical exfoliation procedures are an integral part of the practice 
of esthetics. Medium and deep peel treatments are the domain of the physician. 
Professional exfoliation is very beneﬁcial in helping clients improve the appear-
ance  of  ﬁne  lines,  rough  textures,  hyperpigmentation  issues,  and  photoaging 
conditions. The esthetician must be careful when performing these exfoliation 
procedures  because  they  involve  deﬁnite  contraindications.  Careful  pre-care 
procedures also must be followed for safe treatment as well as good results.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. Discuss the difference between mechanical and chemical peeling.

  2. What is the difference between peeling and exfoliating?

  3. What are some skin conditions that can beneﬁt from enzyme peeling?

  4. What are the differences between deep, medium, and superﬁcial peels?

  5. Discuss the consultation procedures for superﬁcial chemical peeling.

  6. What conditions are not improved by salon superﬁcial peeling?

  7. Discuss the procedures and possible problems associated with salon chemical 

peeling. Why is it so important to receive hands-on training?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

22

Plastic and 
Cosmetic Surgery: 
Treating the Patient

OBJECTIVES . . .

At one time just a few decades ago, only celebrities and the 
wealthy had plastic surgery. Today, it is very accepted and 
almost commonplace for clients to have elective plastic 
surgery performed. In this chapter, we discuss the many types 
of plastic surgery procedures used and common problems of 
the plastic surgery patient. We also discuss treatments for 
preparing the patient for plastic surgery, counseling the plas-
tic surgery patient for referral, and how to treat cosmetic side 
effects of plastic surgery.

Management of postoperative skin care and makeup needs 
by a licensed esthetician can be beneﬁcial to both the surgeon 
and the patient. An esthetician who is well trained and experi-
enced in clinical preoperative and postoperative care can help 
the postoperative patient by providing services in proper skin 
care, moisturization, control and mitigation of erythema and 
milia, camouﬂage makeup instruction for coverage of bruising, 
post-laser erythema, and contouring techniques for dimin-
ishing the look of swelling, not to mention providing health 
education and emotional support. The esthetician can be the 
patient’s “lifeline,” managing problems that may not be patho-
logical but are of great concern to the patient.



     435

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.436         CHAPTER 22

Cosmetic surgery generally 
refers to surgical procedures used 
for cosmetic purposes only.

Rejuvenation surgery is surgery 
intended to correct symptoms of 
aging to make the client appear 
younger.

Reconstructive surgery gener-
ally refers to surgical procedure 
techniques used to correct 
noncosmetic abnormalities such 
as skin cancer removal, surgery 
needed due to accidental injury, 
and other physical deformities.

CONCERNS OF THE PATIENT

Clients  considering  cosmetic  plastic  surgery  often  have  many  questions  and 
concerns  about  the  procedures  and  results.  They  are  often  concerned  about 
the possibility of not looking natural, downtime after surgery, costs, pain, and 
choosing the right surgeon for them. The esthetician is in a unique position to 
help answer some of the client’s questions, offer education resources about cos-
metic surgery, offer reassurance, and refer the client to the appropriate facility 
for surgery. It is often advisable for the client to consult more than one surgeon 
before selecting her doctor. This allows the client or patient to get more than 
one surgeon’s assessment of his or her needs.

Postoperative patients are frequently referred to the esthetician and arrive at 
the esthetician’s clinic or salon very concerned about their immediate appear-
ance. Rarely are these problems pathological; they are usually purely cosmetic 
and self-limiting. However, they are of immediate concern to the patient who 
needs cosmetic help, relief of discomfort, and reassurance to make it through 
the postoperative period.

Psychological Needs

The esthetician can play a signiﬁcant role as a health educator and psychological 
support for the patient. An ear that understands the immediate concerns of the 
patient is sincerely appreciated by the patient. The esthetician should be well 
versed and experienced in postoperative procedures in order to answer basic 
questions regarding cosmetic prognosis.

Proper Esthetician Training

It is vitally important that the esthetician be adequately trained to assist in man-
aging postoperative cosmetic surgery patients. This means that the esthetician 
should  have  hands-on  experience  with  actual  patients  under  the  supervision 
of a cosmetic surgeon, dermatologist, or an experienced postoperative-trained 
esthetician.  Estheticians  should  take  all  the  classes  and  seminars  they  can  on 
postoperative procedures and post-laser esthetic treatment.

PLASTIC SURGERY

Years ago, plastic surgery was considered by many to be a sign of vanity and 
reserved only for the rich and famous. Now plastic surgery is performed daily in 
every major American city. It is no longer considered unacceptable for people 
to want to look better. There are two basic types of plastic surgery—cosmetic 
surgery and reconstructive surgery.

Cosmetic surgery generally refers to surgical procedures used for cosmetic 
purposes only. A subcategory of cosmetic surgery is referred to as rejuvenation 
surgery. This speciﬁcally means that the surgery is intended to correct symp-
toms  of  aging  to  make  the  client  appear  younger.  These  procedures  include 
eyelid,  face,  and  forehead  lifts;  dermabrasion;  chemical  peelings;  liposuction; 
laser resurfacing; collagen injections; and other procedures. Body cosmetic sur-
gery includes body-sculpting contour surgery, body liposuction, tummy tucks, 
and breast augmentation or reduction.

Reconstructive surgery generally refers to surgical techniques used to cor-
rect noncosmetic abnormalities such as skin cancer removal and facial reconstruc-
tion, post-cancer breast reconstructive surgery, surgery needed due to accidental 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      437

injury, and other physical deformities. These surgical procedures are often medi-
cally necessary and in some cases, such as melanoma, can involve treatment for 
serious, life-threatening diseases.

For  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  we  primarily  discuss  facial  cosmetic 

surgery, although we brieﬂy discuss reconstructive surgery.

TYPES OF SURGEONS

Several  different  types  of  physicians  perform  plastic,  reconstructive,  and  cos-
metic surgery. All of these doctors receive four years of medical school train-
ing, followed by an internship and residency that takes four or more years to 
complete. These various specialists are then board certiﬁed by their particular 
specialty associations.

General plastic surgeons perform all types of plastic, reconstructive, and 
cosmetic surgery. They often also perform hand surgery. They perform surgery 
on  all  areas  of  the  face  and  body.  They  are  board  certiﬁed  by  the  American 
Board of Plastic Surgery, which is associated with the American Society of Plastic 
Surgeons (ASPS). 

Facial plastic surgeons specialize in plastic surgery of the face, head, and 
neck. They generally do not perform body surgery. They are usually trained in 
otolaryngology,  the  specialty  area  of  medicine  that  treats  diseases  of  the  ears, 
nose, and throat, and surgery of the head and neck. Their professional associa-
tion  is  called  the  American  Academy  of  Facial  Plastic  and  Reconstructive  Sur-
geons (AAFPRS). The AAFPRS administers a specialty board certiﬁcation for its 
members. Facial plastic surgeons may perform facial cosmetic or reconstructive 
surgery, but they may also perform surgery on the sinuses, ears, nose, and throat.
Ophthalmic  surgeons  are  medical  doctors  who  treat  eye  diseases  and 
perform eye surgery. They perform eyelid surgery, or reconstructive or cosmetic 
surgery involving the eyes.

Dermatological surgeons are dermatologists who also perform plastic or 

cosmetic surgery.

You  should  always  work  with  surgeons  who  are  board  certiﬁed  in  their 

specialty areas.

COMMON TYPES OF COSMETIC 
SURGERY

First, we discuss the various types of facial cosmetic surgery procedures. Each 
of these procedures is divided into several subjects: symptoms of need for plas-
tic  surgery,  discussion  of  the  actual  surgical  procedure,  suggestions  for  pre- 
and post-care treatment (salon treatment and home-care recommendations for 
before and after surgery), makeup needs of the postoperative patient, and long-
term needs of the patient.

Warning:  Do  not  perform  services  on  any  postoperative  patient  until  the 
patient  has  been  released  and  approved  for  esthetic  treatment  by  the  attend-
ing cosmetic surgeon or dermatologist! Treating a patient before or without the 
surgeon’s approval or without proper training is dangerous to the patient and a 
tremendous legal risk for the salon and esthetician.

General plastic surgeons per-
form all types of plastic, recon-
structive, and cosmetic surgery.

Facial plastic surgeons special-
ize in plastic surgery of the face, 
head, and neck.

Ophthalmic surgeons are medi-
cal doctors who treat eye diseases 
and perform eye surgery.

Dermatological surgeons are 
dermatologists who also perform 
plastic or cosmetic surgery.

Rhytidectomy

Rhytidectomy is the medical term for a face lift.

Rhytidectomy is the medical 
term for a face lift.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.438         CHAPTER 22

Sutures are materials used in 
reconnecting areas of surgical 
incisions.

Presurgical  Facial  Characteristics  Presurgical  facial  characteristics  include 
sagging skin with marked lack of elasticity, folds of skin in the jawline and neck 
area,  pronounced  nasolabial  folds,  jowls  in  the  cheek  and  jawline  area,  and 
general lack of skin tone.

Surgical Procedure Incisions are made in front of, or inside, the ears, follow-
ing around the back of the ears, and into the hairline in the back of the head. 
After the incision is made, the underlying muscle structure is surgically altered, 
and excess fat may be removed. In some cases, a small incision may have to be 
made under the chin. After the muscle structure is tightened, the face is literally 
“pulled up,” and excess skin is clipped away. After the excess skin is removed, 
the  skin  is  reconnected  in  the  areas  of  the  incisions  and  sewn  together  with 
materials called sutures (often called “stitches” by laypeople). In some cases, 
surgical staples are used instead of suture material (Figure 22-1A–D).

After  surgery,  the  patient’s  face  is  very  swollen  and  bruised.  The  head  is 
wrapped in gauze dressing to provide support for the surgical area. The patient 

A

C

B

D

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

FIGURE 22-1  A–D, Rhytidectomy, or face lifting, can dramatically improve the appearance of sagging facial skin 
and elastosis. A forehead lift has also been performed on this patient.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      439

is instructed to keep the head elevated for several days, even when sleeping, to 
provide gravity for draining ﬂuids. Skin discolorations, mainly due to bruising, 
are typical after surgery and may last for weeks. Some patients notice numbness 
in certain areas, particularly in front of the ears.

A few days after surgery, the plastic surgeon removes the patient’s sutures 
and dressings. Most patients are pleasantly surprised by how little pain is associ-
ated with rhytidectomy, but any pain they do feel can be managed with medica-
tion. The skin may feel very tight at ﬁrst, but it generally feels better after a few 
weeks when the facial swelling has subsided.

A mid-face lift is a newer procedure that is usually performed at the same 
time as a regular face lift. Classic face lifting concentrates on affecting the jaw-
line and neck. The mid-face lift helps give the patient a more uniform look after 
surgery by altering the contour of the area just under the cheekbones, and it has 
a lifting effect on the nasolabial folds.

The procedure for the mid-face lift involves the surgeon adjusting the muscle 
and  skin  from  the  cheekbone  and  repositioning  the  muscle  in  this  area.  This 
produces a more evenly distributed look to the lift procedure, and in most cases 
it looks more natural and is less likely to look “draped.” Not only are the jawline 
and neck recontoured, but the cheek area is lifted as well. Due to the adjustment 
of muscle and tissue around the cheekbones, a little more downtime and bruis-
ing are associated with mid-face lifting. Most patients, however, are very pleased 
with the results (Figure 22-2A–F).

Pretreatment  for  the  Lift  Patient  The  same  pretreatment  procedures  are 
followed for blepharoplasty, rhytidectomy, and forehead lift. Ideally, treatment 

A

B

Mid-face lift is a surgical pro-
cedure used to lift the middle 
section of the face.

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-2  A–F, This patient had both a face lift and a mid-face lift, upper and lower eyelift, facial liposuc-
tion, and an endoscopic forehead lift. She also had her neck muscles resculpted for a much more youthful look. 
This series of before and afters is a good example of how natural-looking results in facial rejuvenation can be 
achieved with good plastic surgery.




 
 
 
 
440         CHAPTER 22

C

E

D

F

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-2 (continued)

should begin at least three months before surgery. Treatments should be admin-
istered weekly or biweekly for a minimum of six treatments. 

The purpose of these treatments is to thoroughly cleanse the skin, to improve 
circulation through massage and electrical treatment, and to have the skin in the 
best condition possible before surgery. Just like a person in great health recovers 
from any kind of surgery better than an unhealthy person does, skin that is in 
prime condition before surgery most often looks better after surgery than skin 




 
 
 
 
Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      441

that  is  not  well  conditioned.  In  addition,  skin  that  is  in  good  condition  heals 
better and faster.

Before starting the treatment program, you should talk to the client exten-
sively about plans for the surgery, including the dates of the surgery. Plan your 
treatment schedule around the date of the actual surgery. You should explain all 
the beneﬁts of skin treatment in general, as well as how important it is for the 
patient to take perfect care of the skin before and after the surgery, and empha-
size the need for ongoing care after the surgery is completed. Give the client 
realistic expectations of what you will accomplish, and discuss the differences 
between what the surgeon and the esthetician do to improve the appearance of 
the skin and face.

  1. To begin treatment, thoroughly cleanse the face.
  2. Thoroughly examine the face under a magnifying lamp, making notes of all 
problems, especially conditions that will not be improved by plastic surgery 
(e.g., comedones, milia, ﬁne wrinkles, hyperpigmentation, rough, dehydrated 
areas,  etc.).  Type  the  skin  and  write  up  a  detailed  analysis,  as  you  would 
for any new client. Regardless of the surgery, treat the skin as you always 
would for the analyzed condition. Design treatment based on the examina-
tion. Client home care will also be directly related to the analysis, as always.
  3. Begin the procedure by using the steamer on the skin for 8 to 10 minutes. 
During the steam, you can apply an exfoliating treatment if necessary. Scrub 
creams are frequently helpful, provided the skin is suitable for scrubs. Brush-
ing may be used over a layer of hydrating ﬂuid. Instead of mechanical exfoli-
ation, an enzyme treatment may be used. Using hydrating ﬂuid during steam 
can greatly help soften a rough-textured surface. If the skin is oily, apply a 
desincrustant pre-mask to the skin to help soften comedones and sebaceous 
ﬁlaments. Enzyme exfoliation may also be helpful to this type of skin.

  4. After steaming, proceed with galvanic desincrustation (assuming there are 
no contraindications) to all areas with comedones, sebaceous ﬁlaments, or 
other impactions. Oil-dry (alipidic), poreless areas of the skin should not be 
treated with galvanic desincrustation.

  5. Begin extraction of any impacted areas. Be thorough, but do not perform 

more than 10 minutes of extraction in one visit.

  6. After extraction, apply a toner with an antiseptic.
  7. Apply a lightweight, noncomedogenic hydrating ﬂuid to the face, and begin 
a thorough massage appropriate for the skin type. Oily skin should not be 
excessively massaged, nor should areas that are still clogged. A good facial 
massage is excellent for improving the circulation before surgery.

  8. Apply more hydrating ﬂuid, and apply high frequency to the skin with the 

mushroom electrode for two to three minutes.

  9. Apply a mask appropriate for the skin type. You may need to use more than 
one mask, such as a cleansing clay mask for the oily areas and a soft-setting 
gel or cream mask for dry areas. After the setting time has passed, remove 
the mask and apply a moisturizer with sunscreen.

Home Pre-Care The main difference between this home-care procedure and 
that of a regular client is that the client must be diligent about performing home 
care daily. Not enough emphasis can be placed on good, routine home care. You 
should mention that home care may need to be altered after surgery depending 
on the case and the surgeon’s wishes.

Bruising  and  Vitamin  K  Vitamin  K  is  a  fat-soluble  vitamin  necessary  for 
proper clotting of the blood. Topical vitamin K creams are now available. These 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.442         CHAPTER 22

Arnica montana is a homeo-
pathic herb also used to control 
and speed healing from bruising.

are used to treat bruising of all types on all body areas and telangiectasias and 
distended capillaries, and they are also used as a presurgical treatment to help 
prevent and reduce bruising from plastic surgery. These creams are available to 
the esthetician to sell and recommend to their clients.

For two weeks before facial surgery, the vitamin K cream should be applied 
daily or twice daily to all areas that will be affected by bruising during surgery. 
This includes surrounding areas as well as areas where incisions will be made. 
After surgery and with the surgeon’s approval, vitamin K can continue to be used 
in areas of bruising, but it should not be used on incisions until they are com-
pletely healed and the vitamin K cream has been approved for use by the surgeon. 
Arnica  montana  is  a  homeopathic  herb  also  used  to  control  and  speed 
healing from bruising. Arnica is available in both supplemental pill and cream 
or gel topical forms to treat postsurgical bruising. The surgeon will determine 
which bruise treatment is appropriate and preferable.

Postsurgical Skin Care Immediate post-care for the patient is handled by the 
surgeon. The client should check with the surgeon to see when regular home 
care can resume.

After the client receives the surgeon’s approval to continue home care, the 
client should be instructed to be extremely gentle with the skin, being careful not 
to pull on the skin or apply signiﬁcant pressure to the suture areas. Light mas-
sage at home, always using a hydrating ﬂuid, will help dissipate bruising. Instruct 
your client on how to perform light efﬂeurage and tapotement (piano massage) 
to the face nightly.

Post-Care Salon Treatment Never begin treatment of a postsurgical client with-
out the approval of a plastic surgeon. After you have established a good working 
relationship with a plastic surgeon, you should sit down and discuss your mutual 
expectations for post-care of the patients he or she sends you. The plastic surgeon 
may  establish  a  general  set  of  rules  for  administering  postsurgical  treatment  to 
patients. You will both be fully informed of each others’ procedures and precau-
tions.  The  patient  should  not  have  treatment  while  sutures  are  still  in  the  skin, 
unless otherwise directed by the surgeon. Be extremely gentle with all facial pro-
cedures. The client may still be sensitive from the surgery, and you do not want to 
pull on the suture areas or apply ﬁrm pressure, especially immediately after sur-
gery. Generally, salon treatment can resume about two to three weeks after surgery.
The main objectives of post-care are to help improve the circulation, reduce 
swelling,  and  dissipate  any  discolorations  from  bruising.  Long-term  goals  of 
postsurgical  treatment  are  to  improve  the  texture  and  appearance  of  the  sur-
face of the skin, putting the “icing on the cake” by routinely providing care to 
improve the surface appearance.

Assuming the patient has approval from the surgeon, the following is a typi-

cal postsurgical treatment:

  1. Apply liquid cleanser to the face with gloved hands, using very gentle appli-
cation  movements.  Use  very  soft  facial  cloths,  sponges,  or  cotton  pads  to 
remove the cleanser, being careful not to pull on the skin too much.

  2. Apply a light hydrating ﬂuid to the skin and allow it to be steamed for about 
eight minutes. Cool steam is a good choice if the client has redness present.
  3. Remove the hydrating ﬂuid, and examine the skin under a magnifying lamp. 
Check for bruised areas, and look carefully at the suture areas. In general, 
suture areas should be avoided during treatment.

  4. If there is a lot of surface ﬂaking, apply a diluted, nondrying creamy exfo-
liator, such as honey and almond scrub, and gently massage, removing the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      443

scrub with the same careful technique. Avoid using brushing, microderm-
abrasion,  or  suction  immediately  after  surgery.  After  a  rhytidectomy,  wait 
about three months before using these techniques.

  5. Any extraction should be minimal. In general, unless there are large open 

comedones, avoid doing extraction at this time.

  6. Apply a lightweight hydrating ﬂuid and begin a thorough but gentle mas-
sage, using light efﬂuerage and tapotement. Avoid petrissage, rolling, fric-
tion, or any rigorous or stimulating type of massage. Use plenty of hydrating 
ﬂuid to keep the skin slippery during the massage, which also helps to avoid 
excessive pulling. Concentrate on the eyes and neck, using gentle, circular 
efﬂeurage movements and light tapotement.

  7. Apply more hydrating ﬂuid, and apply high frequency with the mushroom 
electrode set at a very low intensity. Move the electrode around the face in 
small, gentle, circular movements for about three to four minutes.

  8. Apply a nonsetting, nonstimulating mask, or apply a thick coat of hydrating 
ﬂuid. Remember that whatever you put on the face must be easy to remove. 
Setting masks and thicker creams may be more difﬁcult to remove, causing 
you to pull on the face more than normal.

  9. After the mask has processed for 10 minutes, wet it well using a spray of cool 
toner to help loosen it for removal. Remove the mask gently by using soft, 
wet facial cloths, sponges, or cotton pads. Apply a moisturizer-protectant with 
sunscreen, as appropriate for the skin type.

 10. Although it is best to avoid makeup immediately after treatment, this may 
be impossible for the plastic surgery patient. Be understanding and help her 
with makeup after treatment. Do not start any “new” treatments on the client 
immediately after surgery. There is a rare possibility of allergic reaction, par-
ticularly with new products that the client has not tried. Do not recommend 
new products for home use at this point. Wait until the healing process is 
further along to start any new procedures.

Makeup  Needs  The  postsurgical  rhytidectomy  patient  will  likely  experience 
extensive bruising. Many patients who undergo extensive presurgical skin care 
at home and in the salon seem to have less bruising, and any bruising seems to 
dissipate faster.

It is a very good idea to plan a presurgery makeup consultation if possible. 
At  this  session,  inform  the  patient  about  what  to  expect  in  terms  of  makeup 
needs during various phases of postoperative healing. The client’s natural skin 
color can be easily and accurately pre-matched for camouﬂage makeup. Some-
times makeup can be harder to match when bruising and redness appears after 
surgery.

Bruises  are  the  main  problem  immediately  after  surgery.  As  soon  as  the 
surgeon approves, the esthetician may help the client with camouﬂage makeup 
for the bruising. You should help the client select a heavy-coverage camouﬂage 
makeup to help conceal the bruises. The bruising usually occurs under the eyes, 
on the lids, in a half-moon pattern on the upper cheeks, in front of the ears, and 
sometimes along the jawline and neck.

Prepare the skin in the normal manner. A makeup toner is a colored liquid 
or  cream  foundation  that  is  used  to  neutralize  unnatural  skin  colors  such  as 
bruising  or  redness.  Yellow  toner  may  help  conceal  purple  bruises.  You  may 
wish to apply a layer of amber or yellow toner before applying the regular cam-
ouﬂage makeup. Green toner is often used to neutralize redness before applying 
regular foundation.

Using  a  latex  makeup  sponge,  apply  the  coverage  makeup  with  dabbing 
movements.  Blend  in  the  edges  with  the  client’s  normal  foundation.  As  the 

Makeup toner is a colored liquid 
or cream foundation that is used 
to neutralize unnatural skin colors 
such as bruising or redness.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.444         CHAPTER 22

Blepharoplasty is the surgical 
procedure for “lifting” the eyes 
and removing excess skin from 
the eye area.

Forehead lift is a surgical proce-
dure that helps correct elastosis of 
the forehead and lift the brows.

Endoscopic forehead lifting is a 
surgical procedure used to lift the 
forehead area by working from 
small incisions made farther back 
into the scalp.

patient heals, bruises will start to change color as the blood is absorbed by the 
body. Bruising also tends to shift with gravity—that is, bruises that start on the 
jawline may seem to move slowly down the neck and décolleté, and occasion-
ally  onto  the  chest.  During  this  time,  the  bruising  may  vary  in  color,  ranging 
from normal black-purple to yellow or green. Apply the proper color of toner 
to help neutralize the colors.

After  the  bruising  has  totally  subsided  and  the  suture  lines  have  healed 
completely, have a second makeup lesson with the client and teach her to cover 
the incision scars. Work with her hairstylist to establish a good hairstyle that will 
help conceal the scars from the incisions. This is particularly necessary if there 
are scars in front of the ears. Occasionally, a plastic surgery patient experiences 
a small amount of hair loss in the surgical area, and sometimes hair areas from 
above the ears end up in back of the ears. Again, the skills of a good hairstylist 
are very important.

Within a few months of surgery, after all swelling has subsided, the client 
should have a new makeup lesson. Teach her how best to complement her new 
look, emphasizing the new contours created by the surgeon.

Long-Term Needs The main long-term need is great skin care. Clients often 
are interested in new products and treatments to improve the look created by 
the surgery. Most patients are very interested in protecting their “investment” by 
taking good care of their skin.

Blepharoplasty

Blepharoplasty is the surgical procedure for “lifting” the eyes and removing 
excess skin from the eye area.

Presurgical Facial Characteristics These characteristics include pufﬁness, bags 
under the eyes, and drooping or ﬂapping upper lids. Sometimes the drooping of 
the upper lids is so dramatic that it actually interferes with the patient’s vision.

Surgical Procedure The patient is anesthetized or sedated. Incisions are made 
in the normal fold of the upper lid, and excess skin is trimmed away. The suture 
line is made in the actual fold of the lid, rendering it practically invisible when 
it heals.

Lower lids are corrected by making an incision in the lower lash line. The 
fat pocket in a “bag” is removed, and, again, the excess skin is trimmed away 
and sutured along the lower lash line. Newer procedures now often allow the 
lower lid to be corrected from the inside of the lid, completely eliminating out-
side incisions.

The brows are lifted by making an incision in the lower part of the browline. 
Excess skin and fat are removed from this area as well. More and more patients 
are having a forehead lift at the same time as their eyes are corrected. Much 
of the sagging of the upper lid may be attributed to elastosis in the forehead. 
In a forehead lift, an incision is made about an inch back into the hairline. The 
excess  skin  is  removed  from  the  hairline  incision,  simultaneously  lifting  the 
brow area, making the upper lids more visible, and helping the eye areas look 
younger. Forehead lifts may be a problem in persons with extremely high fore-
heads or in men who have receding hairlines or male pattern baldness, because 
the scars will not be concealable (Figure 22-3A–D).

Endoscopic  forehead  lifting  is  a  newer  procedure  in  which  small  inci-
sions are made several inches back into the scalp and special suture materials are 
attached to the forehead; essentially, the forehead is pulled up using these special 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      445

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 22-3  Blepharoplasty, or eyelid surgery, can help signiﬁcantly restructure the eye contours, achieving a 
more alert, youthful look.

suture “cords.” The suture material is secured. The advantage to this procedure is 
that the hairline is not directly adjusted and there is no suture scar in the forehead 
hairline, as there is in a traditional forehead lift. The only different possible side 
effect of endoscopic forehead lifting is numbness in the area of the incisions in 
the mid-scalp. This numbness usually subsides over time (Figure 22-4).

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-4  This patient had an endoscopic forehead lift, with a blepharoplasty (eyelift), achieving more 
youthful contours in both the forehead and eye areas. Notice how much more open her eyes appear.




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
446         CHAPTER 22

Thread lifting is a less invasive 
procedure for lifting the skin of 
the cheeks and jawline.

Pretreatment The same basic procedure is followed as outlined earlier in the 
pretreatment section for rhytidectomy.

Home Pre-Care Use the same procedures as for rhytidectomy patients.

Postsurgical Skin Care Follow the same post-treatment recommendations as for 
post-rhytidectomy patients. Mild massage of the lids using a gentle fragrance-free 
massage ﬂuid, after they have healed and with the surgeon’s approval, may help 
dissipate discoloration from bruising and swelling. Makeup needs are the same.

A  patient  may  occasionally  choose  to  have  only  a  forehead  and  eyelift, 
without a general face lift. Although this is sometimes appropriate, particularly 
in  young  individuals  who  have  only  eyelid  drooping  and  pufﬁness,  in  most 
cases  general  face  lifting  is  also  necessary.  Most  plastic  surgeons  encourage 
these clients to proceed with face lifting at the same time as the corrective pro-
cedure for the eyes.

Quick Face-Lifting and Mini-Lifts A number of lifting surgical procedures 
are less involved than the classic face-lifting surgeries. Sometimes referred to as 
mini-lifts, these procedures may lift only the skin and not the muscle. They have 
short-term results, but generally are not as effective and do not last nearly as 
long as a classic face lift.

The advantages of these types of procedures are that they are less invasive; 
require very little downtime; are less expensive; and are quick, usually in-ofﬁce 
procedures. The disadvantages are that the procedure does not alter the muscles 
of the face, which normally needs recontouring in aged skin, and the results are 
relatively short term. Some of these procedures also do not remove the excess skin.

“Thread  Lifting”  Thread  lifting  is  a  less  invasive  procedure  for  lifting  the 
skin  of  the  cheeks  and  jawline  and  is  sometimes  used  for  the  eye  area.  This 
procedure uses a needle to insert a barbed thread or suture into the skin or the 
fatty layer under the skin of the treated area. The barbs “anchor” the skin tissue, 
allowing  the  doctor  to “pull  up”  the  skin  and  attach  it  to  a  hidden  base  area 
with a suture. The “gathered” skin is not removed, as it would be in a classic 
rhytidectomy.

A number of problems have been documented with these procedures. They 
include broken threads, threads visible through the skin, and bumps and ridges 
from thread sutures that are too close to the skin surface.

Rhinoplasty

Rhinoplasty is the term for surgically altering the nose. Many clients of all ages 
request this procedure, which is commonly called a nose job. In an older indi-
vidual, a rhinoplasty may make the entire face look younger, particularly if the 
nose is “drooping.”

Presurgical Facial Characteristics People undergoing the rhinoplasty pro-
cedure  have  various  esthetic  and  medical  conditions  affecting  the  nose.  The 
nose  may  be  crooked,  too  long,  too  short,  upturned,  or  drooping.  In  many 
cases,  rhinoplasty  is  medically  necessary  to  correct  internal  blockages  of  the 
breathing  passages  caused  by  chronic  sinus  problems  or  a  deviated  septum 
(Figure 22-5A–D).

Surgical Procedure An incision is made inside the nostrils. The bones of the 
nose are reshaped using special surgical tools. The nose is then “redraped” over 
the  new  bone  structure.  Occasionally,  excess  skin  and  cartilage  are  removed, 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      447

B

D

A

C

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

,
s
e
n
o
J

.

A
k
e
r
e
D
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-5  A–D, These views feature the patient before and after a rhinoplasty. Note the reduction of the 
nasal bone protrusion, the straightening of the nostrils, and the softer look of the face in general after surgery.

and any internal problem affecting breathing is corrected. After surgery, a splint 
is placed on the nose; the splint is removed after a few days. The nose is quite 
swollen immediately after the surgery. Swelling may last for weeks after surgery, 
and results cannot be assessed until the swelling has completely subsided.




 
 
 
 
448         CHAPTER 22

Pretreatment In the salon, the follicles of the nose should be cleaned routinely 
before surgery. It is advisable for the client to have about six weekly or biweekly 
treatments, concentrating on deep cleansing as well as general skin care. The 
same procedure should be followed as for rhytidectomy, outlined earlier in this 
chapter. If the general skin of the face is in excellent shape, the skin in general 
will be in better condition for healing.

Home  Pre-Care  Again,  the  procedure  is  the  same  used  for  rhytidectomy 
patients. You may recommend that the client apply a deep-cleansing mask to 
the  nose;  this  treatment  is  especially  advisable  for  clients  with  extremely  oily 
skin and many clogged follicles on the nose.

Postsurgical  Skin  Care  You  must  be  extremely  careful  with  treatment  of 
the  nose  for  several  months  after  surgery.  Remember,  the  bones  have  been 
reshaped,  and  no  pressure  should  be  applied.  This  is  particularly  important 
regarding extraction. Essentially, no extraction on the nose or on surrounding 
tissue should take place for several months after surgery.

In place of extraction, you may use enzyme treatment on the nose to help 
remove  excess  cell  buildup.  Comedones  on  the  nose  may  be  increased  after 
surgery due to trauma, because of surgical dressings, and because cleaning the 
nose  may  be  uncomfortable  for  the  client.  Use  of  enzyme  peelings  or  desin-
crustant pre-masks on the nose will help soften pore accumulations

If this treatment is followed by clay-based deep-cleansing masks, improve-
ment may be obtained without extraction on the nose area. The tissue around 
the nose and upper cheeks should be treated in the same manner. Use “wet” 
treatments—do not apply treatments that need to be rubbed or lifted off. Stick 
to ﬂuid-type treatments that can be removed easily. Clay-based masks should be 
thoroughly moistened before removal. After the clay mask dries, spray it with a 
cold spray of diluted toner to loosen and wet it before removal.

You may notice that the client is uncomfortable, even during massage and 
basic cleansing. Be very gentle when cleansing the nose area, and avoid any 
movements that pull upward on the nose.

Avoid the use of brushing or suction on the nose area. Galvanic desincrusta-

tion can be beneﬁcial, but be careful with the amount of pressure used.

Nightly  use  of  an  alpha  hydroxy,  mild  salicylic  gel,  or  mild  (2.5  percent) 
benzoyl peroxide gel on the nose may help loosen and reduce clogged follicles, 
especially while the nose is healing and extraction is not appropriate. As with all 
postop procedures, this treatment should be approved by the surgeon.

Makeup Needs Clients may need help with contouring makeup to minimize 
the  appearance  of  nose  swelling,  particularly  during  the  ﬁrst  few  weeks  after 
surgery. Bruising of the eyes and cheeks may occur. Use the same procedures 
outlined earlier in this chapter to help the client cover these areas.

Long-Term Needs After several months have passed, you may proceed with 
extraction, being very careful and gentle. The client may need frequent treat-
ments to help with clogged pores, especially while extraction is being avoided.

Dermabrasion

Dermabrasion is the technique 
of reducing acne scarring; scar tis-
sue; and, in some cases, wrinkles.

Dermabrasion is the technique of reducing acne scarring; scar tissue; and, in 
some cases, wrinkles (Figure 22-6A–D).

Presurgical  Facial  Characteristics  These  characteristics  are  acne  scarring, 
“icepick” scarring, “pock” marks from acne, hypertrophic (raised) scarring, and 
wrinkles in limited areas such as around the mouth.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      449

A

B

C

D

.

.

D
M

,
h
t
i

m
S
k
r
i

K
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-6  A, Acne scarring in the cheek of this former acne patient. B, After dermabrasion, the cheek area is 
much smoother. C, This patient needed both dermabrasion and revision of this large surgical scar. D, Notice how 
much smoother the scar appears.




 
 
450         CHAPTER 22

Surgical Procedure The patient is anesthetized or sedated. The surgeon uses 
a rotating attachment that is similar to an esthetician’s electric brush, except the 
attachment is an abrasive steel instrument. The skin is literally “sanded,” and the 
tissue is “planed” to a low level, helping to smooth out imperfections.

Generally, only the areas affected by the scarring are treated. Although the 
treatment sounds painful, most patients are surprised at how little pain is involved.

Pretreatment This procedure probably requires the most intensive preopera-
tive and postoperative salon treatment. Many dermabrasion patients are present 
or former acne sufferers who often still have very oily, problem skin. If the acne 
has been or is cystic, the client should be seen by a dermatologist for treatment 
before surgery. It is vital to be sure that acne is not recurring before performing 
surgery. If the surgery is performed while cysts are still developing, the patient 
may risk more scarring after surgery.

Assuming the client has completed any dermatological treatment, treat the client 
as you would any client with acne or oily skin—by using deep-cleansing treatments 
routinely in the salon before the surgery. Frequent treatment, weekly or biweekly, 
before surgery is usually necessary. Follow the treatment program outlined in 
Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthetician. The ultimate goal is to have the skin com-
pletely clear, with oiliness under control, and as clean as possible before surgery.

Home Pre-Care Again, follow the procedures outlined in Chapters 15 and 16 
on  acne  and  comedogenicity.  The  client  should  use  completely  noncomedo-
genic products at home. Keratolytics such as salicylic acid, resorcinol, sulfur, gly-
colic acid, and benzoyl peroxide are useful before surgery. Due to the nature of 
the dermabrasion procedure, keratolytics must be discontinued after the surgery 
until otherwise advised by the plastic surgeon or dermatologist.

Postsurgical Skin Care During the dermabrasion procedure, the skin is trau-
matized, and this often results in multiple milia development. Sometimes dozens 
and dozens of milia appear after a dermabrasion. After the surgeon has approved 
your treatment of the skin, you may begin treatment of the milia. A great deal 
of redness also is usually present. Normally, treatment in the salon may resume 
three  to  four  weeks  after  surgery.  The  following  is  a  suggested  treatment  for 
post-dermabrasion clients with multiple milia:

  1. Cleanse the face thoroughly with cleansing milk.
  2. Steam the face with lukewarm steam over a layer of desincrustant pre-mask 
or solution. Do not use brushing, enzymes, or suction on the skin at this time.
  3. Using a sterile lancet, begin extraction of the milia, which are usually very 
soft  and  easily  removed.  Do  not  perform  this  procedure  unless  you  have 
been thoroughly trained in extraction of milia! Extract for only a few min-
utes, and discontinue immediately if redness seems to worsen. The skin is 
still erythemic from the surgery. You must be very careful not to traumatize 
the skin.

  4. After extraction, spray the skin with an antiseptic toner solution.
  5. Apply cold compresses to the extracted area. Keep them in place for 15 to 

20 minutes.

  6. Do not apply tightening or abrasive masks to freshly dermabraded skin. The 

skin has already been exfoliated through the surgical procedure.

  7. After compresses have been on the face for 15 to 20 minutes, remove them 

and apply a noncomedogenic moisturizer-protectant sunscreen.

Treatment for the milia may take several weeks. The client should visit for 

treatment either weekly or biweekly.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      451

Postsurgical Home Care Advise the client to use a rinseable cleanser, a mild 
toner, a protectant sunscreen, and a night hydrating ﬂuid. Remember, you are 
still dealing with oily skin, but this oily skin has been severely exfoliated. Avoid 
the use of any keratolytic or peeling agents for at least the ﬁrst 8 or 10 weeks, 
depending  on  the  surgeon’s  recommendations.  All  home  care  should  still  be 
completely noncomedogenic, as it should be for any oily skin. Before the surgical 
procedure, explain the differences in home care to the client so that he or she can 
anticipate and understand the need for the change of products.

Makeup  Needs  The  client  will  need  help  in  concealing  the  redness  caused 
by surgery. Using a green-colored toner and beige-based makeup is helpful in 
concealing the redness in the areas treated. The client’s normal makeup can be 
blended into the outer nontreated areas. Remember to keep all makeup prod-
ucts noncomedogenic!

Long-Term  Needs  After  the  initial  post-treatment  is  completed,  the  milia 
have subsided, and the redness has diminished, the client generally has much 
smoother skin. The client should have a makeup lesson to learn how best to 
complement the change in skin texture. The skin normally still has oily tenden-
cies, and treatment should be adapted to the current conditions of the skin four 
to six months after surgery. At this time, it may be appropriate to return to the 
keratolytic treatments previously used.

Chemical Peeling

We have already discussed types of surgical chemical peeling. Here we discuss only 
phenol-type peeling treatments administered by plastic surgeons or dermatologists.

Presurgical  Facial  Characteristics  These  characteristics  include  multiple 
deep wrinkles and superﬁcial lines in the areas to be treated. Treatment may 
be isolated to one or two areas, such as around the mouth. Many clients seek 
information about chemical peeling for acne scarring, but dermabrasion is the 
most commonly used procedure for acne scarring. Chemical peeling can also 
be used for medicinal purposes to treat recurring skin cancers and precancers.

Surgical Procedure After sedating the patient, the plastic surgeon paints the 
affected areas of the face with a phenol solution. The patient is closely moni-
tored.  The  face  may  or  may  not  be  taped  with  adhesive-like  tape  strips.  The 
tape, if used, is removed within a few days of the procedure. The skin looks very 
red and scabbed at this point. Patient discomfort is common and is controlled 
by prescribed medication. The doctor often recommends a special ointment to 
keep the skin lubricated at this point.

Pretreatment Salon pretreatment should begin about 12 weeks before the treat-
ment. Treatment every two weeks is typical. Several layers of skin are actually 
“burned off” during phenol peeling. The main reason for treatment is to have the 
skin in the best shape possible before surgery. Postoperative care, and particularly 
makeup, is often more important in the patient who has undergone phenol peeling.

Home Pre-Care This procedure is designed for the sun-damaged, but sensi-
tive skin.

Postsurgical  Skin  Care  Extensive  redness  is  typical  for  several  weeks  after 
chemical phenol peeling. Treatment should not begin in the salon until approved 
by  the  surgeon,  usually  about  three  weeks  after  surgery.  All  keratolytic  and 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.452         CHAPTER 22

exfoliating treatments should be completely avoided, unless otherwise recom-
mended by the surgeon.

Use an extremely gentle, soothing treatment. Avoid using any scrubs, peels, 
or stimulating treatment. Cool aloe compresses are often used as a mask. The 
primary purpose of esthetic treatment for postoperative peel patients is to help 
with redness. Efﬂeurage and very light tapotement are the only massage move-
ments that should be used. Masks should be gels or liquid hydrating treatments 
that do not tighten and can be easily removed. Milia may form during healing, 
as  with  dermabrasion,  but  they  are  usually  not  as  severe.  Patients  who  have 
received chemical peeling often need more emotional support than other plastic 
surgery patients. The skin may be red for weeks after surgery, and hypopigmen-
tation is sometimes a side effect. The skin may appear grainy, and pores may 
appear larger than before surgery. The client will need esthetic help to minimize 
these problems with proper skin care or makeup.

See the upcoming section for step-by-step treatment for post-laser patients.

Post-Home  Care  The  client,  with  the  surgeon’s  approval,  should  use  very 
mild cleansers, usually milks or liquid rinseable cleansers followed by a mild, 
nonalcoholic toner. Sunscreen must be used. Skin often no longer tans after a 
chemical peel, making routine use of sunscreen a must. Hydrating products that 
are fragrance-free are the best bet. Lipid-infused moisturizers help restore barrier 
function and may help with both dryness and redness.

Creams  with  soothing  ingredients  such  as  dipotassium  glycyrrhizinate,  sea 
whip,  green  tea  extract,  bisabolol,  or  soothing  peptides  help  minimize  redness. 
The client, again, should avoid scrubs or any sort of peeling or exfoliating products.
Home  care  for  post-chemical  peel  patients  is  similar  to  that  for  post-laser 
patients. See the upcoming section on post-laser home care for more information.

Makeup Needs Plastic surgeons frequently refer chemical peel patients for makeup 
lessons to help conceal the redness after a chemical peel and to help the patient 
conceal any lines of demarcation that may be present as a result of the peel treat-
ment. Application of a green-colored toner after proper skin preparation will help 
neutralize redness. Then apply a liquid foundation, carefully matching the patient’s 
neck color. In some cases, cream makeup may provide better coverage, but liquid 
makeup generally looks more natural if it is feasible to cover the skin with a liquid. 
Teach the client to carefully blend in any lines of demarcation, such as darker areas 
that have not been treated by the chemical peel. Makeup designs that focus atten-
tion on the eyes may help draw attention away from other treated areas of the face.

Long-Term Needs Besides good general skin care, the chemical peel patient 
will need help with the aforementioned possible side effects of the peel.

Phenol  peeling  is  most  often  recommended  for  seriously  sun-damaged, 
wrinkled, and leathery skin. Although the peel procedure does seem to tighten 
the face, it is not a substitute for a face lift. The phenol peel is often reserved for 
patients who need serious help because of severe wrinkling and rough texture 
from sun damage. The possible side effects of phenol peelings must be consid-
ered acceptable risks for this sun-damaged skin.

ESTHETIC MANAGEMENT 
OF THE POST-LASER PATIENT

The following information is condensed from an article written by the author for 
Les Nouvelles Esthetiques—American Edition. The author wishes to thank Les Nou-
velles Esthetiques for its cooperation in reprinting this information (Figure 22-7).



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      453

Make sure all products used in
this treatment are designed for
use on post-laser patients. After
receiving approval from the
surgeon to treat the post-laser
patient, gently cleanse the skin
using a nonfragranced, emulsion
cleanser with cool, wet cotton
pads.      

Place the client under cool
steam. This uses a special vapor
machine that operates from
ultrasonic vibration.   

Apply a hyaluronic serum with
antioxidants. This will soothe and
improve hydration. Make sure
that the serum is designed for
use on laser patients. It should
not have a low pH!    

Apply a nonfragranced hydrating
ﬂuid with lipids to reinforce the
barrier function. Massage very
gently with slow efﬂeurage
movements and light
tapotement. 

Unfold a 4'' x 4'' (16-ply) gauze pad
across the face. 

Apply cold “globes” to the face
in gentle, symmetrical stroking
movements.  

Slowly move the globes around
the face. Apply more hydrating
ﬂuid after removing the gauze. 

Apply a cooling, nondrying, non-
setting gel mask with chamomile,
matricaria, licorice, or bisabolol. 

Apply cool, wet cotton
compresses to remove the gel
mask. Be careful not to pull on
the face. 

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

Apply concentrated fragrance-free lipid serum to any lasered area, such as
the eyes and around the mouth. 

(All Post-Laser Treatment Photos Courtesy Mark Lees Skin Care, Inc.)

FIGURE 22-7  Post-laser treatment.




 
 
 
 
454         CHAPTER 22

Ablative laser removes or “evapo-
rates” skin cells. In laser resurfac-
ing, the laser is used to retexturize 
the surface of the skin, literally 
vaporizing layers of skin.

Fractional laser, sometimes 
called by its trademark name 
Fraxel®, is used to treat wrinkles, 
photo damage, mild scarring, and 
hyperpigmentation. This ablative 
laser is split into thousands of col-
umns, hence the name fractional. 
The method provides results over 
a series of treatments with less 
severe and fewer side effects and 
downtime.

Laser Surgical Procedures

Plastic surgery, like many other ﬁelds, is beneﬁting from advanced technology. 
An excellent example is the popularity of lasers for skin resurfacing. Lasers are 
basically very concentrated stream forms of polarized light. An ablative laser 
removes or “evaporates” skin cells. In laser resurfacing, the laser is used to retex-
turize the surface of the skin, literally vaporizing layers of skin. This helps to 
“plane down” wrinkles and, if “full-face” laser is performed, it does have a slight 
ﬁrming effect on the face.

Lasers can be used for surface lines and wrinkles and minor scarring. For 
shallow imperfections, lasers are good alternatives to surgical chemical peeling, 
because the penetration level is easier to control. The depth of the procedure 
is controlled by how many “passes” the patient receives, or basically how many 
times the surgeon passes across particular areas of the face.

Two types of lasers are currently being used for skin resurfacing: carbon diox-
ide (CO2) and erbium. The CO2 laser is generally stronger and is a better choice for 
deeper wrinkles and more severe sun damage. CO2 cannot be used on the neck, 
however, because the skin on the neck is not as thick as facial skin. The erbium 
laser is primarily used for a “refreshening” procedure, in younger clients or clients 
with  less  severe  wrinkling.  The  two  types  of  laser  are  used  in  combination  by 
some surgeons. Some surgeons also use a laser at the same time as they perform 
another procedure such as rhytidectomy or face lift. Lasers can also be used on 
speciﬁc areas such as around the mouth and eyes. Patients can experience many 
cosmetic side effects during recovery from laser surgery. The esthetician can play 
a signiﬁcant role in managing and controlling these esthetic side effects. 

FRACTIONAL LASER TREATMENT

A newer laser treatment device is the fractional laser. Fractional lasers are 
used to treat wrinkles, photo damage, mild scarring, and hyperpigmenta-
tion.  Also  sometimes  referred  to  as  Fraxel®  (which  is  a  commercial  trade 
name), fractional lasers work on much smaller areas of skin because the 
laser  is  split  into  thousands  of  columns,  hence  the  name  fractional.  The 
method provides results over a series of treatments with less severe and 
fewer side effects and downtime.

Treatment is performed in the plastic surgeon’s ofﬁce. A cream anes-
thetic is applied and allowed to take effect. The laser is then applied to 
the  skin.  Treatment  usually  takes  about  30  minutes.  Immediately  after 
fractional  treatment,  the  skin  becomes  tight  and  pink,  and  it  may  feel 
like a sunburn. Pinkness and some swelling may take place the ﬁrst few 
days after treatment. The skin will turn darker, similar to the darkening 
that occurs after a Jessner’s peel. The skin may also scale and peel. The 
darkness  and  ﬂaking  may  occur  for  about  two  weeks.  Fractional  laser 
treatments are performed in a series of four or ﬁve monthly treatments 
to see results. 

Esthetic treatment is similar to post-treatment for traditional ablative 
lasers, but the side effects from fractional treatment are much less severe. 
As with all laser procedures, sun and any exfoliating treatments or products 
must be avoided completely after treatment. An SPF 30+ sunscreen must be 
used during daylight hours. Use of a lipid-based moisturizer will help hydrate, 
reduce the appearance of ﬂaking, and make the skin more comfortable.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      455

Pretreatment  The  surgeon  generally  meets  with  the  patient  several  weeks 
before the surgery. Medical pre-care varies from doctor to doctor but generally 
consists of use of either Retin-A® or an alpha hydroxy acid (AHA) home-care 
product coupled with a melanin suppressant such as a 4 percent hydroquinone 
preparation to help prevent hyperpigmentation that may result as a side effect 
of the laser treatment.

PROCEDURES FOR THE ESTHETICIAN

Before Resurfacing Laser Surgery

The esthetician should meet with the client and establish a plan of treatment. 
This plan may vary slightly based on the individual needs of the patient and the 
procedures being performed. For example, laser resurfacing may accompany a 
blepharoplasty, or a partial resurfacing may be performed with a face lift. Some 
patients will elect to have only their perioral or periocular regions resurfaced.

Typically, the esthetician should perform at least one deep-cleansing pro-
cedure,  carefully  removing  impactions,  comedones,  or  milia.  Some  patients 
will  require  more  than  one  session  for  cleansing,  again  depending  on  indi-
vidual needs.

A series of treatments performed weekly for six weeks before surgery can 
be very helpful in optimizing the health of the skin. This should consist primar-
ily of light exfoliation using 30 percent AHA, which will help remove dead-cell 
buildup and dislodge clogged follicles.

The mission of pre-care is to have the skin in top shape before the resurfac-
ing. The theory is that skin in excellent condition will heal better and have fewer 
potential complications than skin in poor condition.

On the last visit before the resurfacing, the esthetician should consult with 
the client and instruct her in a step-by-step postoperative home-care program, 
making sure the client has all the products she needs. A camouﬂage makeup 
shade should be chosen, and the client should receive basic instructions on how 
to use this product. As previously mentioned, a more involved makeup lesson 
should be performed two to three weeks after the resurfacing to individualize 
the technique for the particular case.

After Laser Surgery
Laser Patient Referral The plastic or dermatological surgeon generally refers 
patients for esthetic treatment usually around 11 to 12 days post-laser, and after 
the skin is sufﬁciently re-epithelialized and no longer raw, to reduce any risks of 
infection or poor healing. If a face lift was performed at the same time, the sur-
geon always removes sutures before referral. Only with the surgeon’s approval 
should the esthetician proceed with esthetic treatment.

The  esthetician  will  evaluate  the  individual  case  for  skin  type,  age  of  the 
patient, amount of redness, dryness, discomfort, and areas of treatment. A good 
esthetician should also be trained to recognize conditions such as infection that 
should be referred to the surgeon (Figure 22-8A–F).

Hyperpigmentation  Hyperpigmentation  is  a  problem  for  some  patients  fol-
lowing laser resurfacing. Generally, the lighter the skin of the patient, the less 
the hyperpigmentation problem or risk. Laser is not a good alternative for any 
patient who experiences hyperpigmentation easily.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.B

D

456         CHAPTER 22

A

C

FIGURE 22-8 (continued)

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L

k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C




 
 
 
 
Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      457

E

F

.
c
n
I

i

,
e
r
a
C
n
k
S
s
e
e
L
k
r
a
M
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-8  A, The patient arrived 11 days post-CO2 laser resurfacing, concerned with extreme redness and dry, 
tight skin. B, The patient complained of extreme tightness around the mouth, and dryness was evident from crusty 
ﬂaking above the upper lip. The patient was instructed in the use of proper camouﬂage makeup and how to achieve 
as natural a look as possible. The patient was instructed to use a fragrance-free moisturizer along with a lipid-based se-
rum to increase hydration. The patient was also instructed in proper cleansing of the skin, using a nonfoaming, gentle 
cleanser. A facial treatment using a lipid-based hydrator with hyaluronic acid and sodium PCA and a gentle steam 
treatment to increase hydration were administered. Cool steam was applied, over which high-frequency current was ap-
plied to provide a gentle massage. After this, cold cryogenic globes were applied over gauze. These are special glass or 
Pyrex® balls ﬁlled with cold refrigerant chemicals, like those used in chemical ice packs. Another layer of hydrator was 
applied over the entire face and allowed to sit for 20 minutes. After the treatment, a lipid serum was applied. C, The 
patient experienced signiﬁcantly lessened redness in ﬁve days. D, Flakiness and dryness were lessened and smoothness 
was achieved in ﬁve days. The patient reported ease of dryness and discomfort almost immediately. E, This patient had 
an extreme amount of redness after full-face CO2 laser resurfacing and full face lift. She had an important engagement 
in only a few weeks and was very concerned about having a natural appearance for this event. Again, this patient was 
given the same hydrating cream, lipid serum, and gentle cleanser and was instructed in the use of camouﬂage makeup 
to cover the redness. F, The patient had tremendous improvement in only ﬁve days. Within a short period of time, she 
was able to discontinue the heavier camouﬂage makeup and return to the use of a lighter-weight liquid makeup.

Pre-care  use  of  a  prescribed  4  percent  hydroquinone  preparation  helps 
reduce the likelihood of pigment problems after the procedure. Postoperative 
hyperpigmentation may also be avoided by the proper use of a broad-spectrum 
SPF 15 or higher daily-use sunscreen, which will be used routinely after the skin 
has healed. Management of any severe postoperative hyperpigmentation should 
be referred to the surgeon.




 
 
 
 
458         CHAPTER 22

Redness Redness or erythema is typical of many resurfacing procedures, par-
ticularly ablative laser resurfacing. This is one of the biggest, if not the biggest, 
concern of post-laser surgery patients and a side effect that the esthetician can 
help alleviate. Patients are anxious to get back to work and their normal lifestyle 
without appearing red and drawing attention to their situation.

Redness is easily covered with camouﬂage makeup for the short term, but 
in laser and chemical resurfacing patients, this redness can last for weeks, and 
in some cases, for months. Patients are very interested in reducing the redness, 
not  just  covering  it  up.  The  use  of  lipid-based  products,  soothing  antioxidant 
and peptide complexes, and effective hydrators can help reestablish the barrier 
function of the epidermis and minimize postoperative redness.

Dryness The surgeon often prescribes an antibiotic ointment for the ﬁrst few 
days after the laser procedure. Sometimes the surgeon uses a dressing such as 
Flexan® to protect the face.

After  the  dressing  is  removed,  the  surgeon  often  recommends  a  heavy, 
occlusive, emollient, petrolatum-type product. This is to protect the skin with 
a barrier while the skin is reestablishing the epidermal tissue and the natural 
barrier function. Although these products deﬁnitely serve their purpose and are 
temporarily necessary, heavy, occlusive ointments are very sticky, oily, and not 
user friendly. They cannot be used with makeup and are uncomfortable.

Dryness of the skin—particularly during the transitional period from the post-
resurfacing patient’s use of a heavier, occlusive emollient and the return to a daily-
use  moisturizer—can  be  aesthetically  displeasing  as  well  as  uncomfortable  for 
the  patient.  Patients  frequently  complain  of  tightness  and  discomfort  as  well  as 
unsightly  ﬂaking  that  can  accentuate  skin  wrinkles  or  imperfections  and  add  to 
difﬁculty in makeup application. Foundations tend to clump in areas of extreme 
dryness, adding to the patient’s cosmetic problems, even with camouﬂage coverage 
makeups. This can actually draw attention to the area rather than detract from it.

Dehydration Because the surface layers have basically been removed, the skin 
must  re-epithelialize  to  reestablish  the  various  layers  of  the  epidermis.  While 
the skin is reepithelializing, it has a very poor barrier function, which results in 
dehydration, sensitivity, and erythema. The skin feels and looks very dehydrated 
during this period. With the doctor’s approval at the appropriate time after the 
procedure, the esthetician can help to properly hydrate the skin, reducing the 
feeling of tightness and easing the rough texture of severely dehydrated skin.

Ingredients to Help Restore Barrier Function

The substance between the epidermal cells is referred to as the interstitial ﬂuid, 
intercellular  matrix,  or  cement.  This  substance  is  a  complex  mixture  of  lipids 
such as ceramides (sphingolipids and glycosphingolipids), phospholipids, cho-
lesterol, and fatty acids, with hydrating water binders (called natural moisturizing 
factors—NMFs) such as sodium PCA. These combined ingredients in the proper 
proportions can help “patch the mortar between the bricks” in the intercellular 
matrix, which is essentially absent after laser resurfacing. This helps reestablish the 
protective barrier function that keeps skin protected and well-hydrated and will 
signiﬁcantly reduce redness following surgery. The use of products and serums 
based in lipid replacement ingredients, coupled with hydrating ingredients such 
as sodium hyaluronate, glycerin, or sodium PCA, can help mimic the natural bar-
rier function, resulting in better-hydrated, smoother, and more comfortable skin. 
The serums are often in a silicone base. These products can be lighter in weight 
and much more user friendly than cumbersome, heavy ointments.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      459

Because freshly resurfaced skin tends to be much more sensitive and reac-
tive than normal skin, it is very important that all products used on post-laser 
patients be fragrance-free to avoid sensitizing the skin. It is also vital that the 
products have been properly tested by an independent laboratory for irritancy.

Treatment Methods

Use of in-ofﬁce facial treatments can help minimize redness. These treatments 
involve the use of fragrance-free, lightweight hydrating ﬂuids using functional 
ingredients such as the aforementioned sphingolipids, glycosphingolipids, cho-
lesterol, and phospholipids, along with hydrating ingredients such as glycerin, 
sodium  PCA,  and  sodium  hyaluronate.  Light  and  gentle  facial  massage  with 
a  hydrating  ﬂuid,  and  the  use  of  cold  therapy  or  compresses  along  with  the 
proper products, can help reduce redness in a fairly short time. If you are certi-
ﬁed in manual lymph drainage, this procedure may be appropriate for post-laser 
patients. Soothing, nonhardening gel or cream mask treatments are implemented 
to  increase  moisturization  and  help  remove  dry,  dead  skin  ﬂakes  gently. This 
treatment modality also reduces the appearance of dryness, tightness, and ﬂak-
ing and helps achieve the appearance of skin smoothness.

Home-care instructions for the patient should include the use of a very mild, 
fragrance-free, low- or nonsurfactant (one that does not foam much) cleanser, 
because stronger surfactant cleansers can further irritate and add to the dryness. 
Use of a well-formulated antioxidant serum may also help soothe the redness 
and dehydration. Some vitamin preparations may not be appropriate, especially 
if they sting when applied or increase redness after application.

Routine use of a good hydrator with a concentrated lipid serum eases dehy-

dration and ﬂaking and decreases redness.

This combination of treatment products will also serve as a good pre-makeup 

treatment, allowing for smoother application of color cosmetics.

Sun Protection Obviously, post-laser patients should have absolutely no direct 
sun exposure. They should do everything they can to protect their skin from 
the sun, and it doesn’t hurt to remind them that sun is probably the reason they 
needed the laser in the ﬁrst place!

Due to the irritancy potential of many absorbing sunscreen ingredients, sun-
screen  application  is  usually  not  advised  for  the  ﬁrst  18  to  21  days  after  laser 
surgery. If any sunscreen is used during this time, it should be a reﬂecting screen, 
such as one with micronized zinc oxide or titanium dioxide as an active ingredient.
After the epidermis is reestablished, about 18 to 21 days, the client should be 
instructed to use a broad-spectrum sunscreen SPF 30 or higher on a daily basis. 
This should be a routine part of their daily care for the rest of their lives. The 
easiest way to do this is to ﬁnd a wearable facial moisturizer with a built-in SPF 
30+ sunscreen. Make sure the client understands that a little dab of sunscreen 
is probably not enough. Instruct the client to apply several dots to the face and 
neck  and  massage  it  in,  allowing  a  few  minutes  for  it  to  be  absorbed  before 
applying makeup. Don’t forget the hands and arms, too—other very vulnerable 
spots for sun damage and sun-induced aging!

Milia Formation Milia frequently develop during healing of resurfacing proce-
dures. Estheticians are a great help in removing these unsightly cosmetic lesions, 
which are of much concern to the patient.

Freshly  lasered  skin  is  very  fragile.  Do  not  extract  milia  unless  you  have 
extensive experience in performing milia extraction and have the approval of 
the referring surgeon.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.460         CHAPTER 22

Liposuction is the term for surgi-
cal removal of fat deposits.

Implants are small silicone or 
saline “sacks” used to improve the 
cheeks and chin.

Return to Normal Routine The client can return to the normal skin care routine 
after two to three months. This is, of course, assuming that the client had an appro-
priate regimen established before surgery. Daily use of a mild, effective cleanser, 
broad-spectrum SPF 15 sunscreen day cream, alpha hydroxy acid products appro-
priate for the skin type, topical antioxidants, peptides, and lipid-based hydrators are 
all helpful in management of aging skin. There is mounting evidence that these few 
procedures do help skin look younger and maintain the proper health of the skin.

Ongoing Care The esthetician can help the patient with ongoing care and cos-
metic and skin care needs. Additional skin care procedures can be added long 
after the skin has healed from surgery, further improving the appearance of the 
results of the surgery.

Makeup  lessons  after  the  immediate  postoperative  adjustment  period  can 
teach the patient how best to accentuate her new look and detract from  any 
imperfections.  The  well-trained  esthetician  can  further  advise  the  patient  on 
sun protection and keep the patient abreast of new developments in skin care, 
makeup, and plastic surgery techniques that might be appropriate for the patient.
General  skin  care  instruction  and  help  in  selecting  the  right  program  for 
the client are important services, both for the short and long term. The licensed 
esthetician  plays  an  important  role  in  management  of  postoperative  cosmetic 
surgical side effects, health education skin care instruction, and support for the 
patient’s psyche as the patient returns to a normal lifestyle.

OTHER SURGICAL PROCEDURES

Liposuction is the term for surgical removal of fat deposits. The procedure uses 
a vacuum-like instrument that suctions away fat from areas such as the chin or 
the cheeks. Liposuction is often also used on the body, such as the hips and 
thighs. A small incision is made in the skin, and the instrument is inserted into 
the subcutaneous fat layer, where treatment is administered. Bruising is the main 
side effect of this procedure. Chin or cheek liposuction is often performed at the 
same time as a face lift.

There  are  no  speciﬁc  additional  preoperative  or  postoperative  salon  pro-
cedures  for  facial  liposuction,  except  as  already  outlined  for  face-lift  surgery. 
Treatment of the incision areas should be avoided, and harsh massage should 
be avoided. Treatment, as always, should not begin until the surgeon approves.
Implants are used to improve the cheeks and chin. These small “sacks” of 
silicone or saline (saltwater solution) are implanted in the chin and cheek areas 
to improve the appearance of low cheekbones or a receding chin. Avoid treating 
the  area  immediately  after  surgery,  following  the  surgeon’s  recommendations. 
Implants are often performed at the same time as a face lift.

Wrinkle Treatments

Fillers are materials used to ﬁll 
wrinkles and skin depressions by 
injection or implantation.

Facial sculpting, also known as 
soft tissue augmentation, is a 
technique of using ﬁller materials 
to reshape the facial contours.

Many treatments are now available for treating and reducing the appearance of 
wrinkles. Most of these treatments are ﬁllers, which means that they “ﬁll in” the 
wrinkles being treated. Fillers are primarily designed for individual wrinkles in 
the normal facial expressions, such as brow wrinkles, forehead wrinkles, nasola-
bial folds, and crow’s feet around the eyes. Fillers are also used to “polish” results 
of cosmetic surgery, improving small areas not affected by the surgery. Fillers are 
now also used for facial sculpting, also known as soft tissue augmentation, 
which is a technique of using ﬁller materials to reshape the facial contours. These 
procedures ﬁll in wrinkles and “volumize” cheekbones and other areas, achieving 
a lifting effect that some clients consider an alternative to a face lift.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      461

Fillers are generally injected through an intradermal injection. Intradermal 
means “inside the dermis.” The injections are speciﬁcally targeted to be depos-
ited in the dermis itself. There are many types of injectable ﬁller materials, each 
designed for different skin problems. Fillers vary in thickness, particle size, and 
depth of the injection.

Intradermal means “inside the 
dermis,” which is where collagen 
and other ﬁller material may be 
injected to ﬁll out hypotrophic 
scars, wrinkles, or pock marks.

Salon Treatment for Post-Laser Patients

Before proceeding with any salon procedure, you must have a direct refer-
ral and approval for treatment from the plastic surgeon! Do not treat the 
client without the surgeon’s approval!

  1. Have the client complete a health history form, carefully checking for 
previous allergies, sensitivities, and other contraindications for treatment.
  2. Seat the client and carefully examine her skin, without cleansing fi rst. 
Sometimes  the  client’s  skin  may  not  yet  be  ready  for  treatment,  and 
you must thoroughly examine and check for areas that are still healing. 
Normally, surgeons will refer the post-laser client for salon treatment 
around 11 to 12 days after the procedure. Clients should be ready if 
they have the surgeon’s referral. Carefully observe and record areas of 
redness (erythema), rawness, dryness, dehydration, ﬂaking, and milia. 
Should you notice any pus or strange-looking lesions, refer the patient 
back to the surgeon, or call the surgeon for advice.

  3. If everything appears normal for postoperative condition, gently cleanse 
the skin with cool, predampened cotton pads with a very gentle cleanser. 
After  cleansing,  apply  a  nonfragranced  hydrating  ﬂuid  that  contains 
lipids and hydrating agents such as glycerin, hyaluronic acid, or sodium 
PCA. The skin should be slightly damp before application.

  4. Place  the  client  under  (not  hot)  vapor.  Cool  steam  is  preferable.  If 
warm vapor is used, focus it at least 18 inches away from the client’s 
face. The point is to gently moisten the face, not to warm or stimulate 
it. Vapor should be administered for about ﬁve to eight minutes.

  5. Gently wipe down the face again with fresh, cool cotton pads. Apply 
more hydrating ﬂuid and gently massage the face in long, gentle efﬂeu-
rage strokes. Do not use any stimulating massage movements. Gentle 
tapotement (piano movements) is appropriate.

  6. Apply more hydrating ﬂuid to ensure the skin is very moist and lubri-
cated.  Apply  high  frequency  with  the  mushroom  electrode  at  a  low 
setting. Use circular movements for about two to three minutes. Stop 
immediately if the face reddens or if the client complains of discomfort.
  7. Once again, apply hydration ﬂuid over the face. Unfold a 4" × 4" gauze 
square and place across the face. Apply the cryoglobes in gentle circles 
across the face for about ﬁve to seven passes.

  8. Apply more hydrating ﬂuid, and then apply a cool, wet cotton com-
press in three strips across the face. Allow this compress to stay on for 
5 to 10 minutes.

  9. Gently remove any excess ﬂuid with fresh cotton pads. Apply several 

drops of lipid serum over the entire face.

 10. Depending on the redness level, you may apply makeup. However, if 
the skin is extremely red now or before treatment, or if this is the ﬁrst 
treatment, it is often best not to apply makeup immediately after treat-
ment. In many cases, it is better to deal with skin care on the ﬁrst day 
and makeup instruction the next day.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.462         CHAPTER 22

A

B

.

.

D
M

,
h
t
i

m
S
k
r
i

K
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 22-9  A, Note the deep nasolabial folds on this patient. B, By injecting collagen, the surgeon achieves a 
remarkable reduction in wrinkles.

Collagen injections are pro-
cedures performed by a plastic 
surgeon; they involve injecting 
collagen into depression scars or 
wrinkles to reduce the appearance 
of the depressed lesion.

Fat injections are ﬁlling injec-
tions using the patient’s own fat 
to ﬁll depressions and wrinkles.

Hyaluronic acid, commercially 
known as Restylane® and 
Hylaform®, is a ﬁlling mate-
rial used for correcting wrinkles. 
Another type of hyaluronic acid 
is used in moisturizers and other 
skin care products.

Collagen  injections  are  the  oldest  form  of  wrinkle  ﬁller.  Commercially 
known  as  Zyderm®  and  Zyplast®,  the  collagen  in  these  treatments  is  obtained 
from bovine (cow) sources. The wrinkle depression in the dermis is “inﬂated” 
with the collagen, immediately reducing the appearance of the wrinkle. Besides 
the areas mentioned previously, ﬁllers like collagen are also used to treat small 
hypotrophic (depressions) scars and pock marks (Figure 22-9A and 22-9B). Col-
lagen  is  also  injected  in  and  around  the  lips  to  add  fullness  and  improve  the 
outline of the lips.

Bovine collagen injections require a skin test administered before the actual 

injection to make sure the client is not allergic to the collagen.

Slowly, over a few months, the body absorbs and rids itself of the collagen. 
Therefore,  collagen  injections  must  be  repeated  every  few  months.  Zyplast  is 
designed to degrade more slowly than Zyderm and is used in deeper wrinkles.
Besides the potential allergic reaction, other side effects include temporary 
soreness and lumpiness in the area of the injection, which usually subsides over 
time. Esthetic treatment should be avoided in the area of the injection for at least 
one to two weeks. You can treat areas of the face that were not injected.

Cosmoderm® and Cosmoplast® are ﬁllers that contain bioengineered human 
collagen. They do not require skin tests. They last slightly longer than bovine 
collagen injections.

Fat injections are gaining popularity. The fat used in the injections is “har-
vested” or taken from other areas of the patient, often obtained from liposuc-
tion  of  the  hips,  legs,  chin,  and  so  on,  and  intradermally  injected,  similar  to 
collagen  injections.  The  advantage  to  fat  injections  is  that  allergy  is  never  a 
problem, because the fat came from the patient’s body. Disadvantages are that 
fat is absorbed relatively quickly, and “overﬁlling” must take place to make the 
fat injection results last; and that fat injections are the most expensive type of 
ﬁller treatment.

Hyaluronic acid, commercially known as Restylane®, Perlane®, Hylaform®, 
and Juvederm®, is another ﬁller used to correct wrinkles. Hyaluronic acid and 
its  derivative,  sodium  hyaluronate,  are  used  in  hydrating  products  for  their 
strong water-binding capabilities. When injected into the dermis, they also bind 
water, further helping to plump out the wrinkle. Hyaluronic acid injections are 
absorbed more slowly than collagen injections and are very unlikely to cause 




 
 
Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      463

allergies.  Different  products  vary  in  concentration  of  hyaluronic  acid  and  in 
preparation techniques. Each has unique usage characteristics, so the doctor can 
select the appropriate formulation based on area of injection, depth of injection, 
thinness of skin, and so on. Juvederm is prepared to have a longer-lasting effect 
and is used for deeper injections and sculpting to provide a lifting effect.

Radiesse®  (Ray-dee-ess)  is  a  ﬁller  made  from  a  synthetic  material  called 
calcium  hydroxylapatite  (high-drock-sill-AP-uh-tight).  It  is  used  primarily  for 
deeper injections and has the longest life of all the current injectables.

Gortex® is a synthetic material that has been developed as a ﬁller and can 

be used in lipline or nasolabial injections.

About Botox®

Botox® is a popular treatment for relaxing wrinkles. Botox® is the commercial 
name for botulinum toxin (BTX), derived from a toxin from the bacteria Clos-
tridium botulinum. This normally dangerous bacterium produces the toxin that 
causes botulism, a type of often deadly food poisoning. The toxin is obviously 
very diluted for use in injectables.

Botox® was originally used to treat blepharospasms, or chronic tremors of 
the eyelid. Botulinum toxin causes paralysis of muscles, and in Botox® injections 
this paralysis is temporary (usually lasting a few months) because the toxin is 
diluted.

Intrinsic facial wrinkling is caused from repeated facial expressions. Injec-
tion of Botox® into a muscle prevents contraction of the muscle, thus preventing 
certain facial expressions, which therefore softens the wrinkle. Botulinum injec-
tions are not effective for wrinkles that are not caused by normal facial expres-
sions, such as multiple wrinkles in the cheeks from sun damage. 

Another  newly  approved  alternative  drug  is  Dysport®.  Dysport®  is  also 
derived  from  botulinum  toxin,  but  it  reportedly  has  better  spreadability  once 
injected,  so  the  physician  can  use  fewer  injections  to  administer  it.  It  is  also 
reported to be considerably less expensive that Botox®. Dysport® has been used 
outside the United States for over a decade.

Home  Care  for  Post-Laser  Patients  The  ﬁrst  11  to  12  days  are  directly 
supervised by the surgeon.

  Days 1 to 5—Antibiotic ointment
  Days 5 to 12—Occlusive (petrolatum) applied routinely
  Days 11 to 30—Gentle cleanser, soothing antioxidant serum, hydrating ﬂuid, 

lipid serum

  Day 30—Return to normal routine as advised by the esthetician or surgeon

Sunscreen is typically not used until day 18 or until erythema is reduced. 
Sunscreens can be irritating or sensitizing to freshly lasered skin. Sun exposure 
must  be  totally  avoided.  These  are  general  guidelines  that  may  vary  with  the 
patient or the surgeon.

Botox® and Dysport® are mainly used on, and are most effective in, the top 
half of the face, primarily for the “scowl” wrinkles between the eyes. The muscle 
injected is called the glabella. Botulinum injections are also used to treat fore-
head wrinkles and crow’s-feet wrinkling. Some doctors use them to treat wrin-
kles in the lower half of the face; however, potential side effects are increased 
when used in the lower face (Figure 22-10A and 22-10B).

Obviously, the main side effect of botulinum injections is the inability to use 
certain muscles for particular facial expressions. Another side effect, although 

Botox® is a drug treatment for 
wrinkles using a toxin derived 
from a normally deadly food 
bacterium. The toxin works by 
temporarily paralyzing speciﬁc 
muscles that create expression 
lines.

Botulinum toxin (BTX) is the 
toxin used in Botox®.

Dysport® is an injectable drug 
derived from botulinum toxin, 
used to treat expression lines in 
the face.

Glabella is the muscle between 
the eyes that frequently causes 
expression lines in the forehead 
area. This area is frequently 
treated with Botox®.




 
 
 
464         CHAPTER 22

A

B

FIGURE 22-10  Unretouched clinical photos taken before Botox® Cosmetic and after treatment with 
Botox® Cosmetic at day 14. Results may vary.

)
n
a
r
g
e

l
l

A

(

Permanent eyeliner or makeup 
means “tattooing” a permanent 
eye line or lip line. It can also be 
used in the cheek area and oc-
casionally is used to help correct 
dark, ﬂat lesions such as small, 
red macules.

temporary and not common, is drooping of the eyelids, which is caused when 
the toxin is accidentally injected into the wrong muscle area.

Botox® or Dysport® injections must be repeated every few months to remain 
effective.  Both  drugs  are  also  used  to  treat  excessive  sweating  and  migraine 
headaches.

Permanent eyeliner or makeup involves a “tattooing” process that implants 
small amounts of pigment in the skin. The procedure is often used to create a 
permanent eye line or lip line, but it can also be used in the cheek area and 
occasionally to help correct dark, ﬂat lesions, such as small, red macules. Check 
your state’s laws regarding permanent makeup. In some states, estheticians may 
administer these services. Permanent makeup is not customarily a part of a tra-
ditional esthetic curriculum, so additional specialty training is required.

Reconstructive  surgery,  as  previously  discussed,  is  used  to  help  correct 
skin scars and abnormalities caused by accidents, disease, or congenital (birth) 
defects. These procedures vary greatly, due to the many differences in the prob-
lems being treated. Plastic surgeons often remove facial skin cancers, using their 
skills to best conceal the demarcations from these treatments.

Often there is no time for pretreatment of these areas. The patient normally 
sees the esthetician after the surgery has occurred. Often seeking makeup help, 
the patient is frequently referred by the surgeon for help with concealing scars 
from the surgery. Sometimes several operations may have to take place to help 
revise  scars  from  accidents  or  skin  cancer.  Makeup  help  may  be  required  for 
coverage during and between these operations.

We will not discuss the correction of these types of scars here. The estheti-
cian should take specialty courses in paramedical camouﬂage makeup in order 
to help these patients.




Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery: Treating the Patient      465

REFERRALS

The plastic surgery candidate often ﬁrst seeks counseling from the esthetician. 
Carefully evaluate the client’s concerns, and then refer the client to a plastic sur-
geon. Because plastic cosmetic surgery is an elective procedure, the client often 
wants time to think about the possibility of surgery before proceeding.

You should have brochures available from your referring surgeon that brieﬂy 
describe the various types of surgery. Plastic surgeons will gladly furnish these 
at no charge to you once you have established a working relationship. It is best 
to have relationships with several surgeons. Advise the client to have consulta-
tions with at least two different surgeons, to make sure he or she feels comfort-
able with the doctor and to see pictures of the doctor’s work. Referring a client 
to more than one doctor also reduces any liability you might encounter if, by 
chance, a client has a bad experience with the surgeon.

You should have a working understanding with the plastic surgeon of each 
other’s procedures and needs. Prepare a presurgical and postsurgical brochure 
discussing esthetic procedures and how they help plastic surgery patients. Work 
with your plastic surgeon on this brochure, so that both of you are involved and 
are knowledgeable about typical procedures. When in doubt about treating a 
cosmetic or plastic surgery patient, always consult the doctor.

Many  workshops  and  classes  are  available  on  camouﬂage  makeup  and 
working with plastic surgeons. You should take these courses to best prepare 
yourself for working with a plastic surgeon.

IN CONCLUSION

It is a natural combination for estheticians and plastic surgeons to work together. 
Both professions have the same goal in helping people feel better about their appear-
ance. Whether you work in the same ofﬁce as a plastic surgeon or have a referral 
relationship with a plastic surgeon, you can help accentuate each other’s work.

Helping  clients  achieve  skin  that  is  healthy  before  surgery,  helping  them 
with the esthetic side effects after plastic surgery, and helping them care for and 
accentuate their new look are all part of the clinical esthetician’s job.

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What is the difference between cosmetic and reconstructive surgery?

  2. What are the various types of physicians who perform plastic surgery?

  3. What are some general postoperative skin care procedures that should be 

avoided?

  4. Why is it important for the plastic surgery patient to have presurgical skin 

care treatments?

  5. What should the esthetician do when there is a question about a treatment 

procedure for a plastic surgery patient?

  6. Discuss preparing a brochure about esthetic treatment for a plastic surgery 
patient. Why is it important for both the esthetician and the plastic surgeon 
to be involved in preparing such a brochure?

  7. Discuss the use of surgical lasers for resurfacing. What concerns of the laser 

patient must be handled by the esthetician?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

23

Cosmetic Medicine 
and Medical 
Relations

OBJECTIVES . . .

When the ﬁrst edition of this book was ﬁrst published, it 
was extremely unusual for an esthetician to work in a medi-
cal ofﬁce. Some estheticians had referral relationships with 
dermatologists and plastic surgeons at that time, but they 
rarely worked together in the same building. Now, it seems 
the norm rather than the exception—it is unusual to ﬁnd a 
dermatology or plastic surgery ofﬁce without estheticians.

The medical community has now accepted and understood 

how estheticians’ services can beneﬁt the skin. There are 
numerous reasons for this new working relationship, includ-
ing modern topical technology that really changes the skin’s 
appearance, and the advent of new cosmeceutical ingredients. 
The coming of age of the huge generation of baby boom-
ers has created a demand for age management appearance 
services, both medical and esthetic. 

There has also been a blurring of the line between 

esthetic services and medical services. Because of advances 
in technology, such as noninvasive laser treatments, light 
therapies, ﬁllers, Botox®, and other cosmetic medical services, 
many such services now available require a doctor to 
administer or at least supervise. In addition, many doctors 
practicing these services are not dermatologists or plastic 
surgeons. 

Treating the appearance is also big business. We need 
to recognize that there is a lot of money in helping people 



     467

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.468         CHAPTER 23

improve their appearance. Many members of the medical community 
obviously want to cash in on these services.

In this chapter, we discuss types of esthetic medical services that 

are offered to clients by medical doctors. These services are not 
necessarily traditional plastic surgery or traditional dermatologi-
cal services. We will also discuss how esthetic services and medical 
services can complement one another, and consider the different 
types of professional relationships an esthetician can have with a 
medical doctor.

HOW ESTHETICIANS WORK 
WITH PHYSICIANS

Estheticians can provide many services that complement a medical practice. For 
example, estheticians can provide deep-cleansing facial treatments for patients 
with acne or those with problem skin who also receive medical treatment from 
a  dermatologist.  Peels  can  help  many  skin  conditions,  including  photoaging. 
Estheticians  can  also  administer  treatments  before  and  after  plastic  surgery  to 
prepare the skin or speed the recovery process. Estheticians can help play the 
role  of  health  educator  within  a  medical  practice  by  helping  patients  choose 
proper products and learn to take care of their skin at home. Estheticians can 
help clients by teaching speciﬁc care after a cosmetic medical procedure, and 
also help with care for special medical problems such as rosacea, acne, or pig-
mentation issues. They can also teach clients how to cope with the cosmetic side 
effects of many dermatological drugs. 

The dermatologist may refer a client to an esthetician for help in choosing 
noncomedogenic cosmetics, or the doctor may ask the esthetician to ﬁnd a cos-
metic that will work for a speciﬁc client who may be allergic to certain ingredi-
ents. Dermatologists often refer camouﬂage makeup cases to an esthetician for 
treatment of scars, birthmarks, and other conditions.

MEDICAL TRAINING

Let us discuss the kinds of doctors you may work with and what kind of train-
ing they have.

Dermatologists specialize in diseases of the skin, hair, and nails. They treat 
diseases, whereas estheticians treat cosmetic disorders. They study for four years 
of college and then four years of medical school, at which time they are awarded 
the doctor of medicine (MD) degree. Another type of physician is the doctor 
of  osteopathic  medicine  (DO).  Osteopathic  school  is  very  similar  to  medical 
school, except that osteopathic physicians traditionally have more holistic train-
ing, with emphasis on nutrition, body alignment, and so forth. Osteopaths are 
basically licensed to practice just like medical doctors.

After medical or osteopathic school, doctors generally have a year of intern-
ship  and  then  two  to  four  years  of  specialty  residency  in  dermatology.  They 
train  under  dermatologists  at  major  hospitals  or  universities.  After  all  these 
years of training, they take their board exam in dermatology, which is adminis-
tered by the American Academy of Dermatology, the professional association for 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      469

Mohs’ surgeons are dermatolo-
gists specially trained in a precise 
form of surgery to remove skin 
cancers.

Endocrinologists specialize in 
treating diseases of the endocrine 
system.

Rheumatologists are specialists 
in rheumatoid diseases, including 
lupus.

Internists specialize in treating 
internal diseases, including heart 
problems, diabetes, and other 
internal afﬂictions.

dermatologists. This special certiﬁcation is what dermatologists refer to when 
they say they are board certiﬁed.

Dermatologists  may  also  subspecialize  in  several  ﬁelds.  Mohs’  surgeons 
have further specialty training in micrographic surgery, a specialized form of sur-
gery for hard-to-treat skin cancers. Other dermatologists may be dermatological 
surgeons, specializing in skin surgery, or may practice plastic surgery.

Plastic surgeons have four years of college and four years of medical school, 

internship, and then several years of residency in plastic surgery.

Qualiﬁcations  for  board  exams  and  the  different  types  of  physicians  who 
practice plastic surgery have been discussed in Chapter 22, Plastic and Cosmetic 
Surgery.

OTHER DOCTORS

Besides dermatologists and plastic surgeons, estheticians should be acquainted 
with and be able to refer cases to other types of doctors. Generally, these physi-
cians are medical doctors or osteopathic doctors who are board certiﬁed in their 
various ﬁelds of specialty.

Gynecologists specialize in treating women’s reproductive and urinary sys-
tems  and  often  help  women  with  hormonal  disorders.  Hormonal  chin  acne, 
unwanted  hair  growth,  and  hyperpigmentation  are  all  symptoms  that  can  be 
hormone related.

Endocrinologists specialize in treating diseases of the endocrine system. The 
glandular system, if it is diseased, can seriously affect the skin. Thyroid or adrenal 
disorders, for example, can affect the skin, hair, and nails. Rheumatologists are 
specialists in autoimmune diseases, including lupus.

Internists specialize in treating internal diseases, including heart problems, 
diabetes,  and  other  internal  afﬂictions.  Clients  who  have  body  massage  may 
need  referral  to  orthopedic  surgeons,  neurologists,  or  chiropractors.  Cosmetic 
dentists, who specialize in the treatment of cosmetic disorders of the mouth and 
teeth, can also help make the client look better.

WHAT IS “PARAMEDICAL” ESTHETICS?
A great deal of controversy has occurred in the esthetics profession about the 
term  paramedical.  This  term  evolved  out  of  a  need  for  some  estheticians  to 
clarify or legitimize what they do.

The truth is that no U.S. state recognizes the title “paramedical esthetician.” 
Estheticians who work in medical ofﬁces often refer to themselves as medical 
estheticians, although there is no ofﬁcial governmental recognition of this term 
either.  Some  states  do  not  recognize  the  esthetician’s  license  when  they  are 
practicing in a medical ofﬁce. Often, the services performed by these estheti-
cians are quite different from traditional esthetic services. These estheticians 
are working under the doctor’s license; therefore, depending on the individual 
state law, they may perform treatments and services under the supervision of 
the doctor.

Some estheticians refer to themselves as clinical estheticians. Although this 
term is also not ofﬁcially recognized, clinical esthetics infers that the esthetician 
understands skin from a scientiﬁc perspective and understands how to manage 
the skin using results-oriented approaches. Clinical estheticians often have pri-
vate  practices  and  may  have  referral  relationships  with  dermatologists,  plastic 
surgeons, and other doctors.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.470         CHAPTER 23

COSMETIC DERMATOLOGY 
AND MEDICAL SPAS

Noninvasive describes proce-
dures that do not break the skin.

Scope of practice describes 
services allowed to be performed 
under a speciﬁc license.

Invasive describes procedures 
that break the skin.

Cosmetic dermatology is a sub-
specialty of dermatology treating 
appearance-oriented problems of 
the skin.

Medical spas are medical ofﬁces 
that offer medical esthetic proce-
dures beyond the scope of routine 
esthetic services.

Estheticians  can  offer  only  topical,  noninvasive  services.  Estheticians  are  not 
trained in medical procedures, injections, or other medical procedures. These 
services are said to be beyond the esthetician’s scope of practice. A scope of 
practice is the area in which a licensed person has been trained and licensed or 
certiﬁed by the government—in the esthetician’s case, the state board of cosme-
tology. The scope of practice of the esthetician includes services to improve the 
appearance of the skin but does not include services using instruments or tech-
niques for which they are not trained or are not deﬁned by the law. This means 
that services involving treatment below the surface of the skin or on live tissues 
are invasive, considered to be medical treatment, and can be administered only 
by medical personnel. 

When a client requires services that an esthetician is not qualiﬁed to admin-
ister, doctors can take the client to the next level of esthetic care, whether that 
might be a Botox® injection or a laser treatment for capillaries.

Cosmetic  dermatology  is  a  subspecialty  of  dermatology  focusing  on 
appearance-related  problems  of  the  skin.  The  cosmetic  dermatologist  treats 
wrinkles and other aging symptoms, scars, hyperpigmentation, telangiectasias, 
hyperplasias, and any other problem with the skin that affects appearance. They, 
of course, are also qualiﬁed to treat skin cancers, skin diseases, and other der-
matological problems.

Medical spas are medical ofﬁces that may offer traditional spa services and 
also have medical personnel to offer services beyond the scope of practice of the 
licensed esthetician (Figure 23-1). Some medical “spas” offer only laser services, 
Botox® injections, and the like; they do not offer traditional facials, makeup, and 
so on. The medical personnel in medical spas may include physicians, nurses, 

i

.
g
n
n
r
a
e
L

e
g
a
g
n
e
C

f
o

t
r
a
p

a

,
y
d
a

l
i

M
©

FIGURE 23-1  Medical spas try to combine the relaxed atmosphere of a spa with 
medical cosmetic services.




 
 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      471

nurse  practitioners,  or  certiﬁed  physician  assistants.  The  physician  might  be  a 
dermatologist  or  plastic  surgeon,  but  he  or  she  may  be  a  physician  who  is  a 
family practitioner, ophthalmologist (medical eye specialist), an emergency room 
physician, or some other type of physician. Because of licensure laws, any medi-
cal physician is allowed to administer cosmetic medical services.

Laws regarding medical spas vary greatly from state to state. This is largely 
due to the “newness” of medical spas. For example, some states prohibit use of a 
medical laser by anyone except a licensed medical physician. Other states allow 
nurses to perform laser services. A few states allow estheticians, if supervised by 
a doctor, to perform certain laser services. Again, the laws vary primarily because 
medical spas and cosmetic medical treatment are new areas of technology.

Medical spas offer medical services that affect the skin or its appearance. 
The following sections describe common services offered by medical spas. This 
discussion is only an overview of these services; it is not intended to speciﬁcally 
recommend or endorse any of these services.

Laser Services

Many different types of lasers are used in cosmetic dermatology and by medi-
cal spas. Most of these lasers are nonablative, which means that they do not 
destroy or peel the skin to any degree (Figure 23-2A and 23-2B, Figure 23-3A 
and 23-3B). They are not the same type of lasers used in laser resurfacing as 
discussed in the Chapter 22 on plastic surgery. Lasers that vaporize or peel the 
skin are referred to as ablative lasers.

Lasers are basically extremely focused, single-colored, polarized light that is 
beamed through a specialized chamber that contains some sort of chemical. The 
word laser stands for “Light Ampliﬁcation by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.”
What differentiates one laser from another is the speciﬁc wavelength of the 
light,  the  type  of  material  in  the  chamber  through  which  the  light  is  beamed 
(such  as  Nd:YAG,  which  stands  for  neodymium:yttrium  aluminum  garnet),  the 

B

Nonablative describes a proce-
dure that does not remove tissue.

Ablative is a term describing a 
laser that removes tissue.

A

.

.

D
M

,
l
l

e
w
o
r
C
h
t
i
d
u
J

y
b

i

d
e
d
v
o
r
p

s
o
t
o
h
P

FIGURE 23-2  A, Aging face. B, Aging face resurfacing with nonablative laser.




 
 
 
 
472         CHAPTER 23

A

B

.

.

D
M

,
l
l

e
w
o
r
C
h
t
i
d
u
J

i

y
b
d
e
d
v
o
r
p
s
o
t
o
h
P

FIGURE 23-3  A, Rhinophyma. B, Rhinophyma after laser treatment.

Coherent describes extremely 
concentrated light.

Dermaplaning is a procedure 
that involves carefully planing 
the facial skin with a scalpel-like 
instrument before using alpha or 
beta hydroxy acid peels.

color of the laser light, and what type of material within the speciﬁc type of laser 
will absorb the laser light. The light is extremely concentrated or focused and is 
referred to as being coherent light. Speciﬁc lasers can focus on speciﬁc tissue 
(for  example,  blood  vessels)  without  affecting  surrounding  tissue.  Lasers  often 
work by slightly injuring a speciﬁc tissue, depending on the body’s healing mech-
anisms to respond, and this response is what creates the desired effect of “repair.”
Some lasers can work on different problems. By varying the wavelength, the 
laser can focus on blood vessels (telangiectasias), hyperpigmentation (lentigenes 
or melasma), or other problem areas.

Peeling Services

Peeling treatments using higher concentrations of peeling agents are often pro-
vided  by  medical  spas.  These  primarily  include  higher-level  superﬁcial  and 
medium-depth peels using chemicals like trichloroacetic acid (TCA), or higher-
level alpha hydroxy acids. Dermaplaning is a procedure that involves carefully 
planing the facial skin with a scalpel-like instrument before using alpha or beta 
hydroxy  acid  peels.  Dermaplaning  requires  additional  training  and  should  be 
performed only under the supervision of a physician. Depending on state laws, 
it may be illegal for an esthetician to perform dermaplaning, even if they are 
working under a doctor’s supervision.

Laser Hair Removal 

Laser hair removal involves using a laser to remove unwanted hair for long peri-
ods of time. This treatment is particularly effective for large areas of dark hair, 
such as backs and legs, but laser hair removal is also used on the face. 

The  laws  regarding  this  area  vary  from  state  to  state.  Some  states  allow 
estheticians or electrologists to perform laser hair removal, although most states 
require some form of medical supervision.

Spider Vein and Capillary Treatment

Using  a  specialized  laser,  telangiectasias  or  spider  angiomas  are  treated,  the 
blood supply to the area is cut off, and the telangiectasia disappears. The laser 
creates heat in the blood vessels, causing it to dry up, and the vessel is eventually 




 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      473

.
s
t
t
e
s
u
h
c
a
s
s
a
M
d
n
a
y
a
W

l

l

,
n
o
i
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
C
a
e
d
n
a
C
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 23-4  Ellipse intense pulsed 
light system.

absorbed by the body. The treatment can be used for individual telangiectasias 
or areas of couperose with many telangiectasias. This type of laser service may 
be very helpful for patients with rosacea and persons with vascular birthmarks.

Hyperpigmentation Treatment

Hyperpigmentation treatment is specialized laser treatment that focuses on treat-
ment of hyperpigmented areas, melasma, and sun-related freckles and splotches. 

Intense Pulsed Light

Intense pulsed light (IPL) is a type of very strong light therapy that uses a pow-
erful, focused light to treat telangiectasias and hyperpigmentation (Figure 23-4). 




 
 
 
474         CHAPTER 23

A

B

.
c
n
I

i

,
l
a
c
d
e
M
a
t
l
o
S
y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 23-5  A, Before radio frequency treatment. B, 6 months after treatment.

IPL is not technically a laser, because it contains multiple colors of light. Several 
treatments are often required. IPL is also sometimes promoted as a treatment 
for wrinkles and as a way to improve skin surface smoothness. Effectiveness for 
wrinkles varies. IPL works best for telangiectasias, solar freckles, mottling, and 
other hyperpigmented areas.

Radio Frequency Skin Tightening

Radio frequency heat energy is used to stimulate collagen production and tighten 
ﬁbrils, resulting in skin tightening. This medical procedure heats the lower levels 
of the dermis, causing slight purposeful damage that in turn causes the ﬁbrils to 
contract and the skin to produce more collagen (Figure 23-5A and 23-5B). Ther-
mage® is one of the trademarked names for this procedure. Results vary, and it 
generally takes at least a month to see results after treatment. Several treatments 
may be needed.

Another similar technology is known as electro-optical synergy (ELOS). 
ELOS uses a combination of light and radio frequency energy. ELOS is used for 
skin tightening, hair removal, telangiectasias, and hyperpigmentation.

Skin tightening does not produce the same effect as a traditional surgical 
face lift. It does not remove excess skin, nor does it alter the muscle structure 
like a surgical lift.

One  drawback  of  radio  frequency  treatment  is  that  it  may  produce  more 

pain than other procedures.

Electro-optical synergy (ELOS) 
is a medical technique of treat-
ing cosmetic disorders using a 
combination of light and radio 
frequency energy.




 
 
A

B

Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      475

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

l

,
y
e
n
i
r
t
a
P

.

R
s
e
m
a
J

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 23-6  A, Prominent oral commissures. B, Same patient after injection with hyaluronic acid.

Other Services Offered by Medical Spas

Botulinum toxin, known as Botox® or Dysport®, injections are often administered 
in medical spas. These injections are used to treat wrinkles caused by repetitive 
facial expressions, primarily in the top half of the face, especially in the forehead 
and brow furrow. For more information on Botox® and Dysport® treatments, see 
Chapter 22, Plastic and Cosmetic Surgery.

Fillers and Wrinkle Injections Cosmetic ﬁllers, such as hyaluronic acid injec-
tions (Restylane®, Hylaform®) and Juvederm® (Figure 23-6A and 23-6B), collagen 
injections  (Cosmoderm®  and  Cosmoplast®)  (Figure  23-7A  and  23-7B),  calcium 
hydroxylapatite (Radiesse®), and other materials are used to ﬁll wrinkles. These 
injectables vary in particle size, depth of the injections, and effect on individual 
facial aging problems. Some are used to ﬁll wrinkles, and others are used to add 
volume and thickness to the skin. Many medical spas now offer facial sculpting, 
using combinations of these ﬁllers to have a ﬁrming and lifting effect on the face. 
See Chapter 22 for more information on cosmetic ﬁller injections.

ESTABLISHING A RELATIONSHIP 
WITH A DOCTOR

Choosing doctors for referral is an important decision for the esthetician. You 
want to establish relationships with the best doctors for your clients. You also 
may  want  to  choose  a  doctor  who  does  not  compete  with  you  by  offering 




 
 
 
 
476         CHAPTER 23

A

B

.

.

S
C
A
F

.

.

,
.

.

D
M

l

,
y
e
n
i
r
t
a
P

.

R
s
e
m
a
J

y
s
e
t
r
u
o
C

FIGURE 23-7  A, Nasolabial lines. B, Same patient after injection with hyaluronic acid.

traditional esthetic services. If you are in private practice as an esthetician, it is 
usually the best business practice to choose a doctor for referral who does not 
have estheticians on staff. This way you and the doctor can refer to each other, 
knowing that neither professional is directly competing with the other.

Many doctors employ estheticians, and this is another opportunity you may 
want to consider. If you work for a doctor, you may offer traditional esthetic ser-
vices; but you may also assist the doctor with other cosmetic medical services. 
Depending on your state laws, you may be able to offer other services under the 
supervision of the doctor.

It is important to check out the credentials of the doctor you may be work-
ing with or referring. Board certiﬁcation in dermatology or plastic surgery is an 
important consideration, although many medical spas are run by doctors who 
are not dermatologists or plastic surgeons. The reputation of the doctor within 
the community is a big factor to consider. If you have numerous clients who 
have good experiences with a certain doctor, that doctor may be a good contact. 
If you have a friend who is a doctor, ask him or her about the reputation of the 
doctor you are considering working with. 

You also want to choose to refer your clients to a doctor who administers 
a lot of these services. Some doctors offer cosmetic treatment as a side service, 
and these doctors generally do not have as much experience as those whose 
practice is limited to cosmetic medical services and thus perform these services 
all the time. 

The  doctor  you  wish  to  work  with  may  have  similar  questions  for  you. 
Reputable doctors want to refer their patients only to estheticians who are highly 
qualiﬁed and will take good care of the patients. 




 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      477

Physicians are sometimes not familiar with esthetician training. You should pre-
pare a complete résumé listing all your credentials. List all your academic esthetic 
training, specialties you may have, and any additional degrees you may hold. If you 
hold  a  specialized  diploma  or  certiﬁcation  from  a  recognized  organization  such 
as CIDESCO, EstheticsAmerica, BABTEC, or ITEC (see Chapter 24, The Scientiﬁc 
Approach), make sure you list this, along with a short explanation of the certiﬁca-
tion,  because  the  doctor  may  not  be  familiar  with  esthetics  board  certiﬁcations. 
Speciﬁcally list if you have real clinical training or advanced training in the sciences.
List all your work experiences, any professional organizations you belong 
to, and any special awards in the esthetics ﬁeld. Make sure your résumé looks 
very professional. It may be beneﬁcial to contact a résumé service organization 
to help you write your résumé.

WHAT DOCTORS LIKE . . . 
AND DON’T LIKE

Doctors have very serious, scientiﬁc training. They generally do not have much 
training in artistic ﬁelds and are not always well acquainted with special tech-
niques in the esthetics ﬁeld. Be speciﬁc about the kind of special training you 
have had. Doctors are trained in the scientiﬁc method—so make sure you read 
Chapter 24 on the scientiﬁc approach. It will help you better understand why 
doctors are sometimes skeptical about estheticians.

Sometimes it may seem that some doctors do not care much about esthetics. 
Generally  speaking,  these  physicians  are  not  doctors  who  administer  cosmetic 
procedures. Often a doctor is more concerned about a patient’s medical condition 
than about a cosmetic problem. Medical concerns outweigh cosmetic concerns. In 
other words, a physical reaction is more important than how something looks. If a 
patient has skin cancer, for example, getting rid of the cancer outweighs how the 
skin will look after medical treatment. Ideally, of course, both factors will be taken 
into consideration—but the patient’s life and medical condition are always ﬁrst!

Doctors in general are impressed with estheticians who have a good work-
ing knowledge of dermatology and how the human body functions in general. 
It helps to have additional training in other medically related ﬁelds. Estheticians 
who are also nurses, for example, often do very well working with dermatolo-
gists. If you have a good background in a science-related ﬁeld, it will help you 
greatly when communicating with physicians. Doctors also appreciate it when 
an esthetician takes a scientiﬁc approach to cosmetic treatment. Examples of this 
are practicing clinically, using sterile techniques, using time-tested methods, and 
respecting when a client needs dermatological care rather than esthetic care.

The  biggest  dislike  of  dermatologists,  and  doctors  in  general,  is  unscien-
tiﬁc,  “miraculous”  approaches  to  beauty.  If  you  make  exaggerated  claims  or 
always tout the latest “miracle” treatment, you will not get much respect from 
the medical community. “Natural” treatments also raise medical eyebrows. There 
are advantages and disadvantages to using “natural” products. As one prominent 
dermatologist  said, “Tuberculosis  is  natural,  and  so  are  scorpions!”  For  more 
information on why “natural” is not always best, read Chapter 13 (Sensitive Skin, 
Allergies, and Irritants).

The bottom line is that most doctors are honest with patients and expect the 
same from you. They know that neither of you can perform miracles. Be honest 
with  your  medical  colleagues.  Admit  when  you  don’t  understand  something. 
And don’t act as if you are the dermatologist’s equal. You are in entirely differ-
ent, though related ﬁelds.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.478         CHAPTER 23

YOUR FIRST CONTACT 
WITH A DERMATOLOGIST

Call and make an appointment with the dermatologist to talk. Tell the recep-
tionist who you are, and brieﬂy explain why you would like to talk to the der-
matologist. If the receptionist is hesitant about making the appointment, leave 
a message for the doctor to call you. If the doctor returns your call, ask for an 
appointment to come by and talk.

Remember, not all doctors understand what estheticians do. Brieﬂy explain 
the services you perform and your particular specialties. Bring your résumé. 
You may want to bring a book with you to show the kind of education you 
have had.

Ask if the doctor has any particular specialties, and ask him or her to con-
sider working with you. Relax and get to know the doctor as a person. You will 
often ﬁnd you have more in common than you think.

Ask  the  dermatologist  for  any  patient  brochures  distributed  in  the  ofﬁce. 
Familiarize yourself with these brochures and any other patient education mate-
rials  the  doctor  uses  routinely.  This  will  acquaint  you  with  the  doctor’s  tech-
niques and may also give you an idea of how you could ﬁt into the practice.

Invite  the  doctor  to  visit  your  salon.  Offer  a  free  treatment,  and  after  the 
treatment offer some free samples of products. Do everything just as you nor-
mally would. Tell the doctor that you will act as if he or she were any other 
client. This way the doctor will see how you really work. Most dermatologists 
are actually very impressed with a good facial treatment. You might also offer 
a free treatment to the doctor’s nurse or assistant. They often are involved with 
patient education in the ofﬁce.

After getting to know the doctor, ask if it is possible for you to observe some 
procedures. Spending a day with a dermatologist is a truly enlightening experi-
ence. You will see cases you never see in the salon, and you will leave with a 
better understanding of medicine in general.

Don’t forget that the interview is also a great opportunity for you to see how 
you feel about the doctor you are meeting. Is he or she friendly and warm? Does 
he or she have a holistic approach to medicine? Does he or she already have a 
working understanding of esthetics? All of these factors will help indicate a suc-
cessful medical referral situation.

DOCTORS’ CONCERNS

Allergies

Have a good understanding of how allergies develop and how irritation occurs. 
Dermatologists see a lot of allergic reactions and a lot of contact dermatitis. Be 
knowledgeable about common cosmetic ingredient allergies and patch testing. 
Ask the doctor to help you understand the method of allergy testing.

Comedogenic Cosmetics

Understanding  comedogenicity  is  an  area  where  you  can  really  win  over  a 
dermatologist. If you have a good understanding of comedogenicity and acne, 
you can provide an excellent service to the dermatologist, helping patients ﬁnd 
noncomedogenic, nonacnegenic cosmetics and skin care products.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      479

Rosacea and Sensitive Skin

Many  patients  are  diagnosed  with  rosacea,  and  many  people  have  sensitive 
skin.  Estheticians  can  provide  a  lot  of  help  in  addressing  redness  issues  for 
clients with rosacea, as well as helping these patients select proper home-care 
products and educating them about avoiding triggers that cause ﬂares of red-
ness and ﬂushing. With the doctor’s help, you can also help clients coordinate 
their  medical  treatment  with  proper  and  complementary  skin  care.  Having  a 
good knowledge of rosacea management and sensitive skin is very helpful to 
dermatologists.

Sun Damage

Dermatologists are impressed if you have a good knowledge of skin cancer and 
sun  damage.  Understanding  sunscreens,  proper  usage  of  sunscreens  and  sun 
safety, and offering your clients education about sun care will win points with a 
good dermatologist. He or she will be equally unimpressed if you offer tanning 
sessions in your salon!

Electrolysis

Here is another excellent service for esthetic referral. Dermatologists see a lot of 
cases of unwanted hair that may be a result of another medical condition. Elec-
trolysis is generally very well accepted by dermatologists and doctors in general. 
Some estheticians are also electrologists or may be afﬁliated with an electrologist.

Camouﬂage Makeup

Doctors  very  often  refer  patients  for  help  with  camouﬂage  and  corrective 
makeup. It is important for you to be well versed in corrective makeup tech-
niques and clinical camouﬂage makeup. Doctors frequently refer patients with 
scars or birthmarks, accident victims, patients post skin-cancer treatment, and 
patients with disﬁgurements for help with makeup. Do not be discouraged if 
these are the only patients the dermatologist refers at ﬁrst. Eventually, one of 
those patients will have skin care treatments and will return to the doctor with 
glowing results and comments.

Extraction

Dermatologists often refer patients for treatment of comedones. They are often 
already treating the patients with other prescription drugs. Knowing how to treat 
these patients will help you prove yourself to the doctor. Discuss your extraction 
techniques with the doctor, and set up a list of rules for various types of patients.

Skin Care Management for 
Dermatological Drugs

Tretinoin (Retin-A®, Renova®), azelaic acid (Azelex®), adapalene (Differin®), taz-
arotene (Tazorac®) and other prescription topical drugs are often prescribed by 
dermatologists. These and other topical drugs can have side effects on the skin 
and often make the skin more sensitive to some cleansers, cosmetics, and other 
skin care products. You should be familiar with management of clients being 
treated with other drugs that can affect the skin, what ingredients and products 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.480         CHAPTER 23

should  be  avoided,  and  which  are  unacceptable  treatments  for  sensitive  skin. 
Helping clients ﬁnd suitable products while being treated with these drugs is an 
important part of a clinical skin care practice.

Patients  taking  isotretinoin  (also  known  as  Accutane®)  are  another  group 
that needs help with extra-gentle skin care. See Chapter 15, Acne and the Esthe-
tician, for more information.

Seborrheic Dermatitis and Other Inﬂammations

The doctor will be interested in how you deal with the patient who has a his-
tory of seborrheic dermatitis or other types of dermatitis. Some forms of skin 
care  products  and  treatments  can  aggravate  seborrheic  dermatitis.  In  general, 
stay away from fatty moisturizers, aggressive cleansers, and fragranced products.

Referral for Medical Esthetic Procedures

You  can  provide  a  great  referral  service  for  the  doctor  by  recognizing  client 
needs and referring clients for procedures that you do not provide as an esthe-
tician.  Laser  services,  Botox®  and  Dysport®  injections,  and  ﬁllers  are  all  good 
examples of these types of procedures.

Learning More about Dermatology

Perhaps you are lucky enough to have attended a school that has a lecturing 
dermatologist on staff. This type of learning experience is extremely valuable 
preparation for working with a dermatologist. Try to take continuing education 
classes with dermatologists, or take classes that address some of the pertinent 
topics we have discussed as being important issues to dermatologists. Read all 
that  you  can,  obtaining  brochures  and  purchasing  dermatology  textbooks  to 
study on your own. Several condensed versions of these types of texts are avail-
able, as well as a variety of good books, written in easy-to-understand language, 
that discuss common dermatological problems.

Some pharmaceutical companies are progressive enough to offer training to 
allied health professionals, including estheticians. Many of these programs are 
new, and more will, no doubt, be offered in the future. Many of the esthetician’s 
journals  offer  regular  interviews  with  medical  experts  and  frequently  contain 
articles about the subjects we have discussed. Taking a course in medical ter-
minology is also a good idea so you will better understand medical language.

HOW TO REFER A CLIENT

When you notice that a client has a problem that needs referral, tell the client 
to call your referring dermatologist for an appointment. Send the dermatologist 
a referral slip about your client, explain why you are referring the client, and 
describe the services you have been performing to help the client. Arrange with 
the dermatologist to have him or her send you a reply referral letter letting you 
know what the diagnosis was and what treatment they have prescribed. In this 
letter,  the  doctor  will  tell  you  what  should  be  done  in  the  salon  as  a  follow-
up. Occasionally, a dermatologist tells a client not to have esthetic services for 
a period of time. This should be explained in the doctor’s letter, as well as the 
reason for this recommendation. Sometimes, particularly if the patient has minor 
skin surgery or has recurrent dermatitis or a communicable disease, it is neces-
sary to discontinue esthetic treatment.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      481

SOME COMMON PROBLEMS

Many estheticians have discussed problems they have in their relationships with 
dermatologists.  Many  of  these  are  caused  by  miscommunication  between  the 
doctor and the esthetician. This is why it is so important to have an open line 
of communication with the dermatologist. Here we discuss some of the most 
common  complaints  estheticians  have  about  dermatologists  and  the  common 
problems dermatologists have with estheticians.

Why Do Dermatologists Recommend 
Only Certain Product Lines?

Just  as  you  are  educated  about  certain  product  lines,  dermatologists  receive 
training  about  certain  products.  Drug  companies  sponsor  product  knowledge 
classes and workshops, just like cosmetic companies do. So it is only natural that 
the doctor recommends familiar products. An esthetician would not recommend 
unfamiliar products either.

Doctors  recommend  what  is  widely  available  to  their  patients.  They  also 
recommend  products  they  know  their  patients  can  afford.  Dermatologists  are 
particular about many allergy-causing, comedogenic, or irritancy-inducing chemi-
cals used in cosmetics. Therefore, it is important that you have products available 
that meet these standards, and that you inform the doctor about their availability 
at your facility. You should try to have available moderately priced, noncomedo-
genic,  hypoallergenic  cosmetics  that  are  as  fragrance-free  as  possible.  Derma-
tologists are concerned about allergies, and fragrances frequently cause allergies. 
This  does  not  mean  that  this  type  of  product  is  all  you  should  carry,  but  you 
certainly  should  have  a  specialty  line  available  for  this  type  of  client.  Furnish 
information to dermatologists about your products, and furnish them with some 
sample products to try themselves.

Why Do Dermatologists Always Recommend 
Soap and Water?

Although this is not as much of a problem as it once was, doctors sometimes tell 
clients to cleanse with soap. The reason for this is that soap and water are read-
ily available to most patients in all income groups. Speciﬁc soaps that dermatolo-
gists recommend rarely cause allergy problems. Most dermatologists and plastic 
surgeons are now advocates of rinseable facial cleansers and washes. Talk to the 
dermatologist about recommending rinseable “soapless” soaps, which have the 
same rinseability as soap but without the residues and possible higher pH. Again, 
you should have this type of product available, and it should be fragrance-free.

When I Send a Client to a Dermatologist, 
the Client Doesn’t Come Back to the Salon!

This outcome could result from different situations. First, get the doctor to agree 
to send you a referral letter letting you know about the client’s progress, whether 
esthetic treatment should be discontinued, and most important, why. Sometimes 
sending such a letter may be an issue due to health privacy laws.

Occasionally, a client will ﬁnd that the visit to the dermatologist solves the 

problem and simply elects not to return to the salon at that time.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.482         CHAPTER 23

Occasionally,  you  will  discover  that  you  are  working  with  an “esthetician 
basher”! Some dermatologists have had bad experiences with estheticians, and 
they may have reservations about referring or endorsing esthetic services. The 
best way to deal with this kind of doctor is to ﬁnd another doctor whom you 
can work with. Fortunately, due to the continuing trend of the two professions 
working together, this problem occurs less frequently than it once did.

Again, you may want to choose to refer to a doctor who does not have an 
in-house esthetician, rather than to a doctor who does. You may risk losing a 
client to the doctor’s esthetician.

Dermatologists’ Problems with Estheticians

Here are some common complaints dermatologists have about estheticians.

The  Esthetician  Is  Not  Scientiﬁc  To  fully  understand  this,  please  read 
Chapter  24,  The  Scientiﬁc  Approach.  Many  products  on  the  market  were 
developed based on anecdotal evidence, which is not scientiﬁcally sound. If 
you use and recommend products with exaggerated claims, or that have no 
scientiﬁc  basis,  this  is  a  problem  for  many  dermatologists.  Carrying  exces-
sively  expensive  products  may  also  preclude  dermatologists  from  referring 
patients  to  you.  The  solution  to  this  problem  is  to  carry  reasonably  priced 
products that are as scientiﬁc as possible and that do not make unbelievable, 
“miraculous” claims.

The Esthetician Uses Products That Are Too Heavy or Comedogenic 
Both of these are “no-nos” with dermatologists. As previously discussed, carry a 
good line of lightweight, fragrance-free, noncomedogenic cosmetics.

Patients Complain That the Esthetician Is “Hard-Sell” Estheticians should 
never take a hard-sell approach, no matter what kind of client they are deal-
ing with. Carefully evaluate each client’s individual needs, as well as lifestyle, 
budget, and skin care needs. You should let the doctor know the price range of 
your products, so he or she can brief the patient.

Some  patients  simply  cannot  afford  esthetic  services.  Medical  doctors  see 
patients with serious medical problems, and many of them may not be able to 
afford esthetic services. Try your best to help these patients ﬁnd an affordable 
product they can use at home, even if they don’t visit regularly for services.

WORKING WITH THE PLASTIC SURGEON
Plastic surgeons are generally easier to work with than dermatologists. Cosmetic 
surgeons  have  clients  who  can  afford  elective  cosmetic  surgery.  These  clients 
can usually also afford esthetic services and more upscale products.

Because  plastic  surgery  is  often  elective,  plastic  surgeons  are  more  inter-
ested in esthetics, due to the artistic aspects of their specialty. They are interested 
in having their patients look as good as possible. Esthetic services “put the icing 
on the cake” by accentuating the plastic surgeon’s work. Good skin care and 
proper makeup really enhance a good cosmetic surgery procedure. You should 
establish a relationship with a plastic surgeon and have an understanding with 
the surgeon about treatment procedures, so that you both know what to expect 
from one another.

The bottom line is that good communication and a healthy respect for each 

other’s professions are the keys to a successful working medical relationship.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Cosmetic Medicine and Medical Relations      483

IN CONCLUSION

High-tech treatments and cosmetic medical services are very popular, especially 
with the baby boomer generation and beyond. Less invasive medical services 
are popular because of little or no downtime, and because they allow patients 
to treat more minor esthetic issues as they arise, and as the client begins to age.
Many  estheticians  are  now  working  in  ofﬁces  with  physicians  or  have  a 
referral  relationship  with  a  dermatologist,  plastic  surgeon,  or  other  physician 
who  performs  cosmetic  medical  procedures.  The  esthetician  must  understand 
the various services offered in cosmetic medicine, and should be able to refer 
clients as necessary to the proper medical professional. Because the two pro-
fessions work closely together, estheticians and doctors should be familiar with 
each other’s services, understand each other’s domain and scope of practice, and 
establish good communication to have their clients receive the best and most 
appropriate services. 

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. What are some services that you can provide to the dermatology patient?

  2. What types of conditions might you refer to the dermatologist?

  3. Discuss a physician’s training.

  4. Discuss what might take place during a ﬁrst-time meeting with a dermatologist.

  5. What are common communication problems between estheticians and der-

matologists?

  6. Discuss some ways to improve relations between the esthetics and medical 

communities.

  7. Discuss how to choose the right doctor to whom you can refer clients.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


CHAPTER

24

The Scientiﬁc 
Approach

OBJECTIVES . . .

Improving your education is a vital part of professional growth. 
Setting standards and learning to evaluate new developments 
is an essential part of any profession.

In this chapter, we discuss the need to be scientiﬁc in your 

approach to the practice of esthetics and the many educa-
tional opportunities that are available for advancement in the 
profession of esthetics.

Esthetics, like other health-related ﬁelds, is not an exact 

science. Too many factors are involved to determine the 
exact cause of a skin problem or to suggest an exact solu-
tion to a skin problem. So many factors are involved in any 
treatment involving the human body, whether the treatment 
is esthetic or medical. Therefore, estheticians can give only 
a “best guess” opinion about skin conditions and what they 
recommend to help.

We can, however, make an educated guess, taking the time 
to learn as much as we can about the human body in general 
and the skin in particular.



     485

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.486         CHAPTER 24

Scientiﬁc method refers to the 
experimental technique of devel-
oping a hypothesis, or idea, based 
on available information. The hy-
pothesis is tested and interpreted, 
and results are published.

Control group is the group in an 
experiment that has no change in 
its behavior during the experiment.

Placebo describes a substance 
used in an experiment that does 
not contain the ingredient thought 
to achieve a change.

Statistics are precise mathematical 
measurements of changes in an 
experiment.

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

The  scientiﬁc  method  refers  to  the  experimental  technique  of  developing  a 
hypothesis, or idea, based on available information. After the hypothesis is estab-
lished, the method involves testing the idea and interpreting and publishing the 
results of the experiment. Let’s look at an example. Years ago, doctors observed 
that  certain  keratolytic  agents  helped  to  peel  the  skin.  They  knew  that  many 
forms of acne were essentially caused by dead cells building up and clogging 
the follicles. It made sense that a keratolytic agent applied to the skin of acne 
patients would help loosen and remove dead-cell buildup, opening the follicle 
and therefore increasing the oxygen content of the follicle canal. They also knew 
that acne bacteria could not survive in the presence of oxygen. They assembled a 
group of acne sufferers and experimentally applied keratolytic agents routinely to 
the skin of these patients. They tried to control the patients’ other habits. In other 
words, if some of these patients were using special soaps, or vigorously scrub-
bing the skin, this could affect the results of the study. Factors that can affect an 
experiment are called variables. If a study involves too many variables, it is hard 
to determine what causes changes that occur in an experiment.

To see if other factors caused changes besides the keratolytic agents, these sci-
entists assembled a control group, a group of acne patients who did everything 
the  same  as  the  experimental  group  but  did  not  apply  the  keratolytic.  Instead, 
they were given a product that looked the same as the keratolytic product but did 
not actually contain the keratolytic. Such a product is called a placebo. Scientists 
observed that the group of acne patients who used the product with the kera-
tolytic experienced marked improvement in their acne, whereas the group who 
applied the product without keratolytic had no improvement.

This experimental research showed that keratolytics can help acne patients. 
The scientists carefully observed the number of acne lesions present on all of 
the patients’ faces before and after the experiment. They carefully calculated the 
percentage of decrease in acne lesions of the group using the keratolytic and 
compared it to the control group. Then they applied specially designed math-
ematical formulas to measure the differences they observed. Using this type of 
mathematical calculation is called statistics. If there is a measurable difference 
in factors before and after the experiment, as there was in the group using the 
keratolytic, the results are said to be statistically signiﬁcant. The scientists then 
published the results of their study, and the theory of using keratolytics to help 
acne eventually became standard practice.

This is a simpliﬁed example, but it illustrates the scientiﬁc method. Other 
factors can inﬂuence a study. The number of subjects (patients) studied is an 
important factor. If too few people are studied, the study will not be signiﬁcant. 
If the study does not take place over a long enough period of time, the study 
will not be signiﬁcant. Research like this takes a lot of time and money. Drugs 
may be tested for years and years before being released. Side effects and pos-
sible dangers of using the drug must also be studied. If a drug helps a certain 
condition, but at the same time hurts another area of the body, it often cannot be 
practically used. Cosmetics generally have less research performed on them than 
do drugs. The main reason for this is money; complicated research studies are 
expensive. Also, as we learned in Chapter 12, Claims in Cosmetics, if a cosmetic 
manufacturer makes a claim that its product  affects anything but appearance, 
it is considered a drug and is subject to governmental regulations that require 
much more research. This is why some doctors often are skeptical about bene-
ﬁts obtained from skin care products. Because cosmetics are generally not tested 
nearly as extensively as drugs, they are therefore not as scientiﬁcally sound as 
pharmaceuticals, according to many scientists.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Scientiﬁc Approach      487

Research on cosmetics is often performed on the ingredients rather than the 
product itself. After being laboratory tested to determine its beneﬁts, the per-
formance agent is then mixed with a usable vehicle, such as a cream or lotion. 
That being said, more and more cosmetic companies are independently testing 
their ﬁnished products and measuring improvement in the subjects’ appearance.
We have already discussed anecdotal evidence in Chapter 10 (Performance 
Ingredients and Active Ingredients). Anecdotal evidence is based on observation 
and theory, but the theory has not been thoroughly scientiﬁcally tested, as we 
discussed earlier. This doesn’t mean that the product has no beneﬁcial cosmetic 
effects; it simply means that the results and use are based on anecdotal, rather 
than scientiﬁc, ﬁndings.

Over  the  years,  much  of  the  evidence  about  purported  beneﬁts  of  plant 
extracts and essential oils has been anecdotal. However, with the evolution and 
advancement of scientiﬁc research in topical skin care, some plant extracts are 
now more thoroughly researched. These efforts have enabled science to deter-
mine the chemical composition of many plant extracts and has led to the stan-
dardization of extracts for use in topical products. Standardization is a method 
of testing extracts to make sure they contain certain levels of biochemical com-
ponents. Still, much more work remains to be done in substantiating the beneﬁts 
of many plant extracts used in skin care.

This brings up the subject of “natural” versus “synthetic.” Natural cosmetics 
are regarded by some estheticians as superior to “chemicals.” But plant extracts 
are nothing more than a group of different chemicals, because all materials on 
earth are made of chemicals! As we discussed in Chapter 13 on sensitive skin, if a 
person experiences an allergic reaction to salicylic acid, it is easy to determine that 
the person is allergic because salicylic acid is used as an isolated chemical. But if a 
client has an allergic reaction to a product containing sweet birch extract, a plant 
source for salicylic acid, it is hard to determine if the client had a reaction to sali-
cylic acid or to one of the many other chemicals that comprise sweet birch extract.
This  example  is  why  dermatologists  are  often  skeptical  about  the  use  of 
plant extracts and essential oils in cosmetic products. It is generally accepted 
that the fewer and more isolated ingredients that are used in cosmetics, the less 
potential there is for allergic reaction. Plant extracts can contain many botanical 
chemicals, and it is difﬁcult to pinpoint possible isolated sensitizing chemicals.

EVALUATING PRODUCTS

When you talk to a manufacturer about a new product or line of products, you 
should try to establish how scientiﬁc the research has been on the products. Ask 
many questions. Has the product been evaluated as thoroughly as possible? Do 
their claims sound believable? Or are they using “pufﬁng” descriptions? Pufﬁng 
refers to using complicated descriptions of the products to describe their effects on 
the skin. Some companies have excellent products and still use pufﬁng because 
they are attempting to avoid making drug claims. If a company claims that a prod-
uct has an effect on the functioning of the body, it is making drug claims. 

Here are some questions to ask when evaluating a company’s product:

•  What is the company’s approach to skin care? 
•  How long has the company been making skin care products? 
•  Are formulations based on current research, and do they use techniques that 

have been time tested?

•  What are their developer’s credentials?
•  If they make claims for hypoallergenicity or noncomedogenicity, how are the 

products tested?

Pufﬁng is a term used to describe 
the way some companies make 
their products sound better than 
they are.



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.488         CHAPTER 24

•  Do they have actual photographed case studies that they can present to you, 
so  you  can  see  the  improvement  in  the  skin’s  appearance  from  the  use  of 
their products?

You must have a sound background in skin care and the esthetics business 
to be able to ask good questions and evaluate a product. How do you prepare 
so you know what questions to ask? You can do many things to improve your 
scientiﬁc approach to skin care.

Go Back to School

Take some courses in chemistry, biology, and other sciences at your local com-
munity college or university. Start with beginning-level classes. Many estheticians 
go back to school for additional classes and even degrees. A college degree in 
a related ﬁeld such as health, chemistry, nutrition, or biological sciences is very 
helpful in the practice of esthetics. A few universities now offer full programs in 
cosmetic science. 

Many very successful estheticians have degrees in other related ﬁelds. You 
don’t have to give up your practice to expand your education. More and more 
colleges offer night or weekend classes, and on-line classes for working people. 
Some major universities now offer special two- to ﬁve-day classes in cosmetic 
sciences. One of these is the University of California at Los Angeles. For further 
information on this program, contact UCLA Extension.

Read Your Journals

You should subscribe to every journal in the beauty business. Contacts for maga-
zines are listed in the bibliography section of this book.

These journals contain a wealth of information, including information about 
the many products available to estheticians. Many excellent estheticians write for 
these journals, describing their good and bad experiences. There is so much you 
can learn each month from reading these magazines.

Buy Any Book You Can about Skin

Visit your bookstore every month, and purchase any new books about skin or 
health. Visit your college bookstore and purchase beginning-level textbooks in 
anatomy, chemistry, biology, and other subjects related to esthetics.

An extremely important learning source is trade shows! You will meet and 
learn from some of the top estheticians, dermatologists, chemists, and research-
ers in the industry.

Stay for the whole show, and attend all the classes you can. You will learn 
a lot from your fellow attendees. The fellowship and learning experience has 
no price and is an extremely valuable learning tool. But you won’t meet them if 
you don’t go to the shows!

While at the shows, talk to the exhibitors and speakers to ﬁnd out which of 
them you think you can learn the most from. Ask if they offer additional training 
or classes. Arrange to attend classes offered by these specialists. Get on their 
mailing  lists,  so  you  can  receive  a  calendar  of  upcoming  events  or  speaking 
engagements. Make sure you get a show program early and plan your days and 
classes. Popular speakers’ classes ﬁll up quickly. Many ﬁrst-time show attend-
ees waste a lot of time feeling lost and confused in a huge convention center 
because they have not planned well. Make a list of booths you wish to visit for 
information or to purchase some trial products. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Scientiﬁc Approach      489

Three types of classes are generally offered at trade shows. General edu-
cation is taught at a “main stage” routinely throughout the convention. This is 
included in your admission fee. These events are usually held in a large ball-
room,  where  speakers  discuss  their  specialties  or  participate  in  panel  discus-
sions. These lectures are usually less than an hour each.

Manufacturer education is offered in private classrooms. This is where the 
manufacturers teach you about their products. Obviously, manufacturers want 
you to buy their products after the classes. This is an excellent opportunity to 
evaluate new products. Remember, these lectures are usually commercial, but 
they are still a great way to learn more about your profession.

Workshops and seminars are often offered after the main convention. These 
are sometimes referred to as post-classes. Post-classes usually carry a separate 
fee and allow you to spend two or more hours with an accomplished speaker. 
If you read journal articles that you like or ﬁnd helpful, the authors of these arti-
cles may be featured at trade show post-classes. The education in these classes 
is  often  called  generic,  meaning  that  it  is  not  commercially  product  oriented. 
Spending  this  kind  of  time  with  a  top  esthetician  is  by  far  the  best  learning 
experience you can have.

Regional Seminars

Most skin care companies have educational programs available, both product 
classes and general advanced esthetics classes. These classes often last a day or 
more  and  are  offered  frequently.  Of  course,  this  involves  traveling  to  the  city 
where the seminar is held, but you will usually ﬁnd it very worthwhile.

Clinical Skin Care

As we have discussed previously, clinical skin care is a results-oriented program 
approach to esthetics. This combines a thorough assessment of the particular 
client’s needs and a step-by-step plan of action, based on scientiﬁc treatment 
methods, and individualized home care, based on performance ingredients.

The  profession  is  deﬁnitely  turning  toward  clinical  approaches.  Although 
there will always be a need for relaxation therapy facial treatments, many esthe-
ticians  are  interested  in  offering  clinical  care,  which  is  for  many  estheticians 
more challenging and rewarding.

Advanced Schools and Training

Basic skin care training, in general, does not offer enough hours or the special-
ized instruction necessary for advanced clinical skin care. The individual estheti-
cian must decide what type of practice he or she wishes to pursue. It is often 
necessary to look for schools or programs that offer advanced specialty classes.
Fortunately, more of these specialty programs are now emerging. These pro-
grams offer one- to ﬁve-day intensive learning sessions, often with well-known 
skin care experts. To ﬁnd out more about these types of graduate programs, look 
for information in skin care journals.

Join Your Professional Associations
EstheticsAmerica  EstheticsAmerica  is  the  esthetics  division  of  the  National 
Cosmetology Association (NCA). If you are a licensed esthetician and you join 
the  NCA,  you  are  a  member  of  EstheticsAmerica.  EstheticsAmerica  sponsors 
national seminars that offer both business and technical classes and education. 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.490         CHAPTER 24

EstheticsAmerica is the United States chapter of CIDESCO International, the 
oldest and best-established esthetics organization in the world. CIDESCO helps 
set standards for the industry and administers the CIDESCO International Exami-
nation, a board certiﬁcation exam for estheticians. In many countries, estheti-
cians attend schools that have been accredited by CIDESCO and are eligible to 
take the exam upon graduation. Several CIDESCO-accredited schools are now 
in the United States. For graduates of schools that are not accredited, CIDESCO 
offers  the “Three-Year  Exam.”  This  means  that  if  you  have  graduated  from  a 
licensed esthetics school, have practiced as a licensed esthetician for three years, 
and complete a special intensive training program through CIDESCO, you may 
take the exam. The exam is difﬁcult, and you should plan on several months of 
preparation for the test. If you pass the test, which is both written and practical, 
you are awarded the CIDESCO International Diploma. Estheticians who pass the 
exam are called CIDESCO board-certiﬁed estheticians. The CIDESCO diploma is 
recognized as the highest earned title in the world for estheticians.

National Cosmetology Association (NCA) The NCA is now a division of 
a larger organization, the Professional Beauty Association. For information on 
NCA, EstheticsAmerica, and CIDESCO programs, contact NCA at 15825 N. 71st 
Street, Suite 100, Scottsdale, AZ 85254. In the United States, call 866-871-0656 or 
visit the NCA Web site at http://ncacares.org. 

National  Coalition  of  Estheticians,  Manufacturers/Distributors  and 
Associations  (NCEA)  The  NCEA  is  active  in  helping  to  establish  both  stan-
dards  and  advanced  educational  programs  for  both  estheticians  and  esthetic 
educators.  This  organization  also  offers  a  certiﬁcation  exam  and  training  pro-
grams.  Contact  NCEA  at  484  Spring  Avenue,  Ridgewood,  NJ  07450-4624,  call 
201-670-4100, or visit on-line at http://www.ncea.tv.

American Association for Esthetics (AAE) The AAE is an organization dedi-
cated to providing specialized advanced education for estheticians. It offers con-
tinuing education credits for some states and offers regular specialty seminars 
and classes. It is afﬁliated with America’s Beauty Network. Contact AAE at 401 
N. Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611. Call 1-800-648-2505 or 312-245-1570, or 
visit the AAE Web page at http://americasbeautynetwork.com.

Aesthetics  International  Association  (AIA)  The  AIA  offers  educational 
programs through the International Congresses of Esthetics (located in several 
cities  throughout  the  United  States)  as  well  as  other  special  educational  and 
certiﬁcation programs. Contact this group at Aesthetics International Associa-
tion, 310 E. Interstate 30, Suite B107, Garland, TX 75043. Call 877-968-7539 or 
visit AIA on-line at http://www.aestheticsassociation.com.

Probably the most important function of the professional organizations is serv-
ing as legislative watchdogs for the profession. This work helps prevent deregula-
tion and helps ensure safety and standards for public health. Most professional 
organizations also offer special seminars, conventions and congresses, magazine 
subscriptions and journals, special insurance programs, and many other beneﬁts.

IN CONCLUSION

Completing your basic education and getting your license is only the beginning 
of learning in the ever-changing world of professional esthetics. There are many 
great educational opportunities after basic schooling. Be a learning sponge! Read 
all you can, take all the advanced courses you can! Get to know your colleagues!



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.The Scientiﬁc Approach      491

Strive  to  obtain  the  highest  credentials  you  can.  Being  a  great  esthetician 
involves three special secrets: You must receive the best education possible. You 
have to communicate well with people. And most of all, you have to love your 
profession!

TOPICS FOR DISCUSSION

  1. Describe the scientiﬁc method.

  2. What does statistically signifi cant mean?

  3. What kind of factors can affect a study?

  4. What is the difference between scientiﬁc and anecdotal evidence?

  5. Discuss how to evaluate products.

  6. Why is it important to read and subscribe to esthetic journals?



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Bibliography and 
Recommended Readings

Bark, J. (1989). Retin-A and other youth miracles. Rocklin, 

Jovanovic, L., & Levert, S. (1993). A woman doctor’s guide to 

CA: Prima.

menopause. New York: Hyperion.

Baumann, L. (2002). Cosmetic dermatology. New York: 

McGraw-Hill.

Jovanovic, L., & Subak-Sharpe, G. (1987). Hormones—the 
woman’s answer book. New York: Fawcett Columbine.

Bevan, J. (1979). The Simon and Schuster handbook of anatomy 

Kaiser, J. (1999). Healing HIV. Mill Valley, CA: HealthFirst Press.

and physiology. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Lahita, R., & Phillips, R. (2004). Lupus Q & A. New York: Penguin.

Boyd, A. (1998). The skin sourcebook. Los Angeles: Lowell 

Leffell, D. (2000). Total skin. New York: Hyperion.

House.

Lowe, N., & Sellar, P. (1999). Skin secrets. London: Collins & 

Brinker, N., & Chihal, J. (1997). 1000 questions about women’s 

Brown.

health. Arlington, TX: Summit.

Brown, G. (2005). About face. New York: Ballantine Books.

Michalun, N. (2009). Skin care and cosmetic ingredients 

dictionary. Albany, NY: Milady, a part of Cengage Learning.

Chase, D. (1989). The new medically based no-nonsense 

beauty book. New York: W.W. Norton.

Milady. (2003). Milady’s standard: comprehensive training for 

estheticians. Albany, NY: Milady, a part of Cengage Learning. 

Chihal, J., & London, S. (1999). Menopause: Clinical concepts. 

Otto, J., & Towle, A. (1993). Modern biology. New York: Holt, 

Durant, OK: EMIS Medical.

Rinehart & Winston.

Desowitz, R. (1987). The thorn in the starfi sh. New York: 

Perricone, N. (2000). The wrinkle cure. Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press.

W.W. Norton.

Pugliese, P. (2001). Physiology of the skin II. Carol Stream, IL: 

Dibner, R. (1994). Lupus handbook for women. New York: 

Allured Publishing.

Fireside.

Pugliese, P. (2005). Advanced professional skin care. Bernville, 

Dwyer, J. (1990). The body at war. New York: Mentor Books.

PA: The Topical Agent, LLC.

Fitzpatrick, T., Johnson, R., Wolff, K., Polano, M., & Suur-
mond, D. (1997). Color atlas and synopsis of clinical 
dermatology. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Schoon, D. (1994). HIV/AIDS & hepatitis. Albany, NY: Milady, 

a part of Cengage Learning.

Scott, A., & Fong, E. (1998). Body structures & functions. 

Flandermeyer, K. (1979). Clear skin. Boston: Little, Brown.

Albany, NY: Delmar.

Fulton, J. (1984). Dr. Fulton’s step-by-step program for clearing 

Shomom, M. (2002). Living well with autoimmune disease. 

acne. New York: Barnes & Noble Books.

New York: HarperCollins.

Gerson, J. (1999). Standard textbook for professional estheti-

Steigleder, G., & Maibach, H. (1984). Pocket atlas of dermatol-

cians. Albany, NY: Milady.

ogy. New York: Thieme.

Goldberg, D., & Herriott, E. (2003). Light years younger. 

Stoll, D. (1994). A woman’s skin. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 

Herndale, VA: Capital Books.

University Press.

Goodman, T., & Young, S. (1988). Smart face. New York: 

Prentice-Hall.

Taylor, Susan C. (2003). Brown Skin. New York: Harper-Collins.

Teaff, N., & Wiley, K. (1996). Perimenopause—preparing for 

Gray, H. (1995). Gray’s anatomy. Philadelphia: Running 

the change. Rocklin, CA: Prima. 

Press.

Turkington, C., & Dover, J. (2007). Skin deep. New York: 

Haberman, F., & Fortino, D. (1983). Your skin. New York: 

Facts on File.

Berkley.

Warshofsky, F. (1999). Stealing time. New York: TV Books.

Irwin, B., & McPherson, M. (2002). Your best face. Carlsbad, 

Winter, R. (1999). A consumer’s dictionary of cosmetic ingre-

CA: Hay House.

dients. New York: Three Rivers Press.

Johnson, B., Moy, R., & White, G. (1998). Ethnic skin. 

Wolfe, D. (1988). Introduction to college chemistry. New 

St. Louis, MO: Mosby.

York: McGraw-Hill.

     493



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.494         Bibliography and Recommended Readings

PERIODICALS
American Spa
One Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016
212-951-6600

Cosmetic Dermatology
7 Century Dr.
Parsippany, NJ 07054-4609
800-480-4851

DAYSPA Magazine
7628 Densmore Ave.
Van Nuys, CA 91406-2042
818-782-7328

Dermascope
4402 Broadway Blvd., Suite 14
Garland, TX 75043
800-961-3777

Les Nouvelles Esthétiques—American Edition
3929 Ponce de Leon
Coral Gables, FL 33134
800-471-0229

PCI (Progressive Clinical Insights) Journal 
484 Spring Avenue
Ridgewood, NJ 07450-4624
201-670-4100 

Skin, Inc.
336 Gunderson Dr., Suite A
Carol Stream, IL 63005
630-653-2155

Skin & Allergy News
5635 Fishers Lane, Suite 6000
Rockville, MD 20852
877-524-9336



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Index

AAE. See American Association 

for Esthetics

Ablated is a medical term meaning 

“removed.” Tissue ablated during 
laser resurfacing is removed by 
the laser, 426

Ablative is a term describing a laser that 

removes tissue, 426, 471

Ablative laser removes or “evaporates” 

skin cells. In laser resurfacing, 
the laser is used to retexturize the 
surface of the skin, literally vapor-
izing layers of skin, 454

Abscesses are extremely deep infections 

with pockets of pus, 122

Abstinence means that the persons do 
not engage in sexual intercourse 
at all, 65

Acanya, 305
Accutane, 103, 138, 306–307, 428, 480
ACD. See Allergic contact dermatitis
Acetyl dipeptide-2 is a peptide used to 

help reduce pufﬁness, 186, 402

Acetyl hexapeptide-8, also known as Ar-
gireline, is known as the wrinkle-
relaxing peptide, 186, 208, 402

Acid mantle is the layer of lipids and 

sweat secretions on top of the skin 
that help kill bacteria, 47

Acids, 148–151
Acne is a skin condition that results in 
inﬂammatory and noninﬂamma-
tory lesions, 276

adult, 283
allergies and irritations from 

products for, 242–243

alpha hydroxy peeling treatments for, 

421–422

analysis technique for, 308–311
birth control pills and, 92, 284–285
chin, 283–284
conditions related to, 290–292
cosmetics and, 290
day treatment for, 298
environmental factors, 287–288
glycolic and other peels for, 311–312
grades of, 280
heat and humidity in, 287
hereditary factors in, 276
home-care products for, 297–303
hormones and, 283
inﬂammatory lesions in, 276–280
light therapy for, 307–308
masks for, 298
medical attention for, 123

medication active ingredients 

for, 191

menopause and, 285
night treatments, 298
noninﬂammatory lesions in, 276–280
nutrition, diet, and, 289–290
overcleaning and, 288
peels for, 311–312
perimenopausal, 95
PMS and ﬂare-ups in, 91–92
pregnancy and, 285
premenstrual, 283
salon treatment for, 299
self-trauma excoriations 
and, 288–289
smoking and, 288
stress and, 284
sun exposure and, 287
teenage, 285–287, 298–299
toners for, 202–203, 297
topical drugs often prescribed 

for, 303–307
treatment of, 292–297

Acne cosmetica is acne caused or wors-
ened by the use of comedogenic 
or inﬂammatory cosmetics or skin 
care products, 314, 315–316
Acne excoriée is a condition in which 

a person picks at his or her acne 
lesions, causing scrapes and pos-
sible scars and hyperpigmenta-
tion, 288

Acne vulgaris is the most common form 

of acne that is often associated 
with teenagers, 276

Acnegenic reaction is an inﬂammatory 

reaction caused by a skin care 
product or cosmetic or other 
inﬂammation; the result is sudden 
ﬂares of papules or pustules, 282

Acnegenic refers to the tendency of 
a topical substance, usually a 
cosmetic or skin care product, to 
cause inﬂammation or 
aggravate acne, 254, 314
Acquired immunity is the process of 
building antibodies to disease 
when you are sick, 43, 44
Actinic keratoses, or precancers, are 

rough areas of sun-damaged skin, 
indicating dysplastic cell growth, 
374

Active agents, also known as perfor-

mance agents, are chemicals that 
cause physical changes in the 

skin’s appearance or alter the ap-
pearance in any way, 154, 171, 172

Active ingredients are ingredients in 

drug products that cause a change 
in the function of the human 
body, 154, 171, 172

Acyclovir is a prescription antiviral drug 

used to treat and prevent herpes 
viruses, 59

Adapalene is a form of vitamin A, also 
known as Differin, that is a 
topical prescription drug used for 
acne treatment, 123, 138

alpha hydroxy acid treatment and, 181, 

396, 421

follicular exfoliation and, 293, 305
mechanical exfoliation and, 415
side effects, 103
skin care management for, 479

Adenosine triphosphate, also known as 

ATP, is a substance produced in 
the mitochondria as an energy 
source for the cell, 3

Adipose tissue is fat tissue, 5
Adolescence, appearance changes in, 86
Adrenal glands are located just above 

the kidneys and produce hor-
mones needed by the nervous sys-
tem to transport nerve impulses, 
79–80

Adrenaline is secreted when the body is 

under stress, 79–80

Adult acne. See Rosacea
Advanced education and training, 489
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) 

are formed during glycation and 
can create crosslinked proteins, 
resulting in skin wrinkling and 
elastosis, 184

Aesthetics International Association (AIA), 

490

Age spots, 358
Aging skin. See also Photoaging skin

beginning of, 357–358
causes of symptoms, 352–355
cell renewal slowing and, 354–355
changes by age in, 351–352
dermal changes, 358
diet and, 356
epidermal changes, 358
exercise and, 356
extrinsic, 116
facial treatments for, 360–362
foundation wear and, 354
home-care programs for, 359–360

     495



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.496         INDEX

Aging skin (continued )

hormonal factors in, 355
intrinsic, 116
prevention and management of, 

355–357

psychological effects of, 358–359
skin care and, 357
sleep and, 356
stress and, 356–357
sun damage and, 116–118
treatment of, 361–362
weight gain or loss and, 356

AHA. See Alpha hydroxy acids
AIA. See Aesthetics International Association
AIDS/HIV, 27

client questions about, 72
dispelling myths, 66
estheticians and, 66–67
illnesses associated with, 63–64
infection by, 61–62
mental and emotional states and, 71
overview, 61
personal precautions, 66
prevention of, 65–66
skin cancers associated with, 70–71
skin symptoms associated with, 67–70
testing for virus, 62–63
treatment of, 64–65
window phase of, 62
Alcohol, 28, 174–175, 181
Alipidic means “lack of lipids.” These 

skin types do not produce enough 
lipids, 178, 331

as antiaging ingredient, 179–182
applications of, 179
azelaic acid and, 421
benzoyl peroxide and, 181, 188
contraindications for, 181
dehydration treatment and, 109
for dry, sun-damaged skin, 210
extraction and, 335–336
home-care programs, 398–400
as hydrator, 176
irritant reactions, 236
keratolytic drugs and, 138
menopausal skin and, 96
for oily-combination, clogged 

skin, 210–211

overexposure, 16
pH of, 150
for photoaging, 396–400
pregnancy and, 90
Retin-A and, 181, 410
sensitive skin and, 248
strengths and effectiveness of, 180–181
tretinoin and, 181, 410
tretinoin as alternative to, 357
types of, 179
vehicles and other ingredients with, 181

Alpha hydroxy peeling treatments, 418–422

acne and, 421–422
hyperpigmentation and, 423
medical, 424–425
precautions, 420–421
procedure for, 419
stronger solutions in, 423–424

Allergen is a substance that provokes an 
allergic reaction, 187–188, 236

Alpha lipoic acid is a potent 
antioxidant, 401

common, 238–244
noncosmetic, 244–245

American Academy of Dermatology, 

382, 468

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is 

American Association for Esthetics 

inﬂammation resulting from an 
allergy to a particular 
substance, 235–236

Allergic reactions

to chemical peels, 432–433
irritant reactions vs., 237–238
signs of, 237
Allergies, 102–103

to acne products, 242–243
alpha hydroxy acids and, 242–243
fragrance, 238–239
latex, 36
medical treatment of, 254–255
noncosmetic, 244–245
salicylate, 241
sunscreen, 240–241

Allergy is the body’s immune system’s 

rejection of a particular sub-
stance, 235–236
Allergy testing, 247–248
Alpha hydroxy acids (AHAs) are a fam-

ily of naturally occurring, mild 
acids, 271, 285–287, 293, 296–299. 
See also Glycolic acid

adapalene and, 181, 396, 421
allergies and, 242–243

(AAE), 490

America’s Beauty Network, 490
Amino acids are proteins that help 

break down simple sugars, fats, 
and parts of proteins, 3, 148

Ammonium carbonate, 165
Ammonium hydroxide, 165
Ammonium lauryl sulfate, 172, 297
Amphoteric surfactants may have ei-

ther a positive or negative ionic 
charge. They are frequently used 
in facial lotions and creams, 158

Ampoules are sealed vials of concen-
trated ingredients designed to 
give intensive treatment to a skin 
condition, 209–210

Anaerobic bacteria are those that do not 
need oxygen to grow and survive, 
277

Androgens are male hormones largely 

responsible for oily skin and acne, 
81, 283

Anecdotal is information that purported 
to be accurate but has not yet 
been substantiated, or proved, by 
scientiﬁc means, 187

Anhydrous products are treatment 
products that do not contain 
water, 224
Animal testing, 226–227
Anionic surfactants are strong cleansers 
and are frequently used in house-
hold products, 158
Annular lesion is a ring-shaped 

lesion, 123

Anorexia, 97
Antiaging ingredients

alpha hydroxy acids, 179–182
antiglycation ingredients, 183–184
antioxidants, 182–183
combining, 186–187
ﬂavonoids, 183
grapeseed extract, 401
hydrators, 185
lipid replacement, 185
peptides and collagen stimulants, 

185–186
resveratrol, 184–185
retinol, 186
sunscreen as, 182

Antibiotics are drugs made from ex-

tracts obtained from living organ-
isms and used to ﬁght bacterial 
infections, 46, 294

Antibody is a protein that helps neutral-

ize foreign organisms entering 
the body, 43, 44, 45

Antigen refers to a foreign substance 

recognized by the immune system 
as an invader, 43, 44
Antiglycation ingredients, 183–184
Anti-inﬂammatory ingredients, 297
Antimicrobials, 162–163, 294
Antioxidants are topical free-radical 

scavengers that help neutral-
ize free radicals before they can 
attach themselves to cell mem-
branes, eventually destroying the 
cell. They are added to cosmetic 
formulas to prevent oxidation, 
51–52, 164. See also specifi c 
antioxidants

as antiaging ingredients, 182–183
photoaging skin and, 400–402
sensitive skin and, 253

Antiseptic washes, 35
Antiseptics are a weaker form of 

disinfectant. They are usually 
mild enough to use on the skin, 
28, 31

Apocrine glands are present in the 
groin area and armpits. They 
produce a thicker form of sweat 
and are responsible for produc-
ing the substance that, when in 
contact with bacteria, produces 
body odor, 8, 77, 78

Arbutin is a melanin suppressant, used 
for skin brightening, 192, 367

Argireline, 402



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Arnica montana is a homeopathic herb 

also used to control and speed 
healing from bruising, 442

Aseptic accidents, 38–42
Aseptic procedure is the term scientists 

use to describe proper handling 
techniques of sterilized and disin-
fected equipment, 28, 39, 41–42

Astringents, 201–203, 297
Astringents have a tightening effect on 
the skin or pore appearance, 174

Athlete’s foot, 126
Atom is the smallest measurable unit of 

an element, 142

Atopic dermatitis, 132–133
Atopic eczema, also known as atopic der-
matitis, is a chronic inﬂammatory 
condition of the skin that is heredi-
tary and may be related to respira-
tory allergies or asthma, 132–133

Bacterial skin infections, 123–125
Barrier function refers to the protective 
barrier furnished by the corneum 
and intercellular cement. This 
protects against dehydration of 
the epidermis and exposure to 
irritative substances, 11–13
restoring, after laser resurfacing, 

458–459

sensitive skin and, 188, 232–233
Basal cell carcinomas are the most com-
mon forms of skin cancer; lesions 
have a pearl-like appearance 
with small blood vessels running 
through, 371–372

Basal cells are the cells that make up 

the innermost layer of the epider-
mis, where the epidermal skin 
cells form, 10

Basal layer is the innermost layer of the 

Atrophic scars are depressed scars such 

epidermis, 10

as acne pocks, caused by loss of 
tissue, 123

Bases, 148–151
Bases have a low concentration of hy-

Atrophy means “wasting away”, 123
A/T/S, 123
Autoantibodies are antibodies that at-

tack the body’s own cells, 52

Autoclave is a machine that sterilizes 

drogen atoms and high pH values, 
149

Blood

Bearberry and mulberry extracts are in-
gredients used for skin brighten-
ing, 192, 367

equipment, implements, and other 
materials through a combination 
of steam heat and pressure, 26–27

Beeswax, 165
Benign moles, 373
Bentonite is an oil-absorbing clay 

Autoimmune diseases, 52–54
Autoimmunity is a condition in which 

frequently used in clay cleansing 
masks, 193, 298

the immune system cannot distin-
guish the difference between anti-
gens and its own body cells, 52

Benzalkonium chloride, 28
Benzoic acid, 165
Benzoyl peroxide is a frequently used 

Avita, 138
Avobenzone is a UVA-absorbing sun-
screen ingredient, 191, 377, 385

Azelaic acid is a form of acid, also 

known as Azelex, that is a topical 
prescription drug used for acne 
and rosacea treatment, 123, 138, 268

alpha hydroxy acid and, 421
follicular exfoliation with, 293, 305
mechanical exfoliation and, 415
melanin suppression, 293, 367, 410
side effects, 103, 138
skin care management for, 479

Azelex, 103, 123, 293, 305, 479
Azidothymidine (AZT), 64
Azulene is a hydrocarbon that is derived 

from the chamomile ﬂower, 175, 
247

acne medication; it is an exfoli-
ant and antiseptic, 84, 91, 191, 211, 
294, 305

alpha hydroxy acid and, 181, 188
irritant reactions, 236
in masks, 298
in medicated cleansers, 297
in night treatments, 299, 324
prescription-strength, 123
recommended usage of, 295–296
sensitive skin and, 242

Beta hydroxy acids (BHAs) are a group 
of organic acids used in skin care 
products; BHA includes salicylic 
acid, 179, 191, 271

BHA. See Butylated hydroxyanisole
BHT. See Butylated hydroxytoluene
Bioavailable means “able to be easily 

Index      497

reactions that cause psoriasis, thus 
helping to control and prevent 
symptoms, 134

Biopsied refers to removal of a small 

sample of tissue for microscopic 
or other examination, 317

Birth control pills

acne and, 92, 284–285
hyperpigmentation and, 92–93
melasma and, 88, 92–93, 115
skin problems associated with, 92

Birthmarks, 111
Bisabolol is an agent that is added to 

cosmetics designed for sensitive 
skin, 175, 247

Blackheads. See Open comedones
Blanching occurs when the skin turns 

white upon being touched ﬁrmly 
with the ﬁngers, 230

Bleach. See Sodium hypochlorite
Blepharoplasty is the surgical procedure 

for “lifting” the eyes and remov-
ing excess skin from the eye area, 
444–446

avoiding exposure to, 37
function of, 6
as liquid tissue, 5
septicemia and, 124
viral load in, 64

Blood sugar, 148
Blushline acne is a type of acne cos-

metica characterized by multiple 
closed comedones in the blush-
line; it is caused by comedogenic 
pressing agents and/or dyes in 
the blush, 315

Body, chemicals found in, 147–148
Borage oil is an excellent source of fatty 

acids, including linoleic acid, 176

Boric acid, 31
Botox is a drug treatment for wrinkles 
using a toxin derived from a nor-
mally deadly food bacterium. The 
toxin works by temporarily para-
lyzing speciﬁc muscles that create 
expression lines, 463–464, 475
Botulinum toxin (BTX) is the toxin used 

in Botox, 463

Broad-spectrum antioxidants are a 

mix of various antioxidants that 
help neutralize or stop various 
free-radical reactions during the 
inﬂammation cascade, 401

used by the skin”, 183

Broad-spectrum sunscreens protect 

B cells, also called B lymphocytes, make 

Biochemistry is the study of chemicals 

antibodies that are 
proteins that help prevent fur-
ther infection or reoccurrence, 
44, 45
BABTEC, 477
Bacilli are rod-shaped bacteria that 

cause a variety of diseases, includ-
ing tuberculosis and tetanus, 23, 24

and chemical reactions within the 
body, 147

Biologically inert means a substance 
that does not react with chemi-
cals in the human body, 156, 178

Biologics are protein compounds pre-
pared from live cells; they help 
suppress different biochemical 

against both ultraviolet A and B 
rays, 377

Bromelain is keratolytic enzyme derived 

from pineapple, 193
Brushes, disinfecting, 30–31
BTX. See Botulinum toxin
Buffering refers to adjusting the pH of a 

product to make it more accept-
able to the skin, 165



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.498         INDEX

Bulla is a large vesicle, 122
Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), 164
Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), 164
Butylene glycol is a humectant often 

used in dry- or sensitive-skin 
moisturizers, 175

Calcitonin is one of the hormones se-
creted by the thyroid gland, 79

Calcium carbonate, 165
Calcium hydroxylapatite, 475
Camouﬂage makeup, 479
CA-MRSA. See Community-acquired MRSA
Cancer, causes of, 49–50
Candidas are yeast infections, 127
Caprylic acid, 156
Carbomer, 165
Carbon dioxide (CO2) laser is a surgi-
cal laser used in resurfacing. It 
removes epidermal and dermal 
tissue to treat wrinkles in sun-
damaged skin, 426

Carbuncles are large boils that often 
result in abscesses, 124

Carcinogenic means “cancer causing”, 49
Carcinogens are substances that cause 

cancer, 49

Cardiac muscle tissue is both striated 

and involuntary, 5

Carrier refers to a person who is in-

fected with an illness and able 
to transmit it to another person. 
A carrier may or may not show 
symptoms of the disease, 72
Cartilage is a type of tough connective 
tissue that helps form structures 
in the body, 5

Cathelicidin is an immune protein that 
normally helps protect skin from 
infection and other problems, 263

Cationic surfactants have a positive 

ionic charge. They are frequently 
used in cosmetics and hair sham-
poos, 158

Cell is a very small, self-contained unit 

of life. Within the human body, 
cells specialize in individual func-
tions, 2

nucleus of, 4–5
organelles in, 3
specialization of, 5–6, 13–14
structure of, 2–3

Cell membrane gives the cell structure 

and shape and contains the many 
internal parts of the cell, 2
Cellulitis is a deep infection of the der-
mis caused by streptococcus, 125
Ceramides are lipid materials that are 

a natural part of the intercellular 
cement, 96, 175

Chalazia are small, lumpy cysts in the 

eyelids, 267

Chamomile extract is a soothing agent, 

175, 247

Charting is the process of creating a 

Citric acid, a beta hydroxy acid, is most 

written record of clinical ob-
servations and treatments in a 
client’s or patient’s chart, 118

Cheilitis, also known as perleche, is a 
yeast infection affecting the cor-
ners of the mouth, 127
Chelating agent is a chemical that is 

added to cosmetics to improve the 
efﬁciency of the preservative, 165

Chemical emulsiﬁers are agents that cause 
an even blending of water and oil in 
a lotion or cream, 233

Chemical exfoliants are ingredients 

used to remove dead cells from 
the skin’s surface by chemically 
dissolving the bond between dead 
cells or dissolving the dead cell 
itself, 193

Chemical peeling. See also specifi c peeling 

agents

reactions to, 432–433
surgical, 451–452

Chemical reactions are reactions be-

tween two elements or two com-
pounds that result in chemical 
changes, 147

Chemical terms, 151–152
Chemical-absorbing sunscreen contains 

ingredients that absorb and neu-
tralize ultraviolet 
rays, 377

Chemistry, principles of, 142–146
Chemo exfoliation is the use of chemi-
cals to exfoliate or peel the sur-
face of the skin, 18

Chin acne, 283–284
Chloasma, often called “liver spots,” are 
dark brown patches of hyperpig-
mentation on the skin caused by 
sun overexposure, 116, 366

Chloramine-T, 31
Chlorazene, 31
Chlorozol, 31
Cholesterol is a lipid material that is a 
natural part of the intercellular 
cement, 13, 175

Chromatin is largely responsible for cell 

division, 5

Chromosomes are chromatin ﬁbers, 5
Chronic wasting syndrome refers to 

rapid, unexplained weight loss, 64
Chrysin is a ﬂavonoid derived from pas-
sion ﬂower, used to help clear up 
dark circles under the eyes, 183

CIDESCO, 477, 490
CIR. See Cosmetic Ingredient Review
Cirrhosis is scarring within the liver 
caused by chronic inﬂammation; 
it can be caused by chronic viral 
infection and is often caused by 
alcoholism. Cirrhosis can lead 
to liver failure, liver cancer, and 
death, 72

often used as a pH adjuster but 
can also be used as a mild exfoli-
ant, 165, 179

Citrus extract and lemon extracts have 

astringent effects, 174
Claim substantiation testing is per-

formed, usually by independent 
consumer testing laboratories, 
to back up and document claims 
made by product companies, 227

Cleaning

disinfection vs., 38
extraction and, 336
general, 32–33
high-frequency electrodes, 30
iontophoresis rollers, 30
over, 288
sponges, 32
tweezers, 31

Cleansers, 196
acne, 199
combination skin, 197–200
dry skin, 197–198, 201
emulsion, 173
exfoliating, 297
masks, 193, 298
medicated, 199, 297
milk, 173, 199–201, 297
oily skin, 197–200
rinsable, 197–199
rosacea and, 270
sensitive skin, 200–201, 253
superfatted, 173
Cleansing agents, 172–174
Cleansing milk is an emollient, non-

foaming cleanser generally used 
for makeup removal, 173, 199–201, 
297

Cleansing sponges, 32
Cleocin T, 123, 294
Client conﬁdentiality, 119–120
Client health history, 101
Clindamycin is a topical prescription 

antibiotic used for acne treatment, 
123, 294, 305

Clinical comedogenics, 326–327
Clinical esthetics, 469
Clinical skin care, 489
Clogged pores, 330
Clog-prone skin, foundations for, 324–325
Closed comedones are noninﬂammatory 
acne lesions, known as white-
heads, 109, 277, 330

extraction of, 338

CO2 laser. See Carbon dioxide laser
Cocamidopropyl betaine, 172
Cocci are round bacteria that often oc-

cur in groups, 23, 24

Coherent describes extremely concen-

trated light, 472

Cold creams, 160, 174
Cold globes, 19
Cold sores, 59



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Collagen injections are procedures 

Communicable diseases are diseases 

performed by a plastic surgeon; 
they involve injecting collagen 
into depression scars or wrinkles 
to reduce the appearance of the 
lesion, 462, 475

Collagen is a large, long-chain molecu-

lar protein that lies on top of the 
skin and binds water; it also helps 
prevent water loss, 7, 16, 176

Collagen stimulants, 185–186
Collagenase is an enzyme produced 

during inﬂammation that breaks 
down collagen in the skin, 182

Color agents, 239
Coloring agents, 165–166
Combination skin is facial skin charac-
terized by a mix of oily and dry 
skin areas, 104

Combination-dry is a skin type that has 
both oily and dry areas but is pre-
dominantly dry. It is indicated by 
larger pores through the middle 
of the T-zone only, 107

Combination-oily is a skin type that has 
both oily and dry areas but is pre-
dominantly oily. It is indicated by 
larger pores through the T-zone, 
expanding into the outer cheeks, 
with smaller pores in the facial 
perimeter only, 107

Comedogenic is the tendency of a topical 

substance to cause a buildup of 
dead cells, resulting in the devel-
opment of comedones, 254, 314, 
326–327, 478

Comedogenic reaction is a gradual 

buildup of cells caused by fatty 
topical products; the result is the 
formation of open or closed com-
edones, 282

Comedogenicity is the tendency of 

topical substances to cause the 
development of comedones, possi-
bly leading to or worsening acne 
eruptions, 313, 314
chemistry of, 320–323
client product analysis for, 327–328
ingredients frequently causing, 

318–320

product analysis for, 323–325
testing for, 316–317

Comedonal acne is the most common 
form of acne; the skin develops 
comedones from 
genetic retention hyperkeratosis 
and oiliness, 281

Comedone extractors, 30–31
Comedones

closed, 109, 277, 330, 338
extraction of, 336–338
micro, 293
open, 109, 277, 330, 333–334, 336–338
solar, 345–346

that can be transferred from one 
person to another, 57, 58

Community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) 
is a type of MRSA that can result 
in boil-like skin lesions. It must 
be referred to a physician, 60

Compound is produced when 

molecules of two different 
elements join, 146

Compromised is to be impaired or 

injured, not completely functional, 
16

Compulsive skin picking (CSP) is a con-
dition in which a person picks at 
acne lesions, 288

Coneﬂower (Echinacea purpurea) is 

part of a patented botanical 
complex that helps improve the 
appearance of skin elasticity, 186
Congenital refers to conditions of the 

body present since birth, 111

Conjunctivitis is a bacterial eye infec-
tion, commonly called pinkeye, 
37, 58

Connective tissue is a group of cells that 

specialize in providing support 
and cushioning for the body, 5

Contact dermatitis is an inﬂamed condi-

tion caused by an allergic reaction 
to, or by irritation of, something 
or some substance that touches 
the skin or comes in contact with 
the skin’s surface, 131–132, 235–236

medical treatment of, 254–255

Contamination means that a surface or 

substance has been exposed to 
microorganisms, 36

Contraindications are treatment tech-

niques, products, or ingredients 
that must be avoided because of 
individual client conditions that 
may cause side effects or possibly 
endanger the client’s health, 101

Control group is the group in an experi-

ment that has no change in its 
behavior during the experiment, 
486

Corneocytes are cells of the stratum 

corneum, 10, 15

Cornﬂower extract is a soothing agent, 

247

Corniﬁed envelope is a structure in 

the top-layer cells of the stratum 
corneum, located just beneath the 
cell membrane, made of a variety 
of overlapping proteins that form 
a very strong barrier structure to 
help provide additional barrier 
capabilities at the top of the epi-
dermis, 11, 232

Index      499

Cortisone, 138
Corundum is an aluminum oxide crystal 

powder often used in microderm-
abrasion, 18

Cosmeceuticals are products that are not 

drugs intended to treat disease, 
but they still beneﬁt the skin in a 
positive way, 172, 221

Cosmetic dermatology is a subspecialty 

of dermatology treating appear-
ance-oriented problems of the 
skin, 470–475

Cosmetic ﬁllers, 475
Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR), 164, 

180, 418

Cosmetic surgery generally refers to sur-
gical procedures used for cosmetic 
purposes only, 436
patient concerns, 436
types of, 437–452

Cosmetics are articles intended to be 
applied to the human body to 
alter the appearance or promote 
attractiveness, 171, 172

acne and, 290
buying, 227–228
drugs vs., 220–221
fragrance-free, 224
hypoallergenic, 224
natural, 225
organic, 226
preservative-free, 224

Cosmoderm, 462, 475
Cosmoplast, 462, 475
Couperose refers to diffuse redness, 

including telangiectasias of the 
face and other areas of the body, 
89, 113, 135, 234, 259, 260
Covalent bond is the bond between 

atoms sharing electrons, 144

COX. See Cyclooxygenase
Cream peel, 429, 432
Cross-contamination occurs when you 

touch a contaminated surface 
or substance and then touch an 
uncontaminated item, 36, 39

Cross-linking is a process in which 
collagen and elastin ﬁbrils in 
the dermis collapse, causing the 
support system for the skin also 
to, 370

Crust is caked body ﬂuids, pus, or 

blood remnants left from diseased 
skin, 122

Cryosurgery is the dermatological removal 
of lesions by freezing, usually with 
liquid nitrogen, 375
CSP. See Compulsive skin picking
Cushing’s syndrome, 80
Cyanoacrylate is a synthetic polymer, 

commonly known as superglue, 318

Corticosteroids are drugs used to sup-
press symptoms and the overac-
tive immune system, 55

Cyclomethicone is a type of silicone 
used primarily as a vehicle or 
emollient, 155, 178



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.500         INDEX

Cyclooxygenase, often called COX, is an 

Dermatitis is inﬂammation of the skin, 

enzyme that helps produce pros-
taglandin, 49

Cyclopentasiloxane is a silicone-based 
ingredient used as a vehicle or 
emollient, 155, 178

Cysts are deep infections caused by the 

deep, massive invasion of white 
blood cells, 111, 123, 280

dermatological treatment of, 307
Cytokine is a chemical released by cells 
to signal other chemical immune 
responses, 233

Cytoplasm is a ﬂuid inside cells that 

is made of water and other sub-
stances, 2

Day creams and treatments, 203–205
comedogenicity analysis for, 324
D&C Red No. 4 Aluminum Lake, 166
Decyl polyglucoside, 172
Defatting agents remove fats and lipids, 
along with dirt, makeup, and 
debris, from the surface of the 
skin, 172

Dehydrated, clogged skin, 325–326, 345
Dehydration is a condition in which the 
skin lacks moisture in the surface 
cells, 107–109, 122, 175, 355

131, 235

Dermatographic literally means “skin 

writing.” Skin turns red and 
swells at the slightest scrape, 234

Dermatoheliosis (dur-muh-tohheel-

ee-OH-sis) is the medical term 
describing long-term damage to 
the skin caused by sun exposure, 
369

Dermatological surgeons are dermatolo-
gists who also perform plastic or 
cosmetic surgery, 437

Dermatologist tested, 225
Dermis, often called the “live” layer of 
the skin, lies next to the subcuta-
neous skin layer, 6

Desincrustation refers to the process of 
softening the skin and sebaceous 
impaction by applying a chemi-
cal that helps liquefy the sebum, 
reducing hard, solid plugs to a 
softer consistency, 334

Desquamation is the process of dead 

cells shedding off the skin, 9

Detergents are cleansing ingredients 
that help break up and remove 
fatty residues and other impuri-
ties from the skin, 172–173

Discoids are the hard, round lesions 
that form around hair follicles 
when a person has DLE, 53

Disease protection, 34–37
Disinfectants are chemicals that kill 

pathogenic microorganisms. EPA-
registered disinfectant is a disin-
fectant that is registered with the 
Environmental Protection Agency, 
28–29, 31

Disinfection is the process of killing the 

majority of pathogenic microor-
ganisms, 28
of brushes, 30–31
cleaning vs., 38
of electrodes, 40
of estheticians, 40–41
sterilization vs., 38

Disodium EDTA, 165
Disodium lauryl sulfate, 172
Disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate, 297
Disposable materials, 29
Distillation is the process of purifying 

water, 154

DLE. See Discoid lupus erythematosus
Doxycycline, commercially known as 

Oracea, is an oral antibiotic used 
to treat more severe cases of 
rosacea, 138, 268

Deionizing is the process of neutralizing 

Detergents are surfactants used for 

Drug cocktails are mixtures of several 

ions in water that can cross-react 
in a product, 154

Delivery systems are special ingredi-
ents or groups of ingredients 
that place speciﬁc ingredients in 
speciﬁc places for best results in 
affecting the skin’s appearance, 
167, 401

Dementia is a decrease in cognitive abil-

ities that can occur in a chronic, 
slowly progressing manner or as 
part of an acute illness such as 
encephalitis, 63

Demodex folliculorum is a type of skin 
mite that is sometimes associated 
with rosacea, 262

Dendrites are the branch-like structures 
on the ends of certain cells, such 
as nerve cells, melanocytes, and 
Langerhans cells, 13, 47

Dendritic describes cells that have one 

end with branches, 13

Depigmentation drugs, 52
Dermabrasion is the technique of re-

ducing acne scarring; scar tissue; 
and, in some cases, wrinkles, 
448–451

Dermal papillae attach to the 

epidermis, 7

cleansing, 158
DHA. See Dihydroxyacetone
DHT. See Dihydrotestosterone
Diabetes is a disease that results from 

the pancreas not secreting enough 
insulin, 80–81

Diet

acne and, 289–290
aging and, 356

Differin, 123, 138, 256

alpha hydroxy acid treatment and, 181
follicular exfoliation and, 293, 305
side effects, 103
skin care management for, 479

Diffuse redness, 113
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is a form 

of male hormone that stimulates 
the sebaceous glands to produce 
sebum, 283

Dihydroxyacetone (DHA) is an ingredi-

different drugs that work well 
together, 64
Drug facts labeling, 189–190
Drug facts labels are special charts used 
on the packages of over-the-counter 
drugs to inform the consumer 
about the drug’s uses and pos-
sible problems, 189

Drug is an article intended to affect the 

structure or any function of the 
body, 171, 172

cosmetics vs., 220–221
esthetic skin typing and, 103
labeling of, 223–224
sensitive skin and, 256

Dry (alipidic) skin is a skin type char-

acterized by very small or barely 
visible pores, indicating below-
average sebaceous production, 
104

ent used in self-tanning agents 
that causes keratin to turn brown 
when applied, 387

Dimethicone is a smaller, lighter version 

of silicone, 155, 178

products for, 178–179

Drying alcohols are alcohols used in 

cosmetics that have a drying 
effect, such as isopropyl or SD 
alcohol, 233

Dipotassium glycyrrhizinate is a sooth-

ing agent derived from licorice 
extract, 247

Dyschromias are conditions that cause 
changes in the normal colors of 
the skin, 113, 123

Disaccharide means two saccharides are 

Dysplastic means “abnormal growth”, 

Dermaplaning is a procedure that in-

bonded together, 148

374

volves carefully planing the facial 
skin with a scalpel-like instru-
ment before using alpha or beta 
hydroxy acid peels, 472

Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is 
a form of lupus that affects the 
skin, producing hard, round le-
sions, 53

Dysport is an injectable drug derived 
from botulinum toxin, used to 
treat expression lines in the face, 
463



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Ecamsule, also known as Mexoryl, is a 

Endocrinologists specialize in treating 

UVA-absorbing sunscreen ingredi-
ent, 377, 385

diseases of the endocrine system, 
469

Eccrine glands are sweat glands found 
in the face and other parts of the 
body, 8
Eczema. See Dermatitis
Eczematization refers to a combination 

of symptoms, including erythema, 
weeping, crusting, and present 
vesicles, 123

Edema is swelling, 230
EDTA. See Ethylenediaminetetraacetic 

acid
Education, 488–489
Efudex, 375
Elastase is an enzyme produced during 

inﬂammation that breaks down 
elastin ﬁbers in the skin, 182
Elastin ﬁbrils intertwine throughout the 

reticular layer and give the skin 
ﬁrmness and elasticity, 7

Elastin is a large, long-chain molecular 

protein that lies on top of the 
skin and binds water; it also helps 
prevent water loss, 176

Elastosis is lack of skin ﬁrmness and lack 

of elasticity, 8, 116, 352

Electrodes

cleaning, 30
disinfection of, 40

Electrolysis, 479
Electrons are negatively charged par-
ticles that orbit the nucleus of 
an atom. The exchange of these 
particles causes chemical reac-
tions, 142

Electro-optical synergy (ELOS) is a 

medical technique of treating cos-
metic disorders using a combina-
tion of light and radio frequency 
energy, 474

Index      501

emollients in skin care products 
and cosmetics, 157

Esthetic skin typing, 101–104
EstheticsAmerica, 477, 489–490
Estradiol is a steroid made from the 

hormone estrogen that gives 
women female characteristics, 81

Estrogen is the hormone that gives 

women female characteristics, 
81, 92

Ethanol is specially denatured ethyl al-
cohol, also known as SD alcohol, 
174
Ethyl alcohol, 31
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 165
Eumelanin is the only type of melanin 

in the skin that is brown-black in 
color, 13

Endoplasmic reticulum is a maze-

like structure inside cells. This 
network of material forms little 
canals within the cytoplasm that 
allows substances and other 
organelles to move around, 3
Endoscopic forehead lifting is a surgical 

procedure used to lift the fore-
head area by working from small 
incisions made farther back into 
the scalp, 444

Endothelial tissue refers to inner tissues 
that line the walls of the intes-
tines, lungs, and other internal 
organs, 5

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 28
Enzyme inhibitors are chemicals that 

Evaluating products, 487–490
Evening primrose oil is an excellent 

interfere with enzyme activity. In 
the case of HIV infection, they 
interfere with enzymes that cause 
viral replication, 64

source of fatty acids, including 
linoleic acid, 176

Excoriation is a scrape or scratch on the 

skin, 122, 288

Enzyme peels, 335–336
Enzymes are naturally occurring 

Exercise, 356
Exfoliants usually come in the form 

chemicals used in cosmetics 
primarily as chemical exfoliants, 
193, 293

EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
Epidermal–dermal junction is where the 

epidermis and dermis are con-
nected, 8

Epidermis is the outermost layer of the 

skin and is made up of ﬁve layers, 
7, 8–11

Epiduo, 305
Epilepsy, 103
Epithelial tissue refers to outer tissues 
that line the outer and exposed 
body surfaces, 5

Equation is a chemical reaction such 

of scrubs. They are water-based 
products containing a humectant 
mixed with some sort of abrasive 
agent such as almond meal or 
polyethylene granules, 192–193, 
214, 293

rosacea and, 271
skin care products for users of, 305–306
Exfoliating cleansers are acne cleansers 
to which small, bead-like granules 
made of polyethylene or ground 
nuts, seeds, or hulls have been 
added, 297

Exfoliation. See also Chemical exfoliants; Me-
chanical exfoliation; specifi c exfoliants

for aging skin, 360
follicular, 293
for photoaging, 395
salon treatments, 416–418
surface, 414–416
types of, 18

Exocrine glands, such as the sebaceous 
glands and the sudoriferous 
glands, have ducts through which 
chemicals move, 77, 78

Expression lines, 353–354
Expression lines are caused by constant 

or repetitive facial expressions, 
116

External phase is the water in an oil-in-

water emulsion, 161

Extraction refers to the removal of dead 

cells, sebum, bacteria, and other 
debris from the skin’s follicles, 
329

analysis of need for, 330–333
clogged, dehydrated skin and, 345
of closed comedones, 338

Eleidin is a substance produced from 

keratohyalin and will eventually 
form keratin, 10

that equal numbers of the same 
atom are on either side of the 
reaction, 147

Element is a chemical in its simplest 

Erosion refers to a shallow depression 

form, 142

ELOS. See Electro-optical synergy
Emollients are somewhat like occlusives 

in that they mostly lie on the sur-
face of the skin and prevent water 
loss. They also help “ﬁll in the 
cracks” of dry, dehydrated skin, 
155–156, 177–178

comedogenicity and, 319–320
Emulsiﬁers are chemicals that keep 

water and oil solutions well 
mixed, 159–161

Emulsion cleansers, better known as 

cleansing milks, are nonfoaming, 
cream-type cleansers, 173
Endocrine glands secrete hormones 
directly into the bloodstream, 
77, 78–82

in the skin, 122

Erycette, 123
Erysipelas, also known as St. Anthony’s 
Fire, is a severe form of bacterial 
cellulitis, 125

Erythema refers to any area of redness 
associated with a lesion, 113, 122, 
230

Erythematotelangiectatic rosacea is a 

subtype of rosacea characterized 
by diffuse, patchy redness and a 
grainy texture, 264

Erythromycin is an antibiotic used topi-
cally for medical acne treatment, 
123, 294

Esters, 320
Esters are modiﬁed fatty substances that 
are primarily used as vehicles and 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Eye creams are designed for the skin 

Flavonoids are plant-derived antioxidant 

around the eye area, 211–212

substances, 183

502         INDEX

Extraction (continued )

dermatologist referral for, 479
duration of, 346–347
enzyme peels and alpha hydroxy exfo-

liation for, 335–336

examination procedures for, 331
extractor technique for, 337–338
facial treatment before and after, 

340–341

ﬁnger technique for, 336–337
frequent mistakes in, 340
general rules for, 343
hygiene and, 336
lesions around eyes and, 344–345
of milia, 341–344
of open comedones, 336–338
pre-softening before, 334
of pustules, 339
solar blackheads, 345–346

Extrinsic aging factors are the effect of 

outside inﬂuences on the skin’s 
health, 349, 350

Extrinsic aging is premature aging of 
the skin due to environmental 
factors such as sun exposure, 116

Eyelid dermatitis is a lid irritation re-
sulting in swelling and redness 
of the eyelids, 245–246

Eyes

jaundice and, 72
lesions around, 344–345
milia around, 344–345
ocular rosacea, 267
pinkeye, 37
puffy, 212

Facial plastic surgeons specialize in 

plastic surgery of the face, head, 
and neck, 437

Facial sculpting, also known as soft 

tissue augmentation, which is a 
technique of using ﬁller materials 
to reshape the facial, 460
Fat injections are ﬁlling injections us-
ing the patient’s own fat to ﬁll 
depressions and wrinkles, 462

Fat-soluble vitamins, 16
Fatty acids are another component of 

the fatty materials in the barrier 
function. They are naturally 
derived fatty materials used in 
cosmetics as emollients, lubri-
cants, and to improve product 
texture, 13, 156, 175, 319

Fatty alcohols are fatty materials used 

as vehicles and emollients in skin 
care products and cosmetics, 157, 
320

Fatty esters, 157–158
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
FD&C. See Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
Federal Packaging and Labeling Act, 221

Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 227
Feverfew is a soothing agent, 247
Fibroblasts are specialized cells that 

produce collagen, 7

Fillers, 475
Fillers are materials used to ﬁll wrinkles 
and skin depressions by injection 
or implantation, 460

Finacea, 103, 138, 268
Finevin, 103
Finger technique, extraction and, 336–337
Fitzpatrick Skin Typing is a way of 

classifying skin by its tendency 
to sunburn or tan; indicates how 
susceptible a person is to sun 
damage and erythema, 100, 101, 
379

5-aminolevulinic acid, also known as 
Levulan or Kerastick, is a drug 
chemical that is used when 
administering photodynamic 
therapy, 307–308

Foundations, clog-prone skin and, 

324–325

Fractional laser, sometimes called by 

its trademark name Fraxel, is 
used to treat wrinkles, photo 
damage, mild scarring, and 
hyperpigmentation. This ablative 
laser is split into thousands of 
columns, hence the name frac-
tional. The method provides re-
sults over a series of treatments 
with less severe and fewer side 
effects and downtime, 454

Fragrance allergies, 238–239
Fragrance-free cosmetics, 224
Free radicals are oxygen atoms that are 

unstable because they have lost 
an electron in their outer orbit. 
They are attracted to fats and 
lipids, which have extra electrons 
available to stabilize these oxygen 
atoms, 50–51, 384

Flare is when pimples and redness oc-

Frosting describes a white appearance 

cur in a person who has rosacea, 
260

Fluocinolone acetonide, 138
Fluorouracil is a topical prescription 
drug used to remove multiple 
actinic keratoses, 375

Flushing, 94–95
Flushing refers to the reddening of the 

skin due to stimulation, 259, 260

Follicle-related conditions, 109–111
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is a 

hormone secreted by the pituitary 
gland that causes the develop-
ment of the egg, or ovum, 79, 
82–83, 86–87

Follicular exfoliants are chemical ingre-

dients that slough the inside of 
the follicle, shedding and prevent-
ing cell buildup that can cause 
comedones and acne lesions, 
293, 305

Folliculitis is a bacterial infection of the 

hair follicle, 69, 123

Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C), 219, 

220

Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 160, 

164, 165, 180, 219, 367

sunscreen ingredient names and, 190

Forehead lift is a surgical procedure 

that helps correct elastosis of the 
forehead and lift the brows, 444

Formaldehyde, 28
Formalin donors are preservatives or 

chemicals that release small 
amounts of formaldehyde, 240

of the skin that appears after 
applying a strong exfoliation or 
peeling substance. It is caused by 
denaturing keratin protein in the 
corneum cells, 429

FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission
Functional ingredients are cosmetic in-

gredients that are used primarily 
to spread, preserve, or affect the 
feel or look of a product, 153, 154

Fungal skin infections, 125–127
Furuncle is a severe infection of the hair 
follicle. It is also known as a boil, 
124

GAGs. See Glycosaminoglycans
Gellant is an agent that is added to a 
product to give it a gel-like con-
sistency, 165

General plastic surgeons perform all 
types of plastic, reconstructive, 
and cosmetic surgery, 437
Genes are small structures that contain 

hereditary traits, 5

Genetics, 352. See also Heredity
sensitive skin and, 230
skin color and, 14

Geographic lesion looks like a map, 123
Gestational diabetes, 80
Glabella is the muscle between the eyes 
that frequently causes expression 
lines in the forehead area. This 
area is frequently treated with 
Botox, 463

Globules are oil droplets in an oil-in-

water emulsion, 161

Formication is an itching and tingling 

Glogau Photoaging Classiﬁcation is a 

feeling of the skin experienced by 
some women during menopause, 
95

scale developed by renowned Uni-
versity of California dermatologist 
Richard Glogau which ranks the 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.severity level of photoaging skin 
by the speciﬁc characteristics of 
the individual’s skin, 116–118

Gloves, 35–36, 40
Glucose, 148
Glutaraldehyde, 28
Glycation is an abnormal, damaging 
biochemical process in which 
blood sugars bind with proteins 
or fats, 183

Glycerin is a humectant and is a very 
strong water binder, 176

Glycerol is a humectant that is a natural 

part of the intercellular cement, 
175

Glycolic acid is an alpha hydroxy acid 

used primarily as a cellular exfoli-
ant. It has many beneﬁcial effects 
on the skin’s appearance, 18, 179, 
192, 293, 296–297

Glycolic peeling treatments, 418–422, 424

Index      503

Hamamelis extract, or Witch hazel, can 

be a soothing agent; in higher 
concentrations, it is an astringent, 
174

rhytidectomy pre-care, 441
for rosacea, 272–273
sensitive skin and, 250–254
Homogenizers are high-speed mix-

Hand washing, 40–41
Hard water is water that contains a lot 
of minerals and lime, 244
Health Insurance Portability and Account-

ers used to emulsify lotions and 
creams, 162

Homosalate, 191
Hordeolums, or styes, are infected tear 

ability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), 120

ducts, 267

Heavy creams, 326
Hectorite is a clay used in cleansing 

Hormonal phases of life, 83–87
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 

masks, 193

Helicobacter pylori is a type of intesti-
nal bacterium that is sometimes 
associated with rosacea, 262

Hematomas are bruises, 122
Hepatitis is an inﬂammation of the liver, 

uses oral or injectable female 
hormones to control or pre-
vent symptoms of menopause. 
HRT may also help prevent 
skin changes or osteoporosis in 
women, 94

72–73, 103

Hormones are special chemicals that 

Hereditary means a trait or condition is 

inherited from the parents; it is 
genetic, 232, 276

for acne, 311–312

Heredity, 352

Glycolipids, 148
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are car-

bohydrate chains that help bind 
water in the dermis, 8
Glycosphingolipids are lipid materi-

als that are a natural part of the 
intercellular cement, 13, 175
Glycosylation is a normal reaction that 

binds proteins to glucose in the pro-
duction of energy for the cell, 183

Golgi apparatus is a storage mechanism 
that helps store proteins for later 
conversion to manufacture other 
necessary chemicals when the cell 
needs them, 3

Gommage is a mechanical exfoliation 

procedure in which a parafﬁn-
based cream is applied to the 
skin, allowed to dry, and then 
“rolled” off the skin surface, re-
moving dead surface cells, 193, 416

Gortex, 463
Granulomatous rosacea causes hard, 

nodular papules in any form of 
rosacea, 267

Grapeseed extract is a powerful antioxi-
dant extract, often used in sooth-
ing, anti-redness, and antiaging 
products, 401

Graves’ disease, 79
Green tea is a very strong antioxidant, of-
ten used in soothing, anti-redness, 
and anti-aging products, 175, 401
Ground substance is a jelly-like ﬂuid 

acne and, 276
atopic eczema and, 132–133
intrinsic aging and, 7, 116, 349–350
port-wine stains and, 111, 136
skin types and, 101–104, 108, 

378–380

Herpes refers to a group of viruses, 37, 

67–68, 128

Herpes simplex is the virus that causes 

fever blisters or cold sores, 59, 
103–104, 128

Herpes zoster, better known as shingles, 

is caused by the same virus that 
causes chicken pox. The lesions of 
herpes zoster look like multiple 
red blisters, 67, 128, 129

Hesperidin methyl chalcone is a citrus 
bioﬂavonoid used to reduce the 
appearance of redness and under-
eye circles, 183

Hexachlorophene, 14
High-frequency electrodes, cleaning, 30
High-frequency treatment releases 

heat deeper into the skin layers, 
helping to stimulate the skin and 
increase product absorption, 20

HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 

Accountability Act of 1996
Hirsutism refers to excessive hair 

growth, 97

Histopathological refers to microscopic 

examination of tissue to deter-
mine causes of disease or abnor-
mality, 316

in the dermis that cushions and 
helps with moisture retention, 8

HIV. See Human immunodeﬁciency virus
Hives are a localized swelling, usually 

H1N1, 27
Hair follicles, 14
Hairy leukoplakia is a tumorlike erup-

tion that can occur on the tongue 
or the insides of the cheeks, 70

caused by allergies, 230

Home-care programs and products
for aging skin, 359–360
alpha hydroxy acids, 398–400
mechanical exfoliation and, 416
for photoaging skin, 398–400, 404–406

are manufactured or secreted by 
glands within the body, 77, 78. 
See also specifi c hormones

acne and, 283
aging and, 355
anorexia and, 97
menopause and, 93–96
obesity and, 97
ovaries and testes producing, 82–83

Hot ﬂashes, 94–95
HRT. See Hormone replacement therapy
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), 61
illnesses associated with, 63–64
personal precautions, 66
symptoms of, 63–64
treatment of, 64–65

Humectants or hydrophilic agents are 
ingredients in moisturizers that 
attract and bind water to the skin 
cells, infusing the dehydrated 
cells with moisture, 108, 175–177
Hyalurodinase is an enzyme produced 
during inﬂammation that breaks 
down hyaluronic acid in the skin, 
182

Hyaluronic acid, or sodium hyaluronate, 

is a hydrophilic agent with excel-
lent water-binding properties. It 
is used as a ﬁlling material used 
for correcting wrinkles. Another 
type of hyaluronic acid is used in 
moisturizers and other skin care 
products to bind water to the skin 
surface, 8, 176, 182, 462
Hydrating ingredients, 175–176
Hydration

of aging skin, 185
of photoaging skin, 404
sensitive skin and, 253–254

Hydrocortisone is a hormone that helps 

relieve inﬂammation and skin ir-
ritation, 52, 103, 138

Hydrocotyl (Centella asiatica) is part of 
a patented botanical complex that 
helps improve the appearance of 
skin elasticity, 186



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.ing of the immune system, 50

the emulsion, 161

Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), 80
Impaired means there is damage in the 

International companies, 227
International Cosmetic Ingredient 

barrier function of the skin, 11
Impetigo is a bacterial skin infection 

Dictionary & Handbook, 222
International Nomenclature Cosmetic 

504         INDEX

Hydrogen peroxide, 28, 31
Hydrophilic ingredients, or “water-

loving” ingredients, attract 
and bind water, 161, 176

Hydroquinone, 52, 93, 138
Hydroquinone is an active topical ingre-
dient that inhibits the production 
of melanin, 138, 192, 367

ICD. See Irritant contact dermatitis
Idebenone is a powerful antioxidant, 401
IGT. See Impaired glucose tolerance
Immune describes the body’s defense 
against disease and inability to 
contract an illness due to excel-
lent function of the immune 
system, 43, 44

Hydroxyl radical is a very destructive 

Immune system is the body’s mecha-

form of free radical, 51
Hydroxysuccinimide helps clear up 
dark circles under the eyes by 
chelating iron and bilirubin (a 
pigment in hemoglobin), help-
ing to disperse the biological 
components that create dark 
circles, 183

Hygiene. See Cleaning
Hylaform, 462, 475
Hyperpigmentation refers to any condi-
tion that has more than a normal 
amount of melanin, 13, 113, 123, 
366

acne excoriée and, 288
alpha hydroxy peeling treatments for, 

423

birth control pills and, 92–93
chloasma, 116, 366
laser resurfacing surgery and, 455, 457
post-inﬂammatory, 13, 115, 288
solar freckles, 376
treatment of, 93, 409–410, 473

Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which 
the thyroid gland secretes too 
much thyroid hormone, 79

nism for ﬁghting diseases, 43, 44

communication in, 48–49
components of, 44–45
medicine and, 46
skin’s role in, 46–48

Immunoglobulins, or Igs, are antibodies 
that protect against speciﬁc 
invaders, 44, 45

Immunosuppression refers to the slow-

resulting in weeping sores; com-
monly seen in children, 37, 59–60, 
69, 123

Implants are small silicone or saline 

“sacks” used to improve the 
cheeks and chin, 460

In vitro refers to scientiﬁc testing that 
occurs outside of a living organ-
ism. It has not been tested on a 
live specimen, 226

INCI. See International Nomenclature 

Cosmetic Ingredient

Hypertrophic describes a raised scar 

Infectious diseases are highly conta-

above the skin’s surface, 111
Hypertrophy is thickening of a tissue, 

gious diseases that can easily be 
transferred to another person, 58

123

Inﬂammation cascade is a series of 

Hypoallergenic cosmetics are generally 

those manufactured without the 
use of certain ingredients that are 
known to frequently cause aller-
gic reactions, 224, 238

Hypopigmentation refers to any area 

with less than the normal amount 
of pigment, 113, 123

Hypothalamus gland controls some 

involuntary muscles, such as the 
muscles of the intestines that 
help move food through the gas-
trointestinal system, 78

Hypothalamus manufactures hormones 
that stimulate the pituitary 
gland to make other hormones. 
It is also able to detect needs 
of various parts of the body by 
chemically monitoring the blood, 
78

Hypothyroidism is a condition in which 

the thyroid gland secretes too 
little thyroid hormone, 79

Hypotrophic describes a depressed 

biochemical reactions triggered 
by inﬂammation (often sun 
exposure) and resulting in skin 
damage and breakdown; also 
sometimes called the free-radical 
cascade, 182, 233–234, 392, 401

Inﬂammation is a complex or series of 
biological biochemical processes 
responding to a negative event 
that affects cells of the human 
body, 51–52

Inﬂammatory acne is ﬂares of acne 

without comedones; it can result 
from hormonal ﬂares or acne-
genic products causing follicle 
irritation, 276–280, 282, 315
Inﬂammatory means “swollen and red”, 

276

Inﬂammatory mediators are chemicals 

released by irritated cells that 
alert the immune system to the 
irritation, 233

Ingredient lists, 322–323
Ingrown hair is an infected follicle 

the side of the follicle wall, 111, 
123, 202

Intense pulsed light (IPL) is a powerful 

medical light treatment used to 
treat pigmentation, vascular le-
sions, and aging skin, 135, 473–474
Intercellular cement, or interstitial lipid 

matrix, is the cushion of lipid 
substance between the cells of the 
corneum that keeps the skin from 
dehydrating and helps protect the 
skin from irritating substances, 11

Intercellular lipids, 15
Interleukin is present in the cytoplasm 

of T cells and is released as an 
alarm system when the T cell is 
alerted to a foreign body, 48
Internal phase is the dispersed part of 

Ingredient (INCI) names are stan-
dardized ingredient names that 
have been approved for world-
wide use by the international 
cosmetic community, 222

Internists specialize in treating internal 

diseases, including heart prob-
lems, diabetes, and other internal 
afﬂictions, 469

Intradermal means “inside the dermis,” 
which is where collagen and oth-
er ﬁller material may be injected 
to ﬁll out hypotrophic scars, 
wrinkles, or pock marks, 461

Intrinsic aging is the part of the aging 
process that is due to the actual 
passing of the years, wearing out 
of the body, and hereditary fac-
tors, 7, 116, 349, 350

Intrinsic wrinkles, also known as ex-

pression lines, are naturally 
occurring wrinkles caused by 
constant or repetitive facial 
expressions, 116

Invasive procedures are procedures that 

enter the body, 28, 470

Iodine, 79
Ionic bond is the bond of two ions join-
ing to form a molecule, 144

Ionization uses electrical current to 
polarize preparations into the 
skin, 20

Ions, or charged atoms, are the result-

ing atoms with new charges when 
atoms “steal” or “give away” elec-
trons to each other, 144
Iontophoresis rollers, cleaning, 30
Iontophoresis uses electrical current 

to polarize preparations into the 
skin, 20

scar, 111

caused by a hair that grows into 

IPL. See Intense pulsed light



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Index      505

Irritancy potential is the tendency of a 

substance to cause skin irritation, 
246

Irritancy testing, 247–248
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is 

inﬂammation resulting from a 
substance that is irritating the 
skin, 235–236

pinpoint-sized white papules that 
look like tiny milia, 85, 134–135, 
286
Klaron, 138, 268
Kojic acid is a melanin suppressant 

“brightening” ingredient, 192, 367

KS. See Kaposi’s sarcoma

Irritant reactions, 236–237
Irritants are substances that can inﬂame 

Labeling laws, 221–223
Lactic acid is an alpha hydroxy acid 

Light therapy, 307–308. See also Electro-

optical synergy; Intense pulsed light; 
Photodynamic therapy

Light treatments, 103
Light-emitting diode (LED) treatment 

is a fast-ﬂashing light treatment 
that is often used to treat diffuse 
redness and increase the collagen 
content of the skin, 103, 135, 273, 
407, 408

the skin, 187–188, 235–236
Isopropyl alcohol is a fairly strong 

drying alcohol used as a cleans-
ing and drying agent to remove 
excess oil from very oily skin. 
Isopropyl alcohol can dehydrate 
and irritate if overused or used 
on skin that is not excessively 
oily, 17, 31, 174, 175, 233
Isotretinoin (commonly known as 

Accutane ) is an oral medication 
derived from vitamin A and used 
to treat severe cystic acne, 103, 
138, 306–307, 428, 480

ITEC, 477

Jaundice is a yellowing of the skin and 

eyes, 72
Javelle water, 31
Juvederm, 462, 475

Kaolin is a clay used in oil-absorbing and 
cleansing mask products, 193

Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) is a rare form 
of skin cancer characterized by 
purple-brown lesions, 70

Kerastick, 307, 308
Keratin is a protein that helps protect 

the skin against invasion, 10

Keratinization is the process in which 
the epidermal cells ﬁll with kera-
tin protein as they approach the 
surface of the epidermis, 13
Keratinocytes are epidermal cells ﬁlled 

with keratin, 10

Keratohyalin helps form keratin, 10
Keratolytic drugs, 16, 137–138, 256, 293, 

303–305

massage and, 398

Keratolytic or proteolytic means “pro-

tein dissolving”; these agents 
work by dissolving keratin 
protein within dead surface cells, 
helping to remove these cells, and 
making the skin look clearer and 
smoother, 191, 193

occurring naturally in milk; it is 
both an exfoliant and a hydrophil-
ic, 18, 179, 293

Lakes are certiﬁed colors and are 

Lightening treatment gel, 211
Linear lesion is a line-like lesion, 123
Linen service, 33
Linoleic acid is a fatty acid that is a 

regulated by the Food and Drug 
Administration, 165

natural part of the intercellular 
cement, 176

Lamellar bodies are thought to be 

produced during the stage of ke-
ratinization in the granular layer 
of the skin. Their function is to 
produce lipids, 10

Lamellated corpuscles are nerve endings 

in the subcutaneous skin layer, 5

Lancets, 29
Langerhans cell is an immune cell that 
“patrols” the epidermis looking 
for foreign invaders, 13, 47

Lanolin, 320
L-ascorbic acid is a water-soluble form 

of vitamin C, 401

Laser hair removal, 472
Laser resurfacing surgery, 453–455, 457–460
Laser services, 471–472
Laser surgical procedures, 453–455
Latex allergy, 36
Laundry, 33
Lauramphocarboxyglycinate, 172
Lauric acid, 156
LED. See Light-emitting diode
Lemon extract and citrus extracts have 

astringent effects, 174
Lentigines are freckles, 123
Lesion is any mark on the skin that is 

not a normal part of the skin, 122

Leukocytes are white blood cells, 233
Leukotrienes help bring investigatory 

white blood cells to the source of 
inﬂammation within the body; they 
also help make blood vessels more 
permeable, which causes redness 
and swelling in areas of inﬂamma-
tion, 49

Levulan, 307, 308
LH. See Luteinizing hormone
LHRH. See Luteinizing hormone-
releasing hormone

Lipid peroxide is a fat that has been at-
tacked by singlet oxygen, 51

Lipid replacement, 185
Lipid replacement involves using topical 

lipids to repair the barrier func-
tion, 175–176

Lipids, 148
Lipids are fats that occur naturally 
in the barrier function of the 
skin, 10

Lipophilic means “fat-loving”, 161
Liposomes are hollow spheres made of 

phospholipids that are used to 
transport other agents, 16, 
167–169

Liposuction is the term for surgical 

removal of fat deposits, 460

Liquid peeling, 429
Liquid tissue includes blood and 

lymph, 5

Loaded is the term used to describe a 

microencapsulation unit, such as a 
liposome, that contains a per-
formance ingredient, such as an 
antioxidant, 168

Lupus, or systemic lupus erythematosus 

(SLE), is an autoimmune disease 
that primarily affects the skin, the 
joints, the nervous system, and 
the kidneys, 53, 103–104, 133

causes of, 54
skin problems in, 54–55

Lupus ﬂare occurs when someone is 

having a problem caused by his 
or her lupus, 53

Luteinizing hormone (LH) causes the 

actual process of ovulation or the 
release of the egg from the ovary. 
It also causes the testes to manu-
facture testosterone, 83, 86–87

Keratosis is a general term meaning 

thickening of the stratum corne-
um, such as seborrheic keratosis, 
123

Keratosis pilaris is a condition in which 

the skin exhibits redness and ir-
ritation in patches, accompanied 
by a rough texture, and small 

Lichochalcone is a powerful antioxidant 
derived from licorice root, 401
Licorice extract is a soothing agent, 247. 
See also Dipotassium glycyrrhizinate; 
Stearyl glycyrrhetinate; Stearyl 
glycyrrhizinate

Ligaments are connective tissues that 
connect the bones of the body, 5

Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone 

(LHRH), 83

Lymph, function of, 6
Lymph nodes are ﬁlters in the lymph 

system, 5

Lymphocyte is produced in the lymph 

nodes, the spleen, and the thymus 
gland, 44



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.506         INDEX

Lysosomes manufacture enzymes that 

help break apart large molecules 
entering the cell so that they 
can be more easily converted to 
other necessary chemicals and 
substances, 3

Machine brushes, disinfecting, 30
Macrophage is a large type of white 
blood cell that acts as a guard, 
constantly patrolling the 
body looking for foreign 
invaders, 44

Macules are ﬂat (nonelevated) marks 

on the skin where there is only a 
change in the normal skin color, 
122

Magnesium ascorbyl phosphate is an 
ester of vitamin C that is a fat-
soluble antioxidant, often consid-
ered to be a stable form of topical 
vitamin C; also used for skin 
brightening, 192, 367, 401
Makeup toner is a colored liquid or 

cream foundation that is used to 
neutralize unnatural skin colors 
such as bruising or redness, 443

Malic acid is an alpha hydroxy acid 
derived from apples, 179

Mask brushes, disinfecting, 30
Masks are designed to treat a variety of 

skin problems, from oil dryness 
to acne, 213–214

for acne, 298
bentonite in, 193, 298
hectorite in, 193
kaolin in, 193

Massage

keratolytic drugs and, 398
sun-damaged skin and, 398

Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) are 

special instruction sheets that de-
scribe safety concerns of products 
used in the skin care practice, 
33–34

Matricaria extract is a soothing agent, 

247
Matrixyl, 186, 402
Matrixyl-3000, 402
Matter is anything that takes up space 

and has substance, 142

Mechanical exfoliants are ingredients 

used to bump off dead cells from 
the skin’s surface. Some examples 
include granules, jojoba oil beads, 
and ground nut shells, 193
Mechanical exfoliation describes any 

process that removes dead cells 
from the skin surface by physical 
means, such as brushing, a granu-
lar scrub, or microdermabrasion, 
414–416

gommage, 193, 416
home care with, 416

microdermabrasion, 18, 400, 401
precautions for, 414–415
MED. See Minimal erythemal dose
Medical conditions

esthetic skin typing and, 103–104
rosacea as, 267–268
skin, 118–119

Metrolotion, 138, 268
Metronidazole is a prescription anti-yeast 

antibiotic that is used topically to 
treat rosacea and decrease inﬂam-
mation, 138, 268

Mexoryl, 377, 385
Mica is a coloring agent used in makeup 

Medical spas are medical ofﬁces that 

to cause a shiny effect, 245

offer medical esthetic procedures 
beyond the scope of routine 
esthetic services, 470–475

Medical training, 468–469
Medicated cleansers are acne cleans-

ers to which medications such as 
benzoyl peroxide, sulfur-resorcinol, 
and salicylic acid have been 
added, 199, 297

Medium-depth peels are performed by 

dermatologists or plastic sur-
geons. These trichloroacetic acid 
(TCA) peels affect the dermis, but 
not as deeply as phenol, 426
Meissner’s corpuscles are nerves located 
in the papillary layer and are sen-
sitive to ﬁrm touch, 7

Melanin is the pigment of the skin, 13, 
123, 138, 277, 364, 367, 385

Melanin suppressant is a substance that 
interferes with the skin’s produc-
tion of melanin pigment, 367. See 
also specifi c melanin suppressants

Melanocytes are cells that are “pigment 
factories” for the skin, 13, 364

Melanoma is characterized by moles or 
mole-like lesions that are dark in 
color, 372

Melanosomes are granules ﬁlled with 

melanin, 14

Melasma are splotchy, pigmented 

complexions that may be present 
after use of birth control pills, 88, 
92–93, 115

Menarche is a girl’s ﬁrst period, 86
Menopause is the time in a woman’s life 
when the ovaries stop producing 
ova, 93–94
acne and, 285
skin conditions associated with, 94–96

Menstrual cycle, 86–87
Menstruation is the body getting rid of 
an unused ovum and accompany-
ing endometrium, 86

Mequinol is an active topical ingredient 

that inhibits the production of 
melanin, 138

Metastasis is the spreading of cancer, 49
Methicillin, 25
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 

aureus (MRSA; pronounced 
MUR-sah) is a dangerous type of 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, 60–61

Methyl cellulose, 165
Metrocream, 138, 268
Metrogel, 138, 268

Micelle is an over-emulsiﬁed 
ingredient, 167

Microcomedo is a small impaction formed 

by cells that have built up on the 
inside of the follicle wall, 276

Microcomedones, 293
Microcurrent is a low-level current ap-
plication used to stimulate and 
improve the elasticity of aging 
and sun-damaged skin, 20, 96, 360

for photoaging skin, 406–407

Microdermabrasion is a procedure using 
crystal particles that are pressure-
sprayed onto the skin and then 
vacuumed. Microdermabrasion is 
a mechanical exfoliation tech-
nique that removes corneum cells, 
18, 400, 401

Microencapsulation is the process of 
using barrier and intercellular-
compatible materials like lipids 
to form special microshells to pro-
tect and better penetrate certain 
ingredients, 167–169, 401
Mid-face lift is a surgical procedure 

used to lift the middle section of 
the face, 439

Milia are small deposits of sebum 

between the follicle and the cor-
neum, 111, 112

extraction of, 341–344
around eyes, 344–345
laser resurfacing and, 459

Mineral makeup is another term for 

loose powder makeup foundation; 
it largely comprises earth-based 
ingredients. This product contains 
coverage pigments like zinc oxide 
and titanium dioxide, both of 
which are also physical sunscreens, 
325

Minimal erythemal dose (MED) refers 

to how much time passes without 
the skin turning red from irrita-
tion, 378

Minocycline is an oral antibiotic used 

to treat more severe rosacea and 
other acne-related conditions, 
268, 294

Mitochondria are the “lungs” and “diges-

tive system” of the cell, 3

Mitosis is the division and reproduction 

of cells, 5

Mixture is produced when different ele-

ments or compounds are mixed 
together physically, 146



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Index      507

Modiﬁed live vaccines are still alive, but 

radiation treatment renders the 
organisms unable to reproduce, 46

National Coalition of Estheticians, Manufac-
turers/Distributors and Associations 
(NCEA), 490

Noninvasive describes procedures that 
do not break the skin, 470

Nonionic surfactants are used in 

Mohs’ surgeons are dermatologists 

National Cosmetology Association (NCA), 

specially trained in a precise form 
of surgery to remove skin cancers, 
469

Mohs’ surgery is a specialized form of 
surgery for very precise removal 
of skin cancer cells, 372
Moisture treatments, increasing physical 

absorption of, 19–20

Moisturizers

rosacea and, 271
sensitive skin and, 253–254

490

National Rosacea Society, 264
Natural cosmetics, 225
Natural immunity is immunity to certain 

diseases that you have had since 
you were born, 44

Natural moisturizing factors (NMFs) are 

a group of substances produced 
in the interstitial layer that help 
attract and retain moisture in the 
skin, 13, 175

heavier creams such as hand 
creams, 159

Nonpathogenic means “non-disease-

producing”, 23, 24

Noritate, 138, 268
Normal skin is a skin type characterized 
by evenly distributed average-sized 
pores, 104
Novacet, 138, 268
Nucleic acids are a mixture of protein 
and special chemicals that make 
up chromatin, 5

Molecule is two or more atoms joined 

Natural oils occur in nature, primarily 

Nucleus of the cell is made up largely 

together, 144

Moles, benign, 373
Molluscum contagiosum is a viral infec-
tion frequently seen on the faces 
of children; it appears as groups 
of small, ﬂesh-colored papules, 
68, 128, 129

Monosaccharide is one saccharide by 

itself, 148

Mottling is a splotchy form of small, 

sun-related freckles and can be 
an early sign of photo damage on 
any skin type. The skin is simply 
no longer one color, 114, 116

MRSA (pronounced MUR-sah) is an 

aggressive form of Staphylococ-
cus bacteria. MRSA stands for 
methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus, which means 
that this bacterium is very 
resistant to many forms of 
traditional antibiotic treatment, 
24, 125, 126

MSDSs. See Material Safety Data Sheets
Mucopolysaccharides are carbohydrate–

lipid complexes that are also good 
water binders, 176

Mulberry or bearberry extract is a natu-
rally occurring melanin suppres-
sant, 367

Muscular tissue is of three types: vis-

ceral muscle, skeletal muscle, and 
cardiac muscle, 5

Mutation means a change in the DNA of 

an organism that affects all new 
forms of that organism, 49, 61
Mycoses are fungal infections, 26, 69, 125
Myristic acid, 156

Nanoparticles are ultra-small particles 

derived from larger molecular 
structures or ingredients, 169

Nanotechnology is the development 

of ingredients, substances, and 
products that are very small mo-
lecular structures that sometimes 
can penetrate the skin surface, 
169

in plants, 156
Natural products, 239
NCA. See National Cosmetology Association
NCEA. See National Coalition of Estheticians, 
Manufacturers/Distributors and 
Associations

Neck creams are made with more emol-
lients and less humectant, because 
the neck area has thinner skin that 
dries easily, 212–213
Necrotic tissue is dead tissue, 44
Nerve tissue is a group of cells that 
control the brain and nerves, 5
Neurohormones are secreted by the 
hypothalamus and trigger the 
pituitary gland to make speciﬁc 
hormones, 78

Neurological factors are those involving 

nerves and the nervous system, 
230

Neutrons are very small, uncharged 
particles within the atom, 142

Nevus is a mole, 123
Night creams and treatments, 205–208

acne, 298
benzoyl peroxide, 299, 324
comedogenicity analysis for, 324
NMFs. See Natural moisturizing factors
Nodules are raised lesions that are 

larger and deeper in the skin. A 
nodule looks like a lump, but the 
skin can be moved over the le-
sion, 122, 280

Nonablative describes a procedure that 
does not remove tissue, 471

Nonacnegenic, 225
Noncomedogenic means that the ingre-
dient or product does not cause 
excessive follicular hyperkerato-
sis and therefore is unlikely to 
cause comedone development, 
225, 314

Noncosmetic allergies, 244–245
Nondisposable items, 29–32
Noninﬂammatory acne lesions, 

276–280

of protein and is also responsible 
for building certain proteins, 4–5, 
142

Nutrition, acne and, 289–290
Nylon is a synthetic molecule used in 

oil-control products to absorb 
excess sebum and reduce shini-
ness, 192

Obesity, hormones and, 97
Objective symptoms, such as redness 

or swelling, are physically observ-
able, 230

Occlusion means covering the skin with 

some sort of impermeable sub-
stance that helps improve mois-
turization of the skin and blocks 
moisture evaporation, 18, 20
Occlusive is a heavy, large molecule that 

sits on top of the skin and pre-
vents moisture loss, 177
Occupational Safety and Health Ad-

ministration (OSHA) is a federal 
government agency, part of the 
Department of Labor, formed to 
help ensure that places of employ-
ment maintain a safe and healthy 
environment for employees, 28, 
33–34

Octinoxate is a UVB-absorbing sun-

screen ingredient, 191, 377, 385
Octisalate is a UVB-absorbing sunscreen 

ingredient, 191, 377, 385

Octocrylene, 191, 377, 385
Ocular rosacea is a subtype of rosacea that 

affects the eyes, resulting in eye 
redness, swollen eyelids, and other 
eye lesions, 267

Oil absorbers are agents used to absorb 

excess sebum, 192

Oil control, 293
Oil-free, 326
Oiliness describes a larger-than-normal 

amount of sebum secreted onto 
the skin by the sebaceous glands, 
276

Noninﬂammatory refers to an impaction 

Oil-in-water (O/W) is a solution of water 

that is not red or inﬂamed, 276

and oil that is mostly water, 159



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.508         INDEX

Oils, 319
Oleic acid, 156
Oncogenes are specialized genes that 
regulate and trigger cell duplica-
tion, 49

Oncologists are physicians who 

specialize in the treatment of 
cancer, 49

Oncology is the study of cancer, 49
Opacifying agent is a functional ingre-

dient that helps a product be 
opaque in color, 157

Open comedones are noninﬂammatory 
acne lesions, usually called black-
heads, 109, 277, 330, 333–334

extraction of, 336–338
solar, 345–346

Ophthalmic surgeons are medical doc-
tors who treat eye diseases and 
perform eye surgery, 437

Opportunistic infections are sicknesses 
that the immune system normally 
has no trouble ﬁghting off, 61

Oracea, 138, 268
Oral thrush is an infection of the mouth 

and throat caused by the yeast 
known as Candida albicans, 70

“Orange peel” texture, 109
Organelles are small structures within 
the cell that have their own 
function, 3

Organic cosmetics, 226
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health 

Administration

Osteoporosis is a weakening of the 
bones that is associated with 
aging and is predominant in 
women, 94

Ostium is the opening in follicles, 

277, 330
scarred, 111

OTC. See Over-the-counter
Ovaries are located just above the 

uterus and are connected to the 
uterus by two hollow tubes called 
fallopian tubes, 81

hormones produced by, 82–83

PABA. See Para-amino benzoic acid
Palmitic acid, 156
Palmitoyl oligopeptide and palmitoyl 

changes in the skin’s appearance, 
148, 185–186
Performance agents

tetrapeptide-7, also known as Ma-
trixyl-3000 (an updated complex), 
are a combination of two different 
peptides that together stimulate 
collagen, ﬁbronectin, and hyal-
uronic acid content in the skin. 
Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7 also has 
soothing properties, 402

Palmitoyl oligopeptide is a peptide used 
to improve the appearance of skin 
elasticity, 186

Palmitoyl pentapeptide-4, also known as 

Matrixyl, is a peptide that stimu-
lates collagen and reduces the 
production of collagenase, the en-
zyme that breaks down collagen 
in photoaging skin, 186, 402

Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-7 is a peptide 

that has soothing effects and is 
also used to improve the appear-
ance of skin elasticity, 186
Pancreas is located in the abdomen. It 
secretes pancreatic enzymes that 
are delivered into the intestine, 80

comedogenicity of, 320
for dehydrated skin, 175
for oily and acne-prone skin, 192–193
for sensitive skin, 187–189
in toners, 174

Performance ingredients, or perfor-

mance agents, are cosmetic ingre-
dients that cause the actual physi-
cal appearance to change, 154

Performance ingredients are ingredi-

ents within a skin care product 
or cosmetic that actually cause 
changes to the appearance of the 
skin, 171, 172

Perifollicular inﬂammation is inﬂamma-

tion that occurs in and around the 
follicle, 282
Perimenopausal acne, 95
Perimenopause is the time before and 

around menopause, 93
Perimeter is the outside edge of the 

face, bordered by the ears, lower 
chin and neck, and top of the 
forehead, 104

Pancreatin is a keratolytic enzyme 

Periodic table is the chart of all the ele-

derived from bovine (cow) or por-
cine (pig) pancreas extract, 193

ments, 142

Perioral dermatitis is dermatitis around 

Papain is a keratolytic enzyme derived 

the mouth, 123, 292

from papaya fruit, 193

Papillary layer is the upper part of the 

dermis, 7

Papule is a raised area on the skin; it is 
generally smaller than 1 centime-
ter, 109, 122, 278, 280

Papulopustular rosacea is a subtype of 

rosacea that often resembles acne 
vulgaris, with large red pustules 
and papules, 264

Para-amino benzoic acid (PABA), 240–241
Paraben preservatives, 163–164
Paramedical esthetics, 469
Parathyroid gland is responsible for reg-
ulating calcium and phosphates in 
the bloodstream, 79

Perioral wrinkling, lines around the 
mouth (often called smoker’s 
lines, although they can occur in 
nonsmokers), 351

Perleche, also known as cheilitis, is a 
yeast infection affecting the cor-
ners of the mouth, 127

Permanent eyeliner or makeup means 
“tattooing” a permanent eye line 
or lip line. It can also be used in 
the cheek area and occasionally 
is used to help correct dark, ﬂat 
lesions such as small, red macules, 
464

Permeable means “easily penetrated”, 

232

Personal Care Products Council, 180, 222, 

418

used to prevent water loss and 
irritants from entering the skin, 
12, 155, 177

Petroleum jelly is an excellent occlusive, 
preventing moisture loss from the 
skin, 177

pH, 148–151
pH adjusters, 174
Phagocytosis is the process in which 

polymorphs attack bacteria and 
other pathogenic organisms, 44

Phenolics, 31
Phenyl trimethicone is a type of silicone 

Patches are large macules that are larger 

Petrolatum is an occlusive agent that is 

Overcleaning, 288
Overprocessed describes irritation re-

Patch testing, 247

salon, 254–255

sulting from overusing a product 
or using too many products that 
exfoliate, 236

than 1 centimeter, 122

Pathogenic means “disease causing”, 

Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs are 

23, 24

available without a prescription, 
189–192, 220

drug facts labeling and, 189–190

O/W. See Oil-in-water
Oxidation is the process by which 
oxygen is exposed to certain 
ingredients, which results in a 
breakdown of the ingredient, 164

Oxybenzone is a UVB- and UVA-

absorbing sunscreen ingredient, 
191, 241, 377, 385

Pathogenic organism is a type of bacte-
ria, virus, or other one-celled or-
ganism that causes disease, 43, 44

PCP. See Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
PDT. See Photodynamic therapy
Peeling services, 472. See also specifi c peels
Penicillin, 46
Peptide bond is the bond between two 

amino acid groups, 148

Peptides are chains of amino acids used 

in skin care products to produce 

emollient, 155, 178



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Index      509

Pheomelanin is responsible for the color 

Physical sunscreens work by reﬂecting 

Polymers are chains of carbon–

of red hair but is not present in 
skin, 13

Phospholipids are naturally moisturiz-

ing humectants found within the 
skin, 148, 175

rather than absorbing UV rays. 
Examples are zinc oxide and tita-
nium dioxide, 241, 378

Physicians

common problems in relationships 

Photo damage or photoaging describes 

with, 481–482

carbon and carbon–hydrogen 
bonded together, 148

Polymethylsilsequioxane is another 
type of silicone-based vehicle, 
155

Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (or 

skin symptoms of aging skin, 
such as wrinkles and sagging 
that are caused by lifelong and 
cumulative exposure to the sun, 
104, 363, 364, 392
long-term, 369–371

Photoaging are symptoms of aging skin 

caused by cumulative sun expo-
sure, 363, 364

prevention of, 394–395

Photoaging skin

alpha hydroxy acids for, 396–400
alpha hydroxy home-care programs, 

398–400
analysis of, 393–394
antioxidant therapy for, 400–402
exfoliation of, 395
home-care programs for, 404–406
hydrators for, 404
LED treatment for, 407, 408
lipid products for, 404
microcurrent treatments for, 406–407
microdermabrasion for, 400, 401
peptides for, 186, 402–403
retinoids for, 396
salon treatment programs for, 406
stimulation of, 398
symptom and treatment guide for, 

408–409

treatment of, 394–410
treatment selection for, 407–408
Photoallergic describes drugs that can 

cause allergic reactions if the 
patient has sun exposure while 
using the drug, 256

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a medi-
cal treatment using intense types 
of light, 307–308

Photomodulation is the process of using 

light to treat conditions of the 
skin, 273

Phymatous rosacea is a subtype of 

rosacea in which the nose has a 
thickened appearance and the 
client sometimes has rhinophyma 
(a noticeable, substantial enlarge-
ment of the nose), 265

Physal emulsions are lotions or creams 

that use physical rather than 
chemical techniques to blend and 
suspend oil and water mixtures, 
161–162

Physical emulsiﬁers are used in skin 

products to separate oil par-
ticles, thus keeping the product 
blended without damaging the 
barrier function, 233

concerns of, 478–480
establishing relationship with, 475–477
estheticians working with, 468
ﬁrst contact with, 478

Phytoestrogens are plant hormones, 96
Pigmentation conditions, 113–115. 
See also Hyperpigmentation; 
Hypopigmentation

Pineal gland is located in the brain. Its 
function is not well understood, 
but it is theorized to be related to 
the sex hormones, 80

Pinkeye, 37
Pinkness, 113
Pituitary gland is found in the center of 

the head. It serves as the “brain” 
of the endocrine system, 78

Pityriasis rosea is a patchy, red, rash-

polymorphs) are white blood cells 
that attack bacteria and other 
pathogenic organisms, 44
Polypeptide is a chain of amino acid 
molecules (peptides), 148

Polysaccharide means many saccharides 

are bonded together, 148
Pomade acne is bumpiness in the skin 
of the forehead and around the 
hairline, 315

Pore and follicle-related conditions, 

109–111

Pore is the lay term for follicle; it is 

most often used to refer to the 
top view of the follicle. Oily skin 
is a skin type characterized by 
enlarged pores, indicating active 
sebaceous production, 104

like disorder, 130

Porphyrins are chemicals produced 

Pityrosporum ovale is a type of yeast 

sometimes associated with sebor-
rheic dermatitis, 133, 290
Placebo describes a substance used 

in an experiment that does not 
contain the ingredient thought to 
achieve a change, 486

Plant extracts, 187. See also specifi c extracts
Plaque is a buildup of cholesterol and 

triglycerides in the blood vessels, 
50

Plaques are papules that are larger than 

1 centimeter, 122

Plasma makes up the liquid part 

of the blood, 5

Plastic surgeons, working with, 482
Plastic surgery, 436–437
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome
Pneumocystis carinii, 63
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia 

(PCP), 63

Pockmarks are hypotrophic scars often 

caused by chicken pox or acne, 
111

Poikiloderma of civatte is a condition 
in sun-damaged skin resulting 
in horseshoe-shaped pigment 
and red splotching on the neck, 
393–394

Polygonum cuspidatum extract, 185
Polymers are a type of delivery system 

that utilizes synthetic molecu-
lar structures as state-of-the-art 
spreading agents that help many 
ingredients spread evenly across 
the skin, adhere to the skin sur-
face, or penetrate performance 
ingredients, 167

by acne bacteria during normal 
metabolic processes. These chemi-
cals can react with blue light and 
become toxic to the bacteria, 307

Port-wine stains are hereditary vascular 

birthmarks, 111, 136

Post-inﬂammatory hyperpigmentation 

describes dark melanin splotches 
caused by trauma to the skin; this 
condition can result from acne 
pimples and papules, 13, 115, 288
Potassium alum is a strong astringent, 

174

Potassium hydroxide, 165
Powder enzyme treatment, 417–418
Precancers are conditions in cells that 
may become cancerous, 375

Pregnancy

acne and, 285
precautions for treatment in, 90
progesterone and, 81, 92
skin and appearance changes 

during, 87–90
Premenstrual acne, 283
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a 

condition in which some women 
experience uncomfortable physi-
cal changes before menstruation, 
90–92

Pre-peel consultations, 428
Prescription dermatological drugs, 137–138
Preservative-free cosmetics, 224
Preservatives are chemical agents that 

inhibit the growth of microor-
ganisms in creams or cosmetic 
products, 162–165, 239–240

Pre-softening, 334
Pressing agents, 321



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.510         INDEX

Primary lesions are lesions that are in 
the early stages of development, 
122–123

Product buying, 227–228
Product development, 215–217
Product evaluation, 487–490
Professional associations, 489–490
Professional Beauty Association, 490
Progesterone helps prepare the uterus 

for pregnancy and is an important 
hormone in the menstrual cycle, 
81, 92

Purpura are hemorrhages of the blood 

vessels, 122

Pustule is a clump of white blood cells 

that have formed and risen to the 
surface of the skin, 111, 122, 278, 
280

extraction of, 339

PUVA, 52

Restylane, 462, 475
Resurfacing laser surgery, 453–455, 457–460
Resveratrol, a naturally occurring plant-

derived biochemical, is a very 
strong antioxidant and has an 
effect on cells that, in essence, 
slows the expression of genes 
that cause or contribute to aging, 
184–185, 401

Quaternary ammonium compounds 

Retention hyperkeratosis refers to an 

(Quats), 31

Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes) is 

the scientiﬁc name of the bacteria 
that cause acne vulgaris, 277

Radiesse, 463, 475
Radio frequency skin tightening, 474
Rancid means discoloration and/or odor 

Propylene glycol is a humectant that 

due to oxidation, 164

penetrates the skin fairly easily, 
making it a good hydrating agent, 
17, 175

Prostaglandins are biochemicals that 

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) deﬁnes 

any type of molecule that is a free 
radical and contains a form of 
oxygen, 51, 384

regulate inﬂammatory response, 49

Receptor sites are small structures 

Proteases are enzymes that dissolve 

proteins, 182, 233

Protectants are chemicals that stop 
water evaporation, 155
Protein is made of carbon, oxygen, 

nitrogen, hydrogen, and sulfur, 
148
Proteolipids, 148
Proteolytic enzyme peeling, 416–417
Proteolytic means protein dissolving, 18
Protons are very small, positively 

charged particles within the atom, 
142

Prototype is a product sample that has 

been developed by the chemist 
and is ready to be tried, 217

Pruritus is the technical term for itch-

ing, 230

Pseudofolliculitis is caused by irritation 

from shaving. Ingrown hairs are 
the main cause of pseudofollicu-
litis, 123

Pseudopod means “false foot”, 47
Pseudopores, 111, 112
Psoriasis is an autoimmune inﬂamma-
tory disease of the skin that is 
caused by the skin and epidermis 
“turning over” faster than it does 
in a normal individual, resulting 
in red, ﬂaky patches, 52, 133–134

Ptosis (TOE-sis) refers to more speciﬁc 

areas of drooping skin, such as 
eyelid ptosis or breast ptosis, 352
Puberty is the stage of life when physi-
cal changes occur in both sexes 
and when sexual function of the 
sex glands begins to take place, 
83–85

Pufﬁng is a term used to describe the 

way some companies make their 
products sound better than they 
are, 226, 487

Pumpkin peel, 417

on the cell membrane that are 
“docking stations” for hormones 
and other chemicals. Receptor 
sites receive chemical messages 
from other cells or organs that 
cause the cell to behave in a 
certain way, 2

Receptors inform T cells about the type 

of cell it is and that it is an “of-
ﬁcial” cell of the body and not an 
antigen, 48, 77, 78

Reconstructive surgery generally refers 
to surgical procedure techniques 
used to correct noncosmetic 
abnormalities such as skin cancer 
removal, surgery needed due to ac-
cidental injury, and other physical 
deformities, 436

Red corpuscles complete oxygen–carbon 
dioxide transport to and from the 
cells, 5
Red dyes, 320
Redness conditions, 113
Referrals, 465, 480–482
Regional seminars, 489
Rejuvenation surgery is surgery in-

tended to correct symptoms of 
aging to make the client appear 
younger, 436

Relaxin is a hormone manufactured by 

the ovaries that helps enlarge the 
pelvic opening during childbirth, 81

Remission is a phase of disease where 

the disease is dormant and no 
symptoms are present, 53, 263

Renova, 103, 138, 181, 396, 428, 479

as alternative to alpha hydroxy acid, 

357

Repeated insult patch test (RIPT), 248
Resorcinol is a peeling agent, usually 

coupled with sulfur, used in acne 
treatments and drying lotions, 181, 
191, 293, 296

overabundance of sebum that 
often begins at the time teenagers 
begin producing larger amounts 
of sex hormones, 276, 330
Reticular layer is the lower, more inter-

nal area of the dermis, 7
Retin-A, 123, 138, 303–304, 312, 396, 428

alpha hydroxy acid and, 181, 410
as alternative to alpha hydroxy acid, 

357

exfoliating cleansers and, 297
follicular exfoliation with, 293
hyperpigmentation treatment and, 93
massage and, 398
side effects, 103
skin care for, 305, 479
sun exposure and, 256

Retinoic acid, 123, 428
Retinoids are drug or skin care ingre-
dients that are vitamin A deriva-
tives, 16, 96, 138, 256, 303–305, 396
Retinol is a natural form of vitamin A, 

appears to regulate skin function, 
and is theorized to be necessary 
for skin cell generation, 96, 186

Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune 

disease that affects the joints in 
the body, 52

Rheumatologists are physicians who 

specialize in treating autoimmune 
diseases, 53, 469

Rhinophyma is an enlarging of the nose, 
often resulting from a severe form 
of acne rosacea, 266

Rhinoplasty, 446–448
Rhytidectomy is the medical term for a 

face lift, 437

bruising and vitamin K, 441–442
home pre-care, 441
long-term needs, 444
makeup needs, 443–444
post-care salon treatment, 442–443
postsurgical skin care, 442
presurgical facial characteristics, 438
pretreatment for, 439–441
surgical procedure, 438–439

Rhytides are wrinkles, 116
Ribosomes are very small organelles 

that help build the protein struc-
tures needed by the cell, 3
RIPT. See Repeated insult patch test
ROS. See Reactive oxygen species
Rosacea, sometimes called adult acne, is 

a condition of the skin in which 



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.the skin turns red very easily, 113, 
123, 138, 259, 260, 283

causes of, 262–263
esthetic treatment goals for, 270
esthetician role in management of, 269
home-care recommendations for, 

facial areas; they are caused by 
oxidized, solidiﬁed sebum, 109, 
110, 330

Sebaceous (oil) glands are found in the 

reticular layer, 8, 14

Sebaceous hyperplasias are small, 

272–273

lifestyle triggers for, 263–264
as medical condition, 267–268
medical treatment of, 268–269
physician involvement for, 479
salon treatments for, 273
skin care products and, 270–272
skin care triggers for, 264
subtypes of, 264–267

Saccharide can refer to any carbohy-

drate group, 148
Sagging, wrinkles vs., 355
Salicylate allergies, 241
Salicylic acid is a beta hydroxy acid in-

gredient used for exfoliating and 
for its antibacterial properties, 16, 
18, 84, 179, 191
allergies to, 241, 296
alpha hydroxy acid and, 181, 243, 296
antiglycation with, 184
as benzoyl peroxide alternative, 242
as drying agent, 296
follicular exfoliation with, 293
irritant reactions to, 236
in medicated cleansers, 297
seborrheic dermatitis treatment with, 

291

skin lightening and, 192
in toners, 175
wart treatment with, 128

Salon patch testing, 254–255
Scales are patches of dry, dehydrated 

skin without crust, 122

Scarred ostia, 111
Scars, 111

atrophic, 123
formation of, 280–281

Scientiﬁc method refers to the experi-
mental technique of developing 
a hypothesis, or idea, based on 
available information. The hypoth-
esis is tested and interpreted, and 
results are published, 486–487

SCLE. See Subacute cutaneous lupus erythe-

matosus

Scleroderma is an autoimmune disease 

that causes thickening of the skin, 
53

Scope of practice describes services 

allowed to be performed under a 
speciﬁc license, 470

SCTE. See Stratum corneum tryptic enzymes
SD alcohol is specially denatured ethyl 

alcohol, also known as ethanol, 
17, 174–175, 233

Sebaceous ﬁlaments are small, impacted 

follicles on the nose and other 

doughnut-shaped lesions that 
look like large, open comedones 
surrounded by a ridge of skin, 
109, 110, 111, 375

Seborrheic dermatitis is a skin disorder 
characterized by ﬂaky, red, patchy 
skin primarily in the eyebrows, 
T-zone, and scalp. Seborrheic der-
matitis is caused by inﬂammation 
of the sebaceous gland, 69, 123, 
133, 269, 290–291, 480

Seborrheic keratoses are large, ﬂat, 

crusty-looking, brown, black, yel-
lowish, or gray lesions that are 
often found on the faces of older, 
sun-damaged clients, 375–376

Sebum is an oily substance, secreted 
onto the skin surface by the se-
baceous gland in the dermis, that 
helps prevent dehydration of the 
corneum cells, 8

Secondary lesions are lesions that pri-

mary lesions eventually become; 
characterized by piles of mate-
rial on the skin surface such as a 
crust or scab, or depressions in 
the skin surface such as an ulcer, 
122–123

Secreted means synthesized or released 

by various cells or organs, 77, 78
Selective permeability means that the 

cell membrane can let substances 
into the cell, such as food, water, 
and oxygen. It can also let sub-
stances out of the cell, such as 
waste and carbon dioxide, 2

Self-tanning products, 387–388
Self-trauma excoriations, 288–289
Seminars, 489
Sensitive skin

analysis of, 230–232, 234–235
at-home programs for, 251–254
barrier function and, 232–233
consultation for, 254
deﬁning, 230
external factors inﬂuencing, 255–256
genetic factors affecting, 230
home-care concepts for, 250–251
performance agents for, 187–189
physician involvement for, 479
protecting barrier function in, 188
soothing and anti-redness agents for, 

188–189

treatment contraindications for, 248
treatment suggestions for, 249–250
Sensitive-dry is a skin type that is both 
dry (alipidic) and tends to be red 
and reactive, 113

Index      511

Sensitive-oily is a skin type that is both 
oily and tends to be red and reac-
tive, 113

Septicemia, also known as blood poison-
ing, occurs when a bacterial infec-
tion enters the bloodstream, 124

Serpiginous lesion is a lesion that has a 

snake-like pattern, 123

Serums are products containing concen-

trated ingredients that are usu-
ally in pump or tincture bottles, 
209–210

for puffy eyes, 212

Sharps box, 29
Shingles, known also as herpes zoster, 
is caused by the same virus, 
varicella zoster virus (VZV), that 
causes chicken pox. The lesions of 
herpes zoster look like multiple 
red blisters, 68

Short-term sun exposure, 365–369
Silica is an oil absorber, 192
Silicones are emollients that leave a 

protective ﬁlm on the surface of 
the skin, 155, 178

Singlet oxygen describes a very reactive 
single oxygenation that lacks the 
proper electrons for stability, 51
Sirtuins (silent information regulator 
2 [Sir2] proteins) are enzymes 
involved in cellular activity that 
help deactivate gene expression 
and are involved in production 
of energy for the cell in the form 
of ADP (adenosine diphosphate), 
a biochemical cousin of ATP (ad-
enosine triphosphate), 184
Skeletal muscles are responsible for the 

movement of the bones and the 
body’s physical motion, 5
Skeletal tissue makes up the bones of 

the body, 5

Skin. See also Photoaging skin
abnormalities in, 111
aging, 179, 185
bacterial infections of, 123–125
barrier function of, 11–13
birth control pills and, 92
chemicals found in, 147–148
clog-prone, 324–325
common infections of, 123–130
dehydrated, clogged, 325–326
dry, 178–179
epidermis, 7, 8–11
fungal infections of, 125–127
immunity role of, 46–48
menopause and, 94–96
physiology of, 6–8
pigmentation of, 13–14
preparing for treatment, 17–18
rosacea and, 273
routes of penetration of, 14–16
specialized cells in, 13–14
viral infections of, 128–130



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.512         INDEX

Skin aging. See Aging skin
Skin analysis is the process of determin-
ing a client’s skin type and condi-
tions, 99, 100, 108

prioritizing observations, 119
procedure for, 104–107
sensitive skin, 230–232, 234–235

Skin “brightening”, 192
Skin cancer, 371–374

AIDS-associated, 70–71

Skin conditions are generally treatable 

disorders of the skin that are 
often related to environmental 
damage or the client’s skin type, 
104. See also specifi c skin conditions

medical, 118–119
skin types vs., 104
Skin growths, 136–137
Skin lightening, 192
Skin of color is black or brown skin or 
any skin color that is darkly pig-
mented through genetics, 14

Skin penetration

factors inﬂuencing, 17
increasing moisture treatment absorp-

tion, 19–20
routes of, 14–16
Skin resurfacing, 454
Skin tags are very small, threadlike 

growths. They are benign lesions 
but frequently are irritated by 
jewelry or clothing rubbing 
against them, 136

Skin types is the determination of the 

hereditary oiliness or dryness 
level of an individual’s skin, 104

determining, 108
esthetic typing, 101–104
skin conditions vs., 104
sun, 378–380

SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sleep, aging skin and, 356
Smoking, acne and, 288
Soap is made of salts of fatty acids. It 

defats the skin’s surface, 173

Sodium chloride is the compound cre-
ated by combining sodium and 
chloride, commonly known as 
table salt, 144

Sodium hyaluronate or hyaluronic acid 
is a hydrophilic agent with excel-
lent water-binding properties, 176

Sodium hydroxide, 165
Sodium hypochlorite (bleach), 28, 31
Sodium laureth sulfate, 172
Sodium lauryl sulfate, 172
Sodium PCA is a humectant that helps 

bind water in the 
epidermis, 13, 16, 175

Sodium sulfacetamide is a topical drug 

agent used to treat 
rosacea, 268

Soft tissue augmentation, also known 

as facial sculpting, which is a 

technique of using ﬁller materials 
to reshape the facial contours, 460

Strata are skin layers, 9
Stratum corneum is the outermost layer 

Solage, 138
Solar blackheads, 345–346
Solar freckles, also known as “liver 

spots,” are clumps of hyperpig-
mentation caused by sun expo-
sure, 376

Solar lentigenes, 114
Solute is the solid part of a solution, 146
Solution is a mixture of chemicals, 146
Solvent is the liquid part of a solution, 

146

Sorbitol is a humectant, 175
Soy lecithin is used as a moisture-bind-

ing material; it is also used for 
many liposomes, 176

Soy sterols are natural sources of lipid 

of the epidermis, 10, 17
Stratum corneum tryptic enzymes 

(SCTE) are enzymes involved in 
activating the cathelicidin protein, 
263

Stratum granulosum is the layer where 
cells are ﬁlled with keratohyalin, 
which helps form keratin, 10

Stratum is a layer of the skin or 

epidermis, 10

Stratum lucidum, or clear layer, is ﬁlled 
with a substance called eleidin, 10

Stratum spinosum is so called because 

the cells appear to have little 
spines or thorns on the outside of 
the membrane, 10

materials, 176

Stress

Specialized lasers are designed for spe-

ciﬁc treatment uses such as vascu-
lar lesions and aging skin, 135

SPF. See Sun protection factor
Sphingolipids, also known as ceramides, 

are fatty substances that help hold 
water in the epidermis’s barrier 
function, 13, 96, 175

acne and, 284
adrenaline and, 79–80
skin aging and, 356–357

Striations are stripes on skeletal mus-

cles that control body movement. 
These muscles are known as stri-
ated muscles, 5

Styes, or hordeolums, are infected tear 

Spider angiomas are a type of blood 

ducts, 267

vessel distention that resembles 
a spider, 136

treatment of, 472–473

Spirilla are spiral in shape. Syphilis is 

the best-known disease caused by 
spirilla, 24

Spironolactone is an antiandrogen medi-

cation used to treat hormonally 
related acne in women, 285

Sponges, cleaning, 32
Squalane is a lipid material that is a 

natural part of the intercellular 
cement, 16, 175

Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus 
(SCLE) is a sub-form of lupus that 
is a skin disorder that presents as 
a rash affecting the sun-exposed 
areas of the body skin such as the 
trunk, shoulders, arms, neck, and, 
less likely, the face, 55

Subclinical inﬂammation is an irritation 

with no obvious physical symp-
toms, 51

Subclinical symptoms, such as stinging 

or tingling, have no visible ap-
pearance, 234

Squamous cell carcinoma is a common 

Subcutaneous layer is the most 

form of skin cancer characterized 
by unexplained skin bleeding or 
a small red or pink, sometimes 
ulcerated, lesion, 372
Staphylococcus aureus, 25, 125
Statistics are precise mathematical 

measurements of changes in an 
experiment, 486

Stearic acid, 156
Stearyl glycyrrhetinate is a soothing 
agent derived from licorice ex-
tract, 183, 188, 247

Stearyl glycyrrhizinate is a potent sooth-

ing agent antioxidant derived 
from licorice, 401

Sterilization is the process of killing all 
microorganisms, including good 
and bad ones. Sterilization also 
kills spores—bacteria that are in 
their inactive phase, 26–29, 38
Strains are slightly genetically different 
forms of the same virus, 64

internal layer of the skin, 5

Subjective symptoms include 
itching or burning, 230

Substantives are ingredients that attach 
themselves well to the surface of 
the skin, sort of spreading out 
across the skin, to protect and 
hydrate the surface, 177

Sudoriferous duct, 15
Sudoriferous glands, or sweat glands, 

are found in the reticular layer, 8

Sulfacetamide is a sulfur-based prescrip-

tion topical drug used to treat 
rosacea, 138
Sulfacet-R, 138, 268
Sulfur is an exfoliant and an antibacte-

rial, 181, 191, 243, 268, 293, 296

Sun care, 384
Sun damage, 116

exposures causing, 383–384
frequent misconceptions about, 

380–381



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.Index      513

physician concerns with, 479
preventing, 376–378, 384, 386
Sun exposure. See also Photoaging

acne and, 287
dermatoheliosis from, 369
extrinsic aging and, 116
photoallergic reactions and, 256
Retin-A and, 256
short-term problems from, 365–369

Sun fungus, 125–126
Sun protection factor (SPF) is a number 
that represents how long a person 
can stay out in the sun without 
burning while using the product, 
378

Sun skin types, 378–380
Sunbathing, 380–381
Sunblocks, 191, 386
Sunﬂower oil is an excellent source of 

fatty acids, including linoleic acid, 
176

Sunscreen, 55, 84–85, 384

aging prevention and management, 355
AHA use and, 181
allergies to, 240–241
antiaging use of, 182
broad-spectrum, 384–385
as childhood health habit, 369
comedogenicity analysis for, 324
ingredients of, 190–191
irritations from, 241–242
after laser resurfacing, 459
menopausal skin and, 96
for oily and combination skin, 204
rosacea and, 271
for sensitive skin, 205
sensitive skin and, 253
types of, 380

Superfatted cleansing agents have had 

fat added, 173

Superﬁcial peeling affects the epidermis 

and is performed by estheticians 
or physicians. These peels include 
alpha and beta hydroxy acids, 
Jessner’s solution, and resorcinol 
peeling treatments, 426

candidates for, 427–428
procedure, 428–432

Superoxide dismutase is an enzyme that 

helps squelch reactions early in 
the cascade of reactions, 401
Surfactants are chemicals in cosmetics 
that enable the cosmetic to slip 
across or onto the skin, 158–159

Surgeons, types of, 437
Surgical phenol peeling is a very 
deep-peeling procedure per-
formed by a plastic surgeon or 
dermatologist. The peel affects 
the dermis and has considerable 
risks, 425

Suspension means the solute is suspend-

ed throughout a solvent. Suspen-
sion is usually not homogenous. 

The internal and external phases 
do not stay mixed for any period of 
time, 161

Sutures are materials used in reconnect-

ing areas of surgical incisions, 
376, 438
Swine ﬂu (H1N1), 27
Syringomas (sear-in-GO-muhs) are small 

pinpoint lesions that 
occur under the eyes, 344
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 

commonly known as lupus, is an 
autoimmune disease that primar-
ily affects the skin, the joints, the 
nervous system, and the kidneys, 
53, 103–104, 133

causes of, 54
skin problems in, 54–55

cretes hormones and helps trigger 
synthesis of more lymph tissue, 81
Thyroid gland is located in the neck. It 
regulates both cellular and body 
metabolism and produces hor-
mones that stimulate growth, 79
Thyroxine is one of the two main hor-
mones secreted by the thyroid 
gland, 79
Tincture of iodine, 31
Tinea corporis is better known as ring-

worm, 127

Tinea pedis is commonly known as ath-
lete’s foot, which is a fungal infec-
tion of the skin on the foot, 126
Tinea versicolor is what many refer to 

as “sun spots” or “sun fungus.” 
These white splotches are a fun-
gal condition, 125–126, 368

T cells, also called T lymphocytes, help 

alert the immune system, 44, 45

Tactile roughness means roughness to 

Tissues are groups of cells that perform 
the same function, 5. See also 
specifi c tissues

the touch, 116, 370

Tanning, 382–383

immune function and, 385

Tanning pills, 388
Target, or iris, lesion has a center with a 

round surrounding area, such as 
a pustule, 123

Tartaric acid is an alpha hydroxy acid 

occurring naturally in grapes and 
passion fruit, 165, 179

Tazarotene is a topical prescription reti-
noid (vitamin A derivative) used 
to treat acne. It is commercially 
known as Tazorac, 103, 138, 181, 
293, 479

Tazorac, 103, 138, 181, 256, 293, 479
TCA. See Trichloroacetic acid
Teenage acne, 285–287, 298–299
Telangiectasias are small, red, enlarged 
capillaries of the face and other 
areas of the body, 89, 113, 135, 234, 
259, 260

treatment of, 472–473

Testes are present within the scrotum 

and produce sperm, 81
Testosterone is the male hormone 

responsible for the development 
of typical male characteristics, 
81, 283

Tetracycline is an oral antibiotic used 

to treat more severe rosacea and 
other acne-related conditions, 
268, 294
Tetrasodium EDTA, 165
TEWL. See Transepidermal water loss
Thermage, 474
Thickening agents, 165
Thread lifting is a less invasive proce-
dure for lifting the skin of the 
cheeks and jawline, 446
Thymus gland is located under the 
breastbone in the chest. It se-

Titanium dioxide, 191, 241, 377
Tocopherol is the chemical name for 

vitamin E, 165, 401

Tocopheryl acetate is a more stable form 

of vitamin E often used in skin 
care products, 401

Toners, 201

acne, 202–203, 297
combination skin, 202
for dehydrated skin, 175
oily skin, 202
performance agents in, 174, 175
rosacea and, 270
sensitive skin, 253
Topical steroids, 52, 103
Transdermally means to penetrate the 

epidermis and the dermis and 
then be absorbed in the blood-
stream, 14

Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) is the 
evaporation of excess intercellular 
water, 11, 232

Transient erythema is redness that 

comes and goes, 264
Transient means “temporary”, 232
Tretinoin, commonly known as its 
trademark names Retin-A or 
Renova, is a vitamin a derivative 
topical prescription medication 
used to treat acne as well as sun 
damage symptoms, 138, 303–305, 
396, 479

alpha hydroxy acid and, 181, 410
as alternative to alpha hydroxy acid, 

357

follicular exfoliation with, 293
hydroquinone and, 192
hyperpigmentation treatment and, 93
side effects, 103

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 426, 472
Trichochrome is a different type of red-

yellow pigment in the hair, 13



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.514         INDEX

Triggers are activities that cause facial 

Valence is the number of electrons in 

Vitiligo is a condition in which the skin 

ﬂushing, which can lead to a rosa-
cea ﬂare, 262

the outer energy level of an atom, 
144

Triglycerides are fatty materials that 

Varicella zoster virus (VZV), that causes 

stops making skin pigment, re-
sulting in white splotches on the 
skin, 52, 79, 114, 115

make up part of the barrier 
function, 13, 148

Triluma, 93, 138
Trisodium EDTA, 165
Trophic hormones are chemicals that 
cause other glands to make hor-
mones, 78–79

Tumors are very large nodules, 122
Tweezers, 40

cleaning, 31

T-zone is the middle area of the face, 

including the forehead, nose, and 
chin, 107

chicken pox. The lesions of her-
pes zoster look like multiple red 
blisters, 68

Varicose veins, 89–90
Vascular growth factor (VGF) is a bio-

chemical within the skin that trig-
gers the growth of capillaries, 261
Vascular lasers are designed speciﬁcally 
to treat vascular lesions, 136
Vascular lesions are visible conditions 
that involve the blood or circula-
tory system, 135–136

Vascular means “blood vessel related”, 

259, 260

Ulcers are deep erosions in which part 

Vasodilation is the dilation of the blood 

VZV. See Varicella zoster virus

Warts are caused by a variety of viruses 

known as papillomaviruses or 
verrucae, 68, 128, 130

Water is the most common vehicle ingre-

dient, 154–155

Water-based, 326
Water-in-oil (W/O) is a solution of oil 
and water that is mostly oil, 159

Waxes, 319
Waxes are thick, fatty substances that are 
derived primarily from plants and 
used as emollients in skin care 
products, 156

of the dermis has been lost, 122
Ultrasonic treatment uses ultrasound 

vibration to help expand the area 
between cells and to warm tissue 
for better absorption of certain 
products, 20

vessels resulting in ﬂushing, 262

Welts, or wheals, are raised, swollen, red 

Vasodilators dilate the blood vessels, mak-

ing more blood ﬂow through the 
arterial system, 358

Vehicles are ingredients used as spread-

ing agents, 154, 166–167

lesions, usually caused by aller-
gies. They are also called hives, 
122, 230

White corpuscles are responsible for de-
fending the body against bacterial 
invasion, 5

Ultraviolet A (UVA) rays are longer, 

with AHAs, 181

deeper-penetrating rays that af-
fect the dermis of the skin. These 
rays are responsible for most pre-
mature aging symptoms, 364–365, 
384–385

Ultraviolet B (UVB) rays are sunrays 

that cause sunburn and most 
types of skin cancer, 364, 384–385
Ultraviolet C (UVC) rays are short sun-
rays blocked by the ozone layer, 
364

Ultraviolet (UV) rays are light rays pro-

duced by the sun, 364

United States Department of Agriculture 

(USDA), 226

Urticaria, or hives, is due to allergies, 

134, 230

USDA. See United States Department of 

Agriculture
UV. See Ultraviolet
UVA. See Ultraviolet A
UVB. See Ultraviolet B
UVC. See Ultraviolet C

Vaccines are an artiﬁcial way of tricking 

the immune system into making 
antibodies, or Igs, 46, 73

Vacuoles are the “storage vats” for waste 
and excess food supplies, 3

Vehicles are the spreading agents in 

White tea is a strong antioxidant extract, 

skin care or cosmetic products, 
104
Verbal claims, 221
Vesicle is the medical term for blisters, 

122

VGF. See Vascular growth factor
Viral load is a measurement of how 

many viral particles are in a 
person’s blood, 64

Viral skin infections, 128–130
Viruses are another form of microorgan-

ism that are often pathogenic, 24
Visceral muscle is responsible for invol-

untary muscle actions, 5

Viscosity is the thickness and liquidity 
of a solution, skin care product, 
or cosmetic, 157

Vitamin A, 16, 96
Vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin 

essential in the skin for helping 
to neutralize free radicals; it is 
also needed in the production of 
collagen, 401
Vitamin D, 16, 79, 381–382
Vitamin E, 16, 165
Vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin that is 

a strong antioxidant, 401

Vitamin K, 441–442

401

Window phase is the period of time 

between exposure to HIV and the 
time antibodies are made, 62
Witch hazel, or Hamamelis extract, can 

be a soothing agent; in higher 
concentrations, it is an astringent, 
174

W/O. See Water-in-oil
Wrinkle treatments, 460–463
Wrinkles, sagging vs., 355

Xanthelasmas (zan-thuh-LAZmuhs) 

are much ﬂatter than milia, 
have a yellowish appearance, 
are below the skin’s surface, 
and may have an irregular shape, 
137, 344

Xanthomas are fatty pockets found on 

the eyelids, 137

Xanthum gum, 165

Ziana, 305
Zinc oxide, 191, 241, 377
Zinc supplements, 290
Zonite, 31
Zyderm, 462
Zyplast, 462



Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.