THE ART  
OF SKIN HEALTH
RESTORATION 
AND REJUVENATION

THE ART  
OF SKIN HEALTH
RESTORATION 
AND REJUVENATION
THE SCIENCE 
OF CLINICAL PRACTICE

SECOND EDITION

ZEIN E. OBAGI, M.D.
Obagi Skin Health Institute
Beverly Hills, California
USA

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742

© 2015 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business

No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20140911

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-84214-597-5 (eBook - PDF)

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable 
data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. 
The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them 
and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, 
scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of 
the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medi-
cal science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader is strongly urged to consult the 
relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ printed instructions, and their websites, before  administering any of the drugs recommended 
in this book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole 
responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors 
and publishers have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if 
permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may 
rectify in any future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides 
licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment 
has been arranged.

Trademark  Notice:  Product  or  corporate  names  may  be  trademarks  or  registered  trademarks,  and  are  used  only  for  identification  and  explanation 
without intent to infringe.

Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com

and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

To my most loving and supportive wife, Samar

CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
PREFACE 

CHAPTER 1  A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON SKIN ANATOMY AND 

PHYSIOLOGY 

CHAPTER 2  PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES OF SKIN HEALTH 

RESTORATION 

CHAPTER 3  TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN HEALTH 

RESTORATION 
Monika G. Kiripolsky, MD, FAAD

CHAPTER 4  ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN CLASSIFICATION 

CHAPTER 5  SKIN REJUVENATION: THE ART, THE SCIENCE, 

AND THE PROCEDURES 

CHAPTER 6  SEBUM-INDUCED INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS 

AND TREATMENTS 

CHAPTER 7  MEDICAL APPLICATIONS: TREATING 

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS AND 
PHOTODAMAGE 

CHAPTER 8  OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL PEELING AGENTS 

CHAPTER 9  EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL PEELS 

CHAPTER 10  ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH TRICHLORO ACETIC 

ACID PEELS 

CHAPTER 11  SKIN RESURFACING PROCEDURES: 

IDENTIFICATION AND MANAGEMENT OF 
ANTICIPATED REACTIONS AND POTENTIAL 
COMPLICATIONS 

CHAPTER 12  LASER AND ENERGY SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 

AND REJUVENATION 
E. Victor Ross, MD

CHAPTER 13  NUTRACEUTICALS AND THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 

HEALTH RESTORATION 
Kevin Nagengast, PharmD

CHAPTER 14  DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL PHILOSOPHY 

ON SKIN HEALTH 

CHAPTER 15  A SELECTION OF CLINICAL CASES 

INDEX 

ix
xi

1

17

45

81

107

137

165

197

209

231

271

297

321

345

367

385

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This  comprehensive  book  represents  the  evolution  of  my  philosophy  of  the 
science of skin health and clinical experience as a dermatologist for the past 
35 years. It would not have been possible without the assistance, support, and 
contributions of a long list of many dedicated and talented individuals.

First and foremost I want to thank my wife Samar for her love and patience 
and all the tremendous effort she has devoted to coordinating the whole team 
as skillfully as a movie director. I have always been able to count on her love 
and support, for which I am very grateful every day.

I also want to thank my wonderful children for their love and support, espe-
cially Serene and Zaidal, who must be acknowledged for providing invalu-
able assistance in searching the web for me, even while he was so busy with 
his pre-med studies. I know that he will develop into a brilliant physician.

To my dermatologic colleagues many thanks also to my Junior Associate, 
Monika  Kiripolsky,  MD,  for  her  monumental  effort  in  writing  the  chapter 
entitled, “Topical Agents for Skin Health Restoration,” and devoting so much 
of  her  valuable  time  to  editing  numerous  chapters  in  the  book.  She  raised 
the  most  intriguing  questions  that  required  answers  to  make  the  theories 
advanced in this book more precise. I also want to thank my esteemed col-
league E. Victor Ross, MD, for his tremendous contribution. He was gracious 
enough to provide the chapter on lasers and energy-based systems and share 
his  great  insights  and  incredible  knowledge.  And  I  wish  to  thank  Rachael 
Eckel,  MD,  for  her  help  with  editing  some  of  the  chapters  and  fine-tuning 
many ideas for clarity and accuracy, and for her excellent suggestions.

To my pharmacist colleague, Kevin Nagengast: I wish to thank him for 
contributing a superb chapter covering the full spectrum of supplements 
and their role in Skin Health Restoration.

To my editorial team: I want to thank Julia Petrauskas for her assistance in 
providing her expert medical writing services, quest for accuracy, and dedica-
tion. I also want to thank Wendy Lewis for her astute advice, counsel, and pub-
lishing expertise.

To the Obagi Skin Health Institute Staff: I wish to thank Angeli Lacson and 
the entire team for their help with research and administrative work and for 
tolerating all of the rewrites and edits of the chapters. I wish to thank Cynthia 
S. Gordon (medanimations.com) for expert illustrations and timely delivery. 
My special thanks go out to Albert Waisman for helping to select and compile 
the clinical photography with great precision and professionalism.

To  the  ZO  Skin  Health  Management  Team:  I  want  to  acknowledge  the 
hard work of my longtime friend Jim Headley, as well as Deborah Tomes and 
Chris Kraneiss, for their never-ending dedication to helping me achieve my 

x

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

vision for the ZO brand, ZO Skin Health and ZO Medical. I also wish to thank 
Tommy Lee for his brilliant creative contributions to the cover design for the 
book.

To  the  CRC  medical  team:  I  want  to  thank  Robert  Peden  and  his  col-
leagues for their patience and professionalism in helping me bring this book 
to fruition.

To  my  patients,  who  believed  in  my  innovative  approach  to  skin  health, 
had faith in the outcomes that we could achieve together, and afforded me the 
honor of treating them throughout my career in dermatology.

Finally,  much  of  the  wisdom  that  I  have  gained  was  from  my  beloved 
mother who told me from an early age: “A blind person cannot see with his 
eyes, but he may acquire more knowledge better than a person who can see. 
Don’t accept what you see as the ultimate that is etched in stone; open your 
mind to see and absorb.”

PREFACE

“The science of skin health must be taught in medical school. Physicians 
must  know  the  difference  between  diseased  skin  and  healthy  skin  to 
restore skin health.”

This comprehensive book represents the entirety of my philosophy of healthy 
skin and clinical experience as a dermatologist for the past 35 years. This is 
the second edition of my original book (Obagi Skin Health Restoration and 
Rejuvenation,  Springer-Verlag,  2000)  and  serves  to  describe  my  new  way  of 
thinking about the science behind skin health. The emphasis in this text is 
on skin, and it covers the science of restoring skin health, cellular function, 
and improving the skin’s ability to tolerate procedures and surgery. The range 
of  skin  conditions  addressed  includes  diseases  of  pigmentation  (melasma, 
hypopigmentation,  hyperpigmentation),  textural  disorders  (scars,  rhytides, 
large pores), aging, photodamage, inflammatory disorders, rosacea, and acne. 
The  modern  solutions  described  in  this  book  are  based  on  the  latest  scien-
tific advances coupled with my 35 years of clinical experience. It is intended 
to provide the reader with a wealth of original theories and information on 
many issues encountered in day-to-day practice when dealing with skin. Any 
physician can follow these principles, both students and advanced skin care 
professionals, and they can be adapted to treat any patient.

Health and skin care occupy a prominent place within the mind of con-
sumers.  “Looking  one’s  best”  is  an  innate  desire  shared  by  all. The  cry  for 
youthful,  disease-free,  healthy  skin  has  been  heard,  as  can  be  seen  in  the 
dramatic expansion in skin care products currently available on the market. 
But sadly, such formulations often lack the support of research and science. 
Because of their ineffectiveness and lack of long-term improvement and sus-
tainable results, customers are repeatedly left feeling disappointed and hope-
less. These self-prescribed products are not part of a comprehensive program 
tailored to the patient’s skin needs; their use is haphazard and lacks physician 
guidance.

Regrettably,  patients  seeking  a  clinician’s  advice  are  often  misled.  An 
increasing  number  of  clinicians  today  make  recommendations  based  on 
personal enticements and nonscientific marketing pitches. They may favor a 
“quick fix” for their patients because of time and economic benefits. As such, 
they are hasty to recommend any procedure that cuts, evaporates, resurfaces, 
plumps, and tightens the skin. They fail to address the skin itself—its quality, 
integrity, vitality, and, most important, suitability for a procedure.

Having begun my career in pathology, I was regularly exposed to diseased 
tissue.  The  way  in  which  cells  function,  both  individually  and  collectively, 

xii

PREFACE

became my principal focus. My mind was trained to think at a cellular level 
when addressing disease, an invaluable foundation that proved advantageous 
when I switched to dermatology. It soon became obvious that the generally 
accepted approach to treating skin was flawed. It is simply inadequate to treat 
a  disease  or  its  symptoms  independently.  Instead,  the  cells  involved  in  the 
condition must be comprehensively and collectively addressed. The skin is not 
a wall that one can paint and superficially plaster; it is an organ that requires 
cellular activation and regulation to achieve health. It is therefore crucial that 
any practitioner dealing with skin—whether with incision, lasers, peels, injec-
tions, or other treatments—first respects and understands the skin’s function 
at a cellular level in order to achieve the best possible results.

A baby’s skin has always fascinated me. Microscopically, each cell is fulfill-
ing its precise function, and this corresponds to its flawless appearance. As a 
physician, I wanted to offer this possibility to patients of all ages. And so, more 
than 35 years ago, my passion ignited, I set out to define the science underlying 
skin health. The fundamental principle driving my approach is that skin must 
be holistically restored at the cellular level. If the focus is limited to treating 
only the disease or its symptoms, the results will be limited and short lived.

Skin health and its science have many features that allow for a standard-
ized  method  of  treatment  and  superior  overall  patient  outcome.  Innovative 
products  and  protocols  have  been  created  in  parallel,  using  the  most  novel 
scientific  research  and  clinical  experience.  There  are  programs  for  diseased 
and nondiseased states, each relying on a systematic approach to holistically 
restore skin health.

Since  my  introduction  of  skin  health  science  (which  is  the  core  of  what 
this book is about), I have devoted my career to educating physicians all over 
the world on how to deal with skin from a different perspective. My goal has 
been  to  shift  their  focus  away  from  the  disease  they  intend  to  treat,  which 
will help to calm down the symptoms and provide short-term remission, to 
focus mainly on the skin itself in order to bring it back to the state of optimal 
cellular activity and functions while treating disease. This approach will lead 
to better and longer lasting overall results. It is most gratifying to me to see 
that skin health science is currently being adapted by thousands of physicians 
worldwide and enabling them to obtain the best results in skin treatment and 
rejuvenation.

It  is  about  time  that  as  professionals  dealing  with  skin,  we  set  aside  our 
differences on how to approach skin. We must adapt a unified approach that 
is  proved  to  be  the  ideal  one  rather  than  follow  the  current  individualistic, 
misguided, and narrow-minded approaches that focus solely on the surface 
of the skin and symptoms. We must address the science of skin health as the 
essential basis for treatment and intervention. This should be recognized as a 
science to be studied beginning in medical schools and residency programs, 
before learning about diseases of the skin. It will help to establish clear objec-
tives when treating skin problems. It is no longer enough to say that a specific 
problem has been resolved, as many of us still believe. Wouldn’t it be better to 
be able to say, “The main problem has been resolved, and skin health has been 
restored”?

Adapting  skin  health  science  should  be  the  only  valid  approach  to  deal 
with  skin  because  it  is  a  comprehensive  process  that  yields  many  benefits. 
The new definition of skin health that I have introduced will clarify the exact 

xiii

PREFACE

meaning of skin health and eliminate the use of loosely described terminol-
ogy that is often used to sell products that have nothing to do with skin health. 
Unfortunately, clinicians have become targets for promotion of certain prod-
ucts and devices, and few among us have the courage to refute some of the 
erroneous concepts that now dominate clinical practice. My hope is to chal-
lenge  traditional  procedure-oriented  approaches  to  skin  care  and  shift  the 
emphasis back to skin health.

My  new  definition  of  skin  health  science  will  establish  a  well-rounded 
approach to restore and maintain skin health using fundamentals that can be 
adopted clinically and histologically through subjective and objective criteria, 
applicable  to  any  skin  type.  The  definition  helps  to  establish  a  comprehen-
sive  diagnosis,  to  identify  the  objective  of  the  treatment  required,  to  allow 
the monitoring of treatment progress, and to accurately measure results on 
completion of the treatment.

Skin  health  science  will  also  guide  the  physician  through  novel  original 

principles, including

(cid:127)  Adapting Zein Obagi Skin Classification System as a guide in planning 
any treatment plan, selecting procedures, and determining the safe depth 
for any skin type

(cid:127)  Insuring that the proper topical agents are used for treatment by follow-

ing Zein Obagi Skin Classification System

(cid:127)  Simplifying the proper selection of procedures by following Zein Obagi 
Skin Procedure Classification System based on the mechanism of action

Those of you who joined me years ago and are familiar with my original 
products,  including  Obagi  NuDerm  and  the  Obagi  Blue  Peel,  will  find  this 
book more exciting than my first edition and easier to follow. I have main-
tained the original principles of skin health that I introduced 25 years ago, and 
the book contains many clinical concepts I used to develop Obagi NuDerm 
and the Obagi Blue Peel. However, my original principles have been expanded 
in this book, as evidenced by a selection of patients’ photographs before and 
after  using  the  original  Obagi  NuDerm,  as  well  as  patients’  photographs 
before and after using the new ZO Medical system. The latter program was 
developed to include wider indications and applications when used purely for 
Skin Health Restoration, for maintaining skin health, and as a skin treatment. 
Those patients with no medical problems were given ZO skin health for pre-
vention and daily skin care.

The three original principles of Skin Health Restoration include correction 
(improving the epidermis); stimulation (improving the dermis); and bleaching 
and blending (correcting pigmentation problems). Recently, I added a fourth 
principle, stabilization. This novel concept was created to address the need for 
prevention. It aims to maintain skin health by preventing diseases, changes in 
skin texture, and cellular dysfunction. When targeting any disease, the four 
principles should be employed, and the disease approached within the larger 
context of overall skin health. Using acne as an example, my treatment plan 
first  involves  correction,  followed  by  specific  acne  agents,  then  stimulation, 
and finally bleaching and blending if discoloration exists. My objective here 
is to remedy the skin disease by thoroughly treating it within the entire skin 
unit. The rationale is that disease does not affect only a single spot on the face 
that can be seen or touched; rather, it influences all cells and layers, and one 

xiv

PREFACE

must comprehensively treat every element to restore the skin to its optimal 
health. After the disease has been treated, the focus should shift to stabiliza-
tion to maintain the results achieved.

The reader will notice that I address skin in a novel way. My style contrasts 
with the traditional, narrow approach to treating skin in which the focus is 
on  the  disease  or  its  symptoms. This  primitive  method  often  yields  limited 
improvement,  frequent  recurrences,  and  treatment  failures.  My  approach  is 
broader, yet still targets the core of the problem: the cells. The two primary 
objectives to my method are to restore skin health while treating the disease 
in parallel to achieve maximal results.

This book will provide key insights into achieving and optimizing patients’ 
results. My extensive research and clinical experience on defining and refining 
the science of skin health has enabled me to provide a standard step-by-step 
approach to treating skin. I hope the text will prove to be an indispensable tool 
for practitioners dealing with skin in the following ways:

(cid:127)  Selecting a daily skin care program
(cid:127)  Providing treatment
(cid:127)  Rejuvenating skin
(cid:127)  Preventing skin problems
(cid:127)  Maintaining results
(cid:127)  Selecting the appropriate procedure based on the problem, the skin type, 

the mechanism of action, and the objective of such procedures

(cid:127)  Conditioning skin for procedures
(cid:127)  Managing skin after procedures

The  practitioner  will  further  learn  that  many  currently  used  principles 
related to skin are either outdated or do not provide adequate information. 
This book will address these matters and set new standards for the following:

(cid:127)  Skin classification
(cid:127)  Topical agent classification
(cid:127)  Classification of procedures based on their mechanism of action
(cid:127)  Understanding and treating skin sensitivity and dryness
(cid:127)  Preventing  and  treating  pigmentation  disorders,  aging,  photodamage, 

and inflammatory diseases

(cid:127)  Selecting and performing the best procedure for a patient, from chemical 

peels to laser resurfacing

“Finis origine pendet”; the end depends on the beginning.

This  book  is  intended  for  anyone  who  desires  to  deliver  the  safest,  most 
comprehensive,  current,  and  effective  treatment  results  to  their  patients. 
Many of the principles I have put forth in this book are original. The ideas may 
challenge you and stimulate your own research, experimentation, and clinical 
studies. I encourage this; it is precisely what I have done and continue to do 
throughout my career in dermatology. I want the reader to see my principles 
as tools and to adapt them to create their own tour de force. Practitioners will 
develop their own preferences, and I encourage them to do so. But they must 
do so with a solid understanding of the skin’s cellular function: the control of 
cells before and after procedures, the interaction between skin types, the safe 
procedure depth, and the skin’s response to injury.

xv

PREFACE

By being inventive, we progress as a species, in technology and in medicine. 
We  must  begin  somewhere—and  with  imagination,  inspiration,  and  hard 
work as key ingredients, it shall evolve. I often find comfort remembering that 
not too long ago our ancestors believed the world was flat. The pioneer who 
sought  to  change  this  view  was  ridiculed.  Criticism  and  doubt  will  indeed 
follow whenever you seek to be inventive and change the established mindset. 
But we must never let this distract us from our patient’s best interest.

As Aristotle said, “There is only one way to avoid criticism: do nothing, say 

nothing, and be nothing.”

Zein E. Obagi, MD
Obagi Skin Health Institute
Beverly Hills, California 90210

Note:  I have created this text for physicians and skin care professionals who 
want to learn about the products that we use in our clinics. Please contact ZO 
directly for more information about ZO Skin Health and ZO Medical proto-
cols and standards of care.

ZO Skin Health by Zein Obagi, MD
1 Technology Drive, Suite B-123
Irvine, CA 92618
Telephone: 949-988-7524
Customer service: 888-893-1375
Fax: 949-988-7544
customerservice@zoskinhealth.com
zoskinhealth.com

Note  on  Terminology:  In this book, ZO refers to the products developed by 
Dr. Zein Obagi in conjunction with ZO Skin Health Inc. Neither has a business 
connection with Obagi Medical Products.

A NEW 
PERSPECTIVE 
ON SKIN 
ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

CHAPTER 

1

Many textbooks are available on the structure and the physiology of the skin, 
and reading of these is recommended for a firm grounding in dermatological 
science. The purpose of this chapter is to connect the Skin Health Restoration 
program approach to the anatomical and physiological properties of the skin 
(Box 1.1).

The skin is the largest organ of the body, having a surface area of 1.8 m2 
and making up approximately 18% of body weight. It is readily available for 
inspection and can reveal health or disease. Functionally, the skin has many 
roles:  thermal  regulation,  detection  of  sensation,  immune  responsiveness, 
energy storage, vitamin D production, and protection against environmental 
insults. During a lifetime, the skin undergoes numerous changes, including 
adapting to the change from a water to air environment at birth; adapting to 
hormonal  influences  at  puberty;  and,  in  females,  adjusting  to  the  effects  of 
hormonal changes seen during menstruation and pregnancy and while tak-
ing contraceptive pills during the reproductive years. In addition, profound 
changes can occur during illness, trauma, and environmental exposures and 
throughout the aging process. Sun exposure, smoking, disease, scarring, and 
psychological factors can profoundly change the structure and appearance of 
the skin. Skin Health Restoration principles and treatments were developed to 
address many of these changes.

Some  of  the  factors  leading  to  deteriorative  changes  in  the  skin  are  con-
trollable,  whereas  others,  with  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  are  not. This 
chapter examines the structure and function of the skin (Table 1.1), with an 
emphasis on defining the controllable factors of skin health. It also examines 
the physiological changes that accompany aging of the skin, both intrinsic bio-
logical aging and extrinsic photoaging that results from exposure to sunlight. 
Along the way, the chapter lays the scientific foundation on which the clinical 
treatments and procedures that follow are based.

2

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

Box 1.1

Skin  health  can  be  restored  and  maintained  by  directly  targeting  the 
different  layers  and  cells  of  the  skin  involved  in  the  processes  of  skin 
aging, dysfunction, and disease.

Table 1.1  Skin Functions and Activities

Function

Protection

Barrier function

Activity

Protect inner organs and maintain homeostasis

Prevent invasion of water, bacteria, irritants
Prevent transepidermal water loss
Build skin tolerance and reduce sensitivity
Provide natural protection from ultraviolet radiation through melanin and keratin

Stability of body organs

Synthesize vitamin D
Eliminate certain toxins

Immune system role

Carry out antigen processing and immune surveillance through Langerhans cells

Sensory recognition

Relay information to brain about external environment, mechanical stimulation

Temperature control

Conserve body heat through insulation, vascular constriction; cool the body through vasodilation, 
sweat evaporation

Sebum production

Reduce water loss, form acid mantle, discourage microbial growth

LAYERS AND COMPONENTS 
OF THE SKIN

SKIN STRUCTURES

The skin is stratified horizontally into three compartments—the epidermis, 
dermis, and subcutaneous layer—and is penetrated vertically by appendages 
such as hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands (Figure 1.1). The out-
ermost, thinnest layer, the epidermis, forms a barrier to the world (the barrier 
function), keeping out water, bacteria, toxins, ultraviolet light, and allergens 
in healthy skin. The epidermis also shows the genetic expression of skin color 
and  reveals  dryness,  softness,  or  roughness.  It  can  be  clear  or  diseased,  as 
is the case with acne, or have precancerous or cancerous lesions, pigmenta-
tion problems, psoriasis, rosacea, and a host of other conditions. Throughout 
the body, the epidermis is uniform in thickness, except for certain thickened 
areas, such as the palms and soles.

The  dermis,  composed  of  the  papillary  dermis  and  the  thicker  reticular 
dermis,  lies  below  the  epidermis.  The  papillary  dermis  contains  thin,  hap-
hazardly arranged collagen fibers, abundant ground substance, and delicate 
elastic fibers, whereas the reticular dermis comprises thick collagen bundles 
and coarse elastic fibers. Upward projections of the dermis, the papillae, fit 
into  the  epidermal  depressions,  the  rete  ridges.  This  arrangement  provides 
a greater interface between the epidermis and the dermis than would result 
from  contact  between  two  flat  surfaces.  A  rich  supply  of  blood  vessels  and 

Epidermis

Dermis

3

LAYERS AND COMPONENTS 
OF THE SKIN

Stratum corneum

Stratum granulosum

Stratum spinosum

Basal layer

Papillary dermis

Immediate reticular dermis

Upper reticular dermis

Mid dermis

Lower reticular dermis

Subcutaneous tissue

Figure 1.1  The layers of the skin (blood vessels omitted for clarity).

nerve endings can be found in the dermis. The deepest layer of the skin, the 
subcutaneous layer, is composed primarily of fatty tissue.

THE EPIDERMIS

Keratinocytes and the Keratinocyte Maturation Cycle
Four  cell  types  are  found  in  the  epidermis:  keratinocytes,  melanocytes, 
Langerhans  cells,  and  Merkel  cells.  Keratinocytes  are  the  major  cells  of  the 
 epidermis. They originate at the basal layer, mature, lose their nucleus, and flat-
ten as they move upward. At the uppermost level, they form a strong, flexible, 
dry surface known as the stratum corneum. This layer, composed of cells firmly 
attached to one another, continually loosens, detaches, and falls away in the nat-
ural process of exfoliation that takes 30 to 40 days in normally maturing skin. 
However, this transit time varies widely after mild injury or major trauma, in 
the presence of disease states like psoriasis, and throughout the aging process.

Keratinocytes are involved in a steady state of cell production and cell loss. 
The keratinocyte maturation cycle is the amount of time it takes for a keratino-
cyte to mature and transform into a corneocyte, reach the stratum corneum, 
and subsequently exfoliate from the surface of the epidermis. One of the main 
objectives of skin health, as discussed in this book, is restoration of a normal 
maturation cycle through skin conditioning. It usually takes 6 weeks of skin-
conditioning treatment to complete one cycle, and more than one cycle may 
be required in some patients (Box 1.2). Some of the factors that participate in 
the regulation of the keratinocyte maturation cycle are the dermis, hormones, 

4

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

vitamin A and its derivatives, epidermal growth factor, and cyclic nucleotides. 
Normal barrier function, in turn, increases skin tolerance. Skin barrier func-
tion,  however,  can  be  disrupted  by  overuse  of  moisturizers.  The  layers  and 
cells of the epidermis are shown in Figure 1.2.

Melanocytes, Melanosomes, and Skin Pigmentation
Melanocytes are melanin-synthesizing cells that are found only in the basal 
layer where they are interspersed among the basal keratinocytes. Approximately 
every 10th cell of that single-cell layer is a melanocyte. Through its finger-like 

Box 1.2

■■ One of the main objectives of skin health is restoration of a normal 

maturation cycle through skin conditioning

■■ It usually takes 6 weeks of skin conditioning treatment to complete 

one keratinocyte maturation cycle.

Horny layer

Transitional layer

Granular layer

Keratinocyte

Melanin granules

Spinous layer

Melanosome
Melanocyte

Basal layer

Basement membrane

Melanophage

Dermis

Figure 1.2   The layers and cells of the epidermis.

5

LAYERS AND COMPONENTS 
OF THE SKIN

dendritic processes, each melanocyte is in contact with 30 to 40 keratinocytes. 
Inside the melanocyte, organelles known as melanosomes produce melanin 
pigment—the primary pigment of skin. These pigment granules migrate from 
the cytoplasm into the dendrites and are transferred from there into the sur-
rounding keratinocytes, where they form a protective cap over the keratino-
cyte nucleus, protecting the nuclear DNA from the effects of ultraviolet (UV) 
radiation. Normal pigmentation of the skin depends on the efficient transfer 
of melanosomes to keratinocytes.

Variation in normal skin color, including that due to racial differences or 
the process of tanning, is not determined by the number or density of melano-
cytes but by the number, size, and distribution of melanosomes; the distribu-
tion of the pigment granules in the melanosomes; and the quantity of melanin 
produced. Melanosomes in darkly pigmented skin are large, single, and indi-
vidually bound by a membrane. In lightly pigmented skin, melanosomes are 
smaller and clustered together in complexes enclosed by a membrane.

The  main  function  of  melanin  is  to  protect  DNA  from  UV  light  by  act-
ing  as  an  antioxidant  to  reduce  inflammation.  Even  melanin  production  in 
dark skin leads to the desirable tan, whereas in fair skin it leads to freckles, 
uneven color tone, and no tanning. The two types of melanin are eumelanin 
and pheomelanin. Eumelanin is stable, darkens when oxidized by UV light 
(produces a tan), and protects from UV light at a sun protection factor of 4 to 
8. It is dominant in dark skin (skin types IV to VI on the Fitzpatrick scale). 
Pheomelanin, on the other hand, is unstable, provides little natural UV pro-
tection, and breaks down when exposed to UV light (causing DNA damage). 
Pheomelanin is present in all skin types (Fitzpatrick types I to VI) but is dom-
inant in fair skin. It may be the causative factor in skin cancer in dark skin.

Melanin  exists  in  the  skin  of  animals  and  in  many  botanical  and  marine 
plants. Plant melanin should be included in skin care products, especially sun-
screen, to offer extra protection from UV light, to protect skin melanocytes 
through an antioxidant effect, and to act as a shield to prevent penetration of 
UV light.

Tanning of the skin occurs in response to the UVA (320 to 380 nm) and 
UVB (290 to 320 nm) spectrums of solar radiation that reach the earth’s sur-
face. Within a few minutes of exposure to UVA, an immediate reaction occurs 
that  then  fades  over  6  to  8  hours.  During  this  time,  preexisting  melanin  is 
photo-oxidized, resulting in an immediate pigment darkening, and melano-
cytes increase in size. A delayed reaction involving new pigment production 
becomes apparent only after 2 to 3 days of repeated exposure. This delayed 
reaction occurs in response to both UVA and UVB and involves an increase 
in  the  number  of  active  melanocytes,  enhanced  melanosome  production, 
and an increase in melanogenesis. The transfer of mature melanosomes from 
the melanocytes into keratinocytes increases, and keratinocyte proliferation 
increases. Changes also occur in the size and aggregation pattern of melano-
somes, from smaller and grouped to larger and singly dispersed.

Skin  can  also  darken  in  response  to  hormonal  stimulation,  such  as  with 
increased synthesis of melanocyte-stimulating hormone or adrenocorticotropic 
hormone, or during the poorly understood process of postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation. Persons with lentigines (sun-induced dark spots) show increased 
numbers of melanocytes at the dermal-epidermal junction. Lentigines tend to 
be stable in color regardless of the length of exposure to UV light. These lesions 

6

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

are  believed  to  result  from  an  increase  in  metabolically  active  melanocytes. 
Ephelides  (freckles),  on  the  other  hand,  are  not  due  to  an  increase  in  mela-
nocytes  but  represent  areas  of  increased  melanin  synthesis.  Freckles  appear 
in  childhood,  and  their  pigmentation  usually  increases  during  the  summer, 
indicating  that  melanocytes  respond  to  UV  light.  Melasma,  a  very  common 
patchy brown, tan, or blue-gray facial skin discoloration, is almost entirely seen 
in women in the reproductive years. It typically appears on the upper cheeks, 
upper lip, forehead, and chin. Melasma is thought to be the result of stimula-
tion  of  melanocytes  or  pigment-producing  cells  by  the  female  sex  hormones 
estrogen and progesterone to produce more melanin pigments when the skin is 
exposed to sun. Women with a light brown skin type who are living in regions 
with intense sun exposure are particularly susceptible to developing this condi-
tion. Figure 1.3 shows a woman with melasma on the cheeks and forehead.

THE DERMIS

In  contrast  to  the  epidermis,  the  dermis  is  a  layer  of  connective  tissue  500 
to 1,000 μm thick that is largely acellular. It is composed of a mucopolysac-
charide gel held together by a fibrous matrix of primarily collagen fibers and 
about  5%  elastin.  The  dermis  lies  beneath  the  epidermis  and  gives  it  struc-
tural support. It also provides nutrition and removes waste products. The der-
mis is subdivided into two layers: the more superficial papillary dermis and 
the deeper reticular dermis (see Figure 1.1). The papillary dermis is the most 
active dermal layer. It is constantly repairing damaged collagen and elastin 
tissue  and  producing  collagen,  elastin,  and  glycosaminoglycans.  It  contains 
a rich supply of blood vessels that penetrate from the deeper layers, as well as 
numerous nerve endings, thermoreceptors, and cryoreceptors.

Below  the  papillary  dermis  is  the  thicker,  major  layer  of  the  dermis,  the 
reticular  dermis,  which  is  densely  packed  with  collagen  and  elastic  fibers. 
Various cell types are also present, including mast cells, fibroblasts, macro-
phages, and dermal dendritic cells. The transition from papillary dermis to 

Figure  1.3  Asian  patient  with  melasma  on 
cheeks and forehead.

7

LAYERS AND COMPONENTS 
OF THE SKIN

upper  reticular  dermis  (called  the  immediate  reticular  dermis,  or  IRD)  can 
be observed histologically. The IRD is the line where collagen fibers become 
thicker  and  more  horizontal  and  elastic  fibers  become  less  distinct.  Peels 
reaching the papillary dermis and the IRD lead to maximum skin tighten-
ing (Box 1.3). They are suitable for all skin types, and there is no risk for per-
manent effects, such as hypopigmentation skin thinning or textural changes. 
Complications such as keloids are rare. Healing is rapid, usually occurring in 
8 to 10 days. Procedures below the IRD, such as those penetrating to the upper 
reticular dermis, can achieve skin leveling, but they have a higher incidence of 
color and texture changes and the possibility of keloids.

Collagen and Tensile Strength
Collagen  is  produced  by  fibroblast  cells  that  lie  among  collagen  fibers  and 
makes up approximately 70% of the dry weight of the dermis. It has great ten-
sile strength—a single fiber 1 mm in diameter can withstand a load of up to 
20 kg (Box 1.4). It is insoluble because of chemically stabilizing intermolecular 
cross-linking. In young skin that has not been exposed to sun, mature colla-
gen is cross-linked into collagen fibrils that come together into small groups 
of fibers, which are then organized into thin, wavy fiber bundles. The collagen 
fiber bundles are arranged in a mat-like orthogonal pattern, such that each 
layer is at right angles to the one above and the one below. These bundle for-
mations are loosely arranged in the papillary dermis and become thicker in 
the deep dermis. Newly formed collagen fibrils become less soluble and more 
stable as they mature. Fully mature collagen fibers have a very low turnover 
rate compared with other body proteins.

In elderly persons, dermal collagen fibers become more heterogeneous, and 
the dermis becomes thinner. Reports on changes in the amount of collagen in 
unexposed human skin over time have been contradictory. It appears that the 
absolute amount of skin collagen decreases with age as skin becomes thinner, 
whereas the relative amount of collagen does not undergo significant change. 
Skin  exposed  to  sunlight  shows  similar  but  more  severe  changes  than  nor-
mally aged skin, with less insoluble collagen than normal skin.

Box 1.3

Procedures for Skin Tightening

Peels reaching the papillary dermis and the immediate reticular dermis 
lead to maximum skin tightening.

Box 1.4

Collagen and Skin Tensile Strength

Collagen fibers provide the skin with its tensile strength, allowing the 
skin to serve as a protective organ against external trauma.

8

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

Elastic Fibers, Skin Elasticity, and Resilience
Elastic fibers are extracellular matrix protein complexes produced by fibro-
blasts, and they make up 2% to 4% of the total volume of the dermis. They form 
a network that is composed mostly of the protein elastin, which has unusual 
elasticity and tensile strength, and a small amount of microfibrils composed of 
a family of proteins. It is this network that maintains normal skin tension and 
provides extensibility. The integrity of the elastic fiber network in skin is very 
important  because  wrinkling,  looseness,  sagging,  and  other  structural  and 
mechanical changes in aging skin appear to be due to alterations in this net-
work. In young skin, elastic fibers snap back quickly after stretching. Elastic 
fibers are continuously degraded and replaced by newly synthesized fibers in 
normal situations, but the turnover is slow.

The components of skin strength are shown in Box 1.5.

Extracellular Matrix and Hydration
The insoluble fibers of collagen and elastin are imbedded in the gel-like extracel-
lular matrix of the dermis. This matrix is made up of noncollagenous glycopro-
teins and glycosaminoglycan-proteoglycan macromolecules. The glycoproteins 
facilitate cell adhesion, cell motility, and cell-matrix interactions, whereas the 
macromolecule complexes are important for hydration. Although the glycos-
aminoglycans are less than 1% of the dry weight of the skin, they are able to bind 
up to 1,000 times their own weight in water. Hyaluronic acid and dermatan sul-
fate are the major glycosaminoglycans in adult skin. As part of innate cutane-
ous aging, the content of hyaluronic acid diminishes with age; this may in part 
explain the reduced turgor of aged skin. Because of their high water-binding 
capacity, glycosaminoglycans allow some movement in dermal structures.

Fibroblasts and the Synthesis and Degradation of 
Connective Tissue
Fibroblasts, the “master” cells of the dermis, are responsible for synthesizing 
the connective tissue elements (the dermal-extracellular matrix) of the dermis, 
including  collagen,  elastic  fibers,  and  the  proteoglycan-glycosaminoglycan 
macromolecules. They are more numerous and larger in the papillary dermis 
than in the reticular dermis. Fibroblasts also control the turnover of connec-
tive tissue by secreting enzymes that degrade collagens (collagenases), elastin 
(elastases), and proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans. With advancing age, 

Box 1.5

Components of Skin Strength

Skin strength is the combination of:

■■ Skin firmness: resistance to shearing forces, which is related to quan-

tity and quality of collagen

■■ Skin tightness: ability of skin to snap back after pulling or stretching, 
which is related to quantity and quality of elastin, especially in the 
papillary dermis

fibroblasts  become  smaller  and  less  active.  In  photodamaged  skin,  they  are 
often hypertrophied.

9

LAYERS AND COMPONENTS 
OF THE SKIN

Mast Cells and the Inflammatory Response
A second cell type of the dermis is the mast cell. These cells are found close 
to blood vessels, nerves, and appendages and are present in greater numbers 
in  the  subpapillary  dermis.  Mast  cells  are  distinguished  primarily  by  the 
presence  of  numerous,  large  cytoplasmic  granules  that  contain  histamine, 
enzymes, and other mediators. During an allergic reaction, mast cells bind to 
immunoglobulin E, and the granules discharge their contents as part of the 
inflammatory response.

THE SUBCUTANEOUS LAYER

The  subcutaneous  layer,  composed  of  lobules  of  fatty  tissue,  functions  as  a 
buffer against blunt trauma and gives the skin its appealing full and plump 
appearance (Box 1.6). It also provides “gliding ability” to both the dermis and 
epidermis, which helps to make skin more flexible. Areas with abundant sub-
cutaneous tissue heal better and have less severe scarring than areas with a 
very thin or no subcutaneous layer. This can explain why certain areas of the 
face, such as the upper lip, jawline, and neck, where the dermis is in contact 
with the underlying muscles with little or no fat in between, have an increased 
tendency  for  fibrosis  and  scarring  after  procedures.  It  is  very  important  to 
avoid deep dermal penetration in these areas.

SEBACEOUS GLANDS

Sebaceous glands are found on all parts of the body except the palms and soles, 
but they are small and relatively inactive in hairless areas. They are formed 
from epidermally derived cells that bud out from the side of a hair follicle. The 
purpose of the sebaceous glands is to form oil, sebum, which lubricates and 
thus protects the hair and skin. The dominant pathological condition of the 
sebaceous glands is acne.

There  are  several  misconceptions  about  sebum  and  aging.  Skin  aging 
involves changes to collagen and elastin and does not depend on the amount 
of sebum production or skin dryness. Thus, oily skin does not age at a slower 
rate. Dryness is in fact related to the loss of glycosaminoglycans and abnormal 
barrier function (Box 1.7). Sebum helps to keep the skin at a slightly acidic pH 
(between 6 and 7).

Box 1.6

Fatty Tissue

The  subcutaneous  layer,  composed  of  lobules  of  fatty  tissue,  gives  the 
skin its appealing full and plump appearance.

10

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

Box 1.7

Sebum and Skin Dryness

Dryness is related to the loss of glycosaminoglycans and abnormal bar-
rier function, not to a decrease in sebum.

THE AGING PROCESS

In any discussion of skin aging, it is important to differentiate between bio-
logical  aging  (chronological  aging)  and  photoaging  that  is  a  direct  result  of 
exposure to sunlight. Clinically, the appearance of photoaged skin is distinctly 
different from biologically aged, sun-protected skin (Table 1.2). The most vis-
ible signs of biological aging include laxity, paleness, smooth-to-fine wrinkling, 
deepening of expression lines, dryness, and general thinning. Bruising is more 
common, and healing is slower. In contrast, visibly photoaged skin is more yel-
lowish in pigmentation with marked areas of hyperpigmentation, coarser and 
roughened in texture, more lax, and more deeply wrinkled. These differences 
are readily evident when comparing skin areas of elderly persons that are usu-
ally covered, and thus photoprotected, with areas that have not been photopro-
tected.  As  a  general  rule,  individuals  with  biologically  aged,  photoprotected 
skin appear younger than individuals with photodamaged skin who are of the 
same chronological age. In biological aging, most skin functions are slowed, 
and there is atrophy of tissues, whereas in photoaging, there is an increase in 
irregular  activity  with  hypertrophy  of  certain  tissues.  Although  exposure  to 
UV radiation is the most important extrinsic factor in skin aging, other exter-
nal factors, such as environmental toxins and infectious agents, may also play a 
role. Figure 1.4 shows a patient with skin atrophy, laxity, and wrinkles (intrin-
sic aging). Figure 1.5 shows a patient with classical signs of photodamage.

BIOLOGICAL AGING

Biological  aging  is  characterized  by  a  decrease  in  functional  capacity  and 
increased  susceptibility  to  certain  diseases  and  environmental  insults.  The 

Table 1.2  Clinical Appearance of Biologically Aged and Photoaged Skin

Biologically Aged Skin

Photoaged Skin

Lax

Leathery

Deepened expression lines

Dry

Dry

Overall thinning

Nodular and hypertrophied

Yellow
Telangiectasia
Deep wrinkles
Accentuated skin furrows
Sags and bags
Variety of benign, premalignant, and malignant 
neoplasms

11

THE AGING PROCESS

most  pronounced  changes  in  biologically  aged  skin  occur  within  the  epi-
dermis, affecting primarily the basal cell layer. The aging process takes place 
within all organs of the body and can be seen visibly in the skin. Skin aging is 
influenced by several factors, including genetics, environmental exposure, hor-
monal changes, and metabolic processes. Together, these factors lead to cumu-
lative alterations of skin structure, function, and appearance. The functioning 
of  the  central  nervous,  immune,  endocrine,  and  cardiovascular  systems,  as 
well  as  of  the  skin,  is  also  impaired  with  age.  Chronologically  aged  skin  is 
thin,  relatively  flattened,  dry,  and  unblemished,  with  some  loss  of  elasticity 
and age-related loss of architectural regularity. General atrophy of the extra-
cellular matrix is reflected by a decrease in the number of fibroblasts. Reduced 
levels of collagen and elastin, with impaired organization, are primarily due 
to decreased protein synthesis affecting types I and III collagen in the dermis, 
with an increased breakdown of extracellular matrix proteins. Oxidative stress 
is considered of primary importance in driving the aging process. The original 

Figure  1.4  Patient  with 
Notice skin atrophy, laxity, and wrinkles.

intrinsic  aging. 

Figure  1.5  Patient  with  classical  signs  of 
photodamage (extrinsic aging).

12

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

free radical theory of aging purported that the molecular basis of aging was 
derived  from  a  lifetime  accumulation  of  oxidative  damage  to  cells  resulting 
from excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced as a consequence of aero-
bic metabolism. Although the skin possesses extremely efficient antioxidant 
activities, ROS levels rise, and antioxidant activities decline during aging.

A flattening of the dermal-epidermal interface is one of the more profound 
structural changes that occur with age. Because of this and the other aged-
related structural and morphological changes that occur at both the  tissue 
and  cellular  levels,  normal  skin  functions  progressively  deteriorate,  and 
skin  becomes  more  susceptible  to  the  development  of  various  benign  and 
malignant  diseases.  Hereditary  factors,  hormone  levels,  and  various  meta-
bolic substances modulate the structural and physiological changes inherent 
in the aging process. Skin barrier functioning, permeability, thermoregula-
tory  mechanisms,  response  to  injury,  sensory  perception,  metabolism,  and 
immune function are all altered as we age. Several theories have been pro-
posed over the years to explain the changes that occur, but it is likely that 
multiple  pathways  are  involved.  Alterations  occurring  during  biological 
aging are shown in Box 1.8.

Changes to the Epidermis
With age, corneocytes become bigger and adhere less to one another, the rete 
pegs  of  the  epidermis  disappear,  and,  along  with  a  decrease  in  the  number 
and size of dermal papillae, the lower surface loses its undulating contour. As 
a result, the epidermis flattens and has less surface contact with the dermis 
(with less nutrient and waste transfer). In this way, the skin becomes less resis-
tant to shearing forces and more vulnerable to insult, leading to an increased 
risk for epidermal peeling. Although this flattening of the dermal-epidermal 
junction may give the appearance that the epidermis thins substantially with 
age, the actual thickness of the epidermis decreases only 20% over the human 
lifespan. It is the dermal layer that thins markedly during the biological aging 
process. Along with the various structural changes that occur, there is a pro-
gressive  decline  in  active  melanocytes.  In  addition,  keratinocytes  change 
shape, becoming shorter and fatter.

Changes in Histology of the Dermis and the Appearance of the 
Skin following Biological Aging
Alterations in the dermal structural network of elastic fibers, collagen, pro-
teins, and glycosaminoglycans lead to changes in the resilience and strength 
of  aging  skin.  One  of  the  most  prominent  changes  occurring  in  biological 

Box 1.8

Alterations during Biological Aging

Skin barrier functioning, permeability, thermoregulatory mechanisms, 
response to injury, sensory perception, metabolism, and immune func-
tion are all altered as we age.

13

THE AGING PROCESS

aging is the decrease and increasingly abnormal structure of the elastic fibers, 
which may cause skin laxity and the loss of resiliency after stretching. Loss of 
elastic microfibrils and the appearance of cavities are also highly characteris-
tic of biological aging. Collagen is a tougher, more stable material and does not 
show the well-defined aging changes that are seen with elastic fibers. However, 
there is less collagen per surface area in aging skin, and it is less dense and 
stiffer, probably owing to progressive cross-linking. Also, the fibers of collagen 
appear thickened and stain differently. The three-dimensional meshwork of 
collagen becomes distorted from many years of mechanical stress and, in this 
way, contributes to the laxity, sagging, and wrinkling of older skin.

One of the marked differences between the sexes is that men have a thicker 
dermis than women across all age groups. Similarly, collagen density is greater 
in men than women, although the rate of collagen loss is similar in both sexes. 
These  differences  may  explain  why  facial  skin  of  women  appears  to  show 
greater deterioration with age.

Additional  age-related  dermal  changes  affect  fibroblasts,  which  become 
smaller  and  show  decreased  metabolic  activity  and  a  decreased  prolifera-
tion rate. The concentrations of glycosaminoglycans—an important factor in 
the water-holding capacity of the dermis—are stable until about 40 years of 
age  and  then  fall  continuously. This  decrease  of  glycosaminoglycans  that  is 
observed  in  later  years  may  be  due  to  decreased  synthesis  and  might  have 
explained the dry and wrinkled appearance of aged skin. However, biological 
aging does not appear to alter the water structure significantly.

Other Changes
With age, lipid content of the skin decreases, and lipid composition changes. 
And, although the fat content of the subcutaneous layer is greater in women 
than  in  men,  the  distribution  of  subcutaneous  fat  changes  and  the  volume 
decreases  in  both  sexes  as  they  age.  Androgen-dependent  production  of 
sebum by the sebaceous glands begins to decrease in postmenopausal women 
and declines steadily thereafter. The clinical consequences are a 40% to 50% 
decrease in sebum output, which may account for the prevalence of dry skin 
in  older  women.  Excessive  use  of  soaps  and  cosmetics  and  actinic  damage 
may be even  more important. In men, the output  of sebum does not begin 
to decline until about their early 70s. The secretions of sweat glands are also 
diminished. Table 1.3 shows skin changes in biological aging.

Table 1.3  Skin Changes in Biological Aging

Skin Component

Histological Change

Elastic fibers

Collagen

•  Decreased amount
•  Abnormal structure

Clinical Change

•  Skin laxity
•  Loss of resiliency

•  Less per surface area
•  Less dense and stiffer
•  Three-dimensional meshwork 

•  Laxity
•  Sagging
•  Wrinkling

becomes distorted

Glycosaminoglycans Decreased synthesis

Subcutaneous fat

Decreased volume

•  Dryness
•  Wrinkling

•  Loss of full and plump 

skin appearance

14

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

PHOTOAGING

Ongoing  photoaging  results  in  marked  changes  to  both  the  epidermal  and 
dermal layers that are distinct from those observed with biological aging (see 
Table  1.2).  Photoaging  of  the  skin  is  broadly  characterized  by  hypertrophy. 
Sebaceous glands become enlarged, and neoplastic growths are frequent. In 
marked contrast to biologically aging skin, the dermis of photodamaged aging 
skin  thickens,  and  small  blood  vessels  become  dilated  and  deranged.  The 
microvasculature collapses, showing only a few dilated, thickened, tortuous 
vessels. In addition, the number of hair follicles is reduced, and hair thinning 
is more prominent than in biologically aged skin. Figure 1.4 shows a patient 
with photoaging and fine wrinkles.

Epidermal Damage
Excessive  sun  exposure  causes  significant  changes  in  the  epidermis. 
Melanocytes  increase,  enlarge,  and  become  more  branched.  Keratinocytes 
may  become  vacuolated  and  necrotic  or  show  variation  in  size,  shape,  and 
staining properties. The thickness of the photodamaged epidermis is variable, 
with alternating areas of atrophy and hyperplasia. It is thought that atrophy 
may result from depletion of cells from the basal layer, whereas areas of hyper-
plasia may reflect compensatory overgrowth of UV-damaged tissue.

Not surprisingly, many of these morphological changes are associated with 
clinical changes in the appearance of the skin. Melanocyte hyperplasia causes 
irregular  pigmentation  interspersed  with  more  severely  damaged  areas  in 
which  melanocytes  are  depleted  or  unable  to  transfer  pigment  to  keratino-
cytes. Hyperplastic melanocytes that produce great amounts of pigment give 
rise to solar lentigines. Also known as liver spots, solar lentigines are benign 
lesions  that  occur  on  photodamaged  skin.  Most  lightly  pigmented  persons 
develop solar lentigines on sun-exposed hands, wrists, arms, neck, and face in 
middle age. Injury to basal keratinocytes results in a scaly stratum corneum 
and actinic keratoses.

Dermal Damage
Many  of  the  visible  signs  of  deterioration  in  photoaged  skin  reflect  major 
structural changes in the dermis. The dominant change to the dermis is hyper-
plasia  of  the  elastic  tissue,  ending  in  complete  disorganization.  Compared 
with  biologically  aged  skin,  new  apparently  abnormal  elastin  accumulates, 
whereas elastin degradation is slowed. The degree of elastosis correlates with 
the  amount  of  sun  exposure.  Histologically,  large  quantities  of  thickened, 
tangled, disorganized, and degraded elastic fibers are seen, and with extreme 
damage,  an  amorphous  mass  of  what  once  was  elastic  tissue  is  present.  In 
sun-protected  skin,  elastosis  this  extensive  is  never  seen,  even  in  people  of 
advanced age.

Together with hyperplasia of the elastic tissue, collagen fibers become frag-
mented, thickened, and more soluble in sun-damaged skin, whereas glycos-
aminoglycans increase. Collagen is degraded as a result of the upregulation 
of  collagen-degrading  enzymes  that  occurs  in  response  to  UVB  radiation. 
In contrast, mature collagen appears to become more stable and resistant to 
enzymatic degradation with biological age.

15

REFERENCES

Box 1.9

Maintaining Proper Skin Functioning

Despite the effects of aging, it is theoretically possible to keep the skin 
functioning properly throughout life so that it overcomes damage from 
the environment and remains in a healthy state.

MAINTAINING SKIN HEALTH AND 
FUNCTION THROUGHOUT LIFE

Facial skin is remarkable for its ability to reveal health or disease of the skin, 
as well as that of the other organs of the body. Genetics, environmental expo-
sure, hormonal changes, and metabolic processes, alone or together, lead to 
changes in skin structure, function, tolerance, and appearance. Moisturizers, 
so  popular  in  over-the-counter  products,  cannot  slow  the  progress  of  these 
intricate and inter-related changes. In fact, moisturizers slow down the rate of 
natural exfoliation, causing decreased skin tolerance, dullness, dryness, and 
actual moisturizer addiction. Yet consumers continue to purchase moisturiz-
ers in the hope that “this one will be different.” For profound beneficial clini-
cal changes, skin must be treated on the cellular level with agents that target 
different layers and cells of the skin. The restoration and maintenance of skin 
health should be based on many of the anatomical and physiological properties 
of the skin reviewed in this chapter. This volume presents the advances in Skin 
Health Restoration that allow the maintenance of skin health and function 
throughout life. The principles of skin health are defined and described, skin-
conditioning processes are presented, and simple, standardized programs are 
explained. It is time to end patients’ moisturizer addiction and give them the 
solutions that lead to fundamental and lasting changes. Box 1.9 discusses a 
view on maintaining proper skin functioning throughout life.

REFERENCES

  1.  McGrath  JA,  Uitto  J.  Anatomy  and  organization  of  human  skin.  In:  Burns  T, 
Breathnach  S,  Cox  N,  Griffiths  C,  eds.  Rook’s  Textbook  of  Dermatology.  8th  ed. 
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:Ch 3.

  2.  Bergstresser PR, Costner MI. Anatomy and physiology. In: Bolognia J, Jorizzo JK, 

Rapini RP, eds. Dermatology. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2007:25-35.

  3.  Piérard GE, Paquet P, Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Quatresooz P. Physiological variations 
during aging. In: Farage MA, Miller KW, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Aging Skin. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2010:45-54.

  4.  Glogau RG. Systematic evaluation of the aging face. In: Bolognia J, Jorizzo JK, Rapini 

RP, eds. Dermatology. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2007:2295-2299.

  5.  Piérard GE, Paquet P, Xhauflaire-Uhoda E, Quatresooz P. Physiological variations 
during aging. In: Farage MA, Miller KW, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Aging Skin. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2010:45-54.

16

A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON 
SKIN ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY

  6.  Raschke  C,  Elsner  R.  Skin  aging:  a  brief  summary  of  characteristic  changes.  In: 
Farage MA, Miller KW, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Aging Skin. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag; 2010:37-43.

  7.  Elsner P, Fluhr JW, Gehring W, et al. Anti-aging data and support claims: consensus 

statement. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2011;9(Suppl 3):S1-S32.

  8.  Makrantonaki E, Zouboulis CC. Skin alterations and diseases in advanced age. Drug 

Discov Today Dis Mec. 2008;5:e153-e162.

  9.  Farage MA, Miller KW, Maibach HI. Degenerative changes in aging skin. In: Farage 
MA, Miller KW, Maibach HI, eds. Textbook of Aging Skin. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 
2010:25-35.

  10.  Kanitakis J. Anatomy, histology and immunohistochemistry of normal human skin. 

Eur J Dermatol. 2002;12:390-401.

  11.  Stanley JR. Synergy of understanding dermatologic disease and epidermal biology. 

J Clin Invest. 2012;122:436-439.

  12.  Gilchrest BA. Aging of differentiated cells (excluding the fibroblast) in skin: in vitro 
studies. In: Kligman AM, Balin AK, eds. Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven Press; 
1993:77-92.

  13.  Arin  MJ,  Roop  DR,  Koch  PJ,  Koster  MI.  Biology  of  keratinocytes.  In:  Bolognia  J, 
Jorizzo JK, Rapini RP, eds. Dermatology. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2007:731-742.
  14.  Balin  AK,  Lin  AN.  Skin  changes  as  a  biological  marker  for  measuring  the  rate  of 
human aging. In: Kligman AM, Balin AK, eds. Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven 
Press; 1993:43-75.

  15.  Kligman  AM,  Balin  AK.  Aging  of  human  skin.  In:  Kligman  AM,  Balin  AK,  eds. 

Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven Press; 1993:1-42.

  16.  Grove GL. Age-associated changes in human epidermal cell renewal and repair. In: 
Kligman AM, Balin AK, eds. Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven Press; 1993:193-204.
  17.  Bolognia JL, Orlow SJ. Melanocyte biology. In: Bolognia J, Jorizzo JK, Rapini RP, eds. 

Dermatology. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2007:901-911.

  18.  Bolognia  JL,  Pawelek  JM.  Biology  of  hypopigmentation.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 

1988;19:217-255.

  19.  Thody  AJ.  Skin  pigmentation  and  its  regulation.  In:  Priestley  GC,  ed.  Molecular 

Aspects of Dermatology. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons; 1993:55-73.

  20.  Schwartz T. Immunology. In: Bolognia J, Jorizzo JK, Rapini RP, eds. Dermatology. 

2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2007:63-79.

  21.  Krieg T, Aumailley M. The extracellular matrix of the dermis: flexible structures with 

dynamic functions. Exp Dermatol. 2011;20:689-695.

  22.  Matsuoka LY, Uitto J. Alterations in the elastic fibers in cutaneous aging and solar 
elastosis. In: Kligman AM, Balin AK, eds. Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven Press; 
1993:141-151.

  23.  Ghersetich  I,  Lotti  T,  Campanile  G,  et  al.  Hyaluronic  acid  in  cutaneous  intrinsic 

aging. Int J Dermatol. 1994;33:119-122.

  24.  Kamell  JM,  Maibach  HI.  A  quantitative  approach  to  anatomy  and  physiology  of 
aging skin: barrier, dermal structure, and perfusion. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, eds. 
Textbook of Cosmetic Dermatology. 4th ed. London: Informa Healthcare; 2010:14-27.
  25.  Tur  E.  Skin  physiology  and  gender.  In:  Baran  R,  Maibach  HI,  eds.  Textbook  of 

Cosmetic Dermatology. 4th ed. London: Informa Healthcare; 2010:1-13.

  26.  Assaf H, Adly MA, Hussein MR. Aging and intrinsic aging: pathogenesis and mani-
festations.  In:  Farage  MA,  Miller  KW,  Maibach  HI,  eds.  Textbook  of  Aging  Skin. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2010:129-138.

  27.  Kligman L. Skin changes in photoaging: characteristics, prevention, and repair. In: 
Kligman AM, Balin AK, eds. Aging and the Skin. New York: Raven Press; 1993:331-346.
  28.  Yaar  M,  Gilchrest  BA.  Biochemical  and  molecular  changes  in  photoaged  skin.  In: 
Gilchrest BA, ed. Photodamage. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell Scientific; 1995:168-184.

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF 
SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION

CHAPTER 

2

A LIFETIME OF HEALTHY SKIN

This chapter presents the original principles and objectives of the Skin Health 
Restoration program that were developed over the past 30 years. These com-
prehensive solutions defy the traditional narrow focus on skin disease and 
aim to provide truly healthy skin for the lifetime of any individual, regard-
less of age, sex, race, or skin condition. Current dermatology training, pub-
lished literature, and clinical practice focus mostly on the treatment of skin 
disease and do not address overall skin health. This situation gives rise to 
a number of questions, including the following: 1) If a patient has no active 
skin disease, is his or her skin healthy? 2) Is skin health restored when a skin 
disease has been treated and cleared? 3) Is it advisable to wait for a disease to 
appear, or should we intervene to prevent its appearance? 4) Is maintenance 
of  skin  integrity  and  function  not  as  important  as  resolving  a  disease  or 
performing a procedure to improve the appearance of skin? Our answers to 
these questions may reveal deficiencies in the current mainstream attitude 
toward skin health.

HEALTHY SKIN: DEFINITION AND MODEL

Skin health does not have a widely accepted definition or model—it means 
different  things  to  different  people  throughout  the  world.  Healthy  skin  is 
frequently  described  as  beautiful,  flawless,  glowing,  and  young,  but  these 
terms are imprecise and reflect subjective and nonquantifiable characteris-
tics. The definition of skin health introduced in 1983 and expanded in 2008 
provides specific, easily recognized physiological, histological, and clinical 
characteristics. Specifically, healthy skin is smooth, even in color tone, firm 
and tight, well hydrated, tolerant to external factors, contour rich, and free 

18

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.1

Skin Health Defined

■■ Smooth
■■ Even in color
■■ Firm and tight
■■ Well hydrated
■■ Tolerant
■■ Contour rich
■■ Free of active disease

from underlying disease (Box 2.1). Skin treatments must correct any abnor-
malities  in  skin  health  that  deviate  from  this  definition  so  that  the  skin 
attains desirable attributes.

The definition of healthy skin has many applications. The first is in estab-
lishing a comprehensive patient diagnosis by listing the common character-
istics of healthy skin and then determining which of these are lacking in the 
skin of the patient being evaluated (Table 2.1). The practitioner must then cre-
ate a treatment plan that corrects any abnormalities (based on the definition) 
by treating the patient’s skin disease. The definition also improves the physi-
cian’s ability to monitor the progress of a topical product regimen aimed at 
Skin Health Restoration and for judging treatment results and success rates. 
Figure 2.1 highlights characteristics of a baby’s skin, which illustrate the goals 
for achieving success in any comprehensive topical Skin Health Restoration 
treatment  regimen.  Table  2.2  delineates  each  of  the  main  characteristics  of 
healthy skin as seen in a baby and identifies the etiology behind each of these 
characteristics.

SKIN PHASES OVER A LIFETIME

Most  of  us  begin  life  with  healthy,  unflawed  skin.  However,  environ-
mental/external  and  internal  factors,  hereditary  factors,  and  the  natural, 

Table 2.1  Definition of Skin Health: Attribute Presence versus Absence

Attribute Present (Optimized Skin 
Health)

Attribute Absence (Sub-Optimal Skin 
Health)

Smooth

Evenly colored

Firm

Tight

Hydrated

Tolerant

Contour rich

Rough

Dyschromic

Weak (little to no resistance to shearing force)

Lax

Dry

Intolerant

Hollow, sunken

Free of underlying disease(s)

Underlying disease present

Table 2.2  Factors Underlying Skin Health Characteristics

Characteristic

Factors

Smooth

Soft, compact stratum corneum and minimal basket-weaving 
(histology)
Continuous epidermal cell renewal and repair owing to 
balanced and regulated keratinocyte maturation cycles 
(KMCs). (Each cycle is approximately 6 weeks; KMCs are 
described later in this chapter.)

Firm

Tight

Abundant, optimally functioning collagen

Abundant, optimally functioning collagen and elastin

Evenly colored 

Properly functioning melanocytes

Well hydrated 

Intact barrier 
function

Abundance of glycosaminoglycans (thus, no need for external 
moisturization)

Smooth stratum corneum with little to no basket-weaving.
Multiple layers of corneocytes that are bound well together
Overlying stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum below the 
numerous layers of well-defined, pink keratinocytes arising 
from the basal layer

Heals rapidly and 
properly

Effective renewal of keratinocytes
Good circulation

Contour rich 

Optimal volume of collagen, elastin, and subcutaneous tissue

Free of clinically 
active disease 

Normal skin histology

Figure 2.1  Healthy skin. This 1-year-
old  girl  has  skin  that  embodies  each 
major skin health attribute.

chronological changes associated with aging proceed to undo what was ours 
at birth. With the passage of time, activities promoting skin health decrease, 
and  a  deterioration  of  skin  quality  begins.  The  skin  is  not  diseased,  but 
intrinsic aging and photoaging have caused anatomical, physiological, and 
clinical changes. These range from a sensation of dryness and the appear-
ance of dull, weathered skin, to the appearance of wrinkling, jowling, laxity, 
hypertrophy, and easy bruising. Although these changes (phases) may not 
be clinically detectable at an early stage, they are occurring and will become 
detectable  at  a  later  age.  It  may  be  surprising  to  learn  that  skin  reaches  a 
relatively inactive phase at age 30, with decreased cellular function and the 
appearance  of  wrinkles.  The  phases  skin  passes  through  in  a  lifetime  are 
shown in Box 2.2; they are divided into one of the following three catego-
ries: a healthy (optimally active) phase, an altered (deteriorated) phase, and 
an inactive phase. Some of the most common causes of skin deterioration 
may  be  controllable,  whereas  others  are  not  (Table  2.3).  Of  note,  many  of 
the individual factors leading to skin deterioration have inflammation as an 
underlying cause.

SIGNIFICANT FACTORS IN 
ACHIEVING SKIN HEALTH

The  skin  health  definition  presented  previously  described  the  external 
characteristics  of  healthy  skin,  whereas  the  baby  skin  model  specified  the 

19

20

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.2

Skin Phases over a Lifetime
HEALTHY (OPTIMALLY ACTIVE) SKIN PHASE

■■ From birth to age 9 or 10 years
■■ Embodies the definition of optimal skin health
■■ Optimized epidermal and dermal cellular function and continuous, 

regular cell renewal and repair (normal KMC*)

■■ No sebum production
■■ No chronic inflammation
■■ No dryness or sensitivity

ALTERED (DETERIORATED) SKIN PHASE

■■ From age 10 to 30 years
■■ Begins to diverge from the main characteristics that define optimal 

skin health

■■ Irregular  cellular  functions,  including  impaired  epidermal  cell 

renewal (abnormal KMC*)
■■ Impaired skin barrier function
■■ Sebum produced at varying levels
■■ Chronic inflammation
■■ Textural irregularities
■■ Enlarged pores, dyschromia, atrophy, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, 

and a “dull” appearance

■■ Skin disease may be present or beginning to appear

INACTIVE SKIN PHASE

■■ Begins at age 30 years
■■ Progressively greater deviation from the characteristics that define 

optimal skin health (compared with the previous two phases)
■■ Irregular epidermal cellular function (abnormalities in KMCs*)
■■ Weakened, impaired barrier function
■■ Chronic inflammation
■■ Advanced textural changes and irregularity
■■ Conspicuous signs of extrinsic and intrinsic aging (e.g., hypertrophy, 

atrophy)

■■ Laxity and wrinkles (due to damaged existing collagen and elastin in 
combination with an overall decrease in the production of collagen 
and elastin)

■■ Increased likelihood of concurrent skin disease

*The keratinocyte maturation cycle (KMC) is described later in this chapter.

Table 2.3  Common Causes of Skin Deterioration

Controllable

Uncontrollable

Excess sebum production (abnormality of pilosebaceous units) Genetic factors and skin type

Intrinsic and chronological aging changes

Abnormalities in the skin caused by an underlying, incurable, 
systemic disease (including immunological disorders); many 
of these can have an unpredictable course*

Dysfunctional melanocytes

Sun exposure

Unhealthy diet (e.g., high glycemic index and/or excessive 
hormonal exposure through the consumption of 
nonorganic dairy products), lifestyle, unsuitable topically 
applied products

Medications (some systemic medications have effects on the 
skin)

Complications of surgical and nonsurgical rejuvenation 
procedures

Exposure to irritants and allergens

Prolonged use of certain medical and nonmedical topical 
agents (i.e., topical steroid−induced skin atrophy)

Chronic inflammation

* Some chronic, incurable, systemic disorders and their associated skin inflammation (e.g., lupus erythematosus) can be con-
trolled with medications; however, regardless of periods of control with medications, many are associated with an unpredict-
able course.

physiological, histological, and clinical characteristics of such skin. The next 
step  was  to  determine  the  factors  and  processes  that  negatively  influence 
skin health so that treatment programs could be created to help restore it. 
Investigations and clinical experience have revealed that the areas of most 
concern in skin health include the following: the integrity of the skin bar-
rier function, duration of the KMC, and presence of chronic inflammation 
(Box 2.3).

SKIN BARRIER FUNCTION

It would be hard to overstate the importance of an intact barrier function in 
skin health. As a physical, chemical, and immunological barrier, it prevents 
penetration of harmful substances and excessive transepidermal water loss. 
We do not currently know all of the intricate mechanisms of the barrier func-
tion, but we do know that the barrier function can be repaired by following 
the ZO Skin Health Restoration principles using topical regimens.

Box 2.3

Factors Responsible for Skin Health

■■ Skin barrier function
■■ Keratinocyte maturation cycle (KMC)
■■ Chronic inflammation

21

22

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

The  barrier  function  acts  as  a  protective  skin  envelope  consisting  of  1)  a 
matrix  of  water,  lipids,  and  proteins  that  surrounds  keratinocytes  and  cor-
neocytes and 2) stratum corneum cells (corneocytes), which are keratinocytes 
that  have  completed  their  differentiation  process,  having  lost  their  nuclei 
and  cytoplasmic  organelles.  As  new  corneocytes  appear,  the  older  cells  are 
shed  through  desquamation. The  normal/healthy  barrier  function  relies  on 
a 40-day cycle of epidermal renewal (the KMC); this entails the production 
of new cells through mitosis within the basal cell layer, which subsequently 
mature to become corneocytes. Corneocytes are arranged in multiple layers, 
enveloped by the natural matrix of water, lipids, and proteins. These two com-
ponents need to be in balance and work together to maintain the integrity of 
the barrier function. Disturbances of either component result in a compro-
mised barrier function.

Moisturizers, which contain approximately the same  components (water, 
lipids, and proteins) as the skin’s natural elements, impair the skin’s barrier 
function. Specifically, when a moisturizer is applied to the skin surface, cells 
on the surface detect a large amount of moisture and send a message to the 
body  to  stop  delivering  water  to  the  skin  (essentially,  a  feedback  loop).  To 
clarify, externally applied moisturizers alter the balance of water, lipids, and 
proteins in the skin, which leads to a compromised barrier function and to an 
acquired skin sensitivity.

Externally applied moisturizers are also detrimental in that they interfere 
with  the  natural  exfoliation  and  desquamation  of  corneocytes  (dead  kera-
tinocytes).  Under  normal  circumstances,  the  KMC  regulates  natural  skin 
exfoliation in a proper manner. But when moisturizers are applied, corneo-
cytes within the stratum corneum do not exfoliate in the usual fashion but 
accumulate on the surface instead. This accumulation sends a message to the 
basal cell layer to terminate mitosis and slow down or end the creation of new 
keratinocytes.  With  repeated  application  of  moisturizers,  new  epidermal 
cells stop being created in the basal cell layer. Subsequently, with repeated 
application of moisturizers, the epidermis thins, the barrier function is com-
promised, and skin becomes more sensitive. Box 2.4 shows barrier function 
activities.

Box 2.4

Barrier Function Activities

■■ Transmission  of  messages  from  superficial  to  deeper  layers  of  the 
skin,  which  is  intended  to  elicit  appropriate  responses  following 
exposure to external stimuli

■■ Maintenance of proper natural epidermal hydration (e.g., minimiza-

tion of transepidermal water loss)

■■ Enhancement of epidermal renewal and repair, which is responsible 

for building and maintaining skin tolerance

23

SIGNIFICANT FACTORS IN 
ACHIEVING SKIN HEALTH

THE KERATINOCYTE MATURATION CYCLE

As briefly mentioned previously, the skin’s normal barrier function depends on 
a 40-day cycle of epidermal renewal, the KMC. This cycle is the foundation of 
Skin  Health  Restoration  because  without  adequate  epidermal  exfoliation  and 
subsequent  replacement  with  fresh,  active  cells,  skin  health  is  compromised. 
A properly regulated KMC is  essential for the production of skin that is nat-
urally  hydrated  and  tolerant  of  detrimental  external  stimuli.  In  this  text,  the 
term KMC is synonymous with the process of natural skin exfoliation because 
each can be measured in time. The term KMC describes the amount of time it 
takes for a keratinocyte to mature and transform into a corneocyte, reach the 
stratum corneum, and subsequently exfoliate from the surface of the epidermis 
(Figure 2.2). This normal 40-day cycle is shortened in certain diseases such as 
psoriasis, malignant tumors, and verruca. The cycle can be lengthened as a result 
of intrinsic aging, photoaging, and the use of moisturizers and topical corticoste-
roids. The main objective of Skin Health Restoration regimens is to restore nor-
mal maturation cycles, which restores optimal skin barrier functions. Normal 
barrier function, in turn, increases skin tolerance. Skin should have developed a 
good level of tolerance before undergoing any rejuvenation procedure.

Benefits of Regulating the Keratinocyte Maturation Cycle
Completion of two to three KMCs while using Skin Health Restoration princi-
ples and certain topical agents will establish sufficient skin tolerance and pro-
duce a number of clinical benefits (Box 2.5). The stratum corneum becomes 
smooth, soft, and compact, with a minimal basket-weave pattern. Mitosis in 
the basal layer, as well as within adnexal structures, proceeds at an optimal 
rate,  producing  a  population  of  healthy  keratinocytes  and  a  thicker  epider-
mis. Bacterial flora are reduced, and comedones and enlarged pores decrease 
in size and number. The skin becomes properly hydrated and does not need 
externally applied moisturizers. With restoration of the skin’s barrier func-
tion, the skin’s tolerance to cosmetics, dermatological treatments, and other 
external  or  environmental  factors  increases,  and  the  pigmentary  system  is 
effectively controlled.

In general, one to two maturation cycles produce a good level of tolerance; 
three maturation cycles (5 months) are needed to renew most of the epider-
mis.  Renewal  of  the  epidermis  entails  repairing  damaged  DNA,  producing 
and  maintaining  adequate  amounts  of  soft  keratin,  fully  restoring  hydra-
tion, and regulating natural skin exfoliation. With an aggressive Skin Health 
Restoration program, tolerance (to the initial expected amount of erythema, 

Basal cell

Mitosis

Keratinocyte

Mature keratinocyte

28 days

Corneocytes

Detachment

12 days

Figure  2.2  The  keratin  maturation  cycle 
(KMC) describes the amount of time it takes for 
a keratinocyte to fully mature as it rises upward 
from  the  basal  cell  layer  and  is  eventually  shed 
from  the  surface  of  the  epidermis.  Specifically, 
the KMC describes the transformation of kerati-
nocytes to corneocytes as they reach the stratum 
corneum, continue to rise upward from the basal 
cell layer, and ultimately exfoliate from the sur-
face of the epidermis.

24

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.5

Benefits of Regulating Keratinocyte Maturation Cycles

■■ Skin surface is smooth and soft.
■■ Epidermis is thicker.
■■ Bacterial flora, comedones, and enlarged pores are reduced.
■■ Skin  is  properly  hydrated  and  does  not  need  externally  applied 

moisturizers.

■■ Tolerance to cosmetics, dermatological treatments, and other external 

or environmental factors is increased.

■■ Skin tone is uniform from control of the pigmentary system.

Table 2.4  Treatment Strength and Number of Keratinocyte Maturation Cycles for 
Epidermal Renewal and Restoration of Barrier Function

Treatment Strength

Number of Keratinocyte Maturation Cycles

Aggressive

Standard

Mild

1 (6 weeks)

2-3 (12-18 weeks)

4-6 (23-34 weeks)

dryness,  and  peeling  of  the  treated  skin)  can  usually  be  attained  after  one 
KMC  (6  weeks).  With  less  aggressive  approaches,  tolerance  takes  longer  to 
achieve: 2 to 3 months with a moderately aggressive approach, 4 to 6 months 
with  a  standard  approach,  and  up  to  8  months  with  a  mild  approach.  The 
duration of treatment time (as quantified by the number of KMCs) necessary 
for optimal epidermal renewal and barrier function restoration is correlated 
to the intensity and strength of the topical regimen (as shown in Table 2.4).

SKIN INFLAMMATION

We have reviewed skin barrier function and regulation of the KMC as two of 
the three significant factors that must be addressed in Skin Health Restoration. 
The third significant factor is inflammation. Humans are at risk for invasion 
and destruction by agents that penetrate or damage skin, including disease, 
bacteria, viruses, fungi, irritants, heat, and ultraviolet (UV) light. When any 
of these invaders strike, the skin mounts a defense in the form of acute inflam-
mation. Acute inflammation, manifested by pain, erythema, exfoliation, and 
swelling, is beneficial in that it is a natural defense against the invader and 
an  attempt  to  limit  its  spread.  With  proper  treatment,  acute  inflammation 
can be corrected in 2 to 3 weeks. If acute inflammation is not promptly and 
adequately treated, the inflammation becomes chronic, more destructive, and 
difficult to treat.

Chronic  inflammation  can  also  occur  without  a  preceding  acute  phase, 
as  is  seen  with  chronic  sun  exposure,  glycation,  diabetes,  lupus,  and  expo-
sure to photosensitizing agents. Chronic inflammation can manifest as skin 
sensitivity, dryness, impaired healing, eruptions, and erythema and is highly 

25

SIGNIFICANT FACTORS IN 
ACHIEVING SKIN HEALTH

prevalent among dermatology patients. It is because of chronic inflammation 
that skin deteriorates rapidly after the age of 10 years. This is the age at which 
one’s sebaceous glands begin to become active and produce sebum (excessive 
sebum induces inflammation).

Chronic  inflammation,  seen  in  various  conditions  including  seborrhea, 
rosacea, acne, sensitivity, and dryness, is frequently observed in clinical prac-
tice and is responsible for patient discomfort and treatment failure. Despite 
its importance, many dermatologists do not recognize the need for address-
ing  chronic  inflammation  when  treating  skin  and  instead  focus  mostly  on 
treating symptoms and specific diseases. Such symptomatic treatment often 
fails  if  the  factors  causing  the  chronic  inflammation  are  not  identified  and 
eliminated. For example, if sebum, a strong inflammatory agent responsible 
for acne, seborrhea, and rosacea, is not reduced, treatment of these conditions 
either fails or provides only short-term symptomatic relief.

One 5-month course of low-dose isotretinoin (20 mg per day) can eliminate 
sebum and facilitate the elimination of chronic inflammation. As a side note, 
both acute and chronic inflammatory acneiform conditions tend to be local-
ized in small areas (e.g., face, neck, back, and chest) where sebaceous glands 
are present that produce excessive sebum and a localized immune response in 
the affected area. This same focal response to excessive sebum can be seen in 
patients with melasma and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation where the 
localized response is the face. Box 2.6 highlights important aspects of acute 
versus  chronic  inflammation.  Box  2.7  highlights  the  most  common  mani-
festations of acute skin inflammation. Table 2.5 shows the manifestations of 
chronic inflammation.

Box 2.6

Acute versus Chronic Skin Inflammation

Acute inflammation is a protective repair process that is triggered by 
exposure  of  the  skin  to  various  insults  (e.g.,  excess  sebum).  Chronic 
inflammation is destructive and gradually damages both skin texture 
and cellular function.

Box 2.7

Manifestations of Acute Skin Inflammation

■■ Erythema
■■ Dryness
■■ Edema
■■ Pain
■■ Irritability and sensitivity
■■ Exfoliation

26

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Table 2.5  Manifestations of Chronic Skin Inflammation

Condition

Clinical Manifestations

Textural abnormalities

Solar elastosis; sebaceous gland hyperplasia

Skin sensitivity and dryness

Impaired barrier function

Dyschromia

Impaired healing

Accelerated signs of aging

Melanocyte instability leading to hyperactivity

Cellular dysfunction

Thinning of dermis, melanocyte instability, solar 
elastosis, etc.

Treatment failure

Offending insults to skin not adequately eliminated

Box 2.8

Halting Chronic Inflammation

The key to halting chronic inflammation is to induce a limited amount 
(about 2 to 4 weeks) of acute inflammation.

Treatment of Skin Inflammation
If acute inflammation in the skin is left untreated, chronic inflammation will 
follow. Eliminating the triggering factors easily terminates acute inflamma-
tion. This repairs and restores the barrier function, the normal renewal cycle 
of the epidermis, and offers symptomatic relief. In contrast, treating or elimi-
nating chronic inflammation is more difficult in that detecting the offending 
factor may be more complex. Chronic inflammation may be difficult to diag-
nose in certain patients. Furthermore, physicians should know that chronic 
inflammation does not have a specific and effective treatment.

Observing the distinctly different processes involved in acute and chronic 
inflammation led to development of a unique treatment approach that involves 
the  induction  of  acute  inflammation  to  ultimately  treat  chronic  inflamma-
tion. This approach restores the skin’s innate ability to renew itself, while also 
reestablishing a strong barrier function and eliminating any inciting triggers. 
In short, chronic inflammation is fought by activating defense mechanisms 
induced by acute inflammation (Box 2.8).

In short, to eliminate chronic skin inflammation, we need to induce a limited 
(2- to 4-week) phase of acute inflammation through use of specific topical agents. 
This will enable the skin to generate its own natural mechanism to stop acute 
inflammation and simultaneously eliminate the existing chronic inflammation. 
The phases of Skin Health Restoration and the corresponding topical agents used 
for the elimination of chronic inflammation are presented later in this chapter.

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

For many years, dermatologists have focused on treating signs and symptoms 
of a patient’s skin disease without identifying and subsequently correcting the 

27

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

Box 2.9

Skin Health Restoration Principles

 1.  Preparation
 2.  Correction
 3.  Stabilization
 4.  Stimulation and pigmentation control

 a.  Bleaching  by  use  of  hydroquinone  (HQ)  or  blending  (topical 

 retinoid + HQ)

 b.  Melanocyte stabilization by use of non-HQ agents

 5.  Hydration and calming
 6.  Ultraviolet light protection

cellular  dysfunction  underlying  the  condition.  Frequently,  these  physicians 
administer a procedure as a first line of treatment. This approach may initially 
improve  the  appearance  of  the  skin  condition,  but  because  the  underlying 
source of the problem was not directly addressed, any or all improvement is 
typically limited and short-lived. In the long run, results of these treatments 
are often variable, with some patients improving greatly, others less, and some 
not at all. If the patient subsequently complains that the condition has failed 
to improve or resolve completely, he or she is often told that the recommended 
treatment is the current standard of care and that no other effective treatment 
options are currently available.

An unwillingness to simply accept this restrained and superficial approach 
led to many years spent studying and developing the science of skin health, 
which ultimately resulted in the generation of the six key principles of Skin 
Health  Restoration  (Box  2.9).  These  principles  standardize  the  treatment 
approaches  to  both  medical  and  nonmedical  skin  problems  and  eliminate 
variables that typically cause treatments to fail. (Nonmedical skin problems 
are skin changes without an underlying disease; examples include acquired 
sensitivity, acquired dryness, textural irregularities, and nonspecific dyschro-
mia.)  By  following  these  six  key  principles,  physicians  are  able  not  only  to 
improve a patient’s disease but also to restore overall skin health.

SKIN PREPARATION

The skin preparation process entails normalizing the skin surface to prepare it 
for the steps that follow. It involves cleansing, scrubbing (mechanical exfolia-
tion), toning (if skin is dry and/or the pH is imbalanced), and oil and sebum 
control (Table 2.6). The wash, scrub, and sebum control steps are essential for 
preparing skin to become a “clean slate” for subsequent correction, stabiliza-
tion, and stimulation. Minimizing excess sebum by use of an astringent (often 
containing salicylic acid as one of its active ingredients) is essential to correct 
abnormalities related to the pilosebaceous units, such as acne (including rosa-
cea), seborrheic dermatitis, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, or simply the sebum 
in patients with oily skin.

28

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Table 2.6  Skin Preparation: Processes and Purposes

Process

Purpose

Wash/cleanse

Removal of surface impurities

Scrub

Mechanical exfoliation

Stimulation of epidermal renewal

Regulation of surface keratin

Elimination of microcomedone formation

Stimulation of circulation

Restoration of normal skin pH

Tone

Restoration of pH balance when a patient’s skin is dry or thin; in 
these patients, a scrub is needed only twice a week (vs. every day, 
as recommended for all other patients)

Sebum control

Prevention of induction and progression of chronic inflammation 
from excessive sebum production

Provision of antibacterial benefit

Prevention of microcomedone formation and progression

Tightening of enlarged pores

Enhanced penetration of subsequently applied therapeutic topical 
agents

CORRECTION OF THE SKIN

The objective of the correction principle is to repair and enhance epidermal 
renewal,  to  restore  and  maintain  proper  skin  barrier  function,  and  to  nor-
malize skin color and pigmentation. Epidermal repair involves regular appli-
cation  of  specific  essential  topical  agents  such  as  tretinoin  (retinoic  acid), 
alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs), and hydroquinone (HQ), as well as the concur-
rent application of disease-specific agents (if necessary). In relatively uncom-
plicated cases, correction may be the only principle necessary for skin health 
maintenance, treatment and prevention of acne, and correction of nonspecific 
epidermal dyspigmentation in children and teenagers.

STABILIZATION

Stabilization, a new principle in Skin Health Restoration, is a process to regu-
late, stimulate, and repair and control cellular functions in both the epidermis 
and dermis. The effects of stabilization are shown in Box 2.10.

Certain topical agents are needed for stabilization, such as tretinoin/retinol, 
antioxidants, anti-inflammatory agents, and DNA repair agents, which are an 
essential part of ZOSH and ZOMD formulations. The goals of epidermal and 
dermal stabilization are shown in Table 2.7.

After  successful  correction  and  stabilization,  the  epidermis  and  dermis 
appear  thicker  in  each  layer  on  histologic  examination,  with  both  the  epi-
dermis  and  the  dermis  having  more  mucinous  material  (specifically,  gly-
cosaminoglycans).  Melanocytes  exhibit  more  uniform  activity,  with  fewer 
melanosomes. The main histologic changes associated with successful correc-
tion and stabilization of the epidermis are shown in Table 2.8.

29

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

Box 2.10

Effects of Stabilization

 1.  DNA is repaired, and sun-damaged atypical keratinocytes are gradu-

ally shed—to be replaced by a healthier cell population.

 2.  Barrier function is restored.
 3.  Soft keratin production increases.
 4.  Epidermis becomes thicker.
 5.  Pores are unclogged, reducing the chance of acne or folliculitis.
 6.  Melanocytes become resistant to activation on exposure to ultravio-
let  light,  drugs,  irritants,  epidermal  injury,  procedures,  and  acute 
and chronic inflammation (prevents melanin overproduction).

 7.  Prevents and treats dyschromia when bleaching with hydroquinone 

is contraindicated.

 8.  When a procedure is to be performed on the skin, adequate prepro-
cedure stabilization as part of skin conditioning shortens the heal-
ing phase and reduces certain complications (e.g., postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation).

Clinically,  correction  and  stabilization  of  the  epidermis  are  manifested 
by  a  softer,  more  resilient  (spongy-feeling),  uniformly  pigmented,  and  well-
hydrated epidermis that is optimally tolerant to negative external stimuli and 
free  of  underlying  medical  problems.  Similarly,  clinical  examination  of  the 
dermis reveals significantly firmer, resilient, and more youthful skin.

STIMULATION

Stimulation is the process of improving both the epidermis and the dermis 
through use of tretinoin. When the combination of correction, stabilization, 
stimulation, and bleaching and blending principles is used to treat a disease, 
the  objective  is  general  skin  repair,  which  is  usually  accomplished  within 

Table 2.7  Objectives of Epidermal and Dermal Stabilization

Epidermal 
stabilization

Strengthen barrier function (improves tolerance to detrimental stimuli, e.g., ultraviolet light, contact 
irritants, certain topical agents) to render skin more tolerant and able to resist the negative effects of 
external and internal stimuli

Optimize natural exfoliation by regulation of keratinocyte maturation cycles

Repair damaged DNA

Restore adequate hydration

Control melanin production and prevent melanocyte activation

Dermal stabilization

Optimize fibroblast production of collagen and elastin

Improve repair of preexisting, damaged collagen and elastin

Increase glycosaminoglycans

Improve circulation*

* By optimizing dermal stabilization, the epidermis also improves through improved perfusion of oxygen and nutrients to the 
basal cell layer.

30

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Table 2.8  Histologic Findings associated with Dermal and Epidermal Correction 
and Stabilization

Epidermis

Stratum corneum

Stratum granulosum

Stratum spinosum 

Stratum basalis

Dermis

Papillary dermis

Finding

Compact with minimal basket-weaving

Thicker with coarse granules

More uniform keratinocytes, no atypia

Increased, controlled mitosis

Finding

Intact collagen and elastin

No inflammatory cellular infiltrate

Abundance of glycosaminoglycans

three KMCs. After completion of any medical treatment, general repair ends, 
and the objective becomes specific repair through dermal stabilization with 
retinol  because  patients  without  underlying  medical  conditions  need  only 
specific repair as a basic, daily preventative and anti-aging skin care regimen. 
Specifically, stimulation involves improving the papillary dermis in one of two 
ways.  First,  in  skin  without  pigmentation  abnormalities,  “general  repair”  is 
accomplished through application of tretinoin, which stimulates the produc-
tion of collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans. It also improves circulation 
(nutrient and oxygen delivery to individual cells). In skin with pigmentation 
abnormalities, optimal stimulation is achieved through the process of blend-
ing,  which  entails  application  of  a  mixture  of  tretinoin  and  HQ.  This  ulti-
mately restores a uniformly even color tone (Table 2.9).

Of note, when used alone, topically applied HQ bleaches the skin (“bleach-
ing”). However, when used concurrently with tretinoin (by mixing), HQ forces 
an even distribution of melanin to all neighboring keratinocytes (“blending”). 
To  clarify,  when  used  in  combination  with  tretinoin,  HQ  does  not  bleach 
the  skin  as  it  does  when  HQ  is  used  alone.  Also  note  that  the  stimulation 
mentioned previously affects only the papillary dermis and not the reticular 

Table 2.9  Tretinoin and Hydroquinone Use in Skin Stimulation

Baseline Skin Condition

Process

Purpose (General Repair)

Dyschromia absent

Tretinoin applied alone

Dyschromia present

Tretinoin applied after being 
mixed with hydroquinone 
(“blending”)

Dermal stimulation:
Upregulates angioblast function, which improves 
circulation with associated increased oxygen and nutrient 
delivery
Further optimizes the activities of fibrocytes and fibroblasts to 
increase the production of new and the repair of damaged 
collagen (firmness), elastin (tightness), glycosaminoglycans 
(hydration)

Restores normal/even color tone by blending action 
(decreases dyschromia)
Optimizes the activities of fibrocytes and fibroblasts to 
increase production and repair of damaged collagen 
(firmness), elastin (tightness), and glycosaminoglycans 
(hydration)
Upregulates angioblast function, which improves circulation, 
with associated increased oxygen and nutrient delivery

31

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

dermis. This is because fibroblastic activity in the reticular dermis responds 
and is activated only by deep injury (e.g., ablative lasers, deep chemical peels, 
full-thickness cuts or lacerations).

Stimulation  produces  remarkable  changes  in  the  dermis  by  1)  increasing 
and  stimulating  fibroblast  activity  and  collagen  synthesis  (improves  skin 
firmness);  2)  decreasing  collagenase  activity  (reduces  collagen  degradation); 
3) increasing elastin production (increased skin tightness and resilience); 4) 
increasing  glycosaminoglycan  production  (increased  ability  for  moisture 
retention); and 5) creating new anchoring fibrils that subsequently strengthen 
the basement membrane.

The physician must keep in mind that after completion of general repair, 
in  any  medical  treatment  and  Skin  Health  Restoration  program,  stimula-
tion should be continued using appropriate concentrations of retinol. Specific 
repair is needed for the continuation of dermal stimulation and stabilization, 
which is required to produce lifelong benefits, especially after the age of 30, 
when normal skin functions begin to rapidly deteriorate.

In the past, bleaching and blending were considered appropriate for every 
patient, regardless of whether the patient had a concurrent pigmentary abnor-
mality. However, based on the observation that melanin elimination leads to 
increased photosensitivity and a tendency to build resistance to HQ, which 
can  lead  to  rebound  hyperpigmentation,  toxicity  to  melanocytes,  and  the 
potential  for  exogenous  ochronosis,  especially  when  HQ  is  used  for  longer 
than 4 or 5 months or in concentrations higher than 4%, bleaching and blend-
ing are now used only when a particular patient presents with a concurrent 
pigmentation problem or potential for one.

Delivering Stimulation
Stimulation  of  the  skin  can  be  administered  with  tretinoin  through  three 
strengths:  mild,  moderate,  and  aggressive  (Table  2.10).  In  the  aggressive 
approach,  skin  improvement  and  tolerance  are  quickly  achieved  and  reach 
an optimal level. Anticipated reactions peak during the initial 6 weeks and 
then decline regardless of the strength of the topical program used (e.g., mild 
versus aggressive). With both the mild and the moderate approaches, benefits 
of skin stimulation and tolerance are reached more slowly and are less intense 
(Figure 2.3). Despite the decreased benefits associated with a less intense treat-
ment  approach,  some  patients  prefer  to  have  fewer  associated  reactions  for 
professional or social reasons.

Table 2.10  Skin Stimulation through Three Strengths of Tretinoin

Stimulation 
Strength

Mild

Moderate

Aggressive

Frequency of Application

Amount of Tretinoin 
Applied*

Once daily or two times weekly 

0.5 gram

Once daily

Twice daily

0.5 or 1 gram

1 gram

* Each reference to tretinoin in this table refers specifically to tretinoin at a concentra-
tion of 0.1%. A more mild approach to each category can be achieved by using a treti-
noin concentration of 0.05% instead of 0.1%. However, use of tretinoin at 0.1% strength 
yields a deeper benefit and faster repair (as well as a stronger reaction) than that seen 
with use of 0.05%.

32

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Delivering Stimulation with 0.1% Tretinoin Using the
Aggressive, Moderate, and Mild Approaches

(a)

100

Aggressive Approach: Tretinoin 0.1%

)

%

(
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

f
o
t
n
e
t
x
E

75

50

25

Tolerance

Improvement*

Reactions

6 weeks

12 weeks

18 weeks

(b)

100

Moderate Approach: Tretinoin 0.1%

)

%

(
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

f
o
t
n
e
t
x
E

75

50

25

Tolerance

Improvement*

Reactions

6 weeks

12 weeks

18 weeks

(c)

100

Mild Approach: Tretinoin 0.1%

)

%

(
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

f
o
t
n
e
t
x
E

75

50

25

Tolerance
Improvement*

Reactions

6 weeks

12 weeks

18 weeks

Tolerance stage

Remission stage

*Improvement in terms of stimulation

Figure 2.3  Keratin maturation cycle. Tretinoin 0.1% can deliver stimulation through a 
mild, moderate, or aggressive approach. Initially, reactions are lower with the moderate 
and mild approaches, but tolerance and improvement are reached more slowly, and the 
benefits are more superficial (epidermal).

Tretinoin is the best agent for stimulation and building skin tolerance. The 
aggressive program with twice-daily use of 1 gram of 0.1% tretinoin produces 
the  most  effective  stimulation  and  correction  in  a  Skin  Health  Restoration 
program. The moderate program of once-daily use is less effective, whereas the 
mild program of once-daily use of 0.5 gram is the least effective. Regardless 
of  which  program  strength  is  chosen,  some  stimulation  and  correction  are 
attained in 6 weeks (Figure 2.4).

Objectives  of  dermal  stimulation  in  various  skin  types  are  shown  in 

Table 2.11.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Relationship of Treatment Strength and Attainment of
Effective Stimulation and Correction with 0.1% Tretinoin

0.1%, 2 gm daily (1 gm AM, 1 gm PM)

0.1%, 1 gm daily PM

0.1%, 0.5  gm daily PM

Aggressive

Moderate

Mild

33

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

f
o
t
n
e
t
x
E

Effective
stimulation
and
correction

Weak
stimulation,
average
correction

6 weeks

12 weeks
Treatment duration

18 weeks

24 weeks

Figure  2.4  Treatment  strength  and  stimulation.  With  the  aggressive  or  moderate 
approach (1 or 2 grams of 0.1% tretinoin applied daily), effective stimulation and correc-
tion are attained in 6 weeks. With the mild approach, stimulation is weak, and correction 
is only partially achieved at 6 weeks.

CORRECTING SKIN DYSCHROMIA IN MEDICAL 
TREATMENT

Concepts of Bleaching and Blending
Dyschromia  can  arise  from  multiple  causes,  including  hyperpigmentation 
from  increased  melanin  production  by  hyperactive  melanocytes  and  from 
uneven distribution of melanin to surrounding keratinocytes. Increased mela-
nin production by hyperactive melanocytes can be corrected by the use of HQ 
alone (bleaching), whereas uneven distribution of melanin to the surrounding 
keratinocytes can be corrected by the use of HQ in combination with tretinoin 
or retinol (blending). Bleaching and blending must be performed in a specific 
order to achieve optimal cosmesis. Bleaching should be performed first, fol-
lowed by blending. The formulation in which the HQ is applied for bleaching 
(used  alone)  should  be  designed  to  prevent  HQ  oxidation,  whereas  the  for-
mulation of HQ when used for blending should be more acidic to allow stable 
mixing with an acidic substance (tretinoin or other retinoid). It is preferable 
for patients to apply the HQ alone, morning and evening, and in combina-
tion with tretinoin or another retinoid, evening only or morning and evening. 

Table 2.11  Benefits of Stimulation with Various Skin Types and Characteristics

Skin Type or Characteristic

Thin

Rough or irregular texture

Enlarged pores

Scars (atrophic, flat, hypertrophic keloids (e.g., at skin graft 
donor and recipient sites and on areas of prior burns, 
lacerations, cuts, or other trauma) 

Objective

Increased thickness of epidermis and papillary dermis

Smoother, more uniform texture

Tightening and shrinkage of enlarged pores

Reduced fibrosis, softened scar, correction of unevenly 
pigmented skin
Smoother, more uniform texture
Additional treatment modalities (intralesional steroid 
injections, laser procedures, chemical peels, and steroid-
impregnated tape), when necessary, become easier to 
perform and yield better results

 
 
34

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.11

Correcting Dyschromia

Correct the increased melanin 
production by hyperactive melanocytes 

Correct the uneven distribution of 
melanin to the surrounding 
keratinocytes

Hydroquinone alone (bleaching)

Hydroquinone in combination with 
tretinoin or retinol (blending)

The bleaching step must be applied before the blending step. The products to 
correct dyschromia are shown in Box 2.11.

In  general,  the  use  of  HQ  for  bleaching  should  be  limited  to  a  4-  to 
5-month treatment course (about three full KMCs) to avoid HQ resistance, 
excessive  photosensitivity,  melanocyte  toxicity,  and  exogenous  ochrono-
sis.  Physicians  should  be  especially  cautious  when  treating  dark  or  black 
skin. After a break lasting about 2 to 3 months, the use of HQ for bleach-
ing can be resumed, if necessary; this is referred to as “pulse” therapy. In 
contrast,  the  use  of  HQ  as  part  of  the  blending  step  (when  mixed  with  a 
topical retinoid or tretinoin) can be continued for two to three additional 
KMCs  because  there  are  fewer  side  effects  associated  with  the  blending 
step. Blending should be discontinued sooner than noted previously if no 
further improvement is being seen with its use; this suggests the patient has 
developed resistance to HQ. Recommended HQ pulse treatment is shown 
in Box 2.12.

Blending is associated with anticipated reactions (redness, dryness, and 
exfoliation),  which  are  induced  by the  tretinoin/retinol  component. These 
initial anticipated reactions distress some patients. It is imperative that the 
physician  inform  each  patient—before  initiation  of  the  topical  regimen—
that the redness, dryness, and peeling are expected and necessary, and will 
last  for  about  6  to  8  weeks.  These  unpleasant—though  necessary—effects 
will persist for longer than 6 to 8 weeks (occasionally for up to 8 months) 
if the patient is not compliant with daily application of the blending step. 
After  the  dyschromia  has  been  adequately  corrected  or  when  no  further 

Box 2.12

Hydroquinone Pulse Treatment

■■ Bleaching with hydroquinone should be discontinued after about 4 
to 5 months and only restarted—if necessary—after a 2- to 3-month 
“break” from its use.

■■ Blending can be discontinued two to three additional full KMCs fol-
lowing  discontinuation  of  bleaching  and/or  observation  of  no  fur-
ther improvement with its use.

improvement  is  being  seen,  both  the  beaching  and  the  blending  steps 
should  be  discontinued,  and  the  patient  should  be  switched  to  a  non-HQ 
melanocyte- stabilizing agent.

35

SKIN HEALTH RESTORATION 
PRINCIPLES

Concept of Melanocyte Stabilization
Melanocyte stabilization, a new approach, is the process of preventing mela-
nocyte  activation  or  hyperactivity  by  making  these  cells  more  tolerant  to 
various  types  of  negative  stimuli  (e.g.,  irritation,  inflammation,  UV  light, 
skin injury). Melanocyte stabilization (part of epidermal stabilization) can 
be used in combination with bleaching and blending and is accomplished 
through use of a topical regimen that contains proper concentrations of reti-
nol,  antioxidants,  anti-inflammatory,  and  DNA-repair  agents.  Melanocyte 
stabilization is to be used by all patients as part of a daily skin and preven-
tative program, regardless of whether the patient is prone to pigmentation 
problems.  Furthermore,  melanocyte  stabilization  is  an  essential  mainte-
nance step to be continued even after completion of a full course of bleach-
ing and blending. The topical product aimed at stabilizing the melanocytes 
is best applied in the morning, although it can be applied twice per day for 
added benefit, when needed. Melanocyte stabilization is also used in medi-
cal  pigmentation  treatment  (general  repair)  when  bleaching  and  blending 
are being used.

HYDRATION AND CALMING

The objective of the principle of hydration and calming is to reduce skin dry-
ness  (as  needed),  irritation,  and  the  severity  of  anticipated  reactions,  which 
include skin redness, dryness, and peeling. Integrating a product with hydra-
tion  and  calming  benefits  into  a  patient’s  daily  topical  skin  care  regimen 
makes the process of Skin Health Restoration more tolerable, which results in 
increased overall compliance. This is particularly important during the first 
phase of treatment (the first and second KMCs), when the patient’s skin has 
not yet reached full tolerance to the program and is still experiencing redness, 
dryness, and peeling associated with use of the topical retinoid. Hydration and 
calming are accomplished by using a formulation that is distinct from standard 
moisturizers. The latter agents contain water, lipids, and protein. In contrast, 
the hydrating and calming formulation contains anti-inflammatory, antioxi-
dant, hydrating, and DNA repair and protection ingredients. Hydration and 
calming agents are to be applied after the correction, stimulation, pigmenta-
tion control, and melanocyte stabilization steps. Although it can ultimately 
lead  to  increased  patient  compliance  with  the  full  therapeutic  topical  skin 
care  regimen,  regular  use  of  hydrating  and  calming  agents  in  Skin  Health 
Restoration is optional. Table 2.12 summarizes the benefits of the hydration 
and calming step.

Ultraviolet Light Protection
The objective of the UV light protection principle is to protect the skin from 
UV light damage through the use of sunscreens with chemical and/or physical 

36

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Table 2.12  Hydration and Calming: Components and Benefits

Components

Benefits

Anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and 
DNA repair agents, as well as those with 
hydration properties, such as hyaluronic 
acid 

Increase skin tolerance (synergistic effects 
when used with melanocyte stabilizing 
agents)
Reduce irritation from topical retinoids 
(tretinoin and retinol), alpha-hydroxy 
acids, and beta-hydroxy acids
Help patients with true skin dryness* 
(not related to effects of topical 
products)

*Less than 1% of the population has true, genetically determined xerosis.

blockers. Without such protection, acute and chronic exposure to UV light 
induces numerous detrimental molecular effects, which can be seen histologi-
cally and clinically. Early changes associated with UV-induced photodamage 
include dullness, redness, roughness, and dyspigmentation. Later changes that 
appear after prolonged UV exposure include the formation of deep wrinkles, 
leathery texture, lax skin, solar lentigines (age spots), actinic keratoses, and 
cutaneous malignancies.

The  approach  to  UV  protection  was  refined  after  finding  that  all  broad-
spectrum  sunscreens  (containing  both  chemical  and  physical  blockers)—
regardless of SPF rating—offer only 1 to 2 hours of protection. This is likely 
the reason for the high incidence of skin cancer and the frequently seen clini-
cal signs of sun damage. This new approach to sun protection consists of two 
steps. The first step, increasing the skin’s tolerance and natural resistance to 
UV light, is accomplished through epidermal stabilization. The second step, 
providing both short-term and longer-term UV protection, involves the use 
of  a  product  that  contains  both  physical  and  chemical  blockers,  as  well  as 
externally  applied  plant-derived  melanin. The  physical  and  chemical  block-
ers provide short-term protection (about 2 hours), and the externally applied 
melanin provides more long-term protection (about 6 to 8 hours). Melanin is 
not sweated, washed, or rubbed off as readily as other ingredients common in 
over-the-counter sunscreens.

EMPHASIZING CERTAIN PRINCIPLES

Various, differing skin conditions require that an emphasis be placed on one 
or more of the previously mentioned principles and steps. A topical regimen 
formulated for a teenager with acne is not the same as that which would be 
used for a postmenopausal woman with melasma and lentigines. For example, 
in teenagers, the correction step is most important and is thus emphasized. 
In  patients  with  mainly  dyschromia,  the  bleaching  and  blending  steps  are 
emphasized.  Furthermore,  in  patients  at  risk  for  developing  postinflamma-
tory hyperpigmentation, emphasis should be placed on the blending step. In 
contrast,  in  older  patients  with  photodamage  and  severe  textural  problems 
(without  concurrent  dyschromia),  an  anti-aging  regimen  that  emphasizes 
stimulation and dermal stabilization should be used.

37

PHASES OF SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION IN MEDICAL 
TREATMENT AND GENERAL REPAIR

Many  of  the  topical  agents  used  for  Skin  Health  Restoration  in  a  medical 
treatment are the same as those used for skin conditioning before procedures 
(details on skin conditioning appear later in this chapter); the steps for per-
forming each process are also the same. Agents used for medical Skin Health 
Restoration include tretinoin (0.5% to 1%), HQ (4%), AHAs (6% to 10%), and 
certain disease-specific agents. Each of these agents has been carefully chosen, 
and the program for how they are to be used (order of application and amount 
used)  has  been  designed  to  eliminate  variables  that  often  make  traditional 
treatments  fail  (Table  2.13).  See  Chapter  3  for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  the 
major classes of topical agents.

PHASES OF SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION

Skin Health Restoration, with an ultimate goal of eliminating chronic inflam-
mation,  can  be  divided  into  three  phases  or  stages,  corresponding  to  three 
KMCs: the repair phase, the tolerance phase, and the completion phase, which is 
followed by maintenance (Box 2.13). Each phase takes about 6 weeks to complete 

Table 2.13  Variables Linked to Traditional Treatment Failure

Variable

Patient education

Emphasis on comfort 

Skin color (as sole focus)

Focusing on the disease

Formulation properties of topical agents 
(penetration and concentration) 

Amount of agent to be applied

Agent synergy

Duration of treatment

Reason for Treatment Failure

Patients are inadequately educated on the nature of their skin condition and are 
thus less likely to comply with treatments. They do not understand the 
importance of each topical or oral agent, chemical peel, or laser procedure in the 
overall treatment approach.

Patient comfort is erroneously given more weight than overall efficacy of the 
treatment.

Color is the only consideration in treatment choice, and all other factors, as 
presented in the skin classification principles, are ignored.

Specific disease is the main consideration in treatment choice. Importance of 
restoring and maintaining a patient’s overall skin health while treating the 
disease is ignored.

No standard protocol is available when selecting certain topical agents in regard 
to penetration or concentration.
The vehicle used to deliver the active ingredient may counteract the effects of 
another ingredient.

Patients are given little to no guidance on how much of the topical agent to use at 
each application.

The synergistic benefits of combining certain topical agents are not considered.

Adequate timetables for treating various skin conditions and for establishing and 
maintaining overall skin health are not well defined.

38

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.13

Phases of Skin Health Restoration

■■ Phase 1. Repair: when most anticipated reactions—redness, dryness, 

peeling—occur.

■■ Phase 2. Tolerance: when anticipated reactions start to subside and 
the overall improvement of the skin’s appearance becomes noticeable.
■■ Phase 3. Completion: when minimal to no redness, dryness, or peeling 
persists and the skin’s appearance is optimized (skin health is restored).

(one KMC), assuming that the aggressive approach is chosen and the patient is 
compliant with treatment. Each phase can be lengthened to last several months 
if the patient is not consistent with treatment and continually starts and stops 
use of the products. The main objectives of the repair phase include repairing 
the skin’s barrier function, restoring hydration, stimulating cellular functions, 
and inducing acute inflammation. During the tolerance phase, general repair 
continues while the skin’s barrier function is restored and epidermal renewal 
is optimized. After the patient completes the general repair phase, skin health 
has been restored, and a maintenance program is to be started.

CORRELATION OF TREATMENT BENEFITS WITH 
REGIMEN STRENGTH

Skin  Health  Restoration  treatments  are  offered  at  three  levels  of  strength: 
mild,  moderate,  and  aggressive.  Program  strength  is  determined  by  the 
concentration of tretinoin used as well as by the amount and frequency of 
product  application.  The  benefits  of  the  treatment  correlate  well  with  the 
treatment strength. Specifically, the more aggressive the treatment, the bet-
ter  the  results  that  can  be  achieved  within  a  given  amount  of  time  (Box 
2.14). With the aggressive approach, full Skin Health Restoration is achieved 
in  the  time  it  takes  to  complete  three  KMCs  (about  18  weeks  total).  This 
approach is ideal for all pigmentation problems, severe textural irregulari-
ties, severe photodamage, thick skin with moderate to severe acne, rosacea, 
enlarged  pores,  and  numerous  areas  of  sebaceous  gland  hyperplasia.  The 
moderate  approach  is  good  for  all  skin  problems  and  all  skin  types.  The 
mild approach is suitable for thin skin, mild skin abnormalities, and unmo-
tivated patients. The correlation of treatment benefits with the strength of 

Box 2.14

The stronger the treatment approach, the greater the benefits and the 
faster the repair phase is completed.

Table 2.14  Characteristics of Skin Health Restoration Treatment Strength

Treatment Strength*

Characteristics

Mild

Moderate

Aggressive

Comfortable for the patient; minimal to no skin reactions
Appropriate for patients with sensitive skin or for unmotivated patients who desire minimal 
reactions
Strength is not intense enough to adequately correct pigmentary disorders or severe textural 
irregularities (can start at this level but must ultimately increase strength to a more aggressive level)

Initially uncomfortable (variable intensity of skin reactions—redness, dryness, peeling)
Good level of intensity for all patients to treat any skin condition
For motivated and compliant patients who seek faster results
Good for skin conditioning before procedures (chemical peels and laser treatments), but the 
aggressive strength is better

Uncomfortable; intense reactions (redness, dryness, peeling)
Ideal for severe pigmentary and textural abnormalities
For motivated and compliant patients
Best for skin conditioning before procedures (chemical peels and laser treatments)

* The more aggressive the treatment strength, the greater and deeper the overall benefits and the faster these benefits become 
apparent.

the treatment regimen was also discussed previously under the Stimulation 
section and was shown in Figure 2.4.

When a mild treatment approach is followed without gradual progression 
to a stronger treatment approach, the benefits of Skin Health Restoration are 
mostly superficial (epidermal) and incomplete. Furthermore, in a small sub-
section of patients, anticipated reactions can be continuous and not subside 
throughout the phases. These patients are most likely unable to build an effec-
tive  and  strong  barrier  function  and  suffer  from  extreme  sensitivity,  man-
ifested  as  an  inability  to  tolerate  the  irritating  properties  of  agents  such  as 
tretinoin and AHAs. In such cases, skin sensitivity should be treated first and 
nonirritating topical agents used with gradual introduction (e.g., once a week) 
of a strong topical agent to slowly strengthen barrier function.

In  rare  cases  of  severe  reactions,  such  as  extreme  redness,  dryness,  and 
peeling that the patient is unable to tolerate, low-potency topical corticoste-
roids can be used. However, topical steroids should never be used for longer 
than 5 to 6 days. Longer use of corticosteroids can suppress cellular functions. 
Table 2.14 shows the most common characteristics associated with each of the 
three levels of intensity of treatment strength (mild, moderate, and aggressive) 
for Skin Health Restoration.

Table 2.15 shows the strength of the Skin Health Restoration approach and 

the corresponding time to reach skin tolerance.

For clinical examples of patients using a moderate-strength topical treatment 
approach, see Figures 2.5, 2.6, and 2.7. For clinical examples of patients using an 
aggressive strength topical treatment approach, see Figures 2.8 and 2.9.

Table 2.15  Skin Health Restoration Strength and Related Time to Reach Tolerance

Strength of Approach

Time to Reach Skin Tolerance*

Mild

Moderate

Aggressive

>10 weeks

8 to 10 weeks

6 weeks

*Improved tolerance = stronger barrier function

39

40

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Figure 2.5  A patient shown after the moderate-strength topical treatment approach. 
Notice the extent of her skin’s redness, dryness, and exfoliation. These are anticipated 
reactions necessary to achieve full Skin Health Restoration.

Figure  2.6  A  patient  shown  after  the  moderate-  or  aggressive-strength  treatment 
approach (face and neck). Notice the anticipated reactions (redness, dryness, and exfo-
liation) on both her face and neck. Of note, the skin on the neck is thinner and more 
sensitive. As such, the physician may want to recommend that, for the neck, the patient 
initially start the full regimen but limit use of the retinoic acid/retinol to only two to 
three times per week for the first few weeks. When tolerance is achieved, the goal is to 
have the patient increase application of the retinoic acid/retinol to every day.

Figure 2.7  A male patient shown after the moderate- or aggressive-strength treatment 
approach.  Notice  the  anticipated  reactions  to  Skin  Health  Restoration  (increased  ery-
thema and peeling, especially in the perioral area). The lower face typically peels/reacts 
more than the upper face regardless of the treatment strength, and the patient should 
be made aware of this  at  the start of treatment to limit  confusion on initiation of the 
regimen.

41

PHASES OF SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION

Figure  2.8  A  patient  using  the  moderate-  to  aggressive-strength  topical  treatment 
approach to achieve Skin Health Restoration of her face and neck. Notice the intense, 
blotchy  erythema  and  mild  diffuse  edema,  which  are  anticipated  reactions  in  some 
patients in the beginning of the treatment course.

Figure 2.9  A patient shown after the aggressive-strength topical treatment approach. 
Notice the intense exfoliation and erythema. It is important to educate the patient that 
this is not an “allergic reaction” but an expected, anticipated reaction, and that its inten-
sity will fade over time assuming the patient is compliant with daily application of the 
Skin Health Restoration topical program.

Exceptions to Skin Health Restoration Principles and Programs
In certain cases, exceptions may need to be made to the strength or duration 
of the recommended Skin Health Restoration program.

Exception 1: Duration of treatment. Treatment may need to last longer 
than  5  months  if  the  patient  started  with  a  mild  approach,  did  not 
comply with daily use of products as directed, or used a smaller than 
recommended amount of one or more of the topical agents.

42

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Exception 2: Inherited defect in skin barrier function. In such cases 
(atopic  dermatitis,  diseases  associated  with  suppression  or  dysfunc-
tion of the immune system, and congenital syndromes), reactions can 
be severe even with the mild approach. In these rare cases, a very mild 
treatment  approach  is  recommended,  using  a  lower  amount  of  cer-
tain agents and a less frequent application of the products (e.g., only 
once  or  twice  weekly).  Treatment  regimens  in  these  patients  can  be 
increased gradually as tolerance is restored.

Exception  3:  Continuous  reactions  to  tretinoin.  In  a  few  patients, 
reactions  are  continuous  and  not  limited  to  the  repair  phase.  The 
exact  etiology  has  yet  to  be  elucidated.  However,  this  phenomenon 
may be due to a genetic deficiency in a patient’s skin’s barrier func-
tion.  Strengthening  the  barrier  function  should  be  addressed  first, 
followed  by  addition  of  a  low  concentration  of  retinol  that  can  be 
increased in strength and frequency; later, the tretinoin can be added 
in the same fashion. Unlike the situation with tretinoin, all patients 
can build complete tolerance to topically applied retinol.

Exception 4: Continuous reactions to tretinoin. Continuous reactions 
to  tretinoin  indicate  that  its  irritating  properties  are  dominant.  For 
that reason, after 5 months of treatment (general repair), tretinoin can 
be discontinued (pulse treatment). For example, in this scenario, the 
patient can be switched to another topical retinoid or switched to a 
topical retinol preparation. After this “vacation” period, the tretinoin 
can be restarted, if needed, and skin weakness will most likely have 
resolved.

SKIN CONDITIONING VERSUS SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Skin conditioning is a standardized program that has been carefully devel-
oped for the following purposes: to prepare skin to best tolerate a procedure, 
to hydrate skin and optimize skin healing after a procedure, and to further 
expedite the return of skin to a normal, healthy state. The principles of cor-
rection,  stabilization,  stimulation,  and  bleaching  and  blending  are  used  in 
both medical Skin Health Restoration and skin conditioning. The difference 
is that Skin Health Restoration is a program to restore skin health and treat 
any existing disease with or without a procedure, whereas skin conditioning 
is designed to prepare skin for a procedure and manage skin after a procedure 
(Box 2.15).

Patients  with  very  young  and  healthy  skin  should  follow  a  nonmedical 
maintenance or preventive program to maintain the best skin quality and tol-
erance. Patients with more damaged and deteriorated or aged skin, however, 
are best suited to start a Skin Health Restoration program, during which some 
procedures can be performed. Studies have shown that skin preconditioning 
can  enhance  wound  healing  after  a  procedure,  yield  overall  more  uniform 

43

THE ZO SKIN HEALTH 
CIRCLE

Box 2.15

Skin Health Restoration versus Skin Conditioning

■■ Skin Health Restoration entails restoring a patient’s skin to its health-

iest baseline state (the main objective).

■■ Skin  Conditioning  entails  preparing  skin  for  a  procedure  and 
managing skin following the procedure (the procedure is the main 
objective).

■■ The principles of correction, stabilization, stimulation, and bleach-
ing and blending are used in both Skin Health Restoration and Skin 
Conditioning.

and reliable depths of penetration of the chemical peel or laser procedure, and 
lengthen the beneficial effects of a rejuvenation procedure.

THE ZO SKIN HEALTH CIRCLE

Physicians see a wide variety of patients in their offices. Some need only a 
basic  skin  care  program,  whereas  others  need  a  prevention  program.  Still 
others need medical treatment and Skin Health Restoration, whereas others 
need a procedure that requires skin conditioning. All of these patients should 
join the ZO Skin Health Circle (like a “members-only” club) to receive con-
tinuous observation and services. The concept of the ZO Skin Health Circle 
is the continuum of care in both the medical and the nonmedical approaches 
to  achieve  optimal  Skin  Health  Restoration  and  preservation  (Figure  2.10, 
Box 2.16).

Figure  2.10  The  ZO  Skin  Health  Circle  represents  the  comprehensive  continuum  of 
skin care.

44

PRINCIPLES AND 
OBJECTIVES OF SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 2.16

The ZO Skin Health Circle

The  ZO  Skin  Health  Circle  represents  the  continuum  of  care  in  both 
the medical and nonmedical approaches to achieve optimal Skin Health 
Restoration and preservation.

REFERENCES

  1.  Goldsmith LA. Biochemistry and Physiology of the Skin. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 

University Press; 1991:873-909.

  2.  Montagna  W,  Parakkal  PF. The  Structure  and  Function  of  Skin.  3rd  ed.  New  York: 

Academic Press; 1974:2-39.

  3.  Zelickson AS. Ultrastructure of Normal and Abnormal Skin. Philadelphia: Lea and 

Febiger; 1967:202-227.

  4.  Sparr E, Millecamps D, Isoir M, et al. Controlling the hydration of the skin through 
the application of occluding barrier creams. J R Soc Interface. 2012;26;10:788.

  5.  Pierard GE. What does “dry skin” mean? Int J Dermatol. 1987;26:167-169.
  6.  Draelos  Z.  Facial  moisturizers  and  eczema.  In:  Draelos  Z,  ed.  Cosmetic  and 

Dermatological Problems and Solutions. London: Informa Healthcare; 2011:18-26.

  7.  Held  E,  Sveinsdóttir  S,  Agner  T.  Effect  of  long-term  use  of  moisturizer  on  skin 
hydration,  barrier  function  and  susceptibility  to  irritants.  Acta  Derm  Venereol. 
1999;79:49-51.

  8.  Lodén  M.  Effect  of  moisturizers  on  epidermal  barrier  function.  Clin  Dermatol. 

2012;30:286-296.

  9.  Kraft JN, Lynde CW. Moisturizers: what they are and a practical approach to product 

selection. Skin Ther Lett. 2005;10:1-8

  10.  Wildnauer RH, Bothwell JW, Douglass AB. Stratum corneum biomechanical prop-
erties. I. Influence of relative humidity on normal and extracted human stratum cor-
neum. J Invest Dermatol. 1971;56:72-78.

  11.  Baroni A, Buommino E, De Gregorio V, et al. Structure and function of the epider-

mis related to barrier properties. Clin Dermatol. 2012;30:257-262.

  12.  Levin J, Momin SB. How much do we really know about our favorite cosmeceuti-

cal ingredients? J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2010;3:22-41.

  13.  Davis EC, Callender VD. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation: a review of the epi-
demiology,  clinical  features,  and  treatment  options  in  skin  of  color.  J  Clin  Aesthet 
Dermatol. 2010;3:20-31.

TOPICAL AGENTS 
FOR SKIN HEALTH 
RESTORATION

Monika G. Kiripolsky, MD, FAAD

CHAPTER 

3

INTRODUCTION TO TOPICAL AGENTS

Dermatologists and others who consider themselves experts in skin care may 
not be recommending to patients the most essential, scientifically proven, and 
beneficial  topical  products.  Several  reasons  underlie  this  problem.  Because 
there are no standardized Skin Health Restoration and maintenance treatment 
guidelines,  doctors  are  left  to  promote  topical  products  based  on  their  own 
variable beliefs and the influence of heavy industry marketing. Practitioners 
are  also  guided  by  patient  comfort  and  their  ill-advised  desires.  Clinicians 
therefore  do  not  recommend  products  that  may  cause  irritation  and  subse-
quent patient complaints (e.g., retinoids, astringents).

When assessing the value of a topical agent, physicians must distinguish 
between scientifically proven claims and those that are of only theoretical ben-
efit. Furthermore, if a topical agent is not delivering beneficial effects within 
a  relatively  “limited”  amount  of  time  (e.g.,  2  to  3  months,  which  correlates 
to approximately two full keratinocyte maturation cycles), its use should be 
discontinued. Box 3.1 gives an overview on how to effectively assess topical 
agents.

Guidelines that categorize topical agents based on their therapeutic values 
could  greatly  aid  physicians  in  making  evidence-based  decisions  on  topical 
products. The active ingredients within the product formulations should be 
classified  into  one  of  three  categories:  essential,  supportive,  or  questionable 
(Table 3.1). Essential agents are therapeutic, and they primarily work intra-
cellularly.  Their  contribution  to  overall  Skin  Health  Restoration  is  undeni-
able and scientifically justified. Supportive agents, on the other hand, are only 
mildly therapeutic. They often have extracellular mechanisms of action and 
should therefore be used in combination with essential agents. Questionable 
agents have not shown any scientifically proven benefit. These should only be 
used, if at all, after essential and supportive topical agents have been employed. 
Of note, approximately 80% of all cosmeceuticals currently available on the 
market use active ingredients that fall into the questionable category. Whether 

46

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Box 3.1

Assessing Topical Agents

In  assessing  the  value  of  topical  agents,  physicians  must  distinguish 
between scientifically proven claims and those that are of only theoreti-
cal benefit.

Table 3.1  Classification of Topical Agents for Skin Conditioning

Agent Classification

Characterization

Essential

Enhance natural epidermal exfoliation

Ensure proper epidermal barrier function by restoring the correct balance of water, lipids, and proteins

Stabilize melanin production by melanocytes

Ensure even distribution of melanin to surrounding keratinocytes

Enhance skin vitality through constant stimulation of collagen and elastin repair/production

Ensure adequate hydration through glycosaminoglycan production

Minimize chronic inflammation (e.g., through the reduction of sebum) and free radical generation

Repair damaged DNA

Supportive 

Questionable

Mildly therapeutic and should be used in combination with essential agents

Have not shown any scientifically proven therapeutic benefit

Value in skin conditioning is questionable

classified  as  essential,  supportive,  or  questionable,  each  topical  formulation 
can further be categorized by the mechanism of action of its active ingredients.
Examples  of  essential  and  supportive  changes  are  shown  in  Table  3.2. 
Questionable  agents,  which  are  optional,  include  the  following:  gold,  plati-
num, caviar, silk, ursolic acid, Planifolia PFA, and Imperiale Orchidee molec-
ular extract. A seemingly endless array of questionable agents are being used 
in various skin care products currently available on the market. A complete 
list of these agents would not only fail to fit within the confines of this book 
but would also be irrelevant because these have shown no scientific benefit in 
either Skin Health Restoration or maintenance processes.

Table 3.2  Examples of Essential and Supportive Topical Agents

Essential Agents

Supportive Agents

Vitamin A derivatives (tretinoin and retinol)

Alpha-hydroxy acids (glycolic, lactic, and malic acids)

Hydroquinone

Beta-hydroxy acids (salicylic acid)

Antioxidants (α-lipoic acid, glutathione, ubiquinone, 
idebenone, vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin B3)
DNA repair agents (oxo-guanine glycosylase, ultraviolet 
endonuclease, photolyase, and natural DNA precursors 
including Unirepair T-43)

Anti-inflammatory agents

Growth factors

Nonhydroquinone pigment-stabilizing agents (kojic acid, 
azelaic acid, arbutin, resorcinol)

Disease-specific agents (5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, benzoyl 
peroxide, topical antibiotics, and topical antifungals)

CHOOSING TOPICAL AGENTS

47

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Physicians and other skin care professionals often recommend topical agents 
with active ingredients that are inert but that provide comfort and quick grat-
ification  to  patients.  With  demanding  schedules,  practitioners  prefer  not  to 
deal with unwanted reactions from topical agents, even if these expected reac-
tions are necessary to achieve Skin Health Restoration. Furthermore, derma-
tologists are often recruited by skin care companies to promote their products. 
Hence the term dermatologist tested. Each year, many meaningless studies are 
performed  in  this  fashion,  with  the  principal  investigating  physicians  paid 
handsomely by pharmaceutical companies for these tasks.

Patients tend to seek a skin care program based on recommendations from 
their  dermatologists  and  aestheticians.  Pharmaceutical  company  marketing 
and promotional activity is also influential. This approach is laced with bias 
and often oriented toward products that generate the most instant gratifica-
tion for patients and profit for pharmaceutical companies.

Ideally, before commencing any skin care program, patients should them-
selves research and analyze the component ingredients. This could ensure that 
only products proved to be beneficial, therapeutic, and specifically matched to 
a patient’s particular skin type and needs are used. But with so much unclear 
and misleading information, this task can be overwhelming. To assist patients 
with their choices and be able to discourage them from using unproven prod-
ucts with inert active ingredients, practitioners must be able to step in and offer 
scientifically  based  advice.  Explanation  should  be  given  that  these  products 
provide quick gratification (through looking, smelling, and feeling good) but 
yield no visible or lasting benefit. It must further be emphasized that pleasant 
properties do not necessarily correlate with skin improvement. These comfort-
able products are ultimately counterproductive; skin is weakened through bar-
rier function disruption, and the innate proliferative properties are hampered. 
Furthermore,  patients  should  be  made  aware  that  most  currently  marketed 
anti-aging products are useless and do not live up to their claims because their 
active ingredient (or “hero” molecule) is ineffective, too low in concentration, 
or too large of a molecule to penetrate the skin and reach the intended target.

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Essential agents are fundamental for restoring skin health. These have been 
scientifically  validated  as  having  beneficial  activity,  and  they  are  the  only 
known substances that can return the skin to its best possible original state. A 
comprehensive overview of their characteristics is given in Table 3.1.

Topical agents in the essential category must offer one or more of the fol-
lowing  features:  intracellular  activity,  therapeutic  effect,  anti-inflammatory 
benefit,  activation  of  cellular  function,  or  improvement  of  the  barrier  func-
tion. These products, which are crucial to achieving Skin Health Restoration 
and successful maintenance, include vitamin A derivatives (tretinoin and reti-
nol), hydroquinone (HQ), antioxidants, DNA repair agents, anti-inflammatory 
agents, and growth factors (Table 3.2).

48

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

TRETINOIN (RETINOIC ACID)

Tretinoin (retinoic acid) has profoundly beneficial effects on the stratum cor-
neum  and  the  deeper  layers  of  the  skin.  It  has  an  intracellular  mechanism 
of  action,  with  direct  effects  on  the  nuclear  receptors.  By  stimulating  gene 
expression  and  regulating  cellular  functions,  it  ultimately  provides  strong 
therapeutic benefit for a myriad of skin conditions. Most notably, keratin is 
made softer and more gelatinous, and the stratum corneum becomes smooth 
and compact. These effects last for up to 4 months, even after application has 
ceased. This is in contrast to the shorter-lasting, smoothening effects of alpha-
hydroxy acids (AHAs).

Initially,  tretinoin  dehydrates  the  outer  surface  of  the  stratum  corneum 
while keeping the desmosomes intact. This leads to a rapid, coarse exfoliation 
and the shedding of an attached group of cells. This is in opposition to the 
shedding of individual cells, as occurs with AHAs when the desmosomes are 
disbanded. Tretinoin is the preferred agent for treating the stratum corneum 
and disorders focused within deeper layers of the epidermis because it repairs 
damaged  keratinocytes,  increases  basal  cell  mitosis,  and  restores  adequate 
hydration.

Tretinoin has been extensively used as an effective topical treatment for a 
number of dermatological conditions, including photoaging. Its efficacy in 
improving this condition was first demonstrated by Kligman and colleagues 
in  1984  using  an  animal  model  of  photoaging.1 The  authors  observed  that 
treatment of photoaged mouse skin with tretinoin for 10 weeks resulted in a 
significant repair zone of new collagen in the papillary dermis. This further 
correlated with wrinkle effacement.

Topical  tretinoin  has  further  shown  efficacy  in  improving  signs  of  aging 
(both  intrinsic  and  extrinsic),  including  fine  lines,  hyperpigmentation,  and 
wrinkles.2-18  Effectiveness  has  also  been  histologically  documented.2,17-19  A 
study  with  0.025%  tretinoin  applied  to  intrinsically  aged  skin  showed  an 
increase  in  epidermal  thickness  and  a  more  uniform  keratinocyte  density.3 
Dermal changes included an increase in glycosaminoglycan deposition, elas-
tic  fibers,  and  angiogenesis.2  The  vehicle  comparison  study  showed  similar 
clinical and histological changes when tretinoin 0.1% and 0.025% were used 
in patients with photoaging.17 Histological changes included epidermal thick-
ening,  increased  granular  layer  thickness,  stratum  corneum  compaction, 
increased vascularity, and decreased melanin content. A further study showed 
alterations  in  dermal  matrix  components  including  neocollagenesis.  Here, 
treatment was continued beyond 24 months, and collagen organization only 
continued to improve while elastosis further decreased. Ongoing increases in 
epidermal and dermal mucin production and decreases in epidermal melanin 
formation were also consistent throughout the treatment period.18

The concentration of tretinoin has a direct  correlation with its beneficial 
activity; the higher the concentration, the deeper and more potent its effects. 
Lower  concentrations  (≤0.025%)  have  mainly  epidermal  benefit,  whereas 
higher concentrations (0.05% to 0.1%) have both epidermal and dermal effects. 
The  vehicle  in  which  tretinoin  is  delivered  also  affects  its  potency.  Vehicles 
that add moisturizing components to the formulation weaken the action and 
the benefits of tretinoin, regardless of the concentration.

49

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Retinoid use (tretinoin and retinol) is associated with skin dryness, ery-
thema, and exfoliation. These factors can sometimes limit patient compli-
ance.  The  anticipated  “retinoid  reaction”  varies  with  concentration  and 
frequency of application; the higher the concentration and the greater the 
application frequency, the more irritation that is expected to occur.10,11,17,18 
These reactions generally manifest within the first few weeks of treatment, 
and they are thought to be initiated by the release of pro-inflammatory cyto-
kines.20 As the treated skin begins to accommodate product application, the 
associated signs and symptoms subside. Photosensitivity is another notable 
side  effect  associated  with  retinoid  therapy,  and  typically,  it  is  most  pro-
nounced at the start of treatment. To counteract this, patients using topical 
retinoids are advised to avoid excessive sun exposure, use broad-spectrum 
sunblock,  and  wear  sun-protective  clothing.  Box  3.2  shows  the  effects  of 
tretinoin.

A patient may continue using topical tretinoin for maintenance purposes. 
In that case, tretinoin is to be applied two to three times weekly and a retinol-
based  product  used  on  the  remaining  days.  Alternatively,  the  patient  may 
switch  to  daily  application  of  a  retinol  agent  for  maintenance  and  specific 
repair.  The  first  option  is  occasionally  recommended  to  maintain  skin  free 
from active medical disease (e.g., melasma, acne, rosacea). The second option 
is preferred, however, especially in patients without underlying medical con-
ditions, for daily prevention and anti-aging benefits.

The  reason  for  these  suggestions  is  that  tretinoin  serves  two  functions: 
therapeutic  and  irritative.  The  former  is  fulfilled  after  18  weeks  of  product 
use, and then the latter predominates. Patients are unable to build tolerance 
to the tretinoin, and their skin remains red, dry, and exfoliating long-term. 
This state of irritation is unfavorable, so tretinoin use should be discontinued 
after the 18-week time frame. Retinol should instead be used for maintenance 
purposes; it is not associated with long-term irritation because skin is able to 
successfully build tolerance to this agent.

Box 3.2

Effects of Tretinoin

■■ Tretinoin has profoundly beneficial effects on the stratum corneum 

and on the deeper layers of the skin.

■■ In the epidermis, tretinoin:

■■ Repairs  damaged  keratinocytes,  increases  basal  cell  mitosis, 
restores natural hydration, and increases epidermal thickness.

■■ In the dermis, tretinoin:

■■ Increases  angiogenesis,  elastic  fibers,  and  glycosaminoglycan 

deposition.

■■ Lower concentrations (<0.025%) of tretinoin have mainly epidermal 
effect, whereas higher concentrations (0.05% to 0.1%) produce both 
epidermal and dermal benefit.

50

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

RETINOL

Retinol,  like  tretinoin,  is  a  vitamin  A  derivative.  Both  are  among  the  most 
common  ingredients  found  in  prescription  and  over-the-counter  skin  care 
products. They are frequently studied ingredients and have the most data sup-
porting their efficacy in skin care.

Within the skin, retinol is first oxidized to retinaldehyde and then to treti-
noin, the biologically active form of vitamin A.21,22 Topical retinol (at concen-
trations up to 1.6%) has been shown to induce the same beneficial effects as 
those  associated  with  tretinoin  (at  a  concentration  of  0.025%).23  In  particu-
lar, topical retinol leads to a decrease in the appearance of wrinkles through 
the  increased  production  of  glycosaminoglycans  (which  retain  substantial 
amounts of water) and collagen.24 However, despite demonstrating the same 
beneficial effects as tretinoin, topical retinol produces only minimal signs of 
irritation and erythema.23 More specifically, retinol has been shown to induce 
less scaling, transepidermal water loss, and erythema compared to tretinoin.25
Retinol,  although  ultimately  converted  within  the  skin  to  tretinoin  (a 
prescription product), is available over the counter. However, concentration 
strengths of retinol and tretinoin are not comparable. Topical retinol prod-
ucts typically contain strengths of 1% or higher, yet tretinoin is rarely avail-
able above 0.1%. It is important to note that retinol is approximately 20 times 
less potent than tretinoin (Box 3.3).23,26 Thus, a concentration of 1% retinol is 
approximately equivalent to a 0.05% concentration of tretinoin. Furthermore, 
when  determining  efficacy,  the  vessel  and  the  vehicle  in  which  the  topical 
retinol is delivered must be considered. Retinol is extremely unstable for it is 
degraded to biologically inactive forms on exposure to air and light.27

HYDROQUINONE

HQ is a skin-lightening agent derived from phenol. It is commonly used in 
dermatology  practice  to  treat  conditions  of  hyperpigmentation,  including 
melasma,  ephelides,  lentigines,  and  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation 
(PIH).  HQ  works  by  inhibiting  the  tyrosinase  enzyme,  which  is  necessary 
for  converting  dihydroxyphenylalanine  (DOPA)  to  melanin.28,29  Tyrosinase 
activity can be reduced by as much as 90% with the use of HQ.30 HQ may also 
degrade melanosomes and be selectively toxic to melanocytes. It achieves this 
through structurally altering the melanocyte’s organelles, thereby decreasing 
the  production  of  melanosomes  and  increasing  their  breakdown.31  Because 
HQ only prevents the formation of new melanin (from melanocytes located 
within or near the basal cell layer), skin brightening is not seen immediately.

Box 3.3

Potency of Retinol

Retinol at a 1% concentration is approximately equal to a 0% to .05% 
concentration of tretinoin.

51

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

HQ is available in a lotion, cream, liquid, or gel formulation. The lotion and 
cream vehicles are preferable because the liquid and gel forms result in uneven 
application.  It  is  important  to  note  that  after  the  HQ  formulation  has  been 
oxidized and turns brown, it has little to no activity.

HQ is available over the counter at a concentration of 2% and in prescrip-
tion topicals at concentrations of 3% to 5%. Higher concentrations (6% to 8%) 
have  not  been  shown  to  be  more  effective  and  carry  the  increased  risk  for 
inducing  an  idiosyncratic  reaction  during  or  after  discontinuation  of  treat-
ment (similar to ochronosis). Occasionally, pharmacies will compound topical 
HQ to concentrations as high as 20% for specifically treating conditions such 
as vitiligo universalis. However, the use of HQ in strengths greater than 4% is 
not generally condoned because these are associated with an increased risk for 
paradoxical skin darkening (exogenous ochronosis), which can be permanent. 
Exogenous ochronosis presents as patches of bluish-black skin color, and it is 
more common in black-skinned people of certain tribal origins. It can occur, 
however, in any skin color or type.

The recommended use of HQ is limited to a 4- or 5-month period. Prolonged 
use of even lower strengths of HQ can be toxic to cells and is associated with 
an increased risk for exogenous ochronosis. In patients who do present with 
exogenous ochronosis, effective results can usually be obtained by having the 
patient use HQ for bleaching and blending, along with a papillary dermal peel 
and a series of Nd:YAG laser treatments.

Other rare side effects associated with the use of HQ are stinging, burn-
ing,  irritation,  rash-like  reaction,  and  allergic  contact  dermatitis.  Systemic 
absorption  or  toxicity  from  prolonged  use  of  topical  HQ  (at  concentrations 
of 2% to 4%) has not been reported. Even if accidentally ingested, HQ seldom 
produces systemic toxicity. This contrasts to depigmenting agents used in the 
past, such as mercurial compounds, which caused renal damage, and mono-
benzone, which causes permanent melanocyte destruction. An increased risk 
for skin cancer has not been documented with the use of HQ. Also, HQ does 
not directly cause increased photosensitivity. However, a resulting decreased 
amount of melanin will allow the skin to absorb more ultraviolet (UV) rays. 
This in turn leads to chronic sun damage. Broad-spectrum sunblocks, pref-
erably those containing physical blockers, are therefore recommended while 
HQ is being used.

For optimal results, with each application, patients should saturate the epi-
dermis with approximately 1.5 grams of HQ (similar to the amount in 1 inch 
of toothpaste). This quantity should be massaged fully into the skin. After HQ 
has been applied, the pH of the skin will shift toward neutral, thereby facilitat-
ing the product’s oxidation. Because of this phenomenon, the activity of HQ 
is relatively short lived, and it should therefore be used twice daily. When an 
even skin color becomes apparent, the frequency of application can be gradu-
ally reduced. Application should not be stopped abruptly.

Although  HQ  is  a  powerful  depigmenting  agent,  its  efficacy  can  be  fur-
ther enhanced when it is used in combination with AHAs, tretinoin, or both. 
The presence of AHAs in products containing HQ also prevents oxidation of 
the latter, thus preserving its activity. Because HQ is relatively unstable, when 
compounding it with tretinoin, the two products should be freshly combined 
just  before  topical  application.  Penetration  of  HQ  can  also  be  increased  by 
coupling it with other key agents (e.g., azelaic acid) and by adjusting the pH of 

52

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

the skin before treatment. Of note, the aforementioned process of enhanced 
penetration  is  entirely  different  from  a  state  of  increased  permeability.  The 
penetration of a product’s active ingredients can be enhanced by using it in 
conjunction with another topical agent (as when we are treating a disease). In 
contrast, an increase in epidermal permeability is a disorder characterized by 
a damaged epidermal barrier function. This leads to skin dryness, sensitivity, 
irritation, and impaired healing. Moreover, when using HQ, the presence of 
oily skin must be noted and reduced. Oily skin requires proper washing and 
the use of additional topical or systemic agents. These both aid in reducing 
sebum and allow for the increased penetration of HQ.

The combined use of HQ and tretinoin for at least 6 weeks is essential before 
performing a procedure like the ZO Controlled Depth Peel (20% or 26% to 28% 
trichloroacetic acid [TCA]). This prior conditioning decreases the skin’s ability 
to produce melanin and therefore reduces the risk for developing PIH. The HQ 
and tretinoin combination further evens the skin’s hydration, yielding more 
uniform results because water is the chromophore for the peeling agent.

Melamin  (HQ  4%,  ZO  Medical),  when  used  alone,  can  mitigate  most 
hyperpigmentation problems attributed to the increased activity of melano-
cytes and their overproduction of melanin. In this instance, the suppression 
of melanin hyperproduction is referred to as bleaching. However, when HQ 
is mixed with tretinoin or AHAs, the bleaching effect becomes less impor-
tant, and another effect takes preference. The term blending refers to this pro-
cess, which constitutes a more even distribution of melanin to surrounding 
keratinocytes.

For faster, more effective results, the two steps should be combined. The bleach-
ing step should be performed first, followed by blending. When a product con-
taining HQ (Melamix, 4% HQ, ZO Medical) is intended for combination with 
another containing tretinoin (for blending purposes), the HQ vehicle must have 
a more acidic pH to allow for effective mixing with tretinoin. This contrasts to 
products containing HQ alone, which are more basic, and intended for bleaching 
purposes. Because of their suppression of bleaching and blending effects, topical 
HQ products that contain steroids should also be avoided. Box 3.4 shows a sum-
mary of hydroquinone properties and effects.

ANTIOXIDANTS

Antioxidants  are  molecules  that  inhibit  the  oxidation  of  surrounding  mol-
ecules.  Oxidation  involves  the  transfer  of  electrons  or  hydrogen  from  one 
molecule to another, the oxidizing agent. This chemical reaction leads to the 
production  of  free  radicals.  These  trigger  intracellular  chain  reactions  and 
ultimately, cell damage or cell death ensues. Antioxidants, through their pref-
erential oxidation, stop these adverse chain reactions. Free radicals are there-
fore removed, and further oxidation reactions are terminated.

Inflammation  causes  the  depletion  of  collagen,  and  antioxidants  help 
to inhibit this process. They also protect against acute and chronic photo-
damage and skin cancer. The most common topically applied antioxidants 
include  the  following:  alpha-lipoic  acid,  glutathione,  idebenone,  ubiqui-
none, vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid), vitamin E (tocopherol), and vitamin B3 
(niacinamide).

53

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Box 3.4

Hydroquinone Summary

■■ Hydroquinone  (HQ)  prevents  the  formation  of  new  melanin  by 

inhibiting the tyrosinase enzyme.

■■ HQ is available over the counter at a concentration of 2% and in pre-

scription topicals at concentrations between 3% and 5%.

■■ In  strengths  above  4%,  HQ  may  cause  paradoxical  skin  darkening 

(exogenous ochronosis), which can be permanent.

■■ The efficacy of HQ can be enhanced when used in combination with 

alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA), tretinoin, or both.

■■ Bleaching is the use of HQ to suppress the overproduction of melanin.
■■ Blending is HQ mixed with tretinoin or AHAs to obtain a more even 

distribution of melanin to surrounding keratinocytes.

■■ Bleaching and blending should be combined for faster, more effective 

results.

■■ To decrease the risk for postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, HQ 
and tretinoin should be applied for approximately 6 weeks before a 
procedure is performed.

Alpha-Lipoic Acid
Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), created in the mitochondria of animals and plants, 
acts as a potent antioxidant. It protects cells from UV and other environmen-
tally  generated  free  radical  damage.  Because  of  its  solubility  in  both  aque-
ous and lipid layers, ALA penetrates rapidly through the epidermis to reach 
the dermis and subcutaneous layers of the skin. Although most free ALA is 
rapidly  converted  (reduced)  to  dihydro-lipoic  acid  (DHLA),  both  ALA  and 
DHLA are highly effective antioxidants. Like ALA, DHLA acts as a scavenger 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS). DHLA has also been shown to repair oxi-
datively  damaged  proteins  and  to  regenerate  endogenous  antioxidants  such 
as glutathione, ubiquinol, vitamin E, and vitamin C.32,33 Furthermore, both 
ALA and DHLA act as anti-inflammatory mediators through the scavenging 
of ROS secreted by macrophages and leukocytes at sites of inflammation.

Glutathione
A cysteine-containing peptide found in most forms of aerobic life, glutathione 
is a strong intracellular antioxidant because of its thiol group (within the cys-
teine moiety). This compound acts primarily as a reducing agent, mopping up 
ROS.34 Glutathione also serves as a co-antioxidant, in that it supports vitamin 
E and L-ascorbic acid.35,36 Furthermore, topically applied glutathione reduces 
UV-induced erythema.37

Ubiquinone (Coenzyme Q10)
Ubiquinone, which functions both as an antioxidant and an energy genera-
tor, is ubiquitous and present in almost all living cells (with the exception of 
some fungi and bacteria). Ubiquinone has been shown to reduce UV-induced 

54

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

oxidative DNA damage within keratinocytes. It has also been shown to impair 
UV-generated collagen degradation through its ability to suppress fibroblast 
production of collagenase. Moreover, topically applied ubiquinone decreases 
the loss of hyaluronic acid (a glycosaminoglycan produced by fibroblasts) and 
the slowing of cell division, both of which contribute to intrinsic aging.33 Thus, 
ubiquinone is an important topical antioxidant because it protects the dermis 
from both extrinsic and intrinsic related aging.

Idebenone
Idebenone, an engineered analog of ubiquinone, acts as a potent primary anti-
oxidant. Clinical research evaluating its topical benefits suggests a more well-
rounded free radical scavenging capability compared with other traditional 
antioxidants (ALA,  tocopherol, and ascorbic acid).38  In  vivo  studies of topi-
cally applied idebenone have shown decreased lipid peroxidation and inhib-
ited UVB-induced DNA damage and erythema.38 Research has also suggested 
that idebenone is best used in combination with other antioxidants. This is 
because  of  its  lack  of  photoprotective  benefits,  which  are  present  in  several 
other topical antioxidants.39,40

Vitamin C (L-Ascorbic Acid)
The only truly bioavailable form of vitamin C, L-ascorbic acid, is also the only 
form  that  provides  the  molecule’s  antioxidant  benefits.  When  applied  topi-
cally, L-ascorbic acid serves as a multifunctional antioxidant, quenching ROS 
generated in the skin’s aqueous environment.41 Proper stabilization (through 
encapsulation and anhydrous vehicles or esterification) of a topical containing 
vitamin C is crucial because L-ascorbic acid is easily oxidized.42 When formu-
lated in an aqueous base, the preferred method, topical products containing 
L-ascorbic acid should have a pH of 3.5 or lower.43 Although ester versions of 
vitamin  C  (such  as  magnesium  ascorbyl  phosphate  and  ascorbyl  palmitate) 
have shown some of the antioxidant capabilities in clinical studies, they do 
not  provide  the  collagen  synthesis,  anti-inflammatory,  and  photoprotective 
activities.44  Thus,  esterification  is  not  the  preferred  method  of  stabilization 
compared with encapsulated or anhydrous preparations.

Vitamin E (α-Tocopherol)
Vitamin  E  is  the  most  abundant,  lipophilic  antioxidant  found  in  the 
skin. Tocopherols, which consist of four different subtypes (alpha-, beta-, 
gamma-, and delta-tocopherol), are the most abundant form of vitamin E 
in the body. Alpha-tocopherol is the primary form of vitamin E present in 
the skin; topical preparations permeate both the epidermis and the dermis. 
After application, vitamin E accumulates in cell membranes and within the 
extracellular lipid matrix of the stratum corneum. It is here that it contrib-
utes its antioxidant benefits. Because it reduces ROS and thereby protects 
cellular membranes from lipid peroxidation by free radicals, vitamin E is 
classified as an antioxidant. In addition, vitamin E can absorb energy from 
UV light. This enables it to be named a photoprotective agent because ulti-
mately it prevents UV-induced free radical skin damage.45

Alpha-tocopherol is also available as an ester derivative, which increases its 
stability on exposure to air, light, and heat. Vitamin E content in the skin is 

55

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

decreased with exposure to UV light, ozone, and advancing age.46-52 Topically 
applied  vitamin  E  has  been  studied  in  varying  concentrations,  typically 
between 0.1% and 1%. Even with solutions containing concentrations as low 
as 0.1%, increased vitamin E levels have been observed in the skin.53 However, 
studies  comparing  the  dose-dependent  accumulation  of  vitamin  E  and  its 
effectiveness in terms of antioxidant benefits are lacking.

Vitamin B3 (Niacinamide)
Vitamin B3, a potent antioxidant, reduces transepidermal water loss, thereby 
improving the lipid barrier function of the epidermis. Interestingly, vitamin 
B3 also reduces the appearance of hyperpigmentation by inhibiting the trans-
fer of melanosomes. Studies evaluating the effects of topically applied vitamin 
B3 have also found a significant improvement in fine lines, wrinkles, and skin 
elasticity.54-56 Properties of antioxidants are displayed in Box 3.5.

DNA Repair Agents
Repeated  exposure  to  UVA  and  UVB  induces  skin  thinning,  acute  ery-
thema, wrinkling, and chronic discoloration. These external manifestations 
reflect internal, molecular damage to the DNA double helix that lays within 
the cell’s nucleus.57 An example of UVB-related DNA damage is the forma-
tion of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs). These are mutations formed 
between  adjacent  pyrimidine  bases  on  the  same  DNA  strand.58  CPDs  alter 
the  function  of  DNA  and  cause  transformational,  tumorigenic,  and  lethal 
cellular  events.59-61  Moreover,  with  chronological  aging,  one’s  innate  DNA 
repair mechanisms decrease, conferring a heightened mutational risk.62,63 UV 
exposure further induces the formation of ROS. Proteins are one of the main 
targets for this ROS-mediated oxidation.64,65 No longer functional, oxidized 
proteins are either repaired, eliminated by exocytosis, or broken down by pro-
teolysis into amino acids and peptides.66

In  addition  to  the  cellular  DNA  damage,  chronic  exposure  to  UVA  and 
UVB  results  in  increased  expression  of  matrix  metalloproteinases  (MMPs) 
typically  associated  with  intrinsic  cutaneous  aging.  Extrinsic  aging  there-
fore yields both damaged DNA and increased MMP production. The factors 

Box 3.5

Antioxidants

■■ Oxidation  involves  the  transfer  of  electrons  or  hydrogen  from  one 
molecule  to  another,  the  oxidizing  agent.  This  chemical  reaction 
leads  to  the  production  of  free  radicals.  These  trigger  intracellular 
chain reactions that produce cell damage.

■■ Antioxidants, through being oxidized themselves, remove free radi-

cals. Further oxidation reactions are thereby terminated.

■■ Alpha-lipoic  acid,  glutathione,  idebenone,  ubiquinone,  vitamin 
C, vitamin E, and vitamin B3 are all potent topical antioxidants in 
human skin.

56

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

involved  in  generating  these  changes  include  oxidative  stress  (nuclear  and 
mitochondrial),  UV  exposure,  glycation,  and  alkylation.  Topically  applied, 
DNA repair enzymes complex, excise, extract, and repair DNA damaged by a 
variety of insults.

Oxo-Guanine Glycosylase-1 (OGG-1)
Oxo-guanine  glycosylase-1  (OGG-1)  is  an  enzyme  that  repairs  DNA  dam-
aged by oxidative stress. To effectively penetrate the epidermis, OGG-1 can 
be encapsulated within pH-sensitive liposomes. The inflammatory response 
induced by exposure to UVB leads to the formation of oxidative DNA byprod-
ucts such as 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanine (8-oxo-dG). These have been linked 
to  the  development  of  skin  cancer.  The  OGG-1  enzyme  repairs  8-oxo-dG 
adducts,  suggesting  that  supplementing  its  activity  through  topical  applica-
tion might increase repair of 8-oxo-dG and subsequently prevent skin cancer 
development.67

Ultraviolet Endonuclease
UV  endonuclease  is  also  best  delivered  through  liposomal  encapsulation. 
It  acts  to  recognize  distorted  DNA  molecules  (e.g.,  UV-induced  thymine 
dimers),  break  the  DNA  chain  near  the  dimer,  excise  the  small  damaged 
region, and patch up the strand with the complementary bases to the bases 
on the intact strand. Exposing skin to UV endonuclease also helps to reduce 
cytokines  regularly  released  during  stress  (e.g.,  interleukin-1  [IL-1],  IL-6, 
IL-8, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor-α [TNF-α]). UV endonuclease further 
downregulates UV-induced elevated levels of MMP’s (e.g., MMP-1, also called 
collagenase-1, which cleaves collagen I, the major subtype of collagen in the 
extracellular matrix of the dermis). A subtype of UV endonuclease, T4 endo-
nuclease  V,  is  a  DNA  repair  enzyme  specific  for  pyrimidine-dimers.  When 
administered through liposomal encapsulation to UV-irradiated human cells, 
this form increases the incision of UV-irradiated DNA, the survival of these 
cells, and the DNA repair replication process.68 Therefore, application of this 
DNA repair enzyme topically to human skin can potentially prevent skin can-
cer formation.

Photolyase
Photolyase  is  also  best  delivered  when  encapsulated  within  liposomes.  It 
cleaves  and  reverses  DNA  damage  specifically  in  relation  to  CPDs  caused 
by UV with shorter wavelengths. This process, known as photoreactivation, 
cleaves the UV-induced cyclobutane. Photolyase also reduces UV radiation-
induced cellular apoptosis.69

Natural DNA Repair Precursors
Natural DNA repair precursors such as acetyl tyrosine, proline, hydrolyzed 
vegetable protein, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) can be delivered to areas 
of  damaged  DNA  for  additional  benefit.  A  recent  study  demonstrated  the 
safety and efficacy of a topical product regimen containing both biologically 
stable DNA repair enzymes (OGG-1, UV endonuclease, and photolyase) and 
natural precursor proteins (a mixture of acetyl tyrosine, proline, hydrolyzed 
vegetable protein, and ATP). The study’s outcome was measured via improve-
ment in the most common signs of photoaging. These variables included the 

57

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

following: fine and deep rhytides, skin texture, color, suppleness, brightness, 
roughness,  elasticity,  mottled  pigmentation,  pore  prominence,  and  overall 
photodamage. The study investigators concluded that twice daily use of a topi-
cal  skincare  regimen  containing  DNA  repair  enzyme  complexes  and  natu-
ral repair protein precursors was well-tolerated and effective with respect to 
improvement of the most common signs of facial photoaging.70

Unirepair T-43, a product of Induchem (Switzerland), is a DNA-repairing 
bioactive  complex  that  boosts  cutaneous  cells’  natural  DNA  repair  mecha-
nism  through  its  supplementation  of  amino  acids  like  proline  and  acetyl 
tyrosine.71  Both  proline  and  acetyl  tyrosine  have  shown  redox  properties.72 
In the DNA repair pathway, proline and acetyl tyrosine are targets for pro-
tein kinases, which are involved in repairing damaged DNA.73 Several studies 
have  found  a  strong  association  between  erythema  formation  and  repair  of 
DNA damage. Protection or repair from UV-induced DNA damage is linked 
to reduced erythema development.74-78 Interestingly, patients pre-treated with 
topical  Unirepair  T-43  showed  reduced  erythema  following  UV  exposure. 
This was thought to be due to ability of Unirepair T-43 to hasten the repair 
of CPDs, thereby reducing DNA damage and the subsequent triggering of an 
inflammatory response.79 Box 3.6 shows known DNA repair agents.

Anti-inflammatory Agents
Cutaneous inflammation weakens the epidermal barrier function by alter-
ing the skin’s permeability. It induces cellular dysfunction and causes tex-
tural  irregularity.  Until  relatively  recently,  inflammation  (both  acute  and 
chronic) was not considered an important factor that required control. Now 
it is increasingly evident that inflammation is a destructive process in both 
diseased  and  nondiseased  skin.  For  example,  inflammation  is  the  main 
cause of scarring (as seen in acne), induction of skin cancer (as seen follow-
ing  UV-induced  damage  to  DNA),  accelerated  skin  aging  (extrinsic),  and 
both hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation (after chronic UV-induced 
melanocytic dysfunction or damage).

Inflammation is the immune system’s defense against an insult to its integ-
rity. In certain conditions, such as wound healing, inflammation can be con-
structive because it is necessary for injury repair. This is an example of acute 
inflammation, which is a beneficial process and should be facilitated for faster 

Box 3.6

DNA Repair Agents

■■ Aging is believed to be a consequence of an accumulation of unre-

paired naturally occurring DNA damage.

■■ Known DNA repair agents include:

■■ Oxo-guanine glycosylase-1
■■ Ultraviolet endonuclease
■■ Photolyase
■■ Natural DNA repair precursors

58

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

injury resolution. Therapeutic, acute inflammation usually subsides in 8 to 20 
days following adequate treatment. Resolution of acute inflammation is marked 
by re-epithelialization, increased basal cell mitosis, and repair of the extracellu-
lar matrix. After an acute injury, supportive and beneficial dermal modulation 
may last 4 to 6 months. Conversely, when inflammation becomes chronic, it can 
lead to a destructive state, with permanent and adverse sequelae (e.g., scars).

The wound healing process attracts neutrophils and macrophages that are 
eventually  replaced  by  lymphocytes  and  histiocytes.  The  release  of  MMPs 
ensues,  and  these  trigger  several  inflammatory  pathways.  Ultimately,  this 
results  in  destructive  processes  such  as  scarring  and  textural  irregularities. 
When an insult to the stratum corneum fails to permit renewal to a normal 
stratum corneum, and therefore an active barrier function, said destruction 
occurs. If such acute inflammation is not accordingly treated, chronic inflam-
mation will result.

Chronic inflammation can also occur from three other processes: glycation, 
formation  of  ROS,  and  induction  of  the  arachidonic  acid  cascade.  Glycation 
is  characterized  by  saccharides  (sugar)  in  the  circulation  that  are  deposited 
within  the  blood  vessels. This  results  in  vascular  insufficiency.  Activation  of 
the arachidonic acid cascade, however, commonly induced by UV exposure, 
results in the impairment of the lipid bilayer (barrier function). It also leads to 
the activation of prostaglandins, the inhibition of apoptosis, increased angio-
genesis (to feed oxygen and nutrients to tumors), proliferation of tumor cells, 
and their eventual local invasion and metastases.

Acute inflammation can be easily treated through the application of spe-
cific  topical  ingredients,  leading  to  a  quick  restoration  of  the  skin’s  inher-
ently  strong  barrier  function.  Treatment  of  chronic  inflammation,  on  the 
other hand, requires a more methodical and long-term approach. This may 
be  accomplished  through  the  use  of  a  combination  of  topical  antioxidants 
that  will  target  chronic  inflammation  through  multiple  avenues.  To  clar-
ify, the use of one antioxidant or anti-inflammatory agent is not enough to 
adequately treat chronic inflammation. When applied, the single agent may 
convert through inflammation to a damaging oxidizing agent; a combination 
approach in which the second agent acts as an antioxidant is therefore sug-
gested instead. Features of chronic inflammation are shown in Box 3.7.

Box 3.7

Chronic Inflammation

■■ Chronic  inflammation  leads  to  destructive  processes,  such  as  scar-

ring and textural irregularities.

■■ Chronic inflammation can be treated by inducing a controlled, ther-

apeutic period of acute inflammation.

■■ One  antioxidant  or  anti-inflammatory  agent  is  not  enough  to  ade-
quately treat chronic inflammation because the agent may convert to 
a damaging oxidizing agent.

■■ A  combination  of  antioxidants  must  be  used  to  treat  chronic 

inflammation.

59

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

An effective approach to arresting and eliminating chronic inflammation is 
through  the  induction  of  controlled,  therapeutic,  acute  inflammation.  Using 
the proper volume and concentration of select topical agents, a 2-week phase of 
controlled acute inflammation is generated. The skin will respond to this and, 
through innate mechanisms, will overcome both the acute and chronic inflam-
mation. This process will in turn fortify the barrier function, restore the skin’s 
renewal ability, eliminate the offending agent, and return skin to a healthy state.
In addition to their primary function, many topical antioxidants (e.g., vita-
min E) and topical antibiotics (e.g., metronidazole) provide anti-inflammatory 
benefits. Similarly, certain topically applied botanical agents, including green 
tea and Ginko biloba, also produce anti-inflammatory effects.80

Ginkgo Biloba
Ginkgo biloba is a plant with leaves containing flavonoids, flavonol glycosides, 
and polyphenols (such as terpenoids). These decrease inflammation through 
antilipoperoxidant  and  antiradical  properties.  Controlled  clinical  studies 
evaluating  anti-inflammatory  and  other  beneficial  effects  of  topical  Ginkgo 
biloba are currently lacking.

Green Tea
Topically applied green tea extract contains epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a poly-
phenol shown to decrease UVB-induced inflammation.81 These findings were 
confirmed through skin-fold thickness measurements in mice both before and 
after UVB exposure. This measurement reflects the amount of tissue edema (a 
sign of inflammation) and is the current cosmeceutical industry standard for 
quantifying inflammation. Although this is the current industry standard, it 
is a difficult test to replicate, and the murine model findings may not necessar-
ily correlate with similar findings in humans.

Growth Factors
Growth factors are chemical messengers between cells to turn on or off spe-
cific  cellular  activities  such  as  cell  proliferation,  chemotaxis,  and  extracel-
lular matrix formation.82 Topical application of growth factors also reduces 
signs of photoaging; they promote fibroblast and keratinocyte proliferation 
and induce extracellular matrix formation.83-86 Growth factors can be derived 
from  several  sources,  including  epidermal  cells,  human  foreskin,  placental 
cells,  colostrum,  recombinant  bacteria,  yeast,  and  plants.87  Growth  factors 
can also be produced synthetically. A partial  list  of human  growth  factors 
and their corresponding functions in the skin is shown in Table 3.3.88-90

The use of human-derived growth factors in topical skin care products is 
controversial.  Although  human  growth  factors  have  been  shown  to  repair 
photodamage through the induction of cell proliferation and differentiation, 
the associated increase in angiogenesis (secondary to excessive VEGF expo-
sure) has also been shown to be a critical step in the transition of dormant 
tumors to malignancies (Box 3.8). Furthermore, various types of melanomas 
have  receptors  for  growth  factors  (e.g.,  VEGF).91-93  Thus,  alternate,  nonhu-
man sources of growth factors have been sought to offer the same cutaneous 
benefits as the human-derived growth factors, but without the potential for 
stimulating skin cancers. Animal-derived growth factors, such as one derived 
from  a  mollusk,  have  been  shown  to  be  effective  substitutes  in  repairing 

Table 3.3  Human Growth Factors and Their Respective Functions in the Skin

Growth Factor

Fibroblast growth factor (bFGF [FGF-2], FGF-4, FGF-6, KGF 
[FGF-7], FGF-9)

Transforming growth factor (TGF-β1, TGF-β2, TGF-β3)

Function in Skin

Angiogenic and fibroblast mitogen*

Keratinocyte migration; chemotactic for macrophages and 
fibroblasts

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF AA, PDGF BB, PDGF Rb) Chemotactic for macrophages and fibroblasts; fibroblast 
mitogen and matrix production; macrophage activation

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)

Influences angiogenesis and vascular permeability to 
improve tissue nutrition

Placental growth factor (PGF)

Promotes endothelial cell growth (member of VEGF family)

Insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1, IGF-BP1, IGF-BP2, 
IGF-BP3, IGF-BP6)

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)

Endothelial cell and fibroblast mitogen

Strong mitogen; wound healing and three-dimensional 
tissue regeneration

*Mitogen induces cell mitosis (replication) and transformation and differentiation.
  Adapted from Mehta RC, Smith SR, Grove GL, et al. Reduction in facial photodamage by a topical growth factor product. J 
Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7:864-871; and Sundaram H, Mehta R, Norine J, et al. Role of physiologically balanced growth factors 
in skin rejuvenation. J Drugs Dermatol. 2009;8(5 Suppl):1-13.

Box 3.8

Growth Factors

■■ The use of human-derived growth factors in topical skin care prod-

ucts is controversial.

■■ Growth factors have been shown to repair photodamage, but there is 
concern that dormant tumors may be transformed into malignancies.
■■ Nonhuman  and  synthetically  sourced  growth  factor  variants  are 

preferable because of their enhanced safety profile.

■■ Ossential  Advanced  Growth  Factor  Serum  contains  synthetic 

lipopeptides.

photodamage.94 Kinetin, a plant-derived topical growth factor, has similarly 
shown  promise  in  repairing  photodamage.  Synthetically  produced  growth 
factor, composed of lipopeptides (the main active portions of growth factors, 
composed of small-chain amino acid sequences), has shown great potential 
in terms of providing the necessary building blocks for fibroblasts to produce 
collagen and elastin. These synthetic lipopeptides are one of the main ingre-
dients in Ossential Advanced Growth Factor Serum. Because no human or 
animal product is directly applied to the skin when synthetic growth factors 
are used, their safety profile is enhanced.

SUPPORTIVE AGENTS

60

Because they often have only extracellular mechanisms of action and offer only 
mildly therapeutic benefit, supportive agents should be used in combination 

61

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

with  essential  agents.  Topical  products  considered  to  be  supportive  agents 
include  AHAs,  beta-hydroxy  acids  (BHAs),  non-HQ  pigment-stabilizing 
agents (kojic acid, azelaic acid, and arbutin), resorcinol, and disease-specific 
agents (5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, benzoyl peroxide, topical antibiotics, and 
topical antifungals).

Alpha-Hydroxy Acids
The exact mechanism of action of AHAs, such as glycolic, lactic, and malic 
acid, is not known. Dermatologic effects, however, are believed to be primar-
ily limited to the epidermis. AHAs, also referred to as fruit acids, are weakly 
hydroscopic (i.e., they draw water into dry skin cells). AHAs are characterized 
as having an alcohol (hydroxyl) function in the alpha position relative to the 
carbon  atom  bearing  the  carboxyl  function.  Skin  feels  rough  when  there  is 
an accumulation of partially attached surface stratum corneum cells. Forced 
exfoliation with topical agents, such as the AHAs, can restore a smoother tex-
ture. The concentration of the AHA agent is critical. At low concentrations 
(2% to 8%), only a few layers of the stratum corneum are removed, and enough 
cells remain to keep the skin’s barrier function intact. Conversely, concentra-
tions higher than 12% may lead to a total loss of stratum corneum (affecting 
10 to 20 layers of cells) and cause irritation of the skin. This is especially true 
if AHAs are used more than once daily.

Although the exact mechanism of action of AHA is unknown, it is hypoth-
esized that AHAs act as chelating agents for calcium and reduce the calcium 
ion  epidermal  concentration.  Removing  calcium  ions  from  intercellular 
keratinocyte adhesions disrupts their function and results in desquamation. 
Moreover, these reduced ion levels promote cell growth and slow differentia-
tion, giving the skin a more youthful appearance.95 AHA-induced effects are 
temporary, however, because they do not regulate the keratinization process, 
nor do they produce softer keratin as tretinoin does. Thus, when the use of 
AHAs is discontinued, the condition being treated often returns within 2 or 
3 weeks.

In  an  attempt  to  create  a  more  potent  product,  a  recent  trend  has  been  to 
increase the concentration of AHAs, thereby decreasing their overall pH. This, 
however,  is  not  wholly  beneficial.  Using  glycolic  acid  as  an  example,  when  the 
pH  is increased, so too is the efficacy (to a mild  extent), but  the irritation  and 
adverse effects also increase (Table 3.4).96 Acidity alone does not predict acantho-
lytic efficacy. Hydrogen bonding, electrostatic, inductive, and steric effects are also 

Table 3.4  Glycolic Acid Concentrations and Their Different pH Values

Concentration (%)

5

10

20

30

40

40

50

60

pH

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.0

62

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

involved.97 Cutaneous surface pH changes induced by AHAs should be seriously 
noted because these changes can persist for up to 4 hours following application.

The  acidic  pH  of  glycolic  acid  is  buffered  to  approximately  2.8  to  3.5  for 
facial application.97 Many cosmetic products on the market claim to be “neu-
tralized”  or  “buffered,”  thereby  yielding  less  irritation.  It  should  be  noted, 
however, that neutralized products would have little cutaneous efficacy.98

Glycolic and lactic acids are the AHAs most commonly used in skin care 
products. As the molecular sizes of AHAs vary, so do their respective effica-
cies. Glycolic acid is the smallest and thus has the best penetrating activity. 
Glycolic acid is hydroscopic and binds to water in the skin. It also decreases the 
bonds between keratinocytes. At higher concentrations, glycolic acid detaches 
the epidermis from the dermis (epidermolysis) through lysis of hemidesmo-
somes. It can be used alone or in combination with other chemicals in facial 
peels.96,99-102

Mild to moderate concentrations (≤30%) of glycolic acid have been used for 
“lunch-time” peels. These remove epidermal corneocytes and produce exfo-
liation at the lower levels of the stratum corneum.103,104 Because they have no 
dermal  effects,  lunch-time  peels  are  not  true  peels.  Indeed,  they  may  yield 
temporarily smoother skin and improve acneic comedones, but they have no 
effect on wrinkles, scars, or skin tightening. The effects of AHAs are shown 
in Box 3.9.

Beta-Hydroxy Acids
BHAs  induce  smoothness  of  the  stratum  corneum  surface  through  their 
keratolytic  action.  BHAs,  such  as  salicylic  acid,  however,  are  irritating  and 
increase skin sensitivity. They are not recommended for daily use on normal 
skin because of the potential for causing allergic reactions. Typically, BHAs 
are used to increase the efficacy of a chemical peel or treat warts and acne. 
They may also be used independently (as in a salicylic acid “peel”). It is worth 

Box 3.9

Effects of Alpha-Hydroxy Acids

■■ Alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) cause stratum corneum exfoliation that 

can restore skin smoothness.

■■ At low concentrations (2% to 8%), AHAs remove only a few layers of 
the stratum corneum, leaving enough cells to keep the skin’s barrier 
function intact.

■■ Concentrations higher than 12% may lead to a total loss of stratum 
corneum (10 to 20 layers of cells) and cause skin irritation and adverse 
effects.

■■ Glycolic acid has the smallest molecule size and therefore shows the 

best penetration of skin.

■■ “Lunch-time” peels with AHAs are exfoliations and not true peels; 
they do not reach the dermis, have no effect on wrinkles or scars, and 
cannot tighten skin.

noting here that the use of the term peel to  describe the  effects of topically 
applied salicylic acid is incorrect because it has no dermal effects. Thus, BHAs 
are not recommended as the primary treatment for wrinkles, scars, or skin 
tightening.

63

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Nonhydroquinone Pigment Stabilizers
Kojic Acid
Kojic  acid  is  a  skin-lightening  agent  that  inhibits  the  tyrosinase  enzyme 
involved in melanogenesis. It is derived from several fungal species such as 
Penicillium and Aspergillus. Kojic acid is often used in concentrations between 
1% and 4%, and it is usually more effective at lightening the skin when used in 
combination with other agents (e.g., vitamin C, arbutin, glycolic acid, hydroxy 
acids, gamma-aminobutyric acid, licorice extract).105 Kojic acid is a good skin-
lightening  option  for  patients  who  cannot  tolerate  HQ.  Products  contain-
ing kojic acid are recommended to be used twice daily for approximately 2 
months, or until the desired amount of skin lightening is achieved. However, 
because of its high potential for sensitization, it often induces irritant contact 
dermatitis and is thus poorly tolerated.

Azelaic Acid
A dicarboxylic acid sourced from Pityrosporum ovale, azelaic acid acts as a 
tyrosinase inhibitor to lighten the skin. Optimal stabilization of melanocyte 
activity, and thus correction of hyperpigmentation, is achieved when azelaic 
acid is used concomitantly with a product that enhances its penetration (e.g., 
glycolic acid, retinol).

Arbutin
Arbutin, a glycoside derived from the bearberry fruit, has skin-lightening effects 
through  the  inhibition  of  tyrosinase.  In  general,  arbutin  is  believed  to  be  less 
potent than kojic and azelaic acid. Therefore, it is best used in combination with 
other skin-lightening agents to achieve optimal correction of hyperpigmentation.

Resorcinol
Resorcinol (m-dihydroxybenzene) has keratolytic activity and may be used 
as a superficial peeling agent to decrease microcomedone formation. When 
used in conditions such as acne, it can enhance the penetration of concomi-
tantly  used  essential  topical  agents.  In  low  concentrations  (1%  to  2%),  res-
orcinol is a component in many keratolytic and antiseptic topical products. 
Higher concentrations (up to 40%) in a paste vehicle can be used as a peeling 
agent  for  a  stronger  acne  treatment  option.  The  use  of  higher  strengths  of 
resorcinol  is  not  advised  because  they  can  cause  methemoglobinemia  and 
other systemic central nervous system side effects that are similar to those 
seen with phenol use.106

5-Fluorouracil
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), a fluorinated pyrimidine analog, has cytotoxic effects. 
Interestingly, it penetrates areas of abnormal skin (e.g., actinically damaged) 
more thoroughly than areas of normal skin. Topically applied, a 5% concentra-
tion of 5-FU is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for 

64

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

the treatment of multiple actinic keratoses and basal cell carcinoma.107 When 
treating patients with actinic keratoses, a cream containing 5% 5-FU is rec-
ommended to be applied twice daily for 2 to 4 weeks. For treatment of super-
ficial basal cell carcinoma, a cream containing 5% 5-FU is also recommended 
twice daily, but for a longer duration (3 to 6 weeks). The most common side 
effects, which are limited to the treatment site, include inflammation (redness, 
swelling,  and  exfoliation)  and  occasionally  superficial  erosions.  Alternative 
treatments for actinic keratoses include cryotherapy, electrodessication with 
curettage, chemical peels, and photodynamic therapy.

Imiquimod
A  non-nucleoside  heterocyclic  amine  and  synthetic  member  of  the  imid-
azoquinolone  family,  imiquimod  (Aldara)  acts  as  an  immunomodulating 
medication.  It  is  FDA  approved  for  the  topical  treatment  of  actinic  kerato-
ses,  superficial  basal  cell  carcinoma,  and  external  genital  warts.  A  5%  con-
centration  of  imiquimod  in  a  cream  vehicle  is  recommended  for  use  two 
times per week for 16 weeks for actinic keratosis and five times per week for 
6 weeks for superficial basal cell carcinoma. For external genital warts, it is 
recommended that imiquimod be applied three times per week for 16 weeks. 
Imiquimod binds to toll-like receptor-7 (TLR-7) on macrophages, monocytes, 
and dendritic cells.108 Stimulation of these cells through TLR-7 causes various 
pro-inflammatory cytokines to be released (TNF-α, IFN-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, 
IL-10, and IL-12), which subsequently activate the helper T-cell type 1 (Th-1) 
cell-mediated immune response. The TH-2 pathway is in turn inhibited.109 In 
addition  to  this  immune  system  modulation,  imiquimod  upregulates  natu-
ral killer cell activity by inducing the production of 2´5´-oligoadenylate syn-
thetase.110 Together, these actions inhibit the growth of tumors and viruses. 
Common, expected side effects include itching, redness, swelling, peeling, and 
occasionally the formation of erosions at the application site.

Benzoyl Peroxide
Topically  applied  benzoyl  peroxide,  a  powerful  oxidizing  and  bactericidal 
agent  against  Propionibacterium  acnes,  Pityrosporum  ovale,  and  several 
strains of Staphylococcus,111 is indicated for the treatment of mild to moderate 
acne. It also has comedolytic and keratolytic activity.112 Topical benzoyl perox-
ide is available in a variety of concentrations (2.5% to 20%) and in numerous 
vehicles (gel, cream, and lotion).113

TOPICAL ANTIBIOTICS

An extensive list of all topical antibiotics used in dermatology would be long 
and beyond the scope of this chapter. Most topical antibiotics used in derma-
tology, however, can be simply categorized into one (or both) of the two fol-
lowing categories: those used to treat acne or rosacea, and those used to treat 
healing wounds.

For the treatment of acne or rosacea, the most commonly prescribed topical 
antibiotics  are  erythromycin  (from  the  macrolide  class),  clindamycin  (from 
the lincosamide class), and metronidazole (from the nitroimidazole class). For 

the treatment of cutaneous wounds, the most frequently used topical antibiot-
ics are mupirocin, bacitracin, neomycin, gentamicin, polymyxin B, and silver 
sulfadiazine.

65

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

Acne and Rosacea Treatment
Erythromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, is bactericidal. It inhibits protein syn-
thesis  by  irreversibly  binding  to  the  50S  subunit  of  the  bacterial  ribosome. 
Erythromycin  is  effective  against  the  following  bacteria:  gram-positive 
cocci,  Legionella  pneumophila,  Chlamydia,  Corynebacterium  diphtheriae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, Treponema pallidum, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae.114 Improvement in acne is induced by erythromy-
cin’s further activity against Propionibacterium acnes. Erythromycin is poorly 
soluble in water. Therefore, vehicles composed of liposomal and conventional 
emulsions  are  more  effective  at  delivering  this  medication  than  hydroalco-
holic  vehicles.115,116  Topical  concentrations  of  erythromycin  typically  range 
between 1% and 4%.

Clindamycin,  a  synthetic  lincomycin  derivative,  has  the  same  mecha-
nism of action as erythromycin (irreversible bacterial 50S subunit binding). 
Clindamycin is effective against anaerobic gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria, as well as most aerobic gram-positive cocci.117 As with erythromy-
cin,  clindamycin  improves acne through its  bactericidal effects on  P.  acnes. 
Topical clindamycin is available as a 1% concentration in a lotion, gel, or solu-
tion (alcohol based).

Metronidazole,  a  synthetic  nitroimidazole  antibiotic,  is  also  bactericidal. 
It inhibits the synthesis of nucleic acid and disrupts the DNA in susceptible 
bacteria (which include most anaerobic bacteria and protozoa).118 But unlike 
erythromycin and clindamycin, metronidazole is not active against P. acnes. 
It  is  also  inactive  against  Demodex  folliculorum,  streptococci,  and  staphy-
lococci.119  Because  the  microflora  of  the  skin  in  rosacea  patients  does  not 
change significantly with topical metronidazole use, the beneficial effects are 
most  likely  due  to  the  agent’s  anti-inflammatory  effects.120  Inflammation  is 
decreased through the suppression of cell-mediated immunity and by limiting 
leukocyte chemotaxis.121

Wound Treatment
Mupirocin, a metabolite of Pseudomonas fluorescens, is bactericidal when applied 
topically. Mupirocin interrupts bacterial protein synthesis, RNA synthesis, and 
cell wall synthesis through the inhibition of bacterial isoleucyl-tRNA synthe-
tase.122 Mupirocin is active against Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, beta-hemolytic streptococci, and some strains of 
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA).123 Interestingly, because of the height-
ened use of mupirocin, one study found that up to 65% of the MRSA strains 
tested were resistant to mupirocin.124 Mupirocin is available in a 2% ointment 
or cream. Because very little of the mupirocin is metabolized by the skin, most 
of the medication applied remains on the surface to fight bacteria.

Bacitracin  is  bacteriostatic.  It  is  sourced  from  a  strain  of  Bacillus  sub-
tilis,  and  it  inhibits  bacterial  cell  wall  synthesis.  Bacitracin  is  active  against 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. aureus, H. influenzae, T. pallidum, and Neisseria 
strains. Bacitracin is indicated for short-term use on minor wounds because 

66

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

patients can otherwise become sensitized to the medication and subsequently 
develop  allergic  contact  dermatitis.  This  is  especially  common  when  it  is 
applied to nonintact skin and used for prolonged periods.

Derived  from  Streptomyces  fradiae, neomycin is a  bactericidal  aminogly-
coside  that  inhibits  protein  synthesis  by  binding  to  the  30s  subunit  of  the 
bacterial  ribosome.  Neomycin  may  additionally  inhibit  DNA  polymerase 
enzymes  within  the  bacteria.125  It  is  effective  against  most  gram-negative 
and some gram-positive bacteria, including H. influenzae, Escherichia coli, S. 
aureus,  Proteus,  Klebsiella,  and  Serratia.  To  reduce  the  potential  for  bacte-
rial  resistance  and  compensate  for  neomycin’s  relatively  weak  streptococcal 
coverage, bacitracin is commonly combined with neomycin and occasionally 
with  polymyxin  B.  The  latter  improves  gram-negative  coverage  to  include 
Pseudomonas. As seen with bacitracin, when neomycin is used for prolonged 
periods,  the  potential  for  developing  allergic  contact  dermatitis  increases. 
Treatment therefore is typically limited to one week.

Gentamicin,  derived  from  Micromonospora  purpurea,  is  a  bacterio-
static  aminoglycoside.  It  irreversibly  binds  the  bacterial  30s  ribosomal 
subunit  and  is  effective  against  gram-negative  bacteria  such  as  Proteus, 
Pseudomonas  aeruginosa,  and  E.  coli.  Gentamicin  also  has  some  gram-
positive effect against organisms such as S. aureus. Of note, gentamicin does 
not cover streptococci.126 Although allergic contact dermatitis to gentamicin 
is rare, approximately 40% of patients who have a neomycin allergy (with 
no prior exposure to gentamicin) also demonstrate positive patch testing to 
gentamicin.127

Polymyxin B is bactericidal and derived from Bacillus polymyxa. It destroys 
bacterial cell membranes through a detergent-like mechanism.126 Polymyxin 
B is especially effective against gram-negative bacteria, such as P. aeruginosa, 
Serratia marcescens, and Proteus mirabilis.127 Because of its inability to cover 
gram-positive bacteria, polymyxin B is usually combined with bacitracin and 
neomycin to broaden its coverage.

Silver sulfadiazine is commonly used for the topical treatment of burns. It is 
formulated through a reaction between silver nitrate and sodium sulfadiazine. 
Silver sulfadiazine inhibits bacterial replication by binding to bacterial DNA. 
It  covers  both  gram-positive  and  gram-negative  bacteria,  including  MRSA 
and P. aeruginosa.128

Topical Antifungals
Cutaneous fungal infections are among the most common conditions encoun-
tered by dermatologists. Topical agents used to treat dermatomycoses typically 
fall within one of the following categories: azoles, polyenes, and allylamines-
benzylamines. These three main antifungal classes are further detailed later. 
Less commonly used topical antimycotic agents, which do not fall into these 
three  categories,  include  selenium  sulfide,  hydroxypyridone  (ciclopirox 
olamine), and thiocarbonate (tolnaftate).129

Azoles
Azoles, effective against Candida, dermatophytes, and Malassezia furfur (also 
known as Pityrosporum ovale), work by blocking the production of ergosterol, 

67

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

a primary component of the fungal cell membrane.130,131 More specifically, the 
azoles block synthesis of ergosterol by inhibiting lanosterol 14α-demethylase, 
a cytochrome P-450−dependent enzyme that converts lanosterol to ergosterol. 
After the fungal cell membrane is compromised (by decreased ergosterol and 
accumulation  of  intracellular  14α-methylsterols),  its  increased  rigidity  and 
altered  permeability  prevent  the  fungi  from  growing  and  surviving.130,132-134 
The most commonly prescribed topical azoles include ketoconazole, clotrima-
zole, miconazole, and econazole.

Ketoconazole is a water-soluble imidazole derivative. It has a broad spec-
trum  of  activity  against  Candida  albicans,  M.  furfur,  and  dermatophytes. 
In one study, ketoconazole 2% cream, when applied twice daily for 4 weeks, 
showed marked clinical improvement in approximately 82% of patients with 
tinea corporis, tinea pedis, and tinea cruris.135 In another study, approximately 
80% of infants with seborrheic dermatitis treated with topical ketoconazole 
for 10 days demonstrated a good to excellent degree of disease clearance.136 
Similar  efficacy  has  been  observed  in  adults  with  the  condition,  who  were 
treated with ketoconazole cream, ketoconazole 2% shampoo, or both. These 
effects  are  largely  due  to  its  activity  against  M.  furfur.136-145 Tinea  versicolor 
and  cutaneous  candidiasis  have  also  shown  excellent  clearance  rates  with 
ketoconazole cream.146-151

Clotrimazole exhibits the same mechanism of action as the other azole anti-
fungals. It is effective against most strains of Epidermophyton, Trichophyton, 
Microsporum,  gram-positive  bacteria,  and  Candida.152,153  When  used  twice 
daily,  clotrimazole  is  an  effective  treatment  for  tinea  corporis,  tinea  pedis, 
tinea  versicolor,  tinea  cruris,  and  cutaneous  candidiasis.152-160  It  comes  in 
lotion, cream, and solution formulations.

Although exhibiting the same mechanism of action as the other azole anti-
fungals, miconazole is unique. After a single application, it can be detected 
within  the  stratum  corneum  for  up  to  4  days. This  is  a  significantly  longer 
duration compared with the other topicals in its class. Miconazole is active 
against the following common dermatophytes: Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 
Trichophyton  rubrum,  and  Epidermophyton  floccosum.  It  also  inhibits  the 
growth of M. furfur and C. albicans.161,162 The cream formulation of micon-
azole  has  shown  efficacy  in  the  treatment  of  tinea  cruris,  tinea  pedis,  tinea 
corporis, tinea versicolor, and cutaneous candidiasis.162-166 Twice-daily appli-
cation is recommended for each condition with the exception of tinea versi-
color, for which a once-daily application is effective.

Econazole, exhibiting the same mechanism of action as the other azole 
antifungals, is notable for its depth of penetration. Its minimal inhibitory 
concentrations  for  dermatophytes  extend  as  deep  as  the  mid-dermis.168,169 
Econazole  inhibits  most  strains  of  Microsporum,  Trichophyton,  and 
Epidermophyton  species,  as  well  as  M.  furfur  and  C.  albicans.168  Topical 
econazole  effectively  treats  tinea  cruris,  tinea  pedis,  and  tinea  corporis 
caused  by  dermatophytes,  cutaneous  candidiasis  from  C.  albicans,  and 
tinea  versicolor  from  Malassezia  organisms.168,170-175  Interestingly,  with 
respect  to  the  treatment  of  cutaneous  candidiasis  and  tinea  infections, 
econazole 1% cream has been shown to be just as effective as clotrimazole 
1% cream. However, econazole-treated patients show a more rapid onset of 
improvement.175

68

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Polyenes
Identified  through  their  molecular  structure,  polyene  antifungals  are  com-
posed of carbon atoms with conjugated double bonds in a macrolide ring. The 
macrolide  ring  is  closed  by  lactose  or  by  an  internal  ester.176  Although  two 
clinically significant polyene antifungals exist, nystatin and amphotericin B, 
the latter is rarely used in the United States.

Nystatin, produced by Streptomyces albidus and Streptomyces noursei, dem-
onstrates both fungistatic and fungicidal properties.177 Nystatin’s mechanism 
of action involves irreversible binding to sterols within the cell membrane of 
certain species of Candida. This leads to increased cell membrane permeabil-
ity and the subsequent leakage of intracellular elements.176-179 Nystatin is not 
water soluble and so is not absorbed by intact skin. Although nystatin is inef-
fective against dermatophytes that cause cutaneous infections, it is effective in 
treating cutaneous as well as mucosal infections due to C. albicans, Candida 
krusei,  Candida  tropicalis,  and  Candida  parapsilosis.128,175  Recommended 
treatment involves twice-daily application of nystatin to the affected areas. A 
cream, powder, or ointment formulation is available for use. For oral mucosal 
thrush, the suspension form is more appropriate, and the recommended use is 
four to five times daily.

Allylamines and Benzylamines
Allylamines,  which  include  naftifine  and  terbinafine,  and  benzylamines, 
which include butenafine, share a similar structure and mechanism of action. 
Both  allylamines  and  benzylamines  exhibit  a  comparable  mechanism  of 
action to the azole class of antifungal agents. They all inhibit the synthesis of 
ergosterol, an essential element within the fungal cell membrane. This results 
in increased fungal cell membrane permeability, allowing important intracel-
lular elements to escape from within. An intracellular accumulation of sterol 
precursors additionally occurs.

Allylamines  and  benzylamines  differ  from  azoles  in  that  the  former  two 
agents  inhibit  ergosterol  synthesis  independent  of  cytochrome  P-450  (an 
enzyme involved in drug metabolism and bioactivation). In opposition, azoles 
work  in  a  cytochrome  P-450  dependent  manner.  Furthermore,  allylamines 
and benzylamines block ergosterol synthesis at an earlier stage in the produc-
tion pathway compared with azoles.180-182

Naftifine  is  a  synthetic  allylamine  with  both  fungicidal  and  fungistatic 
behavior.183,184 It is strongly lipophilic, which leads to its effective penetra-
tion  and  the  subsequent  accumulation  of  large  concentrations  within  the 
stratum  corneum.185-187  Naftifine  specifically  inhibits  squalene  epoxidase, 
an  enzyme  necessary  for  the  conversion  of  squalene  to  squalene  oxide  in 
the production of ergosterol. Naftifine is effective against a broad spectrum 
of  dermatophytes  (including  T.  mentagrophytes),  saprophytes  (including 
Sporothrix schenckii), and yeasts.183,184,188 One study evaluated the treatment 
of  tinea  corporis  and  tinea  cruris  by  comparing  naftifine  1%  cream  with 
econazole 1% cream.189 Although they were both similar in efficacy, nafti-
fine displayed a faster onset of action. When compared with clotrimazole, 
naftifine  was  just  as  effective  at  treating  tinea  cruris, tinea  corporis, tinea 
pedis, and candidiasis, but it had an earlier onset of action compared with 
clotrimazole.189-194 Available in both gel and cream formulations, naftifine’s 

69

ESSENTIAL AGENTS

recommended  application  frequency  is  once  to  twice  daily  in  each  of  the 
aforementioned conditions.

Terbinafine,  like  naftifine,  is  a  synthetic  allylamine  antifungal  agent. 
Through a cytochrome P-450−independent mechanism, it compromises the 
integrity of fungal cell membranes. Terbinafine halts ergosterol synthesis by 
inhibiting squalene epoxidase. Similar to naftifine, terbinafine has both fun-
gistatic and fungicidal capabilities. It is also highly lipophilic, which allows 
for  high  concentrations  to  accumulate  within  the  stratum  corneum.183,195 
Interestingly, persistent concentrations above the mean inhibitory concentra-
tions for common dermatophytes were detected 7 days after topical application 
of terbinafine.184,196 Terbinafine was created through structural modifications 
to naftifine, which makes the former 10 to 100 times more potent (in terms 
of antifungal activity) than the latter.180,197,198 Terbinafine is fungicidal against 
numerous dermatophytes, C. albicans, and several dimorphic fungi, includ-
ing S. schenckii, Histoplasma capsulatum, and Blastomyces dermatitidis.195,199 
Terbinafine 1% cream is effective in treating tinea cruris, tinea corporis, tinea 
pedis, tinea versicolor, and intertriginous candidiasis.200 One study found the 
overall  efficacy  of  terbinafine  in  treating  all  tinea  infections  to  be  approxi-
mately 70% to 90%, with the greatest efficacy seen in the treatment of tinea 
cruris and tinea corporis.201

Butenafine, a benzylamine antifungal, is structurally similar to the allyl-
amines, with the exception of a butylbenzyl group in the former, replacing 
the allylamine group in the latter.202,203 An impressive characteristic of buten-
afine is that fungicidal concentrations of this agent can be detected within 
the stratum corneum for at least 72 hours after topical application.204,205 The 
mechanism of action of butenafine is the same as that of naftifine and terbin-
afine. Butenafine is fungicidal against aspergilli, dermatophytes, and dimor-
phic fungi, including S. schenckii.202,203 Its inhibitory capabilities have been 
found to be equal to or greater than those of naftifine and terbinafine. Cure 
rates for tinea cruris treated with butenafine range between 84% and 100%. 
Topical butenafine is also an effective treatment against tinea corporis, tinea 
pedis, tinea versicolor, and cutaneous candidiasis.206-213 In general, for each 
of the previously mentioned conditions, once- to twice-daily application of 
butenafine for approximately 2 weeks is recommended. Notably, after ceasing 
application of the butenafine, clinical and mycological cure rates continue for 
up to 2 weeks. This is likely because of its strong keratin-binding capacity.

Wound Healing
Biafine
Biafine (OrthoNeutrogena), a water-based topical emulsion, is used to hasten 
healing  after  radiation  dermatitis,  burns,  wounds,  and  ablative  laser  treat-
ments.  Biafine  contains  the  following  ingredients  within  its  aqueous  phase: 
alginate of sodium salts, demineralized water, and triethanolamine. Within 
the  lipid  state,  the  following  exist:  ethylene  glycol  stearic  acid,  paraffin  liq-
uid,  propylene  glycol,  paraffin  wax,  squalene,  cetyl  palmitate,  avocado  oil, 
and fragrance.214 Biafine is a chemotactic agent for macrophages and works at 
the level of the dermis (within granulation tissue).215 Biafine also reduces the 
secretion of IL-6, thereby increasing the IL-1/IL-6 ratio.216 The formation of 
granulation tissue is thus enhanced, as is the production of collagen.216

70

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

QUESTIONABLE AGENTS

Questionable agents have not shown any scientifically proven therapeutic benefit. 
These should therefore only be used, if at all, after essential or supportive topical 
agents are already employed. A seemingly endless array of questionable agents are 
added to various skin care products currently on the market. A complete list of 
these agents not only would fail to fit within the confines of this book but would 
also  be  irrelevant  because  they  have  shown  no  scientific  benefit  in  either  Skin 
Health Restoration or maintenance processes. Many of the most expensive over-
the-counter  skin  care  creams  (ranging in  price  from  $200  to  $1,000  per  small 
container) contain only questionable agents as their active ingredients. Examples 
of  these  include  gold,  platinum,  caviar,  silk,  ursolic  acid,  Planifolia  PFA,  and 
Imperiale  Orchidee  molecular  extract.  Randomized,  controlled  clinical  stud-
ies demonstrating the efficacy of the following popular questionable agents do 
not currently exist: gold (found in Chantecaille’s Nano Gold Energizing Cream 
and Orlane’s Creme Royale), platinum (found in La Prairie’s Cellular Radiance 
Cream),  caviar  (found  in  La  Prairie’s  White  Caviar  Illuminating  Cream),  silk 
(found in Kanebo’s Sensai Collection Premier The Cream), ursolic acid (found 
in  Sisley’s  Sisleya  Global  Anti-Age  Cream),  Planifolia  PFA  (found  in  Chanel’s 
Precision  Sublimage  Serum  Essential  Regenerating  Cream),  and  Imperiale 
Orchidee Molecular Extract (found in Guerlain’s Orchidee Imperiale Cream Next 
Generation). Correspondence to the previously mentioned companies requesting 
clinical data to support product efficacy went largely unanswered. The few com-
panies that did reply, however, offered only anecdotal reports of efficacy. Thus, the 
high price of many popular skin care products does not necessarily reflect effec-
tiveness. It is therefore more appropriate to eat caviar, wear silk clothing, adorn 
ourselves with gold and platinum jewelry, and visually admire orchids than to 
apply products containing these questionable ingredients onto our skin.

REFERENCES

  1.  Kligman LH, Chen HD, Kligman AM. Topical retinoic acid enhances the repair 
of  ultraviolet  damaged  dermal  connective  tissue.  Connect  Tissue  Res.  1984;12: 
139-150.

  2.  Kligman AM, Dogadkina D, Lavker RM. Effects of topical tretinoin on the non-sun 

exposed protected skin of the elderly. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1993;29:25-33.

  3.  Kligman DE, Sadiq I, Pagnoni A, et al. High-strength tretinoin: a method for rapid 

retinization of facial skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1998;39:S93-97.

  4.  Kligman AM. Cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Clin. 2000;18:1-7.
  5.  Goldfarb MT, Ellis CN, Weiss JS, et al. Topical tretinoin therapy: its use in photoaged 

skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989;21:654-650.

  6.  Ellis  CN,  Weiss  JJ,  Hamilton  TA,  et  al.  Sustained  improvement  with  prolonged 
topical tretinoin (retinoic acid) for photoaged skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1990;23: 
629-637.

  7.  Green LJ, McCormick A, Weinstein GD. Photoaging and the skin: the effects of treti-

noin. Dermatol Clin. 1993;11:97-105.

  8.  Gilchrest BA. Treatment of photodamage with topical tretinoin: an overview. J Am 

Acad Dermatol. 1997;36:S27-36.

71

REFERENCES

  9.  Olsen EA, Katz HI, Levine N, et al. Tretinoin emollient cream for photodamaged 
skin:  results  of  48-week,  multicenter,  double-blind  studies.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 
1997;37:217-216.

  10.  Olsen EA, Katz HI, Levine N, et al. Sustained improvement in photodamaged skin 
with  reduced  tretinoin  emollient  cream  treatment  regimen:  effect  of  once-weekly 
and three times-weekly applications. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;37:227–230.
  11.  Chew AL, Bashir SJ, Maibach HI. Topical retinoids. In: Elsner P, Maibach H., eds. 
Cosmeceuticals: Drugs vs. Cosmetics. New York: Marcel Decker; 2000:107-122.
  12.  Samuel  M,  Brooke  RC,  Hollis  S,  Griffiths  CE.  Interventions  for  photodamaged  skin. 

Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;CD001782.

  13.  Mukherjee S, Date A, Patravale V, et al. Retinoids in the treatment of skin aging: an 

overview of clinical efficacy and safety. Clin Interv Aging. 2006;1:327-348.

  14.  Sorg O, Antille C, Kaya G, Saurat JH. Retinoids in cosmeceuticals. Dermatol Ther. 

2006;19:289-296.

  15.  Ting W. Tretinoin for the treatment of photodamaged skin. Cutis. 2010;86:47-52.
  16.  Griffiths CE, Kang S, Ellis CN, et al. Two concentrations of topical tretinoin (retinoic 
acid) cause similar improvement of photoaging but different degrees of irritation: a 
double-blind, vehicle-controlled comparison of 0.1% and 0.025% tretinoin creams. 
Arch Dermatol. 1995;131:1037-1044.

  17.  Bhawan J. Short- and long-term histologic effects of topical tretinoin on photodam-

aged skin. Int J Dermatol. 1998;37:286-292.

  18.  Fluhr JW, Vienne MP, Lauze C, et al. Tolerance profile of retinol, retinaldehyde and 
retinoic  acid  under  maximized  and  long-term  clinical  conditions.  Dermatology. 
1999;199(Suppl 1):57-60.

  19.  Kligman AM, Grove GL, Hirose R, et al. Topical tretinoin for photoaged skin. J Am 

Acad Dermatol. 1986;15:836-859.

  20.  Kim  BH,  Lee  YS,  Kang  KS.  The  mechanism  of  retinol-induced  irritation  and  its 

application to anti-irritant development. Toxicol Lett. 2003;146:65-73.

  21.  Connor MJ, Smit MH. Terminal-group oxidation of retinol by mouse epidermis: 

inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Biochem J. 1987;244:489-492.

  22.  Duell EA, Derguini F, Kang S, et al. Extraction of human epidermis treated with retinol 
yields retro-retinoids in addition to free retinol and retinyl-esters. J Invest Dermatol. 
1996;107:178-182.

  23.  Kang  S,  Duell  EA,  Fisher  GJ,  et  al.  Application  of  retinol  to  human  skin  in  vivo 
induces  epidermal  hyperplasia  and  cellular  retinoid  binding  proteins  characteris-
tic of retinoic acid but without measurable retinoic acid levels or irritation. J Invest 
Dermatol. 1995;105:549-556.

  24.  Kafi R, Kwak HSR, Schumacher WE, et al. Improvement of naturally aged skin 

with vitamin A (retinol). Arch Dermatol. 2007;143:606-612.

  25.  Fluhr JW, Vienne MP, Lauze C, et al. Tolerance profile of retinol, retinaldehyde and 
retinoic  acid  under  maximized  and  long-term  clinical  conditions.  Dermatology. 
1999;199(Suppl 1):57-60.

  26.  Kurlandsky  SB,  Xiao  JH,  Duell  EA,  et  al.  Biological  activity  of  all-trans  retinol 
requires metabolic conversion to all-trans retinoic acid and is mediated through acti-
vation of nuclear retinoid receptors in human keratinocytes. J Biol Chem. 1994;269: 
32821-32827.

  27.  Brisaert MG, Everaerts I, Plaizier-Vercammen JA. Chemical stability of tretinoin in 

dermatological preparations. Pharmaceutica Acta Helvetiae. 1995;70:16-166.

  28.  Ball Arefiev KL, Hantash BM. Advances in the treatment of melasma: a review of the 

recent literature. Dermatol Surg. 2012;38:971-984.

  29.  Rendon MI, Gaviria JI. Skin lightening agents. In: Draelos ZD, Dover JS, Alam M, 
eds.  Procedures  in  Cosmetic  Dermatology:  Cosmeceuticals.  Philadelphia:  Saunders/
Elsevier; 2005:104.

72

  30.  Palumbo A, d’Ischia M, Misuraca G, et al. Mechanism of inhibition of melanogenesis 

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

by hydroquinone. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991;1073:85-90.

  31.  Jimbow K, Obata H, Pathak MA, Fitzpatrick TB. Mechanism of depigmentation by 

hydroquinone. J Invest Dermatol. 1974;6:436-449.

  32.  Biewenga GP, Haenen GR, Bast A. The pharmacology of the antioxidant lipoic acid. 

Gen Pharmacol. 1997;29:315-331.

  33.  Burke  KE:  Nutritional  antioxidants.  In:  Draelos  ZD,  Dover  JS,  Alam  M,  eds. 
Procedures in Cosmetic Dermatology: Cosmeceuticals. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 
2005:125-132.

  34.  Meister A, Anderson, ME. Glutathione. Ann Rev Biochem. 1983;52:711-760.
  35.  Linder J. Antioxidants: Essential preventative and corrective topicals. Dermatologist. 

2011;19:28-33.

  36.  Chan AC. Partners in defense, vitamin E and vitamin C. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 

1993;71:725-731.

  37.  Montenegro L, Bonina F, Rigano L, et al. Protective effect evaluation of free radical 
scavengers on UVB induced human cutaneous erythema by skin reflectance spec-
trophotometry. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2007;17:91-103.

  38.  McDaniel DH, Neudecker BA, DiNardo JC, et al. Idebenone: a new antioxidant. Part 
I. Relative assessment of oxidative stress protection capacity compared to commonly 
known antioxidants. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2005;4:10-17.

  39.  Tournas JA, Lin FH, Burch JA, et al. Ubiquinone, idebenone, and kinetin provide 
ineffective photoprotection to skin when compared to a topical antioxidant combi-
nation of vitamins C and E with ferulic acid. J Invest Dermatol. 2006;126:1185-1187.
  40.  Huang C, Miller T. The truth about over-the-counter topical anti-aging products: a 

comprehensive review. Aesthet Surg J. 2007;27:402-412.

  41.  Farris PK. Topical vitamin C: a useful agent for treating photoaging and other der-

matologic conditions. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:814-818.

  42.  Heber GK, Markovic B, Hayes A. Anhydrous topical ascorbic acid on human skin. 

J Cosmet Dermatol. 2006;5:150-156.

  43.  Pinnell SR, Yang HS, Omar M, et al. Topical L-ascorbic acid: percutaneous absorption 

studies. Dermatol Surg. 2001;27:137-142.

  44.  Traikovich  SS.  Use  of  topical  ascorbic  acid  and  its  effects  on  photodamaged  skin 

topography. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1999;125:1091-1098.

  45.  Lopez-Torres M, Thiele JJ, Shindo Y, et al. Topical application of alpha-tocopherol 
modulates  the  antioxidant  network  and  diminishes  ultraviolet-induced  oxidative 
damage in murine skin. Br J Dermatol. 1998;138:207-215.

  46.  Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Packer L. Depletion of human stratum corneum vitamin E: an 
early and sensitive in vivo marker of UV induced photo-oxidation. J Invest Dermatol. 
1998;110:756-761.

  47.  Shindo Y, Witt E, Han D, et al. Dose-response effects of acute ultraviolet irradiation 
on antioxidants and molecular markers of oxidation in murine epidermis and der-
mis. J Invest Dermatol. 1994;102:470-475.

  48.  Weber  C,  Podda  M,  Rallis  M,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  topically  applied  tocopherols  and 
tocotrienols  in  protection  of  murine  skin  from  oxidative  damage  induced  by 
UV-irradiation. Free Radic Biol Med. 1997;22:761-769.

  49.  Weber SU, Thiele JJ, Cross CE, et al. Vitamin C, uric acid, and glutathione gradients in 
murine stratum corneum and their susceptibility to ozone exposure. J Invest Dermatol. 
1999;113:1128-1132.

  50.  Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Podda M, et al. Ozone depletes tocopherols and tocotrienols 

topically applied to murine skin. FEBS Lett. 1997;401:167-170.

  51.  Valacchi G, Weber SU, Luu C, et al. Ozone potentiates vitamin E depletion by ultra-
violet radiation in the murine stratum corneum. FEBS Lett. 2000;466:165-168.

  52.  Baumann L. Skin ageing and its treatment. J Pathol. 2007;211:241-251.

73

REFERENCES

  53.  Thiele  JJ,  Ekanayake-Mudiyanselage  S.  Vitamin  E  in  human  skin:  organ-spe-
cific  physiology  and  considerations  for  its  use  in  dermatology.  Mol  Aspects  Med. 
2007;28:646-667.

  54.  Bissett DL, Miyamoto K, Sun P, et al. Topical niacinamide reduces yellowing, wrin-
kling, red blotchiness, and hyperpigmented spots in aging facial skin. Int J Cosmet Sci. 
2004;26:231-238.

  55.  Bissett  DL,  Oblong  JE,  Berge  CA.  Niacinamide:  a  B  vitamin  that  improves  aging 

facial skin appearance. Dermatol Surg. 2005;31:860-865.

  56.  Rivers  JK.  The  role  of  cosmeceuticals  in  antiaging  therapy.  Skin  Therapy  Lett. 

2008;13:5-9.

  57.  Dell’Acqua  G,  Schweikert  K.  A  DNA  repair  complex  to  decrease  erythema  and 

UV-induced CPD formation. Cosmetics Toiletries. 2008;123:69-78.

  58.  Setlow  RB.  Cyclobutane-type  pyrimidine  dimers  in  polynucleotides.  Science. 

1966;153:379-386.

  59.  Sutherland  BM,  Delihas  NC,  Oliver  RP,  et  al.  Action  spectra  for  ultraviolet  light-
induced transformation of human cells to anchorage-independent growth. Cancer Res. 
1981;41:2211-2214.

  60.  Hart R, Setlow RB, Woodhead AD. Evidence that pyrimidine dimers in DNA can 

give rise to tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977;74:5574-5578.

  61.  Harm H. Repair of UV-irradiated biological systems: photoreactivation. In: Yang SY, 
ed. Photochemistry and Photobiology of Nucleic Acids. Vol. 2. New York: Academic 
Press; 1976:219-262.

  62.  Takahashi Y, Moriwaki S, Sugiyama Y, et al. Decreased gene expression responsible 
for  post-ultraviolet  DNA  repair  synthesis  in  aging:  a  possible  mechanism  of  age-
related reduction in DNA repair capacity. J Invest Dermatol. 2005;124:435-442.
  63.  Yamada  M,  Udono  MU,  Hori  M,  et  al.  Aged  human  skin  removes  UVB-induced 
pyrimidine dimers from the epidermis more slowly than younger adult skin in vivo. 
Arch Dermatol. 2006;297:294-302.

  64.  Yaar  M,  Gilchrest  BA.  Photoaging:  mechanism,  prevention  and  therapy.  Br  J 

Dermatol. 2007;157:874-887.

  65.  Sander CS, Chang H, Salzmann, S, et al. Photoaging is associated with protein oxida-

tion in human skin in vivo. J Invest Dermatol. 2002;118:618-625.

  66.  Schweikert  K,  Gafner  F,  Dell’Acqua  G.  Uniprotect  PT-3:  bioactive  complex  for 
protection  of  skin  proteins  from  UV-induced  oxidation.  Int  J  Cosmet  Sci.  2010; 
32:29-34.

  67.  Wulff BC, Schick JS, Thomas-Ahner JM, et al. Topical treatment with OGG1 enzyme 
affects UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis. Photochem Photobiol. 2008;84:317-321.
  68.  Ceccoli J, Rosales N, Tsimis J, et al. Encapsulation of the UV-DNA repair enzyme 
T4  endonuclease  V  in  liposomes  and  delivery  to  human  cells.  J  Invest  Dermatol. 
1989;93:190-194.

  69.  Berardesca E, Bertona M, Altabas K, et al. Reduced ultraviolet-induced DNA dam-
age  and  apoptosis  in  human  skin  with  topical  application  of  a  photolyase-con-
taining DNA repair enzyme cream: clues to skin cancer prevention. Mol Med Rep. 
2012;5:570-574.

  70.  Kiripolsky MG, Sundaram H, Bucay VW. A multi-center, open-label study to evalu-
ate  the  effects  of  topically-applied  DNA  repair  enzymes  and  substrates  on  photo-
aged skin. 2012. White paper.

  71.  Schweikert K, McGregor W, Klein C, et al. Amino acids to increase DNA repair after 

UVB irradiation of reconstituted human skin. SÖFW J. 2006;132:22-26.

  72.  Milligan JR, Aguilera JA, Ly A, et al. Repair of oxidative DNA damage by amino acids. 

Nucleic Acids Res. 2003;31:6258-6263.

  73.  Bender K, Blattner C, Knebel A, et al. UV-induced signal transduction. J Photochem 

Photobiol B. 1997;37:1-17.

74

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

  74.  Petit-Frere C, Clingen PH, Grewe M, et al. Induction of interleukin-6 production by 
ultraviolet radiation in normal human epidermal keratinocytes and in a human kerati-
nocyte cell line is mediated by DNA damage. J Invest Dermatol. 1998;111:354-359.
  75.  Wolf P, Maier H, Mullegger RR, et al. Topical treatment with liposomes containing T4 
endonuclease V protects human skin in vivo from ultraviolet-induced upregulation of 
interleukin-10 and tumor necrosis factor. J Invest Dermatol. 2000;114:149-156.
  76.  Stege H, Roza L, Vink AA, et al. Enzyme plus light therapy to repair DNA damage in 

ultraviolet-B-irradiated human skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97:1790-1795.

  77.  Schul  W,  Jans  J,  Rijksen  YMA,  et  al.  Enhanced  repair  of  cyclobutane  pyrimi-
dine dimers and improved UV resistance in photolyase transgenic mice. EMBO J. 
2002;21:4719-4729.

  78.  Berg RJW, Ruven HJT, Sands AT, et al. Defective global genome repair in XPC mice 
is associated to skin cancer susceptibility but not with sensitivity to UVB induced 
erythema and edema. J Invest Dermatol. 1998;110:405-409.

  79.  Dell’Acqua  G,  Schweikert  K.  A  DNA  repair  complex  to  decrease  erythema  and 

UV-induced CPD formation. Cosmetics Toiletries. 2008;123:1-8.

  80.  Draelos ZD: Cosmeceutical botanicals: part 1. In: Draelos ZD, Dover JS, Alam M, 
eds.  Procedures  in  Cosmetic  Dermatology:  Cosmeceuticals.  Philadelphia:  Saunders/
Elsevier; 2005:75-77.

  81.  Katiyar  SK,  Elmets  CA,  Agarwal  R,  et  al.  Protection  against  ultraviolet-B  radia-
tion-induced local and systemic suppression of contact hypersensitivity and edema 
responses  in  C3H/HeN  mice  by  green  tea  polyphenols.  Photochem  Photobiol. 
1995;62:855-861.

  82.  Babu  M,  Wells  A.  Dermal-epidermal  communication  in  wound  healing.  Wounds. 

2001;13:183-189.

  83.  Bertaux B, Horneback W, Eisen AZ, et al. Growth stimulation of human keratino-

cytes by tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases. J Invest Dermatol. 1991;97:679-85.
  84.  Finch PW, Rubin JS, Miki T, et al. Human KGF is FGF related with properties of a 

paracrine effector of epithelial cell growth. Science. 1989;245:752-55.

  85.  Eming SA, Krieg T, Davidson JM. Inflammation in wound repair: molecular and 

cellular mechanisms. J Invest Dermatol. 2001;127:514-525.

  86.  Schwartz E, Cruickshank FA, Christensen CC, et al. Collagen alterations in chroni-

cally sun-damaged human skin. Photochem Photobiol. 1993;58:841-844.

  87.  Bonin-Debs AL, Boche I, Gille H, et al. Development of secreted proteins as bio-

therapeutic agents. Exp Opin Biol Ther. 2004;4:551-558.

  88.  Mehta RC, Smith SR, Grove GL, et al. Reduction in facial photodamage by a topical 

growth factor product. J Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7:864-871.

  89.  Sundaram H, Mehta R, Norine J, et al. Role of physiologically balanced growth fac-

tors in skin rejuvenation. J Drugs Dermatol. 2009;8(5 Suppl):1-13.

  90.  Demidova-Rice TN, Hamblin MR, Herman IM. Acute and impaired wound healing: 
pathophysiology and current methods for drug delivery. Part 2. Role of growth fac-
tors in normal and pathological wound healing: therapeutic potential and methods 
of delivery. Adv Skin Wound Care. 2012;25:349-370.

  91.  Liu  B,  Earl  HM,  Baban  D,  et  al.  Melanoma  cell  lines  express  VEGF  receptor 
KDR  and  respond  to  exogenously  added  VEGF.  Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun. 
1995;217:721-727.

  92.  Lazar-Molnar  E,  Hegyesi  H,  Toth  S,  et  al.  Autocrine  and  paracrine  regulation  by 

cytokines and growth factors in melanoma. Cytokine. 2000;12:547-554.

  93.  Draelos  ZD.  Exploring  the  pitfalls  in  clinical  cosmeceutical  research.  Cosmet 

Dermatol. 2007;20:556-558.

  94.  Tribo-Boixareu MJ, Parrado-Romero C, Rais B, et al. Clinical and histological effi-
cacy of a secretion of the mollusk Cryptomphalus aspersa in the treatment of cutane-
ous photoaging. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2009;22:247-252.

75

REFERENCES

  95.  Wang X. A theory for the mechanism of action of the alpha hydroxy acids applied to 

the skin. Med Hypothes. 1999;53:380-382.

  96.  DiNardo JC, Grove GL, Moy LS. Clinical and histological effects of glycolic acid at 

different concentrations and pH levels. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:421-424.

  97.  Draelos ZD. Dermatologic considerations of AHAs. Cosmet Dermatol. 1997;10:14-18.
  98.  Daniello NJ. Glycolic acid controversies. Int J Aesthetic Restor Surg. 1996;4:113-116.
  99.  Murad H, Shaman AT, Premo PS. The use of glycolic acid as a peeling agent. Dermatol 

Clin. 1995;13:285-307.

 100.  Moy LS, Murad H, Moy RL. Glycolic acid peels for the treatment of wrinkles and 

photoaging. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1993;19:243-246.

 101.  Piacquadio D, Dobry M, Hunt S, et al. Short contact glycolic acid peels as a treatment 

for photodamaged skin: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:449-452.

 102.  Coleman  WP,  Futrell  JM.  The  glycolic  acid  tricholoroacetic  acid  peel.  J  Dermatol 

Surg Oncol. 1994;20:76-80.

 103.  Newman NN, Newman A, Moy LS, et al. Clinical improvement of photoaged skin 

with 50% glycolic acid. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:455-460.

 104.  Moy  LS,  Howe  K,  Moy  RL.  Glycolic  acid  modulation  of  collagen  production  in 

human skin fibroblast culture in vitro. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:439-441.

 105.  Lim JT. Treatment of melasma using kojic acid in a gel containing hydroquinone and 

glycolic acid. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:282-284.

 106.  Bontemps H, Mallaret M, Besson G, et al. Confusion after topical use of resorcinol. 

Arch Dermatol. 1995;131:112.

 107.  Baumbach JL, Sheth PB. Topical and intralesional antiviral agents. In: Wolverton SE, 
ed. Comprehensive Dermatologic Drug Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:532-533.
 108.  Stanley, MA. Imiquimod and the imidazoquinolones: mechanism of action and 

therapeutic potential. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27(7):571-577.

 109.  Navi  D,  Huntley  A.  Imiquimod  5  percent  cream  and  the  treatment  of  cutaneous 

malignancy. Dermatol Online J. 2004;10:4.

 110.  Skinner RB Jr. Imiquimod. Dermatol Clin. 2003;21:291-300.
 111.  Cove JH, Holland KT. The effect of benzoyl peroxide on cutaneous micro-organisms in 

vitro. J Applied Bacteriol. 1983;54:379-382.

 112.  Oh CW, Myung KB. Retention hyperkeratosis of experimentally induced comedones 

in rabbits: the effects of three comedolytics. J Dermatol. 1996;23:169-180.

 113.  Hsu S, Quan LT. Topical antibacterial agents. In Wolverton SE, ed. Comprehensive 

Dermatologic Drug Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:480-481.

 114.  Mycek MJ, Gertner SB, Perper MM. Lippincott’s Illustrated Review: Pharmacology, 

New York: JB Lippincott; 1992.

 115.  Puhvel SM. Effects of treatment with erythromycin 1.5 percent topical solution or 
clindamycin phosphate 1.0 percent topical solution on P. acnes counts and free fatty 
acid levels. Cutis. 1982;31:339-42.

 116.  Rappaport M, Puhvel SM, Reisner RM. Evaluation of topical erythromycin and oral 

tetracycline in acne vulgaris. Cutis. 1982;30:122-126, 130, 132-135.

 117.  Moreau D: Physician’s Drug Handbook. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation; 

1995.

 118.  Schmadel LK, McEvoy GK. Topical metronidazole: a new therapy for rosacea. Clin 

Pharm. 1990;9:94-101.

 119.  Gamborg  Nielson  P.  Metronidazole  treatment  in  rosacea  with  1%  metronidazole 

cream: a double-blind study. Br J Dermatol. 1983;108:327-332.

 120.  Eriksson  G,  Nord  CE.  Impact  of  topical  metronidazole  on  the  skin  and  colon 

microflora in patients with rosacea. Infection. 1987;15:8-10.

 121.  Gamborg Nielsen P. Metronidazole treatment in rosacea. Int J Dermatol. 1988;27:1-5.
 122.  Ward  A,  Campoli-Richards  DM.  Mupirocin:  a  review  of  its  antibacterial  activity, 

pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic use. Drugs. 1986;32:425-444.

76

 123.  Parenti MA, Hatfield SM, Leyden JJ. Mupirocin: a topical antibiotic with a unique 

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

structure and mechanism of action. Clin Pharm. 1987;6:761-70.

 124.  Miller MA, Dascal A, Portnoy J, et al. Development of mupirocin resistance among 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus after widespread use of nasal mupirocin 
ointment. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 1996;17:811-813.

 125.  Lechevalier HA. The 25 years of neomycin. CRC Crit Rev Microbiol. 1975;3:359-97.
 126.  Winkelman W, Gratton D. Topical antibacterials. Clin Dermatol. 1989;7:156-162.
 127.  Marks JG Jr, DeLeo VA. Contact and Occupational Dermatology. St Louis: Mosby-

Year Book; 1997.

 128.  Marone P, Monzillo V, Perversi L, et al. Comparative in vitro activity of silver sul-
fadiazine, alone and in combination with cerium nitrate, against staphylococci and 
gram-negative bacteria. J Chemother. 1998;10:17-21.

 129.  Phillips RM, Rosen T. Topical antifungal agents. In: Wolverton SE, ed. Comprehensive 

Dermatologic Drug Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:497-523.

 130.  Vanden Bossche H. Mode of action of pyridine, pyrimidine and azole antifungals. In: 
Berg G, Plempel M, eds. Sterol Biosynthesis Inhibitors. Chichester, UK: Ellis Horwood; 
1988:9.

 131.  Vanden  Bossche  H,  Marichal  P.  Mode  of  action  of  anti-Candida  drugs:  focus  on 
terconazole  and  other  ergosterol  biosynthesis  inhibitors.  Am  J  Obstet  Gynecol. 
1991;165:1193-1199.

 132.  Vanden  Bossche  H.  Cytochrome  P450:  target  for  itraconazole.  Drug  Dev  Res. 

1986;8:287-298.

 133.  Vanden Bossche H, Lauwers W, Willemsens G, et al. Molecular basis for the antimy-
cotic and antibacterial activity of N-substituted imidazoles and triazoles: the inhibi-
tion of isoprenoid biosynthesis. Pestic Sci. 1984;15:188-198.

 134.  Vanden Bossche H. Biochemical targets for antifungal azole derivatives: hypothesis 
on the mode of action. In: Mcginnis MK, ed. Current Topics in Medical Mycology. 
Vol. 1. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1985.

 135.  Lester M. Ketoconazole 2% cream in the treatment of tinea pedis, tinea cruris, and 

tinea corporis. Cutis. 1995;55:181-183.

 136.  Taieb A, Legrain V, Palmier C, et al. Topical ketoconazole for infantile seborrhoeic der-

matitis. Dermatologica. 1990;181:26-32.

 137.  Carr MM, Pryce DM, Ive FA. Treatment of seborrheic dermatitis with ketoconazole. I. 
Response of seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp to topical ketoconazole. Br J Dermatol. 
1987;116:213-216.

 138.  Peter RU, Richarz-Barthauer U. Successful treatment and prophylaxis of scalp sebor-
rhoeic dermatitis and dandruff with 2% ketoconazole shampoo: results of a multi-
center, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Br J Dermatol. 1995;132:441-445.
 139.  Farr  P,  Shuster  S.  Treatment  of  seborrheic  dermatitis  with  topical  ketoconazole. 

Lancet. 1984;2:1271-1272.

 140.  McGrath J, Murphy GM. The control of seborrhoeic dermatitis and dandruff by antipi-

tyrosporal drugs. Drugs. 1991;41:178-184.

 141.  Stratigos JD, Antoniou C, Katsambas A, et al. Ketoconazole 2% cream versus hydro-
cortisone 1% cream in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis: a double-blind com-
parative study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1988;19:850-853.

 142.  Ive  FA.  An  overview  of  experience  with  ketoconazole  shampoo.  Br  J  Clin  Pract. 

1991;45:279-284.

 143.  Green CA, Farr PM, Shuster S. Treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis with ketocon-
azole. II. Response of seborrhoeic dermatitis of the face, scalp and trunk to topical 
ketoconazole. Br J Dermatol. 1987;116:217-221.

 144.  Katsambas A, Antoniou C, Frangouli E, et al. A double-blind trial of treatment of 
seborrhoeic dermatitis with 2% ketoconazole cream compared with 1% hydrocorti-
sone cream. Br J Dermatol. 1989;121:353-357.

77

REFERENCES

 145.  Cauwenbergh  G,  De  Doncker  P,  Schrooten  P,  et  al.  Treatment  of  dandruff  with  a 
2% ketoconazole scalp gel. A double-blind placebo-controlled study. Int J Dermatol. 
1986;25:541.

 146.  Danby  FW,  Maddin  WS,  Margesson  LJ,  et  al.  A  randomized,  double-blind,  pla-
cebo-controlled trial of ketoconazole 2% shampoo versus selenium sulfide 2.5% 
shampoo in the treatment of moderate to severe dandruff. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1993;29:1008-1012.

 147.  Rekacewicz I, Guillaume JC, Benkhraba F, et al. A double-blind placebo-controlled 
study  of  a  2  percent  foaming  lotion  of  ketoconazole  in  a  single  application  in  the 
treatment of pityriasis versicolor. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 1990;117:709-711.

 148.  el Euch D, Riahi I, Mokni M, et al. Ketoconazole 2% foaming gel in tinea versicolor: 

report of 60 cases. Tunis Med. 1999;77:38-40.

 149.  Caterall  MD.  Ketoconazole  therapy  for  pityriasis  versicolor  (letter).  Clin  Exp 

Dermatol. 1982;7:679.

 150.  Savin  RC,  Horwitz  SN.  Double-blind  comparison  of  2%  ketoconazole  cream  and 

placebo in the treatment of tinea versicolor. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;15:500-503.

 151.  Greer  D,  Jolly  H.  Topical  ketoconazole  treatment  of  cutaneous  candidiasis.  J  Am 

Acad Dermatol. 1988;18:748-749.

 152.  Holt RJ, Newman RL. Laboratory assessment of the antimycotic drug clotrimazole. 

J Clin Pathol. 1972;25:1089-1097.

 153.  Gupta AK, Einarson TR, Summerbell RC, et al. An overview of topical antifungal 
therapy in dermatomycoses: a North American perspective. Drugs. 1998;55:645-674.
 154.  Clayton YM, Connor BL. Clinical trial of clotrimazole in the treatment of superficial 

fungal infections. Postgrad Med J. 1974;50(Suppl 1):66-69.

 155.  Gip L. The topical therapy of pityriasis versicolor with clotrimazole. Postgrad Med J. 

1974;50(Suppl 1):59-60.

 156.  Oberste-Lehn H. Ideal properties of a modern antifungal agent: the therapy of myco-

ses with clotrimazole. Postgrad Med J. 1974;50(Suppl 1):51-53.

 157.  Fredriksson T. Topical treatment of superficial mycoses with clotrimazole. Postgrad 

Med J. 1974;50(Suppl 1):62-64.

 158.  Polemann  G.  Clinical  experience  in  the  local  treatment  of  dermatomycoses  with 

clotrimazole. Postgrad Med J. 1974;50(Suppl 1):54-56.

 159.  Zaias  N,  Battistini  F.  Superficial  mycoses.  Treatment  with  a  new,  broad-spectrum 
antifungal agent: 1% clotrimazole solution. Arch Dermatol. 1977;113:307-308.
 160.  Plempel M, Buchel KH, Bartmann K, et al. Antimycotic properties of clotrimazole. 

Postgrad Med J. 1974;50(Suppl 1):11-12.

 161.  Van Cutsem JM, Thienpont D. Miconazole, a broad-spectrum antimycotic agent 

with antibacterial activity. Chemotherapy. 1972;17:392-404.

 162.  Odds FC, Abbott AB, Pye G, et al. Improved method for estimation of azole anti-
fungal inhibitory concentrations against Candida species, based on azole/antibiotic 
interactions. J Med Vet Mycol. 1986;24:305-311.

 163.  Botter  AA.  Topical  treatment  of  nail  and  skin  infections  with  miconazole,  a  new 

broad spectrum antimycotic. Mykosen. 1971;14:187-191.

 164.  Brugmans  J,  Van  Cutsem  J,  Thienpont  D.  Treatment  of  long  term  tinea  pedis  with 

miconazole. Arch Dermatol. 1970;102:428-432.

 165.  Fulton  JE  Jr.  Miconazole  therapy  for  endemic  fungal  disease.  Arch  Dermatol. 

1975;111:596-598.

 166.  Mandy SJ, Garrott TC. Miconazole treatment for severe dermatophytoses. J Am Med 

Assoc. 1974;230:72-75.

 167.  Ongley RC. Efficacy of topical miconazole treatment of tinea pedis. Can Med Assoc 

J. 1978;119:353-354.

 168.  Heel  RC,  Brogden  RN,  Speight  TM,  et  al.  Econazole:  a  review  of  its  antifungal 

activity and therapeutic efficacy. Drugs. 1978;16:177-201.

78

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

 169.  Schaefer H, Stuttgen G. Absolute concentrations of an antimycotic agent, econazole, 

in the human skin after local application. Arzneimittelforschung. 1976;26:432-435.

 170.  Brenner M. Efficacy of twice-daily dosing of econazole nitrate 1% cream for tinea pedis. 

J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 1990;80:583-587.

 171.  Cullen  S,  Millikan  L,  Mullen  R.  Treatment  of  tinea  pedis  with  econazole  nitrate 

cream. Cutis. 1986;7:388-389.

 172.  Cullen S, Rex I, Thorne E. A comparison of a new antifungal agent, 1% econazole 
nitrate (Spectazole) cream versus 1% clotrimazole cream in the treatment of inter-
triginous candidiasis. Curr Ther Res. 1984;35:606-609.

 173.  Vicik G, Mendiones M, Qinones C, et al. A new treatment for tinea versicolor using 

econazole nitrate 1.0 percent cream once a day. Cutis. 1984;33:570-571.

 174.  Fredriksson T. Treatment of dermatomycoses with topical econazole and clotrima-

zole. Curr Ther Res. 1979;25:590-594.

 175.  Daily A, Kramer S, Rex I, et al. Econazole nitrate (Spectazole) cream, 1 percent: a 

topical agent for the treatment of tinea pedis. Cutis. 1985;35:278-279.

 176.  Medoff G, Kobayashi G. The polyenes. In: Speller DCE, ed. Antifungal chemotherapy. 

London: John Wiley & Sons; 1980.

 177.  Hazen EL, Brown R. Nystatin. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1960;89:258-266.
 178.  Fitzpatrick  J.  Topical  antifungal  agents.  In:  Freederg  I,  Eisen  A,  Wolff  K,  eds. 
Dermatology in General Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1999:2737-2741.
 179.  Bennett  JE.  Antimicrobial  agents:  antifungal  agents.  In:  Gilman  AG,  Rall  TW, 
Nies AS, eds. The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
1993:1165-1181.

 180.  Ryder N. Mode of action of allylamines. In: Berg D, Plempel M, eds. Sterol Biosynthesis 

Inhibitors. Chichester, UK: Ellis Horwood; 1988.

 181.  Ryder  N,  Dupont  M.  Inhibition  of  squalene  epoxidase  by  allylamine  antimycotic 
compounds: a comparative study of the fungal and mammalian enzymes. Biochem J. 
1985;230:765-770.

 182.  Ryder  N.  The  mechanism  of  action  of  terbinafine.  Clin  Exp  Dermatol.  1989;14: 

98-100.

 183.  Georgopoulos A, Petranyi G, Mieth H, et al. In vitro activity of naftifine, a new anti-

fungal agent. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1981;19:386-389.

 184.  Petranyi  G,  Georgopoulos  A,  Mieth  H.  In  vivo  antimycotic  activity  of  naftifine. 

Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1981;19:390-392.

 185.  Schuster I, Schaude M, Schatz F, et al. Preclinical characteristics of allylamines. In: 
Berg D, Plempel M, eds. Sterol biosynthesis inhibitors. Chichester, UK: Ellis Horwood; 
1988:449-470.

 186.  Grassberger M, Mieth M, Petranyi G, et al. Aspects of antimycotic research exempli-

fied by the allylamines. Triangle. 1986;25:711-784.

 187.  Jones TC. Treatment of dermatomycoses with topically applied allylamines: naftifine 

and terbinafine. J Dermatol Treat. 1990;1(Suppl 2):29-32.

 188.  Faruqi A, Khan K, Qazi A, et al. In vitro antifungal activity of naftifine (SN 105-843 

GEL) against dermatophytes. J Pakistani Med Assoc. 1981;31:279-282.

 189.  Millikan LE, Galen WK, Gewirtzman GB, et al. Naftifine cream 1% versus econazole 
cream 1% in the treatment of tinea cruris and tinea corporis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1988;18:52-56.

 190.  Kagawa  S.  Comparative  clinical  trial  of  naftifine  and  clotrimazole  in  tinea  pedis, 

tinea cruris, and tinea corporis. Mykosen. 1987;30(Suppl 1):63-69.

 191.  Haas PJ, Tronnier H, Weidinger G. Naftifine in foot mycoses: double-blind therapeu-

tic comparison with clotrimazole. Mykosen. 1985;28:33-40.

 192.  Smith EB, Wiss K, Hanifin JM, et al. Comparison of once- and twice-daily naftifine 
cream regimens with twice-daily clotrimazole in the treatment of tinea pedis. J Am 
Acad Dermatol. 1990;22:1116-1117.

79

REFERENCES

 193.  Smith EB, Brenerman DL, Griffith RF, et al. Double-blind comparison of naftifine 
cream and clotrimazole/betamethasone dipropionate cream in the treatment of tinea 
pedis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1992;26:125-127.

 194.  Zaun H, Luszpinski P. Multicenter double-blind contralateral comparison of naftifine 
and clotrimazole cream in patients with dermatophytosis and candidiasis. Z Hautkr. 
1984;59:1209-1217.

 195.  Petranyi G, Meingassner JG, Mieth H. Antifungal activity of the allylamine deriva-

tive terbinafine in vitro. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1987;31:1365-1368.

 196.  Hill S, Thomas R, Smith SG, et al. An investigation of the pharmacokinetics of topi-

cal terbinafine (Lamisil) 1% cream. Br J Dermatol. 1992;127:396-400.

 197.  Stutz A. Allylamine derivatives: a new class of active substances in antifungal chemo-

therapy. Angew Chemie (International Edition: England). 1987;26:320-328.

 198.  Stutz A. Synthesis and structure-activity correlations within allylamine antimycotics. 

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1988;544:46-62.

 199.  Clayton YM. In vitro activity of terbinafine. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1989;14:101-103.
 200.  Kagawa S. Clinical efficacy of terbinafine in 629 Japanese patients with dermatomyco-

sis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1989;14:116-119.

 201.  Villars V, Jones TC. Clinical efficacy and tolerability of terbinafine (Lamisil): a new topi-
cal and systemic fungicidal drug for treatment of dermatomycoses. Clin Exp Dermatol. 
1989;14:124-127.

 202.  Nussenbaumer P, Dorfsatter G, Grassberger M, et al. Synthesis and structure-activity 
relationships of phenyl-substituted benzylamine antimycotics: a novel benzylamine 
antifungal agent for systemic treatment. J Med Chem. 1993;36:2115-2120.

 203.  Maeda T, Takase M, Ishibashi A, et al. Synthesis and antifungal activity of butenafine 
hydrochloride  (KP-363),  a  new  benzylamine  antifungal  agent.  Yakugaku  Zasshi. 
1991;111:126-137.

 204.  Arika  T,  Hase  T,  Yokoo  M.  Anti-Trichophyton  mentagrophytes  activity  and  percu-
taneous  permeation  of  butenafine  in  guinea  pigs.  Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother. 
1993;37:363-365.

 205.  Arika T, Yokoo M, Hase T, et al. Effects of butenafine hydrochloride, a new ben-
zylamine derivative, on experimental dermatophytosis in guinea pigs. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 1990;34:2250-2253.

 206.  Tschen E, Elewski B, Gorsulowsky DC, et al. Treatment of interdigital tinea pedis with a 
4-week once-daily regimen of butenafine hydrochloride 1% cream. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1997;36:S9-S14.

 207.  Greer D, Weiss J, Rodriguez D, et al. Treatment of tinea corporis with topical once-
daily  butenafine  HCl  1%:  a  double-blind,  placebo  controlled  trial.  Presentation  at 
55th Annual American Academy of Dermatology Meeting, 1997.

 208.  Lesher  J,  Babel  D,  Stewart  D,  et  al.  Butenafine  HCl  1%  cream  in  the  treatment  of 
tinea  cruris:  A  multicenter,  vehicle  controlled,  double-blind  trial.  Presentation  at 
55th Annual American Academy of Dermatology Meeting, 1997.

 209.  Lesher JL Jr, Babel DE, Stewart DM, et al. Butenafine 1% cream in the treatment of 
tinea cruris: a multicenter, vehicle-controlled, double-blind trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1997;36:S20-S24.

 210.  Greer DL, Weiss J, Rodriguez DA, et al. A randomized trial to assess once-daily topical 
treatment of tinea corporis with butenafine, a new antifungal agent. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
1997;37:231-225.

 211.  Savin R, De Villez RL, Elewski B, et al. One-week therapy with twice-daily butenafine 
1% cream versus vehicle in the treatment of tinea pedis: a multicenter, double-blind 
trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36:S15-S19.

 212.  Reyes BA, Beutner KR, Cukllen SI, et al. Butenafine, a fungicidal benzylamine deriv-
ative, used once daily for the treatment of interdigital tinea pedis.  Int J Dermatol. 
1998;37:450-453.

80

TOPICAL AGENTS FOR SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

 213.  Savin R, Lucky A, Brennan B. One-week treatment of tinea pedis with butenafine 
HCl 1%: a multi-center, double-blind, randomized trial. Presentation at 55th Annual 
American Academy of Dermatology Meeting, 1997.

 214.  Biafine  PDR  drug  information;  as  found  on  1-8-12  on  www.pdr.net/drugpages/

concisemonograph.

 215.  Coulomb  B,  Friteau  L,  Dubertret  L.  Biafine  applied  on  human  epidermal  wounds 
is chemotactic for macrophages and increases the IL-1/IL-6 ratio. Skin Pharmacol. 
1997;10:281-287.

 216.  Brown GL, Nanney LB, Griffen J, et al. Enhancement of wound healing by topical 

treatment with epidermal growth factor. N Engl J Med. 1989;321:76-79.

ZEIN OBAGI 
SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

CHAPTER 

4

EXISTING SKIN CLASSIFICATION 
SYSTEMS

The  best-known  existing  skin  classification  systems  are  the  Fitzpatrick1 
system  and  the  Glogau2  system.  The  Fitzpatrick  skin  typing  system  was 
developed by Thomas B. Fitzpatrick in 1975, and, though subjective, it has 
had  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  value.  This  classification  system  denotes 
six different skin types, differentiated by skin color and typical reaction 
to sun exposure. The skin types are on a continuum and range from very 
fair (type I) to very dark (type VI), also depending on whether the patient 
burns or tans with sun exposure (Table 4.1). A major disadvantage of the 
Fitzpatrick system is that it fails to accurately predict a patient’s response 
to  topical  treatments  as  well  as  the  ideal  depth  for  chemical  peeling  or 
other resurfacing procedures.

Another  skin  classification  system,  developed  by  Richard  G.  Glogau,2 
groups skin into four types, classifying patients according to their degree of 
photodamage, wrinkling, and scarring. This scale has limitations similar to 
those of the Fitzpatrick scale in that it does not help select the ideal procedure 
for  each  group  or  predict  response  or  anticipated  skin  reactions  to  topical 
treatments.

DEVELOPMENT OF ZEIN OBAGI SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

Recognizing the limitations of existing skin classification systems, Zein Obagi 
Skin Classification System more specifically addresses variables in skin types 
and  their  expected  responses  to  various  treatments.  This  new  system  came 
about after years of observing the factors that consistently influenced patient 
outcomes during treatment for a variety of skin problems. First, patients with 
the same skin condition or problem who were treated with the same treatment 
demonstrated a variable response to the treatment. To clarify, some patients 
improved greatly, some improved less, and others either did not improve at 

82

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Table 4.1  Fitzpatrick Skin Classification

Skin Type  Color 

Light, pale white 

White fair 

Reaction to Sun Exposure

Always burns, never tans

Usually burns, only occasionally tans

Medium, white to light brown 

Sometimes burns, gradually tans

Olive, moderate brown 

Rarely burns, tans easily

Brown, dark brown 

Very rarely burns, tans very easily

Black, very dark brown to black  Never burns, tans very easily

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 

Box 4.1

Applications of the Zein Obagi Skin Classification System

■■ Select appropriate procedures for specific skin types.
■■ Determine the safe procedure depth for specific skin types.
■■ Determine the safety of repeating procedures.
■■ Determine the approach and duration of treatment to prepare skin 

before a procedure and to manage skin after the procedure.

■■ Control factors that influence procedure results, exacerbate certain 
skin  conditions,  and  predispose  certain  skin  types  to  developing 
complications. Select the appropriate topical agents.

all or actually appeared worse. Second, despite the same standards, a proce-
dure sometimes led to a very good outcome in some patients but produced 
unwanted  reactions  or  complications  in  others.  Third,  certain  procedures 
were associated with  undesirable  effects in  some patients but not  in others. 
Specifically, patients with white skin often had good results, whereas patients 
with black or other darker skin types did not. Furthermore, some patients had 
poor outcomes following CO2 fractional laser resurfacing yet had good results 
following a chemical peel that reached the same depth. Thus, the two existing 
skin classification systems described previously were of limited value because 
they  address  only  a  few  variables  and  do  not  predict  the  skin’s  response  to 
various  treatments.  Box  4.1  shows  the  applications  of  the  Zein  Obagi  Skin 
Classification  System,  and  Table  4.2  shows  the  attributes  considered  in  the 
Zein Obagi Skin Classification System.

Table 4.2  Attributes Considered in Zein Obagi Skin Classification System

Attribute 

Color 

Thickness 

Oiliness 

Elasticity 

Fragility 

Classification

Original, deviated, complex

Thick, medium, thin

Oily, normal, dry

Lax or firm

Proper or improper healing

CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN TYPE 
ACCORDING TO COLOR

83

CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN 
TYPE ACCORDING TO COLOR

CONSIDERATION OF ETHNICITY IN SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS

The Fitzpatrick system, although used widely, has major shortcomings. It describes 
colors (shades) of skin on a scale of I to VI, but does not take into account the 
ethnic purity or mixed nature of the skin color or how such color affects skin 
response to treatment or a procedure in terms of rate of healing, reactions, and 
ultimate outcome. If the Fitzpatrick skin classification considered  ethnic purity 
of skin, it should include original white as types I or II, original black as type VI, 
and original Asian as types IV or V. In short, the Fitzpatrick system is inadequate 
in describing skin color, especially skin of patients of mixed ethnicity.

The color categories of original, deviated, and complex were developed to 
improve on the Fitzpatrick system and other systems of classifying skin color. 
Patients  from  India,  Pakistan,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  and  North  and  South 
America may have skin of mixed ethnicity (from several different or unknown 
origins) and are classified as having deviated skin. The skin of these patients 
can behave as black, Asian, or even white skin in unpredictable ways. Deviated 
skin types are more difficult to treat because they have a greater tendency to 
develop  hypopigmentation,  depigmentation,  and  severe  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation (PIH). They are also more likely to have a prolonged recov-
ery time after procedures.

Patients with the complex skin type have an uneven, variable skin color tone 
that is exacerbated by sun exposure. Examples include persons of indigenous 
(original) South American Indian and American Indian origin; those from India, 
Pakistan, and surrounding regions; and others of mixed racial origin. Complex 
skin could be considered as severely deviated. These patients also require a spe-
cific approach for safe and successful treatment. Recognizing whether the skin 
type is original, deviated, or complex facilitates individual treatment for each 
patient  and  assures  the  best  outcome  in  Skin  Health  Restoration,  procedure 
selection, and recommended procedure depth (Box 4.2).

SKIN COLOR STABILITY AND TIME TO NORMAL 
COLOR RECOVERY

Skin  color  stability  refers  to  the  skin’s  ability  to  quickly  regain  its  natural 
color  following  various  treatments  or  procedures.  It  is  a  major  factor  in 

Box 4.2

The Role of Mixed Ethnicity

Mixed  ethnicity  plays  a  major  role  in  skin  response  to  disease  treat-
ment, procedures, and injury.

84

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Box 4.3

Importance of Skin Color Stability

■■ Skin  color  stability  refers  to  the  skin’s  ability  to  regain  its  natural 

color quickly after a treatment or procedure.

■■ Stability  of  skin  color  is  a  major  factor  in  classifying  skin  into  the 

three Zein Obagi Skin Classification System color groups.

classifying skin into the three Zein Obagi color groups (Box 4.3). Skin in the 
original  color  category  shows  a  fast  and  favorable  response  to  Skin  Health 
Restoration treatments that are aimed at correcting a pigmentation problem; 
this skin type also typically demonstrates a good outcome after a chemical 
peel  or  laser  treatment  that  reaches  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  (IRD) 
or the upper reticular dermis (URD). Conversely, skin in the deviated color 
category requires a longer preprocedure skin conditioning period and a more 
aggressive  topical  approach  before  and  after  a  procedure.  Also,  those  with 
deviated skin may show permanent changes in color tone after a procedure 
reaching the IRD or URD.

The most unstable skin type is the complex color category. Like skin in the 
deviated category, that in the complex category requires a more meticulous 
approach to treatment, a longer preprocedure conditioning period, and a lon-
ger post-procedure management period. The features of Zein Obagi skin color 
types are shown in Table 4.3.

Table 4.3  Features of Skin Color Types

Skin Color Category  Genetics 

Features

Original  

Not mixed racially or ethnically   Stable

Color returns quickly after treatment

PIH is rare and, when it occurs, is short lived

Requires one KMC (6 weeks) of conditioning before and after 
procedures

Deeper procedures (to the level of the URD) are typically safe

Deviated 

Racially or ethnically mixed 

Weakly stable

PIH is darker, more pronounced, and lasts longer

Requires one to three KMCs (12 weeks) of conditioning before 
and after procedures

Deeper procedures (to the level of the URD) are possible but must 
be performed with caution

Complex 

Racially or ethnically mixed 

Extremely unstable

PIH is stronger and responds slowly to treatment

Requires two to three KMCs (12 to 18 weeks) of conditioning both 
before and after procedures

Deeper procedures (to the level of the URD) are risky; results are 
unpredictable

KMC = keratinocyte maturation cycle; PIH = postinflammatory hyperpigmentation; URD = upper reticular dermis.

85

CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN 
TYPE ACCORDING TO COLOR

ORIGINAL SKIN COLOR TYPE

The original skin color type includes light white, dark black, and dark Asian 
(yellow)  and  is  found  in  persons  who  are  not  racially  or  ethnically  mixed 
(Figure 4.1, Figure 4.2, and Figure 4.3). This type is stable after most rejuve-
nation procedures, with the exception of certain deep procedures (discussed 
later).  Melanocytes  resume  their  normal  function  after  healing  has  been 
completed,  and  skin  returns  to  its  original  color.  There  may  be  short-lived 
PIH, but it responds rapidly to topical corrective treatment. However, skin of 
patients with black or dark Asian original color type undergoing deep proce-
dures (below the level of the IRD, such as phenol peels, a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel to the URD, CO2 laser resurfacing, and dermabrasion) does not return 
to normal after such procedures. Instead, after these procedures, the skin of 
these patients can undergo variable degrees of melanocytic destruction with 

Figure  4.1  Patient  with  original  white  skin 
type (light).

Figure  4.2  Patient  with  original  Asian  skin 
type (dark).

86

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Figure  4.3  Patient  with  original  black  skin 
type (dark).

subsequent textural changes; together, these can result in a lighter color tone. 
It  is  important  to  warn  patients  with  dark  skin  about  these  potential  post-
procedure color and textural changes because some may not welcome these 
changes.  Table  4.4  shows  the  original  color  types  and  the  corresponding 
Fitzpatrick types.

Regardless of a patient’s color group classification, skin conditioning before 
and after a procedure must be performed in a specific manner that is appro-
priate  for  the  skin’s  category.  Specifically,  the  light  white  group  needs  one 
keratinocyte maturation cycle (KMC) of topical preprocedure skin condition-
ing (6 weeks), whereas the dark-skinned groups may need two to three cycles 
(12 to 18 weeks). After the procedure, all color groups need topical treatment 
for at least one KMC (6 weeks) to stabilize skin color; darker skin groups may 
need two to three cycles (12 to 18 weeks).

ZEIN OBAGI DEVIATED SKIN COLOR TYPE

The  deviated  skin  type  is  found  in  persons  who  are  racially  or  ethnically 
mixed.  This  skin  color  is  unstable  and  more  sensitive  to  the  depth  reached 

Table 4.4  Zein Obagi Original Skin Color Types with Corresponding Fitzpatrick Skin Types

Zein Obagi Original Color Type  Fitzpatrick Type  Description

Very light white, normal white

I, II, III

Dark white

Dark Asian 

Dark black 

IV 

V 

VI 

Light color; burns and does not tan; may have some light freckles. 
Chronically sun-exposed areas show telangiectasias, redness, actinic 
keratoses, and other forms of photodamage

Dark white (brunettes) same as above and higher tendency to 
pigmentation problems

Brownish color; mildly darker in sun-exposed areas

Very dark; sun-exposed and nonexposed areas mostly similar in color

87

CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN 
TYPE ACCORDING TO COLOR

Deviated

Original

Asian

Type III = Light

Type IV-V = Medium

Type VI = Dark

Black

Type III = Light

Type IV = Medium

Type VI = Dark

White

Type IV = Dark

Type III = Medium

Type  II = Light

Darker

Darker

Darker

Figure 4.4  The spectrum of original to deviated Zein Obagi skin types in Asian, black, 
and white skin. In Asian skin, dark yellow is the original type, and the skin becomes 
more deviated as it becomes lighter. In black skin, dark black is the original type, and the 
skin becomes more deviated as it becomes lighter. In white skin, the original is light, and 
the skin becomes more deviated as it becomes darker.

by procedures and takes longer than skin in the original category to return 
to its natural color after a procedure. Although procedures that reach depths 
below the IRD (phenol peels, deep trichloroacetic acid [TCA] peels, deep CO2 
laser resurfacing, and dermabrasion) are likely to produce variable degrees of 
melanocyte reduction or destruction and a lighter color tone in all skin types, 
such deep procedures are even more likely to produce hypopigmentation in 
patients with deviated skin. Skin darkening in the form of PIH is also more 
likely,  and  it  may  persist  longer  and  require  more  aggressive  bleaching  and 
blending. Figure 4.4 shows the spectrum of original to deviated skin types and 
the corresponding Fitzpatrick types.

Patients  with  skin  in  the  deviated  color  category  need  more  aggressive 
 preprocedure  topical  skin  conditioning  and  should  have  a  procedure  only 
after topical skin preparation for one to three KMCs (6 to 18 weeks) (Box 4.4). 
The physician should not wait for the appearance of PIH before starting post-
procedure treatment. Bleaching and blending in moderately aggressive form 
should begin immediately after re-epithelialization. Table 4.5 shows the devi-
ated color types and the corresponding Fitzpatrick types.

COMPLEX SKIN COLOR TYPES

Skin in the complex color category is variable, dark in some areas and lighter 
in others, and is extremely unstable and photosensitive (Figure 4.11). This kind 

Box 4.4

Deviated Color Types

■■ Patients with skin in the deviated color categories need more aggres-
sive topical preprocedure conditioning and should have a procedure 
only after color has been controlled and tolerance has been achieved.
■■ This is usually after one to three keratinocyte maturation cycles (6 to 

18 weeks).

88

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Table 4.5  Zein Obagi Deviated Color Types and Corresponding Fitzpatrick Types

Zein Obagi Deviated 
Color Type 

Corresponding Fitzpatrick 
Type 

Stability and Degree of 
PIH

Normal white 

Dark white 

Light Asian 

Medium Asian 

Light and medium Black 

II, III 

IV 

II, III 

III, IV 

III, IV 

PIH = postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Unstable, mild PIH

Unstable, strong PIH

Unstable, very strong PIH

Unstable, very strong PIH

Figure 4.5  Patient with deviated white skin 
type (light white).

Figure 4.6  Patient with deviated white skin 
type (dark white).

Figure 4.7  Patient with deviated Asian skin 
type (light).

89

CLASSIFICATION OF SKIN 
TYPE ACCORDING TO COLOR

Figure 4.8  Patient with deviated Asian skin 
type (medium).

Figure  4.9  Patient  with  deviated  black  skin 
type (light).

90

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Figure 4.10  Patient with deviated black skin 
type (medium).

of skin naturally has an uneven, variable skin color tone that is exacerbated by 
sun exposure. Examples include persons of indigenous South American Indian 
and  American  Indian  origin;  those  from  India,  Pakistan,  and  surrounding 
regions; and others of mixed racial origin. Most people in the complex cat-
egory are considered to have Fitzpatrick skin type IV; however, occasionally 
they can also have Fitzpatrick skin type V or VI. Some patients have a combi-
nation of all three Fitzpatrick types.

Patients with skin in the complex category need two to three KMCs (12 to 
18 weeks) of aggressive topical skin conditioning (see Chapter 2) to stabilize 
color before a procedure. Despite adhering to a post-procedure conditioning 
program, these patients typically have severe and long-lasting PIH following 
procedures. Hypopigmentation can also occur. Thus, procedures in patients 
with complex skin should not reach deeper than the level of the IRD. These 

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.11 

 (a, b) Two patients with complex skin type (India).

91

SKIN TYPE CLASSIFICATION 
ACCORDING TO THICKNESS

Table 4.6  Number of Keratinocyte Maturation Cycles for Skin Health Restoration 
in Skin of Various Colors

Skin Color 

Original  

Deviated white 

Deviated Asian, black 

Complex 

Skin Conditioning 

Number of KMCs (before and 
after the Procedure)*

Aggressive

Moderate

Aggressive

Aggressive 

Aggressive 

1

1-2

1-2

2

2-3

* Patients of all skin colors must have a minimum of one keratinocyte maturation cycle 
(KMC) before any procedure.

patients should also be told in advance that it will take some time for their 
skin to return to normal after a procedure. The complex skin type has no spe-
cific category in Fitzgerald classification.

The number of KMCs needed for Skin Health Restoration in skin of various 

colors is shown in Table 4.6.

SKIN TYPE CLASSIFICATION 
ACCORDING TO THICKNESS

Skin thickness is determined genetically and can be categorized into one of 
the following types: thin, medium, thick, and hamartomatous (Figure 4.12, 
Figure 4.13, Figure 4.14, and Figure 4.15). (Hamartomatous skin is described 
later  in  this  chapter.)  Distinctions  between  each  type  are  not  clear-cut  and 
must be made by clinical examination of firmness, tightness, bulkiness, and 

Figure 4.12  Patient with thin skin.

92

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Figure  4.13  Patient  with  medium-thickness 
skin.

Figure 4.14  Patient with thick skin.

Figure  4.15  Patient  with  very  thick  skin 
(hamartomatous).  Notice  enlarged  pores, 
dominant static lines.

93

SKIN TYPE CLASSIFICATION 
ACCORDING TO THICKNESS

the ease with which the skin can be folded by the action of underlying muscles 
during facial expressions. Not only does overall skin thickness vary from per-
son to person, but it also varies according to anatomical location. Specifically, 
the epidermis and papillary dermis (PD) are of approximately the same thick-
ness in all anatomical locations; the stratum corneum is thickest in the palms 
and soles, and the dermis (papillary and reticular) is thickest on the back and 
thinnest on the eyelids. In general, in each skin thickness type, cheeks have 
thicker skin relative to the rest of the face, forehead skin thickness varies, and 
skin along the jawline is thinner than that on the cheeks. Efforts have been 
made  to  standardize  the  measurement  of  skin  thickness  through  biopsies, 
ultrasound, and other methods, but results have been inconclusive, and stan-
dards are yet to be created.

There are also racial differences in skin thickness. Black patients generally 
have predominantly thick or medium-thick skin, whereas Asian patients typi-
cally are more likely to have medium-thick skin. The thickness of white skin 
can vary widely, with some patients having fairly thick skin and others, such 
as the very fair, having very thin skin. Sex also plays a role in skin thickness; 
men have thicker skin than women in all racial groups.

DETERMINATION OF SKIN THICKNESS BY 
PINCHING TECHNIQUE

In addition to using ultrasound devices and histological analysis, skin thick-
ness can be determined easily by the cheek-pinching technique. By grabbing 
the cheek between the index finger and thumb, the size of the fold between the 
fingers reveals skin thickness. The skin is considered thin if the fold is 1 cm 
or less, medium-thick if the fold is 1½ cm, and thick if the fold is more than 
2 cm (Table 4.7). Of note: the determination of skin thickness is not precise 
because it provides a range and a sufficient idea of thickness. Facial expression 
lines can also indicate skin thickness because skin appearance, aggregation, 
and extension of lines can be seen. Figure 4.16 shows a patient with original 
white skin color undergoing the pinching technique demonstrating variations 
in skin thickness on her cheeks, jawline, and eyelids.

EXPRESSION LINES AND FOLDS AND 
SKIN THICKNESS

Expression lines (dynamic lines) are folds in the skin seen when the under-
lying  muscles  contract  while  furrowing  the  eyebrows  (Figure  4.17);  during 

Table 4.7 

Identification of Skin Thickness by Pinching

Category 

Very thin  

Thin  

Medium  

Thick 

Thickness of Fold

<½ cm

<1 cm to 1½ cm

1½ cm

>1½ to >2 cm

94

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4.16  Patient with original white, medium-thickness, oily skin. (a) Each face has 
variable thickness based on anatomical areas. The thickest skin on a face is the cheek. (b) 
The skin on the jawline is of medium thickness for that particular skin. (c) The thinnest 
part of skin is on the eyelids.

elevation of the eyebrows (Figure 4.18); while smiling (Figure 4.19); or while 
pursing  the  lips  (Figure  4.20).  They  are  more  numerous  and  prominent  in 
persons with overall thin skin, as well as within thinner areas of skin in the 
same  individual,  such  as  the  periorbital  and  perioral  areas,  forehead,  and 
cheeks.  Skin  thickness  can  be  determined  by  evaluating  the  extent  of  the 

(a)

Thin skin

(b)

Medium thick skin

(c)

Thick skin

Frown lines: Furrowing of brows

Width: 2 to 4 mm
Number: >4 (numerous)
Usually extend  to adjacent skin
(vertical, horizontal, and oblique) 

Width: 5 to 10 mm
Number: 3–4
Minimal extension (vertical) to
adjacent skin

Width: 10 mm
Number: 2–3
No extension (vertical) to
adjacent skin

Figure 4.17  Effect of skin thickness on expression lines of patients while furrowing the 
brows: (a) thin; (b) medium; (c) thick.

(a)

Thin skin

(b)

Medium thick skin

(c)

Thick skin

Expression lines: Elevating the eyebrows

95

SKIN TYPE CLASSIFICATION 
ACCORDING TO THICKNESS

Width: 2 to 5 mm
Number: 5–20
Extension to temples
Trace appearance when not
lifting eyebrows 

Width: 5 to 10 mm
Number: 2–5
Minimal extension to temples
Not apparent when not
lifting eyebrows

Width: 10 mm
Number: 1–3
No extension to temples
Not apparent when not
lifting eyebrows

Figure 4.18  Effect of skin thickness on expression lines of patients while raising the 
eyebrows through contraction of the frontalis muscle (horizontal forehead lines): (a) thin 
skin; (b) medium-thickness skin; (c) thick skin.

(a)

Thin skin

(b)

Medium thick skin

(c)

Thick skin

Periocular lines: Smiling

Width: 2 to 3 mm
Number: 8–20
Extension to temples and cheeks
Apparent even when not smiling

Width: 5 mm
Number: 3–5
Minimal extension to temples
and cheeks
Trace appearance when not
smiling

Width: 5 to 10 mm
Number: 2–3
No extension to temples and
cheeks
Not apparent when not smiling

Figure  4.19  Effect  of  skin  thickness  on  expression  lines  in  the  periocular  areas  of 
patients while smiling (crow’s feet): (a) thin skin; (b) medium-thickness skin; (c) thick 
skin.

(a)

Thin skin

(b)

Medium thick skin

(c)

Thick skin

Perioral rhytides (smoker’s vertical lip lines): Pursing

Width: 2 to 4 mm
Number: 6–10 upper lip
   4–10 lower lip

Apparent when lips are not pursed

Width: 5 mm
Number: 2–4 upper lip
   1–2 lower lip
Faint appearance when lips are
not pursed

Width: 10 mm
Number: 1–4 upper lip
   1–2 lower lip
No appearance when lips are
not pursed

Figure  4.20  Effect  of  skin  thickness  on  vertical  perioral  rhytides  while  pursing  the 
lips, which is commonly seen in long-term cigarette smokers: (a) thin skin; (b) medium-
thickness skin; (c) thick skin.

folds made with facial expressions. The physician should ask the patient to 
contract a muscle or muscle group to the extreme by frowning, smiling, lift-
ing  the  eyebrows,  pursing  the  lips  as  if  whistling,  and  so  forth. The  physi-
cian should then observe the following three manifestations: the width of the 
“mountains,” assessed by the depth of the “valleys,” the degree of fold length 

 
 
 
 
 
 
96

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

extension,  and  the  appearance  of  static  rhytides  in  these  same  facial  areas 
(which are present when the patient is not making any active facial expres-
sions and the muscles are relaxed).

Expression folds (the mountains), otherwise known as dynamic rhytides, 
are  a  result  of  underlying  muscle  contraction.  In  thin  skin,  these  folds  are 
fine and numerous. The valleys, which are visible even when the patient is not 
contracting facial muscles to make an expression, are typically shallow. These 
folds extend to skin beyond the underlying anatomical demarcations of the 
individual muscles. They can be made to appear without extreme muscle con-
traction (i.e., with only mild expression) and are typically present to a lesser 
degree than when the muscles are relaxed.

In skin of medium thickness, expression folds are wider than in thin skin 
with deeper valleys. The folds typically extend just slightly beyond the underly-
ing muscle demarcations to the surrounding skin. Some degree of facial expres-
sion (through muscular contraction) is necessary to make the folds appear; they 
are not apparent when the muscles are relaxed.

Thick skin has fewer folds, and they are wider than in thinner skin types, 
typically  not  extending  to  the  surrounding  skin  beyond  the  borders  of  the 
underlying muscles. The valleys in thick skin are deeper than those in thinner 
skin  types.  Effort,  in  the  form  of  dynamic  facial  movements,  is  required  to 
make folds in thick skin appear; folds are not apparent when the underlying 
muscles are relaxed.

Regardless of skin thickness, long-standing static rhytides (those that pres-
ent even without facial expression) may be a result of years of dynamic rhyt-
ides from facial expressions. In summary, skin is considered thin if a pinch 
test yields a fold less than or equal to 1 cm in thickness, medium if it is approx-
imately 1½ cm in thickness, and thick if it is greater than 2 cm in thickness.

Skin thickness plays a significant role in Skin Health Restoration because 
it influences the necessary strength and duration of preprocedure and post-
procedure skin conditioning, procedure selection (including target treatment 
depth),  predictability  of  procedure  results,  potential  for  treatment-related 
complications, and suitability for repeating a specific procedure. Skin thick-
ness also allows the practitioner to predict which wrinkles will disappear and 
which will only be minimized with specific procedures (chemical peels and 
laser treatments) (Box 4.5).

Box 4.5

Factors Influenced by Skin Thickness

■■ Strength and duration of skin conditioning
■■ Selection of a procedure and its depth of penetration
■■ Predictability of post-procedure outcome
■■ Wrinkle minimization versus eradication
■■ Suitability for a repeat procedure
■■ Propensity  for  periprocedural  complications  (permanent  color 

changes and scarring)

Table 4.8  Characteristics of Thin Skin

Characteristic 

Firmness 

Translucence 

Features

Minimal; the dermis is thin because of a lower collagen content

Translucent; underlying blood vessels are easily visible

Adnexal structures 

Few

Aging  

Dynamic rhytides 

Wrinkles appear early; jowling and laxity appear later and can be quite prominent

Numerous on forehead and periocular areas; periocular areas and perioral areas develop 
numerous shallow folds

Dryness/oiliness 

Tendency toward dryness

Procedural safety margin 

Narrow for all invasive resurfacing procedures (because of fewer adnexal structures)

Post-procedure complications 

Higher rate of complications (hypopigmentation, depigmentation, hypertrophic 
reactions, keloids) than with thicker skin types

Rate of healing 

Bruising 

Slow after procedures below the IRD

Easily bruised after injectables (fillers, neurotoxins)

Response to nonsurgical tightening 
procedures 

Optimal; one procedure may be sufficient (e.g., a ZO Controlled Depth Peel reaching the 
PD or IRD)

Maximum procedure depth 

PD to the IRD

IRD = immediate reticular dermis; PD = papillary dermis.

Defining characteristics of thin, medium, and thick skin are further delin-

eated in Table 4.8, Table 4.9, and Table 4.10.

Atrophic skin, a subtype of thin skin, results from certain diseases, chronic 
application  of  topical  corticosteroids,  radiation  treatment,  and  malnutrition 
(including in those patients with anorexia nervosa). This skin type shows mini-
mal firmness and a very thin dermis (like cigarette paper) due to a sparse content 

Table 4.9  Characteristics of Medium-Thickness Skin

Characteristic 

Firmness 

Translucence 

Features

Good; sufficiently thick (more collagen within the dermis than thin skin has)

None

Adnexal structures 

Adequate or average number

Aging  

Dynamic rhytides 

Dryness/oiliness 

Wrinkles in areas of thin skin (e.g., periorbital sites); laxity and moderately deep folds in 
areas of thicker skin (e.g., the forehead)

Less numerous; appear as thicker and deeper folds

Tendency toward oiliness

Procedural safety margin  

Good safety margin for invasive or ablative resurfacing

Post-procedure complications 

Less frequent (hypopigmentation, depigmentation, hypertrophic reactions, keloids)

Rate of healing 

Bruising 

Response to nonsurgical tightening 
procedures 

Good even after procedures below the level of the IRD

Less bruising after injectables (fillers, neurotoxins) than in patients with thin skin

Good; optimal after a ZO Controlled Depth Peel down to the level of the PD or IRD

Safe procedure depth 

PD to IRD; focal URD in the designed peel

IRD = immediate reticular dermis; PD = papillary dermis; URD = upper reticular dermis.

97

Table 4.10  Characteristics of Thick Skin

Characteristic 

Firmness 

Translucence 

Features

Strong; thick dermis because of abundant amount of collagen

None

Adnexal structures 

Rich, numerous

Aging  

Dynamic rhytides 

Dryness/oiliness 

Mainly laxity (jowling and deeper folds); wrinkles appear later and are less deep

Few, but with thicker folds and deeper valleys

Tendency toward oiliness

Procedural safety margin  

Excellent safety margin for resurfacing or ablative procedures

Post-procedure complications 

Infrequent (hypopigmentation, depigmentation, hypertrophic reactions, keloids)

Rate of healing 

Bruising 

Good even after procedures that penetrate below the IRD

Rare after injectables (fillers, neurotoxins)

Response to nonsurgical tightening 
procedures 

Weak response to nonsurgical tightening procedures (e.g., ZO Controlled Depth Peel) 
reaching the level of the IRD

Safe procedure depth 

PD, IRD, URD

IRD = immediate reticular dermis; PD = papillary dermis; URD = upper reticular dermis.

of  collagen  fibers.  It  is  translucent  with  visible  underlying  blood  vessels,  has 
minimal adnexal structures, and is highly sensitive and dry. Aging changes in 
thin skin are mainly skin mummification, with no wrinkles or laxity. This skin 
type is not suitable for any procedures other than a mild exfoliation because 
post-procedural  complications,  including  severe  atrophic  and  hypertrophic 
scarring and permanent dyschromia, can follow more invasive procedures.

Hamartomatous (bulldog or lion face) skin is abnormally thick with many 
deep folds, greatly enlarged pores, and lumps and bumps from sebaceous gland 
hyperplasia and adenomas. Certain areas may be so thick that they cannot be 
folded, and thickness cannot be assessed. Aging changes are mostly seen as 
skin sagging, jowling, and deep folds. Rhytides may not be present. Because of 
the great degree of firmness and the low degree of elasticity in hamartomatous 
skin, nonsurgical tightening procedures are not suitable. However, procedures 
that improve texture, such as fully ablative or CO2 fractional laser resurfac-
ing and dermabrasion, are ideal treatment options. Additionally, depending 
on the severity of the hamartomatous skin texture, photodynamic therapy, a 
course of systemic isotretinoin, or both, may be necessary to shrink the seba-
ceous glands to produce an optimal cosmetic result.

Table  4.11  shows  the  significant  effect  of  skin  thickness  on  Skin  Health 
Restoration objectives and their outcomes. Box 4.6 shows factors to consider 
in selecting a procedure.

A COMBINED PROCEDURE APPROACH TO 
SKIN THICKNESS

Skin can be rejuvenated by a variety of distinct procedures performed concur-
rently to reduce  injury  and yield  synergistic  beneficial effects. For example, 
the ultimate result after the combination of relaxing dynamic rhytides with 
neurotoxin injections, restoring volume deficits through filler injections, and 

98

Table 4.11  Skin Health Restoration Objectives in Relation to Skin Thickness

Objectives  

Thin Skin 

Restore a strong barrier function 

Eliminate sensitivity

Medium and Thick Skin

Same as in thin skin

Improve natural or inherent hydration

Control sebum production 

Only if skin is oily 

When skin is normal or oily

Stimulate 

Increase epidermal cell turnover

Improve epidermal cell turnover and 
increase dermal elasticity

Optimal treatment strength  

As tolerated

Moderate to aggressive approach

Increase to build tolerance 

Increase dermal collagen production 

Box 4.6

Skin Thickness and Procedure Selection
THIN SKIN

■■ Use  caution  with  any  resurfacing  procedures;  avoid  penetrating 
deeper  than  the  papillary  dermis  or  immediate  reticular  dermis 
(IRD).

■■ Avoid ablative laser resurfacing.
■■ Tightening procedures, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, are 

ideal.

MEDIUM TO THICK SKIN

■■ Tightening procedures, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, can be 

safely performed down to the IRD.

■■ One  to  two  procedures  may  be  needed  for  optimal  tightening  (ZO 

Controlled Depth Peel).

■■ CO2 fractional laser resurfacing is the gold standard for improving 

texture.

tightening skin and evening out texture and tone using a chemical peel pro-
duce much more comprehensive and aesthetically pleasing results than any 
of  those  treatment  modalities  alone.  As  noted  previously,  the  selection  of  a 
proper procedure approach (whether singular or combined) must be guided 
by the nature of the skin problem and by the patient’s skin thickness. Table 
4.12 shows specific skin treatment goals and the appropriate procedures.

Selection of a Procedure for Thin Skin
Skin thickness is the most important variable in selection of a rejuvenation 
procedure. Thin skin is ideal for a tightening procedure that does not extend 
beyond the IRD in depth. This depth will provide sufficient tightening and 
mild  leveling  and  will  not  make  the  skin  thinner  or  change  its  color.  The 
procedure can be repeated at intervals of 6 to 8 weeks or longer for gradual 

99

Table 4.12  Skin Treatment Goals and the Appropriate Procedures

Goal 

Procedure

Increase dermal collagen 

Stimulate with topical retinoids

Exfoliate the epidermis 

Tightening 

Leveling 

Volume restoration 

Alpha-hydroxy acid peels, microabrasion, ZO 3-Step Peel composed of a cocktail of TCA, 
salicylic acid, and lactic acid

ZO Controlled Depth Peel (20% to 28% TCA) to the level of the PD or IRD
CO2 fractional laser resurfacing, ZO Controlled Depth Peel (20% to 28%) to varying depths
Fillers, biostimulatory molecule injections

Softening of dynamic rhytides 

Neurotoxin injections to immobilize underlying facial muscles

IRD = immediate reticular dermis; PD = papillary dermis; TCA = trichloroacetic acid.

improvement. Leveling procedures, such as a ZO Controlled Depth Peel, laser 
resurfacing, or a phenol peel, are risky in thin skin because they may make 
skin  even  thinner  and  accelerate  long-term  aging  changes.  In  patients  with 
thin skin, prolonged stimulation with topical agents to increase dermal thick-
ness is essential. Scarring, such as keloids, and permanent hypopigmentation 
are more common in patients with thin skin following procedures that reach 
below the IRD. Thin skin has a narrow safety margin for deep procedures.

Combination Procedures in Thin Skin
Patients with thin skin can benefit from the combination of a focal leveling 
procedure and a tightening procedure, both of which can be done at the same 
time. Focal leveling limited to deep unstretchable wrinkles or scars can be 
obtained with the CO2 fractional laser, which is safer than deeper chemical 
peels. The IRD-level peel is performed first, followed by leveling that is lim-
ited to the affected areas and extends no deeper than the URD. Leveling of the 
entire face should be avoided. However, even with this approach, expression 
lines  are  only  minimally  improved,  and  a  long-term  neurotoxin  treatment 
to soften dynamic rhytides may be necessary to maintain optimal cosmesis.

Medium and Thick Skin
Medium  and  thick  skin  is  ideal  for  leveling  and  tightening  procedures. 
Expression lines can be significantly minimized, and some can be eliminated 
entirely for a prolonged period of time. However, as in thin skin, expression 
lines  will  not  be  minimized,  and  additional  treatment  with  a  neurotoxin 
may be necessary to weaken the underlying muscles responsible for dynamic 
rhytides.

SKIN TYPE ACCORDING TO OILINESS

Skin can be classified as oily, secreting excessive sebum; normal, secreting 
a  moderate  amount  of  sebum;  or  dry,  secreting  a  below-average  amount 
of sebum (Box 4.7). Oily skin is seen predominantly in persons with thick 
and medium-thickness skin and is only occasionally seen in patients with 
thin skin. Figure 4.21 shows a patient with thick, oily skin, and Figure 4.22 

100

Box 4.7

In terms of oiliness and dryness, skin should be grouped into two cat-
egories: dry (for genetic reasons) and oily. The terms normal skin and 
combination skin should be avoided.

101

SKIN TYPE ACCORDING TO 
OILINESS

Figure 4.21  Patient with thick, oily skin.

Figure 4.22  Patient with medium-thickness, 
oily skin.

102

Figure 4.23  Patient with thin, dry skin.

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

shows  a  patient  with  medium-thickness,  oily  skin.  Oily  skin  is  associated 
with large or hyperactive sebaceous glands. It is also frequently associated 
with enlarged pores. Despite a common misconception, oily skin does not 
age more slowly than dry skin; aging changes in skin are directly propor-
tional to the amount and quality of collagen and elastin within the dermis. 
Also, a relative lack of sebum is not the cause of skin dryness. For example, 
an infant’s skin has no surface sebum (the sebaceous glands are small and 
inactive), yet it does not appear dry. Dryness is actually related to dermal 
and epidermal hydration, as well as effective barrier function, which regu-
lates transepidermal water loss. Figure 4.23 shows a patient with thin, dry 
skin. The amount of glycosoaminoglycans and natural moisturizing factors 
that attract and retain water within the dermis influences the skin’s ultimate 
hydration status. Table 4.13 shows commonly held misconceptions related 
to skin dryness.

Sebum provides antibacterial activity and yields a natural smoothness and 
glow to skin. Excess sebum, on the other hand, is detrimental. Hypersecretion 
of sebum leads to clogged pores, comedone formation (as in acne and rosa-
cea),  and  seborrheic  dermatitis.  Although  naturally  produced  by  one’s  own 
skin,  sebum  is  a  highly  inflammatory  substance  that  induces  a  significant 
immune response; this resultant inflammation is manifested as acne, rosacea, 
seborrheic dermatitis, PIH, and scarring. Patients with oily skin pose more 

Table 4.13  Misconceptions Regarding Skin Dryness

Misconception 

Fact

Those with oily skin 
appear to age more 
slowly  

Sebum prevents skin 
dryness 

Skin aging is not related to the amount of sebum; instead, it 
is proportional to the amount and quality of collagen and 
elastin within the dermis.

Dryness is due to a relative decreased amount of dermal 
glycosaminoglycans and natural moisturizing factors as 
well as to an impaired barrier function (increased 
transepidermal water loss).

103

ATYPICAL HEALING EFFECTS 
IN RELATION TO SKIN TYPE

challenging treatment approaches (regardless of the treatment type) because 
sebum  reduces  the  efficacy  and  penetration  of  many  topical  agents.  It  also 
reduces the ultimate efficacy of chemical peels and laser treatments and may 
even cause treatment failure, especially when treating stubborn hyperpigmen-
tation. Extreme caution is advised when treating skin with excess sebum using 
resurfacing procedures because they can result in an uneven penetration and 
skin response and in post-procedure acne or rosacea flares. Additionally, pre-
mature treatment of skin with chemical peels or lasers (before first controlling 
excess sebum production) can increase the potential for PIH that is resistant 
to topical treatment.

SKIN TYPE ACCORDING TO 
ELASTICITY AND LAXITY

Skin  laxity  is  manifested  as  wrinkles,  eyebrow  dropping,  redundancy  of 
upper  and  lower  eyelid  skin,  deepened  nasolabial  folds,  redundant  skin  on 
the  cheeks  and  jawline,  and  jowling. These  changes  begin  at  approximately 
the age of 30 years with the appearance of fine lines and the loss of skin tight-
ness and are accelerated by the degenerative effects of chronic photodamage 
on  elastin  within  the  dermis.  Histologically,  lax  skin  is  characterized  by  a 
thinner epidermis and dermis. Specific dermal changes include solar elasto-
sis (degenerating elastin fibers) and disorganization and a reduced amount of 
collagen fibers. Although often seen together in advanced skin aging, muscle 
laxity is not synonymous with skin laxity for treatment purposes. Examples 
of muscle laxity include platysmal banding and redundancy (which can lead 
to jowl formation) and orbicularis oculi and frontalis muscle drooping, which 
can ultimately lead to eyelid and eyebrow ptosis. Loss of elasticity in the face 
can be categorized as early versus late skin laxity. Features of facial laxity are 
delineated in Box 4.8. Figure 4.24 shows a patient with skin laxity, and Figure 
4.25 shows a patient with skin and muscle laxity.

ATYPICAL HEALING EFFECTS IN 
RELATION TO SKIN TYPE

Although skin displaying atypical healing is not a distinct skin classification, 
its  presence  can  be  the  cause  of  many  complications  following  procedures 
(e.g.,  chemical  peels  and  laser  treatments).  Complications  from  atypical  or 
impaired  healing  include  hypertrophic  scars  and  keloids.  The  potential  for 
atypical  healing  should  be  assessed  in  every  patient  before  performing  any 
procedure; this is especially important in more invasive procedures such as 
resurfacing below the level of the IRD.

Evaluation  of  skin  thickness  by  measuring  the  fold  created  when  apply-
ing  pressure  simultaneously  with  the  practitioner’s  thumb  and  index  finger 
reveals that skin in certain patients does not offer resistance to firm squeezing 

104

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

Box 4.8

Features of Early and Late Facial Laxity
EARLY LAXITY

■■ Appearance of wrinkles
■■ Lack of resistance to pulling of the skin (decreased elasticity)
■■ Deepening of nasolabial folds and exaggeration of expression lines 

(dynamic rhytides)

■■ Improvement  with  gentle  skin  stretching  in  one  direction  (the 

Dr. Zein Obagi Stretch Test)

■■ Minimal textural changes
■■ Can be reversed at a very early stage with topical retinoic acid or retinol 
and with a trichloroacetic acid chemical peel reaching the immediate 
reticular dermis

■■ Not significantly improved by a surgical procedure (such as a facelift)

LATE LAXITY

■■ Muscle laxity and skin laxity
■■ Dermatochalasis
■■ Eyebrow ptosis
■■ Jowl formation
■■ Redundancy of neck muscles
■■ Fat pad migration (downward and inward/medially)
■■ Minimal to no improvement with the Dr. Zein Obagi Stretch Test
■■ Ideal for the combination of surgical and non-surgical skin tightening

Figure 4.24  Patient with skin laxity.

Figure  4.25  Patient  with  skin  and  muscle 
laxity.

105

REFERENCES

Box 4.9

Skin Types Showing Lack of Resistance

Lack of resistance to the fold-pinch test can be seen in all skin types but 
appears most often in Asian and black patients.

or pinching. This lack of resistance can be compared with what one feels when 
attempting  to  pinch  a  sponge:  the  thumb  and  index  finger  can  touch,  and 
the created fold bulges wide above the squeezed area. In other patients, such 
squeezing  indicates  strong  resistance,  similar  to  what  one  would  encounter 
with a firm substance such as leather. In addition, skin resistance in patients 
with a propensity for keloid formation after surgery or deep resurfacing proce-
dures, as well as in those who developed keloids after resolution of individual 
inflammatory acne lesions, reveals little or no resistance to the fold-pinch test. 
Lack of resistance can be seen in all skin types but appears most often in Asian 
and black patients (Box 4.9). After identifying skin with a propensity toward 
atypical  healing,  the  practitioner  should  avoid  penetrating  deeper  than  the 
papillary dermis when performing resurfacing procedures.

REFERENCES

  1.  Fitzpatrick 

scale.  Wikipedia.  Available 

from:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Fitzpatrick_scale. Retrieved June 23, 2014.

  2.  Fitzpatrick TB. The validity and practicality of sun-reactive skin types I through VI. 

Arch Dermatol. 1988;124:869-871.

  3.  Glogau RG. Chemical peeling and aging skin. J Geriatr Dermatol. 1994;2:30-35.

106

  4.  Roberts  WE.  Skin  type  classification  systems:  old  and  new.  Dermatol  Clin. 

ZEIN OBAGI SYSTEM OF SKIN 
CLASSIFICATION

2009;27:529-533.

  5.  Holck DE, Ng JD. Facial skin rejuvenation. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2003;14:246-252.
  6.  Sachdeva S. Fitzpatrick skin typing: applications in dermatology. Indian J Dermatol 

Venereol Leprol. 2009;75:93-96.

  7.  Kim MM, Byrne PJ. Facial skin rejuvenation in the Asian patient. Facial Plast Surg 

Clin North Am. 2007;15:381-386.

  8.  Sehgal VN, Verma P, Srivastava G, et al. Melasma: treatment strategy. J Cosmet Laser 

Ther. 2011;13:265-279.

SKIN 
REJUVENATION
The Art, the Science, 
and the Procedures

CHAPTER 

5

SKIN REJUVENATION DEFINED

The popularity of skin rejuvenation procedures has increased exponentially 
over the past decade as a result of increased patient interest and technological 
advancements. Patients are becoming better educated and more aware of dif-
ferent treatment options for skin rejuvenation through the Internet. However, 
the seemingly endless variety of claims in advertisements sponsored by prod-
uct and device companies can confuse patients. This most likely arises from 
the different perceptions among professionals of the meaning of “skin reju-
venation.”  To  many  physicians,  skin  rejuvenation  indicates  performance  of 
a procedure. To cosmeceutical companies, it implies use of their anti-aging 
topical products, and to laser and device manufacturers, it implies treatment 
with one of their own devices.

Skin  rejuvenation,  however,  is  not  a  cream  used  to  improve  the  skin’s 
 surface; it is not a procedure, such as use of a laser or other energy-emitting 
device, a chemical peel, or filler or neurotoxin injections; and it is not invasive 
surgery, such as a facelift. Skin rejuvenation is a comprehensive treatment plan 
with a combined approach, as defined in Box 5.1.

This definition makes the concept of skin rejuvenation simple, straightfor-
ward, and suitable for all patients. Restoring and maintaining skin in its optimal 
original state is the main objective of skin rejuvenation (Box 5.2). This is accom-
plished by designing an appropriate topical protocol and overall treatment plan 
that is appropriate for each patient’s needs. Such a plan is based on the following:

(cid:127)  Topical agents that restore general skin health and treat any concurrent 

skin disease

(cid:127)  When  indicated,  an  additional  appropriate  procedure,  based  on  its 

mechanism of action and the desired result

(cid:127)  When choosing a procedure, identification of the safe depth of penetra-
tion for a particular skin type (see Chapter 4) to ensure maintenance of 
skin integrity and natural appearance

108

SKIN REJUVENATION

Box 5.1

Skin Rejuvenation Defined

Skin  rejuvenation  is  the  art  of  transforming  skin  to  its  original  state 
through combined use of the following:

■■ Topical agents that restore general skin health
■■ Topical  agents  to  treat  existing  disease  (e.g.,  acne,  rosacea,  actinic 

keratoses) when they are present.

■■ Procedures (e.g., lasers and other energy-emitting devices, chemical 
peels,  and  injections  of  fillers  or  neurotoxins)  when  topical  agents 
alone do not completely restore skin to its original state.

Box 5.2

Restoring and maintaining skin in its original state is the main objec-
tive of skin rejuvenation.

PATIENT SELECTION

In  all  aesthetic  procedures,  proper  patient  selection  is  a  crucial  component 
of a successful outcome. Prospective patients seeking skin rejuvenation often 
come to the physician with a “consumer” attitude. They want to look younger 
and better and are interested in finding out the specific out-of-pocket expenses 
for such improvement. As consumers, however, patients often “doctor shop,” 
seeking  the  lowest  price  for  a  given  procedure,  yet  also  expect  an  excellent 
outcome, a predictable post-procedure course, and minimal downtime dur-
ing recovery. Because of the considerable variation in individual expectations, 
demands, and levels of understanding of preprocedure skin conditioning and 
procedures, the physician must make every effort to ensure that each patient 
has  realistic  expectations  and  is  fully  informed  about  alternative  treatment 
options, the expected duration of post-procedure healing time, and potential 
adverse events associated with each procedure.

Patients seeking better skin may ask for one treatment from the physician, 
without  knowing  that  another  treatment  would  better  achieve  the  specific 
desired results. For example, patients often point to static rhytides around the 
mouth and ask for administration of a neurotoxin. However, in this scenario, 
volume  restoration  using  filler  injection,  not  the  use  of  neurotoxin,  which 
relaxes muscles and softens the appearance of dynamic rhytides, is the most 
appropriate  method  of  achieving  the  desired  improvement.  Furthermore,  a 
patient’s expectations may seem realistic before a specific procedure, yet after 
the  procedure  has  been  performed,  the  same  patient  may  reveal  his  or  her 
actual, but unrealistic, expectations. The physician must make every attempt 
to  screen  for  these  problem  patients  during  the  initial  consultation  to  avoid 

109

DIAGNOSTIC 
CONSIDERATIONS

Box 5.3

Patients to Exclude from Treatment

■■ Pregnant women and, occasionally, lactating women (depending on 

the treatment type)

■■ Those who fail to keep appointments
■■ Those demonstrating poor compliance with the topical skin condi-

tioning regimen

■■ Those who have unreasonable expectations
■■ Those who mention a myriad of “complications” they have had with 

other physicians

■■ Those  who  believe  that  their  appearance  is  responsible  for  a  failed 

marriage or other relationship

■■ Those  who  are  unable  to  allow  enough  time  for  necessary  post- 

procedural healing

■■ Those  who  are  depressed,  undergoing  emotional  crises,  or  taking 

several psychotropic medications

time-consuming post-procedure complaints and lawsuits. Finding a tactful way 
to exclude patients who appear to have unrealistic expectations, as well as those 
displaying traits suggesting they may not be compliant with preprocedure and 
post-procedure instructions, will ultimately provide invaluable peace of mind.
The  physician  must  also  consider  the  patient’s  motivation  for  the  reju-
venation  procedure.  Patients  seeking  aesthetic  treatments  may  suffer  from 
emotional  dysfunction  and  a  lack  of  self-confidence.  On  the  severe  end  of 
the  spectrum,  patients  may  have  a  serious  mental  health  disorder,  such  as 
body dysmorphic disorder. These and other patients are often not prepared 
psychologically or financially for a lengthy treatment program and are more 
likely to be dissatisfied with their results, regardless of the treatment type. The 
physician should avoid accepting patients with psychological and emotional 
problems for cosmetic and rejuvenation procedures. Box 5.3 lists patients who 
should be excluded from cosmetic treatments.

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

A patient’s diagnosis has a significant effect on the time needed to complete 
the rejuvenation program. For example, scars and rhytides can be corrected 
relatively quickly (by intralesional steroid injections and/or laser treatments 
and  injections  of  neurotoxins  and  fillers,  respectively).  In  contrast,  the  cor-
rection of melasma or other forms of dermal melanosis typically takes much 
longer, often involving a combination approach with multiple distinct treat-
ment modalities.

Any concurrent skin conditions must be corrected before performing a reju-
venation  procedure.  Specifically,  inflammatory  skin  conditions  such  as  acne 

110

SKIN REJUVENATION

vulgaris,  rosacea,  seborrheic  dermatitis,  and  folliculitis  must  be  controlled 
because they can impair or prevent optimal post-procedure healing. Similarly, 
other skin conditions, such as melasma, excessive skin oiliness, or sensitivity, 
should also be treated before a rejuvenation procedure. For example, before treat-
ing melasma with a chemical peel, the physician must ensure that the patient 
has adequately preconditioned his or her skin, which includes daily application 
of a product containing a retinoid to stabilize melanocytes, as well as a product 
containing hydroquinone (HQ) to control melanocytes. These creams should 
be used for at least 6 weeks before the rejuvenation procedure to optimize results 
and minimize the risk for potential complications. Furthermore, patients with 
these conditions should be counseled regarding their required participation in 
prepeel and postpeel care; the potential need for multiple treatments, such as 
chemical peels for melasma; and long-term topical treatment to reduce excess 
sebum and restore and maintain the skin’s barrier function to prevent skin sen-
sitivity  and  other  complications.  Occasionally,  low-dose  (20  mg/day)  isotreti-
noin is started after a rejuvenation procedure and used for approximately 3 to 
5 months to minimize oiliness that leads to post-procedure hyperpigmentation 
and acne flares. Textural skin changes, such as solar elastosis, diffuse acne scar-
ring, disseminated sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and rhinophyma, may require 
different types of procedures (e.g., hyfrecation, subscission, wire loop surgery) 
or combined or multiple procedures for optimal cosmesis.

The depth of the problem should guide the choice of corrective procedure 
(Figure 5.1). Conditions limited to the epidermis respond well to any exfolia-
tive procedure, whereas conditions located within the dermis can be improved 

Exfoliative procedures
(cid:127) ZO Retinol
   Stimulation Peel
(cid:127) ZO 3-Step Peel

(cid:127) ZO Controlled
    Depth Peel to PD
(cid:127) CO2 fractional laser

ZO Controlled Depth
Peel to IRD

ZO Designed
Peel to URD

ZO Controlled Depth
Peel to URD (PD, IRD,
URD are reached)

Maximum depth

Stratum corneum

Epidermis

Basal cell layer

Papillary dermis (PD)

Immediate reticular dermis
(IRD)

Upper reticular dermis
(URD)

Mid-line

Lower reticular dermis

Subcutaneous fat

Figure 5.1  Skin layers and corrective procedures.

     
with tightening or leveling (deep chemical peels and/or CO2 fractional laser 
treatment).  Subcutaneous  volume  loss  responds  best  to  injections  of  fillers, 
biostimulatory molecules, and/or autologous fat. Surgical removal of excess 
lax skin is also appropriate in certain circumstances. Neurotoxin injections 
can add further benefit on the muscular level by “softening” the appearance 
of dynamic rhytides.

TREATMENT PLANNING

111

TREATMENT PLANNING

After  classifying  the  patient’s  skin  and  making  the  diagnosis,  the  physician 
should formulate a comprehensive treatment plan that includes both short- and 
long-term goals. The plan must clearly inform the patient of the reason for each 
part of the overall plan, the importance of patient compliance, and the com-
plexity of the plan. Monitoring patient compliance with short-term treatment 
recommendations—for example, assessing the patient’s daily use of a compre-
hensive topical regimen—allows the physician maximal control over the entire 
process. A patient’s inability or unwillingness to follow the recommended, pre-
procedure daily skin care regimen should be a “red flag,” signaling the physician 
to  avoid  any  subsequent  invasive  rejuvenation  procedures.  These  noncompli-
ant patients are much more likely to experience suboptimal overall results and 
adverse events. See Box 5.4 for an overview of skin rejuvenation treatment plan-
ning, which has been broken down into seven parts for the sake of simplicity.

Regardless of specifics related to each patient’s individualized rejuvenation 
treatment plan, certain physician guidelines should always be followed. One 
must always maintain the clear objective of restoring overall skin health while 
also  treating  concomitant  skin  disorders.  As  such,  before  any  rejuvenation 

Box 5.4

Overview of Skin Rejuvenation Treatment Planning

 1.  Classify the patient’s skin (according to color/ethnicity and thickness).
 2.  Diagnose conditions to be treated.
 3.  Treat any active disease.
 4.  Maintain  the  objective  of  restoring  skin  health  while  initiating  a 
plan for skin conditioning (through the use of daily topical products) 
before any upcoming planned procedures.

 5.  If one or more rejuvenation procedures are indicated, choose them 
based  on  the  match  of  the  procedure’s  mechanism  of  action  to  the 
depth of the condition being treated.

 6.  Have a clear plan for expediting recovery, minimizing potential for 
post-procedural  complications,  and  treating  complications  if  they 
do occur.

 7.  Establish  a  comprehensive,  effective  post-procedure  maintenance 

regimen.

112

SKIN REJUVENATION

Box 5.5

Before any rejuvenation procedure, the skin must be conditioned for at 
least 6 weeks by at-home daily application of a comprehensive topical 
regimen.

Box 5.6

Essential Physician-to-Patient Communication before 
a Procedure

■■ Explain the overall treatment plan or program.
■■ Inform of the possibility of adverse events or complications.
■■ Explain the possible need for a repeated procedure.
■■ Communicate the expected “downtime” following the procedure.
■■ Explain the need for a maintenance program.
■■ Answer the patient’s questions.

procedure, the skin must be prepared and conditioned adequately for at least 
6 weeks by at-home daily application of a comprehensive topical regimen (Box 
5.5). The patient should know that the doctor may terminate the overall treat-
ment plan if he or she fails to comply with individual recommendations.

Effective, two-way communication between the physician and the patient 
is essential. The physician should explain the overall treatment plan or pro-
gram, answer all of the patient’s questions, and clearly inform the patient 
that, despite best intentions and one’s overall experience, the treatment pro-
gram may not succeed and could result in unintentional, adverse events or 
complications.  The  physician  should  also  clearly  explain  that  a  procedure 
might need to be performed more than once (e.g., more than one treatment 
with the CO2 fractional laser may be necessary to optimally correct severe 
facial acne scarring). The expected “downtime” should also be made clear so 
that patients can schedule their work and social commitments accordingly. 
It is always best to underpromise and overdeliver when treating any patient. 
Furthermore, a thorough discussion of alternative treatment options should 
be included when proposing a treatment plan to a patient. And, the patient 
should know that a post-procedure, daily topical maintenance program will 
be essential for overall treatment success. The essential physician-to-patient 
communication is shown in Box 5.6.

PROCEDURE SELECTION

Physicians  currently  choose  light,  medium,  or  deep  procedures  for  their 
patients without understanding the meaning of these terms. They also tend to 

113

PROCEDURE SELECTION

focus mainly on skin color (such as the Fitzpatrick skin type) when choosing a 
procedure, while overlooking other important factors, such as skin thickness, 
laxity,  and  tendency  to  form  hypertrophic  scars  or  keloids.  In  choosing  the 
best procedure for a patient, physicians need to take a broader post-treatment 
perspective that evaluates and optimizes the skin’s overall quality, health, and 
function.

There  are  currently  no  adequate,  standardized  guidelines  for  choosing  a 
procedure or procedures for correction of a given condition involved in skin 
rejuvenation.  Physicians  tend  to  select  procedures  based  on  their  personal 
experience, mostly acquired during training in residency and fellowship. The 
popularity (from media and advertising influences) and profitability of pro-
cedures seem also to guide a physician’s choice. This is a clear danger in that 
profitability and popularity do not necessarily correlate with effectiveness or 
appropriateness  of  that  procedure.  For  example,  exfoliative  chemical  peels 
are being performed to correct wrinkles and scars, which actually necessitate 
chemical peels or laser treatments that penetrate deeper. On the other hand, 
there are many cases in which physicians are choosing to perform rejuvena-
tive procedures that are more invasive than necessary for the specific patient.

Selecting procedures should be based on multiple factors:

  1. Skin type (color, thickness, oiliness, laxity, and healing properties)
  2. The nature of the patient’s skin problems
  3. The skin’s response to Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test
  4. Thermal versus chemical procedures
  5. Proper procedure depth

PROCEDURE SELECTION ACCORDING 
TO SKIN TYPE

Skin type is a broad term encompassing skin color, thickness, oiliness, laxity, 
and healing properties.

Skin Color
Skin  color  that  is  light  white  and  original  white  (Zein  Obagi  Skin 
Classification System; see Chapter 4) is suitable for thermal (i.e., lasers and 
other energy-emitting devices that employ radiofrequency and ultrasound) 
and  chemical  procedures.  Darker  skinned  patients,  of  African  or  Asian 
descent,  are  best  treated  with  nonthermal  procedures  such  as  chemical 
peels. This avoids potential complications such as postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation (PIH), which can occasionally occur after excessive heating 
of melanocytes with certain laser procedures. Furthermore, to avoid com-
plications and maximize cosmetic improvement in darker skin types, the 
penetration depth for chemical peels should not exceed the immediate retic-
ular dermis (IRD). For patients with more severe or persistent conditions 
(e.g., certain cases of melasma), the physician should consider performing 
a second procedure—again, limited in depth to the IRD—at a future visit. 
For  skin  in  the  deviated  category,  nonthermal  procedures  are  preferred. 
Thermal procedures can be performed in these patients, but recovery time 
will be longer because PIH is more likely to occur and responds more slowly 

114

SKIN REJUVENATION

to post-procedure topical corrective treatments, although it does ultimately 
respond well in the long run.

Skin Thickness
Keeping  in  mind  the  previous  recommendations  on  optimal  treatments 
for specific skin color types (assuming all else is equal), thick skin is better 
equipped to tolerate invasive and ablative procedures and is thus ideal for ther-
mal as well as nonthermal procedures. For patients with thick skin (for lighter 
skin  types,  see  earlier  discussion),  chemical  peels  can  safely  be  performed 
down to the level of the upper reticular dermis (URD), when appropriate. For 
thin skin, nonthermal procedures, such as chemical peels, are preferred, and 
penetration depth should be limited to the IRD to avoid complications. Figure 
5.2  shows  a  patient  with  thin  to  medium-thickness  skin  treated  with  a  ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the IRD.

Skin Oiliness
Preceding all procedures, sebum must be reduced during skin conditioning. 
In oily skin, including skin prone to acne or rosacea, a course of low-dose (20 
mg) daily isotretinoin should be considered. However, this oral medication 
should only be started after any deep chemical peel or laser procedure because 
there have been reports in the literature that isotretinoin used immediately 
before  or  during  ablative  or  invasive  procedures  can  impair  the  skin’s  abil-
ity to heal optimally. If the decision is made to control severe cases of acne 
or rosacea with a 5-month course of isotretinoin before an ablative or inva-
sive  procedure,  a  “washout  period”  of  at  least  6  months  (during  which  the 
patient is completely off the isotretinoin) is recommended. After the patient’s 
skin has completely re-epithelialized following the rejuvenation procedure, a 
course of daily low-dose isotretinoin should be started or restarted and topi-
cal skin conditioning resumed. Adherence to these recommendations accel-
erates the return of skin to normal and minimizes potential post-procedure 

Figure 5.2 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as original white, thin to medium 
thickness, and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having skin laxity and photodamage. (b) 
After. The patient was treated with 6 weeks of Skin Health Restoration followed by a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis.

115

PROCEDURE SELECTION

Figure 5.3 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated black, thick, and oily. 
She was diagnosed as having rosacea and dermal melasma. (b) One year later. The patient 
was treated with 6 weeks of HQ-based Skin Health Restoration followed by a medium-
depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel. This was followed by HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration and use of isotretinoin, 20 mg/day for 5 months.

complications, such as PIH. Taking into consideration the degree of oiliness in 
a patient’s skin is also important because excessive sebum, as seen in oily skin, 
decreases  the  efficacy  of  the  preprocedure  and  post-procedure  topical  con-
ditioning programs. This, in turn, increases the potential for periprocedural 
complications.  Figure  5.3  shows  a  patient  with  thick,  oily  skin,  diagnosed 
with rosacea and melasma, who was treated with Skin Health Restoration to 
condition skin and reduce sebum, followed by a medium-depth ZO Designed 
Controlled Depth Peel.

Skin Laxity
When there is skin laxity, which is different from muscle laxity, a nonther-
mal, nonablative procedure that tightens is best. Specifically, a chemical peel 
penetrating  to  the  level  of  the  papillary  dermis  (PD)  or  IRD  is  optimal  for 
correcting skin laxity because this restores the production of healthy elastin. 
Skin  laxity  is  best  corrected  by  a  procedure  that  penetrates  to  the  depth  of 
the IRD, such as a tightening procedure (Figure 5.4). This is in contrast to the 
temporary  tightening  effect  seen  following  treatment  with  thermal  devices, 
including many lasers, because these cause collagen denaturation and shrink-
age, yet do not induce elastin production. Furthermore, skin with concomi-
tant, underlying muscle laxity—for example, in patients with loose skin of the 
neck due to platysmal muscle laxity—usually requires a surgical approach to 
correction (platysmaplasty), in addition to a tightening procedure that treats 
lax skin for optimal cosmesis.

Skin with Suboptimal Healing
Nonthermal,  nonablative  procedures,  such  as  chemical  peels  penetrating  to 
the depth of the PD, are the ideal choice for patients with a history of sub-
optimal or atypical healing (e.g., those with a propensity to form hypertro-
phic scars and keloids). These procedures should not exceed depths beyond 

116

SKIN REJUVENATION

Figure 5.4 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as light white, medium thickness, 
and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having photodamage, laxity, and stretchable rhytides. 
(b) One year later. The patient was treated for 10 weeks with non-HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis. 
This was followed by 12 weeks of non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration.

the level of the PD in all patients in this category. Furthermore, to avoid the 
potential for hypopigmentation in patients with dark skin (original type), the 
procedures should not penetrate to depths below the level of the IRD.

The recommended procedures for Zein Obagi Skin Classification System 

are shown in Table 5.1.

PROCEDURE SELECTION ACCORDING TO THE 
NATURE OF THE SKIN PROBLEM

Presence of Active Disease
Patients with an underlying active disease, such as acne, rosacea, psoriasis, or 
irritant or allergic contact dermatitis, should not undergo a tightening or leveling 
procedure (thermal or nonthermal, ablative or nonablative) until after the disease 
has been adequately treated and controlled. In contrast, more superficial, exfo-
liative procedures, such as mechanical exfoliation (microdermabrasion), as well 
as light chemical peels (glycolic and salicylic acid), can in fact be very beneficial 

Table 5.1  Skin Type and Recommended Procedures

Zein Obagi Skin Type

Recommended Procedures

Light white and original white skin

Thermal and nonthermal procedures, such as chemical peels

Darker skin patients of African or Asian descent Nonthermal procedures, such as chemical peels

Deviated skin

Thick skin

Thin skin

Skin with laxity

Nonthermal procedures, such as chemical peels

Thermal and nonthermal procedures (such as chemical peels, possibly 
down to the level of the upper reticular dermis)

Chemical peels

Chemical peels to the papillary dermis or immediate reticular dermis

Skin with suboptimal healing

Chemical peels to the papillary dermis

PROCEDURE SELECTION

117

Figure 5.5 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated normal white, medium 
thickness,  and  oily.  He  was  diagnosed  as  having  active  severe  rosacea  and  seborrheic 
dermatitis. (b) One year later. The patient was treated with 3 months of non-HQ-based 
Skin  Health  Restoration,  metronidazole  in  the  morning,  and  isotretinoin,  20  mg/day. 
Two treatments with the ZO 3-Step Peel were performed after 6 and 10 weeks of starting 
Skin Health Restoration. Note that no procedure should be performed on a patient until 
rosacea has been cleared.

in correcting skin with active disease and are best used in combination with a 
comprehensive daily topical treatment regimen. Figure 5.5 shows a patient with 
active disease—severe rosacea and seborrheic dermatitis—who was treated with 
a program of Skin Health Restoration first and then a ZO Controlled Depth Peel.
Patients with epidermal and dermal melasma usually respond well to chemi-
cal peels. Because melanocytes are heat sensitive, thermal procedures are best 
avoided because they have the potential to worsen the post-procedural dyschro-
mia. In contrast, those with hyperpigmented patches due to an underlying dis-
order referred to as a nevus of Ota or a nevus of Ito respond best to thermal 
procedures  (e.g.,  sequential  treatments  with  the  1064-nm  QS-Nd:YAG  laser) 
because they are due to an excessive proliferation of melanocytes and their pres-
ence in the dermis and subcutaneous tissue (as opposed to melasma, which is 
due to an overproduction of melanin from a relatively normal number of indi-
vidual melanocytes). As such, thermal and laser treatments in these patients are 
beneficial because they induce selective destruction of excessive melanocytes.

A lentigo is a discrete hyperpigmented macule or patch due to an increased 
number of melanocytes located within the epidermis in the cell layer directly 
above the basement membrane. Lentigines are distinguished from ephelides 
(freckles)  based  on  the  etiology  of  the  outwardly  observed  hyperpigmented 
macules. Specifically, ephelides have a relatively normal total number of indi-
vidual melanocytes, but these melanocytes are producing an increased amount 
of  melanin.  Again,  lentigines,  in  contrast,  are  histologically  distinct  in  that 
they have an increased number of melanocytes. Both lentigines and ephelides 
are easily treated by intense pulse light (IPL), certain lasers (QS-alexandrite 
and QS-ruby), and chemical peels. As with all skin treatments, proper prepro-
cedure and post-procedure topical skin conditioning is essential for patients 
with active underlying pigmentary disorders.

Presence of Photodamage
Chronic photodamage is most commonly manifested as numerous, scattered, 
diffuse,  poorly  demarcated  actinic  keratoses,  lentigines,  ephelides,  telangiec-
tasias,  atrophic  patches,  and  skin  with  textural  irregularities.  Regardless  of  a 
patient’s  skin  color,  the  optimal  rejuvenation  approach  to  correcting  chronic 

118

SKIN REJUVENATION

Figure 5.6 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as Asian (light) and thick. She was 
diagnosed as having photodamage and lentigines on her cheeks. (b) One year later. The 
patient underwent 6 weeks of aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration followed by 
a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis. Aggressive HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration was continued for 12 weeks following the peel. Maintenance involved a non-
HQ-based skin health program.

actinic damage is one or more chemical peels to the level of the IRD. Figure 5.6, 
Figure 5.7, and Figure 5.8 show patients with photodamage and/or lentigines who 
were treated with a program of Skin Health Restoration and a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel. Of note, photodamaged skin is atrophic, fragile, and thus susceptible 
to scarring following ablative procedures. Finally, IPL treatments, when admin-
istered by experienced providers using optimal devices, can correct the overall 
poikilodermatous appearance of photodamaged skin. Box 5.7 lists the common 
manifestations  of  chronic  photodamage.  Box  5.8  summarizes  the  procedures 
that can be used for rejuvenation of skin in patients with certain conditions.

Figure 5.7 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (normal) and thick. He 
was diagnosed as having severe photodamage, lentigines, actinic keratoses, and a basal 
cell carcinoma on his right cheek. (b) One year later. The patient underwent 6 weeks of 
HQ-based Skin Health Restoration and DNA repair, epidermal stabilization, and stimu-
lation, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis.

PROCEDURE SELECTION

119

Figure 5.8 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as original white, medium thick-
ness,  and  nonoily.  He  was  diagnosed  as  having  photodamage,  lentigines,  and  actinic 
keratoses. (b) One year later. The patient was treated with 5 months of HQ-based Skin 
Health Restoration, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular 
dermis on his face and scalp. This was followed by 6 weeks of HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration.

Box 5.7

Manifestations of Chronic Skin Photodamage

Chronic skin photodamage is commonly manifested as actinic kerato-
ses, lentigines, ephelides, telangiectasias, atrophic patches, and textural 
irregularities.

Box 5.8

Procedures for Patients with Certain Conditions

■■ Patients with an underlying active disease, such as acne, rosacea, pso-
riasis, or irritant or allergic contact dermatitis, should not undergo 
a  tightening  or  leveling  procedure  until  after  the  disease  has  been 
adequately treated and controlled.

■■ Exfoliative procedures, however, are beneficial for patients with these 

conditions.

■■ Patients with epidermal and dermal melasma usually respond well to 

chemical peels.

■■ Patients with nevus of Ota or nevus of Ito respond best to thermal 

procedures.

■■ Patients  with  chronic  actinic  damage  are  best  treated  with  one  or 

more chemical peels to the level of the IRD.

120

SKIN REJUVENATION

Box 5.9

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test

When an area of skin with hyperpigmentation is stretched:

■■ Epidermal  melasma  will  appear  lighter,  and  dermal  melasma  will 

appear darker.

When an area of skin with wrinkles is stretched:

■■ Rigid wrinkles and scars will not improve or fade. This reveals severe 
textural damage and indicates a leveling procedure for correction.
■■ Wrinkles and scars that improve or disappear indicate minimal tex-
tural damage, and less invasive procedures (tightening) are needed.

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test
Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test is a simple way to identify the nature and 
depth  of  certain  problems. The  test  is  performed  by  gently  stretching,  with 
both hands, the affected areas of the patient’s skin and observing subsequent 
specific changes on the skin surface (Box 5.9).

The  importance  of  Dr.  Zein  Obagi  Skin  Stretch  Test  is  two-fold.  First,  it 
allows the physician to determine the depth of skin involved with hyperpig-
mentation.  With  this  information,  an  appropriate  procedure  and  depth  of 
procedure penetration can be determined. Second, this test allows the physi-
cian to choose the correct rejuvenation procedure based on evaluation of how 
the wrinkles and scars responded to the test. Specifically, rigid wrinkles and 
scars  are  best  treated  by  a  leveling  procedure  reaching  the  URD  (e.g.,  CO2 
fractional laser treatment or a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel). In contrast, soft wrinkles and scars are best treated by a tightening pro-
cedure (e.g., a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the IRD).

THERMAL VERSUS NONTHERMAL PROCEDURES

All  lasers,  as  well  as  other  energy-emitting  devices,  such  as  IPL,  radiofre-
quency, and ultrasound, are considered thermal devices. They are very useful 
for treating a wide variety of skin problems and play an important role in Skin 
Health Restoration and rejuvenation. The physician must carefully determine 
safe and effective parameters for each individual patient based on skin type, 
skin thickness, the target for correction, and the depth of treatment required 
to reach the target, among other factors. The most important laser parameters 
that  must  be  adjusted  specifically  for  each  patient  include  the  wavelength, 
pulse width, spot size, and amount of energy emitted. The CO2 fractional laser 
and the erbium lasers are optimal treatment choices for skin resurfacing, par-
ticularly for treating rigid wrinkles and scars. Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.10 show 
patients treated with CO2 fractional laser treatment.

Chemical peels are considered nonthermal procedures. The most important 
parameters to be considered when choosing a specific chemical peel include 

121

PROCEDURE SELECTION

Figure 5.9 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (medium), medium 
thickness, and oily. She was diagnosed as having acne, rosacea, sebaceous gland hyperpla-
sia, and severe textural irregularities due to acne scarring. (b) After. The patient was treated 
with 6 weeks of aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration, followed by CO2 fractional 
laser treatment. This was followed by a 5-month course of low-dose isotretinoin (20 mg/
day) and aggressive, HQ-based Skin Health Restoration for another 6 weeks.

the type of acid used (TCA, salicylic acid, glycolic acid, lactic acid, and phe-
nol,  among  others),  the  concentration  of  the  acid,  and  the  total  amount  of 
acid applied to the treatment area. For those chemical peels that do not self-
neutralize, the amount of time that the chemical solution is in contact with 
the skin is also a consideration.

Regardless of whether a thermal or a nonthermal procedure is chosen, the 
depth of skin penetration is proportional to the extent of rejuvenation, as well 
as to the possibility of adverse events or complications (including treatment 
failure). The physician should consider the safety of a chosen depth for a par-
ticular skin type and whether the treatment can be safely permitted to pen-
etrate deeper in certain focal areas within the full treatment site when these 

Figure  5.10 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  white  (dark)  and 
medium thickness. She was diagnosed as having cystic acne and variable acne scars. (b) Six 
days after a CO2 fractional laser procedure. Following the laser procedure, she had 18 weeks 
of aggressive Skin Health Restoration and used isotretinoin, 20 g/day. (c) Six months later.

122

SKIN REJUVENATION

Figure 5.11 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original Asian and medium thickness. 
She was diagnosed as having photodamage, lentigines, and dermatosis papulosa nigra. 
(b) One year later. The patient underwent HQ-based Skin Health Restoration for 6 weeks, 
followed by hyfrecation and a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular der-
mis. The patient continued for 12 weeks following the peel.

focal areas could benefit from deeper or stronger correction. Figure 5.11 and 
Figure 5.12 show patients who underwent Skin Health Restoration followed by 
a chemical peel (ZO Controlled Depth Peel) to the level of the IRD.

Peel Terminology
Current terminology used to describe the depth of a chemical peel tends to be 
confusing, unscientific, and easily subject to misinterpretation. For example, a 
“light” peel to one physician may be a “medium-depth” peel to another. Thus, 

Figure 5.12 
(a) The patient had skin classified as light white, medium thickness, and oily. 
He was diagnosed as having photodamage and actinic keratoses. He had a history of basal 
cell  carcinomas.  (b)  One  year  later.  The  patient  underwent  aggressive  HQ-based  Skin 
Health Restoration for 5 months. A ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular 
dermis level was performed after 6 weeks of Skin Health Restoration (skin conditioning).

Box 5.10

123

PROCEDURE SELECTION

Describing Chemical Peel Depth

■■ Terms such as “light,” “medium,” and “deep” are inadequate descrip-
tors for chemical peels. (See the classification of peel depth and ter-
minology shown in Table 5.2.)

■■ The concentration of an acid does not directly correlate to its depth 

of penetration.

■■ With  continuous  application,  any  concentration  of  acid  can  reach 

any depth in the skin.

when describing chemical peels, the terms “light,” “medium,” and “deep” are 
relatively meaningless and are best avoided to prevent confusion. Regardless 
of the term used to describe the intensity of the chemical peel, it is important 
to remember that one should never administer a peel that penetrates deeper 
than the URD.

The concentration of an acid is another incorrect indicator for describing 
the depth of a peel. As discussed in Chapter 8, with continuous application, 
any concentration of acid can reach deep into the URD (and beyond, when 
used incorrectly) (Box 5.10). Of note, this concept applies not just to trichloro-
acetic acid (TCA) but also to all types of chemical peel acids that are applied 
to the skin. Classification of peel depth and terminology is shown in Table 5.2.

PROCEDURE SELECTION ACCORDING 
TO MECHANISM OF ACTION

Rejuvenation procedures differ in their mechanism of action. These include 
1)  exfoliation,  2)  tightening,  3)  leveling,  4)  extracellular  matrix  stimulation 
and  thickening,  5)  volume  restoration,  and  6)  immobilization  of  muscular 
contraction.  The  ideal  skin  rejuvenation  approach  consists  of  1)  improving 
the appearance and function of skin (restoring skin health) by using proper 

Table 5.2  Classification of Rejuvenation Procedures Based on Depth

Depth of Penetration

Epidermis

Papillary dermis (PD)

Immediate reticular dermis (IRD)

Appropriate Procedure to Reach Desired Depth

Exfoliative or “false” peels

Tightening procedure, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to 
the PD

Tightening procedure, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to 
the IRD

PD, IRD, or upper reticular dermis (URD)

Combined tightening and leveling procedures, such as:

The ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel when the URD 
is reached in small areas

The ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD, IRD, and the URD, or

The medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel 
when the URD is reached in large areas

The combination of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the IRD 
followed by the CO2 fractional procedure to the URD

Table 5.3  Rejuvenation Procedures: Penetration and Mechanism of Action

Procedure

CO2 Fractional Laser
ZO Controlled Depth Peel (trichloroacetic acid)

Phenol peel

Dermabrasion

Neurotoxin injections

Microabrasion, intense pulse light, “false” or superficial peels

Depth of 
Penetration

Propensity 
for Leveling

Propensity 
for Tightening

URD

IRD

URDs

Mid-dermis

URD

Muscles

Epidermal 
exfoliation

Strong

Weak

Strong

Strong

Strong

None

None

Weak

Strong

Strong

Weak

Weak

None

None

topical agents and 2) performing select procedures to correct problems that 
cannot be corrected by topical agents alone (Table 5.3).

When a physician’s main goal is to correct mild skin textural irregularities 
such as tactile roughness, minimize comedone formation, or normalize dys-
chromia limited to the epidermis, a procedure that achieves only superficial 
exfoliation is best. Microdermabrasion, a retinol home peel (see Chapter 9), an 
alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) chemical peel, or a chemical peel that combines 
relatively  low  concentrations  of  salicylic  acid,  TCA,  lactic  acid,  and  retinol 
(the  ZO  3-Step  Peel)  can  be  chosen  for  simple  exfoliation.  Fine  to  medium 
stretchable wrinkles, stretchable scars, and lax skin are optimally improved 
through a tightening procedure, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
PD. Of note, the CO2 fractional laser is best suited for leveling because it does 
not provide sufficient tightening.

Deep,  nonstretchable  wrinkles  and  scars  are  optimally  improved  through 
leveling procedures, which include the CO2 fractional laser, a chemical peel that 
penetrates to the URD (by TCA in the ZO Controlled Depth Peel), or dermabra-
sion. For optimal improvement, in certain patients with more severe, extensive, 
or numerous wrinkles, skin laxity, photodamage, and textural irregularities or 
scarring, a combination approach, using both a chemical peel and a laser proce-
dure, may offer optimal results while allowing the physician to avoid individual 
procedures penetrating to unnecessarily deep levels over all of the face.

EXFOLIATION AND EXFOLIATIVE 
PROCEDURES

Current exfoliative procedures remove parts of the epidermis above the basal 
layer.  They  are  beneficial  for  temporary  correction  of  epidermal  problems 
but have no beneficial effect on dermal problems, such as wrinkles or scars, 
regardless of how many times they are repeated. Healing is rapid (3 to 6 days) 
after an exfoliating procedure.

In general, exfoliation can be classified as “natural,” “induced,” or “false.” 
Natural exfoliation is innate and involves daily shedding of mature, nonviable 
cells from the upper stratum corneum. Natural exfoliation is the body’s natu-
ral method of continually renewing the epidermis and maintaining its barrier 

124

125

EXFOLIATION AND 
EXFOLIATIVE PROCEDURES

function. It is impaired or slowed down with advanced age, overuse of mois-
turizers, and the use of oil-based cosmetics; it can be accelerated by manual 
friction or rubbing. The rate of natural exfoliation is increased in those with 
psoriasis (within the areas of the psoriatic papules or plaques), seborrheic der-
matitis,  or  hypertrophic  actinic  keratoses,  as  well  as  by  several  other,  more 
rare dermatologic disorders.

As bonds between corneocytes break and individual corneocytes become 
partially separated (which occurs in both intrinsic and extrinsic aging), skin 
develops a rough texture, which patients typically interpret as dryness and 
subsequently begin habitual application of moisturizers. Although this pro-
duces temporary relief of the perceived dryness, chronic use of moisturizers 
actually reduces the rate of epidermal mitosis and leads to reduced natural 
exfoliation, a weakened barrier function, and a thinner epidermis. Together, 
these lead to skin that is more sensitive or reactive to external insults.

Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 show patients who used exfoliative procedures 
as part of their Skin Health Restoration programs. In Figure 5.13, the patient 
used the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, and in Figure 5.14, the patient used the 
ZO 3-Step Peel for effective exfoliation.

Induced exfoliation results from various concentrations of topical AHAs, 
beta-hydroxy  acids  (BHAs),  and  kojic  acid.  These  substances  disrupt  the 
hemidesmosomal bonds between corneocytes and, to some extent, between 
keratinocytes.  More  specifically,  the  topical  application  of  AHAs  (glycolic, 
lactic, citric, and malic acids), which are water soluble, leads to exfoliation of 
individual corneocytes and keratinocytes, whereas the application of BHAs 
(e.g., salicylic acid), which are lipid soluble, “melts” cells through keratolysis.
False exfoliation refers to stratum corneum dehydration leading to subse-
quent exfoliation induced by topically applied tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide, or 
several other agents. With these specific agents, groups of cells are shed (coarse 
exfoliation). However, in most patients, this exfoliation phenomenon subsides 

Figure 5.13 
(a) The patient had skin classified as light white and medium thickness. 
She  was  diagnosed  as  having  photodamage,  discoloration,  and  dullness.  (b)  One  year 
later. The patient was treated for 5 months with a non-HQ-based program of Skin Health 
Restoration and had two ZO Retinol Stimulation Peels and an injection of Botox.

126

SKIN REJUVENATION

Figure 5.14 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as complex (Indian) thick and 
oily. He was diagnosed as having postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (b) Six months 
later. The patient was treated with 3 months of HQ-based Skin Health Restoration and 
isotretinoin, 20 mg/day. This was followed by 3 months of non-HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration and one ZO 3-Step Peel.

after a few weeks of steady, daily use. Thus, they are considered “false” exfolia-
tors. False exfoliation can also be mechanically induced through microderm-
abrasion, vigorous scrubbing with a porous material like sandpaper, scraping 
with a blade (dermaplaning), and stripping with adhesive tape.

TIGHTENING PROCEDURES

Skin tightness is related to the amount and quality of elastin in the dermis and, 
to a lesser extent, to the amount and quality of collagen. The opposite of skin 
tightness is skin laxity, as is seen in both intrinsic and extrinsic aging. Inherent 
skin  laxity  (with  advancing  age)  is  accelerated  with  chronic  photodamage. 
Laxity  can  be  reversed  and  tightness  restored  through  the  regeneration  of 
new elastin and collagen, which is induced by certain tightening procedures. 
Referring to certain procedures as “tightening” procedures originated from the 
observation  that  patients  who  underwent  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  with 
TCA, which was allowed to penetrate to at least the level of the PD, had reduced 
skin  laxity  and  increased  skin  tightness.  Specifically,  skin  tightening  occurs 
from procedures that penetrate to the level of the PD, the IRD, or occasionally 
even the URD. These procedures are ideal for epidermal and dermal stretch-
able wrinkles, scars, large pores, sun damage, and dermal melasma.

CHARACTERISTICS OF TIGHTENING 
PROCEDURES

Tightening procedures are minimally invasive procedures that heal quickly 
(7 to 10 days) with almost no potential for hypopigmentation or scarring, 

TIGHTENING PROCEDURES

127

assuming they are performed by well-trained individuals who follow patients 
closely during the healing process. After tightening procedures, most of the 
adnexal  structures  in  the  treatment  field  remain  intact,  and  deep  irregu-
larities in skin texture (areas of rolling and  boxcar acne scarring) are not 
significantly affected. These procedures can be performed on all skin types 
and on facial as well as nonfacial skin. Of note, in areas of nonfacial skin 
with a lower concentration of adnexal structures, such as the neck and upper 
chest, special care should be taken to avoid penetration below the level of 
the PD because these areas are more prone to scarring if they are treated too 
aggressively.

In  general,  the  ideal  candidate  for  a  tightening  procedure,  such  as  the 
ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel,  is  someone  with  fine  to  medium  stretchable 
wrinkles  or  scars  with  or  without  concurrent  signs  of  photodamage  (tel-
angiectasias and/or diffuse poikiloderma). For a greater tightening effect, 
more than one peel can be performed, ideally spaced at least 6 to 8 weeks 
apart for peels penetrating to the PD and 8 to 12 weeks apart for peels pen-
etrating to the level of the IRD. More than one ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
procedure  (usually  two  to  three  treatments)  is  often  necessary  to  achieve 
optimal tightening and cosmesis in thick skin. Figure 5.15 shows a patient 
who had Skin Health Restoration followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
for tightening.

Combining Procedures
Immediately following application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD 
or IRD, a CO2 fractional laser procedure can be performed to the level of the 
URD in areas of unstretchable wrinkles or scars during the same procedural 

Figure 5.15 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original white and medium thick-
ness. She was diagnosed as having photodamage, early solar elastosis, wrinkles, and 
discoloration.  (b)  One  year  later.  The  patient  underwent  aggressive  HQ-based  Skin 
Health Restoration for 6 weeks, followed by a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel to 
the papillary dermis and immediate reticular dermis, as well as to the upper reticu-
lar dermis periorally. Skin Health Restoration was continued for 12 weeks following 
the peel.

128

SKIN REJUVENATION

visit.  However,  combined  procedures  should  only  be  considered  by  those 
highly  trained  in  chemical  peels  and  lasers  because  they  are  more  invasive 
and have more potential for complications.

LEVELING PROCEDURES

Leveling procedures are intended to smooth out skin surface textural irregu-
larities, as is seen in patients with deep static rhytides who respond negatively 
to Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test. Chemical peels that penetrate to the level 
of the IRD can produce mild leveling (smoothing out or correction of the tex-
ture),  but  optimal  results  are  achieved  following  procedures  that  penetrate 
deeper, to the level of the URD (e.g., CO2 fractional laser treatment). However, 
because no reliable depth signs (see Chapter 10) are available for monitoring 
the safety and efficacy of leveling procedures that penetrate below the depth of 
the IRD, a safe and effective outcome depends on the skill and experience of 
the physician. The deeper the leveling, the more injury is inflicted on the skin, 
including destruction of adnexal structures, which house the stem cells that 
allow re-epithelialization during the healing process.

PENETRATION ISSUES

Allowing a leveling procedure to penetrate too deeply can result in permanent 
skin thinning, dyschromia (including areas of depigmentation), demarcation 
lines, and scarring (atrophic, hypertrophic, and keloidal). Furthermore, even 
greater caution should be used when treating patients with skin that is dark or 
of the deviated color type because these patients have an increased chance of 
developing permanent post-procedural dyschromia.

If a scar or wrinkle does not improve during Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch 
Test, it most likely extends to below the level of the IRD. Thus, as opposed 
to conditions that do improve with this stretch test and are best treated with 
tightening procedures, those that do not improve are best treated with pro-
cedures that are capable of penetrating to the depth of the URD, and thus 
provide  effective  leveling.  These  include  CO2  fractional  laser  procedures 
and certain chemical peels (e.g., the ZO Controlled Depth Peel). Figure 5.16 
and Figure 5.17 show patients who had a ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel for leveling.

OBTAINING OPTIMAL LEVELING RESULTS

Factors associated with leveling procedures, including selection of the most 
suitable,  specific  leveling  procedure,  as  well  as  the  determination  of  the 
optimal  depth  of  penetration  (taking  into  account  skin  color,  thickness, 
propensity toward abnormal healing and scarring, and other characteris-
tics),  make  it  difficult  to  formulate  a  cookie-cutter  approach  to  routinely 

129

LEVELING PROCEDURES

Figure 5.16 
(a) Before. The patient had skin type classified as deviated Asian (light) and 
thick. She was diagnosed as having stretchable and unstretchable acne scars. (b) One year 
later. The patient had 6 weeks of aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration and then 
underwent a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis and immediate 
reticular dermis, as well as to the upper reticular dermis in areas with unstretchable scars 
on the cheeks. She was then treated for 3 months with a Skin Health Restoration program 
and used isotretinoin, 20 mg/day.

obtain  optimal  results.  First  and  foremost,  physicians  should  attempt  to 
master a leveling procedure that they can best control. As noted elsewhere 
in this chapter, for patients with thin skin, the maximum safe penetration 
depth is the IRD. However, for patients with very thin skin, the procedure 
should not extend deeper than the PD. Furthermore, patients with a history 

Figure  5.17 
(a)  Before.  The  patient’s  skin  was  classified  as  original  white,  thick,  and 
oily. He was diagnosed as having acne scars (severe atrophic, fibrotic, and rolling). (b) 
One year later. The scars on the patient’s cheeks and jaw line were treated with subscis-
sions using a 21-gauge needle, 1 month apart, while he was being treated with HQ-based 
Skin Health Restoration. Six weeks later, he underwent a medium-depth ZO Designed 
Controlled Depth Peel, followed by HQ-based Skin Health Restoration for 3 months.

130

SKIN REJUVENATION

of keloid formation or other signs of poor or impaired healing, as can be 
revealed by the presence of hypertrophic or keloidal scars, as well as atro-
phic  scars  elsewhere  on  their  body,  should  not  undergo  procedures  that 
exceed the level of the PD.

Leveling procedures that reach the URD or the mid-dermis (phenol peels 
and  dermabrasion)  alter  skin  texture  permanently  and  are  associated  with 
a higher rate of complications. They cannot be repeated safely in every skin 
type. In general, as a leveling modality, the CO2 fractional laser is an easily 
learned and controlled procedure that is ideal for this purpose. It is too risky, 
however, on thin skin, and the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD or IRD is 
the preferred modality for treating patients with thin skin.

In  general,  tightening  procedures  are  ideal  for  patients  with  all  skin 
types. Patients with concurrent muscle and skin laxity may be best suited 
for  a  treatment  plan  that  includes  surgical  correction,  such  as  a  facelift, 
combined with a tightening procedure to address skin laxity. As mentioned 
previously, these can be performed at the same time. Leveling procedures 
are best for thick and medium-thick skin and should be limited to areas that 
require depth to the URD. Of note, compared with tightening procedures, 
which typically have a healing time of 8 to 10 days, leveling procedures are 
associated with a longer healing time (typically 10 to 12 days). Furthermore, 
recovery  time  (resolution  of  diffuse  erythema  and  blotchiness)  is  approx-
imately  4  to  6  weeks  longer  after  leveling  procedures  compared  with 

Table 5.4  Tightening or Leveling Procedures: Summary

Procedure Type

Comment

Tightening 

Ideal for thin skin, epidermal and dermal stretchable rhytides, scars, large pores, sun damage, dermal 
melasma

Can be achieved by procedures that penetrate to the level of the papillary dermis (PD) or immediate 
reticular dermis (IRD), such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Nonablative lasers or other energy-emitting devices (e.g., radiofrequency or ultrasound) can be used, but 
results are generally suboptimal and inconsistent

Does not correct deep irregularities in skin texture

Can be performed on nonfacial skin (only to the PD level)

More than one procedure can be performed

Can be combined with a CO2 fractional laser procedure for nonstretchable scars
Healing time of 8 to 10 days

Leveling

Ideal for patients with deep static rhytides and nonstretchable scars

Can be achieved by procedures that penetrate to the upper reticular dermis (URD) by means of the 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Can be achieved with CO2 fractional laser treatment
Can be achieved by a combination of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel and the CO2 fractional laser 
procedure

Cannot be repeated safely (with a few exceptions)

Alter skin texture permanently and are associated with a higher rate of complications

Healing time of 10 to 12 days

Leveling procedures should be attempted only after the physician has mastered the technique

Table 5.5  Complications Correlated with Procedure Action and Depth

Mechanism 
of Action

Depth of 
Penetration

Likelihood 
of PIH

Likelihood 
of Scarring

Likelihood of Persistent 
Erythema, Sensitivity, 
Disease Flare-Ups

Exfoliation

Epidermis

Tightening

PD or IRD

Leveling

URD

Very rare

Common

Common

None

Possible

Possible

None

Rare

Common

131

COMBINATION APPROACHES 
TO SKIN REJUVENATION

tightening procedures. A summary of tightening and leveling procedures is 
shown in Table 5.4.

Leveling Procedures and Procedure Depth
Selecting  a  procedure  based  on  its  mechanism  of  action—for  example, 
leveling  versus  tightening—ensures  that  the  procedure  penetrates  to  the 
depth necessary to improve the patient’s specific conditions, while avoiding 
unnecessary depths that can reduce adnexal structures,  melanocytes, and 
fibroblasts  and  possibly  cause  postoperative  complications.  As  mentioned 
elsewhere, the patient’s skin type (see Chapter 4) is also important in deter-
mining  the  optimal  depth  of  penetration  for  a  specific  procedure  because 
certain  skin  types  necessitate  depth  limitations.  Examples  include  thin-
ner  versus  thicker  skin,  original  color  versus  deviated  color,  and  so  forth. 
Reactions  and  complications  as  correlated  to  procedural  depth  are  shown 
in Table 5.5.

COMBINATION APPROACHES TO SKIN 
REJUVENATION

Combining two or more procedures with different mechanisms of action can 
maximize  ultimate  results,  minimize  invasiveness,  and  optimize  safety.  A 
combination of procedures is recommended to avoid unnecessary depth in 
areas where there might be higher risk for textural changes or other compli-
cations. Using multiple procedures can also maximize results as each proce-
dure approaches the problems in a different way. To further clarify, following 
a leveling procedure, the skin has fewer adnexal structures and melanocytes 
and is typically permanently thinner. These changes make it more difficult 
for a physician to perform a second leveling procedure safely, especially in 
patients with initially thinner skin. For that reason, a combined tightening 
and leveling procedure is the safest approach and allows these procedures to 
be repeated, if necessary.

Possible  combinations  of  procedures  for  optimal  skin  rejuvenation  are 
shown  in  Table  5.6.  Figure  5.18  and  Figure  5.19  show  patients  who  under-
went a ZO Controlled Depth Peel followed by CO2 fractional laser treatment. 
Figure  5.20  shows  a  patient  who  underwent  hyfrecation  of  the  dermatosis 

Table 5.6  Combination Procedures for Skin Rejuvenation

Procedures

Example

Comment

A tightening procedure to the papillary 
dermis (PD) to tighten skin and 
correct stretchable scars and wrinkles 
combined with a leveling procedure to 
the URD in areas where such depth is 
needed 

A ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD 
and immediate reticular dermis (IRD) 
on the entire face, followed 
immediately by the CO2 fractional 
laser to the URD in certain areas

This combination provides better results 
than either procedure alone. It increases 
safety because it avoids penetrating to 
unnecessarily deep levels (e.g., the 
upper reticular dermis [URD]) to 
achieve the desired tightness while 
limiting the depth only to areas where 
leveling is desired

A surgical procedure to remove 
excessive skin and/or muscle combined 
with a nonsurgical skin tightening 
procedure to the entire face

A tightening procedure combined with 
neurotoxin injections

A facelift followed by a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel to the PD or IRD on the 
entire face

The tightening from the facelift is 
heightened by additional tightening 
from the peel.

A ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
performed after Botox/Dysport/
Xeomin 

This combination maximizes the 
tightening results from a peel.

Neurotoxin immobilizes the muscles of 
expression and allows maximal 
tightening of skin in the forehead, 
glabella, and around the eyes.

For optimal results, injection of the 
neurotoxin should be performed at least 
1 week before the tightening procedure 
to achieve maximal muscle relaxation 
and optimize skin surface area treated 
with the tightening procedure (e.g., ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel).

This combination simultaneously 
improves skin texture, restores even 
color tone (e.g., in those with dermal 
melanosis, nevi of Ito/Ota/Huri, or 
tattoos), and corrects stretchable 
wrinkles and scars.

This combination is performed in two 
steps: first the vascular or pigment laser 
is used to treat vascular or pigmentary 
lesions, respectively. An endpoint of 
bruising of nonstretchable scars is 
typically used when the FLPD is chosen 
as the vascular laser treatment modality. 
This is followed by a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel to the PD or IRD.

Dermatosis papulosa nigra, condyloma 
accuminata, syringomas, and actinic 
keratoses are first treated by 
electrodessication and immediately 
followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
to the PD or IRD.

A vascular or pigment laser treatment 
combined with a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel to the PD 

Pulse dye laser (FLPD), KTP, or other 
laser that selectively targets 
vasculature or QS-alexandrite, 
QS-ruby, or other laser that selectively 
targets excessive brown pigment—to 
individual lesions—followed by a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the entire 
face or other full treatment area

Electrodessication and gentle 
hyfrecation combined with a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the PD or 
IRD 

132

133

COMBINATION APPROACHES 
TO SKIN REJUVENATION

Figure  5.18 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  original  white  (normal), 
medium thick, and not oily. She was diagnosed as having skin laxity and stretchable and 
unstretchable rhytides around the mouth. (b) The patient was treated for 6 weeks with 
HQ-based ZOMD treatment, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate 
reticular  dermis. This  was  immediately  followed  by  perioral  CO2  fractional  laser  dur-
ing the same treatment session (a combined approach). The patient then continued the 
ZOMD HQ-based program for 3 months. (c) Six months later.

Figure 5.19 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as white (light), medium thick, 
and  nonoily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  laxity  and  rhytides  (stretchable  on  cheeks, 
nonstretchable  in  the  perioral  area).  (b)  After  6  weeks  of  non-HQ-based  Skin  Health 
Restoration  treatment,  she  underwent  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  immediate 
reticular dermis followed by CO2 fractional laser treatment in the perioral area. (c) Six 
days after the combined procedures.

Figure 5.20 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated white (medium), thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having dermatosis papulosa nigra (DPN). (b) One year later. 
After 6 weeks of treatment with HQ-based Skin Health Restoration, she underwent hyfre-
cation of the DPN and had a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis at the same 
surgical session. This was followed by 3 months of HQ-based Skin Health Restoration.

Figure 5.21 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as light white, medium thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having 
laxity and wrinkles. (b) The right side of the patient’s face was treated with a ZO Controlled Depth Peel and the left side with 
CO2 fractional laser. (c) One month after the procedures. Notice greater tightness and less erythema on the peel side compared 
with the laser-treat left side. (d) Three months later. The patient is being treated with non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration.

Figure  5.22 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  white,  medium 
thick,  and  normal  oiliness.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  rhytides  and  laxity.  (b) 
Immediately postoperatively. The patient was treated with 6 weeks of HQ-based Skin 
Health Restoration, followed by CO2 fractional laser treatment on the right side of her 
face  and  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  on  the  left 
side of her face. The purpose was to compare the tightening effects produced individu-
ally by the two different procedures. (c) Four months after the procedure. Notice that 
a greater tightening effect was achieved on the patient’s left side (the ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel side).

papulosa nigra followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel during the same treat-
ment session.

Figure  5.21  and  Figure  5.22  show  a  split-face  comparison  of  the  tighten-
ing  effects  obtained  with  CO2  fractional  laser  resurfacing  and  with  a  ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel. Figure 5.23 shows the steps of a combination of a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel and an ablative CO2 fractional laser treatment.

134

(a)

(d)

(g)

(c)

(f)

(i)

(b)

(e)

(h)

(j)

Figure 5.23 
(a) Application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution (TCA plus blue base) to the face in a controlled, even 
fashion. (b) Characteristic endpoints specific to a successfully completed ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular 
dermis on the face (with the exception of the eyelids, which were treated to the papillary dermis). Notice the confluent, white, 
sheet-like frost without an underlying pink background on the face (with the exception of the upper and lower eyelids). (c, d) 
Immediately following completion of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the patient is treated with the CO2 fractional laser. In this 
patient, the perioral areas are being treated with this combined method to target the unstretchable wrinkles, which are due to 
long-standing solar elastosis. (e, f, g) Notice the irregular texture of the damaged skin on the chin (a combination of sebaceous 
gland  hyperplasia  and  solar  elastosis).  (h,  i)  The  endpoints  of  this  combined  treatment  approach:  pinpoint  bleeding  to  total 
effacement of surface wrinkles/textural irregularities. Feathering of the surrounding areas, including the border of the man-
dibular line and the upper neck, is performed through lower laser energy and density. (j) The appearance of the face, immediately 
following the combined approach (both procedures).

135

136

SKIN REJUVENATION

REFERENCES

  1.  Moran ML. Office-based periorbital rejuvenation. Facial Plast Surg. 2013;29:58-63.
  2.  Mangat DS, Tansavatdi K, Garlich P. Current chemical peels and other resurfacing 

techniques. Facial Plast Surg. 2011;27:3-49.

  3.  Goldman  A,  Wollina  U.  Facial  rejuvenation  for  middle-aged  women:  a  combined 
approach with minimally invasive procedures. Clin Interv Aging. 2010;23;5:293-299.
  4.  Kumari  R,  Thappa  DM.  Comparative  study  of  trichloroacetic  acid  versus  glycolic 
acid chemical peels in the treatment of melasma. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 
2010;76:447.

  5.  Wollina U, Payne CR. Aging well—the role of minimally invasive aesthetic dermato-

logical procedures in women over 65. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2010;9:50-58.

  6.  Rullan P, Karam AM. Chemical peels for darker skin types. Facial Plast Surg Clin 

North Am. 2010;18:111-131.

  7.  Fabbrocini G, De Padova MP, Tosti A. Chemical peels: what’s new and what isn’t 

new but still works well. Facial Plast Surg. 2009;25:329-336.

  8.  Berson DS, Cohen JL, Rendon MI, et al. Clinical role and application of superficial 

chemical peels in today’s practice. J Drugs Dermatol. 2009;8:803-811.

  9.  Hirsch R, Stier M. Complications and their management in cosmetic dermatology. 

Dermatol Clin. 2009;27:505-520.

  10.  Ho  SG,  Chan  HH.  The  Asian  dermatologic  patient:  review  of  common  pigmen-
tary disorders and cutaneous diseases. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2009;10:153-168.
  11.  Fitzgerald R, Graivier MH, Kane M, et al. Appropriate selection and application of 
nonsurgical facial rejuvenation agents and procedures: panel consensus recommen-
dations. Aesthet Surg J. 2010;30(Suppl):36S-45S.

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

CHAPTER 

6

This chapter will address a variety of skin problems without systemic involve-
ment that are seen daily in our clinics. These conditions are grouped into cate-
gories, based on the causative factors, their depth of involvement (epidermal or 
dermal), and their clinical manifestations (Box 6.1). Treatment approaches for 
each of the various conditions within a specific category are similar. Throughout 
this chapter, these topics will be addressed in a way that serves dermatologists, 
plastic surgeons, and other professionals interested in treating specific skin dis-
orders, while also maintaining focus on Skin Health Restoration.

ACNE AND ITS CAUSES

Acne is a common skin disorder that arises from pilosebaceous unit dysfunc-
tion, which consists of a hair follicle and its associated sebaceous gland. Acne 
affects approximately 85% of individuals between the ages of 12 to 24 years. 
Typically, it first manifests at puberty, when increasing androgen levels acti-
vate the sebaceous glands, which begin producing sebum. As androgen levels 
continue to rise, sebaceous glands become hypertrophic, and the amount of 
sebum greatly increases. Sebum is a powerful inflammatory agent that leads to 
the more severe forms of acne and scarring when produced in excess. Sebum 
also disturbs the maturation of keratinocytes (dyskeratosis) by inducing epi-
dermal  inflammation.  These  two  factors—increased  sebum  production  and 
the dyskeratotic keratinocytes—cause occlusion of pores and the subsequent 
appearance of whiteheads. When the trapped material in the pores oxidizes 
and turns dark, whiteheads appear as blackheads. Blackheads are commonly 
seen  in  areas  with  enlarged  pores,  such  as  the  nose.  The  immune  system’s 
response to the excessive sebum on the skin surface, together with the trapped 
sebum in the hair follicle and the bacterial flora (Propionibacterium acnes), 
leads to the appearance of inflammatory cystic lesions that involve the dermis 

138

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Box 6.1

Etiologic Categories of Skin Problems Addressed

■■ Sebum-induced pilosebaceous unit abnormalities  
■■ Melanocytic dysfunction (pigmentary disorders)
■■ Textural (photodamage, extrinsic aging, and scars)

and lead to acne scars. The severity of inflammation leads to the spread of acne 
lesions and the formation of pustules, inflammatory nodules, and more cysts.
Inflammation  induced  by  the  presence  of  increased  sebum  and  P.  acnes 
leads  to  variable  degrees  of  scarring  and  postinflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation  (PIH)  in  certain  patients.  Over  time,  the  chronic  inflammation  with 
its  destructive  effects  damages  skin  texture,  producing  rolling,  boxcar,  and 
ice-pick scarring. Occasionally, hypertrophic scars and keloids can appear in 
predisposed individuals with severe acne. Factors contributing to acne devel-
opment and severity are shown in Box 6.2. The chronological changes in acne 
are shown in Table 6.1.

Box 6.2

Factors Contributing to Acne Development and Severity

■■ Heredity: the size, number or density, sensitivity, and activity level of 

sebaceous glands

■■ Disorders of keratinization, in which corneocytes are not shed at an 
adequate rate. This can cause occlusion of pores and microcomedone 
formation.

■■ Lifestyle, including exposure to:

■■ Practices  that  increase  sebum  production  (e.g.,  hot  showers  or 
baths, saunas or steam rooms, and sweating from physical exer-
tion or warm climates)

■■ Dietary  factors  (nonorganic  dairy  products  from  cows  that  have 
been  given  hormones,  a  diet  with  a  high  glycemic  index  [which 
induces inflammation], and stimulants, such as caffeine)

■■ Inappropriate  skin  care  products  (moisturizers,  which  weaken 

skin, and oil-based makeup)

■■ Hormonal  factors:  systemic  hormonal  abnormalities  (e.g.,  polycys-
tic ovarian syndrome and other conditions associated with excessive 
androgens).  Additionally,  hormonal  changes  before  and  during  a 
woman’s  monthly  menses,  as  well  as  those  that  occur  during  preg-
nancy, may cause acne to develop or flare.

■■ Patient  manipulation  of  acne  lesions:  attempts  to  squeeze  or  extract 
whiteheads or cysts can increase lesion depth, inflammation, and the 
immune response, creating more aggravated acne flare and increasing 
the potential for postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Table 6.1  Chronological Changes in Acne

Stage of Life

Features

Adolescence 

Adulthood

Elderly

Sebaceous glands

Size

Activity

Normal or large

Larger (rosacea)

Smaller

Active

Active or very active

Less active

139

APPROACH TO 
TREATING ACNE

Skin oiliness

Normal or oily

Normal or oily

Acne

Inflammation

Acne course 

None or all types 
may be present

None or all types and 
rosacea 

None to strong 

Strong or very strong

Little to none

Continuous*

Continuous

Diminished

Normal or dry

None or mild

*Acne that persists into adulthood converts to rosacea.

APPROACH TO TREATING ACNE

The range of topical and oral acne treatment options currently on the market 
is so broad that it may seem limitless. Similarly, recommendations on how to 
use specific products (alone or in combination) are numerous. The approach 
presented  here  is  based  on  several  fundamental  beliefs  that  may  contradict 
what many physicians accept as standard in acne treatment. One such belief, 
which lays the foundation for the treatment protocols in this chapter, is that 
acne is preventable. Patients with various types of acne and their treatment are 
shown in Figures 6.1 to 6.7.

Figure  6.1 
(a)  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  original  white,  thick,  and  oily.  She 
was diagnosed as having cystic acne and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (b) Six 
months later. The patient had aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration and applied 
benzoyl peroxide and used isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, simultaneously with topical treat-
ment for 5 months. She also underwent two ZO 3-Step Peel treatments (an exfoliation 
and stimulation procedure).

140

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Figure 6.2 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (light), oily, with large 
pores. She was diagnosed as having cystic acne. (b) Six months later. The patient under-
went 5 months of HQ-based Skin Health Restoration (to provide exfoliation, stimulation 
blending,  and  epidermal  melanocyte  stabilization)  and  acne  treatment  (with  benzoyl 
peroxide).  She  used  isotretinoin,  20  mg/day,  simultaneously  with  topical  treatments. 
After 5 months of treatment, she began a maintenance program.

ACNE PREVENTION

Acne is preventable only if addressed at the initial stages, when whiteheads 
and blackheads begin to appear, but before sebum-induced inflammation can 
trigger the immune response. Every effort should be made to eliminate white-
heads and blackheads in the early, noninflammatory acne lesions stage. They 
can  be  extracted  with  a  comedone  extractor,  which  applies  equal  pressure 
circumferentially around the comedone and causes the sebum and follicular 

Figure 6.3 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark), thick, and oily. 
She  was  diagnosed  as  having  cystic  acne,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  and 
acne scars. Before her visit, she had been treated by another physician with isotretinoin, 
60 mg/day, for 5 months but was not prescribed any topical treatment.

141

APPROACH TO 
TREATING ACNE

Figure 6.4 
(a) The patient had skin classified as black (medium), medium thickness, 
and  oily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  cystic  acne,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmenta-
tion,  and  acne  scars.  She  had  been  treated  only  with  isotretinoin  and  moisturizers  at 
another clinic. (b) Six months later. The patient was treated with HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration to provide correction, stabilization, and stimulation.

debris to be expelled outward. Manual picking should be avoided because it 
can push the sebum and follicular debris deeper and induce inflammation and 
cyst formation. Use of a good acne preventive program, consisting of cleanser, 
scrub, and a sebum-reducing agent, can help eliminate whiteheads and black-
heads in an early stage (Table 6.2). If, however, some inflammatory acneiform 
cysts appear, intralesional steroid injections (triamcinolone acetonide, diluted 

Figure 6.5 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated black (light), medium thick, 
and oily. He was diagnosed as having cystic acne, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 
and acne scars. (b) Six months later. The patient was treated with non-HQ-based Skin 
Health  Restoration  for  melanocyte  stabilization  and  stimulation.  He  was  also  treated 
with isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, and underwent one ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papil-
lary dermis. Notice the restoration of natural skin color tone.

142

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Figure 6.6  
(a) The patient had skin classified as medium black, thick, and oily. She was 
diagnosed  as  having  active  cystic  acne  and  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation.  (b) 
Five months later. The patient followed an aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration 
program. On week 6, she had a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis. After 
healing,  she  restarted  the  same  Skin  Health  Restoration  regimen  as  before  and  began 
using isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, for 5 months.

to a concentration of 2.5 mg/mL) should be used to prevent or arrest the focal 
inflammation early.

Moreover, P. acnes does not directly cause acne. Rather, these bacteria play a 
secondary role in the condition. The complete pathophysiology of acne has not 
yet been elucidated, and the etiology appears to be multifactorial. Focusing on 

Figure 6.7 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (light), medium thick-
ness, and very oily. He was diagnosed as having cystic acne, acne scars, and postinflam-
matory hyperpigmentation. Treatment with antibiotics and acne topical treatments by 
other physicians had failed to improve his condition. (b) Five months later. The patient 
had HQ-based Skin Health Restoration to provide exfoliation, stimulation and blending 
(tretinoin plus HQ), and epidermal melanocyte stabilization. He also used topical ben-
zoyl peroxide and isotretinoin, 20 mg/day.

Table 6.2  Acne Prevention Steps and Products

Steps

Skin Preparation

Cleansing

Scrub

Products

Oily skin cleanser, AM and PM

Nonirritating Ossential Exfoliating Polish once daily

Sebum reduction

Offects TE-Pads (sebum-reducing agent), AM and PM

Stabilization and correction

Alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) for 
exfoliation

Acne-specific topical agents

Barrier repair and stabilizing agents

Lifestyle Changes

Modify lifestyle factors to prevent 
increased sebum production

Glycogent (topical exfoliator), AM

Alternate AHAs with acne-specific topical agents, such as Aknetrol (benzoyl 
peroxide), every 4-5 months to prevent bacterial resistance

Ossential Daily Power Defense (combination of retinol, antioxidants, and anti-
inflammatory agents)

Never use moisturizers, even the noncomedogenic variety, or heavy foundation. Both 
can alter skin barrier function and increase skin irritability, which can lead to 
inflammation and cystic acne

bacteria does not address the pathogenesis of the condition and, in practice, 
leads to high rates of reoccurrence and treatment failure. In actuality, sebum 
and the resulting inflammation are the main problems in acne, and the con-
trol of sebum may be the key to acne prevention and treatment.

ACNE TREATMENT STRATEGY

Acne treatment should represent only a portion of the broader approach that 
aims to restore general skin health. Healthy skin is less susceptible to acne. 
Accordingly, the treatment objective should be not only to temporarily slow 
down sebaceous gland activity and dry up the pimples but also to restore skin 
health while correcting all of the contributing factors responsible for causing 
acne at the same time.

The  patient’s  first  consultation  is  especially  important.  It  should  provide 
the  patient  (and  physician)  with  an  idea  of  what’s  going  on  medically  and 
what treatment options are available. This sets the stage for the formulation 
of both a long- and short-term treatment strategy. As such, the first consulta-
tion should include a thorough patient history and a physical examination. If 
an  underlying  systemic  hormonal  abnormality  is  suspected  as  contributing 
to the patient’s acne, the patient should have appropriate blood tests ordered 
during the visit; a consult with an endocrinologist may also be appropriate in 
this setting. In female teenagers, it appears that certain birth control pills can 
help tremendously to regulate hormonal factors that play a major role in their 
acne condition. Such pills include drosperinone (Yaz), which counteracts the 
androgens  that  drive  sebum  production.  Additionally,  other  agents  such  as 
spironolactone or insulin resistance agents (e.g., metformin) can be used. The 
physician must also determine whether a systemic antibiotic or isotretinoin 
is indicated. In short, the physician must determine the acne type (comedo-
genic [cystic and nonscarring] or severe [cystic and scarring]) and, based on 
the type, inform the patient (Box 6.3) and discuss treatment options. Patient 

143

144

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Box 6.3

Patient Education

Necessary discussion points with the acne patient include the following:

■■ Causative factors (etiology)
■■ Treatment  course  and  expected  duration,  including  the  products 

“essential” for treatment

■■ Anticipated  reactions,  which  usually  include  initial  irritation,  dry-
ness, and flaking or peeling of skin caused by topical medications
■■ Patient responsibilities during treatment, which include strict adher-
ence  to  the  treatment  program  and  ability  to  return  for  regular 
 follow-up visits

compliance with a daily treatment regimen is essential, and drawing pictures 
for patients while explaining their condition is helpful.

The  topical  approach  to  treating  acne,  while  at  the  same  time  improv-
ing overall skin health, includes the following: skin preparation, addition of 
 disease-specific agents (if indicated), exfoliation and stimulation of epidermal 
renewal, barrier repair, stimulation of the dermis (for deep repair), hydration 
and calming (only if needed for skin dryness), and sun protection (Box 6.4).

Treatment should begin with appropriate topical agents; systemic agents can 
be added when needed. Procedures such as exfoliative peels and photodynamic 

Box 6.4

Skin Health Restoration and Treatment in Acne Patients

 1.  Skin preparation:

■■ Washing  face  twice  daily  with  a  cleanser  specifically  formulated 

for oily skin

■■ Mechanical exfoliation
■■ Application of a sebum-reducing astringent

 2.  Addition of disease-specific agents

■■ Examples include topical benzoyl peroxide, antibiotics, dapsone, 

adapalene, tazarotene

 3.  Epidermal renewal—alternate daily with the disease-specific agents
■■ Exfoliation: all patients should use topical alpha-hydroxy acids
■■ Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  if  present:  hydroquinone 

(HQ) or non-HQ agents can be added

 4.  Barrier repair agents (for epidermal stabilization), AM
 5.  Stimulation of the skin (for deep repair), PM

■■ Tretinoin (retinoic acid) or tretinoin plus HQ (blending)

 6.  Hydration  and  calming  of  the  skin  (as  needed,  to  reduce  reactions 

and improve compliance) (optional)

 7.  Protection of the skin—sunscreen daily, nonoily makeup

145

APPROACH TO 
TREATING ACNE

therapy  (PDT),  with  blue  or  red  light,  can  be  used  to  assist  treatment,  but 
never as the first line of treatment. For example, if PDT is going to be used, 
one should start with all essential and supportive topical agents (see Chapter 
3). When the acne is somewhat controlled and the skin is more tolerant (e.g., 
after at least 6 weeks on a topical regimen containing essential topical agents), 
PDT  sessions  can  be  added  to  the  overall  treatment  plan  to  accelerate  and 
improve results. The topical photosensitizing agent applied before PDT treat-
ment collects preferentially in sebaceous glands, and the subsequent exposure 
to light of the appropriate wavelength destroys those glands.

Immediate Interventions during Initial Visits
Along with the discussion and planning that occurs at a patient’s first visit, the 
physician can take certain steps to resolve some of the patient’s most pressing 
acne  issues  during  that  same  visit.  These  include  extraction  of  comedones, 
intralesional steroid injection into inflammatory acneiform nodules, and ini-
tiation of a short course of oral steroids (Box 6.5). Furthermore, to help unclog 
pores and dry cystic lesions faster, physicians can use exfoliative procedures or 
products, including alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs), beta-hydroxy acids (BHAs), 
or exfoliative chemical peels (Invisapeel, Non-irritating Ossential Exfoliating 
Polish once daily, Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair, ZO 3-Step Peel) 
after the first maturation cycle of treatment (6 weeks) has been completed.

The Skin Health Restoration program for the acne patient is shown in Box 

6.6, and the treatment duration and phases are shown in Box 6.7.

Dr. Zein Obagi’s Revised Acne Classification
Current  acne  classifications  (mild,  recalcitrant,  severe;  comedogenic,  cystic 
adult acne—conglobata, necrotica, keloidae) are merely descriptive terms that 

Box 6.5

Early Acne Interventions (during Initial Visits)

■■ Extraction of individual comedones
■■ Injection of active inflammatory acneiform nodules and cysts (to stop 

inflammation and prevent scarring)

■■ Initiation of a 1-week course of oral systemic steroids (if not contra-
indicated) in patients with severe cystic acne that involves the face, 
back, or chest

■■ Methylprednisolone in tapered doses (60-50-40-30-20-10-5 mg/day), 

which can be helpful in severe cases

■■ If needed to arrest inflammation (while the patient is also starting on 
oral  isotretinoin):  repeated  additional  courses  of  oral  systemic  ste-
roids (1 week per month for two to three courses) until isotretinoin 
benefits become apparent

■■ If systemic steroids are contraindicated, an alternate anti-inflammatory 
agent, such as 200 mg ibuprofen daily for 10 days, repeated once a 
month during the first three keratin maturation cycles (18 weeks) of 
treatment

146

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Box 6.6

Skin Health Restoration Program for the Acne Patient

■■ Preparation of the skin with oily skin cleanser, mechanical exfolia-

tion, and a sebum-reducing astringent

■■ Addition of a disease-specific agent or agents, such as topical benzoyl 

peroxide, antibiotic, dapsone, adapalene, or tazarotene, AM

■■ Epidermal renewal: alternated daily with the disease-specific agents

■■ Exfoliation: topical alpha-hydroxy acids in all patients
■■ Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  (if  present):  addition  of 

hydroquinone (HQ) or non-HQ agents

■■ Barrier repair agents, AM
■■ Stimulation of the skin (for deep repair), PM
■■ Tretinoin (retinoic acid) or tretinoin + HQ (blending)
■■ Hydration  and  calming  of  the  skin  (as  needed,  to  reduce  reactions 

and improve compliance) (optional)

■■ Protection of the skin: sunscreen daily, nonoily makeup (optional)

do  little  more  than  confuse  physicians  and  patients.  Instead,  the  following 
suggested  classification  (Table  6.3)  provides  more  clear  objectives  and  frees 
physicians from the restrictions that conventional wisdom imposes on proper 
treatment choice.

SYSTEMIC TREATMENTS FOR ACNE

At the first visit, when discussing and formulating the treatment plan, phy-
sicians  should  inform  patients  that  more  severe  cases  of  acne  and  those 
cases that are not responding to topical treatment may require concomitant 

Box 6.7

Treatment Duration and Phases in Acne Treatment

Treatment duration: three keratinocyte maturation cycles (KMCs), which 
are 6 weeks each (18 weeks total), in which each cycle represents a treat-
ment phase. These include the following:

 1.  Repair phase: expected skin reaction to topical medications
 2.  Tolerance phase: reactions begin to subside; skin improvement starts 

to become noticeable

 3.  Completion phase: minimal to no skin reactions persist, and maxi-

mal improvements are seen

Every patient should follow a maintenance program after completion 

of active treatment to prevent recurrence.

Table 6.3  Acne Classification

Type of Acne

Comedogenic

Comment

Comedones without cysts or scars:

Prevention is possible and recommended.

Cystic, no scars 

Acne with cysts but no visible scars

Cystic with scars

Cystic acne with visible scars

147

APPROACH TO 
TREATING ACNE

systemic treatment. Similarly, patients presenting with cystic acne and subse-
quent active scarring may require concurrent systemic treatments such as oral 
antibiotics, isotretinoin, spironolactone, or other agents.

If acne improvement after one keratin maturation cycle (KMC) (6 weeks) is 
minimal and new lesions continue to appear despite patient compliance with 
a thorough topical regimen, the physician has two options:

•  Add antibiotics for 1 to 2 months (if acne scars are not present), with the 
plan  to  wean  the  patient  off  the  antibiotics  as  soon  as  improvement  is 
achieved.

•  Add isotretinoin (especially if acne scarring is actively occurring).

Role of Antibiotics
Many physicians prescribe topical and/or oral antibiotics for acne, using the 
rationale that these agents will kill P. acnes and other potential strains of bac-
teria and reduce inflammation. However, such an approach introduces con-
cerns  that  likely  outweigh  these  treatments’  merits.  In  particular,  research 
shows that patients using topical or systemic antibiotics for acne should use 
them in pulsed fashion to reduce the potential for the development of antibi-
otic resistance. Specifically, after a patient has used one antibiotic agent for 2 
or 3 months, he or she should be switched to another agent.

Additionally,  oral  antibiotics  have  the  potential  for  many  side  effects. 
These  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  bacterial  resistance,  gastrointestinal 
upset, photosensitivity, allergic reactions (including anaphylaxis), and, rarely, 
severe  cutaneous  immune  system  reactions,  such  as  Stevens-Johnson  syn-
drome.  For  these  reasons,  the  physician  should  limit  acne  treatment  with 
systemic antibiotics to 2- to 3-month intervals and repeat only when neces-
sary (Box 6.8). Overall, the benefits of systemic antibiotics in acne are likely 
overstated.

Box 6.8

Antibiotic Treatment of Acne

■■ Systemic antibiotics are not essential in acne treatment.
■■ If systemic antibiotics are used, they should be administered in 2- to 
3-month “pulses,” followed by rest and subsequent treatment with a 
different antibiotic, if necessary.

■■ This applies only in cases in which the acne is responding well to the 
systemic antibiotics and no postinflammatory scarring is appearing.

148

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Role of Oral Isotretinoin
Isotretinoin is extremely effective in the treatment of acne because it addresses 
the role of sebum. Namely, isotretinoin reduces sebum production that then 
decreases inflammation, lowers P. acnes counts, and inhibits microcomedone 
formation. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), it is 
indicated for patients who have severe, inflammatory, recalcitrant nodular or 
cystic acne.

In  2006,  the  FDA  implemented  the  iPLEDGE  Program,  which  manages 
potential risks of isotretinoin use by educating patients in an attempt to elimi-
nate fetal exposures to this highly teratogenic drug. Accordingly, it cannot be 
given  to  women  who  are  breastfeeding,  pregnant,  or  planning  a  pregnancy 
in the upcoming 6 months or so (assuming a 5-month treatment course with 
isotretinoin).

Isotretinoin also has been associated with increased risk for developing or 
worsening depression (including suicidal ideation). The association between 
isotretinoin use and an increased risk for inflammatory bowel disease has not 
been completely elucidated, but evidence for an association does not appear 
to  be  strong.  Other  potential  contraindications  include  hepatic  dysfunction 
(isotretinoin is metabolized in the liver), severe hyperlipidemia (isotretinoin 
can lead to a slight elevation in cholesterol), anorexia nervosa, and osteopo-
rosis. If isotretinoin is contraindicated or the patient declines the drug after 
a thorough discussion of its risks and benefits, the physician may prescribe a 
series of treatments with photodynamic therapy.

Guidelines Regarding Isotretinoin
During the past decade, the reputation of isotretinoin has been tarnished, partic-
ularly in the popular press, as lawsuits over potential and purported side effects 
have garnered headlines by targeting prescribers and manufacturers of isotreti-
noin. These developments have created a fear of isotretinoin that the public and 
many physicians now share. Many patients, even those with severe, recalcitrant, 
scarring acne, refuse to consider the drug because they have researched it online 
and have come across various sources claiming harmful effects from the medi-
cation. Also, many physicians, afraid of lawsuits and averse to the additional 
work  required  to  initiate  and  maintain  patients  on  isotretinoin  through  the 
FDA iPLEDGE Program, hesitate to prescribe isotretinoin.

Many of these concerns appear to be exaggerated. To date, isotretinoin has 
usually been prescribed for patients with severe nodulocystic acne that resists 
traditional  treatments  such  as  topical  agents,  as  well  as  systemic  antibiotics 
and hormonal therapies. The dosage recommended by the FDA and isotreti-
noin manufacturers is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg of body weight/day, taken for an average 
of 5 months. Our clinic has had great success using oral isotretinoin in much 
lower doses (i.e., 10 to 20 mg/day) for a similar total treatment duration of 5 
months, while concomitantly treating the acne in an aggressive topical fash-
ion. In contrast  to our  method  (low-dose daily isotretinoin in combination 
with aggressive daily topical treatment), many doctors tell patients not to use 
any topical acne treatments, while treating patients with much higher doses 
(i.e.,  60  to  80  mg/day)  of  isotretinoin.  Instead,  these  patients  are  instructed 
to use moisturizers to reduce the skin dryness that invariably accompanies 
high-dose  isotretinoin  use.  The  latter  approach  suffers  from  the  following 
three fundamental flaws:

149

APPROACH TO 
TREATING ACNE

  1. The  recommendation  that  physicians  prescribe  isotretinoin  only  for 
patients with severe acne unresponsive to traditional treatments is ambig-
uous and unfair to many patients who otherwise could benefit from the 
drug. Rather, a more flexible indication considers the following factors:
•  Acne severity
•  Presence of early acne scarring
•  Patient’s psychological condition and social requirements
•  Presence of other skin diseases or abnormalities

    Following these guidelines will provide patients with a more effective, 
compassionate  treatment  plan,  which  prevents  unnecessary  long-term 
suffering, scarring, and complications.

  2. The current recommended daily dose (0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day) is too high. Our 
clinic has found that the dose of isotretinoin is relatively proportional to the 
severity and the incidence of certain side effects, such as skin dryness, that 
patients experience. The FDA selected this dose to maximize the benefits 
of isotretinoin (shrinking sebaceous glands and reducing sebum) within 
5 months. However, side effects of all systemic retinoids are similar, and 
most of them are dose related. Being prescribed a dose of isotretinoin that 
is all but guaranteed to cause severe skin and mucosal dryness and irrita-
tion has turned away many patients who could benefit from isotretinoin.

  3. The trend of not prescribing topical acne therapies to patients while they 
are taking isotretinoin is also highly counterproductive. Using a lower 
daily  dose  allows  patients  to  incorporate  topical  treatments  that  can 
restore the skin’s barrier function and the integrity of the pilosebaceous 
units, while also addressing pigmentary changes and eliminating com-
edones. In our experience, lower dose systemic isotretinoin treatment in 
combination with more aggressive, concomitant topical acne treatment 
leads to longer remissions and better overall results.

Isotretinoin is a potent drug with a high potential for serious complications 
when  used  on  improperly  screened  patients  and  warrants  strict  prescribing 
guidelines. However, after spending several years evaluating varying doses and 
monitoring  recurrence  rates  achieved  with  isotretinoin  monotherapy  versus 
concomitant use of topical agents at our clinic, we now recommend the follow-
ing for prescribing isotretinoin therapy:

•  Use a fixed dose of 10 to 40 mg daily (most commonly 20 mg/day) taken 
twice a week. This is enough to reduce sebum production, arrest sebum-
induced  inflammation,  and  prevent  the  immune  response  that  cre-
ates tissue destruction and scarring. In fact, the remission lengths and 
recurrence rates achieved by our patients are exactly the same as those 
achieved with high daily isotretinoin doses. Yet the lower dose creates 
less dryness and other systemic side effects, while also allowing patients 
to incorporate beneficial topical treatments. Specifically, we recommend 
that physicians never prescribe more than 40 mg daily and that they use 
topical acne treatments simultaneously.

•  In teenagers, start at 10 to 20 mg of isotretinoin daily, or even every other 
day, along with a daily topical Skin Health Restoration regimen (correc-
tion, stimulation, and acne-specific agents).

•  Continue daily systemic acne treatment with isotretinoin, in combina-

tion with topical treatments, for 5 months.

 
150

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Box 6.9

Conditions Indicating Discontinuation of Isotretinoin

■■ Significant elevation of cholesterol or liver enzymes
■■ Development of colitis, depression, or any other systemic complaint

•  After 5 months of treatment, do not discontinue isotretinoin abruptly. 
Rather, reduce dosing from daily to twice a week for 2 months after the 
5-month course of daily treatment.

•  After patients fully complete isotretinoin treatment (including the taper), 
begin  a  3-month  observation  period.  If  acne  flares  during  this  time, 
restart isotretinoin for an additional 1 to 2 months.

•  Be  flexible.  Monitor  patients  for  depression  (work  with  the  patient’s 
therapist  in  this  regard)  and  evaluate  for  severe  dryness  or  other  side 
effects. If any of these side effects occur, allow the patient to reduce dos-
ing to twice weekly, or even to temporarily stop isotretinoin and restart, 
as appropriate.

Isotretinoin Caveats
Whichever regimen one selects, because isotretinoin is a potent drug with the 
potential to cause serious side effects, physicians should follow all precautions 
suggested by the iPLEDGE Program. Accordingly, prescribers must adminis-
ter monthly pregnancy tests for females of childbearing potential (and ensure 
they remain negative throughout the course of treatment), monitor patients’ 
blood levels at baseline and during treatment if indicated, and stop isotreti-
noin whenever any of the conditions shown in Box 6.9 occur.

Addressing Teratogenicity
Because of public misconceptions and fears about isotretinoin, many women 
incorrectly  believe  that  they  should  wait  1  year  after  stopping  isotretinoin 
to  become  pregnant.  However,  we  now  know  that  the  body  does  not  store 
isotretinoin,  as  it  does  vitamin  A,  and  that  isotretinoin  is  not  detectable 
in the blood within 5 to 7 days of discontinuing use. Therefore, we can tell 
women  of  childbearing  potential  that  they  can  become  pregnant  1  month 
after stopping isotretinoin. Also, because isotretinoin does not affect sperm 
quality in any way, males taking isotretinoin need no such restrictions.

ROSACEA

Rosacea,  a  subtype  of  acne,  is  a  disorder  of  the  pilosebaceous  units,  which 
affects both the skin’s appearance and texture. In acne, sebaceous glands can 
be large and/or hyperactive, whereas in rosacea, the glands enlarge gradually as 
the person ages. Dermatologic and popular literature frequently characterizes 
rosacea as red or pink skin; however, this is inaccurate because some patients 
may  not  show  redness.  In  general,  hallmarks  of  rosacea  include  transient 

redness (flushing), which can sometimes be persistent, plus an increased num-
ber of visible telangiectasias and, in many cases, papules and pustules. These 
symptoms typically appear on the central face in a symmetrical distribution, 
although other body sites, including the upper trunk and neck, can also be 
affected. Figures 6.8 to 6.12 show that rosacea can present in a wide spectrum 

151

ROSACEA

Figure 6.8 
(a) The patient had skin classified as light white and oily. She was diagnosed as 
having large pores, rosacea, and erythema. (b) Six months later. The patient followed non-
HQ-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  to  provide  correction,  stabilization,  and  stimulation 
for five months, during which time she received two FLDP laser treatments for erythema.

Figure 6.9 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian, medium thick, and very 
oily. She was diagnosed as having rosacea, enlarged pores, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, 
and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Topical treatments and antibiotics had failed 
to improve her condition. (b) Five months later. The patient had HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration  with  exfoliation,  correction,  blending  (tretinoin  and  HQ),  and  epidermal 
melanocyte stabilization. She was treated with isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, simultaneously 
with  the  topical  medication.  During  the  treatment,  she  underwent  two  ZO  Retinol 
Stimulation Peel treatments.

152

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Figure 6.10 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (medium), thick, and oily. 
She was diagnosed as having rosacea, manifested by general erythema, telangiectasias, and 
skin sensitivity. Her history revealed many years of treatment with fluorinated corticoste-
roids (which caused steroid atrophy) and moisturizers. (b) Eight months later. The patient 
had non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration with emphasis on barrier function repair, epi-
dermal  stabilization,  and  mild  stimulation  initially.  Stimulation  strength  was  gradually 
increased, and her skin became tolerant after 4 months. She underwent four FLDP laser 
treatments for the erythema. On her third month of treatment, she began isotretinoin, 20 
mg/day, twice weekly to suppress sebum and sebum-induced inflammation.

of clinical situations and with many variations. With an overall prevalence of 
up to 10% in the general population, rosacea strikes women more often than 
men. However, affected men are more likely to progress to advanced stages 
(including  prominent  rhinophyma).  Rosacea  is  typically  diagnosed  in  the 
third or fourth decade of life and in those with a history of adolescent acne. 
The chronological changes characteristic of rosacea are shown in Table 6.4.

Experts disagree about the precise etiology of rosacea; it is likely multifac-
torial with hereditary and environmental influences. In many patients, acne 
first appears in the teenage years and over time can gradually evolve into rosa-
cea, often without being recognized by the patient or physician until signifi-
cant skin texture damage has occurred. Rosacea usually progresses through 
the following stages:

•  Erythema
•  Flushing  (with  or  without  generalized  facial  edema  and/or  ocular 

symptoms; namely, blepharitis and conjunctivitis)

•  Papules and pustules
•  Rhinophyma  (hypertrophic  sebaceous  glands  leading  to  an  enlarged 

nose)

The  range  of  clinical  manifestations  makes  rosacea  a  great  imitator  of 
many  other  dermatologic  conditions  (Box  6.10).  Because  of  this,  rosacea  is 
frequently misdiagnosed by physicians. The cyclical (recurring and remitting) 
nature of rosacea further contributes to physicians’ propensity to misdiagnose 
the condition as adult acne or one of several types of dermatitis. Misdiagnosis 
results in the prescription of inappropriate treatment.

153

ROSACEA

Figure 6.11 
(a) The patient had skin classified as light white, medium thickness, and 
oily. She was diagnosed as having granulomatous rosacea, resistant to traditional treat-
ment. Notice the deformity of the chin. (b) One year later. The patient had aggressive 
non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration along with metronidazole, intralesional steroid 
injections, and isotretinoin, 20 mg/day. She had FLPD laser treatment to decrease ery-
thema and break up the granulomas. Five months after discontinuing isotretinoin, a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis was performed.

Figure 6.12 
(a) The patient had skin classified as normal white, medium, and oily. She 
was diagnosed as having enlarged pores, rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, stretchable acne 
scars, and mild laxity. (b) The patient immediately after a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to 
the immediate reticular dermis, performed after 6 weeks of non-HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration. Notice the even blue frost with no pink background. (c) Five months later. 
The patient had Skin Health Restoration (correction, epidermal stabilization, and stimu-
lation) and also used metronidazole in the morning. Isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, was added 
to the Skin Health Restoration program after complete healing from the peel and con-
tinued for 4 months.

Table 6.4  Chronological Changes in Sebaceous Glands

Period of Life

Features

Adolescence 

Adulthood

Advanced Years

Sebaceous gland size*

Large or hyperactive, resulting 
in acne and oily skin

Large or enlarging, resulting in 
hyperplasia, adenomas, and rosacea

Hypertrophy, adenomas, 
rhinophyma

Skin oiliness

Acne 

Oily

Present

Excessively oily

Variable

Texture changes, acne-like cysts, 
granulomas

Severe textural damage

Inflammation

Strong 

Increasing 

Variable

*Increased size of the sebaceous glands implies increased activity (sebum production).

Box 6.10

Conditions that May Be Mistaken for Rosacea

■■ Adult acne
■■ Seborrheic dermatitis
■■ Allergic contact or irritant dermatitis
■■ Folliculitis
■■ Infections
■■ Photosensitizing conditions

DIAGNOSING ROSACEA

To  counter  the  misconceptions  and  uncertainties  about  rosacea,  consider 
that a diagnosis of rosacea generally requires the presence of sebaceous gland 
abnormalities plus two or more of the manifestations shown in Box 6.11. The 
only  exception  is  that,  rarely,  rosacea  may  initially  present  as  a  perioral 
dermatitis-like rash or edema alone, without any other symptoms.

With these symptoms in mind, diagnosing rosacea requires inspecting skin 
carefully, looking for sebaceous gland hyperplasia and adenomas, as well as signs 

Box 6.11

Rosacea Signs and Symptoms

■■ Erythema, telangiectasias
■■ Oily skin and history of acne
■■ Changes in skin texture (hypertrophy, rhinophyma)
■■ Thick, glabrous skin with enlarged pores
■■ Skin sensitivity, irritability
■■ Involvement of the mucosal surfaces of the eyes and eyelids (blepha-

ritis, conjunctivitis) and scalp (pustules, dandruff)

■■ Pustules, acne-like cysts, granulomas
■■ Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation

154

155

ROSACEA

of inflammation and hypertrophic changes (in the nose, cheeks, and chin). About 
15% to 20% of patients with cutaneous rosacea have concurrent ocular involve-
ment (ocular rosacea). In about one out of five of these cases, the ocular manifesta-
tions appear first. These can include irritation, redness, dry eyes, itching, burning, 
a foreign body sensation, photosensitivity, and recurrent styes and eye infections.
No single histological, serological, or other diagnostic test can specifically 
confirm the presence or absence of rosacea. However, physicians can perform 
various diagnostic tests, such as bacterial cultures, skin scrapings (with KOH 
evaluation to look for fungi and spores), patch tests, and biopsies to rule out 
conditions with a similar appearance.

POTENTIAL CAUSES OF ROSACEA

Though there’s a dearth of definitive research regarding the causes of rosacea, 
experts  have  identified  several  factors  that  appear  to  play  major  roles  in  its 
development and severity (Box 6.12).

Although some of the conflicting opinions regarding the cause or causes of 
rosacea have merit, as in acne, sebaceous gland size and activity are the main 
culprits (Box 6.13). Therefore, to better understand the skin signs of rosacea 
and how best to treat them, one must understand the activities of sebaceous 

Box 6.12

Possible Causes of Rosacea

■■ Genetic tendency: rosacea occurs in families, in fair-skinned people of 
Celtic or northern European descent, and in individuals with oily skin.
■■ Hormonal fluctuations: rosacea typically begins appearing from the 
age of 30 years and older; it also commonly strikes women during 
menopause.

■■ Lifestyle  triggers:  for  some  sufferers,  avoiding  a  wide  range  of  the 
most common potential triggers (e.g., alcohol, spicy foods, hot tem-
peratures,  ultraviolet  exposure,  and  physical  exertion)  appears  to 
minimize rosacea flares.

■■ Parasitic mites (Demodex folliculorum, Demodex brevis): some stud-
ies have shown that the skin of patients with rosacea harbors above-
normal amounts of these mites.

■■ Bacterial:  treatment  of  Helicobacter  pylori,  for  example,  often 

improves rosacea symptoms.

Box 6.13

Main Causes of Rosacea

Sebaceous gland size and activity are the main causes of rosacea.

156

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

glands over a normal lifespan and the various skin changes that this activity 
can induce.

At puberty, rising androgen levels increase sebaceous gland activity, lead-
ing  to  increased  sebum  production.  Increased  sebum  induces  a  severe  level 
of inflammation, which is the source of most rosacea symptoms. Focal and 
generalized skin hypertrophy due to the enlargement of sebaceous glands also 
occurs.  In  some  patients,  acne  lesions  and  nodules,  as  well  as  granulomas, 
continue  to  appear,  whereas  in  others,  erythema,  telangiectasias,  hyperpig-
mentation, and textural damage are the dominant forms of presentation.

ROSACEA TREATMENT

As reflected in the current lack of consensus regarding how best to define rosa-
cea and establish its cause, physicians typically focus mainly on relieving its 
symptoms instead of addressing its cause. To that end, physicians commonly 
prescribe topical metronidazole, steroids, moisturizers, sulfa-based products, 
retinoids (occasionally), and oral antibiotics. Also, doctors frequently use laser 
and intense pulsed light (IPL) treatments to treat the erythema of rosacea and 
photodynamic therapy (PDT) to suppress sebaceous gland activity. These reg-
imens deliver short-lived improvements at best because they fail to address the 
underlying sebaceous gland hyperactivity and the damage to the skin’s bar-
rier function. Following a comprehensive treatment plan, with attention paid 
to  concurrent  Skin  Health  Restoration  measures,  maximizes  each  patient’s 
chance for successful treatment and long-term management of rosacea. This 
treatment plan rests on the following fundamental principles: 1) rosacea can-
not be prevented or cured; however, it can be treated and controlled, and its 
manifestations can be reversed; and 2) for treatment to succeed, well-defined 
targets and objectives must be addressed.

Rosacea can aggravate and contribute to the failure of treatment of other 
skin conditions. For example, melasma will not respond to treatment if the 
patient’s rosacea is not simultaneously treated. And trying to treat erythema 
or  telangiectasias  using  IPL  devices  or  vascular  lasers  before  controlling 
rosacea  can  aggravate  the  condition.  Attempting  to  perform  any  proce-
dures while rosacea is still active can lead to a flare-up and a high risk for 
complications

Rosacea Treatment Steps
Early,  mild  rosacea  (with  minor  textural  changes  and  acne  activity)  gener-
ally responds to topical agents and PDT. Advanced rosacea (with severe tex-
tural changes and acne), however, requires a more aggressive approach with 
topical agents and systemic isotretinoin. If isotretinoin is contraindicated, a 
series of PDT treatments, in addition to the daily topical treatment regimen, 
is recommended. Also, certain other procedures such as chemical peels, focal 
electrodessication, the CO2 fractional laser, and certain other laser treatments, 
can be of additional use.

Step  A.  Treat  sebaceous  gland  enlargement  and  hyperactivity  to 
reduce sebum production, which helps in suppressing skin inflamma-
tion,  arresting  breakouts  (papules  and  pustules,  cysts,  and  nodules) 

157

ROSACEA

and preventing further textural damage. To that end, use one or more 
of the following therapies:
•  PDT (for milder cases)
•  Oral isotretinoin (for more effective treatment and more advanced 

cases)

•  CO2 fractional laser: in patients desiring improvement in skin texture, 
we perform the CO2 fractional laser treatment first, then, immediately 
after  the  laser  procedure,  start  that  patient  on  a  5-month  course  of 
daily oral, low-dose isotretinoin.

Step B: Improve skin tolerance. Restoring a strong skin barrier func-
tion requires using Skin Health Restoration principles (correction and 
stabilization).

Step  C:  Treat  rosacea-induced  PIH  and  discoloration.  This  can  be 
accomplished by using HQ (bleaching and blending) or by non-HQ 
melanocyte stabilization in a Skin Health Restoration program.

Step D: Calm acne-like eruptions and shrink enlarged pores. As dis-
cussed  with  acne  treatment,  targeting  whiteheads  and  blackheads, 
cysts, nodules, and granulomas requires using the following measures:
•  To prepare the skin, patients should use a cleanser designed for oily 
skin,  followed  by  mechanical  exfoliation  with  an  exfoliating  scrub 
once  daily  to  stimulate  epidermal  renewal  and  provide  deep  pore 
cleansing,  and  then  application  of  a  topical  astringent  to  eliminate 
surface sebum twice daily.

•  The physician may add one or more of the following disease-specific 

agents, as needed:
 − Benzoyl peroxide has antibacterial properties that reduce rosacea-
related inflammation. This agent may initially cause stinging and 
erythema in patients with barrier dysfunction. However, reactions 
are generally short lived, and improvement is quickly realized by 
patients with acneiform eruptions and granulomatous rosacea.
 − Retinoids: vitamin A−derived topical agents promote tissue remod-
eling and help in combatting skin inflammation. Their use is asso-
ciated with an initial phase of anticipated reactions (see Chapter 2).

 − AHAs are essential for epidermal exfoliation and renewal.
 − Metronidazole: an antibiotic of the nitroimidazole class, metronida-
zole (which can be used topically or orally) kills bacteria and protozoa.
 − Sodium  sulfacetamide:  this  topical  antibiotic  is  available,  often 
combined  with  sulfur,  in  a  variety  of  vehicles  (foams,  washes, 
lotions), for use in acne, rosacea, and seborrhea.

Step  E:  Improving  skin,  texture,  and  color.  To  address  skin  texture 
(enlarged pores and sebaceous gland hyperplasia and adenomas), use 
strong stimulation (tretinoin) and certain procedures, such as chemi-
cal  peels,  PDT,  or  laser  fractionation.  But  to  eliminate  skin  redness 
that does not respond well to laser treatment, it is necessary to arrest 
skin inflammation (see Step A). Telangiectasias, which represent pro-
liferation and permanent dilation of small blood vessels, respond only 
to vascular laser treatment.

Step F: Use of systemic antibiotics. Oral antibiotics (tetracycline and its 
derivatives) are of limited value in the treatment of rosacea. Because 
bacteria play only a minor role in the etiology of rosacea, reduction of 

Table 6.5  Choice and Timing of Treatment Based on Signs and Symptoms of Rosacea

Signs and Symptoms

Treatment Choice

Timing of Treatment

Erythema, telangiectasias

Intense pulsed light or vascular-
specific lasers

At any time after 6 weeks of skin conditioning*

Postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation, discoloration

Topical agents alone or in 
conjunction with exfoliative peels

At any time after 6 weeks of skin 
conditioning*

Sebaceous gland hyperplasia

Photodynamic therapy

Isotretinoin
CO2 fractional laser

Once a month while patient is treated with 
topical agents

Once or twice yearly during maintenance

20 mg/day for 5 months, along with topical 
agents

20 mg/2 weeks during maintenance in patients 
with no risk for pregnancy

* Treatment of the skin with at least 6 weeks of a topical regimen to strengthen and stabilize the skin’s barrier function and its 
melanocytes is recommended before any energy- or light-based treatment (including intense pulsed light and laser treatments) 
to optimize overall results. This preconditioning topical regimen is most important in patients who are prone to developing 
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

bacteria-induced inflammation with antibiotics has limited benefits, 
and these agents should not be used long term because of their poten-
tial to induce bacterial resistance and other side effects.

Administering Procedures: Timing and Selection
Procedure selection and timing should be based on the individual’s signs and 
symptoms of rosacea (Table 6.5), as well as the patient’s priorities. Patient prior-
ities play a part in treatment plan selection and timing only when isotretinoin 
is a part of rosacea treatment. When a patient desires overall improvement in 
the shortest time possible, the fast protocol is preferred. But if the patient is 
interested only in improvement of the rosacea, and not in cosmetic improve-
ment at the same time, the slow protocol is preferred.

Rosacea Treatment Protocols

The Fast Protocol  The fast protocol (Table 6.6) allows patients to improve 
their appearance and correct skin texture with a procedure, such as CO2 frac-
tional laser or a 26% to 28% TCA peel (ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the imme-
diate  reticular  dermis  [IRD]),  as  soon  as  their  skin  is  ready  for  it  (invasive 

Table 6.6  Fast Treatment Protocol for Rosacea*

Step 1: Prepare Skin

Step 2: Correction

Step 3: Rosacea Treatment

Skin conditioning 6 
weeks or longer 
with:

Topical agents

Treat textural damage and 
irregularities with:

CO2 fractional laser 
treatment or a ZO 
Designed Controlled 
Depth Peel

After healing, treat for three 
keratinocyte maturation cycles 
(5 months) with:

Topical agents

Disease-specific 
agents (if necessary)

Low-dose isotretinoin (20 mg/
day), if indicated

158

*Rosacea with excessive sebum.

Table 6.7  Slow Treatment Protocol for Rosacea*

Step 1: Treat the Disease
(Three KMCs = 5 months)

Step 2: Discontinue Isotretinoin 
and Begin Maintenance
(Three or more KMCs)

Step 3: Skin Conditioning
(One or more KMCs to 
prepare skin)

Skin Health Restoration with: Continue topical agents as 

maintenance.

Perform CO2 fractional 
laser to improve texture 
and/or ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel.

Topical agents

To eliminate isotretinoin effects 
on skin, wait ≥5 months after 
discontinuing isotretinoin 
before performing a procedure 
to improve texture.

Step 4: Begin Skin Health 
Restoration
(After 8 to 10 days or When 
Healing Is Complete)

Restart topical agents and 
disease-specific agents, if 
needed.

Restart another course of 
low-dose (20 mg/day) 
isotretinoin for 3-5 months 
for long-term rosacea 
control.

Disease-specific agents

Consider course of low-dose 
(20 mg/day) isotretinoin or 
photodynamic therapy.

*Rosacea with excessive sebum.

procedures are contraindicated in the context of active rosacea). Begin with 
skin conditioning for one to two KMCs (6 to 12 weeks). When the skin is ready 
and the rosacea has been adequately controlled, perform the procedure. Allow 
the patient’s skin to heal for 8 to 10 days after the procedure. Then, restart the 
rosacea topical treatment agents and initiate a 5-month course of daily oral 
isotretinoin (usually 20 mg/day). The fast method is preferred because it saves 
time,  quickly  provides  both  disease  treatment  and  cosmetic  improvement, 
and restricts the use of isotretinoin to the time after the procedure.

The Slow Protocol  First arrest the disease, starting with topical agents and 
isotretinoin  for  three  KMCs  (5  months)  (Table  6.7).  Then,  discontinue  the 
isotretinoin  and  continue  maintaining  improvements  with  topical  agents. 
Continue this regimen for three KMCs (5 months) to eliminate the residual 
effects  of  isotretinoin,  which  could  lead  to  unreliable,  suboptimal  post-
procedure results. A procedure can now be safely performed (CO2 fractional 
laser  or  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel).  If  rosacea  has  been  activated  by  the 
procedure, an additional course of isotretinoin may be needed.

FOLLICULITIS AND 
PSEUDOFOLLICULITIS BARBAE

Folliculitis refers to a family of skin conditions involving infected and inflamed 
hair follicles. This inflammation can lead to skin reactions including papulo-
pustular eruptions, eczematous rashes, pruritus, PIH, and scarring.

Of  the  many  forms  of  folliculitis  (eosinophilic  pustular  folliculitis,  fol-
liculitis  decalvans,  herpetic  folliculitis,  and  more),  pseudofolliculitis  barbae 
(PFB)  is  the  one  that  dermatologists  most  commonly  encounter  and  treat. 
As its name implies, PFB is not a true folliculitis because it is not caused by 

159

160

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

a  pathogenic  microorganism.  Rather,  this  potentially  disfiguring  condition 
results from ingrown hairs, which occur quite commonly, although not exclu-
sively,  in  African  Americans.  It  also  affects  other  races  genetically  predis-
posed to tightly curled hair, such as Hispanics. Caucasians can be affected. In 
affected individuals, hairs can curl before they exit the follicle and grow under 
the epidermis, which subsequently induces focal areas of inflammation.

PFB  classically  presents  in  groups  of  small,  red,  raised  folliculocentric 
papules that may flare after shaving. In men, PFB occurs most often in areas 
of increased sebum production, such as the cheeks, jawline, chin, and neck. 
Postmenopausal women can also experience PFB because hormonal changes 
may  enhance  facial  hair  growth.  Additionally,  PFB  can  affect  other  hair-
bearing areas (such as the neck, chest, back, arms, and legs) in both genders. 
Conversely, one rarely sees folliculitis (or acne, for that matter) in hairless, oil-
free areas of the skin because these areas lack sebaceous glands and terminal 
hairs. Figures 6.13 and 6.14 show patients with PFB.

CAUSES OF PSEUDOFOLLICULITIS BARBAE

Causes  of  folliculitis  range  from  infection,  occlusion,  and  irritation  to  spe-
cific skin diseases, such as discoid lupus erythematosus and lichen planus. In 

Figure 6.13 
(a) The patient had skin classified as black (medium), thick, and oily. She was 
diagnosed  as  having  pseudofolliculitis  barbae,  early  scarring  from  skin  excoriation  and 
hair  plucking  with  tweezers,  and  severe  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation.  (b)  Five 
months later. The patient had HQ-based Skin Health Restoration with emphasis on cor-
rection, exfoliation, blending (tretinoin and HQ), epidermal melanocyte stabilization, and 
acne treatment. She took isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, simultaneously with topical treatment.

161

FOLLICULITIS AND 
PSEUDOFOLLICULITIS 
BARBAE

Figure 6.14 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviate black (medium black), 
medium  thick,  and  oily.  He  was  diagnosed  as  having  pseudofolliculitis  barbae  (PFB), 
cystic  acne,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  and  depigmentation  after  laser 
hair removal. (b) On completion of treatment. The patient was treated with aggressive, 
HQ-based ZO Medical and had extractions of trapped hairs. He was also treated with 
isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, for 5 months. Notice the restoration of normal color tone and 
the disappearance of both the acne and the PFB.

PFB, close shaving, as well as tweezing and plucking hairs, can give already 
curved hair shafts sharp tips that, as they grow, penetrate and reenter the der-
mis (sometimes extending to the surrounding epidermis). In particular, when 
someone  uses  a  double-bladed  razor,  the  first  blade  pulls  the  hair  slightly 
out of the follicle. The second blade cuts it, but then the now-sharpened hair 
retracts back into the follicle to continue growing in a curvilinear direction. 
The same dynamic can occur when someone stretches the skin while shaving 
for a closer shave. When the hair grows into the skin, a foreign-body reaction, 
including  follicular  inflammation  and  an  acne-like  eruption,  occurs.  Over 
time,  infection  develops,  most  often  bacterial  in  cases  involving  shaving  or 
heavy  sweating.  The  inflammation  of  folliculitis  and  PFB  destroys  hair  fol-
licles, leading to the development of focal scars (including hypertrophic scars 
and keloids), alopecia, and PIH.

DIAGNOSING PSEUDOFOLLICULITIS BARBAE

The diagnosis of PFB rests on the clinical appearance, location, and type of 
lesions observed. In this regard, characteristic PFB lesions can appear as flesh-
colored, erythematous, or hyperpigmented papules occurring in a follicular 
distribution. Often, one can see the ingrown hair within the papule. To get to 
the root of the problem, patient histories should investigate any hair-removal 
methods a patient is using.

PFB and other forms of folliculitis can be somewhat difficult to diagnose 
because  folliculitis  commonly  occurs  concurrently  with  other  skin  condi-
tions and systemic disorders. For example, the infectious type of folliculitis 
can  be  seen  more  commonly  in  patients  with  impaired  immune  systems, 
such as those with underlying diabetes or atopic dermatitis. Similarly, sebum-
induced inflammation and acne can aggravate folliculitis, which explains why 
patients commonly present with both acne and folliculitis. Likewise, on the 
scalp and chest, folliculitis almost always presents in the context of seborrheic 

Table 6.8  Preventing Folliculitis and Shaving-Induced Pseudofolliculitis Barbae

Facial pseudofolliculitis barbae—objectives

Actions

1. Reduce bacteria

2. Reduce trauma to the hair

3. Eliminate hair entrapment

4.  Control sebum and bacteria after shaving

Cleanse skin thoroughly before shaving.

Use shaving creams that soften the hair shaft before shaving with a razor.

Scrub with nonirritating formula before shaving to free entrapped hair.

Shave with a clean, sharp single-blade razor (or consider an electric clipper 
or laser hair removal).

5. Avoid occlusion and excess moisture

Avoid very close shaving (including moving the razor in multiple directions).

Avoid use of blunt or used razor blades.

Apply antibacterial and sebum-reducing agents after shaving.

Avoid after-shave moisturizers; use mild exfoliant or barrier repair agent 
instead.

dermatitis.  Additionally,  folliculitis  (and  acne)  can  occur  in  the  context  of 
hormonal syndromes and after use of systemic steroids.

PREVENTING AND TREATING FOLLICULITIS

In general, prevention of PFB is the best approach (Table 6.8).

To  prevent  PFB  when  shaving  nonfacial  skin  (such  as  the  chest,  axillae, 
arms, and legs), patients should take the following steps daily for 3 days before 
and 3 days after shaving:

•  Scrub the area (to free trapped hair)
•  Apply astringent (to control sebum and bacteria) AM and PM
•  Use a mild exfoliating and barrier repair formulation

To treat an existing outbreak of PFB, instruct patients as in Box 6.14.
Successfully treating PFB also requires treating any coexisting problems, 
such as acne. Additionally, for seborrheic dermatitis associated with follicu-
litis in the scalp area, the physician can prescribe appropriate topical agents 
(including  medicated  shampoos  and  mousse  preparations)  and,  in  severe 
cases, isotretinoin.

Box 6.14

Calming Pseudofolliculitis Barbae Outbreaks

■■ Stop shaving for at least 30 days to free any trapped hair and elimi-

nate ingrown hairs.

■■ Cleanse and exfoliate the beard area by using a scrub or exfoliating 

formula daily for 30 days.

■■ Apply topical retinoid nightly to soften the hair and regulate surface 

skin keratinization.

■■ Treat any infected areas with appropriate topical (or in severe cases, 
systemic) antibiotics, based on the results of sensitivity cultures.

162

163

FOLLICULITIS AND 
PSEUDOFOLLICULITIS 
BARBAE

KERATOSIS PILARIS

Keratosis  pilaris  (KP)  is  commonly  called  “chicken  skin”  because  affected 
areas  appear  to  have  persistent  “goosebumps”  (Figure  6.15).  Specifically,  KP 
presents as large patches of small (1 to 3 mm), lightly pigmented papules, each 
covering a hair follicle. KP usually appears on the upper arms and thighs, often 
presenting between the ages of 14 and 25 years. It can also extend to the upper 
back, buttocks, and shoulders and, in rare cases, can affect the cheeks in the 
form of fine, erythematous patches, usually in young children and teenagers. 
About 50% of children and 40% of adults experience KP (males and females 
equally). It is thought to be passed through generations in an autosomal domi-
nant fashion.

KP is a chronic condition that cannot be cured, but it can be kept under 
control  with  the  regular  application  of  topical  treatments.  Although  KP  is 
usually asymptomatic, patients tend to excoriate the involved areas in their 
attempts to get rid of them. This tends to worsen the condition and may cause 
localized discoloration and scarring. If left untreated, the condition usually 
persists for many years and fades later in life, although it can recur as well.

Figure 6.15 
(a) The patient was diagnosed as having keratosis pilaris. Her right arm 
was  treated  aggressively  for  6  weeks  with  a  ZO  body  renewal  protocol  that  consisted 
of 1) Invisapeel formula applied for 3 hours then washed off in the evening; 2) Oraser 
Body Emulsion Plus lotion to renew the epidermis applied morning and evening; and 
3) Retamax (1% retinol) applied in the evening. Her left arm was untreated. (b) Twelve 
weeks after treatment with the same program (both arms). Notice the improvement in 
redness, exfoliation, and texture of the treated arm. On completion, the patient will use 
only the Oraser Body Emulsion Plus, applied morning and evening.

164

SEBUM-INDUCED 
INFLAMMATORY 
DISORDERS AND 
TREATMENTS

Table 6.9  Keratosis Pilaris: Treatment Steps

Step A. Avoid triggers:

Tight clothing

Overly hot baths and showers

Harsh loofah scrubs and washcloths

Drying soaps

Scratching and picking

Step B. To stabilize and repair 
skin, use this topical regimen:

AM: alpha-hydroxy acids, stabilization and barrier 
repair products

PM: Tretinoin or retinol stimulation (tretinoin 0.1% 
or retinol 1% work best), more stabilization and 
barrier repair

For patients with postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation, add HQ 4% (AM and PM) or 
non-HQ melanocyte stabilization to restore even 
skin color tone.

Causes of Keratosis Pilaris
No one knows the exact cause of KP. However, most experts believe it results 
from a combination of genetic susceptibility, dry skin, hypersensitivity reac-
tions,  and  friction.  The  most  common  factors  that  cause  KP  in  susceptible 
individuals include the following:

•  Continuous  skin  friction  caused  by  rough  and  tight  clothing  (shirts, 

jeans)

•  Excessive exposure to hot baths and showers
•  Obsessive and overly vigorous skin scrubbing (often with loofah scrubs)

Clinically,  these  factors  can  stimulate  keratin  overproduction  and  accu-
mulation of excess keratin around the opening of hair follicles, creating the 
individual bumps of KP. Along with hyperkeratosis, microscopic evaluation 
of lesions reveals mild thickening of the skin and plugging of the hair follicle. 
Dilation of small, superficial blood vessels also may occur, giving affected skin 
a red or flushed appearance. Additionally, the red or brown spots that form 
beneath the excess keratin stem from follicular inflammation.

Treating Keratosis Pilaris
Much like with PFB, treating KP demands that patients eliminate causative 
factors (Table 6.9, Step A) whenever possible and apply a carefully designed 
topical regimen regularly (Table 6.9, Step B). KP treatment objectives include 
softening  of  the  surface  keratin,  exfoliating  the  superficial  accumulation  of 
hypertrophic corneocytes, and restoring normal skin-surface keratinization, 
thereby restoring barrier function. In these areas, the stronger the morning 
and evening stimulation, the stronger the skin’s anticipated reactions (such as 
erythema and exfoliation) will be, and the faster the patient will experience 
improvement. By following the steps described here, patients should achieve 
normal-looking skin within two to three KMCs (12 to 18 weeks). For severe 
cases, adding two to three exfoliative chemical peels during that period can 
further hasten resolution.

MEDICAL 
APPLICATIONS
Treating 
Pigmentation 
Problems and 
Photodamage

CHAPTER 

7

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

Problems with skin pigmentation rank among the most common problems 
seen by dermatologists. Examples range from melasma and vitiligo to photo-
damage, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH), genetic conditions, and 
various types of nevi. Melanocytes, which actively produce melanin, are the 
cells  responsible  for  all  skin  pigmentation  problems. The  high  frequency  of 
pigmentation problems stems largely from the fact that melanocytes are sensi-
tive to a variety of influences from within and outside of the body (Box 7.1).

One  could  easily  write  a  book  on  any  single  pigmentary  disorder.  The 
medical literature is rich with information regarding the full spectrum of pig-
mentary  disorders—their  causes,  comorbidities,  differential  diagnoses,  and 
treatments. Because this material is extensively reviewed elsewhere, this chap-
ter focuses on a system for classifying and treating pigmentary disorders.

Physicians tend to treat pigmentary disorders on a case-by-case basis, select-
ing an individualized regimen geared to what they believe are each patient’s 
needs. However, results of this approach have been mixed. Regarding melasma, 
for  example,  physicians  typically  treat  with  hydroquinone  (HQ)  concentra-
tions ranging from 2% to 12%, various concentrations of retinoic acid, topical 
steroids, and exfoliative procedures involving chemical peels, intense pulsed 
light (IPL), and lasers. Yet some patients improve; others do not. In still others, 
melasma worsens. To avoid such pitfalls, the proposed classification system 
(Table 7.1) seeks to standardize the way physicians think about and treat pig-
mentary disorders so that they may achieve more consistent results.

166

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Box 7.1

Factors that Influence Melanocytes

■■ Temperatures:  excessive  heat  and  cold  can  stimulate  or  kill 

melanocytes.

■■ Chemicals:  exposure  to  phenols  (hydroquinone,  resorcinol)  and 
other chemicals can be toxic and fatal to melanocytes. Phenols can 
also stimulate melanocyte activity, depending on the concentration.
■■ Mechanical and endogenous stimuli: factors that can easily stimulate 
melanocytes include skin irritation, inflammation, injury, diseases, 
sun exposure, hormones, genetic influences, hot baths, and showers.

■■ Certain medications

Table 7.1  Zein Obagi Classification of Pigmentary Problems

Column 1: Etiology Column 2: Depth

Column 3: Origin

Hormonal

Epidermal

Inflammatory

Dermal

Endogenous

Exogenous

Genetic

Acquired

Epidermal and dermal

Endogenous and exogenous

Epidermal, dermal, and subdermal

The  columns  in  Table  7.1  are  equally  important,  and  it  doesn’t  mat-
ter  which  column  or  category  is  considered  first. The  key  is  that  by  using 
all  three  columns,  we  can  comprehensively  describe  any  pigmentary  dis-
order. Additionally, columns 1 and 3 provide valuable prognostic informa-
tion.  For  example,  melasma  is  a  hormonal  problem  with  possible  genetic 
influences (column 1) that usually involves the epidermis, dermis, or both 
(column 2) and originates endogenously, although it can be exacerbated by 
exogenous  factors  (column  3).  As  a  hormonally  caused  pigment  disorder, 
melasma  has  an  unpredictable  long-term  course  (as  do  most  genetically 
based disorders).

Conversely, pigment disorders with acquired and inflammatory sources are 
largely curable—provided one removes these sources. PIH, for instance, is an 
inflammatory disorder (column 1) that mainly affects the epidermis (column 
2) and that stems from endogenous and exogenous factors (column 3). In con-
trast to the uncertain course of hormonal and genetic pigment disorders, PIH, 
once treated, can be considered cured—as long as the epidermal inflamma-
tion does not return.

THE MYSTERIES OF MELASMA

Clinically, it is difficult to mistake melasma for anything else. It presents as 
areas of ill-defined brownish or dark macules or patches, usually in a symmet-
rical pattern, on a sun-exposed area, especially the face. In particular, melasma 
seems to favor the forehead, nose, cheeks, and upper lip. The skin color change 

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

167

depends  on  the  location  of  the  melanin  deposition.  Epidermal  involvement 
appears as brown discoloration, whereas dermal deposition appears as blue-
gray.  Mixed  epidermal  and  dermal  depositions  appear  as  brown-gray  dis-
colorations. Whether the melanin is deposited in the epidermis or dermis is 
important therapeutically because dermal hyperpigmentation is much more 
challenging to treat.

Although  melasma  strikes  all  races,  it  occurs  most  commonly  in  darker 
Fitzpatrick skin types III through V. It is also more common in women. Like 
most pigment problems, it is clinically benign but psychologically distressing 
to patients because of the effect it can have on their social and professional 
lives. Although much is known about melasma, research has not yet identified 
why the following statements are true of melasma:

•  Some  melanocytes  become  hyperactive,  whereas  other  melanocytes 

nearby do not.

•  Some women develop melasma, whereas others who are exposed to the 

same factors do not.

•  Although not exposed to the same hormones as women are, some men 

develop melasma.

•  Melasma appears mainly on the face and very rarely on other body areas, 

sun-exposed or otherwise.

Likewise, the precise cause of melasma remains a subject of debate. In addi-
tion  to  genetic  and  hormonal  (including  pregnancy)  influences,  researchers 
have identified several potential factors (Box 7.2).

We do not know exactly how these factors ultimately contribute to increase 
the synthesis of melanin (within melanocytes) and the deficiency in the even 
transfer  of  melanin  to  surrounding  keratinocytes.  Increased  melanin  pro-
duction by some melanocytes can be explained by two possibilities, which in 
some cases may work together (Box 7.3).

Genetic predisposition could explain why melasma tends to run in families. 
In many cases, a mother and daughter (or two sisters) share not only melasma 
but also a similar distribution and severity level. People with a genetic predis-
position to melasma may also require a triggering factor to develop the dis-
ease. However, triggers may also operate independently of genetics. In short, 
internal or external factors may overstimulate melanocyte receptors. When 

Box 7.2

Potential Causes of Melasma

■■ Ultraviolet light exposure
■■ Vascular factors
■■ Chronic inflammation and inflammatory disorders
■■ Use of cosmetics and other products
■■ Phototoxic or photosensitizing agents
■■ Medications:  antiseizure,  blood  pressure,  and  antimalarial  agents, 

and tetracycline

168

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Box 7.3

Potential Causes of Melanin Overproduction

■■ Genetic factors
■■ Internal or external factors that act as triggers
■■ Among internal triggers, inflammation is most likely the main cause 

of dermal melasma.

the receptors reach this hyperexcited state, they respond on subsequent expo-
sure to the trigger by producing more melanin. Or perhaps the trigger might 
affect the melanocyte receptors, disrupting the melanocytes’ ability to regu-
late melanin production altogether.

Internal Melasma Triggers
Internal triggers of melanin production may include hormones. This might 
explain why melasma appears after women begin taking birth control pills or 
hormones or become pregnant. In fact, chloasma, a condition seen commonly 
during  or  shortly  after  pregnancy,  is  merely  epidermal  melasma.  It  usually 
responds quickly to treatment, although it tends to reoccur.

Among internal triggers, inflammation is most likely the main factor that 
causes the dermal form of melasma. The potential for inflammation to initi-
ate or worsen melasma is perhaps most evident in that patients with melasma 
who also suffer from adult acne or rosacea (both of which arise from sebum-
induced inflammation) usually have more severe resistant melasma than peo-
ple with normal or dry skin. When sebum is reduced through topical or oral 
treatments, these more serious cases of melasma begin responding better and 
faster to treatment.

Additional  internal  triggers  for  melasma  may  include  melanocyte- 
stimulating  hormone  (MSH).  When  a  receptor  is  triggered,  the  associated 
melanocyte may become more sensitive to MSH, leading to excessive melanin 
production.

External Melasma Triggers
External factors, on the other hand, may include everything from ultravio-
let (UV) rays and hot water to continuous skin irritation and inflammation 
caused by improper use of topical drugs. In the latter area, melasma some-
times paradoxically worsens in patients who self-treat with HQ, alpha-hydroxy 
acids (AHAs), or kojic acid for more than 1 year. Over time, melanocytes can 
acquire  resistance  to  these  treatments  and  respond  by  the  overproduction 
of tyrosinase, which leads to rebound hyperpigmentation. Additionally, the 
reduced melanin levels created by these treatments may result in photosen-
sitivity or phototoxicity, which represent additional sources of UV sensitivity 
and induced inflammation.

Nevertheless, melanin overproduction represents only half of the melasma 
story. The other half involves uneven uptake of melanin by certain surround-
ing  keratinocytes.  In  this  regard,  we  know  that  each  melanocyte  provides 

Box 7.4

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

169

Retinoids and Melanocyte Activity

■■ Retinoids  regulate  keratinocyte  activity  that  leads  to  more  even 

melanin uptake.

Box 7.5

Suggested Pathophysiology of Melasma

■■ Overproduction of melanin by certain melanocytes
■■ Uneven uptake of melanin by surrounding keratinocytes with normal 

or increased production of melanin

melanin  to  approximately  36  surrounding  keratinocytes.  But  in  melasma, 
perhaps  only  a  few  of  these  keratinocytes  take  up  all  the  melanin,  leaving 
little  or  none  for  the  rest.  The  success  of  certain  retinoids  (tretinoin  [reti-
noic acid] and retinol) in treating melasma appears to support this theory. 
Applying these topical agents can increase keratinocyte activity and turnover 
and equalize melanin uptake, thereby restoring even color tone and improv-
ing  the  appearance  of  melasma,  not  through  bleaching,  but  through  more 
even melanin uptake (Box 7.4). Box 7.5 shows the suggested pathophysiology 
of melasma.

POSTINFLAMMATORY HYPERPIGMENTATION

Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  presents  as  generalized  or  focal  dys-
chromia that can occur after any type of skin injury, disease, or inflammation. 
It can appear on sun-exposed or sun-protected skin. However, UV exposure 
usually worsens PIH. We can even consider a suntan a form of generalized, 
uniform PIH because people who tan evenly and easily have skin that is more 
prone to develop PIH when exposed to anything that might cause localized 
skin inflammation.

Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation occurs commonly in all skin types, 
including deviated (racially mixed) skin, which is more sensitive to the effects 
of inflammation and dermatologic procedures. As such, this group of patients 
tends to develop more profound and prolonged PIH than do patients of purely 
black,  Asian,  Hispanic,  or  of  any  other  ethnic  or  racial  descent.  Similarly, 
patients  with  oily  skin  often  develop  more  severe,  resistant  PIH  because 
sebum is a pro-inflammatory substance. Accordingly, reducing sebum, treat-
ing inflammatory skin diseases, and conditioning the skin before and after 
procedures will reduce or prevent post-procedural PIH and make treatment 
easier and more successful.

170

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

TREATING MELASMA AND POSTINFLAMMATORY 
HYPERPIGMENTATION

The  guidelines  for  treating  melasma  and  PIH  are  fairly  similar,  though  not 
identical (Box 7.6). Successful treatment of skin symptoms and the underlying 
causes essentially cures PIH; however, treated melasma can recur, because of 
hormonal or other unpredictable influences, months or even years after suc-
cessful treatment.

Melasma-Specific Steps
When treating melasma, one must first distinguish the epidermal type from 
the dermal type. In this regard, use a Wood’s lamp or a simple skin-stretching 
test (just stretch the affected skin with your hands—if the pigment appears 
lighter, it is epidermal melasma; if not, it is dermal) (Box 7.7). Remember that 
the  more  stubborn  dermal  component  will  require  a  procedure  (e.g.,  a  ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel) to the papillary dermis (PD) performed after 4 to 6 
weeks of skin conditioning.

The best approach to treating melasma or PIH is the aggressive treatment 

approach that incorporates the following four essential steps:

Step 1. Bleaching. This step arrests melanin production, thereby reduc-
ing hyperpigmentation. The regimen involves applying HQ 4% (daily, 
AM and PM) and AHAs for exfoliation (daily, AM). It is important 

Box 7.6

Guidelines for Treating Melasma and Postinflammatory 
Hyperpigmentation
TREAT THE DISEASE AND ITS CAUSES

■■ Reduce sebum.

■■ Sebum  induces  inflammation  and  represents  a  major  cause  of 

treatment failure.

■■ Use  topical  astringent,  and  even  isotretinoin  (in  stubborn  cases), 
in  patients  being  treated  for  melasma  or  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation.

■■ Treat any active disease (such as acne) simultaneously.
■■ Use strong sun protection throughout treatment.

TREATMENT MODALITY

■■ Treat aggressively.
■■ Bleaching and blending work best.
■■ When procedures are needed as part of the treatment, peels are bet-

ter than heat-generating devices (intense pulsed light lasers).

■■ Use skin conditioning for one to three keratinocyte maturation cycles 

(6 to 18 weeks) before and after procedures.

Box 7.7

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

171

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test for Melasma

Stretch  the  affected  skin  with  your  hands—if  the  pigment  appears 
lighter, it is epidermal melasma; if not, it is dermal.

Box 7.8

Pulsed Hydroquinone Therapy

To avoid HQ side effects, use pulsed therapy:

■■ Five months of bleaching and blending
■■ Two to 3 months of rest
■■ Resumption of hydroquinone, if needed

not to use HQ for too long and to discontinue use at an appropriate 
time to avoid serious side effects. HQ adverse effects can be avoided 
with pulsed therapy. This entails 5 months of bleaching and blending, 
2 to 3 months of rest, then resumption of HQ, if needed. Pulse therapy 
is explained in Box 7.8.
  Figures 7.1, 7.2, and 7.3 show patients with epidermal and dermal 
melasma, and Figure 7.4 shows a patient with dermal melasma; all 

Figure 7.1 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white, medium thick, and oily. 
She  was  diagnosed  as  having  epidermal  and  dermal  melasma.  (b)  One  year  later.  The 
patient  was  treated  with  aggressive  HQ-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  for  6  months, 
during which she had three monthly treatments with a ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel. The 
dermal melasma on her forehead remained after treatment and required a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel to the papillary dermis.

 
172

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure  7.2 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  (dark),  thick,  and 
oily. She was diagnosed as having epidermal and dermal melasma by means of Dr. Zein 
Obagi Skin Stretch Test. (b) One year later. The patient was treated with an aggressive 
HQ-based ZO Medical Skin Health Restoration program for 6 weeks followed by a ZO 
Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  papillary  dermis. This  peel  was  repeated  6  weeks  before 
the end of treatment. Maintenance consisted of non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration.

were treated with ZO programs. Figure 7.5 shows a patient with PIH 
and melasma, Figure 7.6 shows a patient with rosacea and PIH, and 
Figure 7.7 shows a patient with rosacea, discoloration, large pores, 
and  laxity  who  was  treated  with  ZO  programs  and  a  combination 
of a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel and a CO2 fractional laser 
procedure. Figure 7.8 shows a patient with PIH who was successfully 

Figure 7.3 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated (dark) white, medium 
thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having epidermal and dermal melasma. (b) One year 
later. The patient was treated with four courses of HQ-based ZO Medical. Each course 
consisted of Skin Health Restoration for 6 weeks followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
to the papillary dermis. To prevent HQ resistance, non-HQ-based ZO Medical was used 
between each course for 3 months. Notice the residual of dermal melasma in the forehead 
area that may require deeper peels or pigment laser treatment.

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

173

Figure  7.4 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  (medium)  Asian, 
thick,  and  nonoily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  dermal  melasma.  (b)  One  year  later. 
The  patient  was  treated  for  5  months  with  HQ-based  ZO  Medical  followed  by  a  ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis. Maintenance consisted of non-HQ-based 
Skin Health Restoration.

treated  with  Skin  Health  Restoration  and  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth 
Peel to the PD for PIH, after previous unsuccessful treatment with 
other peels.

Step 2. Stabilization. After stopping the bleaching step, patients should 
start  the  stabilization  step  (as  described  in  Chapter  2),  using  anti-
inflammatory topical agents (antioxidants) and retinol (in a high con-
centration) to stabilize melanocytes and make them less responsive to 

Figure 7.5 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark), medium thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having severe postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and 
melasma.  (b)  One  year  later.  The  patient  was  treated  with  aggressive  HQ-based  Skin 
Health Restoration for 5 months. Six weeks after starting Skin Health Restoration, she 
underwent a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis. After healing, isotreti-
noin was added to the Skin Health Restoration regimen.

174

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure 7.6 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as black (medium), medium thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having rosacea and postinflammatory hyperpigmenta-
tion. (b) One year later. The patient was treated with aggressive HQ-based ZO Medical 
Skin Health Restoration for 5 months along with isotretinoin, 20 mg/day. She also had 
two  treatments  with  a  ZO  3-Step  Peel.  Maintenance  consisted  of  non-HQ-based  Skin 
Health Restoration.

external  and  internal  stimulation  and  inflammation,  while  starting 
the blending regimen (step 3).

Step  3.  Blending.  To  force  even  melanin  distribution  and  increase 
uptake  by  surrounding  keratinocytes,  patients  should  use  a  fresh 
mixture  of  HQ  4%  and  tretinoin  (retinoic  acid),  in  proper  propor-
tions,  as  discussed  in  Chapter  2,  for  three  keratinocyte  maturation 
cycles  (KMCs)  (18  weeks).  Start  with  a  moderate  or  mild  approach 
and build to the aggressive approach as soon as the patient’s skin can 

Figure  7.7 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (medium), 
thick,  and  oily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  rosacea,  discoloration,  large  pores,  and 
laxity. (b) Eight days after a combined procedure of a ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel and a CO2 fractional laser procedure. The patient had been treated with 6 weeks of 
aggressive, HQ-based skin conditioning before the procedures. After the procedures, 
she followed the same topical regimen along with 20 mg/day isotretinoin for 3 months. 
(c) One year later.

(a)

(b)

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

175

(c)

(d)

Figure 7.8 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original white, thick, and oily. She was 
diagnosed as having PIH.  Six months earlier, she had undergone a TCA peel at another 
clinic. The PIH did not respond to topical HQ and two Cosmelan peels, and her condi-
tion  worsened.  (b)  The  patient  at  one  year.  She  was  treated  with  non-HQ-based  Skin 
Health  Restoration  for  three  months  for  epidermal  and  melanocyte  stabilization,  fol-
lowed by five months of aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration. Six weeks after 
starting the second course of Skin Health Restoration, a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
PD was performed. After healing, isotretinoin 20 mg/day was added to her Skin Health 
Restoration regimen. (c) Before. Side view. (d) After. Side view.

tolerate it. Melanocytes do not build resistance to blending as quickly 
as they do to HQ alone, and patients can use the blending regimen 
longer  than  the  bleaching  regimen.  As  with  bleaching,  however, 
patients should discontinue HQ blending as soon as their color tone 
has  been  corrected.  This  helps  prevent  photosensitivity,  resistance, 
rebound hyperpigmentation, and ochronosis (discussed later).

Step 4. Continue stabilization/begin maintenance. After stopping the 
bleaching and blending steps, an HQ-free approach is ideal for main-
taining skin improvements and preventing future recurrences of PIH 
or melasma. This means using retinol, antioxidants, anti- inflammatory 
agents, and non-HQ skin lighteners to provide continuous correction, 
stabilization, and stimulation. If melasma starts to recur, patients can 
return to the bleaching and blending steps.

176

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

TREATING MELASMA AND 
POSTINFLAMMATORY HYPERPIGMENTATION 
WITH HYDROQUINONE

HQ is a popular and effective topical agent used extensively to treat a wide 
variety of skin pigmentation problems. It is approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of melasma, and when used in 
reasonable concentrations (4% is best) and under physician supervision, it is 
the gold standard for treating pigmentation disorders. Unfortunately, HQ is 
often used in an arbitrary and dangerous manner. It can be easily obtained 
from  doctors’  offices,  pharmacies,  the  Internet,  and  the  black  market,  and 
individuals often self-treat with high concentrations for long periods of time. 
Continuous  use  in  this  manner  can  lead  to  medical  and  aesthetic  disasters 
that cannot be repaired.

HQ  acts  in  two  ways:  1)  by  reversibly  inhibiting  tyrosinase,  the  main 
enzyme involved in the conversion of tyrosine to melanin; and 2) by selec-
tively damaging melanosomes and melanocytes. Therefore, the mechanism 
of action of topical HQ is through prevention of new melanin production. 
Pigmented areas do not disappear immediately with HQ treatment: as skin 
cells mature, the melanin-containing keratinocytes within the epidermis are 
shed, and new keratinocytes are formed with less pigmented melanosomes.

Hydroquinone Side Effects
In recent years, we have encountered an increasing frequency of unexplained 
side effects induced by HQ and noticed several commonalities in these patients 
(Box 7.9). The side effects in these patients included rebound hyperpigmenta-
tion, photosensitivity or phototoxicity, tolerance or resistance, and exogenous 
ochronosis.

Rebound Hyperpigmentation
The best concentration of HQ for treating pigmentation problems is 4%, and 
more  benefits  or  faster  results  do  not  follow  use  of  higher  concentrations. 
On the contrary, patients who use 6%, 8%, or 12% concentrations tended to 
develop  more  stubborn,  difficult-to-treat  hyperpigmentation,  which  often 
appeared more prominent than their original problem. The exact mechanism 

Box 7.9

Commonalities Seen in Patients Who 
Experienced Hydroquinone Side Effects

■■ HQ was used without medical supervision and without stopping for 

1 year or longer.

■■ A high concentration (6% to 12%) of HQ was used.
■■ A combination of HQ with tretinoin (retinoic acid) and corticoste-
roid (Tri-Luma Cream, Galderma: fluocinolone acetonide 0.01%, HQ 
4%, tretinoin 0.05%) was used.

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

177

Figure  7.9  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  (medium)  Asian,  thick,  and 
oily. She was diagnosed as having melasma, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, and 
rebound hyperpigmentation. She had been treated with 4%, 8%, and 10% hydroquinone 
(HQ) in various clinics for 1 year, but the melasma progressively worsened. This indi-
cated resistance to both HQ and HQ-induced sensitivity and inflammation.

responsible for rebound hyperpigmentation associated with the use of topi-
cal  hydroquinone  has  yet  to  be  fully  elucidated.  However,  the  most  likely 
explanation is that higher concentrations 1) induce toxic or shocking effects 
on  melanocytes,  forcing  cells  to  rebound  and  increase  melanin  production 
(rebound hyperpigmentation); or 2) provoke skin inflammation (because HQ 
is  a  known  inflammatory  agent),  which  leads  to  melanocyte  hyperactivity 
that overpowers the tyrosinase-suppressing effect of hydroquinone. Figure 7.9 
shows a patient with rebound hyperpigmentation.

Photosensitivity and Phototoxicity
The skin-damaging effects of UV light exposure are well known and include 
DNA damage, an increased incidence of skin cancer, and accelerated signs 
of  aging.  Medications,  both  topical  and  systemic,  can  increase  skin  sensi-
tivity to UV exposure, with subsequent damage being seen with shorter yet 
repeated exposure. Thus, it is surprising that photosensitivity to HQ is rarely 
mentioned. By reducing the amount of melanin (which has a natural sun pro-
tection factor of 4 to 8), HQ weakens or eliminates the skin’s natural ability 
to protect itself. Without proper protection from the sun, skin may be dam-
aged by inflammation, which can then ultimately stimulate overproduction 
of melanin.

Exogenous Ochronosis
Exogenous  ochronosis  is  a  paradoxical  hyperpigmentation  caused  by  the 
overuse of HQ and is the worst side effect of its use because many cases of 
ochronosis cannot be successfully treated (Figure 7.10). Although triggering 
factors for exogenous ochronosis are known, there is no scientific explanation 
for why this condition develops in certain individuals and not in others who 
share the same HQ history and triggering factors.

178

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure 7.10  The patient had skin classified as white, medium thick, and oily. She was 
diagnosed as having early exogenous ochronosis that was more severe on her left cheek. 
The condition developed 2 years after she had used 4% HQ in an unsupervised manner 
in an attempt to induce skin lightening.

Endogenous ochronosis, in contrast to exogenous ochronosis, is due to a 
patient’s inherent deficiency in the enzyme homogentisic acid oxidase (HAO), 
which  ultimately  leads  to  the  accumulation  of  homogentisic  acid  in  multi-
ple organs, including the skin, in affected patients. Photosensitivity induced 
by HQ may cause deficiency of HAO, leading to an accumulation of homo-
gentisic acid, which forms complexes with melanin in the skin that manifest 
macroscopically as bluish patches. These patches are indicative of exogenous 
ochronosis.  Exogenous  ochronosis  may  also  be  triggered  by  the  phototoxic 
effect of HQ, ultimately leading to the production of chemically altered, bluish 
melanin compounds, which are again characteristic of exogenous ochronosis.
Exogenous ochronosis was once thought to be a problem limited to people 
within  certain  tribes  in  Africa,  and  its  etiology  was  thought  to  be  partially 
due to the prolonged use of HQ in patients with this genetic predisposition. 
At that time, neither photosensitivity nor phototoxicity was considered to be a 
major factor in causing this problem. However, within the past few years, we 
have observed a higher incidence of exogenous ochronosis not only in African 
Americans but also in Caucasian brunettes, Asians, and Hispanics. The com-
mon variable among these patients was that each had been using HQ in vari-
ous concentrations (sometimes compounded to strengths as high as 20% to 
30%) for years. Another commonality was that they had each been using HQ 
without  adequate  medical  supervision  and  had  obtained  it  from  repeated 
unsupervised physician prescription refills, the Internet, or the black market. 
Often these patients were also not properly protected from daily sun exposure 
because the areas of the face with the most sun exposure were also those most 
likely to show exogenous ochronosis.

Tolerance or Resistance
When treating melasma, we have observed no further improvement from HQ 
application in some patients after 4 to 5 months of good response. Furthermore, 
the bleaching effects from HQ application were more pronounced in the areas 
not affected by melasma, whereas the affected dark areas showed no further 
improvement. We could only conclude that active melanocytes in the affected 
areas were becoming resistant to HQ and that the patient’s hyperpigmentation 
became worse from the prolonged use of HQ.

When such resistance is observed, HQ use should be immediately discon-
tinued to prevent rebound pigmentation. To reverse HQ resistance, patients 

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

179

Figure 7.11 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (light), 
medium thick, and oily. Her history showed 6 years of unsupervised HQ use. She was 
diagnosed as having melasma and rebound hyperpigmentation due to HQ resistance. (b) 
One year later. The patient underwent 3 months of nonmedical Skin Health Restoration 
with an emphasis on epidermal, melanocyte, and dermal stabilization. She underwent 
two treatments with a ZO 3-Step Peel and had a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papil-
lary dermis. Maintenance consisted of non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration.

should stop HQ use for 2 to 3 months to allow melanocytes to stabilize. This 
process makes melanocytes more resistant to negative stimuli that could trig-
ger  their  activity.  After  such  rest,  patients  can  resume  HQ  use  if  needed—
under proper supervision. Figure 7.11 shows a patient who developed melasma 
and rebound hyperpigmentation due to HQ resistance.

Of note, HQ has also been used in combination with a topical corticoste-
roid and retinoic acid (Kligman formula, Tri-Luma) with the rationale that the 
steroid  suppresses  inflammation  that  excites  melanocytes  and  subsequently 
results in an increased production of melanin with associated patches of skin 
showing  hyperpigmentation.  This  is  only  true  for  pigmentation  induced  by 
injury or disease, such as PIH. In some patients, long-term use of this combi-
nation formulation has been shown to result in skin atrophy, the appearance 
of telangiectatic matting, more stubborn pigmentation, and photosensitivity. A 
general rule of thumb is that, regardless of the condition being treated, topical 
steroids should only be used for short durations (or “pulses”) of 5 to 7 days in a 
row. The long-term use of topical steroids to treat melasma should be avoided 
because melasma is induced by factors other than inflammation alone.

Treating Melasma and Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation 
with and without Hydroquinone
After  many  years  of  experience,  we  developed  two  approaches  for  treating 
melasma and PIH: 1) the HQ-based approach (Table 7.2) and 2) the non-HQ-
based approach (Table 7.3). Most important, we recognized the limitations of 
HQ treatment and developed pulsed HQ therapy (as was shown in Box 7.8) 
that avoids the development of ochronosis and other undesirable effects. We 
also developed guidelines for discontinuing the use of HQ (Box 7.10).

Table 7.2  The Hydroquinone Approach for Treating Melasma and Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation*†

Step

Function

  1.  Bleaching

To minimize or stop melanin production, 4% HQ (AM and PM) works best.

Alternative agents, including arbutin, kojic acid, vitamin C, retinol, and tretinoin, are weak bleaching 
agents without therapeutic value.

  2.  Epidermal 
exfoliation

To reduce epidermal melanin and provide mild blending benefits, use a formulation of alpha-hydroxy 
acid and anti-inflammatory agents (once daily).

  3.  Stabilization

This step does the following:

•  Increases skin tolerance (strengthens barrier function)

•  Repairs damaged DNA

•  Provides anti-inflammatory benefits

  4.  Blending

•  Reduces melanocytes’ response to negative factors (such as ultraviolet light or hormones)

A formulation available from ZO Skin Health can provide all these benefits.

To stimulate keratinocyte activity and turnover so that all active keratinocytes phagocytize melanin 
evenly (to be done once or twice daily, AM and PM). This ensures more even color tone without 
bleaching effects.

*These steps should be performed in the order above: 1, 2, 3, 4.
†Many of the formulations recommended are not readily available except from ZO Skin Health.

Table 7.3  The Nonhydroquinone Approach to Melanocyte Stabilization*

Step

Function

  1.  Accelerate epidermal turnover 

(to unload epidermal 
melanin): the Invisapeel

  2.  Stabilizing melanocytes: 

Brightenex-F

To decrease epidermal pigmentation by accelerating natural epidermal exfoliation, which 
reduces epidermal melanin and provides beneficial blending effects
The Invisapeel (an enzymatic invisible peel) is used for this purpose. (See formulation and 
use in Chapter 9)
To be applied once daily

To suppress abnormal melanin production by melanocytes that have been exposed to 
internal or external stimuli. The stabilizing process makes melanocytes more resistant to 
such stimuli so that they produce only normal melanin (maintaining normal color tone 
without bleaching effects).
Use Brightenex-F in AM. This product is a non-HQ-blending agent that does not bleach 
the skin. It helps only in restoring an even color tone.

  3.  Epidermal stabilization: 

This step is similar to step 3 in the section “Melasma-Specific Steps”

Retamax-F

  4.  Stimulation

To activate keratinocyte phagocytosis of melanin in order to blend for an even color 
tone
This step requires a special formulation of encapsulated retinol (apply in PM)

* The non-HQ approach will prove more effective if one performs a special peel 1 month after using the program above for one 
keratin maturation cycle (6 weeks). Recommended peels include the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel and the ZO 3-Step Peel (see 
Chapter 9).

PHOTODAMAGE

Photodamage is a universal problem that can affect any skin type. It starts 
at an early age (2 to 3 years old) and is undetectable initially. However, as 
a person experiences more sun exposure over the years, damage becomes 
clinically significant, as localized and generalized pigmentation increases 
and texture (wrinkling, loss of elasticity) become apparent.

180

Box 7.10

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

181

Guidelines for Discontinuing Hydroquinone

To avoid HQ overuse, discontinue HQ:

■■ After achieving an even skin tone (one to three KMCs, 6 to 18 weeks) 

in most skin types

■■ After  three  KMCs  (18  weeks)  to  avoid  resistance  that  can  lead  to 

rebound hyperpigmentation

■■ After one to two KMCs (6 to 12 weeks) in black skin to avoid hypopig-

mentation and photosensitivity

■■ Whenever HQ stops delivering further improvement

Unfortunately, many physicians and the majority of the public do not recog-
nize sun damage until it becomes severe and extensive (e.g., actinic keratoses 
[AKs] and skin cancers appear). Thus, they ignore the early signs of photo-
damage, such as tanning, freckles, and lentigines. One of the key messages of 
this chapter is that recognizing and treating photodamage in its earliest stages 
will help patients avoid the more severe and clinically troublesome types of 
photodamage  and  perhaps,  more  important,  to  prevent  all  photodamage, 
which is our ultimate goal. Figure 7.12 shows a patient with severe photodam-
age treated with ZO Programs. Figure 7.13 shows a patient with early signs of 
photodamage.

Prevention of Photodamage
The best way to address photodamage is not to have it occur in the first place. 
This requires going beyond basic sun protection and incorporating principles 
of Skin Health Restoration (Box 7.11).

Figure 7.12 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as original white, medium thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having severe photodamage with lentigo, freckles, and 
actinic  keratoses.  She  was  treated  with  HQ-based  ZO  Medical  for  5  months.  (b)  Six 
months later.

182

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure  7.13 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (medium), 
medium  thick,  and  oily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  skin  dullness,  sensitivity,  and 
nonspecific  discoloration  (early  signs  of  sun  damage).  (b)  One  year  later.  The  patient 
was treated for 2 to 3 months with non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration to treat the 
skin sensitivity, followed by 3 months of HQ-based ZO Medical treatment and two ZO 
Retinol Stimulation Peels.

Box 7.11

Preventing Photodamage

■■ Avoid tanning: physicians must educate the public so that they know 
that  tanning  reflects  DNA  damage  and  a  host  of  unhealthy  skin 
changes that can have major consequences over time.

■■ Do not rely on sunscreens alone: regardless of how high the sun pro-
tection  factor  is,  chemical  and  physical  sunscreens  wear  off  after  1 
to 2 hours. Research shows consistently that people underapply sun-
screen and fail to reapply it often enough.

■■ Practice  sun  avoidance:  wear  protective  clothing  (hats,  long  pants, 
and sleeves); pursue outdoor activities before 10 AM or after 4 PM, 
and use adequate sunscreen and protective clothing.

■■ Adopt a healthy skin protection program as part of a daily routine:

■■ Load the skin with antioxidants (four to six types) in a proper for-
mulation that also provides DNA protection and repair agents.
■■ Enhance  skin  barrier  function  by  using  appropriate  concentra-
tions of retinol and alpha-hydroxy agents daily, and before apply-
ing sunscreens.

■■ Increase  the  skin’s  ability  to  repair  and  renew  itself  by  following  a 
skin care program that provides effective stabilization of the epider-
mis (keratinocytes and melanocytes) and the dermis (fibroblasts).

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

183

Along with the prevention and treatment of all early signs of photodamage, 
this chapter addresses the treatment of textural photodamage and solar elas-
tosis because these conditions are part of skin aging and respond to rejuvena-
tion therapies. This chapter also covers longer term forms of photodamage, 
such as photosensitivity and dyschromias. Additionally, the chapter addresses 
the advanced forms of photodamage (AKs and skin cancers), but only briefly. 
Much of this material can be found in more specialized skin cancer texts.

Aging Effects of Photodamage
Photodamage  is  a  form  of  extrinsic  aging  (Box  7.12)  and  represents  direct 
damage to the skin, whether the damage occurred superficially or at deeper 
levels.

Photosensitivity
Photosensitivity deserves special mention because it accelerates the onset and 
severity of many types of photodamage. The process begins with alterations 
in the skin’s barrier function caused by problems ranging from dermatitis and 
other skin diseases to injury, allergy, infection, and excessive use of moistur-
izers or exfoliants. This altered barrier function causes skin sensitivity, which 
manifests as irritation, itching, burning, erythema, dryness, exfoliation, and/
or intolerance to many topical cosmetic products.

People rarely consider the sun as a cause of skin sensitivity. However, derma-
tologic literature recognizes photosensitivity as an allergic or immune response 
to UV light. Photosensitivity is more widespread than previously recognized 
and  plays  a  major  role  in  aggravating  all  other  causes  of  skin  sensitivity. 
Additionally, because UV light can trigger skin inflammation, UV light alone 
can cause barrier function abnormalities.

Similarly,  medications,  including  hydrochlorothiazide,  antimalarials,  tet-
racycline,  and  minocycline,  and  agents  such  as  resorcinol,  kojic  acid,  and 
salicylic acid (as well as HQ, discussed previously) can themselves cause skin 
sensitivity  and  are  known  to  increase  skin  photosensitivity.  Accordingly, 

Box 7.12

Intrinsic versus Extrinsic Aging
INTRINSIC AGING

■■ A normal, progressive phenomenon characterized by skin atrophy.
■■ Proper  treatment  can  correct,  reverse,  or  at  least  slow  down  this 

process.

EXTRINSIC AGING

■■ Abnormal,  progressive  changes  in  skin  appearance  and  texture  that 
occur in response to factors such as cigarette smoking and sun exposure.
■■ With sun exposure, fair skin experiences more profound, aggressive 

changes, whereas darker skin undergoes milder changes.

■■ Avoiding harmful exposures is the key to preventing extrinsic aging.

184

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Box 7.13

Treating Photosensitivity

■■ Treat  irritated  areas  with  topical  corticosteroids  and/or  oral 

antihistamines.

■■ Avoid sun exposure, use sunscreens, and wear sun-protective clothing.
■■ For best results, patients should also avoid photosensitizing chemi-
cals and treat any skin sensitivity these chemicals may have caused.

photosensitivity can be considered the sole cause or an aggravating factor for 
all patients with sensitive skin. Treatment recommendations follow (Box 7.13).

Progressive Forms of Photodamage
No one wakes up one day with full-blown skin cancer. Rather, research has 
established  conclusively  that  skin  cancer  tends  to  develop  gradually,  some-
times decades after a person’s most harmful sun exposures. And the process 
begins with benign-looking initial changes (Box 7.14).

In Zein Obagi Skin Classification System, tanning, freckles, and most len-
tigines are acquired, epidermal, and endogenous (although one cannot rule 
out genetic causes in lentigines). Lentigo maligna, melanoma, and skin can-
cers may combine acquired and genetic causes and reside in the epidermis 
and dermis.

Tanning
Sometimes you hear people say that a golden tan is a healthy sign of beauty 
and vitality. In the Western world, some associate tanned skin with an active 
lifestyle  and  the  pursuit  of  relaxation  and  recreation.  Tanning  accelerators 
and tanning salons are big business; in fact, the U.S. indoor tanning industry 
makes an estimated $5 billion annually.

Moderate sun exposure (no more than 15 minutes daily on exposed face 
and arms) does provide real benefits—it helps the body to synthesize vitamin 
D, which is necessary for bone health and perhaps prevents various diseases, 

Box 7.14

Stages of Visible Skin Damage

■■ Tanning
■■ Freckles (ephelides)
■■ Lentigines
■■ Solar
■■ Senilis

■■ Lentigo maligna, lentigo maligna melanoma
■■ Actinic keratoses
■■ Skin cancers

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

185

Box 7.15

Tanning

Tanning  is  the  body’s  attempt  to  protect  itself  by  increasing  pigment 
production; it is actually a sign of DNA damage.

such as multiple sclerosis and certain cancers. These preventive effects have 
yet to be proved beyond doubt, though. And even if they are substantiated, 
for people concerned about their vitamin D levels, it is much safer to take oral 
vitamin D supplements than to deliberately tan the skin.

In reality, tanning is a sign of DNA damage (Box 7.15). It is the skin’s way 
of screaming for help and an attempt to protect itself by increasing pigment 
production. Both the World Health Organization and the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services have declared natural and artificially generated 
UV rays as known carcinogens. Exposure to these rays—especially early in 
life—has been shown to increase rates of melanoma and nonmelanoma skin 
cancer. Therefore, for health reasons, Westerners should emulate the approach 
to sun safety taken by women in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. In these 
regions, people consider darker skin less desirable, a sign of lower social stand-
ing.  These  women  faithfully  apply  sunscreens,  wear  hats,  use  parasols,  and 
avoid peak midday sun exposure.

Freckles
Freckles (ephelides) are small, flat macules with a smooth surface and uniform 
color (light tan to brown). They occur predominantly on the face and nose, 
mainly  in  fair-skinned  individuals,  but  can  also  involve  other  sun-exposed 
areas. Freckles result from increased activity of melanocytes in response to 
repeated sun exposure. As such, the sun darkens them, whereas HQ applica-
tion can lighten them.

Freckles are more dangerous than a tan because their presence indicates 
that  the  person’s  skin  cannot  tolerate  sun  exposure  (Box  7.16).  More  spe-
cifically,  the  focal  areas  where  freckles  actually  appear  will  suffer  some-
what less damage because the melanin content of the freckles provides some 
protection. However, the surrounding areas, which are unable to tan, will 
suffer the greatest damage, including textural changes, photoaging, actinic 
keratoses,  and  possibly  skin  cancer.  Although  freckles  themselves  rarely 
develop  into  skin  cancer,  it  is  important  not  to  misdiagnose  skin  cancer 
as a freckle or vice versa, which could lead to unnecessary treatment and 

Box 7.16

Freckles

Freckles are more dangerous than a tan because their presence indicates 
that the person’s skin cannot tolerate sun exposure.

186

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure 7.14 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (light), medium 
thick, and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having disseminated ephelides and melasma. 
(b) One year later. The patient was treated for 5 months with aggressive HQ-based ZO 
Medical, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 6 weeks later.

anxiety for the patient. Figure 7.14 shows a patient with disseminated ephe-
lides and melasma.

Lentigines
Larger than freckles, lentigines are small (5 to 10 mm), round or oval macules 
of a light tan to brown color. Their surfaces can be smooth and flat or hyper-
keratotic. Though usually the result of sun exposure, lentigines can appear on 
sun-exposed and on sun-protected skin (Box 7.17). Except for solar lentigines, 
lentigines do not darken in response to further sunlight exposure, and once 
formed, they generally persist in the absence of sunlight. Figure 7.15 shows a 
patient with multiple lentigos solares treated with a ZO Skin Health program 
and two treatments with the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel.

Actinic Keratoses and Skin Cancer
Appearing on sun-exposed areas, AKs present as rough, scaly, often asymp-
tomatic reddish macules measuring 2 to 15 mm. They can be atrophic or hyper-
trophic, appearing in relative isolation or in clusters. AKs may enlarge slowly 
and carry a greater than 20% risk for transforming into skin cancer (basal cell 
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, de novo melanoma, and melanoma aris-
ing from lentigo maligna or from mutated nevi). The color and surface char-
acteristics of AKs can help one distinguish them from solar lentigines. Figure 
7.16 shows a patient with disseminated AKs and rosacea.

Diagnosing Early Photodamage
Distinguishing all types of lentigines and lentigo-like lesions can be done with 
a  simple,  gentle  scratch  test  with  a  #15  blade. The  scratch  test  produces  the 
results shown in Box 7.18.

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

187

Box 7.17

Types of Lentigines

 1.  Solar lentigines (lentigo solaris). These lesions tend to have rougher, 
hyperkeratotic  surfaces  and  appear  on  sun-exposed  areas,  indicat-
ing  severe  focal  sun  damage.  Compared  with  freckles,  solar  len-
tigines historically show more dyskeratosis and DNA damage. This 
means that, over time, they can transform into lentigo maligna (see 
#3 below). Accordingly, dermatologists must closely follow patients 
with lentigo solaris and treat these lesions aggressively if they appear 
to have the potential to transform into lentigo maligna.

 2.  Lentigo senilis. Often called liver spots, these lesions actually reflect 
local areas of melanocyte proliferation and hyperactivity. They can 
have  irregular  borders,  and  they  occur  mainly,  though  not  exclu-
sively, in sun-exposed areas. As with solar lentigines, patients with 
lentigo senilis require monitoring to make sure these lesions do not 
develop into lentigo maligna.

 3.  Lentigo  maligna.  These  premalignant  areas  of  dark  pigmentation, 
often found on the neck and face of older patients, show character-
istic cancerous features, including enlargement, ill-defined borders, 
and color variations within individual lesions. They require biopsy 
and vigorous treatment because they are highly likely to develop into 
lentigo maligna melanoma (invasive melanoma).

Figure  7.15 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (medium), 
medium  thick,  and  nonoily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  skin  dullness  and  multiple 
lentigo solares. (b) One year later. The patient was treated for 5 months with the ZO Skin 
Health program and had two treatments with a ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel.

188

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure 7.16 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as white (light), thick, and oily. He 
was diagnosed as having disseminated actinic keratoses and rosacea. (b) Three months later. 
The patient was treated for 5 months with aggressive HQ-based ZO Medical treatment.

Box 7.18

Scratch Test Results

■■ Freckles: no bleeding or scarring
■■ Lentigo solaris, lentigo senilis: fine scaling, lightening of lesions, no 

bleeding

■■ Lentigo maligna: lesion may or may not scale, does not lighten, and 

may bleed easily

■■ Actinic keratoses: scaling, bleeding

It is crucial to identify any lentigo maligna, dysplastic lentigines, and 
AKs because they require aggressive treatment.

Treating Visible Photodamage
As  sun  damage  progresses,  it  requires  increasingly  aggressive  treatments 
(Table 7.4).

Other Changes Indicating Textural Damage
Physicians and patients also must watch for longer term changes indicating 
that sun exposure is damaging the skin’s texture (Box 7.19).

Solar Elastosis
Over  time,  damage  to  dermal  collagen  and  elastin  leads  to  the  appearance 
of wrinkles that gradually become deeper, indurated, and unstretchable (see 
Box 7.7). Severe photodamage produces a condition known clinically as solar 
elastosis, in which damaged collagen and elastin accumulate in bulk in the 
dermis. This causes the skin to appear yellowish and to have a leathery texture 
and deep furrows and wrinkles. Figures 7.17 and 7.18 show patients with solar 
elastosis treated with a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel.

Table 7.4  Treatments for Visible Photodamage

Condition

Freckles

Lentigines:

Treatment

Bleaching and blending

Exfoliative peels and HQ treatment

Sun protection to prevent recurrences

Lentigo solaris and lentigo senilis

Scraping with blade or curette, followed by TIA 30%

Electrodessication
Laser resurfacing (CO2, erbium)
ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel or ZO 3-Step Peel

Correction, stimulation, and sun protection to prevent recurrences

Proper surgical excision

Treat topically (options include 5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, diclofenac, and ingenol 
mebutate)

Cryosurgery (for isolated or small numbers of lesions)

Photodynamic therapy, dermal peels

Perform an accurate biopsy

Diagnose properly

Treat promptly with appropriate surgical and/or nonsurgical modalities

Lentigo maligna

Actinic keratoses

Skin cancer

Box 7.19

Signs of Skin Textural Damage

■■ Solar elastosis
■■ Dyschromia
■■ Poikiloderma of Civatte

Figure 7.17 
(a)  Before. The patient had skin classified as original white (light), medium 
thin, and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having solar elastosis. (b) One year later. The patient 
had aggressive non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration with emphasis on epidermal stabi-
lization and stimulation, as well as a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel.

189

190

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Figure  7.18 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  white  (medium)  thick,  and 
nonoily. She was diagnosed as having severe solar elastosis. (b) One year later. The patient 
was treated for 2 to 6 months with aggressive, HQ-based Skin Health Restoration, fol-
lowed by a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel performed after 6 weeks 
of skin conditioning.

Dyschromia
Dyschromia  refers  to  nonspecific  pigmentation  problems  that  can  appear 
in sun-exposed areas, either alone or along with other forms of photodam-
age (e.g., lentigines, freckles, or uneven tanning). The identifying features of 
dyschromia include round focal areas of depigmentation surrounded by ill-
defined patches of hyperpigmentation. The sharply demarcated depigmented 
lesions  stem  from  the  focal  death  of  melanocytes  and  the  presence  of  epi-
dermal atrophy. The surface of these lesions may also display roughness and 
hyperkeratosis. Above all, dyschromia indicates that early textural (epidermal 
and dermal) damage has occurred.

Additionally,  physicians  sometimes  misdiagnose  dyschromia  because  it 
can look similar to other pigmentary changes, at least superficially. To avoid 
such  misdiagnoses,  consider  the  dyschromia  look-alikes  (Table  7.5).  Figure 
7.19 shows a patient with dyschromia.

Poikiloderma of Civatte
Poikiloderma of Civatte is a form of erythema associated with mottled pig-
mentation that appears on both sides of the neck, usually below the hairline. It 

Table 7.5  Conditions that May Resemble Dyschromia

Condition

Vitiligo

Postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation (PIH)

Differentiating Factors

Dyschromia has surrounding circles of 
hyperpigmentation; vitiligo does not.

Dyschromia affects only sun-exposed skin; unexposed 
adjacent areas appear normal, whereas PIH can affect 
sun-protected skin.

If the patient has no associated condition that might 
cause PIH (e.g., acne, rosacea, injury, or dermatitis), it 
is dyschromia.

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

191

Figure 7.19 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as white, thick, and oily. He was 
diagnosed as having lentigos, actinic keratoses, and nonspecific discoloration (dyschro-
mia). (b) One year later. The patient was treated with aggressive HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration,  followed  by  a  medium-depth  ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth  Peel  per-
formed after 8 weeks of Skin Health Restoration.

typically strikes women, involving the upper lateral part of the neck, while the 
surrounding skin, which is equally sun-exposed, shows minor changes due to 
direct photodamage, but no apparent changes due to photosensitivity. It can 
prove  somewhat  difficult  to  diagnose  and  treat  because  it  combines  several 
elements:

•  Dyschromia (hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation)
•  Photo-induced textural atrophy (dermal and epidermal)
•  Telangiectasias
•  Guttate dermal lumpiness (solar elastosis)

First  characterized  in  1923,  poikiloderma  of  Civatte  proves  refractory  to 
treatment unless the photosensitizing offender is eliminated. This offender is 
often perfume, which women tend to apply on both sides of the upper neck. 
With repeated application, the perfume photosensitizes the area, leading to 
much more severe photodamage than that found in perfume-free areas. After 
a patient stops using the perfume, the condition is more likely to respond to 
treatment.

Treating Deeper Photodamage
As  with  earlier  forms  of  photodamage,  treating  textural  changes  induced 
by  the  sun  requires  matching  therapeutic  modalities  with  causative  factors 
(Table 7.6).

NEVI

Nevus of Ota
Essentially a hamartoma of dermal melanocytes, this congenital nevus pres-
ents as a blue, blue-black, or gray patch on the temples, forehead, or periocular 

Table 7.6  Treating Textural Changes

Solar elastosis (and textural 
damage)

Activate skin (correction, stimulation, bleaching and blending for three keratin maturation 
cycles [KMCs] [18 weeks]).

Dyschromia (dermal and 
epidermal)

For conditions that show improvement on skin stretch test, perform a trichloroacetic acid or 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis.

For conditions that do not show improvement with the stretch test, perform tightening 
procedures (e.g., CO2 fractional laser or a custom-designed ZO Controlled Depth Peel).
Use essential topical agents (tretinoin, hydroquinone, alpha-hydroxy acids), ideally using the 
aggressive approach for three KMCs (18 weeks).

In the meantime, add a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis.

Consider laser resurfacing for dermal dyschromia.

For pigmentation too deep to reach with laser resurfacing, a pigment laser treatment may be 
indicated.

For focal depigmentation, a simple 2- to 3-mm epidermal punch graft can be used. (Topical 
agents and peels cannot correct focal depigmentation.)

Poikiloderma of Civatte 

Discontinue application of perfume (or other irritants) on the neck, and instead apply perfume 
to hair-bearing areas on either side of the lower scalp.

Add topical agents (aggressive approach) for three KMCs, plus peels and vascular laser 
treatment, if needed.

area.  These  nevi  also  can  involve  conjunctival  and  ocular  tissue,  as  well  as 
mucous  membranes  of  the  mouth  and  nose.  Usually  appearing  unilaterally 
(and occasionally bilaterally), these lesions are present at birth and can darken 
and  enlarge  with  age.  They  mainly  affect  Asian  persons  (usually  women), 
though they can occur in black skin.

A biopsy of nevi of Ota reveals heavy deposits of melanin in the dermis and 
subepidermis caused by aberrant melanocytes located throughout the dermis. 
When  considered  as  a  whole,  the  foregoing  factors  dictate  that  Zein  Obagi 
Skin Classification System groups them among genetic, endogenously caused 
disorders that can affect any layer of the skin. Figure 7.20 shows a photo of a 
patient with nevus of Ota and Figure 7.21 a patient with nevus of Hori.

Nevus of Hori
These brown-gray to brown-blue nevi look much like congenital bilateral nevi of 
Ota, except nevus of Hori typically involves the malar area. And although these 
nevi  are  present  from  birth,  they  usually  become  apparent  in  a  patient’s  40s 
or 50s (most often in women). Histologically, the abnormal melanocytes that 
cause these nevi reside in the papillary and middle portions of the dermis (not 
the subcutaneous tissue, or the conjunctiva and mucous membranes), causing 
dot-like or speckled patches of hyperpigmentation. As such, Zein Obagi Skin 
Classification System considers them to be genetic, endogenous, and dermal.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Congenital Nevi
The striking appearance of both nevi of Ota and Hori means that often they 
can be diagnosed based on clinical findings alone. However, these lesions may 
require careful follow-up; nevi of Ota in particular have been associated with 
comorbidities  ranging  from  malignant  melanoma  to  increased  intraocular 
pressure.  Additionally,  neither  type  of  nevus  responds  well  to  topical  treat-
ment with HQ. However, they typically respond well to four to six treatments 

192

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

193

Figure  7.20 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (light)  and 
medium thick. She was diagnosed as having nevus of Ota. (b) One year later. The patient 
was  treated  with  moderate  HQ-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  to  prevent  postinflam-
matory hyperpigmentation and stabilize her skin. She also underwent five Q-switched 
Nd:YAG 1,064-nm laser treatments.

with  pigment-targeting  lasers  such  as  the  Q-switched  ruby,  alexandrite,  or 
Nd:YAG laser.

Nonspecific Dermal Melanosis
This  condition  presents  as  hyperpigmented  patches  occurring  usually  on 
areas that come in contact with scalp hair: the forehead, ears, and upper neck. 

Figure 7.21 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated (medium) Asian, thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having dermal pigmentation on the zygoma for many years 
that did not lighten with Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test. She had failed to respond to 
previous treatments with HQ, exfoliative peels, and intense pulse laser treatments in dif-
ferent clinics. (b) One year later. The patient was treated for 2 to 5 months with aggressive 
HQ-based Skin Health Restoration. Four Q-switched Nd:YAG 1,064-nm laser treatments 
were performed at monthly intervals during Skin Health Restoration treatment.

194

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Box 7.20

Treating Nonspecific Dermal Melanosis

■■ Stop using the offending products (which may include heavy facial 

creams).

■■ Undergo a series of peels to the papillary dermis.
■■ Consider topical stabilization and stimulation through Skin Health 
Restoration.  In  some  patients,  however,  this  approach  may  worsen 
the condition.

It  most  commonly  afflicts  individuals  who  frequently  treat  their  hair  with 
chemical straighteners or apply oily products to help style or hold it in place. 
Zein Obagi Skin Classification System characterizes nonspecific dermal mela-
nosis as a dermal condition with acquired, endogenous inflammatory causes 
(hair-treating agents induce chronic skin inflammation).

Unfortunately, this condition does not respond to any known treatments, 
including HQ or pigment-targeting lasers. However, patients may experience 
some improvement if they take the measures shown in Box 7.20.

OCHRONOSIS

Exogenous or acquired ochronosis develops gradually and progresses slowly, 
in response to external factors, such as HQ application. It typically presents 
as  asymptomatic  blue-black  or  blue-gray  macules  of  varying  intensity  on 
sun-exposed areas such as the cheeks, temples, and neck (Box 7.21). Figures 
7.22  and  7.23  show  patients  with  ochronosis.  Ochronosis  occurs  more  fre-
quently in black skin, particularly in regions such as Africa, where people try 
to lighten their skin color with HQ to achieve a higher social status. Recently, 
however, this condition has become a problem in other skin types, including 
skin of Asians, Hispanics, and Caucasians.

Performing Dr. Zein Obagi Stretch Test reveals the root of ochronosis to 
be guttate or pinpoint pigmentation in the dermis. Based on all these factors, 
Zein Obagi Skin Classification System characterizes this condition as exog-
enous, acquired, inflammatory, and dermal.

Alkaptonuria  is  an  example  of  an  endogenous  cause  of  ochronosis.  This 
autosomal  recessive  disease  results  from  a  deficiency  of  the  enzyme  HAO, 
which helps to metabolize the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. The 

Box 7.21

Ochronosis

Ochronosis typically presents as asymptomatic blue-black or blue-gray 
macules of varying intensity on sun-exposed areas.

PIGMENTATION PROBLEMS

195

Figure 7.22  The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark), thick, and oily. She 
had used 4% HQ for melasma, unsupervised, for 10 years. She was diagnosed as having 
ochronosis.

result is an accumulation of homogentisic acid (a byproduct of phenylalanine 
and tyrosine metabolism) in the dermis and other organs.

In  both  exogenous  and  endogenous  ochronosis,  the  pigmentation  level 
and severity are identical. But although exogenous ochronosis occurs mainly 
on  sun-exposed  skin,  the  pigmentation  in  endogenous  ochronosis  can  also 
involve skin that is not exposed to the sun. The proposed pathophysiology of 
ochronosis is shown in Box 7.22.

Diagnosing, Managing, and Preventing Ochronosis
Because ochronosis affects only HQ-treated areas, diagnosing it and distin-
guishing it from other types of hyperpigmentation (e.g., induced by drugs or 
systemic diseases such  as Addison’s disease)  are relatively simple. Similarly, 
biopsy  findings  and  patient  histories  of  prolonged  HQ  use  can  confirm  the 
presence  of  ochronosis.  However,  no  successful  treatments  for  ochronosis 
exist. Exfoliative peels and non-HQ skin lighteners  prove useless against it. 

Figure  7.23 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  black  (medium),  medium  thick,  and  normally  oily.  She  was 
diagnosed as having postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and dermatosis papulosa nigra. She was seen in 1995 and treated with 
hyfrecation and bleaching and blending for 3 months with good results. (b) The patient in 2010 (15 years later). She was self-treating 
with 4% HQ (purchased online) without supervision. Notice the ochronosis on her left cheek. (c) The patient in 2012 (2 years after 
development of ochronosis). Two months after discontinuing HQ-based treatment, she started treatment with non-HQ-based blend-
ing with Brightenex-F and stimulation with Retamax-F. (d) The patient in 2013 (after 1 year of treatment). She is being treated with 
non-HQ-based blending and stimulation (as in 2012). Notice that the restoration of normal skin color tone is masking the ochronosis.

196

MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Box 7.22

Proposed Pathophysiology of Ochronosis

■■ A  paradoxical  increase  in  tyrosinase  production  causing  rebound 

hyperpigmentation and pigment migration to the dermis

■■ Skin photosensitivity or phototoxicity, causing severe inflammation 

that leads to structural alteration in dermal melanin synthesis

■■ Resistance to HQ, possibly causing melanocytes to produce an altered 
form of melanin. Combined with photosensitivity, this creates a pho-
toreaction  and  the  appearance  of  classic  ochronotic  pigment  in  the 
dermis

■■ Suppression of homogentisic acid oxidase, leading to the accumula-

tion of homogentisic acid in the dermis, as in alkaptonuria

Box 7.23

Addressing Ochronosis

■■ A topical regimen involving rigorous sun protection, melanocyte sta-

bilization, and anti-inflammatory agents

■■ Repeated ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis
■■ Pigment laser therapy
■■ CO2 fractional laser resurfacing (may be useful for mild ochronosis)

One may achieve partial success by stopping the patient’s HQ use immedi-
ately, then choosing one or more of the measures shown in Box 7.23.

Recommendations
All cosmetic companies should refrain from using the word “whitening” on 
any of their products. As we all know, “whitening” the skin requires killing all 
the melanocytes. Medically, this is an extreme, high-risk measure for a purely 
aesthetic goal. Physicians sometimes try to do this in severe cases of vitiligo, 
using specific drugs (not HQ), all the while knowing that such patients will 
suffer the rest of their lives from severe photosensitivity.

Simultaneously,  every  effort  should  be  made  to  regulate  and  restrict  HQ 
use by persons without a proper medical indication and medical supervision. 
This approach includes efforts to end Internet and black-market sales of HQ. 
Additionally, manufacturers should make HQ available only in small pack-
ages that suffice to treat small, well-defined areas of skin, and these packages 
should carry a hefty price tag to discourage overuse.

Furthermore,  HQ  should  carry  an  FDA-mandated  “black  box”  warning 
against its dangers like many dermatologic drugs such as isotretinoin do. In 
short, physicians should make every effort to prevent HQ abuse and to pre-
scribe it only in a safe manner, for specific medical indications, under medical 
supervision, and for a specified period of time.

OVERVIEW OF 
CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

CHAPTER 

8

HISTORY OF CHEMICAL PEELS

Although the ancient Egyptians used various herbs and chemical extracts as 
treatments to rejuvenate and beautify the skin,1 peeling agents such as salicylic 
acid,  resorcinol,  phenol,  and  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  were  not  scientifi-
cally described until 1882 by the work of German dermatologist P. G. Unna.2 
Furthermore, the use of phenol to treat soldiers with gunpowder burns during 
World War I strengthened the knowledge base of this chemical peeling agent, 
which was used predominantly for the next 30 years.

MacKee used full-strength (88%) phenol for the treatment of acne scars as 
early as 1903; his biopsy findings 1 year after surgery showed compact colla-
gen bundles and fibers arranged parallel to the surface.3 In 1960, Ayres4 essen-
tially confirmed MacKee’s findings when he reported a subepidermal band of 
new  collagen  with  parallel  fibers  arranged  horizontally  following  application 
of phenol to actinically damaged skin of the neck. Litton, in 1962, described an 
increase in the number and thickness of collagen fibers following a phenol peel.5
From the 1920s to the 1940s, TCA peels and sulfur and resorcinol pastes, 
salicylic acid, carbon dioxide snow, and 13-naphthol peels were described in 
the literature.6-9 In the 1960s, the introduction of the Baker-Gordon formula 
for the phenol peel eclipsed other phenol peel protocols.10-12 This formula pen-
etrated deeper (to the mid-reticular dermis) than full-strength (88%) phenol, 
while also eliminating severe photodamage as well as deep rhytides. Baker, 
Stuzin, and Baker13 believe that phenol peeling produces the most predictable 
degree of dermal penetration followed by a predictable degree of neocollagen 
formation and dramatic, long-term clinical improvement (Box 8.1, Table 8.1).
However, the striking clinical results of phenol peels came at the price of 
potential  for  serious  systemic  toxicity  (cardiac,  renal,  and  hepatic),  toxicity 
to melanocytes that caused permanent hypopigmentation and a “china-doll” 
skin color,14-21 conspicuous lines of demarcation between treated and untreated 
areas, and a prolonged post-procedure recovery period. Furthermore, phenol 
peels were not suitable because of the greater potential for scarring. Despite its 
toxicity, phenol was considered the gold standard for facial chemical peels22 
and was widely used. In a 1981 survey, 74% of plastic surgeons reported using 

198

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

Box 8.1

Baker-Gordon Formula

■■ 3 mL 88% USP phenol
■■ 8 drops liquid soap (Septisol)
■■ 3 drops croton oil
■■ 2 mL distilled water

phenol for facial peeling.23 In the 1990s, however, the phenol peel fell out of 
favor because of its reported complications.

To prevent potential complications such as systemic toxicity and hypopig-
mentation, only fair-skinned patients should undergo phenol peels, and the 
treatment needs to be applied slowly and cautiously.24 Brody recommended 
dividing  the  face  into  five  to  eight  segments,  with  application  of  phenol  to 
each of the segments at 10- to 20-minute intervals.25 Heart rhythm had to be 
monitored during the procedure and intravenous fluids administered.26

A number of safer and equally effective alternatives to phenol peels are now 
available. Dermabrasion is very effective for treating coarse rhytides and scars in 
the perioral, cheek, and forehead regions and does not have the same bleaching 
effect. However, it is not recommended for all skin types, cannot be used to treat 
rhytides around the eyes, and is a difficult procedure to master. CO2 fractional 
laser resurfacing and deeper TCA peels such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 
with a TCA concentration of 28%, can produce very effective results with full-face 
treatment and are replacing phenol peels for the treatment of deeper wrinkles and 
scars in most patients. These modalities produce more predictable results in terms 
of fewer changes in facial pigmentation because the depth of penetration of the 
peeling agent is controlled and can thus treat a wider spectrum of skin-color types.
The  sharing  of  knowledge  from  multiple  disciplines  such  as  dermatol-
ogy, plastic surgery, and cosmetic surgery has resulted in the availability of 
many techniques and makes it possible for us to improve the appearance of all 
skin types and colors, in facial and nonfacial areas, with a quality of results 
and safety not imagined 20 years ago. The methods that have been used for 
medium to deep chemical peels are shown in Box 8.2, and the mechanism of 
action of chemical peeling agents is shown in Table 8.2.

Table 8.1  Suggested Timing and Sequence for Full-Face Baker-Gordon Peel

Time

8:30 AM

9:00 AM
9:15 AM
9:30 Am
9:45 AM
10:00 AM
10:15 AM
10:30 AM
11:00 AM

Activity

Perioperative preparation: skin cleaning, analgesia, intravenous access, 
cardiac monitoring
Solution applied to forehead
Solution applied to first cheek
Solution applied to contralateral cheek
Solution applied to nose and glabella
Solution applied to perioral and vermillion areas
Solution applied to lower eyelids
Solution applied to upper eyelids
Patient monitored for 30 minutes before dressing of wound

199

TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

Box 8.2

Methods Used for Medium to Deep Chemical Peels

■■ Phenol
■■ Conventional TCA, 35% to 50%
■■ 35% TCA augmented with solid CO2
■■ 35%  TCA  augmented  with  Jessner’s  solution  (resorcinol,  salicylic 

acid, lactic acid, and ethanol)

■■ 35% TCA augmented with 5% to 10% methylsalicylate, 1% polysor-

bate 20

Table 8.2  Mechanism of Action of Chemical Peeling Agents

Agent

Mechanism of Action

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)

Phenol

Jessner’s solution

Alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) 

Coagulation of dermal and epidermal proteins 
resulting in desquamation (keratolytic)

Coagulation of dermal and epidermal proteins

Breaking of intercellular bridges to enhance effects of 
keratolytic agents

Low concentrations (5%-10%) decrease corneocyte 
adhesion; high concentrations (50%-70%) produce 
epidermolysis

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEELS

The feasibility of performing a chemical peel that was less deep than a phenol 
peel  became  apparent  in  the  1980s  as  TCA  peel  techniques  were  refined  to 
increase their efficacy and safety. Stagnone showed the absence of toxicity of 
50% TCA.11 Other investigators demonstrated the histologic changes that cor-
related with peel penetration depth in humans and in animal models27-29 and 
provided clinical descriptions of patient peels.30-32 Following these and other 
reports,  the  clinical  spectrum  of  TCA  skin  peeling  came  to  be  recognized, 
ranging from exfoliation to eradication of lines, wrinkles, elastotic deposits, 
and  mottled  pigmentation  (now  called  skin  rejuvenation)  by  penetration  to 
the papillary dermis or below.

Today, chemical peels using TCA are widely practiced techniques for super-
ficial penetration depths (exfoliation) to deep penetration depths (mid-dermal 
penetration).  These  chemical  peels  are  currently  performed  in  a  variety  of 
ways, including the following:

  1. Used alone in concentrations ranging from 30% to 50%
  2. Combined with augmenting agents, such as glycolic acid or solid CO2, 

for increased penetration

  3. Use  of  the  Designed  and  Medium-Depth  ZO  Designed  Controlled 
Depth Peel with TCA, which can be performed to reach the papillary 
dermis  (PD),  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  (IRD),  and  the  upper 
reticular dermis (URD). These peels have specific, clinically apparent 

200

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

depth signs indicating that the desired proper depth has been reached. 
Specifically, a blue coloring agent is used as a guide for even applica-
tion,  and  the  TCA  concentration  is  fixed  at  20%  or  26%  to  28%,  as 
needed.

This book emphasizes the ZO Controlled Depth Peel with TCA mentioned 
previously,  as  well  as  new  exfoliative  (epidermal)  peels  that  provide  dermal 
benefits (stimulation).

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID 30% TO 50%, 
USED ALONE

Although conventional TCA peels have produced good results in the hands 
of certain physicians, many others have experienced poor depth control and 
variable results. The properties of TCA vary with its concentration. However, 
at  any  concentration,  TCA  penetrates  the  skin  quickly.  Therapeutic  effects 
dominate at low (≤30%) concentrations, producing protein coagulation and 
rapid self-neutralization, made apparent by the slow formation of a skin frost 
(see  Figure  10.1).  At  high  concentrations  (>45%),  the  caustic  effects  of  TCA 
dominate, producing protein denaturation and slow neutralization that allow 
deep and dangerous penetration to the dermis. Permanent textural damage, 
hypopigmentation, or even depigmentation and scarring are continuing con-
cerns with higher concentrations. Other problem areas are a generally poor 
understanding of the mechanism of a TCA peel and poor control of the many 
variables  involved,  such  as  thin,  fragile  skin,  where  excessive  dermal  depth 
can  be  reached  rapidly  in  concentrations  of  35%  or  higher  (strong  caustic 
effects). Conventional, deeper TCA peels are difficult to perform and are not 
recommended for anyone but the most experienced physician.

The most important variable in the quality of outcome and safety of a TCA 
peel procedure is the depth of acid penetration (Box 8.3). Light penetration 
(to the basal layer) generally improves the epidermis and evens out superfi-
cial  hyperpigmentation.  If  the  upper  papillary  dermis  is  reached,  improve-
ment in texture, increased tightness, removal of fine lines, and correction of 
deeper  pigmentation  problems  and  some  scars  can  be  expected.  Medium-
depth wounding (reaching the URD to the mid-dermis) generally improves 
deeper  wrinkles  and  scars,  softens  the  texture,  corrects  deep  discoloration, 
and  increases  skin  firmness.  Deep  wounding  (below  the  URD  to  the  lower 
reticular dermis) should be avoided.

TCA peels in concentrations of 10%, 30%, and 50% have been erroneously 
classified  as  superficial,  medium,  and  deep,  respectively,  with  the  assump-
tion that a certain concentration penetrates to a certain depth.33 As will be 
explained later, TCA concentration determines only the speed at which the 
acid penetrates the skin and the amount of skin protein needed to neutralize 
such a concentration. Specifically, higher concentrations penetrate faster and 
denature larger amounts of protein, leading to deeper peels, as well as a higher 
risk for scarring from the caustic effect. However, any concentration can be 
made to penetrate to any depth.

As with other rejuvenation procedures, TCA complications are correlated 
with  depth;  deeper  TCA  peels  have  a  higher  incidence  of  complications 

201

TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

Box 8.3

Peel Depth

■■ Skin  thickness  and  fragility  must  be  determined  before  the  peel  is 

performed, and only a proper safe depth should be considered.

■■ Peel depth is the most important variable in peel safety and quality 

of outcome.
■■ Light penetration (to the basal layer) generally improves the epi-

dermis and corrects superficial hyperpigmentation.

■■ Penetration  to  the  PD  or  the  IRD  leads  to  improvement  in  skin 
tightness and stretchable scars (removes fine lines), and corrects 
deeper pigmentation problems.

■■ Penetration  to  the  URD  provides  both  tightening  and  leveling 
(corrects deeper wrinkles and scars, softens texture, corrects deep 
discoloration, and increases skin firmness).
■■ Deep wounding (below the URD) should be avoided.

than lighter TCA peels. Two common misconceptions about TCA peels are 
that  high  concentrations  cause  scarring,  implying  that  lower  concentra-
tions are thus safer and that lower concentrations cannot penetrate deeply. 
Table 8.3 shows the general characteristics of the TCA peels known today, 
and  Table  8.4  shows  the  problem  areas  of  conventional,  nonstandardized 
TCA peels. Box 8.4 shows the prevailing misconceptions about TCA peels. 
The  Designed  and  Standard  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  was  developed  to 
address and prevent these problems. The ZO Peels are discussed in depth in 
subsequent chapters.

Table 8.3  Characteristics of Trichloroacetic Acid Peels

Characteristic

Comment

Histology

Upregulate production of collagen and elastin in the dermis, 
while maintaining the natural three-dimensional alignment of 
collagen

Neutralization

Self-neutralizing

Penetration

Higher concentrations penetrate skin faster

Penetration can be increased with additional applications

With continuous application, deep penetration can be achieved 
with any concentration

Quality of results

Depth reached generally determines the postpeel quality of skin 
texture and color

Skin conditioning

Conditioning before and after a TCA peel—through the 
patient’s home use of topical agents—improves the quality of 
skin after the peel and expedites healing

Complications

Related to depth; deeper procedures have a higher risk for 
complications, such as keloids and hypopigmentation

202

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

Table 8.4  Variables Associated with Conventional, Nonstandardized 
Trichloroacetic Acid Peels

Variable

Concept of depth

Characteristic

Not consistent—a “superficial peel” can range 
from penetration to the stratum corneum to the 
papillary dermis

Skin type

Not properly classified for proper patient selection

Before and after skin conditioning 
programs (patients applying 
topical agents to treatment areas 
at home)

Trichloroacetic acid concentration 
can vary from 20% to 50%

Erratic and arbitrary

Optimal concentration is not identified

Depth-monitoring signs

Nonexistent

Box 8.4

Misconceptions about Trichloroacetic Acid Peels

Misconceptions

Reality

High concentrations cause scarring.

Scarring is related to depth.

Lower concentrations are safer because 
they cannot penetrate deeply.

With continuous application, low 
concentrations can penetrate to any depth.

ELIMINATING TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEEL 
VARIABLES

The practitioner must keep in mind that a 100% safe chemical peel or proce-
dure does not exist; however, risk can be significantly lowered with procedures 
that give the physician more control of the variables associated with the peel. 
Eliminating the variables provides more predictable penetration and depth, thus 
reducing complications, increasing peel safety, and ensuring the best results.

Many  peeling  methods  have  been  devised  to  increase  the  penetration  of 
TCA into the skin by using various agents mixed with TCA or applied to the 
skin before the application of TCA. These augmented peels are not necessary, 
however, because TCA does not need any enhancement to penetrate deeper 
(Box 8.5). These peels are mentioned here for historical value.

SOLID CARBON DIOXIDE PLUS 
TRICHLOROACETIC ACID

Adjunctive agents have been combined with 35% TCA to increase the depth 
of  penetration,  thus  augmenting  its  action.22,34  In  1986,  Brody  and  Hailey 
reported satisfying clinical results with the application of solid carbon diox-
ide, followed by application of 35% TCA, to enhance the penetration of the 

203

TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

Box 8.5

Trichloroacetic Acid

■■ Trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  is  a  versatile  peeling  agent  that  can  be 
used for a peel depth ranging from superficial (the stratum corneum) 
to deep (the lower reticular dermis).

■■ The ability of TCA to correct skin conditions is controlled by two fac-
tors: 1) the depth of the problem, which is especially important in the 
case of scars; and 2) the depth of the peel that is performed.

TCA  solution.35  Specifically,  actinic  damage,  appearance  of  atrophic  scars, 
fine  rhytides,  and  irregular  hyperpigmentation  were  improved  with  this 
“medium-depth” peel. Histological specimens showed an expanded papillary 
Grenz zone (neocollagen formation in the subepidermal region of the dermis) 
and a mid-reticular dermal band consisting of elastic fibers and collagen. This 
technique  was  reported  to  penetrate  to  the  upper  reticular  dermis,  a  depth 
that was similar to that previously reached with full-strength phenol, and to 
be more effective than Jessner’s solution plus TCA in the treatment of scars.36
Solid carbon dioxide should not be used with TCA for several reasons:

  1. It will produce edema with poorly defined boundaries at the site of appli-
cation that can result in uncontrolled deeper penetration in certain areas.
  2. It can destroy melanocytes not only in the epidermis but also in the adnexal 
structures, leading to hypopigmentation, especially in darker skin.
  3. There are no clear endpoints for using the agent along with TCA.

This form of TCA peel is poorly controlled and yields unpredictable and 
variable results. It should be considered a questionable variation of a TCA peel 
until clinical studies demonstrating its value are available.

PEELS USING JESSNER’S SOLUTION, 
METHYLSALICYLATE, OR GLYCOLIC ACID PLUS 
TRICHLOROACETIC ACID

Jessner’s Solution plus Trichloroacetic Acid
Monheit developed a medium-depth peel that incorporated Jessner’s solution 
(resorcinol 14 g, salicylic acid 14 g, lactic acid 14 mL, and ethanol 100 mL), 
an agent that destroys the epidermal barrier function by breaking the inter-
cellular bridges between keratinocytes.37,38 His procedure involved vigorous 
degreasing with Septisol and acetone, then application of Jessner’s solution to 
remove the stratum corneum and “open” the epidermis to TCA penetration, 
followed by application of 35% TCA. Formation of a white frost indicated pro-
tein coagulation. According to Monheit, the application of Jessner’s solution 
allows TCA to penetrate to the papillary dermis and leads to the formation 
of new collagen that clinically decreases wrinkles and improves skin texture. 
Treatment with Jessner’s solution plus TCA has been shown to reach the same 

204

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

depth  and  achieve  similar  results  as  solid  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  plus  TCA, 
with the exception of the treatment of scars, for which solid carbon dioxide 
plus TCA has shown superior results.

Methylsalicylate plus Trichloroacetic Acid
Fulton39 developed a hot-rod TCA peel that contained 35% TCA with 5% to 
10% methylsalicylate to augment penetration and 1% polysorbate 20 as a sur-
factant.  Dermabrasion  was  suggested  4  to  6  weeks  after  the  peel  to  remove 
scars or remaining perioral and periorbital wrinkles.

Glycolic Acid plus Trichloroacetic Acid Peels
Glycolic acid 70% has also been applied before the application of 35% TCA. 
This is believed to allow TCA to frost more evenly and to penetrate deeper.49 
After  2  minutes  of  contact  with  the  skin,  the  glycolic  acid  is  removed  with 
water,  and  the  35%  TCA  solution  is  applied.  The  skin  sloughs  between  the 
fourth and sixth postoperative day, and after 7 days, the patient can usually 
wear  makeup.  Postoperative  histology  specimens  showed  effects  similar  to 
those of other medium-depth peels. According to the investigators, this peel-
ing method has the advantage of not requiring storage of solid CO2, the pre-
cise mixing of components needed for Jessner’s solution, or vigorous pre-peel 
scrubbing with acetone.

Jessner’s Solution, Methylsalicylate, or Glycolic Acid plus 
Trichloroacetic Acid
Removing the stratum corneum before the application of 35% TCA to enhance 
TCA penetration appears to have no clear advantage, and histological stud-
ies have not shown results to be any different from those obtained after a peel 
in which TCA alone was used. Subjecting the skin to two injurious agents is 
not necessary when TCA as a single agent can penetrate very well, and the 
second  agent  simply  complicates  the  penetration  issues.  Acid  penetration 
depth with peels that use augmenting agents is arbitrary, and the peels do not 
have clear endpoints indicating when application of the peeling agent should 
stop. Furthermore, papillary dermis peels performed with augmenting agents 
have erroneously been labeled “medium-depth” peels. Peels to this depth are 
in reality “superficial” peels (see recommended terminology in Chapter 10). 
Augmentation of TCA by removing the stratum corneum with methylsalicy-
late (the Fulton hot-rod peel) is similar to using Jessner’s solution, and both 
techniques of augmentation are unnecessary.

GLYCERIN AND POLYSORBATE PLUS 
TRICHLOROACETIC ACID

In 1994, Dinner reported good cosmetic results with less irritation and easier 
and more even application when using a mixture of 40% TCA and glycerin 
that was emulsified with the surfactant polysorbate 20.42 He believed that the 
concentration of TCA used for a peel was actually of limited importance and 
that factors such as volume of the acid, the force of application, and the suscep-
tibility of the skin determined the depth of penetration and subsequent tissue 

205

ALPHA-HYDROXY 
ACID PEELS

destruction. He attributed the beneficial clinical effects and ease of application 
to the emollient action of glycerin.

Collins44 reviewed the variables that affect penetration of TCA, including 
concentration of the acid, technique of application, prior use of retinoic acid, 
pre-peel skin degreasing, sebaceous gland density and activity, and applica-
tion  of  pre-peel  keratolytic  agents  and  solutions.  He  believed  a  15%  to  25% 
TCA concentration would produce mild epithelial sloughing, whereas a 45% 
TCA concentration would produce necrosis of the epidermal proteins and a 
dermal, inflammatory infiltrate. With vigorous rubbing, however, a 35% solu-
tion could penetrate to the same depth as a 45% solution. Similarly, he stated 
that  repetitive  application  of  TCA  would  increase  penetration,  so  that  sev-
eral TCA peels with a lower concentration, separated by intervals of weeks to 
months, could be as effective as a single, more concentrated peel.

Glycerin plus Polysorbate plus Trichloroacetic Acid
Dr. Dinner’s peel follows Dr. Obagi’s original principles and techniques to a 
certain extent, but his use of polysorbate 80, a well-known penetrating agent, 
makes it necessary to categorize this peel in the augmented TCA peel group. 
TCA penetrates skin very well, and agents that increase its penetration, such 
as polysorbate 20, lead to a faster appearance of frost and give the physician 
less time to observe depth signs.

ALPHA-HYDROXY ACID PEELS

Alpha-hydroxy  acids  (AHAs)  have  been  extolled  by  manufacturers  and  the 
media  as  products  that  dramatically  improve  skin  appearance  and  texture, 
despite a lack of well-controlled studies. Numerous daily-use skin care prod-
ucts contain AHAs in concentrations of 2% to 10%, and “refresher” or “lunch-
time” low-concentration (e.g., 30%) glycolic acid peels are being performed by 
medical personnel as well as aestheticians for “rejuvenation.” These procedures 
cannot live up to their rejuvenation claims because they remove only the stra-
tum corneum for a simple exfoliation effect. They can produce smoother skin 
and improve comedogenic acne, but they have minimal effects on wrinkles 
or scars and cannot tighten lax skin. Unsubstantiated and inaccurate claims, 
however, are prevalent.

Although  the  mechanism  of  action  is  not  fully  known,  glycolic  acid  is 
believed  to  thin  the  stratum  corneum  and  thicken  the  stratum  granulo-
sum.49-55 The effects are pH dependent; solutions with a pH between 2.8 and 
3.5 are the most effective for inducing desquamation. Whether the therapeutic 
effects are merely a result of pH-induced irritation has not been demonstrated.
AHAs have also been used in concentrations of 50% to 70% for true chemi-
cal peeling to the level of the papillary dermis, usually using glycolic acid. A 
higher  concentration,  as  well  as  an  increased  length  of  time  the  acid  is  left 
in contact with the skin, results in deeper penetration because these agents 
are  not  self-neutralizing  like  TCA.  However,  these  peels  rarely  penetrate  to 
the epidermal-dermal junction, and, if they do, penetration can be uneven. A 
70% glycolic acid concentration in contact with the skin for up to 7 minutes 

206

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

Box 8.6

Results with Glycolic Acid Peels

Clinical results with glycolic acid peels are subtle and hard to validate 
scientifically.

may not penetrate into the PD. Deeper penetration into the dermis, however, 
can occur if the peel is not monitored or neutralized properly, especially in 
thin skin. Cases of significant irritation and hypertrophic scarring have been 
reported.  Fifty  percent  glycolic  acid  solutions,  considered  “safer”  than  the 
70%, can also penetrate the dermis if left long enough on the skin.

Glycolic  acid  agents  need  to  be  neutralized  by  washing  off  with  large 
amounts of water to terminate their action when they have penetrated to the 
desired  depth.  However,  there  are  no  clear  endpoints  for  when  to  stop  the 
peel. After application, the skin appears pink and then progressively redder, 
indicating penetration of the epidermis. If the solution has penetrated to the 
epidermal-dermal  junction,  small  gray-white  patches  will  appear,  and  with 
significant dermal involvement, some white frosting may be seen.

Uneven penetration and highly variable results from patient to patient have 
been reported with glycolic acid peels. Although a high concentration (>50%) 
of glycolic acid used repeatedly (over multiple sessions) can stimulate the der-
mis to form new collagen and increase glycosaminoglycans in the upper der-
mis, the process has to be repeated a number of times for beneficial effects to 
be realized. Patients often drop out before completion of the sequence, feeling 
dissatisfied with the limited improvement and inconvenience. Clinical results 
have been described as “subtle” and hard to validate scientifically (Box 8.6). As 
expected, more superficial beneficial skin changes, including surface texture, 
superficial hyperpigmentation, acne, and xerosis, can improve following a gly-
colic acid peel. Fine wrinkles may be improved, but deeper wrinkles are not.

A  clinical  study  conducted  to  evaluate  short-contact  (3-  to  6-minute)  70% 
glycolic acid peels used on a monthly basis showed no benefit in the treatment of 
photodamaged skin.56 The investigators concluded that the value of glycolic acid 
“refresher peels” should be questioned as a “value-added” treatment for aging 
skin and that topical retinoids and low-concentration TCA peels are a better 
value for the consumer. Another study, however, of 50% glycolic acid applied 
for 5 minutes once weekly for 4 weeks showed mild improvement of some skin 
photoaging signs.57 AHA research is currently in its infancy, and there is not yet 
enough scientific evidence to support AHAs as true therapeutic agents.58

REFERENCES

  1.  Bryan  CP,  trans.  Ancient  Egyptian  Medicine:  The  Papyrus  Ebers.  Chicago:  Ares 

Publishers; 1974:158-161.

  2.  Marmelzat WL. A historical review of chemical rejuvenation of the face. In: Kotler R, 

ed. Chemical Rejuvenation of the Face. St. Louis: Mosby; 1992:934-938.

207

REFERENCES

  3.  MacKee GM, Karp FL. The treatment of post-acne scars with phenol. Br J Dermatol. 

1952;64:456.

  4.  Ayres S. Dermal changes following application of chemical cauterants to aging skin. 

Arch Dermatol. 1960;82:578.

  5.  Litton C. Chemical face lifting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1962;29:371.
  6.  Roberts  HL.  The  chloroacetic  acids:  a  biochemical  study.  Brit  J  Dermatol. 

1926;38:323-391.

  7.  Monash S. The use of trichloroacetic acid in dermatology. Ural Cut Rev. 1945;49:119.
  8.  Ayres S. Superficial chemosurgery in treating aging skin. Arch Dermatol. 1962;82:125.
  9.  Eller JJ, Wolff S. Skin peeling and scarification. JAMA. 1941;116:934-938.
  10.  Baker TJ, Gordon HL. The ablation of rhytides by chemical means: a preliminary 

report. J Fla Med Assoc. 1961;48:541.

  11.  Baker TJ. Chemical face peeling and rhytidectomy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1962;29:199.
  12.  Baker TJ, Gordon HL, Seckinger DL. A second look at chemical face peeling. Plast 

Reconstr Surg. 1966;37:487-493.

  13.  Baker TJ, Stuzin JM, Baker TM. Histologic effects of photoaging and facial resurfac-

ing. In: Facial Skin Resurfacing. St. Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1998:12-28.

  14.  Wexler  MR,  Halon  DA,  Teitelbaum,  et  al.  The  prevention  of  cardiac  arrhythmias 
produced in an animal model by the topical application of a phenol preparation in 
common use for face peeling. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1984;73:595-598.

  15.  Kligman  AM,  Baker  TJ,  Gordon  H.  Long-term  histologic  follow-up  of  phenol  face 

peels. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1985;75:652-659.

  16.  Warner MA, Harper JV. Cardiac dysrhythmias associated with chemical peeling with 

phenol. Anesthesiology. 1985;62:366-367.

  17.  Stagnone JJ, Orgel MB, Stagnone GJ. Cardiovascular effects of topical 50% trichloro-

acetic acid and Baker’s phenol solution. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1987;13:999-1002.

  18.  Lober  CW.  Chemexfoliation-indications  and  cautions.  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol. 

1987;17:109-112.

  19.  Asken  S.  Unoccluded  Baker-Gordon  phenol  peels:  review  and  update.  J  Dermatol 

Surg Oncol. 1989;15:998-1008.

  20.  Alt TH. Occluded Baker-Gordon chemical peel: review and update. J Dermatol Surg 

Oncol. 1989;15:980-993.

  21.  Klein  DR,  Little  JH.  Laryngeal  edema  as  a  complication  of  chemical  peel.  Plast 

Reconstr Surg. 1983;71:419-420.

  22.  Beeson WH. Chemical peeling: a facial plastic surgeon’s perspective. Dermatol Surg. 

1995;21:389-391.

  23.  Litton C, Trinidad G. Complications of chemical face peeling as evaluated by a ques-

tionnaire. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1981;67:738-744.

  24.  Baker TJ, Stuzin JM, Baker TM. Histologic effects of photoaging and fa cial resurfac-

ing. In: Phenol Peels. St. Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1998:118-143.

  25.  Brody HJ. Complications of chemical peeling: a variation of superficial chemosur-

gery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:1010-1019.

  26.  Hopping SB. Chemical peeling in 1996: what have we learned? Int J Aesthetic Restor 

Surg. 1996;4:73-80.

  27.  Stegman  SJ.  A  study  of  dermabrasion  and  chemical  peels  in  an  animal  model. 

J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1980;6:490-497.

  28.  Stegman SJ. A comparative histologic study of the effects of three peeling agents and 
dermabrasion on normal and sundamaged skin. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 1982;6:123-135.
  29.  Brodland  DG,  Cillimore  KC,  Roenigk  RK.  Depths  of  chemexfoliation  induced  by 
various concentrations and application techniques of trichloroacetic acid in a por-
cine model. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:967-971.

  30.  Resnick  SS,  Lewis  LA,  Cohen  BH.  Trichloroacetic  acid  peeling.  Cutis. 

1976;17:127-129.

208

  31.  Resnik SS, Lewis LA. The cosmetic uses of trichloroacetic acid peeling in dermatol-

OVERVIEW OF CHEMICAL 
PEELING AGENTS

ogy. South Med J. 1973;66:225.

  32.  Brodland  DG,  Roenigk  RK.  Trichloroacetic  acid  chemexfoliation  (chemical  peel) 
for  extensive  premalignant  actinic  damage  of  the  face  and  scalp.  Mayo  Clin  Proc. 
1988;63:887.

  33.  Brody  HJ.  Chemical  Peeling  and  Resurfacing.  2nd  ed.  St.  Louis:  CV  Mosby; 

1997:109-136.

  34.  Collins P. Trichloroacetic acid peel revisited. J Derm Surg Oncol. 1989; 15:933-940.
  35.  Brody HJ, Hailey CW. Medium depth  chemical  peeling  of the  skin: a variation of 

superficial chemosurgery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1986;12: 1268-1272.

  36.  Brody HJ. Variations and comparisons in medium-depth chemical peeling. J Derm 

Surg Oncol. 1989;15:953-963.

  37.  Monheit G. The Jessner’s + TCA peel: a medium depth chemical peel. J Dermatol 

Surg Oncol. 1989;15:945-952.

  38.  Monheit  GD.  The  Jessner’s-trichloroacetic  acid  peel:  an  enhanced  medium-depth 

chemical peel. Cosmet Dermatol. 1995;13:277-283.

  39.  Fulton JE. Step-by-step skin rejuvenation. Am J Cosmet Surg. 1990;7:199-205.
  40.  Coleman WP, Futrell JM. The glycolic acid-trichloroacetic acid peel. J Dermatol Surg 

Oncol. 1994;20:76-80.

  41.  Fulton,  JE.  Paper  presented  at  American  Academy  of  Aesthetic  and  Restorative 

Surgery, World Congress, Los Angeles, 1997.

  42.  Dinner  MI,  Artz  JF.  Chemical  peel:  what’s  in  the  formula?  Plast  Reconstr  Surg. 

1994;94:406-407.

  43.  Laub DR. Polysorbate as an adjunctive chemical in the trichloroacetic acid peel [let-

ter]. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1995;95:425.

  44.  Collins PS. Trichloroacetic acid revisited. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15:933-940.
  45.  Johnson JB, Ichinose H, Obagi ZE, Laub, DR. Obagi’s modified trichloroacetic acid 
(TCA)-controlled variable depth peel: a study of clinical signs correlating with histo-
logical findings. Ann Plast Surg. 1996;36:225-237.

  46.  Obagi ZE, Sawaf MM, Johnson JB, et al. The controlled depth trichloroacetic acid peel: 
methodology, outcome, and complication rate. Int J Aesthetic Restor Surg. 1996;4:81-94.
  47.  Duffy D. Alpha hydroxy acids/trichloroacetic acids risk/benefit strategies: a photo-

graphic review. Dermatol Surg. 1998;24:181-189.

  48.  Baker TJ, Stuzin JM, Baker TM. Facial Skin Resurfacing. St. Louis: Quality Medical 

Publishing; 1998:88.

  49.  Van Scott EJ, Yu RJ. Alpha hydroxy acids: therapeutic potentials. Can J Dermatol. 

1989;1:108-112.

  50.  Matarasso ST, Salman SM, Glogau RG, et al. The role of chemical peeling in the treat-

ment of photodamaged skin. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1990;16:945-954.

  51.  Moy LS, Murad H, Moy RL. Glycolic acid peels for the treatment of wrinkles and 

photoaging. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1993;19:243-246.

  52.  Moy LS, Murad H, Moy RL. Glycolic acid therapy: evaluation of efficacy and tech-

niques in treatment of photo damage lesions. Am J Cosmet Surg. 1993;10:1.

  53.  Murad  H,  Shamban  AT,  Premo  PS.  The  use  of  glycolic  acid  as  a  peeling  agent. 

Dermatol Clin. 1995;13:285-307.

  54.  Daniello NJ. Glycolic acid controversies. Int J Aesthetic Restor Surg. 1996;4:113-116.
  55.  Draelos ZD. Dermatologic considerations of AHAs. Cosmet Dermatol. 1997;10:14-18.
  56.  Piacquadio D, Dobry M, Hunt S, et al. Short contact glycolic acid peels as a treatment 

for photodamaged skin: a pilot study. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:449-452.

  57.  Newman NN, Newman A, Moy LS, et al. Clinical improvement of photoaged skin 

with 50% glycolic acid. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:455-460.

  58.  Brody H, Coleman WP, Piacquadio D, et al. Round table discussion of alpha hydroxy 

acids. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:475-477.

CHAPTER 

9

EXFOLIATING 
CHEMICAL PEELS

ELIMINATING THE GUESSWORK

Chemical peels have been used for decades to improve the skin’s appearance by 
addressing problems ranging from sun damage and minor wrinkling to spe-
cific dermatologic conditions, such as melasma and postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation (PIH). Until recently, all chemical peels on the market were based 
on one simple concept: application of one or more acid solutions directly onto 
the skin surface. These agents would remove variable levels of the epidermis 
and dermis, after which the patient’s skin would heal by replacing the treated 
or damaged skin with fresh-looking, new skin. In general, the deeper the peel 
was allowed to penetrate, the longer the treated area took to heal.

Exfoliative peels improve only the epidermis, a fact not often explained to 
the patient. These superficial, exfoliative peels, currently the most popular type 
of chemical peel being performed, do not have a uniform lexicon in terms of 
their active ingredients, percentage strength of each component, and overall 
efficacy. Many contain active ingredients of questionable efficacy. Results of 
many  currently  available  exfoliative  peels  are  unpredictable—some  exfolia-
tive peels are effective in inducing epidermal exfoliation, whereas others are 
not. Similarly, deeper penetrating, dermal peels, as discussed in Chapter 10, 
also tend to be poorly defined, have multiple difficult-to-control variables, and 
produce  unpredictable  results.  Furthermore,  the  terms  “light,”  “medium,” 
and “deep,” when used to describe chemical peels, are virtually meaningless 
because peel ingredients, percentage concentrations, and ultimate efficacy of 
these peels vary greatly, depending on the active ingredients, the physician’s 
skill level, and other patient-related factors (Boxes 9.1 and 9.2).

AGENTS USED FOR EXFOLIATING 
CHEMICAL PEELS: MECHANISMS OF 
ACTION AND OTHER PROPERTIES

TRICHLOROACETIC ACID

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) works by coagulating epidermal and dermal proteins 
and can be used for both epidermal and dermal peels. A few days after applica-
tion of TCA, the affected cells in each skin layer that is reached by the acid will 

210

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Box 9.1

Variables Related to Peeling Agents that Affect Outcome

Currently, there is no generalized consensus regarding the following:

■■ Suitable active ingredients in terms of peeling agents for penetrating 
to specific depths (exfoliative agents are not suitable for dermal peels)
■■ Ideal concentrations of acids used for peels penetrating to specific depths
■■ Ideal volume of acid solution for specific size of skin surface areas
■■ Methods for ensuring even application, absorption, and interaction 

of the peeling agents with the skin.

peel off as sheets. Repeated application causes the peel to penetrate more deeply 
as the TCA coagulates more protein. In other words, the concentration and vol-
ume of TCA determine the TCA peel depth (Box 9.3). After application, a frost 
usually forms and gradually progresses. TCA is not absorbed systemically, and 
it  self-neutralizes  following  interaction  with  skin  proteins.  Thus,  unlike  sev-
eral other chemical peeling agents (e.g., glycolic acid), the treatment site does 
not have to be treated with sodium bicarbonate or another neutralizing agent 

Box 9.2

Patient-Related Variables that Affect Peel*†Outcome

■■ Poor or uneven skin hydration†

■■ Properly hydrated skin (through proper and adequate skin condition-
ing) allows consistent, even acid penetration and distribution because 
well-hydrated skin shows a quick, visible, quantifiable response (frost-
ing) after acid application and heals evenly and relatively quickly.
■■ Poorly hydrated skin (due to improper or inadequate skin condition-
ing) shows little to no visible or quantifiable response initially. This 
delayed response can lead the physician to administer additional lay-
ers of acid, which yield a deeper than intended peel penetration and 
can ultimately lead to adverse events.
■■ Skin sensitivity (innate or acquired)

■■ Sensitive  skin  is  indicative  of  skin  having  an  impaired  barrier 

function.

■■ Sensitive skin is unsuitable for any resurfacing procedure because 
of its propensity toward developing strong post-procedural irrita-
tion, inflammation, and suboptimal healing.

* This box uses trichloroacetic acid as the example of the peeling agent, but most of the prin-

ciples can be applied to other chemical peeling agents as well.

† Adequate and even skin hydration are achieved by at least 6 weeks of consistent daily topi-

cal use of products to precondition skin (see Chapter 2).

continued

211

AGENTS USED FOR 
EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS: MECHANISMS 
OF ACTION AND OTHER 
PROPERTIES

Box 9.2

Patient-Related Variables that Affect Peel Outcome 
(Continued)
■■ Presence of certain active diseases (including autoimmune disorders) 
■■ Those with active lesions or simply a history of autoimmune condi-
tions such as systemic lupus erythematosus, discoid lupus erythe-
matosus, or bullous disorders, and those with vascular dysfunction, 
such as stasis dermatitis or vasculitis, should not undergo chemi-
cal peels or other resurfacing procedures because these disorders 
are associated with compromised healing and occasional flares of 
otherwise latent disease. 

■■  In contrast, those with disorders related to pilosebaceous units (acne, 
rosacea, and seborrheic dermatitis) can benefit from exfoliative peels 
as  part  of  a  treatment  protocol,  even  when  their  disease  is  active. 
Of note, these conditions should be controlled before these patients 
undergo more deeply penetrating procedures, such as dermal peels or 
other resurfacing procedures.

Box 9.3

The  concentration  and  volume  of  trichloroacetic  acid  determine  the 
peel depth.

following application of the TCA. Of note, TCA penetrates through the skin 
rapidly (within 1 to 2 minutes), and its effects cannot be reversed by washing skin 
with water or sodium bicarbonate after the cutaneous proteins have coagulated.

ALPHA-HYDROXY ACIDS

Used for epidermal exfoliation, alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) break apart bonds 
between skin cells (desmosomes), which allows epidermal exfoliation to occur 
through the shedding of single cells. AHAs are water soluble. The main AHAs 
used  in  dermatology  are  glycolic,  lactic,  and  mandelic  acid.  There  is  no  gen-
erally accepted consensus regarding the ideal concentration of AHAs needed 
to achieve an optimal epidermal exfoliating effect. Typically, concentrations of 
glycolic acid used for this purpose vary broadly, usually ranging from 30% to 
70%. AHAs are not absorbed systemically and do not self-neutralize. Thus, areas 
treated with AHAs must be neutralized after several minutes by the applica-
tion of a basic solution like sodium bicarbonate or diluted by the application of 
water; the approximate time that the AHA should be in contact with the skin 
(before dilution or neutralization) usually ranges from 3 to 5 minutes. Without 
subsequent neutralization or dilution, the AHAs and their associated effects will 
penetrate deeper than intended (occasionally into the dermis). AHAs penetrate 
slowly through the epidermis. However, the amount of time that the AHAs are 

212

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

allowed to sit on the skin needs to be carefully monitored because they are very 
caustic to collagen and elastin and will cause scarring if permitted to penetrate 
to the depth of dermis. The practitioner should expect some redness and little to 
no frost to appear on treatment sites after application of AHAs.

BETA-HYDROXY ACIDS

Also effective in inducing epidermal exfoliation, beta-hydroxy acids (BHAs) 
essentially “melt” cells with which they come in contact (acantholysis), lead-
ing  to  epidermal  shedding  and  exfoliation. The  most  commonly  used  BHA 
in  dermatology  is  salicylic  acid.  Of  note,  unlike  TCA  and  AHAs,  BHAs  are 
lipophilic and are thus systemically absorbed. Thus, BHAs have the potential 
to yield both allergic and toxic reactions. Salicylate toxicity, though rare, can 
affect the central nervous system (e.g., confusion, dizziness, psychosis) as well 
as the gastrointestinal system (nausea and vomiting). Consequently, in gen-
eral, physicians should avoid using BHAs in concentrations greater than 30% 
because higher concentrations not only are more likely to induce negative side 
effects but also have not been shown to offer additional benefit compared with 
solutions of less than 30%. Similar to AHAs, BHAs are not self-neutralizing 
and also penetrate the epidermis quickly. The practitioner must use caution 
when determining how much time to allow the BHA solution to be in con-
tact with the skin before dilution and neutralization (optimal times typically 
range from 3 to 5 minutes). Also similar to what is observed with AHA appli-
cation, little to no frost will appear after the application of a BHA to the skin.

RESORCINOL

Resorcinol is used for epidermal action. Its mechanism of action is much like 
that associated with phenol, which is a deeper dermal peel solution that has 
lost  its  popularity  because  of  its  potential  for  serious  systemic  side  effects. 
Specifically, both resorcinol and phenol induce epidermal acantholysis as well 
as coagulation and precipitation of cellular proteins. With resorcinol, protein 
coagulation  is  limited  to  keratinocytes  within  the  epidermis,  whereas  with 
phenol, penetration is deeper, and proteins within the dermis are coagulated. 
Although serious systemic side effects are more likely to occur with phenol, 
resorcinol is much less likely to induce systemic effects. Of note, resorcinol is 
absorbed systemically and can lead to methemoglobinemia, especially when 
used on children or on large areas of the body.

A NOVEL APPROACH TO CHEMICAL 
PEELS

The lack of predictability and efficacy of previously available chemical peels 
inspired the development of new principles and applications. The result is a 
comprehensive  spectrum  of  chemical  peels  that  address  and  minimize  the 

213

A NOVEL APPROACH TO 
CHEMICAL PEELS

previously mentioned uncertainties (e.g., optimal concentration of the active 
ingredients in the peeling solution, optimal total volume of the acid solution 
administered, and ideal duration of time between when the acid and the dilut-
ing and neutralizing agent are subsequently applied, when the solution is not 
self-neutralizing).  Specifically,  this  new  approach  has  fine-tuned  the  art  of 
administering  chemical  peels  to  make  them  safer  to  perform  and  easier  to 
learn through the following measures:

•  Adopting  a  skin  classification  system  (see  Chapter  4)  that  takes  into 
account  the  effect  of  skin  thickness,  color,  and  suitability  for  peels  to 
various depths

•  Conditioning the skin before the peel to eliminate skin sensitivity, restore 

proper hydration, and activate the skin’s ability to renew itself

•  Establishing that TCA is the gold-standard peeling agent to be used when 
one wants to perform a chemical peel that penetrates down to the level of 
the dermis. TCA offers superior, predictable results; short-lived activity 
(seconds); and a self-neutralizing capability. Because of the latter, it does 
not need to be washed off or buffered with a basic solution.

•  Incorporating a color guide (blue dye) into the peeling solution, which 
penetrates  into  the  dermis,  to  ensure  that  an  even  application  and 
intended depth are reached

•  Standardizing optimal concentrations and formulations of TCA used in 
chemical  peels,  as  well  as  the  appropriate  volumes  for  specific  surface 
areas and intended depths of penetration

•  Obtaining  not  only  superficial,  exfoliating  benefits  of  more  superficial 

peels but also the deeper, dermal benefits following such peels

•  Allowing physicians to accurately determine the depth of dermal pen-

etration by providing clearly identifiable, clinical depth signs

•  Establishing safe, yet effective, peel depths for all skin types (determined 
by  observing  clinical  depth  signs).  This  way,  peels  will  not  alter  one’s 
original skin color or texture, and the chances of serious complications 
are minimized.

These innovations include three highly safe and reliable exfoliative peels, as 
well as a universal dermal peel (Table 9.1) that offers clearly identifiable depth 
signs. More specific details regarding this dermal peel are given in Chapter 10. 
Through this comprehensive spectrum of chemical peels, characterized by the 

Table 9.1  ZO Peels: Penetration Depths and Their Associated Objectives

Peel

Penetration Depth 

Objective

ZO Retinol Stimulation 
Peel (home application)

Epidermis

ZO Invisapeel

Epidermis

ZO 3-Step Peel 

Epidermis

Light exfoliation and stimulation 
(epidermis and upper dermis)

Near-invisible (microscopic) 
exfoliation

Deep exfoliation and stimulation 
(epidermis and upper dermis)

ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel

Papillary dermis
Immediate reticular 
dermis

Mild skin tightening
Strong skin tightening

Upper reticular dermis Maximal skin tightening and some 

skin leveling

214

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

intended and maximal depth of penetration, physicians are now able to offer 
a peel that precisely reaches whichever of the following four main levels that 
one desires: the epidermis, the papillary dermis (PD), the immediate reticular 
dermis (IRD), and the upper reticular dermis (URD).

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

To simplify the exfoliating peel process and increase its benefits, the new exfo-
liating  peels—ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel,  Invisapeel,  and  ZO  3-Step  Peel—
combine  agents  that  induce  epidermal  exfoliation  and  strongly  stimulate  the 
epidermis and dermis simultaneously. This is not generally characteristic of other 
exfoliating peels on the market. The ZO exfoliating peels are delivered in easy- 
to-administer packages with clear instructions. They are remarkably safe, result-
ing in little to no side effects when performed properly on compliant patients.

ZO RETINOL STIMULATION PEEL

Retinol is a powerful acid that can be very irritating and chemically unstable. 
Vehicles and formulations that include water or oil significantly diminish reti-
nol’s activity. The concentration of retinol must be 1% or greater in chemical 
peels and greater than 0.3% in topical cosmetic products. However, most retinol-
containing products currently on the market contain only trace amounts of 
retinol  (below  a  0.3%  concentration),  and  the  retinol  may  be  delivered  in  a 
neutralized form by manufacturers trying to reduce irritation. The efficacy of 
these products is therefore highly questionable (Box 9.4).

The  ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel,  a  home  peel  that  entails  several  con-
secutive  days  of  twice-daily  application  of  a  specified  amount  of  Ossential 
Advanced  Radical  Night  Repair,  avoids  the  previously  mentioned  problems 
through its unique anhydrous formulation as well as its 1% concentration of 
retinol. The retinol is encapsulated in microspheres and lipospheres to reduce 
potential irritation. The microspheres and lipospheres allow absorption of ret-
inol into skin cells and prevent contact of free retinol with the skin extracellu-
larly. This ultimately reduces the potential for irritation. When applied nightly, 
the retinol in Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair functions as an anti-
aging agent, delivered in a stabilized formulation. The cream is applied to the 
face each night (4 pumps, the equivalent of 1 gram). For a milder approach, 

Box 9.4

Most retinol-containing products currently on the market contain only 
trace  amounts  of  retinol  (below  a  0.3%  concentration),  and  the  reti-
nol may be delivered in a neutralized form by manufacturers trying to 
reduce irritation. The efficacy of these products is highly questionable.

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

215

patients may begin with two pumps, which is the equivalent of ½ gram, once 
to  twice  weekly  and  gradually  increasing,  as  tolerated,  to  a  goal  of  nightly 
application of 4 pumps (1 gram).

When used twice daily as a peeling agent, it can induce exfoliation through 
dehydration and forced exfoliation of the surface epidermis for 2 to 3 days, 
leading to much deeper and more powerful stimulation and anti-aging effects. 
This  stimulation  also  improves  skin  strength  and  texture  by  increasing  the 
production of collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans.

Use of Retinol versus Tretinoin
For direct application to the skin, retinol is preferred over tretinoin (Table 
9.2). Tretinoin is extremely irritating and, as a free agent, penetrates through 
the epidermis intercellularly before exerting its benefit intracellularly. Any 
excess tretinoin that remains extracellularly within the epidermis will con-
tinue to cause severe irritation. It is virtually impossible to predict the opti-
mal amount of tretinoin for any given treatment area of skin. In contrast, 
the  retinol  in  Ossential  Advanced  Radical  Night  Repair  penetrates  down 
to  the  dermis,  while  causing  exfoliation  of  only  the  upper  portion  of  the 
epidermis.

 Home Application
The  specially  formulated  retinol  (with  an  anhydrous  base)  allows  Ossential 
Advanced Radical Night Repair to be used nightly as part of a basic skin care 
regimen and twice daily as a peeling agent that provides strong stimulation 
and benefits. This was demonstrated in 100 patients of all skin types and with 
various skin disorders. After completion of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, 
all experienced healing times of 3 to 4 days, without occurrence of significant 
irritation, redness, or sensitivity. Subsequently, patients experienced continu-
ous improvement for 2 to 3 weeks after the peel, which other current commer-
cially available exfoliating peels cannot provide.

Table 9.2  Properties of Retinol versus Tretinoin as Peeling Agents

Properties

Formulation

Volume/size of 
treatment area

Penetration

Retinol

1% Anhydrous

Controlled

Tretinoin

0.4% in oil

Uncontrolled

Even and effective

Variable and poor

Stabilization benefits

Anti-aging effects

Strong

Strong

None

Weak (poor penetration)

Irritation

Minimal and short lived

Strong and dominant

Use of applied amount Complete

Partial (unused portion causes 
continuous irritation)

Healing

Indications

Person performing the 
peel

Three to 4 days, with no 
residual redness

Five to 6 days, with redness for 
1 week or more

Prevention, anti-aging, and 
textural benefits

Not popular; no clear 
indications

Patient, at home

Physician, in clinic

216

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Mechanism of Action
In the upper epidermis, the stratum corneum and the stratum granulosum 
(down  to  the  upper  mid-epidermis)  are  composed  of  keratinocytes  that  are 
rich in keratin granules and are significantly less hydrated than the keratino-
cytes in the lower epidermis. The less-hydrated upper epidermis, on contact 
with  the  retinol  in  the  anhydrous  base,  dries  up  completely  and  exfoliates, 
whereas the hydrated lower portion of the epidermis is unaffected because of 
its higher level of hydration.

In the lower epidermis, well-hydrated keratinocytes offer no barrier resis-
tance  to  the  penetration  of  retinol  within  the  Ossential  Advanced  Radical 
Night Repair formula. This explains why the encapsulated retinol is able to 
penetrate through the lower portion of the epidermis into the PD. After daily 
application of Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair, exfoliation starts on 
about day 3 and is completed by days 6 to 7. Figure 9.1 illustrates the penetra-
tion of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel according to day of application.

Course Duration
The reactions experienced by patients undergoing a standard duration (5 con-
secutive days of application) or a short duration (3 consecutive days of appli-
cation) of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel are shown in Table 9.3. For both 
the standard and the short duration course, the patient is to apply Ossential 
Advanced Radical Night Repair twice daily; the strength of treatment can be 
further  adjusted  to  light,  medium,  or  strong  based  on  the  total  amount  of 

ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel: Penetration According to Day of Application*

Day

1

2

3

4-5

Exfoliation is limited
to the upper portion
of the dehydrated
epidermis “site of
retinol activity” as
the hydrated portion
of epidermis blocks
exfoliative properties
of retinol and allows
only retinol stimulating
effects to penetrate to PD

Stratum corneum

Upper epidermis

Lower epidermis

Epidermis

Basal cell layer

Papillary dermis (PD) 

Immediate reticular
dermis (IRD)

Dermis

Upper reticular
dermis (URD)

Dark blue arrows indicate penetration depth
Light blue arrows indicate stimulation depth

*Lower epidermis is stimulated on each day of use (Days 1–5).
 Papillary dermis is stimulated on Days 4–5.

Figure 9.1  Penetration according to day of application during the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel.

Table 9.3  Anticipated Sensations and Reactions during the ZO Retinol Stimulation 
Peel (Standard and Short Duration)

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

217

Standard Duration ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel (5 Days)

Day Reactions

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Begin application—no reaction or a mild, stinging sensation

Tightness and/or a mild, stinging sensation

Tightness and stinging sensation; exfoliation begins

More intense exfoliation

Same or slightly less exfoliation (last day of treatment/application)

No longer applying Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair
Begin anti-inflammation treatment and hydration, four to five times daily

Continue anti-inflammation treatment and hydration, four to five times daily
Expect complete healing

Patient should be instructed to return to his/her pretreatment topical regimen

Short Duration ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel (3 Days)

Day Reactions

1

2

3

4

5

Begin application—no reaction or a mild, stinging sensation

Tightness and/or a mild, stinging sensation

Tightness and/or stinging sensation; exfoliation begins
Final day of application of Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair

Begin anti-inflammation treatment and hydration, four to five times daily
Expect complete healing

Patient should be instructed to return to his/her pretreatment topical regimen

Table 9.4  Variable Strengths of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel and Associated 
Ultimate Responses

Strength

Light

Medium

Strong

Amount Applied* 
(No. of Pumps)

5 

8 

10-12

Anticipated Response†

Mild exfoliation, mild stimulation

Moderate exfoliation, moderate stimulation

Intense exfoliation, strong stimulation

* Regardless  of  which  treatment  strength  category  is  chosen,  the  Ossential Advanced 
Radical Night Repair should be applied twice daily.
† The  physician  may  have  the  patient  change  to  ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel  strength 
Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair. To shorten the exfoliation and healing phase, 
the physician may recommend that the patient perform the ZO Retinol Stimulation 
Peel for 3 days and then perform the 5-day peel at a later time.

Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair applied at each application (between 
5 and 12 pumps) (Table 9.4). Patients ultimately decide on their desired ZO 
Retinol Stimulation Peel strength and peel duration (3 or 5 days), depending 
on their motivation and lifestyle.

Application Steps
Patients should undergo the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel only after using a 
basic (preventive) or therapeutic ZO Skin Health or ZO Medical program for 
at least 4 to 6 weeks. During this pre-peel conditioning stage, patients should 
use Ossential Radical Night Repair Plus every night to activate skin renewal 
and  strengthen  the  skin’s  barrier  function.  Patients  must  not  perform  the 

218

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel  (increasing  the  amount  of  Ossential Advanced 
Radical  Night  Repair  applied  or  change  the  frequency  from  once  to  twice 
per  day)  until  their  skin  can  tolerate  the  nightly  application  of  3  pumps  of 
Ossential  Advanced  Radical  Night  Repair  (this  usually  takes  2  to  4  weeks). 
The ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel can be performed only after skin is properly 
activated and repaired.

With AHA, BHA, Jessner’s solution, and other currently available exfolia-
tors, the peeling agent is applied during one visit, and the skin exfoliates for 
2 to 3 days thereafter. Such peels result in limited, short-lived improvement 
of the skin’s surface, with no stimulating effects. In contrast, the ZO Retinol 
Stimulation Peel is an ongoing process of total epidermal repair that provides 
dermal benefits that no other epidermal peels can offer. This peel consists of 
multiple steps (Table 9.5) that users must follow sequentially for 3 to 5 days to 
maximize  the  procedure’s  benefits  and  therapeutic  efficacy.  Patients  should 
perform this peel every 2 to 3 months as an anti-aging strategy, which will 
keep skin looking its best indefinitely.

Additionally, patients can perform the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel at vari-
able strengths, providing variable levels of stimulation and epidermal renewal 
and  exfoliation.  The  amount  of  Ossential  Advanced  Radical  Night  Repair 
peeling formula applied determines the procedure’s strength. The peeling for-
mula comes in a 1-fluid-ounce (30-mL) tube that includes a pump from which 
the formula is dispensed.

Patients who are just beginning the peeling process should start with the 
light level and progress to the moderate and strong levels for their second and 
third peels, respectively. The optimal time between peels is 3 to 4 weeks. After 
patients have experienced all levels of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, they 
can choose whichever level they prefer for future peels. Figures 9.2, 9.3, and 
9.4 show patients who underwent a ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel for various 
conditions.

Alternately, patients can also use the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel to acceler-
ate and accentuate overall response to separate treatment programs for condi-
tions such as melasma, textural damage, actinic keratoses, acne, and rosacea. 
When the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel is used in this fashion—as merely a 
portion of a broader treatment protocol—the moderate or strong levels should 
be used when feasible. Benefits of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel are shown 
in Box 9.5.

Table 9.5  ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel: Daily Steps

Step

  1.  Cleanse*

Function

Remove surface impurities, dead skin 
cells, and excess sebum

Instructions

AM and PM†

  2.  Apply Ossential Daily 

Power Defense

Reduce inflammation, support DNA 
repair, and restore barrier function

AM and PM

  3.  Apply Ossential 

Stimulate and exfoliate 

AM and PM

Advanced Radical Night 
Repair Plus

* Disease-specific topical agents can be added after skin cleansing.
† Recommended: 
for  normal  skin—Normacleanse, 
for  oily  skin—Oilacleanse; 
Foamacleanse,  or  the  Offects  Exfoliating  Cleanser;  and  for  dry  skin—the  Offects 
Hydrating Cleanser.

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

219

Figure 9.2 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (light) skin, medium 
thick,  and  oily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  photodamage  and  rosacea.  (b)  Five  days 
after  the  peel.  The  patient  underwent  6  weeks  of  treatment  with  the  ZO  Skin  Health 
program and also had a ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel. Notice the exfoliation and overall 
textural improvement on day 5 of the peel.

Figure  9.3 
(a) The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  black  (light)  skin,  medium 
thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having acne, rosacea, and postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation.  (b)  Six  months  later. The  patient  followed  an  aggressive  hydroquinone-
based Skin Health Restoration program during which she underwent three monthly ZO 
Retinol Stimulation Peel applications. Dermal melasma on the forehead remained after 
the peels that necessitated a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis.

220

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Figure 9.4 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original white, medium thin, and oily. She 
was diagnosed as having photodamage, fine wrinkles, and mild laxity. (b) Eight months 
later. The patient followed a non-hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration program for 
6 months with emphasis on epidermal and melanocyte stabilization. She also underwent 
two ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel applications.

Box 9.5

Benefits of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel

■■ Epidermal renewal and dermal stimulation
■■ Thicker epidermis
■■ Powerful anti-aging benefits (collagen and elastin stimulation)
■■ Faster and more effective results in treating various skin conditions
■■ Stabilization of melanocytes (evens color tone)
■■ Stabilization  of  keratinocytes  (yields  softer  keratin  and  a  stronger 

barrier function)

■■ Repair and reversal of photodamage (actinic keratoses, dullness, and 

dyschromia) through enhanced DNA repair

■■ Epidermal and dermal hydration (glycosaminoglycans regulate trans-

epidermal water loss)

■■ Improved  overall  results  of  skin  resurfacing  procedures  (e.g.,  ZO 
Controlled  Depth  Peel,  CO2  fractional  laser  resurfacing)  as  well  as 
surgical procedures, such as facelifts. In such cases, the ZO Retinol 
Stimulation Peel is performed after patients’ skin has re-epithelial-
ized (when skin is tolerant and when healing is complete), as a part of 
the Skin Health Restoration program

■■ Maximal  safety  (no  allergies,  dermal  damage,  postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation, scars, or infections) when properly performed

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

221

Postpeel Reactions, Instructions, and Healing Time
Healing  occurs  quickly—in  2  to  3  days—after  stopping  the  ZO  Retinol 
Stimulation  Peel  formula  and  starting  the  calming  and  hydrating  creams 
(ZO Medical Calming Creme). During and after stopping the peel, patients 
must be instructed to refrain from picking, peeling, or overly manipulating 
actively exfoliating skin because these could lead to PIH and secondary skin 
infections.

Rarely, reactions including redness, stinging, and excessive exfoliation may 
occur during the peeling process following inadequate pre-peel conditioning 
(not reaching tolerance with the once-daily use of Ossential Advanced Radical 
Night Repair before the peel). In such cases, patients can be instructed to 1) 
stop  the  peel  at  any  time  or  2)  apply  calming  and  hydrating  creams  before 
applying the ZO Retinol Stimulation formula (never after or on top of it) to 
increase skin tolerance. Of note, application of calming and hydrating creams 
on top of (after) the application of the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel formula is 
discouraged because this would reduce the activity and the penetration of the 
Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair.

INVISAPEEL

Invisapeel,  the  only  peel  that  does  not  require  prior  skin  conditioning,  is  a 
universal peel that can be applied to any skin surface, on any skin type, and 
as  part  of  treatment  for  any  condition.  It  is  applied  by  the  patient  at  home, 
usually to the target areas daily or two to three times per week. Invisapeel is 
intended to maximize the benefits and accelerate the results of any treatment 
program, medical or nonmedical, because it enhances penetration of topical 
agents,  stimulates  epidermal  renewal,  and  maintains  the  skin’s  smoothness 
and natural healthy glow. It is called Invisapeel because patients who undergo 
this peel experience no visible exfoliation or reactions. Without visible peeling 
or symptoms, patients need not worry about the appearance of exfoliating skin.
This peel delivers proteases and fruit enzymes from papain and bromelain 
together with glycolic acid. It is enriched with bio-preventative and immune-
regulatory factors that eliminate burning or stinging sensations, inflammation, 
redness, and the skin dryness and irritation that are encountered with currently 
available exfoliating peels. In contrast to other peels, Invisapeel preserves the 
barrier function while maintaining natural hydration and is not associated with 
any symptoms. Patients can use Invisapeel on the face or the body.

Indications
Because of its keratolytic activity, Invisapeel is ideal for treating hyperkera-
totic disorders that commonly affect the skin of the arms, knees, and elbows. 
Daily application of Invisapeel can also be beneficial for the following:

•  To  even  skin  tone  after  healing  from  ablative  and  nonablative  laser  or 

chemical resurfacing procedures

•  To  maximize  the  benefits  of  Skin  Health  Restoration  programs  (espe-
cially the mild types in which patients want little to no visible reactions)
•  To improve skin texture and treatment results (enhanced penetration of 
other topically applied agents) for all forms of acne and rosacea therapies

222

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Figure 9.5  A patient with skin classified as original white showing photodamage on 
arms. Her right arm was treated with Invisapeel Intensive Resurfacing Peel in the PM, 
Oraser Body Emulsion in the AM and PM, Retamax Active Vitamin A Micro Emulsion 
in the PM, and three treatments with the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel.

Figures 9.5, 9.6, and 9.7 show successful treatment of arms with Invisapeel. 

Table 9.6 gives instructions on applying Invisapeel to the face and body.

Invisapeel is well tolerated by nearly all patients. For that reason, it can be 
left on (without washing off) before each patient’s application of the individ-
ual components of his or her specific ZO Program without any interruption. 
However, certain patients who have sensitive skin may complain of a burn-
ing  sensation  from  Invisapeel.  In  these  cases,  patients  need  to  wash  off  the 
Invisapeel before subsequent application of their ZO Program.

ZO 3-STEP STIMULATION PEEL

Compared  with  the  ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel,  the  ZO  3-Step  Peel  is  a 
deeper  exfoliating  peel  that  provides  much  stronger  stimulation.  The  ZO 
3-Step Peel must be performed in the office because there is a small chance 
the peel solution could penetrate down to the PD, especially in patients with 
thin  skin.  If  this  occurs,  the  situation  requires  more  intense,  dermal  peel 
management.

The  ZO  3-Step  Peel  can  be  performed  as  part  of  a  treatment  program 
to  expedite  and  improve  results  in  the  conditions  shown  in  Box  9.6.  The 
ZO 3-Step Peel can be safely repeated at monthly intervals. Of note, cer-
tain cases or conditions may require two to three peels to achieve optimal 

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

223

Figure  9.6 
(a)  A  patient  with  skin  classified  as  deviated  (dark)  white.  He  was  diag-
nosed as having hypopigmentation on his arm 6 months after laser hair removal. (b) 
Four weeks after Invisapeel applied in the PM, Oraser Body Emulsion Plus in the AM 
and PM, and Retamax Active Vitamin A Micro Emulsion in the AM and PM. Notice 
redness  and  mild  exfoliation.  (c)  Skin  on  arm  showing  complete  recovery  3  months 
later.

benefit. Characteristics of the ZO 3-Step Peel are shown in Box 9.7. Figures 
9.8  and  9.9  show  patients  who  underwent  a  ZO  3-Step  Peel  for  various 
conditions.

Components
The ZO 3-Step Peel includes the following components (Figure 9.10):

•  Eight milliliters of an acid cocktail (TCA, salicylic acid, and lactic acid 
mixed with a saponin-like cofactor for rapid neutralization) in a sealed 
bottle for individual use

224

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Figure 9.7  A patient with skin classified as original white, showing photodamage and 
lentigines on arms. The patient’s left arm was treated with Invisapeel in the PM, Oraser 
Body Emulsion Plus in the AM and PM, Retamax Active Vitamin A Micro Emulsion in 
the PM, and two treatments with the ZO 3-Step Stimulation Peel.

Table 9.6  Applying Invisapeel

For the Face

For the Body

(Mild Approach, for Sensitive, Dry, or 
Thin Skin)

Cleanse the skin. Apply the peel solution, 
two or three times per week; leave on for 
2 to 3 hours, then wash.
Proceed with the specific ZO Program 
that was recommended to you.

(Strong Approach Preferred)

Prepare the skin.
Apply peel lotion (do not wash it off).
Follow with the specific ZO Program that 
was recommended for you.

Three to 4 pumps of the peel lotion are sufficient for 5% of body surface skin.

•  Five grams of 6% retinol in a microsphere formulation with a highly pen-

etrating base

•  Two-ounce tube of calming and hydrating lotion with powerful anti-

irritative and anti-inflammatory properties

The volume of the “acid cocktail” was specifically calculated to provide lim-
ited action and penetration to keep it as an “exfoliating” peel. Each acid com-
ponent  will  therefore  be  neutralized  by  epidermal  proteins  before  reaching 

Box 9.6

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

225

Indications for the ZO 3-Step Peel

■■ Melasma
■■ Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
■■ To improve and even out the results of past resurfacing procedures
■■ Textural damage and irregularity (enlarged pores or fresh, early acne 

scars—before fibrosis)

■■ Diffuse photodamage (including solar lentigines and poikiloderma)
■■ Aging signs (mild wrinkles, laxity)

Box 9.7

ZO 3-Step Peel Features

■■ Fast healing time (3 to 4 days of exfoliation)
■■ Easily performed by the clinician with minimal patient discomfort
■■ Lack of swelling, crusting, or oozing, as is commonly seen in dermal 

peels

■■ Strong epidermal stimulation (renewal) and repair
■■ Dermal (anti-aging) benefits and dermal textural repair

Figure  9.8 
(a)  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  deviated  Asian  (light),  thick,  and 
oily.  She  was  diagnosed  as  having  melasma  and  postinflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation.  (b)  Eight  months  later.  The  patient  followed  a  hydroquinone-based  Skin 
Health Restoration program and underwent two treatments with the ZO 3-Step Peel. 
Currently, she is on a maintenance program with the non-hydroquinone-based ZO 
Skin Health program.

226

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Figure 9.9 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original white, medium thick, and oily. 
She was diagnosed as having photodamage, freckles, and early wrinkles. (b) Six months 
later.  The  patient  used  a  non-hydroquinone-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  program, 
followed  by  two  treatments  with  the  ZO  3-Step  Stimulation  Peel  and  one  ZO  Retinol 
Stimulation Peel.

Figure 9.10  ZO 3-Step Peel components.

the lower portion of the epidermis. Because of the presence of the saponin-
like  cofactor,  this  neutralization  occurs  rapidly  (within  4  to  5  seconds),  as 
evidenced by the appearance of a powdery film on the skin surface that repre-
sents the denatured protein.

Each of the three acids in the acid cocktail of this peel works on epider-
mal  protein  through  a  distinct  mechanism.  Specifically,  TCA  coagulates 
and dehydrates epidermal proteins, lactic acid demonstrates an exfoliating 

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

227

phenomenon  by  breaking  the  bonds  between  individual  keratinocytes, 
and salicylic acid demonstrates acantholytic activity by breaking down the 
cell membranes of keratinocytes. The combined action of these three acids 
allows for a rapid interaction with the epidermal proteins. Furthermore, the 
saponin-like agent in the cocktail acts as a cofactor in initiating and acceler-
ating neutralization of the acids. After the acid cocktail has been applied to 
the skin, the saponin agent, the skin’s epidermal proteins, and the acids are 
chemically altered and converted to a powdery film visible on the surface of 
the treated skin. The precipitation of this powder indicates the completion of 
acid activity and full neutralization of the acid solution.

As  is  the  standard  in  most  chemical  peels,  skin  must  first  be  prepared 
before  administration  of  the  ZO  3-Step  Peel  solution.  This  prepara-
tion  involves  removing  all  lotions,  sunscreen,  and  makeup  from  the  area 
to  be  treated.  The  skin  in  the  treatment  areas  is  then  stripped  of  sebum 
(“degreased”)  with  acetone  or  alcohol.  Degreasing  insures  that  the  activ-
ity  of  each  acid  is  intact  to  exert  its  action  on  the  epidermis.  Because  the 
saponin-like agent in the peel is deactivated on contact with water or oil, 
the skin must also be completely dry before administering the acid cocktail 
to the treatment area.

As in the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, variations in hydration of the epi-
dermis affect the activity of the acids and the saponin-like agent on the epi-
dermal proteins in the ZO 3-Step Peel. Specifically, the hydration level is high 
in  the  lower  epidermis  and  the  papillary  dermis,  which  makes  these  areas 
resistant  to  the  action  of  the  acids.  Accordingly,  the  activity  of  the  acids  is 
maximal in the upper portion of the epidermis where epidermal hydration 
is relatively low and keratin protein content is high. In contrast, the activity 
of the acids is minimal in the lower portion of the epidermis (Box 9.8). This 
characteristic is beneficial in providing maximal safety because all the acids 
are  neutralized  in  the  upper  epidermis,  thus  preventing  unwanted  dermal 
penetration and accidental injury.

Mechanism of Action
The acids in the ZO 3-Step Peel initially denature epidermal proteins, leading 
to the elimination of the skin’s barrier function. This facilitates the activity of 
the second step, the application of retinol directly over the treatment areas and 
its penetration through the lower part of the epidermis to the papillary der-
mis. The basal cells of the epidermis respond with accelerated mitosis and epi-
dermal renewal, melanocyte stabilization, and fibroblast stimulation (which 

Box 9.8

Acid Cocktail Activity in the Epidermis

■■ Acid cocktail activity is maximal in the upper portion of the epidermis, 
where epidermal hydration is low and keratin protein content is high.
■■ Acid activity is minimal in the lower portion of the epidermis, where 

epidermal hydration is high and the protein content is low.

228

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

yields increased collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans) in the PD (stimu-
lation). The third step involves application of a calming cream that provides 
triple  benefits:  anti-inflammatory  and  anti-irritation  effects  and  increased 
hydration benefits.

Performing the Peel
All peels require skin conditioning and herpes simplex prophylaxis based on 
patient history. On the day of the peel, degrease and dry the skin surface with 
rubbing alcohol. Empty the acid bottle’s contents into a cup. Fold the supplied 
round gauze pad twice to create a quarter of a circle, then dip it in the solution 
and start painting the face (gently, to prevent any solution from moving freely 
on the skin surface) (Figure 9.11). Apply the solution evenly, in different direc-
tions, and observe the powdery film to ensure that it has been applied over the 
entire intended treatment area.

Approximately  4  to  5  seconds  after  the  application,  a  powdery  film  will 
begin  appearing  on  the  painted  areas.  Continue  painting  until  all  8  mL 
of  solution  have  been  painted  on  5%  of  the  skin  surface  (usually  the  face). 
Finishing  the  entire  bottle  requires  painting  the  whole  face  multiple  times. 
The only exceptions include patients with small faces or thin skin. For these 
patients, one may use half or more of the total volume of the solution to avoid 
accidental dermal penetration, which would induce a PD peel in certain areas. 

(2)
Fold again

(1)
Fold

(3)
Dip in paint solution

(4)

(cid:127) Paint, avoid dripping
(cid:127) Paint on top of powder
(cid:127) You will circle the face multiple times
(cid:127) Paint the eyelids (avoid the eyes)

Figure 9.11  Folding of gauze and application of the ZO 3-Step Peel to a patient’s face.

NEW ZO EXFOLIATING PEELS

229

The powder does not have to be wiped off; one can simply continue the acid 
application on top of the powdery film.

Using  scissors,  open  the  sealed  packet  of  retinol  at  one  corner,  then  vig-
orously massage half of the content over the entire face (again, on top of the 
powdery film) until all the applied retinol (half of the package) is completely 
absorbed.

To complete the peel, open the sealed tube of calming cream, apply enough 
to cover the face, and massage it in until it is completely absorbed (Figure 9.12). 
That completes the peel. The burning sensation that occurs when one applies 
the acid solution is well tolerated by patients. Using a fan or cold air machine 
can  minimize  the  discomfort.  Avoid  topical  anesthetics  (EMLA  or  others) 
because they hydrate the skin surface and can weaken the peel or cause uneven 
penetration. The steps of the ZO 3-Step Peel are shown in Box 9.9. Figure 9.13 

Figure 9.12 
(a) Patient’s right side immediately after application of the acid cocktail 
of the ZO 3-Step Peel. Notice the powdery film. (b) Patient’s left side after the applica-
tion  of  the  second  step  (the  stimulation  step).  Notice  disappearance  of  the  powdery 
film.

Box 9.9

Performing the ZO 3-Step Peel

■■ Degrease and dry the skin surface with rubbing alcohol or acetone.
■■ Empty the contents of the acid bottle into a cup.
■■ Dip the supplied sponge into the solution and start painting the face 

gently.

■■ Apply the solution evenly, in different directions.
■■ Using scissors, open the sealed packet of retinol at one corner, and 
vigorously massage half the content over the entire face (again, on top 
of the powdery film) until all the applied retinol (half of the package) 
is completely absorbed.

■■ Keep  the  remaining  half  of  the  retinol  packet  for  use  the  next 

morning.

■■ Open the sealed tube of calming cream and apply enough to cover the 

face and massage it in until completely absorbed.

230

EXFOLIATING CHEMICAL 
PEELS

Figure 9.13 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark), thick, 
and oily. He was diagnosed as having dermal pigmentation and postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation due to photosensitivity. (b) Twelve weeks later. The patient was treated for 
5 months with aggressive hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration. Two treatments 
with the ZO 3-Step Retinol Stimulation Peel were performed at weeks 6 and 10 during 
the treatment.

Table 9.7  Home Instructions

Day

Activity

Day 1 (day of 
the peel)

Day 2 in AM

Do not wash the face for 5 hours after the peel. Washing the face 
sooner will interrupt retinol stimulation.
When showering, avoid having the shower water hit the face directly.
Apply small amount of calming creams whenever the treated skin 
feels dry. Excessive application of calming creams could lead to 
premature exfoliation.

Wash face gently (pat the skin; do not scrub or rub).
Apply second half of the retinol packet (used the day before) and 
massage gently until completely absorbed.
Apply calming creams in small amount to maintain comfortable 
hydration; repeat as needed.

Days 3-5

When skin starts to exfoliate, do not assist the exfoliation by rubbing 
or peeling the skin. Apply calming cream, as needed.

Healing is complete, on average, in 4 to 5 days.

shows a patient who was treated with two ZO 3-Step Retinol Stimulation Peels 
for dermal pigmentation problems.

Home Instructions
Table 9.7 shows home care instructions for the patient who has a ZO 3-Step 
Peel.

ZO CONTROLLED 
DEPTH 
TRICHLORO-
ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

CHAPTER 

10

ZO TRICHLOROACETIC ACID PEELS

This chapter addresses three highly effective variations of the ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel: the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis (PD), the 
ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  (IRD),  and 
the  medium-depth  ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth  Peel.  An  illustration  in 
Chapter 5 (Figure 5.1) depicts the skin layers reached by each of these peels.

The  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  comprises  highly  controlled  skin  reju-
venation  procedures  with  precise,  standardized  variables  not  commonly 
seen  with  other  types  of  trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  peels  (Box  10.1).  The 
ZO  peels  were  created  to  eliminate  the  confusion,  limitations,  and  risks 
associated with current TCA-based peels and can be performed by virtu-
ally any physician who has received adequate training in dermal chemical 
peels.

SAFETY, EFFICACY, AND EASE OF USE

The ZO Controlled Depth Peel is exceptionally versatile and can be used on 
all skin types and ethnicities. Moreover, the ZO Controlled Depth Peel has no 
systemic toxicity and can be performed in a timely manner.

When a fixed concentration of TCA (20% or 26% to 28%) is combined 
with the blue base dye, the ZO Controlled Depth Peel penetrates the skin 
and forms frost at a slower rate than other types of TCA peel. Physicians 
have enough time to observe the development of standardized clinical end-
points  that  indicate  the  peel’s  specific  depth  of  penetration  and  therefore 

232

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.1

Standardized Variables in a ZO Controlled Depth Peel

 1.  TCA concentration used: fixed at 20% or 26% to 28%
 2.  Total volume applied: fixed at 6 mL or 10 mL
 3.  Surface area treated: 5% of total body surface area
 4.  Depth control: visible, well-defined clinical endpoints
 5.  Color of solution: blue tint added to quantify the penetration depth, 
highlight  the  location  of  solution  application,  and  ensure  even 
application

 6.  Application method by a “coat’’ system
 7.  Preprocedure skin conditioning required. Skin quality and thickness 
are considered when selecting the appropriate peel, which results in 
faster healing and higher safety margins.

increase the procedure’s safety (Box 10.2). The ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
approach eliminates guesswork for the physician  and  provides  a  teaching 
framework. For several other chemical peels, the techniques are vague and 
haphazard and are acquired through casually observing others or learning 
from  one’s  own  mistakes.  Box  10.3  shows  variables  associated  with  other 
(not ZO) TCA peels.

Transforming  TCA  chemical  peels  into  a  precise  science  entailed  sev-
eral  years  of  researching,  collecting,  and  analyzing  data.  Wherever  pos-
sible, the variables associated with existing TCA peels were minimized or 
eliminated. This resulted in a unique ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the only 
TCA-based peel currently available that offers maximal safety and reliabil-
ity (Box 10.4).

CHOOSING A ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

A variety of peeling options are available to satisfy the physician’s goals for 
any given patient. The most commonly performed peel is the ZO Controlled 

Box 10.2

ZO Controlled Depth Peel Advantages

ZO Controlled Depth Peel with TCA mixed with blue base:

 1.  Allows the TCA to act more slowly on the skin (i.e., a smaller amount 
penetrates the skin at any given time). This increases the practitio-
ner’s awareness and control over the peel depth.

 2.  Penetrates more evenly
 3.  Causes less irritation through its anti-inflammatory properties

233

ZO TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

Box 10.3

Variables Associated with Other Trichloroacetic Acid Peels

 1.  Lack of consensus regarding the optimal trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 
concentration and solution volume needed to peel a fixed skin sur-
face area to the desired depth

 2.  Lack of definitive penetration depth signs (clearly observable clini-
cal endpoints), which allow physicians to accurately determine peel 
depth at any given time

 3.  Lack of a common consensus regarding the safe depths for peels on 

both facial and nonfacial skin

 4.  High speed of TCA penetration in current TCA-based peels, which is 

both risky and troublesome

 5.  Lack of attention to the significance of skin thickness as a determi-

nant of depth safety

 6.  Lack of attention to skin quality to determine patient suitability for 

chemical peels

 7.  Lack of standardized methods of solution application to ensure even 

coverage of TCA

Depth Peel to the PD. If a deeper peel is desired, the practitioner can choose 
the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis (IRD). The 
physician skilled in peels may also choose the ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel,  which  allows  the  peeling  solution  to  reach  multiple  depths  within  the 
same treatment. In some areas, the PD will be reached, whereas in other areas, 
it may be the IRD or upper reticular dermis (URD). This allows the physician 
to skillfully design and tailor the patient’s peel.

Box 10.4

ZO Controlled Depth Peel Advantages

 1.  Methodological and simple for physicians to learn and perform
 2.  Clear-cut,  easily  recognizable  endpoints,  which  allow  the  practi-
tioner  to  control  penetration  depth  and  reduce  the  potential  for 
complications

 3.  Standardized  protocol  (concentration,  volume,  surface  area,  and 

number of coats), which eliminates peel variables

 4.  Capability of improving a wide range of cosmetic and medical skin 

conditions

 5.  Suitable for all skin types and for facial and nonfacial skin
 6.  Consistent  results  with  exceptional  skin  tightening  and  some  skin 

leveling

 7.  Design modification that allows physicians to enhance the tightening 

effect by increasing the peel’s depth in precise areas

Table 10.1  Tightening and Leveling Characteristics of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Aim of Peel

Type of Peel

Penetration Depth

Clinical Indication

Comment

Skin tightening  ZO Controlled 

Depth Peel

Papillary dermis or 
immediate 
reticular dermis

Stretchable scars or wrinkles 
(those that disappear with light 
stretching of skin), photodamage, 
melasma, skin laxity 

A gradual, noninvasive effect 
that reduces skin laxity and 
other problems without 
altering skin texture

Skin leveling 

ZO Designed 
Controlled 
Depth Peel

Upper reticular 
dermis, focally or 
largely

Nonstretchable scars or wrinkles

A more invasive effect that 
can change skin texture to 
varying degrees

The primary clinical objectives for the ZO Controlled Depth Peel are skin 
tightening and correcting stretchable rhytides, scars, and other skin problems 
located within the PD or IRD. The peel is remarkably safe and effective for 
these purposes. The ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel provides a further 
advantage: skin leveling (smoothing of texture). This is accomplished through 
correction of skin problems located in the URD (deeper than the IRD) (Table 
10.1). Because a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD and the IRD does not 
penetrate to the URD, its leveling effects are limited to only stretchable wrin-
kles and scars (those that disappear when one gently stretches the skin during 
Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test).

Factors Affecting the Outcome of a ZO Controlled Depth Peel
Performing a successful chemical peel requires identification of key character-
istics in each patient’s skin before performing the procedure. Box 10.5 shows 
the  three  primary  skin  factors  that  affect  the  outcome  of  a  ZO  Controlled 
Depth Peel and resurfacing procedures. Skin quality can be greatly improved 
through  proper  skin  conditioning  and  treatment  in  the  weeks  or  months 
before the procedure. Although skin thickness and color are fixed variables, 
they play a fundamental role in determining the safe depth in all skin types 
for any resurfacing procedure including ZO Controlled Depth Peel.

IMPORTANCE OF TRICHLOROACETIC ACID 
CONCENTRATION, VOLUME, AND SIZE OF 
TREATMENT AREA

Importance of Trichloroacetic Acid Concentration
Unlike phenol or alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) peels, the concentration of TCA 
alone does not determine the depth to which a TCA peel will penetrate the 
skin. Concentration determines only the speed at which the acid penetrates.1,2 
(Box  10.6).  To  determine  the  depth  of  penetration  for  any  given  TCA  con-
centration,  the  volume  (number  of  coats  applied/total  amount  used)  is  also 
important. These conclusions contrast those of Brody, who classifies 10% to 
35% TCA as concentrations that reach a superficial depth and 35% TCA com-
bined  with  other  agents,  or  50%  TCA  alone,  as  concentrations  that  reach  a 
medium depth.3

Depending  on  its  concentration,  a  TCA  peel  can  produce  therapeutic 
effects,  followed  by  proper  healing,  or  caustic  effects,  leading  to  impaired 
healing.  Therapeutic  effects  result  from  using  a  carefully  controlled  TCA 

234

235

ZO TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

Box 10.5

Factors Affecting the Outcome of the 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel

■■ Skin quality
■■ Sensitivity (indicates damaged barrier function)
■■ Hydration status* (dry or poorly hydrated skin will not allow for even 
acid penetration and will thereby generate an irregular skin response 
and possibly serious complications)

■■ Skin thickness
■■ Skin color

* Hydration status also affects the response to laser resurfacing because water is the chro-

mophore for both modalities.

concentration  and  volume  to  produce  a  consistent  and  reliable  penetration 
depth. This approach preserves enough dermal adnexal structures and fibro-
blasts  to  allow  re-epithelialization  and  dermal  regeneration  postoperatively 
(Box 10.7). Conversely, caustic effects damage the dermal adnexal structures 
to  the  extent  that  hypopigmentation,  fibrosis,  scarring  (atrophic  as  well  as 
hypertrophic), and/or abnormal, prolonged skin healing occur. These effects 
resemble those seen following second- and third-degree burns.

TCA  concentrations  above  49%  are  primarily  associated  with  caustic 
effects, which can be detrimental in thin, fragile, or dark skin (Figure 10.1). 
For these particular skin types, even 30% to 40% TCA concentrations can be 
caustic when a large total volume of TCA is applied (e.g., too many coats).

TCA concentrations greater than 30% can quickly coagulate large amounts 
of protein. This leads to the inability of proteins in the epidermis and PD to 
neutralize the TCA. Then, if the concentration of the solution is high enough, 
even a small volume can penetrate deeper to reach the lower reticular dermis 
relatively quickly. In contrast, a lower TCA concentration can reach the same 
desired depth and do so more slowly and only with a higher solution volume. 
Therefore, repeated applications (yielding higher total volume of TCA applied) 

Box 10.6

Trichloroacetic Acid Concentration

■■ Trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  concentration  determines  the  speed  at 
which the acid penetrates; it is not the sole determinant of the depth 
reached in the skin. Volume must also be considered when establish-
ing peel depth.

■■ Depending  on  concentration,  a  TCA  peel  can  produce  therapeutic 
effects,  associated  with  proper  healing,  or  caustic  effects,  associated 
with impaired healing.

236

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.7

Control of Trichloroacetic Acid Depth of Penetration

■■ The  importance  of  using  a  carefully  controlled  trichloroacetic  acid 
(TCA)  concentration  and  volume  to  result  in  a  consistent  depth  of 
penetration cannot be overstated.

■■ Control over TCA concentration and total volume applied preserves 
enough dermal adnexal structures and fibroblasts to allow re-epithe-
lialization and dermal regeneration.

10%

34% 35%

49% 50%

60%

70%

80%

90% 100%

Therapeutic effects
dominate
Caustic effects minimal

Therapeutic effects =
Caustic effects

Caustic effects dominate
No therapeutic effect
Not recommended for peels

Figure 10.1  The therapeutic and caustic effects of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) are related 
to concentration. At 10% to 34% concentration, the therapeutic effects of TCA dominate, 
and  the  caustic  effects  are  minimal.  At  35%  to  49%,  the  therapeutic  effects  equal  the 
caustic effects. Concentrations higher than 49% are caustic and are not recommended 
for peels.

will allow for any TCA concentration to penetrate to any intended depth. The 
effects of concentration versus speed are shown in Box 10.8.

TCA concentrations of 20% or 26% to 28% were carefully chosen for the ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel because, at these concentrations (with a predetermined 
volume  and  size  of  the  area  to  be  peeled),  TCA  is  optimally  neutralized  by 
proteins  within  the  epidermis  and  papillary  dermis.  TCA  at  these  percent-
ages will not penetrate deeply unless one applies a large volume over a long 
time. This is unlikely to happen, however, because the ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel parameters, such as the total volume applied and the suggested speed of 
application, are set to control such variables.

Importance of Trichloroacetic Acid Volume and the Size of 
Treatment Area
To maximally standardize the TCA chemical peel, the ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel  uses  a  fixed-volume  approach  to  the  TCA  solution.  This  is  termed  a 
‘‘coat.’’ The coat system helps to ensure safe and controlled application of the 

Box 10.8

Concentration versus Speed

Given the same volume, the higher the concentration of trichloroacetic 
acid used, the faster the peel will penetrate into the dermis.

237

ZO TRICHLOROACETIC 
ACID PEELS

ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution. This is achieved by carefully applying a 
fixed TCA concentration and volume to a predetermined size of skin surface 
using a sponge or gauze and a cotton swab.

A coat application is complete when the entire fixed volume of acid has been 
evenly applied to the predetermined surface area. This treatment size should 
constitute 5% of the entire body’s skin surface area (Figure 10.2). Typically, 
this is the face, although the same principle applies to any area of the body 
that constitutes approximately 5% of the skin’s total surface area. One prede-
termined total volume of TCA (at a 20% or 26% to 28% concentration) should 
be applied evenly, by multiple applications, until all the volume is consumed. 
The  depth  signs  should  be  monitored  concurrently.  Usually  more  than  one 
coat is needed to reach the desired depth, and the number of coats or volume 
needed depends on skin thickness and depth desired.

The 6 mL of 20% TCA prepared ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution, or 
the 10 mL of the 26% to 28% solution, will reach the desired depth: the PD, 
the IRD, and/or the URD (Table 10.2). To achieve a greater depth of penetra-
tion,  the  physician  will  need  to  apply  more  than  one  coat  of  the  fixed-
concentration TCA solution. The PD is the ideal level that the ZO Controlled 
Depth  Peel  aims  to  reach  because  it  may  correct  more  than  80%  of  skin 
problems that involve the PD. However, more coats (a higher total volume of 

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

5%

Figure 10.2  Diagram of 5% body surface areas.

Table 10.2  The Coat System for ZO Controlled Depth Trichloroacetic Acid Peels on Facial Skin

Type/Depth of ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Papillary dermis (PD)

Immediate reticular dermis (IRD)

Designed PD, IRD, upper reticular dermis (URD)

(cid:127)  Designed peel when URD is minimally and 

focally involved

(cid:127)  Designed medium-depth peel when URD is 
generally involved; deeper and larger areas

Solution 
Concentration for 
Coat

20%
26%-28%

20%
26%-28%

Thin Skin

Up to 1 coat
Not used

Up to 2 coats
1 coat

Thick Skin

Up to 2 coats
1 coat

Up to 2 coats
1 coat ± a partial coat

26%-28% is best
20% can be used
26%-28% is best

20% only
Up to 2 coats
Not recommended

26% to 28%, up to 2 coats

Up to 2 coats

Depth signs are more important than coats to determine the depth of any ZO Controlled Depth Peel.
A higher concentration is more suitable for the designed peel because it reaches the depth faster and is better for monitoring 
the short-lived depth signs. A lighter concentration takes longer to reach the IRD and URD as the depth signs start to 
disappear.

the TCA solution) can be applied to the treatment site if one intends for the 
peel to reach deeper into the IRD for maximal tightening or the URD for 
tightening and some leveling.

PERIOD OF RELATIVE RESISTANCE

The period of relative resistance refers to the length of time that the skin resists 
penetration of TCA, or the time it takes for TCA to be neutralized. This period 
can be short or long, depending on specific factors: 1) concentration—a high 
concentration needs much more skin protein to neutralize the applied TCA 
(more  depth);  and  2)  volume—rapid  application  of  a  larger  volume  has  the 
same effect.

When  one  applies  an  acid  to  the  skin,  natural  defenses  are  mobilized 
to  counteract  its  penetration.  In  the  first  line  of  defense,  epidermal  pro-
tein (keratin) begins to neutralize and arrest the penetration of acid. When 
this  epidermal  defense  has  been  exhausted,  applying  further  acid  allows 
for deeper penetration (to the PD and beyond). The second line of defense 
consists  of  a  cessation  of  TCA  penetration  through  the  following  dermal 
components:  collagen,  elastin,  glycosaminoglycans,  blood  vessels,  blood, 
and  other  proteins.  After  these  elements  have  been  used,  applying  more 
TCA will result in deeper penetration (to the URD or deeper). A physician 
should respect the period of relative resistance (1 to 2 minutes) and, when 
performing the peel, never return to the same area that has been painted 
with TCA before the required minutes have passed in order to avoid unnec-
essary additional depth.

NEUTRALIZATION OF TRICHLOROACETIC ACID

238

TCA is a self-neutralizing acid. This means it is not necessary for the practi-
tioner to apply bicarbonate or another basic solution to the treatment site after 

239

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

the chemical peel solution has been applied. The patient’s own skin neutralizes 
the TCA. The factors that influence the ability of skin’s defenses to neutralize 
TCA include the TCA concentration, the total volume of solution applied (in 
relation to the size of the skin area being treated), and the thickness of the skin 
at the application site.

To further clarify, a higher concentration of TCA will rapidly consume a 
large amount of skin proteins and penetrate faster and deeper than a lower 
concentration.  Similarly,  a  larger  volume  of  TCA  solution  (of  any  concen-
tration)  will  consume  a  larger  amount  of  skin  proteins,  resulting  in  deeper 
penetration. In current uncontrolled-depth peels (plain or augmented), TCA 
penetrates  the  skin  much  faster  than  the  TCA  within  the  ZO  Controlled 
Depth Peel. It is therefore relatively impossible to view the crucial depth signs 
with the uncontrolled peels because the signs develop rather slowly and dis-
appear quickly. Skin thickness also affects the efficacy of TCA neutralization 
because thicker skin is richer in protein and is capable of neutralizing a larger 
volume of TCA compared with thin skin.

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

SELECTION OF PEEL CONCENTRATION

Before administering the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the physician must make 
several choices. First, when choosing a TCA concentration, the practitioner 
must choose a peel appropriate to his or her experience with TCA peels (Table 
10.3) and also must consider the importance of depth sign in this choice (Box 
10.9). Depth signs are discussed in detail later in this chapter.

Table 10.3  Matching Physician Experience with Trichloroacetic Acid 
Concentration

Physician Skills

Novice
Skilled

Facial skin
Nonfacial skin

Skin type:
(cid:127)  Thin
(cid:127)  Thick

Peel depth:

20% TCA + Blue 
Base

26% to 28% TCA + 
Blue Base

Comment

X

X
X

X
X

Not recommended
X

X
Not recommended

Not recommended
X Preferred

(cid:127)  Papillary dermis
(cid:127)  Immediate reticular 

X “Novice”
X

X “Skilled”
X Preferred

dermis

(cid:127)  Upper reticular dermis

Not recommended

X Best

Conscious or general 
sedation

X

X Preferred

240

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.9

Peel Concentration and Depth Signs

■■ A  low  concentration  is  good  for  PD-  and  IRD-level  peels  because 
depth signs are easily recognized. However, with a low concentration, 
depth signs tend to disappear before the URD is reached because of 
the slow penetration.

■■ A higher concentration is preferred for IRD and URD depth because 
depth signs appear faster and indicate to the physician when to end 
the peel.

Concentration and Skin Thickness
With the appropriate volume (number of coats), the 20% and the 26% to 28% 
concentration  of  the  peel  can  achieve  any  desired  depth  of  penetration  (as 
previously  shown  in  Table  10.1).  Skin  thickness,  however,  is  an  important 
additional consideration. To further clarify, the standard volume of solution 
(6 mL) for 20% TCA will penetrate to the PD or IRD in thin skin. In thick 
skin, however, the same 6-mL volume of the 20% solution may only exfoliate 
the epidermis to the basal layer. Thick skin may require a greater volume of 
the 20% solution to penetrate to the same depth as thin skin. The 26% to 28% 
solution is ideal for the ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, but the physician 
needs to keep in mind that it reaches the URD faster and is to be used only 
after he or she has gained sufficient experience.

SELECTION OF PEEL DEPTH

When choosing the appropriate depth of peel penetration, the physician must 
consider the clinical condition being treated as well as the patient’s skin type, 
color, and thickness. For epidermal conditions such as actinic keratosis, super-
ficial dyschromia, acne, and rough or sallow skin, one may choose other exfo-
liative (less potent) chemical peels instead of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel. 
These  include  the  ZO  Invisapeel,  the  ZO  Retinol  Stimulation  Peel,  and  the 
ZO 3-Step Peel. These provide either light exfoliation of the stratum corneum 
(the  former)  or  heavy  exfoliation  down  to  the  mid-epidermis  (the  latter).  It 
is important to note that exfoliation does not thin the skin but may actually 
thicken the epidermis. These exfoliative peels are unique in that they provide 
the additional benefit of stimulation and mildly improve wrinkles, scars, large 
pores, and skin laxity. They can be repeated every 2 to 4 weeks.

As discussed previously, the ZO Controlled Depth Peel can achieve varying 
levels of penetration: to the PD, the IRD, and the URD. For conditions involv-
ing both the epidermis and the dermis, the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
PD is the most suitable choice because it will improve dermal melasma, actinic 
keratosis, stretchable wrinkles and scars, general skin laxity, early solar elasto-
sis, and enlarged pores. Peeling to the PD tightens the skin without thinning it 
or changing its color. This peel can be repeated every 6 to 8 weeks, as needed, 
especially when treating severe dermal melasma and sun damage. Patients do 

Table 10.4  Clinical Conditions Treatable with Chemical Peels

Clinical Condition

Acne, comedones, flat warts

Procedure

Exfoliative peels

Epidermal and dermal hyperpigmentation, 
uneven patches of hypo/hyperpigmentation

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
papillary dermis (PD)

241

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

Actinic keratosis, other premalignant lesions

Large pores

Skin laxity

Fine and medium-to-deep stretchable wrinkles 
(which disappear with light skin stretching)

ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel to 
different depths, including the upper reticular 
dermis (URD) (for maximal tightening and 
leveling)

Stretchable scars

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD
ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD 
(for tightening)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD 
(for moderate tightening)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
immediate reticular dermis (IRD) 
(for maximal tightening)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD 
or IRD (for tightening)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
IRD

ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel 
to different depths, including the 
URD (for tightening and leveling)

not need to discontinue isotretinoin (Accutane) use before a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel so long as the peel does not penetrate deeper than the PD.

A  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  IRD  provides  the  greatest  amount 
of skin tightening while reaching the maximal safety depth for most skin 
types. The ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel involves performing a peel 
to  the  PD  and/or  IRD,  followed  by  application  of  additional  solution  to 
select areas. This will increase the penetration depth focally to the URD to 
provide  texture  improvement  with  unstretchable  wrinkles  and  scars. The 
ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel is used for both tightening and level-
ing purposes.

Before performing a ZO Controlled Depth Peel, physicians must be ade-
quately trained in performing the peel and in perioperative skin management. 
The patient’s skin should also be conditioned through the appropriate Skin 
Health Restoration program (see Chapter 2). The skin conditions that particu-
lar chemical peels can improve (including various types of the ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel) are shown in Table 10.4.

PREPARING THE ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL 
SOLUTION

ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  ingredients  and  their  functions  are  shown  in 
Table 10.5. When developing the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the color blue 
was found to be the best choice for revealing the presence of other associated 
colors that serve as guides in the peeling process, such as the white frost and 
the pink sign.

242

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Table 10.5  The ZO Controlled Depth Peel Ingredients and Their Function

Ingredient

  1.  TCA

  2.  Blue base*

a.  FD&C Blue #1

b.  Glycerin

c.  Cofactors

Function

Coagulative agent

Color guide that helps ensure even application of the 
acid (even blue = even application) and allows for 
depth signs to be recognized

Natural oil that permits easy gliding of the solution, 
which results in smoother application of the solution

Allow bonding of the trichloroacetic acid (TCA) with 
the blue base for slow release of TCA (slower 
penetration)

d.  Botanical anti-

Suppress TCA-induced irritation

inflammatory agents

* The new modified blue peel base (in contrast with Dr. Obagi’s previous blue peel base) 
has a lighter blue color, washes off easily, and contains anti-inflammatory agents.

The  ZO Controlled  Depth  Peel  base  is  packaged  within  a  bottle  that  has 
a pump dispenser to dispense the modified blue base. Pipettes and sponges 
(gauze  may  be  used  instead)  are  also  supplied  within  the  same  kit.  Figure 
10.3 shows the components of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel. Before applica-
tion on a patient, the physician must freshly combine a precise volume of 30% 
TCA solution with the supplied blue base and mix it together (Figures 10.4 to 
10.6). The necessary 30% TCA solution should be obtained from a depend-
able source. Any remaining unused portion of the mixed preparation should 
be discarded because gradual evaporation may increase concentration of the 
TCA within the mixed solution.

In addition to having ready the freshly mixed solution of desired TCA con-
centration (30% TCA of varying volumes and blue base), the physician should 
have readily accessible a bottle of normal saline for flushing in the unfortu-
nate case of acid accidentally entering the patient’s eyes. Cotton-tipped swabs 
should also be handy to apply the solution to icepick scars and eyelids.

Figure 10.3  Essentials: cleanser, rubbing alcohol, trichloroacetic acid 30%, blue base, 
cup, sponge, transfer pipette, cotton-tipped applicators and brush stick, and spatula.

 
 
 
 
243

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.4  Adding 6 pumps of blue base to the clear 30% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) 
solution in the bowl ensures both the proper concentration and slower trichloroacetic 
acid penetration when it is applied on the skin. To prepare the 20% coat system: 4 mL 
30% TCA plus 2 mL (6 pumps) blue base = 6 mL of the 20% concentration. To prepare 
the 26% to 28% coat system: 8 mL 30% TCA plus 2 mL (6 pumps) blue base = 10 mL of 
the 26% concentration; 10 mL 30% TCA plus 2 mL (6 pumps) blue base = 12 mL of the 
28% concentration.

Figure 10.5  Mixing the blue base in the bowl that contains 4 to 8 mL of the clear 30% 
trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution. In addition to having ready the freshly mixed solu-
tion  of  desired  TCA  concentration  (30%  TCA  of  varying  volumes  and  blue  base),  the 
physician  should  have  readily  accessible  a  bottle  of  normal  saline  for  flushing  in  the 
unfortunate  case  of  acid  accidentally  entering  the  patient’s  eyes.  Cotton-tipped  swabs 
should also be handy to apply the solution to icepick scars and eyelids.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS

Sedation
To control a patient’s pain and discomfort, physicians can choose from various 
methods. Topical anesthetics such as EMLA cream (lidocaine 2.5% and pri-
locaine 2.5%) are not recommended for use with chemical peels. These agents 
alter skin hydration and may result in an uneven penetration of the TCA solu-
tion. The other three options (local anesthesia, conscious sedation, and general 
sedation)  are  acceptable  methods  for  use  with  chemical  peels.  Anesthesia  is 
important only before and during the chemical peel; after the procedure, the 
patient’s skin heals painlessly. Regardless of the method the physician chooses, 
he or she must adhere to local laws in terms of in-office administration of seda-
tion. Furthermore, for safety purposes, patients undergoing conscious sedation 
should have someone accompany her and drive her home.

244

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

(a)

(b)

Figure  10.6 
(a,  b)  Before  administration  of  the  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel,  the  phy-
sician  can  use  gentle  hyfrecation  (electrodessication)  to  superficially  remove  certain 
benign lesions (seborrheic keratoses, flat warts, dermatosis papulosa nigra, acrochorda 
[skin tags], and junctional nevi) to ensure even and proper penetration of the trichloro-
acetic acid solution.

Applying the Peel Solution
Patients should arrive the day of the procedure without makeup or jewelry. 
Hair should be held back with a ponytail holder or a headband. Before admin-
istration of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the physician can remove certain 
benign lesions using gentle hyfrecation (electrodessication) to ensure even and 
proper penetration of the TCA solution (see Figure 10.6).

The patient’s face is degreased with alcohol or acetone before the peel solu-
tion is applied (alcohol is preferred because it is less irritating). When the face 
is dry, dip, but do not saturate, a corner of the gauze or sponge (provided in 
the ZO Controlled Depth Peel kit) into the prepared solution. Begin to apply 
the solution with short, gentle strokes in all directions, using light pressure. 
Apply two to five strokes to an area, and then move to another area with a 
steady speed and rhythm (Figures 10.7 and 10.8). Many physicians prefer to 
begin with the chin, proceeding to the perioral area, nose, cheeks, and then 
the forehead. The upper and lower eyelids and other areas can be refined with 
cotton-tipped swabs. Whether one proceeds in a clockwise or counterclock-
wise direction, it is important not to return to an already treated area until the 
solution has been evenly applied to the entire face while respecting the 1 to 2 
minutes it takes for neutralization of the applied acid (the period of relative 
resistance is explained later).

Treating the Perioral Area
Using  the  same  application  technique,  treat  the  perioral  skin  circumferen-
tially all the way down to the mental region. The maximal depth for this area 

245

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.7  Applying the ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution (trichloroacetic acid plus 
blue base) to the face in a controlled, even fashion. Notice the thin and even application 
of the solution, accomplished by using mainly one corner of the sponge.

is the IRD. Avoid reaching unnecessarily deep levels in this area because scar-
ring can easily occur. This is especially important in the upper lip area where 
the dermis is thin and little subcutaneous fat rests between the dermis and 
the underlying muscle. For further correction in this region, it is preferable 
to repeat the peel (or use another method, such as the CO2 fractional laser for 
unstretchable wrinkles) sometime after the peel or 6 to 8 weeks later, rather 
than attempting deeper correction through a single peel.

To prevent sharp demarcation lines between the neck and the mandibular 
region, use the feathering technique along the chin and jaw line. To achieve 
this, apply the solution 1 to 2 inches beyond the main facial treatment site with 
progressively lighter pressure and progressively shorter acid contact intervals. 
When the solution has made contact with the skin at these feathering sites, 
immediately wipe it with a dry tissue. This prevents unintentional deep pen-
etration of the TCA preparation in these peripheral sites. Feathering should 
achieve a gradually decreasing peel depth, progressing from the IRD to the 
PD to a deep exfoliation, and ending with a light exfoliation 1 to 2 inches away 
from the main treatment area (Figure 10.9).

When performing a chemical peel, the maximal safety depth must be observed 
and respected. With the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, the physician should peel 
no deeper than the PD or IRD. If the patient requires a deeper peel, a Designed 

Figure 10.8  No free solution is rolling or dripping anywhere as the solution is being 
applied. The nondominant hand can be used to control any unintentional application of 
excess solution by removal with a tissue.

246

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure 10.9  Proper feathering on the border between the mandibular line and the upper 
neck is shown here; this is essential to avoid the appearance of a sharp demarcation line.

ZO Control Depth Peel with a 26% to 28% solution (penetrating to a maximal 
depth of the URD in select sites) may be considered.

Treating the Eyelids
Treating the eyelids helps to eliminate wrinkles and tighten the skin for a bet-
ter overall cosmetic result. The eyelids should be carefully painted with solu-
tion in the same manner as the rest of the face. When coating the upper eyelids, 
apply the solution in a downward and sideways manner while the patient’s eyes 
remain closed (Figure 10.10). This technique will prevent unwanted opening 
of the eye. The solution should be applied with only minimal pressure, and it 
should not drip or run onto already treated skin. Moreover, it should never be 
allowed to enter the patient’s eyes.

When  coating  the  lower  lids,  the  physician  must  remember  to  keep  the 
patient’s eyes open by lifting and holding the upper lid against the eyebrow 
bone  with  his  or  her  thumb.  A  medical  assistant  can  aid  with  this  maneu-
ver.  Apply  the  solution  with  horizontal  strokes  (Figure  10.11).  The  applica-
tion should extend beyond the lateral canthi and inward toward the medial 
canthus. The solution should reach as far superior as the eyelashes and extend 
inferiorly to the infraorbital rim. At the end of the procedure, the eyelid appli-
cation  should  be  refined  with  a  cotton  swab  applicator  dipped  in  solution 
(Figures 10.12 and 10.13).

Figure 10.10  Application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution to the upper eyelid. 
Notice the eyes are closed. The sponge is not saturated and not dripping. Application is 
done sideways and downward.

247

ADMINISTERING THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.11  Application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution to the lower eye-
lid. Note that the acid is applied with the eye open to ensure optimal visualization and 
control  of  acid  application.  This  prevents  any  free  acid  from  accidentally  entering  the 
patient’s eyes. If the patient’s eyes are closed during this step, acid that might have spread 
between the eyelids may not be noticed until later. On the lower eyelid, the solution is 
applied laterally and upward.

Figure 10.12  When treating the periocular area with  the  ZO Controlled  Depth Peel 
solution, notice that the eye is open and the lid skin is stretched to prevent any free acids 
from collecting at the bottom of any fold; stretching the skin ensures even application 
and fast drying of any solution on the surface.

Figure 10.13  Fine-tuning application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel solution in the 
periocular areas using a cotton-tipped applicator. This allows the physician to apply the 
acid solution to areas that were not easily reached with the sponge.

248

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

ENDPOINTS AND CLINICAL SIGNS OF 
A ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

Endpoints refer to visible skin changes that indicate the depth of penetration 
of the TCA solution. Monitoring for specific endpoints allows the physician 
to  stop  adding  further  solution  volume  after  the  desired  treatment  level  is 
reached. Conversely, the physician may continue adding more solution until 
the peel reaches the chosen depth. This approach produces consistent results 
and reduces the risk for complications because distinct endpoints correspond 
to specific ZO Controlled Depth Peel depths (Table 10.6). In contrast, current 
TCA peels that simply use plain or augmented TCA do not have such clear 
endpoints. Their results are therefore unpredictable and produce a higher risk 
for complications.

Despite the publication of a study documenting the correlation of repro-
ducible skin changes to the depth of acid penetration (depth signs), some phy-
sicians doubt the existence of these clinically based signs.3 Recognition of the 
development  of  these  depth  signs  requires  careful  clinical  observation  and 
experience. The ZO method of monitoring solution penetration depth is based 
on the appearance of these signs and allows the physician to perform a safer, 
more controlled chemical peel.

THE FROST SIGN AND THE PINK SIGN

During a ZO Controlled Depth Peel, TCA will cause a frost to appear on the 
skin as a result of coagulation of epidermal and dermal proteins. If the acid 
penetration  is  limited  to  the  epidermal  layer,  the  skin  shows  an  even  blue 
appearance.  An  initial  speckled,  scattered  frost  may  or  may  not  be  present 
at the epidermal level (Figures 10.14 and 10.15). Following the application of 
more solution volume and deeper penetration, this cloud-like frost will begin 

Table 10.6  Clinical Endpoints at Different Depths of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Peel Type and Depth 

Color

Frost

Pink 
Background

Epidermal 
Sliding

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis 
(PD) 

Even blue Thin, transparent, 

Present

Present

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular 
dermis (IRD)

Even blue

organized white sheet

Solid, organized white 
sheet

ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel to the PD, IRD, 
or upper reticular dermis (URD) (URD focally 
involved)*

Even blue

Solid frost, white with 
grayish tone

ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel medium depth to 
PD, IRD, and URD (URD more extensively involved)†

Even blue White frost with 

grayish tone

*In the ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, the URD is reached in small focal areas of the face.
†In the medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, the URD is reached to involve larger local areas.

Just faded

Just faded

PD: present
IRD: absent
URD: absent

PD: present
IRD: absent
URD: absent

PD: present
IRD: absent
URD: absent

PD: present
IRD: absent
URD: absent

249

ENDPOINTS AND CLINICAL 
SIGNS OF A ZO CONTROLLED 
DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.14  Early frost formation (speckles) on the treated skin at the epidermal level. 
Notice that this frost has not yet become confluent to form an “organized” sheet of frost.

Figure 10.15  Denser speckles during early frost formation.

to  organize,  and  a  more  confluent  white  sheet  will  appear.  This  will  occur 
faster in thin skin than in thick skin.

When  the  peel  reaches  the  PD,  the  frost  looks  like  a  thin,  transparent, 
organized,  white  sheet  with  a  pink  background  (Figure  10.16).  This  “pink 
sign’’ is visible only at certain stages of the peel. When TCA has begun to 
penetrate the PD, the frost will show the pink background. This is due to the 
intact blood vessels and continuous blood flow within the PD capillary loops. 
Frosting of the PD should last for 5 minutes (before total defrosting), which 

Figure 10.16  The treated area now appears to have an organized, sheet-like frost that 
has an underlying pink background. This appearance is characteristic of a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel that has penetrated to the level of the papillary dermis.

250

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

confirms that the peel has adequately reached the PD. If the frost starts to 
fade in less than 5 minutes, more TCA solution should be applied to restore 
the white frost. This frost should then last an additional 1 to 2 minutes. The 
peel has reached the IRD when the frost resembles a solid white sheet without 
any pink background. (When the pink signs start to fade, the IRD and the 
desired depth have been reached.) The pink sign disappears because of the 
occlusion  or  vasospasm  within  the  capillary  loops  of  the  papillary  dermis, 
and  blood  flow  in  these  papillary  dermal  vessels  has  stopped.  Figure  10.17 
shows  the  progressive  levels  of  vascular  reactions  during  TCA  application. 
If the IRD is the depth desired, no further solution should be applied at this 
point. If one of the designed URD depths is desired, additional solution can 
be applied in chosen areas.

Further  application  of  the  acid  solution  will  transform  the  white  frost 
to a grayish color, which indicates that the peel has reached the URD. The 
moment  this  grayish  tone  appears,  the  physician  must  stop  applying  the 
peel solution. The URD is the maximal depth advisable for a ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel. In skilled hands and in certain areas of the patient’s face, the 
URD may be reached. Medium to thick skin is ideal for the ZO Designed 
Controlled  Depth  Peel,  but  thin  skin  is  not.  Figure  10.18  shows  a  patient 
demonstrating  all  levels  of  frost  simultaneously  during  a  ZO  Designed 
Controlled Depth Peel.

(a)

(b)

PDPD depdeppthth
PD depth

(c)

IRDIRD dedepthpthp
IRD depth

(d)

URDURD dedepthpthp
URD depth

Stratum corneum

Epidermis

Papillary dermis

Immediate

Upper

Reticular dermis

Middle

Deep

Subcutaneous tissue

Blood circulation
intact.
Frost is white with
pink background.

Blood circulation
has stopped.
Frost is white with
no pink background.

Blood circulation
has stopped.
Frost is white with
grayish tone.

Figure 10.17  Progressive levels of vascular reactions during application of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel. When trichloroace-
tic acid (TCA) has penetrated to the level of the papillary dermis, blood circulation is intact, and the frost is white with a pink 
background. When TCA has penetrated to the level of the immediate reticular dermis, blood circulation has stopped, and the 
frost is white with no pink background. When TCA has penetrated to the upper reticular dermis, blood circulation has stopped, 
and the frost is white with a grayish tone.

251

ENDPOINTS AND CLINICAL 
SIGNS OF A ZO CONTROLLED 
DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.18  A patient showing varying depths of penetration and frosting during a 
ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth  Peel.  Note  that  there  are  no  sharp  demarcation  lines 
between the three levels. After this photo was taken, the patient’s face was peeled to the 
appropriate  papillary  dermis,  immediate  reticular  dermis,  and  upper  reticular  dermis 
levels. (1) White sheet of frost with a pink background at the level of the papillary dermis. 
(2) White sheet of frost with no pink background at the level of the immediate reticular 
dermis. (3) Frost with a hint of gray at the level of the upper reticular dermis.

EPIDERMAL SLIDING

Applying  TCA  to  the  skin  initially  causes  protein  coagulation  and  precipi-
tation in the epidermis, disruption of anchoring fibrils, initial vasodilation, 
edema, and a turgid epidermis. These changes allow the epidermis to be moved 
more freely on the uninvolved dermis (TCA has not yet reached the dermis). 
If the skin is pinched or pushed, a wrinkling effect occurs in the epidermis 
and is referred to as the “epidermal sliding sign” (Figures 10.19 to 10.24). This 
manifestation indicates that the TCA has reached but not completely coagu-
lated the PD. The frost still shows a pink background, however, because the 
blood flow within the PD capillary loops remains intact.

When  the  acid  has  precipitated  all  components  of  the  PD,  the  epidermis 
becomes “fixed” to the dermis as one protein block and is no longer moveable. 

Figure 10.19  The epidermal sliding phenomenon on the cheeks and temple. Notice the 
confluent, sheet-like frost and underlying pink appearance of the treated skin.

252

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure 10.20  Epidermal sliding on the cheeks.

Figure 10.21  Epidermal sliding on the temples.

Figure 10.22  Epidermal sliding on the upper cheek indicating penetration to the papil-
lary dermis.

Figure  10.23  Epidermal  sliding  on  the  cheek  indicating  penetration  to  the  papillary 
dermis.

253

ENDPOINTS AND CLINICAL 
SIGNS OF A ZO CONTROLLED 
DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.24  Epidermal sliding on the lower cheek, indicating penetration to the papil-
lary dermis.

Figure 10.25  Epidermal sliding has disappeared on the upper cheeks, indicating that 
the ZO Controlled Depth Peel has penetrated beyond the papillary dermis to the level of 
the immediate reticular dermis. Notice the frost without pink in the upper cheek and the 
presence of epidermal sliding and frost with pink in the lower cheek.

When the epidermal sliding sign disappears, the peel has completely penetrated 
the PD and has now reached the IRD. The frost here no longer displays a pink 
background because the capillary loops in the PD have been occluded or con-
stricted by vasospasm, as was shown in Figure 10.18. Figure 10.25 shows the dis-
appearance of epidermal sliding when the peel has reached the level of the IRD.

ENDPOINTS AT COMPLETION OF THE ZO 
CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

With experience, the physician will easily be able to identify the signs at differ-
ent acid penetration depths (Table 10.7). Of note, the ZO Designed Controlled 

Table 10.7  Endpoints for a ZO Controlled Depth Peel

Penetration

Papillary dermis 

Endpoint

(cid:127)  Frost with a pink background
(cid:127)  Epidermal sliding

Immediate reticular dermis

(cid:127)  Frost with minimal to no pink background
(cid:127)  No epidermal sliding

254

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.10

Ideal Depth for the ZO Controlled Depth Peel

■■ The immediate reticular dermis is the ideal safe depth in all skin types.
■■ At this depth, the frost appears white (because the pink background 

has faded), and epidermal sliding has just disappeared.

Depth Peel is ideal for darker skin types because such skin makes it difficult 
to  see  the  grayish  tone  of  URD  penetration.  The  IRD  is  the  ideal  depth  of 
safety in all skin types (Box 10.10). Figure 10.26 shows a properly completed 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the level of the PD, whereas Figure 10.27 shows a 
properly completed ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the level of the IRD. Figure 
10.28 shows a patient demonstrating all of the clinical endpoints during a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel.

(a)

(b)

Figure  10.26 
(a)  Completed  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  level  of  the  papillary 
dermis. Notice the even bluish-white, sheet-like frost overlying a confluent pink back-
ground. (b) Right side view of completed ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the level of the 
papillary dermis. Notice the even blue color and even frost around the eye.

(a)

(b)

Figure 10.27 
(a) Completed ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis. Notice the confluent white, sheet-
like frost without an underlying pink background on the face (with the exception of the upper and lower eyelids, which were 
treated to the papillary dermis level). (b) Completed ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the level of the immediate reticular dermis 
showing even white frost, which is confluent into a sheet-like appearance without an underlying pink background.

255

ENDPOINTS AND CLINICAL 
SIGNS OF A ZO CONTROLLED 
DEPTH PEEL

Figure 10.28  A patient showing clinical endpoints during a ZO Controlled Depth Peel. 
(1) Sheet of white frost with pink background. (2) Epidermal sliding (fine wrinkles). (3) 
White, sheet-like frost with no pink background. If pressure were to be applied, no epi-
dermal sliding would be observed here.

SUPPORTIVE CLINICAL SIGNS TO CONFIRM 
DEPTH

Supportive clinical signs associated with the specific depth of penetration of a 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel include 1) defrosting time, 2) skin firmness, and 3) 
healing time (Table 10.8). The depth of skin injury has an especially high cor-
relation with the expected healing time; the former can help predict the latter.
Frosting signifies the coagulation of epidermal and dermal proteins. After 
this has occurred, the process of dispersing the precipitated proteins, termed 
defrosting, begins. Defrosting time depends on skin thickness; the thicker the 
skin, the longer it takes to defrost. Dermal frost should last 3 to 5 minutes in 
peels to the IRD level in thick skin and 3 minutes in thin skin.

Following each peel, the practitioner should pinch the skin to feel for firm-
ness  to  validate  the  achieved  depth.  The  more  proteins  coagulated  by  the 
action of TCA, the firmer the skin will feel on pinching. In peels that reach the 
IRD and the URD, one can easily detect an increased level of skin firmness. 
However, when they reach only the PD, this sign becomes less clear. Firmness 
is especially pronounced with the ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, espe-
cially in thick skin.

Healing time is the time required by the skin to complete its re-epithelial-
ization. Because this sign correlates well with the depth of skin injury in all 
skin  types,  one  can  accurately  predict  healing  time  if  one  carefully  follows 

Table 10.8  Supportive Clinical Signs at Different Depths of the ZO Controlled 
Depth Peel

Defrosting Time (min)*

Peel Depth

Thin Skin Thick Skin

Firmness

Healing Time (days)

Papillary dermis

Immediate 
reticular dermis

Upper reticular 
dermis

2-3

3-4

5-6

4

5-6

5-8

Light

Moderate

7 to 8

8 to 10

Strong 
(leather-like)

10-12

* The difference in defrosting time is due to a range of skin thicknesses: very thick, 
thick, medium, medium-thin, thin, and so forth. However, 3 to 5 minutes is an 
acceptable average.

256

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

the  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  endpoints.  After  the  procedure,  observing  a 
patient’s  healing  time  gives  the  physician  a  retrospective  indication  of  the 
depth achieved by the peel. The observed healing time should be documented 
in the patient’s record.

PATIENT SELECTION AND 
COUNSELING

As  with  any  dermatologic  procedure,  physicians  can  help  to  ensure  the 
success of the ZO Controlled Depth Peel by selecting appropriate patients 
and  teaching  them  preprocedure  and  post-procedure  care  and  explaining 
expected  results.  Before  undergoing  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel,  patients 
should be aware of all features of the peels (Box 10.11).

THE PRE-PEEL OFFICE CONSULTATION

Along with explaining the objectives of ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the patient 
(leveling vs. tightening), the physician must also address several logistic and 

Box 10.11

Patient Information
FEATURES OF THE ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL

 1.  When properly performed, the ZO Controlled Depth Peel is a well-
controlled procedure that can reach specific depths to achieve both 
medical and aesthetic results.

 2.  The peel’s main objective is to tighten the skin (improve laxity, eliminate 

stretchable scars and wrinkles).

 3.  The ZO Controlled Depth Peel offers a high degree of safety and is 

suitable for all skin types.

 4.  Even when carefully allowed to penetrate to the depth of the IRD, the 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel will not thin the skin or cause permanent 
hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation.

 5.  For thin skin, one ZO Controlled Depth Peel down to the depth of 
the IRD will provide maximal tightening. Thick skin will require two 
to three treatments with the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to produce 
equivalent results.

 6.  For  maximum  improvement,  patients  may  need  more  than  one  ZO 

Controlled Depth Peel or other procedure.

 7.  If the peel is to be repeated, the time intervals between peels must be 
no shorter than 6 weeks for PD peel, 8 to 10 weeks for IRD peel, and 
4 to 5 months for URD peel.

257

PATIENT SELECTION AND 
COUNSELING

medicolegal matters in preparation for the peel. Patient dependability must 
be  ascertained  and  the  importance  of  program  compliance  stressed.  Clear 
verbal and written explanation should be given about the preprocedure skin-
conditioning  regimen,  with  at  least  6  weeks  (one  full  keratinocyte  matura-
tion cycle) of consistent and thorough program use. The physician must also 
ensure that the patient has realistic expectations regarding the final result of 
the peel and is not pregnant or lactating.

The physician should further identify, treat, and control all inflammatory 
conditions (e.g., acne, folliculitis, active infections) and provide prophylactic 
treatment to prevent herpes simplex virus (HSV) eruptions before performing 
a ZO Controlled Depth Peel. If the patient has a history of HSV cold sores, oral 
antiviral medication should be started to prevent recurrence. Typical antiviral 
prophylaxis is begun the day before the procedure and continued for 10 days 
after the procedure. Either acyclovir (400 mg, three times daily) or valaciclovir 
(500 mg, twice daily) can be used.

At  least  1  week  before  performing  the  peel,  the  detailed  consent  forms 
should  be  reviewed  with  the  patient.  The  physician  must  ensure  that  the 
patient understands the expected recovery time, anticipated reactions (postin-
flammatory  hyperpigmentation  [PIH],  milia,  acne),  potential  complications 
(hypertrophic  scars,  keloids,  hypopigmentation,  infection),  and  alternatives 
to having the ZO Controlled Depth Peel procedure. The patient must also be 
advised that he or she may need more than one ZO Controlled Depth Peel (or 
other additional procedures) to achieve an optimal cosmetic result. Pre-peel 
counseling should also include a thorough discussion regarding the various 
post-procedure healing stages; instructional videos and photos can be shown 
to further clarify these to the patient, if available.

The planned method of sedation should also be explained to the patient 
in detail. If nerve block or conscious sedation is anticipated, patients must 
be  told  that  they  will  need  someone  to  drive  them  to  and  from  the  pro-
cedure  appointment.  An  anesthesiologist  is  usually  employed  to  admin-
ister  nerve  blocks  and  conscious  sedation  to  patients  undergoing  a  ZO 
Controlled  Depth  Peel.  After  the  procedure  has  been  completed,  patients 
generally feel no pain.

Patients should have high-quality preprocedure photographs taken without 
makeup, and these should be kept on file in the office. On the day of the proce-
dure, the patient should be sent home with all of the required post-procedure 
supplies and a follow-up visit scheduled.

HEALING AND RECOVERY EXPECTATIONS

Patients go through distinct healing stages after a ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 
and they should know what to expect during each stage (Boxes 10.12 to 10.14). 
Such stages apply to all resurfacing procedures.

For the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD, the initial healing period lasts 
8 days, compared with 10 days for a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the IRD, and 
10 to 12 days for a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel (which penetrates to 
the URD in certain areas).

The first stage of healing has been completed when the skin has re-epitheli-
alized. At this point, the skin is able to tolerate topical treatment with tretinoin 

258

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.12

Day of Procedure and Initial Healing Period

 1.  Blue color disappears in 1 to 3 days.
 2.  Total healing time is 7 to 12 days (varies according to depth of peel 

penetration).

 3.  Generalized edema and a subsequently darker appearance of skin tone 
will occur at the treatment site. Prepare patients for this so that they are 
not alarmed.

 4.  Home care instructions should begin according to Table 10.9.

Box 10.13

Recovery Period

■■ Duration: 3 to 6 weeks. Skin may look normal, but most often it will 
appear red, blotchy, and uneven in color tone after deeper procedures.
■■ Postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  may  be  present;  acne  and 

rosacea may flare.

■■ When the skin becomes tolerant, patients may restart their full skin-

conditioning regimen.

■■ If indicated, low-dose isotretinoin (20 mg/day) may be added at this 

time to treat and control certain problems (e.g., acne, rosacea).

Box 10.14

Normalization with Continued Improvement

■■ Duration:  2  to  3  months.  Skin  appears  relatively  normal  (scant 
 erythema is possible and/or postinflammatory hyperpigmentation).
■■ The patient either continues with the preprocedure skin-conditioning 
regimen or switches to a long-term maintenance regimen when ready.

■■ If indicated, isotretinoin may be started, continued, or stopped.

and hydroquinone. Patients may resume their preprocedure skin-condition-
ing regimen, as tolerated. It is essential to restart this topical program (with 
the exception of mechanical exfoliating agents) as soon as re-epithelialization 
has occurred because it stabilizes skin color (reduces the risk for PIH), reduces 
redness, and restores the skin’s normal tolerance (barrier function).

The  second  healing  stage  is  marked  by  changes  within  the  epidermis 
and  dermis,  including  redness,  uneven  color,  PIH  and  collagen  produc-
tion  and  alignment,  and  neovascularization.  The  second  healing  stage  lasts 

259

PATIENT SELECTION AND 
COUNSELING

Table 10.9  Post-procedure Home Care Instructions

Activity

Cleanse face with nonabrasive 
cleanser twice daily

Antiseptic compresses every 
2-4 hours while awake

Thin layer of petrolatum-based 
lubricant (after each compress)

Post-procedure Day

Days 1-4

Day 5 
Healing

X

X

X

X

X

After Complete Healing

Return to using ZO 
Medical in the recovery 
stage

approximately 2 to 6 weeks. Accordingly, one must not judge a peel’s results 
until this stage has been completed.

Several elements can delay healing. These include patient-related factors such 
as picking, excoriation, and cracking of the epidermis due to stretching of the 
facial skin and improper postpeel management (excessive dryness or moisture). 
Other conditions that can hinder healing include minor complications such as 
irritation or infection, which may be avoided through use of wet antiseptic com-
presses and other home care steps.

POST-PROCEDURE HOME CARE INSTRUCTIONS

Following  the  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  procedure,  the  patient  should  be 
instructed to cleanse the treatment site twice daily with a mild, nonabrasive 
cleanser (Table 10.9). Cleansing must be gentle in nature, and vigorous rub-
bing of the skin should be avoided. Antiseptic compresses should be applied 
four times per day (every 2 to 3 hours while the patient is awake). Antiseptics 
most commonly used for this include acetic acid 5%, aluminum acetate 0.14% 
(ZO  Medical  Surfatrol,  one  packet  mixed  with  16  ounces  of  bottled  water), 
or white vinegar (1 part white vinegar mixed with 9 parts of bottled water). 
These solutions are applied with 4 × 4 inch gauze pads. Patients should pat 
skin  firmly  with  the  soaked  gauze  (apply  perpendicular  pressure  with  the 
gauze), without rubbing, for approximately 1 to 2 minutes. Patting with pres-
sure allows serous fluid to be absorbed onto the gauze.

For  the  first  3  to  5  days  following  the  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel,  the 
patient should apply a thin layer of a petrolatum-based lubricant (ZO Medical 
Pomatrol Soothing Ointment) to all treatment areas after application of anti-
septic compresses. This hastens healing and prevents premature dryness and 
scabbing. Applying too thick a layer of this lubricant can cause premature skin 
peeling and increase the likelihood of post-procedure acne.

Beginning on post-procedure day 5, the patient should discontinue use of 
the  petrolatum-based  lubricant  (ZO  Medical  Pomatrol  Soothing  Ointment) 
and  instead  start  using  a  nongreasy  (nonocclusive),  mild  moisturizer  (ZO 
Medical Regencell Epidermal Renewal Creme) after each antiseptic compress. 
Patients should be encouraged to use this moisturizer frequently throughout 
the day to prevent premature skin dryness and crust formation. After a thin 
layer has been applied, it should be gently massaged into the skin until it is 

260

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

fully absorbed. A specially formulated healing kit is also available from ZO 
Skin Health, Inc. It provides the required three healing elements: step 1—3- to 
5-day semiocclusive ointment; step 2—day 5 of healing with a nonocclusive, 
hydrating and calming lotion; and step 3—antiseptic, anticrusting, calming 
powder for compresses.

Patients should be cautioned about picking or manually peeling the skin. 
Clean scissors may be used to cut any loose or hanging skin. When cleans-
ing, water should be splashed gently onto the face, and water pressure from 
the showerhead should not be allowed to directly contact the treatment area. 
Excessive facial expressions and stretching of facial skin should be avoided. 
Loose hair should always be pulled back to avoid contact with the treatment 
site. Patients should be encouraged to sleep on their back (not on their side or 
stomach) to avoid rubbing their face on the pillow. Elevating the head with 
two or more pillows for the first few nights following the procedure is encour-
aged because it will lessen edema.

PATIENT RESULTS

Figure 10.29 shows a patients who underwent a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
to the  PD, Figures 10.30 through 10.32 show patients who underwent the 
peel to the IRD, and Figure 10.33 shows a patient who had a PD level peel 
and  later,  after  developing  HQ  resistance,  had  an  IRD  level  peel.  Figures 
10.34 through 10.36 show patients who underwent a ZO Design Controlled 

Figure 10.29 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (light Asian), 
thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and 
fine rhytides. (b) One year later. The patient had 6 weeks of an aggressive hydroquinone 
(HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration program followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
to the papillary dermis. After the peel, she continued with the HQ-based protocol for an 
additional 12 weeks. A non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration regimen was then used 
for maintenance.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 10.30 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated white (medium white), thick, and oily. He was diagnosed 
as having rosacea, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and associated erythema. Six weeks of skin conditioning was followed by 
a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis. (b) The patient on day 1 following a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel. (c) The patient on day 5 following a ZO Controlled Depth Peel. (d) One month after the peel. The patient had resumed 
hydroquinone-based skin conditioning and started isotretinoin, 20 mg/day. (e) Forehead before. The patient had significant 
gland hyperplasia on the forehead. (f) Forehead after. Many of the sebaceous glands were hyfrecated lightly before the ZO 
Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  immediate  reticular  dermis.  He  was  then  treated  with  Skin  Health  Restoration  along  with 
isotretinoin, 20 mg/day for 3 months after healing, which led to the disappearance of most of the hypertrophic sebaceous 
glands. (g) Cheeks before. The patient had wrinkles, skin laxity, and erythema from rosacea. (h) Cheeks after. The patient’s 
skin is tighter, and erythema has disappeared after using Skin Health Restoration along with isotretinoin following healing 
from the peel.

Depth Peel, Figures 10.37 and 10.38 show patients who practiced Skin Health 
Restoration for 20 years and periodically underwent a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel.  Figures  10.39  through  10.42  show  patients  who  underwent  an  IRD-
level ZO Controlled Depth Peel or a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel for 
leveling and/or tightening.

261

262

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure 10.31 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (light Asian), 
thick, and oily. She was diagnosed with early signs of aging consisting of rhytides and 
laxity. (b) One year later. The patient had 6 weeks of an aggressive hydroquinone (HQ)-
based Skin Health Restoration program followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
immediate reticular dermis. After the peel, she underwent 12 weeks of HQ-based Skin 
Health  Restoration.  During  maintenance,  she  followed  a  non-HQ-based  skin  health 
regimen.

Figure 10.32 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as original white (light white), 
medium thick, and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having photodamage, rhytides, and 
laxity. (b) Six months later. The patient had 6 weeks of aggressive hydroquinone (HQ)-
based Skin Health Restoration, followed by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the imme-
diate reticular dermis. After the peel, she continued with the same ZOMD HQ-based 
program for 5 months. During maintenance, she followed a non-HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration regimen.

(a)

(b)

263

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
PEEL COMBINED WITH 
OTHER PROCEDURES

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 10.33 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as complex, medium thick, and 
oily. Complex skin is of mixed racial origin and could be considered to be highly devi-
ated.  She  was  diagnosed  with  melasma,  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation,  photo-
damage, and freckles. (b) Five months later. The patient received 6 weeks of aggressive 
hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration, a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
papillary dermis, and 12 weeks of moderate non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration. (c) 
Ten years later. The same patient was using HQ without supervision (obtained from an 
Internet supplier). She was diagnosed as having melasma, freckles, and HQ resistance. 
(d)  The  patient  directly  after  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel.  She  had  12  weeks  of  non-
hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration with aggressive epidermal and mela-
nocyte stabilization to eliminate HQ resistance. Following non-HQ-based restoration, 
she had 6 weeks of aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration. This was then followed 
by a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis. (e) Ten days after a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel. The patient’s skin shows complete healing. She returned to an 
aggressive HQ-based Skin Health Restoration regimen for three keratinocyte matura-
tion cycles (18 weeks), followed by non-HQ-based maintenance.

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH PEEL 
COMBINED WITH OTHER 
PROCEDURES

As detailed in Chapter 5, combining two or more procedures with different 
mechanisms of action during the same surgical session can maximize results, 
minimize  invasiveness,  and  optimize  safety.  For  example,  unnecessary 
depth in areas where there might be higher risk for textural changes or other 

264

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure 10.34 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as original white color, thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having rosacea and photodamage. (b) One year later. The 
patient had 5 months of Skin Health Restoration and a ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel (6 weeks after starting the program) during the treatment.

complications  can  be  avoided.  A  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  PD  and 
IRD on the entire face, followed immediately by the CO2 fractional laser to 
the URD in certain areas, provides better results than either procedure alone. 
It increases safety because it avoids penetrating to unnecessarily deep levels 
(e.g., the URD) to achieve the desired tightness while limiting the depth only 
to areas where leveling is desired. Other combinations include 1) a facelift to 
remove excessive skin and/or muscle combined with a nonsurgical skin tight-
ening procedure to the entire face by means of a ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 2) 

Figure 10.35 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark white), 
thick, and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having photodamage and solar elastosis. (b) 
One  year  later.  She  underwent  6  weeks  of  aggressive  hydroquinone  (HQ)-based  Skin 
Health Restoration, followed by a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel 
12 weeks after starting the treatment. After the peel, she continued the HQ-based Skin 
Health Restoration program for 3 more months.

265

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
PEEL COMBINED WITH 
OTHER PROCEDURES

Figure  10.36 
(a)  Before.  The  patient’s  skin  was  an  original  white  color  (light  white), 
medium thick, and normally oily. She was diagnosed as having laxity and rhytides. (b) 
One year later. The patient underwent aggressive hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health 
Restoration for 6 weeks followed by a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel. After heal-
ing, she continued with an HQ-based Skin Health Restoration program for 3 months, 
followed by non-HQ-based maintenance.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure  10.37 
(a)  The  patient  directly  after  her  first  ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth 
Peel. (b) The patient 8 days after a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel. (c) The patient 
1 year later. (d) The patient at age 36 years. The skin of this patient was a deviated white 
color, normal white, medium thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having rosacea, early 
laxity,  and  rhytides.  (e)  Twenty  years  later  after  undergoing  five  treatments  with  the 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel (three of Dr. Obagi’s previous Blue Peels and two of the ZO 
Controlled Depth Peels) to the papillary dermis, immediate reticular dermis, and upper 
reticular dermis each time.

266

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure 10.38 
(a) The patient in 1992. The patient’s skin is normal white, medium thick, 
and medium oily. She was diagnosed with rosacea, large pores, postinflammatory hyper-
pigmentation, and mild laxity. (b) The patient in 2012. For 20 years, she was treated with 
multiple courses of hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration for 5 months at 
a time. To maintain tightness, she underwent two of Dr. Obagi’s previous Blue Peels, fol-
lowed by two treatments with the ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular 
dermis (one peel every 4 to 5 years). After certain peels, she started isotretinoin, 20 mg/
day for 3 to 5 months. Maintenance was not HQ based.

a vascular or pigment laser treatment combined with a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel to the PD simultaneously improves skin texture, restores even color tone, 
and  corrects  stretchable  wrinkles  and  scars,  and  3)  electrodessication  and 
gentle hyfrecation to treat dermatosis papulosa nigra, condyloma acuminata, 
syringomas, and actinic keratoses combined with a ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
to the PD or IRD (as shown in Figures 10.43 to 10.45).

Figure 10.39 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as normal white, medium thick, 
and oily. She was diagnosed as having laxity, acne scars, and lower eyelid hollowness. 
Her  conditions  indicated  the  need  for  a  tightening  procedure.  (b)  One  year  later.  She 
had  5  months  of  hydroquinone  (HQ)-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  during  which  a 
ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis was performed. Notice the 
tightness, texture improvement, and disappearance of the lower eyelid hollowness.

PEELING NONFACIAL SKIN

267

Figure 10.40 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as normal white, medium thick, 
and  oily.  He  was  diagnosed  as  having  rosacea,  stretchable  acne  scars,  and  sebaceous 
gland hyperplasia. His conditions indicated the need for a tightening procedure. (b) One 
year later. He had 6 weeks of non-hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration 
followed by a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel. He then had 3 months 
of non-HQ-based Skin Health Restoration and isotretinoin, 20 mg/day.

PEELING NONFACIAL SKIN

The skin of nonfacial areas, such as the décolletage, arms, and hands, tends to 
be poor in sebaceous glands and other adnexal structures. Within the same 
location, it may be tight and/or loose. For example, the skin on the hands is 
tight and cannot be pinched in the area of the fingers, but on the dorsum, it is 
loose. Over the neck area, the skin is tight posterolaterally and loose anteriorly. 

Figure 10.41 
(a) Before. The patient had skin classified as normal white, medium thick, 
and nonoily. She was diagnosed as having photodamage, laxity, wrinkles, and acne scars. 
Her conditions indicated the need for a tightening and leveling procedure. (b) One year 
later. The patient had 5 months of hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration 
and a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel after 6 weeks of Skin Health 
Restoration (skin conditioning).

268

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Figure  10.42 
(a)  Before.  The  patient  had  skin  classified  as  normal  white,  thick,  and 
oily. He was diagnosed as having laxity, wrinkles, and a scar on his left cheek. His condi-
tions indicated the need for a tightening and leveling procedure. (b) One year later. The 
patient had 6 weeks of hydroquinone (HQ)-based Skin Health Restoration followed by 
a medium-depth ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel and then 12 weeks of HQ-based 
Skin Health Restoration.

This is due to the direct attachment of this skin to the underlying muscle with 
little subcutaneous fat.

In areas where  nonfacial  skin  is loose (can be  easily pinched) and  where 
the stratum corneum is thin, frost appears faster compared with areas where 
the  skin  is  firmly  attached  (knuckles,  toes)  or  where  the  stratum  corneum 
is thick. The latter may show only a cloud of speckled frost or no frost at all, 
despite equal and adequate application of acid solution. In nonfacial skin, the 
physician should focus on achieving an even blue color and not an even frost.
When  painting  nonfacial  skin  with  a  colorless  TCA  solution,  nonfrosted 
areas frequently confuse physicians. They believe that these regions have been 
neglected and that no acid was applied. They therefore paint additional solu-
tion to induce a frost. This confusion can lead to unnecessary deep penetration 
and possible scarring. This does not occur with the ZO Controlled Depth Peel 

Figure 10.43  Dr. Zein Obagi performing a CO2 fractional laser treatment immediately 
following the ZO Controlled Depth Peel.

PEELING NONFACIAL SKIN

269

Figure  10.44  A  CO2  fractional  laser  treatment  on  the  unstretchable  wrinkles  in  the 
perioral area.

because of the presence of the blue color, which easily differentiates painted 
from nonpainted skin.

PERFORMING A NONFACIAL PEEL

Use the 20% coat system when peeling nonfacial skin and do not exceed the 
PD in depth. Select a 5% body surface area and apply the coat gradually with 
even application. Skipped areas are easily made visible by the blue dye in the 
base. After a coat has been applied, wait 2 minutes for the acid to be neutral-
ized and then paint another. Be sure to maintain an even blue color, similar 
in intensity, while the frost is slowly progressing. Do not attempt to obtain an 
even frost. In most cases, one coat of the 20% solution will be enough to reach 
the PD. Hydrated and pinchable areas will show a sheet of white frost with 

Figure 10.45  The patient immediately following the completion of both procedures.

270

ZO CONTROLLED DEPTH 
TRICHLORO ACETIC ACID 
PEELS

Box 10.15

Peeling Nonfacial Skin

■■ Use the 20% coat system.
■■ Select an area to peel that is 5% of the body’s surface. If that area is 
smaller  than  5%,  decrease  the  amount  of  acid  solution  in  the  coat 
proportionately.

■■ Peel no deeper than the papillary dermis.
■■ Apply the solution equally and aim for an even blue. After an area 
shows a sheet of white frost with a pink background, stop the peel. 
Never attempt to achieve an even frost.

■■ The areas that frost should display frost with a pink background and 

epidermal sliding.

epidermal sliding (the dorsum of the hand), whereas firmer, thicker skin (the 
dorsum of the fingers) may not show any frost or epidermal sliding.

When peeling an area smaller than 5% of the body’s surface (as with spot 
peels), one of two methods may be employed. With the first approach, deter-
mine the percentage surface area of the skin to be peeled and then calculate 
the amount of acid solution needed for one coat (e.g., a 5% surface area will 
require 4 mL, a 2.5% area 2 mL, and a 1% area 0.8 mL). Then apply the appro-
priate amount of solution to the chosen area.

With the second method, clinical endpoints are the guide. The physician 
should apply the solution evenly, wait 2 minutes, and then reapply it again. It is 
important that an even blue is maintained throughout. After organized, sheet-
like frost with a pink background appears within the frosted areas, further 
application  should  stop. This  is  the  desired  endpoint  in  nonfacial  skin,  and 
application should stop even if other areas are not evenly frosted. Feathering 
should then be performed between the frosted and nonfrosted areas to pre-
vent any demarcation lines.

Peeling of nonfacial skin is summarized in Box 10.15.

REFERENCES

  1.  Brody  HJ.  Chemical  Peeling  and  Resurfacing.  2nd  ed.  St.  Louis:  CV  Mosby; 

1997:108-136.

  2.  Obagi ZE, Sawaf MM, Johnson JB, et al. The controlled depth trichloroacetic acid 
peel:  methodology,  outcome,  and  complication  rate.  Int  J  Aesthetic  Restor  Surg. 
1996;4:81-94.

  3.  Johnson JB, Ichinose H, Obagi ZE, Laub DR. Obagi’s modified trichloroacetic acid 
(TCA)-controlled variable depth peel: a study of clinical signs correlating with histo-
logical findings. Ann Plast Surg. 1996;36:225-237.

CHAPTER 

11

SKIN 
RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES
Identification and 
Management of 
Anticipated 
Reactions and 
Potential 
Complications

Skin reactions, side effects, and serious complications are an invariable part 
of a dermatologist’s career. In fact, the saying, “if you did not have any com-
plications during your medical career, you did not practice medicine,” is an 
undeniable truth. To practice medicine within approved medical standards, 
a physician must be alert to the possible risks of any procedure or agent used 
to treat the patient. Furthermore, physicians must be able to maintain a high 
index of suspicion for potential adverse events, being careful to identify any 
problems in their early stages and treat them promptly. Dermatologists, plas-
tic surgeons, and other skin professionals are trained to identify abnormal or 
problematic results and act quickly to improve the outcome, and our patients 
expect nothing less of us. This chapter is intended to provide the reader with 
information  that  may  lead  to  earlier  and  more  effective  intervention  in  the 
treatment  of  immediate  reactions,  anticipated  during  the  recovery  stage,  as 
well as in true complications following rejuvenation procedures.

272

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Reactions occurring  after skin rejuvenation  procedures can be divided into 
the following three types: 1) immediate reactions (occurring 1 to 14 days after 
the procedure); 2) recovery period reactions (2 to 6 weeks after the procedure); 
and 3) delayed reactions (3 to 10 weeks after the procedure) (Table 11.1). The 
first two of these three types of post-procedure reactions can be further sub-
divided into anticipated versus unanticipated reactions, the latter considered 
true complications. The third type, delayed reactions, are always considered 
unanticipated.  As  such,  any  reaction  occurring  after  recovery  is  considered 
a true complication. With improper treatment, recovery stage complications 
can carry over into the delayed period.

Before  any  procedure,  the  physician  needs  to  counsel  the  patient  on  the 
expected  postoperative  course.  The  potential  post-procedure  adverse  events 
should also be discussed and included on the consent form signed by the patient. 
When patients are not sufficiently informed about what to expect following a 
procedure (especially the anticipated reactions), they may become concerned 
and dissatisfied with the treatment and the physician. It is always good practice 
to overprepare and underpromise patients so that their expectations are ulti-
mately met or surpassed, and trust in the physician is maintained.

IMMEDIATE ANTICIPATED REACTIONS

Edema
The severity or extent of post-procedure edema is relatively proportional to the 
procedure’s  depth  of  penetration.  Specifically,  edema  is  mild  following  pro-
cedures  that  reach  the  papillary  dermis  (PD)  and  stronger  after  procedures 
reaching  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  (IRD).  Edema  appears  within  24 
hours, peaks by the third day, and disappears by the fifth day. The extent of 
edema varies between patients. Generally, it is more extensive in thin and lax 
skin and after deeper procedures. In rare cases, it can extend to the neck and 
upper chest. Because the periocular area of the human skull lacks bone to sup-
press expansion, edema may be overly prominent around the eyes and, occa-
sionally, the patient’s eyes may seal shut. The edema generally does not cause 
laryngeal symptoms or any other systemic reaction or pain.

Edema  does  not  have  to  be  treated.  However,  if  the  physician  desires  to 
minimize post-procedure edema, 10 mg of dexamethasone (Decadron) can be 
administered intravenously during the procedure and a methylprednisolone 
(Medrol) dose pack applied for 5 days following the procedure on a tapering 
schedule  (6  mg  orally  first  day,  5  mg  the  next  day,  etc.).  Alternatively,  oral 
prednisone can be used for 7 days, starting with 60 mg the morning after the 
procedure, tapered daily to 50 mg, 40 mg, 30 mg, 20 mg, 10 mg, and ending 
with  5  mg.  Edema  cannot  be  completely  prevented,  even  with  intravenous 
and oral steroids, but the swelling can be reduced and the patient made more 
comfortable. Cold compresses, started early and applied gently over the eyes, 
may help reduce the eyelid swelling.

/
g
n

i
r
r
a
c
s

c
i
h
p
o
r
t
r
e
p
y
H

e
s
u
ff
i
d
g
n
i
v
l
o
s
e
r
/
l
a
m
n
M

i

i

V
S
H

:
s
e
l
c
i
s
e
v
l

u
f
n
i
a
P

a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

t
n
e
u
fl
n
o
C

x
e
l
p
m

i
s

s
e
p
r
e
h

:
s
e
l
c
i
s
e
v
l

u
f
n
i
a
P

s
d
i
o
l
e
k

a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

t
n
e
u
fl
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
c
a
e
r

a
m
e
d
e
d
l
i

m
d
n
a

n
o
i
t
p
u
r
e

)

V
S
H

(

s
u
r
i
v

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a
n
U

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
A

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a
n
U

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
A

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a
n
U

d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
A

a
m
e
d
E

)
0
1
-
3
s
k
e
e
w
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p
-
t
s
o
P
(
d
e
y
a
l
e
D

)
6
-
2
s
k
e
e
w
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p
-
t
s
o
P
(
†
y
r
e
v
o
c
e
R

)
4
1
-
1
s
y
a
d
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p
-
t
s
o
P
(

e
t
a
i
d
e
m
m

I

*
s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
P
n
o
i
t
a
n
e
v
u
j
e
R
e
v
i
t
a
l
b
A
r
e
ft
a

)
d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a
n
U
d
n
a
d
e
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
A
(

s
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
R
e
l
b
i
s
s
o
P

.

1
1
1
e
l
b
a
T

n

i

,

y
l
l
a
n
o
i
s
a
c
c
o
(

c
i
h
p
o
r
t
a

o
t

g
n

i
d
a
e
l

,
s
e
s
a
c

e
r
e
v
e
s

)
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
o
i
p
o
r
t
c
e

d
n
a

c
i
h
p
o
r
t
r
e
p
y
h

:
s
r
a
c
S

e
s
u
ff

i
d
g
n

i
v
l

o
s
e
r
/
l
a
m
n
M

i

i

a
m
e
d
e

h
t
i

w
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e
d
e
r

t
h
g
i
r
B

s
e
l

u
t
s
u
p

l
l
a
m

s

g
n

i
y
l
r
e
v
o

)
a
d
i
d
n
a
c
/
t
s
a
e
y
(

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
r
e
p
y
h

)

H
I
P
(

l
l
a
m

s

s
u
o
r
e
m
u
n
f
I

.
l
a
i
r
e
t
c
a
b

t
n
e
u
fl
n
o
c

g
n

i
y
l
r
e
v
o
s
e
l

u
t
s
u
p

)
t
s
a
e
y

:
a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

t
n
e
t
s
i
s
r
e
p

:
e
t
a
d
u
x
e
d
e
r
o

l

o
c
-
y
e
n
o
h

y
r
o
t
a
m
m
a
fl
n

i
t
s
o
P

f
I
(
n
o
i
t
c
e
f
n

i

t
s
a
e
y

r
o

l
a
i
r
e
t
c
a
B

a
m
e
h
t
y
r
e

t
n
e
u
fl
n
o
C

s
e
n

i
l

n
o
i
t
a
c
r
a
m
e
d
p
r
a
h
S

g
n

i
l
a
e
h
/
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
i
l
e
h
t
i
p
e
-
e
r

d
e
y
a
l
e
d
d
e
n
i
a
l
p
x
e
n
U

)
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
e
r
u
t
l
u
c
(

i

l
a
c
i
p
y
t
a
g
n
w
o
r
g
y
l
w
o
l
s

)
a
i
r
e
t
c
a
b
o
c
y
m

a
i
l
i

M

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
r
r
I

g
n
i
z
o
O

/
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
o
p
y
H

f
i
(

H
I
P
t
e
s
n
o
-
d
e
y
a
l
e
D

r
o
s
n
o
i
s
o
r
e

t
n
e
t
s
i
s
r
e
P

p
u
-
e
r
a
fl
a
e
c
a
s
o
r

,
e
n
c
A

s
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

c
i
g
r
e
l
l

A

k
r
a
d
r
o
g
n
n
e
k
r
a
D

i

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
g
i
p
e
d

a
h
t
i

w
e
c
n
a
i
l
p
m
o
c
n
o
n

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p
(

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
c
l
u

e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p
-
t
s
o
p
r
e
p
o
r
p

l
a
i
r
e
t
c
a
b
c
i
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

r
o
c
i
b
o
r
e
a

)
n
e
m
i
g
e
r
n
i
k
s

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
e
f
n

i

k
s
a
m

d
e
l
l

o
r
t
n
o
C
O
Z
e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n

i

,
s
l
e
e
p

l
a
c
i
m
e
h
c

d
n
a

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

r
e
s
a
l

2

O
C
d
e
t
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
(

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
d
e
t
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f
n
o
n

d
n
a

d
e
t
a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

h
t
o
b

e
d
u
l
c
n

i

s
e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

n
o
i
t
a
n
e
v
u
j
e
r

e
v
i
t
a
l
b
 A
*

.
)
y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

,
l
e
e
P
h
t
p
e
D

n
i
k
s

f
o
g
n
i
h
g
u
o
l
S

a
o
t

s
i
t
i
t
a
m
r
e
d
t
c
a
t
n
o
c

c
i
g
r
e
l
l

A

s
e
n

i
l

n
o
i
t
a
c
r
a
m
e
D

n
o
i
t
a
r
e
c
a

M

g
n
i
b
b
a
c
S

l
a
c
i
p
o
t
d
e
i
l
p
p
a
y
l
e
v
i
t
a
r
e
p
o
t
s
o
p

t
n
e
g
a

)
s
u
o
e
n
i
u
g
n
a
s
o
r
e
s
(

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
S

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
c
l
U

s
u
t
i
r
u
r
P

273

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

.

d
o
i
r
e
p
d
e
y
a
l
e
d
e
h
t
o
t
d
n
e
t
x
e
n
a
c

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
m
o
c

e
g
a
t
s
y
r
e
v
o
c
e
r

,
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

r
e
p
o
r
p
m

i
h
t
i

 W

†

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
274

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Erythema
A CO2 laser resurfacing procedure (fully ablative as well as fractionated abla-
tive)  and  dermabrasion  remove  some  or  all  surface  layers  of  the  skin  and 
expose the dermis. The dermis is exposed during chemical peels that penetrate 
sufficiently deep. This produces intense confluent redness (erythema) imme-
diately after the procedure that disappears in 7 to 10 days but is followed by 
less intense erythema (confluent or patchy) that may last a few months. After 
chemical peels, erythema may last a few weeks following light peels, or 1 to 2 
months following deeper peels. Figure 11.1 shows a patient with erythema and 
sharp demarcation lines following a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peel to the IRD.

Darkening of the Skin
In contrast to CO2 laser resurfacing and dermabrasion, in which the immedi-
ate post-procedural field has a bloody appearance, TCA peels allow the treated 
skin on the surface to act as a natural dressing that gradually separates and 
peels off. After chemical peeling with TCA, the treated surface layers of the 
skin  become  darker,  like  a  mask,  which  later  separates  and  begins  to  peel 
away. Following a TCA chemical peel, separation and peeling begins by the 
third day, accelerates by the fifth or sixth day, and is completed in an average 
of 7 to 10 days, revealing pinkish and smooth skin. Patients must be advised 
to allow the skin to peel naturally and not to manipulate or pick the skin or 
otherwise attempt to remove the peeling skin prematurely.

Oozing
Serous exudates will immediately begin to ooze from the skin after a proce-
dure that reached the IRD or deeper and will persist for 3 to 4 days. To pre-
vent secondary infection and the formation of thick scabs and crusts, oozing 
fluid must be removed through gentle washing or direct pressure applied (in a 

Figure 11.1 
(a) A patient following CO2 fractional laser resurfacing without skin condi-
tioning before and after the procedure. Notice the postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. 
(b) The patient after 6 weeks of aggressive hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration. 
Notice the improved skin texture and even color tone.

275

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Figure 11.2  Scabbing and crusting. (a) A patient with stretchable acne scars. (b) The 
patient’s left cheek shows poor management of a medium-depth peel. Notice the scab-
bing and crusting. (c) Three months after the peel. The patient has complete healing with 
use of aggressive, hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration.

“patting” manner) with an antiseptic solution, such as ZO Medical Surfatrol, 
Domeboro, or vinegar-water soaks. If the exudate is not removed and allowed 
to accumulate, scabs will form increasing the potential for secondary infection.

Scabbing
To decrease the risk for infection, scab thinning or melting should be routinely 
performed  (multiple  times  throughout  the  day,  as  needed)  after  a  chemical 
peel or any other resurfacing procedure penetrating to the dermis. Specifically, 
scabs should be melted away by gentle pressing with gauze saturated in an anti-
septic solution using ZO Medical Surfatrol at least two to three times per day 
until complete resolution of the scabs. Scabs should never be forcefully removed 
by the patient or the physician. Figure 11.2 shows an acne patient with scabbing 
and crusting following a medium-depth TCA peel.

IMMEDIATE UNANTICIPATED REACTIONS

Herpes Simplex Virus Infection
In patients with a positive history of herpes simplex labialis or even genital 
herpes,  every  precaution  needs  to  be  taken  to  prevent  the  activation  of  the 
herpes  virus  and  its  appearance  on  the  treated  skin  area  after  a  procedure. 
Prophylactic oral antiviral treatment should  be  initiated the evening before 
any rejuvenation procedure. A herpes simplex prophylaxis regimen tailored 
to the patient’s history is shown in Table 11.2.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV-1 and HSV-2) spreads rapidly on de-epithelial-
ized, wet skin, especially during the first 7 days following a procedure. Patients 
can often predict the onset of an HSV flare about 24 hours before the actual 
eruption by prodrome-related symptoms that include itching, tingling, tender-
ness, or aching in a previously affected area. This is followed by the formation 
of vesicles, consisting of serous fluid that contains the infectious virus. Vesicles 
typically dry out (turn into a dry crust) and heal in approximately 7 to 10 days 

Table 11.2  Herpes Simplex Prophylaxis Tailored to Patient History

Number of 
Occurrences/Year

Prophylaxis

Low-Risk Patients 

1 or fewer per year

Medium-Risk Patients 

High-Risk Patients

2-3 per year

>3 per year

Famciclovir (Famvir) 300 mg twice 
daily, or acyclovir (Zovirax), 400 mg 
three times daily, or valacyclovir 
(Valtrex), 500 mg twice daily started 
the day before the procedure and 
continued for 10 days

Same agents as for 
low-risk group, but 
started 1 week before the 
procedure

Same agents as for low-risk 
group, but started 3 months 
before the procedure
Perform the procedure while 
the patient is on the treatment

following onset. The labial eruption is usually only slightly painful and, unless 
it is a manifestation of a primary viral eruption, is not associated with systemic 
symptoms.

In contrast, a disseminated infection, which is distinguished by vesicular 
lesions erupting over the entire treatment area, is painful, can occur rapidly, 
and has a greater potential for leaving scars. Patients must be instructed to 
notify the physician immediately and return to the office for examination if 
prodromal  symptoms,  signaling  the  onset  of  an  outbreak,  occur  or  if  they 
experience any unusual or increasing pain in the days following the chemi-
cal peel or laser treatment. Treatment of herpes simplex infection is shown in 
Table 11.3. Figure 11.3 shows a patient with disseminated HSV that occurred 
5 days after a chemical peel.

Secondary Infection: Bacterial, Viral, or Yeast
A  bacterial  infection  occurring  in  the  treatment  areas  after  the  procedure 
is  rare  if  the  patient  follows  proper  home  care  instructions.  However,  one 
should maintain a high index of suspicion of a secondary bacterial infection 
in patients with a depressed immune system (e.g., those with diabetes), those 
who demonstrate poor hygiene, and those who are poorly compliant. Pain is 
the hallmark of a post-procedural infection. Infected areas typically have ten-
der, macerated erosions or ulcerations with a purulent exudate. Concomitant 
systemic symptoms such as a fever and chills may develop.

When a bacterial or viral infection is suspected, the physician should first 
obtain a culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial and, in certain cases, viral 
organisms. Following culture, the patient should be started on a broad-spectrum 

Table 11.3  Treatment of Herpes Simplex Infection

Treatment

General

Compresses

Antiviral ointment

Procedure

Allow skin to dry. Avoid ointments and moisturizers in the 
affected area.

Apply 2% to 5% acetic acid with change of gauze after each 
contact with skin.

Apply 5% Zovirax ointment or 1% Denavir (penciclovir) cream 
four to five times daily to lesions only. Discontinue after all 
lesions have cleared.

Severe cases

May require hospitalization for intravenous antiviral 
administration.

276

277

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Figure 11.3  The patient is shown 8 days after a trichloroacetic acid peel to the papil-
lary dermis. Notice the disseminated vesicles and erythematous lesions. The patient was 
not given antiviral prophylaxis before or during the procedure. She was given 1 gram of 
valacyclovir (Valtrex) twice daily for 7 days and topical acyclovir (Zovirax) ointment fol-
lowing the procedure. She cleared well without scarring.

oral antibiotic, such as cephalexin, ciprofloxacin, or cefadroxil. The infected 
area should be allowed to dry up by avoiding further lubrication (e.g., applica-
tion of petrolatum-based products) and the patient encouraged to immediately 
increase the frequency of administration of antiseptic compresses, ZO Medical 
Surfatrol, three or four times per day. Also, the patient should be instructed 
to apply topical antibiotic cream (not ointment), for example, mupirocin 2% 
(Bactroban) cream, twice daily to the affected area. Bacterial infections usu-
ally respond quickly to treatment. The two most common bacterial causes of 
skin  infections  after  resurfacing  procedures  are  Staphylococcus  aureus  and 
(Streptococcus pyogenes).

Fungal  and  yeast  infections  are  rare  but  can  occur,  especially  in  women 
with  a  previous  history  of  vaginal  yeast  infections.  Patients  with  persistent 
confluent erythema (and occasional overlying small white pustules) that does 
not respond to oral antibiotics should be suspected of having a possible sec-
ondary yeast infection (Candida albicans being the most common). Patients 
with post-procedure sites that appear clinically consistent with a secondary 
yeast infection should be treated with oral fluconazole tablets for 2 weeks (200 
mg the first day and 100 mg for the remainder of the course). Compresses, as 
described previously, are also advised. A rare possibility in patients during re-
epithelialization following deep chemical peel or ablative laser treatment that 
can cause impaired healing is atypical mycobacteria; these patients are typi-
cally not responsive to a course of cephalosporins or tetracyclines. Atypical 
mycobacteria are slow growing, and tissue cultures are the best method for 
diagnosis. Although very rare, atypical mycobacteria should be considered in 
any patient with impaired healing despite standard treatment measures fol-
lowing  a  resurfacing  procedure.  After  the  infection  has  cleared,  lubrication 
can be resumed. Figure 11.4 shows a patient with infection 8 days after a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel. Figure 11.5 shows a patient with infection 8 days after 

278

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure 11.4  Eight days after a medium-depth trichloroacetic acid peel. The patient was 
treated with proper systemic antibiotics (based on culture) and topically with antiseptic 
compresses and topical antibiotic ointment.

a medium-depth ZO Controlled Depth Peel. Figure 11.6 shows a patient 10 
days after a TCA peel.

Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Allergic reactions are rare during the immediate post-procedure period and 
can be cleared quickly with proper treatment. These reactions are signaled by 
the appearance of swelling, itching, and erythema in the treated areas and the 
surrounding  skin.  The  simplest  topical  agents  not  containing  antimicrobial 
agents, such as Aquaphor, Vaseline, or petrolatum, are preferred because some 
topical antibiotics are highly allergenic. The most common triggers of allergic 

Figure  11.5 
(a)  A  patient  with  photodamage  and  actinic  keratoses.  (b)  The  patient 
showing delayed healing and infection 7 days after a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the 
immediate reticular dermis. She was treated with topical and systemic antibiotics and 
antiseptic compresses. (c) The patient 3 months after the peel. Notice the keloid on her 
left lower cheek.

279

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Figure 11.6  A patient with an infection 10 days after a trichloroacetic acid peel. Notice 
the purulent patches on the cheeks indicating infection. She was treated with topical and 
systemic antibiotics and antiseptic compresses.

contact dermatitis (ACD) in our clinic include neomycin and polymyxin (in 
certain over-the-counter topical products) and other uncertain home reme-
dies that the patient tried before the clinic visit. Treatment of ACD following 
a chemical peel or laser procedure can include a Medrol dose pack or another 
systemic steroid, oral antihistamines, and allowing the skin to dry up for 24 
hours. After the reaction has cleared, lubrication with a bland lubricant can 
be resumed.

Irritant Contact Dermatitis
Irritation of the skin surface after a procedure is common and is usually caused 
by  excessive  skin  manipulation,  such  as  rubbing,  overzealous  washing,  or 
scratching before the skin has re-epithelialized (during the first 7 days). After a 
chemical peel, irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) can also be induced by exces-
sive moisturizing, which ultimately leads to premature skin separation. When 
comparing the clinical characteristics of ICD and ACD, it is important to know 
that  ICD  involves  only  the  treated  area,  whereas  ACD  spreads  out  to  affect 
the surrounding skin. Symptoms consist of burning, redness, and discomfort. 
Treatment involves gentle handling of skin, use of antiseptic compresses, and 
allowing the skin to remain dry for 24 hours. Then, home care can be resumed, 
with the goal of keeping the skin from becoming too dry or too moist.

Premature Skin Separation
Premature  skin  separation  can  occur  after  chemical  peels  because  skin  in 
treated areas remains after the application of acid. In most cases, this treated 
skin separates slowly and progressively from the underlying skin as skin re-
epithelializes.  This  gradual  skin  separation  is  advantageous  in  that  treated 
skin that was exposed to the peel acts as a natural dressing, providing comfort 
and  allowing  re-epithelialization  to  proceed  slowly  and  naturally.  However, 
if the treated skin is lifted off before completion of re-epithelialization, a raw, 

280

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure 11.7  A patient 10 days after ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticu-
lar dermis. She peeled away her skin surface 4 days after the peel. Excessive exposure to 
water during showering caused premature skin separation of the peeled area. Notice the 
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and variations in areas of healing.

denuded,  sensitive  surface  is  exposed.  This  can  follow  excessively  vigorous 
washing of highly moisturized skin if water has been allowed to run on the 
skin  for  a  long  time  during  a  shower  (Figure  11.7).  It  can  also  follow  if  the 
patient  picked  at  the  skin  and  caused  excoriations  (Figures  11.8  and  11.9). 
Premature  skin  separation  is  associated  with  significant  pain  and  extreme 
tightness. Immediate treatment consists of having the patient apply a heavy 
amount  of  a  bland  ointment  to  the  affected  areas.  In  severe  cases,  patients 
may need to be prescribed oral pain medication. Although patients may be 
frightened by premature skin separation, it is ultimately not harmful to the 

Figure  11.8  A  patient  with  scabbing  and  cracking  due  to  excoriations  8  days  after  a 
trichloroacetic acid peel.

Figure 11.9 
(a) A patient with skin classified as deviated white, medium thick, and oily. (b) The patient 10 days after a trichlo-
roacetic acid peel to the immediate reticular dermis. The patient excoriated her face by aggressive washing and picking. (c) The 
patient 10 days after 5 days of application of fluorinated steroids and aggressive Skin Health Restoration. (d) The patient 1 year 
later. Notice the improved skin texture and the absence of scarring in the excoriated areas.

skin and does not affect the outcome (with the exception of a possible delay in 
healing of a few more days). However, premature separation does make skin 
increasingly susceptible to infection.

RECOVERY STAGE: ANTICIPATED REACTIONS

Erythema
After healing, erythema (redness) can be uniform (confluent) or uneven and 
blotchy,  with  deeper  red  areas  usually  signaling  areas  of  deeper  penetration 
within the entire treatment field. Erythema is more intense and tends to persist 
longer following procedures that penetrate deeper than the IRD. This is espe-
cially notable in patients with light-colored skin, as well as in patients (regardless 
of skin type) following administration of ablative procedures, such as the CO2 
fractional laser. Confluent erythema is common, especially in those with white 
and deviated dark skin types, and is not a true complication. Erythema is usu-
ally mild and disappears over the course of 1 week following a ZO Controlled 
Depth  TCA  Peel  that  penetrates  to  the  IRD.  Persistent  postprocedural  ery-
thema is rare after a ZO Controlled Depth Peel that extends no deeper than the 
PD. However, erythema may persist for approximately 4 to 6 weeks following 
a ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel because these have focal areas that are 
treated as deep as the upper reticular dermis (URD). Similarly, erythema may 
persist for 3 to 4 months following any deep chemical peel (such as 26% to 28% 
TCA  allowed  to  penetrate  to  the  URD)  or  CO2  fractional  laser  treatment  in 
patients with very light white or light white skin. The duration and intensity of 
erythema ranked according to occurrence after certain procedures are shown 
in Box 11.1. One caveat related to post-procedural erythema is that whenever 
there is a focal area of intense erythema with an overlying rough texture or an 
underlying slowly progressive increase in skin thickness, the physician must 
consider that a hypertrophic scar or keloid may be developing.

Some patients may find that the redness increases when bending, exercis-
ing,  or  drinking  alcohol.  This  is  usually  a  vascular  phenomenon  (vasodila-
tion),  which  diminishes  in  both  incidence  and  intensity  over  time  without 

281

282

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Box 11.1

Likelihood of Post-procedural Erythema 
According to Treatment Type

CO2  fractional  laser  ≥  dermabrasion  >  phenol  chemical  peel  >  ZO 
Designed Controlled Depth Peel > standard ZO Controlled Depth Peel 
> exfoliative chemical peels

treatment.  Use  of  alpha-hydroxy  acid  (AHA)  products  in  concentrations 
higher than 4% should be avoided for 3 weeks after deeper chemical peels as 
well as CO2 fractional laser because these agents strip the stratum corneum, 
which can worsen and prolong the erythema.

Uneven  redness  (blotchiness)  is  more  likely  to  occur  after  combined 
procedures, for example, a 26% to 28% TCA ZO Controlled Depth Peel to 
the  entire  face  immediately  followed  by  CO2  fractional  laser  treatment  to 
the  perioral  and  periocular  areas  because  these  achieve  variable  depths. 
Erythema may be longer lasting in fair or thin skin and in individuals who 
previously  have  had  CO2  laser  (fractionated  as  well  as  fully  ablative,  non-
fractionated), a phenol chemical peel, or dermabrasion. Fissuring, cracking, 
picking,  or  rubbing  of  scabs  after  a  procedure  can  produce  more  intense, 
localized erythema. Patients with severe solar elastosis may exhibit intense, 
blotchy erythema mixed with less erythematous or normal-appearing areas 
(marbleization). This is due to variable penetration without proper feather-
ing between deep and less deep levels or to an uneven response to the proce-
dure. The latter can occur if skin is not adequately pretreated with a strong 
topical regimen in the weeks preceding the chemical or laser treatment. A 
summary of erythema after certain procedures and in different skin types is 
shown in Table 11.4. Box 11.2 shows the temporary nature of postprocedure 
erythema.

Treatment of Erythema
When the severity of erythema is mild, it can be left untreated, and it will 
resolve spontaneously. If treatment is desired for mild erythema, nonfluori-
nated hydrocortisone (0.05% to 1%) cream can be used for 1 week and then 
repeated, as needed, two to three times in an on-and-off cycle. Stimulation 
with  topical  tretinoin  cream  is  preferred;  it  can  increase  the  intensity  of 

Table 11.4  Erythema after Different Procedures and Skin Types

Skin Type

Procedure

Erythema

White and deviated dark 
skin 

Chemical peels to the papillary dermis (PD) or 
deeper and ablative laser treatments 

Usually uniform; lasts for 3 to 4 weeks

Very light white or light 
white skin

Very light white to dark 
skin

Lasts 3 to 4 months (especially following CO2 
laser treatment and deep chemical peels)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the IRD
ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel to the PD
Combined procedures

Usually mild and disappears after 1 week
Rare
Uneven redness (blotchiness) more likely

Box 11.2

In  certain  cases,  post-procedure  erythema  may  be  prolonged,  but  it 
eventually disappears and is never permanent. 

283

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

erythema  initially  but  should  shorten  its  overall  duration.  Sunscreen  and 
moisturizer should be used if there is dryness. For severe erythema and sig-
nificant,  uneven  redness,  treatment  with  a  fluorinated  topical  steroid  (e.g., 
clobetasol) for 1 week, stopping for 1 week, and repeating the on-off schedule 
two to three times may help while the patient is using tretinoin. Occasionally, 
in  patients  who  have  severely  photodamaged  skin  and  irregular  redness 
(marbleization) that is unresponsive to the previously mentioned creams, it 
may be necessary to perform a chemical peel (to the PD or deeper) or a home 
retinol peel to even out the blotchiness. In these cases of persistent blotchy 
erythema, one should not repeat fractionated CO2 laser surgery in hopes of 
treating the erythema because the skin may not tolerate the effects of addi-
tional thermal damage. In severe cases, topical vitamin C, oral beta-carotene, 
and gingko biloba supplements may provide some benefit. Exposure to infra-
red wavelengths may also help.

Postinflammatory Hyperpigmentation
Uneven  pigmentation,  including  areas  of  postinflammatory  hyperpigmen-
tation (PIH), is the result of temporary melanocytic hyperactivity following 
skin injury from any procedure that extends to the PD or below. PIH is usually 
limited to the epidermis, but the dermis may be involved on rare occasions. 
The incidence of PIH increases with deeper procedures and in patients with 
the  deviated  type  of  skin  color.  Sun  exposure  without  sunscreen  or  sun-
protective clothing soon after the procedure can exacerbate PIH. The poten-
tial for PIH also increases after treatment complications, including irritant and 
allergic contact dermatitis, and secondary infection during the healing stage.

PIH can persist for 2 to 3 weeks after light procedures and for 4 to 6 months 
after  deeper  procedures.  However,  with  aggressive  early  topical  treatment 
(bleaching and blending), it can resolve completely in 2 to 6 weeks (Box 11.3). 

Box 11.3

Duration and Resolution of Postinflammatory 
Hyperpigmentation

■■ Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) can persist 2 to 3 weeks 
after  light  procedures  and  4  to  6  months  after  deeper  procedures. 
However,  with  aggressive  early  topical  treatment  (bleaching  and 
blending), it can resolve completely in 2 to 6 weeks.

■■ Use  of  the  skin  conditioning  principles  before  and  after  the  proce-

dure helps to reduce both the incidence and severity of PIH.

284

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure  11.10  A  patient  with  skin  classified  as  deviated  white  (dark),  medium  thick, 
and nonoily following periorbital CO2 fractional laser treatment without previous skin 
conditioning. Notice the postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.

Use  of  the  skin  conditioning  principles  before  and  after  the  procedure  also 
helps to reduce both the incidence and severity of PIH. Repeated ZO Controlled 
Depth Peels (at intervals of at least 4 to 6 weeks in between peels) to blend skin 
color and any demarcation lines can be performed if topical treatment does 
not  restore  an  even  skin  tone.  Excessive  skin  oiliness  can  reduce  the  effec-
tiveness of topical agents used for skin conditioning. In stubborn cases, post- 
procedural sebum reduction, for example, with the use of oral isotretinoin for 
at least 2 to 3 weeks, may be necessary. Figures 11.10, 11.11, and 11.12 show 
patients with PIH following CO2 fractional laser treatment without previous 
skin conditioning. Figure 11.13 shows a patient with severe PIH following a 
peel with an unknown agent. With poor treatment, PIH that appeared at the 

Figure 11.11 
(a) A patient following CO2 fractional laser resurfacing without skin con-
ditioning before and after the procedure. Notice the postinflammatory hyperpigmenta-
tion.  (b)  The  patient  after  six  weeks  of  aggressive  HQ-based  Skin  Health  Restoration. 
Notice improved skin texture and even color tone.

285

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Figure  11.12 
(a)  A  patient  following  CO2  resurfacing  without  previous  skin  condi-
tioning. Notice the postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and depigmentation. (b) The 
patient  6  months  following  aggressive  hydroquinone-based  Skin  Health  Restoration. 
Notice the restoration of normal skin color tone and repigmentation of the depigmented 
areas.

recovery stage can persist to the delayed stage. Persistent PIH is considered to 
be an unanticipated reaction and a true complication.

Acne or Rosacea Flares
Patients with oily or thick skin and those who are acne prone may experi-
ence  a  flare  of  cystic  or  comedogenic  acne,  usually  2  to  4  weeks  after  the 
procedure. However, in rare cases, it may begin as early as 4 to 5 days after 
the procedure.

Figure 11.13 
(a) A patient 6 months after a peel with an unknown agent. Notice the 
severe postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and the normal skin color around the eyes. 
(b) The patient 6 months after aggressive hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration 
during  which  a  monthly  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  papillary  dermis  was  per-
formed for a total of three peels. Notice the restoration of normal skin appearance.

286

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Large, inflamed cysts should be injected intralesionally with 2 to 2.5 mg/
mL  of  triamcinolone  acetonide  (Kenalog).  Topical  ointment  or  moisturizer 
may be applied lightly when needed for comfort, but the skin should be kept 
somewhat dry in the healing stage. Acne flares can be minimized or prevented 
by skin conditioning before and immediately after healing and, if necessary, by 
using topical or systemic antibiotics in acne-prone individuals. Patients with 
a history of active acne can be given a 10-day course of twice-daily oral anti-
biotics, such as a tetracycline, macrolide, or third-generation cephalosporin, 
starting the evening before the procedure. If necessary, a 4- to 5-month course 
of isotretinoin (Accutane) can be prescribed for patients who are to have a peel 
not extending deeper than the PD. If the acne is severe, oral isotretinoin can 
also be started immediately or soon after the procedure. Peels to the IRD level 
have been performed in patients taking oral isotretinoin before the procedure 
without any ill effects. However, for procedures penetrating deeper than the 
level of the IRD, isotretinoin should be discontinued for at least 6 to 8 months 
before the procedure.

Milia
Milia are likely the result of excessive re-epithelialization or sebum produc-
tion that caused pore closure and accumulation of sebum and keratin. Milia 
are more common following procedures that penetrate to depths deeper than 
the IRD. Treatment consists of mechanical removal with a #11 blade or com-
edone extractor, light hyfrecation with an epilating needle, and the daily use 
of topical tretinoin to prevent recurrence. If not treated, milia can persist for 3 
to 4 months or longer and can become quite problematic.

Demarcation Lines
Demarcation lines are the result of inadequate feathering between treated and 
untreated areas during a procedure, especially in those that penetrate deeper 
than the IRD. Prevention of demarcation lines can be achieved by performing 
a combination treatment such as fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing of the face, 
followed  by  the  administration  of  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  resurface 
the neck. Post-procedural demarcation lines can be treated by performing a 
second procedure (exfoliation or a light peel) to even out any abrupt changes 
between treated and untreated areas. One or more ZO Controlled Depth Peels 
that penetrate to the PD may be needed for adequate correction; standard ZO 
Controlled Depth Peels can be repeated every 4 to 6 weeks, as needed. During 
these “corrective” peels, special attention should be given to the process of feath-
ering. The peel should reach the IRD on the dark margin of the demarcation 
line and penetrate to progressively shallower depths as it extends to encompass 
normal  skin  up  to  3  to  4  inches  away  from  the  line.  Demarcation  lines  can 
also be treated by aggressive skin conditioning consisting of twice daily topi-
cal bleaching, blending, and stimulation, which extends to encompass normal 
skin 3 to 4 inches beyond the initial treatment areas. A patient with demarca-
tion lines following a TCA peel to the IRD was shown in Figure 11.1.

Enlarged Pores
With advancing age, enlarged pores appear because of a relative loss of peri-
follicular elastin in the papillary and upper reticular dermis. In individuals 

287

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

with thick skin, preexisting enlarged pores, sebaceous gland hypertrophy or 
hyperplasia, acne, or other underlying causes of excessive oiliness, pores may 
appear enlarged 3 or 4 weeks after re-epithelialization following a procedure 
that extended deeper than the IRD. This is usually a transient phenomenon 
because the pores return to their normal size 6 to 10 weeks after new elastin 
and collagen have been formed. In contrast, following certain deeply pene-
trating procedures, such as a phenol peel, dermabrasion, CO2 laser resurfacing 
(nonfractionated or fractionated, in which settings are overly aggressive with 
respect to the density of microcolumns of destruction), or a medium-depth 
ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, a mild  degree of fibrosis surrounding 
the hair follicle within the PD can prevent restoration of elastic tissue in that 
area and lead to the appearance of enlarged pores.

Whenever  there  is  wide  involvement  of  the  URD,  there  is  potential  for 
subsequent loss of elastin and overproduction of thick, fibrotic-like collagen. 
Unfortunately, there is no currently available treatment that can fully correct 
enlarged  pores.  However,  a  few  keratinocyte  maturation  cycles  of  skin  con-
ditioning with aggressive stimulation may increase the production of elastin 
in the PD, thus softening the fibrotic areas enough to induce the desired pore 
tightening. In cases of extensive areas of enlarged pores, a ZO Controlled Depth 
Peel to the level of the PD can be helpful because of the enhanced production 
of elastin in the PD after this peel. This chemical peel can be repeated every 4 
to 6 weeks, for a total of two to three times, as needed. Reassessment every 4 to 
6 weeks following a chemical peel should be performed to determine whether 
additional  peels  are  necessary.  For  enlarged  pores  resulting  from  sebaceous 
gland hypertrophy or hyperplasia and excessive skin oiliness, a 3- to 5-month 
course of oral isotretinoin (Accutane) can be effective when added to the skin 
conditioning or Skin Health Restoration program.

RECOVERY STAGE: UNANTICIPATED REACTIONS

Marbleization
Marbleization is a term that describes an uneven post-treatment pigmentary 
response  that  may  occur  after  a  chemical  peel  or  ablative  laser  procedure 
that penetrates unevenly over the treatment area. It can also occur if feather-
ing  intended  to  blend  variable  depths  of  penetration  was  unevenly  applied. 
Marbleization has been observed following ZO Designed Controlled Depth 
Peel,  dermabrasion,  and  fractionated  CO2  laser  surgery  performed  on  skin 
with  deep,  fibrotic  scars  or  on  severely  photodamaged  skin  with  extensive 
solar elastosis. Certain areas of damaged or poorly hydrated skin do not frost 
equally  (compared  with  adjacent  areas  of  undamaged,  adequately  hydrated 
skin)  following  a  TCA  peel.  A  similar  phenomenon  can  be  seen  following 
ablative (CO2) laser treatment, when the depth of penetration is uneven, even 
after extra passes. After healing, certain areas that appear as if they were not 
treated may be admixed with areas that responded well to treatment, with the 
latter appearing red and smooth. The poorly responding areas may represent 
very dense, damaged elastin or severely fibrotic tissue that did not adequately 
respond  to  the  acid  or  ablative  laser  treatment.  In  most  cases,  aggressive 
stimulation  by  daily  or  twice-daily  application  of  topical  tretinoin  tends  to 

288

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

reduce the differences in appearance within 3 to 4 months. However, in severe 
cases of marbleization, one or more future chemical peels or laser treatments 
may be needed to achieve optimal cosmesis. The occurrence of marbleization 
can be minimized by ensuring that patients comply with a longer and more 
aggressive preprocedure skin conditioning regimen.

Persistent Skin Sensitivity
After  undergoing  a  procedure  reaching  the  URD  or  deeper,  patients  with 
thin, dry, fragile skin or in areas with sparse adnexal structures (e.g., the 
upper chest) may develop intolerance to external factors, including applied 
topical  agents.  This  state  of  extreme  sensitivity  can  persist  for  weeks  to 
months  and  is  often  accompanied  by  severe  erythema.  Excessively  deeply 
penetrating  treatments  may  yield  postoperatively  persistent  skin  sensi-
tivity.  Also,  multiple  other  underlying  cutaneous  factors  can  be  at  fault, 
including poor circulation, defective keratinization, an inadequate number 
and  density  of  adnexal  structures,  and  defective  barrier  function.  In  thin 
skin, the maximal depth of treatment penetration should be the PD; only 
rarely in thin skin should the treatment penetrate to the depth of the IRD. 
Patients with thin skin are treated by gradually building skin tolerance and 
improving the skin’s barrier function through a program that includes 2 to 
3 months of daily stimulation with topical tretinoin (Box 11.4; see Chapter 
2). Topical steroids should generally not be used in these cases because they 
can thin the epidermis, increase skin fragility, and further weaken the bar-
rier  function.  However,  topical  steroids  can  occasionally  be  used—for  a 
limited  amount  of  time—to  reduce  the  severity  of  a  patient’s  anticipated 
reaction to tretinoin.

Persistent Erythema
Erythema is quite common after procedures penetrating to depths below the 
IRD, including those that penetrate to the URD. Persistent erythema, defined 
as persisting for 6 to 12 months after a procedure, is more pronounced and 
prolonged in patients with thin, dry, or severely sun-damaged skin. The cause 
is not known, but it is likely that a defect in keratinization that leads to a weak 
barrier  function  (as  discussed  in  the  previous  section)  is  at  fault.  Persistent 
erythema  is  difficult  to  treat,  and  long-term  steroid  treatment  should  be 
avoided. In certain situations, correcting the keratinization defect and build-
ing up skin tolerance gradually using the principles of correction and stimula-
tion has been successful.

Box 11.4

Treating Persistent Skin Sensitivity

Persistent  skin  sensitivity  can  be  treated  by  gradually  building  skin 
tolerance  and  improving  the  skin’s  barrier  function  through  a  2-  to 
3-month program of stimulation.

289

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Treatment  of  persistent  erythema  can  be  described  as  “treating  fire  with 
fire.”  Tretinoin  or  retinol  is  used  in  gradually  increasing  concentrations, 
amounts,  and  frequency  of  application  to  which  the  patient’s  skin  initially 
responds with more severe erythema and sensitivity. Treatment for 1 to 2 days 
with a mild topical steroid to reduce skin inflammation while strengthening 
the barrier function is permitted but with decreasing frequency. This should 
continue until natural skin tolerance has been restored, which may take 5 to 6 
months. Transient hypersensitivity, on the other hand, is common in all skin 
types after a procedure. It is characterized by 1 to 2 weeks of poor tolerance 
to topically applied agents, sun exposure, or changing ambient temperatures. 
Transient hypersensitivity may occur with or without erythema and is treated 
in the same manner.

DELAYED UNANTICIPATED REACTIONS (TRUE 
COMPLICATIONS)

Unlike immediate post-treatment reactions and those that appear relatively 
early during healing and are temporary and resolve spontaneously, delayed, 
unanticipated reactions are true complications that appear later and may be 
permanent. The more common complications in this category are hypertro-
phic reactions, keloids, hypopigmentation, depigmentation, and ectropion.

Hypertrophic Reactions
Hypertrophic  “reactions”  are  distinct  from  hypertrophic  scars  or  keloids. 
They are erythematous, firm, indurated plaques  that can  be  flat  or  raised, 
appear  in  a  linear  or  cobblestone-like  distribution,  or  are  grouped  into 
plaques  and  may  be  pruritic.  Hypertrophic  areas  are  usually  well  demar-
cated and have limited growth. The most susceptible areas are the upper lip, 
cheeks, and lower eyelids, especially in areas treated with a chemical peel or 
ablative laser procedure penetrating to a depth below the IRD. Areas with 
long-standing crusts or cracks, sites that the patient has picked or peeled and 
areas of prior secondary infection are also at risk. Hypertrophic reactions 
can usually be detected 2 to 3 weeks after re-epithelialization. Concomitant 
erythema may or may not be present. Pinching the involved skin reveals a 
thicker texture than that of surrounding skin. Under magnification, hyper-
trophic  areas  appear  as  rough,  pearly  patches  with  fine,  raised  threads  or 
papules.

Hypertrophic  reactions  can  sometimes  resolve  slowly  without  treatment, 
but resolution can be hastened through intralesional or topically applied cor-
ticosteroids.  A  potent  steroid  cream,  such  as  clobetasol,  should  be  liberally 
applied twice daily and massaged into the affected areas as soon as the reaction 
has  been  identified.  Flurandrenolide-impregnated  tape,  applied  at  bedtime, 
releases a steady dose of steroid that can help in rapid resolution. Intralesional 
injection of steroid (e.g., triamcinolone acetonide at a concentration of 10 mg/
mL) into the stroma of the thickened areas is helpful. Every effort should be 
made to avoid injecting the steroid into normal skin because this can cause 
atrophy. A combined treatment approach with flash lamp pulsed dye (FLPD) 
laser treatments and intralesional steroid injections may also be effective. The 

290

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Box 11.5

Hypertrophic Reactions

■■ Hypertrophic reactions can sometimes resolve slowly without treat-
ment, but resolution can occur faster with use of injected or topical 
corticosteroids.

■■ With  proper  treatment,  hypertrophic  reactions  usually  disappear 

quickly without residual scarring.

laser treatment should be performed 2 weeks apart from the steroid injection 
because heat generated by the laser inactivates the steroid. Intralesional ste-
roid administration helps calm and shrink the hypertrophic reaction, which 
makes  subsequent  laser  treatments  more  effective.  With  proper  treatment, 
hypertrophic  reactions  usually  disappear  quickly  without  residual  scarring 
(Box  11.5).  Figure  11.14  shows  a  hypertrophic  reaction  following  CO2  frac-
tional laser treatment without previous skin conditioning.

Keloids
Keloids (hypertrophic scars) should be suspected in areas showing localized 
thickening and persistent erythema after a procedure (Box 11.6). The affected 
areas thicken quickly to produce a tumor-like growth that extends beyond 
the margins of injury to include areas of normal skin. Erythema, deformity, 
and  retraction  of  surrounding  skin  are  often  seen,  and  symptoms  of  itch-
ing and pain are common. Keloids are more likely to form after a medium-
deep to deep procedure in the upper lip area, jawline, shoulders, back, and 
chest, and in individuals with a prior history of atypical healing or keloid 
scar formation elsewhere. A keloid rarely forms after a PD- or IRD-level peel. 

Figure 11.14 
(a) A patient with hypertrophic reactions 6 months after CO2 fractional 
laser treatment without previous skin conditioning. (b) Appearance after treatment with 
the flash lamp pulsed dye (FLPD) laser. (c) One year later. The patient had aggressive, 
non-hydroquinone-based  Skin  Health  Restoration  with  epidermal  stabilization  and 
stimulation.  The  patient  had  four  FLPD  treatments  and  two  ZO  Retinol  Stimulation 
Peels. Notice the skin’s normal texture and appearance.

Box 11.6

Persistent Erythema Indicates Keloids

Any localized, persistent erythema should be considered an early sign 
of a keloid scar unless proved otherwise.

291

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

The rate of keloid formation is much higher in black and Asian (5% to 10%) 
patients than in white patients with light skin (1% to 2%). Infections, crack-
ing, or scabbed areas that the patient has picked during the healing phase are 
also at increased risk for keloid formation. Figure 11.15 shows a patient with 
a  hypertrophic  reaction  and  keloid  following  a  CO2  fractional  laser  treat-
ment without previous skin conditioning. Figure 11.16 shows a patient with a 
hypertrophic reaction and keloid following a medium-depth TCA peel with-
out  previous  skin  conditioning.  Figure  11.17  shows  a  patient  with  keloids 
following a medium-depth TCA peel.

Treatment  of  keloids  should  be  aggressive  and  begin  as  soon  as  possible 
after  detection.  Intralesional  injection  of  a  steroid  (triamcinolone  acetonide 
at a concentration of 10 mg/mL) into the stroma of the thickened areas is the 
primary initial therapy; injections are typically repeated every 3 to 4 weeks, as 
needed. In the early stages, keloids should be covered with silicone gel sheet-
ing as much as possible. If keloid growth is not curbed following the first tri-
amcinolone acetonide (Kenalog) injection, one should switch to intralesional 
injections of triamcinolone hexacetonide (Aristopan), 20 mg/mL, diluted to 
10 mg/mL or, in severe cases, undiluted. Care must be taken when injecting 
triamcinolone hexacetonide because it is a very potent steroid that can also 
cause skin atrophy. Injection of 0.5 to 1 mL into a lesion every 4 to 6 weeks is 

Figure 11.15 
(a) A patient 3 weeks after CO2 fractional laser treatment without previous 
skin conditioning. Notice the hypertrophic reaction on the cheeks and an early keloid in 
the glabellar region. (b) The patient after 8 weeks of aggressive non-hydroquinone-based 
Skin Health Restoration, two flash lamp pulsed dye laser treatments, and intralesional 
steroid injections.

292

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure 11.16 
(a) A patient showing a hypertrophic reaction and early keloid formation 
3  weeks  after  a  medium-depth  TCA  peel  without  previous  skin  conditioning.  (b)  The 
patient 5 months after aggressive hydroquinone-based Skin Health Restoration during 
which  three  flash  lamp  pulsed  dye  laser  treatments  were  performed  and  intralesional 
steroid was injected. Notice the restoration of normal skin appearance.

the maximum. Alternating injections of triamcinolone acetonide with triam-
cinolone hexacetonide is helpful in the case of large keloids.

For  early-growing  keloids,  recombinant  interferon  alfa-2b  (Intron  A),  a 
water-soluble protein that exerts its activity by binding to specific receptors on 
the cell surface, is an alternative treatment. The intracellular events that fol-
low binding include enzyme induction, suppression of cell proliferation, sup-
pression  of  collagen  production,  decrease  of  immunomodulating  activities, 
and inhibition of virus replication in virus-infected cells. A dose of 1 million 

Figure 11.17 
(a) A patient with keloids following a medium-depth trichloroacetic acid 
peel. (b) The patient following Skin Health Restoration, four sessions of flash lamp pulsed 
dye  laser  treatment,  and  five  sessions  of  intralesional  injection  of  steroids.  Notice  the 
total clearance of keloids.

293

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

international units (IU) is injected intralesionally in one treatment, repeated 
three times weekly, not to exceed a total of 5 million IU per week. Both Intron 
and  intralesional  steroids  can  be  used  to  treat  the  same  keloids,  with  the 
steroid injected once every 3 to 6 weeks and Intron three times each week. 
However, Intron should not be injected 3 days before or 3 days after steroid 
injections because the delay between treatments permits the steroid to settle 
within  the  keloid  before  the  Intron  is  administered;  if  the  two  are  admin-
istered  less  than  3  days  apart,  the  Intron  will  “flush  out”  the  steroid  from 
the  area  where  it  was  placed.  Compression  and  manual  massage  of  keloids 
have been shown to be independent factors that help prevent progression and 
hasten resolution of keloids. This treatment is based on the assumption that 
occlusion suppresses the action of fibroblasts, but the exact mechanism has 
not  been  defined.  Thus,  flurandrenolide-impregnated  tape  is  a  useful  home 
treatment for keloids because it administers pressure as well as slowly releas-
ing steroids directly into keloids. Treatment with the FLDP laser once every 4 
to 6 weeks until resolution is helpful in shrinking the keloid, eliminating the 
redness, and improving the surface texture.

Scars
Scarring  (full-thickness  destruction  or  slough)  is  rare,  occurring  only  after 
deep,  poorly  controlled  procedures,  such  as  deep  chemical  peels,  dermabra-
sion, or CO2 laser resurfacing. Scarring can also occur following these deep 
procedures  when  they  are  performed  on  a  skin  flap  at  the  same  time  that  a 
facelift is performed. This is because deep, ablative procedures on a skin flap 
may compromise the blood supply to the tissue with resulting full-thickness 
necrosis (no collateral blood supply is available in these cases to prevent tissue 
necrosis). Scars can also occur after a severe infection during the healing stage. 
Some sloughing scars that appear as small indentations or shallow lines can be 
corrected after a few months by repeated resurfacing, a “spot treatment” with 
TCA (typically 30% to 40% concentration),  or a  repeat TCA  peel to the full 
area previously treated (typically 20% to 30% TCA concentration). Figure 11.18 
shows a hypertrophic reaction and skin slough following a facelift procedure.

Hypopigmentation and Depigmentation
Hypopigmentation is caused by a dysfunction or a reduced number of func-
tioning melanocytes. The likelihood of occurrence is correlated with the depth 
of the procedure and with the underlying thickness or fragility of the patient’s 
skin. For example, areas of hypopigmentation are relatively common follow-
ing deeply penetrating treatments such as phenol peels, medium to deep TCA 
peels, ablative CO2 laser resurfacing, and dermabrasion. Patients with severe 
photodamage,  thin  or  fragile  skin,  or  skin  that  has  previously  been  treated 
with dermabrasion or phenol peels are more susceptible.

After  medium-depth  TCA  peels,  hypopigmentation  improves  with  time 
before  becoming  permanent.  Hypopigmentation  can  sometimes  be  treated 
successfully by early aggressive stimulation with tretinoin for 3 to 4 months 
or  recurrent  administration  of  psoralen  plus  ultraviolet  A  light  (PUVA)  to 
regenerate melanocytes (Box 11.7). If these fail, blending and feathering into 
untreated areas with a PD-level peel, such as the ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 
may be effective.

294

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure  11.18  The  patient  had  necrosis  and 
skin slough following a facelift that resulted in 
scarring.  Notice  fibrosis  and  depigmentation 
in the necrotic area after healing.

Box 11.7

Hypopigmentation  can  sometimes  be  treated  successfully  by  early 
aggressive stimulation with tretinoin for 3 to 4 months or psoralen plus 
ultraviolet A light (PUVA). 

Depigmentation (the complete loss of skin color) is caused by a total destruc-
tion of underlying melanocytes. Very white, sharply demarcated macules or 
patches,  resembling  islands  surrounded  by  normally  colored  skin,  appear 
following  deep  procedures  performed  in  thin  skin,  skin  poor  in  adnexal 
structures,  or  severely  photodamaged  skin.  Areas  of  depigmentation  may 
also appear after resolution of focal secondary infection, complicating such 

Figure  11.19  A  patient  with  skin  classified 
as  complex  (from  India)  showing  depigmen-
tation and uneven color tone 1 year after CO2 
laser resurfacing.

295

REACTIONS RELATED TO 
RESURFACING PROCEDURES

Figure 11.20 
(a) A patient 6 months after a phenol  peel. Notice  the  depigmentation, 
uneven appearance of telangiectasia, and erythema. (b) The patient after non-hydroqui-
none-based Skin Health Restoration followed by three flash lamp pulsed dye laser treat-
ments and a ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel. Notice skin improvement (texture) and the 
permanent hypopigmentation.

procedures. Treatments to correct depigmentation are usually futile. However, 
attempts can be made with epidermal grafts or epidermal and dermal punch 
grafts,  along  with  aggressive  stimulation  with  tretinoin.  Hypopigmentation 
of the darker areas surrounding the white skin in order to produce more even 
coloration can also be helpful but should be only considered a last resort. If 
loss of color is extensive in distribution, monobenzone 20% (Benoquin) cream 
can be used to depigment the residual dark areas of skin. However, treating 
depigmented patches by inducing the loss of pigment in surrounding areas of 
skin (making the former appear less noticeable) is a cumbersome process, has 
potentially toxic side effects, and takes a long time to work. Figure 11.19 shows 
a patient with complex skin type showing depigmentation 1 year after CO2 

Figure  11.21  A  patient  showing  permanent 
perioral depigmentation after a localized phe-
nol peel.

296

SKIN RESURFACING 
PROCEDURES

Figure 11.22 
 (a) A patient’s feet 10 years after first- and second-degree burns that were 
treated  with  hydroquinone  (HQ)  and  a  variety  of  topical  agents.  Notice  the  hypopig-
mentation and areas of near depigmentation. The patient’s skin was classified as original 
black. (b) One year after treatment. The patient underwent non-HQ-based Skin Health 
Restoration  for  epidermal  and  melanocyte  stabilization,  stimulation,  and  blending. 
Intralesional steroid was injected into fibrotic areas, and three exfoliative TCA peels were 
performed. Notice the improved texture, even color, and attractive nails.

Box 11.8

Performing the Lid Snap Test

■■ With  your  fingers,  press  the  skin  4  inches  below  the  lower  lid  and 

move it upward with a gentle pull in ½-inch increments.

■■ The point at which the lid margin is pulled down should be noted as 
the point at which an IRD peel should end and a PD-level peel begin. 

laser  resurfacing.  Figures  11.20  and  Figure  11.21  show  patients  with  depig-
mentation following a phenol peel. Figure 11.22 shows a patient with hypopig-
mentation on his feet following first- and second-degree burns.

Ectropion
Ectropion  (eversion  of  the  eyelid  margin)  is  more  likely  to  occur  after  pro-
cedures penetrating deeper than the PD performed on lower eyelids that are 
already  lax  (weak  snap  test).  Unintentionally  deeper  chemical  peels  or  CO2 
laser resurfacing can cause full-thickness injury to the thin and lax skin of 
the eyelids, resulting in ectropion or scleral show. True ectropion should be 
distinguished from false ectropion in that the latter may appear secondary to 
retraction of the lower eyelid during the edematous period after the peel or 
during the early tightness period after CO2 laser resurfacing. To prevent ectro-
pion, the lid snap test should be performed on every patient to tailor the depth 
of the procedure in the eyelid area (Box 11.8). True ectropion can be corrected 
surgically with skin grafts.

LASER AND 
ENERGY SOURCES 
IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND 
REJUVENATION

E. Victor Ross, MD

CHAPTER 

12

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

The  role  of  energy  sources  in  skin  health  and  rejuvenation  has  expanded 
greatly over the past 20 years. From the early argon and CO2 lasers to present-
day fractional lasers and radiofrequency equipment, the ever-enlarging array 
of devices allows for many applications. On the other hand, that same large 
list  has  made  the  selection  of  the  best  equipment  for  particular  skin  mala-
dies an ongoing challenge. In this chapter, we review lasers and other energy 
sources from first principles and develop a logical proposal for optimal device 
selection.

DEVELOPMENT OF LASERS IN DERMATOLOGY

The first laser (ruby) was used for pigmented lesions. Between 1980 and 1990, 
only argon, Nd:YAG, and CO2 lasers were added to the dermatology field. The 
first  laser  “designed”  for  a  specific  skin  condition  was  the  pulsed  dye  laser 
(PDL).1-5 The development of this laser and its parameters for port wine stain 
(PWS) was based on a logical selection of pulse width and wavelength such 
that very spatially localized heating was achieved. In those early days of lasers 
in  dermatology,  the  primary  applications  were  not  cosmetic  but  medical  in 
nature. If one reviews the literature before 1996, almost every treated condi-
tion was a benign tumor or vascular anomaly.

298

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

By the middle of the 1990s, three developments expanded the role of lasers 
in  cutaneous  medicine.  One  was  the  introduction  of  CO2  laser  resurfac-
ing,  another  was  the  introduction  of  nonpurpuric  settings  for  vessel  reduc-
tion, and a third was Q-switched lasers for removal of tattoos and pigmented 
lesions.  However,  two  procedures  transformed  the  laser  dermatology  arena 
more  than  any  other  development,  at  least  from  a  commercial  perspective. 
One was laser hair reduction, now the most popular laser procedure in the 
world, and the second was the application of the intense pulsed light (IPL) for 
full-face and off-the-face rejuvenation. These two procedures themselves were 
novel enough, but the delivery of these procedures by nonphysicians broad-
ened the type of practices providing them and likewise the number of patients 
who underwent laser procedures.

LASERS FOR PIGMENT REDUCTION

Modern lasers and other therapeutic light sources are developed to maximize 
target selectivity and minimize collateral damage. Based on the absorption of 
specific chromophores, namely blood, melanin, and water, one can achieve very 
high  localized  temperatures.5  The  greatest  selectivity  occurs  with  hemoglobin 
and melanin because their distribution in the skin is discrete. Water, on the other 
hand, is ubiquitous in the skin so that high temperature confinement is estab-
lished by either using 1) a shorter pulse, 2) a very small spot (fractional lasers; 
vide infra), or 3) a wavelength where absorption is so strong that thermal damage 
is minimal adjacent to the laser impact. Based on an understanding of the rela-
tive absorption of the three major chromophores in the skin (Box 12.1), one can 
devise logical strategies to treat a number of skin conditions (Figure 12.1).

Box 12.1

Major Skin Chromophores

■■ Hemoglobin
■■ Melanin
■■ Water

MELANIN

1480

HEMOGLOBIN

2940

WATER

10,640

PROTEIN

DNA

n
o
i
t
p
r
o
s
b
a
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

SCATTER

UV

400

VISIBLE

750

IR

Wavelength (nm)

Figure 12.1  Spectrum of the three major skin chromophores.

 
299

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

Table 12.1  Popular Laser Settings for the Treatment of Telangiectasia

Pulse 
Width (ms)

Fluence 
(J/cm2)

Spot Size 
(mm)

6-40

6-12

5-10

Pulsed dye laser 
(nonpurpuric settings)

Large-spot KTP laser

Intense pulsed light

8-20

10-30

6-12

8-12

Cooling

Cryogen spray or 
cold air

Sapphire contact

Variable Up to 10 × 30 

Sapphire contact

mm on face

The most rewarding applications for laser technology are those in which the 
ratio of absorption of the target versus normal skin enjoys the greatest value. 
One of these is the vasculature, where until the 1980s, one was confined to 
treatment with nonselective tools such as electrosurgery for telangiectasia and 
where there were essentially no effective options for broader vascular patholo-
gies such as rosacea and port wine stain (PWS) (although the CO2 laser was 
applied with varying results for PWS).6 With typical vascular laser applica-
tions, the ratio of absorption of the blood vessel versus surrounding skin is 
more than 100:1. For skin rejuvenation, the most common vascular maladies 
are rosacea, telangiectasia, keratosis pilaris rubra faceii, flushing (which some 
consider a variant of rosacea), and poikiloderma (of the neck). The three most 
commonly  applied  tools  are  the  KTP  (potassium  titanyl  phosphate)  laser 
(more rigorously called a frequency doubled, long-pulsed Nd:YAG laser), the 
PDL, and the IPL. All three devices have been applied with relatively equal 
effects, depending on settings. For telangiectasia, we have listed the most pop-
ular settings with particular equipment in Table 12.1.

The endpoint in successful vessel reduction is either 1) persistent bluing of 
the vessel or 2) constriction of the vessel so that it is almost invisible. For larger 
vessels, a longer wavelength laser might be required, such as the alexandrite 
laser, 810-nm laser, or 1,064-nm laser. An alternative is a multiple wavelength 
IPL coupled with a longer pulse (>50 ms) in which a spectral shift allows for 
deeper penetration than with shorter pulses (5 to 20 ms). Periorbital blue veins 
respond  particularly  well  to  longer  wavelength  lasers,  where  the  1,064-nm 
laser can be applied with a 2- to 3-mm spot, 20- to 40-ms pulse width, fluence 
of 120 to 180 J/cm2, and surface cooling to achieve predictable closure. Metal 
internal  corneal  eye  shields  should  accompany  the  use  of  the  laser  in  this 
region, where the retina can be damaged by the deeply penetrating infrared 
light.7,8  For  smaller,  finer  vessels  in  fair-skinned  patients,  visible  (VIS)  light 
devices can achieve vessel closure (Figure 12.2). For darker skinned patients, 
the 1,064-nm laser often provides the greatest ratio of vascular damage to epi-
dermal damage. A conundrum is the tanned or dark patient with “fine vessel” 
disease, such as poikiloderma, where shorter wavelengths might be required 
for vessel closure but where those wavelengths are also likely to damage the 
epidermis.  In  these  cases,  we  have  found  the  PDL  to  be  preferable  to  other 
interventions, primarily because of the cooling efficacy of the dynamic cool-
ing device (DCD, cryogen spray cooling.).9

In addition to vascular lesions and redness, VIS light devices can also target 
pigment dyschromias, where, depending on the wavelength and pulse dura-
tion,  melanin  within  melanosomes  can  be  selectively  heated.  To  illustrate 
the use of VIS light in rejuvenation, we examine treatment in the patient in 

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.2  Right mid-cheek vessel before 532-nm laser (a) and just after treatment with a 4-mm spot KTP device at 12 J/cm2, 
15-ms pulse width, and contact cooling (b).

(a)

(b)

Figure  12.3 
(a)  Pretreatment  cheek  showing  lentigines  and  telangiectasia.  (b)  Three 
months after treatment with an intense pulsed light (Icon, Palomar Medical Technologies, 
Max G handpiece, 32 J/cm2, 10 ms).

Figure 12.3. This patient shows excessive pigment and vessels. There are mul-
tiple  possible  treatment  strategies.  In  one  scenario,  a  pulsed-light  device  is 
applied to the entire face. The settings are adjusted so that one pass achieves 
reduction in brown and red dyschromias. Numbing cream is typically applied 
to the face about 1 hour before the procedure. Settings are device dependent, 
but generally the lowest settings that achieve “immediate” pigment darkening 
or vessel stenosis are applied. Test spots can be applied just before application 
of numbing cream in a representative area of the face and reviewed just before 
treatment (on removal of the numbing cream about 1 hour later). Although 1 
hour is inadequate to determine the full extent of the reaction, this interval 
is sufficient to avoid gross overtreatment or undertreatment, and with experi-
ence, one can use this technique to improve outcomes. Test spots, evaluated 
only 5 to 10 minutes after the procedure, are almost impossible to interpret 
and  in  many  cases  can  result  in  overtreatment  or  undertreatment. The  saf-
est patients to treat are those with a lighter skin type where there is maximal 
contrast between red and brown dyschromias and background skin. As the 
background skin color increases or lentigines become lighter, the sweet-spot 
fluence, where selective heating of the target is achieved, becomes smaller. In 
acutely tanned skin, the injured dermis and epidermis should not be treated. 
Treatment should be deferred until most of the sunburn erythema has resolved. 
Although  treatment  of  chronically  tanned  skin  in  regions  with  year-round 
sun is suboptimal, treatment avoidance of all tanned skin is impractical. With 
experience, such skin can be treated as long as the operator is careful to reduce 
fluence to avoid overheating of background skin (Box 12.2).

300

301

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

Box 12.2

Treatment with Visible Light Devices

■■ VIS light devices can be used to treat:

■■ Vascular lesions and redness
■■ Pigment dyschromias
■■ In pigment dyschromias

■■ Melanin within melanosomes can be selectively heated
■■ As the background skin color increases and/or lentigines become 
lighter, the sweet-spot fluence, where selective heating of the target 
is achieved, becomes smaller

■■ The safest patients to treat are those with maximal contrast between 

red and brown dyschromias and their background skin

With a large spot KTP laser or IPL, one pass of the device can reduce red 
and brown spots. In the presence of contact cooling, overheating of the back-
ground skin is preventable. The PDL can also be applied for red and brown 
dyschromias; however, in the most common configuration, in which a cryo-
gen  cooling  device  is  incorporated  into  the  system,  epidermal  pigmented 
lesions are often overcooled, and two passes must be applied (one with and 
one without the cooling device). Alternatively, the PDL can be equipped with 
contact  cooling  or  refrigerated  air.  These  cooling  accessories  have  a  lower 
cooling protection factor (CPF) and are less likely to overcool the targeted epi-
dermal pigmented lesions than their lower CPF counterparts. The long pulsed 
alexandrite  laser  and  810-nm  diode  lasers  have  also  been  used  for  pigment 
dyschromias.10

For discrete lesion treatment, the Q-switched ruby, alexandrite, and 532-
nm  lasers  achieve  excellent  clearance  of  most  lesions  (Box  12.3).  The  con-
finement of heat to the melanosomes offers a quick recovery with almost no 
damage  to  surrounding  skin.  Even  with  pulse  stacking,  collateral  damage 
is  minimal,  and  side  effects  such  as  scarring  are  unlikely  in  the  absence  of 
infection.  Hand  lentigines  respond  predictably  well  to  this  approach.  Also, 
low-contrast  lesions,  where  the  degree  of  pigment  in  the  lesions  compared 
with the surrounding skin is small, are a good indication for this technology. 
Alternatives to Q-switched lasers for low-contrast lesions include “masking” 
down larger spots to a smaller spot where the lesion size and spot sizes are 
similar (Figure 12.4). Special adaptors can also be used to decrease the spot 

Box 12.3

Lasers for Discrete Lesion Treatment

The Q-switched ruby, alexandrite, and 532-nm lasers achieve excellent 
clearance of most discrete pigmented lesions.

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.4 
(a) A Teflon mask used to protect normal skin. A small lentigo is present within the smallest “hole.” (b) The intense 
pulsed light handpiece is applied over the area. The mask protects the background slightly tanned skin. (From Soon SL, Victor 
Ross E. Letter: use of a perforated plastic shield for precise application of intense pulsed light. Dermatol Surg. 2008;8:1149-1150.)

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.5  An adaptor truncates the 10- × 15-mm sapphire window down to 4 mm.

size. In this manner, higher fluence can be applied to the lesion without dam-
aging the background skin (Figure 12.5). Ablative CO2 and erbium YAG lasers 
can be applied as well.

Often the patient presentation includes widespread actinic keratoses (AKs) 
in addition to dyschromias (Figure 12.6.). In this scenario, reduction of the 
AKs is an important component in rejuvenation. If one treats the facial dys-
chromias  and  neglects  AKs,  a  red  splotchiness  will  persist  where  the  AKs 
are observed, and the patient will not achieve optimal results. Adding topi-
cal aminolevulinic acid with photodynamic therapy (ALA/PDT) is a good 
option for this presentation. We apply the ALA 1.5 hours before light treat-
ment. Initially we use IPL, KTP, or PDL to reduce red and brown dyschro-
mias, followed immediately by 3 to 8 minutes of blue light. We have ceased 
use of numbing cream in this protocol because the cream enhances the PDT 
effect in an unpredictable way (most likely by accelerating the penetration of 
ALA). In the absence of cream, we offer facial nerve blocks.

Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis is another challenging condition. These 
white lesions, which are commonplace on the arms and legs, most likely rep-
resent small lightly pigmented seborrheic keratoses. Liquid nitrogen, ablative 
lasers,  and  most  recently,  fractional  ablative  lasers  have  been  applied  with 
some success.11,12 We have found that the best way to improve this condition is 

302

(a)

(b)

303

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

Figure  12.6 
(a)  Patient  with  widespread  actinic  keratoses  and  lentigines.  (b)  One 
month after treatment with aminolevulinic acid with photodynamic therapy combined 
with Q-switched alexandrite laser.

to simply reduce the dyschromia around the lesions and improve the overall 
homogeneity of skin coloration on the arms and legs.

One  common  conundrum  after  laser  treatment  of  pigmented  lesions 
is  recurrence  and  worsening  of  pigment  in  the  area  (postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation [PIH]). Patients should be counseled that both of these 
sequelae are possible. Lighter skinned patients are less likely to experience 
early lesion recurrence and PIH. Studies have shown that for skin types IV 
and V, longer pulsed (non-Q-switched) technologies are less likely to cause 
PIH.13  On  the  other  hand,  Q-switched  lasers  are  more  likely  to  achieve 
complete clearance. Substances that can suppress PIH include topical cor-
ticosteroids, hydroquinone, and retinoids. Sun avoidance is also critical in 
prevention.

LASERS FOR HAIR REMOVAL

As with pigment reduction, hair removal with light relies on pigment contrast 
between the hair follicle and the epidermis (Box 12.4). Melanin is the initial 
target, and heat diffusion from melanin in the hair matrix and possibly the 
shaft is required for hair follicle destruction. Complete destruction of the der-
mal papilla ensures permanent hair removal. Typical endpoints are charring 
of the hair at the surface and perifollicular edema (PFE). Depending on the 
pulse duration, fluence, hair thickness, and hair color, varying degrees of PFE 
are observed. Longer pulses, thinner light hairs, and lower fluence are associ-
ated with reduced PFE. In the early years of laser hair reduction, permanent 
removal  was  the  goal.  However,  as  the  field  matures,  patterns  have  evolved 
regarding the likelihood of permanence and the required number of sessions. 
Many of these patterns depend not only on the thickness and color of hair 
and laser parameters but also on the specific anatomic region, as well as the 
age and gender of the patient. Based on a literature review and clinical experi-
ence, the bikini area and axilla are the most predictably successful regions for 
laser hair reduction. Other regions that enjoy good success are legs and arms. 
Men’s backs show mixed results, with many patients requiring maintenance 

304

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Box 12.4

Lasers for Hair Removal

■■ Hair removal with light relies on pigment contrast between the hair 

follicle and the epidermis.
■■ Melanin is the initial target.
■■ Permanent hair removal is no longer the goal. Instead, patterns have 
evolved regarding the likelihood of permanence and required num-
ber of sessions.

■■ The bikini area and axilla are the most predictably successful regions. 
Other regions that enjoy good success are legs and arms. Men’s backs 
show mixed results. Women’s faces have shown the greatest variabil-
ity in responses.

■■ Optimal laser parameters for hair removal selectively target the hair 

bulb while preserving the epidermis.

■■ Long pulsed alexandrite, 810-nm diode, and Nd:YAG lasers, as well 

as the IPL, are the most effective devices for hair removal.

■■ Paradoxical laser-induced growth stimulation (PLIGS) has become a 

major issue, especially in female facial areas.

treatments  even  after  as  many  as  six  sessions  spaced  2  to  3  months  apart. 
Women’s faces have shown the greatest variability in responses.

Generally, optimal laser parameters for hair removal selectively target the 
hair bulb while preserving the epidermis (Figure 12.7). Shorter pulses gener-
ate higher peak temperatures but can result in hair shaft vaporization during 
the  pulse  such  that  the  latter  portion  of  the  pulse  energy  is  not  applied  to 
follicle heating. Longer pulses have been shown to generate a larger cylinder 
of residual thermal damage; however, fluence must be much larger to reach a 
threshold T (the temperature required for pan follicular cellular death), par-
ticularly for lighter, thinner hairs.

A  large  number  of  devices  have  been  applied  in  laser  hair  removal.  The 
initial ruby laser has been largely replaced by long pulsed alexandrite, 810-nm 
diode, and Nd:YAG lasers, as well as the IPL. Larger spot sizes have allowed 
for  faster  treatment  times  (determined  by  cm2/s).  A  review  of  laser  hair 
removal and specific considerations is found in the publication by Ross and 
colleagues.14 The focus of laser hair removal has been optimized hair follicle 
heating, but phenomena such as paradoxical laser-induced growth stimula-
tion (PLIGS) and resistant anatomical regions have redirected consideration 
to hair biology.

The optimal intervals for laser reduction have been determined based on a 
mathematical model that considers the hair cycle.15,16 The model shows that lon-
ger intervals are indicated for areas with longer telogen phases. For skin types 
I to IV, IPL, alexandrite, and 810-nm diode lasers can all be applied with a rea-
sonable safety window, where the fluence to achieve laser hair removal is less 
than that to cause epidermal damage. For type V or VI skin, the 1,064-nm laser 
enjoys a much greater safety window. Also, in tanned patients and in areas where 

1. LASER

Epidermis

2. TISSUE OPTICS

Dermis

3. HEAT SOURCE

4. HEAT TRANSFER
TO FOLLICLE

Pili muscle

Bulge

Follicle

Melanin

Bulb

Fat

Figure 12.7  Diagram showing progression of laser tissue interaction for hair reduction. (From Ross EV, Ladin Z, Kreindel M, 
Dierickx C. Theoretical considerations in laser hair removal. Dermatol Clin. 1999;17(2):333-355, viii.)

melanin concentration is greater (pubic region), longer wavelength lasers can be 
used with less risk for epidermal damage.

Some IPLs feature handpieces with filtering or pulse modulation that shift 
the  emission  spectrum  toward  the  infrared. The  handpieces  can  be  applied 
safely in most skin types. Still, if one’s practice primarily serves darker skinned 
patients, the 1,064-nm laser is a good first choice. Because the 1,064-nm laser 
offers  an  enviable  ratio  of  hair  bulb  to  epidermal  heating,  even  for  lighter 
skin, one might suggest that the 1,064-nm laser is the ideal first laser for laser 

305

306

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Box 12.5

Characteristics of Lasers Used for Hair Removal

Alexandrite: 755 nm (near infrared) (most effective on pale skin 

and not safe on very dark skin at effective settings)

Pulsed diode array: 810 nm (near infrared) (for pale to medium skin)
Nd:YAG laser: 1,064 nm (near infrared) (made for treating darker 
skin types, though effective on all skin types as long as hair is 
dark)

Intense pulsed light: 810 nm (not a laser, but used for hair removal) 
(for pale to olive type skin, depending on the type of filter and 
settings)

hair removal in any practice, even one with mostly lighter skinned patients. 
However, larger spot Nd:YAG lasers tend to peak at about 70 J/cm2, a fluence 
that would prove inadequate for destruction of lighter hairs (blond through 
sandy brown). Studies have explored sequential and simultaneous delivery of 
two wavelengths (755 and 1,064 nm) for laser hair removal for some slightly 
darker patients with lighter hairs. In these cases, an 80/20 mixture of 1,064 to 
755 nm achieved the optimal combination of hair reduction, epidermal pro-
tection, and pain tolerance.17,18 Characteristics of lasers used for hair removal 
are shown in Box 12.5.

PLIGS has become a major issue, especially in female facial areas (Figure 
12.8).19 Most of these cases have occurred when thinner hairs in the cheek, 
neck, and sideburn areas were treated. In some cases, even areas adjacent to 
the treated area have grown more hair, suggesting that subsurface light scatter-
ing at lower fluence might paradoxically stimulate hair growth. Almost every 
laser device has been reported as a culprit. Corrective actions have included 
cooling  the  nontargeted  adjacent  area,  using  ever-increasing  fluence  and/or 
shorter pulse width, using different wavelengths, making a second pass over 
the area in the same treatment session, and having patients return 1 week after 
treatment for a second treatment. In the latter scenario, one theory suggests 

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.8  Paradoxical laser-induced growth stimulation. Note increased hair after four treatments about 2 months apart. 
Parameters were 40 J/cm2, 3 ms, 1,064 nm, and cryogen spray cooling.

307

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

that  the  initial  treatment  induces  differentiation  of  the  follicle,  rendering  it 
more susceptible to laser injury 1 week later. PLIGS does not tend to improve 
naturally.  Although  some  clinics  have  abandoned  facial  hair  removal  in 
women altogether, most facilities continue to perform laser hair removal but 
confine treatment to areas of thicker hair, avoiding the areas and hair types 
most susceptible to this phenomenon. Studies report some synergy between 
Vaniqua (Allergan, Inc., Irvine, CA), a prescription hair removal cream, and 
laser hair removal, and this combination treatment is one option for PLIGS-
plagued patients.20,21 Spironolactone, which antagonizes the male hormone at 
the skin level to directly stop new hair growth, can also be used in conjunction 
with laser treatment.

Pain  with  laser  treatment  is  variable  but  tends  to  be  proportional  to  the 
thickness, color, and density of hair. It follows that treatment of men’s beards 
(normally  only  treated  with  PFB)  generates  the  greatest  pain.  Topical  anes-
thetics  usually  suffice  in  pain  reduction,  although  some  sensitive  patients 
might require oral analgesics or anxiolytics. For some hair types and regions, 
the 1,064-nm laser tends to generate more discomfort than 755- and 810-nm 
lasers.  IPL  overall  tends  to  generate  the  least  discomfort.  An  exception  to 
1,064 lasers being the most painful are scenarios in which the hair is thin and 
light enough that insufficient heat is generated in the follicles. In general, as 
long as the hairs are sufficiently thick, longer pulses tend to produce greater 
pain than shorter pulses.

LASERS FOR SKIN RESURFACING

Until 2006, laser skin resurfacing was carried out in a confluent manner, and 
the  efficacy,  risks,  and  recovery  intervals  tended  to  be  proportional  to  the 
total depth of injury. A number of side effects contributed to the reduction 
in full-face laser resurfacing cases from 1994 to 2000. Infections, prolonged 
erythema, pain, and scarring were not uncommon.22,23 However, a common 
long-term side effect was hypopigmentation, which tended to occur along the 
lateral  jawline  and  perioral  area  (Figure  12.9).  Also,  neurotoxins  and  later 
hyaluronic acid fillers were introduced into the cosmetic arena, allowing laser 
resurfacing to play only a complementary role in skin rejuvenation. Beginning 
in 1997, investigators reported the first results of nonablative, nonfractional 
lasers.24 The term selective dermal heating was introduced, wherein a laser, 
using  water  as  a  chromophore,  was  coupled  with  surface  cooling  to  spare 
the epidermis and heat a subsurface slab of skin from 200 to 800 µm below 
the epidermis. Wavelengths from 1,320 to 1,540 nm were applied with these 
devices.  In  the  end,  higher  settings  resulted  in  unacceptably  high  levels  of 
pain and side effects. But when parameters were reduced, wrinkle and acne 
scar improvements were so marginal that only sophisticated imaging tools 
could show the changes.25 Most of these devices are no longer manufactured.

Fractional Lasers
Nonablative Fractional Lasers
By 2006, nonablative fractional rejuvenation (NAFR) was introduced and has 
continued  to  enjoy  success.  NAFR  relies  on  wavelengths  that  are  relatively 

308

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Figure 12.9  Patient 1 year after CO2 confluent resurfacing. Note the hypopigmentation.

weakly absorbed by water.26-28 Unlike their nonfractional counterparts, small 
micro-columns  of  thermal  damage  are  generated  with  diameters  of  100  to 
300 µm. Density (or the cross-sectional percentages) tend to range from 10% 
to 50% per treatment session. The first commercially available fractional laser 
was the Fraxel Restore (Solta Medical, Hayward, CA). This laser emits 1,550-
nm radiation with 120-µm diameter spots at typical pulse energies. The device 
uses unique scanning technology (intelligent optical tracking system [IOTS]) 
that randomly places beamlets across the skin as the tip rollers cover the skin 
surface.  Multiple  passes  are  made  until  a  preset  density,  determined  by  the 
treatment level, is achieved. The scanner is able to measure the speed over the 
skin and adjusts the beamlet rate to accommodate the speed. Although opti-
cally the micro-beam size remains constant, with increasing pulse energies, 
the  zone  of  thermal  damage  increases.  Conventional  wisdom  dictates  that 
conditions with deeper microscopic changes (acne scars) are best treated with 
lower densities and higher pulse energies, whereas superficial surface irregu-
larities (pigment dyschromias and fine lines) are optimally treated by lower 
pulse energies and higher densities. More recent additions to the nonablative 
fractional armamentarium are the Palomar 1,540-nm laser (Palomar Medical 
Technologies, Burlington, MA); Mosaic laser (Lutronic, Inc., Fremont, CA); 
Cynosure Affirm CO2 laser (Sentient Medical Technologies, Kamas, UT); and 
the new Lumenis ResurFX (1,565 nm) (Lumenis Ltd., Yokneam, Israel). These 
lasers use a stamping mode in which a larger beam is separated into beamlets 
by a diffraction lens.

When applying fractional lasers, visible endpoints are vague, such that the 
operator  must  rely  on  “recipes”  for  successful  rejuvenation.  The  user  must 
track  the  number  of  passes  so  that  critical  total  surface  densities  are  not 

309

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

exceeded. Bulk cooling, either through frequent application of a contact roller 
or through refrigerated cold air, is useful for overall skin protection and anal-
gesia. Indications for fractional nonablative lasers are extensive, but the three 
most common “rejuvenative” indications are fine wrinkling, pigment reduc-
tion, and scars. Wrinkle reduction is achieved after a number of treatments, 
spaced usually about 1 to 3 months apart, when higher depths and densities 
are  applied.  In  another  scenario,  lower  densities  and  depths  can  be  applied 
with either home devices or less powerful clinic-based technologies where the 
treatments can even be applied on a daily basis.

Ablative Fractional Lasers
Ablative fractional resurfacing (AFR) lasers emit radiation at 2,790 nm, 2,940 
nm, or 10,600 nm.29,30 The relative absorption by water is roughly 1 to 2 orders 
of  magnitude  greater  than  in  NAFR.  The  types  of  lesions  created  by  AFR 
devices can be divided into 1) deeper narrower wounds (the most common 
type) and 2) more superficial broader wound types (500 to 1,500 µm in diam-
eter). In the former case, the depth exceeds the width of the lesion and the 
geometry is akin to lawn aeration. In the latter case, the fractional geometry 
mimics a “lily pad on the pond” type of injury.

Rational Use of Fractional Lasers and Common Applications
NAFR  is  a  more  practical  approach  for  patients  because  recovery  side 
effects are typically confined to erythema and swelling. Also, NAFR can be 
combined  with  other  procedures;  for  example,  in  a  patient  with  telangiec-
tasia  and  lentigines,  an  IPL,  KTP  laser,  or  PDL  can  be  applied  just  before 
NAFR. Similarly, neurotoxins and fillers can be used before the procedure. 
Shortcomings  associated  with  NAFR  include  1)  poor  reduction  in  perioral 
rhytides; 2) only partial improvement in excessive pigmentation; 3) possible 
worsening of melasma, particularly with higher pulse energies and densities; 
and  4)  variable  degrees  of  pain.  Also,  in  some  cases,  acneiform  eruptions 
occur in the acute follow-up period. Despite conventional wisdom that mul-
tiple sessions are required for rejuvenation, many patients are satisfied with 
only one treatment as long as that treatment is repeated every year. In another 
approach, three to six treatments are carried out with 1- to 2-month inter-
vals, again with a high likelihood that a repeat series of treatments would be 
applied every 1 to 2 years.

Often the approach to an individual patient is based on the precise “cos-
metic” presentation, the willingness of the patient to accept filler and neu-
rotoxins  as  part  of  the  “solution,”  the  available  lasers  in  the  practice,  and 
the tolerance for downtime. The goal is to play to the respective strengths of 
the interventions. For example, in a 55-year-old patient with deep perioral 
wrinkles  and  multiple  lentigines,  the  physician  should  first  determine  the 
patient’s  primary  concern.  If,  for  example,  perioral  wrinkles  are  particu-
larly bothersome, a conventional CO2 or erbium laser can be applied around 
the  mouth  and  a  fractional  ablative  laser  over  the  remainder  of  the  face. 
Neurotoxins and fillers can be applied in the same session. If the patient has 
little time for recovery, a program of VIS light technologies combined with 
NAFR can be applied. Box 12.6 provides a summary of the use of fractional 
lasers.

310

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Box 12.6

Summary of Fractional Lasers

■■ The  Fraxel  Restore  (Solta  Medical),  the  first  nonablative  fractional 

laser (NAFR):
■■ Emits 1,550-nm radiation with 120-µm diameter spots at typical 

pulse energies

■■ Uses unique scanning technology that randomly places beamlets 

across the skin as the tip rollers cover the skin surface
■■ Entails multiple passes until a preset density is achieved

■■ Other nonablative fractional lasers are the Palomar 1,540-nm laser, 
Lutronic Mosaic laser, Lumenis 1565-nm laser, and Cynosure Affirm 
CO2 laser.

■■ With fractional lasers, conditions with deeper microscopic changes 
(acne  scars)  are  best  treated  with  lower  densities  and  higher  pulse 
energies. Superficial surface irregularities (pigment dyschromias and 
fine lines) are optimally treated by lower pulse energies and higher 
densities.

■■ The  three  most  common  “rejuvenative”  indications  for  NAFR  are 

fine wrinkling, pigment reduction, and scars.

■■ Nonablative fractional lasers can be combined with other procedures.
■■ With NAFR, recovery side effects are typically confined to erythema 

and swelling.

■■ NAFR  shortcomings  include  poor  reduction  in  perioral  rhytides, 
only  partial  improvement  in  excessive  pigmentation,  and  possible 
worsening of melasma.

■■ Often the approach to an individual patient is based on:

■■ The precise “cosmetic” presentation
■■ The willingness of the patient to accept filler and neurotoxins as 

part of the “solution”

■■ The available lasers in the practice
■■ The tolerance for downtime

■■ Fractional ablative:

■■ Can achieve good wrinkle reduction around eyes and cheeks after 

one treatment; the durability of the response is variable

■■ Reduces perioral wrinkles but not as well as confluent resurfacing
■■ Is  less  likely  to  cause  hypopigmentation,  scarring,  and  infection 

than confluent resurfacing
■■ Is an excellent tool for scars

NONINVASIVE SKIN-TIGHTENING PROCEDURES

Probably  nothing  in  the  skin  rejuvenation  arena  is  more  controversial 
and  challenging  than  noninvasive  deep  skin  tightening  (Box  12.7).  The 
controversy  includes  the  definition  of  “tightening”  itself  as  well  as  estab-
lishing  objective  assessment  tools  for  efficacy.  Often  the  results  are  three-
dimensional  such  that  simply  examining  a  standard  photo  is  inadequate 

311

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

Box 12.7

Skin Tightening

■■ Skin tightening is the visible reduction in jowls, neck laxity, and so 

forth, as opposed to a reduction in fine wrinkles.

■■ The Thermage device (Solta Medical) is a noninvasive skin-tighten-
ing technology that delivers radiofrequency energy through a square 
cooled tip.

■■ Multiple  passes  and  lower  energy  settings  called  for  with  recent 
Thermage algorithms provide consistent tightening and reduced side 
effects (pain, fat atrophy).

■■ Resurfacing with the CO2 laser provides for at least temporary skin 

tightening, as do deeper applications of the erbium YAG laser.

for assessment. Regarding the definition, we refer to “skin tightening” as a 
visible reduction in jowls, neck laxity, and so forth, as opposed to a reduc-
tion  in  fine  wrinkles.  There  are  several  noninvasive  skin-tightening  tech-
nologies. The most common are radiofrequency  (RF)  devices, followed by 
halogen  lamps  (infrared  heating),  and  ultrasound.  Noninvasive  RF  has 
enjoyed a 10-year market experience, beginning with the Thermage device 
(Solta  Medical),  in  which  RF  energy  is  delivered  through  a  square  cooled 
tip coupled to a fine dielectric membrane that distributes the electrical field 
somewhat evenly over the skin. Early approaches relied on one pass and a 
high-energy setting, whereas more recent algorithms call for multiple passes 
and  lower  energy  settings.  In  this  scenario,  tightening  has  remained  con-
sistent  and  side  effects  (pain,  fat  atrophy)  have  been  reduced.  Unlike  the 
Thermage device, most other RF devices use a motion technique in which 
the skin is heated over a certain temperature and time (i.e., 41° C at surface 
for 3 to 10 minutes). In this scenario, the tip is moved back and forth over 
the surface until the skin achieves a certain surface temperature or becomes 
intolerably  hot.  More  than  10  devices  use  this  approach  of  large-volume, 
low-level heating. Although most patients report  a warm or hot  sensation 
after treatment, with an associated sense of “tightening,” few objective stud-
ies support a strong role for these devices.

In designing a skin-tightening application or any energy-based application, 
the operator should consider the basis for the underlying cosmetic concern. 
For  example,  in  skin  tightening,  for  which  the  most  common  complaint  is 
sagging of the lower face, multiple factors contribute to “loose” skin, includ-
ing volume loss, elastic tissue loss, bony recession, relaxation of the suspen-
sory ligaments associated with the superficial muscular aponeurotic system, 
and others. It follows that a logical approach to skin tightening should address 
these factors. Among the technologies applied for skin tightening, some older 
technologies that heat superficially do provide tightening. A primary exam-
ple is the CO2 laser, in which production of collagen in the dermis and pos-
sibly  resetting  of  the  wound-healing  matrix  provide  for  at  least  temporary 
skin tightening. Likewise, deeper applications of the erbium YAG laser have 
achieved some skin tightening. Cutis laxa, in which even very young patients 

312

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Return
electrode

Small pins-
60 total

Figure 12.10  Fractional RF device (Fractora). The tip is placed against the skin, and the 
machine sends radiofrequency current to each of the 60 pins.

show skin sagging, is a good example of the importance of elastic tissue in 
skin health.

Fractional  radiofrequency  devices  (e.g.,  Viora,  Jersey  City,  NJ;  Fractora, 
Invasix,  Irvine,  CA)  and  other  sublative  RF  fractional  devices  (eMatrix, 
ePrime; Syneron and Candela, Irvine, CA) deliver RF energy in a bipolar fash-
ion whereby the return electrodes are typically placed at the perimeter of the 
square applicator (Figure 12.10). The energy is delivered through small micro-
pins at a certain pitch. Small wounds are created at the skin surface. In this 
configuration, the superficial energy deposition is best suited for fine wrinkle 
reduction and acne scar treatment. Another device creates microplasmas on 
the skin surface to improve scars, striae, and wrinkles (Pixel RF, Alma Lasers, 
Buffalo Grove, IL).

Halogen lamps have also been applied for skin tightening. The lamps, emit-
ting radiation from about 1.2 to 1.7 µm, are coupled with cooling at the surface 
and achieve heating about 1 to 2 mm deep in the skin. Like their nonfractional 
RF counterparts, these devices rely on large volume and relatively small tem-
perature elevations for the desired effect.

Ultrasound  devices  have  been  studied  for  skin  tightening.  One  device, 
Ulthera (Ulthera, Mesa, AZ), creates 1-mm3 wounds 2 to 5 mm deep in the 
skin,  depending  on  the  transducer.  With  each  application,  a  line  of  coagu-
lative wounds is produced. The number of lines can vary depending on the 
needs of the patient. In the most recent scenarios, multiple passes are made in 
some areas with different transducers.

Another  device,  ePrime,  uses  an  RF  design  in  which  five  sets  of  paired 
electrodes are impaled by a spring action about 2 mm deep in the skin. The 
electrodes  are  angled  at  about  25  degrees  from  the  skin  surface.  Insulation 
prevents the superficial portion of the electrode from damaging the epidermis 
and the very superficial dermis. Studies have shown an increase in elastin pro-
duction and a volumization effect after treatment. Optimally the procedure is 
paired with other procedures so that patients observe the immediate as well as 
the delayed effect of the procedure. This coupling of procedures is a recurrent 
theme for procedures with very small immediate effects. Often a patient will 
respond best when engaged by an immediate response (i.e., IPL for red brown 
spots, neurotoxins, filler) that complements the deeper tightening procedure.

313

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Of the major advances in lasers and other energy-based technologies, some 
landmark  changes  have  been  the  addition  of  skin-cooling,  platform-based 
rejuvenation systems, fractional lasers, and deeper heating RF and ultrasound 
systems.  Nonetheless,  several  common  cosmetic  ailments  have  defied  laser 
treatment. Among these are melasma, idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis (dis-
cussed earlier), sebaceous hyperplasia, lightly pigmented seborrheic keratoses, 
white hair, and multicolored tattoos. Future light sources might be designed 
that can improve these common conditions.

Engineering advances will miniaturize lasers. Diodes will become increas-
ingly  commonplace;  diode  chips  will  replace  some  high-powered  solid-state 
lasers. These diode chips enjoy a much higher effectiveness compared with tra-
ditional lasers. IPLs will continue to improve with improved lamp filtration, 
better cooling, and larger spots. A new device, the TRASER (total reflection 
amplification of spontaneous emission of radiation),31 which combines some of 
the attributes of IPL and laser, will likely become commercially available and 
allow for a large number of monochromatic wavelengths from one device.

Laser  complications  result  primarily  from  unfamiliarity  with  the  device 
and a lack of understanding of laser-tissue interactions. Experience with a few 
devices is preferable to dabbling with many types of light-based technologies. 
When performing a laser procedure, operators must apply all of their senses 
to  minimize  the  likelihood  of  side  effects.  Endpoints  should  always  prevail 
over settings. With experience, one’s eyes provide excellent feedback insofar 
as applications addressing surface concerns. However, for deeper heating (RF, 
Ulthera), one relies on time-tested recipes for safety and efficacy. The intro-
duction of real-time assessments of subsurface temperature should enhance 
outcomes and increase safety within the field of deeper dermal and fat heating.
Most  complications  result  from  overheating  the  epidermis  when  treat-
ing  brown  and  red  dyschromias  or  in  laser  hair  reduction  (Figure  12.11). 
Underestimation of background epidermal pigment is often a contributor or, 
even more commonly, underestimation of a tan. Technique can also contribute 
to complications. For example, poor contact between the skin and handpiece 
tip, particularly in concave or convex areas, can result in inadequate cooling. 
Air is a good insulator, so that any air between the skin and the handpiece 
can result in surface overheating. Another cause for complications is a failure 
to  understand  heat  transfer,  which  is  one  of  the  foundations  of  laser-tissue 
interactions. For example, in making multiple passes of a fractional laser over 
a shorter time, bulk heating of the skin can occur. Skin heating with short 
pulsed lasers is immediate, on the same time scale as the laser pulse; however, 
cooling is slow, on the order of milliseconds and, for larger targets, even sec-
onds. Box 12.8 provides a summary of future directions with lasers.

Much to-do is made of skin typing in establishing laser settings, particularly 
in laser scenarios for darker skin. By convention, operators are discouraged 
from treating darker skin types, out of fear of either immediate complications 
or  delayed  PIH.  However,  skin  typing  was  developed  to  guide  practitioners 
in optimizing ultraviolet treatments for psoriasis, not for laser applications. 
Although skin typing is related to constitutive pigmentation and epidermal 
tolerance, real-time melanin assessment is a more valuable tool. To that end, 

314

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Figure 12.11  Note the hypopigmentation after intense pulsed light treatment. This type 
of side effect will usually resolve over 6 to 12 months.

Box 12.8

Future Directions with Lasers

■■ Lasers will be miniaturized.
■■ Diodes lasers and diode chips will replace some high-powered solid-

state lasers.

■■ Intense  pulsed  light  (IPL)  will  continue  to  improve  with  improved 

lamp filtration, better cooling, and larger spots.

■■ A new device, the TRASER (total reflection amplification of sponta-
neous emission of radiation),31 which combines some of the attributes 
of  IPL  and  laser,  will  allow  for  a  large  number  of  monochromatic 
wavelengths from one device.

manufacturers have developed devices for bedside assessment of skin melanin 
to aid in parameter selection.32 One of these devices is the Skintel (Palomar 
Medical Technologies), a built-in skin meter that reports pigment levels from 
the skin through Bluetooth to the base unit. A recommended range of settings 
is then displayed for the provider (Figure 12.12).

PIH is a common sequela in treatment of darker skin; however, the risk for 
PIH should only be considered a relative contraindication to laser surgery. In 
some cases, the depth of injury needed to improve the skin lesions exceeds the 

315

LASER DEVICES AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS

Figure 12.12  Pigment meter (Skintel). The tip is applied on skin, and the meter mea-
sures the real-time skin color.

depth that causes PIH. A good example is acne scarring, where deeper NAFR 
or AFR is required for marked improvement. More superficial treatments can 
achieve scar reduction, but deeper treatments are more likely to achieve success. 
If a patient shows melasma and acne scarring, the physician should counsel the 
patient that PIH (and worsening of melasma) might be likely if treatments are 
carried out aggressively enough to see meaningful scar improvement.

PROBLEMATIC CONDITIONS

Despite the long list of lasers and other energy-based technologies, some skin 
conditions are still only mildly improved by lasers, and indeed, in some cases 
less expensive nonlaser technologies are still preferred (Box 12.9). Melasma, 
for  example,  is  often  best  treated  by  retinoids,  bleaching  creams,  and  sun-
blocks.33 Sebaceous hyperplasia has been treated by a number of lasers, but 
recurrences  are  frequent,  and  the  risk  for  scarring  tends  to  increase  with 
the likelihood of a durable response. Syringomas and other benign adnexal 
tumors respond to ablative lasers, but given their microscopic location in the 
dermis, very deep ablation must be carried out to achieve a durable response. 
Fractional lasers have recently been applied to a number of conditions. In one 
recent paper, a CO2 fractional laser was applied to syringomas with a partial 
response.34-36 However, the use of fractional lasers in “nonfractional” condi-
tions (e.g., AKs) is still controversial. Dark circles under the eyes are a com-
mon  patient  complaint  and,  depending  on  the  precise  patient  presentation, 
are likely the result of increased vasculature, excessive pigment, a trough-like 
condition under the eye, and thinner skin that increases light transmission 
and shows the underlying orbicularis muscle.37,38 We have found that dark cir-
cles due to true hyperpigmentation do respond to noninvasive, Q-switching 
1,064-nm lasers. Traditional resurfacing has also proved effective, but often 
only after PIH resolves months after the treatment. Carefully placed fillers can 
also diminish dark circles in selected patients.

Red striae can be improved with vascular lasers. Older striae improve after 
ablative or nonablative fractional treatment. Still, results are somewhat unpre-
dictable,  and  PIH  is  common  and  persistent  in  some  patients  with  darker 
skin.  Striae  alba  have  been  particularly  challenging  to  improve  with  lasers. 
More  recently,  NAFR  and  AFR,  as  well  as  fractional  RF  technologies,  have 
been applied.

316

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Box 12.9

Laser Treatment of Problematic Conditions

■■ Patients with melasma and acne scarring may see PIH and worsening 
of melasma with aggressive laser treatment (that may be needed to 
achieve meaningful scar improvement).

■■ Recurrences of sebaceous hyperplasia are frequent after laser treatment.
■■ Very deep ablations must be carried out to achieve a durable response 

with syringomas and other benign adnexal tumors.

■■ The use of fractional lasers in “nonfractional” conditions (e.g., actinic 

keratoses) is controversial.

■■ Dark circles under the eyes do respond to noninvasive, Q-switching 

1,064-nm lasers.

■■ Red  striae  can  be  improved  with  vascular  lasers,  and  older  striae 
improve after ablative or nonablative fractional treatment, but results 
are somewhat unpredictable, and PIH is common and persistent in 
some patients with darker skin.

■■ Scar rehabilitation or improvement is a growing application in laser 

dermatology, but improvement is gradual and incremental.

■■ Early  red  acne  scars  are  treated  with  vascular-specific  devices,  and 
PIH is treated with pigmented lasers. More mature scars, if they are 
of the boxcar type, can be treated by nonablative fractional rejuvena-
tion or ablative fractional laser.

■■ Light should not normally be a first-line acne treatment, and creative 
use of topical and oral medications is usually sufficient to treat acne.
■■ Visible light devices (and more recently alexandrite and Nd:YAG lasers) 
can be applied for reduction of redness and flushing after the papules 
and pustules of rosacea have been reduced by oral and topical drugs.43
■■ Laser removal or lightening of true nevocellular nevi is controversial.
■■ The  excimer  laser  is  helpful  for  pigment  restoration  in  facial  skin 

with vitiligo.

Scar rehabilitation or improvement is a growing application in laser derma-
tology. Depending on the type of scar, the provider can use a mix of vascular 
devices and fractional lasers to improve range of motion, color, and texture. 
In scar assessment, one should look for scar features that differentiate the scar 
from normal surrounding skin. For example, after a motor vehicle crash, one 
might observe traumatic tattooing, hyperemia, and later PIH (Figure 12.13). 
In this scenario, a combination of a dedicated pigment and vascular laser, as 
well as a fractional laser, can prove helpful. In the consultation, the concept of 
scar rehabilitation should be discussed with the patient, with an emphasis on 
gradual incremental scar improvement. Impairments of both form and func-
tion should be corrected in an effort at normal skin restoration. Typically, for 
hypertrophic and keloid scars, intralesional corticosteroids and 5-fluorouracil 
can be added to the treatment routine.

Acne  scar  treatment  should  be  based  on  the  morphology  of  the  scars. 
Goodman  has  established  a  comprehensive  grading  system  with  a  logical 

(a)

(b)

Figure 12.13 

(a) Traumatic tattoo before treatment. (b) The patient after one treatment with Q-switched 1,064-nm laser.

treatment program based on scar features.39,40 Early red scar areas are treated 
with vascular-specific devices, and PIH is treated with pigmented lasers. More 
mature scars, if they are of the boxcar type, can be treated by NAFR or AFR. 
Rolling scars can be treated by filler and subcision and laser. Icepick scars can be 
treated by the CROSS (chemical reconstruction of skin scars) technique. In our 
experience, although AFR tends to improve scars more than NAFR on a per ses-
sion basis, we have found that most patients prefer a series of NAFR treatments.
Light-based treatment of active acne has been touted as a bona fide tech-
nique  to  reduce  papules,  pustules  and  redness.  In  our  experience,  light 
should  not  normally  be  a  first-line  acne  treatment,  and  creative  use  of 
topical  and  oral  medications  is  usually  sufficient  to  treat  acne.  However, 
a  role  for  light  in  acne  is  reasonable  under  certain  patient  presentations. 
For example, for temporary improvement of redness, vascular targets are 
logical and effective, and IPL, PDL, and KTP are all useful. For acne refrac-
tory  to  treatment  with  isotretinoin  or  when  that  drug  is  contraindicated 
(e.g., pregnant patients, depressed patients), ALA/PDT can be very useful. 
We have found that the greatest effect is seen after treatment regimens as 
outlined by Sakamoto and colleagues.41,42 where long incubation times, red 
light, and higher fluence are applied (about 50 to 200 J/cm2). Under these 
conditions,  especially  when  the  treatments  are  carried  out  two  or  three 
times at 2- to 3-month intervals, results similar to those obtained with oral 
isotretinoin can be achieved. However, under these conditions, often des-
quamation, discoloration, acne flares, and PIH are observed. Gentler forms 
of  PDT  with  shorter  incubation  times,  blue  light,  and  shorter  irradiation 
times have shown mixed results.

For rosacea patients, after the papules and pustules have been reduced by 
oral and topical drugs, visible light devices (and more recently, alexandrite and 
Nd:YAG lasers) can be applied for reduction of redness and flushing.43 Often 
multiple treatments are required, and treatment packages must be repeated 
every 6 to 12 months. Some patients are particularly resistant to treatment, 
and antihistamines and topical vasoconstrictive agents must be added to the 
therapeutic “soup.”

Laser  removal  or  lightening  of  true  nevocellular  nevi  is  controversial. 
However, as long as the nevus shows benign features and the patient is edu-
cated regarding the relative risks, certain nevi may be safely removed. Among 
nevi  most  often  considered  for  removal  are  small  junctional  nevi  in  darker 
patients. They can be lightened by a series of Q-switched or long-pulsed alex-
andrite  lasers  or,  alternatively,  a  series  of  a  switched  YAG  lasers.  Another 

317

318

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

possibility  is  ablation  by  the  CO2  or  erbium  YAG  laser,  where  one  can  use 
magnification  to  ablate  the  nevus  layer  by  layer  with  multiple  passes.  The 
advantage over shave excision is the precision of removal because the opera-
tor is not committed to one depth across the entire lesion. Normally we use a 
0.2- to 2-mm spot size, and with magnifying loops, we very carefully ablate 
the  lesion  until  a  very  slight  depression  is  observed.  We  have  also  used  the 
Surgitron (Ellman International, Hicksville, NY) with a fine loop or needle to 
achieve excellent cosmetic results. If the patient is mainly concerned regard-
ing the color of the nevus versus its exophytic nature, we recommend a formal 
elliptical excision or no treatment at all.

Vitiligo has been treated with the excimer laser. As a form of targeted ultra-
violet therapy, the laser at 308 nm is near the peak action spectrum for repig-
mentation potential with a relatively lower risk for erythema than 290 nm. We 
have found the laser helpful for pigment restoration in facial skin (about 80% 
repigmentation after 20 to 30 treatments delivered twice a week). Off-the- face 
treatments  have  proved  to  be  more  resistant;  however,  after  30  to  50  treat-
ments, we have observed considerable repigmentation of the knees, neck, and 
hands in some patients.

Devising  a  laser  strategy  for  a  particular  patient  should  be  based  on  a 
good  understanding  of  laser  tissue  interactions  and  wound  healing.  With 
experience,  a  logical  approach  can  be  designed  that  accommodates  the 
recovery constraints of the patient. The complementary nature of neurotox-
ins and fillers to the laser arsenal is a major advance in skin rejuvenation. In 
most cases, an individualized approach is best for both provider and patient. 
Undertreating the patient is always better than overtreating, and operator 
and patient safety should take precedence over other concerns for the suc-
cessful laser surgeon.

REFERENCES

  1.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Microvasculature can be selectively damaged using dye 
lasers: a basic theory and experimental evidence in human skin. Lasers Surg Med. 
1981;1(3):263–276.

  2.  Apfelberg DB, Maser MR, Lash H, Rivers J. The argon laser for cutaneous lesions. 

JAMA. 1981;245(20):2073–2075.

  3.  Greenwald J, Rosen S, Anderson RR, et al. Comparative histological studies of the 
tunable dye (at 577 nm) laser and argon laser: the specific vascular effects of the dye 
laser. J Invest Dermatol. 1981;77(3):305–310.

  4.  Anderson RR, Jaenicke KF, Parrish JA. Mechanisms of selective vascular changes 

caused by dye lasers. Lasers Surg Med. 1983;3(3):211–215.

  5.  Anderson RR, Parrish JA. Selective photothermolysis: precise microsurgery by selec-

tive absorption of pulsed radiation. Science. 1983;220(4596):524–527.

  6.  Anderson RR. Carbon dioxide lasers: a broader perspective. Arch Dermatol. 1987; 

123(5):566–567.

  7.  Eremia S, Li CY. Treatment of face veins with a cryogen spray variable pulse width 
1064  nm  Nd:YAG  laser:  a  prospective  study  of  17  patients  [comment].  Dermatol  
Surg. 2002;28(3):244–247.

  8.  Lai SW, Goldman MP. Treatment of facial reticular veins with dynamically cooled, 
variable spot-sized 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2007;6(1):6–8.

319

REFERENCES

  9.  Chang CJ, Nelson JS. Cryogen spray cooling and higher fluence pulsed dye laser 
treatment improve port-wine stain clearance while minimizing epidermal dam-
age. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(10):767–772.

  10.  Trafeli JP, Kwan JM, Meehan KJ, et al. Use of a long-pulse alexandrite laser in the 
treatment of superficial pigmented lesions. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(12):1477–1482.
  11.  Goldust  M,  Mohebbipour  A,  Mirmohammadi  R.  Treatment  of  idiopathic  guttate 
hypomelanosis with fractional carbon dioxide lasers. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2012; May 8 
[Epub ahead of print].

  12.  Kim  SK,  Park  JY,  Hann  SK,  et  al.  Hypopigmented  keratosis:  is  it  a  hyperkeratotic 
variant of idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis? Clin Exp Dermatol. 2012; Apr 20 [Epub 
ahead of print].

  13.  Kono T, Manstein D, Chan HH, et al. Q-switched ruby versus long-pulsed dye laser 
delivered  with  compression  for  treatment  of  facial  lentigines  in  Asians.  Lasers  Surg 
Med. 2006;38(2):94–97.

  14.  Ross EV, Ladin Z, Kreindel M, Dierickx C. Theoretical considerations in laser hair 

removal. Dermatol Clin. 1999;17(2):333–355, viii.

  15.  Kolinko V, Littler CM. Mathematical modeling for the prediction and optimization 

of laser hair removal. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;26(2):164–176.

  16.  Kolinko VG, Littler CM, Cole A. Influence of the anagen:telogen ratio on Q-switched 

Nd:YAG laser hair removal efficacy. Lasers Surg Med. 2000;26(1):33–40.

  17.  Bernstein EF, Basilavecchio L, Plugis J. Bilateral axilla hair removal comparing a single 
wavelength alexandrite laser with combined multiplexed alexandrite and Nd:YAG laser 
treatment from a single laser platform. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11(2):185–190.
  18.  Nilforoushzadeh MA, Naieni FF, Siadat AH, Rad L. Comparison between sequen-
tional treatment with diode and alexandrite lasers versus alexandrite laser alone in 
the treatment of hirsutism. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10(11):1255–1259.

  19.  Desai  S,  Mahmoud  BH,  Bhatia  AC,  Hamzavi  IH.  Paradoxical  hypertrichosis  after 

laser therapy: a review. Dermatol Surg. 2010;36(3):291–298.

  20.  Hamzavi I, Tan E, Shapiro J, Lui H. A randomized bilateral vehicle-controlled study 
of eflornithine cream combined with laser treatment versus laser treatment alone for 
facial hirsutism in women. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;57(1):54–59.

  21.  Smith SR, Piacquadio DJ, Beger B, Littler C. Eflornithine cream combined with laser 
therapy in the management of unwanted facial hair growth in women: a randomized 
trial. Dermatol Surg. 2006;32(10):1237–1243.

  22.  Ragland  HP,  McBurney  E.  Complications  of  resurfacing.  Semin  Cutan  Med  Surg. 

1996;15(3):200–207.

  23.  Apfelberg DB. Side effects, sequelae, and complications of carbon dioxide laser resur-

facing. Aesthet Surg J. 1997;17(6):365–372.

  24.  Lask G, Lee PK, Seyfzadeh M, et al. Nonablative laser treatment of facial rhytides. In: 
Anderson RR, ed. Lasers in Surgery: Advanced Characterization, Therapeutics, and 
Systems VII. Vol. 2970. San Jose, CA: Society of Photo-Instrumentation Engineers; 
1997:338–349.

  25.  Kopera D, Smolle J, Kaddu S, Kerl H. Nonablative laser treatment of wrinkles: meeting 
the objective? Assessment by 25 dermatologists. Br J Dermatol. 2004;150(5): 936–939.
  26.  Rahman Z, Alam M, Dover JS. Fractional laser treatment for pigmentation and tex-

ture improvement. Skin Ther Lett. 2006;11(9):7–11.

  27.  Weiss RA, Gold M, Bene N, et al. Prospective clinical evaluation of 1440-nm laser 
delivered by microarray for treatment of photoaging and scars. J Drugs Dermatol. 
2006;5(8):740–744.

  28.  Tierney EP, Kouba DJ, Hanke CW. Review of fractional photothermolysis: treatment 

indications and efficacy. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(10):1445–1461.

  29.  Trelles MA, Mordon S, Velez M, et al. Results of fractional ablative facial skin resur-
facing with the erbium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet laser 1 week and 2 months after 
one single treatment in 30 patients. Lasers Med Sci. 2009;24(2):186–194.

320

  30.  Paasch  U,  Haedersdal  M.  Laser  systems  for  ablative  fractional  resurfacing.  Expert 

LASER AND ENERGY 
SOURCES IN SKIN HEALTH 
AND REJUVENATION

Rev Med Devices. 2011;8(1):67–83.

  31.  Zachary CB, Gustavsson M. TRASER: total reflection amplification of spontaneous 

emission of radiation. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(4):e35899.

  32.  Dolotov LE, Sinichkin YP, Tuchin VV, et al. Design and evaluation of a novel por-

table erythema-melanin-meter. Lasers Surg Med. 2004;34(2):127–135.

  33.  Sardana  K,  Chugh  S,  Garg  VK.  Which  therapy  works  for  melasma  in  pigmented 
skin: lasers, peels, or triple combination creams? Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 
2013;79(3):420–422.

  34.  Brightman L, Geronemus R. Commentary: treatment of syringoma using an ablative 
10,600-nm carbon dioxide fractional laser. Dermatol Surg. 2011;37(4):439–440.
  35.  Cho SB, Kim HJ, Noh S, et al. Treatment of syringoma using an ablative 10,600-nm 
carbon dioxide fractional laser: a prospective analysis of 35 patients. Dermatol Surg. 
2011;37(4):433–438.

  36.  Akita H, Takasu E, Washimi Y, et al. Syringoma of the face treated with fractional 

photothermolysis. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2009;11(4):216–219.

  37.  Xu TH, Yang ZH, Li YH, et al. Treatment of infraorbital dark circles using a low-

fluence Q-switched 1,064-nm laser. Dermatol Surg. 2011;37(6):797–803.

  38.  Roh  MR,  Chung  KY.  Infraorbital  dark  circles:  definition,  causes,  and  treatment 

options. Dermatol Surg. 2009;35(8):1163–1171.

  39.  Goodman  GJ.  Treating  scars:  addressing  surface,  volume,  and  movement  to 
expedite  optimal  results.  Part  2:  more-severe  grades  of  scarring.  Dermatol  Surg. 
2012;38(8):1310–1321.

  40.  Goodman GJ. Treating scars: addressing surface, volume, and movement to optimize 
results: part 1. Mild grades of scarring. Dermatol Surg. 2012;38(8):1302–1309.
  41.  Sakamoto FH, Torezan L, Anderson RR. Photodynamic therapy for acne vulgaris: a 
critical review from basics to clinical practice: part II. Understanding parameters for 
acne treatment with photodynamic therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;63(2):195–
211; quiz 211–192.

  42.  Sakamoto FH, Lopes JD, Anderson RR. Photodynamic therapy for acne vulgaris: a 
critical review from basics to clinical practice: part I. Acne vulgaris: when and why 
consider  photodynamic  therapy?  J  Am  Acad  Dermatol.  2010;63(2):183-193;  quiz 
193–184.

  43.  Neuhaus  IM,  Zane  LT,  Tope  WD.  Comparative  efficacy  of  nonpurpuragenic  pulsed 
dye laser and intense pulsed light for erythematotelangiectatic rosacea. Dermatol Surg. 
2009;35(6):920–928.

NUTRACEUTICALS 
AND THEIR 
ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH 
RESTORATION

Kevin Nagengast, PharmD

CHAPTER 

13

NUTRACEUTICALS

The  fact  that  the  skin  is  the  least  nutrient  supplied  yet  largest  organ  of  the 
body compels us to choose nutraceuticals that are well formulated to realize 
optimal  results  in  skin  health.  Most  components  essential  for  healthy  skin 
are first used elsewhere in the body, as determined by higher priority, such as, 
the brain, liver, and kidneys. Because the skin receives what is left, it is nec-
essary to supplement the essential nutrients in the highest of quality, in the 
correct form, carried in an appropriate vehicle, and delivered with sufficient 
quantity. With many complex interactions possible within and between nutri-
tional supplements, the perfect skin nutraceutical regimen demands a deeper 
understanding of the intricacies of each essential component. As we approach 
each nutraceutical with a pragmatic and scientific eye, a review of the current 
literature is provided. Attention to the details as we review the future of skin 
health from the inside out is key to achieving total skin health.

Without  a  clearly  developed  methodology  for  carrying  botanicals,  vita-
mins,  and  minerals  across  the  skin’s  barrier,  there  can  be  minimal  absorp-
tion and effectiveness achieved. Correctly supplementing a standard diet with 
essential  elements  for  healthy  skin  can  dramatically  improve  the  appear-
ance, elasticity, fullness, and glow of the skin. By addressing each category of 
supplementation, this section will cover an array of mechanisms to promote 
positive skin outcomes. The survey of nutraceuticals, as we shall call them, 
will detail antioxidants, vitamins, cofactors, enzymes, amino acids, and the 
related botanicals that contain them. Through the correct use of nutraceuti-
cals, a universal approach to the treatment of skin conditions from the inside 

322

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

out, as an adjunct and option for the prescriber, can achieve optimal results. 
Nutraceuticals are an excellent approach to achieving skin health in addition 
to the use of topical creams when a patient, for example, may not be a can-
didate for procedures such as peels, lasers, or surgery because of disease or a 
compromised immune system.

There are several modalities and guidelines for using oral supplements, such 
as vitamin C for colds and vitamin D for supplementing lack of exposure to the 
sun; however, there are limited data on using nutraceuticals to aid in achieving 
skin health. An overview of the current data will assist the practitioner in select-
ing the proper nutraceuticals for skin health.

CLINICAL STUDIES AND RESEARCH

It is common practice for clinical studies to evaluate outcomes based on the 
patient’s  subjective  feedback  and  an  arbitrary  scoring  system.  The  advent  of 
newer  technology  provides  tools  for  the  practitioner  to  document  the  effec-
tiveness of oral supplementation beyond what can be seen by the naked eye. 
Such  devices  use  processors  to  analyze  the  surface  of  the  skin  for  discolor-
ation,  hydration,  ultraviolet  radiation  (UVR)  damage,  wrinkles,  and  more. 
Objectively  assessing  skin  rejuvenation  by  emphasizing  clinical,  functional, 
and histological aspects will lead to more accurate evaluations. Although tech-
nology  has  allowed  for  advances  in  clinical  trials  to  measure  the  benefits  of 
supplementing with nutraceuticals, there are few trials using these technolo-
gies for practitioners to evaluate.

MARKET

According to Consumer Reports, 50% of adults in the United States currently 
use nutraceuticals. The market for skin health supplements is rapidly expand-
ing, creating an opportunity for dermatologists and skin care professionals to 
add a new tool in the fight against aging. Selecting the correct ingredients can 
be a cumbersome task of navigating through the limited literature available 
on ingredients classified as “cosmetic.” Because these supplements are com-
plementary,  as  opposed  to  a  replacement  to  current  prescription  and  other 
therapeutic topical regimens, they require patient education and expertise to 
create a unique oral supplementation protocol to complete the patient’s com-
prehensive maintenance program.

The role of nutraceuticals in skin health is to supplement the current treat-
ments  and  enhance  patient  outcomes  where  traditional  therapies  fall  short. 
Most patients are willing to add to their skin care routine if additional benefits 
and  correction  can  be  achieved.  Although  taking  pills  orally  is  usually  not 
a patient’s first choice, oral supplementation has the unique advantage over 
topical application of benefiting the whole body. The added benefits of nutra-
ceuticals include the perception of luxury, natural sourcing, being less inva-
sive than procedures, and achieving overall skin health at a faster rate than 
with other therapies alone. The goals of nutraceuticals for skin health are 1) 
to prevent and protect the skin from harmful UVR and other environmental 

and internal stressors; 2) to rejuvenate skin, enhance results, and improve its 
appearance; 3) to minimize side effects and maximize efficacy; and 4) to cre-
ate an easy application for compliance to meet the patient needs (Table 13.1).

323

NUTRACEUTICALS

DOWNSIDE OF NUTRACEUTICALS

Unlike  pharmaceutical-grade  products,  nutraceuticals  tend  to  lack  high-
quality studies because of the high cost and time required of clinical trials. 
Products available in the marketplace, including chain stores and other health-
related  outlets,  provide  numerous  products  with  little  to  no  information  to 
guide the patient to an appropriate, safe, and effective supplement. Regulatory 
agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) limit claims 
made about a nutraceutical product: the product cannot be advertised as hav-
ing the ability to treat, cure, diagnose, or prevent a disease. However, nutra-
ceuticals  may  state  their  effectiveness  with  phrases  such  as  “improves  the 
appearance of wrinkles” or “enhances skin glow” rather than making a spe-
cific medical claim related to disease or skin function.

TESTING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
NUTRACEUTICALS

Manufacturers of nutraceuticals are not required to submit detailed infor-
mation  including  chemistry,  mechanism  of  action,  pharmacokinetics, 
toxicity,  and  interactions  to  the  FDA.  The  German  Commission  E  is  one 
source available to evaluate the clinical evidence behind the reasonable use 
of nutraceuticals. However, much of the available nutraceutical detailing is 
lacking  for  currently  popularized  nutraceuticals  for  skin  health.  Further, 
many formulations use “cocktails” or products with numerous ingredients, 
making a review of all of the active ingredients complicated and tedious. The 
common practice of “more ingredients are better” can lead patients to dupli-
cating ingredients when more than one combination nutraceutical product 
is used. It is well documented that products such as antioxidants and skin-
lightening products are more effective with multiple ingredients, providing 
a variety of mechanisms of action. Unfortunately, many companies analyze 

Table 13.1  Goals and Benefits of Nutraceuticals

Goals

Benefits

To prevent and protect the skin from harmful 
ultraviolet rays and other environmental and 
internal stressors
To rejuvenate the skin, enhance results, and 
improve the appearance of damaged skin
To minimize side effects and maximize 
efficacy
To create an easy application for compliance 
to meet the patient needs

Less invasive than procedures
The perception of luxury
Natural sourcing
Faster rate of achieved skin health 
than with topical creams alone

324

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

their safety based on the safety profile of individual ingredients rather than 
the final formulation. This leaves room for interactions within the formula-
tion, generating possible side effects and decreased potency.

The  ideal  oral  skin  health  supplement  creates  an  immediate  result,  has  a 
low  side-effect  profile,  is  applicable  to  a  variety  of  skin  conditions,  and  has 
long-lasting preventative benefits. Such a product does not currently exist in the 
nutraceutical marketplace.

MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF ANTIOXIDANTS

Several mechanisms of action are required to address the various internal and 
external stresses created by our environment. The first line of defense is cre-
ating a protective barrier to UVR by either deflection or the transfer of UV 
energy into heat. As solar UVR and our body’s own metabolic pathways create 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), constantly depleting our available antioxidants, 
supplementation becomes essential to replenish and restore our body’s supply 
of antioxidants. For the sake of simplicity, all oxidative agents and oxidative 
stress will be referred to as ROS. Supplementation of antioxidants can result 
in 1) protecting and promoting collagen by stimulating production and inhib-
iting matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), which breaks down collagen; 2) sup-
porting the skin’s structural integrity; 3) strengthening the barrier function; 
4) reducing the transepidermal water loss (TEWL); 5) increasing cell turnover; 
and 6) upregulating DNA repair enzymes.

ANTIOXIDANTS

The  most  common  nutraceuticals  promoting  skin  health  are  antioxidants. 
Benefits include protection from oxidative and UVR damage, which is respon-
sible for accelerating the aging process and DNA damage. Current thinking 
in skin health promotes the application of multiple antioxidants, addressing 
protection through multiple mechanisms of action.

Environmental  stressors,  including  UVR,  industrial  pollutants,  cigarette 
smoke, and chemical oxidants, and internal stressors, including normal meta-
bolic reactions, create destructive ROS. The supplementation of bioactive anti-
oxidants is aimed at replenishing the endogenous antioxidant pool, reducing 
pro-inflammatory  mediators,  and  preventing  oxidative  chain  reactions  and 
DNA damage.

Some DNA damage can be prevented by antioxidants because they effec-
tively arrest ROS activity, preventing the chain reaction of oxidation that can 
lead to misreading and a change in the DNA sequence referred to as a mutation. 
The  direct  absorption  of  UVR  causing  DNA  cross-linking  is  not  prevented 
by antioxidants because free radicals are not involved in this process. These 
reactions  are  extremely  dangerous,  leading  to  mutations  that  are  linked  to 
cancers, including squamous and basal cell carcinomas. To lessen the chances 
of these dangerous DNA mutations, patients can take advantage of physical 
blockers,  including  sunscreens,  protective  clothing,  and  visors.  DNA  repair 

Box 13.1

Physical sunblocks, together with antioxidants, can provide ultraviolet 
radiation protection. 

325

ANTIOXIDANTS

requires multiple steps, including specific repair enzymes to replace damaged, 
cross-linked sites. The damage to DNA strands can ultimately lead to 1) new 
genes; 2) the release of stress signals, including tumor necrosis factor-α and 
interleukins; and 3) the upregulation of MMP-1 in fibroblasts that will result 
in collagen degradation. Through multiple mechanisms, the chronic exposure 
to UVR and toxins will physically and superficially result in photodamaged, 
uneven, aged skin. Antioxidants can effectively support skin health, resulting 
in brighter, healthier, and more even-looking skin.

The requirements for UVR protection are fulfilled by using multiple mech-
anisms of action, including absorption or reflection with physical sunblocks 
and antioxidants such as vitamin C, vitamin E, beta-carotene, and selenium 
to eliminate ROS (Box 13.1).

Plant  evolution  has  provided  for  multiple  mechanisms  to  protect  from 
damaging  solar  UVR  exposure.  Popular  botanicals  in  skin  health  contain 
hundreds  of  different  chemical  constituents,  many  possessing  antioxidant 
properties. The  main  categories  of  plant  active  components  having  antioxi-
dant  properties  for  oral  supplementation  are  polyphenols  and  carotenoids. 
Polyphenols  provide  plants  with  pigmentation  and  oxidative  protection. 
Carotenoids have a similar structure to vitamin A, protecting from UVR and 
ROS. There are more than 600 carotenoids identified, with 10% of these acting 
as precursors to vitamin A, often referred to as having provitamin A activity. 
Commonly used carotenoids include astaxanthin, lutein, lycopene, and zea-
xanthin. Popular polyphenols are ellagic acid from pomegranate, curcumin 
from turmeric, epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) from green tea, genistein in 
soybeans, and silymarin from marigolds.

CURCUMIN

Curcumin is the yellow-orange constituent of turmeric root. Categorized as 
a polyphenol antioxidant, it is commonly used as a spice, food coloring, and 
food preservative preventing discoloration from oxidation. Structurally simi-
lar to resveratrol, curcumin has anti-inflammatory activity and is believed to 
prevent the breakdown of ceramides, the major lipid in cell membranes sup-
porting the skin barrier.

ELLAGIC ACID

Ellagic acid is found in many fruits and vegetables, with the highest amount 
present  in  pomegranate  and  berries.  This  phytochemical  antioxidant  is 
unfortunately  poorly  absorbed,  rapidly  metabolized,  and  readily  eliminated 

326

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

by  the  body.  Benefits  include  skin  lightening  by  inhibiting  tyrosinase,  anti-
inflammatory activity, and protection from UVR-induced collagen degrada-
tion by blocking MMP.

EPIGALLOCATECHIN-3-GALLATE

EGCG is the main component of green tea and is also found in grape seeds 
and buckwheat to name a few. EGCG has shown promising applications in 
skin health with photoprotective properties, anti-inflammatory activity, and 
ability to stimulate keratinocyte proliferation. Black tea has lower amounts of 
EGCG than green tea because of the intense processing of the leaves.

GENISTEIN

Genistein, known as an isoflavone of the polyphenol family, is primarily iso-
lated  from  soybeans.  This  phytoestrogen  has  a  similar  structure  to  human 
estrogen but has weak estrogen and antiestrogen effects. Genistein benefits the 
skin by increasing skin thickness and decreasing facial wrinkling in women. 
Other  benefits  include  protection  from  UVR,  ROS,  lipid  peroxidation,  and 
increased collagen gene expression. Genistein is also used to reduce skin dis-
coloration, erythema, and inflammation.

LUTEIN

Lutein,  lycopene,  and  zeaxanthin  are  all  similarly  structured  carotenoid 
antioxidants. Classified as food coloring in the United States, they are often 
used for their bright yellow, orange, or red color. Lutein is well known for 
its use in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) for its ability to absorb 
blue light and prevent UVR damage. It is believed to have similar benefits 
as antioxidants for UVR absorption.

NIACINAMIDE

Niacinamide  is  converted  to  niacin  in  vivo  and  has  similar  effectiveness  to 
niacin, without causing skin flushing at high doses. Niacin and its derivatives 
are used for their anti-inflammatory benefits, encouraging skin turnover, and 
lightening  effect  on  the  skin.  Niacinamide  is  thought  to  contribute  to  skin 
lightening  by  inhibiting  the  transfer  of  melanosomes  from  melanocytes  to 
epidermal keratinocytes.

FRENCH MARITIME PINE BARK

French maritime pine bark of the species Pinus pinaster is a newer popular-
ized antioxidant capable of regenerating vitamins C and E to their reduced 

and active forms. Benefits include improvements in skin elasticity, hydration, 
and collagen synthesis.

327

ANTIOXIDANTS

SILYMARIN

Silymarin, commonly sourced from milk thistle, is an antioxidant of the poly-
phenol group employed to reduce inflammation, protect from UVR, and pro-
mote skin healing. Silymarin possesses anticancer attributes for the skin and 
other cancers.

UBIQUINONE

Ubiquinone,  or  ubidecarenone,  is  more  popularly  referred  to  as  coenzyme 
Q10 or simply CoQ10. As an antioxidant, CoQ10 is popularized for its benefits 
in heart failure patients by preventing lipid peroxidation. CoQ10 regenerates 
reduced  vitamin  E  and  is  regenerated  by  alpha-lipoic  acid.  Ubiquinone  has 
been shown to decrease collagen breakdown by decreasing collagenase, and it 
enhances healing after laser skin treatments.

ASCORBIC ACID

Ascorbic acid (L-ascorbic and ester-C forms of vitamin C) is a very effective 
antioxidant, second only to vitamin E in abundance within the skin. Vitamin 
C is used in numerous skin products with benefits including the reduction of 
wrinkles, decreased skin inflammation, reversal of damage from UVR expo-
sure, brightened skin, repair of damaged DNA, and stimulation of collagen 
and elastin synthesis.

VITAMIN E

Vitamin E is the primary antioxidant in the stratum corneum. Actively regener-
ated by alpha-lipoic acid, glutathione, and ubiquinone, vitamin E is effective at 
soothing dry skin, preventing UVR damage, and providing anti-inflammatory 
benefits. Continuous supplementation is required to keep levels elevated within 
the  skin.  Combining  vitamin  E  with  ascorbic  acid  has  been  shown  to  work 
 synergistically to decrease UVR-induced erythema.

GRAPE SEED EXTRACT

Grape seed extract possesses antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antihistaminic, 
and antimutagenic substances. Grape seed’s numerous beneficial ingredients 
include EGCG, alpha-lipoic acid, vitamin E, and oligomeric proanthocyani-
dins (OPCs) that stabilize collagen and elastin. Oral supplementation has been 

328

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

shown by one study to reduce the risk for squamous cell carcinoma, the sec-
ond most common skin cancer in the United States.

RESVERATROL

Resveratrol is found in high quantities in grape skin, pomegranate, and some 
berries.  Commonly  associated  with  the  benefits  of  the  Mediterranean  diet 
and the “French paradox” phenomenon, resveratrol is readily absorbed and 
rapidly metabolized. Resveratrol has been shown to inhibit tyrosinase and to 
have anti-inflammatory benefits and carcinopreventive properties.

BETA-CAROTENE

Beta-carotene is the most important and popularized provitamin A. Two vita-
min As are released upon cleaving beta-carotene, promoting benefits such as 
the growth, repair, regeneration, and differentiation of epithelial cells, includ-
ing cohesiveness, keratinization, and immunomodulation. Oral bioavailability 
of beta-carotene is low and dependent on the source, quantity, and fat content 
in the diet. Overconsumption of foods high in beta-carotene, including car-
rots, sweet potatoes, and pumpkins, and supplementation may cause carote-
nodermia, or orange skin, but is highly unlikely to cause hypervitaminosis A.

VITAMIN D

Vitamin D is essential to skin health, creating a dilemma between sun expo-
sure providing for synthesis of vitamin D, weighed against the sun damag-
ing  UVR-induced  aging  and  increased  cancer  risk.  The  recommendation 
for  employing  photoprotective  measures  may  compromise  vitamin  D  suffi-
ciency.  Nonetheless,  there  is  not  an  established  safe  level  of  UVR  exposure 
to provide for cutaneous vitamin D synthesis without increasing the risk for 
skin cancers. Vitamin D is fat soluble, stored in the liver and fat, and not a 
true  vitamin  because  it  is  produced  cutaneously  through  UVR.  Vitamin  D 
often refers to both vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) and vitamin D3 (cholecalcif-
erol) forms. Vitamins D2 and D3 are essentially equivalent because our bodies 
use them similarly, with the exception of vitamin D3 possibly having a higher 
bioavailability than vitamin D2 at higher doses. Although a precise dose and 
correlated vitamin D serum level have not been established for optimal skin 
health, the supplementation of vitamin D for most patients can safely be rec-
ommended at daily doses up to the upper limit (UL) of 4,000 IU.

Vitamin D Source
Vitamin  D  is  obtained  from  epidermal  photosynthesis,  through  dietary 
means, and from additional supplementation. The human body synthesizes 
vitamin D from provitamin D3 (7-dehydrocholesterol) through UVB irradia-
tion.  Dietary  sources  are  fatty  fish,  egg  yolks,  and  supplemented  products, 
including dairy, cereal, and orange juice. The highest amounts of vitamin D 
are found in fatty fish, especially swordfish, salmon, and tuna (Table 13.2).

329

ANTIOXIDANTS

Table 13.2  Dietary Sources of Vitamin D

Food

Swordfish, cooked (3 oz)

Salmon, cooked (3 oz)

Tuna, canned (3 oz)

Orange Juice, fortified (1 cup)

Milk (1 cup)

Egg (1 large)

Cereal, fortified (1 cup)

IU per Serving

566

447

154

137

115-124

41

40

Data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Website: 

www.ars.usda.gov.

Vitamin D Deficiencies
Vitamin D deficiency is linked to a number of diseases and conditions affecting 
the bones, gastrointestinal tract, heart, lungs, kidneys, and thyroid, including 
diabetes, cancer, and inflammatory conditions. Low vitamin D serum levels 
may be due to numerous reasons. A deficiency in UVB absorption and vita-
min D activation may be the result of high amounts of melanin in the skin, 
limited  effective  sun  exposure  because  of  climate  or  occupation,  and  older 
age, which is associated with less exposure and less efficient synthesis. UVB 
irradiation is also blocked by glass, and all but half will penetrate clouds and 
pollution. Sunscreens and clothing can also block UVB rays from reaching 
the  skin.  Strict  diets  including  vegan  and  lactose  avoidance  may  also  limit 
vitamin  D  intake  (Box  13.2).  Because  some  dietary  fat  is  required  for  vita-
min  D  absorption,  high-dose  oral  supplementation  or  intramuscular  injec-
tion  may  be  necessary  for  patients  with  fat  malabsorption,  including  those 
with gastric bypass or liver disease. Vitamin D is fat soluble and sequestered 
by  subcutaneous  fat,  so  obese  patients  may  have  low  serum  levels  owing  to 
limited release of vitamin D into circulation. Activation of vitamin D to its 
active form 1,25(OH)2D may be limited because of kidney dysfunction, steroid 
therapy, or inflammatory disease.

Vitamin D Toxicity
The  risk  for  toxicity  is  highly  unlikely  from  excessive  UVR  exposure  or  a 
diet high in vitamin D foods and is usually due to supplementing vitamin D 
above the UL of 4,000 IU to 10,000 IU or more daily. One study found vita-
min D supplementation of 5,000 IU/day gave rise to serum 25(OH)D levels of 
100 to 150 nmol/L. High 25(OH)D levels are considered above 125 nmol/L, 
and  toxic  levels  are  suggested  to  be  above  500  nmol/L.  Symptoms  of  toxic-
ity include arrhythmias, polyuria, and weight loss. As calcium levels increase 

Box 13.2

Strict diets, fat malabsorption, and obesity can decrease serum vitamin 
D levels.

330

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

with vitamin D levels, kidney stones and calcification of vascular and soft tis-
sue, including the heart, kidneys and intestine, can occur.

Vitamin D Monitoring Levels
Vitamin D exposure is measured through serum levels of the vitamin D forms 
25(OH)D and the bioactive form 1,25(OH)2D (Box 13.3). 25(OH)D has a long 
half-life of 15 days and is recognized as the best biomarker for exposure to 
vitamin D. In contrast, the 1,25(OH)2D levels are highly variable with a half-
life of less than a day and are affected by changing levels of serum parathyroid 
hormone  (PTH),  calcium,  and  phosphorus.  1,25(OH)2D  levels  are  only  sig-
nificant when vitamin D deficiency is severe. A serum vitamin 25(OH)D level 
for optimal skin health has yet to be agreed on, although monitoring may be 
useful to identify patients at risk with potentially low levels and those with 
high and possibly toxic levels.

Vitamin D Supplementation
The  recommended  dietary  allowances  (RDA)  for  adults  is  600  IU/day  for 
those aged 70 years and younger and 800 IU/day for those older than 70 years 
(Box 13.4). The RDA recommendations are suspected to be too low and do not 
take into account vitamin D that is synthesized from UVR. Thirty-seven per-
cent of the U.S. population take a daily supplement containing vitamin D. The 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2005 to 
2006 showed a mean 25(OH)D level above 50 nmol/L, consistent with intake 
of  vitamin  D  from  diet  and  supplements  equivalent  to  the  RDA  amounts. 
Supplementation  of  vitamin  D  has  a  nonlinear  relationship  with  25(OH)D 
levels.  Estimates  state  that  with  doses  less  than  600  IU/day,  serum  25(OH)
D levels will increase 2.3 nmol/L for every 40 IU supplemented daily. Doses 
greater than 1,000 IU/day are estimated to increase serum 25(OH)D levels by 
1 nmol/L for every 40 IU supplemented per day.

Box 13.3

Vitamin D Monitoring Levels

Low level and at risk: <30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL)

■■ Low bone mineral deposits: osteomalacia in adults, rickets in children
■■ Secondary hyperparathyroidism

Potentially at risk for inadequacy: 30-50 nmol/L (12-20 ng/mL)

■■ Osteoporosis through reduced calcium absorption

Adequate levels: ≥50 nmol/L (≥20 ng/mL)
High levels: >125 to 150 nmol/L

■■ Long-term effects not yet defined

Toxic: >500 nmol/L (>200 ng/mL)

Note: 1 nmol = 0.4 ng/mL.

Box 13.4

Recommended Dietary Allowances for Vitamin D*

■■ For 1-70 years old: 600 IU/day (15 μg/day)
■■ > 70 years old 800 IU/day (20 μg/day)

*Note: 1 μg = 40 IU.

331

ANTIOXIDANTS

The Ultraviolet Radiation Exposure Quandary
The benefits of sun exposure are boasted to increase vitality and release endor-
phins,  raising  vitamin  D  levels,  stimulating  epidermal  melanization,  and 
increasing the tumor suppressor “guardian of the genome” p53 in the skin. 
The accumulation of p53 in the skin can interrupt the cell cycle of damaged 
cells to allow for the upregulation of DNA repair and stimulate apoptosis if 
irreparably damaged. The quandary of sun exposure versus protection lies in 
determining a “safe” amount of UVR, allowing for the benefits without the 
negative consequences. UVR and sun exposure are described as the “complete 
carcinogen” because they are indirectly and directly mutagenic, with nonspe-
cific damage leading to the initiation and promotion of tumors. UVR damage 
also attributes to skin pigmentation changes, atrophy, wrinkling, epidermal 
hyperplasia, and cell death.

Skin Cancer
The prevalence of skin cancer is on the rise and is currently the most common 
cancer, with an estimated 1.5 million cases per year in the United States. UVR 
exposure is the major cause of the three most common skin cancers: basal cell 
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma. Skin cancers 
are also responsible for more than half of all malignancies. Those at highest 
risk  are  individuals  genetically  predisposed  to  UVR  sensitivity,  individuals 
with  fair  skin,  and  immune-compromised  patients.  Surgical  resection  can 
often leave imperfections such as scars and is not a solution to skin health. 
UVR protection and vitamin D supplementation are the essential preventative 
steps a person can take to lower their risk for skin cancer.

Vitamin D and Skin Cancer Studies
Whereas many antioxidants have been shown to decrease DNA damage from 
ROS, vitamin D is unique in its ability to not only lessen DNA damage but 
also increase DNA repair of both oxidative damage and dimmer formation. 
However, in one study, a positive correlation between serum 25(OH)D levels 
and basal cell carcinoma has created an uncertainty of their interconnection. 
The same UVR that damages DNA and increases the risk for epidermal malig-
nancy is also responsible for vitamin D synthesis. Vitamin D and vitamin D 
receptors (VDRs) play an important role in protecting skin from cancer for-
mation by controlling keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation, as well as 
enhanced cell survival. The question arises of whether the increased survival 
of UVR-induced DNA-damaged cells could lead to increased risk for cancer. 

332

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Cells lacking VDR in mice exposed to UVR were predisposed to epidermal 
tumor formation, specifically basal cell carcinoma. This study speculates that 
VDR  limits  tumor  formation  and  promotes  DNA  repair.  Topically  applied 
1,25(OH)2D protects from UVR-induced photodamage, increases DNA repair 
of dimmer formations, increases cell survival, and increases p53 expression. 
Topically applied vitamin D also regulates VDR proliferation, differentiation, 
and signaling. Vitamin D facilitates DNA repair following UVR exposure by 
increasing  p53  in  keratinocytes  and  melanocytes  and  increasing  nucleotide 
excision repair enzymes.

Vitamin D Conclusion
Because  vitamin  D  is  available  in  very  few  foods,  oral  supplementation 
remains advisable for most patients. Without a safe level of UVR exposure 
established  to  adequately  synthesize  vitamin  D,  the  recommendation  for 
photoprotection,  especially  for  fair-skinned  individuals,  necessitates  our 
continued advocacy. Vitamin D has protective effects against carcinogenic 
actions of UVR by preventing UVR-induced cell death and DNA damage, 
increasing  the  rate  of  DNA  repair,  inhibiting  UVR-induced  immunosup-
pression, and upregulating endogenous antioxidants. For most patients, it is 
recommended to increase a diet with foods rich in vitamin D and to incor-
porate safe supplementation (Box 13.5).

GLUTATHIONE

Glutathione is arguably the most important antioxidant in the body and has 
the greatest potential for being beneficial in skin health. Glutathione within 
the skin can regenerate other antioxidants, protect from UVR-induced ROS, 
detoxify, and provide skin-lightening benefits.

Maintaining generous quantities of glutathione throughout the body and 
skin is essential for the management and maintenance of optimal skin health. 
Ubiquitous  throughout  the  body,  including  the  skin,  glutathione  is  known 
as the master antioxidant, life extender, detoxifier, and mother of all antioxi-
dants. It is cited in more than 100,000 scientific articles, providing insight into 
its significance as an essential component to life as the most vital intracellular 
and extracellular antioxidant.

Glutathione  is  widely  known  for  its  detoxification  in  the  liver  of  many 
harmful compounds, including medications, carcinogens, and other toxins. 
Throughout the body, glutathione also 1) protects cells from ROS damage, 2) 

Box 13.5

Vitamin D Chart

7-dehydrocholesterol (pre−vitamin D3) → UVR (UVB) → vitamin D3 → 
liver (25-hydroxylase) → 25(OH)D (calcidiol) → kidney (1α-hydroxylase) 
→ 1,25(OH)2D (calcitriol) (active form)

ENZYMES AND COFACTORS

333

acts as a cofactor for the activation and regulation of numerous enzymes, 3) 
complements the immune system, 4) is an effective amino acid transporter, 
and 5) is involved in DNA, protein, and prostaglandin synthesis. Glutathione 
is also used as a whitening agent because it inhibits tyrosinase activity. The 
lack of glutathione is associated with poorer health and a weaker immune 
system.  Low  glutathione  levels  are  also  associated  with  elevated  oxidative 
stress, aging, and many diseases.

Bioavailability
Glutathione is a small protein readily digested when consumed orally without 
appropriate  protection  from  digestive  enzymes.  For  glutathione  to  reach  its 
target in the skin, it first must survive the gastrointestinal tract, be absorbed 
across  the  intestinal  barrier,  remain  active  through  first-pass  metabolism 
by  the  liver,  and  continue  on  through  the  circulation  to  reach  the  skin. 
Unfortunately, weak cellular absorption is observed owing to its large struc-
ture and lack of sufficient transport mechanisms.

Supplementation
To  enhance  the  benefits  of  glutathione,  multiple  mechanisms  are  necessary 
to maintain elevated levels in the body, including providing sufficient essen-
tial precursors, cofactors, regenerators, and lifestyle modifications such as diet 
and exercise.

Glutathione concentrations are increased when essential precursors, in par-
ticular cysteine-containing compounds such as N-acetylcysteine and cystine, 
are ingested. Folate, selenium, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 are also essential 
cofactors required for the production and regeneration of glutathione. Alpha-
lipoic acid and vitamins C and E can also regenerate oxidized glutathione. To 
effectively increase levels, measures must be taken to decrease various stress 
conditions that deplete glutathione. Supplementing the diet with dietary gly-
cine,  silymarin,  and  sulfur-rich  foods,  such  as  garlic,  onions,  broccoli,  and 
kale, is also beneficial. Studies suggest that regular exercise may also improve 
glutathione levels.

ENZYMES AND COFACTORS

SELENIUM

Selenium is an essential trace element, acting through enzymes as an antioxi-
dant, providing UVR protection, and stimulating elastin formation. Further 
studies are necessary to evaluate selenium’s potential and appropriate dose for 
tumor suppression and skin health.

ALPHA-LIPOIC ACID

Alpha-lipoic  acid  supplementation  benefits  include  antioxidant  proper-
ties,  chelation  of  heavy  metals,  and  possible  anti-inflammatory  benefits. 

334

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

Alpha-lipoic  acid  is  only  50%  absorbed  orally,  has  a  short  half-life,  and  is 
quickly  reduced  to  dihydrolipoic  acid  (DHLA).  As  an  active  metabolite, 
DHLA  is  capable  of  regenerating  the  antioxidants  glutathione,  vitamin  C, 
vitamin  E,  and  ubiquinone.  Alpha-lipoic  acid’s  application  in  skin  health 
includes antioxidant properties, increased collagen synthesis, and lightening 
dyspigmentation.

ZINC

Calamine, a natural topical containing the active ingredient zinc oxide, has 
been in use for centuries to sooth inflammation. Zinc in its ionic form (Zn2+) 
has important attributes to skin health not only for its ability to reduce irri-
tation  but  also  for  its  ability  to  absorb  and  reflect  UVR  and  to  accelerate 
wound healing through re-epithelialization and improved elasticity, as well 
as its anti-inflammatory properties. Numerous enzymes require zinc for activ-
ity, including those necessary for the synthesis of the retinol-binding  protein 
and the vitamin A transport protein. Without adequate zinc, symptoms of 
vitamin A deficiency, including severe dermatitis, can appear, regardless of 
the presence of vitamin A.

The RDA of zinc is 15 mg/day for adults. Oral consumption of zinc, although 
established in wound healing, requires further research in skin health. As a 
natural sun block, zinc taken orally can absorb and reflect radiation within 
the skin, potentially generating free radicals within the dermis, eliciting an 
inflammatory response. Despite the rarity of a deficiency, zinc’s importance as 
a cofactor necessitates our attention and encouragement for patients to receive 
an adequate intake for healthy skin.

AMINO ACIDS AND PEPTIDE 
SUPPLEMENTS

PEPTIDES

Peptides  are  amino  acid  chains  providing  many  functions,  including  cel-
lular regulation and communication between cells. Peptides also affect neu-
rotransmitter release, act as carriers for cofactors, and are involved in many 
complex enzymatic steps in the skin, including the production of collagen. 
Long  peptides  with  a  large  molecular  size  can  create  an  obstacle  to  effec-
tively penetrating the skin for topical application, often requiring a sophis-
ticated carrier system to provide sufficient quantities for therapeutic results. 
Smaller peptides containing only a few amino acids are much more likely 
to  traverse  the  skin  barrier  than  larger,  complex  peptides  known  as  pro-
teins. Oral supplements of peptides are unlikely to bestow benefits in their 
intact form because they are readily digested by proteases on oral ingestion, 
releasing  their  individual  amino  acid  components  for  absorption.  Amino 

335

AMINO ACIDS AND PEPTIDE 
SUPPLEMENTS

acid and protein supplements are frequently consumed in weight-loss and 
muscle-building  nutritional  regimens,  replenishing  the  essential  building 
blocks for protein and enzyme synthesis, and possibly providing other ben-
efits,  including  increased  energy,  a  lean  body,  and  muscle  support.  A  few 
proposed  oral  supplements  include  collagen,  elastin,  and  spirulina,  which 
may  provide  benefits  in  skin  health  as  protein  and  ultimately  amino  acid 
supplements.

Collagen plays an integral role in providing strength and flexibility to the 
skin as the most abundant and significant component of connective tissues. 
Known as collagen I in the skin, it is created largely by fibroblast, mainly 
of the amino acids proline, glycine, and alanine. Identified as a skin con-
stituent  that  becomes  more  rigid  and  declines  in  functioning  with  aging, 
optimizing collagen’s vigor is often a target for skin rejuvenation therapies. 
By breaking down the collagen to what is commonly referred to as hydro-
lyzed collagen, an increase in the  absorption of the  essential amino acids 
is provided.

Elastin is the elastic polypeptide in connective tissue providing the ability 
of skin to stretch and return to its original shape. Because oral supplementa-
tion of elastin is likely to be broken down before reaching the skin, benefits are 
conceivably due to providing essential amino acids.

Spirulina,  a  blue-green  algae,  is  an  ancient  food  that  contains  all  of  the 
essential amino acids, as well as antioxidants and vitamins. Spirulina is 60% 
protein by weight, making it a great oral protein supplement option for skin 
health.

Although  supplemented  peptides  are  likely  to  be  broken  down  to  their 
essential amino acids, the pendulum can be swayed to lean toward higher use 
of these amino acids through greater availability. More research is required, 
including enhanced technologies for providing the skin with these essential 
amino acids and peptides for oral consumption.

GROWTH FACTORS

Numerous growth factors are involved in complex and synergistic combina-
tions to stimulate collagen, elastin, and glycosaminoglycans. They are also 
involved  in  regulating  epithelial  proliferation,  differentiation,  and  other 
cellular  functions.  Transforming  growth  factor-α  is  involved  in  the  regu-
lation  of  systemic  inflammation,  including  the  pro-inflammatory  condi-
tion  psoriasis.  One  nutraceutical,  curcumin,  has  been  shown  to  decrease 
transforming growth factor-α in vivo, which may be used to decrease skin 
inflammation.

HYALURONIC ACID

Hyaluronic acid has viscoelastic and lubricating properties that make it use-
ful in osteoarthritis, cosmetic fillers, and topicals for its humectant proper-
ties  benefiting  atopic  dermatitis,  eczema,  wounds,  and  ulcers.  Hyaluronic 

336

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

acid will increase retinoic acid use and keratinocyte proliferation, support-
ing skin hydration. The quantity of hyaluronic acid in the skin decreases with 
age, UVR exposure, and ROS exposure. Constantly degraded and synthe-
sized, hyaluronic acid production can be stimulated by retinol and inhibited 
by hydrocortisone. Oral supplements of hyaluronic acid without a protective 
delivery system are likely to be readily metabolized before absorption.

SPECIFIC INDICATIONS

SKIN LIGHTENING

Patients  with  dyspigmentation  from  photoaging,  hyperpigmentation  from 
melasma,  and  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  are  best  treated  with 
products that help balance overactive melanin production and uneven distri-
bution. To address this situation, most active ingredients for skin-lightening 
inhibit tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of melanin.

Glabridin, obtained from licorice, is the most commonly used tyrosinase 
inhibitor  in  nutraceutical  products.  Another  popular  tyrosinase  inhibitor 
is ascorbic acid, which interacts with the copper ion binding on tyrosinase. 
Arbutin, a derivative of hydroquinone from the bearberry fruit, paper mul-
berry from the mulberry tree roots, aloesin from aloe vera, resveratrol from 
grapes, and ellagic acid from berries are also tyrosinase inhibitors. Vitamin 
A derivatives are commonly used for lightening of skin. The effectiveness of 
vitamin A analogs in reducing skin pigmentation are likely due to their ability 
to inhibit tyrosinase, accelerate epidermal turnover, and interfere with mela-
nosome transfer to keratinocytes.

Nutraceuticals that lighten and even pigmentation may also work through 
other mechanisms of action in addition to inhibiting tyrosinase. For exam-
ple, aloesin and alpha-linolenic acid can also act as a weak lightening agent 
by  decreasing  the  presence  of  tyrosinase.  Niacinamide  helps  by  inhibiting 
the melanosome transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes and stimulates 
exfoliation. Soybean trypsin inhibitor from soy has been shown to even skin 
discoloration by interfering with the phagocytosis of melanosomes by kerati-
nocytes. Antioxidants and physical blockers will also function as whitening 
agents  through  protection  from  UVR  and  ROS  stimulation  of  melanocytes 
to produce melanin. Acai, bisabolol, and curcumin may also have benefits in 
hyperpigmentation. In observation of several mechanisms of action, multiple 
categories  can  be  used  to  provide  optimal  results.  Emphasizing  the  impor-
tance  of  strict  adherence  to  treatment  protocols,  including  appropriate  sun 
protection, will help the patient realize benefits in light of the lessened and 
evenly distributed melanin throughout the skin.

OILY SKIN

With  the  exception  of  isotretinoin,  there  is  a  deficiency  of  efficacious  oral 
treatments  available  for  excess  sebum  and  oily  skin.  Vitamin  A  and  its 

derivatives are effective in creating a drying effect and may be continued with 
lower  doses  for  further  benefits.  Niacinamide  demonstrates  a  reduction  in 
sebum,  along  with  promoting  exfoliation.  Soy  and  its  effective  constituent 
genistein are also effective in reducing oil production, possibly through their 
antiandrogen effects.

337

THE MARKETPLACE

DRY SKIN

Xerosis is frequently seen with the lack of exfoliation; certain skin conditions; 
harsh  environments,  including  wind,  low  humidity,  and  extreme  tempera-
tures; and aggressive cleansers or chemicals. An approach to treatment and 
prevention of dry skin from the inside out is addressed by enhancing the skin 
barrier to prevent water loss and the addition of humectants to draw moisture 
in. Vitamin B5, also known as pantothenic acid, functions as both a humec-
tant and supporter of the skin barrier to prevent skin dehydration. Hyaluronic 
acid is the best know humectant for the skin. Niacinamide strengthens the 
barrier function by increasing ceramides, long-chain fatty acids, and choles-
terol  in  the  stratum  corneum  and  thus  decreasing  TEWL.  Orally  adminis-
tered vitamin E, curcumin, and CoQ10 may also decrease the skin’s insensible 
water loss. Through exfoliation, barrier, and hydration support, one can lock 
in moisture and lessen the symptoms of dry skin.

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS

Skin inflammation is a physiological response to infection and injury, corre-
lated with the aging process and often indicated by redness, swelling, warmth, 
and  irritation.  As  an  adjuvant  to  topical  applications,  nutraceuticals  with 
anti-inflammatory  characteristics,  including  allantoin,  bisabolol,  curcumin, 
EGCG,  ellagic  acid,  French  maritime  pine  bark,  niacinamide,  resveratrol, 
and silymarin, can greatly enhance the healing and lessen the inflammatory 
symptoms  commonly  associated  with  acne  and  rosacea.  The  antioxidants 
beta-carotene, vitamin A, ascorbic acid, vitamin E, lutein, selenium, and zea-
xanthin have been shown to have a negative correlation with inflammatory 
markers, as detailed in one study. Because inflammation commonly involves 
ROS, antioxidants can also play a potential role in alleviating and preventing 
the inflammatory response.

THE MARKETPLACE

“Natural”  products,  with  their  perceived  safety  and  association  with  lux-
ury  compared  with  synthetic  chemicals,  are  more  frequently  sought  by 
health-conscious  consumers.  Many  of  the  active  ingredients  in  these 

338

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

preservative-free, holistic treatments are highly processed through chemical 
and manipulative processing and protected by preservatives that are reclas-
sified as other ingredients. A patient’s mentality of equating high price with 
quality leads to high expectations of overpriced products containing rare, 
exotic, or expensive ingredients with unsubstantiated efficacy. Ecologically 
minded consumers are also interested in purchasing products with biode-
gradable or no packaging and with ingredients that are organic, from non−
genetically  modified  organisms,  and  nontoxic  to  the  environment.  These 
values  and  perceptions  of  consumers  are  likely  to  affect  the  skin  health 
nutraceutical marketplace.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

The future of nutraceutical research will likely lead to isolating active com-
ponents from botanicals, creating advanced delivery systems, and allowing 
for  increased  potency,  additional  therapeutic  applications,  and  enhanced 
results. Further studies will elucidate  detailed information  on biologically 
active ingredients, giving rise to greater detail to their pharmacokinetics and 
mechanisms of action. Whereas nutraceuticals can promote their capacity 
to enhance skin appearance, claims of detailed improvements in skin func-
tion are presently available only to products classified as pharmaceuticals in 
the United States. With further isolation of the active components within 
nutraceuticals,  detailed  studies  on  their  effectiveness  are  likely  to  narrow 
the gap between nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals.

PRODUCTS

The  current  skin  health  marketplace  for  nutraceuticals  is  large,  although 
few products are well formulated specifically for the skin. Many companies 
marketing nutraceuticals make unsubstantiated claims that promise unre-
alistic results. With numerous nutraceuticals available, the onerous task of 
selecting  the  appropriate  supplement  can  be  confusing  to  consumers  and 
practitioners alike. A recent survey shows that most nutraceuticals have one 
or only a few ingredients. To receive noticeable benefits, many ingredients 
with  multiple  mechanisms  of  action  are  required.  As  with  most  supple-
ments,  palatability  and  convenience  are  important  to  consumers.  Studies 
have shown that patients do not like to consume multiple capsules and tab-
lets  throughout  the  day,  leading  to  noncompliance  and  early  discontinua-
tion. An optimal oral supplement is complete, compatible, consumable, and 
complementary  to  topical  treatments  and  procedures.  Copackaging  with 
other  products  will  help  lead  patients  toward  a  multifaceted  approach  to 
skin heath, addressing the needs of the risk-averse populations that seek a 
less invasive but therapeutic approach and those who are looking to maxi-
mize their current regimen.

339

REFERENCES

CONCLUSION

Historical records and current use of botanicals for healing wounds and skin 
disorders has led us to the isolation, research, and application of their bioactive 
constituents. By selecting specific categories of nutraceuticals, we can enhance 
our patient’s current regimen with oral supplements, including antioxidants, 
anti-inflammatory agents, skin-lightening ingredients, and constituents that 
address oily or dry skin. By considering all of our options in the array of treat-
ments, including topicals, procedures, and nutraceuticals, we can select the 
most effective and unique combination in achieving an optimal outcome for 
each and every patient.

REFERENCES

  1.  Dodge  T,  Litt  D,  Kaufman  AJ.  Influence  of  the  Dietary  Supplement  Health  and 
Education Act on consumer beliefs about the safety and effectiveness of dietary sup-
plements. Health Commun. 2011;16(3):230-244.

  2.  Hass DJ, Lewis JD. Quality of manufacturer provided information on safety and effi-
cacy claims for dietary supplements for colonic health. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 
2006;15(8):578-586.

  3.  Crowley  R,  FitzGerald  LH.  The  impact  of  cGMP  compliance  on  consumer  confi-

dence in dietary supplement products. Toxicology. 2006;221(1):9-16.

  4.  Hussain  SP,  Hofseth  LJ,  Harris  CC.  Radical  causes  of  cancer.  Nat  Rev  Cancer. 

2003;3(4):276-285.

  5.  Duan J, Duan J, Zhang Z, Tong T. Irreversible cellular senescence induced by pro-
longed  exposure  to  H2O2  involves  DNA-damage-and-repair  genes  and  telomere 
shortening. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005;37(7):1407-1420.

  6.  Berson DS. Natural antioxidants. J Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7(7 Suppl):7-12.
  7.  Liu  RH.  Health  benefits  of  fruit  and  vegetables  are  from  additive  and  synergistic 

combinations of phytochemicals. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78:517S-520S.
  8.  Hsu S. Green tea and the skin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;52(6):1049-1059.
  9.  Krinsky NI. The antioxidant and biological properties of the carotenoids. Ann N Y 

Acad Sci. 1998;854:443-447.

  10.  Palozza P, Krinsky NI. Antioxidant effects of carotenoids in vivo and in vitro: an over-

view. Methods Enzymol. 1992;213:403-420.

  11.  Aggarwal  BB,  Sung  B.  Pharmacological  basis  for  the  role  of  curcumin  in  chronic 
diseases: an age-old spice with modern targets. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2009;30:85-94.
  12.  Zhou  H,  Beevers  CS,  Huang  S.  The  targets  of  curcumin.  Curr  Drug  Targets. 

2011;12:332-347.

  13.  Sawai H, Okazaki T, Yamamoto H, et al. Requirement of AP-1 for ceramide-induced 

apoptosis in human leukemia HL-60 cells. J Biol Chem. 1995;270(45):27326-27331.
  14.  Kasai K, Yoshimura M, Koga T, et al. Effects of oral administration of ellagic acid-
rich pomegranate extract on ultraviolet-induced pigmentation in the human skin. J 
Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2006;52(5):383-388.

  15.  Bae JY, Choi JS, Kang SW, et al. Dietary compound ellagic acid alleviates skin wrinkle 

and inflammation induced by UV-B irradiation. Exp Dermatol. 2010;19:e182-e190.
  16.  Hseu  YC,  Chou  CW,  Senthil  Kumar  KJ,  et  al.  Ellagic  acid  protects  human  kerati-
nocyte (HaCaT) cells against UVA-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis through 

340

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

the  upregulation  of  the  HO-1  and  Nrf-2  antioxidant  genes.  Food  Chem  Toxicol. 
2012;50:1245-1255.

  17.  Chen D, Wan SB, Yang H, et al. EGCG green tea polyphenol and their synthetic ana-
logs for human cancer prevention and treatment. Adv Clin Chem. 2011;53:155-177.
  18.  Wang Y, Ho CT. Polyphenolic chemistry of tea and coffee: a century of progress. J 

Agric Food Chem. 2009;57:8109-8114.

  19.  Kuriyama S, Shimazu T, Ohmori K, et al. Green tea consumption and mortality due 
to  cardiovascular  disease,  cancer,  and  all  causes  in  Japan:  the  Ohsaki  study.  JAMA. 
2006;296(10):1255-1265.

  20.  Jung  JY,  Han  CR,  Jeong  YJ,  et  al.  Epigallocatechin  gallate  inhibits  nitric  oxide-

induced apoptosis in rat PC12 cells. Neurosci Lett. 2007;411:222-227.

  21.  Elmets CA, Singh D, Tubesing K, et al. Cutaneous photoprotection from ultraviolet 

injury by green tea polyphenols. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2001;44:425-432.

  22.  Zhao  J,  Jin  X,  Yaping  E,  et  al.  Photoprotective  effect  of  black  tea  extracts  against 

UVB-induced phototoxicity in skin. Photochem Photobiol. 1999;70:637-644.

  23.  Korać B, Buzadzić B. Doxorubicin toxicity to the skin: possibility of protection with 

antioxidants enriched yeast. J Dermatol Sci. 2001;25(1):45-52.

  24.  Wei H, Saladi R, Lu Y, et al. Isoflavonegenistein: photoprotection and clinical impli-

cations in dermatology. J Nutr. 2003;133(11 Suppl 1):S3811-S3819.

  25.  Thornfeldt C. Cosmeceuticals containing herbs: fact, fiction, and future. Dermatol 

Surg. 2005;31:873-880.

  26.  Baumann  LS.  Cosmeceutical  critique:  soy  and  its  isoflavones.  Skin  Allergy  News. 

2001;32:17.

  27.  Shegokar R, Mitri K. Carotenoid lutein: a promising candidate for pharmaceutical 

and nutraceutical applications. J Diet Suppl. 2012;9(3):183-210.

  28.  Mohammed D, Crowther JM, Matts PJ, et al. Influence of niacinamide contain-
ing formulations on the molecular and biophysical properties of the stratum cor-
neum. Int J Pharmacol. 2013;441(1-2):192-201.

  29.  Marini A, Grether-Beck S, Jaenicke T, et al. Pycnogenol effects on skin elasticity and 
hydration coincide with increased gene expressions of collagen type I and hyaluronic 
acid synthase in women. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2012;25(2):86-92.
  30.  Berson DS. Natural antioxidants. J Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7(7 Suppl):7-12.
  31.  Girish C, Pradhan SC. Hepatoprotective activities of picroliv, curcumin, and ellagic 
acid compared to silymarin on carbon-tetrachloride-induced liver toxicity in mice. J 
Pharmacol Pharmacother. 2012;3(2):149-155.

  32.  Polyak SJ, Morishima C, Lohmann V, et al. Identification of hepatoprotective flavo-
nolignans from silymarin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107(13):5995-5999.
  33.  Velussi  M,  Cernigoi  AM,  DeMonte  A,  et  al.  Long-term  (12  months)  treatment 
with an anti-oxidant drug (silymarin) is effective on hyperinsulinemia, exogenous 
insulin  need  and  malondialdehyde  levels  in  cirrhotic  diabetic  patients.  J  Hepatol. 
1997;26(4):871-879.

  34.  Quinzii CM, Area E, Naini A, et al. Treatment of CoQ(10) deficient fibroblasts with ubi-
quinone, CoQ analogs, and vitamin C: time- and compound-dependent effects. PLoS 
One. 2010;5(7):e11897.

  35.  McDaniel DH, Neudecker BA, DiNardo JC, et al. Idebenone: a new antioxidant. Part 
I. Relative assessment of oxidative stress protection capacity compared to commonly 
known antioxidants. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2005;4(1):10-17.

  36.  Kishimoto Y, Saito N, Kurita K, et al. Ascorbic acid enhances the expression of type 1 
and type 4 collagen and SVCT2 in cultured human skin fibroblasts. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 2013;430(2):579-584.

  37.  Patel V, Khanna S, Roy S, et al. Natural vitamin E alpha-tocotrienol: retention in vital 
organs in response to long-term oral supplementation and withdrawal. Free Radic Res. 
2006;40(7):763-771.

341

REFERENCES

  38.  Fuchs J, Kern H. Modulation of UV-light-induced skin inflammation by D-alpha-
tocopherol  and  L-ascorbic  acid:  a  clinical  study  using  solar  simulated  radiation. 
Free Radic Biol Med. 1998;25(9):1006-1012.

  39.  Asgari MM, Chren MM, Warton EM, et al. Supplement use and risk of cutaneous 

squamous cell carcinoma. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65(6):1145-1151.

  40.  Park  J,  Boo  J.  Isolation  of  resveratrol  from  vitis  viniferae  caulis  and  its  potent 
inhibition  of  human  tyrosinase.  Evid  Based  Complement  Alternat  Med. 
2013;2013:645257.

  41.  Buonocore D, Lazzeretti A, Tocabens P, et al. Resveratrol-procyanidin blend: nutra-
ceutical and antiaging efficacy evaluated in a placebo controlled, double-blind study. 
Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2012;5:159-165.

  42.  Baxter RA. Anti-aging properties of resveratrol: review and report of a potent new 

antioxidant skin care formulation. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2008;7:2-7.

  43.  La VC. Association between Mediterranean dietary patterns and cancer risk. Nutr 

Rev. 2009;67(Suppl 1):S126-S129.

  44.  Feart C, Samieri C, Rondeau V, et al. Adherence to a Mediterranean diet, cognitive 

decline, and risk of dementia. JAMA. 2009;302:638-648.

  45.  Aggarwal  BB,  Bhardwaj  A,  Aggarwal  RS,  et  al.  Role  of  resveratrol  in  preven-
tion and therapy of cancer: preclinical and clinical studies. Anticancer Res. 2004; 
24:2783-2840.

  46.  Bournival J, Quessy P, Martinoli MG. Protective effects of resveratrol and quercetin 
against  MPP(+)-induced  oxidative  stress  act  by  modulating  markers  of  apoptotic 
death in dopaminergic neurons. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009;29:1169-1180.

  47.  Bastianetto  S,  Zheng  WH,  Quirion  R.  Neuroprotective  abilities  of  resveratrol  and 
other red wine constituents against nitric oxide-related toxicity in cultured hippo-
campal neurons. Br J Pharmacol. 2000;131:711-720.

  48.  Subbaramaiah K, Chung WJ, Michaluart P, et al. Resveratrol inhibits cyclooxygen-
ase-2 transcription and activity in phorbol ester-treated human mammary epithelial 
cells. J Biol Chem. 1998;273:21875-21882.

  49.  Stahl  W,  Sies  H.  Bioactivity  and  protective  effects  of  natural  carotenoids.  Biochim 

Biophys Acta. 2005;1740(2):101-107.

  50.  Rühl R. Induction of PXR-mediated metabolism by beta-carotene. Biochim Biophys 

Acta. 2005;1740(2):162-169.

  51.  Faulks RM, Southon S. Challenges to understanding and measuring carotenoid 

bioavailability. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005;1740(2):95-100.

  52.  Dimitrov NV, Meyer C, Ullrey DE, et al. Bioavailability of beta-carotene in humans. 

Am J Clin Nutr. 1988;48(2):298-304.

  53.  Mathews-Roth MM. Plasma concentrations of carotenoids after large doses of beta-

carotene. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990;52(3):500-501.

  54.  Sonneveld E, van der Saag PT. Metabolism of retinoic acid: implications for develop-

ment and cancer. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 1998;68:404-410.

  55.  Green A, Williams G, Neale R, et al. Daily sunscreen application and betacarotene 
supplementation  in  prevention  of  basal-cell  and  squamous-cell  carcinomas  of  the 
skin: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 1999;354(9180):723-729.

  56.  Moon TE, Levine N, Cartmel B, Bangert JL. Retinoids in prevention of skin cancer. 

Cancer Lett. 1997;114(1-2):203-205.

  57.  Tangrea  JA,  Edwards  BK,  Taylor  PR,  et  al.  Long-term  therapy  with  low-dose 
isotretinoin  for  prevention  of  basal  cell  carcinoma:  a  multicenter  clinical  trial. 
Isotretinoin-Basal  Cell  Carcinoma  Study  Group.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst.  1992;84(5):

  328-332.

  58.  Levine N, Moon TE, Cartmel B, et al. Trial of retinol and isotretinoin in skin  cancer 
prevention:  a  randomized,  double-blind,  controlled  trial.  Southwest  Skin  Cancer 
Prevention Study Group. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1997;6(11):957-961.

 
342

  59.  Cassidy  PB,  Fain  HD,  Cassidy  JP,  et  al.  Selenium  for  the  prevention  of  cutaneous 

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

melanoma. Nutrients. 2013;5(3):725-749.

  60.  Rafferty T, Norval M, El-Ghorr A, et al. Dietary selenium levels determine epidermal 

Langerhans cell numbers in mice. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2003;92(2):161-172.

  61.  Fritz  H,  Kennedy  D,  Fergusson  D,  et  al.  Selenium  and  lung  cancer:  a  systematic 

review and metaanalysis. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26259.

  62.  Suadicani  P,  Hein  HO,  Gyntelberg  F.  Serum  selenium  level  and  risk  of  lung  can-
cer  mortality:  a  16-year  follow-up  of  the  Copenhagen  Male  Study.  Eur  Respir  J. 
2012;39(6):1443-1448.

  63.  Hurst R, Hooper L, Norat T, et al. Selenium and prostate cancer: systematic review 

and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(1):111-122.

  64.  Sharma  AK,  Amin  S.  Post  SELECT:  selenium  on  trial.  Future  Med  Chem. 

2013;5(2):163-174.

  65.  Matsugo S, Bito T, Konishi T. Photochemical stability of lipoic acid and its impact on 

skin ageing. Free Radic Res. 2011;45(8):918-924.

  66.  Tsuji-Naito K, Ishikura S, Akagawa M, Saeki H. α-Lipoic acid induces collagen bio-
synthesis involving prolylhydroxylase expression via activation of TGF-β-Smad sig-
naling in human dermal fibroblasts. Connect Tissue Res. 2010;51(5):378-387.
  67.  Okawa T, Yamaguchi Y, Takada S, et al. Oral administration of collagen tripeptide 
improves dryness and pruritus in the acetone-induced dry skin model. J Dermatol 
Sci. 2012;66(2):136-143.

  68.  Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S, Takada Y, et al. TNF blockade: an inflammatory issue. 

Ernst Schering Res Found Workshop. 2006:161-186.

  69.  Anilkumar TV, Muhamed J, Jose A, et al. Advantages of hyaluronic acid as a compo-

nent of fibrin sheet for care of acute wound. Biologicals. 2011;39(2):81-88.

  70.  Sakai  S,  Yasuda  R,  Sayo  T,  Ishikawa  O,  Inoue  S.  Hyaluronan  exists  in  the  normal 

stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol. 2000;114(6):1184-1187.

  71.  McGill CR, Green NR, Meadows MC, Gropper SS. Beta-carotene supplementation 
decreases  leukocyte  superoxide  dismutase  activity  and  serum  glutathione  peroxi-
dase concentration in humans. J Nutr Biochem. 2003;14(11):656-662.

  72.  Shimogaki  H,  Tanaka  Y,  Tamai  H,  Masuda  M.  In  vitro  and  in  vivo  evaluation  of 

ellagic acid on melanogenesis inhibition. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2000;22:291-303.

  73.  Brown  MS,  Goldstein  JL.  Drugs  used  in  the  treatment  of  hyperlipoproteinemias. 
In: Goodman Gilman A, Rall TW, Nies AS, et al., eds. Goodman and Gilman’s The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 8th ed. New York: Pergamon; 1990:893-894.
  74.  Konda S, Geria AN, Halder RM. New horizons in treating disorders of hyperpig-

mentation in skin of color. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2012;31(2):133-139.

  75.  Lee J, Jun H, Jung E, et al. Whitening effect of alpha-bisabolol in Asian women sub-

jects. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2010;32(4):299-303.

  76.  Thanos SM, Halliday GM, Damian DL. Nicotinamide reduces photodynamic ther-

apy-induced immunosuppression in humans. Br J Dermatol. 201;167(3):631-636.

  77.  Fowler JF Jr, Woolery-Lloyd H, Waldorf H, Saini R. Innovations in natural ingredi-

ents and their use in skin care. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010;9(6 Suppl):72-81.
  78.  Wu J. Anti-inflammatory ingredients. J Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7(7 Suppl):13-16.
  79.  Draelos  ZD.  Skin  lightening  preparations  and  the  hydroquinone  controversy. 

Dermatol Ther. 2007;20(5):308-313.

  80.  Ward  A,  Brogden  RN,  Heel  RC,  et  al.  Isotretinoin:  a  review  of  its  pharmacologi-
cal  properties  and  therapeutic  efficacy  in  acne  and  other  skin  disorders.  Drugs. 
1984;28(1):6-37.

  81.  Fowler JF Jr, Woolery-Lloyd H, Waldorf H, Saini R. Innovations in natural ingredi-
ents and their use in skin care. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010;9(6 Suppl):72-81; quiz 82-33.
  82.  Surjana  D,  Damian  DL.  Nicotinamide  in  dermatology  and  photoprotection.  Skin 

Med. 2011;9(6):360-365.

343

REFERENCES

  83.  Tanno O, Ota Y, Kitamura N, Katsube T, Inoue S. Nicotinamide increases biosynthe-
sis of ceramides as well as other stratum corneum lipids to improve the epidermal 
permeability barrier. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143(3):524-531.

  84.  Draelos ZD, Ertel K, Berge C. Niacinamide-containing facial moisturizer improves 

skin barrier and benefits subjects with rosacea. Cutis. 2005;76(2):135-141.

  85.  Soma Y, Kashima M, Imaizumi A, et al. Moisturizing effects of topical nicotinamide 

on atopic dry skin. Int J Dermatol. 2005;44(3):197-202.

  86.  Tanno O, Ota Y, Kitamura N, et al. Nicotinamide increases biosynthesis of cerami-
des as well as other stratum corneum lipids to improve the epidermal permeability 
barrier. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143(3):524-531.

  87.  Verdier-Sévrain S, Bonté F. Skin hydration: a review on its molecular mechanisms. J 

Cosmet Dermatol. 2007;6(2):75-82.

  88.  Staiger C. Comfrey: a clinical overview. Phytother Res. 2012;26(10):1441-1448.
  89.  Braga PC, Dal Sasso M, Fonti E, Culici M. Antioxidant activity of bisabolol: inhibi-
tory  effects  on  chemiluminescence  of  human  neutrophil  bursts  and  cell-free  sys-
tems. Pharmacology. 2009;83(2):110-115.

  90.  Rhodes LE, Darby G, Massey KA, et al. Oral green tea catechin metabolites are incor-
porated into human skin and protect against UV radiation-induced cutaneous inflam-
mation  in  association  with  reduced  production  of  pro-inflammatory  eicosanoid 
12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. Br J Nutr. 2013;28:1-10.

  91.  Al-Okbi SY. Nutraceuticals of anti-inflammatory activity as complementary therapy 
for rheumatoid arthritis. Toxicol Ind Health. 2012; Oct 26 [Epub ahead of print].
  92.  Geronikaki AA, Gavalas AM. Antioxidants and inflammatory disease: synthetic 
and  natural  antioxidants  with  anti-inflammatory  activity.  Comb  Chem  High 
Throughput Screen. 2006;9(6):425-442.

  93.  Jialal  I,  Singh  U.  Is  vitamin  C  an  anti-inflammatory  agent?  Am  J  Clin  Nutr. 

2006;83(3):525-526.

  94.  Song  JH,  Murphy  RJ,  Narayan  R,  Davies  GBH.  Biodegradable  and  composta-
ble  alternatives  to  conventional  plastics.  Philos  Trans  R  Soc  Lond  B  Biol  Sci. 
2009;364(1526):2127-2139.

  95.  Wong  VW,  Levi  B,  Rajadas  J,  et  al.  Stem  cell  niches  for  skin  regeneration.  Int  J 

Biomater. 2012;2012:926059.

  96.  Johnson  JL,  Lowell  BC,  Ryabinina  OP,  et  al.  TAT-mediated  delivery  of  a  DNA  repair 
enzyme to skin cells rapidly initiates repair of UV-induced DNA damage. J Inv Dermatol. 
2011;131(3):753-761.

  97.  Salmela MT, MacDonald TT, Black D, et al. Upregulation of matrix metalloprotein-
ases in a model of T cell mediated tissue injury in the gut: analysis by gene array and 
in situ hybridisation. Gut. 2002;51(4):540-547.

  98.  Dixon KM, Tongkao-On W, Sequeira VB, et al. Vitamin D and death by sunshine. Int 

J Mol Sci. 2013;14:1964-1977.

  99.  D’Orazio J, Jarrett S, Amaro-Ortiz A, Scott T. UV radiation and the skin. J Mol Sci. 

2013;14:12222-12248.

 100.  Bikle DB, Elalieh H, Welsh J, et al. Protective role of vitamin D signaling in skin can-

cer formation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013;136:271-279.

 101.  Bailey RL, Dodd KW, Goldman JA, et al. Estimation of total usual calcium and vita-

min D intakes in the United States. J Nutr. 2010;140:817-822.

 102.  Institute  of  Medicine,  Food  and  Nutrition  Board.  Dietary  Reference  Intakes  for 

Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2010.

 103.  Wolpowitz D, Gilchrest BA. The vitamin D questions: how much do you need and 

how should you get it? J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54(2):301-317.

 104.  Webb AR, Kline L, Holick MF. Influence of season and latitude on the cutaneous syn-
thesis of vitamin D3: exposure to winter sunlight in Boston and Edmonton will not 
promote vitamin D3 synthesis in human skin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1988;67:373.

344

 105.  Davis CD. Vitamin D and cancer: current dilemmas and future research needs. Am 

NUTRACEUTICALS AND 
THEIR ROLE IN SKIN 
HEALTH RESTORATION

J Clin Nutr. 2008;88:565S-569S.

 106.  Reichrath  J.  Skin  cancer  prevention  and  UV-protection:  how  to  avoid  vitamin 

D-deficiency? Br J Dermatol. 2009;161(Suppl 3):54-60.

 107.  Cranney A, Horsley T, O’Donnell S, et al. Effectiveness and safety of vitamin D in 
relation to bone health. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep). 2007;(158):1-235.
 108.  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Agricultural  Research  Service.  Website: 

www. ars. usda. gov. 

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S 
PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON 
SKIN HEALTH

CHAPTER 

14

A PHILOSOPHY BASED ON SCIENCE, 
CLINICAL EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

This chapter presents Dr. Zein Obagi’s personal approach to treating, repairing, 
and maintaining skin health throughout a person’s lifetime because every stage 
of life has special needs and requires a particular strategy. The philosophy that 
guides this approach stems from the realization that most current skin care and 
cosmetic products revolve around an outdated philosophy of the need for “skin 
moisturization.” Such moisturizing products are popular because they provide 
instant  gratification—they  make  the  skin  temporarily  feel  smooth,  calm,  and 
well  hydrated.  However,  the  continued  application  of  these  kinds  of  products 
slows down the rate of natural exfoliation and disrupts the barrier function, lead-
ing to further dryness, which then leads to continued use of the same or more 
potent moisturizing products. In the end, dependence or “moisturizer addiction” 
develops. This phenomenon is seen almost exclusively in women; men, who gen-
erally do not use such products, rarely complain of dry or sensitive skin.

Similarly, most current medical skin care products on the market to treat 
specific skin diseases are of limited value because they address only the dis-
ease, the skin’s surface, and the symptoms. They do not improve skin quality 
and often lack proper use guidelines.

Nevertheless, moisturizers and other cosmetic and medical skin care prod-
ucts are heavily promoted not only to patients but also to physicians, many of 
whom ignore the lack of real efficacy and base their product recommendations 
on invalid studies, promotional items, and gifts given by the sponsoring com-
panies. In recent years, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) placed 
stricter limits on the value of promotional items that manufacturers are per-
mitted to give physicians. However, the undue influence persists, in the form 
of consulting fees, speaking fees, and clinical study funding that companies 
give physicians who help promote their products.

346

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Box 14.1

Dr. Zein Obagi’s Innovations

■■ The new ZO Systems of products that provide medical and nonmedi-

cal systems of products (ZOSH and ZOMD)
■■ New approaches to preventing skin problems
■■ New  approaches  to  treating  skin  problems  while  simultaneously 

restoring skin health

■■ Added new principles to expand the benefits and maintain the results 

of any treatment

■■ A range of effective procedures and products that allow physicians to 

improve the skin of every patient

Ensuring that consumers have access to safer, more effective skin care prod-
ucts requires patient education and perhaps further regulation of drug and cos-
metic companies—or at least more stringent enforcement of existing laws that 
prohibit misleading marketing tactics. While awaiting the implementation of 
these, this chapter will focus on the innovations shown in Box 14.1 that provide 
true  skin  benefits.  The  new  ZO  Systems  include  a  program  for  Skin  Health 
Restoration (ZO Skin Health, or ZOSH) and a program for medical treatment 
(ZO Medical, or ZOMD) within the scope of Skin Health Restoration.

DEVELOPMENT OF ZO SKIN HEALTH

In 1983, Dr. Zein Obagi played a pioneering role in introducing the science of 
skin health, beginning with the definition of healthy skin and proceeding to 
defining the principles and designing treatment protocols that help in treating 
specific  skin  disease,  while  simultaneously  restoring  skin  health.  Nu-Derm, 
the  first  product  system  developed  around  these  concepts,  debuted  in  1987 
and was distributed by Worldwide Products, Inc. In 1997, a group of investors 
purchased  Worldwide  Products  and  renamed  the  company  Obagi  Medical, 
Inc. This company went public in 2006. Soon after, Dr. Obagi left the company 
because the direction and objectives of Obagi Medical, Inc. did not agree with 
his vision and intentions. He devoted his time to expanding the science of skin 
health by emphasizing the concept of prevention and expanded and enhanced 
his already popular treatment protocols. These efforts led to the creation of his 
new company, ZO Skin Health, Inc. His concept of taking the time to address 
the root of the problem, unusual in the world of “quick fixes,” ensures that a 
dermatologist can help every patient who walks into his or her office, with or 
without a medical skin disease or problem, restore the health of the patient’s 
skin, and thereby prevent the recurrence of skin problems.

The  Obagi  name  remains  the  trademark  for  Obagi  Medical,  Inc.,  allow-
ing the company to put this name on many products they produced indepen-
dently, without Dr. Obagi’s involvement. To avoid any confusion, the initials 
ZO (from Zein Obagi) are used to differentiate the system of new products 
from those of Obagi Medical, Inc. However, in the end, any product that now 

347

A PHILOSOPHY BASED 
ON SCIENCE, CLINICAL 
EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

Box 14.2

Issues and Observations with Nu-Derm Use

■■ Certain patients improved dramatically but others only mildly.
■■ Sometimes, after 2 to 3 months of improvement, patients experienced 

no further improvement despite continuous use.

■■ Some patients continued to suffer from anticipated reactions; their 

skin could not build the needed tolerance.

■■ In some cases, the system made pigmentation problems worse.

carries the family name Obagi alone has currently no relationship with Dr. 
Zein Obagi. Only the ZO brands represent Dr. Obagi’s formulations and his 
expanded treatment and prevention protocols.

Patients found the Nu-Derm system easy to use, and many of them achieved 
highly satisfactory initial results. However, the original Nu-Derm protocols 
have raised several issues (Box 14.2).

The  boom  in  Internet  sales  of  copycat  and  other  skin  care  products  cre-
ated additional challenges. In particular, when pharmaceutical and cosmetic 
companies  began  selling  their  products  online,  patients  could  directly  pur-
chase  many  medical  products  at  lower  prices  and  without  medical  supervi-
sion  that  they  previously  received  from  their  doctors.  Primary  examples  of 
this  phenomenon  include  hydroquinone  (HQ),  tretinoin,  and  even  isotreti-
noin, all of which patients can purchase from websites owned by physicians, 
pharmaceutical companies, and commercial companies, apparently driven by 
a profit motive rather than patient safety. As we know, isotretinoin carries so 
many risks that patients must not use it outside of the FDA-mandated iPledge 
risk management program. Somewhat similarly, unsupervised use of retinoids 
and HQ can cause skin irritation and photosensitivity that can worsen skin 
pigmentation problems and possibly cause ochronosis, a severe and sometimes 
permanent pigmentation disorder.

Solving the Issues Encountered with Nu-Derm Use
Clinical observation, retrospective analysis, and the advances in the patho-
physiology  of  skin  helped  in  expanding  the  principles  of  skin  health,  while 
adjustment of product formulations and the creation of more effective treat-
ment protocols helped to solve many of the problems and issues encountered 
with Nu-Derm use.

The author’s research made it clear that the approach to skin health should 
change to incorporate the new objectives and principles (Box 14.3). To meet these, 
the new ZO System of products was designed to include both a medical line, ZO 
Medical (known as ZOMD) and a preventive nonmedical line, ZO Skin Health 
(known as ZOSH). These products were formulated to provide the already estab-
lished skin health principles (correction, stimulation, and bleaching and blend-
ing) and several new principles (Table 14.1). This makes the ZO Systems one of 
the most advanced, effective, and comprehensive systems in skin treatment, skin 
health restoration, skin conditioning, and maintenance and prevention.

The ZO Medical line in particular offers several advantages (Box 14.4).

348

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Box 14.3

New ZO Skin Health Principles and Objectives

These  new  principles  must  be  incorporated  with  the  original  princi-
ples—correction, stimulation, bleaching and blending—to provide:

 1.  Skin barrier function repair
 2.  DNA protection and repair
 3.  Elimination of chronic skin inflammation
 4.  Stabilization of the epidermis, dermis, and melanocytes (increasing 

skin tolerance and resistance to harmful stimuli)

 5.  Providing skin resistance to beneficial medical topical agents
 6.  Long-term maintenance

Comparing ZOMD to Nu-Derm (Table 14.2) will help physicians who are 
familiar with Nu-Derm to compare and switch to ZOMD if they elect to do 
so. Table 14.3 shows a comparison of Nu-Derm and ZOMD product names 
and principles/steps.

ZEIN OBAGI’S SKIN HEALTH PRINCIPLES: 
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS

One  of  the  reasons  that  Dr.  Obagi  left  Obagi  Medical  Products  is  that  the 
company created separate or independent disease-driven skin treatment sys-
tems to treat specific skin diseases or conditions with no apparent regard to 
overall skin health. In contrast, ZOSH products embody the principle that, 
unless  one  restores  overall  skin  health,  the  effects  of  disease-specific  treat-
ments  will  be  limited  and  brief.  Any  skin  disease  occurs  within  the  larger 
context of the skin’s overall health. Restoring the natural balance and pro-
cesses that govern skin health can resolve a wide variety of diseases and con-
ditions, not vice versa.

Table 14.1  Product Lines Formulated to Meet the ZO Principles

Product Line

Principle/Objective

Contents

ZOSH 
(Nonmedical)

Preventing skin deterioration, 
and maintaining skin health

  1.  A daily basic skin care program
  2.  A preventive step can be added to the basic program to prevent any 
specific problem (acne, sun damage, discoloration, and signs of skin 
aging). For use as needed in any stage of life.

ZOMD

Treating medical skin problems 
while simultaneously restoring 
skin health 

  1.  A program for patients with a skin disease
  2.  Disease-specific agents can be added to be used at specific 

concentrations, for specific lengths of time

ZOSH 
(Nonmedical)

Maintenance

  1.  A program for patients who have completed a course of treatment
  2.  Topical agents are used for maintaining skin health and treatment 

results

349

A PHILOSOPHY BASED 
ON SCIENCE, CLINICAL 
EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

Box 14.4

Advantages of the New ZO Medical Line

■■ New state-of-the-art formulations and effective penetration
■■ Enhanced  protocols  to  increase  compliance  and  rate  of  treatment 

success

■■ Airtight packaging (no oxidation and related loss of efficacy)
■■ Larger product sizes (economical)
■■ No  public  Internet  or  black-market  sales  allowed  (it  is  sold  only  to 

physicians)

■■ Expanded treatment applications, including medical and nonmedi-

cal conditions

■■ Support through continuous medical education and manuals by Dr. 

Obagi and a select faculty of distinguished physicians

■■ Frequent  infusion  with  more  innovative  products  to  broaden  the 

application of product benefits

■■ Near-constant formulation updates and enhancements to reflect ongo-
ing advances and evolving knowledge of skin care and skin health

What is unique about ZOSH and ZOMD is that these two systems gener-
ally follow similar principles. This makes the ZO Systems easy to administer, 
whether a patient is transitioning from a medical approach to maintenance or 
from basic skin care and prevention to a medical program. The only difference 
between the medical and nonmedical systems is that the medical approach 
uses  certain  topical  agents  in  treating  skin  medical  problems,  whereas  the 

Table 14.2  Similarities and Differences of Nu-Derm and ZOMD

Principles/Steps

Cleanser

Toner (pH balance)

Stimulating scrub

Sebum control

Epidermal stabilization

Exfoliation

Bleaching (HQ-based)

Bleaching (non-HQ-based)

Melanocyte control (non-HQ-based)

Stimulation

Dermal stabilization

Moisturizers

Hydration and calming

Sun protection

  Standard

  Triple-action 

Nu-Derm (Obagi 
Medical Products)

ZOMD

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

350

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Table 14.3  Comparison of Product Names and Principles/Steps

Nu-Derm (Obagi 
Medical Products)

ZOMD

Principle/Step

Cleanser

Toner (pH balance)
Stimulating scrub
Sebum control
Epidermal stabilization
Exfoliation
Bleaching (HQ-based, 4%)
Melanocyte control 
(non-HQ-based) and 
stabilization
Bleaching (non-HQ-based)
Stimulation
Dermal stabilization and 
texture repair

Foaming gel
Gentle wash

Nu-Derm Toner
None
None
None
Exfoderm
Clear
None

None
Tretinoin
None

Moisturization
Hydration and Calming 

Nu-Derm Action
None

Sun protection

Healthy Skin 
Protection
Multiple products

Sun protection plus HQ

Sun Fader

Oilacleanse
Normacleanse
Foamacleanse
Balatone
Vitascrub
Cebatrol
Ossential Daily Power Defense
Glycogent
Melamin
Brightenex

Brightalive
Tretinoin
Ossential Advanced Radical 
Night Repair
Retamax
Ossential Growth Factor 
Serum Plus
None
Ommerse Renewal Crème
Ommerse Overnight 
Recovery Crème
Restoracalm
Oclipse–M Broad Spectrum 
Tinted Sunscreen SPF 50
Oclipse–C Broad Spectrum 
Sunscreen SPF 50
None

nonmedical  program  does  not.  Following  the  ZO  Skin  Health  principles 
moreover allows physicians to create treatment programs geared to a patient’s 
specific medical condition, tolerance, motivation level, and desired results—
while avoiding the pitfalls of traditional disease-driven dermatological treat-
ments that fail to restore overall skin health.

ZO NONMEDICAL AND MEDICAL SYSTEMS: 
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES, AND STEPS

The  following  section  provides  a  step-by-step  guide  for  ZOMD  and  ZOSH 
regimens.

ZO Skin Health Principles and Steps:

  1. Getting skin ready. This is a step to make skin receptive to the steps that 
follow. This step is to be used indefinitely. The objectives of preparing skin 
are as follows:

351

A PHILOSOPHY BASED 
ON SCIENCE, CLINICAL 
EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

•  Enable the skin to function properly and reduce inflammation
•  Enhance  penetration  of  active  ingredients  used  in  medical  or  non-

medical regimens to increase their effectiveness

•  Prevent and control acne, rosacea, shaving bumps, skin pigmenta-
tion  problems,  enlarged  pores,  and  improve  rough,  damaged  skin 
texture

    The agents used in these steps are cleansers, mechanical stimulation 

and exfoliation, and sebum control.

  2. Epidermal  stabilization.  This  step  is  used  in  both  medical  and  non-
medical regimens. The objectives are to help in barrier function repair 
and in DNA protection and repair and to calm inflammation. These are 
accomplished by the product Ossential Daily Power Defense.

  3. Dermal  stabilization.  This  step  is  also  known  as  dermal  stimulation. 
The objectives are to provide anti-aging benefits and improve both epi-
dermal and dermal skin texture. Dermal stimulation uses retinol in one 
of two ways:
•  Mild:  Ossential Growth  Factor  Serum  Plus  (little  to  no  anticipated 

reactions)

•  Strong: Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair and Retamax (both 

are associated with anticipated reactions)

  4. Hydration  and  calming.  The  objectives  are  to  enhance  the  therapeu-
tic benefits and provide maximal comfort when using any ZO Program. 
This step does not weaken the efficacy of the basic skin care preventive 
or  treatment  programs.  Formulations  used  for  hydration  and  calming 
perform the following functions:
•  Increase skin tolerance
•  Reduce irritation and inflammation
•  Enhance hydration from within
•  Improve patient compliance

    The products used in this step are Ommerse Renewal Crème, Ommerse 

Overnight Recovery Crème, and Restoracalm.

  5. Ultraviolet (UV) protection. The objective of this step is to protect the 
skin from damaging UV rays. Both the medical and nonmedical systems 
use the same formulation (Oclipse) to provide the necessary protection 
from UV light. The ZO System of photoprotection uses a triple-defense 
mechanism  for  protection  from  UVA,  UVB,  and  high-energy  visible 
light because it goes beyond the sun protection factor (SPF) offered by 
traditional chemical or physical sunscreens. UV protection is an indis-
pensable part of any skin care regimen.

  6. Non-HQ bleaching and non-HQ blending. The objective of this step 
is  to  decrease  melanin  production  and  reduce  melanocyte  activity 
through  an  HQ-free  formulation. This  helps  to  avoid  photosensitivity 
that is associated with HQ bleaching and improves the appearance of 
epidermal  discoloration.  For  bleaching,  the  Brightalive  and  C-Bright 
10% active vitamin A formula is used when treatment with HQ has been 
completed,  is  contraindicated,  or  is  no  longer  indicated.  For  non-HQ 
blending, Brightenex for the face and Brightamax for the body are used 
in the AM to stabilize melanocytes and help in restoring an even color 
tone. These products contains retinol, melanin inhibitors, and antioxi-
dants  in  a  natural,  patented  Oleosome  technology  that  releases  active 

 
 
352

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

ingredients  gradually.  ZO  Medical  Brightenex  use  is  associated  with 
initial anticipated reactions of redness and exfoliation, which can last 
2 to 3 weeks. The effects of Brightenex are enhanced by using Retamax 
and Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair in the dermal stabiliza-
tion step for both facial and nonfacial skin, such as that on arms, legs, 
and hands.

ZO Medical Treatment and ZO Skin Health Restoration: Principles, 
Objectives, and Steps

  1. Correction.

•  Preparing skin (as with ZOSH)
•  Bleaching (HQ)
•  Exfoliation:  the  objective  is  to  improve  texture  and  accelerate  treat-

ment response.

•  Epidermal stabilization: The objective is to strengthen skin, increase 
patient compliance, and accelerate treatment results. Epidermal sta-
bilization is an essential part of any nonmedical or medical treatment 
programs and should be maintained indefinitely.

  2. Stimulation  and  blending.  The  objective  is  to  restore  even  skin  color 
tone  with  minimal  bleaching  effects  because  it  increases  the  ability  of 
keratinocytes  to  evenly  absorb  any  melanin  that  is  produced  by  mela-
nocytes.  Blending  is  accomplished  by  a  mixture  of  tretinoin  and  HQ. 
Blending  (non-HQ-based  approach)  is  accomplished  using  Brightenex 
after discontinuing HQ-based blending (when continued use of HQ is no 
longer indicated). HQ-based and non-HQ-based approaches to blending 
are shown in Box 14.5.

  3. Stimulation. The objective is to repair the dermis and provide more even 
color tone. Keep in mind that stimulation using tretinoin alone repairs 
the  dermis  and  provides  minimal  blending.  More  effective  blending 
can be achieved by tretinoin and HQ (step 2). Therapeutic stimulation 
requires tretinoin (Table 14.4) and should be completed in a maximum 
of 5 months (three keratinocyte maturation cycles [KMCs]) (see Chapter 
2).  Continuing  tretinoin  use  beyond  this  point  can  be  self-defeating 
because it will lead to continuous reactions without additional therapeu-
tic benefits. After stopping tretinoin, further stimulation can be obtained 
by using retinol (in the proper concentration and formulation) in daily 
skin  care  and  in  preventive,  maintenance,  and  anti-aging  regimens.  If 
needed, patients can return to treatment with tretinoin alone or mixed 
with HQ (blending) for an appropriate time period, then resume their 
long-term retinol stimulation.

  4. Hydration  and  calming.  The  objective  is  the  same  as  previously  dis-

cussed for ZOSH.

  5. UV  protection.  The  objective  is  the  same  as  previously  discussed  for 
ZOSH, and the same formulation (Oclipse) is used to provide the neces-
sary protection from UV light. Box 14.6 shows the triple-defense mecha-
nism for protection from UVA, UVB, and high-energy visible light.

ZOSH and ZOMD formulations provide the skin with numerous ben-
efits (Box 14.7) that many other skin care products do not address because 

Box 14.5

Blending:

Hydroquinone (HQ)- and Non-HQ-Based Approaches

THE HQ PLUS TRETINOIN APPROACH

HQ blending should be used for a limited period of time and discontin-
ued when any of the following conditions occur:

353

A PHILOSOPHY BASED 
ON SCIENCE, CLINICAL 
EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

■■ Treatment is completed
■■ Worsening of pigmentation is seen
■■ No further improvement is seen
■■ Anticipated reactions do not subside
■■ Resistance to HQ develops
■■ HQ side effects are noted:

■■ Photosensitivity
■■ Ochronosis
■■ Allergy

■■ The patient is on maintenance

THE NON-HQ APPROACH

Non-HQ  blending  is  an  alternative  to  HQ  blending  in  the  following 
circumstances:

■■ HQ (bleaching and blending) treatment is complete
■■ No  further  improvement  is  observed  from  using  HQ  (resistance 

develops)

■■ HQ side effects are noted

The non-HQ blending steps are as follows:

■■ Brightenex: AM
■■ Retamax or Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair: PM
■■ ZO 3-Step Peel, when indicated and especially during maintenance

most  other  products  focus  on  superficial  skin  improvement  and  not  on 
skin health.

ZO Systems  can  be  used  by  patients  of  all  skin  types.  The  physician  can 
design nonmedical or medical programs that are suitable for any individual 
and any medical or nonmedical problem. Any ZO Program can be designed 
to be aggressive, moderate, or mild, depending on the patient’s needs, moti-
vation,  and  type  of  skin  problem.  Certain  formulations  in  both  ZOSH  and 

Table 14.4  Stimulation: Type and Agents

Therapeutic (Medical Treatment)

Nontherapeutic (Nonmedical Care)

Tretinoin

Retamax

Tretinoin + hydroquinone

Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair

Ossential Growth Factor Serum Plus

354

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Box 14.6

Triple-Action Ultraviolet Light Protection by the 
ZO System

Action  1  is  achieved  by  epidermal  stabilization  (Ossential  Daily 
Power Defense) applied in AM to strengthen the skin. This for-
mula  will  increase  skin  defenses  and  tolerance  of  ultraviolet 
(UV) light by suppressing inflammation, enhancing DNA pro-
tection,  and  repairing  and  stabilizing  melanocytes  to  provide 
“all-day benefits.” This step makes the ZO System of photopro-
tection better than that of any traditional chemical or physical 
sunblocks (see action 3).

Action 2 is achieved by incorporating natural melanin with physi-
cal blockers in one formulation. The melanin creates a barrier 
or umbrella on the skin surface that protects the skin’s natural 
melanin from UV light for “all-day protection.”

Action  3  uses  zinc  and  titanium  dioxide  as  physical  blockers  to 
offer extra protection. As such, they are typically used in other 
sunscreens  and  can  only  protect  the  skin  for  2  to  3  hours  at 
most. Studies have shown that people rarely reapply these types 
of sunblocks frequently enough to achieve adequate protection. 
That is another reason that ZO UV protection is better than that 
of other ordinary sunscreens.

ZOMD are potent and will induce anticipated skin reactions for a period of 
time before skin builds the necessary tolerance.

ZO SYSTEMS ANTICIPATED REACTIONS

Physicians  and  patients  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  more  aggressive  the 
program that is chosen, the stronger the initial skin reactions and the deeper 
the benefits will be. Most reactions disappear within 3 to 6 weeks, followed 

Box 14.7

Unique Benefits of ZO Systems

■■ Anti-inflammatory
■■ DNA repair and protection
■■ Strengthening and repair of skin barrier function
■■ Cellular activation and stabilization
■■ Calming  and  hydrating  without  the  damage  caused  by  typical 

moisturizers

Box 14.8

Anticipated Reactions

Most reactions disappear within 3 to 6 weeks, followed by the develop-
ment  of  a  robust  tolerance  and  restored  barrier  function,  along  with 
visible improvement of the skin.

355

A PHILOSOPHY BASED 
ON SCIENCE, CLINICAL 
EXPERIENCE, AND 
PREVENTION

by the development of a robust tolerance and restored barrier function, along 
with visible improvement of the skin (Box 14.8). To maximize results, treat-
ment programs with ZO products require at least three KMCs (5 months) to 
achieve the best results.

Nonmedical-basic  skin  care  and  prevention  programs  also  can  be  made 
aggressive, moderate, or mild by using certain formulations of retinol. When 
properly  educated  by  their  physicians,  patients  can  choose  and  control  the 
strength of their own nonmedical programs, which includes knowing when 
and how to stop skin reactions.

Most ZO products come with airtight pumps. The number of pumps applied 

determines the strength of the program (Box 14.9).

Additionally, the physician should educate patients about the importance 
of skin reactions. During treatment, these reactions are normal and expected, 
and  they  show  that  effective  repair  is  taking  place.  The  more  significant  a 
reaction a patient can tolerate, the faster and deeper the repair will be dur-
ing  the  uncomfortable  stage  of  treatment  (repair  stage).  Keep  in  mind  that 
most ZOMD formulations are approximately four to five times stronger than 
those in the ZO nonmedical (ZOSH) program and thus can cause stronger 
reactions.

Furthermore, the more skin damage a patient has, the more reactions the 
patient’s skin will experience. These reactions stop only when skin becomes 
strong and healthy. One must eliminate the old, damaged skin to make room 
for  new,  healthy  skin.  ZO  formulations  that  induce  anticipated  reactions 
include those shown in Box 14.10.

When starting patients on a ZO System, inform them about which formu-
lations can cause reactions, mark those products, and tell the patients how to 
minimize or stop reactions when needed. To minimize anticipated reactions, 
the physician can take one of the steps listed in Box 14.11.

Box 14.9

With any product, the number of pumps determines the strength of the 
program:

■■ 4 pumps: ideal for the aggressive approach
■■ 2 to 3 pumps: ideal for the moderate approach
■■ 1 to 2 pumps: ideal for the mild approach

356

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Box 14.10

ZO Formulations that Induce Anticipated Reactions

■■ Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair
■■ Retamax
■■ Brightenex
■■ Glycogent
■■ Aknetrol

Box 14.11

Reducing Reactions

■■ Identify the products that are responsible for the reaction.
■■ Stop use of the products causing the reaction and allow use of one of 
the hydrating and calming formulations instead. Reactions usually 
disappear within 4 days.

■■ Reduce  the  frequency  and  amount  of  the  reaction-causing  product 

that is being applied.

■■ Reduce  the  concentration  of  such  products  by  mixing  them  with 
one of the hydrating and calming formulations (Ommerse Renewal 
Crème, Ommerse Overnight Recovery Crème, or Restoracalm).
■■ Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair cannot be mixed with 
a  hydrating  and  calming  formulation.  Patients  can  reduce  the 
strength of Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair by applying 
a hydrating and calming product first.

■■ After reactions are resolved, the program can be started again at a 

strength that can be tolerated.

GUIDELINES FOR USING THE ZO SKIN HEALTH 
AND ZO MEDICAL SYSTEMS

The commonly encountered skin problems and their treatment according 
to  the  principles  of  ZO  Skin  Health  and  ZO  Medical  are  shown  in  Table 
14.5.  Studying  and  remembering  when  to  use  which  particular  steps  and 
how to apply the principles that guide them will go a long way toward meet-
ing the needs of a variety of patients. But do not try to memorize individual 
product  names  because  these  names  may  change.  You  should,  however, 
memorize skin health principles and steps of application because they will 
not change. Also remember that the standard duration for applying medi-
cal agents present in some of the principles is three KMCs (5 months) to 
achieve maximal benefits. The only exception involves preparing the skin 
for  a  procedure  (skin  conditioning).  Here,  use  each  principle  for  one  to 
three  cycles  before  the  procedure,  depending  on  skin  type  and  the  time 
required to treat and control any active disease. After the procedure, have 

Table 14.5  Steps and Principles of ZO Systems in Clinical Application

ZO System

Main Objective 

Principles: Order and Emphasis

ZOSH

Daily skin care: the basic program

ZOSH 

Early signs of photodamage and 
nonspecific discoloration

ZOMD

Photodamage, no discoloration

ZOMD

Pigmentation problem (with 
discoloration):
The hydroquinone (HQ) approach

Pigmentation problem (with 
discoloration):
The non-HQ approach
Emphasis on:

ZOMD

Acne, rosacea, seborrhea

ZOSH

Prevention

  1.  Getting skin ready
  2.  Epidermal stabilization
  3.  Dermal stabilization
  4.  Hydration and calming
  5.  Photoprotection

  1.  Correction
  2.  Epidermal stabilization
  3.  Stimulation

  Emphasis on:

•  Barrier function repair
•  DNA repair
•  Epidermal or dermal stabilization

  1.  Correction
  2.  Epidermal stabilization
  3.  Stimulation

  Emphasis on:

•  Barrier function repair
•  DNA repair
•  Epidermal or dermal stabilization

  1.  Correction (preparing skin, HQ-based bleaching, exfoliation)
  2.  Blending (tretinoin + HQ)

  Emphasis on:
  Bleaching and blending

  1.  Correction (Preparing skin, non-HQ-based bleaching or 

non-HQ-based blending)
  2.  Melanocyte stabilization
  3.  Epidermal stabilization
  4.  Stimulation (non-HQ-based blending)

  Emphasis on:
  Non-HQ-based blending

  1.  Correction
  2.  Disease-specific topical agents
  3.  Epidermal stabilization
  4.  Stimulation (when no pigmentation problems are present)
  5.  Blending (when pigmentation problems are present)

  Emphasis on improving texture through:

•  Exfoliation
•  Epidermal stabilization
•  Dermal stabilization

Emphasis on what needs to be prevented:
  1.  Aging: strong dermal stabilization
  2.  Acne:

•  Getting skin ready
•  Epidermal stabilization
  3.  Skin sensitivity, dryness:
•  Epidermal stabilization
•  Dermal stabilization (mild)
•  Hydration and calming

patients resume skin conditioning for one to three  more KMCs until the 
skin returns to normal.

In the ZOMD regimen, it is also important to remember that using HQ for 
pigmentation problems (bleaching and blending) provides fast, but short-lived, 

357

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ZOSH Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Non-HQ blending and melanocyte 
 stabilization: Brightenex (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Retamax (PM)

•  Photoprotection

Figure 14.1 
cific discoloration. (b) Six months later. The patient was treated with a nonmedical, non-HQ program.

(a) The patient had skin classified as original white. She was diagnosed as having early photodamage and nonspe-

results. Conversely, the non-HQ approach (blending) is slower but provides 
lasting  results.  For  this  reason,  when  treating  skin  pigmentation  problems, 
start with the HQ approach, in the following order:

•  Bleaching: up to 5 months, then switch to the non-HQ approach
•  Blending: up to 6 or 7 months, then switch to the non-HQ approach

Application of the Principles: Patient Results
Patients  suffering  from  early  photodamage  and  nonspecific  discoloration 
can  be  treated  successfully  with  ZOSH  alone  (Figure  14.1)  or  ZOSH  plus  a 
ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel or a ZO 3-Step Peel (Figures 14.2 to 14.5). The 

ZOSH Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Non-HQ blending: Brightenex (AM)

•  Barrier Repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Retamax (PM)

•  Photoprotection

Figure 14.2 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark) and medium thick. She was diagnosed as having early 
photodamage and lentigo solaris. (b) Six months later. The patient was treated with a ZOSH program, during which she had two 
treatments with a ZO 3-Step Peel.

358

ZOSH Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, toner

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  ZOSH Advanced Radical Night Repair 

(PM)

•  Hydration and calming

Figure 14.3 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (medium), thick, and dry. She was diagnosed as having mild 
aging changes, photodamage, and discoloration. (b) One year later. The patient was treated for 6 months with a ZOSH program, 
during which she had one ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel. The photograph shows the patient on the same ZOSH program during 
maintenance at one year.

resolution of the black patient’s discoloration and rough texture (see Figure 
14.5)  is  notable  given  the  greater  difficulty  in  treating  these  problems  in 
patients with black skin.

The ZOMD program was used to treat the patients shown in Figures 14.6 
to  14.11.  The  patient  shown  in  Figure  14.6  had  skin  classified  as  complex 

ZOSH Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil 

control

•  Non-HQ blending: Brightenex (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Retamax (PM)

Figure 14.4 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original black, medium thick, and very oily. She was diagnosed as having 
rough texture, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, comedones, and rosacea. This patient’s skin demonstrates the negative 
inflammatory effects of sebum. (b) Six months after treatment with a basic ZOSH program with emphasis on epidermal and 
melanocyte stabilization, reduction of sebum, and elimination of chronic inflammation. The patient also underwent two treat-
ments with the ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel. This patient is also an ideal candidate for treatment with ZO Medical and isotreti-
noin. This aproach was deferred because she did not want to have any reactions.

359

ZOSH Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Non-HQ blending: Brightenex (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Retamax (PM)

Figure 14.5 
(a) The patient had skin classified as original black, thick, and very oily. He was diagnosed as having large pores, 
rough texture, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, and pseudofolliculitis barbae. (b) Six months later. The patient was 
treated with ZOSH, with emphasis on epidermal and melanocyte stabilization and sebum reduction (topical Cebatrol from 
ZOMD and systemic isotretinoin, 20 mg/day for 5 months). He also had three treatments with the ZO Retinol Stimulation 
Peel.

and  displayed  postinflammatory  hyperpigmentation  and  deep  acne  scars. 
Although  his  complex  skin  type  is  considered  difficult  to  treat,  it  can  be 
improved by aggressive and properly performed procedures (peels, laser, the 
ZOMD program). Another patient with deviated skin type (Figure 14.7) suf-
fered from acne that did not respond to traditional acne treatment; however, 
she responded well to the ZOMD program and isotretinoin.

ZOMD Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Bleaching: Melamin (4% HQ) (AM 

and PM)

•  Exfoliation: Glycogent (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Blending: Tretinoin 0.1% + Melamix 

(4% HQ) (PM)

•  Retamax (PM)

Figure 14.6 
(a) The patient had skin classified as complex, thick, and oily. He was diagnosed as having deep acne scars (stretch-
able  and  nonstretchable).  (b)  One  year  later.  The  patient  was  treated  with  a  ZOMD  program  and  had  a  medium-depth  ZO 
Designed Controlled Depth Peel. Six months later, he had CO2 fractional laser treatment. His skin was treated with ZOMD 
(hydroquinone-based) for 5 months before and after each procedure. Procedures were performed after 6 weeks of the ZOMD 
program. He received isotretinoin, 20 mg daily for 5 months after the second procedure.

360

ZOMD Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Acne control: Aknetrol (benzoyl 

 peroxide) (AM)

•  Bleaching: Melamin (4% HQ) (AM 

and PM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Blending: tretinoin 0.1% plus Melamix 

(4% HQ) (PM)

Figure 14.7 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated Asian (medium), thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as having severe 
cystic acne, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, and acne scars. She was unresponsive to traditional treatments attempted by 
multiple dermatologists (topical agents and antibiotics). (b) Eighteen weeks later. The patient was treated with HQ-based ZOMD, 
hydroquinone, and benzoyl peroxide. She had aggressive correction and stimulation and used isotretinoin for 5 months. She is 
currently on a ZOSH maintenance program.

The patient with rosacea and PIH was treated successfully with the ZOMD 
program, isotretinoin, and Invisapeel (Figure 14.8). The patient with rosacea 
and  PIH  (Figure  14.9)  was  successfully  treated  with  an  HQ-based  ZOMD 
program  along  with  isotretinoin,  whereas  the  patient  with  melasma  (Figure 
14.10)  was  effectively  treated  with  an  HQ-based  ZOMD  program  and  a  ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis (IRD). Figure 14.11 
shows a patient with deviated Asian skin and seborrheic dermatitis, lentigines, 
seborrheic keratosis, and PIH successfully treated with a ZO Medical program, 
hyfrecation, and a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis (PD) level.

PHILOSOPHY ON MOISTURIZERS

The stratum corneum, the outermost layers of the epidermis, forms the skin’s 
all-important  barrier  function.  This  barrier,  consisting  of  dead  cells  called 
corneocytes, is enveloped by water, lipids, and protein. It maintains normal 
hydration, prevents penetration of infectious and toxic agents, and regulates 
electrolyte balance. One significant process that occurs in the stratum cor-
neum is constant renewal through exfoliation. In healthy skin, natural exfoli-
ation is an orderly process in which individual or small groups of corneocytes 
detach  from  neighboring  cells,  drop  off,  and  are  replaced  by  younger  cells 
from the deeper layers. The time it takes for keratinocytes to form, mature, 
and exfoliate from the stratum corneum is known as the KMC and takes an 
average of 6 weeks (see Chapter 2). A normal cycle allows the skin to main-
tain  an  effective  barrier  function  and  healthy  water  content.  It  also  allows 

361

362

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

Box 14.12

Undesirable Effects of Habitual Moisturizer Use
CELLULAR EFFECTS

■■ Natural  skin  surface  exfoliation  of  dead  corneocytes  weakens  or 

ceases.

■■ The dead cells accumulate, leading to reduced basal cell mitosis and 

decreased cellular activity.

■■ The water-lipid-protein balance in the stratum corneum is disturbed.
■■ The natural delivery of nutrients and water from within the epider-

mis and dermis is reduced.

■■ The barrier function is damaged.

CLINICAL EFFECTS

■■ Change in skin texture from suppression of natural skin exfoliation 

(roughness, dullness, and even accelerated aging)
■■ Drier, weaker, and sensitive skin (acquired dryness)
■■ Intolerance to products and procedures (acquired sensitivity)
■■ Dependence on external moisture supply (addiction)

skin hydration and transepidermal water loss to be regulated from within the 
body. In diseased and damaged skin, however, the barrier function may be 
impaired, causing xerosis or dry skin.

Recently, a new cause has emerged for dry and sensitive skin—the use of 
moisturizers. Excessive moisturization of the skin surface slows down the rate 
of natural exfoliation, thus altering the water, lipid, and protein balance and 
weakening the skin’s barrier function. This leads to strong acquired dryness 
and sensitivity that lead to increased moisturizer use and, eventually, to an 
addiction to moisturizers. Box 14.12 shows the undesirable effects of habitual 
moisturizer use.

EFFECTS OF FACIAL MOISTURIZERS

Moisturizer  advertisements  perpetrate  a  big  lie—that  moisturizers  can  pre-
vent or decrease skin aging. Facial moisturizers are among the most popular 
over-the-counter skin care products. Some simply offer increased hydration, 
whereas others promise repair benefits, such as anti-aging effects, skin firm-
ing, and anti-wrinkle activity. The most prevalent claim identifies “dry, thirsty 
skin”  as  the  major  offender  in  aging  or  problematic  skin.  Moisture  must  be 
“restored” through external means—through use of special hydrating cleans-
ers,  moisturizing  foundations,  moisturizers  to  complement  the  foundations, 
and so on—or a woman’s youth and beauty will be lost forever. The acceptance 
of  these  marketing  claims  has  been  so  widespread  that  even  dermatologists 
and plastic surgeons recommend use of facial moisturizers to their patients. 
Scientific evidence to support these marketing claims is invariably not available.

363

PHILOSOPHY ON 
MOISTURIZERS

Box 14.13

The Truth about Moisturizers

■■ The advertising of moisturizers perpetrates a big lie—that moisturiz-

ers prevent or decrease skin aging.

■■ Over-the-counter  moisturizers  do  not  penetrate  below  the  stratum 

corneum and never reach deeper into the epidermis.

■■ Occasional use of moisturizers can help reduce temporary skin dry-
ness and irritability from prolonged exposure to wind, cold, or heat 
that  tend  to  dehydrate  skin  surface,  but  they  should  not  be  used 
routinely.

True Effects of Moisturizers
Most moisturizers consist of variable percentages of water, lipid, and protein 
and work by hydrating the skin surface. They do not replace natural hydration 
to all skin layers. Moisturizer products merely comfort skin, improve surface 
texture by hydration (artificial smoothing), or plump the surface of skin, lead-
ing to a very temporary improvement of wrinkles. They provide a short-lived 
feeling of skin smoothness and fast gratification and are well tolerated. The 
“extra” ingredients in moisturizers, such as anti-aging, whitening, and nutri-
tional benefits, are false and not supported by science.

Keep in mind that there is no guarantee that any moisturizer will live up 
to all of its claims or even contain its advertised ingredients. Moisturizers are 
considered cosmetics, so the FDA regulates them in a more lenient manner 
than it does drugs. This means that these products do not need to undergo 
the same rigorous testing for safety and effectiveness before going to market 
that prescription drugs require. The popularity of moisturizers with women 
is a likely result of aggressive marketing by manufacturers and the desire for 
a quick solution to dryness and signs of aging. But these products do not and 
cannot live up to their claims because they do not penetrate below the stra-
tum corneum to have any measurable effect, and they inevitably disappoint 
their users.

Perhaps moisturizer users do not have the patience or inclination to explore 
the scientific validity of advertising claims, or they simply want to believe that 
there is a simple answer, a magic formula to erase signs of aging. A program 
of Skin Health Restoration takes time and patience, and the woman must be 

Box 14.14

Moisturizer Addiction

■■ By keeping the stratum corneum at a high level of moisture satura-
tion, moisturizers slow down the rate of stratum corneum exfoliation.
■■ After constant application, skin becomes dependent on the moistur-
izers, and constant use is required—that is, an addiction develops.

ZOMD Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Exfoliation: Glycogent (AM)

•  Bleaching: Melamin (4% HQ) (AM 

and PM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Blending: Tretinoin 0.1% plus Melamix 

(4% HQ) (PM)

The Invisapeel was applied three times 
a week, left on for 3 hours, and then 
washed off.

Figure 14.8 
(a) The patient had skin classified as white, medium thick, and very oily skin. She was diagnosed as having rosacea, 
rough texture, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (b) She was treated with an HQ-based ZOMD program and isotreti-
noin, 20 mg/day for 5 months. Invisapeel was applied to accelerate and improve results.

willing to renounce the possibility of a quick solution with a moisturizer. Box 
14.13  presents  the  truth  about  moisturizers.  Box  14.14  explains  moisturizer 
addiction.

Skin Sensitivity from Moisturizer Use
The habitual use of facial moisturizers eventually dehydrates skin and creates 
acquired dryness. In addition, habitual use leads to acquired skin sensitivity 

ZOMD Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Exfoliation: Glycogent (AM)

•  Bleaching: Melamin (4% HQ) (AM 

and PM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Blending: tretinoin 0.1% plus Melamix 

(4% HQ) (PM)

The Invisapeel was applied three times 
a week, left on for 3 hours, and then 
washed off.

Figure 14.9 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated (medium) Asian, thick, and very oily. (He was diagnosed as having 
rosacea, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and seborrheic dermatitis. (b) One year later. He was treated for 5 months with a non-
HQ-based ZOMD program and used isotretinoin, 20 mg/day. Electrodessication was performed to treat the sebaceous gland 
hyperplasia. One ZO 3-Step Peel was also performed.

364

ZOMD Maintenance Program

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil 

control

•  Non-HQ blending: Brightenex (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power 

Defense (AM)

•  Retamax (PM)

•  ZO 3-Step Peel planned two to three 
times per year, if melasma reappeared

Figure 14.10 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated white (dark), medium thick, and oily. She was diagnosed as hav-
ing melasma (epidermal and dermal) based on Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test. (b) One year later. The patient was treated for 
5 months with aggressive HQ-based ZOMD treatment and one ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the immediate reticular dermis.

because of the damaging effects on skin barrier function. It should be noted 
that “skin sensitivity” is not a true sensitivity disorder, which can be seen with 
certain  cases  of  skin  disease  or  genetic  disorders,  but  is  in  fact  skin  weak-
ness  or  intolerance.  Eliminating  the  so-called  skin  sensitivity  necessitates 
discontinuation of the very products that are promoted as a solution to skin 

ZOMD Program (Aggressive)

•  Preparing skin: wash, scrub, oil control

•  Bleaching: Melamin (4% HQ) (1 gram, AM and PM)

•  Exfoliation: Glycogent (AM)

•  Barrier repair: Ossential Daily Power Defense (AM)

•  Blending: tretinoin 0.1% and Melamix (4% HQ) (PM)

Figure 14.11 
(a) The patient had skin classified as deviated (medium) Asian. He was diagnosed as having seborrheic dermatitis, 
lentigines, dermatosis papulosa nigra (DPN), and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (b) Six months later. By week 6 of his 
ZO Medical program, one session of hyfrecation had been performed on the DPNs. By week 12, the patient had undergone a ZO 
Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis. He followed the same ZOMD program for another 6 weeks and was then started 
on ZOSH maintenance.

365

366

DR. ZEIN OBAGI’S PERSONAL 
PHILOSOPHY ON SKIN 
HEALTH

sensitivity—moisturizers—and the beginning of a commitment to skin bar-
rier function repair that will effectively increase skin tolerance and prevent 
sensitivity.  However,  conditioned  as  they  are  to  the  desirability  of  gentle, 
nonirritating  products,  many  patients  will  complain  about  the  anticipated 
reactions that are part of barrier function repair. Dermatologists must spend 
time reassuring patients that the temporary burning and stinging are desir-
able reactions that lead to skin tolerance and improved function. It may be 
too much to expect all patients to eliminate habitual use of moisturizers and 
accept  the  anticipated  reactions,  but  one  by  one,  the  mindset  of  patients  in 
these areas may be changed.

Recommendations
In the ZO skin conditioning and Skin Health Restoration programs, certain 
products have been created to calm and hydrate the skin (the hydration and 
calming  principle—using  Ommerse  Renewal  Crème,  Ommerse  Overnight 
Recovery  Crème,  or  Restoracalm).  These  agents  are  to  be  used  only  when 
needed for soothing the skin while it is undergoing the correction and stimu-
lation processes. This includes the short period of time during which a patient 
desires  to  reduce  the  normal  skin  reactions  to  tretinoin  and  alpha-hydroxy 
acids  for  a  short  period  of  comfort  or  for  social  events.  In  addition,  use  of 
certain  hydrators  is  permitted  in  patients  with  atopic  dermatitis,  asteatosis 
of old age, or the dry skin type (see Zein Obagi Skin Classification System in 
Chapter 4), which cannot become properly hydrated because of genetic influ-
ence. In these cases, the ZO calming and anti-inflammatory hydrators can be 
used long term while normal skin barrier functions are being repaired.

Remember  that  skin  does  not  feel  dry  and  moisturizers  are  not  needed 
when  skin  cell  functions  are  intact.  Correction  and  stimulation  eventually 
returns natural hydration from within, especially in the stratum corneum, 
which  often  eliminates  the  need  for  moisturizers. The  cycle  of  moisturizer 
addiction can be broken when patients are informed about the damage that 
excessive moisturizer use can cause and can see the improvements in their 
skin after Skin Health Restoration.

A SELECTION OF 
CLINICAL CASES

The  following  cases  were  chosen  to  illustrate  Dr.  Zein  Obagi’s  approach  to 
using  ZO  Skin  Health  (ZOSH)  and  ZO  Medical  (ZOMD)  principles  and 
products in his treatments. The appropriate treatment and maintenance steps 
are outlined, and careful consideration is given to the ZO Peels discussed in 
Chapters 9 and 10. With each case, the patient’s skin health is analyzed, which 
includes the skin’s surface texture, color, tolerance, hydration level, and pres-
ence or absence of clinical disease. A suitable treatment and maintenance plan 
then follows.

CHAPTER 

15

PATIENT 1: MELASMA

SKIN CLASSIFICATION

Color: original Asian
Thickness: medium
Oiliness: oily
Laxity: minimal
Propensity for atypical healing*: none

PATIENT HISTORY

The  patient  in  Figure  15.1  intermittently  used  prescription-strength  hydro-
quinone (HQ) for bleaching and blending purposes for 3 years without any 
medical supervision. After two visits with her initial dermatologist, she began 
purchasing these HQ products online. Her skin improved minimally at the 
beginning, but with subsequent ongoing “self-medication,” her melasma wors-
ened. She concurrently received four intense pulsed light (IPL) treatments and 
several exfoliative procedures with glycolic acid. The patient reported that the 
IPL caused her melasma to worsen and that the exfoliative procedures pro-
vided  no  improvement.  She  was  in  good  overall  health,  with  no  history  of 
allergies. She was currently taking the oral contraceptive pill and had previ-
ously used topical antibiotics for acne that commenced at age 12 years.

*Propensity for atypical healing is explained in Chapter 4.

368

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

Figure 15.1  Patient 1 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

DIAGNOSIS

The  patient  was  diagnosed  with  dermal  and  epidermal  melasma  (based  on 
Dr. Zein  Obagi  Skin  Stretch  test  results),  rosacea,  oily  skin,  and  subjective 
skin sensitivity.

OVERALL SKIN HEALTH

The  patient’s  skin  was  uneven  in  color  (melasma),  rough  in  texture,  weak 
in  tolerance,  and  normally  hydrated,  and  active  skin  disease  (rosacea)  was 
present.

TREATMENT PLAN

The treatment plan consisted of an overall approach to restore complete skin 
health. It emphasized reversing the patient’s melasma and rosacea, while also 
reducing the skin’s sensitivity through barrier function repair (Table 15.1).

The following key points were explained to the patient:

•  Her skin diagnosis and the appropriate planned course of treatment.
•  Skin improvement is expected to occur gradually.
•  Reactions  (redness,  dryness,  exfoliation)  are  anticipated  during  the  early 
stages of treatment. It is important to continue with the program despite 
the appearance of these signs so that the skin will build tolerance to the pro-
gram. Explanation was also given on how to control these reactions when 
required. She was further advised that the stronger these reactions, the bet-
ter her results would be, and the faster her skin conditions would improve.
•  A long-term maintenance regime will be required after she has finished 
the treatment because there is no permanent cure for melasma or rosacea.

369

PATIENT 1: MELASMA

Table 15.1  Patient 1: Treatment Plan

Step

Start ZOMD program

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the papillary dermis (PD)
More than one procedure may be needed*

After healing, add isotretinoin and restart the ZOMD 
program
Multiple treatments with the ZO 3-Step Stimulation 
Peel can be performed during this period†

Duration

Six weeks of medical skin 
conditioning

Eight to 10 days of healing

Five months of treatment

ZO Maintenance Program

As directed by physician

* In the future, a second ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD, a pigment laser procedure, 
or a CO2 fractional laser procedure may be required.
† The ZO 3-Step Stimulation Peel will help to exfoliate the pigmentation at a faster rate 
while also providing dermal benefit for improvement of rough texture.

The ZOMD treatment products used by the patient for skin conditioning 

are shown in Table 15.2.

Treatment Preparation and Course
After 6 weeks of using the ZOMD treatment steps for skin conditioning, the 
patient  consented  to  undergo  a  ZO  Controlled  Depth  Peel  to  the  papillary 
dermis (PD). In preparation for this peel, the patient was:

•  Instructed to stop both the exfoliation (Glycogent) and blending (Melamix, 
tretinoin) steps 4 days before the peel. The purpose of this was to arrest 
any remaining anticipated reactions.

•  Told about the postpeel healing stages and their duration
•  Provided with written home-care instructions and product supplies
•  Questioned about herpes simplex virus history and, if needed, provided 

with the appropriate prophylaxis

The patient underwent a ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the PD as scheduled, 
and her skin healed fully within 8 days. By postpeel day 10, she restarted appli-
cation of the ZOMD products. She proceeded gradually, following the same 
steps that she had used for initial skin conditioning. As tolerated, she increased 
the program strength until the desired aggressive approach was achieved.

After her skin had healed from the peel, isotretinoin, 20 mg/day, was intro-
duced to treat her rosacea simultaneously. Isotretinoin was specifically cho-
sen instead of photodynamic therapy because the latter is contraindicated in 
patients who have both melasma and rosacea. Of note, the patient fulfilled the 
isotretinoin risk management program requirements before beginning treat-
ment. One month later, a single ZO 3-Step Peel was performed to improve her 
skin’s texture. Treatment was completed within 6 months, and a maintenance 
program was then recommended (Table 15.3).

Treatment Notes

•  HQ used for bleaching (Melamin) purposes should be discontinued in 
all patients after 5 months. This is to avoid inducing photosensitivity and 
HQ resistance.

Table 15.2  Patient 1: ZOMD Products Used for Treatment

Product

Application

Comment

Step
Skin preparation
Cleanse
Scrub

Oilacleanse
Vitascrub

AM and PM
Once daily

Oil control

Cebatrol

AM and PM

Epidermal 
exfoliation

Glycogen

AM, 2 pumps (½ gram)

Bleaching

Melamin (4% 
hydroquinone [HQ])

Epidermal 
stabilization

Ossential Daily Power 
Defense

Blending

Melamix (4% HQ)
plus tretinoin (0.1%)

AM and PM, 4 pumps 
for each application as 
follows:
Treat the entire face.
Focus product 
application on severely 
affected areas.
Decrease the amount of 
product applied to 
nonaffected areas.
AM and PM, 3 pumps

AM and PM
In milder cases, only 
blending can be 
performed and only at 
PM.
With each application, 
freshly mix together: 
Melamix (2 pumps) 
and tretinoin (1 gram)
(size of 1 inch of regular 
toothpaste)

Oily skin cleanser for all pigmentation problems. It is 
used to boost epidermal renewal and deeply cleanse 
pores.
For both chemical and mechanical exfoliation, 
enhanced epidermal renewal, and deep pore 
cleansing
This sebum-reducing astringent provides deep pore 
cleansing, antibacterial activity, and anti-inflammatory 
benefits. It may cause a stinging sensation.
For epidermal exfoliation and renewal and to further 
enhance the penetration of other agents. (Glycogent was 
given to this patient to address the rosacea. It is not used 
routinely in melasma treatment.) Glycogent causes a 
stinging sensation.
HQ for skin bleaching combined with anti-
inflammatory agents.
The patient previously used HQ for 3 years to bleach 
her skin. Intermittently, she also used HQ with 
tretinoin, but she stopped this combination once 
anticipated reactions began to appear.
At the time of the initial consultation with the patient, 
there was no evidence of HQ resistance. The melasma 
HQ treatment protocol was therefore selected to 
provide both bleaching and blending effects.
For barrier function renewal, anti-inflammatory 
activity, DNA repair and protection, antioxidant 
benefit, and melanocyte stabilization, and to increase 
the skin’s resistance to ultraviolet light.
HQ and tretinoin, when combined in this penetration-
enhancing formula, generate a blending effect.
Blending offers both dermal stimulation and the 
restoration of an even skin tone without any 
bleaching effect.
This mixture causes strong anticipated reactions 
(redness, dryness, and exfoliation). Anti-
inflammatory and barrier repair agents are added to 
the formula to calm these reactions.
As with bleaching, the mixture is to be applied to the 
entire face, focusing application on severely affected 
areas.

Controlling 
reactions

Ommerse Daily 
Renewal Crème
Ommerse Overnight 
Recovery Crème
Hydrafirm (eye cream)

AM and PM, as needed Anti-inflammatory, nourishing agents to be used only 
occasionally. They are given to calm the skin during 
the reaction phase.

Sun Protection Oclipse Broad 

AM, reapply as needed

Spectrum Tinted 
Sunscreen SPF 30 or 
Oclipse-C Broad 
Spectrum Sunscreen 
SPF 50

370

A comprehensive sunscreen with physical blocks 
(UVA/UVB), fractionated melanin (high-energy 
visible light), and antioxidants.

Table 15.3  Patient 1: Products Used for Maintenance

Step

Skin preparation

Exfoliation

Bleaching

Product

Oilacleanse
Vitascrub
Cebatrol

Glycogent

Melamin (4% HQ)

Non-HQ melanocyte stabilization, blending Brightenex (no bleaching effects)

Epidermal stabilization

Ossential Daily Power Defense

Blending

Stimulation

Hydration

Melamix (4% HQ)
Tretinoin (0.1%)

Retamax

Ommerse Daily Renewal Crème

Ommerse Overnight 
Recovery Crème Hydrafirm

Application

Maintained

Discontinued

Discontinued

AM, 3 pumps

Maintained
AM only, 3 pumps

Discontinued

PM, 3 pumps

Maintained, but optional 
AM and PM, as needed

Ultraviolet protection

Oclipse Broad Spectrum Tinted Sunscreen SPF 30 
or Oclipse-C Broad Spectrum Sunscreen SPF 50

Maintained AM, reapply as 
needed

•  Blending (Melamix, tretinoin) can continue for 7 to 8 months. It should be 
applied PM but only during the early phases of maintenance. The blending 
step should be replaced by Retamax for long-term stimulation and stabi-
lization. Alternatively, if patients require blending beyond 7 or 8 months, 
they  may  alternate  between  blending  one  night  and  retinol  stimulation 
(Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair or Retamax) the following night.

Treatment Results
This patient achieved outstanding results on program completion. Her skin now 
fulfilled all the criteria for skin health, including a smooth skin surface, even color 
throughout, strong tolerance, natural hydration, and no active clinical disease.
The  patient  will  continue  with  the  previously  detailed  maintenance  reg-
imen,  and  she  will  be  placed  in  ZO  Skin  Health  Circle  to  receive  ongoing 
observation and service. However, despite the use of a maintenance program, 
it is possible for melasma and rosacea to return. This can occur a year or more 
after initial successful treatment. She was informed of this possibility on her 
initial consultation, and as such, the physician cannot rule out further need 
for bleaching, blending, exfoliation, or use of isotretinoin.

PATIENT 2: SOLAR ELASTOSIS

SKIN CLASSIFICATION

Color: light white
Thickness: medium
Oiliness: normal
Laxity: moderate
Propensity for atypical healing: none

371

372

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

PATIENT HISTORY

The patient in Figure 15.2 was highly motivated to improve her appearance. 
Fifty-five years of sun exposure had created classic solar elastosis marked by 
leathery  texture,  yellowish  color,  and  deep,  firm  wrinkles  and  furrows  that 
failed to improve on stretching. Of note, she had a positive past history for 
cold sores but was otherwise in good overall health.

DIAGNOSIS

Solar elastosis, acquired skin sensitivity, and skin dehydration.

OVERALL SKIN HEALTH

The patient’s skin was even in color, displayed a rough texture, and was sensi-
tive with poor hydration (due to moisturizer overuse).

TREATMENT PLAN

This  patient  primarily  required  a  deep  resurfacing  procedure  such  as  a  CO2 
fractional  laser  or  a  medium-depth  ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth  Peel. 
However, with her initial poor skin health, she was neither able to benefit nor 
tolerate such a procedure. Her skin needed strengthening before undergoing 
any resurfacing. The primary aim was to repair her skin’s barrier function and 
restore  natural  hydration  to  the  epidermis  and  dermis.  This  can  be  accom-
plished by nonmedical skin conditioning (ZOSH) for 6 to 8 weeks (Table 15.4). 
It is essential for the skin to be properly hydrated before the CO2 fractional laser 
procedure or the ZO Controlled Depth Peel is performed in order to obtain an 
even response and uniform results.

Figure 15.2  Patient 2 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

Table 15.4  Patient 2: Treatment Plans

Step

Product

Application

Comment

Skin preparation

Offects Hydrating Cleanser

AM and PM

Treatment Plan to Eliminate Skin Sensitivity

Offects Exfoliating Polish

Once daily or less, as 
tolerated

Balatone

AM and PM

Epidermal stabilization

Dermal stabilization

Hydrating and calming

Sun protection

Stabilization

Ossential Daily Power 
Defense

Ossential Growth Factor 
Serum Plus

Ommerse Daily Renewal 
Crème
Ommerse Overnight 
Recovery Crème

Oclipse Broad Spectrum 
Tinted Sunscreen SPF 30 or 
Oclipse-C Broad Spectrum 
Sunscreen SPF 50

Ossential Advanced Radical 
Night Repair

AM, 2 to 3 pumps

PM, 2 to 3 pumps

AM and PM, as needed

AM, reapply as needed

PM, 2 to 3 pumps
Begin by using once weekly, 
and gradually increase until 
tolerated nightly.

Treatment Plan for Skin Conditioning

Cleanser for normal to dry 
skin that hydrates and 
rejuvenates without 
disrupting the moisture 
barrier
Exfoliating scrub to increase 
epidermal turnover and 
promote healthy circulation
A calming, pH-balancing 
toner used to invigorate dry, 
weak skin

To repair skin’s barrier 
function

To stimulate dermal activity 
and hydration

Anti-inflammatory 
nourishing agents to be used 
only occasionally to calm 
the skin during the reaction 
phase

Comprehensive sunscreen 
with physical blocks (UVA/
UVB), fractionated melanin 
(high-energy visible light), 
and antioxidants

High-potency retinol for 
aggressive anti-aging and 
dermal stimulation

Skin preparation
Cleanse
Scrub
Oil control

Epidermal stabilization

Stimulation (blending)

Oilacleanse
Vitascrub
Cebatrol

Ossential Daily Power 
Defense

Melamix (4% HQ)
Tretinoin 0.1%

AM and PM
Once daily
AM and PM

AM, 2 to 3 pumps

PM
With each application, freshly 
mix together: Melamix 
(2 pumps; ½ gram) and 
tretinoin (1 gram)

Blending offers aggressive 
dermal stimulation and the 
restoration of an even skin 
tone without any bleaching 
effect.

Treatment Course
Because the patient reported having skin sensitivity, her treatment plan was 
divided into two parts: 1) eliminating skin sensitivity using ZO Skin Health 
(ZOSH) (nonmedical) and 2) conditioning her skin to prepare it for needed 
procedures  and  managing  skin  after  the  procedure.  The  treatment  choice 
for  eliminating  skin  sensitivity  consisted  of  epidermal  stabilization  using 
Ossential  Daily  Power  Defense  and  dermal  stabilization  using  Ossential 

373

Growth Factor Serum Plus, with the addition of Ossential Advanced Radical 
Night Repair to be used gradually until it is tolerated as a nightly applica-
tion. This would indicate the elimination of skin sensitivity and moisturizer 
addiction. ZOMD skin conditioning was started at that time to prepare skin 
for the procedure.

It is important to note that the patient’s skin-conditioning program (ZO-
MD) did not include bleaching (Melamin) because she had no pigmentation 
problems.  However,  blending  using  tretinoin  plus  HQ  was  used  at  PM  as  a 
general repair to control skin melanocytes, to maintain even color tone, and 
to prevent potential postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH).

Selecting the Appropriate Procedure
Considering this patient’s skin type and her clinical presentation—light white 
skin of medium thickness, solar elastosis, and textural problems (a leathery 
feel  with  unstretchable  wrinkles)—one  of  several  resurfacing  procedures 
could be used:

  1. Phenol  peel.  In  expert  hands,  this  peel  produces  exceptional  results. 
However, it is not recommended because it will thin the skin and result 
in permanent hypopigmentation or depigmentation.

  2. Standard  dermabrasion.  This  too  is  a  very  effective  procedure  when 
properly  performed.  However,  today  many  dermatologists  consider  it 
obsolete.

  3. CO2 laser resurfacing. This is an effective procedure when performed 
in  the  correct  manner.  However,  this  choice  carries  a  high  rate  of 
complications.

  4. CO2 fractional laser resurfacing. This procedure is currently quite pop-
ular. It is ideal for improving textural problems of the skin (unstretchable 
wrinkles  and  scars).  Patients  may  require  one  to  three  of  these  proce-
dures, depending on the skill and aggressiveness of the physician.
  5. ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel (medium depth). This peel could 
also be a viable and effective option for this patient. As with CO2 frac-
tional laser resurfacing, she may require one to three peels, depending on 
the practitioner’s skills.

In many appropriate cases, combining the ZO Controlled Depth Peel with 
a CO2 fractional laser provides synergistic results. In such scenarios, the peel 
is  performed  first,  reaching  at  least  the  immediate  reticular  dermis  (IRD) 
(observing for frost with no visible pink background). Immediately after, dur-
ing  the  same  treatment  session,  a  CO2  fractional  laser  is  used  to  efface  the 
remaining indurated wrinkles or scars.

Procedure Choice for This Patient
After the patient began a treatment protocol that consisted of 6 weeks of skin 
conditioning  (ZO  Skin  Health  Restoration)  using  ZOMD  she  had  one  ZO 
Designed Controlled Depth Peel that reached the PD, IRD, and upper reticu-
lar dermis (URD). After healing, she resumed her ZO regimen for a further 
12 weeks. She later began the maintenance program as a member of the ZO 
Skin  Health  Circle.  Her  post-treatment  photo  was  taken  1  year  after  initial 
treatment.

374

375

PATIENT 3: PHOTODAMAGE

Overall, this case highlights the importance of eliminating skin sensitiv-
ity before peels or fractional resurfacing procedures. Skin conditioning (ZO 
Skin Health Restoration) is essential before these procedures because it helps 
restore even skin hydration. This is crucial because water is the chromophore 
for both the CO2 laser and the trichloroacetic acid (TCA) procedure. If the 
skin  is  poorly  hydrated,  the  laser  will  cause  severe  burns  and  lead  to  seri-
ous complications. Similarly, TCA cannot coagulate skin proteins in poorly 
hydrated skin, and no frost or only a thin frost will form. This can mislead the 
physician into applying more TCA in an attempt to achieve a frost and may 
cause severe, deep, caustic burns and other complications. Achieving properly 
hydrated skin before a procedure avoids all these problems and ensures a safer 
outcome with more even results.

PATIENT 3: PHOTODAMAGE

SKIN CLASSIFICATION

Color: normal white
Thickness: thick
Oiliness: oily
Laxity: minimal
Propensity for atypical healing: none

PATIENT HISTORY

The patient in Figure 15.3 endured many years of extensive sun exposure with-
out adequate protection. This resulted in repeated sunburns. She presented to 
the clinic eager to improve the large brown spots and freckling throughout 
her face. One year prior, a basal cell carcinoma had been removed from the 

Figure 15.3  Patient 3 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

376

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

left side of her chin. The patient was otherwise healthy with no allergic history 
or prior cold sores.

DIAGNOSIS

Severe photodamage, actinic keratoses, lentigines, freckles, oily skin.

OVERALL SKIN HEALTH

The  patient’s  skin  showed  roughness,  oiliness,  discoloration  (freckles  and 
lentigines),  mild  sensitivity,  poor  hydration,  and  severe  photodamage  with 
actinic keratosis on a background of prior basal cell carcinoma.

TREATMENT PLAN

The patient required a combination of ZOMD creams and a ZO Controlled 
Depth  Peel  to  the  IRD.  The  moderate  protocol  for  skin  conditioning  was 
selected as the appropriate program. This regimen was used before and after 
the peel (Table 15.5). The objectives were to repair damaged DNA and provide 
total epidermal renewal, with dermal stimulation.

Maintenance
This patient’s maintenance program was designed with an emphasis placed on 
stabilization of the epidermis, the melanocytes, and the dermis (Table 15.6).

PATIENT 4: ACNE SCARS

SKIN CLASSIFICATION

Color: dark white
Thickness: thick
Oiliness: oily
Laxity: minimal
Propensity for atypical healing: none

PATIENT HISTORY

The  patient  in  Figure  15.4  has  a  history  of  severe  acne  during  adolescence. 
Her disease left various scars, primarily on the bilateral cheeks. Several physi-
cians refused to perform deep resurfacing procedures because of her dark skin 
color. The patient was healthy with no allergies and no prior history of cold 
sores.

Table 15.5  Patient 3: ZOMD Products Used for Treatment and Skin Conditioning

Step

Products

Skin preparation

Oilacleanse

Application

AM and PM

Vitascrub

Once daily

Epidermal 
exfoliation

Bleaching (HQ 
approach)

Epidermal 
stabilization

Blending

Hydration and 
calming

UV protection

Cebatrol

AM and PM

Glycogent

AM, 2 to 3 pumps

Melamin (4% HQ)

AM and PM, 4 pumps

AM and PM, 3 pumps

PM
With each application, 
freshly mix together: 
Melamix (2 pumps) and 
tretinoin (1 gram)

AM and PM, as needed

AM and reapplication

Ossential Daily Power 
Defense

Melamix (4% HQ)
Tretinoin (0.1%)

Ommerse Daily Renewal 
Crème, Ommerse
Overnight Recovery 
Crème

Oclipse Broad Spectrum 
Tinted Sunscreen SPF 30 
or Oclipse-C Broad 
Spectrum Sunscreen 
SPF 50

Comment

Oily skin cleanser for all pigmentation 
problems
A chemical and mechanical exfoliant to 
improve the patient’s skin texture and 
enhance epidermal renewal
Oil reduction step particularly important when 
treating pigmentation disorders

An exfoliative lotion for texture repair and a 
faster rate of pigmentation improvement

HQ used to bleach the skin and reduce the 
excess pigment production

Barrier restoration, ultraviolet (UV) 
protection, and melanocyte stabilization

Blending is used to provide a more even skin 
tone while aggressively causing dermal 
stimulation.

Used occasionally to calm and nourish the 
skin during the reaction phase.

Sunscreen with physical blocks (UVA/UVB), 
fractionated melanin (high-energy visible 
light), and antioxidants
Because of her photosensitivity, she is 
susceptible to the damaging effects of UV 
rays and requires a robust approach in sun 
protection. By combining Ossential Daily 
Power Defense use with either of these two 
sunscreens, she is protecting her skin both 
internally and externally. This provides 
comprehensive photoprotection and, 
invariably, better overall skin health.

DIAGNOSIS

Acne scarring (icepick scars, stretchable and depressed scars), and PIH.

OVERALL SKIN HEALTH

The patient’s skin was rough in texture, oily, discolored (PIH), and tolerant, 
with no active disease and normal hydration.

TREATMENT PLAN

The goal was to prescribe an aggressive ZOMD skin-conditioning program 
for 6 to 8 weeks, and then perform a resurfacing procedure. A few supportive 

377

378

Table 15.6  Patient 3: Products Used for Maintenance

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

Step

Skin preparation

Exfoliation

Bleaching

Non-HQ melanocyte 
stabilization

Product

Oilacleanse
Vitascrub
Cebatrol

Glycogent

Melamin (4% HQ)

Brightenex

Application

Maintained

Discontinued

Discontinued

AM, 3 pumps

Epidermal stabilization Ossential Daily Power Defense Maintained

Blending

Stimulation

Hydration

Ultraviolet protection

Melamix (4% HQ)
Tretinoin (0.1%)

Retamax

Ommerse Daily Renewal 
Crème
Ommerse Overnight Recovery 
Crème

Oclipse Broad Spectrum 
Tinted Sunscreen SPF 30 or 
Oclipse-C Broad Spectrum 
Sunscreen SPF 50

AM only, 3 pumps

Discontinued

PM, 3 pumps

Maintained, but optional 
AM and PM, as needed

Maintained
AM, reapply as needed

procedures would also be necessary during this period to address the different 
types of scars. After she had healed from the procedure, she was to continue 
with the ZOMD program, and isotretinoin would be added simultaneously 
for 3 to 5 months.

Treatment Note
This  patient  and  several  others  mentioned  in  this  book  used  the  original 
Nu-Derm  system.  Although  the  patient’s  response  to  Nu-Derm  was  good, 
restoration  of  skin  to  normal  health  took  longer  because  of  certain  factors 

Figure 15.4  Patient 4 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

379

PATIENT 4: ACNE SCARS

that were not recognized 20 years ago when Nu-Derm was introduced. Had 
the ZOMD program been used instead, it would have resulted in faster heal-
ing and more permanent skin health. Table 15.7 shows a comparison of the 
Nu-Derm  system  used  by  this  patient  and  what  could  have  been  used  with 
ZOMD.

Treatment Course
The  patient  underwent  a  ZO  Designed  Controlled  Depth  Peel  with  varying 
depths  throughout  her  face,  including  the  PD,  IRD,  and  URD.  The  patient’s 
skin healed completely within 12 days. Postoperatively, she suffered from strong 
PIH for 2 months, which did not respond to bleaching and blending. However, 
a  good  response  followed  when  sebum  was  reduced  through  the  addition  of 
isotretinoin, 20 mg/day for 3 months. Supportive procedures performed during 

Table 15.7  Comparison of the Nu-Derm System Used by the Patient and the ZOMD Program

Nu-Derm

Program Previously Used for This Patient 

The Steps

Oily skin cleanser

Surface skin scrub

Sebum control

pH balance “all”

Target

Epidermal repair

Bleaching

Epidermal stabilization: for 
barrier function and DNA 
repair

Foaming Gel

NA

NA

Toner

Nu-Derm

Exfoderm

Clear

NA

ZOMD

New Program

The Steps

Skin Preparation

Oilacleanse

Vitascrub

Remove impurities

Mechanical stimulation and exfoliation 
(skin renewal)

Cebatrol

Exfoliate, anti-inflammatory

Balatone
Dry, sensitive skin

Calming

Correction
ZOMD

Glycogent

Objective

Renew the epidermis through exfoliation

Melamin (4% HQ)

Reduce melanin production

Ossential Daily Power 
Defense

Anti-inflammatory, ultraviolet (UV) 
protection and melanocyte stabilization, 
barrier function renewal, DNA repair

Target

Epidermis and dermis

Nu-Derm

Tretinoin

Blending (Stimulation plus Hydroquinone)

Stimulation (Nonhydroquinone)

ZOMD

Tretinoin

Objective

Stimulate epidermal and dermal repair

Target

Nu-Derm

ZOMD

Objective

Epidermis, dermis, melanin

Tretinoin plus 
Blender (4% HQ)

Tretinoin plus Melamix 
(4% HQ)

Stimulate and restore even color

Skin texture

N/A

Advanced Radical 
Night Repair, Retamax 
(after blending has 
been accomplished)

Improve texture and provide anti-aging 
benefits

Target

Reactions

Reaction Control/Hydration and Calming

Nu-Derm

ZOMD

Objective

Action (will weaken 
the treatment)

Restoracalm (will not 
weaken the treatment)

Calming, hydrating, and anti-inflammatory

380

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

the  initial  conditioning  period  included  punch  excision  for  icepick  scars  and 
scar subcision. A total of 10 icepick scars were punched out and allowed to heal 
naturally.  Afterward,  only  slight  depressions  were  left,  which  were  later  cor-
rected with a peel. Two other depressed scars on the right cheek were subcised 1 
month before the peel. With this technique, a special needle was used to lift the 
base of the scars and break up the fibrous attachments.

This patient used the Nu-Derm system. Here, a comparison will be made 
between Nu-Derm and the new approach of ZOMD. For skin preparation, 
the  Nu-Derm  system  uses  a  cleanser  (Foaming  Gel)  for  general  oily  skin 
cleansing in addition to a toner for all patients. Both of these steps provided 
weak epidermal renewal and sebum control. It took years to learn that cer-
tain steps need to be added to skin preparation to achieve the desired objec-
tives,  such  as  mechanical  exfoliation  (ZO  Medical  Vitascrub)  and  sebum 
control (ZO Medical Cebatrol), both of which are essential. Oilacleanse, a 
cleanser for oily skin with additional anti-inflammatory benefits and acan-
tholytic activity, is also used for ZOMD. Vitascrub is used to renew the epi-
dermis through mechanical exfoliation and deep pore cleansing. Cebatrol 
provides  sebum  control  to  reduce  skin  inflammation.  The  ZOMD  toner 
would  not  be  selected  for  this  patient  because  it  is  reserved  for  dry  and 
sensitive skin.

Regarding the principle of epidermal correction, the Nu-Derm system uses 
Exfoderm for exfoliation and Clear (4% HQ) for bleaching. Similarly, ZOMD 
uses Glycogent for exfoliation and Melamin (4% HQ) for bleaching. However, 
ZOMD has introduced an additional component to the correction stage that 
strengthens  skin  and  improves  tolerance  (Ossential  Daily  Power  Defense). 
This novel addition provides epidermal stabilization, repairs the barrier func-
tion, controls inflammation, and repairs damaged DNA.

For stimulation, the Nu-Derm system uses only tretinoin and, for blend-
ing, tretinoin with Blender. The Nu-Derm system does not provide a non-HQ 
bleaching or blending option. Comparatively, for stimulation, ZOMD offers 
HQ  blending  in  treatment  and  non-HQ  (blending  and  bleaching)  in  main-
tenance  as  follows:  use  tretinoin  for  stimulation  during  treatment  and  reti-
nol (in the form of Ossential Advanced Radical Night Repair or Retamax) in 
maintenance; use tretinoin mixed with 4% HQ for blending during treatment 
and a non-HQ bleaching product, Brightalive, C-Bright 10% vitamin C; and 
use non-HQ blending, Brightenex, with the added benefits of melanocyte sta-
bilization during maintenance.

The Nu-Derm system uses a moisturizer to control reactions, which weak-
ens the treatment program. Instead of a moisturizer, the ZOMD system uses 
Restoracalm, which provides a wide range of benefits and does not counter-
productively weaken the treatment program.

PATIENTS 5 AND 6: OCHRONOSIS

Table 15.8 provides skin classification data for patients 5 and 6; Table 15.9 pro-
vides skin health data for patients 5 and 6; and Table 15.10 provides diagnostic 
data for patients 5 and 6.

381

PATIENTS 5 AND 6: 
OCHRONOSIS

Table 15.8  Patients 5 and 6: Skin Classification

Color

Thickness

Oiliness

Laxity

Propensity for atypical healing

Patient 5

Asian

Medium-thick

Oily

Minimal

None

Patient 6

Black

Thick

Oily

Minimal

None

Table 15.9  Patients 5 and 6: Skin Health

Texture

Color

Tolerance

Hydration

Disease

Patient 5

Rough

Discolored

Normal

Normal

Patient 6

Rough

Discolored

Very sensitive

Normal

Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, 
ochronosis on face

Ochronosis on face, 
neck, and chest

Table 15.10  Patients 5 and 6: Diagnosis

Patient 5

Patient 6

Superficial ochronosis, postinflammatory 
hyperpigmentation, and depigmentation 
following CO2 fractional laser

Deep ochronosis, contact dermatitis with 
severe irritation, and sensitivity

PATIENT HISTORY

Patient 5
The patient in Figure 15.5 is a physician who for several years was treating her-
self with HQ for melasma. She presented to the clinic with increased pigmen-
tation  periorally.  Prior  treatment  in  a  different  clinic  with  a  CO2  fractional 
laser led to PIH and focal depigmentation but produced no improvement of 
the ochronosis.

Patient 6
After years of using HQ (4%), the pigmentation of the patient in Figure 15.6 
worsened. She progressed to using 8% HQ, 10% HQ, Triluma (fluocinolone, 
HQ  4%,  and  tretinoin  0.05%),  and  other  compounded  products  prescribed 
by several physicians. She also received glycolic acid peels and used multiple 
Mesoestetic Cosmelan peels (azeleic acid and kojic acid, among other ingredi-
ents). Her condition only worsened.

TREATMENT PLAN FOR PATIENT 5

The treatment plan for patient 5 consisted of two programs: program A and 
program B.

382

A SELECTION OF CLINICAL 
CASES

Figure 15.5  Patient 5 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

Program A
Program  A  consisted  of  4  months  of  a  non-HQ  ZOMD  program  with  der-
mal  stabilization  to  overcome  HQ  resistance  and  to  stabilize  melanocytes. 
Program A included the principles shown in Table 15.11. After program A, 
the patient’s skin improved slightly, but the ochronosis failed to improve. The 
patient then began program B.

Program B
Before undergoing CO2 fractional laser, the patient’s skin was conditioned for 
6 weeks with an HQ-based bleaching and blending regimen. Preparation of 
the skin was generally the same as shown for program A, but a few additional 
agents were added. Glycogent was used AM and PM (2 pumps) for exfoliation. 
Brightenex was stopped, and instead, Melamin (4% HQ) was used for bleach-
ing, AM and PM. Blending was accomplished with tretinoin (1%, 4 pumps) 
and  Melamix  (2  pumps)  used  PM.  Blending  replaced  Ossential  Advanced 
Radical Night Repair.

Her entire face was treated with a CO2 fractional laser, and this provided 
significant  improvement  after  healing  had  occurred.  Later,  a  QsNd-YAG 
1,064-nm laser was used over the areas that had not fully cleared from the CO2 

(a)

(b)

Figure 15.6  Patient 6 before (a) and after (b) treatment.

383

PATIENTS 5 AND 6: 
OCHRONOSIS

Table 15.11  Program A for Patient 5

Step

Skin preparation

Blending and melanocyte 
stabilization 
(nonhydroquinone)

Barrier repair and 
epidermal stabilization

Products

Oilacleanse
Vitascrub
Cebatrol

Brightenex

Ossential Daily Power Defense

Dermal stimulation and 
stabilization

Ossential Advanced Radical Night 
Repair

Hydration and calming

Ommerse Daily Renewal Crème
Ommerse Overnight
Recovery Crème

Application

AM and PM
Once daily
AM and PM

AM, 3 pumps

AM and PM, 3 
pumps

PM, 2 to 3 pumps

AM and PM, as 
needed

Sun protection

Oclipse-C Broad Spectrum 
Sunscreen SPF 50

AM, reapply as 
needed

fractional laser treatment. A ZO Controlled Depth Peel to the level of the PD 
was further performed to even-out facial tone. By the end of all treatments, the 
patient showed complete clearance of the mild ochronosis, so the HQ-based 
approach (program B) was discontinued, and a non-HQ-based maintenance 
program was started.

TREATMENT PLAN FOR PATIENT 6

The treatment plan for patient 6, with severe ochronosis and sensitivity, made 
use of a non-HQ ZOSH approach. This program included preparing the skin 
with Offects Hydrating Cleanser, AM and PM; Balatone, AM and PM; epider-
mal stabilization with Ossential Daily Power Defense, AM and PM; mild der-
mal stabilization with Ossential Growth Factor Serum Plus, PM; Hydration 
and Calming with Ommerse Daily Renewal Crème and Ommerse Overnight 
Recovery  Crème,  AM  and  PM;  and  sun  protection  with  Oclipse-C  Broad 
Spectrum SPF 50, AM.

While on this non-HQ-based program, the patient showed increased toler-
ance and improved sensitivity. Her ochronosis was not treated because it was 
extremely deep, and unfortunately, the damage was permanent.

Treatment Note
It is imperative that HQ use be discontinued for a period of 3 to 4 months. 
This eliminates the skin’s resistance to HQ, allows proper melanization, and 
reduces photosensitivity. It is important to recognize ochronosis, but it is not 
a sign of an allergy to HQ. If required, HQ can be used again in these patients 
for skin conditioning, but only when following the appropriate guidelines as 
outlined previously.

INDEX

Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; those followed by t indicate tables.

A

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to

case study, 376–380, 378f, 379t

Ablative fractional resurfacing (AFR) lasers, 

Actinic keratosis(es) (AKs)

309

Acne, 137–150

case studies, 139f–142f

causes of, 137–138, 139t

chemical peels for, 241t

classifications of, 145–146, 147t

flare of

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

285–286

prevention of, 140–143, 143t

rosacea and, 152

treatment of

antibiotics in, 147

approach to, 139–150

consultation in, 143–144

chemical peels for, 241t

lasers for, 302, 303f

skin cancer and, 186, 188f

treatment of, 189t

Active disease

presence of

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

selection, 116–117, 117f

AFR lasers. See Ablative fractional 

resurfacing (AFR) lasers

Age

as factor in acne, 139t

Agent(s)

topical, 45–80. See also specific agents 

and Topical agents

Dr. Zein Obagi’s Revised Acne 

Classification System in, 145–146, 

Aging

biological

147t

duration and phases of, 145, 146

exfoliative peels in, 144–145

immediate interventions during 

initial visits in, 145

isotretinoin in, 148–150. See also 

Isotretinoin, in acne management

light-based, 317

patient education in, 144

PDT in, 144–145

Skin Health Restoration in, 144–146

strategy for, 143–146, 147t

systemic, 146–150

topical antibiotics in, 65

topical approach to, 144–145

Acne scar(s)

treatment of

history of, 197

laser, 316–317

of skin, 10–13, 10t, 12f, 13t. See also 

Biological aging, of skin

photodamage effects on, 183

sebum and

misconceptions about, 9–10

signs of

tretinoin for, 48

of skin, 10–15

biological aging, 10–13, 10t, 12f, 13t

factors contributing to, 11–12

AHAs. See Alpha-hydroxy acids

AKs. See Actinic keratosis(es)

ALA. See Alpha-lipoic acid

Alkaptonuria

ochronosis due to, 194–195

Allergic contact dermatitis

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

278–279

Allylamine(s), 68–69

386

INDEX

Aloesin

in skin lightening, 336

resveratrol, 328

silymarin, 327

Alpha-hydroxy acid(s) (AHAs), 61–62, 61t

ubiquinone, 53–54, 327

concentration of, 61–62, 61t

dermatologic effects of, 61

effects of, 62

in exfoliation, 125

in UVR protection, 322, 324–325

vitamins

B3, 55

C, 54

for exfoliative peels, 211–212

D, 328–332, 329t. See also 

glycolic, 62

lactic, 62

Vitamin(s), D

E, 54–55, 327

mechanism of action of, 61

Arbutin, 63

Alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) peels, 205–206

Ascorbic acid

Alpha-linolenic acid

in skin lightening, 336

Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), 53

in skin health, 333–334

Amino acids

in skin health, 327

Asian skin type

deviated, 89f

original, 85f, 86t

thickness of, 93

in skin health, 334–336

Atrophic skin, 97–98

Anti-inflammatory agents, 57–59

in skin health, 337

Antibiotic(s)

in acne management, 147

Azelaic acid, 63

Azole(s), 66–67

topical, 64–69. See also specific types and 

B

Topical antibiotics

Antifungal agents

Bacitracin

topical, 66–69. See also specific types and 

in wound treatment, 65–66

Topical antibiotics, antifungals

Bacterial infection

Antioxidant(s), 52–60, 324–333. See also 

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

specific agents

ALA, 53

276–277

Baker-Gordon peel

anti-inflammatory agents, 57–59

formula for, 197, 198

ascorbic acid, 327

benefits of, 324

beta-carotene, 328

curcumin, 325

defined, 52

described, 52

DNA repair agents, 55–57

EGCG, 326

ellagic acid, 325–326

timing and sequence for, 198t

Barrier function, 361

activities, 22

disruption of, 4

of epidermis, 2

normal, 4

in skin health, 21–22

Basal layer of skin, 3f

Benign adnexal tumors

French maritime pine bark, 326–327

laser treatment of, 315

functions of, 52, 324–325

genistein, 326

glutathione, 53, 332–333

grapeseed extract, 327–328

growth factors, 59–60, 60t

idebeone, 54

lutein, 326

Benzoyl peroxide, 64

Benzylamine(s), 68–69

Beta-carotene

in skin health, 328

Beta-hydroxy acids (BHAs), 62–63

in exfoliation, 125

for exfoliative peels, 212

mechanisms of action of, 324

Biafine

niacinamide, 326

in wound healing, 69

387

INDEX

Biological aging

of skin, 10–13, 10t, 11f, 12f, 13t

appearance of, 12–13

chronological, 11

Cancer(s)

skin. See Skin cancer

Cell(s). See specific types

Chemical peel(s), 120–122, 122f, 128. 

collagen levels effects of, 11

See also specific types

dermal cellular changes with, 12–13

agents for

dermal-epidermal interface flattening 

history of, 197–199, 198t, 199t

in, 12

described, 10–11, 10t, 11f

elastin levels effects of, 11

epidermal effects of, 12

mechanism of action of, 199t

AHA peels, 205–206

clinical conditions treatable with, 241, 241t

depth of

factors contributing to, 11–12

terminology related to, 122–123

lipid content effects of, 13

oxidative stress and, 11–12

ROS levels, 12

described, 122–123

exfoliating, 209–230. See also specific 

types and Exfoliative peels

vs. photoaging, 10–15. See also 

glycerin, polysorbate, and TCA, 204–205

Photoaging

Birth control pills

glycolic acid with TCA peels, 204

history of, 197–199, 198t, 199t

in acne management, 143

Jessner’s solution, methylsalicylate or 

Black skin type

deviated, 89f, 90f

original, 86f, 86t

thickness of, 93

Bleaching, 31

concepts of, 33–35

glycolic acid, and TCA, 204

Jessner’s solutions and TCA, 203–204

medium to deep

methods for, 199

methylsalicylate with TCA, 204

overview of, 197–208

in dyschromia management, 33–35

TCA peels, 199–205. See also 

HQ in, 30, 31, 52

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peels

in melasma and PIH management, 

“Chicken skin,” 163–164, 163f, 164t

170–173, 171f–175f

Chromophore(s), 298, 298f

Blending, 31

concepts of, 33–35

Clindamycin

for acne/rosacea, 65

in dyschromia management, 33–35

Clotrimazole, 67

in melasma and PIH management, 

CO2 fractional laser

174–175

reactions to, 34–35

Body surface areas

5%

introduction of, 298

for melasma, 172, 174f

in skin rejuvenation, 120–121, 121f

with ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 127–128

for TCA application in ZO Controlled 

Coenzyme Q, 53–54

Depth Peel, 237, 237f

Collagen, 7

Bulldog (hamartomatous) skin, 98

aging effects on, 11

Burn(s)

gunpowder

phenol for, 197

Butenafine, 69

C

Calming

appearance with biological aging of 

skin, 13

composition of, 7

production of, 7

in sun-damaged skin, 14

tensile strength of, 7

Collagen fiber(s)

appearance with biological aging of 

in dyschromia management, 35–36, 36t

skin, 13

in PFB outbreak, 162

mature, 7

388

INDEX

Collagen fiber bundles, 7

Collagen fibrils, 7

Color

Depigmentation

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

293–296, 294f–296f

skin. See Skin color; Skin type(s), by color

Depression

Combination approaches

isotretinoin and, 148

to skin rejuvenation, 131–134, 132t, 

Dermabrasion

133f–135f

Comedones

contraindications to, 198

indications for, 198

chemical peels for, 241t

Dermal-epidermal interface

Communication

physician-to-patient

flattening of

aging and, 12

in skin rejuvenation treatment 

Dermal extracellular matrix, 8–9

planning, 112

Complex color category, 84

Dermal melanosis

nonspecific, 193–194

Complex skin color type, 87, 90–91, 90f, 91t

Dermatan sulfate, 8

Indian, 90f

Congenital nevi

Dermatitis

contact

diagnosis and treatment of, 192–193

allergic, 273t, 278–279

Connective tissue

irritant, 273t, 279

synthesis and degradation of

Dermatologist tested, 47

fibroblasts in, 8–9

Dermis, 3f, 6–9

Consultation

in acne treatment, 143–144

before ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 

256–257

Contact dermatitis

allergic

aging effects on, 7

collagen in, 7

described, 2, 3f, 6

elastic fibers of, 8

excessive sun exposure effects on, 14

fibroblasts in, 8

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

histology of

278–279

irritant

aging effects on, 12–13

layers of, 3f, 6

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 279

location of, 3f, 6

Cooling protection factor (CPF), 301

Corneocyte(s), 22, 125, 361

CPF. See Cooling protection factor

CROSS (chemical reconstruction of skin 

male vs. female, 13

mast cells in, 9

in men, 13

mid, 3f

scars), 317

Crow’s feet

papillary. See Papillary dermis (PD)

reticular. See Reticular dermis

in skin thickness determination, 94, 95f

stabilization of

Curcumin

in skin health, 325

Cutis laxa, 311–312

Cynosure Affirm CO2 laser, 308

D

histologic findings associated with, 

28, 30t

objectives of, 28, 29t

stimulation of

effects of, 31

Deviated skin color type, 86–87, 

87f–90f

DNA repair agents, 55–57

Darkening of skin. See Skin darkening

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test, 

Demarcation lines

120, 128

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 284f, 

for melasma, 171

286

for ochronosis, 194

389

INDEX

Dr. Zein Obagi’s Revised Acne 

at completion, 253–254, 253t, 254f, 

Classification System

255f

in acne management, 145–146, 147t

Enzymes

Drosperinone

in skin health, 333–334

in acne management, 143

Ephelides (freckles)

Dry skin (xerosis)

described, 102, 102f

causes of, 6

defined, 117

misconceptions about, 102, 102f

lentigines vs., 117

neutraceuticals for, 337

sebum and, 9–10

Dynamic lines

photodamage and, 185–186, 186f

treatment of, 189t

Epidermal sliding

described, 93–94, 94f, 95f

in ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 251–253, 

Dynamic rhytides, 96

Dyschromia

causes of, 33

251f–253f

Epidermis, 3–6, 3f

acid cocktail activity in, 224, 226–227

conditions resembling, 190t

correction of, 33–36, 36t

aging effects on, 12

barrier function of, 2

bleaching and blending in, 33–35

cells of, 3–6, 4f

melanocyte stabilization in, 35

corrective procedures in, 110–111, 110f

UV light protection in, 35–36

described, 2, 3f

described, 190, 190t

treatment of, 192t

Dyskeratosis, 137

excessive sun exposure effects on, 14

photoaging effects on, 14

stabilization of

Dyskeratotic keratinocytes, 137

histologic findings associated with, 

E

Econazole, 67

Ectropion

28, 30t

objectives of, 28, 29t

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)

in skin health, 326

ePrime

for skin tightening, 312

after resurfacing procedures, 296

Erythema

Edema

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 274, 

after resurfacing procedures, 272, 273t

perifollicular, 303

EGCG

in skin health, 326

Elastic fiber(s), 8

of dermis, 8

Elasticity

skin type by, 103

Elastin

aging effect on, 11

Elderly

274f, 281–283, 282t

treatment of, 282–283

persistent

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

288–289

keloids related to, 290, 291

Erythromycin

for acne/rosacea, 65

Essential agents, 47–60. See also specific 

agents

antioxidants, 52–60. See also specific 

dermal aging effects in, 7

agents and Antioxidant(s)

Ellagic acid

in skin health, 325–326

Endpoint(s)

defined, 248

examples of, 46, 46t

purpose of, 47

retinol, 50

tretinoin, 48–49

of ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 248–255, 

Ethnicity

248t

in skin classification systems, 83

390

INDEX

Eumelanin, 5

Exfoliation, 124–126, 125f, 126f

Facial moisturizers

effects of, 362–366

classification of, 124–125

Facial skin

described, 124

false, 125–126

ZO Controlled Depth TCA Peel for

coat system for, 237–238, 238t

Exfoliative peels, 209–230. See also specific 

False exfoliation, 125–126

types

in acne management, 144–145

agents used for, 209–212

AHAs, 211–212

BHAs, 212

resorcinol, 212

TCA, 209–211

Invisapeel, 221–222, 222f–224f, 224t

new ZO, 214–230. See also specific 

types and ZO Retinol Stimulation 

Peel

novel approach to, 212–214, 213t

outcomes of

variables affecting, 209–211

ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, 214–221

ZO 3-Step Stimulation Peel, 117, 117f, 

125, 126f, 222–230, 224t, 225f, 

226f, 228f–230f, 230t

Exogenous ochronosis

HQ-related, 177–178, 178f

Expression lines

described, 93–94, 94f, 95f

in skin thickness determination, 93–98, 

94f, 95f, 97t–99t

Extracellular matrix

atrophy of, 11

dermal, 8

Eyebrow(s)

furrowing of

in skin thickness determination, 93, 

94f, 95f

raising of

in skin thickness determination, 

93–94, 95f

Eyelid(s)

ZO Controlled Depth Peel of, 246, 246f, 

247f

F

Facial expressions

Fatty tissue, 9

Fibril(s)

collagen, 7

Fibroblast(s)

appearance with biological aging of 

skin, 13

described, 8

function of, 8–9

in synthesis and degradation of 

connective tissue, 8–9

Fitzpatrick skin typing system, 

81, 82t

shortcomings of, 83

skin types in

ZO deviated skin color types 

corresponding with, 88t

ZO original skin color types 

corresponding with, 86t

5-FU, 63–64

Flat warts

chemical peels for, 241t

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), 63–64

Flushing

rosacea and, 150–151

Fold(s)

skin

in skin thickness determination, 

93–98, 94f, 95f, 97t–99t

Folliculitis, 159–162

causes of, 160–161

defined, 159

diagnosis of, 161–162

prevention of, 162, 162t

treatment of, 162

types of, 159

Fractional lasers

for skin resurfacing, 307–309

ablative, 309

applications of, 309

nonablative, 307–309

rational use of, 309

in skin thickness determination, 93–95, 

Fractionated CO2 lasers. See CO2 fractional 

94f, 95f

laser

391

INDEX

Freckles (ephelides)

causes of, 6

defined, 117

lentigines vs., 117

photodamage and, 185–186, 186f

treatment of, 189t

French maritime pine bark

in skin health, 326–327

Grenz zone, 203

Growth factors, 59–60, 60t

in skin health, 335

Gunpowder burns

phenol for, 197

Gycoprotein(s)

dermal, 8

Frequency doubled, long-pulsed Nd:YAG 

laser, 299, 299t, 300f, 301

H

Frost sign

in ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 248–250, 

Hair removal

249f–251f

lasers for, 303–307, 305f, 306f. See also 

Fruit acids, 61–62, 61t. See also Alpha-

Laser(s), for hair removal

hydroxy acids

Halogen lamps

Fungal infection

for skin tightening, 312

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

Hamartomatous skin, 91, 98

277–278, 278f, 279f

Healing

atypical

G

Genetic(s)

in melasma, 167–168

Genistein

in skin health, 326

Gentamicin

in wound treatment, 66

Ginkgo biloba

skin type effects on, 103, 105

Healthy skin

achieving

factors in, 19, 21–26, 23f, 24t, 26t

characteristics of, 17–18, 19f, 19t

defined, 17–18, 18t

described, 17–18

lifetime of, 17–19, 18t, 19f, 19t

model, 17–18, 18t, 19f

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection

as anti-inflammatory agent, 59

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

Glabridin

in skin lightening, 336

Glogau skin classification system, 81

275–276, 276t, 277f

prevention of, 275, 276t

treatment of, 276, 276t

Glutathione, 53

Hormonal stimulation

in skin health, 332–333

skin darkening related to, 5

Glycerin

HQ. See Hydroquinone

polysorbate and TCA with, 204–205

HSV infection. See Herpes simplex virus 

Glycolic acid, 62

TCA peels with, 204

Glycolic acid peels, 205–206

results of, 206

Glycosaminoglycans

aging effects on, 13

dermal, 8

“Goosebumps”

(HSV) infection

Hyaluronic acid, 8

for dry skin, 337

in skin health, 335–336

Hydration

in dyschromia management, 35–36, 36t

Hydroquinone (HQ), 50–53

applications of, 51

persistent, 163–164, 163f, 164t

in bleaching, 30, 31, 33–35, 52

Grapeseed extract

in skin health, 327–328

Green tea

concentration of, 51

described, 50

in dyschromia management, 33–35

as anti-inflammatory agent, 59

efficacy of, 51

392

INDEX

Hydroquinone (HQ)  (Continued)

mechanisms of, 50

I

in melasma and PIH management, 

Idebeone, 54

176–181, 177f–179f, 180t

discontinuance of, 181

mechanisms of action of, 176

misuse of, 176

Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis

lasers for, 302–303

Imiquimod, 64

Immediate reticular dermis (IRD), 3f, 7, 84, 

side effects of, 176–179, 177f–179f

113

penetration of, 51–52

pulsed

for melasma, 171

results of, 51

side effects of, 51, 176–179, 177f–179f

exogenous ochronosis, 177–178, 

178f

photosensitivity, 177

phototoxicity, 177

rebound hyperpigmentation, 176–177, 

177f

tolerance-/resistance-related, 178–179, 

179f

in skin stimulation, 30–31, 30t

tretinoin with, 52

uses of, 50–51

in ZOMD, 352

Hydroquinone (HQ) plus tretinoin 

approach, 352

Hydroquinone (HQ) pulse treatment, 34

Hyperpigmentation

chemical peels for, 241t

postinflammatory. See Postinflammatory 

hyperpigmentation

rebound

HQ-related, 176–177, 177f

Hyperplasia

melanocyte, 14

sebaceous

laser treatment of, 315

Hypertrophic reactions

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

289–290, 290f

Hypertrophic scars

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

290–293, 291f, 292f

Hypertrophy

photoaging and, 14

Hypopigmentation

after laser skin resurfacing, 307, 308f

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 293, 

296f

corrective procedures in, 110–111, 110f

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to, 115, 116f, 

231–270, 261f, 262f, 266f–268f

Indian skin type

complex, 90f

Inflammation

skin. See Skin inflammation

Inflammatory disorders

sebum-induced, 137–164. See also specific 

disorders and Sebum-induced 

inflammatory disorders

Inflammatory response

mast cells in, 9

Insulin resistance agents

in acne management, 143

Intelligent optimal tracking system (IOTS), 

308

Intense pulsed light (IPL) laser

for hair removal, 304–306

for rosacea, 156

for telangiectasia, 299, 299t, 301

Invisapeel, 221–222, 222f–224f, 224t

application of, 224t

depth and objectives of, 213t

described, 221

indications for, 221–222, 222f–224f, 

224t

IOTS, 308

IPL. See Intense pulsed light

iPLEDGE Program, 148, 150

IRD. See Immediate reticular dermis

Irritant contact dermatitis

after resurfacing procedures, 

273t, 279

Isotretinoin

in acne management, 148–150

caveats, 150

contraindications to, 148

depression associated with, 148

dosage of, 148–150

guidelines for, 148–150

side effects of, 148, 149

393

INDEX

suicidal ideation and, 148

teratogenicity, 150

for chronic inflammation, 25

J

AFR, 309

for AKs, 302, 303f

applications of

most rewarding, 299

CO2 fractional. See CO2 fractional laser

complications with, 313, 313f

Cynosure Affirm CO2, 308

Jessner’s solution

development in dermatology, 297–298

methylsalicylate or glycolic acid and 

for discrete lesion treatment, 301–302, 302f

TCA with, 204

TCA with, 203–204

K

Keloid(s)

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

290–293, 291f, 292f

persistent erythema and, 290, 291

Keratin maturation cycle

fractional. See Fractional lasers

frequency doubled, long-pulsed Nd:YAG, 

299, 299t, 300f, 301

future directions for, 313–315, 314f, 315f

for hair removal, 303–307, 305f, 306f

characteristics of, 306

IPL, 304–306

melanin as target in, 304

Nd:YAG laser, 304, 306

pain associated with, 307

PLIGS, 304, 306–307, 306f

skin stimulation during, 31, 32f

for idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis, 

Keratinocyte(s), 3–4, 4f

dyskeratotic, 137

302–303

IPL. See Intense pulsed light (IPL) laser

excessive sun exposure effects on, 14

KTP, 299, 299t, 300f, 301

Keratinocyte maturation cycle(s) (KMCs), 

Lumenis ResurFX, 308

23–24, 23f, 24t, 361–362

described, 3–4

regulation of

Mosaic, 308

Nd:YAG

frequency doubled, long-pulsed, 299, 

benefits of, 23–24, 24t

299t, 300f, 301

for Skin Health Restoration in skin of 

for hair removal, 304, 306

various colors, 90–91, 91t

for noninvasive skin-tightening 

Keratosis(es)

procedures, 310–312, 312f

actinic. See Actinic keratosis(es) (AKs)

Palomar 1,540-nm, 308

Keratosis pilaris (KP), 163–164, 163f, 164t

for pigment reduction, 298–303, 298f, 

causes of, 164

299t, 300f, 302f, 303f

clinical manifestations of, 163, 163f

PIH following, 314–315

prevalence of, 163

treatment of, 164, 164t

Ketoconazole, 67

for problematic conditions, 315–318, 317f

pulsed dye. See Pulsed dye laser

Q-switched, 298

KMCs. See Keratinocyte maturation cycle(s)

recurrence following, 303

Kojic acid

in exfoliation, 125

KP. See Keratosis pilaris

in rosacea management, 156

in skin rejuvenation, 120–121, 121f

for skin resurfacing, 307–310, 308f

KTP laser, 299, 299t, 300f, 301

fractional lasers, 307–309

hypopigmentation after, 307, 308f

L

Lactic acid, 62

Laser resurfacing

for thin skin, 100

Laxity

skin

Laser(s), 297–320. See also specific types

chemical peels for, 241t

394

INDEX

Laxity  (Continued)

skin type by, 103, 104f, 105f

Mast cells

dermal, 9

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

Medication(s)

selection, 115, 116f, 116t

skin sensitivity related to, 183–184

Lentigines (liver spots)

Medium-thickness skin, 92f

causes of, 5–6

defined, 117

ephelides vs., 117

in Asians, 93

characteristics of, 97t

oily, 101f

photodamage and, 186, 187, 187f

procedure selection for, 100

solar, 14, 187

treatment of, 189t

types of, 186, 187

Lentigo

defined, 117

Lentigo maligna, 187

treatment of, 189t

Lentigo senilis, 187

treatment of, 189t

Lentigo solaris, 187

treatment of, 189t

Melamin, 52

Melanin, 4–6, 4f

function of, 5

melanosomes in, 5

source of, 5

as target in laser hair removal, 304

Melanocyte(s), 4–6, 4f

appearance of, 4–5

excessive sun exposure effects on, 14

factors influencing, 166

melasma and, 169

Leveling procedures, 128–131, 129f, 130t, 131t

stabilization of

complications of

non-HQ approach to, 179, 180t

procedure action– and depth–related, 

Melanocyte hyperplasia, 14

131, 131t

Melanocyte stabilization

obtaining optimal results, 128–131, 130t, 

concept of, 35

131t

penetration issues in, 128, 129f

Melanosis

dermal

for thin skin, 99–100

Light-based treatment

of acne, 317

nonspecific, 193–194

Melanosome(s), 4–6, 4f

in melanin pigment production, 5

Lion face (hamartomatous) skin, 98

in skin color changes, 5

Lip(s)

pursing of

in skin darkening, 5

Melasma, 6, 6f

in skin thickness determination, 

causes of, 167–169

94, 95f

Lipid(s)

clinical manifestations of, 166–167

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test 

skin aging effects on, 13

for, 171

Liver spots. See Lentigines (liver spots)

external triggers, 168–169

Lower reticular dermis, 3f

Lumenis ResurFX laser, 308

Lutein

in skin health, 326

Lycopene

in skin health, 326

M

Marbleization

genetic factors in, 167–168

internal triggers, 168

melanocytes and, 169

mysteries of, 166–169

pathophysiology of, 169

rosacea and, 156

treatment of, 165, 170–180

bleaching in, 170–173, 171f–175f

blending in, 174–175

continue stabilization/begin 

maintenance in, 175

after resurfacing procedures, 287–288

guidelines for, 170

395

INDEX

HQ in, 176–181, 177f–179f, 180t. 

Neomycin

See also Hydroquinone (HQ), in 

in wound treatment, 66

melasma and PIH management

Nevus(i), 191–194

laser, 315

retinoids in, 169

stabilization in, 173–174

steps in, 170–175

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to

congenital

diagnosis and treatment of, 192–193

diagnosis and treatment of, 192–193

of Hori, 192–193

nevocellular

case study, 367–371, 368f, 369t–371t

for skin tightening, 317–318

Men’s skin

dermis, 13

sebum decline in, 13

Methylsalicylate

TCA with, 204

of Ota, 191–192, 193f

Niacinamide

for dry skin, 337

for oily skin, 337

in skin health, 326

and Jessner’s solution, 204

in skin lightening, 336

Metronidazole

for acne/rosacea, 65

Miconazole, 67

Mid dermis, 3f

Mid-line

Non-hydroquinone (HQ) approach

in ZOMD, 353

Non-hydroquinone (HQ) pigment 

stabilizers, 63

Nonablative fractional rejuvenation 

corrective procedures in, 110–111, 110f

(NAFR), 307–309

Milia

applications of, 309

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 286

Nonfacial skin

Moisturizer(s)

peeling, 267–270

addiction to, 363–364

Nonthermal skin rejuvenation procedures

barrier function impairment due 

thermal skin rejuvenation procedures vs., 

to, 22–23

facial

effects of, 362–366

philosophy of, 361–366

120–123, 121f, 122f, 123t

Nu-Derm, 346, 347

issues encountered with, 347–348, 

348t–350t

recommendations to replace, 366

product names, 350t

skin sensitivity due to, 364–366

ZOMD vs., 349t, 350t, 380

undesirable effects of, 362

Nutraceuticals, 321–344. See also specific 

Mosaic laser, 308

Mucopolysaccharide gel

of dermis, 3f, 6–9

Mupirocin

in wound treatment, 65

N

NAFR. See Nonablative fractional 

rejuvenation

Naftifine, 68–69

types, e.g., Antioxidant(s)

amino acids, 334–336

anti-inflammatory agents, 337

antioxidants, 324–333

benefits of, 323t

clinical studies and research on, 322

downside of, 323

for dry skin, 337

effectiveness of

testing, 323–324

enzymes, 333–334

future directions in, 338

Natural DNA repair precursors, 56–57

goals of, 322–323, 323t

Nd:YAG laser

growth factors, 335

frequency doubled, long-pulsed, 299, 

hyaluronic acid, 335–336

299t, 300f, 301

for hair removal, 304, 306

indications for, 336–337

market for, 322–323

396

INDEX

Nutraceuticals  (Continued)

Oxidative stress

in the marketplace, 337–338

aging process effects of, 11–12

for oily skin, 336–337

Oxo-guanine glycosylase-1 (OGG-1), 56

peptide supplements, 334–335

role of, 322–323

in skin health, 321–344

for skin lightening, 336

Nystatin, 68

O

Obagi Medical, Inc., 346, 348

Obagi, Z.

background of, 346–348

Ochronosis, 194–196, 195f

alkaptonuria and, 194–195

P

Palomar 1,540-nm laser, 308

Papillary dermis (PD), 2, 3f, 6–7

corrective procedures in, 110–111, 110f

ZO Controlled Depth Peel to, 231–270. 

See also ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 

to PD

Papule(s)

rosacea and, 151

Paradoxical laser-induced growth 

stimulation (PLIGS), 304, 306–307, 

clinical manifestations of, 194, 195f

306f

described, 194

diagnosis of, 195

exogenous

HQ-related, 177–178, 178f

pathophysiology of, 196

treatment of, 195–196

Patient education

in acne management, 144

PD. See Papillary dermis

PDL. See Pulsed dye laser

PDT. See Photodynamic therapy

Penetration issues

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to

in leveling procedures, 128, 129f

case study, 380–383, 381t, 382f, 383t

Peptide(s)

OGG-1, 56

Oiliness

sebum and, 102–103

in skin health, 334–335

Perifollicular edema (PFE), 303

Period of relative resistance

skin type by, 100–103, 101f, 102f, 102t

in TCA peels, 238

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

Perioral area

selection, 114–115, 115f, 116t

ZO Controlled Depth Peel for, 244–246, 

Oily skin

described, 100

246f

Persistent erythema

neutraceuticals for, 336–337

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

Ommerse Overnight Recovery Crème, 

288–289

366

keloids related to, 290, 291

Ommerse Renewal Crème, 366

Persistent skin sensitivity

Oozing

from skin

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 288

PFB. See Pseudofolliculitis barbae

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

274–275

PFE, 303

Phenol

Original skin color type, 84t, 85–86, 85f, 

history of, 197

86f, 86t

for soldiers with gunpowder 

Ossential Advanced Radical Night 

burns, 197

Repair

Phenol peel(s)

exfoliation after, 216, 216f

complications of, 198

with ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, 

history of, 197–199, 198t, 199t

214–221, 217t, 218t. See also ZO 

for thin skin, 100

Retinol Stimulation Peel

Pheomelanin, 5

397

INDEX

Photoaging, 11f, 14–15. See also 

lasers for, 298–303, 298f, 299t, 300f, 302f, 

Photodamage

303f

biological aging vs., 10–15. See also 

Pigmentation

Biological aging, of skin

melanin, 4–6, 4f

dermal damage, 14

described, 10, 10t, 11f

epidermal damage, 14

hypertrophy related to, 14

tretinoin for, 48

Pigmentation problems, 165–196. See also 

Photodamage; specific disorders, 

e.g., Melasma

described, 165

melasma, 166–167

Photodamage, 180–191. See also Photoaging

nevi, 191–194

actinic keratoses and skin cancer, 186, 

ochronosis, 194–196, 195f

188f

aging effects of, 183

chronic

photodamage, 180–191

PIH, 169–180

types of, 165

manifestations of, 119

ZO classification of, 166, 166t

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

PIH. See Postinflammatory 

selection, 117–118, 118f, 119f

hyperpigmentation

deeper

Pinching technique

treatment of, 191, 192t

in skin thickness determination, 93, 93t, 

early

diagnosis of, 186, 188

early signs of, 181, 182f

freckles and, 185–186, 186f

lentigines, 186, 187, 187f

management of, 196

prevention of, 181–183

94f

Pink sign

in ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 249–250, 

249f–251f

PLIGS, 304, 306–307, 306f

Poikiloderma of Civatte, 190–191

treatment of, 192t

progressive forms of, 184–186, 186f, 187f

Polyenes, 68

tanning and, 184–185

textural damage due to

Polymyxin B

in wound treatment, 66

changes indicating, 188–191, 

Polysorbate

189f–191f

visible

stages of, 184–186, 186f, 187f

treatment of, 188, 189t

glycerin and TCA with, 204–205

Pore(s)

enlarged

after resurfacing procedures, 286–287

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to

chemical peels for, 241t

case study, 375–376, 375f, 377t, 378t

Port wine stain (PWS)

Photodynamic therapy (PDT)

PDL for, 297, 299

in acne management, 144–145

Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation 

in rosacea management, 156

(PIH), 113, 165, 169–180

Photolyase, 56

Photosensitivity, 183–184

HQ-related, 177

treatment of, 184

Phototoxicity

HQ-related, 177

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

283–285, 284f, 285f

described, 169

dyschromia vs., 190t

laser surgery and, 314–315

treatment of, 170–180

Physician-to-patient communication

bleaching in, 170–173, 171f–175f

in skin rejuvenation treatment planning, 

blending in, 174–175

112

Pigment meter, 314, 315f

Pigment reduction

continue stabilization/begin 

maintenance in, 175

guidelines for, 170

398

INDEX

Postinflammatory 

Redness

hyperpigmentation  (Continued)

transient

HQ in, 176–181, 177f–179f, 180t. 

rosacea and, 150–151

See also Hydroquinone (HQ), in 

Rejuvenation

melasma and PIH management

skin, 107–136. See also Skin rejuvenation; 

stabilization in, 173–174

steps in, 170–175

Premature skin separation

Skin rejuvenation procedure(s)

Resistance

lack of, 105

after resurfacing procedures, 279–281, 

Resorcinol (m-dihydroxybenzene), 63

280f, 281f

for exfoliative peels, 212

Problematic conditions

Restoracalm, 366

laser treatment of, 315–318, 317f

Resurfacing procedures, 271–296

Pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB), 

reactions related to, 272–296. See also 

159–162

causes of, 160–161

clinical manifestations of, 160

described, 159–160, 160f, 161f

diagnosis of, 161–162

outbreaks of

calming, 162

prevention of, 162, 162t

treatment of, 162, 162t

“Pulse” therapy, 34

Pulsed dye laser (PDL)

development of, 297

for PWS, 297, 299

specific reactions, e.g., Edema

acne flare, 273t, 285–286

allergic contact dermatitis, 273t, 

278–279

bacterial infection, 273t, 276–277

delayed unanticipated, 273t, 289–296, 

290f–292f, 294f–296f

demarcation lines, 273t, 284f, 286

depigmentation, 273t, 293–296, 

294f–296f

ectropion, 296

edema, 272, 273t

enlarged pores, 286–287

for telangiectasia, 299, 299t, 301

erythema, 273t, 274, 274f, 281–283, 

Pustule(s)

rosacea and, 151

PWS. See Port wine stain

Q

Q-switched laser, 298

Questionable agents

topical, 46, 70

R

Race

as factor in skin thickness, 93

Radiofrequency (RF) devices

for skin tightening, 311–312, 312f

Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 12

Rebound hyperpigmentation

HQ-related, 176–177, 177f

Red striae

laser treatment of, 315

282t

fungal infection, 273t, 277–278, 278f, 

279f

HSV infection, 273t, 275–276, 276t, 

277f

hypertrophic reactions, 273t, 

289–290, 290f

hypopigmentation, 273t, 293, 296f

immediate anticipated, 272–275, 273t, 

274f, 275f

immediate unanticipated, 273t, 

275–281, 276t, 277f–281f

irritant contact dermatitis, 

273t, 279

keloids, 273t, 290–293, 291f, 292f

marbleization, 287–288

milia, 273t, 286

oozing, 273t, 274–275

persistent erythema, 273t, 288–289

persistent skin sensitivity, 273t, 288

PIH, 273t, 283–285, 284f, 285f

premature skin separation, 279–281, 

280f, 281f

399

INDEX

recovery stage: anticipated reactions, 

treatment of, 156–159, 158t, 159t

273t, 281–287, 282t, 284f, 285f

recovery stage: unanticipated 

reactions, 273t, 287–289

rosacea flare, 273t, 285–286

scabbing, 273t, 275, 275f

scars, 273t, 293, 294f

skin darkening, 273t, 274

IPL in, 156

laser, 317

PDT in, 156

protocols in, 158–159, 158t, 159t

steps in, 156–158

timing and selection in, 158–159, 

158t, 159t

viral infection, 273t, 276–277

topical antibiotics in, 65

yeast infection, 273t, 277–278, 278f, 

279f

Resveratrol

in skin health, 328

S

Reticular dermis, 2, 3f, 6–7

Scabbing

immediate. See Immediate reticular dermis

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 275, 

lower, 3f

275f

upper. See Upper reticular dermis

Retinoic acid. See Tretinoin (retinoic acid)

Scar(s)

acne

Retinoid(s)

for melasma, 169

“Retinoid reaction,” 49

Retinol, 50

history of treatment of, 197

laser treatment of, 316–317

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to, 

376–380, 378f, 379t

concentration of, 50, 214

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 293, 

described, 50

effects of, 50

potency of, 50

in skin stimulation, 31

strengths of, 50

tretinoin vs., 215, 215t

294f

hypertrophic

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

290–293, 291f, 292f

rehabilitation/improvement for

laser treatment in, 316, 317f

RF devices. See Radiofrequency (RF) devices

stretchable

Rhytides

dynamic, 96

static, 96

ROS, 12

Rosacea, 150–159

acne and, 152

causes of, 152, 155–156

chemical peels for, 241t

Scarring

in thin skin, 100

Sebaceous glands, 9–10

chronological changes in, 152, 154t

purpose of, 9

size and activity of

characteristics of, 150–153, 151f–153f, 154t

rosacea related to, 155–156

clinical manifestations of, 151, 152, 154

Sebaceous hyperplasia

conditions mistaken for, 152, 154

laser treatment of, 315

described, 150–152

diagnosis of, 152, 154–155

flare of

Sebum

aging and

misconceptions about, 9–10

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

excess

285–286

melasma and, 156

prevalence of, 152

effects of, 102–103

in men’s skin, 13

skin glow due to, 102–103

sebaceous glands and, 152, 154t, 155–156

Sebum-induced inflammatory disorders, 

signs and symptoms of, 154

137–164. See also specific disorders

treatment based on, 158–159, 158t, 159t

acne, 137–150

400

INDEX

Sebum-induced inflammatory 

disorders  (Continued)

folliculitis, 159–162

KP, 163–164, 163f, 164t

PFB, 159–162

rosacea, 150–159

Selenium

in skin health, 333

Silver sulfadiazine

thin. See Thin skin

tightness of, 126

Skin cancer

actinic, 189t

AKs and, 186, 188f

prevention of

vitamin D supplementation in, 331

studies of

vitamin D–related, 331–332

in wound treatment, 66

Skin classification system(s)

Silymarin

in skin health, 327

ethnicity of, 83

existing, 81

Skin. See also specific types and components

Skin color. See also Skin type(s), by color

activities of, 2t

changes in

aging of, 10–15. See also Aging

melanosomes and, 5

atrophic, 97–98

skin classification by, 83–91

“chicken,” 163–164, 163f, 164t

in skin rejuvenation procedure selection, 

compartments of, 2–10, 3f, 4f, 6f

113–114

components of, 2–10, 3f, 4f, 6f

stability of, 83–84, 84t. See also Skin 

darkening of, 5

described, 1

deteriorative changes in

factors leading to, 1, 2t

dry. See Dry skin (xerosis)

elasticity of, 8

functions of, 2t

maintaining, 15

hamartomatous, 91, 98

healthy. See Healthy skin

color stability

time to normal color recovery, 83–84, 84t

variation in, 5

Skin color stability

defined, 83–84

importance of, 83–84

time to normal color recovery related to, 

83–84, 84t

Skin condition(s)

correction of

inflammation of. See Skin inflammation

in Skin Health Restoration, 28

layers of, 2–10, 3f, 4f, 6f

before skin rejuvenation procedures, 

lifetime changes in, 1, 2t, 18–20, 21t

109–110, 110f

medium-thickness. See Medium-

Skin conditioning

thickness skin

nonfacial

peeling, 267–270

Skin Health Restoration vs., 42–43

Skin darkening

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 274

oily, 100–103, 101f, 102f, 102t. See also 

hormonal stimulation and, 5

Oiliness; Oily skin

melanosomes in, 5

resilience of, 8

roles of, 1

strength of

components of, 8

structures of, 2–3, 3f

sun-damaged

collagen in, 14

tanning of, 5

thick. See Thick skin

thickness of, 91–100. See also Skin 

Skin dryness. See Dry skin (xerosis)

Skin folds

in skin thickness determination, 93–98, 

94f, 95f, 97t–99t

Skin healing

suboptimal

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

selection, 115–116, 116t

Skin health

achieving

thickness; Skin type(s), by 

factors in, 19, 21–26, 23f, 24t, 26t

thickness

barrier function in, 21–22

401

INDEX

defined, 18

KMC in, 23–24, 23f, 24t

maintaining, 15

traditional treatment for

failure of, 37t

Skin Health Restoration

isotretinoin for, 25

manifestations of, 25, 26t

skin health effects of, 24–26, 26t

described, 57–58

skin health effects of, 24–26, 26t

treatment of, 26

in acne management, 144–146

Skin laxity, 103, 104f, 105f

exceptions to, 17–44

chemical peels for, 241t

exfoliative procedures in, 125, 125f, 126f

in skin rejuvenation procedure selection, 

factors in achieving skin health, 19, 

115, 116f, 116t

21–26, 23f, 24t, 26t

Skin layers

goal of, 37

corrective procedures related to, 110–111, 

lifetime of healthy skin, 17–19, 18t, 19f, 19t

110f

in medical treatment and general repair

Skin lightening

topical agents for, 37, 37t

neutraceuticals for, 336

nutraceuticals in, 321–344. See also 

Skin phases

Nutraceuticals

objectives of, 17–44

over lifetime, 20

Skin pigmentation, 4–6, 4f. See 

phases of, 37–42, 39t, 40f, 41f

Pigmentation; Pigmentation 

correlation of treatment benefits with 

problems; Skin color

regimen strength, 38–42, 39t, 40f, 

Skin preparation

41f

in Skin Health Restoration, 27, 28t

principles of, 17–44

Skin problem(s)

correcting skin dyschromia in 

in skin rejuvenation procedure selection, 

medical treatment, 33–36, 36t. See 

116–120, 117f–119f

also Dyschromia, correction of

Dr. Zein Obagi Skin Stretch Test, 120

emphasis of, 36

exceptions to, 41–42

photodamage, 117–118, 118f, 119f

Skin rejuvenation, 107–136. See also Skin 

hydration and calming, 35–36, 36t

rejuvenation procedure(s)

skin correction, 28

skin preparation, 27, 28t

defined, 107–108

diagnostic considerations, 109–111, 110f

stabilization, 28–29, 29t, 30t

objective of, 108

stimulation, 29–32, 30t, 31t, 32f, 33f, 33t

treatment planning, 111–112

reactions to, 39, 39t

overview of, 111

skin conditioning vs., 42–43

physician-to-patient communication 

skin thickness in

significance of, 96, 99t

strength of

case studies, 39, 40f, 41f

characteristics of, 38, 39t

in, 112

skin conditioning in, 112

Skin rejuvenation procedure(s), 107–136. See 

also Skin rejuvenation

classification of

correction of treatment benefits with, 

depth-related, 122–123, 123t

38–42, 39t, 40f, 41f

patient selection for, 108–109

and related time to reach tolerance, 

popularity of, 107

39, 39t

selection of, 112–124

ZO Controlled Depth Peel with, 261, 

combination approaches, 131–134, 

265f, 266f

Skin inflammation

acute, 57–58

manifestations of, 25

chronic, 58–59

132t, 133f–135f

exfoliative, 124–126, 125f, 126f

factors in, 113

leveling procedures, 128–131, 129f, 

130t, 131t

402

INDEX

Skin rejuvenation procedure(s)  (Continued)

in Skin Health Restoration

mechanism of action in, 123–124, 

significance of, 96, 99t

124t

in skin rejuvenation procedure selection, 

nature of skin problem in, 116–120, 

114, 114f, 116t

117f–119f

variations in, 91, 93

skin type in, 113–116, 114f–116f, 116t

Skin tightening

thermal vs. nonthermal procedures, 

defined, 311

120–123, 121f, 122f, 123t

noninvasive procedures for, 310–312, 

tightening, 126–128, 127f, 130t

Skin resurfacing procedures, 271–296. 

312f

ePrime, 312

See also specific procedures and 

Halogen lamps, 312

Resurfacing procedures

RF devices, 311–312, 312f

laser, 307–310, 308f. See also Laser(s), for 

Ulthera, 312

skin resurfacing

ultrasound devices, 312

Skin sensitivity

causes of

medications, 183–184

moisturizer use, 364–366

sun, 183–184

persistent

procedures for, 126–128, 127f, 130t

characteristics of, 126–127, 127f

combining procedures, 127–128

for sagging of lower face, 311–312

Skin treatment goals

procedures for, 99, 100t

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

Skin type(s)

288

Skin stabilization

melanocyte, 35

atypical healing effects by, 103, 105

by color, 83–91

complex, 87, 90–91, 90f, 91t

Skin stimulation, 29–32, 30t, 31t, 32f, 33f, 

deviated, 86–87, 87f–90f

33t

features of, 84t

delivering, 31–32, 31t, 32f, 33f, 33t

original, 84t, 85–86, 85f, 86f, 86t

dermal, 31

described, 29–30

HQ in, 30–31, 30t

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

selection, 113–114

by elasticity and laxity, 103, 104f, 105f

in keratin maturation cycle, 31, 32f

lack of

retinol in, 31

resistance by, 105

in Skin Health Restoration, 29–32, 30t, 

by laxity

31t, 32f, 33f, 33t

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

tretinoin in, 29–31, 30t. See also 

selection, 115, 116f, 116t

Tretinoin (retinoic acid)

by oiliness, 100–103, 101f, 102f, 102t

for various skin types and 

characteristics, 33t

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

selection, 114–115, 115f, 116t

Skin thickness

in skin rejuvenation procedure selection, 

combined procedure approach to, 98–100

113–116, 114f–116f, 116t

determinants of, 91, 93–98, 93t, 94f, 95f, 

active disease, 116–120, 117f–119f

97t–99t

by color, 113–114

expression lines and folds, 93–98, 94f, 

by laxity, 115, 116f, 116t

95f, 97t–99t

by oiliness, 114–115, 115f, 116t

pinching technique, 93, 93t, 94f

suboptimal healing, 115–116, 116t

factors influenced by, 96

peel concentration and

by thickness, 114, 114f, 116t

stimulation with, 33t

in ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 240

suboptimal healing

procedure selection related to, 99, 100t

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

racial differences in, 93

selection, 115–116, 116t

403

INDEX

by thickness, 91–100. See also Skin 

examples of, 46, 46t

thickness

unstable, 84, 84t

Skintel, 314

Smiling

5-FU, 63–64

imiquimod, 64

non-HQ pigment stabilizers, 63

resorcinol, 63

in skin thickness determination, 94, 95f

Syringomas

Solar elastosis, 188–189, 189f, 190f

laser treatment of, 315

treatment of, 192t

ZOMD and ZOSH approaches to

case study, 371–375, 372f, 373t

Solar lentigines, 14, 187

Solid carbon dioxide

TCA with, 202–203

T

Tanning, 5

photodamage and, 184–185

contraindications to, 203

Tattooing

Spironolactone

laser treatment of, 316, 317f

in acne management, 143

TCA. See Trichloroacetic acid

Stabilization

Telangiectasia(s)

in melasma and PIH management, 

rosacea and, 151

173–174

treatment of

in Skin Health Restoration, 28–29, 29t, 

laser settings for, 299, 299t

30t

Static rhytides, 96

Stimulation

Tensile strength

of collagen, 7

Terbinafine, 69

skin, 29–32. See also Skin stimulation

TEWL, 324

Stratum corneum, 3, 3f

dehydration of, 125

Thermal devices

types of, 120

renewal through exfoliation in, 361–362

Thermal skin rejuvenation procedures

Stratum granulosum, 3f

Stratum spinosum, 3f

Striae

described, 120

nonthermal procedures vs., 120–123, 

121f, 122f, 123t

laser treatment of, 315

Thick skin, 92f

Subcutaneous layer of skin, 3, 3f, 9

characteristics of, 98t

Subcutaneous tissue, 3f

Suboptimal healing

skin with

oily, 101f

procedure selection for, 100

very, 92f

in skin rejuvenation procedure 

Thickness

selection, 115–116, 116t

skin type by, 91–100. See also Skin 

Suicidal ideation

isotretinoin and, 148

Sun

thickness; Skin type(s), by 

thickness

Thin skin, 91, 91f

skin sensitivity related to, 183–184

characteristics of, 97t

Sun-damaged skin

collagen in, 14

Sun exposure

excessive

combination procedures, 100

dry, 102, 102f

procedure selection for, 99–100

scarring in, 100

epidermal effects of, 14

Tightening procedures. See Skin tightening

Supportive agents, 60–64

Topical agents, 45–80

AHAs, 61–62, 61t

benzoyl peroxide, 64

BHAs, 62–63

assessment of, 45, 46

classification of, 46t

discontinuance of, 45

404

INDEX

Topical agents  (Continued)

therapeutic and causative effects of

essential, 47–60. See also Essential agents

concentration-related, 235, 236f

introduction to, 45–46, 46t

questionable, 46, 70

selection of, 47

in ZO Controlled Depth Peel

concentration of, 234–236

depth of penetration control in, 235, 

for Skin Health Restoration, 45–80. See 

236

also specific agents

matching physician experiences with, 

in medical treatment and general 

239–240, 239t

repair, 37, 37t

neutralization of, 238–239

supportive, 60–64. See also Supportive 

volume and size of treatment area in, 

agents

examples of, 46, 46t

topical antibiotics, 64–69

Topical antibiotics, 64–69

for acne, 65

antifungals, 66–69

allylamines, 68–69

azoles, 66–67

benzylamines, 68–69

polyenes, 68

categories of, 64

for rosacea, 65

in wound healing, 69

in wound treatment, 65–66

236–238, 237f, 238t

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) peels, 199–205

characteristics of, 201t

complications of

depth-related, 200–201

conventional, nonstandardized

variables associated with, 202t

described, 199–200

glycolic acid with, 204

methods of use, 199–200

period of relative resistance in, 238

30% to 50%, 200–202, 201t, 202t

variables associated with, 233

elimination of, 202

Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), 324

ZO Controlled Depth, 231–270. See also 

Transient redness

rosacea and, 150–151

specific types and ZO Controlled 

Depth Peel

TRASER (total internal reflection 

on facial skin, 237–238, 238t

amplification emission of 

types of, 231–270

radiation), 313

Tumor(s)

Tretinoin (retinoic acid), 48–49

benign adnexal

concentration of, 48

delivery vehicle, 48

effects of, 48, 49

functions of, 49

HQ with, 52

maintenance use, 49

retinol vs., 215, 215t

side effects of, 49

laser treatment of, 315

Tyrosinase inhibitor

in skin lightening, 336

U

Ubiquinone (coenzyme Q10), 53–54

in skin stimulation, 29–31, 30t

in skin health, 327

uses of, 48

in ZOMD, 352–353, 352t

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)

described, 203, 209–211

Ulthera

for skin tightening, 312

Ultrasound devices

for skin tightening, 312

for exfoliative peels, 209–211

Ultraviolet (UV) endonuclease, 56

concentration and volume of, 210, 211

Ultraviolet (UV) light/radiation

glycerin and polysorbate with, 204–205

protection against

Jessner’s solutions plus, 203–204

antioxidants in, 322, 324–325

methylsalicylate with, 204

in dyschromia management, 35–36

sodium carbon dioxide with, 202–203

UVA, 5

405

INDEX

UVB, 5

vitamin D–related, 331

Upper reticular dermis (URD), 3f, 84

Worldwide Products, Inc., 346

Wound(s)

healing of

corrective procedures in, 110–111, 110f

biafine in, 69

UV. See Ultraviolet

treatment of

V

Very thick skin, 92f

Viral infection

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 276–277

Visible (VIS) light devices, 299–301, 300f

Vitamin(s)

A

for oily skin, 336–337

B3 (niacinamide), 55

B5

for dry skin, 337

C (L-ascorbic acid), 54

D

deficiencies of, 329

described, 328

monitoring levels of, 330

topical antibiotics in, 65–66

Wrinkles

stretchable

chemical peels for, 241t

X

Xerosis (dry skin)

described, 102, 102f

misconceptions about, 102, 102f

neutraceuticals for, 337

sebum and, 9–10

Y

Yeast infection

after resurfacing procedures, 273t, 

277–278, 278f, 279f

recommended dietary allowances for, 

330, 331

skin cancer risk associated 

with, 331

Z

skin cancer studies, 331–332

Zeaxanthin

in skin health, 328

source of, 328, 329t

supplementation of, 330

toxicity of, 329–330

in skin health, 326

Zein Obagi System of Skin Classification, 

81–106, 184

applications of, 82

UVR exposure quandary related to, 331

attributes of, 82t

E (α-tocopherol), 54–55
in skin health, 327

Vitiligo

dyschromia vs., 190t

laser treatment of, 318

W

Wart(s)

flat

development of, 81–82, 82t

deviated skin color type

corresponding with Fitzpatrick skin 

types, 88t

features of, 84t

for ochronosis, 194

recommended procedures 

for, 116t

skin color types

complex, 87, 90–91, 90f, 91t

corresponding with Fitzpatrick skin 

chemical peels for, 241t

types, 86t

White skin type

deviated, 88f

original, 85f, 86t

thickness of, 93

deviated, 86–87, 87f–90f

original, 84t, 85–86, 85f, 86f, 86t

Zinc

in skin health, 334

406

INDEX

ZO Controlled Depth Peel, 100, 114, 114f, 

perioral area treatment with, 244–246, 246f

117, 117f–119f, 118, 122, 122f, 126, 

pink sign in, 249–250, 249f–251f

127, 127f, 130, 173, 175f, 198, 200, 

post-procedure home care instructions, 

201, 231–270

administration of, 239–247

advantages of, 232, 233

clinical objectives for, 234

259–260, 259t

pre-peel office consultation, 256–257

results of

case studies, 260–261, 260f–268f

clinical signs of, 248–255, 248t

safety, efficacy, and ease of use of, 

with CO2 fractional lasers, 127–128

231–232

combined with other procedures, 

sedation for, 243

263–264, 266, 268f, 269f

selection of, 232-234, 234t

completion of

solution application for, 244, 244f, 245f

endpoints at, 253–254, 253t, 254f, 255f

solution preparation for, 241–242, 

concentration selection in, 239–240, 

242f–244f, 242t

239t

depth of, 213t

ideal, 254

standardized variables in, 232

TCA concentration in, 234–236

TCA depth of penetration in

selection of, 240–241, 241t

control of, 235, 236

supportive clinical signs confirming, 

TCA neutralization in, 238–239

255–256, 255t

described, 231, 232

TCA volume and size of treatment area 

in, 236–238, 237f, 238t

endpoints of, 248–255, 248t

tightening and leveling characteristics of, 

epidermal sliding in, 251–253, 251f–253f

234, 234t

erythema after, 281–282, 282t

types of, 231–270

eyelid treatment with, 246, 246f, 247f

ZO Controlled Depth TCA Peel, 231–270. 

on facial skin

See also ZO Controlled Depth Peel

coat system for, 237–238, 238t

erythema after, 281–282, 282t

factors affecting outcome of, 234

on facial skin

features of, 256

coat system for, 237–238, 238t

frost sign in, 248–250, 249f–251f

ZO Designed Controlled Depth Peel, 128, 

general instructions for, 243–246, 

129f, 201, 234, 234t, 241t, 260–261, 

245f–247f

264f–268f, 281–282, 282t

healing and recovery expectations, 

advantages of, 234, 234t

257–259

indications for, 234

infection after, 277, 278f

medium-depth, 115, 115f, 231–270

ingredients and their function in, 241, 

for melasma, 172, 174f

242t

ZO Invisapeel. See Invisapeel

to IRD, 115, 116f, 231–270, 261f, 262f, 

ZO Medical (ZOMD), 217, 346

266f–268f

indications for, 234

medium-depth

infection after, 277–278, 278f

objectives of, 213t

outcomes of

factors affecting, 234, 235

patient selection for, 256–260

to PD, 231–270, 260f

indications for, 234

and IRD, 260, 263f

advantages of, 349

anticipated reactions with, 354–356

benefits of, 353–354

clinical applications of

principles/steps in, 352–354, 353t, 357t

clinical cases

acne scars, 376–380, 378f, 379t

melasma, 367–371, 368f, 369t–371t

ochronosis, 380–383, 381t, 382f, 383t

photodamage, 375–376, 375f, 377t, 

378t

period of relative resistance in, 238

solar elastosis, 371–375, 372f, 373t

407

INDEX

described, 347–348, 348t–350t

clinical applications of, 348–350

guidelines for using, 356–361, 357t, 

principles/steps in, 350–352, 357t

358f–361f, 364f, 365f

clinical cases

HQ approach in, 352

non-HQ approach in, 353

Nu-Derm vs., 349t, 350t, 380

objectives of, 348–350, 348t

principles of, 348–350, 348t

product names, 350t

tretinoin in, 352–353, 352t

acne scars, 376–380, 378f, 379t

melasma, 367–371, 368f, 369t–371t

ochronosis, 380–383, 381t, 382f, 383t

photodamage, 375–376, 375f, 377t, 378t

solar elastosis, 371–375, 372f, 373t

described, 347

development of, 346–348, 348t–350t

uniqueness of, 349–350, 349t, 350t

guidelines for using, 356–361, 357t, 

ZO Medical (ZOMD) Surfatrol

358f–361f, 364f, 365f

after resurfacing procedures, 275, 275f

innovations, 346

ZO Retinol Stimulation Peel, 125, 125f, 

objectives of, 348–350, 348t

214–221, 227

philosophy of, 345–366

anticipated sensations and reactions 

principles of, 348–350, 348t

during, 216–217, 217t

uniqueness of, 349–350

benefits of, 220

ZO Skin Health (ZOSH), Inc., 346

depth and objectives of, 213t

ZO Skin Health (ZOSH) Circle, 43–44, 43f

described, 214

concept of, 43–44, 43f

Ossential Advanced Radical Night 

ZO 3-Step Stimulation Peel, 117, 117f, 125, 

Repair with, 214–221, 217t, 218t

126f, 222–230, 224t, 225f, 226f, 

application steps, 214–215, 217–221, 

228f–230f, 230t

218t, 219f, 220f

acid cocktail activity in epidermis 

course duration, 216–217, 217t

during, 224, 226–227

exfoliation after, 216, 216f

home application of, 215

components of, 223–227, 226f

depth and objectives of, 213t

mechanism of action of, 216

described, 222–223, 225f, 226f

penetration depth of, 215

features of, 225

postpeel reactions, instructions, and 

home instructions, 230t

healing time, 221

indications for, 225

postpeel reactions, instructions, and 

mechanism of action of, 227–228

healing time, 221

procedure, 228–230, 228f–230f

ZO Skin Health (ZOSH), 217

skin preparation for, 227

anticipated reactions with, 354–356

ZOMD. See ZO Medical

benefits of, 353–354

ZOSH. See ZO Skin Health

